REPORTS OF SPECIAL CASES Touching several Customs AND Liberties OF The City
of LONDON.

Collected by Sir H. Calthrop Knight, Sometimes Recorder of London.

Whereunto is annexed diverse ANCIENT CUSTOMS AND USAGES Of the said City of
LONDON.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet,
1670.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS LO, K. ALDERMAN OF The City of LONDON.
Worthy Sir,
BEing put in mind of that saying of Seneca, Ingratum sidixeris Omnia dixeris.
And having a desire to avoid that Rock whereupon so many have suffered
Shipwreck, have had often conflicts within my self, wherein I might express my
thankfulness unto you, of whom I a Stranger have received so many undeserved
favors, and at last bethought my self, that (you being one of the Noble
Governors of this famous City of London, and being likewise a President over
several Companies of Merchants in it) a Treatise concerning the Customs of the
City of London, or otherwise concerning the Privileges and Immunities granted
unto the Merchants of London, would not altogether be an unfitting subject to
be presented unto your view; whereupon I have selected some few Cases collected
by my self, of the resolution of the Judges, concerning some Customs of your
City, and some Charters granted unto the Citizens of it, and offered them unto
your consideration, the which I desire you to accept as a pledge and token of a
thankful mind, howsoever they in themselves are unworthy your pains to be taken
in the reading of them: and so with my truest wishes of the continuance of all
happiness unto your self, your thrice Noble Lady, and the branches of your
flourishing Family, I take my leave, ever resting,

From my Chamber in the middle Temple, 2 Januarii Anno Dom. 1661. The
affectionate and hearty well-wisher of all good unto you and yours Henry
Calthrop.

The Contents of several Cases.
THe Case of the City of London, concerning Neusances in stopping up the lights
of their Neighbors houses by new Buildings page 1 Touching the custom of
Citizens learning that Trade, whereunto they have been Apprentices seven years,
and betaking themselves to other Trades. 9 The custom of London touching
foreign Attachment. 27 The Case concerning the prisage of Citizens Wines. The
Case concerning repairing of Wharfes and Docks. The cuctome of London, to fine
one chosen by the Commons to be Sheriff, and refusing, to hold. 33 The Case of
Merchant-Adventurers. 36 Certifying Indictments upon Certioraries. 42
Concerning Orphans Portions. 46 The custom in not removing body and cause upon
Habeas Corpus. 50 The Case concerning payment of Tithes in London. 54 Diverse
ancient cuctomes and usages of the of City London. 79 Hust of Pleas of Land. 80
Hustings of Common Pleas. page 85 Assizes of Mort d' ancest in London. 94
Assizes of Novel Dissezen, called freshforce in London. 97 De curia Majoris
London and Custumis Civitatis ejusdem and diversis Cesibus terminalibus in
eadem curis. 100 The Commission and Article of the Wardmote Inquest, by the
Mayor. 129 An Act for the reformation of diverse abuses used in the Ward-mote
Inquests. 146 The Articles of the charge of the Ward-mote Inquest. 151 An Act
Parliament for the preservation of the River of Thames. 169 An Act of Common
Council concernidg the conservation and cleansing of the River of Thames. 174
The Oath of the Constables within the City of London. 180 The Oath of the
Scavengers. 182 The Oath of every Freeman of this City of London. 183 An Act of
Common Council concerning making Freemen of the City, againct coloring of
foreign Goods. 185 The Statutes of the Streets of this City against
Annoyances. 187 Old Laws and Customs of this City. 196 By Act of Parliament in
14. Car. 2. 198

REPORTS of special CASES, Touching several CUSTOMS And LIBERTIES Of the City
of LONDON, etc.
The Case of the City of London concerning Neusans in stopping up the lights of
their Neighbors Houses by New-buildings.
REginold Hughs an Attorney of the Kings Bench being seized in his Trinterm. 7.
Jac. Rex Rot. 1490.
demesne as of Fee, of an ancient house in the Parish of Saint Olaves in the
King's Bench. The pleading of this case see in the New-Book of entries fol. 20
and 21.
Ward of Queen Hithe London in the South-Part of which House have been three
ancient Lights (time our of mind.) Anthony Keeme having taken a Lease for 31.
years from the Rector and Guardians of the Parish Church of Saint Michael at
Queen Hithe by Indenture of a rumous house, and yard next adjoining unto the
said House, with a Covenant to bestow a 100 marks at the least upon the
repairing or new building of the said House; does within two years pull down
the said House, and does build a new House in the place where the old House
stood, and likewise upon the yard whereby the three ancient Lights on the
South Side of ^^^^ House are stopped up, whereupon Reynold Jews does bring his
action upon the case against Anthony Keem, for the stopping up the Lights; unto
which the said Anthony does plead a special Plea in Bar, showing the
ruinousness of the House, and likewise the Lease made by the Rector and
Guardians, and the Covenant comprised within the Lease, and does also show that
there is a custom in London, that if one have an ancient house, wherein there
are ancient Lights, and one other has a House adjoining upon that House; he
that has the adjoining House may well enough enhance his House, or build a new
House upon his ground, and to stop those ancient Lights of the House next
adjoining, unless there be some writing to the contrary. And he does aver in
facto, that there was no writing to the contrary, and that he according to the
Custom did take down the old House and build a new one upon the same
Foundation and upon the Yard opposite unto the said Lights, whereby they were
stopped up; and upon this Plea in Bar; the Plaintiff demurreth in Law.

The Questions of this case are.
First, whether it be lawful for a man to build a House upon his own Ground,
whereby the Lights of an ancient House are stopped, there being no Custom to
enable him?

Secondly, whether the Custom of London will enable a man to build a new house
from the ground; where no house formerly was, whereby he may stop the ancient
lights of his Neighbors house?

Thirdly, Whether upon an ancient foundation a house may lawfully be enhansed,
so as it shall stop up the light of the Neighbors house adjoining?

As to the first, it is clear by the opinion Quest. 1.
of Sir Thomas Flemming, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir Cristopher
Yelverton, Sir David Williams, and Sir John Crook, Justices of the Kings Bench,
that there being no custom, it is not lawful to erect a new house upon a void
piece of ground, whereby the old lights of an ancient house may be stopped up;
for the rule of equity, and law says, Utere tuo, ut alienum non laedas; and
the light which comes in by the Windows, being an essential part of the Three
commodities of lights by a Window, Air by Health, light by profit, pleasure by
prospect.
House, by which he has three great commodities, that is to say, Air for his
Health, Light for his profit, prospect for his pleasure, may not be taken away
no more, then a part of his House may be pulled down, whereby to erect the next
House adjoining. And with this resolution agrees the Case of Eldred reported
by Sir Edw. Cook, in his Ninth Report, fol. 58. where he shows the ancient
Cook 9. Rep. Eldred case.
form of the Action upon the case to be quod messuagium horrida tenebritate
obscuratum fuit; but if there be hinderance only of the prospect by the new
erected House, and not of the Air, Vide, Hobarts Reports, Robins of B^ns. 131.
not of the light, then an Action of the case will not lie, insomuch that the
prospect is only a matter of delight, and not of necessity.

As to the second, it was resolved by Quest. 2.
the opinion of the aforesaid Judges, that the custom of London will not
enable a man to erect a new House upon a void space of ground, whereby the
ancients lights of an old house are stopped up; for first the owner of the old
house having possession of a lawful easment and profit which has been
belonging unto the house by prescription, time out of mind of man, may not be
prescribed out of it by another thwarting custom which has been used time out
of mind of man, but the latter custom shall rather be adjudged to be void, and
Prescription against a Prescription will never be allowed by the Law. 2. It may
well be that before time of memory the owner of the said void piece of ground
granted unto the owner of the House, to have his Windows that way without any
stopping of them, the which being done, and continued accordingly, has
begotten a prescription, the which may not be defeated by the Allegation of a
general custom; and with this resolution does agree a case adjudged, Trin. 29.
Eliz. Rot. 253. in the Kings Bench; whereupon an action upon the case brought
by Thomas Bloond against Thomas Mosley, for erecting of a House in the County
of the City of York, whereby the ancient lights of his House were stopped up:
The Desendant did plead a Custom for the City of York, as there is here for
the City of London, and adjudged that the Custom was naught, whereupon the
Plaintiff had his Judgment: But if the Houses had been new erected Houses, or
otherwise Windows had been newly made Windows in that ancient House, the
erection of that new House upon that void space of Ground would have been
lawful notwithstanding that the Windows and Lights be stopped up; for it shall
not lie in the power of the owner of the ancient House by setting out his new
Windows to prevent him, that has the void piece of Ground from making the best
benefit of it.

As to the third point, it was conceived that if the new house be only erected
3. Quest. A new house built upon an old foundation, without enlargement either
in longitude or latitude, though never so high built, shall not be taken to
prejudice the Neighbor.
upon the ancient foundation, without any enlargement either in Longitude or
Latitude, howsoever it be made so high that it ^oppeth up the lights of the old
house yet he is not subject unto any action, because the law authorizeth a man
to build as high as he may upon an ancient Foundation, and it is no reason to
foreclose a man from making his house convenient unto his estate and degree by
building up higher, when there is no other impediment, but only some windows
which are built out over his house; and agreeing to this, seems the old book
of 4. E. 3. 150. to be where an Assize of Nusans was brought for erecting his
house so high, that the light of the Plaintiff in the next adjoining house was
disturbed by it, and the Plaintiff upon the opinion of Herl, Chief Justice, did
not proceed in the Assize, but let it fall to the ground; but if the new
builded house exceeded the ancient foundation, whereby that excess is the cause
of stopping up of lights, then is he subject unto the action of him whose light
is stopped up, as it may appear by 22. H. 6. 25. And in the case at the Bar,
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, because he had brought his action for
building of a new House upon a void piece of ground, by which his Windows were
stopped up. And Keeme the Defendant only justifies by the Custom, the erection
of the House upon an old Foundation, and upon the void piece of ground, the
which is not any answer at all unto that which the Plaintiff lays unto the
charge of the Defendant.

Touching the Custom of Citizens leaving that Trade whereunto they have been
Apprentices seven years, and betaking themselves to other Trades.
John Tolley having been an Apprentice Hill. 12. Jac. in Banco Rep.
in London by the space of seven years unto a Wool-Packer, after the seven
years expired, is made a Freeman of London; afterward he leaves the Trade of
a Wool-Packer, and betaketh himself to the Trade of an Vpholster, and does
exercise that Trade by many years, whereupon one Thomas Allen an Informer, does
exhibit an Information in the Court of the Mayor of London, as well for the
King as for himself, upon the branch of the Statute made in the fifth year of
the late Queen Elizabeth Information upon the Stat. of 5. Eliz. 4. concerning
Manualoccu^ pations, etc.
cap. 4. whereby it is enacted, That after the first day of May next ensuing it
shall not be lawful unto any person or persons, other than such as now do
lawfully use, or exercise any art, Mystery, or manual occupation, to set up,
etc. any such occupation now used or occupied within the Realm of England, or
Wales, except he shall have been brought up seven years at the least as an
Apprentice in manner and form aforesaid, nor to set any person on work in such
Mystery, Art, or Occupation, being not a Workman at this day, except he shall
have been an Apprentice as aforesaid, or else having served as an Apprentice as
is aforesaid, shall or will become a Iourney-man or hired by the year upon pain
that every person willingly offending or doing the contrary, shall forfeit and
lose for every default forty shillings for every month. And he shows, that
John Tolly the now Defendant has exercised the trade of an Upholster by the
space of forty months, whereas he was never an Apprentice to that trade by
the space of seven years; contrary unto the aforesaid Statute, whereby the said
Thomas Allen does demand the forfeiture of eighty pound unto the King and
himself, whereof he the said Allen does require the one moiety, according to
the form of the said Statute. And this Information The custom of L pleaded in
Bar
being removed out of the Court of the Mayor of London by Certiorari into the
Kings Bench, the said John Tolley does plead a special Plea in Bar, showing,
that there is a custom of London which has been used time out of mind of man,
That every Citizen and Freeman of London, which has been an Appretice in
London unto any trade by the space of seven years, may lawfully and well
relinquish that trade, and exercise any other trade at his will and pleasure.
And shows further, That all the Customs of London were confirmed by K. R. 2.
in the Parliament holden in the seventh year of his Reign. And averteth, That
he had served one in the Trade of a Wool-Packer, as an Apprentice, by the space
of seven years, and that he was a Citizen and a Freeman of London, and that he
did relinquish the trade of a Wool-Packer, and betook himself to the trade of
an Upholster, as lawful it was for him to do; and so he demands the Judgment
of the Court if this Information against him will lie; and upon this Plea in
Bar, the said Thomas Allen does demur in Law.

The Questions in the Case were these.
1. Whether the custom of relinquishing one Trade, after that he has been an
Apprentice by the space of sevenyears, and betaking himself to another Trade,
wherein he has not been an Apprentice, be good or no?

2. Whether it may be taken as a custom or no, or whether it shall be said to
be the Common Law of the Realm, and so the Allegation of it, as a custom,
naught?

3. Whether the Statute of the Confirmation of the Customs of London, made in
the seventh of R. 2. as it is pleaded, shall be taken to be an Act of
Parliament, or only a Confirmation made by the Letters Pattents of the King in
Parliament?

4. Whether the branch of the statute of 5. Eliz. cap. 4. being in the
Negative, inhibit all men to exercise the trade when they have not been
Apprentice seven years thereunto, is a Controlment of the custom of London,
which can receive no support by the Statute of confirmations? and whether that
custom shall stand good in opposition of that branch?

5. Whether the trade of an Vpholstor be a Trade restrained by the Statute of
5. Eliz. so as John Tolley may exercise it, Quest. 1.
notwithstanding that he has not been an Apprentice to it by the space of
seven years, according to the course of the Common Law?

6. Whether the Court of the Mayor of London be such a Court of Record, as that
an Information may be exhibited there?

7. Whether a Moiety may be demanded of this Forfeiture by the Informer, when
as a Proviso in the Stat. of 5. Eliz. 4. does appoint the levying, gathering,
and receiving of such Forfeiture as falls in a City or Town Corporate to the
Mayor, or other head Officers, to the use and maintenance of the same City or
Town Corporate?

As to the first Question, Which is the lawfulness of the custom, it was
agreed to be good; for it might have a reasonable construction, beginning, and
just cause, for the putting of it in Execution, insomuch that London being a
famous City for traffic and commerce, cannot but sometimes have Merchants and
Tradesmen in it, who by misadventure of Pirates or Shipwreck in the Seas, or by
conffiscation of their Goods in Foreign Countries abroad, o^ by casu^lties of
Fire, etc. at home, have their Estates sunk, whereby they are not able for want
of Stock and Meane^ to continue that course of Merchandising and Trade wherein
they have been brought up there being great Stocks and sums of money requisite
for the continning of it, whereupon they are forced to leave that course, and
betake themselves to some other Trade proportionable to that means which they
have left. And it were lamentable, that where inevitable casualties have
disabled a man to proceed in that course wherein he was brought up, he now
should not be permitted to acquire his living by any other Trade. Also it may
be, that the Trade whereunto he was an Apprentice, requires great labor and
strength of body, as the Trade of a Smith, Carpenter, and such like, and that
through sickness or other disasters befaln him, he is become infirm in body,
and weak in strength, whereby he is not able to use that Trade. Now to deba^
him of all other Trades, which are more be fitting his crazy body, were somewhat
unreasonable. Wherefore to meet with these inconveniences, and to give
encouragement unto the Citizens and Freemen of London this Custom of
relinquishing the Trade whereunto they have been Apprentices by the space of
seven years, and betaking themselves unto another Trade, has had a perpetual
allowance, and being grounded upon so good reason still has its continuance,
and may not any ways be called in question for the unreasonableness of it.

As to the second question scil. Whether the Allegation of it as Custom in
Quest. 2.
London that every Citizen and Freeman of London may relinquish his Trade
wherein he has been an Apprentice by the space of seven years, and exercise
another Trade or no, be warrantable by the Rules of Law or no, insomuch that
before the Stat. of 5. Eliz. 4. which restrains it, it was lawful for every
man to use what Trade he would, although he had not been an Apprentice by the
space of seven years: And then it being the Common Law of the Realm that a man
might use any Trade, although he had not been an Apprentice for seven years, it
may not be alleged by way of custom in London, but it ought to have been
showed, as the custom of the Realm, for that which is the Common Law of the
Realm, is the custom of the Realm? It was answered Sell.
and agreed, That as this custom was alleged in this information, the
allegation of it was warrantable in the Law, and it may well be said to be a
custom before the Stat. of 5. Eliz. For first.

The custom is restrained to a Citizen Rat. 1.
and Freeman of London, so as he that is not a Citizen and Freeman may not
enjoy the benefit of this custom, and it being restrictive of the Common Law
which gives power unto all, as well Freemen as Citizens, to exercise what
Trade they will, stands well in custom, and may well be alleged by way of
custom.

This is alleged to be the custom 2.
of London, and so is tied to a particular place; and howsoever it may be the
Common Law of the Realm in other places, yet in London, which is for the most
part governed by their particular Customs, it may well be said a Custom, and
so the Plea in Bar good enough, as to this exception.

As to the fourth Question, soil. Whether the branch of the Statute of 5. Eliz.
Quest. 4.
4. be a repeal and control of the Custom of London concerning the exercise
of a Trade where he has not been an Apprentice by the space of seven years?

It was resolved that the Custom of London was of force, and was not any ways
controuled by that branch.

First, In regard that this being a particular Custom used in London, the
general Rat, 1.
words of the branch of that Stat^ shall not be taken to extend to the repeal
of it: For so much regard is to be given unto that City, being Camera Regis,
and as dear to him as the Apple of his Eye, that the Customs of that place
shall not be overthrown by the extent of general words, where there is no
particular provision for it, might tend to a great derogation of the City, and
likewise might be very prejudicial to the Commonwealth, when as the
ill-affectedness of this City being the chief member of this politic body,
cannot but make all the other members to be partakers of theill disposition of
it. And upon this reason it is, that before such time as the Stat. of R. 2. was
thought of, it was holden that the Stat. De Religiosis, otherwise called the
Statute of Mortmain, made in the seventh of the Reign of E. 1. which did make a
general restraint from disposing of lands in Mortmain, did never extend unto
the repeal of the custom of London, which did enable those that were Citizens
and Freemen of London to devise their lands in Mortmain, as before.

Secondly, The City of London, and Rat. 2.
the custom therein used, being the example and pattern which the Statute of 5.
Eliz. in some parts of it does require should be followed, as in that branch,
wherein provision is made, that every person being an householder, and twenty
four years old at the least, dwelling or inhabiting, or which shall dwell or
inhabit in a City or Town Corporate, and use or exercise any art, mystery, or
manual occupation, shall and may yet have and retain the Son of any Freeman not
occupying Husbandry, etc. to serve. and be bound as an Apprentice, after the
custom and order of the City of London for seven years at the least. It
seems that the intent of the makers of that Statute, was rather to confirm;
than repeal the customs of London, for it would never make the custom of
London to be the example which ought to be persued, if it had had an intention
to repeal it. And by the same reason, that the custom of London shall not be
comprehended within the general words of one branch of the Statute, the general
words of another branch shall not be extended unto them.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that the Rat. 3.
Statute of 5. Eliz. has a proviso, That this Act, nor any thing therein
contained or mentioned shall not be prejudicial or hurtful unto the Cities of
London and Norwich or to the lawful Liberties, usages, customs, or privileges
of the same Cities. And howsoever it speaks, only concerning the having or
taking of Apprentices, yet by the whole scope of the Statute, which makes the
customs of London to be their directions in many things enacted by that
Statute, it appears, that the intent was to preserve the Customs of London,
and not any ways to abolish them. For it should be very mischievous to the
City, and would endanger the subversion and decay of it; if all Acts of
Parliament by their general words should stretch to repeal the customs of
London, in Case where they are somewhat opposite unto the Statute.

Fourthly, upon the matter, there must be a repeal of the Statute of Magna
Charta, Rat. 4. 9. H. 3. cap. 9.
cap. 9. which confirms all the Customs of London, the which shall not be
done by general words in a Statute, because it has been so oftentimes
confirmed.

As to the Fifth Question, scil. Whether the Trade of an Upholster be a Trade
Quest. 5.
restrained within the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap. 4. So that none can exercise
it, but he that has been an Apprentice by the space of seven years?

It was agreed and resolved, That an Upholster is not a Trade within that Stat.
For first it is not a trade that is mentioned in any of the branches of the
Statute, Rat. 1.
howsoever in all parts of the Statute there is mention made of sixty one
several trades and mysteries. And if the Arti^ans which at that time were
Assistants unto the Commitees for the expressing of all manner of Trades, and
thought that the Trade of an Vpholster had been such a Trade that required Art
and Skill for the exercising of it, they would not have failed to make mention
of it. Secondly, there having been two former 2.
Acts of Parliament, that is to say, the Statute of 7. H. 7. cap. 17. and 5.
Ed. 6. cap. 23. made concerning Vpholsters, it was not necessary that mention
should be made of it in this Statute, and so it shall be intended that there
was purposely an omission made of an Vpholster, because there was sufficient
Provision made for him formerly. Thirdly, the Trade of an Vpholster does not
require any Art or 3.
Skill for the exercising of it, inasmuch as he has all things made to his
hand, and it is only to dispose them in order after such time as they are
brought to him, as the Ticks of his Beds he borrows from a Weaver, the Frames
of his Beds and Stools from the Joyners and Turners, his Iron-Rods and Nails
from the Smith, his guilding, and setting forth and adorning of his Beds and
Stools from the Guilder and Painter; and so he is like to Aesops Bird, which
borrows of every Bird a feather, his art resting merely in the overseeing and
disposition of such things which other men work, and in the putting of feathers
into a tick, and sowing them up when he has done, the which one that has been
an Apprentice unto it but seven days is able to perform. And the intent of this
Statute was not to extend unto any other trades, but such as required Art and
Skill for the managing of them: and therefore it was adjudged in the Exchequer
upon an information against one in the 42, year of the Reign of the late Queen
Eliz. that a Coster-monger was not a Trade intended by the Statute of 5. Eliz.
because his art was in the selling of Apples, the which required no skill or
experience for the exercise of it. So an Husbandman, Tankard-bearer,
Brickmaker, Porter, Miller, and such like Trades, are not within the Statute of
5. Eliz. cap. 4. so as none may exercise them, but such a one that has been an
Apprentice by the space of seven years; for they are arts which require rather
abillity of body than skill: But a Brewer and Baker are within the Statute,
because it concerns the health of men's bodies to have good Bread baked, and
Beer b^ewed, and so it is fit that they should have skill for the exercise of
them.

Fourthly, an Upholster being no such Rat. 4.
Trade within the Stat. of 5. Eliz. as may compel one to be an Apprentice unto
him for the space of seven years; for it is not mentioned within that branch
that concerns the compelling of men to be Apprentices. It is not any such
trade as is within that branch, which compels men to be Apprentices for the
space of seven years, before such time as they can exercise it; for none shall
be within the branch that restrains men to exercise their trades, where they
have not bin Apprentices by the space of seven years; but such as are within
that other branch, to compel men to be Apprentices unto them by the space of 7.
years. Quest. 6.


As to the sixth Question, which is; whether the Court of the Mayor of London
be such a Court of Record, as an information may be exhibited in it upon this
Statute of the 5. of Eliz. cap 4?

It was answered and resolved, that it Sol. ^:
was. For it is expressed by precise terms, in one of the last branches of the
said Statute, That the said Mayor, or other Head-Officers of the Cities or
Towns Corporate, shall have full power and authority to hear and determine all
and every offense and offenses, that shall be committed or done against this
Statute, or against any branch thereof, as well upon Indictment to be taken
before them in the Sessions of the Peace, as upon Informatio^^ Action of Debt,
or Bill or Complaint to be sued or exhibited by any person, and shall and may
by virtue thereof make process against the Defendant, and award Execution, as
in any other case they lawfully may by any the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
and the Presidents have been always accordingly. For in the 44. year of the
late Queen Eliz. an Information was exhibited by one Robinson against Toby, in
the Mayors Court of London, because he exercised the Trade of a Cutler* where
he had not been an Apprentice by the space of seven years, and allowed to be
well exhibited. So in the Case \l=o*\f one Banister, and Information exhibited
in that Court, because he had exercised the Trade of a Weaver, where he had not
been Apprentice by the space of seven years, was admitted good.

As to the seventh Question, which is, Quest. 7.
Whether the Informer may demand the Moiety of the forfeitures upon this
Statute, because in a branch in the latter end of the Statute, it is enacted,
That all manner of Amerciaments, Fines, Issues, and Forfeitures, which shall
arise, grow, or come by reason of any offenses, or defaults mentioned in this
Act or any branch thereof, within any City or Town Corporate, shall be levied,
gathered, and received by any person or persons of the same City, or Town
Corporate, as shall be appointed by the Mayor, or other Head Officers mentioned
in this Act, to the use and maintenance of the same City or Town, in such case
and condition as any other Amerciaments, Fines, Issues, or Forfeitures, have
been used to belevied, or employed within the same City or Town Corporate, by
reason of any Grant or Charter from the Queens Majesty that now is, or any her
Graces Noble Progenitors, made or granted to the same City, Borough, or Town
Corporate, any thing, or clause before mentioned or expressed to the contrary
notwithstanding?

It was answered and resolved, That the Informer might well demand a Moiety;
Sol.
for there being a former branch, that enacted, that the one half of all
forfeitures and penalties expested and mentioned in this Act other than such as
are expressly otherways appointed, shall be to our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, her Heirs, and Successors, and the other moiety to him or them that
shall sue for the same in any of the Queens Majesty's Courts of Record or
before any of the Jus^i^es of Oyer and Terminer, or before any other Justices
or Presidents and Council before remembered, by action of Debt, Information,
Bill of Complaint or otherwise: The Informer may demand his Moiety, by virtue
of this branch; and the subsequent branch which gives the Forfeitures unto the
Mayor, shall be taken only of the forfeitures which are given to the Queen, and
not of that which is given to the Informer, who is the means whereby the other
Moiety is brought to the Mayor, and other Officers.

The Custom of London Touching Foreign Attachment.
John Tenant a Citizen of London, is indebted forty pound by specialty Mich.
12 Jac. Rs. In Banco Rs.
unto one other Citizen of London, the which said Citizen is likewise indebted
unto one Robert Haydon, another Citizen of London in forty pounds upon a
simple contract. The Citizen so indebted unto Haydon died intestate. Thomas
Spink takes Letters of administration of the goods and chattels of the said
intestate. Tenant after the day of payment of his forty pounds promises Spink
in consideration that he will forbear him the payment of the said forty
pounds, by the space of two months to pay to Spink the said forty pounds.

Spink forbeareth Tenant accordingly, but the forty pounds is not paid
according to promise.

Afterward the debt due by Tenant, is attached in his hands according to the
custom of London of Foreign Attachments for the debt due by the intestate
unto Haydon, Spink brings his action upon the case against Tenant, for not
paying the 40. pounds according to his word who shows in his Plea in Bar,
That the Debt due by him unto the Intestate was attached according to the
custom of Foreign Attachments. And upon this Plea in Bar, Spink demurreth in
Law.

The Questions in this Case are,
1. Whether this Debt of the Intestate being only a Debt due upon a simple
Contract, be such a Debt of which a Foreign Attachment may be made according
to the custom of London?

2. Whether the custom of foreign Attachments may hold in this Case, Inasmuch
as by the Statute made in An 31. Ed. cap. the name of Administrators was
created, and before that Statute Lettars of Administration were never granted?

3. Whether there being a Foreign Attachment of the Debt due unto the
Intestate, after the not performing of the promise, and Title of action given
unto Spink the Plaintiff, be a dispensation with the promise, so as now the
action fails upon the promise for not paying the money.

As to the first Question, which is, Quest. 1.
Whether for the debt, being a debt due only upon a simple contract, a foreign
Attachment may be used or no?

It was agreed and resolved, that a foreign Attachment might well be sued for
it: For by the custom of London, the Executor or Administrator being
chargeable for a debt due by the Testator, or Intestate upon a simple contract,
as well as upon a specialty, a Foreign Attachment may be sued as well for that
debt, as for a debt due upon Specialty. And howsoever the Kings Bench, or any
other Court of Westminster, be not bound to take notice of this particular
custom of London in charging the Executors, or Administrators upon the simple
Contract, nor to give judgment according to the custom yet when judgment has
been given according to that custom, and that judgment appears judicially
unto the Judges by the Record: Now they ought to allow the custom, and give
their judgment according to that custom in affirmance of the judgment given
in London. But it was agreed, that if there had Mich. 39 40. Eliz
Paramoreversus Pain.
not been any debt due by the Intestate unto Haydon; Now howsoever there had
been an Attachment made in London of the debt due by Spink unto the Intestate,
and a judgment given upon it, yet might the Administrator have relieved
himself by way of Denial, and Traverse that there had been any debt due by the
Intestate unto Haydon.

As to the second Question, which is, Quest. 2.
Whether the custom of Foreign Attachments in London may hold as this Case is?

It was agreed and resolved, That it may and does well enough hold. For
howsoever that none was charge able at the Common Law by the name of an
Administrator, inasmuch as by the Statute of 31. Ed. 3. cap. No accusation lay
against an Administrator by that name; And that A custom may not commence
since the making of that Statute; yet inasmuch as he was chargable at the
Common Law as an Executor for his Administration so that the name of the charge
is only changed, and yet in substance is all one (For every Executor is an
Administrator and the pleading is upon an action brought against an Executor,
that he never was Executor, nor ever administered as an Executor. And an
Administrator has the quality and office of an Executor.) Therefore the custom
of Foreign Attachments will hold against an Administrator, as well as against
an Executor.

As to the third Question which is, Whether the Foreign Attachment for Quest.
the debt due unto the Intestate after the promise broken be such a
dispensation with the promise, that no Action now lies for the Administrator
upon the breach of the promise?

It was agreed and resolved, that the promise was dispensed with, and no action
lay upon the breach of it; for the debt due by Tenant unto the Intestate; which
was the ground, and cause of the promise made unto Spink: the Plaintiff is
taken away by the judgment had in London upon the custom of Foreign
Attachments, Et sublato fundamento fallit opus. And therefore if after the
promise broken there had been a Recovery had of the principal debt by the
Plaintiff as Administrator, or otherwise, there had been a Release made unto
the Defendant. Now the Action upon the Case upon the promise would have failed,
inasmuch as the debt, which was the consideration, and ground of the promise is
gone, and so the dampnification which he should have had by not performance of
the promise fails.

And agreeing to this resolution was the Case of one Bardeston, and Humfry
Mich. 37 38. Eliz. Rot. 414.
cited to be adjudged, whereupon an account, he that was found in Arrearges
upon a consideration of forbearance by one month, promises payment of them.
And those Arrerages thus due being attached in the hands of the Accomptant
after the promise broken; It was held that no Action might afterward be
maintained upon the breach of promise.

The Case concerning the Prisage of Wine.
KIng Edward the third in the first year of his Reign Ea. Term. 9. Iac. Rex
Roll. 163.
does by his Letters Patents bearing date the same time, grant unto the Mayor
and Commonalty of London, that no prisage shall be of any of the Wines of the
Citizens of London. But they shall be free, and discharged Kings Be.
from the payment of all manner of Prisage. George Hanger being a Citizen, and
Freeman of London; and Resient within the City, fraughteth four several Ships
with Merchandise to be transported beyond the Seas, the which four Ships being
disburdened of the said Merchandise are laden with Wines. Two of the Ships came
up the Thames at London, and before any unbulking of them, George Hanger makes
Frances Hanger being his wife his Executrix, and dies. Afterward the other
two Ships came up to London. Sir Thomas Waller being chief Butler of the King
by virtue of Letters Patents made unto him, Demands the payment of Prisage of
the said Frances Hanger for the Wines in the said four Ships, that is to say:
To you should read Frances all the way.
have of every of the Ships one Tun before the Mast, and one other Tun behind
the Mast. She denies the payment of it; whereupon the said Sir Thomas Waller
as chief Butler exhibiteth his Information into the Kings Bench against the
said Frances Hanger. Whereunto the said Frances pleads a special Plea in
Bar, showing the whole matter as abovesaid opon which Sir Thomas Waller
demurreth in Law.

The Questions of this case are two.
The first is, whether for the Wines which came up the Thames in the two Ships
before the death of George Hanger, any Prisage ought to be paid unto the King
or not?

The second is, whether any Prisage ought to be paid for the Wines, which were
upon the Sea in the Ships before the death of the said George Hanger but came
not up the Thames until after the death of George Hanger?

The case was argued at several times by Sir Henry Mountague Knight, then
Recorder of London, now Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Thomas Coventry
Counsel^ 5.
then Utter Barister now Solicitor General unto his Majesty, and Francis Mingay
an Utter Barister of the Inner Temple on the behalf of Frances Hanger and by
Henry Yelverton then an Apprentice of the Law of Graies-Inn, and now Attorney
General unto his Majesty, in the case
and Thomas Crew of the same Inn likewise an Apprentice of the Law on the part
of Sir Thomas Waller.

Likewise it was argued at several times Judges 8,
by the Judges of the Kings Bench, that is to say, first by Sir Thomas Fleming
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir Christopher Yelverton, Sir David
Williams, and Sir John Crook, and afterward by Sir Edward Cook Chief Justice
of the Kings Bench, Sir John Crook, Sir John Dodridge and Sir Robert Houghton.

And Sir Edward Crook, Sir Christopher Four of the Judges for the Defendant.
Yelverton, Sir David Williams, and Sir John Dodridge were of opinion, that
judgment ought to be given for Frances Hanger, against Sir Thomas Waller; for
they conceived upon the reasons following, that no Prisage ought to be paid,
neither for the Ships that came in after the death of George Hanger, nor for
the Ships that came in before the death of George Hanger, but they all were to
be discharged of the payment of Prisage by virtue of the said Charter made by
Edward the third unto the Mayor and Commonalty of London.

First in regard thath these Wines thus Rat. 1.
in each of the four Ships aforesaid, remained (notwithstanding the death of
George Hanger) to be still the Wines of George Hanger; for if Frances Hanger
the Executrix were to bring an Action for the recovery of them, she should
bring an Action as for the Wines of George Hanger, if Frances Hanger should be
wained or attainted of Felony or Treason, those Wines should not be forfeited,
insomuch as they are not the Wines of Frances Hanger, but of George Hanger. If
a Judgment in Debt or other Action should be had against Frances Hanger as
Executrix of George Hanger, these Wines should be taken in execution as the
Wines of George Hanger, and so these Wines thus brought in before, and after
the death of George Hanger, continuing as yet the Wines of George Hanger, to be
recovered as his 22. H. 6. 4.
Wines, to be taken in execution as his Wines, and to prevent a Forfeiture,
because these Wines shall be said to be the Wines of George Hanger, whereby
they may be protected, and privileged from the payment of Prisage within the
words, intent, meaning of the before recited Charter made by King Edward the
third, which points rather at the Wines then at the person of George Hanger.

Secondly, in regard that Frances Hanger Rat. 2.
being the Executrix of George Hanger, is the representative person of George
Hanger as to these Wines, so that such Privileges and Immunities as George
Hanger was to enjoy if he had been living, the same shall Frances Hanger have
benefit of after his death. And therefore 21 H. 6. 30
notwithstanding Frances Hanger had been a Nun, and so a dead person in Law to
all intents and purposes, yet she being made an Executrix and so the
representative person of the said George Hanger, shall be enabled to sue, and
be sued, as concerning the personal Estate of the Testator, so far as George
Hanger himself might sue, or be sued. And if Frances Hanger, being a Neif had
been made ^. 1 E. 4. 50.
Executrix now she being the representative person of George Hanger, may well
enough sue her Lord unto whom she is a Neif Reguardant, or any other person
whatsoever, and the being of a Neif shall not be any disability unto her, as to
her office of Executrix-ship. The same Law would have been if Frances Hanger
had been wained and afterward had been made Executrix; for she putting on the
person of George Hanger, and representing him, shall be clothed with the same
Privileges and Abilities as he was, and so Frances Hanger being enabled by the
common Laws of this Realm, to sue, and to be sued, although she had been a Nun,
a Neif, or a wained person, because she represented the person of George Hanger
whose Executrix she was, shall be likewise capable of this privilege of the
payment of Prisage for the Wines of George Hanger, as George Hanger was.

Thirdly this Charter made by King Edward the third, being a Charter only Rat,
3.
to discharge the Citizens of London of the payment of Prisage, and not a
Charter whereby the Prisage of the Citizens of London is granted unto others,
shall have a liberal construction, and not be streined unto a special intent as
a Patent of charge shall be; for it is evident by diverse cases in our Books,
that Frances Hanger being an Executrix, shall be taken to be within the remedy
of an Act of Parliament, to discharge her self of a burden imposed upon her in
respect of George Hanger her Testator, notwithstanding there was never so much
as any mention made of her as Executrix, in the Act of Parliament. And
therefore Frances Hanger being an Executrix, shall have an attaint upon the
Statute of 23. H. 8. chap. 3. 3 Eliz Die 100.
to discharge her self of a false Verdict given against George Hanger, whereby
his Goods are to be charged, and yet she is not named in the Act of Parliament.
So Frances Hanger being an Executrix, shall have a Writ of Error upon the
Statute of 27. El. chap. 8. in the Exchequer Chamber, to discharge her 26.
Eliz. the Lord Mordants Case.
self of an Erroneous Judgment given into the Kings Bench against George
Hanger, whereby his Goods are subject to an Execution. Likewise if George
Hanger be Outlawed upon a Writ of Cap. ad satisfaciend, awarded upon a
Judgment given in Debt, or other personal Action against him, Frances Hanger
as Executrix of George Hanger, shall take advantage of a general pardon made by
Act of Parliament in the life of George Hanger, and shall be suffered to plead
it, and to give satisfaction of the judgment given against George Hanger,
whereby she may be enabled to take benefit of the pardon; the which being so,
that Frances Hanger is a person capable to discharge her self of a false
Verdict of an Erroneous Judgment, of an Out-lawry pronounced against George
Hanger her husband where the Statute by precise words does not relieve her, a
fortiori shall Frances Hanger in the case at the Bar, be enabled to discharge
her self of the prisage of these Wines, within the Charter of Edward the third.

Fourthly, by the same reason, that the Butlarage shall be paid by the
Executors Rat 4.
or Administrators of an Alien, for the Wines brought into England, in case
where the Alien owner of the Wines do die before such time as the Ships are
unladen, and way shall not be given to make an evasion to the payment of
Butlarge, upon an averment that the owner of the Wines is dead before the
unbulcking of the Ships, so by the same reason prisage shall not be paid for
the Wines of George Hanger, who dyed before such time as the Ships came in; for
those Wines shall continue the Wines of the Alien, to make his Executors
subject unto the payment of Butlarage: so these Wines shall remain the Wines of
George Hanger, to free Frances Hanger his Executrix from the payment of prisage.

Fifthly, there being nothing done in the case at the Bar, to prevent George
Rat. 5.
Hanger whereby his Wines should be made incapable of the discharge of the
payment of Prisage within the Charter granted by King Edward the third but only
the death of George Hanger before the disburdening, and unlading of his Ships;
and this being only the Act of God, which by no power of man can be resisted,
nor wit prevented, shall never turn him to that prejudice that a charge now
shall be imposed upon his Wines, the which ought not to have been, if George
Hanger had over-lived the time of breaking the bulk; for it is a Maxim, held,
and a principle of the common Laws of the Realm, that the Act of God shall
never prejudice in case where there is not any Latches in the party; and upon
this reason is it that if one that is impleaded has cause of privilege,
because he is the menial Servant of the Lord Chancellor, he shall not be
prevented of privilege by the death of the Lord Chancellor, but he 35. H. 6.
3.
shall enjoy it, that death notwithstanding; likewise it would be a great
discouragement to the Merchants, to hazard their own lives in fighting against
the Pirates, and in being upon the Seas when their deaths shall subject them to
the payment of Prisage.

Sixthly, in the case at the Bar, there Rat. 6.
are four times to be observed; the first of which is the time of the
fraughting of the Ships, and the sending them out of England beyond the Seas;
the second is the time of the arrival of the Ships, and the unlading, and
disburdening of them beyond the Seas, the third is the time of the lading of
the Ships with Wines, and the returning of them for England; the fourth is the
time of the arrival at the Port in England, and the unlading of them here; and
three of these times were passed in the life of George Hadger when he was a
member of the City, and a Citizen as others are, for all the four Ships, and
part of the fourth time also for two of the Ships; for at the time that the
Ships were Fraughted and sent out of England to the intent to bring in these
commodities, George Hanger was a Citizen; so when the Ships arrived in the Port
beyond the Seas, and unladed themselves to receive ^n the Wines for which they
went, he continued a Citizen. Likewise when the Ships were laden with Wines,
and returning to the coasts of England, the hand of Heaven had not as yet
disfranchised him from being a Citizen, and member of the City of London. And
as to two of the Ships, the said George Hanger had his abode here until such
time as they were in the Port at London safe from being swallowed by the
surging waves of the Sea, secure from the surprising of the desparate Pirates;
the which being so that three of the four times as to all the four Ships were
past during the time that he was a member of the City, and also part of the
fourth time as to two of the Ships, it is reasonable to think that these Ships
shall participate of Immunity and Privilege, it be discharged of the payment
of prisage which is granted by the Charter made b^ King Edward the third
notwithstanding that the last time was not com^ before his death; and the more
especially also, because the law has such regard unto the commencement, and
beginning of a thing, and will have respect unto it, notwithstanding that there
belong distance of time between the in choation, and consummation of it. An^
therefore where a servant having an intention to kill his Master, does depart
ou^ of his service and long time after his departure out of his Masters service
does kill him, that is petty treason in the servant, 33. Ass. Parl. 7.
in regard of the retrospect which the Law has to the first intention of the
servant, when he was in his Masters service; and yet if you respect the time of
the murder committed, without regard had unto the first time, it cannot be
petty treason, because the servant was out of his service at that time.

Seventhly, it is to be observed, that Rat. 7.
this Charter to be discharged of the payment of prisage granted by King Edward
the third, was granted unto the Mayor and Commonalty of London, which is a body
that always continues, and never dies; and so howsoever that George Hanger,
unto whom (as unto a member of that body) the privilege of that Charter is
distributed, be dead, and cut off from that body, yet in so much that the body
politic of the Mayor and Commonalty unto whom the Charter was made lives,
the Privilege and Immunity of George Hanger to have his Wines discharged of
the payment of prisage will live, and continue in that body notwithstanding
that George Hanger be dead.

Eighthly this Charter being a Charter made for the advancement and good of Rat.
8.
Merchandise and trading (which are as it were the Blood which gives
nourishment unto the politic body of the Kingdom) is to have a favorable
and benign construction, whereby trading may be the better supported and
maintained; and the life of the State longer continued; and therefore where
King Edward the third in the third year of his Reign, granted unto the
Merchants of Almagne, France and Spain that they should come safely, and
securely with their Merchandise into England, and should be free from Pontage,
Murag^ and such other Tolles, this Grant was allowed to be good, and received
an exposition according unto the Law o^ Merchants, which is the Law of Nations;
and howsoever it would not b^ good by the strict rules of the Common Law,
because the Merchant-strange^ were not a Corporation able to take yet it was
admitted sufficient by that A^gem marcatoriam, according to which in some cases
of Merchants the Judg^ of the Common Law ought to give the Judgment, wherefore
in the case at the Bar, this Charter concerning the City of London, which is
the University of Merchants, and this case concerning George Hanger which was a
Scholar trained ^^ this in School, and had been matriculated in this place, the
Judge are to fram and give their Judgment so, as the Unversity and Scholars of
it, may receive the better encouragement to proceed and may not be disheartened
to dive^ their courses intended, from Merchandi^ing and Trading, by reason of
the stri^ construction of Charters which giv^ unto them Immunities, and
Privledges.

Ninthly and lastly, this very case received Rat. 9.
formerly the resolution of three Barons in the Exchequer, upon an Information
exhibited there by Sir Thomas Waller, that Frances Hanger should be discharged
of Prisage for the Wines in all the four Ships; whereupon Sir Thomas
discontinued his Information, and exhibited it denove in the Kings Bench,
whereby he would take the opinion of this Court likewise; and there having been
former opinion conceived for the discharge of them, it is more agreeable with
reason to have this opinion confirmed than opposed.

But Sir Thomas Fleming; Sir John Crook, and Sir Robert Haughton seemed Three
Judges of Contrary opinion.
upon the reasons hereafter ensuing, that Judgment ought to be given for Sir
Thomas Waller, and that prisage ought to be paid by Frances Hanger, both for
the Wines which were in the Ships that were arrived before the death of George
Hanger, as likewise for the Wines which were in the two Ships which were upon
the Sea at the time of the death of George Hanger; howsoever by way of advice
they wished that for the Wines in the Ships which were come home during his
life, the payment of prisage ought not to be pressed by Sir Thomas Waller.

First, in regard the Charter extends ^t. 1.
only to discharge the Wines of such a person as is a Citizen of London of the
payment of prisage, and George Hanger being dead, and so a Citizen of the
heavedly Jerusalem, may not be longer said to be a Citizen of London, and so
not within the compass of the Immunity granred by the Charter.

Secondly this privilege to be discharged 2.
of the payment of prisage, is in respect of the person who is the owner of the
Wines, and not in respect of the Wines themselves and then there being a
remotion of the person unto whom the exemption is tied, there is a remotion of
the exemption it self; and therefore notwithstanding a Tenant in ancient
Demesne, be by the Common Laws of this Realm to be discharged of the payment
of Toll in all Faires, and Markets, yet if the Tenant in ancient Demesne make
his Executors, and die the Executors for the Goods of the Testator are to pay a
Toll, in so much, that it was only a personal privilege which dies together
with the person.

Thirdly, this Charter bereaving the King of the payment of prisage which is a
Flower of his Crown, ought to have a strict construction, so as none may take
benefit of it, but only such as are within the precise words of the Charter;
wherefore George Hanger being dead, and so no more a Citizen of London,
howsoever the Wines in the Ship may be said to be the Wines of George Hanger to
a special intent, that is to say, for the payment of his Debts, and the
performance of his Legacies according to his true intendment expressed in his
Will, yet may they not be said to be the Goods of George Hanger to every
intent, in so much that Frances Hanger the Executrix has the disposition of
them according to her will, and pleasure, and the Poet says, Da tua dum tua
sunt, nam post mortem tua non sunt; and they not being the Wines of a Citizen
to every intent, but only to a special intent, may not be said to be capable of
the discharge of payment of prisage according to the Case that has been
adjudged, that where the King by his Letters Patents does grant 8. H. 42.
the Goods, and Chattels of all Felons and Fugitives unto a common person, now
the Patentee, by virtue of this grant, may not claim the Goods, and Chattels of
one that is a Felon of himself, in so much that he is a Felon only to a special
intent; and this being a Flower of the Kings Crown, shall not pass by general
words,

Fourthly, Prisage being a thing 4.
which is not due until such time as the bulk be broken; now forasmuch as
George Hanger was dead, and so was disfranchised before such time as the duty
accrued, the Charter shall not extend to discharge the Wines in the hands of
the Executrix of the payment of Prisage.

And so having given you a taste of the Sir H. Calthrops report and opinion.
opinion of the Judges upon the main case: I will descend to the other matters
considerable in this case, upon this Charter; and for better order and methods
sake, I will divide it into the parts hereafter following, that is to say.

First, what Prisage is, and to whom due, the nature of it, and the diversity
between Butlerage, and Prisage.

Secondly, what is the cause, and ground why the King has Prisage.

Thirdly at what time prisage shall be said to be due.

Fourthly, whether a grant, or discharge may be made by the King of Prisage.

Fifthly, whether the Charter of discharge unto the Mayor and Commonalty of the
payment of Prisage be good, when the grant is made to the Mayor and Commonalty,
and the benefit distributed unto the natural persons and the ground of the
making of this Charter.

Sixthly, what persons shall be discharged of the payment of Prisage within the
words of the Charter which says, Quod de vinis Civium nulla prisa fiat.

Seventhly, what Wines shall be said to be discharged of the payment of Prisage
within the words of the Charter.

As to the first, Prisage is a certain duty which the King and his
Predecessors by 1. What prisage is.
themselves, or their Officers by a custom (time out of mind of man) has used
to take for the provision of his household of all English Merchants of all Wines
whatsoever, which the said English Merchants bring from beyond the Seas into
the Coasts of England. In which said description it is first observed, that it
is a duty due from the subject unto his Majesty, and not a voluntary gift of
the subject unto the King. Hereupon it is that in H. 4. 3. in the Patent-Roll
in the Tower you shall find prisage termed by the name of Regia, and Recta
prisa; for that it apperreineth and is due unto the King of common Right; and
being a Flower of his Crown, may not belong unto any man else but by especial
Grant. Secondly, it appears that it is called a certain duty, because it is
manifestly certain, what the King shall have out of every Ship, both in respect
of the time when he shall take it, in respect of the place where he shall have
it, and in respect of the quantity which he shall have. For as to the time when
he shall take it, it is upon the breaking of the Bulk of the Ship, and not
before; for if a Ship come into the Port laden with Wines, and the Bulk of her
is not broken, now may not 6. E. 3. 5.
Prisage be demanded of her. And as to the place where the King shall take this
prisage, it is ascertained by a Book-Case, where it is said, That the King 20.
Ric. 2. Rot. Pat.
shall take one Tun behind the Mast, and the other before. And as to the
certain quantity which the King is to take, it is manifest by diverse ancient
Records; for if a Ship have ten Tun in her, and under the number of twenty
Tuns, then the King is to have one Tun only; but if the Ship contains twenty
Tuns and more, then the King is to have two Tuns, the one to be taken behind
the Mad, and the other before the Mast, the King paying for the portage
twenty^sh, and by reason of these certainties you shall find in the
Patent-Rolls in the Tower 28. E. 1. that it is called, 28. E, 1. Rot. Pat.
Certa prisa. Thirdly, it is to be observed that is not a duty newly
encroached, for it has by custom (time out of mind of man) been taken; for the
ancientest Records now remaining with us do make mention of the payment of it;
for in the Pat. Roll. aforementioned being in the 40th year of Henry the third
it is spoken of; and Fleta who wrote in the beginning Fleta. Lib. 2. cap. 22.
of E. 1. his time, has not been silent in declaring the nature of prisage;
and in the 15. E. 2. Rast all Estreats Sect. 22. an ordinance is made amongst
other things that the Butler of the King for the time being, either by himself
or his Deputy shall enroll the Wines of prisage, how many times he has taken
them, the testimony of persons of whom the price was had, where, and when, and
the Customers of England shall be charged according as they are assigned for
the gathering of customs within I certain bounds, that they twice yearly shall
certify the Treasurer and Barons how many Ships have arrived within their
bounds, etc. And how many Ships arrived of whom the King did take prisage of
Wine, and how many Tons, and in what Ships the King did take twosh. for the
Tun. And for the other price. And in the Pat. Roll. extant in 20. R. 2. you 20.
R. 2. Rot. Pat.
may see the Record speak in this manner. Memorandum quod Rex habet ex antiqua
consuetudine de qualibet navi mercatoria applicante infra aliquem portum Regni
Angliae duo dolia vini, etc. All which show the antiquity of it. Fourthly, it
is said of all English Merchants to make a difference between those that are
Merchants, and those that buy Wines beyond the Seas for their own private
provision. Secondly to make a distinction between the English Merchants and the
Merchant-strangers, for Merchant-strangers by a Charter made unto them (called
by the name of Charta Mercatoria) in the one and thirtieth year of E. 1, his
Reign are discharged of the payment of prisage, in recompense, and lien of
which Immunity granted unto them, the Merchant-strangers by way of thankful
restitution granted unto the King and his Successors, that he should have two
sh. of every Tun of Wine brought in by them within forty days after it is
brought into the Port, the which two sh. is called by the name of Butlerage,
because the Kings Chief Butler by reason of his Office is to receive it. And
those subject of the Kings who do buy Wines beyond the Seas for their own
spending, without any intention to Merchandise, ought not to pay prisage for
those Wines. Sixthly, it is expressed of all Wines brought from beyond the
Seas; for that if Wines should be made in England. as in times past they have
been (as it appears by an ancient Record in Windsor-Castle, where it is said
that the Parson had ten pound for the Tithe of Claret Wine mad there) and they
should be transported from one Port to another to be sold, no prisage shall be
paid for them. Lastly, it is described which has used to be taken, and not
which has used to be paid by the owners, and Merchants of the Wines, and the
Etymology of the word imports as much. For Prisae being the Latin word for
prisage, has it is name of prendere, and is no more than Prizel, which is
taking, and is a Participle of the word Prendere, which may be applied to all
manner of takings; howsoever here it is only limited to the taking of Wines.

As to the second part, which is what 2. The ground of paying the K. prisage.
is the cause, and ground of the payment of prisage, there is not any Record to
be seen which manifests the original cause of the payment of it; but it is
probably conjectured that for as much as the King of England is King of the
narrow Seas, and has been always at a perpetual charge in the maintaining of
Ships for the defense of his Merchants, and protecting of them from the cruel
spoil of the Pirates, and in scouring the Seas to make their passage the more
secure; therefore in recompense and satisfaction of this care, and charge, the
Merchants have always used (time out of mind) to give an allowance unto the
King, and his Officers for the taking of this prisage of Wines for the better
provision of his household, the which allowance, and usage being continued time
out of mind, has made it to be a duty unto the King, and likewise because the
King has used to take one Tun out of ten Tuns, and two Tuns out of twenty Tuns
(for in ancient time, the Ships that went for these Wines being no great
Voyage, were not of much greater burden) some have conceived that this was in
nature of a Tithe, paid unto the King, and as the particular Pastor, which
ministers spiritual things for the Food of the Soul, has of right the tenth
part of his clear gains due unto him: So the King in that proportion being
Parens patriae, and the general Pastor of all his Subjects, protecting their
lives and goods from violent oppression upon the Seas has received, and taken
the tenth part of the Wines brought in. But this only conjectured, and
therefore I cannot warrant it to be a sure Foundation to build on.

As to the third, which is, at what time prisage is said to be due. I do
likewise 3. When prisage is due.
find some doubt to be made of it; for some Judges (unto whose Learning, and
Judgment because of their Eminent Sir Ed. Crook, Sir John Doddridge.
parts, and singular industry, much reverence is to be ascribed) have been of
opinion that before such time as the bulk of the Ship be broken up, or that it
be arrived at the English Port, prisage is due, and therefore if a Ship after
such time as it is come up into the Haven, finding that Wines will not bear any
price, does before the Bulk of the Ship be broken, depart out of the Harbor,
and go back beyond the Seas, and there vent those Wines. The King, this
notwithstanding, may require his prisage at the Merchants hands; for the narrow
Seas being within the Allegiance of the King of England, as it appears by
diverse of our year-Books, so soon as the 6. R. 2. 46.
Ships come upon them, there is the duty of prisage accrued unto the King,
whereof it does not lie in the power of the Merchant to defeat him; and also
the very nature of prisage being to have one Tun before the Mast, and one other
Tun behind the Mast, shows that the King has an Election to take his Tuns of
Wine where he will, the which may not be, if the duty of prisage should arise
out of the breaking of the Bulk for when the Bulk is broken, how does it appear
which is the Tun before the Mast, and which is the Tun behind the Mast? So as
the King may have the Election to take his prisage, as the Law gives it unto
him; and they are of opinion, that if a Ship come into the Port laden with
Wines, that the King is not to expect his prisage where the Merchant will
unlade his Wines; for it being a certain duty accrued unto the King upon the
coming into the Port, he may take it at the Port, and is not bound to wait upon
the Merchant from one Port unto another, until he will or can unlade his Ship:
But the residue of the Justices which argued in this case, were of opinion,
that prisage is not due, until the Bulk of the Ship be broken; so as that if
the Merchant after his arrival at the Port, will go unto another Port, the King
may not take his prisage before such time as they come unto that Port where
they unlade; and their opinion was grounded upon the reasons following, that is
to say; First, because the reason and ground of the payment of prisage, being
the security which the Merchants enjoy by, and through the care and charge of
the King upon the narrow Seas, they ought to be secured of that benefit, before
such time as they shall be forced to pay the duty; and before the breaking of
the Bulk of the Ship, they are not ascertained of their safe conduct, insomuch
that howsoever they be in the Port or Harbor, yet they may have cause to put
out into the Main again, as if they were driven in there through danger of
Pirates, or violence of Tempests, their Cocquet showing their course to be bent
unto another place, and it is no reason that the K. should take his duty before
such time as the Merchant be assured of his protection. Secondly, incertainties
are always odious in Law; for they are the Mother of confusion, whereas the Law
expects and requires order: And if the time expressed be always ambiguous,
or doubtful, it is careful in the determining and setting of it down certainly;
and for the most part where it is left to her construction, she gives the
longest time for the doing of it, whereby best advantage may be given unto the
party which is to do it, the which may be manifest by diverse instances of cases
set down in our Books which I do purposely omit to avoid too much prolixity;
Wherefore it being the most certain, and the most equal time both for the King
and Merchant to have the prisage taken when the Bulk of the Ship is broken; the
Law, to whose construction it is left, shall rather ordain the taking of it to
be then, than at any other time; for if the Law should say, that it is a duty
presently upon the coming upon the narrow Seas, it should say, it is a duty
before such time as the Merchant can assure himself they are his Wines to
dispose, insomuch that before the coming into Harbor, they may be swallowed up
by the Seas, or he may be dispoiled of them by Enemies unto the King, or Rebels
unto the State. And if the Law should determine the duty to the King when the
Ships are safely in the Harbor, there might a great inconvenience ensue upon
this Judgment, because it may very well be, that their course was intended to
another place, and they were driven in there only by misadventure, and it would
be mischievous to have the Ship rifled, and their Wines disordered, before they
had attained unto the intended Haven. Thirdly, this opinion is consonant unto
the Judgments in former times; for it was ruled in the case of one Kenniston,
Kenniston.
and Boggius, in the fifth year of his Majesty's Reign that now is, that
prisage shall not be said to be due until such time as the Bulk be broken, and
the Ship unladen. And likewise there is a Record, by which it appears, that
the King is to have Prisage of every Ship bringing Wine into England and
unladen thereof, so as if it be not unladen then the King by that Record is not
to have Prisage. Besides, it appears by the Record concerning the payment of
Butlerage by the Merchant Aliens, that the King is to have there two shillings
of them for every Tun within forty days after the unlading; so as the Law
points at the unlading; wheresore this Prisage differing only because the
VVines are paid in specie, it shall be an Argument thus far to persuade, that
the Law will not appoint the time of taking the Wines in specie before the
unlading, when it gives for the payment of the two shillings until sourty
days after the unlading.

Fourthly, it was resolved that howsoever 4. Whether the King may grant, or
discharge Prisage.
Prisage of Wines is a Flower of the Crown, yet is it not such an inseparable
Flower of the Crown, but that it may well enough be granted over, for it is a
matter of profit and benefit which is to redound unto the King, and it is not
of the nature of a Purachans merely, for that it is inseperably annexed in
privity unto the person of the King, that it may not be granted over. And
accordingly it was resolved in the case of Sir Thomas Vavasor, who married 41.
Elix.
one of the Daughters of Alderman Houghton, who had a Grant of the Prisage made
unto him. And in the 15. of E. 4. in the Patent-Rolls it appears, that one
Fitzherbert had 15 E 4. Rot. Pat.
a Grant made unto him, and by the same reason that a Grant may be made of
Prisage, a fortiori may there be a Grant made unto certain persons to discharge
them of the payment of it; for it is easier to make one capable in point of
discharge, than by way of Grant, and the Charter made to the Merchants
Strangers for the discharge of the payment of Prisage. And the Statute of 1. H
8. cap. 5. shows that a Charter made for the discharge of Prisage, is well,
and allowable,

Fifthly, this Grant made unto the 5. Grant to a body politic for the benefit
of bodies natural. 39 E. 3. 21. 21 E. 4. 55.
Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors, Quod de vinis civium nulla prisa
fiat, is good enough, and the grant may well enough be made unto a body
politic, and the benefit of the Patent distributed unto a body natural; for
Patents of that nature are usual in the year-Book of the Common Laws of this
our Realm, and never any exception taken unto them when there has been less
warrant in reason to make them good, then there is for this our Patent which we
have here in hand: For the City of London being the Metropolitan City of this
Land, the which may well be called the Heart and Epitome of the whole Realm,
and the Chamber of the King, the Merchants whereof do fill the Coffers of the
Prince by their customs, and do supply the Subjects of his Majesty with all
manner of necessaries, do increase the honor of their Nation by their
Commerce, and Traffic abroad, and do strengthen the whole body of it by
shipping, which are termed the wooden Walls. It is reason that all Charters
made in their favor, and giving them Immunities and Privileges, should
receive a benign interpretation, and the more especially also, because at this
time all Merchants strangers had a Charter of discharge for the payment of
prisage, but only that they were to pay two shillings in the Tun; and so if the
Merchants of London should not have had a Charter of discharge, they would have
been discouraged from trading for Wines, because the Merchants strangers would
have been able to have afforded their Wines at easier rates, because they were
freed of some part of that charge, which the English Merchants were burdened
with.

Sixthly, as to the Declaration, what persons shall be discharged of the
payment 6. Whatpersons are discharged by the words of the Charter.
of prisage within the words of this Charter, it will be the better manifested
by showing the destinctions and degrees of Citizens which are to be found, for
there is mention made of five manner of Citizens. The first of which is, he 1.
Sort. Citizens of five sorts.
that is a Citizen of London, for the bearing of offices in the City, and such
special intents, because he is a Freeman of the City, but he is not a Citizen
in residency and continuance in the City; for he inhabiteth and dwells out of
the City, and such a Citizen as this, is not such a Citizen as shall enjoy the
benefit and privilege to be discharged of the payment of prisage, according to
the resolution given in the Exchequer in the Case of one Knolls. Trin. 4. H. 6.
Rot. 14. where it was ruled, that one that was a Citizen and Freeman of London
but dwelt in Bristol, might not partake of the benefit of this Charter,
insomuch, that he by reason of his dwelling out of the City, was only a Citizen
to a special intent. The second sort of 2. Sort.
Citizens are those which are Citizens in respect of their Freedom, and
likewise in regard of residence within the City, but are not such Citizens as
do keep a Family and Household within the City, but are Inmates and Sojourners,
and they do harbor themselves under the Roof of another, and a Citizen of this
nature, is not a Citizen which is capable of the Immunity granted by this
Charter; for the discharge of payment of prisage, according to the resolution
given in the Exchequer, in the case of one Snead and Sacheneril. Hill. 43.
Eliz. Rot. 22. for such a Citizen is not subject to Scot and Lot, as he that is
a householder, Et qui non sentit onus, sentire non debet commodum. The third
sort of Citizens are those which do inhabit, reside, and 3. Sort.
keep a Family in the City, but they are not Freemen of the City, so as they
may be chosen in any office, and undergo the charge of the City; and as well as
the Common Law does exclude such Citizens for devising Lands in Mortmaigne 28.
Ass. Par. 25.
unto the Guild of the City, according to the custom of the City of 28. Ass.
Pat. 18.
London, as appears by diverse Book-Cases, as well shall the Common Law
exclude them from enjoining the benefit of the Charter to be discharged of the
payment of prisage. The fourth sort of Citizens, are those which are both
Citizens, 4. Sort.
and Freemen, and do reside, and keep family in the City of London, and they
are not continuing Citizens at such time as the Bulk is broken, and the Ship
unladen; for they were disfranchised before. These Citizens likewise shall not
enjoy the exemption granted for the discharge of the payment of Prisage:
insomuch that they were not continuing Citizens at that time as the prisage
ought to be taken. The fifth sort of Citizens, are those which are both
Citizens, 5. Sort.
and Freemen, and have their families and dwelling in London, and do continue
Citizens at such time as prisage, ought to be taken: Now Citizens of this kind
are the real, proper, and natural Citizens intended by this Charter, which are
to be discharged of prisage; and therefore a Woman which is a Citizen of this
kind, howsoever she cannot bear offices in the City as a Citize^, is yet
intended by the Charter: And yet also in some cases, Citizens of this kind
shall not be intended within the words of this Charter; and therefore if the
Mayor and Commonalty have a joint Stock of Wines come into the Port of London,
now prisage shall be taken of these Wine, not withstanding that every of them
in their proper persons Citizens, both residentia, familia, and continuatione;
for respect is not to be had to their natural bodies, but to their politic
body, in which capacity the Charter will not extend to them. So if one at the
time, that he fraughteth a Ship, be not a Citizen in all the degrees, now
howsoever afterward before the return of the Ship he be enabled in every
respect, yet he shall not enjoy the benefit of the Charter, insomuch that he
was not so at that time that the Ship was sent abroad.

Seventhly and lastly, what Wines shall be discharged of the payment of 7. What
Wines are discharged of prisage.
prisage, it will better appear by the consideration had of the several kinds
of properties; and therefore he that shall have his Wines discharged of prisage
ought to have a property in them, quarto modo, that is, sibi solum and semper;
and also he ought to have jus possessionis and jus proprietatis, and the one
without the other will not serve the turn; and therefore if a Citizen and
Forreigner be joint Merchants for Wines, now the Wines of these joint Merchants
shall not be discharged of the payment of prisage, insomuch that the Citizen
has not a sole property in them, and it may not be distingnished which of the
Wines belong unto the Citizen, and which to the Forreigner, because of their
joint interest. But if two Citizens be joint Merchants or Tenants in common of
Wines, now these Wines shall be within the compass of the Charter to be
discharged of prisage, because they are the Wines of the Citizens of London,
according to the words and intent of the Charter; howsoever neither of them
have a sole interest and property in them. And if a Citizen and Freeman of
London has Wines pledged unto him by another Citizen and Freeman. Now these
Wines upon their coming home shall not be discharged of the payment of prisage,
insomuch that the Citizen has only a special property in them, and not any
absolute property. So if a Forreigner that has fraughted Ships beyond the Seas
for the bringing of Wines into England, does make a Citizen of London his
Executor, and die, and the Ship comes into the Port; now these Wines thus in
the custody of the Citizen shall not be discharged of the payment of prisage,
for as much as the Citizen has only a property in the Wines to the use, and
behoof of the Forreigner, and has not any absolute property in the Wines. And
if one Citizen of London that has Wines abroad coming into England, do make a
Forreigner his Executor, and dies, and this foreign Executor does employ the
Stock that comes of these wines so returned home after the death of him that
set them forth, and Wines are returned home, now howsoever these last Wines so
returned into England are Assets in the hands of the Executor, and in
Appellation are the Goods of the first Citizen, yet they are such Wines as are
capable of the discharge of prisage within the words of, the Charter, because
these Wines came in 1. H. 8. cap. 5.
as it were upon a new contract. And if a Citizen do buy Wines with an intent
that a Forreigner upon their coming home shall have these Wines, now these
Wines shall not be discharged of prisage, and this deceit of buying them by a
Citizen, shall not any ways avail him, no more then if a Citizen buy Cloth, in
London for a Forreigner he shall defeat the custom of Foreign bought, and
Foreign sold, to avoid the Forfeiture of them. So the Wines which a Forreigner
buyeth of a Citizen; or that a Citizen buyeth of a Forreigner, shall not be
discharged of prisage within the words of the Charter, because they were not
the Wines of a Citizen always, from the time of the lading of them, until the
time of the unlading of them, as they ought to be.

The case concerning repairing of Wharfes and Docks.
Termino Sancti Mich. Anno Regni Jac. Regis 7. in the Kings Bench.
Cornelius Fish Chamberlain of London, distreined the Goods of one Walter
Keate, for a pain assessed by the Common Council of London, and all the matter
appeared upon the return of the Sheriffs of London, which was very long; but to
this effect: They returned the Usage, and Power, and Custom of the City of
London, to make By laws by their Common Council; and that Puddle-Dock near
Pauls-Wharfe was an ancient place for lading and unlading of Ships, Boats, and
Lighters, and that it was in decay, and that for reparation of it, it was
ordained, that every Ship that should be laden and unloaden there, should pay
a penny for every load; and that every Carman for every load which he should
carry from thence, shoul pay a penny; and that the said Walter Keate had
carried diverse load, which according to the rate of one penny for every load,
did amount to the value of ten shilling; and that the City did grant this
Assessment to the Chamberlain, in recompense of the charges which ^e should
expend about the said reparations and upon this Certificate a Procedendo was
wayed, and it was alleged, that ^his By law being for the benefit of the City,
was good by Law, and ought to be obeyed, and so it came to be debated.
(Yelverton Henry) prayed, that no Procedendo might be granted, because the
return and the matter of it, is against the Common Law, the Weal ^ublique, and
against the Liberty of the City it self. By the Council Sexto Iacobi it was
ordained, That as well Citizens, as Strangers, should pay, and the King could
not grant^it to the City; son it is an imposition not allowed by the Law, first
against Citizens; because although the Ta^ may be made for the genera^ good of
the City, yet it cannot b^ imposed or taxed upon particula^ persons, but upon
every House o^ the City, etc. but here it is particular and personal to this
part of the City. Also this Dock was never repaired at the general charge of
the City, but by the particular War^ of Baynards-Castle. Also the Citizens of
London shall not pay To^ in any place of England; and her the Dock stands upon
the passage o^ the City, and every Wharfe is as ^ Gate of the City, and
therefore they may as well impose a tax upon every one which goes out of any
of the Gates of the City (which is unreasonable, and against Law as out of this
Wharfe. And also here is no certain profit to the City, but this taxation is
farmed for one and twenty years, for ten shillings a year to the City, which if
it were a general charge, there ought to come some general benefit by it to the
City. It is not like to the case of Cloth, Co. part. 5. fol. 62. because that
was for the general good of the Realm, and in the furtherance of the Execution
of diverse Statutes; but this is neither in furtherance of either Statute, or
common Law, but rather to the prejudice of both, because every Citizen, in
respect of his Freedom, is equal to the Lord Mayor. And 29. Eliz. in the
Common Pleas, it was ordained by the Common Council, That none should use any
Sand in the City, except it were taken out of the Thames, and it was adjudged
to be against Law, and the Officer of the Mayor was committed to Prison. And
this Dock did heretofore belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and has ever
been free, also here the Assessment is unreasonable, viz. to pay for every load
a penny, especially for Inhabitans about, and near the Dock; and so he prayed
that there might be no Procedendo. (Crook George) was of the same side; And he
said, that by the Act of Common Council it is enacted, that none shall carry,
etc. so that by that Ordinance none shall carry a Paile of Water, but he shall
pay a penny for it. Also the Assessment is to be levied, and to continue for
twenty one years together, which is unreasonable; and it has been adjudged
here, that an Assessment levied for twenty one years, for reparations of a
Church, was not lawful. (Mosley of Grays-Inne) prayed for a Procedendo, and
said, that it did not appear by the return, that K^ate was a Citizen, and the
Judges are not to meddle with any thing which is not within the return, and he
said it was a good Bylaw, founded both upon custom and prescription; and he
put Taverner and Cromwells Case, Pasch. 16. Eliz. 322. 323. Dyer, where the
Lord of a Manor made a Bylaw, that no Tenant should put his Beast into the
Common, before the ringing of a Bell, upon pain to forfeit twelve pence, and
adjudged a good Ordinance, and he cited Smith and Shepherds cafe, 49. Eliz.
where there was a prescription for through Toll, adjudged to be good, because
it was for maintenance of Highways, so here it is for the Weal Public, of
that part of the City, and for all the City; and it should be a great
inconvenience, that this Wharfe should not pay, add that all other Wharfes
should pay Toll, and that was one wisemans Case, 42. Eliz. that Wharfaye by
prescription is good; and 44. Elizab. in Hankshead and Wooas Case, where Toll
was paid for maintenance of the Walls of Salisbury; for every pack of Wool
which passed by, one penny, and holden to be a good imposition; and the case of
Gravesend, where there was an imposition, that every one which landed at
Gravesend, should pay a penny toward reparation of the Bridge, and good by the
better opinion of 11. H. 6. Of Fair and Market (Walter) was of the same side,
this by Law is good: First, it is not against the Rules of Law, nor the
Prerogative of the King, nor the benefit of the Subfect; for by the Statute of
4. H. 7. cap. 15. 16. that the City of London is conservator of the River of
Thames, from Stanes to Yealand, in the County of Kent: Also by the Statute of
28. H. 8. cap. it is ordained, that the River shall not be stopped, Ergo this
by Law is for the better execution of those two Acts of Parliament Secondly, it
is a benefit to the Subject, because before, none could any thing there without
danger; but now by this means the rubbish is cleansed, and a stranger shall
have a quicker and safer return, and the penalty upon the Cloth, in the Case
before cited, Co. part. 5. is a stronger Case then this is, because Dock has
continue all need to be cleansed; and if such a Tax should be for reparations
of the Walls of a City, it would be good: As to the objection, he answered,
that as the said Case of Hallage cited before, Co. part. 5. so this is a
general in particular, and the Tax upon the Cloth was to be paid to a
particular person, viz. the Chamberlain, as here it is, who is a General
Officer for the City. The Case of digging of Sand was not good, because thereby
a man was prohibited to use his his own inheritance: Commoners may make a by
Law, that none shall put in his Beasts before such a day; but if the by Law be,
that one particular man shall not put in his Beasts before such a day, that
would not be good; but our Case is more general, and so prayed for a
Procedendo. (Mountague Recorder.) If this be overthrown, all the Orders and
Ordinance of the City should be made void, and stand for nothing; and he said
that the very objection, that a Tax could not be imposed upon Strangers, was
made in the Case of Hallage before (Yelverton Henry.) The Case that Walter has
put for the cleansing of rubbish, etc. may be good, but there is no such thing
here, but Tax only for landing, and adjurnatur.

The Custom of London, To fine one chosen by the Commons to be Sheriff, and
refusing to hold.
RIchard Chamberlain a Citizen, and Freeman of London being chosen by the
Commons according to the custom of London to be one of the Sheriffs of the
City of London, is convented before the Major, and Commonalty to take the
Office upon him, or otherwise to take his Oath that he is not worth ten
thousand pounds; upon his appearance he refuses to take the Oath, and likewise
to execute the Office: whereupon according to the custom of London he is fined
four hundred Marks, and committed to prison until such time as he enter into
Bond unto the Major and Commonalty for the payment of it.

He becomes bound accordingly unto the Major and Commonalty for payment of the
said sum at a certain day, and thereupon is enlarged.

The four hundred Marks are not paid at the day, whereupon the Mayor and
Commonalty affirm a Plaint against him in London for the said Debt. The
Defendant obtains a Habeas Corpus to remove the body and the cause into the
Kings Bench, upon a supposition that he was to have the Privilege by reason of
a Priority of Suit in the Kings Bench, and upon return of the Habeas Corpus,
all this matter appeared unto the Court, and it was moved by Sir Henry
Mountague, now Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, then one of the Sergeants
of the King and Recorder of London, that a Procedendo might be granted, whereby
the Major, and Commonalty might proceed against him in the Court at London. It
being a customary Suit merely grounded upon the custom of London. But that was
denied by Sir Edward Cook Chief Justice, and the whole Court, because by the
Law, Chamberlain having cause of Privilege by reason of the Priority of Suit
against him in the Kings Bench, might not be re-manded; but he was to answer in
that Court. Whereupon the Major and Commonalty did declare against him upon the
said Obligation in the Kings Bench.

Secondly, it was moved that the action upon this obligation might be laid in
some indifferent County, and not in London; forasmuch as the Trial there must
be had by those that were Parties unto the Action, it being brought by the
Mayor and Commonalty. But Sir Edward Cook, and the Court would not upon this
surmise take away the benefit which the Law gives to every Plaintiff upon a
transitory action, which is to lay it in whatsoever County he will. And if there
be any such cause as is surmised, then after Plea pleaded, he may make an
allegation, That the City of London is a County in it self, and that all the
Citizens there are Parties to the Action which is brought, whereby there may
not be an indifferent Trial. And upon this surmise, the Court shall order the
Trial to be in a Foreign County. The which was done accordingly: and so the
matter proceeded.

The Case of the Merchant-Adventurers.
KIng Edward the third, in the year of his reign by Letters Patents does
incorporate certain persons by the name of the Merchants-Adventurers of
England, and does give power unto them to transport white Clothes into diverse
parts beyond the Seas, restrayning them from carrying over Woolls.

The Merchants-Adventurers do trade beyond the Seas and continue the
transposing of Clothes white until the 29. of August, in the tenth year of his
Majesty's Reign that now is. At which time the King by his Letters Pattents
does encorporate the Earl of Sussex late Lord Treasurer of England, Sir Thomas
Vavasour, Sir Stephen Soam, William Cockayn, and others by the name of The
Merchants Adventerers of the new trade of London with full power and authority
to transport dyed, and dressed Cloths into diverse parts beyond the Seas, with a
restraint prohibiting all the Old Merchants-Adventurers, which did not join
themselves unto this new Company to tranport any under the forfeiture of them,
and also inhibiting the New Merchants from transporting any Clothes but such as
are died and dressed. And after three years passed, they having power during
that time to transport 36000, white Clothes: And there being a refusal of the
Old Merchants Adventurers to surrender up their Patent; The King brings a Quo
Warranto against diverse of the Merchants of the old Company by particular
names, to know by what Warrant they do without License of the King transport
Clothes white, undied, and undressed beyond the Seas.

The Merchants upon the return of the Quo Warranto do make their appearance;
And an Information being exhibited against them by Sir Fr. Bacon Knight, now
Lord Chancellor of England and then Attorney General unto his Majesty, comes
into the Kings Bench, and moves the Court that the old Merchants Adventurers
might have a short day the next ensuing Term, to answer unto the Information
exhibited against them. Insomuch, that the new Company of Merchants Adventurers
standing at a gaze, as being uncertain of what validity the old Patent would
be, did slack to transplant the Diers, and other Tradesmen out of the
Low Countries into England, being necessary Instruments for the putting in
Execution of this design, because there were not here in England those that
were able to Die and Dress, in that manner that the Low Country men did. And so
there was in the interim a stop of the current of Merchandising with our Cloth,
the which being the principal Commodity that we had here in England; the Fleece
that causes it, may well and aptly have the term of, The Golden Fleece; and
there being a stop made of the traffiquing and trading with these clothes, it
is as dangerous unto the Politic Body of the Commonwealth, as the stop of a
Vein could be to the natural Body; for as by the stop of a Vein the Blood is
debarred of his free passage, and so of necessity there must be a Consumption
by the continuance of it follow unto the body natural: So traffic being the
Blood which runs in the Veins of the Commonwealth, it cannot be but that the
hinderance of it by any long continuance, must breed a Consumption unto the
State of the Commonwealth; Wherefore, to open this Vein, which was as yet
somewhat stopped, and to give a more free passage unto the Blood, he was a
Suitor unto the Court, on the behalf of the Company of the New
Merchant-Adventurers, that the Court would give expedition in this Case; for
they conceived, that if this new design might take its full effect, as it was
intended, it could not be, but of necessity there must a great benefit redound
to the Commonwealth.

For first, Whereas our State grows sick, by reason of the many idle Persons
1. Benefits of having Woollen Cloth Died and dressed in England.
which have not means to be set on work, this Dying and Dressing of Cloths
within our Kingdom, would give sufficient employment unto them all, whereby
there should be a cure to the lazy Leprosy, which now overspreadeth our
Commonwealth.

Secondly, Whereas now we send out clothes White, and the Low-Country-men 2.
receive them of us, and Dye them and Dress them, and afterward transport them
unto foreign parts, making a wonderful benefit to themselves, both in point of
profit, and likewise in respect of maintaining their Navy; whereas, if the
Clothes were Died and Dressed by our selves, we might reap that matter of gain,
and also be Masters of the Sea, by strengthening our selves in our Shipping.

Thirdly, Whereas there happens 3.
often a confiscation of all our Clothes, and much disgrace and discredit
lights upon our Nation, and our Clothes, by the abuse of the Low-Country-men,
in stretching them a greater length than they will well bear, when they Dye and
Dress them; now it should be prevented, when they should never have the
fingering of them, to put that abuse in practice: Wherefore this Patent made by
King Edw. the 3. bereaving the King and Commonwealth of these great benefits
and commodities, is against the Law and so ought to be repealed. And day was
given accordingly to put in their Plea.

At which time, many of the old Merchants-Adventurers being willing that trial
should be made, whether the benefit intended unto the Commonwealth might be
compassed, did show (to their obedience unto the King, and desire of the good
of their Country) Surrender up their Patent into the hands of his Majesty;
since which time, it being found by experience that the project had not that
success which they expected, and likewise Cloth and Wool lay dead, because
there was no vent for them abroad: The King according to his power reserved
unto him in his Patent, by which he erected, and created the new Company of
Merchants Adventurers of London, did make repeal and revocation of the said New
Patent and new Company, and did redeliver unto the old Merchants their Patent,
confirming it, and likewise by another Charter did enlarge the Liberties and
Privileges of the old Merchants, by reason of which Grace of the King, the old
Company of Merchants-Adventurers of England are reestablished in that estate
wherein they formerly were, and they do now trade again, as formerly they did,
to the great content of the Subject, and benefit of the King and Country.

Certifying Indictments upon Certioraries.
John Forner, John Evans, and diverse others, Hill. 12. Jac. Rex K. Bench.
being Indicted before Sir Thomas Hayes, Lord Mayor of London, Sir Henry
Mountague, Sergeant unto the King, and Recorder of London, Sir Thomas Low, and
diverse others by virtue of a Commission granted unto them; a Certiorari was
directed unto them, as Justices of Peace out of the Kings Bench, for the
certifying the said Indictment, upon which Certiorari, no return was made;
whereupon a second Certiorari was awarded unto the said Commissioners,
commanding them to certify the said Indictment upon a pain, upon which
Certiorari, a return was made in this manner:

That is to say, that King H. 6. in the 23. year of his Reign by his Letters
Patents, bearing the same date, did grant unto the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs of London, that they should not be compelled upon any Writ directed
unto them, to certify the Indictments themselves, taken before them, but only
the Tenors of them, the which they have done accordingly; and Exception being
taken unto this Return for the insufficiency of it; it was resolved by Sir
Edward Cook Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir John Crook, Sir John
Doddridg, and Sir Robert Haughton, that the return, upon the reasons hereafter
following, was insufficient.

For first, the Letters Patents being granted unto them by the name of the Rat.
1.
Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of the City of London, warranteth only the not
certifying of Indictments taken before them, as Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs
of London; and where the Writ is directed unto them by that name, and they do
not excuse them, in Case where the Writ is directed unto them as Justices of
Peace, and where the Indictments are taken before them as Justices of Peace, by
virtue of the Kings Commission. And howsoever the Mayor and Aldermen are
Justices of Peace by Charter, yet insomuch that they are distinct powers,
return made by them by the name of Mayor and Aldermen, where the Writ is
directed unto them (as Justices of Peace) will not be good.

Secondly, there being a Resumption 2. Past all Resumption.
made by Act of Parliament in 28. H. 6. whereby all Lands, Tenements, Grants,
Rent, and Fees granted since the first day of his Reign were resumed; the
Letters Patents made in 23. H. 6. unto the Mayor and Commonalty, are
annihilated and made void, and so no hold may be taken of them; and the Statute
made in 1. Edw. 4. cap. 1. only confirms those privileges not heretofore
revoked and repealed by Act of Parliament, or otherwise; and howsoever there be
a Charter made by H. 7. in the first year of his Reign, whereby restitution was
granted of this privilege, yet no advantage may be taken of it, because it was
not spoken of upon the return, and the Court may not intend it.

Thirdly, the Letters Patents of the King being the sole ground and foundation
3.
to make the return good, are not sufficiently returned unto the Court,
insomuch that it was said upon the return only, that the King by his Letters
Patents did grant unto the Mayor. Commonalty, and Sheriffs of London, that they
should not be compelled to certify the Indictments themselves; but it does not
appear, that they were sealed with the Grand Seal, and if they were not sealed
with that Seal, the Letters Patents may not be of any validity in Law,
howsoever they were sealed with the Exchequer Seal, or Duchy Seal, in respect
of which, they may well be called the Letters Pattents of the King.

Fourthly, the use has always been to remove Indictments, and the Record 4.
of them upon a Certiorari awarded out of the Kings Bench, and there was never
any denial made of it before this time; and in 5. Ed. 6. where a Certiorari was
directed unto them for the removing of an Indictment of a Woman which was
Indicted for being a common Whore, the Indictment was certified in obedience
unto the Writ, although in the end of the return, they showed their Charter,
and prayed that it might be remanded, because it was an Indictment only
warrantable by the custom of the City, and not by the Common Law: And the
Court was of opinion in the return at the Bar, to have imposed a Fine, and to
have awarded a third Certiorari, but it was stayed, and the second return was
amended.

Concerning Orphans Portions.
THe custom of London is, that if any Freeman devises and, or other Hill. 13.
K. Bench.
Legacies of goods unto an Orphan, that then the Mayor and Aldermen have used
to take the profits of the Land, and to have the disposition of the Legacies,
until such time as the Legatees shall attain unto the age of twenty one years,
or otherwise, being a woman, should be married; and if the disposition of the
profits of the Lands, or of the personal Legacies, were declared by the
Testator in his Will, that then the Mayor and Aldermen have used, time out of
mind of man, to convent the person trusted by the Will of the Testator before
them, and to compel him to find Sureties for the true performance of the
Legacies, according to the Law of the Realm, and the Will of the Testator; and
if they refuse to find Sureties, then it is lawful to imprison them until they
find Sureties. The Widow of a Freeman of London dwelling in Middlesex,
bequeathed a Legacy of a thousand pound unto her Daughter after all Debts and
Legacies paid, and upon condition that she should not marry without the assent
of her Executor, and makes a Freeman her Executor, and dies. The Executor is
convented before the Court of Mayor and Aldermen, and required to put in
Sureties unto the Chamberlain of London, according to the Custom for the
payment of a thousand pound, according unto the time limited by the Will, and
according to the Will aforesaid. The Executor denies to find Sureties;
whereupon he was committed to prison, and a Habeas Corpus being awarded out of
the Court of Kings Bench, to have the Body of the Executor, together with the
cause; all this matter appears upon the return. And now it was moved by
Richard Martin late Recorder of London, then an Apprentice of the Law, that the
return was insufficient, and so the Executor ought to be enlarged.

First, in regard that the ground of the imprisonment was the Custom of
London, Rat. 1.
and the custom is against the Law, and void, insomuch that it enforces an
Executor to find Sureties for the payment of a Legacy, according unto the Will,
where the law requires, that debts be paid, before such time as Legacies be
performed; and the Law gives an election unto the Executor, to pay which of
the Legacies he will, in case there be not sufficient to pay all the debts and
legacies of the Testator; but this exception was disallowed by the said Court,
insomuch that the custom of London appears by the return to be, that he
shall find Sureties for the performance of the Legacies according unto the Law
of the Realm, and the Will of the Testator: So as if the Executor had not
sufficient to pay debts, and legacies, he has the same power and liberty after
such time as he has found Sureties, as he had before.

Secondly, except on was taken, because it appeared by the return, that the
Devisor was a woman, and also only the Wife of a Freeman, and not a Freewoman,
and she is not within the custom of London, which only speaks of a Freeman.
But this exception was overruled; for a woman being a Freewoman within the
Statute of Magna Charta cap. 29. which enacteth, that no Freeman shall be taken
or imprisoned, etc. but by the lawful judgment of his Peers: So that she being
a Barroness or Countess shall be tried by her Peers upon an Indictment
preferred against her, she shall also be reputed a Freeman within this custom.

Secondly, the Wife of a Freeman having the liberty and privilege to Trade in
the City, and so able to take benefit by it, she shall also be bound by the
customs of it.

Thirdly, howsoever she was dwelling out of London at the time of the Will
made, she is a Freeman within the compass of the custom.

Fourthly, it was objected, that this custom of London concerning Orphans, was
an antiquated custom, and had not been put in use by many years, and therefore
ought not now to be put in ure to take away the liberty of a man, and
especially also, because the life of a custom is the usage; but this exception
was overruled, for this custom is daily put in Ure.

The custom in not removing body and cause upon Habeas Corpus.
A Petition being affirmed in London, by one Hill, a Citizen and Freeman Pasc.
14. Jac. Chan
of London, against another Citizen and Freeman of London, upon a Bond of a
hundred pound, a Summons is awarded against the said obliged, and the pretext
being returned, that he has nothing whereby he may be summoned within the
City, upon a Surmize made by Hill the Obligee, that one Harrington, a Citizen
and Freeman of London, is indebted in a hundred pound unto the first Obligor, a
Summons is awarded, according to the custom of London of Foreign Attachments,
for the warning of Harrington, who is warned accordingly; whereupon Harrington
procures a Habeas Corpus for the removing of his body, together with the cause
into the Kings Bench, upon which Writ, a return is made in this manner; that is
to say. That London is an ancient City, and, that time out of mind of man, the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London have had Conusans of all manner of
Pleas, both real and personal, to be holden before the Mayor, Altermen, and
Sheriffs of London in London, and that in no action whatsoever they ought to
remove the cause out of London into any other Court, and do moreover show a
confirmation made by R. 2. in the seventh year of his Reign of all their
customs; and so for this cause they had not the body here, nor the cause. And
exception being taken to the insufficiency of this return, it was agreed and
resolved by the whole Court of Kings Bench, that this return made, was ill; for
common experience teaches, that the usual course is, and always has been,
that upon Habeas Corpus, the body, together with the cause, have been removed
out of London, into the Kings Bench; and likewise upon Certioraries awarded out
of the Kings Bench. Records have been certified out of London into that Court:
for Justice being to be done unto the Citizens of London, as well in that
Court, as in the (...) proper Court, the Court of London being an inferior
Court unto the Court of Kings Bench, where the King is supposed to sit in
person, ought to yield bedience unto the Writs awarded out of that Court, as
the Supetiour Court; but if the cause should be such, that there should be a
failer of Justice in the Kings Bench upon the removing of the cause, because it
is only an action grounded merely upon the custom of London, then a return
made of the special matter will be warrantable; or otherwise if the return be
made, that the custom of London is, that no cause, which is a mere customary
cause, wherein no remedy can be had but only in London, according unto the
custom of London, may well be allowed, so as the cause specially be returned
into the Court, whereby it may appear unto the Court, that it is such a cause,
which will not bear action at the Common Law; for it is usual in the Kings
Bench, that if the cause returned unto the Court upon the Habeas Corpus, appear
to be such a cause as will bear an action only by the custom, and not at the
Common Law, the Court will grant a Procedendo, and send it back again to
London, as if the cause returned, appear to be an action of Debt brought upon
concesit se solvere, or to be an aaction of Covenant brought upon a Covenant by
word, without any specialty, for these be mere Customary actions, which cannot
be maintained, but Customary actions to be tried only in the place where the
custom lies.
by the custom of London; and therefore that shall be remanded; for if the
Kings Bench should retain these causes after such time as they are removed, and
should not remand them, there would be failing of Justice, and the Judges of
the Kings Bench in the person of the King, do say, Nulli negabimus, nulli
vendemus, nulli differemus justitiam: and the reteining of these causes would
be a denying of Justice; wherefore they do grant a Procedendo, and remand it.

The case concerning payment of Tithes in London.
RIchard Burrel being seized in his Pasc. 15. Jac. K. Bench.
Demesne, as of Fee, of a House, called Green Acre, a Shop, and Warehouse in
the Parish of Grace-Church street London, for which house, a rent of five pound
yearly has been reserved, time out of mind, in the third year of the King that
now is, by Indenture Upon rent of a Mess. let at an ancient rent of 5. l. per.
an.
does make a Lease for five years unto one Withers, of part of the House, and
of the Shop, rendering the Rent of five pound by the year, at the four usual
Feasts, that is to say at the Feast of the Annuciation, etc. by even and equal
portions. And in the same Indenture it is further covenanted and agreed, that
Withers the Leassee shall pay unto Burrel the Leassor, a hundred and fifty
pound And a fine to be paid by 3^. l. per. ann.
in name of a Fine and Income, the which said hundred and fifty pound is to be
paid in manner and form following; that is to say, thirty pound yearly, and
every year during the said term at the four usual Feasts, by even and equal
portions, the term of five years expired, the said Burrel in the tenth year of
the said King, by Indenture makes a new Lease for the term of seven years, of
the said part of the house, and the Warehouse, unto one Goff, rendering the
rent of five pound by the year, at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, and
the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions. And in
the same Indenture it is further covenanted and agreed, that Goff shall pay
unto the said Burrell 175. l. in the name of a Fine and Income, in manner and
form following; that is to say, twenty five pound yearly, during the said te^m,
at the said two usual Feasts, by even and equal portions. Dunn Parson of
Grace-Church, exhibiteth his Petition unto the then Lord Mayor of London,
against the said Burrel and Goff, wherein he supposes, that Tithes are paid
unto him only, according to the rate of five pound by the year, where in truth
he ought to have an allowance according unto the rate of thirty pound by the
year. The Lord Mayor, by the advice of his Council, does call the said Burrell
and Goff before him, and upon full hearing of the said cause, does order the
p^yment unto Dunn, according unto the rates of five pound by the year, and not
according to the rate of thirty pound by the year; whereupon the said Dunn does
exhibit his Bill of Appeal unto the Lord Chancellor of England in the
Chancery, wherein he does make a recital of the Decree made, and established by
Act of Parliament, in 37. H. cap. 12. and also of the case special, as it
stands, charging the said Goff and Burrell with a practice of fraud and
covin, in the reservation of this twenty five pound by year, by way of Fine and
Income, and defrauding him of that which belonged unto him: The said Goff and
Burrell do make their answer, and show that the rent of five pound by the year
is the ancient rent reserved, and that they are ready, and have often tendered
the payment of their Tithes, according to that proportion, but it has been
denied to be accepted, and they do take a traverse unto the fraud and covin
wherewith they stand charged. And upon this answer, Dunn the Parson demurreth
in Law. And this case was first argued in the Chancery by Sir Francis Moor
Sergeant, and Thomas Crew, on the behalf of Dunn; and by Sir Anthony Benn, late
Recorder of London, and John Walter on the part of the Defendants. The Lord
Chancellor having called Sir Henry Mountague, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
Sir Henry Hobart, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir John Doddridg one of
the Justices of the Kings Bench; and Sir Richard Hutton, one of the Justices of
the Common Pleas, to be his Assistants; and after two Arguments heard on each
side in the Chancery: upon Suit made to the King: by Sir Francis Bacon, then
Lord Chancellor of England; a special Commission was granted unto Thomas Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor of England, Thomas
Earl of Suffolk late Lord Preasurer of England, Edward Earl of Warwick Keeper
of the Privy Seal, William Earl of Pembrook Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
household, John Bishop of London, Bishop of Eli, Sir Henry Mountague, Sir Julius
Caesar, Master of the Rolls, Sir John Doddridg, and Sir Richard Hutton, wherein
there was a special recital of the question, and cause depending between Dunn
on the one part, and Burrell and Goff on the other part; and power given unto
them for the hearing and determining of this cause, and likewise for the
mediating between the Citizens of London, and the Parsons of the several
Parishes and Churches in London, and making an arbitrary end betwixt them,
whereby a competent provision may be made for the Ministers of the Churches of
London, and too heavy a burden may not beimposed upon the Citizens of London,
with a command further, that they shall certify the King what was done in the
premises. And this Commission was sat upon at York-house where the case was
argued at several times by Sir Randal Crew, and Sir Henry Finch Sergeants of
the King, on the part and behalf of the Ministers of London and by Sir Henry
Yelverton Attorney of the King, and Sir Thomas Coventry Solicitor of the King,
on the behalf of the Citizens of London; and because the main Question remained
as yet undetermined and no resolution is given either in point of Law, nor
Arbitrary end by way of mediation: I shall only open the parts of the case, and
make a summary report of them without further debate of them.

The Case divides it self into six parts (that is to say.)
First, whether any thing can be demanded by the person for houses in London,
Quest. 1.
according to the course of the Common Law?

Secondly, whether custom can establish 2.
a right of payment of any thing unto the Parson for houses, and of what nature
the payment established shall be?

Thirdly, what was anciently payable 3.
by the Citizens of London for their houses unto the Ministers of London and
how grew the payment?

Fourthly, whether this twenty five 4.
pounds reserved upon a covenant by way of fine and income, be a rent within
the words of the Decree made, 37. H. 8. cap. 12?

Fifthly, whether this reservation of twenty five pounds by the year, by way 5.
of fine and income, shall be adjudged to be a rent within the intent and
meaning of the Statute an Decree, or no?

Sixthly, who shall be Judge of the Tithes for houses in London? and the remedy
for the Parson, in case that payment be not made unto him, according to the
Decree.

As to the first part, which is, whether by the Common Law, any thing can be
Quest. 1. What the Parson may by Law demand for houses in London? Fitz. Herb.
not. brev. fol. 53.
demanded for the houses in London? It is to be agreed, and clear that nothing
can be demanded. For that which the Parson ought to demand of houses, is
Tithes; and it is improper, and cannot be, that Tithes can be paid of houses.
First, in regard that houses do not increase, and renew, but rather decrease
for want of reparations, and Tithes are not to be paid of any thing, but such
things as do increase, and renew; as it appears by the Levitical Law, and the
Common Law of the Land. Secondly, houses are matters of inheritance, whereof a
praecipe lies at the Common Law. And the rent reserved upon a Lease made of
them, is likewise knit unto the inheritance, and parcel of it; so that it shall
go along unto him that has the inheriritance; and therefore shall descend
un^he Heir: and it is a rule in Law that Tithes are not to be paid of part of
the Inheritance, but they ought to be paid of such things as renew; upon which
reason it is that Tithes by the Common Law of the Land are not to be paid of
Slate, Stone, and Cole dug out of the Pit. Thirdly, houses being built only
for the receiving, habitation, and dweling of men, and for convenience of
protection against the scorching Heats in Summer, and tempestuous Storms in
Winter, without any profit at all redounding unto the owner. And the Parson
being to have a benefit otherwise, in the payment of personal Tithes arising
through his industry in the house, no Tithes can be demanded for the houses
themselves, or for the rent reserved upon them. Fourthly, the Decree made 38.
H. 8. which exempteth the houses of Noblemen from the payment of any
rate-Tythes, shows the Common Law to be, so that houses of themselves are to
be discharged of the payment of Tithes, and accordingly it 34. Eliz. Dawsons
case K. Bench.
has been adjudged in diverse cases happening at the Common Law: that Tithes by
the course of the Common Laws may not be demanded for houses, but they are to
be discharged.

As to the second point, which is, whether 2.
custom can establish a right of payment of any thing unto the Pason for
houses? It is clear that it may well enough: for it may well be, that before
such time as any house was built upon the ground where the house stood, there
had been a sum of money paid for the profits of the ground in the name of a
modus decimandi, and so howsoever the house is built upon the ground, yet the
modus continues, and is not taken away by it; and so there being a continuance
of payment of the modus after the building of the house, time has made it to
be a payment for the house. But this payment is to be termed a modus decimandi,
and cannot be well called a Tithe paid for houses, because as it is formerly
said, Tithes may not be paid for houses; and all this appears by 11. Report.
sol. 16.
Doctor Grants case in the eleventh Report.

As to the third point, which is, what 3. What was anciently paid for houses in
London to the Parson.
was anciently paid by the Citizens of London, unto the Ministers of London and
how the payment grew? It appears by the Records of London, that Niger Bishop
of London, 13. H. 3. made a Constitution in confirmation of an ancient custom
formerly used time out of mind, that provision should be made for the Ministers
of London in this manner, that is to say, that he which pays And how these
payments grew Niger Bishop of London's Constitution. 13. H. 3.
the rent of twenty shillings for his house wherein he dwelt, should offer
every Sunday, and every Apostles day, whereof the Evening was fasted one
halfpenny: and he that paid but ten shillings rent yearly, should offer but
one farthing; and all this amounted unto but according to the proportion of 2.
sh. 6. d. per pound: for there were fifty two Sundays, and but eight Apostles
days, the Vigils of which were fasied. And if it chanced that one of the
Apostles days fell upon a Sunday, then there was but one halfpenny, or
farthing paid; so that sometime it fell out to be less by some little then 2.
sh. 6. d. per pound: and it appears by our Book-cases in Edward the third his
30. E. 3 i.
Reign, that the provision made for the 30. L. 3. 3.
Ministers of London was by offerings and obventions, howsoever the particulars
are not designed there, but must be understood according to the former
Ordinance made by Niger, and the payment of 2. sh. 6. d. in the pound,
continuing until 13. K. Ric. 2. Thomas Arundel. Tho Arun Arch-bish. of Cant.
13. R. 2.
Archbishop of Canterbury made an explanation of the constitution made by
Niger, and thrust upon the Citizens of London two and twenty other Saints days
then were meant by the constitution made by Niger, whereby the Offerings now
amounted unto the sum of 3. sh. 5. d. per pound; against which explanation
there being some reluctation by the Citizens of London, Pope Innocent in 5. H.
4. granted his Pope Innocent. 5. H. 4.
Bull, whereby the former explanation was confirmed; which confirmation,
notwithstanding the difference between the Ministers and Citizens of London
about those two and twenty Saints days which were added unto their number,
Pope Nicholas by his Bull in 31. H. 6. Pope Nich. 31. H. 6.
made a second confirmation of the explanation made by the said Archbishop:
Against which the Citizens of London did contend with so high a hand that they
caused a Record to be made, whereby it might appear in future Ages, that the
Order of explanation made by the Archbishop of Canterbury was done without
calling the Citizens of London unto it, or any consent given by them. And it
was branded by the name of an Order surrepritiously, and abruptiously gotten
and therefore more fit to have the name of a destructory then a declaratory
Order: the which contending notwithstanding, as it seems the pain was most
usually made according unto the rate of 3. sh. 5. d. in the pound; Linwood,
fol. 146.
for Linwood, who writ in the time of K. H. 6. in his Provincial Constitutions
debating the question, whether the Merchants and Artificers of the City of
London ought to pay any Tithes? shows, that the Citizens of London by an
ancient Ordinance observed in the said City are bound every Lords day, and
every principal Feast Day, either of the Apostles, or others whose Vigils are
fasted to pay one farthing for every ten shillings rent, that they paid for
their houses wherein they dwelt; and in 36. H. 6. there was a composition made
between the Citizens of London and the Ministers of London, that a payment
should be made by the Citizens according unto the rate of 3. sh. 5. d. in the
pound, and if any house were kept in the proper hand of the owner, or were
demised withoutreservation of any rent; Then the Churchwardens of the Parish,
where the houses were, should set down a rate of the houses, and according unto
that rate and payment should be made. After which composition so made, there
was an Act of Common Council made 14. E. 4. in London, for the confirmation of
the Bull granted by Pope Nicholas. But the Citizens of London finding that by
the Common Laws of the Realm, no Bull of the Pope, nor Arbitrary composition,
nor Act of Common Council could bind them in such things as concerned their
inheritance; They still wresiled with the Clergy, and would not condes^end unto
the payment of the said elevenpence by the year, obtruded upon them by the
addition of the two and twenty Saints days, whereupon there was a submision
unto the Lord Chancellor, Submission to the Lord Chancellor and Privy-Councel.
and diverse others of the Privy Council, and they made an Order for the payment
of Tithes according unto the rate of 2. sh. 9. d. in the pound: the which Order
was first promulgated by a Proclamation made, and afterward established by an
Act of Parliament made 17. H. 8. cap. 21. in confirmation 27. H. 8. 21. cap.
of which said Order there was a Decree made 37. H. 8. with some further
additions, the which said Decree was confirmed 37. H. 8. decree, cap. 12. Which
decree by the Act ought to have been enrolled in Chancery in six Months; but
search hathbeen, and it is not found.
by an Act of Parliament made 37. H. 8. cap. 12. So as it appears by that
which has been formerly said, that the first payment was only according unto
the rate of 2. sh. 6. d. per pound; afterward, the payment was increased to the
rate of 3. sh. 5. d. per pound: and lastly, there was an abatement and payment
made only according to the rate of 2. sh. 9. in the pound. The first payment
grewby Custom, the second by Constitutions, and Bulls of the Pope; the last by
Decree in the Chancery.

As to the fourth part, which is, whether this twenty five pounds per annum, 4.
Whether the Fine paid, by 25. Per. An. b^ a rent within the words of the decree?
reserved by way of sine and income, be a rent within the words of the Decree,
or Statute, or not? It was clearly agreed, and resolved, that it was not a
rent. For it may not be said either a rent-service, rentcharge, or rent-seck;
and there are only three manner of Rents, Et argumentum a divisione
fortissimum. Secondly, it has not the properties and qualities of a Rent; for
it shall not be incident to the reversion of the house to pass, or descend with
it, it shall not be extinguished by the purchase of the house not suspended by
an entry in the house, nor apportioned by an eviction of part of the house.
Thirdly, the party himself in his Indenture of Lease has called it a Fine, and
Income, and has expressed the days of payment for it, as a Fine and Income;
and therefore now it may not well be said to be a rent either in the judgment
of the Common Laws, or Ecclesiastial Laws, or in common accepration.

As to the fifth part which is, whether this twenty five pounds by the year,
thus 5. Whether the 25 perann. thus Covenanted to be paid for fine, be lent
within the intent of the decree? 1. Arguments on Ministers part.
reserved upon a Covenant by way of Fine and Income, be a rent within the
intent and meaning of the Decree made 37. K, H 8. cap. 12? It was conceived by
those that argued on the behalf of the Ministers of London, upon the reasons
hereafter following that the reservation of twenty five pounds by the year, by
way of Income, was a rent within the meaning of the Decree, and that the
Plaintiff ought to have the rate-Tythes paid unto him, according to the
proportion of thirty pounds by the year, and not according unto the rate of
five pounds by the year only; First, in regard that this Fine being profit
which arises by reason of the house, and being payable at the same times, that
the first five pounds (which without question is a rent) is payable, and upon
the same conditions may well be said a rent; both out of the Etymology of the
word, by common acceptance of the thing, by the judgment both of Common Laws,
and of the Laws of the Church and so is a rent within the intent of the Decree;
and the nameing of it a Fine, or Income shall not cause an evasion out of the
Law. Secondly, this Decree, and Act of Parliament being made for the avail of
the Church, and settling of the revenue thereof; shall have as liberal
construction to give life unto the true intent and meaning of it, as may be,
and the slight of payment of it, as a gross sum by way of Fine and Income upon
a Covenant made by Goff the Leassee, shall not defeat the good provision made
by the Decree. Thirdly, this 2. sh 9 d. in the pound being the laborers hire,
and given him in satisfaction and recompense of all manner of Tithes, either
personal, predial, or mixed, the Decree made concerning it, ought to be extended
and enlarged so far, as by reasonable exposition it may, and is not any ways
to be restrained, whereby to give way to any cautelous provision made by the
party. Fourthly, the Common Law, and Statutes having all with one voice,
condemned fraud, covin, and deceit used in any manner of kind or way, and
bandying themselves against it, whereby to extirpate and root it out of the
hearts of all; and to prevent it from being put in Ure in the actions of any
man; It is great reason in this case, which concerns God, the Church,
Religion, and Learning, to suppress all manner of Acts which may any way have a
taste, or touch of fraud. Wherefore this Fine, or Income thus reserved by way
of Covenant, having the appearance of fraud, shall be taken to be a rent,
within the intent, and meaning of the Decree; and way shall not be given to
this device, whereby to defeat the Church and Ministers Argument on the
Citizens part.
of it of their due. But those that argued on the behalf of the Citizens of
London, were of opinion that this Fine, and Income was not within the intent
and meaning of the Decree; for the Decree being that the Citizens and
Inhabitants of the City of London, and Liberties of the same for the time being
shall yearly for ever without fraud, or covin, pay their Tithes to the Parsons,
Vicars, Curates of the said City and their Successors for the time being, after
the rate hereafter following; that is, to wit, of every ten shillings rent by
the year, of all, and every House, and Houses, Shops, Warehouses, Cellars, and
Stables within the said City, and Liberty of the same, sixteen pence
halfpenny, and of every 20. sh. rent of all and every such House, and Houses,
Shops, Wa^houses, Cellars, and Stables within the said City, and Liberties, 2.
sh. 6. d. and so above the rate of twenty shillings by the year, ascending from
ten shillings to ten shillings according to the rate aforesaid. And where any
Lease is, or shall be made of any dwelling house or houses, shops, warehouses,
cellars, or stables or any of them, by fraud, or covin, reserving less rent
then has been accustomed, or is, or that any such Lease shall be made without
any rent reserved upon the same by reason of any Fine, or Income paid before
hand or by ay fraud, or covin, that then, and in every such case the Tenant or
Farmer; Tenants or Farmers thereof shall pay his or their Tithes of the same,
according to the quantity of such rent, or rents, as the same house, or houses,
shops, warehouses, cellars, stables, or any of them were last letten, without
Fraud or Covin, before the making of such a Lease. It appears that the Decree
aims at a rent, and not at a Fine, or Income, for within the words above
mentioned, it appears that there is a difference, and distinction made
between a Fine, and an Income, and the intent of the maker of the Decree, is
best drawn and understood by the words of the Decree, wherefore the Party
Leassee having expressed himself that this twenty five pounds by the year,
shall be paid in name of a Fine, and Income. And the Decree it self showing
that by reason of a Fine, or Income, less rent is reserved, it may not be said
that this twenty five pounds by the year, shall be a rent within the meaning of
the Decree, when there is a rent of five pounds also reseserved, beside this
Income. Secondly, this Decree made in 37. H. 8. being penal unto the Citizens
of London, because it inflicteth imprisonment upon him, upon his non-payment of
his Tithe according to the rent reserved, and being also in advantage of the
Ministers of London because, by virtue of this Decree, the Minister is to have
according to the rate of 2. sh. 9. d. in every twenty shillings, where
anciently he had but 2. s. 6. d. it is no reason to extend it by equity, and to
construe that to be a rent within the intent and meaning of the Decree, which
of it self is a Fne, or Income. Thirdly, there never having been above the rent
of five 3.
pounds by the year, reserved upon any Lease made, it cannot be taken to be any
covin, or collusion. When the ancient rent is reserved, insomuch, that now so
much as the Law requires, is done and besides where the Common Law or Statute
Law shall take notice of a Fraud, it ought to be in case where the thing in
which the Fraud, or deceit was supposed, is formerly in being; for a Fraud may
not be committed to a person, or thing not in being. Fourthly, it is to be
reserved, so that if no rent at all had been reserved, there might not any more
have been demanded, but only according to the rate of the rent, which was last
reserved for the houses; wherefore the ancient rent of 5. l. being here
reserved, it cannot be, that within the intent and meaning of the Decree there
can be more rate-Tythes demanded, then according to that rent. And besides the
very words of the Decree, intimates that there is no fraud within the meaning
of the Decree, but only where by reason of the Fine, or Income, there is not
rent at all reserved, or a less rent then was anciently reserved; wheresore in
the Case at the Bar, the old rent being reserved, there may be no fraud at
all.

As to the sixth, and last part, which is, who shall be Judge of the payment of
Tithes for houses in London, and the remedy for the recovery of them? It is
apparent out of the words of the Decree, that the Mayor of the City of London
is Judge, and is to give order concerning them; and Suit is not to be made in
the Ecclesiastical Court for them; and if it be, a Prohibition is to be
granted, insomuch, that the party grieved resorteth unto another Judge then the
Statute has appointed. But if the Mayor do not give aid within two months
after complaint made, or do not give such aid as is fitting; then resort is to
be made unto the Lord Chancellor of England, who has three months given him
for ending of the said Cause.

Whereunto is annexed diverse ANCIENT Customs, AND USAGES Of the said City of
LONDON.

Newly Reprinted.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. 1670.

DIVERSE ANCIENT CUSTOMS AND USAGES OF THE City of LONDON.
IN Plato Far in Hustings London, viz. That all the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, Rents, and Services within the City of London, and the Suburbs
of the same, are pleadable in the Guild Hall within the said City, in two Hust.
of which, one Hust. is called, Hust. of a Plea of Land; and the other Hust. is
called, Hust. of Common Pleas, and the said Hustings are kept in the
Guild Hall, before the Mayor, Sheriffs, and other of the said City, every week
upon Monday and Tuesday, that is to say, Monday to enter demands, and to award
Non-Suits, and allow Essovnes, and on Tuesday to award defaults, and to plead,
saving at certain times, and Festival days, and other reasonable causes, on
which times no Hust. may be kept by Custom of the said City. Nota quod Hust.
of Pleas of Land, must be kept one week apart by it self, and the Hustings of
Common Pleas one week by it self, at the said days, yet the Inrolements of the
said Hust. make mention only of Monday.

Hust. of Pleas of Land.
IN Hust. of a Plea of Land, are pleaded Writs of Right Patent, directed to the
Sheriffs of London, in which Writs there are such process by custom of the
said City, viz. The Tenant, or Tenants at the first, shall have three Summons
to the Tenants, delivered at three Hust. of Plea of Land next following, after
the livery of the Writ, not demanding the Tenants at any the Hust, aforesaid:
And after the three Summons ended, three Essoynes, and other three Hust. of
Plea of Land, then next following; and at the next Hust. after that three
Essoyns; if the Tenants make default, Process shall be made against them by
Grand Cape, or Petit Cape after appearance, and other Process, as at the Common
Law. And if the Tenants appear, the Demandants shall declare against the
Tenants in nature of what Writ they will, except certain Writs which are
pleadable in the Hust. of Common Pleas, as shall hereafter be showed, without
making protestation to sue in nature of any Writ, and the Tenants shall have
the view, and shall be Essoyned after the view, at the Common Law: And shall
also have the Tenants Essoyned after any appearance by the custom of the City.

And although one such Writ be abated after view by exception of Joyntenants or
other exception dilatory, and although the same Writ be restored, the Tenants
by the custom of the said City shall have the view in the second Writ,
notwithstanding the first view had; And if the parties plead to Judgment the
Judgment shall be given by the mouth of the Recorde^, and six Aldermen had
wont to be present at the least, at every such Judgment given; and every
Beadle by advise of his Ald^^man, against every Hust. of Pleas of Land shall
cause to be summoned twelve men, being Freeholders of the best and most
sufficient of his Wa^d, to come to the Guild Hall, to pass an Enquest if need
be, if there be so many men of heritage within the same Ward; And if the
parties pleading come to an Enquest, then shall the Enquest be taken of landed
men, being Freeholders of the same Ward where the tenements are, and of other
three Wards nearest adjoining to the place where the Terants are; so that four
men of the same Ward where the Tenants are, shall be swo^n in the same Enquest,
if there be to mary. And no damages by the custom of the City are recoverable
in any such Writ of ^ight Patent: And the ^^ques^ may pass the same day by such
common summons of the Beadle if the parties be at Issue, and the Juiors do
come; otherwise Process shall be (...) the Jury to come at the next Hust. o^
Pleas of ^ard by precept directed from the Major to the Sheriffs, and the
Sheriffs shall be ministers by commandment of the Major to serve the Writs,
and do the execution of the same, albeit the original be directed to the Major
and Sheriffs in common; and you shall understand that as well the Tenants as
Demandants may appoint their Attorneys in such Pleas. And if the Demandants
plead against the Tenants in the nature of a Writ of Right, and he parties come
to a Jury upon the mere Right, then shall the Jury be taken of twenty four, in
the nature of a grand Assize, as always the custom requires, that six of the
Ward be of the Jury of twenty four. And the Tenants in all such Writs may vouch
to warrant within the said City, and also in Foreign County, if the Vouchers
be not Tenants within the same City. And if the Tenants in such Writs vouch to
warrant in Foreign County; In this Case Process cannot be made against the
Voucher by the Law of the City; Then shall the Record be brought before the
Justices of the Common Pleas at the suit of the Demandant, and then Process
shall be made against the Vouchee; And when the Voucher shall be ended in the
same Court, then all the Parol shall be sent back again into the Hust. to
proceed further in the Plea according to the custom of the City, and certain
Statutes. And also if the Tenants in such Writ plead in Bar by release, bearing
date in Foreign County, or Foreign matter be pleaded that it cannot be tried
within the City, then the Defendant shall cause the Process to come into the
Kings Court, to try the matter there where it is alleged, as the matter is
there found, the proceeding shall be sent back again into the Hustings to
proceed further therein, as the Case requires; And all that time the Suit
shall cease in the Hust. as has been heretofore: And also it has been
heretofore accustomed that a man may say in Hastings of Pleas of Land to have
execution of Judgment given in Hust. in nature of Scirefacias without Writ.
And you must note that any such Summons made to the Tenants in a Writ of right
Patent is made two or three days before such Hust. or the Sunday next before
the same Hust.

If Erroneous Judgment be given in the Hustings of London before the Major
Error Fitzz. 23. S.
and Sheriffs, it shall be reserved by Commission out of the Chancery directed
to certain persons to examine the Record and Process.

If Erroneous Judgment be given before the Sheriffs in London, the Defendant
Fitzz. 24. S.
may sue a Writ of Error before the Mayor and Sheriffs in the Hustings.

Hustings of Common Pleas
IN Hust. of Common Pleas are pleadable Writs called Ex gravi querala, to have
execution of the Tenants out of Testaments, which are enrolled of Record in the
Hust. Writs of Dower, unde nihil habet, Writs of Gavelets of Customs and
Services instead of Cessavit, Writs of Error of judgment given before the
Sheriffs, Writs of Waste, Writs of Participatione faciend. among partners,
Writs of Quid juris clamat and per quae servitia, and other the Writs which are
closed and directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs, and also Replegiaries of for
goods and distresses wrongfully taken. These are pleadable before the Mayor and
Sheriffs, in these Hust. of Common Pleas by plaint without Writ; And not as
before, that the Sheriffs are Ministers to do the office of ferving these Writs
and Replegiaries by the Majors Preceps directed to the same Sheriffs.

And the Process is thus.
FIrst, in the Writ of Ex gravi querela, warning before hand shall be given to
the Tenants two or three days before the Hust. or the Sunday be o^e, as in
Plea of Land; And so shall be done of all other Summons touching the same Hust.
And if warning be given and testified by the Sheriffs or his Ministers, the
Tenants may not be essoyned; and if the Tenants make default at the same
warning testified; then the Grand Cape shall be awarded; And if they appear,
they may be essoyned at the view. And hereupon all other Process are made
plainly, as is said in a Writ of Droit Patent in the Hust. in a Plea of Land.

In a Writ of Dower, unde nihil habet, the Tenants shall have at the beginning
three Summons and one Essoyn after the three Summons, and after these shall
have the view, one Essoyn and the Tenant in such Writ of Dower shall have the
view, although they enter by the husband himself demanding the same, albeit he
died seized; and also the Tenants may vouch to warranty, and after be essoyn^d
after every appearance; and all other Process shall be made as in a Writ of
right in the Hust. of Pleas of Land aforesaid: And it the Demandant recover
Dower against the Tenant by default ^o by judgment in Law in such Writ or
Dower; And the same wife of the Demand^nt alleges in Court of Record that her
husband died seized; Then the Major shall command ^he Sheriffs by Precept, that
they cause a Jury of the vi^inity where the Tenants l^e against the next Hust.
of Common Pleas to enquire if the husband died seized, and of the value of the
^enements and of the damages; and (...) recover by verdict the damages shall be
enqui^ed by the same J^y.

In a Writ of Gavi^et, the Ten^nts shall have three (...) and three Essoynes,
and they also shall have tha^ view, they may vouch to (...) and Foreign. And
they shall be essoyned and shall have other exceptions, and all other Process
shall be made as in a Writ of Right, etc. But if the Tenant make default after
default, then the Defendant shall have Judgment to recover and hold for a year
and a day, upon this condition, that the Tenant may come within the same year
and a day, then next following, and make agreement for the Arrearages, and find
Surety, as the Court shall award, to pay the rent, or the services faithfully
from thenceforth, and shall have again his Tenements; and within the same year
and day, the Tenant may come in Court by Scire fac. and shall have again his
Tenements, doing as aforesaid; and if the Tenant come not within the year and
the day, as is aforesaid, then after the year and the day, the Defendant shall
have a Scire fac. against the Tenant to come and answer, whether he can say any
thing why the Defendant ought not to recover the Tenements quite and clearly to
him and his Heirs for ever; and if the Tenant come not to show what he can say,
then Judgment shall be given, that the Defendant shall quite recover the Land
for ever, according to the Judgment, called Shartford by custom of the same
City.

In a Writ of waste, process shall be made against the Tenants by Summons,
Attachment, and distress, according to the Statute in that behalf made; and if
the Tenant come and plead, then he shall have an Essoyn, and so after every
appearance; and if he make default at the Grand Distress, then shall
Commandment go to the Sheriff by the Mayors precept, that the Sheriff shall
come to the place wasted, and shall enquire of the waste and damages according
to the Statute, and that they return the same at the next Hust. of Common
Pleas, and the Plaintiff shall recover the place wasted, and the treble damages
by the Statute.

In a Writ of Error of Judgment, given in Court before the Sheriffs in Actions
personal, and in Assizes of Novel Desseizen or Mortdanc. taken before the
Sheriffs and the Mayor, shall make a Warrant to the Sheriffs, to cause the
Record and Process to come at the next Hust. of the Pleas, and that they cause
the parties to be wa^ned to hear the Record, and after the Record and Process
be in the Hust. although the Defendant come by warning, or make default, the
Errors shall be assigned, and there the Judgment shall be affirmed or
reserved, as the Law requires: And it is to be noted, that by custom of the
same City, that when a man is condemned in debt, or attaint of damages, in any
action personal before the Sheriffs, and brings such a Writ of Error he which
b^ingeth the Writ, must before he be delivered out of Prison, find sufficient
Sureties of men resident within the City to be bo^nd before the Mayor and
Sheriffs to pay the money or to being in the body taken in case the Judgment be
affirmed; and in like sort is to be done where damages are recovered in Assize
before the Sheriffs and Coroners.

In a Writ of Replegiari, the process is such, that if any one take a Distress
or other sole thing within the said City, he which owes the goods, may come to
one of the Sheriffs, and shall have a Minister at the Commandment of the Court
to go to the party that took the goods, and if he may have the view to praise
them by two honest men, and then shall a plaint be made in the Sheriffs
paper-Office in this wise. T. S. queritur versus I. L. de averus suis injuste
Capt. in Dominio suo vel in libero Tenemento suo in ^arochia Sancti etc. And
the same party shall then find two sufficient Sureties, to sue and make return
of the Goods, or the p^ice thereof, in case the return be awarded, and so shall
have deliverance; and the Parties shall have a day prefixed at the next Hust.
of Common Pleas, and then at the next Hust. of Common Pleas, the Sheriff shall
make a Bill containing all the matter and the plaint, and shall carry the Bill
to the same Hust. and there it shall be put upon the file, and the parties
shall be demonded at what day the one or the other may be essoyned of the
common Essoyn; and if that day the Plaintiff makes default, return shall be
awarded to the Avowant, and return in such case is awardable three times by the
custom of the City, and the third time not reprisable; and at that time the
Avowant makes default, then it shall be awarded, that the goods remain to the
Plaintiff; viz. that the goods remain without any recovering; and if it be that
the Sheriff cannot have view of the Distress taken, then he shall certify it
into the said Hust. and there shall be awarded the Wetherum, and upon that,
process shall be made; and if the parties come, and Avowry be made, and pleaded
to the Judgment, or to the Issue of the inquest, then shall Judgment be
given, or process, to cause the Jury to come, as the case requires, and the
parties may be Essoyned after appearance; and if the party claim property in
the Distress, and then certify the same in the Hust. and the process shall be
made by precept made to the Sheriff to try the property, etc. And although the
party be essoyned of the Kings service in a Replegiare, and at the day that he
has by Essoyn, make default; or brings not his Warrant, he shall not be
cleared of damage.

In a Writ of Particepat faciend to make partition between Parceners of the
Tenants in London; the Writ closed, shall be directed to the Mayor and
Sheriffs, containing the matter according to the form of such Writ, and the
parties shall be warned by precept from the Mayor directed to the Sheriff, and
the Tenants may be essoyned and if they come, they may plead their matter; and
if they make default, the Writ of Partition shall be awarded by default; and
every Beadle of the said City, by the advice of his Alderman against every
Hust. of Common Pleas, shall cause to be summoned twelve men, being
Freeholders, of the best and most sufficient of his Ward, to come to the
Guild Hall aforesaid, and to pass in Juries, if need be, if there be so many
men landed in the said Ward; and the Juries shall be taken, as before is said
in the Hust. of Plea of Land.

And note, that Writs of Exigent are taken out of the Hust. as well in Hust. of
Common Pleas, as of Pleas of Land, but those Exigents that are taken in the one
Hust. are not to be sued in the other Hust. and at the fifth Hust. the Utlaries
and Weyneries shall be given in full Hust. before the Mayor and Aldermen by the
mouth of their Recorder; and also all Judgments which are given in the Hust.
shall be given in the same manner and the Exigent after every Hust. shall be
enrolled, and sent into the Chamber of the Guild Hall aforesaid.

And you must note, that all Amerciaments incident to the said Hust. pertain to
the Sheriffs of the said City; and that the Aldermen of London shall be
su^moned to come to the Hust. and oug^^ by custom of the City to be summon by
one of the Sheriffs Officers, sitti^^ upon a horse of a C. s. price at least.

Assize of Mort d'Ancest. in London.
THe Assizes of Mort d' Ancest. a^ holden and determinable before the Sheriffs
and Coroners of London, o^ the Saturdayes, from fourteen days t^ fourteen days
at the Guild Hall, for which the Process is this viz. he that will have such
Assizen, shall come in the Hust. or into the Assembly of the Mayo^ and Aldermen
in the Chamber of the Guild Hall, any Monday, as is said in the Assize of fresh
force, and shall make a Bil^ containing the form of the Assize o^ Mort d'ancest
according to the case, an^ that Bill shall be enrolled, and after the common
Clerk shall make another B^^ containing all the matters of the fin^ Bill,
making mention of the title of the Hust. or of the day of the assembly of the
Mayor and Aldermen, and this Bill shall be sent unto the Sheriffs, or either o^
them to serve, according to the custom; and whi^^ Bill shall be served by any
Sergeant or other Minister of the Sheriffs viz. the land Sergeant the Wednesday
next after the delivery of the Bill, shall make Summons to the Tenants demand,
by witness of two Free holders, men of the City, that they be at the Guild Hall
the Saturday next following to see the Recogni^ance, if they will; against
which Saturday, the Defendant may sue the next Friday before together, and
summon the Jury; and so afterward against the Saturdayes, from fourteen days
to fourteen days at his will, and so may the Tenants sue if they will, for
their celiverance; and the gathering of the Pannels of such Juries shall be
done by the Sheriffs and their Ministers, or by the Mayor and Aldermen, if any
of the parties will require it upon any reasonable cause, in such sort as is
used in Assize of Fresh-force, and in such Assizes of Mort d'ancest. the
parties may be assigned as at the Common Law, and the Tenant may vouch to
warrant within the City and also in Foreign County, if the Vouchee have no
Lands within the City, and if the Tenants plead release, bearing date in
Foreign County, or other Foreign matter that cannot be tried within the City,
or that the Vouch to warrant in Foreign Counties, he that has nothing within
the City, then at the Suit of the party, shall cause the Record to come into
the Kings County, by Writ directed to the Sheriff and Coroner and there shall
such Foreign Pleas, and Foreign Vouchers, be tried and determined, and sent
back again to the said Sheriffs and Coroners, to go forward and proceed,
according to the custom of the City; and continuance shall be made in such
Assizes upon the causes proceeding, and upon other causes reasonable; and when
the Assizes shall be determined and Judgment given, then the same Assizes
shall be engrossed, and entered upon Record, by the said Sheriffs and Coroners,
and afterward sent to the Guild Hall to remain there of Record, according to
the Order of Assize of Fresh-force, hereafter following.

Assizes of Novel Disseizen, called Fresh-force in London.
THe Assizes of Novel Desseizen, called Fresh force of London, and Tenements
and Rents within the City of London, of Disseizins made within 40. weeks, are
holden and determinable before the two Sheriffs, and the Coroner of the said
City in common, every Saturday in the Guild Hall; except certain times wherein
the Assize cannot be holden for reasonable cause, and the process thereof is
such, viz. when any man is grieved, and that he be disseized of his Freehold
within the said City, or the Suburbs of the same; he shall come to any Hust.
holden at the Guild Hall, or for default of Hust. in the Chamber of the
Guild Hall, in the Assembly of the Mayor and Aldermen any Monday, and shall
make there a Bill, and the Bill shall be such, viz. A de B. queritur versus ss.
C. de D. de libero tenemento suo in parochia de E. in Suburb. London. And the
same Bill shall be enrolled, and upon that shall be made another Bill,
containing all the matter of the first Bill, by the common Clark of the City,
making mention of the title of Hust. or of the day of the Assembly of the Mayor
and Aldermen, and then the Bill shall be sent to the Sheriffs, or to either of
them to do process and right unto the parties, and then although the Bill be
served the Wednesday then next following, that is to say, the Minister of the
Sheriffs to whom the Bill is delivered, shall summon the Tenant or Tenants
named in the said Bill of Assize, by the view of two Freemen of the City, and
that of the Tenants from whom the rent is supposed to be issuing, and then it
shall be said to the Tenants, that they keep their day at the Guild Hall the
Saturday then following at their peril, and the names of those which are
summoned, shall be endorsed upon the backside of the Bill, and then may the
Plaintiff sue to have the Assize gathered, and the Jury summoned against such
Saturday, or against other Saturday after at his pleasure, and so may the
Tenants sue for their deliverance, if they will, and such summons shall be made
the Friday before the said Saturday, and the Array of the Pannels of the Juries
shall be made by the Sheriffs or their Ministers, or by the Mayor and Aldermen,
if any of the parties upon reasonable cause shall require it. Also the same
Assizes shall be pleaded and recorded for the greater party, also as elsewhere
at the Common Law; and if release bearing date in Foreign County, bastardy, or
other foreign matters which cannot be tried within the said City, be alleged
in such Assizes, then the Plaintiff may sue, and cause to come the Record in
the Kings Court, that the matter may be tried, as the cause requires; and when
the matter is there determined, the process shall be sent back to the said
Sheriffs and Coroners, or to their Successors to proceed forward before them,
according to the custom, etc. And you must note, that there is no
discontinuance in such Assizes, neither is any mention made in the Record of
the days between the Assizes taken, and the day that the Assize shall be taken,
or Judgment given, if it be not by necessary cause, or that such Assizes be
adjourned for special causes: and when the Assizes are taken before the
Sheriffs, and Coroners, as before is said and Judgment be given, then shall
such Assizes determined be entered of Record; and afterward shall be carried
into the Chamber of the Guild Hall, to remain there in the treasury upon
Record. And note, that no man may enter into any Tenements within the said City
by force, nor any Tenants hold by sorce and arms in disturbance of the peace.

De Curia Majoris London and Custumis Civitatis ejusdem and Diversis Casibus
terminalibus in eadem Curia.
Curia Majoris of the said City of London, is holden by the custom of the same
City before the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being in the Chamber of the
Guild Hall or in Hust. and that from day to day, and there are treated,
determined and discussed the Pleas, and matters touching Orphans, Apprentices,
and other businesses of the same City. And there are redressed and corrected
the faults and contempts of those which do against the custom and ordinance of
the City, as well at the suit of the parties, as by Enquest of Office, and in
other sort by suggestion according as the causes require; and there they use to
justify Bakers, Victuallers, and, Tradesmen, and and to treat and ordain for
the Government of the City, and for keeping the Kings peace and other necessary
points of the City, and according as the time requires.

Item the Officers and Ministers of the said City being found faulty, are to be
cleared before the Mayor and Aldermen, as well at the Suit of the parties by
Process made, as otherwise, according to the discretion of the said Mayor and
Aldermen.

Item, the said Mayor and Aldermen use there to hold, and determine Pleas of
Debt and other Actions personal whatsoever, by Bill as well among Merchants,
and Merchants for Merchandise, as also between others that will plead by
Process made against the parties

Item. the Mayor and Aldermen, or the Mayor and Chamberlain of the said City
take before them in the said Chamber Recognizances of Debt of those that will,
of what sums soever. And if the day of payment be missed, then he to whom the
Recognizance is made out of this Record, shall have execution of all the
Debtors Goods, and of the moiety of his Lands within the said City, and it is
taken as at the Common Laws.

Item, Pleas of Debt according to the Ordinance called the Suit of Smithfield,
are determinable only before the Mayor and Aldermen according as is more
plainly set down in the Ordinance thereupon made.

Item, the Assizes of Nuisance are determinable by plaint before the Mayor and
Aldermen, and that plaint shall be served by the Sheriff the Wednesday against
the Friday; and then the Mayor and Aldermen ought to proceed in Plea according
to that which is set down in the Act of Assize and Nuisance in the said City.

Item, the Mayor and Aldermen have always used to set down penal Acts upon
Victuals, and for other governance of the City and of the peace, according to
their discretion and advice, and proclaim the same Ordinance within the said
City open^y to be kept in the Kings name, and of the City upon that penalty set
down, and shall levy all those penalties of those which do contrary to the
Ordinance aforesaid.

Item, the Mayor and Aldermen have always used, and may by custom of the same
City cause to come before them the offenders which are taken within the said
City for Lies and false Nuses noised abroad in disturbance of the Peace Makers,
and Counterfeiters of false Seals, and false Evidences, and for other
notorious deceits known to them, which they shall find faulty of such
malefactors by confession of the parties or by enquest, and then take them and
punish them by the Pillory or other chastisement by imprisonment, according to
their discretion.

Item, the Mayor and Aldermen have always accustomed, and may by custom of
the said City, change Process, abridge delays in actions personal as well
before themselves, as in the Sheriffs Courts, and to make new Ordinances
touching personal Pleas which Ordinances they understand to be reasonable and
profitable for the people.

Item, you must note that all the City of London is held of our Sovereign Lord
the King in Free Burgage, and without the same City, and of all the Lands and
Tenements, Rents, and Services within the same City, and the Suburbs of the
same, are well in Reversion, as in Demesne, are devisable by Usage of the said
City, so that men and women by Usage of the same City, may devise their
Tenements, Rents, and Reversions within the said City and Suburbs of the same,
to those whom they will, and of what Estate they will; and they may also devise
new rent to be taken of the same their Tenants, in such sort as best shall seem
unto them by their Testament, and by their last Will; and those which are
Freemen of the same City, may devise their Tenements to Mortmain, as appears
by the Kings Charter to that effect made.

Item, He which holds Tenements jointly with others, may devise that which
belongs to him, without any other separation; but Infants within age can make
no devise, nor woman under covert barn, cannnot devise their Tenements by leave
of their Husbands, nor in any other sort during the coverture, 49. 7. 325. per.
Cur.

Also the Husband cannot devise Tenements to his Wife for any higher Estate,
This is now altered by the Stat. of 32. H. 8. ca. I. of Wills.
then for term of life of his Wife, neither can the Wife claim any further
Estate, upon pain of losing the whole, neither can the Husband devise the
Tenements in the right of his Wife nor the Tenements which the wife and the
husband have jointly purchased; but if the Husband and Wife have Tenements
jointly to them and the Heirs of the Husband, the same Husband may devise the
Reversion, and all the Testaments by which any Tenements are divised, may be
enrolled in the Hust. of Record, at the suit of any, which may take advantage
by the same Testaments, and the Testaments which are so to be enrolled, shall
be brought, or caused to be shown before the Mayor and Aldermen in full Hust.
and there the said Will shall be proclaimed by the Sergeant, and then proved by
two honest men well known, which shall be sworn and examined severally of all
the circumstances of the said Will, and of the Estate of the Testator, and of
his Seal; and if the proofs be found good and true, and agreeing, then shall
the same Will be enrolled upon Record in the same Hust. and the Fee shall be
paid for the Inrolment, and no Testament nuncupative, nor other Testament may
be enrolled of Recod, unless the Seal of the party be at the same Will; but
Wills that may be found good and true are effectual, albeit they are not
enrolled of Record.

Item, Testaments within the said City ought by custom of the same City to be
adjudged effectual; and Executors have respect to the Wills of the Testators;
albeit the words of such Wills be defective, or not accordidg to the Common Law.

Item, Where Reversions or Rents be devised by Will enrolled in the Hust. of
Record, the same Reversions and Rents after the death of the Testator, are so
Executed that those to whom such rents are devised, may distrain for the rent,
and make avowry, and those in reversion may sue a Writ of Waste at their will,
without any Attornment of the Tenants, and may plead by the same Inrolment, if
need be, although they have not the same Testament, and the same custom takes
place for Deeds of Land enrolled in the Hust. of Record and such Inrolments
have been always used so, that the Wills are proclaimed and proved in full
Hust. as is aforesaid; and Deeds indented, and other Writings sealed may be
accepted, and the knowledging and confession of women may be received before
the Mayor and one Alderman, or before the Recorder and one Alderman, or before
two Aldermen for need, as well out of the Court as in, so that the same
Charters, Indentures, and other writings so acknowledged, be afterward entered
and enrolled in any Hust. and the Fees paid as the Order is.

Item, where a man has devised by his Will enrolled certain rent to be taken
of his Tenants within the said City without a cause of distress, yet by custom
of the said City he to whom the devise is made, may distrein and avow the
taking for the rent behind, and in the same sort it shall be done for
Amerciaments, Rents called quit-rents within the said City.

Item, the Mayor and Aldermen which are for the time being, by custom of the
same City shall have the Wards and marrying of all the Orphans of the said City
after the death of their Ancestors; although the same Ancestors held elsewhere
out of the City, of any other Lordship by what service soever; and the same
Mayor and Aldermen ought to enquire of all the Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels within the same City pertaining to such Orphans, and the Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chartells within the same City, pertaining to such
Orphans, to seize, and safely keep to the use and profit of such Orphans, or
otherwise to commit the same Orphans, together with their Lands, Tenements,
Goods and Chatels, to other their friends, upon sufficient Surety of Record in
the Chamber of the Guild Hall, in convenient sort to maintain the same Orphans,
during their minority, and to repair their Lands and Tenements, and safely to
keep their Goods and Chattels, and to give good and true account before the
said Mayor and Aldermen of all the profits of the same Infants wen they come to
age, or be put to a trade, or married at the advice of the said Mayor and
Aldermen; and that in all cases, if it be not otherwise ordained and disposed
for the same Orphans, and their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, by
express words contained in the same Wills of their Ancestors; and no such
Orphans may be married, without consent of the said Mayor and Aldermen: And in
like sort, where Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattles within the same City, are
devised to a Child within age, of a Citizen of the same City, his Father
living, and the same Child be no Orphan, yet by custom of the same City, the
said Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels shall be in the custody of the Mayor
and Aldermen, as well as of an Orphan, to maintain and keep the said Lands,
Tenements, etc. to the use and profit of the said Infant, and shall give good
and true account for the same, as is aforesaid. And note, that where a Citizen
of the same City has a wife and children, and dies (all debts paid) this
Goods shall be divided into three parts, whereof the one part shall come to the
dead, to be distributed for his Alms, the other part shall come to his wife
and the third part to his children, to be equally parted amongst them,
notwithstanding any device made to the contrary; and for the same, the wife or
children, or any of them, may have their recovery and suit, to demand such
Goods and Chartels against the Executors or Occupiers of the same Goods and
Chattels, before the same Mayor and Aldermen by plaint.

Item, by ancient custom of the said City it was not lawful to any Stranger or
Forreigner to sell Victuals or other Merchandises to any other Stranger, or
Forreigner within the same City to self again, nor to any such Forreigner or
Stranger to sell Victuals or any other Merchandise within the said City by
retail.

Item, by ancient custom of the said City of London the Citizens and Ministers
of the same City are not to obey any Commandment or Seals except the
Commandment and Seal of our Sovereign Lord the King immediate, neither can any
of the Kings Officers make any Seizure or Execution within the said City, nor
within the Franchises of the same by Land nor by Water (except only the
Officers of the City aforesaid.)

Item, touching the Judgments given in the Sheriffs Court in Actions personal,
or in Assizes taken before the Sheriffs and Coroners by custom of the said
City the parties against whom such Judgments are given, may sue a writ of
Error directed to the May or, Aldermen and Sheriffs to reverse the said
Judgments in the Hust. and if the Judgments be found good, yea, though the
same Judgments be affirmed in the Hust. yet the same party may sue another
writ of Error directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs to cause the Record to come
before the Justices assigned at Saint Martins le Grand as has been heretofore
done. But if any party by such Judgemenn given before the said Sheriffs, be
convict in Debt or Damages; and is therefore committed to Prison until he has
made agreement with the party, and afterward pursues a Writ of Error to
reverse the Judgment in the Hust. where although the Judgment be affirmed,
and the same party will sue aanother Writ of Error to reverse the same
Judgment before the Justices assigned at Saint Martins as is aforesaid, yet
nevertheless the same which is so in person must not be delivered out of
Prison, by ancient custom of the same City by means of any such Writ of Error,,
until he have found sufficient Sureties within the said City, or laid in the
money into the Court to pay him that recovered the same, if in case that the
Judgment be afterward affirmed. And in case that such Writ of Error be sued
to reverse any Judgment given in the Hust. before the Justices assigned at
Saint Martins le Grand, and it be commanded by Writ to safe keep the parties,
and to cause the Record, and Process to come before the same Justices, then
shall the parties be kept as the Law requires. But no Record may be sent
before the same Justices, but that the Mayor and Aldermen shall have forty
days, respite by appointment of the same Justices after first Sessions then to
advise them of the said Record, and of the Process of the same, and at the
first Sessions of the Justices after forty days, shall the said Process and
Record be recorded before the same Justices by mouth of the Recorder of the
said City. And of Judgments given before the Mayor and Aldermen in the Chamber
of the Guild Hall, according to the Law Merchant no Writ of Error is wont to be
sued.

Item, by ancient custom of the said City all the Liberties and Privileges,
and other customs belonging to the said City, are usually recorded by mouth,
and not to be sent or put elsewhere in writing.

Item, the Citizens of London by custom of the City ought not by any Writ to
go out of the City in any sort to pass upon an Enquest.

Item, the Wife after the death of her Husband by custom of the City shall
have her Frank Bank; viz. a woman after the death of her husband shall have of
the Rents within the same City, whereof her husband died seized in Fee. And in
that Tenement wherein the husband and she did dwell together at the time of the
death of the husband, the woman shall have to her self wholly the Hall, the
principal chamber, and the cellar wholly; and shall have the use of the Oven,
the Stable, Privy and Yard in common, with other necessaries thereunto
belonging for her life; and at that hour that she is married, she loses her
Frank Bank, and her Dower of the same, saving her Dower of other Tenements as
the law requires.

Item, every Freeman of the said City using Trade, may by custom of the same
City take an Apprentice to serve him, and learn him his Art, and Mystery, and
that by Indenture to be made between him and his said Apprentice, which
Indenture shall be examined and enrolled of Record before the Chamberlain of
the Guild Hall, and such Apprentice may bind himself, or his friends may put
him to a Trade by their Indenture, if he be of convenient age, at the
discretion of the Chamberlain, or Mayor and Aldermen, if need be. And no
Apprentice by custom of the said City may be bound for less term then seven
years, and the Indenture must be enrolled within a year after the making
thereof upon a certain penalty set down. And after that such Apprentice has
well and sufficiently served his term, he shall be made a Freeman of the said
City without other redemption, whereas no other may come by the Freedom
without redemption, except those which are born within the said City of what
country soever they be under the obeisance of out Sovereign Lord the King, by
custom of the said City are also Free by their birth, having respect to the
Privileges of the Freedom; As those which have been Apprentices or otherwise
been made Free by redemption; and Women under Covert Bath using certain Crafts
within the City by themselves, without their Husbands may take Maids to be
their Apprentices to serve them, and teach them their Trade, which Apprentices
shall be bound by their Indenture of Apprentiship to the Husband and the Wife,
to learn the Wives Trade as is aforesaid. And such Indenture shall be enrolled
as well as the other. And note, that any one having such Apprentice, may sell
and devise his said Apprentice to whom he will being of the same Trade, as well
as his Chattel.

Item, the Thames-water so far as the bounds of the Freedom of the City does
stretch, is parcel of the City. And the same Water and every Appurtenances
within the said Franchize, has always been governed by the same City as
parcel of the same City, as well the one part of the Water as the other. And
the Sheriffs of London for the time being, have always used to do arrests and
executions at the suit of the parties in the said Water of Thames, viz. from
the East Side of the Bridge of London to Recolv. and from the West part of
London. Bridge to Stanes Bridge.

Item, the Sheriffs of London ought by custom of the City to have the
forseiture of all Fugitives and Felons goods whatsoever, as well within the
said City, as the Water of Thames, in and of their Farm which they pay yearly
to the King.

Item, by custom of the City no attaint is maintainable nor lies within the
City.

Item, by Ancient custom of the same City, no man dwelling within the same
City, can be taken nor led out of the City by color or claim of villenage,
before the matter be discussed by order of Law.

Item, if a Freeman of the said City coming or going with merchandise
elsewhere, out of the same City, be constrained to pay Toll or other custom,
or that his Goods be arrested or carried away wrongfully without reasonable
cause and not delivered again by the Governor of the Town when complaint in
made, and it be sufficiently testified by credible men, then if afterward the
Goods or Merchandises of him that did the wrong, or the Goods or Merchandises
of any other of the same Town where the wrong was done, be found within the
City of London, it is the custom at the suggestion of the property to arrest
such Goods and Merchandises by the Officers of the City, and to detain them in
the name of a Withermam until agreement be made with the said Freeman for his
damages sustained in that behalf, except always reasonable answer be alleged
by one other party.

Item, the Citizens of London in ancient time ordained a House called the Tonne
in Cornhill, whereunto the Constables, Beadles, and other Officers, and men of
the City did accustom to bring Trespassours of the Peace, married men and
women found in Adultery, and Chaplains, and other Religious men found openly,
with common women, or married women in suspicious places, and after to bring
them before their Ordinaries.

Item, the City of London has co^usance of Pleas by the Kings Chartes, and the
use is, that no Freeman of the said City shall implead another Freeman of the
same City, elsewhere then in the same City, where he may recover within the
said City, upon pain of losing his Freedom.

Inem, he which is Mayor of London for the time shall have an Hanap, of or a
Golden Tanker at the Coronation of every King, with other privileges belonging
to the said Mayor and City, at such Coronation of the King by ancient custom
of the same City.

Item, the customs is that the Kings chief Butler shall be chief Coroner of
the City of London, which Coroner uses by Writ to substitute another in his
place, who is called Coroner before whom the Indictments, and Appeals within
the said City are taken, and in whose name the Records are made; and all the
Indictments, and Appeals within the said City are taken before the two Sheriffs
and Coroners jointly; and the Juries taken for the death of any man upon view
of the Corpse, are gathered out of the four Wards nearest, and summoned by the
Beadles of the same Wards; and all other Juries to be taken, before the
Sheriffs and Coroners in common, ought to be taken and summoned by the Sheriffs
and their Officers.

Item, heretofore where any Thief in Newgate did appeal another Thief being in
another Goal, that Thief in the other Goal is to be sent by Writ unto Newgate
to answer to the same Appeal, and to be at his delivery there. And in the same
sort if a Thief being in another Goal do appeal another being in Newgate, or
any other within the said City, the same apeallated must be brought by Writ to
the same Goal of Newgate, to maintain his said Appeal. And no Thief being in
Newgate taken with the manner, ought to be sent elsewhere with the manner for
his deliverance but only to have his deliverance, before the Mayor of London,
and other Justices assigned for the said Goal of Newgate.

Item, because the Borough of Southwork, and place of common Stews on the
other side of the Water of Thames, are so hurtful to the City of London, and
Thieves, and other malefactors are often coming thither, and many times after
their Thefts, and Fellonies done within the said City, they fly and retire out
of the same City unto the Stews, and into Southwark, out of the Liberties and
Power of the City, and remain there doing mischief, watching their time to come
back and do mischief, there the Officers of the said City have used always to
pursue, and search such Thieves and ill doers in the same Stews and Town of
South-wark, as well within the Liberty as without, and bring them to New gate,
to stay there for their deliverances, before the Justices as well for open
suspicion, as at the Suit of the party.

Item, the Prisoners which are condemned or arrested within the said City, and
are committed to Prison at the Suit or the party; and afterward are sent by
Writ to the Exchequer or any other the Kings places with their Causes, the same
Prisoners after they are delivered in the Kings Court, ought to be sent to the
said City to answer to the parties, and stay there for their deliverance.

Item, those which have Tenements within the said City, shall not be sufferd to
strip or waste their Tenements Demeasne, nor to pull them down in deforming or
defacing of the City, unless it be to amend them, or build them up again, and
any that does it, or begins to do it, shall be punished by the Mayor and
Aldermen for the offense, according to the custom of the City.

Item, if Walls, Penthouses, or other Houses whatsoever within the said City
stretching to the High street, be so weak or feeble, that the People passing by
mistrust the peril of some suddaih Ruin, then after it is certified to the
Mayor and Alderman by Mason, and Carpenter of the City sworn, or that it be
found in the Wardmore that the danger is such, then the same Mayor and Aldermen
shall cause the parties to be warned to whom the same Tenements belong, to
amend them, and repair them so soon as conveniently he may; and if after such
warning they be not amended, nor begun to be amended within forty days then
next following, then shall the said Tenements be repaired and amended at the
cost and charges of the said City, until the costs be fully levied of his
Goods and Chattels or other his Tenements if ^eed be.

Item, if any House be found within the said City, or the Suburbs of the same,
covered with Straw, Reed, or Thatch, he to whom the House belongs, shall pay
to the Sheriffs for the time being forty shillings, and shall be compelled to
take away the same covering.

Item, if any House within the said City be burning, so that the flame of the
Fire be seen out of the House, he which dwells in the said House shall pay to
the Sheriffs forty shillings in a red Purse.

Item, the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, and all other Officers and Ministers
of the said City are to be chosen by the same City; viz. At the time, when the
Mayor should be chosen the commons of the same City shall by custom be
assembled in the Guild Hall, and the same commons shall make election of two
honest men of the said City, of whom the one shall be Mayor, and the names of
the said two honest men shall be carried before the Mayor and Aldermen which
are for the time within the Chamber of the Guild Hall; And then the one of them
shall be chosen to be Mayor by the said Mayor and Aldermen by way of Screame,
and the said Mayor so newly chosen the morrow after the Feast of Simon and
Jude, shall be presented before the Bacons of the Exchequer at Westminster, or
in their absence to the Constable of the Tower, and afterward shall be
presented to our Sovereign Lord the King himself, according to the content of
the Charter of the said City, and the said Mayor shall have the Government of
the said City under the King for the year following, and the said Mayor shall
take fifty Marks a year for the of Co^n and fifty Marks in time of Peace of the
Merthants of Anzens, Corby, and Neele, according to the ancient Orders
thereupon made; and every Mayor shall hold his general Court at the Guild Hall
the Monday after the Feast of the Epiphany, and then shall be assembled, all
the Aldermen of the same City, and all the Constables, Scavengers, and Beadles
shall be sworn anew, well and faithfully to do their office, during the time
they shall be Officers, and the Wardmotes held by the Aldermen, and the default
found, shall be then delivered up by the said Aldermen in writing, and the
default found in the Wards shall be enquired and examined, and the Mayor for
the time being, by custom of the same City, for maintenance of the Peace, and
for the quiet of the City, has authority to arrest and imprison the disturbers
of the Peace, and other malefactors, for rebellions, or lewd expenses, and
other defaults, according to their discretion, without being appeached, or
afterward impleaded for the same.

Item, No Mayor shall be chosen within the said City, before that he has been
Sheriff of the same City a year before,

Item, The Mayors of London which have been for the time, are accustomed to
have their Sword born upright before them within the said City, and without the
putting the same down in the presence of any, except the King, and that Sword
is called the Kings Sword.

Also the Sheriffs of London are chosen by custom of the said City, on St.
Matthews day in the Guild Hall, viz, the one shall be chosen by the Mayor, and
the other by the Commons, and the said Sheriffs shall afterward be sworn
within the said Guild Hall, and the morrow after St. Michal, presented into the
Exchequer by the Constable of the Tower, according to the form of the Charter
of the City, as is aforesaid; and the same Sheriffs shall have Free Election of
all their Officers, and of their Farmours and Bailiffs, as well within the City
as the County of Middlesex, and of the Goalers of the Prisons within the said
City at their will, and the same Sheriffs pay, and are Accomptants yearly to
the Kings Exchequer, for the Farm of the said City and County of Middlesex,
according to the form of the said City and Charter; and by reason of that Farm,
the said Sheriffs ought to have the ancient Tolls and Customs of Merchandises
coming into the City, and going out of the same; and Forfeitures, Fines, and
Amerciaments, and all other commodities of ancient time belonging to their
Office: And no Merchandises shall pass out of the City by Land nor by Water, by
Cart, Horse, nor Portage by men, without a Warrant sealed by the said Sheriffs;
and Foreigners must pay for their Issue, according to the ancient custom.

Item, The Aldermen every year are elected at the Feast of St. Gregory, and
sworn, and presented to the Mayor, and the said Aldermen are chosen by men of
the same Ward, which Aldermen ought to keep their Wardmotes.

Item, Upon the death of the Alderman of any Ward, the Inhabitants in the Ward
are to choose a new Alderman for their Ward, whom they think good, and are to
certify the Lord Mayor of their choice, who is to declare the same to the
Court of Aldermen at their next meeting, and then to give the Ward notice of
their liking of the choice; but if it be an easy and quiet Ward, then by
order, either the Lord Mayor, or eldest Knight on the Bench, is to have the
same Ward, as Alderman thereof; yet the Election is in the Ward absolute of
themselves, whom they will choose.

THE COMMISSION AND ARTICLES OF THE WARD-MOTE INQUEST, By the MAYOR.
To the Alderman of the Ward.
1. WE charge and command you, Ward-mote, Inquest for a year.
that upon St. Thomas the Apostle next coming, you do hold your Ward-mote, and
that you have before us at our general Court of Aldermen to be holden in the
Guild Hall, the Monday next after the Feast or the Epiphany next coming, all
the defaults that shall be presented before you by Inquest in the said
Ward-more, and the said Inquest shall have full Power and Authority by one
whole year to inquire and present all such defaults as shall be sound within
your said Ward, as oftentimes as shall be thought to you expedient and needful,
which we will shall be once every month at the least.

2. And if it happen any of your said Inquest dying.
Inquest to die, or depart out of your said Ward within the said year, that
then in place of him or them so dying or departing out of your said Ward, you
cause to be chosen one able person to inquire and present with the other in man
and form aforesaid.

3. And that at the said general Court, you give before us the Names and
Surnames Non appearance.
of all them of your said Ward, that come not to your said Ward-more, if they
be duly warned, so that due redress and punishment of them may be had, as the
case shall require according to the Law.

4. And that yea do provide, that at Watch, Light, Visard.
all times convenient, covenable Watch be kept: and that the Lanthornes with
Light by Nightertaile in old manner accustomed, be hanged forth, and that no
man go by Nightertaile without Light, nor with Visard, on the peril that
belongs thereto.

5. And also that you do cause to be Common Council.
chosen, men of the most sufficient, honest, and discreet men of your said
Ward, to be for your said Ward of the Common Council of this City for the year
ensuing, according to the custom in that behalf yearly used. And also that you
do cause the said Men so to be chosen to be of the Common Council, to be sworn
before you and in your presence, according to the Oath for them used, and of
old time accustomed, the Tenor of which Oath hereafter ensues.

The Oath.
YE shall swear, that you shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is, and to his Heirs and Successors Kings of England, and readily ye shall
come when ye be summmed to the Common Council of this City, but if ye be
reasonably excused, and good and true Council, ye shall give in all things
touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your wit and cunning: and that
for favor of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the
common profit of this City, and after that you be come to the Common Council,
you shall not from thence depart until the Common Council be ended without
reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Mayors License. And also, any secret
things that be spoken or said in the Common Council which ought to be kept
secret, in no wise you shall disclose as God you help.

And that together with the said Oath of their Office, you administer to the
said persons that shall be chosen of the Common Council, the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and the other Oath hereafter following.

I A B Do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience that the Kings Highness
is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm; and of all other his Highnesses
Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
causes as Temporal; And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or
Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth, I shall
bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my Power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

I AB Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in my
Conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
lawful and rightful King in this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries: and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any Power, or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms, or Dominions, or to authorizo any foreign Prince to
invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of
their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave to
any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to
his Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my Heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation
made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope, or his Successors; or
by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his See,
against the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said
Subjects from their Obedience; I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attemps whatsoever, which
shall be made against his and their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason
or color of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my
best endeavor to disclose, and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, all Treasons and traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know, or
hear of to be against him or any of them. And I do further swear, that I do
from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure, as Impious, and Heretical, this
damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any
other whatsoever, And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, that neither
the Pope, nor any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or
any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully
administered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to these express words, by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words without any
Equivocation or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever; And I do make
this Recognition, and Acknowledgement heartily, willingly and truly, upon the
true Faith of a Christian. So help me God, etc.

I. A. B. Do declare and believe that it is not lawful, upon any pretense
whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And that I do abhor that traitorous
Position, of taking Arms by his Authority against his person, or against those
that are Commissioned by him. So help me God.

And farther, that you likewise Administer to the same persons that shall be so
elected of the Common Council, to be by them subscribed, the ensuing
Declaration.

I. A. B. Do declare, that I hold there is no Obligation upon me or any other
person from the Oath commonly called the solemn League and Covenant. And that
the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this
Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

For that otherwise, if the said persons, or any of them, that shall be elected
as aforesaid of the Common Council shall not take the said Oaths, and subscribe
the said Declaration, their Election and choice is by the late Act of
Parliament, for the governing and regulating of Corporations, enacted and
declared to be void.

6. And that also in the said Wardmote, you cause to be chosen certain
Constables, Scavengers, Beadle, Raker.
other honest persons to be Constables, and Scavengers, and a Common Beadle,
and a Raker to make clean the Streets and Lanes of all your said Ward,
according to the custom yearly used in that behalf, which Constables have, and
shall have full power and authority to distrein for the Sallery and Quarterage
of the said Beadle and Raker, as oftentimes as it shall be behind unpaid.

7. Also, that you keep a Roll of the Names, Sur-names, Dweling-places, Roll of
names.
Professions and Trades of all persons dwelling within your Ward, and within
what Constables Precinct they dwell, wherein the place is to be specially noted
by the Street, Lane, Alley, or Sign.

8. Also that you cause every Constable Constable Roll.
from time to time to certify unto you, the Name, Sur-name, Dewlling Place,
Profession, and Trade of every person who shall newly come to dwell within his
Precinct, whereby you may make and keep your Roll perfect: and that you cause
every Constable for his Precinct to that purpose to make and keep a perfect
Roll in like manner.

9. Also, that you give special charge, Inholder, Lodger, Sojourner
that every Inholder, and other person within your Ward, who shall receive any
person to lodge or sojourn in his House above two days, shall before the third
day after his coming thither, give knowledge to the Constable of the Precinct
where he shall be so received, of the Name, Sur-name, Dewlling Place,
Profession, and Trade of life, or place of Service of such person, and for what
cause he shall come to reside there: and that the said Constable give present
notice thereof to you: and that the said Inholder lodge no suspected person, or
Men or Women of evil name.

10. Also that you cause every Constable Search. New-comers.
within his Precinct, once every Month at the farthest, and oftener if need
require, to make diligent search and inquiry, what persons be newly come into
his Precinct to dwell, sojourn, or lodge: and that you give special charge that
no Inholder or other person, shall resist or deny any Constable, in making such
search or inquiry, but shall do his best endeavor to aid and assist him
therein.

11. And for that of late there is Frankpledge.
more resort to the City, of persons evil affected in Religion, and otherwise
than in former times have been: You shall diligently inquire if any man be
received to dwell or abide within your Ward by the space of one year, being
above the age of twelve years, and not sworn to be faithful and loyal to the
Kings Majesty, in such sort as by the Law and Custom of the City he ought to be.

12. To all these purposes the Beadle of every Ward shall employ his diligence,
Beadle.
and give his best furtherance.

13. Also that you have special regard that from time to time, there be Fire.
convenient provision for Hooks, Ladders, and Buckets, in meet places within
the several Parishes of your Ward, for avoiding the peril of Fire.

14. Also that the Streets and Lanes of this City be from time to time kept
Streets.
clean before every Church, House, Shop, Warehouse, Door, dead Wall, and in
all other common passages and Streets of the said Ward.

15. And where by diverse Acts of Common Counsel, aforetime made Hucksters of
Ale and Beer.
and established for the Commonweal of this City, amongst other things it is
ordained and enacted, as hereafter ensues.

Also it is Ordained and Enacted, That from henceforth no Huckster of Ale or
Beer, be within any Ward of the City of London, but honest persons, and of good
name and fame, and so taken and admitted by the Alderman of the Ward for the
time being, and that the same Hucksters do find sufficient Surety before the
Mayor and Alderm. for the time being, to be of good guiding and Rule: and that
the same hucksters shall keep no bawdry, nor suffer no Lechery, Dice-playing,
Carding, or any other unlawful games, to be done, exercised, or used within
their Houses: and to shut in their Doors at nine of the Clock in the night from
Michaelmass to Easter, and from Easter to Michaelmass at ten of the Clock in
the night, and after that hour sell none Ale or Beer. And if any Huckster of
Beer or Ale after this Act published and Proclaimed, sell any Ale or Beer
within any Ward of the City of London, and be not admitted by the Alderman of
the same Ward so to do, or find not sufficient surety as it is above
rehearsed, the same Huckster to have Imprisonment, and make fine and ransom
for his contempt, after the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen: and also that
the said Hucksters suffer no manner of common eating and drinking within their
Cellers or Vaults contrary to the ordinance thereof ordained and provided, as
in the said Act more plainly appears at large: we charge you that you do put
the same in due execution accordingly.

16. And also that ye see all Tiplers and other Cellars of Ale or Beer, as well
Measures Scaled.
of privy Osteries, as Brewers and Inholders within your Ward, not selling by
lawful measures sealed and marked with the City Arms or Dagger be presented,
and their Names in your said Indentures be expressed, with defaults, so that
the Chamberlain may be lawfully answered of their Amerciaments.

17. And also that you suffer no Alien or Son of any born an Alien to be of the
Strange born.
Common Council, nor to exercise or use any other office within this City, nor
receive or accept any person into your Watch, privy or open, but Englishmen
born: and if any Stranger born out of this Realm, made Denizen by the Kings
Letters Patents, or any other after his course and lot be appointed to any
Watch, that then ye command and compel him or them to find in his stead and
place one Englishman to supply the same.

18. And also, that you cause an abstract of the Assize appointed by Act of
Parliament, for Billets and other Firewood to be fair written in Parchment, and
to be fixed or hanged up in a Table in some fit and convenient place in every
Parish within your Ward, where the common people may best see the same.

19. And furthermore we charge and command Streets.
you, that you cause such provision to be had in your said Ward, that all the
Streets and Lanes without the same Ward, be from time to time cleansed and
clearly voided of Ordure, Dung, Mire, Rubbish and other filthy things
whatsoever they be, to the annoyance of the Kings Majesty's subjects.

20. And also that at all times as you Vagarants.
shall think necessary, you do cause search to be made within your said Ward,
for all vagarant Beggars, suspicious and idle people, and such as cannot show
how to live, and such as shall be sound within your said Ward, that you cause
to be punished and dealt with according to the Laws and the Statute in such
case ordained and provided.

21. And also we will and charge you Jurymen.
the said Alderman, that your self certify and present before us, at the same
general Court to be holden the aforesaid Monday next after the Feast of
Epiphany, all the Names and Surnames truly written of such persons within your
said Ward, as be able to pass in a grand Jury by themselves: and also all the
Names and Sur-names truly written of such persons, being and dwelling within
your said Ward, as be able to pass in a petty Jury, and not able to pass in a
grand Jury by themselves, that is to say every grand Jury man to be worth in
Goods an hundred Marks, and every petty Jury man forty Marks, according to an
Act in that case made and provided: and the same you shall indorce on the
backside of your Indenture.

22. Item, for diverse reasonable and Harlots.
urgent considerations, us especially moving, we straightly charge and command
you on the King our Sovereign Lords behalf, that you diligently provide and
foresee, that no manner of person or persons within your said Ward, of what
condition or degree soever he or they be of, keeping any Tave^n or Alehouse,
Ale Cellat, or any other Victualing house or place of common resort to eat and
drink in, within the same Ward permit, or suffer at any time hereafter any
common women of their Bodies, or Harlots to resort and come into their said
House, or other the places aforesaid, to eat or drink, or otherwise to be
conversant or abide, or thither to haunt or frequent, upon pain of
imprisonment, as well of the Occupier and Keeper of every such house or houses,
and all other the places before remembered, as of the said common women, or
Harlots.

23. Also, that you do give in charge to the Ward-more Inquest of your Ward,
Articles
all the Articles delivered to you herewith. And that you have a special care
of keeping the Peace and good order during your Ward-mote, and if any offend
herein, you Fine or punish him and them according to Law. Not failing hereof,
as you tender the Common Weal of this City, and advancement of good Justice,
and as you will answer for the contrary at your uttermost peril.

An Act for the Reformation of diverse Abuses, used in the Ward-mote Inquests.
Whereas the Ward-more Inquests, within the several Commons, Dinners,
Banqueting.
Wards of this City, for the maintenance of honesty, virtue, and good living
and for the abolishment, exciling, and suppressing of all kind of Vice, evil
rule and iniquity, according to the ancient, lawdable Laws and Customs of the
said City, are yearly severaly charged and sworn, upon the day of St. Thomas
the Apostle, before the Aldermen of the said Wards chiefly and principally to
the end and incent, that they with all diligence should truly and duly inquire
and present all such Enormities, Nusances, Misorder and Offenses, as are, or at
any time within the space of one whole year, then next ensuing, shall be
severally used, committed, or done within the said Wards, and have day yearly
to make their said presentiments, until the monday next after the Feast of the
Epiphany. The said Inquests heretofore, little or nothing at all regarding (as
it is very manifest and not unknown, the more is the pity) their said Oaths,
or yet the great Commodities, Utility, Quietness, Honor, and Worship, that
might or should grow and ensue to the said City and Inhabitants of the same,
through their good, industrious, and indifferent proceedings, for the
advancement of Virtue, and repressing of Vices, have drawn it in a manner into
a very ordinary course and common custom, to consume and spend a great part of
their said time, that they have yearly given unto them, when they receive their
said charge partly in setting up among themselves, a certain Commons; and
making and keeping many costly and sumptuous Dinners Suppers, and Banquets,
inviting and calling to the same at sundry times, in a manner all the
Inhabitants of the said several Wards, to the no little charges of the same
Inhabitants, and partly in passing and occupying much part of the same time in
playing at Dice, Tables, Cards, and such other unlawful Games both to the great
costs, charges, and expenses, of the said Inquests (whereof the greater part
most commonly are but poor men) and also to the very lewd, pernicious, and evil
example of all such as have any access or recourse unto the same Inquests. And
where also the said Inquests have of late usurped to dispense with such persons
as they by their search, and otherwise, have founden to offend and transgress
the Laws, in using and occupying of unlawful Weights and Measures taking of the
said offenders certain Fines (as it is said) the said Inquests have commonly
used to employ toward the maintenance of their said Feasting and Banqueting,
directly against the due Order of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Laws, and the
public wealth of all his Highness Subjects within the said City and much to
the reproach and dishonor of the same City.

For Remedy and Reformation thereof, be inordained, enacted, and established by
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, in this present Common Council
assembled, and by Authority of the same, that all and every the Wardmore
Inquests of the said City, from henceforth to be yearly charged and sworn
within the several Wards at the time before rehearsed, shall at all times and
places meet and convenient for the due Execution of their said charge, meet and
assemble themselves together, and that they and every of them after their said
meetings, inquisition, and treating of their said necessary matters, shall go
home to their own several houses to Breakfast, Dinner, and Supper, duting all
the said accustomed time of their charge and Session abovesaid. And that none
of the said Inquests shall from henceforward set up any manner of Commons, or
keep or maintain any manner of Dinners, Suppers, or Banquets among themselves,
or use at their said assemblies and Sessions, any of the Games above mentioned,
or any other whatsoever unlawful Games or Plays at any time, before the giving
up of the said presentiments, at the time above remembered. Or shall take or
receive any manner of Fine or Fines, for the concealment and discharging of any
of the offenses before recited: but truly present the same offenses, and every
of them, according to their Oaths, upon pain of imprisonment by the discretion
of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City for the time being.

Provided always and be it enacted by Fire and Candle, etc. Recreation.
the authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawful for all and every of the said
Inquests, to take and receive toward the charges of their Fire and Candles,
and other necessaries during the time of their said Session, all and every such
sums of money, as any honest person or persons of their free will and
benevolent mind, will give and offer unto them: and when they have made their
said presentiments, to go and assemble themselves together, for their Recreation
and solace, where they shall think it good: and there not only to bestow and
spend the twenty shillings, which every Alderman within his Ward according to a
certain Order lately taken, shall yearly give unto them at the time of the
delivery of their said Presentiments, toward their said charges in this behalf,
but also the residue of the said money received and gathered, as it is
aforesaid, of the Benevolence of their said loving Friends, if any such residue
shall fortune to remain. Any clause or Article in this present Act contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Not failing hereof, as ye tender the Common Weal of this City, and advancement
of good Justice, and as ye will answer for the contrary at your uttermost peril.

The Articles of the charge of the Ward-mote Inquest.
1. YE shall swear, that ye shall truly inquire if the Peace of Peace.
the King our Sovereign Lord be not kept as it ought to be, and in whose
default, and by whom it is broken or disturbed.

2. Also, if there dwell any man within Outlaws, Traitots, Fellons, etc.
the Ward, that is outlawed or indicted of Treason, or Felony, or be any
receiver of Traitors or Fellons.

3. Also, ye shall inquire and truly Thames.
present all the offenses and defaults done by any person or persons within the
River of Thames, according to the intent and purport of an Act made by our late
Sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth, in his high Court of Parliament, and also
of diverse other things ordained by Act of Common Council of this City, for the
redress and amendment of the said River which as now is in great decay and
ruin, and will be in short time past all remedy if high and substantial
provision and great help be not had with all speed and diligence possible: as
more plainly appears in the said Act of Parliament, and the said Act of
Common Council of this City.

4. Also, if any manner of person make Congregation, or be Receiver or
Congregations.
Garherer of evil companies.

5. Also if any man be a common Riotor, Riotor. Barrator.
or a Barrator walking by Nightertale without light, against the rule and
custom of this City.

6. Also, if there be any man within Peace, Hue and Cry.
this Ward that will not help, aid, ne succor the Constables, Beadle, and
other Ministers of this City in keeping of the Peace, and Arrest the evil
dooers with rearing of Hue and Cry.

7. Also, if there be any Huckster of Hucksters, Receivers of Apprentices,
Artificers, etc.
Ale and Beer, that commonly uses to receive any Apprentices, Servants,
Artificers or Laborers, that commonly use to play at the Dice, Cards, or
Tables, contrary to the form of the Statute in that Case ordained and provided.

8. Also, if there be any Inholder, Taverner, Inholder, Taverner, Victualer.
Brewer, Huckster, or other Victualer, that hold open their Houses after the
hour limited by the Mayor.

9. Also, if any Parish Clark do ring Curfue.
the Bell called the Curfue Bell, after Curfue rungen at the Churches of Bow,
Barking Church, Saint Brides, and Saint Gile's without Cripplegate.

10. Also, ye shall inquire if any Putour, that is to say, Man-baud, or
Woman-baud, Bauds, Maintainers, of Quarrels.
common Hazerdours, Contectour, maintainer of Quarrels, Champartours, or
Embracers of Inquests, or other common misdoers be dwelling within this Ward,
and present their Names.

11. Also, if any Baud, common Strumpet, Adulterer, Witch, Scold.
Strumpet common Adulterer, Witch, or common Scold be dwelling within this Ward.

12. Also, if there be any House, Hothouse.
wherein is kept and holden any Hothouse, or Sweating-house, for ease and
health of men to the which be resorting or conversant any Strumpers, or women
of evil Name, or Fame, or if there be any Hothouse or Sweating ordained for
women, to the which is any common recourse of young men, or other persons of
evil fame and suspect conditions.

13. Also, if there be any such persons that keep or hold any such Hothouses,
either for men or women, and have found no surety to the Chamberlain for their
good and honest behavior according to the Laws of this City, and lodge any
manner of person by night contrary to the ordinance thereof made by the which
he or they shall forfeit o^ twenty pounds to the Chamber if they do the
contrary.

14. Also, if any manner of person cast Thames, Ditches, Streets, etc.
or lay Dung, Ordure, Rubbish, Seacoledust, Rushes, or any other thing noiant,
in the River of Thames, Walbrook, Flett, or other Ditches of this City, or in
the open Streets, Ways or Lanes, within this City.

15. Also, if any person in or after a Channel.
great Rain falls, or at any other time sweep any Dung, Ordure, Rubbish,
Rushes, Seacole-dust, or any other thing noyant, down into the Channel of any
Street or Lane, whereby the common course there is let, and the same things
noyant driven down into the said water of Thames.

16. Also, if any manner of person nourish Hogs. Kine, Oxen, Ducks,
or keep Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Ducks or any Beasts within this Ward, to the
greivance and Disease of their Neighbors.

17. Also, where before this time it is Persons Indicted in one Ward, flying into
another.
ordained and enacted as hereafter follows. Item, for to eschew the evils of
misgoverned persons that daily when they be indebted in one Ward, fly into
another: It is ordained by the Mayor and Aldermen that as soon as a man or
woman suspect, first do come to dwell within any house, in any Ward within the
City, the Constables, Beadles, or oother Officers of the same, shall be charged
by their Oaths, at the general Court, to inquire and epsy from whence they
come. And if they find by their own confession, or by the Record of any of the
Books of any Alderman of the City, that they be Indicted or cast of evil and
noyous life, and will not find surely for their good abeating and honest
governance to the Alderman for the time being, that then they shall not dwell
there from thenceforth, but shall be warned to aviod within three or four
days, or more, or less after, as it shall be seen to the Alderman of the Wa^
for the time being, and that the Land lo^ that lets the house or his
Attorney shall be also warned to make them ^^ avoid out of his house aforesaid,
with the said time limited by the Alderman and if they be sou^ there after the
tim^ that then not only the said dishone^^ persons shall have imprisonment of
the bodies after the discretion of the Mayo^ and Aldermen, but also the said
Land lords, Letters of the said houses, shall forfeit to the Guild Hall, as
much as they should have had for letting of the said house, or should be paid
by the year, if the said persons or others had dwelled in the said house: you
shall duly enquire of offenses against this Act, and present them.

18. Also, if any Freeman against his Oath made, conceal, cover, or color
Coloring foreign Goods.
the Goods of Forraigners, by the which the King may in any wise lose, or the
Franchises of this City be imblemished.

19. Also, if any Forreigner buy and Foreign buying and seling.
sell with any other Forreigner within this City or the Subburbs thereof, any
Goods or Merchandises, be forthwith forfeit, to the use of the commonalty of
this City.

20. Also, if every Freeman, which Freemen not resident.
receives or takes the benefit, and enjoys the Franchises of this City, be
continually dwelling out of the City, and has not, ^e will not (after his Oath
made) be at Scot and Lot, nor partner in the charges of this City, for the
worship of the same City, when he is duly required.

21. Also, if any man conceal the Orphans, Wards, Marringes.
Goods of Orphans of this City, of whom the Ward and marriage of right
belongs to the Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

22. And if any Officer by color of Officers.
his Office, do extortion unto any man, or be maintainer of Quarrels against
right, or take carriage, or arrest Victual unduly.

23. Also, if any Boteman or Feriour be dwelling in the Ward, that takes
Boteman, Feriour.
more for Botemanage or Feriage, then is ordained.

24. Also, if any man make Purprest^res, Purprestures.
that is to say, incroach, or take of the common ground of this City, by Land
or by Water, as in Walls, Pales, Stoops, Grieces or Doors of Cellars, o^ in any
other like within the Ward, o^ if any Porch, Penthouse or Jetty be to^ low, in
letting of men that ride beside or Carts that go thede forth.

25. Also, that Penthouses and Je^ties Penthouses, Jetties, Stalles, etc.
be at the least the height of nine foot and that the Stalles be not but of two
foot and a half in breadth, and to be flexible or moveable, that is to say, to
hang by Icmewes or Garnets, so that they may be taken up and let down.

26. Also, if any common way or Way, Water course.
common course of water be foreclosed or let, that it may not have his
course as it was wont, to the noyance of the Ward, and by whom it is done.

27. Also, if any Pavement be defective, Pavements.
or too high in one place, and too low in another, to the disturbance of Riders
and Goers thereby, and Carte that go thereupon.

28. Also, if any Regrator or Forestaller Regrators, Forestallers.
of Victual, or of any other Merchandises which should come to this City to be
sold, be dwelling in this Ward: a Regrator is as much to say, as he that buyup
all the Victual, or Merchandises, or the most part thereof when it is come to
the City or the Suburbs of the same at a low price, and then afterward sells
it at his own pleasure, at a high and excessive price: a Forestaller is he that
goes out of the City, and meets with the Victual and Merchandise by the way,
coming unto the City to be sold, and there buyeth it, both these be called in
the Law Inimici publici patriae, which is to say, open Enemies to a country.

29. Also, if any Butcher, Fishmonger, Poulter, Vintner, Hostler, Cook Price of
Victual.
or sellar of Victual, do sell Victual at unreasonable prizes.

30. Also, if any Hostler sell Hay Hay.
Oats or Provender at excessive prizes, taking greater gain thereby then is
reasonable and lawful.

31. Also, if any Victualler sell any Victuals unwholesome price.
Victuals not covenable, or unwholesome for man's body, or else dearer then is
proclaimed by the Mayor, when any such Proclamation is or shall be.

32. Ye shall diligently make search Measures unsealed.
and inquity, whether there be any Vintner, Inholder, Alehouse-keeper, or any
other person or persons whatsoever within your Ward, that do use or keep in his
or their house, or houses, any Cans, Stone pots, or other Measures which be
unsealed, and by Law not allowed to sell Beer or Ale thereby, and whether they
do sell any of their best Beer or Ale, above a penny the quart, or any small
Ale or Beer above a halfpenny the quart, and whether any of them do sell by
any Measure not sealed. If there be any such you shall seize them, and send
them to the Guild Hall to the Chamberlains Office, and present their names and
faults by Indenture, so often as there shall be any occasion so to do.

33. Ye shall also make search in the Weights and Measures.
Shops and Houses of all the Chandlers, and of all others, which sell by weight
or measure, dwelling within your Ward, and see that their Scales be not one
heavier then another, and that their Weights and Measures as well Bushels as
lesser Measures, as well those that they sell Sea-coales by, (which ought to be
heaped) that they be in breadth according to the new Standard, sealed as all
others, and that all Yards and Else that they be their just lengths and sealed
that the poor and other his Majesty's Subjects be not deceived, And further, if
any do buy by one Weight or Measure, and sell by others: and if in your search
you find any false Weights, Measures, or Scales, ye shall seize them and send
them unto the Guild Hall to the Chamberlain: and you shall also do the like if
you shall find any that do sell any thing by Venice Weights, contrary to the
Law and his Majesty's Proclamations, present their Names and faults.

34. Also, if any Inholder bake any Inholder, brown Baker.
Bread to sell within his house: and if any Baker of sower Bread, bake white
Bread to sell, or mark not his Bread, or else take more for the baking then six
pence for a bushel.

35. Also ye shall inquire, if any house House, Tile
be covered otherwise then with Tile, Stone, Lead, for peril of Fire.

36. Also, if any Leaper, Faitour, or Leaper, Beggar.
mighty Beggar be dwelling with in this Ward.

37. Also, if any Baker or Brewer, Bakers, Brewers.
bake or brew with Straw, or any other thing which is perilous for Fire.

38. Also, if any mango with painted Painted visage.
visage.

39. Also, if there be any man that Candle light.
hangs nor out a Lantern with a Candle therein burning after the usage,
according to the Commandment thereupon given.

40. Also, if any person bring or cause Wood.
to be brought to this City or the Liberties thereof, to be sold or sell, offer
or put to sail any Tallwood, Billets, Faggots, or other Firewood, not being of
the full Assize which the same ought to hold.

41. Also, if any Freeman of this City, Country.
use to resort into the Countries near to this City, and there to ingross and
buy up much Billet, Talwood, Faggot, Tosard, or other Firewood, and convey the
same by Water unto this City, and there lay it upon their Wharfs and other
places, and so keep it till they may sell it at high and excessive prizes, at
their own wills.

42. Also, if any Woodmonger, or any other; sell any Billets or other firewood
above the price set by the Lord Mayor.

43. Also, if any Citizen of this City Cheese, Butter.
by himself, or any other person for him, or to his use, use to resort into the
Country, and there buy and ingross greav quantity of Cheese and Butter at
wellbarrelled as otherwise, and after conveigh it by Water or otherwise to this
City to be sold at deer and excessive prizes.

44. Also, forasmuch as it is thought Freemen to show their Copies.
that diverse and many persons dwelling within the Liberties of this City, daily
occupy as Freemen, whereas indeed they be none, nor never were admitted into
the Liberties of this City, ye shall therefore require every such person
dwelling within this Ward, whom ye shall suspect of the same, to show you the
Copy of his Freedom under the Seal of Office of the Chamberlain of the said
City, and such as ye shall find without their Copies, or deny to show their
Copies, ye shall write and present their Names in your Indentures.

45. Also, you shall inquire and truly Melting Tallow.
present all such persons as use melting of Tallow, contrary to an Act of
Common Council in that case made and provided.

46. Also, you shall inquire of all Armorers and other Artificers using to work
in metal, which have or use any Reardorses, or any other places dangerous or
perilous for Fire.

47. Also, if any have appraised any Appraisers.
Goods of any Freeman deceased, leaving behind him any Orphan or Orphans, and
the Appraisers not sworn before the Lord Mayor or the Alderman of the Ward.

48. Also, if any Freeman buy any Wares or Merchandises unweighed, Beam.
which ought to be weighed at the Kings Beam, of any Stranger or Foreign free
of the Liberties of this City, contrary to the Act of Common Council in that
case made and provided.

49. Also, if any buy and sell any Clothes.
Cloth or Clothes in the House, Shop, Warehouse, or other place of any
Clothworker or other person against any ordinance or custom of this City, or
if any Clothworker or other do receive or harbor any Clothes before the same
be brought to Blackwell-Hall, contrary to the ordinance made in that behalf.

50. Also, if any Carman take any Carmen.
money for carriage of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, above the rates
ordained.

51. Also, if any make or cause to be Buildings, divided houses, Inmates
made any new Building or Buildings or divided or cause to be divided any house
or houses, or receive any Inmate or Inmates, contrary to Law, or any Statute of
this Realm.

52. Also, if any be dwelling within Hawkers.
this Ward, which do offer or put to sale any Wares or Merchandises in the open
Streets or Lanes of this City, or go from house to house to sell the same,
commonly called Hawkers contrary to an Act made in that behalf.

53. Also, if any have covenously, fraudulently, or unduely obtained the
Freedom.
freedom of this City.

54. Also, if any Collector of Fifteens Collectors.
or other duties for the public service of the King or of this City, do retain
in his hands any part of the money collected to his own use.

55. Ye shall also enquire if there be Women Receivers of Servants.
dwelling within your Ward any Woman broker, such as resort unto men's houses,
demanding of their Maid servants if they do like of their services: if not,
then they will tell them that they will help them to a better service, and so
allure them to come from their Masters to their houses, where they abide as
boorders until they be provided for. In which time it falls out that by lewd
young men that resort to those houses they be oftentimes made Harlots to their
utter undoing and the great hurt of the Common wealth: wherefore if any such
be, you shall present them, that order may be taken for reformation.

56. Also, if any have or use any common Privies.
Privy, having lssne into any common Sewer of the City.

57. Also, if any Constable, Beadle, Vagabons
or other Officer, be negligent or remiss in discharging his duty, touching the
Execution of the Statute made for punishment of Rogues, Vagabons, and study
Beggars, or otherwise, and wherein the default is, and the Statute of 1. 4. and
21. Iae. concerning the restraint of inordinate haunting and tippling in Innes
and Alehouses, and repressing of drunkeness and other offenses in the same
Statute, and wherein the default is.

58. Also, if any to whom the Execution Poor.
of the Statute made for relief of the Poor does appertain. he remiss in
discharging his duty touching the Execution of the same Statute, and wherein
default is.

59. Also, if any Executor or other Legacies.
person retain in his hands any Legacy, sum of money, or other thing given to
any charitable use.

60. Ye shall inquire whether there Drunkard, Whoremonger, Sabbath, Jesuit,
Seminary Priest, Secular Priest, Popish Recusant, Cozenes, etc.
be within your Ward any common Drunkard, Whoremonger, Blasphemer of Gods holy
Name, Prophaner of the Sabbath, Jesuit, Seminary or Secular Priest or any
Receiver, Releiver or Maintainer of any of them, or any Popish Recusant,
Cozener, or swaggering idle companion, such as cannot give account how they
live; if there be any such you shall present them and the Names of those that
lodge them, or aid them.

61. Ye shall also enquire, whether Mass.
any person or persons do or shall say or sing Mass within your Ward, or be
present at any Mass.

62. Also, if any person or persons within your Ward being evil affected, Roman
Catholic Religion.
do or shall extol the Roman Catholic Religion above the Religion professed
and established by the Kings Majesty's Authority in England, or do or shall
deprave the Religion now professed in this Realm by Authority, as above, which
may breed discord in the City, and dissension in the Common wealth, ye shall
carefully present the same persons and their offenses.

63. Also, if any person or persons that keeps Horses in their houses, do lay
his or their Stable Dung, or such kind of stinking filth in any Streets or
Lanes of this City, to the great annoyance of the people passing that way and
do not lead his Dung Cart at his Stable door as he ought to do.

64. You shall assemble your selves Assembly monthly.
once every month or oftener if need require, so long as you shall continue of
this Inquest, and present the defaults which you shall find to be committed
concerning any of the Articles of your charge, to the end due remedy may be
speedily supplied, and the offenders punished as occasion shall require.

65. And in making your Presentiments, your Clerk is carefully to write making
of Presentiments.
the Christian Name, Sur-name and addition, or calling of every offender, and
the name of the Parish wherein the Offense was committed and some certain,
time, how long the offense has been continued and in presenting any persons,
for dividing Houses or Inmates, to write the Names and addition to the present
Landlord receiving the Rent, and the Names of the Tenants in possession, and of
the Inmate in any house, and also to write in the Margent on the side of every
Presentment the Name or Names, upon whose evidence you make such Presentment.

An Act of Parliament for the Preservation of the River of Thames, Made in the
27. year of King Henry the 8.
Where before this time the River of Thames, among all Rivers within this
Realm, has been accepted and taken, and as it is indeed most commodious and
profitable unto all the Kings Liege people: and chiefly of all other frequented
and used, and as well by the Kings Highness, his Estates, and Nobles,
Merchants, and other repairing to the City of London, and other places, Shires
and Counties adjoining to the same: which River of Thames is and has been most
meet and convenient of all other, for the safeguard and ordering of the Kings
Navy, conveighance o^ Merchandises, and other necessaries to, and for the Kings
most honorable Household, and otherwise, to the great relief and comfort of all
persons within this Realm, till now of late diverse evil-disposed persons,
partly by miso^dering of the said River, by casting in of Dung and other filth,
laid nigh to the Banks of the said River, digging and undermining of the Banks
and Walls next adjoining to the same River, carrying and converghing away of
Way-shides, Shore-piles, Boards, Timber-work, Ballast for Ships, and other
things from the said Banks and Walls in sundry places: by reason whereof, great
Shelfes and Risings have of late been made and grown in the farway of the said
River, and such Grounds as lie within the Level of the said Watermark, by
occasion thereof have been surrounded and overflown by rage of the said Water,
and many great breaches have ensued and followed thereupon, and daily are like
to do, and the said River of Thames to be utterly destroyed for ever, if
convenient and speedy remedy be not sooner provided in that behalf.

For Reformation whereof, be it enacted, established, and ordained by the King,
our Sovereign Lord, and by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same; That if any person or persons hereafter, do or procure any thing to be
done in the annoying of the Stream of the said River of Thames, making of
Shelves by any manner of means, by Mining, Digging, casting of Dung, or Rubbish
or other thing in the same River, or take, pluck, or conveigh away any Boards,
Stakes, Piles, Timberwork, or other thing from the said Banks or Walls, except
it be to amend, and the same to repair again, or dig or undermine any Banks or
Walls on the Water side of Thames aforesaid, to the hurt, impairing or damage
of any the said walls and Banks, then the same person or persons, and every of
them, shall forfeit and pay for every time so offending, one hundred shillings:
the one Moiety thereof to be to the King our Sovereign Lord, and the other
Moiety thereof to the Mayor and Commonalty of London for the time being, the
same to be recovered and obtained by the Mayor and Commonalty of London, by
Bill or Plaint, Writ of debt or information severally against every offender in
any of the Kings Courts, in which Actions and Suits, or any of them, the party
Defendant, shall not be essoyned or wage his Law, or any protection to be
allowed in the same.

And it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if complaint shall
happen to be made to the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord
President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, or to any of them by any
person or persons or body politic, that Sir Thomas Spert Knight, now having
the Office and ordering, of, and for ballasting of Ships or any other that
hereafter shall have the Office and Order of ballasting of Ships do take any
ballast for Ships near the said River of Thames, and do not take for parcel of
the said ballasting the Gravel and Sand of the Shelfes between Greenhith and
Richmond within the said River of Thames, or in any place or places, that is or
shall be unto the damage or annoyance of the said River of Thames, or in any
part thereof, that then upon every such complaint the said Lord Chancellor,
Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most honorable Council, Lord Privy
Seal, and every of them, calling both the Chief Justices of either Bench, or
one of them, shall have power and authority from time to time, to hear and
finally determine every such complaint, by their discretion, and to put such
order therein, for the taking of ballast for Ships upon every such complaint as
by their discretions shall seem most convenient for the preservation of the
said River of Thames: and the parties offending such order, shall suffer
imprisonment, and make no less Fine then five pound to the Kings use for every
time offending or breaking the same.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that it shall be lawful to every person
and persons, to dig carry, and take away, Sand, Gravel, or other Rubbish
Earth, or thing lying or being in, or upon any Shelfe or Shelfes within the
said River of Thames, with out let or interruption of any person or persons, or
paying any thing for the same, any thing contained in this present Act, to the
contrary notwithstanding.

An Act of Common Council concerning the conservation and cleansing of the
River of Thames, made the 28. of September, in the 30. year of King Henry the 8.
Where by the Statute made in the 27. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
King Henry the eight among other for Reformation of the misordering of the
River of Thames by casting in Dung and other filth, many great Shelves and
other risings have been of late grown and made within the same River: By reason
whereof, many great breaches have ensued by occasion thereof, which of like
shall be the occasion of the utter destruction of the said River, unless that
the same Law be put in due Execution according to the true intent and meaning
thereof.

Wherefore for a further Reformation of the same and to the intent that the
said good and wholesome Statute may be put in more Execution, and better
knowledge of the people: It is enacted by the Authority of this Common Council,
that Proclamation may be made within this said City: and the same to be put in
writing and Tables thereof made and and set up in diverse places of this City,
that it shall be lawfully to every person or persons, to dig, carry away, and
take away Sand, Gravel, or any Rubbish, Earth, or any thing lying or being in
any Shelve or Shelves within the said River of Thames, without let or
interruption of any person or persons, and without any thing paying for the
same, and after that to sell the same away, or otherwise occupy or dispose the
said Gravel, Sand, or other thing, at their freeliberty and pleasure. And that
all Paviers, Bricklayers, Tilers, Masons, and all other that shall occupy Sand,
or Gravel, shall endeavor themselves, with all their diligence, to occupy the
said Sand or Gravel, and none other, paying for the same reasonably, as they
should and ought to pay for other Sand or Gravel, dug out of other men's
Grounds, about the said City, which after is filled again with much filthy
things, to the great infection of the Inhabitants of the said City, and all
other repairing unto the same. And that further, humble Suit may be made to the
Kings Highness, that all persons having Lands or Tenements along the said River
side, upon certain pain by his Highness, and the Lords of his most Honorable
Council to be limited, shall well and sufficiently repair and maintain all the
Walls and Banks adjoining unto their said Lands, that so the Water may not, nor
shall break in upon the same: and the same to be continued till the time that
the said noble River be brought again to his old course and former Estate. And
that strong Grates of Iron along the said Waterside, and also by the
Street-side, where any Watercourse is had into the said Thames be made by the
Inhabitants of every Ward, so along the said Water as of old time has been
accustomed. And that every Grate be in height four and twenty inches at the
least: or more, as the place shall need, and in breadth one from another, one
inch: and the same to be done with all expedition and speed. And if the
occupiers of the said Lands and Tenements make default contrary to the
Ordinance asoresaid: or else if any person or persons in great Rains and other
times, sweep their soylage or filth of their houses into the Channel, and the
same after is conveyed into the Thames; every person so offending, shall
forfeit for every such default twenty pence, and that upon complaint to be made
to any Constable, next adjoining to the said place where any such default shall
be found, it shall be lawful for the said Constable, or his sufficient Deputy
for the time being, from time to time distrain for the same offense. And to
retain the same irreplegiable, and like Law to be observed and kept. And like
penalty to be paid for every person that burn Rushes and Straw in their houses,
or wash in the common Streets or Lanes, and to be recovered as aforesaid, and
the one moiety thereof to be to the Mayor and Commonalty, and the other moiety
to be divided between the said Constable that takes pain and the party finder
of the said default. And if the Constable or his Deputy refuse to do his duty
according to the true meaning of this Act, that then the Constable or his
Deputy, which shall so refuse to his duty as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay
for every time so offending, three shillings four pence. And the same penalty
of the said Constable to be recovered and obtained by distress irreplegiable,
to be taken by any of the Officers of the Chamber of London to the use of the
Mayor and Commonalty of London.

And further, that no person or persons having any Wharfe or House by the said
Waterside, make not their Laystalles nigh to the River aforesaid, except only
the common Laystalles, where the Common Rakets of this City use to repose, and
lay all their Soylage, to be carried away by them with their Dung-boats. And
that the said Rakets shall lay their said Dung, carried in their Dung-boats, to
such convenient place or places, as shall be appointed by the Lord Mayor of
London for the time being, with the advice of his Brethren the Aldermen of the
same, and to no other place or places, upon pain to forfeit for every such
default five pound, to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts within the City
of London, by Bill, Plaint, Moiety of Debt, or information by any person that
will or shall pursue for the same: the one Moiety thereof to be unto the Mayor
and Commonalty of London, and the other Moiety to him or them that will or
shall pursue for the same, in which Actions or Suits, no wager of Law nor
Essoygn shall be allowed.

The Oath of the Constables within the City of London.
YE shall swear,, that ye shall keep the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King,
well and lawfully after your power. And ye shall Arrest all them that make
Contect, Riot, Debate, or Afray, in breaking of the said Peace, and lead them
to the House or the Compter of one of the Sheriffs. And if ye be withstood by
strength of misdooers, ye shall rear on them an Outcry, and pursue them from
Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward till they be. Arrested: and ye shall
search at all times, when ye be required by the Scavengers or Beadles, the
common noysance of your Ward. And the Beadle and Raker you shall help to rear
and gather their Sallery and Quarterage if ye be thereunto by them required.
And if any thing be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of this City,
such defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall them present to the Mayor
and Ministers of the City: and if ye be let by any person or persons, that
ye may not duly do your Office, ye shall certify the Mayor and Council of the
City, of the Name or Names of him or them that so let you.

Ye shall also swear, that during the time that ye shall stand in the Office,
and occupy the Room of a Constable, ye shall once at the least every month,
certify and show to one of the Clarks of the Mayors Court, and in the same
Court, as well the Names as Sur-names of all Free men; which ye shall know to
be deceased within the month in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as also
the Names and Sur-names of all the Children of the said Freemen so deceased,
being Orphans of this City. And thus you shall not leave to do, as God you
help. etc.

God save the King.
The Oath of the Scavengers.
YE shall swear, that ye shall diligently over-see that the Pavements within
your Ward be well and sufficiently repaired and not made too high in noysance
of your Neighbors: and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be cleansed of Dung
and all manner of filth for the honesty of this City. And that all the
Chimnies, Furnaces, and Reredoes be of Stone sufficiently and defensively made
against peril of Fire. And if ye find any the contrary, ye shall show it to the
Alderman of the Ward, so that the Alderman may ordain for the amendment
thereof. And thus ye shall do, as God you help.

God save the King.
The Oath of every Freeman of this City of London.
YE shall swear that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, and to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord the King. Obeysant and
obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises
and Customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless in that
which in you is. Ye shall be contributory to all manner of charges within this
City, as Summons, Watches, Contibutrions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot, and to
all other charges bearing your part as a Freeman ought to do. Ye shall color
no Foreign Goods, under, or in your name, whereby the King or this City might
or may lose their Customs or Advantages. Ye shall know no Forraigner to buy
and sell any Merchandise with any other Forraigner within this City or
Franchise thereof, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister
of the Chamber, Ye shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this City, whiles ye
may have Right and Law within the same City. Ye shall take none Apprentice, but
if he be free born (that is to say) no Bond-mans Son, nor the Son of any Alien,
and for no less term then for seven years, without Fraud or Deceit: and within
the first year ye shall cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such a Fine as
shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the same: and after his terms
end, within convenient times (being required) ye shall make him Free of this
City, if he have well and truly served you. Ye shall keep the Kings Peace in
your own person. Ye shall know no Gatherings, Conventicles, or Conspiracies
made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to
your power. All these points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep,
according to the Laws and Customs of this City to your power. So God you help.

God save the King.
An Act of Common Council 1. of June, 18. K. H. 8. Concerning making Freemen of
the City, against coloring foreign Goods.
AT this Common Council, it is agreed, granted, ordained and enacted, That if
hereafter any Freeman or Freewoman of this City, take any Apprentice, and
within the term of seven years suffer the same Apprentice to go at his large
liberty and pleasure: and within, or after the said term, agree with his said
Apprentice for a certain sum of money, or otherwise for his said service, and
within or after the end of the said term, the said Freeman present the said
Apprentice to the Chamberlain of the City, and by good deliberation, and upon
his Oath made to the same City, the same Freeman or Freewoman assures and
affirms to the said Chamberlain, that the said Apprentice has fully served
his said term as Apprentice. Or if any Freeman or Freewoman of this City, take
any Apprentice, which at the time of the said taking has any Wife. Or if any
Freeman or Freewoman of this City, give any Wages to his or her Apprentice, or
suffer the said Apprentices to take any part of their own getting or gains. Or
if any Freeman or Freewoman of this City hereafter, color any Foreign Goods,
or from henceforth buy or sell for any person or persons, or with or to any
person or persons, being Foreign, or Foreigners, Cloths, Silks, Wine, Oils,
or any other Goods or Merchandise whatsoever they be; whether he take any thing
or things for his or their Wages or Labor, or not. Or if any person or persons
being Free of this City, by any color or deceitful means from henceforth, do
buy, sell, or receive of any Apprentice within this City, any money, goods,
merchandise, or wares, without the assent or license of his Master or Masters:
and upon examination duly proved before the Chamberlain of the said City for
the time being. And the same reported by the mouth of the said Chamberlain at a
Court to be holden by the Mayor and the Aldermen of the same City in their
Council Chamber: That as well the said Master as the said Apprentice, shall for
evermore be dis^anchised.

God save the King.
The Statutes of the Streets of this City, against Annoyances.
1. First, no man shall sweep the filth of the Street into the Channel of the
City, in the time of any Rain, or at any other time, under pain of six
shillings eight pence.

2. No man shall cast, or lay in the Streets, Dogs, Cats, or other Carren, or
any noisome thing contagious of Air. Nor no Inholder shall lay out Dung out of
his house, but if the Cart be ready to carry the same away incontinently, under
pain of forty shillings.

3. No Brewer shall cast wilfully dregs or dross of Ale or Beer into the
Channel, under pain of two shillings.

4. No man shall encumber the Streets with Timber, Stones, Carts, or such like,
under pain of Forfeiture of the same thing that so encumbreth the Streets,
which is twenty shillings fine, if he remove it not at the warning of the
Sergeant of the Market.

5. Every Builder of houses ought to come to the Mayor, Aldermen and
Chamberlain, for a special License for hourd of by him to be made in the high
Street, and no Builder to encumber the Streets with any manner of thing, taking
down for the preparing of his New Building under pain of forty shillings,
except he make a hourd of sorty shillings.

6. No man shall set any Carts in the Streets by night time, under the pain of
twelve pence, and recompense to such persons as shall be hurt thereby, if any
such be, twelve pence.

7. No Budge-man shall lead but two Horses, and he shall not let them go unled,
under pain of two shillings.

8. No man shall ride, or drive his Car, or Cart atrot in the Street, but
patiently, under pain of two shillings.

9. No man shall Gallop his Horse in the Street, for Wager or otherwise, under
like pain of two shillings.

10. No man shall Shoot in the Street, for Wager or otherwise, under like pain
of two shillings.

11. No man shall bowl, or cast any Stone in the Street, for Wager, or gain, or
such like, under pain of two shillings.

12. No man shall dig any hole in the Street, for any matter, except he stop it
up again, under pain of two shillings and recompense to any person hurt
thereby, two shillings.

13. No man bury any Dung, or Goung, within the Liberties of this City, under
pain of forty shillings.

14. Goung-Fermour shall carry any Ordure till after nine of the Clock in the
night, under pain of thirteen shillings four pence.

15. No Goung-Fermour shall spill any Ordure in the Street, under pain of
thirteen shillings four pence.

16. No man shall bait Bull, Bear, or Horse in the open Street, under pain of
twenty shillings.

17. No man shall have any Kine, Goats, Hogs, Pigs, Hens, Cocks, Capons, or
Ducks in the open Street, under pain of forfeiture of the same.

18. No man shall maintain any biting Curs, or mad Dogs, in the Streets, under
pain of two shillings, and recompense unto every party hurt therewith, two
shillings.

19. No Carts that shall be shod with Spig-nails that shall come upon the
Streets of this City, under pain of three shillings four pence.

20. No Carts using daily cartiage within this City, nor Car shall have Wheels
shod with Iron, but bare, under pain of six shillings.

21. No man shall burn any Straw Rusnes, or other thing, Linen or Woollen, in
the Streets, by night or by day, under pain of three shillings four pence.

22. No man shall blow any Horn in the night within this City, or Whistle after
the hour of nine of the Clock in the night, under pain of imprisonment.

23. No man shall use to go with Vizards, or disguised by night, under like
pain of imprisonment.

24. That Night-walkers, and Eve^ droppers, endure like punishment.

25. No Hammer-man, as a Smith, Pewterer, a Founder, and all Artifice making
great sound, shall not work after the hour of nine in the night, not ^^fore the
hour of four in the morning under pain of three shillings four pence.

26. No man shall cast into the Ditches of this City, or the Sewers of this
City, without the Walls, or into the Walls, Grates, or Gullets, of this City,
any manner of Carren, stinking Flesh, rotten Fish, or any Rubbish, Dung, Sand,
Gravel, Weeds, Stones, or any other thing to stop the course of the same, under
pain of cleansing them at his own cost and charge, under pain of Imprisonment.

27. No man shall make any Widrawces in any of the Town-Ditches, or the
Town-Gullets, under the pain of twenty shillings.

28. No man shall build nigh the Walls of this City, without License of the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Chamberlain, under pain of throwing down the same,
and no License may be granted except that the Chamberlain freely at all times
have convenient and needful ingross, and entry, going out, and clear recourse.

29. No man shall go in the Streets, by night or by day, with Bow bent; or
Arrows under his Girdle, nor with Sword unscabberd, under pain of imprisonment;
or with Hand-Gun having therewith Powder and Match except it be in an usual
May Game, or sight.

30. No man shall after the hour of nine at the night, keep any rule whereby
any such sudden Outcry be made in the still of the night, as making any
Affray, or beating his Wife, or Servant, or Singing, or Revelling in his house,
to the disturbance of his Neighbors, under pain of three shillings four pence.

31. No man shall make an Affray upon any Officer, which with good Demeanor
does his message by Commandment from my Lord Mayor, or any Alderman, or Mr.
Sheriffs, or Mr. Chamberlain, or misbehave himself in any Railing upon any
Judge of this City, or their Officers, which by Commandment are sent to bring
any breaker of this Law and Custom to Ward, or to distress, or such like, upon
pain of Imprisonment of forty days, and forfeiture of the double penalty: for
the offenses assessing, railing upon any Alderman, or Mayor in his Office is
Judgment of the Pillory: Railing upon Mr. Chamberlain in his Office, forty
days Imprisonment: beating, threatening, and railing of an Officer, is
Imprisonment after the Trespass is.

32. Memorandum, That every offense found in this City, it is accustomed that
the Officer, a Freeman, finding it, which is called primus Inventor, has half
the penalty by the grace of the Court.

33. Also every Freeman may find any offense, but he has no power to bring the
party before any Judge of this City, without an Officer, except the party will
come to his answer by free will.

34. No man has power to Arrest, Attach, or make distress of any Goods
sorfeitable, or offenses, except the Constable or Sergeant of the Mace.

35. No Butcher or his Servant shall not use to drive any Ox or Oxen atrot in
the Streets, but peaceably: and if an Ox happen to be let go when he is
prepared to slaughter, the Butcher shall forfeit two shillings besides
recompense if any person be hurt thereby.

36. No Butcher shall scald Hogs, but in the common Scalding-House, upon pain
of six shillings eight pence.

37. No Butcher shall sell any Measel Hog, or unwholesome Flesh under pain of
ten pounds.

38. No Butcher shall sell any old stale Victual; That is to say, above the
slaughter of three days in the Winter, and two in the Summer, under pain of
ten pounds.

39. None unreasonable Victual for all manner of Victuals.

40. No Victualler of this City shall shall give any rude or unsetting
Language, or make any clamor upon any man or woman in the open Market, for
cheapning of Victual, under pain of three shillings four pence.

41. No Butcher shall cast the inwards of Beasts into the Streets Cleaves of
Beasts Feet, Bones, Horns of Sheep, or other such like, under pain of two
shillings.

42. The Pudding-cart of the Shambles shall not go before the hour of nine in
the night, or after the hour of five in the morning, under pain of six
shillings eight pence.

43. No man shall cast any Urine-boles, or Ordure-boles, into the Streets by
day or night, before the hour of nine in the night: And also he shall hot cast
it out, but bring it down, and lay it in the Channel, under the pain of three
shillings four pence. And if he do cast it upon any persons head, the party to
have a lawful recompense, if he have hurt thereby.

44. No man shall hurt, cut, or destroy any Pipes, Sesperals, or Windvents
pertaining to the Conduit, under pain of Imprisonment, and making satisfaction,
though he does it out of the City, if he may be taken within the City.

45. No man within this City may make any Quill and break any Pipe of the
Conduit coming through his house, or nigh his ground, under pain of the Pillory
or take any water privily unto his house.

46. Casting any corrupt thing, appoysoning the water, Lourgulary and Felony.

47. Whosoever destroy or perish any Cocks of the Conduit, must have
Imprisonment and make satisfaction.

Old Laws and Customs of this City.
48. NO man shall set up Shop or occupy as a Freeman before he be sworn in the
Chamber of London, and admitted by the Chamberlain, under pain of.

49. No man shall set over his Apprentice to any other person, but by license
of Master Chamberlain, and there to be set over, under pain of.

50. No man which is a Foreign, shall not buy nor sell within the Liberties of
this City with any other Foreign, under pain of forfeiture of the Goods so
Foreign bought and sold.

51. No Freeman shall be disobedient for to come at Master Chamberlains
commandment, to any summons to him given by any Officer of the Chamber, under
pain of Imprisonment.

52. Master Chamberlain has power to send a Freeman to Ward, that he
incontinently after send to the Lord Mayor, the cause why that he is punished,
so that the Lord Mayor release him not, but by the Chamberlains assent: and if
he be a great Commoner and disobeying to the Chamberlain, Master Chamberlain
may refer it to a Court of Aldermen.

Master Chamberlain has Authority to send or command any Apprentice to the
Counter for their offenses: and if their offenses be great, as in defyling
their Masters houses by vicious living, or offending his Master by theft, or
dislander, or such like, then to command him to Newgate.

Apprentice enrolled, his Master pays two shillings six pence.

Apprentice set over, he that receives, two shillings.

Apprentice made Free he pays four shillings.

Apprentice never Enrolled, and made Free, his Master pays thirteen shillings
two pence.

A man made Free by his Fathers Copy, pays eighteen pence.

A Proclamation made in the time of the Mayoralty of Sir Michael Dormer Knight.

An Act of Common Council, made in the Even of St. Michael, Anno Regis Henrici
Octavi 21. That no person should lay any Wares in the Street, or beyond the
edge of their Stall, upon pain of forseirure the first time six shillings eight
pence: the second time thirteen shillings four pence: and the third time, the
Ware so laid.

By an Act of Parliament in the 14. Car. 2.
IT is enacted, that all and every person that inhabiting within the Cities of
London and Westminster, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and Borough of
Southwark, or in any the new built Streets, Lanes', Alleys and public places,
before their respective Houses, Buildings and Walls twice every week viz.
Wednesday and Saturday, and all the soil, dirt and other filth, shall cause to
be caken up into Baskets, Tubs, or other Vessels, ready for the Scavenger or
other Officer, to carry away upon pain of three shillings four pence for every
offense or neglect respectively.

That no person whatsoever, shall throw, cast or lay, or cause to be cast,
thrown or laid, any Seacole-Ashes, Dust, Dirt or other Filth, with the said
Cities and places aforesaid, in any place, Street, Lane or Alley, before his,
her, or their own dwelling Houses, Buildings or Walls on the penalty of five
shillings; And it before the Houses, Building, etc. of any of their Neighbors
or other Inhabitants of the said Cities or places, or before or against any
Church, Churchyard, or any of his Majesty's Houses, Buildings or Walls or any
other public Houses, Buildings, etc. or cast, lay or throw, etc. into any
common or public Sink, Vault, Watercourse, Common-sewer, or Highway within
the Cities or places, etc. or any other private Vault or Sink of any of his
Neighbors, or other Inany Dust, Ashes, Filth, Ordure, or other noisome thing
whatsoever, but shall keep, or cause the same to be kept in their respective
houses, etc. until such time as the Raker, Scavenger, etc. or other Officer do
come by or near their houses or doors, with his Cart, Barrow, or other thing
used for the cleansing of the Streets, and carrying away thereof; And then
shall carry the said Ashes, Dust, etc. out of their houses and deliver it to
the Raker, Scavenger or Officer or otherwise put the same into his Cart, etc.
upon pain to forfeit twenty shillings for every offense.

The respective Churehwardens, Housekeepers of Whitehall, or other his Masties
houses; Housekeepers or Porters of Noblemens houses, Ushers or Keepers of the
Courts of Justice, and all other public houses and places respectively shall
be liable to suffer the like penalties, forfeitures and punishments for every
like forementioned offenses done or suffered to be done before any Church,
Churchyard, or before any of his Majesty's houses, Noblemens houses, Buildings,
or before any other public houses, or places whatsoever respectively.

No person shall hoop, wash or cleanse any Pipe, Barrel or other Cask or
Vessel, in any the Streets, Lanes, or other passages aforesaid, nor set out any
empty Coaches to make or mend, or rough Timber or Stones to be sawn or wrought
in the Street upon pain of twenty shillings for every offense.

The Rakers, Scavengers and Officers hereunto appointed, every day in the week
(except Sundays and other Holylayes) shall bring Carts, Dung-pots or other
fitting Carriages into all the Streets within their respective Wards, Parishes
and Divisions, where such Carts etc. can pass, and at or before their approach,
by Bell, Clapper or otherwise, shall make loud noise and give notice to the
Inhabitants of their coming, and so into every Court, Alley or place where
Carts can pass; and abide or stay there a convenient time, that all persons
concerned may bring forth their respective Ashes, Dust, etc. to the respective
Carts, etc. All which the said Raker, Scavengers or Officers shall carry away
upon pain of forty shillings for every offense, or neglect respectively.

All the open Streets, Lanes and Alleys within the Cities and places aforesaid,
are to be sufficiently repaired and paved, and kept paved, and sufficiently
repaired, at the cost of the Householders in the said Streets, Lanes, etc.
respectively viz. Every Householder to repair and pave, and keep repaired and
paved the Streets and Lanes, etc. before his house unto the Channel or middle of
the same Street or Lane, etc. upon pain of forfeit twenty shillings for every
Rod, and after that proportion, for a less quantity, for every default, and
twenty shillings a week for every week after, till it be sufficiently paved and
amended. Provided such ancient Streets, Lanes, etc. within the said Cities, or
either of them, the Suburbs or Liberties thereof, as by custom and usage have
been repaired in other manner, shall be hereafter repaired, paved and amended
in such sort, by such persons as have used to repair, pave and maintain the
same under the penalties aforesaid.

Every Householder within the said Cities and places aforesaid, whose houses
adjoyns unto, or is next the Street from Michaelmas till our Lady Day yearly,
shall set or hang out Candles or Lights in Lanthorns, or otherwise in some part
of his house next the Street, to enlighten the same for Passengers, from such
time as it shall grow dark until nine of the clock in the Evening upon pain of
1. sh. for every default.

Every Justice of either Bench, Ba^on of the Exchequer, and Justices of ^he
Peace of London and Wistminster, ^ave power on their own view, or proof by one
Witness upon Oath to convict persons offending against this Act, and to dispose
the penalties toward mending and cleansing the Strees, if upon proof, half to
the party informing, if uqon conviction by view, then the whole to the
repairing and cleansing the Streets or Ways, to be levied by Warrant from any
Justice under his Hand and Seal directed to the Constable or other Officer of
the same Parish by distress and sale of his Goods, and for default (if no Peer)
imprisonment until payment.

Within London and the Liberties thereof the Scavengers, Rakers and such like
Officers shall be elected, and the Rates and Assesments for them for the
cleansing of the Streets shall be rated, raised and paid by the Parishioners
and Inhabitants of every Parish and Precinct according to the ancient custom
and usage of the City, and all new Messuages, Tenements and Houses shall be
rated and assessed, and pay proportionable with the other in Westminster, the
said Officers shall be chosen according to the custom of that City, and the
rates paid according to the custom of that City, in all other Parishes or
places upon every Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week: The Constables, Church
wardens and Overseers for the Poor, Surveyors of the Highwayes of every Parish
aforesaid, giving notice and calling together such Inhabitants of their
Parishes, as have born the like Offices, they or the greater number of them
shall appoint two, that are Tradesmen in their Parishes, to be Scavenger, for
the Streets, etc. of each Ward to continue for a year, who shall perform the
office upon pain of twenty pound, but upon refusal others shall be chosen, the
same penalties to be levied and employed for mending the Streets and Ways of
the same Parish, by distress and sale of the offenders Goods, and imprisonment
by default by warrant as aforesaid.

Within twenty days after election of such Officers, a Tax or pound rate shall
be made by the Inhabitants of every Parish, which being confirmed by two
Justices of the Peace, shall be quarterly paid upon demand by the Officers
appointed, and upon refusal levied by distress and sale of the Goods, by
warrant from two Justices of the Peace, and for lack of distress by
imprisonment of the offender (not being a Peer) until payment.

Provided all Actions against persons for executing this Act, shall be laid in
their proper County, and the Defendant may plead the general Issue and recover
double cost if wrongfully vexed.

By the same Statute no Hackney Coachman licensed, shall take for his hire in
or about the City of London and Westminster, above 10. sh. for a day reckoning
12. hours to the day, and not above 18. d. for the first hour, and 12. d. for
every hour after, and no Gentleman or other person shall pay from any of the
Inns of Court or thereabouts to any part of St. James or Westminster above 12.
d. and the same rates to the same places or thereabouts back again, and from
any of the said Inns of Court, or thereabouts, to the Royal Exchange 12. d. to
the Tower of London, Bishopsgatestreet, Algate or t^ereabouts 18. d. and so
from the said places to the Inns of Court, and the like rates from and to any
place of like distance and if any Coachman shall refuse to do, act, or exact
more for his hire then thereby limited he shall for every offense forfeit 10.
sh.

FINIS

