C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER To His EXCELLENCY THE LORD GENERAL MONCK, To be
Communicated to the OFFICERS OF THE ARMY: Brought to his Excellency from His
MAJESTY'S Court at the Hague,
By Sir THOMAS CLARGES.
CHARLES R.
TRusty and Wel-beloved, We greet you well:
You will easily believe that your Letter of the fifth of this Month, by Sir
Thomas Clarges, was very welcome to Us; And that as We must always acknowledge
the infinite mercy of GOD Almighty, in disposing the hearts of the Army in such
an entire obedience to you, for the promoting and carrying on Our Service, and
the Peace of the Kingdom, so We can never be without a just esteem of such a
great and well disciplined Army, upon which the eyes of the World are so much
fixed. We must desire you to return Our very hearty Thanks to the Officers and
Soldiers for their Affection and Obedience to Us: And to assure them from Us,
That We shall always have an entire confidence in them, and ever acknowledge
them to be the great Instruments of restoring Us to the Nation, and the Nation
to Us, and Peace and Happiness and Security to Us All: And therefore they may
not only with all imaginable confidence assure themselves, That We will
punctually perform whatever We have promised to them in Our Declaration or
Letter, but that We will take them into Our particular Care and Protection. And
if the License and Distemper of the Time shall so far transport any men, as to
presume upon memory of former Animosities, and of what is past, to use any
Reproaches toward them, We will look upon such persons as disturbers of the
Peace and Security of the Kingdom, and shall cause them to be prosecuted
accordingly. And toward this Settlement and Composure, and for the prevention
of many Inconveniences which may fall out, We think nothing so necessary as Our
presence with you, by which (in a very short time) every member of the Army,
who shall faithfully adhere to you in advancement of the Public Peace, would,
with the blessing of GOD, find himself secured and provided for to his
satisfaction: And longing for that Blessed Time, We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at the Hague the 16/26 day of May, 1660. in the Twelfth
Year of Our Reign. To Our Trusty and VVel-beloved General MONCK, to be
communicated to the Officers of the Army.



Rochester, May 24. 1660.
I Do appoint Mr. Henry Muddiman to ca(...) this LETTER to be forthwith Printed
and Published.

GEORGE MONCK.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.


