C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY.
A DECLARATION to all His Majesty's Loving Subjects in His Kngdoms of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, etc.
FOrasmuch as we have lately received an Overture, in the name of some
thousands of Our Loving Subjects in our Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland,
and Our Dominion of Wales, etc. wherein is expressed the late cruel, Tyrannical
and perfidious practices and proceedings of a packed piece of a Parliament or
Juncto, who have assumed a Power to themselves far beyond what ever has been
acted or done by any of Our Predecessors, contrary to Law, Reason and the just
Rights and Privileges of all Our good Subjects.

We do therefore Declare, that We shall according to our late Proclamation
endeavor so far as in Us lies, to make good Our Promise in every particular.
To which end and purpose, We have already provided shipping, and embarked a
considerable part of Our Army to be landed at one of the places therein
mentioned; resolving with Our Self to appear in Our own Royal Person at the
head of those Forces, for the better encouragement of all Our good Subjects.
All which might have been performed long since, had not the siege of Dunkirk,
put a demur to Our proceedings therein, it being a place very considerable and
of great concernment as to the management of Our so weighty undertakings; Our
chief ends being, to restore Religion in its purity, the Laws to their
Channel, the Nobility and Gentry to their Estates, and all Our loving Subjects
to their Ancient Liberties; In effecting whereof, if not assisted by you, we do
verily believe salvation will come some other way, and we shall by Divine
providence be restored to Our Royal and Legal Prerogatives; Yet we doubt not in
the least but that many of Our good Subjects will so far provide toward Our
assistance, as to unite their heart in a joint and hearty consent to so public
a good as concerns not only Our Self, but them and their Posterities for ever.

In the meantime, (to prevent effusion of blood) If Propositions of Peace shall
be propounded by those at Westminster, Our ears shall be always open unto
them, and not only ready to receive them, but even to seek and solicit for
them, when ever We can probably judge that they are a Full and Free Parliament,
and will not reject Our Overture, which with all possible expedition will come
to their Hands.

And We are so far from denying to answer any Propositions of Peace sent by
them, that we will and do promise, upon the word of a King, that if a Treaty
may be procured, We will use no Hostile means, or other way which may be a
hinderance thereunto; the Sum of Our demands being. The glory of God, in the
maintenance of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the just and inseparable
right of the Crown, the just power and Privileges of Parliament, and the
lawful Rights of all Our Good Subjects: and all these under no ambiguous
terms, whereby the contrary party have formerly deluded and mislead so many
of Our Loving Subjects, pretending that they have all along fought for the same.

Notwithstanding if no Treaty can be procured, we shall hazard Our Self to
defend and maintain these our so just and Legal demands, and for those who are
obstinate, and refuse to join with Us in the prosecution of these Our just
intentions, We do Declare them unworthy of Our assistance. Nevertheless we know
and do assure our selves, that few or none of Our good Subjects are ignorant of
the heavy Taxes that have been imposed upon them since our exilement, upon pain
of plundring their goods, and and imprisonment of their persons, taking from
them a fifth part of their yearly Revenue, besides Contribution; plundring
almost all men of quality in every County, to the undoing of many of Our good.
Subjects; And after these sufferings what an Excise has been set upon the
Bread and Meat they eat, and which is far worse how our Churches have been
abused and made Stables, robbing and defacing them, abolishing the true
Protestant Religion, and instead thereof introduced so many Religions as men
shall fancy to themselves.

We are likewise confident, That many of Our Good Subjects are sensible of the
happy Government they and their Ancestors have enjoyed under many godly and
pious Kings and Queens; Therefore we will and require all Our Loving Subjects
seriously to consider how ever probable they can expect such days again,
except they join with Our Self and Our Forces, to advance Our Throne and Regal
Dignity. Which will be the only means to make up the Breaches in Our poor
Massacred and divided Kingdoms, procure a happy Union betwixt Our Good
Subjects, prevent all future distractions, and we may obtain honor from all
Christian Princes, that Religion, Justice, Loyalty and a Free Trade may
flourish throughout Our Dominions.

Signed by Our Self at Our Court at Brussels Februry 13. 1659.
ANTWERP, Printed by his Majesty's special Command. 1659.


