His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, WITH THE LORD
KEEPERS, On Monday February 14, 166^.

By His Majesty's Command.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 166^. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, With the LORD
KEEPERS, on Monday, February 14, 166^/^.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Sent forth My Proclamation that there might be a good Appearance at this
Meeting, having most confidence in full Houses, where the well-being of the
Church, and all other Interests of the Crown and Nation are best secured.

When we last met, I asked you a Supply, and I ask it now again with greater
Instance: the uneasiness and straightness of my Affairs cannot continue without
very ill Effects to the whole Kingdom: Consider this seriously and speedily; it
is yours and the Kingdoms Interest as well as Mine; and the ill Consequence of
a want of an effectual Supply must not lie at my Door: And that no
misapprehensions or mistakes touching the Expenses of the last War may remain
with you, I think fit to let you know, that I have fully informed My self in
that Matter, and do affirm to you, That no part of those Moneys that you gave
Me for that War, have been diverted to other uses; but on the contrary, besides
all those Supplies, a very great Sum has been raised out of My standing
Revenue and Credit, and a very great Debt contracted, and all for the War.

One Thing I must earnestly recommend to the Prudence of both Houses, that you
will not suffer any occasion of Difference between your selves to be revived;
since nothing but the Unity of your Minds and Counsels, can make this Meeting
happy either to Me or to the Nation.

I did recommend to you at Our last Meeting, the Union of the Two Kingdoms, and
I did the same to My Parliament in Scotland, they have made a great step
toward it; and I do again seriously recommend that Matter to you.

I have directed My Lord Keeper to speak more at large to you.

The Lord Keepers Speech.
My Lords, and you Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons,
AT your last meeting, His Majesty did acquaint you with the great occasions He
had for a Supply, and that He had forborne to ask it sooner, more in
consideration of giving some time, for the ease of the people after the burden
of the War: then that the condition of His Affairs could so long have wanted
it: And His Majesty has Commanded me now, to speak more fully and plainly upon
this Subject.

His Majesty has not only by His Ministers, but in His own Royal Person
examined the Accounts, touching the Expenses of the last War, and has thought
Himself concerned to let you know, That all the Supplies which you gave Him for
the War, have been by Him applied to the War, and no part of them to any other
uses: Nay so far from it, that if the Preparations toward the War, shall be
taken to be for the use of the War, as they must be: A great part of His own
Revenue, to many Hundred thousands of pounds has been employed also, and
swallowed up in the Charges of the War, and what did necessarily relate to it:
To which may be added the great Debts Contracted by His Majesty in the War, and
the great Charge in the Repairs of the Hulls of His Ships, and putting His Navy
into such a condition; as it was before.

Besides, His Majesty thinks it ought: to be considered, That when the Charges
of the War were at the highest, the inevitable effects of it and those other
calamities, which it pleased God at that time to bring upon us, did make so
great a diminution in His Revenues, that besides all other accidents and
disadvantages the loss that He sustained in Three Branches of His Revenues: In
His Customs, Excise, and Hearth-money, by reason of the War, the Plague, and
the Fire, did amount to little les^ then Six hundred thousand pounds.

Thus you see, That though your Supplies have been great, yet the Charges
occasioned by the War, and the Calamities which accompanied it, have been
greater: And that the Debt which is left upon His Majesty and which He
complains of, has been contracted by the War, and not by the diversion of the
Moneys designed for it.

His Majesty has Commanded me to say one thing more to you upon this Subject,
That He did not enter into this War upon any private inclination or appetite of
His own: The first step He made toward it, did arise from your Advice, and the
Promises of your Assistance; But if the Charge^ and Accidents of the War, have
outgone all your Supplies, and left Him under the burden of this Debt, He
thinks that as well the Justice to your Promise, as the Duty and Loyalty you
have always showed Him, will oblige you to relieve Him from it: And the rather,
when you shall seriously consider, how uneasy this burden must be to Him, and
what ill consequences the continuance under it mu^^ draw upon all His Affairs:
In which particular, you, and every person yo^ represent in this Nation, will
be concerned, as well as Himself.

His Majesty does therefore Command me in His Name, to desire you once more,
and to conjure you, by that constant Duty and Loyalty which you have always
expressed to Him, and by all the concernment you have, for the Support of the
Honor and Safety of His Government, to provide such a Supply for Him at this
time, as may bear proportion to the pressing Occasions that He has, and to the
state of Hi^ Affairs at home and abroad: And so speedily, And so effectually,
as may answer the ends for which He has desired it.

His Majesty has further Commanded me to put you in mind of what was at your
last meeting proposed to you, concerning an Union between the two Kingdoms, and
to let you know, That the Parliament of Scotland has since declared to His
Majesty, That such Commissioners as His Majesty shall name, shall be Authorized
on their part, to treat with Commissioners for this Kingdom, upon the Grounds
and Conditions of the Union: His Majesty therefore thought fit now again to
recommend it to you, to take that matter effectually into your Consideration.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1669.


