A MESSAGE From his Highness the Prince of WALES TO His Majesty, and the
Commissioners in the Isle of Wight. With His Declaration concerning the Earl
of Warwick, and the Parliaments FLEET.

Also, a Letter from Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, to the Committee at Derby house,
concerning the Treaty with his Majesty, and his advice touching the same.

With a Journal of the last weeks proceedings between his Majesty, and the
Commissioners, in the said Treaty, and how far his Majesty complies, in signing
of the rest of the Propositions.

Printed for G. Lawrenson, and are to be sold near Temple Bar, October. 6. 1648.

A LETTER FROM THE NAVY
SIR,
THe Earl of Warwick Lord high Admiral with a Navy of 22 sail of ships has
continued about 8 days in Goree Road, attending the motion of the revolted
ships, or rather persuade them to return to their obedience to the Parl. or
daring them to fight; but as yet neither summons, or other persuasions has
been prevalent.

And one that comes from the Prince, says, That His Highness caused a Council
to be called, and advised with his Officers of a way to unite the Seamen of
the revolted ships; and it was agreed, that every chief Officer in the ships
should declare, that His Highness had procured 6000 li. in Gold, which they
should have amongst them, with many other promises and persuasions, that the
treaty would end all differences, both by Sea and Land, and then they should
come off with more honor, then accepting of an Act of Indemnity now; and
finding that the Sailors were somewhat pacified for the present, the Prince sent
a Message to the Lord Admiral, declaring his great dislike that his Lordship
should endeavor any way to draw His servants from Him, requiring him to desist
for the future to do the like, and come and join with Him; which doing, He
would procure a pardon for him from the King His Royal Father.

The L. Admiral answered, that he takes it in dishonor that either in himself,
or any others, there should be the least thought of his breaking the trust
reposed in him; acquainting his Highness, that if he were exposed to the
greatest extremity that is incident to man, he would never dissert the
Parliaments service; and being in a good condition at Sea, his advice to the
Prince was, to come and join with the Parl, but its thought nothing will be
e^^ected till its known how the treaty goes, and we hear that Sir T. Lunsford
has bin lately dispatched privately from the Bruce for the Isle of VVight upon
some Message to the King, or for some instructions or advice from those that
attend his May this treaty.

By other intelligence we likewise hear, that M. Murrey is gone for England,
but upon what Design as yet, we cannot hear.

Some of our ships ride within two leagues of the revolted ships, with whom we
would fain engage, but as yet cannot; for the Hollander instead of securing
those revolted ships the parl. of England (a service which in some measure
might well be expected at their hands) by holding a neutrality, say they will
prevent acts of hostility near unto their parts, though it were never so many
for promoting the affairs of the Parliament. Some assistance of Volunteers is
said to be expected from Denmark which has been long spoken of and is still
likely, to be as slowly performed for we hear of none that come to the revolted
ships, but some few which fled out of England, who are like to have as good a
match by coming over to join with them, that are like to mutiny among
themselves as the Hollanders had by coveting and engrossing the new Gold that
of late they got out of England, or as those which adventured 7000 li. Arms to
recrute Duke Hambletons forces, which were taken the last week going for
Scotland, I have now done with such passages as are remarkable here, a word or
two of two of some Letters we receive out of Ireland and so conclude. By an
Express from London Derry it is certified how exceeding oppertunely Colonel
Monk surprised the Scots at Belfost and other places by which means the English
have not only gotten more Elbow room in fruitful parts of that Kingdom, but
the poor English which were likely to perish by the insolent revolted Scots in
Loncon Derry relieved, for the Scots of that Garrison being far more in
number then the English and standing to their principles for the Parliament of
England, the Scots declared for the King deteyned the Lord president got most
of the provisions into their own Quarters and stopped others from coming in
either by Sea or Land.

And had not this unexpected deliverance thus suddenly happened, in all
probability the Scots in a very short time had been the sole masters of that
City, which (setting aside the particular interest the City of London has
there) is of great concernment, and conduces much to the loss or gain of two
or three Provinces in the North of Ireland.

From aboard the Admiral October. 2. 648. Postscript.
SInce the writing hereof, our Fleet is gotten within one league of the
revolted ships, and have made many shot at them; whereupon the soldiers which
appertain to the revolted ships, (being about 400 land men) brought out
several pieces of Ordnance ready mounted, and would have planted them against
the Earl of Warwicks ships on that shore, but the Hollander caused them to
draw the Ordnance again into the Harbor, and would not suffer them to annoy us
therewith.

And some of the townsmen tell us, that they are weary of maintaining so many
ships and men in their harbor, as are with the Prince, and therefore it is
expected, that the Governor of the town should prefix a day how long the said
revolted ships shall have liberty to stay in their protection, whereby to make
their agreement with the Lord Admiral, or adventure their fortunes on the main
Ocean. I am

Gory Road 3 October. 1648. Your affectionate friend, S T.



Die Sabbati 7. October. 1648.
A Letter came to the Committee at Derby house, from Lieu. Genesis Cromwell,
certifying that Barwick and Carlisle were delivered up to him, for the service
of the parliament, all arms laying down in Scotland, and to the end all
differences may be composed in England and all his Majesty's D^minions, without
the shedding of more blood he desires that the treaty may go on with all
possible speed, great hopes being good upon the commencement thereof, that it
will be concluded in peace and amity, which was Signed O. Cromwell.

And as a further assurance hereof, Letters from the Isle of VVight to the
parliament, do ascertain, that his Majesty after several days debate, has
yielded to the most material clauses in the second Bill concerning the Church,
and settlement of Religion. By the next, there is little doubt, but we shall
hear that he has passed his Royal word to pass this Bil, as he has done
already for the first.

From St. Albans we had the copy of a Letter to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax.

May it please your Excellency,
WE make bold being pressed in spirit, to represent to you, as the ground of our
fears, so the matter of our desires. It has pleased God after much plottings
and endeavors of the old and new malignants to crown the Army with great
success; and although that calls for Justice, little or none is done, and less
is like to be done, unless your Excellency presently appears to do something,
and the Army with you, to be a leading cause to us; we wait for it. Instead of
Justice, behold a treaty with them for peace, that God speaks no peace to, and
instead of owning just petitions, they are laid aside: some employed in the
treaty, not long since voted the Army Rebels; what that prognosticats in the
future, when they have power, we leave to your Excellency to judge. So hoping
you will so far honor us, as to stand by the Kingdom and the Army in their just
rights and privilege.

We subscribe, Your Excellencies humble servants, Lieu. Col. Paul Hobson.
Major Cobbett, etc.

Newcastle 22 Sep. 1648.

FINIS.

