DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
Charles R.

MOst Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Entirely Beloved Counselor,
We greet you well. The continuance of this extreme hard Weather, exciting Our
gracious compassion toward the poorer sort of Our Subjects, so much the more
as that We find in Our Cities of London and Westminster, and in the Parishes
within the Bills of Mortality, that the very great number of such as by reason
of the Weather cannot Work at their Trades and usual Employments, has in a
manner exhausted all Provisions and Charities that have been hitherto made for
them; We have therefore thought it necessary at this time heartily to recommend
unto you, and We do hereby expressly will and require you to take care, that as
soon as it is possible a Collection be made of the Alms and Benevolence of all
charitable and well disposed People within your Diocese of Canterbury; And that
all the Moneys that shall be so Collected, being returned to your hands, be by
you distributed (taking along with you the Notices that Our Right Trusty and
Welbeloved Counselor the Bishop of London will be able to give you, he having
already distributed great Sums of Money upon this Charity) among such Poor as
live within Our Cities of London and Westminster, and the Parishes within the
Bills of Mortality; And that among them a special regard be had (as We have
already directed the said Bishop of London) to poor Seamen, Watermen, and
indigent Housekeepers. We doubt not but upon this occasion you will call
earnestly upon the Clergy of your Diocese, to do their part herein, with a
Diligence and Zeal suitable to the Charity of the Work, and the great Exigency
of the Time. And so We bid you very heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the second day of February 1683, in the Six
and Thirtieth Year of Our Reign.
To the Most Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely
Beloved Counselor, WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY,etc.
By His Majesty's command L. JENKINS.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


