CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Against Fighting of DUELS.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it is become too frequent, especially with Persons of quality, under a
vain pretense of Honor, to take upon them to be the Revengers of their private
quarrels, by Duel and single Combat, upon slight, and, which ought not to be,
upon any Provocation. We considering that the Sin of Murder is detestable
before God, and this way of prosecuting satisfaction, scandalous to Christian
Religion, and the manifest violation of Our Laws and Authority, having by Our
Declaration Published at Brussels the Twenty Fourth Day of November, 1658.
manifested to the World Our utter dislike of such impious and unlawful Duells.

Now, out of Our Pious care to prevent unchristian and rash effusion of Blood,
do, by this Our Proclamation strictly charge and command all Our loving
Subjects of what quality soever, That neither they, by themselves, nor by
others, either by Message, Word, Writing or other ways or means, challenge or
cause to be challenged any Person or Persons to Fight in Combat or single
Duel; nor carry, accept or conceal any such challenge or appointment, nor
actually Fight such Duel with any of Our Subjects, or others; or as a Second
or otherwise, accompany or become Assistant therein.

And We do hereby Declare, That every Person or Persons who shall offend
contrary to this Our express command, shall not only incur Our highest
displeasure, but thereby become incapable of holding or entertaining either
Office or employment in Our Service, and never afterward be permitted to come
into Our Court or Presence. And further, He or They to suffer such other pains
and punishments, as the Law shall inflict, upon Offenses of that horrid nature.

And We do further Declare, That if any Person or Persons whatsoever, do
receave, accept or know of any Challenge, sent or delivered as aforesaid, and
do not forthwith give notice thereof unto some of Our Privy Council, or
otherwise to the next Justice of Peace, near whereunto the said Offense shall
be committed; He or They so offending, shall be liable to the Penalties before
expressed, and proceeded against according to Law, with all rigor and severity.

And Lastly, We do hereby forbid all Intercession or Mediation unto Us to be
made, for or on the behalf of the Offenders. Hereby Declaring, That We will not
extend Our Pardon to any Person that shall Contemn Our Command expressed by
this Proclamation.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirteenth Day of August in the Twelfth
Year of Our Reign, 1660.

