PRINCE CHARLES HIS MESSAGE TO The Levellers in the West, and His Promise and
Royal Grant, concerning their just Liberties and Freedoms; With their Letter to
the Citizens of London, touching the same.

ALSO, His Highness putting forth to Sea, with thirty Sail of French, Dutch,
and Danes, 200. Gentlemen of note, 2000. Officers and soldiers, 5000 Arms, and
a Declaration of their design.

LIKEWISE, A great Fight near Plymouth, between the Par. forces, and 1500
Levellers, upon their attempt to seize upon the town, with the particulars
thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners.

London, printed for G. Laurenson, September 13. MDCXLIX.

PRINCE CHARLES HIS MESSAGE TO The Levellers in the West, and His Promise and
Grant the Liberties of England, and the Freedom of the People.
SIR,
THe great compliance and co-actings of those called Levellers with the
Royalists, does not alittle astonish the well affected in these parts, and the
rather, because of their falling off from their first principles, and adhering
to the common Enemy of the Nation, whose present actings and combinations tends
to an utter extirpation and dissolution of the present Authority and
Government; for many do affirm, That their Agents in several parts, act st^^ly
for the Royal Interest, and declare to the peope, that their present
engagement, is for no other end but to establish peace and truth, and to
restore this languishing but late flouaishing Nation, to its ancient Government
by King, Lords, and Commons. And it is further intimated,

That some of the Royal Grandees and chief Headpieces, have sent a Letter to
the Prince, showing the grounds and reasons of this their engagement, etc. To
whom (we bear) a Message has been returned in answer thereunto, from the
Prince, for their better encouragement, and carrying on of the work in hand,
wherein he promises all possible assistance, the restoration of their just
liberties and freedoms, and engaging of his Royal Word, to satisfy all
interests, which in reason and equity they shall demand or defire.

But since the reception hereof, many have deserted them, not approving of
their addresses, or condescensions for a Kingly Government, and have again
declared for the present Authority, resolving to adhere to them with their
lives and fortunes.

At their first appearing visible in these parts, they seemed somewhat
numerous, but within these few days are exceedingly dissipated, the manner
thus; A party of Sir Hardresse Wallers Horse having notice of their conjunction
and meeting near Plymouth, and fearing a sudden surprizall thereof, immediately
hasted toward them with a considerable party, consisting of about three
hundred resolved fighting men, and fell upon them undiscovered, killed 13 took
diverse prisoners and dispersed the rest, being in all about fifteen hundred,
whose design were to surprise that impregnable Garrison of Plymouth: Thus may
we see the vehement flames which were breaking forth throughout the whole
Nation, and how happily the fire was quenched that threatened inevitable ruin
throughout all the corners thereof, which (for the future) the omnipotent
Jehovah prevent, and incline the hearts of all cordial English men to peace
and truth.

Andover 11. Septem. 1649.
By Letters from Oxford thus: Diverse of Col: Ingoldshies Regiment, and other
discontented parties of the Garrison, being much unsatisfied with the procedings
of the Parl. and army, have revolted, and agreed on a Declaration to be
published, showing the grounds and reasons of their engagement, viz. 1 For a
dissolution of this present Parl. and for electing a free Representative. 2 For
signing of the Agreement of the people. 3 For a Council of Agitators,
according to the engagement at Triple Heath, etc. This being looked upon as a
business of great concernment, it was thought fit to send down a considerable
party against them; and on Sunday night a letter was sent to the Governors of
all the Garrisons of England, to give them intimation of these distempers, and
requite their care of their several charges, thereby to avoid the like. And
withal, that a copy of the letter intercepted, should be enclosed therein, to
show the compliance and co-actings of those called Levellers and the Royalists.
Since their revolt, diverse horse and foot come in to them night and day in
great numbers, their Council consisted most of private soldier. at first, but
some head-pieces lately come from London, are added to them, they keep their
guards very strong, and are stricter then ever we knew any, declaring. That
their friends in other Garrisons will join with them, and that they doubt not
but (within one month) to have a potent Army in the field, being assured, that
not four Regiments in the Army will prejudice ahem in this quarrel, for
recovery of Englands lost freedoms, and for case of the people from all
burdens and oppressions; for obtaining whereof, both they and all the honest
Soldiery of England were resolved to hazard their lives and fortunes.

But they are now prevented from putting the same in execution; for on Monday
last the Agitators were seized on as they sat in Council, and all the
Soldiers reduced to their former obedience.

A Letter from Ireland.
SIR,
Upon the advance of the Lord Governor Cromwell toward Droghedah, great was
the preparation of the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin to receive him,
and upon his near approach with the Van, a selected party were drawn forth to
represent the Royal salutation (as they called it) and accordingly the Lord
Inchiquin had the honor and conduct of these Marshalling Troops, who no sooner
had marched four miles from the town, but a discovery were made of a great Body
of the Parl. horse; whereupon he drew out a Forlorn consisting of two hundred
horse, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Gerrard, who advanced about Musket shot
from the Body, the rest marching after.

The Parliaments forces seeing this, immediately echoed forth a great deal of
alacrity to dispute an engagement, drawing out a Forlorn likewise, and
advancing toward them; infomuch, that after an hours rallying, and wheeling
for wind and ground, both bodies had embattail'd themselves in a well
disciplined postute for the receiving of each others charge with the most
advantage and safety.

And after some short time spent in consultation by the Officers, the Trumpets
founded, and both parties joined battle, a most violent and desperate charge
being given to each other at the first onset, during which conflict, sharp and
cruel was the action, each man striving for Conquest, and endeavoring to
become master of the field; but the victory seemed dubious a long time, until
by main force; the enemies loft wing were disordered and put to a retreat,
which the right wing, and the Center-body seeing (for they were divided into
three bodies) began to decline further engagement, endeavoring an hononrable
retreat, but the L. Governors horse falling in with them, upon their wheeling
off, diverse of them were killed and taken prisoners, the rest received
sanctuary near a spacious bog, where they rallyed, and by the coming in of a
fresh Reserve of three Regiments of horse, commanded by Colonel Steward,
Colonel Cotton, and Collonell Cunningham, the Lord Inchiquin attempted a
second Onset against the Lord Governors forces, who finding themselves to be
both overpowred and unfitting for a second engagement, made an honorable
retreat with the loss of thirty men, the enemy not daring to embrace pursuit
for a mile together, whose loss we hear was exceeding great in the first
engagement, by estimation at least three hundred.

In this conflict the Lord Inchiquin deported himself with great gallantry in
the very heat and midst of the bittell; but Collonell Fitz. Williams (who
commanded the left wing) demeaned himself with as much treachery and cowardice.

Since which fight, we likewise further hear, that the Marquess has sent a
letter to the Prince, intimating, that upon the advance of our forces toward
Droghedah, he fell upon them, routed, killed and dispersed many hundreds, etc.
which seems as incredible as his former, and only penned in a false and contrary
style for the present support of his young Sovereigns drooping spirits. The
Lord Governor is within a days march of Drohedah with his whole Army of horse
and foot, where he intends to fight the enemy, if they stay, and to lay siege
to the town; of which more by the next.

Dublin 7. September. 1649.
From the West some letters make mention, That the Prince is put to Sea with 30
Sail of French, Dutch and Danes, accompanied by 200 Gentlemen of note, and
about 2000 soldiers, there are said to be 5000. Arms, and other furniture for
war: some declare, that his design is for Guernsey, others for Ireland, but
most probable for Scotland.

There is said to be a letter sent from certain Levellers, to their friends in
London, requiring their aid and assistance in this their Engagement, but the
former obstructions, its believed, will retard and frustrate their future
actions.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

J. T.


