NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM THE KING OF SCOTLAND TO The Parliament of that Kingdom;
with his last Promise and Condescensions, and the proclaiming of a new
Proclamation for His Highness. ALSO, Another bloody Fight in Ireland, the
particulars thereof, and the routing of General Oneal's Army by the Lord of
Ards, the raising of the siege at Londonderry, and the rallying of the Marq.
of Ormond's forces, and advancing within 12 miles of Dublin.

Extracted out of the Original, for general satisfaction, and published by
Authority.

London, Printed for E. Cotton, Aug. 17. 1649.

THE KING OF SCOTLAND HIS Propositions to his Subjects of that Nation; and His
Promise and Condescensions to the Desires of the PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
SInce the receipt of the intelligence from Ireland, of the fatal Blow there
given to the Prince his Forces, the Court has continually rung with sorrow,
and his Highness is very sad and melancholy: Since which time, there has been
a great disputation held by his Privy Council, whose result was, That new
propositions should be sent to the Parl. of Scotland, viz. 1 That his declared
Majesty would wive his assent, for the settling of Religion, according to the
solemn League and Covenans.

2 That he would wholly apply his Ear to the Council and Advice of the Estates
conveened, provided, that respect might be had to the tender Consciences of
those who have adhered to or assisted him.

But this will hardly be; for he must either become a perfect Covenanter, or
else a despised Prince.

Many of the Royal party have caused proclamation to be made for Charles the
II, for the raising of Volunteers, but few appears in that engagement,

Hague 9. Augusti, 1649.

The news is confirmed from Dublin, Ormond has paid dear for his bowzing,
Taff, Preston, and he being met together, thought they could destroy the
Parl-power, by drinking healths to their destruction, when its in so many words
a Bull, whereas Lieu. Genesis Jones came soberly upon them, and made them run
several ways: It Is said, that in their have they fell upon Ballyshanon, have
taken it, and are rallyed, being about twelve thousand within twelve miles of
Dublin and fallen to their old way of disputing passes: which when lost, they
run to the next: they increase by the coming of forces to them, and say, if
they recover not their reputation before Michaelmas, they shall not keep Ireland
from a total reducement within a year.

The Scots-Resolution touching their King.
First, that prevailing party of Sectaries of England, who have broken the
Covenant, and despised the Oath of God, corrupted the truth, subverted the
fundamental Government, by King and Parliament, and taken away the life, look
upon us with an evil eye, as upon those who stand in the way of their
monstrous and new-fingled devices, in Religion and Government, and though there
were no cause to fear any thing for that party, but the Gangrene and infection
of those many damnable and abominable errors, which have taken hold on them,
yet our vicinity unto and daily to commerce with that nation, may justly make
us afraid that the Lord may give up many in this land unto a spirit of
delusion, to believe lies, because they have not received the love of truth.

Secondly, Neither is the Malignant party so far broken and brought low, as
that they have abandoned all hopes of carrying on their former designs against
the Covenant, and work of Reformation, besides many of them in this Kingdom who
are as Foxes tide in chains, keeping in evil nature, and waiting opportunity
to break their cords, and again to prey upon the Lords people. That the
standing Armies in Ireland, under the command of the Marq. of Ormond, the Lord
Inchiqueen, the Lord of Airds, and George Munroe, who forgetting the horrible
cruelty that was exercised by the Irish and English Nations in that Land, have
entered into a Peace and association with them, that they may the more easily
carry on the old design of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party, and the
Lord of Airds, and George Munroe, have by treachery and oppression, brought the
Province of Ulster, and Garrisons therein, under their power and command, and
have redacted our Countrymen, and such as adhere unto the Covenant and cause
of God in that Province unto many miseries and straits, and are like to banish
the Ministers of the Gospel, and to overturn these fair beginnings of the
work of God, which were unto many a branch of hope, that the Lord meant to
make Ireland a pleasant Land.

Thirdly, But which is more grievous unto us then all these, our King
notwithstanding of the Lords hand, against his fathers opposition to the work
of God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms, by which it is come
to pass, that his Majesty has hitherto refused to grant the just and
necessary desires of this Kirk and Kingdom, which were tendered unto him from
the Commissioners of both for securing of Religion, the liberties of the
Subject, his May Government, and the peace of the Kingdom; and it is much to be
feared that those wicked Councillors may so far prevail upon him in his tender
years, as to engage him in a War for ouerturning (if it be possible) of the
Work of God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms that adhere
thereto, which if he shall do, cannot but bring great wrath from the Lord upon
himself and his Throne, and must be the cause of many new and great miseries
and calamities to these Lands.

And albeit the Lands be involved in many difficulties and compassed about with
great and imminent dangers; yet ^here is hope and ground of consolation
concerning this thing; the Lord is in the midst of us, and we are called by his
name, our ears hear the joyful sound of the Gospel, add our eyes see our
Teachers. We behold the arm of the Lord stretched out daily in working
salvation for his people, and answering their desires upon their enemies, by
terrible things in righteousness; although we be few in number, yet the Lord
of Hosts is with us, and in the power of his strength we shall be able to
prevail; although our land be filled with sin, yet we have not been forsaken
of the Lord our God, but he has always had compassion upon us, and delivered
us in all our distress; although some of understanding fall, it is bot to try,
and to purge, and to make white even to the end, because it is yet for a time
appointed although many cleave to us by flatteries, yet there be a remnant w^^
keep their integrity, and the Lord shall do good to those that be good; but
such as turn aside to crooked ways, shall be led forth with the workers of
iniquity.

The Lords people in England and Ireland, who adhere to the cause and covenant,
may be perplexed, but shall not despair, they may be persecuted but shall not
be forsaken; they may be cast down but shall not be destroyed; and although
uniformity and the work of Reformation in these hands seem not only to be
retarded, but almost plucked up by the roots, and the foundation thereof razed;
yet the seed which the Lord has sown there, shall again take root downward,
and bear fruit upward, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.

A. KER.

Right Honored,
SInce the late blow given to the Marq. of Ormond by Lieut. Genesis Jones, we hear
that they are re-bodying about Kilkenny and Munster, and that in the said
Engagement thirteen thousand of the Princes forces escaped, who are gathering
together, and randezvouzing in several places; but the raising of the siege,
and defeating that pote^ power is joyfully rescented by many. We have received
another express from thence, which intimates, that the D. of Lorraign has
landed 3000 horse in Ireland, and that a conjunction is designed by them with
7000 Scots under the Lord of Ards, 3000 Irish commanded by the Earl of
Clanrickard, 7000 of the Spanish Faction commanded by Genesis Oneal, 1400 horse
commanded by L. Incihiquin, and the 13000 of Ormonds that escaped at the last
fight; all which (it is said) intend a Randezvouz near Kilkenny, who being
bodyed, will make an Army of 30000 and upwards, and may probably much endanger
our friends in Dublin, if a considerable supply be not speedily sent over to
them.

Bristol 12. August, 1649.

Yesterday came news, as if Dredagh were re-taken or delivered up by the Lord
M^or, that Sir Charles Coot since his relief by his Brethren has been abroad,
disputed several passes with the enemy, and set the Besiegers at a further
distance. The Lord of Ards (its said) has likewise fallen upon Ge^erall Oneal,
and after a sharp Conflict, killed many, took diverse prisoners, and scattered
the rest.

FINIS.

