His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, The
Eighteenth Day of January, 1666.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, His
Majesty's Printers. 1666.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

His MAJESTY'S most Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have now Passed your Bills, and I was in good hope to have had other Bills
ready to Pass too. I cannot forget, That within few days after your coming
together in September, both Houses presented Me with their Vote and
Declaration, That they would give Me a Supply proportionable to My Occasions;
and the Confidence of this made Me anticipate that small part of My Revenue,
which was unanticipated, for the Payment of the Seamen; and My Credit has gone
farther then I had reason to think it would, but it is now at an end.

This is the first day I have heard of any Money toward a Supply, being the
18. of January, and what this will amount to, God knows; And what time I have
to make such Preparations as are necessary to meet three such Enemies as I
have, you can well enough judge: And I must tell you, what Discourses soever
are abroad, I am not in any Treaty; but by the grace of God I will not give
over My self and You, but will do what is in My power for the Defense of My
self and You. It Is high time for you to make good your Promise; and it is high
time for you to be in the Country; as well for the raising of Money, as that
the Lords Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants may watch those seditious Spirits
which are at work to disturb the Public peace. And therefore I am resolved to
put an end to this Session on Monday next come sevennight, before which time I
pray let all things be made ready that I am to dispatch. I am not willing to
complain you have dealt unkindly with Me in a Bill I have now passed, in which
you have manifested a greater distrust of Me then I have deserved. I do not
pretend to be without infirmities, but I have never broken My word with you;
and if I do not flatter My self, the Nation never had less cause to complain of
Grievances, or the least Injustice or Oppression, then it has had in these
Seven years it has pleased God to restore Me to you: I would be glad to be
used accordingly.

FINIS.

