CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring the Cessation of Hostility, and preserving an entire
Amity between His Majesty, and the King of SPAIN.
CHARLES R.

FORASMUCH as Our Dear Brother the King of Spain, upon notice of Our happy
establishment upon Our Throne, has sent Orders into several his Dominions,
commanding an entire Cessation, from all Hostility, between Ours and his
Subjects. And has further proposed, that a certain day might be agreed upon,
for the publication thereof. We, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council,
having (also) thought it meet and expedient to renew Our Ancient Amity and good
Intelligence, betwixt Our Realms, Countries, Dominions and Subjects: Do, by this
Our Proclamation, signify and make known, to all Our Loving Subjects, That
there is as full and entire a Peace and Amity, between Us and Our said Dear
Brother the King of Spain, as there was, by the last Treaty, made between Our
Dear Father of Blessed Memory, and Our said Brother, and that all Acts of
Hostility and War, both by Sea and Land, are ceased and shall cease: And that
the said Cessation has taken beginning and Commencement from the time of Our
Arrival in this Our Kingdom of England, which was upon the Twenty fifth day of
May last past. And further We do hereby Signify and Declare, That all
Prisoners, Ships, Goods, Merchandise, or whatsoever else taken upon one
another, either by any of Our Subjects, or the Subjects of Our said Dear
Brother, since the said time of Our Arrival in England, be, and shall be, upon
due Proof thereof, redelivered and restored. And lastly we do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects, of what degree soever
they be, to take notice of Our Will and Pleasure, signified by this Our
Proclamation, and to observe, perform, and accomplish all that hereunto
belongs, as it is to be published on the side of Our said Dear Brother, the
King of Spain, the date of these Presents.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 10/20 day of September, in the Twelfth
year of Our Reign, 1660.
LONDON* Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660.


