C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Appointing the General Fast, which according to former Order
falls out to be on Wednesday the First of November, being All Saints day, to
be kept on the Wednesday following, being the Eighth of that Month.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty did by His Royal Proclamation,
bearing Date the Sixth day of July last, appoint that from the time therein
mentioned, the First Wednesday of every Month successively should be observed
and kept in all parts of this Realm, as a day of Fasting and Humiliation, until
it shall please God to withdraw this Plague and grievous Sickness. And to the
end that Prayers and Supplication may every where be offered up unto Almighty
God for the Removal of this heavy Judgment: And whereas the First Wednesday in
November (which according to that Order ought to be kept) falls out to be
All Saints day, which is a great Festival in the Church, and so not fit to be
kept as a day of Fasting and Humiliation, His Majesty's Pleasure is, and He
does hereby Declare, That the Next Wednesday following in the said Month, that
is to say, Wednesday the eighth of November, shall be kept in all parts of this
Realm as a day of Fasting and Humiliation, instead of the First Wednesday of
that Month. And for the time to come, the First Wednesday in every Month
shall be so kept as was appointed by the said former Proclamation; Except the
same falls out to be on some day appointed to be kept Holy, and in that case it
shall be kept the Wednesday following, as is hereby directed. And His Majesty
does hereby again call upon the Respective Preachers on the said Fast-days,
that they do Earnestly Exhort the People, in the several Churches, to a Free
and Cheerful Contribution, toward the Relief of their Christian Brethren, whom
it has pleased God to visit with Sickness; And that the Moneys so gathered be
disposed according as His Majesty has directed by His said Former Proclamation.

Given at the Court at Oxford the Twenty Sixth day of September, in the
Seventeenth year of his Majesty's Reign. 1665.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1665.


