The blessed Jew of Marocco: OR, A Blackmoor made White. Being a demonstration
of the true Messiah out of the Law and Prophets, by Rabbi Samuel a Jew, turned
Christian; written first in the Arabic, after translated into Latin, and now
Englished. To which are annexed a Diatriba of the Jews sins, and their misery
all over the world, Annotations to the Book, with large digressions,
discovering Jewish blindness, their refusing Christ, and the many false
Christ's they have received; with other things for profit in knowledge and
understanding.

By Tho: Calvert Minister of the Word at York.

And I will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced: and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his
only son.

Zach. 12. 10. But their minds were blinded: for until this day remains the
same Veil untaken away, in the reading of the old Testament: which Veil is
done away in Christ.

2 Cor. 3. 14. Contra istos Iudaeos non laboro, pugnent contra illos* Codices
sui, pugnent lex and prophetae; and aut victi and humiliati salvabuntur, aut
superbi, and pertinaces punientur.

Aug. in orat. de 5. haeresib. Et si non corrigatur Iudaeus, saltem proficiat
Christianus.

Julian. Pomer. cont. Jud. lib. 1. Printed at York by T. Broad, and are to be
sold by Nath: Brooks at the Angel in Cornwell, London. 1648.

To the intelligent and Christian READER.
NOne, I suppose, is such a stranger about the matters of Jerusalem, but well
understands, that they in it are ^allen by the edge of the Sword, and ^ed away
captive into all Nations, and that Jerusalem is trodden down of the Gentiles,
Luke 21. 24.
(and must be) until the ^^me of the Gentiles be fulfilled. It is ^he fired
Beacon of Gods wrath, by ^he light and fire whereof he gives warning, and by
the destruction whereof he gives instruction to all the people of the earth,
that they beware Jesus Christ the Son of God be not set up amongst them for a
sign or mark of contradiction: Dispersa palabundi, coeli and soli sui extorres,
vagantur per orbe^ sine homine, sine Deo Rege.
Heaven will set that Kingdom and people up for a sign of contradiction and
curse, that set up Christ and his Gospel for a contradiction upon earth. If God
lay out all his mercy in his Son, he will lay out abundance of wrath upon their
backs that despise him, Tertul.
that brings messages of Reconciliation and life from Heaven; and good reason
his blood should be upon their heads, that refuse to believe and receive his
blood-sprinkle upon their hearts; John 8. 24.
If you believe not that I am he^ you shall die in your sins; and die they do
most miserably and horribly, defying and defied of Christ. These poo^ Jews are
the Professors of Butcheri^ against Christ; The Jews miserable septenary.
they 1. have killed the Lord Jesus, and 2. their own Prophets; 3. they
persecuted the Apostles, 1 These. 2. 15, 16.
4. they please not God, and 5. are contrary to all men; 6. they fill up their
sins always, for 7. wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. (...).
Now my desire is to show the Jew before every eye that is tender, Vt Theatrum
vindictae Divinae, as the Stage of Divine wrath, Isid. Pelusiot. lib. 2. ep.
157.
and the subject of Christian pity and prayers, as the only moving spectacle
upon earth for a people and Nation, that have been Bajuli supremae irae almost
1600 years, the scorn of Nations, the cursed outcast of all people, that we
may come in and lend our eyes and Hearts to the Apostles fearful ecce, the
fearefullest ecce out of Hell for mankind; Behold the goodness and severitie
of God, Romans 11. 22,
on them which fell severitie, but toward thee goodness, etc. the M^p of
mercy to the Gentiles, to us heathens, made sweet out of their Map of
bitterness, Judaei Diaboli sors. Niceph. Gregor. Hist To. lib 6.
who swim in a Red Sea of Blood, and in a Brackish Sea of wrath and vengeance.
If I may provoke Christians to be thankful for what God has done for them, and
pitiful to the Jews about the misery that lies upon them, I have attained my
aim. The writing has for Author a converted Jew, whose eyes God opened to see
and know that Just One, whom his unjust and Hellish-hearted Countrymen stand
out against with infidelity and execrations, whose case he deplores as the
only Hell out of Hell; he confutes them, deciphers their cursed condition out
of the unanswerable Writings of the Law and Prop^ets, Plerisque moris est
prolato rerum ordine, protinus utique in aliquem la^tum, atque ^lausibilem
locum qua^ maxim possunt favorabiliter excurrere. Quintil. instit. l. 12. ^^de
egressione.
and shows their evident damnation, for rejecting the great salvation by
Christ. Other things about the Author, time of writing, matter, I (...)
discuss in the Preface, and other preparatory pieces to the discourse; to
(...) annexed some large Ann^t^tio^s, Discourses and Digressions, for the
better understanding of this great mystery of Jewish misery. In this I have
employed some time and labor, and by it shall give account my vacant seasons
(cut off from the public Ministry) are not altogether s^ent in idle and
ignorant wastings, Hane partem (...)* ^raci vocant, latini egressum vel
egressione^. Ibi.
but have labored to acquaint my self and others with the magnalia dei, and to
make it appear, that we should have more study and reading than merely for
filling some hours by Preaching. I have always liked that Speech of Cicero,
Cicer. in epist. l. 9. Papyrio Paeto, epist. 178 (...).
fit for his life that knew no better but Heathen letters, Non possem vivere,
nisi in litteris viverem; and that of Julian Parabates, the wretched Apostate,
(though in this he spoke well) that though he were an Emperor, he did not so
affect to keep his Fingers neat and clean, Julian. Imper. in Misopogon. Some
Christians have said so as well as Heathe^s: Fateor absque literis (...).
Erasm. in epist. ad Mesios Fratres.
but that they commonly wore a black garment dyed with Ink and often writing.
Thus every man is dragged and drawn after some pleasure, to this or that, to
spend his time either as an Athenian Townsman, in exchanging reports of
novelties; or as an Athenian Scholar, to write and read of things that tend to
the Commonwealth of Knowledge and Learing: But we of the Ministry have a
Steward, to dispose of our spare time better than any of these, even the
Apostle Paul, who advises, nay, commands, not to one, but to all Timothies as
well, 1 Timothy 4. 13.
Give attendance to reading, (of Divine things) to exhortation, to doctrine. I
know many are of the mind of Birds, they love Figs, but they care not for
taking pains about planting them, looking to the trees, and gathering the
fruits; like Landlords, they would have their Tenants bring them, (...).
and then they will eat them, though it may be, they will find fault then
also, because they are not brought in an hansome Basket. For these I leave them
to their own ease and curiosity, and never look for other, but conceited
idleness being on the Bench, diligence in any kind shall be condemned,
because they walk not their facile and common way, (...). (...).
to carry the most they have in the tongue, and to hang a fair Sign of
appearance at the door, what ever be in the house; I need not beg of such in
this (and the like) to be contemned. I crave of the learned and ingenuous a
favorable interpretation, that if they find not great things, yet they will
accept good endeavors of him that would gladly teach himself, if he by these
cannot teach others, these being the rapt hours, or the harmless
Scholler-rapines from his preaching Studies; (...). (...).
in which I hope to find some that will give me the Eloquent and holy
Pelusiots censure; He that knows not how to teach, but is very willing to
learn, he is worthy to be accepted. And however some do like that of the
Preaching King the best, that of making (and so of reading) many books there is
no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh; Eccles. 12. 12.
yet we may with as good reason hearken to Paul, as wise as Solomon, to give
all attendance to reading; neither does the one cross the other: for Solomon
it is thought did not intend a non-tearm about the reading of Divine things, of
which his Father had said the blessed man should meditate day and night, Olymp,
in Eccl.
but the Books that he draws from his Son, or his Student, are Gentile
Volumes, and Heathenish writings, on which he should not be too eagerly bent,
for therein would be more weariness to the body, than profit to the soul; and
yet even they are to be used, so as they may be Gi^eonites, Non pudor est nil
seire, pudor nil discere velle.
help to cleave wood, or draw water for the Sanctuary. Next to Scripture,
Jewish state, and Jewish ^earning is to be sought into, as an help to us, as a
weapon against them: after both which we do but grope with a great deal of
purblindnes in this Tract, yet I furnish my self with some considerations of
their condition, and call upon others to see how the judgments of God are a
great deep. The work in the Original is none of mine^ Alieno thuribulo rem
sacram facio, Proverb. apud Pausan.
I do but with the Tailor translate the old garment and make it new; yet that
has some labor, because it is an old piece, and is brought out of rudeness,
being from good Arabic translated into mean Latin, whence I have it. The
Annotations have the more labor, calling me to peruse diverse Authors to
explain, and fullier to declare Jewish matters, and to show how admirably this
converted Jew kisses Jesus. What ever we desire be accomplished upon earth,
this I am sure would make wonderfully for our comfort and Christ's glory, that
all Jews were converted and spoke with one Lip, as our Rabbi Samuel of Marocco,
that the great sin of sins is the rejecting of Jesus Christ, that all are and
shall be cursed as the Jews, that will not believe in him, and that this is
life eternal to know God, and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. O the
blessedness of those times of the Church of the Jews and Gentiles sweetly
commixt in one, when they shall all speak the same Language, Hosanna's to the
Son of David! this will be as the Resurrection from the dead. O Jesus the
fullness of Grace and Truth, bring in the fullness both of Jews and Gentiles. I
make sometimes a digression in the Notes, but I dare say, who duly weighs it,
will not say it is a transgression, for it is to good purpose to bring in
something, which may allure and benefit the Reader both with variety and with
utilitie. And surely I never look into these records of Jewish misery and
Divine Justice, but I seem to be amazed with the Justice of God, and the
hard-heartednesse of that people, that now seem as if they had never known God,
nor any of their Seed were ever known of him. O that they would read these
Books of their own converted Brethren, who deal with them by the old
Testament, with weapons out of their own Armorie, which they honor and almost
adore. How cursed are they, that must either pull out their own eyes, or pull
in pieces the Scriptures, or they can no way maintain that Jesus is not the
Christ, Mel^hior Canus says, Habent pro christo* Aristotelem, pro Petro
Averroem, pro Paulo Aph^odinensem*
the promised Messiah. He mentions very little of the new Testament, for that
is Apocryphal to the Jew. We must deal with Heathens that are rude, by reason,
and libro creaturae; we must deal with Philosophers and learned Atheists by
reason* and arguments spunn upon the best Wheel of Wit and approved Authors
and witnesses, ex libro literaturae, but with Jews, ex libro Scripturae, the
Book of Scripture of Moses and Prophets is our only Shield, Sword, Spear and
Bow, which never return in vain from the Battle. These our Author uses
abundantly, and never strikes but speeds, leaving the Jews dead upon the
place, and slain with their own weapons. I request the readers eyes, but his
heart and judgment also to go along with them, he shall find some addition
to his knowledge, or some exuscitation to his affections; he may in the end
conclude there is some profit by the translation and notes, as well as by the
Authors first draught, and it may be he never had heard of the autographon, but
by the Translator. I conclude with that Jewish Apologue, The Clusters of Grapes
sent out of Babylon to implore favor for the Leaves of the Vine: Mi^te^ant (ex
Babylonia) botri uva rum ad implorandam gratiam pro foliliis quod si enim non
essent folia, non possent sub^^^ere bot^i. Buxtorf. in epist. dedicit. ad
Abbreviat.
for if there were no Leaves, you ha^ lost the Grapes. Let Rabbi Samuels be the
Clusters, and the Translatours the Leaves, yet remember you had not (most of
readers) met with his grapes but for the Translators Leaves. The Lord persuade
Christians to open their eyes, and earnestly to lay to heart the Jewish
blindness, and as earnestly to pray, that the Lord would persuade Shem to come
and dwell in the Tents of Japhet, and take away the Hebrew Vail from the heart,
that they may be turned to the Lord, that there may be one Fold and one
Shepherd: Numb. 24. 23.
But who shall live when God does this?

The Preface to the Book, together with a large Diatriba or Discourse
concerning the estate of the Jews, and and their misery all over the World, By
the English Translatour.
NO way out of the way will it be, Qui talia sentiunt christianos Iudaizantes
appellat. Hiero. in Esa. cap. 54. lib. 15. Rivet. in psa. 68.
in a prefatory Discourse to render the Reasons of putting out a Treatise
concerning the State, Condition, and Doctrine of the Jews in these times, in
which the Hearts of men are much erected to look after and believe a
Chiliasme, Medes Jewish testimo. at the end of his clav. Apocalyp. Iudaei
auream atque gemmatam Jerusalem restituendam pata^t. Hieron. in Hier. 19
Comment.
and the Reign of a thousand years in glorious posture upon earth, which is
much applauded and expected, and that upon too many Jewish Grounds and
Arguments; I would wish none of these times begin to embrace diverse things in
consonancy with them, and some as madd as Julian, bend their faith, or fancy
rather, to think of a re-edification of the long-ruined Jerusalem, and judge
it were none of the worst enterprises, to go to that unholy Land, and be taken
up into Heaven there; of which imaginations I cannot think but that of the
judicious Philosopher must needs be given in advice unto such, Long a Sole
recedite, dum c^reas hab^tis opiniones. Arian in diss. l. 3. c. 21.
Keep at a good distance these waxen opinions from the hot beams of the Sun of
Truth, lest they become liquid, and you lose them running away in the melting.
How is the Creation Sabbath taken up, and that of the Resurrection cried down
by diverse? Nay, things strangled and blood for abstinence from them begin to
have a resurrection with some, as if Christ were not come to confirm their
everlasting Funerals, never to peep out of the grave again. Out of the Jews,
and taking part of Judaisme, sprung up diverse of the worst sort of damnable
Heresies, and sundry Sects, as the Samaritans, Sadduces, Gorthenians,
Jebusaeans, Essenes, Dositheans, Scribes, Pharisees, Hemerobaptists,
Hossinians, Nazaraeans, Herodians, Simonians, Ebionites, Valentinians,
Cerinthians, Sethians, Melchisedechians, Arians, Hypsistarians, and Mahometans;
which last religion was compiled, Damascen. de Haeresib. Postellns de orbis.
Te^rae concord.
and abundance of Jewish matters thrust into it by some Jews that helped
Mahomet to make up that confused Chaos of a strange Religion and Sect; so that
Judaisme has been the fruitful Mother and Nurse, to give both Womb and Pap
to many monstrous Children. There is mention also of a strange Sect of the
Athingani, with whom Michael Balbus the Emperor communicated, Zonar. Annal.
Tom. 3
who withal kept firm with the Jews in many of their errors, ready to
maintain great hopes of the salvation of Judas. It will be behoofefull to show
the cursednesse of that Doctrine and people of the Jews, that every one may
keep off from the Tents and Tenants of the Jews, Illud vituperandum est plane,
and intolerandu^ maxim, si qui genere christianus ad Iudaeos desciverit.
Imman. Tremel. specular^*
which maintain a Diametricall opposition to the Gospel of Christ; for of all
sinners and Sects, the portion of an Antichristian Jew will be the most hard
and heavy. Yet oh the foeces temporis istius! we have an Heresy of all the
dangerousest and subtillest that ever molested the Church of GOD, which now
holds fast, and cries up much of the Jews vanity and unbelief, and in that
cries down Jesus in the truth of his Godhead, and much of the truth of his
Gospel. If I should say, that Socinianisme, that black Crow, which has so
great a Nest in all Europe, and withal in England, does in many things walk
hand in hand with Judaism, I should not need fear that question of the Atheist
to be put unto me, Quae machinae, Apud Ciceron. de nature. Deor. l. ^
quae ferramenta? where are your Hammer and Tools to finish this Work, and
fasten these Nails? Who will but cast his eye into Socinus, and Socinians
writings, shall find too great a conspiracy with the Jew, and so may well
enter those Doctors and Teachers into their table of suspicions, as being no
friends to Christ. I shall give a touch of their wretched harmony in some few
things.

1. For the Deity of Christ the Jew and Socinian speak both with one tongue
negatively and blasphemously, Moses Ben.
which is to us Christians as the Article of the existence of God, Maim. de
fund. leg. cap. 1 (...). Abravancl. de cap Fid. cap. 20.
and giving existence to every thing; Fundamentum fundamentorum, and columna
sapientiae; If our Messiah be not God, then is our faith vain, we are yet in
our sins, the foundation of Christianity is taken away, and what can we do? we
know the Jew is the old cursed Archer, that shoots blasphemies against Christ's
Godhead, our subtle Heretic and his followers are not much behind, denying
Christ to be Consubstantiall with his Father; this is so known as needs not
much be insisted on; their books in the very title some of them will trumpet
out their infidelity de uno Deo Patre, Joan.
denying the Godhead of the Son and the Spirit. Crellius de uno Deo Pat. in
lib. 2.


2. They are both Anti-Trinitarians, Gerha^d. in loc. com. loc. de offic.
going about to weaken and nullify the Doctrine of the Divine Trinity of
Persons, charging it with the introduction of multiplicity of Gods, Chist.
or Tritheisme. Abrah.


3. The Office of the Messiah they both confine to the Humane Nature, Calov. in
Deca.
and must needs, Dissert. de Pseudo-Theolog. Socin. sect. 214.
because both deny the Divine Nature.

4. The Jew will make Christ's Prophetical Office to consist in his new
promulgation of the Law of Moses to believers; nor fail the Socinians to tread
in those steps, making the Messiah to be Mosissimum Mosen.

5. Against Christ's Priestly Office, Grotius de Merit. and satis.
by his blood expiating and satisfying for our sins, both of them are known
to Sail strongly with their best Furniture and Tacklings. Christ.


6. Both do say, Vide Abra. Calov. in li. supra citat.
that justitia imputata is putida, and that our righteousness is our obedience
to the Law, Dantisc. edito 1639.
and our performing of it; but who will may seek and easily find far more
agreement 'twixt these two, and much disagreement with the Gospel. In sixteen
points one has made the Collation, and finds the Jew a Socinian, and the
Socinian too much a Jew in them all. Have we not need in these days, wherein
Satan seems to keep a perpetual Mart, to vent his Hellish inventions, take
notice of those things, which may carry us too near the Jew, and too far from
Jesus, and beware we meddle not with such dangerous folly? And should we use
our best eyes to look at that Hellish callum, and unconquered Brawn upon the
Jews heart, and see what vollies of misery have waited upon their cursed
infidelity, and opposition of the Son of God, we shall find this the best
Bellows in ordinary means to blow up our hearts into holy fear, pity, faith.
Fear to stand out in defiance against Christ, lest the Lord sentence us as the
Jews, to be a land of execrations, and Anathema's. Pity toward that wretched
generation, that neither Heaven nor Earth looks after. And it would waken us
unto Faith, to cleave to, and make much of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, lest we
fall as low, being not warned by the ex^^ple of their unbelief, and the
executions of the wrath of heaven gone our against them for it. Of all the
writings that decipher their faith and their fall, none do it so punctually,
plenarily and particularly, as those that were Jews, but are converted to
Christ, they writing things with knowledge and experience, as having long eaten
of their Salt, and drunk of their Cup. None have done it with so much
affection, as pitying their own kindred and Country, and so are the more to be
heeded by them and by us. Of whom in all Ages God has given us some learned
Jews to be converted, earnestly to write to and cal^ upon their wretched
brethren, to row to land^ and to harbor in the Kingdom of Christ, tha^ they
perish not in the great Ocean of Divine rejection. Besides some Bishops of
Jerusalem after Christ, of which diverse of them from Iudaisme were brought to
Christianity, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 21
we find Hegesippus, the Josephus junior, to be one: of later years many, and
of great learning have excellently writ against the Jews, as N^^las de Lyra
about the year 1310. from being a Jew turned Friar among the Minors, and has
left an excellent confutation of the Jews, about the proving this, that Christ
is come, and none other Messiah to be expected. In his time Paulus Burgensis
turned Christian also, Alsted.
and writ against Iudaisme. Thesau.
Elias Levita, commonly called the Grammarian, Chronolog. in chronol.
left his Rabbinisme, and entered the Church of Christ by Baptism, Kabalist.
bringing some thirty more Jews with him, to be Baptized, about the year 1517.
One Hieronymus de sancta fide, a Jew converted to Christianity, Hieron. de
sanct. fid.
and became Physician to Pope Benedict 13. at the instigation of the Pope, he
writ a book to confute the Jews, which he called Hebraeomastix, The Jews Whip,
or Hebrews scourge; in which he acutely and substantially sets upon them,
Gesner. in Bibliothec.
whipping them with their own Talmud and best Rabbis, making their own Authors
prove Jesus Christ to be the only Messiah, and that he is already come. When
he published the book in Spain, it is said by the clearness of his conviction,
above five thousand Jews were turned to the Faith, as is mentioned in the
Frontispice of the Book. Joan.
This last we have from Gerhards testimony, Gerhar. in Theolog loc. Comm.
for though the Book is among us, yet that I have seen wants the Title, and
the Epistle or Preface, Tit. de extremo Jud. sect. 115.
if it had any. With his own Writing he has joined that which Lyra also writ
against the Jews.

One Paulus Ricius in the Court of the Emperor Maximilian, Gesner. Bibl.
of a Jew converted to Christianity, writ many things against his old
misbelief. Antonius Margarita converted in heart, and Baptized, converts his
Hand and Pen against the Jews. Ernestus Ferdinandus, of a Jew became a Beleevet
in Christ, writes a Flagellum Iudaeorum, A Whipp for the Jews* There is
Christianus Gerson, Ioannes Isaac, and our excellent Emanuel Tremelius, born at
Ferraria in Italy, that sacrificed his holy knowledge so well to the
Translation of the Bible; and one Paulus Weidnerus, has by Writings called
upon his Backsliding Brethren the Jews, having found Jesus himself to bid them
come and see; besides, there are Christians that never were Jews, that have
sufficiently discovered and refuted the vanitie^ of this Apostate Seed of
Israel, who have i^ their Writings upon, Porchet. victor. contra Hebr. P^ris^is
1520.
and against their Books at large proved the truth of the Gospel, and
Christian verities, as Porchetus de Salvaticis in his incomparable Writings de
victoria contra Hebraeos, out of whom Galatinus and others seem to have
borrowed the most they have; The noble Mo^^us in his Book de verit. (...) relig.
as also Rajmundus Martinus, who writ Pugionem (a Book so named) against the
Hebrews. Such a path has Munster walked in, in his Annotations on the Hebrew
Gospel of Matthew. Buxtorfius (the father and son) to whose Jewish Synagogue
is added a Treatise of Ludovious Carretus a converted Jew, Grotius of the same
argument.
whose calling to Christ was begun and occasioned by a Vision, which gives his
Book the name of Visorum Divinorum. Posiellus abundantly has writ this way in
his Orbis terrae Concordia.
Our Rabbi Samuel of Marocco is not altogether to be neglected, who has
brought better stuff than Yarn or Badgers Skins toward the Furniture of the
Christian Tabernacle. Such an one doubtless there was, though in the naming of
the Rabbis, Buxtorf. in Rabbin: Biblioth.
and those of that name Samuel, we cannot find him mentioned, though many
Samuels be found, as Rabbi Samuel Alkali, Arcuvolto, Aben Tybbon, Vzeda, Iom
Toff, etc. however, and upon what envious grounds soever the Jews conceal his
name, and a long ^ime kept hid his Writing, Thesaur. Chrono.
yet our Christian Writers make mention of him, as does Ges^er, Gerhard,
Glassius, and Alsted, who ranks him among Christian Divines, about the year
1090. This Book is also to be found put out by Margarinus B. in 5. Tome of
Bibliot. patrum.
The Book was first Writ in Arabic, as an Epistle of Samuel to Rabbi Isaac,
entreating him to answer his much troubled heart about his fear that the Jews
are accursed for Crucifying Christ, and that he and no other is to be expected
for the Messiah. It was Translated out of Arabicke into Latin by one Alphonsus
Boni hominis, a Spanyard and Friar Predicant, out of which Latin our English
Translation is derived. Three Copies have I seen of it, one a very old one, as
I remember Printed at Paris, in which there are but 25 Chapters, the Book being
less by two Chapters than the other Editions, which have 27 Chapters. In that
ancient one there is an Epistle of Alphonsus to Friar Hugo Master of the Order
of the Preaching Friars, which we shall give Translated after this Preface. The
two Basil copies are with me
The other two Copies came out at Basil, both put forth by Henric. Petri; one
of them is the Book called Micropresbeuticon, a collection of the Witings of
above 30 ancient Fathers, and Christian Doctors, some Greek, some Latin, all
little or short Works, among which R. Samuel is one; this came forth Anno 1550.
Another Book, that has of ancient little Fathers more than the other, came out
at Basil some five years after, 1555. has this Samuel joined with them also:
the old Translation calls him Samuel the Israelite, Joa^. Leo African. in descr.
born at Fer a City of the King of Marocco, and R. Isaac to whom he writes it,
Afric.
is said to be Master of the Synagogue, Philip.
that is in Subinlincia, in the same Kingdom, Cluver. introduct.
the Copy in Micropresbeuticon calls it Subiulmenta: now in the Kingdom of
Marocco we can find no such City as Fer; Geogr. lib. 6.
there may be mistake, it may be it should be Fez, which is the principal
City of all Barbary, the Metropolis of Mauritania, and has the Kingdom of Fez
belonging to it, and named from it. There may be some mistake also, for Fez and
Marocco are two distinct Kingdoms, and are both in Numidia. All the places
almost that the Turk has conquered have either lost their names, or changed
their names; as Damascus is now called Sham; Constantinople, Cluver.
Stambolda; Sychar, Napolis; Biddul.
Jerusalem is called Cuts or Kuds; Beersheba is now named Beer; Engannim,
Jenine; Argier by the Turks is called Jezaier; and Hyppo in Africa where Austin
lived is at this day called Cape Bonne; that which was heretofore Hierapolis,
is now Aleppo: nay, very rivers have changed their names, for Tygris is now
called Tygil, and Euphrates, Frat; and the Country Babylonia goes under the
name of Caldar; In an age or two places are destroyed, or the Names changed
wherefore it is no marvel if in these days we cannot find the old names of
places, seeing either the places are quite destroyed, or their names are
changed. For Subinlincia or Subjulmenta we find no such names in the most
exact describer of those Kingdoms, John Leo the African; yet we find there is
a river called Subu, that runs but six miles from Fez; there is a Castle called
Subeica, with a Town, and another called Subeita: Clenard in his African
travels writes there are some 4000 Jews at Fez, and some 9 Synagogues, in
epist. Latomo.
whether it be Printers mistake, or some Cities and Towns may be destroyed, and
their names lost in ashes, that then were known by these names, or how it is,
we cannot divine; we therefore leave this Geographicall scruple, seeing the
most exact Africanus does not help us in it, nor Ptolomie in his Tables of
Africa. It is well known there are, and since Jewish dispersions, there have been great store of them among the Moors in Africa; there is an exceeding great
number in the City of Fez, the most of their Goldsmiths are Jews there; and
in the whole Country the number is very great. When Ferdinand drove the Jews
out of Spain, Leo African. descript. Afric lib. 1 As many they write came the^
out of Spain, as once under Moses came out of Egypt Cael. Sec. Curio. de Amp.
R. D. in lib. 1.
a world of them came into Africa, being born Moors, though by religion Jews.
We trouble not our selves to find out who this R. Isaac was, seeing he is not
set out with any word of distinction from other Isaacs, of which there were
many, as Abarbanel, bar Abba, ben Abraham, etc. It was expedient to have writ
something about these things of persons and place, lest it should be judged
under the crime of negligence, to let all slip without mentioning either head
or feet of the body of the Translation and Book, of which we were to give an
account.

For the matter of the Book it deplores the Jews misery, their being banished
and hated where ever they come, and fathers all upon their cruelty in
Crucifying Christ, and their unbelief, still denying to receive him and the
Gospel. Now if any ask what is their misery, and what is the cause, I shall
unfold it.

omnibus umbra locis odero, dabis improbe poenas.
they prayed Christ's blood might be upon them, and upon their Children, it is
so, it follows and haunts them where ever they go; few States and Kingdoms
entertain them, and where they are entertained, they are kept under, and made
to endure very hard things, the State serving their own ends by them. In most
places they use (if Christians) to distinguish them from others by place of
dwelling by themselves, and some distinctive habit, as their own Chronologer
tells us, that at Vepice such a year the Jews were commanded to wear a yellow
Hat, David Ganz in Tsemac. David.
that they might be known from Christians. Our Samuel tells enough of this wrath
of God that dogs them at the heels all over. Constantine they used to set upon
those Jews with stones that had left them and turned Christians, till the
Emperor by Edict caused diverse of them to be burnt, and withal ^ppointed,
Baron.
that if any Christians turned Jews, Annal.
^hey should be burnt likewise. Eccl. ad An. 315.
Many of them ^ebelling, he caused their ears to be cut off. They used by craft
and by coin to buy and get of the consecrated bread which was left at (...)
Christmas Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and prick it, burn it, and very
basely and scornfully abuse it, because they heard Christians call it the body
of Christ. Euagr. hist. eccl. lib. 4. ca. 35.
There are ^wo notable stories of this, the one in the reign of the Emperor
Justinian; the other in Germany, where the Jews for that villainy were ^ome of
them burnt, and tortured with hott Pincers; others banished the Diocese of the
Bishop of Passaw. You have the story short in these old Latin verses, which as
a Chronicle are set up in the Church: Anno Milleno quadringen septuageno,
Octavo sub Vdalrico protoflamine claro, Caspar. Brusc. in Laureaco vet. de
Patav. epist. l. 2.

Affecit flamma Majestas Patavjensis
Vrbis Judaeos tam tetro crimine mota.
Per quos heu summj transfixa est hostja Christi,
Extunc flagranti consumpta atrocius igni.


Sometimes they were accused for poisoning of Wells and Springs to make an end
of Christians, Rob.
sometimes for beggering Christians by excessive Usurie and extortion; Gaguin.
sometimes for Clipping of Coin, Hist. Fra. lib. 7.
for Magique, for cozenage, etc. But their cursing of Christ and Christians,
their cursing of Jews that turn Christians, their imprisoning of their dearest
friends, and laying some foul false accusation against them, if they smell that
they intend to turn Christians, makes them oftentimes intolerable, Judaeus
baptizatus sine peccato a ju^^ao occidi potest.
some of their Rabbis reading such Lectures as these, A Jew may murder or slay
a Baptized Jew without sin. So much are they bent to shed the blood of
Christians, that they say a Jew needs no repentance for murdering a Christian;
R. Bacchai.
and they add to that sin to make it sweet and delectable, Heins. in Arist.
Sa. cap. 26.
that he who does it, it is as if he had offered a Corban to the Lord. Hereby
making the abominable sin an acceptable Sacrifice. But beyond all these they
have a bloody thirst after the blood of Christians. In France and many
Kingdoms they have used yearly to steal a Christians Boy, and to Crucify
him, fastening him to a Cross, giving him Gall and Vinegar, and running him in
the end through with a Spear, to rub their memories afresh into sweet thoughts
of their Crucifying Christ, the more to harden themselves against Christ, and
to show their cursed hatred to all Christians. Bzovius ad Ann. 1198.
Thus they incensed Philip of France for such a fact, so as their Goods were
confiscate being Jews, whether guilty or innocent; and some imprisoned, others
cast out of the Kingdom. At Weissenburg in Germany they Crucified a Boy;
Socrat. hist. eccl. lib 7. cap. 16.
at Verona they did it, and at Venice also, at Inmestar a place near Antiochia.
Our diligent Fox has given us notice that when England gave Jews harbor,
Foxii Oliva Evangel. ^narrat. cap. 11. ad Roma. An. 1189. in England and An.
1^41. at Norwi^h in Engl.
they got our English Children, and sometimes crucified them in diverse places,
as you may find in Acts and Monuments: and he publishes it withal in his
Latin Sermon at the Baptism of a Jew. There is an excellent relation, if it can
be proved to bear its weight with truth, to show the original of
Child-Crucifying among the Jews. Cantjpratanus says, he once heard a very
learned Jew, that in his time was converted to the Faith, say, that a certain
Prophet of theirs when he was at point of death, did prophecy of the Jews
thus: When he said Christiano sanguine, he meant Christi sanguine.
Know ye (says he) this for a most certain truth, that you can never be
healed of this shameful punishment wherewith you are so vexed; but only by
Christian blood. This punishment so shameful they say is, H. Komman in Mirac.
vivor. tit. de Judaeis laborantibus menstruo.
that Jews, men, as well as females, are punished cursu menstruo sanguinis,
with a very frequent Bloud-fluxe. These words (says the converted Jew) the
Jews did take with a mistake, for hereupon to heal themselves they every year
get the blood of some Christian Child, whom they murder; whereas if they had
understood aright, this sanguine Christiano, was Christ's blood that they should
get, which in the Sacrament we receive, to the healing and saving of sinners,
so many of us as are turned to Christ, we are presently healed of our Fathers
curse. But alas, they are mistaken indeed, to choose Barabbas a murderer on
earth, nay, to choose Abaddon, the murderer of Hell, before Jesus the Heavenly
Redeemer and Savior of the Souls of Sinners, both Jews and Gentiles that do
believe in him. A miserable mistake, to shed Christian blood by murder, rather
than to seek Christ's blood by faith. It was good counsel he gave them, and
they must be Co-Heires with Satan of perdition, unless they get this blood.
Of Magical and unlawful practices they have also been accused, and their
names made black with that report. That the Jews were much addicted to the use
of Magique, is confessed by R. Elias in his Thisbi: It is a custom (says he)
much taken up by us Jews in Germany, vide etiam Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud.
that we make a circle round about in walls of the Chamber where a woman lies
in Childbed with Chalk or a coal; and write on every wall, Adam, Heva, Chuts,
Lilith: and he relates, how on the inner chamber door they write the names of
three Angels, as Lilith taught them. The Chaldee Paraphrast spares not to
spread this in Cantic. 8. 3. bringing in the Israelitish Synagogue thus
speaking, I am chosen above all people, because I bind Thephili^s to my head
and my left hand, and a paper is affixed to the right side of my door, the
third part of which looks toward my bedchamber, Serarius in cap. 8. Tobit
quaest. 5.
that Devils and evil spirits may have no power to hurt me. Is not this a
Magical paraphrase of that Theological Text, His left hand should be under my
head: and his right hand should embrace me? The same Targum on Cantic. 4. 6.
calls it artem justorum Patrum, The art of the righteous Fathers and
Patriarcks. Vorstii animadvers. in Pirke Eliezer.
No marvel if the Jews love Magique, when they make Abraham as well a father
of Magicians, and skilled in it, as the father of the faithful. As for Solomon
they will prove in his book of Confessions, that he confesses his use of
Magique, I gave my heart to know wisdom, and madness, Coch. in Sanhedr.
and folly. Eccles. 1. 17. Their chief Senate the Sanhedrin, among other
excellent parts, they say, must be Artists in this unlawful Art. The original
of that conceit, to spring from weakness in the Jews imagination of this
required skill in their Judges, Pet. Cu^aeus de Heb. Repub. lib. 1. cap. 12.
may be seen in Cunaeus.

Hitherto we have had witness sufficient of their sins and wickedness, and
truly their misery follows their sins hot foot. Such things as these have
made Kingdoms cast them out, Vide T. Aquin. ad Duciss. Brabant. do reg. Jud.
opusc. 21
and throw them forth like poisons, and sometimes murder them like beasts. Such
virtues as these have made it a much canvased question in politickes, whether
the Jews and Jewish Sanagogues are to be suffered in Christian Commonwealths,
Gerhar. in Cent. quaest. polit.
and there are many reasons urged by some why they should not be endured.
Decad. 9.
There is a proverb used to this purpose, Quaest. 1. Licet permittere mala
minora ad evitanda majora, ut apparet in meretricio. Emman. Sa-Jes. in Aphoris.
Confess.
Happy is that Commonwealth, in which there is neither an Abraham, a Nimrod,
nor a Naaman: that is, Which is neither troubled with a Jew, nor a Tyrant, nor
a Leper. The Jesuit resolves the case, but such kind of resolving dissolves
the conscience; A Prince (say some) may suffer Jews to exercise Usury, if it be
expedient for the Commonwealth, and compel the people to pay them, and keep
touch with them; which opinion (says he) does not displease me. Mark what a
cleanly and Iesuit-like reason he gives; for (says he) it is lawful to permit
or tolerate lesser evils to avoid greater, as is apparent in whoredom. O the
Divinity of Rome, Vivo hic inter Iudaeos, qui Ioage magis mirantur esse
christianos, qua^ nos mira^ur esse aliquos adhuc Iudaeos. Quid mi^um? nihil
s^^unt de nobis, nisi quod strenue Iudaeos comburimus. Clenard. in epist. 4.
Fez.
as Whores are suffered to prevent a greater evil, so are Jews to be suffered.
There are some reasons why they should be suffered, behaving themselves quietly
and honestly, not oppressing Christians, not cursing them, not seducing them,
not speaking evil of the Gospel without punishment, not hindering Jews from
turning Christians, not marrying with Christians, not having any Offices or
places of honor and justice, not refusing to be subject to Magistracy,
distinguished from Christians by dwelling place, and otherwise; thus somewhere
it is fit they should be suffered, think the Civilians. For what ever they be,
Vivi quida^ sunt apices nobis representa^^es Dominicam passionem. Bern. ep.
322. Sohnius super Psa. 59.
though a people that seem to be the Saltest Pillar of Gods wrath to all the
world, yet we may look on them as a Book of our Saviors Passion, and when we
see a bloody Jew, remember our bleeding Jesus. They may be to us the
Looking-glass of Divine vengeance, and better than a Crucifix. They are to be
pitied by men, because there is a promise of mercy from God, there must be a
blessed revocation, and an happy reunion of Jews and Gentiles. Romans 11. 1, 4,
5.
We should not utterly cast off, whom God has not utterly cast off. Has God
cast away his people? Zonar: in 1. Tom.
God forbid. No, Annal.
he has a remnant according to the election of grace. Lip. in 2. lib. de
Constable. cap. 21.
How lavish heaven and earth has been of their blood I could at large relate,
and show their blood streaming upon the earth all over the known world diverse
times. After Christ's Ascension especially, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6.
their first fluxes of Blood were the fearfullest that ever was heard of. Et
qui triginta denariis Jesum comparaverant ad perdendum, just postea 30 capita
suorum viderunt vendi uno denar^o ad illudendum Hegesip de excid Hier. in
Anaceph.
Zonaras will tell us large numbers of slain in Jewish wars, to puzzle
pretty Arithmeticians to cast up in figures. But we have Lipsius exactly and
shortly telling us the number in every place, so many thousands slain in civil
wars in seven years, so many in open war with Romans, part of them famisht,
part drowned, neck-broken, self-murdered, slain with the sword, in all twelve
hundred thousand, besides ninety and seven thousand that were taken prisoners
by the Romans. As they bought Christ for thirty pence, so thirty of them were
sold so dog cheap, as one penny was the price of so many heads, when they
fell into the hands of the Romans. Gods justice measuring out agreeable to
their sin i^ a Divine proportion, that they might read the vengeance in a
proportionable punishment. See but how many thousands were slain by Emperors
Adrian and Trajan, they banish^ Jerusalem, Zonaras Xiphilin.
commanded not so much as to look back to it, it was not lawful for them, N^
quidem specula paternum solum cernere. Let all the world take notice of what
happened to them under the Emperor Julian the Apostate. This son of
Perdition, to make the words of Christ a lie concerning the Temple at
Jerusalem, that one stone should not be left upon another, Ruffin. hist. lib.
1. cap 38. 39
did give the Jews leave to go and build up the Temple again. They give
notice of it to all their Countrymen all over the world, they flock to
Jerusalem from all parts, Socrar. hist Eccl. lib. 3. c 17.
every one is free to give much wealth to this Work, Julian himself was
liberal to them, that he might do something to oppose Christ, and vex the
Christians. So earnest were they on this work, that every one would do
something; almost an infinite multitude of men dug and wrought all the day:
it so pleased them, that they had made Spades, Baskets, Troughs, Shovels, and
such like Instruments all of silver, and made great provision of all
materials. But see the event, a terrible Earthquake rends the earth, and tears
up the very old low-laid Foundation of the Temple, a grievous whirlwinde
scatters all their Lime, Chalk and materials: Lightning flames from Heaven
burnt up their Instruments, yea many men perished, others were much hurt by the
Fire, Christ fighting from heaven against these foolish Builders. There were on
the night time the figures of the Cross formed in their garments, which spying
in the daylight, as they knew not how they came there, so by no no means knew
they how to get them out, for they washed and rubbed, yet nothing would take
out these Crosses. At length (the Lord following them with wrath, Theodor.
hist. lib. 3. cap. 20.
and thus accursing their Work) they gave over, and many were forced to
confess, that this was that God who was nailed to the Cross by their
forefathers.

After Julian some of the Emperors drove away the Jews from Jerusalem, would
not let them so much as abide there, or enter the City, so that under
Theodosius and Valentinian their custom was to pay a sum of money, that they
might have leave once a year to go thither, and bewail the subversion of the
Temple, in the very day of the year when it was done, which Hierome mentions
who lived there. Vt qui quondam emerant sanguin^m Christi, emant lachrymas
suas: and ne fletus quidem eis gratuitus sit. Hier. in comment. ad Sophon. cap.
1.
At this day (says he) the perfidious Jews are forbidden to enter Jerusalem,
except it be to weep and lament the subversion of their Temple, for which also
they are forced to pay money. As in times past they bought the blood of Christ,
so are they now fain to buy their own tears, and may not be suffered to weep of
freecost. See how miserably they are used at Alexandria, and in other places,
in Spain, France, Bohemia, Philo. Iud. in Legate. ad Caium. Dav. Ganz
Italy, and their captivity in England, and that by the Pen of one of their
own Chronologers or Rabbis; and we may conclude with a question to the Jew; O
wretches, is not this some payment of that Bond which you sealed, when you
said, His Blood be upon us, etc? you desired a murderer, A matre doctus nec
rogare Iudaeus. Martial. Epigr. 57. lib. 12. Nil praeter nubes et coeli numen
adorant. Iuvenal. sat. 14. Iudaeus licet and porcinum numen adoret.
does not the Lord give you murderers enough? It will be long ere your blood
will ever be shed sufficiently for the Blood of Christ.

Under the Emperor Domitian it seems the Jews (by Romans) were forced to beg
for their living, dwelling in the Grove of Egerin. Martial exceedingly mocks
them from their Circumcision, others altogether disgrace them, calling them
foetentes Iudaeos, The stinking Jews, or, Et Cilli summas advocet aur iculas.
Breath-stinking Jews. Every one exercised his wit to lay some folly or
vanity to the Jews charge. Petron.
Because they used to look up to Heaven praying, Arbit.
they slandered them for worshipping the Clouds as their only God; Some read
Coeli, but the judicious and acute Pithaeus puts it in his Edition Cilli.
Cillus, and apud Hesychi^m (...) est (...), Asinus.
and because they thought them very Asses, they would make the world believe
that they worshipped Asses, and an Asses Head of Gold, and that they withal
adored a Swine, which the Doctor of wantonness Petronius gives out concerning
them. Plutark and Tacitus so forget their gravitie, Vossius de Orig. Idololat.
lib. 3. cap. 75.
that they fall also to these childish Nuts and Cherrie-stones of the playing
Poets, and put upon this Poets jest the face of Historians sober earnest, as if
it were a very truth, that they worshipped such false and foul, and foolish
gods, as a Swine and an Ass: and afterward they put the Ass upon Christians,
as if it were their Deity, whereupon they were called Asinarii, as both
Minutius in Octavio, and Tertullian in Apologet, cap. 16. stand upon defense
against such an offensive absurdity. About Swine the Jews were grievously
abused, for they are so far from worshipping Swine, that it is a mavelvellous
unholy and unclean thing to touch and eat them, insomuch as their choice have
been to die, rather then to eat Swines flesh, as will appear by the book of
Maccabees. Why should they worship that which they will not name, accounting it
so unclean, that they being to name a Swine in their speech, they avoid the
word, Drusius Cunaeus.
and call it [rem aliam] another thing, that is, a Swine or a Hogg. It is a
misery to be forced to see, or meddle with that thing which we do hate and
abhor: yet this people were even tormented in this kind, for the Tyrants
would needs force them to eat of Swine. Pezel. Mellific. histor. page 2.
Adrian the Emperor called Jerusalem Aelia, and in that gate of the City that
leads toward Bethlehem set up in Marble the figure of a Swine, an abomination
to that nation. I would not charge the Jews falsely, but I think they are often
charged with things that Truth gives no warrant for. Marcellinus calls them
[foetentes Iudaeos] the stinking Jews. some will aver it, Ammian.
that all Jews yield a stink and filthy savor to them that converse with
them, Marcel. histor. lib. 22.
and that they judge this cannot be helped better then by the drinking of the
blood of Christians. One John Matthias Tiberinus, a Physician that lived at
Trent^, writes that in the City Trent, Surius.
Anno 1475. the Jews Crucified a Boy there called Simon, of twenty months
old; being taken, they confessed, that one cause was to drink his blood for
remedy of their disease. I leave it to the learned to judge and determine by
writers or Travelers, whether this be true or no, either that they have a
monthly Flux of Blood, or a continual mal-odoriferous breath. Tacitus has a
fling at the Jews, and Jerusalem, and writes of their Captains Hierosolymus
and Judas, Tacit. lib. 5 hist.
(what poor and lying things they take up?) from which Hierosolymus Jerusalem,
he says, Flor. lib. 3. cap 5.
was named. Florus must needs throw one stone at them in Pompeyes Wars, he saw
illud grande impiae gentis arcanum patens sub aureo Coelo; this must be the
holy Temple. As for the Poets, they are often calling them recutitos and
verpos, as does Martial sometimes, and for incredible things they affix it to
a Jews Faith, Horace.
-- credat Judaeus apella. Though this I suppose is not apella, that is
impellis, a skinlesse or circumcjsed Jew, but apella, or Apellas, or Apelles,
See Ossileg. ling.
was the name of some Jew well known at Rome. Horaces Commentators forget their
Grammar and Critics, Hell. cont. H^ins.
when they make it an appellative against all Rules, In other things it is in
vestis, and imberbis, not investa^ or imberba.
as one may judge. Tullie and Suetonius both have their girds at the Jews,
being made the subject of the whole worlds scommes or scornings. Seneca had his
jeere for them, though in it he lift up his mouth and Pen against Heaven, as
grave and moral as he was, he jeered the fourth Commandment of the moral
Laws, August de Civit. Dei, Lib. ^. c. 11
when he said, the Jews keeping weekly a Sabbath every seventh day, they did
sacrifice to sloth and idleness the seventh part of their whole life and age,
which they let unprofitably slip away. Plutarch also is too bold with the
Sabbath of the Jews, Voss. de Orig. Idol. lib. 2. c. 14.
making it a day dedicated to Bacchus, who was called Sabazius, as if the Jews
worshipped that drunken god that day, and not JEHOVA, who is the holy and only
God. I confess their feasting and much eating and drinking that day, together
with the name Sabbath, might lend occasion to the Heathens to slander it for a
day of Bacchanals. At this very day the Turks do bear worse affection to Jews
than to Christians, though they be circumcised as they are, that if a Jew would
turn Turk, he must first turn Christian, before they will admit him to be a
Turk. And among the Turks it is a word of reproach, and an usual protestation,
when they are falsely accused of any crime, Mr. Biddulph* a Protest.
to acquit themselves, they give out in this manner, Pr^acht in his travels.
If this be true, then God grant I may die a Jew; which is a kind of high
execration with them -- At Zant (whence we have the Oil called Zant Oil) the
Christians that do sojourn there, on good Friday throw stones at the Jews who
live there, so as they dare not come out of their houses all that day, and yet
abide scarce safely in their houses, for they throw stones at their windows,
and doors. Hereupon on Thursday at noon the Jews begin to keep within doors,
and continue within, not daring stir out till Saturday about noon, the poor
people counting it a piece of zeal to be revenged on them for crucifying
Christ; though the best revenge they could take; were to pray, as Christ did,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

It was a miserable and sore exaction, Spectaculum Su^v pet Col^astum.
which in Germany some Princes forced the Jews to, to take a solemn oath, and
to swear standing upon a Swines skin. In contempt and bitter purposes, to add
unto all their misery, was this done, knowing they loved Swine no better than
Egyptians loved shepherds. Come we home to our own Kingdom, and we shall find
the Jews, though very many dwelt in the Land, as at London, York, Lincoln,
Stamford, Norwich, etc. yet miserably used, and afterward miserably slain, and
banished. That we may not be strangers to our own Country, let us but inquire,
and it will be evident, Nic. Harps field in hist. Eccl.
the Jew finds little rest for the Sole of his foot in England. Angl ^^odw.
^ish. Live.
The Old-Jewrie at London gives us notice they have been there, and the busy
stir that John Peccham Bishop of Canterbury kept in pulling down the Jews
Synagogues thorowout his Province, till the King ordered they should have one
Synagogue to repair unto in the City, but no more. Certain it is, that while
they were in the Land, there were many occasions taken to take the staff and
beat them; sometimes vicious and villainous things were charged truly upon
them, for which (after many miseries) at length they were wholly banished the
Land. Sometimes there were forged accusations and raised suspicions, only
because they were full of wealth among them, and some had a desire to squeeze
all the sweet water out of this Sponge; and withal they were greatly hated.
They were oft-times playing the very Jews, besides crucifying of Children,
which Copin the Jew of Lincoln confessed they did every year, N. Harps.
when he was apprehended for crucifying a Boy called Hugh, Hist. Eccl. Angl.
of eight years old. They counterfeited Seals and Deeds, they Clipped grievously
the Kings Coin, for which 280 were executed in K. Edward the first his reign.
K. John exacted great sums of money on them, and when he charged upon a Jew of
Bristow to pay ten thousand Marks, and he refused, the King commanded that
every day one of his teeth should be pulled out, till he had paid that sum; and
after he had undergone that sore Penance for seven days of pulling out seven
teeth, in the eighth day he submitted, and made his purse show mercy to his
mouth. Henry (the son of John) did as woefully grind them to powder with
taxations and payments. In a tumultuous rising of the people at London five
hundred Jews were murdered, and many of their houses pulled down under Henry
the third, occasioned by a complaint against the Jews cruel usury, that they
exacted more then two pence a week of a Citizen for the loan of twenty
shillings. At Linne many of the Jews were slain, and their houses burnt,
because they set with weapons upon a Jew turned Christian, and had plotted his
death, when they next light upon him. At the Coronation of Richard the first,
the Jews were by Edict charged not to come in the great concourse of the
people, neither about Westminster, nor the Court, nevertheless many of them
were present, because it was given out they wrought by Magique, N Harps. in
Eccles.
or other unlawful Arts, Hist. Angl.
to do mischief. Among others two chief ones of them (Ioceus and Benedictus)
were about the Court, Math. Par. in Rich. 1.
two famous Jews of York, the latter of them was called The blessed Jew of
York; one of them being smitten by the Porter, the Citizens and the Courtiers
helping them, fell upon them, and grievously beat and slew them, and in the
City was such a tumult, as they fired their Houses, and withal burnt many
Citizens Houses, and (as if the Kings Edict had given them power to destroy
them all) who ever fled from the fire they were entertained with weapons and
swords by the people, so as a great number perished, that though it were their
Jubilee and year of remission, yet it turned to be a year of destruction and
confusion to them. Ioceus fled to York. Benedictus the blessed Jew of York
(yet nothing so good as our blessed Jew of Marocco) being sore wounded, Mr.
Foxes Acts and Monum. in Rich. 1. He was baptized by William the Priot of St.
Mary's in York, and (after his name) called William.
(to avoid death) offered to be baptized, and was so. But the day after (before
the King) he professed he was a Jew, and said he was resolved to die a Jew, and
not a Christian. The King said to him, Who art thou? I am Benedictus your Jew
of York, answered this newly named William. Hereupon the King turning him to
the Bishop of Canterbury, and the rest that had told him he was turned
Christian, saying, Did not you tell me he was become a Christian? they
answered, Yea, we did so inform your Majesty. The King then demanded of them,
What now shall we do with him? The B. of Canterbury [minus circumspecte] very
inconsiderately, (yea, and very unbishoply) in his spirit of fury, answered, If
he will not be a Christian, Roger de Hoveden in Annal. Rich. 1.
let him be the Devils and he will. A Bishop should have spoke more holily, and
more charitably or pitifully. The same Jew (not long after) died at
Northampton, and was even persecuted after his death, for the Jews would not
suffer him to have burial among them, because he was baptized, and the
Christians denied him burial among them, because he had renounced his Baptism.

The like miseries and slaughter were the lot of the Jews at Norwich,
Edmunds-Bury, Lincoln and Stamford, where many were slain at the Fair. They
begun with them also at York, where was the bloodiest slaughter of them of all
other, they being rifled of goods, houses spoiled, their throats cut, without
any sparing or pity for age or Sex. They that escaped many fled with their
goods and Children into a Castle or house of the Kings, Harpsfield
among whom was Ioceus that escaped at London. They were besieged in the Castle
day and night, Mat. Paris. in Rich. 1. ad an. 1189.
they offered a great sum of money for their lives, but the people refused it.
Then one (very expert in their Law) rose up and said, Ye men of Israel, It is
better for us to die for our Law, then fall into the Hands of our enemies, as
our Law has commanded us. All assented unto him, every father of a Family
(with a sharp Rasor) first cut the throats of their wives and daughters, after
that of the whole Family, and cast some 500 of them that were slain, over the
Castle walls unto the Christians. The rest within the walls putting fire to the
building, the Kings house they burnt and consumed. The Citizens of York and
Soldiers went and burnt all the Jews houses, and all their Bonds and Bills,
containing great debts owing by Christians to them, and seized upon all their
wealth and goods. ^a^isienf.
So continually were they persecuting them, Harpsfiel.
till at length in a Parl. at Westminster, it was enacted under K. Edward, that
all the Jews by a certain day should quit the whole Kingdom, unless they
would profess the faith of Christ, and betake themselves to some honest
Calling, and work with their hands: which was so acceptable an Act to the
people, that they gave the fifteenth part of their goods to the King, and they
were all thrust out of the Kingdom, to the number of some seventeen thousand,
or (as some say) ^0000 and 500. And thus was this wretched Chafe swept out of
England, and the Kingdom has since been ridd of them, that openly profess
that un-Israelitish way.

In the reign of Henry the third, Mat. Paris.
a Jew fell into a Jakes at Tewkesbury in England, Mr. Foxes Acts and Monum.
to whom it being offered to draw him out, it being Saturday, (the Jews
Sabbath) he refused, lest he should pollute the holiness of the day. The thing
coming to the chief Lord of the Country, he commanded they should let him
lie the next day too, for the honor of the Lords Day, the Christians Sabbath,
lest he should profane it; so by abiding in it that day also, he perished. I
have heard or read these Verses on it, but I remember not well where, because I
find them not in the Historians relating it. The Jews Verse (bringing him in
speaking) is thus:

Sabbata sancta colo, de Stercore surgere nolo.

I honor holy Sabbaths rest,
I will not rise from my foul nest.
The Christian Magistrates Verse answers him thus;

Sabbata nostra quidem Solomon celebrabit ibidem.

O Solomon, because you are wise,
And for the Sabbath so precise,
Lest from your holy Rule you swerve,
You shall our Sabbath too observe.
The like was the lot of a Jew at Meidenburg in Germany, Munster in Annot. ad
^vangel. Math. He^r. ad cap. 12.
that sat two days together in so uncomfortable a place, the one day for the
honor of their Sabbath, the other for the Christians pleasure, to give honor
to ours.

And now (Reader) behold and see, if under the whole Heaven has been done to
any people, like as to this people. If it be not as the Lord said, Deuteronomy. 28.
All people are made the Head, and they are the Tail where ever they come,
scorned, pressed, oppressed, punished, murdered. Judge whether it were not a
happiness to our blessed Jew, to have his lot fall among the Christians, and
to be baptized in Christ's Blood, rather than to be baptized (as the Jews) in
their own cursed Blood. By this traversing of Histories and Times, I have
labored to confirm the truth of his demonstrations, that their sin is the
highest, because the wrath of God presses them the hardest; that this sin is
the slaying of Christ, that there will be no end of their misery, till they
take hold of the skirt of a Christian, and look upon Christ whom they have
pierced. This will help to illucidate his complaints in his Book, and give us
some knowledge of the Jews state without God, without Christ, without peace,
without honor in the world. The Book is all Scriptures almost, that they
cannot deny, but incur the guilt of Blasphemers, resisting the Old Testament,
which they make the ground of their Faith. ^orchet. in Vict. contr. Hebr. lib.
2 cap. 6.
If they will stand out still, and maintain the proverb, there are five things
exceed in stubbornness and pertinaciousnesse, the Dog among beasts, the Cock
among birds, the Goat among Cattle, the Prickthorn among Plants, the Jew among
men, as one of their own Doctors sets them forth; Compertius est qua^ ut negari
possi^, non esse, insolentiorem, ferociorem, arrogantiorem populum sub omni
coelo, qua^ Iudei fuerint. Luther in ^narrat. ad Evang. in die oblat. Christi,
in Tem.
not only R. Samuel, but their own Prophets shall rise in judgment against
them, and say, We would have healed them, but they would not be healed; they
were convinced, yet they shut their eyes, and made gross their hearts, and
would not be converted. If by these Relations and Collections I shall not
satisfy all, yet it will please and profit some, at least the less learned
Reader may meet with something he knew not before: and for the Scholar, I know
he that knows the least will despise it the most. I have pleased and profited
my self, and have endeavored to profit others, by seeking up these things, if
I can but fetch up a Christian sigh for the Jews sorrow, and bring men to pray,
[Thou O Lord remainest for ever, thy throne from generation to generation;
wherefore do thou forget the Jew for ever, Lam. 5. 19, 20, 21.
and forsake them so long time? Turn thou unto them O Lord, and they shall be
turned, renew their days as of old;] I have attained to what I aimed at. The
Lord soften our hearts to pity them, his own heart to have mercy on them, and
their hearts, that they may plough with R. Samuels Heifer, The cursed divisions
and Sects of Christians are a great hindrance of the Jews coming into union
with Christ and Christians.
and be enlightened with the saving light of Christ Jesus our common Savior. I
know there is a time appointed by God for their return to him, and kissing the
only begotten Son of the Father, and yet we may be guilty of not doing all we
may to bring them in, or of doing something which helps more and more to harden
them and keep them out. They should not want our pity, they should not want our
prayers. For our unmercifulness to them, helps more to harden them, and our
prayers for them, would mind the Lord of his Covenant, and us of our duty.
Some things there are among Christians, which we should amend, lest by
maintaining such things, we make the Jew more and more to abhor the
Christians way; as the painting of God, and setting him out in Pictures, and
Sculptures by some image, does exceedingly alienate both Jews and Turks from
us, as they have sometimes confessed; and the Idolatry of some corrupt
Christians, as they of the Romish faith, does much keep them back, who hate all
kinds of Idolatry, Librum legis, quantu^ libet rem creatam, adorare non
ver^cundantur.
though they themselves do in some sort adore and worship the Book of the Law.
Especially take we heed of calling into question the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
Lud. Carret Iudaeus Convers.
that is to be blasphemously Jewish, and to harden them in their desperate
blindness. By Arrianism, and the licentiousness is taken among us that way,
we do worse than Crucify the manhood of Christ, in Crucifying the Godhead of
Christ, and thereby may sooner persuade the Jews we are coming to them, then
to induce them to come unto us. For the Godhead of Christ we must hold it
firm, and maintain it, or else we are a laughing stock to the Jews, and the
greatest Soul-fools that are in the world. Campanel. in epist. dedicat ad
Atheis. T^ium.
As he flatteringly called Lewis the thirteenth of France, [Dexrum Messiae
Brachium] so we may more truly call the faith of Christ's Godhead [Dextrum
Evangelii Brachium] The right Arm of the Gospel. They may allege other false
causes, and take scandals that were never given them, as the Doctrine of
Trinity, etc. But let us beware lest a woe be to us because of offenses in
unholy ways and works given to them by us, by which the name and truth of the
Gospel of Christ shall be blasphemed. Let our conversation within win them
that are without, that they may come to think there are divine and rare
examples of virtues in the followers of the Christian Faith, Julian. Imperat.
ad Arsacium Pontif.
as sometimes that cursed root Julian Parabates was forced to commend the Jews
and Galileans [that is, Gal. Epist. 49 Edit. Petavian.
Christians] for giving Alms and relief, not only to poor Christians, but
unto Gentiles and Pagans also in their necessity; and writes earnestly to the
Pontiffe of Galatia, to build Hospitals for the poor, in imitation of the
Christians. O that we could provoke the Jews to cry out, There is no Savior
but Christ, there is no way of salvation but by Christianity; Let us come to
you, for we see the Lord is amongst you, and you walk holily in his ways. It
is a strange way of converting Jews by the wicked and loose lives of
Christians: I fear me few will be induced to think our Religion the best,
because our Christian professors are the worst, and walk in un-Christian
practices. Ex Anton. Pagan utio. edit. per Coel. secun. Curionem.
We have indeed a story or two of some Jews that made that an argument for
their conversion, but we had need to have better arguments, The learned woman
Olympia Fulvia Morata, has translated also the story out of Boccace his
Decameron.
else we shall convince and convert but few Jews. One of them is of Abraham a
Jew, that one Iannottus (a rich Merchant in Paris) did much labor with, being
his kind friend, to persuade him to leave their way, and become a Christian,
by being baptized. After many reasonings and exhortings to it, at length he
told him he would first go to Rome, as the famousest Seat of Christians, (that
is Popish) and having seen them he would tell him what he would do. The other
with all power of wit and friendship, argued against that course, believing
their proud, pompous, loose, Atheistical manners would utterly shipwreck all
the hopes of his turning Christian. Yet no persuasions having Iron enough to
debar him, he went and returned; and when the other thought all hopes were
vanished, he told him he had seen such wickedness, loosnesse, and irreligious
corruptions of manners at Rome, as now he did verily believe the Christian
Church was the only beloved of God, and that therefore in his infinite favor
to the Christians, he did preserve and keep them, else it could not be but they
should quickly perish and be destroyed; and upon this ground he would be
baptized, and turn Christian, Joan. Peregrin. Petro sell. in sermon. Convival.
as judging some admirable excellency in Christianity, which drew the heart of
God toward them, when their ways were quite against him. The other Narration
is to the same purpose, of a Jew under the Duke of Saxony, that being urged as
the former, went first to Rome, and returning, concluded he would now be a
Christian, for at Rome he saw such filthiness, and abominable flagitious
practices, that unless Christians were cared for and beloved of God more than
others, our Faith and Religion could no way stand. I call not for necessity of
belief, in that I think they are more intended for the shame of Christians,
then to commend this backward way of Christians to bring Jews forward to
Conversion. O that our light might shine better before them, that our holy Word
of the Gospel, and our Gospelling works might make them fall down on their
faces, and worship Christ, and report that God is in us of a truth; Vale
Synagoga, salve Ecclesia, farewell the Synagogue of the Jews, welcome O Church
of Christ; farewell Husks for Swine, the Talmud; welcome the Bread of our
Fathers house, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the only way, the only truth, the
only life. How blessed tidings would this be, that ten Jews should take hold
of the skirts of Christians, and say, Zach. 8. 23.
We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

Thus I have made up this exercitation with excerpted Histories and Testimonies
out of approved Authors, for that is the way to delineate the Jews misery and
vanity. It is true, I had other employment, yet I met with these, not found in
the streets, not standing i^le in the Marketplace; and I affirm, that the
asserting of Gods free grace against the Roman Antichrist, and Christ's Divinity
and Mediatorship, against the Jewish Pseudo-christs, is as proper a part of our
Ministerial Office, as any else we perform. I conclude with that of John, We
know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we
may know him that is true, and we are in him that is, 1 Ioh. 5. 20
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God and eternal life.

The Epistle of Friar Alphonsus, of the Order of the Preachers, (who first
translated the Book out of Arabicke into Latin) to Brother Hugh Master of the
same Order, concerning the Book.
To the most reverend Brother in Christ Hugo, Master of the Order of the Friar
Preachers, the most worthy Professor of Divinity, your humble Alphonsus, Boni
hominis, (or Goodman) Spanyard, promises you confidence of devout and prompt
obedience.
SInce according to my meannesse end insufficiency, I am not such an one as for
knowledge, either for you, or to you, can effect any great thing, or assist
such a worthy Father in your labors and cares, which for the quiet of us all,
and peace of our Order you sustain in the Court: For some comfort and ease of
pains, I send you (as a small gift) this ancient little Treatise, by a new
Translation of Arabic rendered Latin, and by me interpreted, which of late came
unto my hands, that before of long time has been concealed and hid. Now it is
to be observed, that among the Jews they make it a grand boast and honor, if
a man be skilled in Arabic learning, both because those letters are of much
use with the Ancient Philosophers, and because in that Character they more
confidently convey their secrets, which they would vail from others, that
Tongue being in acquaintance with few Jews, and fewer Christians, For which
cause I judge this Jew (the Author of this Book, being but a Catachumenus and
novice Christian) writ it in the Arabic, and not in the Hebrew tongue. However
(sooner or later) all things that are hid shall be revealed, according to the
saying of our Savior.

In translating this Book the Bible authorities (brought by the Jew) I have
writ in their proper places in Latin, like as they were in the Arabic, not
following our Translation according to S. Hierome, but as this Jew gave them
when he composed the Work. This I did, that none might charge me for presuming
addition to, or diminution from, or alteration in the Text. In this all that
are expert in Arabic will witness for me. And this I say, that the Jew treads
not in the footsteps of our Translation, as will be evident in the process. I
thought I was bound to express him in Latin, according as he speaks in
Arabic, as near as possibly I could, and observe his order, otherwise I might
come to merit the name of a Corrupter, rather than an Interpreter of this Book.
Nor would the Jews, seeing this Book in both Tongues, lie under so much
conviction by it, if they should see a disagreement and disaccord betwixt the
Arabic and Latin testimonies. To my comfort, O Father, Lord and Master, this
is the end I aim at. Our Lord Jesus Christ keep you many years in our Order
in his grace and love. Written at Paris by the hand of your humble servant

Friar Alphonsus.

The Preface of Rabbi Samuel to his Book of the coming of the MESSIAH, as
already past.
Samuel the Christian to Isaac the Israelite, health.
THe Lord preserve thee, O Brother, and keep thee alive till this our
captivity come to an end, our dispersion be gathered together, and our hopes
draw near, and God set the Seal of his good pleasure upon our life, Amen. I
know [and that upon experience] that the fullness of the knowledge of our time
is in thee, and thou art the hope of our satisfaction in the clearing of the
doubts about the Law and Prophets, by thy glorious expositions: Wherefore I
[much desiring to be made partaker of thy Doctrine] do now open unto thee the
very secrets of my heart, in those things I find in the Law and the Prophets,
about which my soul lies under great anxietie and fear. Hence it is I make my
recourse to they abundant knowledge and wisdom, and send to thee this little
Book, hoping through the will of God, to be confirmed in the truth by thee, and
to have my judgment cleared in the things are doubtful.

The Argument of every Chapter in the Book.
Chapter I. 1. WHy the Jews are under the wrath of God. Chap. II. 2. He proves
they are dispersed for some grievous sin, in which they are, and argues
against observation of their Law. Chap. III. 3. All the Jews observance of the
Law, is unacceptable to God for the sin in which they are. Chap. IV. 4. He
shows they are in blindness. Chap. V. 5. The Jews deceive themselves and
others. Chap. VI. 6. What the sin is for which the Jews are in Captivity. Chap.
VII. 7. That the Just JESUS, the God of the Christians, was unjustly sold.
Chap. VIII. 8. How the dispersion of the Jews (according to Daniel) came to
pass after the death of JESUS. Chap. IX. 9. That there are two advents, or
commings of CHRIST. Chap. X. 10. Of the first coming of CHRIST. Chap. XI. 11.
Of the second coming of CHRIST, that he will then judge with power. Chap. XII.
12. Of the Ascension of CHRIST. Chap. XIII. 13. He more strongly proves the
corporal Ascension of CHRIST. Chap. XIV. 14. Of the Jews blindness, who
neither understand, nor believe that CHRIST is come. Chap. XV. 15. The Jews
blindness and incredulity about CHRIST was foretold by the Prophets. Chap.
XVI. 16. He shows the Jews reprobation for perfidiousnesse, and the Gentiles
election by faith. Chap. XVII. 17. Of the quickening and giving life to the
Gentiles, and slaying of the Jews. Chap. XVIII. 18. How the Gentiles quickened
by faith have pure observances in their New law. Chap. XIX. 19. Of the choosing
of the Apostles in place of the Prophets. Chap. XX. 20. Of the casting off the
Sacrifice of the Jews, and choosing the Sacrament of the Christians. Chap. XXI.
21. God has refused the Fasts, Sabbaths and Sacrifices of the Jews, and chosen
them of the Christians. Chap. XXII. 22. He proves the abjection of the
Synagogue, and the election of the Church by the Lords word to Rebecca. Chap.
XXIII. 23. He proves the same thing by the Word of the Lord to the Prophet
Malachie. Chap. XXIV. 24. He shows the Christians manner of singing is
acceptable to God. Chap. XXV. 25. The Jews unjustly find fault with the
Christians practice of singing. Chap. XXVI. 26. He proves the Apostasy of the
Jews from God. Chap. XXVII. 27. Testimonies of the Saraceus concerning JESUS,
and Mary his Mother.
A Table of the Digressions in the Annotations to every Chapter, wherein diverse
things of consequence are insisted upon, Historical and Theological.
A Digression about the inquiry of that great and particular sin of the Jews,
for which they have been, and are in this long captivity. 2. A second
Digression handles the Titles and Elogies of Christian and Jewish Doctors. 3.
The studying of Rabbis and Jewish learning is asserted and vindicated, as
needful and profitable for Divines. Daniel was not only an Hagiographer, but
a complete and true Prophet. Esaias fitting none but CHRIST, confessed by Jews
themselves. 7. The Epithet [Iust and righteous One] ordinarily given to JESUS
CHRIST. Mis-interpretation of Zach. 14. Malac. 3. corrected. Psalm. 24.
corrected. 10. The 63 of Esaias vindicated at large (...) the mis-application of
it, and the vulgar mistakes of our common Divines. 11. Of the Jews care to
preserve the Writings of the Old Testament from losing or corrupting. Aser,
that it is not (...), but (...). 13, Reasons for that Scripture, A woman shall
compass a man, Jerem. 31. to be understood of something else than CHRIST'S
Incarnation. CHRIST'S time been deluded with. 18. A large discovery of Jewish
follies about the time of CHRIST'S coming, when it should be, and whether he be
yet come or no; and what kind of one their Messiah should be. 20. A censure on
the Alcaron, the Mahometans Gospel. 21. The Creed of this converted Jew, made
out of the Chapters of this (...), or demonstration of the Messiah.
A DEMONSTRATION OF The true Messiah.
CHAP. I. Why the Jews are under the wrath of God.
I Desire (O Master) my conscience may receive some satisfaction by thee, out
of the Testimonies of the Law, the Prophets, and other Scriptures, about this
point, namely, How it comes to pass that we Jews, our whole Nation, have a
general great stroke of God upon us in this Captivity, which now holds us, and
which we may well call Gods perpetual wrath, because it finds no end. The
Wheel of time has now spun a thousand years, and more, completely, since that
Titus first led us Captives. We are not ignorant that our Fathers worshipped
Idols, and slew the Prophets, and cast away the Law of God; yet for all these
transgressions, the smart of Gods smiting hand did vex them but with a seventy
years Captivity in Babylon, and when that set term of time was run out, he
was appeased with them, and brought them back into their own Land again. And at
that time, according to the suffrage of the Scripture, Dan. 9. 12.
the anger of God had then the bitterest and strongest Ingredients of his wrath
mixed with it above any precedent times reckoned in that holy Volume;
notwithstanding, as is already said, the punishment of so great sins laid
upon them no longer then seventy years. But now, O Master, that wrath which at
this present punishes us, is a sentence without a period, neither in all the
Prophets is there any end of it promised. If we would thus shift it off, and
say, That the wrath in which we are now deep plunged, is a continuance of that
wrath, which brought the seventy years misery upon us, seeing that served to
satisfy for the forementioned sins of our Fathers; in so doing we should go
about to charge God with a Ive, which be far from us to attempt, knowing that
the true and glorious God did by his prophets stint that Captivity, within
that number of years. Whereupon such an answer would prove a nullitie, a mere
evasion and excuse, not fit to be propounded before those who have any
intellectuals. Further, if we shall go on to say, That God in that
transmigration made a division of mercy and justice, had pity on one part of
our Jewish generation, showed no pity to the other part, and those on whom he
had mercy, he brought back to re-edifie the Temple, Ier. 25. ^29.
as says the Prophet Jeremie: and if we shall say, that we are that unhappy
remnant, to which he showed no mercy, then will the Christians say to us, That
because God showed mercy to them that worshipped Idols and slew the Prophets,
therefore he should have mercy on us also that have not so sinned. Besides,
when our Fathers sinned, the punishment of Divine Revenge kept within the
bounds of certain years, wherefore then is it, that we, who have not so sinned,
have a punishment without bounds and limits? It is a long and undated
punishment in which we lie fast bound, it is now a thousand years old, and yet
neither in the Law or Prophets can we find an end of it, or spy any grave
wherein it shall be buried. Wherefore



CHAP. II. He proves they are thus dispersed for some grievous sin in which
they are, and argues against observation of their Law.
SUppose, O Master, that we are in some great sin, yet now I request thou
would certify me in this, if after God scattered us out of Jerusalem, and
sent us into this long and lasting captivity for that sin, why do we of our own
authority, and proper motion of our own will, without any special mandate from
God, He blames their observing of Circumcision, Sabhath, etc. for their
traditions and additions, more then they find in Moses his Law.
observe some Legal Rites, and do not keep Circumcision, the Sabbath, and
other Ceremonies that we hold, according to the Law of Moses? We know that from
the time in which Titus destroyed the holy City, and by combustions turned our
Temple and Libraries into ashes, dispersing us in that Captivity, that ever
since Sacrifices, Oblations, and whole burnt-Offerings have quite ceased, God
not making promise to us by any Prophet, in any Prophecy, or by any certain
revelation, that we should any more return to our forsaken Jerusalem, to be in
our former state, nor giving us any precept ^o keep and hold our former
Observances. Hence it seems by due consequence to follow, that these foresaid
observances which we keep, we received them not of God, but of them that were
under the wrath of God. Yea, thus ^ur Adversaries (the Christians) shall justly
^ay unto us, Like as you observe Circumcisi^n and the Sabbath, and do read in
your Sy^agogues the Books of Moses, without any ^ommand from God, why do you
not as well in like manner take up again your sacrificing, and make to your
selves a Priest, a King, a Prince, why use you not holy Unctions and Incense?
why build you not Altars, and keep your Ceremonies, and many other things
contained in the Law, as well as Sabbath and Circumcision, and many other
things, which by your own Traditions and Will Worship, not commanded of God,
you do retain? Thus both ways is the Lord offended by you. These aforesaid
Rites, if you observe them contrary to the Will of God, or if you say it is
Gods Will and his good pleasure that you should do them, (which is more than
you can manifest) why omit you those aforesaid Rites, which you may use as well
as these? Let it be granted, that the Kings of the people, to whom you are
subject, do not permit you; yet seeing they permit you to retain Circumcision,
your Books, Synagogues, and other things, they would suffer you in many other
things as well as these.

To these Arguments, O my Master, a sufficient answer is far to seek amongst
us; yet in all events we belong to God.

CHAP. III. All the Jews observance of the Law is unacceptable to God for the
sin in which they are.
WE have found, O Master, what the Lord speaks by the mouth of his Prophet
Zachary, concerning that first short captivity: Zach. 7. 5.
These things says the Lord God to the Priests and people of the Land, when
you fasted and mourned in the sixth and seventh month, the whole time of your
seventy years, you understood that you fasted and mourned to me, but I would
not have any such fast from you. The words of the first Translatour, Alphonsus
the Spanyard.
[Our Translation has it otherwise, but I purpose to set out in writing the
authorities which Rabbi Samuel brings, as they are in the Arabic, not as we
find them in our Bibles] In the forementioned words, O Master, the Lord
intimates, that while we Jews were in that seventy years Captivity, we were
without his Law, because in the Law we neither had nor have any Fast, as we
have other observances; yea, in like manner we were without Circumcision, and
Sabbath, and doubtless all these things are nothing worth, whiles Gods wrath
abides upon his people. Isa. 54. 7, 8.
That first wrath of God was short, extending to 70 years only; but this, in
which we now are, is a thousand years long, and upward, and none of the
Prophets let us see and end of it. This causes my fear, O Master, that as the
Lord cast our Fathers into that short Bondage and Captivity without any Legal
Observances, their Fastings and all other Rites being abhorred of the Lord,
till the set time of their punishment was expired; so in this our last
Captivity, we may be devout in observing all our Legalities, and yet the Lord
will not accept any of our Works. Greater therefore for certain is our sin,
than that which carried our Fathers into Babylon: and thence it is, that the
wrath of God is greater which is upon us, and consequently our works are less
acceptable, and we in the eyes of the Lord more abominable. The slaughter of
Prophets, the worship of Idols procured them their seventy years captivity and
no more, but we are captives for a great sin, yea, surely ours is the
greatest sin, which is thus punished with a chiliad of years and makes us
miserable millenaries and more. Without doubt, O Master, the Prophet Daniel
speaking from the Lord, means of our Captivity, when he calls it the
Desolation, He shall make it desolate, even till the Consummation, Dan. 9. 27.
and that determined shall be powered upon the desolate. The first Captivity is
called but a transmigration, because after a short time they were brought back
with honor to Jerusalem; but this is called a perpe^uall Desolation, in which
for certain God will ^ot have mercy on us, as he had on our Fathers in Babylon.
And this is two ways evident.

CHAP. IV. He shows the Jews are blind.
A Mavelous thing to me is this, O Master, that all of us are brimm full with
continual hopes of our freedom from our captivity, our Lips do always
mention it, our Tongues know no vacation, but are ever talking of our return to
Jerusalem, wherein we are ^o other than blind men, or mere deceivers of ^he
simple. For look to the time since our dispersion by Titus, and where did any
Prophet appear with any prediction or promise of our return? nay, did any
Prophet since that seventy years hard apprentiship, name any other end of our
Captivity than the Worlds end? The consummation of the World must only
consummate our Captivity, and Daniel to that purpose names it an endless
desolation Dan. 9.
This, this, o Master, is still my fear, our sin^ is the greatest, because our
smart is the sorest* a sin which far exceeds Idol-worship, and Butchering of
Prophets, for which our Fathers before were punished. And if God will show no
mercy to us living, we persevering in the same sin, so will his mercy be far
from us dying also. Yet this nothing can prevent, that we belong to the Lord in
every event.

CHAP. V. The Jews deceive themselves and others.
ME thinks, O Master, we notably gull both our selves and others, because in
the Books of the Law and the Prophets, we have the Lords promise frequently of
freeing our Nation, and of gathering us together again from all our
scatterings. Now these promises looked into with a well advised mind, it will
appear they were all, before, and in the seventy years; or, Ezechiel, If ye
will do my judgments, and keep my Commandments, then Will I gather you from
the four corners of the earth, I will lift you up, and bring you through the
Sea, yea I will make you return unto your holy House. Behold, that which the
Lord promises us by Ezechiel in these words, and other places of his
Prophecy, it was many times fulfilled before the seventy years captivity, as
all such promises of the Lords, whether greater or lesser contained in diverse
places of the sacred Volume, were complete and fulfilled, before we fell into
this last captivity, which has no bottom, though we have been more than a
thousand years in it, yet in none of the Prophets can we find it has a
bottom. And where any promise of God treats of freeing and gathering together,
it is not to be understood of this perpetual bondage, but of those
tribulations and dispersions before the seventy years, but after them there is
not the least inkling of a promise, to gather us from our scattered estate. Of
necessity therefore we must take it to us, that we have committed that great
sin since the forementioned years, in which sin we now are and obstinately
persist, for which the Lord so endlesly punishes us, else the Lords wrath
could not so long time have held in his mercy from us. Psalm. 76.
Through the course of Scriptures, we may perceive our forefathers punished for
their sins before seventy years, out of many I select these few examples. Our
Elders sinned (before that time) who came out of Egypt, the Promise therefore
made to them, had no place in them, for they perished in their sins in the
wilderness. Exodus 32.
Moses sinned at the Waters of strife, Numb. 20.
and that sin bolted him out from entering the promised Land. Deuteronomy. 9.
Aaron sinned, and he bore his punishment. 1 Samuel 4.
Eli the Priest sinned, and he broke his Neck for breaking Gods Command, and
his Posterity lost the Priesthood, though God had promised it them for ever.
Such promises as these, are to be understood with this caution always, they
shall be fulfilled, unless for their sins they promerit another reward, as is
plain in the Kingdom of David, when his Posterity after the flesh fell short
of the Scepter, even as the true and glorious God promised Abraham and his Seed
they should possess the Land for ever, Genesis 17.
yet they often were at a loss of it for their sins, and the Lord often
restored it to them again, until this last great loss of it. Now a thousand
years and above are gone over our heads, and our hopes of recovery are vanished
with them, because we still abide in that sin, by which our Land is lost and
forfeited. This is among wonderful things, a grand one, O Master, that all of
us with one Lip consent to this, that since the sore Servitude in Babylon, it
must needs be, that we have sinned against God some great sin, and yet none
can pick out what this great sin is, for which we have been laden with such a
mass of misery: Or if any of us have knowledge of the cause, and our sin which
has thus engulphed us in these deep evils, yet what are we the better? The
secret sticks in his own breast, he does not declare it to his neighbor. Or
what is himself the better for knowing it, whiles he turns it not to his own
profit, for we all do still lie flat upon the ground. Clearly we do all see,
that in the foresaid Captivity God remained with our Fathers in his Prophets,
Jeremy and others, he gave them Salathiel for a Leader or Captain; they had
both Princes and Priests, which went with them out of Babylon, after the time
of their repentance (or doing Penance) was finished, and having got their God
appeased, they built Jerusalem, the Temple, and other Cities, and the Lord
powered upon them his mercie^ plenteously. In this our Captivity all appears
with a stranger face, it is manifest that both God and Prophet has forsaken
us, neither of these are with us. Wherefore, O Master, this will I make my
task, I will exactly enquire, and uncessantly search out what that great sin
is, which has cast us into this thousand years slavery and more, (in which we
are clothed with desolation) being without Prophet, without King without
Priest, without Altar, without Sacrifice, without Ointment, without Incense,
without our Purifications; yea, in one word, we have engrossed to our selves
the abhorring of God in heaven, and the contempt and abomination of us with the
whole world, and all men on earth. Yet for all this misery that reigns in our
estate, pride reigns in our heart, in our own conceits we prefer our selves
before all the world besides. Concerning which thing what my judgment is, O
Master, I will make known to thee. Nevertheless* what ever fall out, from God
we cannot finally fall off.

CHAP. VI. What that sin is, for which the Jews are in Captivity.
NOw, O my Master, I am in great fear, that that sin, for which we are in this
desolating Captivity, is that of which God speaks by his Prophet Amos, Amos 2.
saying, For three transgressions of Judah, I will turn or translate Israel.
[note that our Bibles have it, The words of the first Translatour, Alphonsus
the Spanyard.
I will turn away, here he has it, I will transfer or translate, and it is
better so for his purpose] and for the fourth I will not translate them,
because they sold the righteous for silver. We indeed, O Master, according to
our Doctrine, make this righteous One to be Joseph the son of Jacob, Genesis 37.
who was sold by his Brethren into Egypt; and this would I hold for true also,
but that the Sacred Writ makes this sin of selling, the fourth for number among
the sins, or transgressio^s of Israel. The Christians themselves (to whom the
study of Sacred Volumes seems to be delivered and committed of God) do answer
to our foresaid interpretation, that the selling of Joseph by his Brethren, is
the first, and not the fourth of Isreal's sins or transgressions. The second sin
they make the worshipping of the Calf in Horeb. The third transgression is the
slaughter of the Prophets, for which we served as slaves seventy years in
Babylon. But the fourth transgression of Israel, the selling of the Righteous,
this they say is plainly meant of JESUS, who was, according to the very letter,
sold after that aforesaid transmigration. And we, O Master, if we mean to
maintain as Authentical our own Doctrine, and stop the Christians mouths with
a sufficient answer, this of us must be undertaken, and made good, that diverse
transgressions of Isreal's did precede this of Joseph's selling, so as to make it
fall in the fourth number. Which thing we cannot uphold, the testimony of the
Book of Genesis making sore against us, which sets the selling of Joseph, as
the first transgression of the Children of Israel. The Prophet Amos also
expressly makes appear, that the fourth sin was the selling of the righteous
One, for which we have been Captives, and of which the Lord with a fearful
Commination speaks, that he will never bring us back again into the Land of
Promise, saying, And for the fourth I will not translate them, because they
sold the righteous for silver. To me it is more then manifest, that for the
selling the Righteous, the fourth sin, we are righteously punished: and now more
than a thousand years are past and gone, in all which time we do no good, nor
prosper at all among the Gentiles, nor remains there any hope, that we shall do
any good at all.

CHAP. VII. That the Just Jesus, the God of the Christians, was unjustly sold.
A Mavelous horror, O Master, has surprised me, and I quake to think, that
this Righteous one sold for silver, according to the Prophet Amos, is JESUS,
whom the Christians worship. And further I fear, that the testimonies, which I
meet withal in the Prophets, are concerning him, and the Christians in their
Doctrine do very apertly, and aptly apply them to him. Isa. 1. 4.
Esaias the Prophet says, Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evil doers, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy
One of Israel to anger, they are gone away backward. The same Prophet says,
Isa. 53.
As a sheep led to the slaughter is dumb, Hierome after the Hebrew so reads it,
oblatus est quia ipse voluit. verse. 7.
so he opened not his mouth. He says, he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief; he was despised of men, and (for this) we esteemed him not; he was
offered up, because so his will was. He was taken from prison and judgment,
and who shall declare his generation? For the transgression of my people have I
smitten him, [and he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death] and he shall give those that injured him for his burying, and the rich
for his death. I fear, O Master, that these injurious doers were our Fathers,
and these rich ones were Pilate and Herod, Annas and Caiaphas, according to
that the Prophet David says, Psa. 2. 2.
The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his Anointed. By the Kings we understand the
aforenamed; by the Rulers, our Fathers and Ancestors. I fear, O Master, this
JESUS is he who was sold, and chopped, and changed for Silver, Zach. 11.
of whom Zachary, Amos 2.
Amos, Esa. 53. 12.
and other Prophets write. Of him Esaias the Prophet speaks, He bare the sins of
many, and made intercession for the transgressors. I fear, O Master, that this
JESUS is that righteous One, of whom David speaks, They gather themselves
together against the soul of the righteous, The Author has it, Delectati sunt.
and condemn the innocent blood, and for this God shall cut them off, yea, the
Lord our God shall cut them off. Psa 94. 21, 23.
Again, I fear, O Master, JESUS is that Just One, Jer. 17. 9.
of whom Jeremie speaks, The Septuagint reads the last part of the Verse thus,
Homo est quis cognoscet ^um?
saying, He is the man, and who is there that understands him; or knows what he
is? In his Lamentations also, The beauty of our countenance, Christ our God,
was taken for our sins, [otherwise with us, The breath of our nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits] of whom we said, Under his
shadow we shall live among the heathen. I fear this is that Just One, of which
Zachary speaks, Zach. 13. 6, 7.
It shall be said in that day, What are these wounds in thy hands? And he
shall answer, Those, with which I was wounded in the house of my friends, and
my shepherd lift up his sword upon me. [With us it is, Awake O sword against my
shepherd.] Zac. 12. 10
The same Prophet has, They shall in that day look upon me whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only begotten
son. I fear, O Master, this is that Just One, of whom Habakkuk speaks, Hab.
3. 4.
He had horns coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power.
And the Gospel of the Christians, where the death of JESUS is related, agrees
with this, Ioh. 19.
where it is said, When they came to JESUS, they found him dead, and they
pierced him with a spear. Hab. 3. 13.
O Master, I fear this is that Righteous One, of whom Habakkuk speaks, Thou
wentest forth for the salvation of thy people with thine Anointed, or, with thy
CHRIST.

CHAP. VIII. How the dispersion of the Jews, according to Daniel, came to pass
after the death of Jesus.
FEar has seized on my spirit, O Master, about those words of the Prophet
Esaias, Esaias 53.
who that righteous One should be, that is without sin, Amos 2.
and who that righteous One is, that in the Prophet Amos is said to be sold for
silver, as is above testified, that for their fourth sin he will not bring
them back into the Land of Promise any more. It seems, O Master, the Prophecy
of Daniel in his ninth Chapter is fulfilled, Dan. 9. 26, 27.
where he says, After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, (but
not for himself) and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy
the City and the Sanctuary, and they shall condemn it, and the Sacrifice shall
cease, and the perpetual destruction shall have its consummation. All doubting
set apart, O Master, this destruction and perpetual desolation is nothing else
but our long lasting Captivity, which is now a thousand years standing. And
very full of mark is it, that the Prophets words have a Candle of plain
indigitation and pointing it out, saying, This perpetual Desola^^on shall be
after that Messiah is cut off. Just so comes in our Desolation, as soon as Jesus
was put to death; neither did God threaten us this everlasting destruction till
after Christ's death. But suppose we would fain prove, that before Christ's death
the Deluge of our desolation had drowned us, this the Christians with their
answer will easily take away, saying, That which is but for seventy years is
not perpetual, but before Christ's death the desolation had but a seventy years
perpetuity, and after those years were worn out, we were carried back into
our own land of Promise, and were highly both favored and honored of God.
Verily, Master, my eyes fail me, nor can I spy any evasion, whereby we can
either slip out, or slip off that Prophecy, seeing it is proved that 72 weeks
and a year above, which are 433 years, are complete from the re-edifying of the
Temple, at that term of time was Jesus cut off by our Fathers, after came
Prince Titus and the Romans, and they dealt with us according to the tenure of
that Prophecy. Now at this day we lie under the waves of a thousand years
misery, and more; nevertheless though we be under the wrath of God, yet still
we fix our hopes on him.

What if we argue thus for our selves, That our Messiah will come, though he be
not yet come, and when he comes he will re-estate, and re-possesse us of our
Land of Promise, then shall our City rise out of her ruins, and be
re-edified, God will bestow both favor and honor upon us in our Land, and
this desolation shall not be perpetual? To this allegation the Christians will
answer, that this Assertion must bring from us this confession, that then the
Messiah is yet to be cut off, that Titus and the Romans are still to come, and
these things performed, that there is a worse desolation will ensue it, that
has more degrees of misery in it than this, in which we have continued a
thousand years. Woe is me, O master, for us, our excuses and evasions are addle,
and want all consonancy to truth.

CHAP. IX. That there are two Advents, or commings of Christ.
MUch am I possessed with fear, O Master, that Christ the Messiah is already
come, and has fulfilled his first Advent, because in Scripture we find a
double coming of his. This first coming of Christ is described by the
Prophets to be in great poverty and humility; the second in glory and Majesty.
Of both these commings of Christ I will propound what occurs in Sacred Writ. Of
the first coming by Zacharies mouth God speaks thus, Rejoice greatly, Zach 9.
9.
O daughter of Zion, For Rex tuus, thy King* he has Praeceptor tuus thy
mast^r.
behold thy King comes unto thee, poor and riding on an Ass. In this first
coming Esaias sets him out as a man despised, Daniel as one cut off or slain*
Zachary and Amos, as one that was sold. And these things were even after this
manner fulfilled in Christ, Dan. 9.
as I have in this little Book declared, Zac. 11.
and will further declare. Amos 2.
We did not esteem him, Psa. 97.
that is, Esaias 29.
we knew him not, as says the Prophet Esaias, yea, we despised him, and
prevailed against him. But his glory and Majesty shall be manifest enough in
his second coming, when flaming fire shall go before him, and shall burn and
lick up his enemies that are round about him, as God by the mouth of the
Prophets David and Esaias has spoken. I fear, O Master, that Christ will judge
us with fire unto death, because we have slain all the Prophets, who spoke of
him to us, God himself so testifies against us by the mouth of his Prophet
Elias. 1 Kings 19 10.


Thus did we slay that Just One, for whose death we lie thus bound under the
Lords endless wrath: Notwithstanding all this, still we are Gods people.

CHAP. X. Of the first coming of Christ.
I Fear, O Master, God describes two commings of Christ by the mouth of the
Prophet Esaias, Esaias 51. 9.
saying, Arise, arise, put on strength O Arm of the Lord. In that he says
twice Arise, arise, he says surely of purpose to denote Christ's double
coming. In the fiftieth, and through the whole Body of the 53. chapter, he
particularly and perspicuously makes a Declaration of the first coming of
Christ, so far as concerns his Passion, and extreme dejection to the lowest
ebb of misery; Esaias 53.
especially when he says, He has no form or comeliness, and when we see him
there is no beauty that we should desire him. His first coming is set our in
that of Esaias, To us a Child is born; ^say 9.
presently upon that his second coming is subjoyned, in which he calls him A
mighty God, who shall sit upon the Throne of David to order and stablish it for
ever. Zachary with his Prophetical Pencill effigiates him in form of a poor
one riding upon an Ass; Zach. 9.
and what else by any deduction can we draw hence, but that the Prophet by it
understands the first appearance of Christ in mavelous debasement and
humility; and his second that is in Power and Majesty, according to Daniels
description, I considered and beheld in a Vision of the night, and one like the
Son of Man came in the Clouds of Heaven, Dan. 7.
and came to the Ancient of days, and they offered him before him. And he gave
him Dominion, Glory, and a Kingdom, and all people, Nations and Languages
shall worship and serve him. The Hebrew has it, Tribes and Languages shall
honor him, his dominion shall be everlasting, and not pass away, his Kingdom
shall not be destroyed, [Our Translation has it, Tribes and Languages shall
serve him, his Power shall be an everlasting Power, The words of the first
Translatour, Alphonsus the Spanyard.
which shall not be taken away, and his Kingdom shall not be corruptible;
otherwise, his Power shall not fail; otherwise, his Power shall be for ever,
and his Kingdom remain for ever] Out of all which these things appear with
evidence, O Master, that Christ in his second coming shall sit before the
Ancient of days, as a God come to judgment, contrary to that of his first
coming, where he stood before our forefathers the Jews, and received their
judgment against him. To these two commings of the Messiah, that is Christ,
the Prophet David has respect in that Psalm, where he says, For he comes,
for he comes to judge the world. Psa. 97.
His first coming was but simple and mean, to which purpose those words are
barely set down, for he comes, without any addition; But as the first was
poor, so the second will be powerful, and therefore is added this clause to
the second, for he comes to judge the world. His second coming is mentioned
by the Prophet Zachary, Zach. 14.
His feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives, etc.

You know well enough, O Master, none of us are so grosse-witted, as to hold
that God, considered in his divine Essence and Nature, has either flesh, or
feet, or any corporeal Members; for to have feet is proper to corporietie.
Psa. 97.
David, alleged in the place before, says of his second coming, A fire shall
burn before him, and round about him. For all this O Master, we do not say God
is circumscriptible for place, that any thing may be said to stand about him,
as he is God; but therefore it is thus written, because these authorities have
a literal verity in that Righteous One described by the Prophets, when one
while they speak of his Humility, another while of his Majesty. Malac. 3.
The Prophet Malachie says, Behold, Our Translation is a little otherwise.
the Lord comes, and who may abide the day of his coming? For he shall sit
as a refining fire, and shall melt the silver and gold. Here behold how that
Just One, once judged, shall appear at his second coming. Attend O Master, and
mark how in the same chapter the Prophet further expresses the glory of his
person; I will come near to you in judgment, and be a true witness against
adulterers, etc. Ezekiel. 34.
In the same sort does Ezechiel describe him, speaking of the Shepherds and
Sheep, I will separate between them, that is, I will separate the transgressors
from the Righteous, and the unbeleevers. [It is not thus in our Translation,
The words of the Translator Alphonsus.
but the Arabic reads it so] Lo here how in his second coming he will
separate the unrighteous from the righteous, as Malachie and Ezekiel are both
clear in this point. Matthew. 25.
At his first coming none of us knew him, for he went beyond the limits of
humane nature, as God by Esaias says, Esa. 53.
He was reckoned with transgressors, and we therefore esteemed him not. And
Jeremie says, Ierem.
This is the man, and who knows him?

Wherefore, O Master, this fear dwells upon my soul, that our Fathers, in the
first coming of the Messiah, fell off, and rann into errors, and because of
this we groan under our endless Captivity: Yet what ever fall out, we belong
unto God, and in him we hope.

CHAP. XI. Of the second coming of Christ, that he then will judge with Power.
THese two things, O Master, I am in no small fear do agree to him. 1. That he
was manifested as a Savior to all them that believed in him at his first
coming. 2. That he shall be a just Judge, to judge all with power at his
second coming. Psa. 97.
David the Prophet speaks of him; The Lord has made known his salvation, he
has openly declared his righteousness in the sight of the heathen. Esaias does
not dissent, Ye shall draw water out of the wells of salvation, Esaias 12.
or, of the Savior; which so far as my eyes serve, Psa. 97.
I can interpret those Wells of salvation to be meant of nothing else but
Baptism. Thus his double Advent has a double Element; his first coming in
water to save by Baptism, his second coming in fire, to try all by
judgment; a Savior by water, a Judge by fire. Of this Savior do those words
mean, Job 19.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that in the last day I shall rise from the
earth, and my eyes in my flesh shall see my God. Observe here, O Master, how he
calls this Just One both Savior and God. It is confessed and manifest, that God
being a Spirit, cannot be seen with any eye of flesh. Esaias 53.
Scripture gives it out, that the Savior is the Righteous God, and he alone
challenges the name of that True Just One, 1 Pet. 2.
of whom that saying is, He did no sin, Zach. 9.
neither was guile found in his mouth. Esaias the Prophet testifies this of him.
This cannot be said of Moses, or any of the Prophets, that he is a Righteous
Savior, and without sin; you Master know well enough that both Moses and the
Prophets were sinners: which the Scripture makes plain, in that none is called
the Righteous One, but Christ, and that name is reserved as only proper to
him. And this without all doubt is to be held, John 3.
that none are saved but those that believe his first coming, and those that
believe not, there is no ground for them to hope for salvation at his second
coming. This argument has a marble reason to lay the foundation strong for it,
for I reason thus, If they were worthy of death that believed not Moses, who
was two great degrees below Christ, for Moses was but a temporary Savior, and
a sinner, how much more are they worthy of this judicatory fire, that believe
not, nay and worse, that blaspheme this Righteous One, the Lord, that never
knew any sin. -- Yet nothing can so fall out as to take this from us, our
relation and belonging to God.

CHAP. XII. Of the Ascension of Christ.
DIgging into the precious earth of the Scriptures, we have found, O Master,
that Christ shall be exalted from earth to Heaven, and hence arises my fear,
that this was fulfilled in him whom our Fathers Butchered, and that the Prophet
David's acclamation is of his exaltation, Open the gates of your Principality,
So reads the Translatour.
O ye Princes, and be you lift up, O ye everlasting doors, and the Prince of
glory shall enter in. Psalm. 24.
To which words I entreat your attention, O Master, that you mark how the
Angels in Heaven make answer; Who is the Prince of Glory? and he will answer
again to them, The Lord of Hosts, mighty in battle, is the Prince of Glory.
Certain and plain it is, O Master, that this righteous Lord of Hosts had no
battle but in his first coming, for in his last coming who shall dare fight
with him? Psa. 97.
for when he shall sit on his Seat of judgment, and a fire round about him
shall flame and burn up his enemies, and shall purify the righteous by fire,
as it were silver, and all this in his last coming: then none shall fight
against him, no place shall there be for any to resist him by battle. Of the
exaltation of this Righteous One the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias 63. 1.
Who is that that comes from Edom, with garments dyed red from Bozrah, this
that is glorious in his apparel? And the righteous One thus makes answer, I
that speak righteousness, [a Defender to salvation] mighty to save. The Angels
then say unto him, Why are thy garments red like him that treads the Winefat?
The Translator turns the Future Tense into the Preter Tense.
He answers them again, I have trodden the Winepresse alone, and there was not
a man with me. See here, O Master, how properly Esaias speaks, yea, I fear, the
answer of this righteous one much touches us, and none but us, when he says,
I have trod them in mine anger, and their blood is sprinkled upon my garments,
and I have stained all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in my heart, and
the year of retribution is come. O where have we any hopes in that Righteous
One, when we see that he complains of us to the Angels in Heaven, and makes
known to them that he trod the Winepresse alone? Whom as it that he trod in
his wrath but us? who, after the Battle in his first coming, has thrown us
down, and we lie prostrate, and trampled under foot now a thousand years, and
still there is a black day of vengeance waits for us in his last coming, and a
year of retribution is in his heart. I would to God, O Master, when we with
murderous hands slew the Prophet Esaias, we had laid hands upon this Prophecy
also, and quite blotted out this fair authority out of his Book, that no eye
might ever have beheld or read it against us. And you may observe, that which
David calls a Battle, The Lord of Hosts mighty in Battle, Esaias calls a
Wineptesse. Alas for us, O Master, we drink that new sweet Wine, of which
Jacob, the Patriarch and Prophet, speaks in the Book of the Generation of the
Creatures (that is Children) of Judah, Genesis 49. 11
He washed his clothes in the blood of the Grape, as it is fallen out in us at
the first coming of the Messiah. [that is, We washed our garments in his
Blood.] But what shall we wretches do in his last coming, when all men shall
stand before this man, coming to judgment, and a furious fire shall be ready
to devour them round about him, against whom he shall pronounce sentence? Then
is the time of Battle ceast, he shall be no more then trod in the Winepresse;
then shall there be neither place nor time for repentance, all refuge shall
then fail, only Justice shall remain; that as he was unjustly judged, when
they found no sin in him, so he shall justly judge all sinners. For God says
in the Prophecy of Solomon, Pro. 11. 31
If the righteous receive judgment, where shall be the wicked and the sinner?
Salomons Proverbs are called his Prophecy; so the Catechisticall instructions
of Salomons Mother are called the Prophecy that his Mother taught him, Prove.
31. 1.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, what shall then become of the ungodly?

CHAP. XIII. He more strongly proves the corporal Ascension of Christ.
FEar, as a Fury, haunts me, O Master, and possesses me with this, that those
Testimonies, recited by me out of the Prophets, are all as points drawn from
the Circumference, and meeting all in that Just One, as their Center, viz. That
he was sold for silver, as the Prophet Amos avouches; That he trod the
Winepresse, as Esaias averrs; That he was in battle with our Fathers, as David
affirms; That he was caught, as in a Net, by our sins, as Jeremie alleges;
That he was wounded in his hands, as Zachary asserts; That upon his Vesture
they cast Lotts, as David assents; That he ascended into Heaven, as the same
Prophet, and others with an unanimous testimony give up: Which is not
compatible, nor can it stand with mere God considered in his Divine Essence and
nature; for the Deity has neither Resurrection, Exaltation, Descension, or
Session properly. Out of what has been said this must issue with a necessary
consequence, That this Righteous one is already come, to whom all the foresaid
things very aptly agree, and are fitly accommodated to his corporeal and
humane nature, which he assumed. Now because [O Master] I know how hardly this
enters into thy belief, as a most improbable paradox, that a man should bodily
ascend into Heaven, ponder these authorities and examples, which we meet with
in Scripture, which underprop and confirm this truth. In the first place I rank
the Prophet David, Psa. 68. 18.
who says, God has ascended on high, he has led captivity captive, Psa. 68.
4.
and given gifts to men. Again he speaks of his Ascension, Sing unto God, and
glorify his name, make way for him that ascends from the Western parts, the
Lord is his name. Again, David speaks of him in that Psalm, which thou have in
thine heart, Sing praises to God that ascends above the heaven of heavens to
the East. Psa. 68. 32, 33.
After him the Prophet Amos in like manner says, It is the Lord that has
built his Seat on high. Of him again the Prophet David, God is gone up with a
shout, See the Annotations to this Chapter.
the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet. Likewise the Prophet Aser in his second
Chapter says, I saw a man descending from the midst or heart of the Sea, and
he came up to heaven. But because we want that Prophecy I omit to write many
other things, which that Prophet has concerning this. The words of the first
Translatour, Alphonsus the Spanyard.
[And yet we have that Prophet, but he knew not then, that he who is Aggaeus
in Latin, is the same with Aser in the Arabic tongue.] Moses in his Song
says, I lift up my hand to Heaven. So Esaias, Awake, or, Arise, arise, O Arm of
the Lord. Hannah, the Mother of Samuel, sings, The Lord shall give strength
unto his King, and exalt the Horn of his Anointed. David again, The Lord
ascended upon the wings of the wind. These authorities have I met with in
Scripture, serving to prove the corporeal Ascension of Christ into heaven.
Many more there are to this purpose, as thou, O Master, very well know. Now
will I annex some examples out of our Law, to follow these Authorities, being a
thing so convenient for the establishing our belief in the point of Christ's
bodily ascent into Heaven. This in the first place must be taken into
consideration, that the true and glorious God has assumed, and translated to
himself out of the earth, many holy men among our forefathers, as the Law and
Prophets will witness; and if we doubt not of the ascent of these, induced to
believe it for the sanctity of the men, and for the verity of Scripture
testifying it, why do we doubt of the ascent of this Righteous One, both in
his Body and Soul, the witness of Scripture confirming this more, than the
testimony of holiness confirms it for the other? And may not this be one
reason, because the Prophets set him out struggling and fighting in a harder
War of miseries than others, and acquainted with an harder bondage, and soret
service of the World than others? Furthermore, this, without any
exemplification, thou know well enough, that Methusalem and Henoch, those
righteous men, and Elias the Prophet, were assumed by God in their bodies to
Heaven, and translated out of this World. As for Moses, it is a thing out of
the reach of all question and doubt, that he now is in Heaven both in body and
soul, as is said in Deuteronomie, The Author quotes Deuteronomy. 34. but the last
words are there only to be found.
Go up into the Mount this night, and he went up into the Mount and died there,
and no man knows of his sepulcher unto this day. What does this signify,
that his Sepulcher is unknown upon earth, seeing he was a Prophet in
greatness and holiness, surpassing others, but that thereby we should
understand, that God has raised him up, and assumed him in body and soul, as
he did other righteous men, and elevated him to that place, where they are now?
Neither need we puzzle our Brains, with marvelling how it can stand with
reason, that gross and ponderous bodies should ride, and be born upward on the
light and subtle Element of Air; this we need not question, if we do but call
to mind, how it pleased the Almighty Power to work the like in the Israelites
egresse out of Egypt, where the Water, an Element in ^aritie and thinness
like unto the Air, did bear their heavy bodies without sinking. And when the
Lord gave a sign of an accepting welcome to a Sacrifice, the Fire (though an
Element lighter then the rest) descended from heaven, and, returning up again
to heaven, carried with it aloft the bodies of the sacrificed Beasts, and
Bullocks offered to God. As for this Righteous One, Moses, Elias, and other
Prophets prophesied of his elevation. From the premises I collect, that we
^eing credulous, and ready to believe the corporal ascent of the aforenamed
Saints, there is no reason remains, why we should let incredulity lurk in us,
and suspend our belief about the elevation of this Righteous One into Heaven,
when Scripture and Prophets do testify it. And that of the foresaid Saints is
^ade so manifest, to exclude all doubts, for ^ood purpose; encouraged by these
examples. But our Nation are locked up under many doubts concerning Christ, by
the Key of his secret and occult coming at first into the world, The Author
names Esaias, but he forgets himself, for he himself has before in his ^.
chapter quoted Jeremy for it Ier. 31.
it being an unusual and unwonted way. Of this the Prophet says, He is a man,
and who shall know him? Esaias says, A Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son.
Where it is to be noted, that there is no mention, but deep silence of any
Father of his, according to the Flesh. Elsewhere he says, We esteemed him
not. And Jeremie has, The Lord shall create a new thing upon earth, Mic. 5. 3.
a woman shall compass a man. Micah also says, Therefore the Lord will give
them up, till the time that she which travelleth has brought forth. In these
words is to be observed, the Prophet has not a syllables mention of (...) the
Husband of her that brings forth, it being the Nativitie of that Righteous One,
who only was born out of the wonted path, and common carnal course of men,
who come by man as the active, and woman as the passive principle of
Generation. But this knows no carnal Father, as Esay's mouth foretold it, Esaias
^.
Give ear, O ye house of Jacob, the Lord shall give you a sign, A Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son. All these other holy men spoken of, were born of man
and woman, carnally conceived in sin, yea, and they themselves were sinners.
Moses himself, though holier than the Prophets his Parents, yet he sinned, and
his own mouth publishes his own sin; but of this Just One it is said in Esaias,
Esaias 53.
he never sinned, nor was there a lie found in his mouth. God by the mouth of
Job has proclaimed, Job 25.
there are blemishes in all the Saints, Behold, he puts no trust in his
saints. Ierem. 17.
And Jeremy joins with that judgment, The hearts of men are wicked.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Jews blindness, who neither believe, nor understand that
Christ is come.
WHat Esaias from the Lord has said, O Master, I shake with fear, lest it be our
lot to have it fulfilled in us, Blindness is fallen upon Israel, Romans 11.
till the fullness of the Gentiles become in. And again he says, Hearing they
shall hear, Esa. 6.
and shall not understand; seeing they shall see, and not perceive, because the
heart of this people is waxen fat. And in the same Chapter, Make the heart of
this people blind, and stop their ears, least they should learn, and be
converted to me, and I should heal them. Esaias then said, Esaias 5.
How long, O Lord? and he answered, Until the Cities be wasted, and the house
be left without an inhabitant. You have Daniel also saying, Dan. 12.
Shut up, and seal up, or wrap up the Prophecy. Ierem. 17.
Jeremie follows with his testimony, The sin of Judah is written with a Pen
of Iron, and the Point of a Diamond, it is graven on the table of their heart.
Esaias likewise in his first Chapter says, The Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his Masters Cribb, but my people does not understand. Jeremie to that
purpose, The Stork, the Crane, and the Swallow know the time of their coming,
but my people know not me. All these speeches, O Master, are Gods Arrows shot
at us, and do show our condi^ion, because we had eyes locked and bolted up, that
we could not discern the first coming of that righteous Lord. Of us do the
Lords words in Esaias mean, Elongate says the Translator, Esaias. 3. T^anslator
reads (...) have no ey^^ and th(...) have no ears.
when he says, Bring forth (or, cast far off) the blind people, that have
eyes, and the deaf people, that have ears. Behold, they are all gathered
together, or rather, Let all the Nations be gathered together. These words
carry no other meaning, but this, that the Prophet says, The Lord has
rejected us, because we knew not soon enough the time of that Righteous Ones
coming, and in stead of u^ he has gathered the Gentiles to him by faith. This
is it which made that admiration break out of David's lips, Psa. 118.
The right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. Yet for all this
we belong to the Lord, though thus sore in an hapless estate, and deep
depressing Captivity, wherein, as in a labyrinth, we are, and can find no
end, or out-gate, though a thousand years we have run with wearied footsteps
in this amazing Maze of misery; neither did ever our Fathers smart thus,
though they did fully transgress the Law, worshipped Idols, and slew the
Prophets, yet drunk they not of such a Cup of Indignation, and Judgment, as we
their Children.

CHAP. XV. The Jews blindness and incredulity, about Christ, was foretold by
the Prophets.
THis, O Master, dives me deep under the waters of fear, that our not believing
in that Righteous One, has caused that to be fulfilled, and to fall upon us,
which the Lord spoke by the mouth of Esaias, Esa. 29. 11 12.
The vision shall be as the words of a Book that is sealed, which shall be
given to one that is learned (to a Reader,) saying read this, I pray thee; and
he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the Book is delivered to him that is
not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he says, I am not learned.
What greater and closer sealing up of the Book can there be found, O Master,
than this, wherewith the Lord has sealed, and fast closed up our blind
hearts, and we have now been a thousand years, and more, (as miserable Truants)
in learning this one lesson of the coming of this Righteous One, propounded to
us in the Prophets, and yet we know it not, nor have taken it out. This is it,
which blows the Prophets Trumpet with that threatening blast, Esa. 1. 7, 8
Jerusalem shall be desolate, and their holy house shall fall down. He further
said, Our Country is desolate, and their holy house shall fall down. He
further said, Our Country is desolate, our Cities burnt with fire, and Zion is
left as a Cottage in a vineyard. This, this is the evil, O Master, which has
now the age of a thousand years, and more, on the back of it. According to this
Esaias further says, O Lord God, Esa. 25. 1, 2
I will exalt thee, for thou have made a City an heap, (an house to be
confusion) a defenced City to be a ruin for ever. Esa. 30. 14.
He shall break the people in pieces, like the breaking of the Potters Vessel,
which shall be broken, so as there shall not be found a sheard to take fire
from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit. Daniels words are
also fulfilled, that after the Messiah is cut off, there shall follow a
perpetual desolation, in which desolation we now are, and have been cast deep
into this flood of miseries a thousand years, and more. Esaias goes on to spinne
the thread of our woe, Esa. 24.
Solitariness shall be left in the midst of the City, (or desolation) and
their Land shall hiss with a perpetual hissing. After him Jeremie says, Ier.
6. 30.
Call ye them reprobate silver, for the Lord has rejected them. Esaias again,
Walk you in the light of your own fire, and in the flames and sparks which you
have kindled. In these flames we (as miserable Salamanders) have now lain a
thousand years and more. Amos comes with like threats, The house of Israel
shall fall, and none shall raise her up. To me, verily O Master, it seems we
are fallen indeed, and ruin is come on us since the coming of that Righteous
One, yea, God has brought it on us, seeing since that time no Prophet has
risen amongst us, neither shall there be any, as is foretold and prophesied of
us, for we remain still in our incredulity, we maintain an obstinate negative
of that Righteous One, and do not believe in him. Hos. 1.
Hosea therefore says, When the woman conceived, and bare a daughter, God
said, call her name, Loruhamah, without mercy, for I will no more have mercy on
the house of Israel. And if thus it be, that the Lord has quite cast us off,
and will have no mercy on us, as we have felt by the miserable experience of a
thousand years, and upward, to what end, or what profit is it for us to retain
our old Ordinances, the Law, Sabbath, and Circumcision? Esaias says, Bring forth
the blind people, as the true and glorious God has now brought us forth of
our Land, Esaias 26. 3.
and made us strangers to it more than a thousand years. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace; this Hierome according to the Hebrew, translates, Vetus error
ab^it. See Hierom. in Comment. on Esaias.
Besides all this he says, The old error is gone away; what can we pick out
of this, O Master? what is the old thing but our Law, which is gone away from
us? yea, we have lost King, Sacrifice, Incense, Altars? Was there any worse
thing in the whole predicament of calamity, that could have befaln us? What
prey or booty of hope have we, for our winged expectations to fly after? Do
we not see, (woe unto us that we see it) that the Lord has scattered and
dispersed us through the four quarters of the world, as Moses, Jeremie, and other
Prophets foretold us? Yet for all, God, we are thine; and to this God we have
our recourse in every event.

CHAP. XVI. He shows the Jews reprobation for perfidiousnesse, and the Gentiles
election by faith.
MY soul is not free from this fretting fear, O Master, that whereas you and I
betwixt our selves can boldly say, and affirm, that we are the sons of Jacob
and Israel, that for all this God may have fulfilled that, which he spoke by
Esaias, God shall slay thee, O Israel, and call his servants by another name. I
quake to think, that we should be of those servants, on whom that name shall be
imposed, as Moses writes in Deuteronomie, The Nations shall be the Head, and
the unbeleeving people the Tail, as we now are, and have been the hindmost, the
very Tail of all the World for 1000 years and more. Of these Nations Jeremie
speaks, The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God, 2 Chro. 6. 32, 33.
as the waters that cover the Seas. Solomon has of them this, O Lord God, when
a stranger, which is not of thy people Israel, shall come to thy holy house,
and call upon thy blessed Name, then hear thou, O Lord my God, that all the
earth may learn to fear thy Name, as does thy people Israel. What have we, O
Master, we proud beggars of the Jews, that we can boast in? Why should we
contemn and hold the Gentiles in scorn, seeing Solomon the Prophet has joined
them as partners with us in the fear of God, and in his holy House? And
peradventure God has shut us out of his House, as unworthy ones, and has
given our room to them, as more worthy; as Moses has spoken of them, Thus
says the Lord God, the whole earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.
Psa. 22. 27.
After him David, All the ends of the world shall remember, and turn unto the
Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nation (or, a thousand generations) shall
worship before thee.

Of them spoke Esaias, O holy house of David, thy light is come, Esaias 60. 1, 3,
4, 10.
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. The Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round
about thee, and see, all they gather themselves together, they come to thee;
thy sons shall come from frare. The sons of strangers shall build up thy walls,
and their Kings shall minister unto thee. And who, I pray, O Master, are these
sons of strangers, which came to the house of God, but the Gentiles? who,
serving Idols, were mere strangers to God, they, their Princes, and their
Kings* of whom God said, They shall walk in the light of his holy house, and we
thrust out shall remain in darkness; and we indeed are in darkness, and have
been fearfully benighted a thousand years, Esaias 55. 5.
and upward. Still that Prophet of that people, Behold, thou shall call a
Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee shall run unto
thee. Now our eyes de facto do testify it, a thousand years and more have
worn out themselves, since the Christ came, that was sent according to the Law
given to us, And the Gentiles which knew not the Law, they came to him, and he
has given them a new, a pure, an holy law. Besides this, in the five and
fortieth Chapter, Esaias 45. 20*
They agreed together, and their Kings were gathered together in the belief of
God. I much fear, O Master, that is meant of them, Esa. 65. 1.
Assemble your selves, come, and draw near ye that are escaped of the Nations;
and, I am found of them that sought me not. Ier. 3. 17.
Jeremie speaks of them, The Nations shall be gathered to the Name of the Lord
in his holy House, nor shall they walk any more after the imagination of their
evil heart. The same Prophet, To thee shall all the Gentiles come from the
utmost ends of the earth, saying, Our fathers have inherited iniquity, and
lies. Zephanie the Prophet follows this stream, The Gentiles shall all call on
the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3. 9.
and shall serve him with one shoulder, every man from his place, and all the
Isles of the Nations. Zachary brings his part to this truth, Sing and rejoice,
O daughter of Zion, lo I come, and will dwell in the midst of thee, says the
Lord: and many Nations shall be joined to the Lord. Zach. 8. 2^*
Again in the 8. Chapter, Our translations have it otherwise.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, many nations shall come from many places, and
every man shall say to his neighbor, Let us go and seek the Lord our God for
good. All these things, O Master, are now fulfilled, and the effects of them
abide plainly before our eyes; you see people and languages brought home to
God, and studying the Law, all the Prophets, and Book of Psalms, to which they
were strangers, and have left their Idols to embrace the Truth. None of them
are brought to this belief by the hand of Moses or Aaron, or any of our
Prophets. And since their hearts were turned to believe in that Righteous One,
Habac. 3.
( of whom Habackuk says, Thou wentest forth, for the salvation of thy people,
with thine Anointed) they have utterly abdicted, and abandoned all their Idols,
no Idolatry since that has remained amongst them.

CHAP. XVII. Of the quickening and giving life to Gentiles, and slaying the Jews.
MY fears, O Master, beat as continually as my Pulse, and in this I tremble to
think, that the powerful and glorious God, as with one hand he gives life to
the Gentiles by faith, so with the other hand he slayes us in our incredultie.
Does not Esaias indigitate and point out this? Because when I called ye did not
answer, Esaias 65. 12* 1^, 14, 15.
when I spoke, ye did not hear; therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, my
servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink,
but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but
ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, Our translation has (...).
and howl for vexation of spirit; and God shall slay thee, O Israel, and shall
call his servants by another name, in which he shall bless them who is blessed
upon the earth, Amen, for in truth. And alas, we see, how exceedingly they are
blessed upon the earth by God, who have received this new name, but for us, we
fly like dispersed dust before the wind of Gods wrath, scattered through the
four quarters of the world in a sad Captivity. Zach. 2*
To this day a thousand years have ^unne over us, and trod with heavy feet upon
our heads. In us expressly appears the deep impressions of the footsteps of
Gods wrath, not for chastisement only, and instruction, ^ut to our
destruction. This is that slaying, which the Lord threatened, that he would slay
Israel, and the nations which he would keep ^live, whom he calls his servants,
shall receive that good name he has promised; but yet ^he order is thus, we
must first lose our ^ame, and then they shall receive their new ^ame. The
funerals of our name must make (...) way for the resurrection of theirs, as the
very order of Esay's words declare. And as for ^^e hunger and thirst, the Lord
threatens we shall be vexed withal, it is not that common ^amine of bread,
and thirst of water, but that ^orse sterility, and spiritual barrenness,
which torments the souls and hearts of us, a ^amine of the Word of God, Amos 8*
as Amos makes appear in his eight Chapter. Amos 8.
But you my Master Plough with a more skillful Heifer in these mysteries, than
I, and better understand these things. However in all these storms of wrath,
and what ever falls on us, we belong unto God.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Gentiles quickened by faith have pur^ observances in their
new Law.
I Cannot but fear, O Master, that the Gentiles are quickened and brought to
life. The Annual circlings of the Sun have made up a thousand years, from
the time that Jesus dyed at Jerusalem, and we know there was no^ good thing at
all to be found among the Gentiles, before they came to believe in God, i^
Christ, and the Apostles, so as they seemed to be the Prophet Habackuks fishes,
Hab. 1. 14.
and creeping things, that had no Ruler: But now these Gentiles being purified
by faith, are ruled by fastings and other observances of their new Law; yea,
they want nothing pertaining to cleanness and purity, so much spoken of in the
old Law. You see how in every language and place, whether you look to the
Oriental, or Occidentall, (utmost Fringes of the world wide garment) that the
Gentiles confess the Name of the Lord. Neither do they believe in him through
Moses, or any of the Prophets, although they be studious in the Law, and the
Prophetical Writings; but God has called them to himself another way, even by
the Disciples of that Righteous One, who went forth with God for the salvation
of his people, as the blessed and glorious God has foretold by the mouth of
the Prophet Habackuk; yea, those very Disciples of his, who by another name are
known among them, being called Apostles, they were Children that sprung out of
the same Root with us, and were the sons of the sons of Israel. Ah, how my poor
heart is Palsied through fear, when it judges, that these same Apostles are
they, of whom God means in David's Psalm, when he says, Psa. 19.
Their sound is gone out into all the earth, and their words into the ends of
the world. The Prophets words carry an express demonstration in them against
us, that he speaks of them, and not of us, when he says, There is no Tongue,
or Language, wherein their voice is not heard; and this cannot be taken of our
Hebrew Language. For what Gentiles are there, which obey the precepts of Moses
and Aaron, seeing they slew the Gentiles, put them to flight, and drove them
from them? But these Gentiles at this day are acquainted with Moses, and the
Prophets, they know God, they keep their new Law, after the prescript form of
the Apostles teaching. Notwithstanding all this, yet we belong to God

CHAP. XIX. Of choosing the Apostles in place of the Prophets.
MY soul converseth in the region of fear, and I am troubled about that place
of Zachary, Zach. 13.
I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered; I
fear that was fulfilled, when we smote the Shepherd of those holy Children the
Apostles, for ever since that time, we, like miserable sheep, run dispersed and
straggling through the whole world, and the Apostles, which were our children,
are risen up in stead of our Prophets. This appears, as a Noontide truth,
seeing from that time God has not sent us one Prophet, nor given us any Divine
notice, or heavenly provision, by the way of Vision. O Master, I fear that the
Apostles are those Children Joel means of, Your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions. For a certainty, O Master, our Prophets
are the Old men, that dreamed of the faith of the Gentiles, which these young
men, the Apostles, have attained unto, and seen it more clearly, even in plain
Visions. Of these Children spoke David the Prophet, Psa. 34.
Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Besides this, when God speaks of us, ^e does not name us commonly Children in
^he Plural number, Exodus 4.
but he stays in the Singular, naming us Israel his first born. In another
Psalm these young men are called Children, Psa. 128.
Thy Children shall be like Olive Plants ^ound about thy Table. Esaias 5. 4.
Of Israel; O Master, God spoke by the mouth of Esaias, The Vine^ard of the Lord
of hosts is the house of Israel, I ^ooked it should bring forth Grapes, and it
^rought forth wild Grapes: therefore I will break down the wall thereof, and
it shall be trodden down. Of these aforesaid Children of God, by Esaias he further
says, Esaias 29. 22, 23.
Jacob shall not now be ^shamed, neither shall his face wax pale. But it shall
be then, Our Translation has it otherwise.
when he shall see his children, the ^ork of mine hands, sanctified before his
eyes. Now if those Children, O Master, were sanctified in our sight, according
to the way of our Law, it could not be said of us, that we were ^shamed, and
our Faces Vermilion'd with ^lushes, and for that cause we should hide them, but
rather would it shape for us glory, and resplendency of face. But hence comes
^his confusion of the faces of Jacobs children, and this is the desolation;
that those Children, the work of Gods own hand, were sanctified in our sight,
and yet they have this honor another way than we, it comes not as our
sanctification by the Law. Thus God would give us to understand, that our Law
is not their Law. So much imports he by the mouth of Jeremy, Ier. 31.
In that day they shall not say, Our fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and their
Childrens teeth are set on edge: as if he meant thus. The infidelity of the
Jews does no way hurt the faith of the Apostles, nor shall it hurt. For this is
added for that cause, As I live says the Lord, this shall be no more a proverb
in Israel. And this is observable, never any of the Apostles, after they had
received the faith of Christ, did return back to embrace our faith. Esa. 63.
8, 9
Thus are they free from tasting the bitterness of our infidelity, This
strangely differs from our Translations, and strangely lacerates, and tears in
pieces both the sentence, and the sense of words, to make them fit his purpose.
notwithstanding, our teeth are set on edge with the sins of our Fathers.
Further, O Master, God, by Esaias, delivers more concerning these children the
Apostles, From whom shall I pass away, but from my people, the children that
are unfaithful, but God shall be their Savior in all their afflictions, his
face and countenance shall keep them in his love, in his pity he has redeemed
them, and shall be merciful unto them for length of days. This has all truth
in it, O Master, that these Children, of whom we speak, does always abide
firm, and steadfast, neither has God at any time left them, and passed away
from them, since that Righteous one their King and Master has redeemed them:
but he has gone away from us, though he abide with them always. Of these
children the Apostles, that wise Jesus, the son of Sirach, Ecclus 3. 1, 2.
has spoken in his book, Hear me, your Father, O dear children, and do
thereafter, that ye may be safe; for the Lord has given the father honor over
the Children. After what manner this honor is understood, God declares by the
mouth of the Prophet Malachie, Malach. 3.
God shall send Elias, who shall turn the hearts of [our] Fathers to the
Children. O Master, seeing this turning is to be understood of believing, and
turning to the faith, if God would have turned the hearts of the Children, viz.
the Apostles, to the Fathers, that is, to us, then the Apostles had moved with
us in the same fearful orb of misery, and should have been companions with
us in this Captivity, that knows no end, as we and our Fathers are involved in
it: But now seeing Gods Ordinance turns the wheel another way, that the
hearts of the Fathers shall be turned to the Children, what good is there, O
good Master, for us to expect, or what glass of hope can we look in, to see a
face of comfort? If we shall go about to affirm, that these must be other
Children, not the Apostles, of whom these aforesaid things are meant, then must
they be in Captivity, as well as we, because they did not follow the way of
that Righteous One, whom the Apostles not only have steadfastly followed, but
have also earnestly taught this way should be followed, herein attaining to the
honor, to be named and accounted Fathers, in that it is said, The fathers
should be turned to them. Wherefore, O Master, seeing our Children attained to
faith in God before us, if our hearts were turned to the Children, then the
hearts of the children should be turned to us also, as the most high God says,
Esaias. 51.
They shall be one people, and one heart in the glorious and powerful God. For
this is to be confessed, that we are not to understand it of any other
conversion, then of turning from infidelity to the faith, and doctrine of that
Just One, who is the Teacher of salvation to all that believe in him. As David
has said of him, that his Priesthood is an everlasting Priesthood, He gives
the meaning of the word Melchisedech, a Lord or King of Righteousness.
after the Order of Melchisedech, who offered a Sacrifice of bread and Wine:
and this Melchisedech was the Priest of the most High God, before Aaron. Now
here, O Master, I would have you perpend and consider, what a main difference
there is betwixt the sacrifice of Aaron, and the sacrifice of this righteous
Lord. The Lord said unto my Lord, thou art a Priest for ever, not for a small
time, as was Aaron, who dyed at an hundred and twenty years of age. Aarons
Sacrifice was but flesh, the Sacrifice of the Just and Righteous Lord was bread
and Wine, according to the Order of Melchisedech. By these words the Lord
manifestly shows in his Prophet, that Aarons Sacrifice should be at an end,
when this Sacrifice of Bread and Wine would begin, which should know no end,
but last for ever; an eternal (or unpassable) Priesthood, not being given to
Aaron, as is given to Christ the Priest. Of these Children God speaks by his
Prophet Moses, Deuteronomy. 3^.
He will avenge the blood of his children, (or servants) and will be merciful
to his land. From Arabic, La^abit terram populi sui.
We, O Master, are the murderers of the Prophets, and for that he took
vengeance of us but with a 70 years Captivity; but besides, we have murdered
the Apostles, and that Just Master of theirs, and now God has avenged that
blood of his Children more severely, bringing a Captivity upon us, that has
lasted a thousand years, and beyond. By their death God has washed the Land of
his People, he does not say it is the Land of the children of Israel, no, he
does not so name them. Of these Children speaks David, Psa. 127.
As Arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are his faithful Children. Where
the Prophet compares these faithful Children to Arrows, shot forth by the hand
of a mighty man: for the Almighty God has sent them forth, being 12
Apostles, Matthew. 28.
into twelve parts of the World, through all the four Climates thereof, Mark 16.
with the doctrine of the Law, the Psalter, and the Prophets. Moses and Aaron
he never sent forth to teach any, beyond the bounds of his own holy House; from
him they had neither Mission, nor Commission to travel to India, o^ trudge to
Rome, nor to any other place, without the precincts of the Holy Land, to
declare and preach to others the Doctrine Legal and Prophetical: Only these
faithful Children have such a Calling, being sent forth through the whole
earth, and are risen up before God in our place, since God slew Israel, and
took away our name, which David punctually denotes in the Psalm, Psa. 45.
saying, In stead of fathers thou shall have Children, whom thou may make
Princes in all lands. By them is that first Law, after the Order of
Melchisedech, renewed, and brought in again, who instituted the Sacrifice of
God in Bread and wine, of which he communicated to Abraham the friend of God.
Thus has God by their Ministry changed, 1. our Sacrifice, as he has also 2.
changed our name; yea more, he has 3. changed our carnal Law into a
spiritual. Had God said so much to our Moses, as he spoke by David to the
Messiah, Psa. 110.
or Christ, Thou shall be a Priest for ever after the law of Moses and Aaron,
then had our law got a ground for a firm standing thereof. But now he says far
otherwise, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedech. And for
Abraham the friend of God, he communicated of the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine,
not of the Sacrifice of Flesh. The word of Moses is hereto consonant, Lev. 25.
22
which says, Ye shall eat of the old fruit, or, of the old store. By this old
fruit he understands the Sacrifice of Melchisedech. Again, They shall eat of
the old till the new fruits come in; meaning, when the sacrifice of the new Law
is published, your old things, that is, your old Sacrifices shall you cast
away. Howsoever, we look up to God, as ours in every event.

CHAP. XX. Of the casting off the sacrifice of the Jews, and choosing the
Sacrament of the Christians.
THe Sting of Fear is fastened in me, O Master, and here it pricks me, I am
afraid lest God has sealed up us and our Sacrifice, under a Writ of rejection,
and has accepted the Sacrifice of the Gentiles, as he spoke by Malachie, I
have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an
Offering at your hands. Mal. 1. 10, 11.
For from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my Name shall
be great among the Gentiles, and there shall be offered in my Name a pure
Sacrifice. Therefore in Gods account, the sum is cast up thus, the sacrifice
of the Gentiles is more clean and pure than ours. Further, God has not only
taken from us our pure Offerings, and deprived us of all other Sacrifices, but
withal, he teaches the Christians to fly from us, and to avoid us, lest they
should receive some soil and defilement from us. Thus are we scourged with a
rod, made of the Twiggs that grew on our own tree; for when we had a Sacrifice,
which God received as pure and acceptable, then did we shun and detest the
Gentiles, as some matter of abomination. yea, yea, Master, you know well enough
what God speaks by the mouth of David, Psa. 50.
concerning our Sacrifice, Think you that I will eat the flesh of Bulls, and
drink the blood of Goats? In which, how can any thing be more manifest, than
this, that God condemns and disallows our fleshly Sacrifice? Gladly do I covet
to know, O Master, with what reason we are harnessed for our detestation of the
Gentiles Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, which God himself has instituted, and
has not disallowed it, as he has disallowed our Sacrifice. Solomon speaks of
the Aaronicall Sacrifice, It is not Solomon, but the son of Syrach.
He stretched but his hands over the Altar, and offered the Blood of the Grape,
and incense to the living God, Ecclus. 50. 15.
and offered up our Sacrifice of the Corn of the earth, Our translations have
it otherwise.
as Melchisedech offered for Abraham. God declares what the Gentiles Sacrifice
is by Moses, Ye shall offer to God a Sacrifice of that is heaved from the Barn
floor, and of the pressed Grapes, that God may bless you, and all the works
of your hands. We well know, O Master, that God at the beginning commanded
Loaves to be set before the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, not flesh: We
know there was something concerning Shewbread, but nothing of Shew-Flesh: and
Gods command, Levit 1.
O Master, in Leviticus, by Moses and Aaron, was, That a man of the Seed of
Aaron the Priest, that had any blemish, should not offer the sacrifice of
Bread, nor any other sacrifice. In diverse other places of Scripture God has
placed his Command, that they should offer to him bread, and a Sacrifice of
fine Flower, and that he will accept it; and such at this day is the Gentiles
Sacrifice, even bread, made of fine Flower. Of this Sacrifice of bread mention
is made in the Book of Kings, 1 Samuel 21.
when David came to Abimelech the High Priest in Silo, That in the Parenthesis
the English Translator puts in.
(or rather Nob) he desired some Loaves of him, who answered, Here is none but
show bread, which it is not fit thy sevants should eat, because it is holy.
Howsoever Gentiles have a mixture of water with their Wine in their Sacrifice,
yet with that are we not burdened with any inconveniencie, seeing the
Scriptures afford an exemplary action for it, that a Sacrifice of water was
not only offered to, 1 King. 18.
but accepted of the Lord. Three mighty men drew water from the Well before
the Gate of Bethlehem, 1 Chro. 11*
which the Prophet David offered to the Lord for a Sacrifice. It is not
therefore contra-Scripturall that the Gentiles practice, in mixing water in
their Sacrifice to God. We read of Aaron sacrificing to God with Bread and
Wine, and David with Water, whence we collect, that a clean and pure offering,
(not such as our flesh of fat Bullocks) must have a concurrence of these three
in it, which doubtless contains some mystical Kernels in it, though the dimm
virtue of our intellectual Optics is not able to penetrate and spy it out.
Our Prophet Elias, as is storied in the Book of Kings, powered water upon the
Sacrifice, on which God sent down fire from Heaven, a sign of his acceptance
of that Sacrifice, which had the Waters effusion on it: yea, and the Angel
brought to Elias his food, Bread and Water, when he, in the strength of that
food, which impotent nature cannot reach unto, traveled forty days together,
to Horeb the Mount of God. Fairly, and fitly has Solomon the Prophet, in his
Proverbs described this commixed Sacrifice of Wine and Water, saying, The most
High wisdom has made ready her sacrifice, she has mingled her Wine, she has
furnished her Table, she has sent forth her maidens, saying, Who so is
simple, let him come in hither, and they that want understanding, and they
shall eat of my Bread, and drink of my mingled Wine. What is this Table (O
Master) the wisdom of the most High has furnished, but the Altar? What is this
bread and mingled wine, but the sacrifice of bread, Wine, and water which is
offered on the altar? who are these without understanding, that the Maidens of
Wisdom are sent to call in, but the Gentiles which know not God, whom the
Apostles have by Preaching called? Wherein this is further remarkable, that it
is called My Bread, and my Wine, which strongly intimates the acceptablenesse
of that Sacrifice unto God. It also imports thus much, that wisdom called not
our Fathers to this so high, and so spiritual a Banquet, who were learned and
wise in the Law, and wholly taken up with the Legal Sacrifice. But now we have
lost all, and are excluded, not only from this spiritual, but we have lost
the carnal sacrifice of the Fathers also. Time has now wound upon her clew a
thousand years complete, since all this misery has fallen on us, for our sin
against that Righteous One. Yet for all this, we are a people that belong unto
God.

CHAP. XXI. God has refused the Fasts, Sabbaths, and Sacrifices of the Jews,
and chosen those of the Christians.
MY soul wrastles with horrible fears, O Master, and out of that word the great
and glorious God spoke by Malachie, my fears issue, where thus he treats of the
Gentiles sacrifice, From the rising of the sun, to the going down of the
same, the Gentiles shall offer a pure offering to my name. Where I note, that
our sacrifice was not accepted, save in one place only, in Gods holy house,
and no where else* and it is plain, God has rejected our sacrifice, because he
has deprived us of the very place, where we should sacrifice, the Land of
Promise, and now for a thousand years the whirlwinde of his breath has
scattered us over all Lands. Thus that is come to pass and fulfilled in us,
which God, by way of similitude, spoke, in the mouth of Esaias, concerning us,
Esa. 32. 10
The Vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come. And that of Malachie,
Mal. 1. 10.
I have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an Offering at your hands.
Esaias 1.
And that of Esaias again, Your sabbaths, and your feasts, Out translations have
it otherwise.
and your sacrifice I will not accept, because you are all under my wrath.
Again, that in Esaias is fulfilled in us, To what purpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices to me? Esaias 1. from 11. to 16.
I am full of the burnt-offerings of Rams, and flesh of Goats, etc. Esaias 66. 3.
Bring no more vain oblations, Our Trans. otherwise.
etc. All your sacrifices are like a stinking Carcass, and as the going out of
the Court of the outer Gate. He that kills an Ox for me, it is as if he
slew a man: he that sacrifices a Kid, as if he cut off a Dogs neck, and he
that offers wine, as if he offered swines blood. All this abomination in our
sacrifice, as God accounts it, signifies nothing else, but the Lords purpose of
changing our ^arnall and gross sacrifice into the spiritual and pure
sacrifice of the just Lord, Matthew. 27.
whose new ^nstitution offers bread in stead of flesh, Mark 14.
clean water in stead of the fat of Beasts, and pure Wine for Blood. Yea man
himself is offered up, but in a spiritual manner, yet very acceptably to God,
not after that way of cutting off Beasts necks in our sacrifices, which the
Prophet likens to a stinking Carrion. O Master, why do we not give credit to
those words of God in the Prophets, which do so evidently describe, and set
forth our sacrifices? God spoke by Jeremy in the seventh Chapter, Ier. 7. 21,
22, 23, 24.
Invite your neighbors to your sacrifices, (put your burnt-offerings to your
sacrifice, and eat flesh) I spoke not to your Fathers, neither commanded them
in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning
burnt-offerings and Sacrifices. But this thing I commanded them, saying, Obey
my voice, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people, and walk you in
all the ways I have commanded you, that it may be well with you. But they
hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to my command. Full well, O Master, do you
know these things to be thus. Notwithstanding, in all these strange events we
still belong unto God, and are his portion.

CHAP. XXII. He proves the abjection of the Synagogue; and the election of the
Church, by the word of the Lord to Rebecca.
NOw new fear falls upon me, O Master, wherein I tremble at that word, which is
written in the 25 Chapter of the first book of our Law, lest that be meant of
the Synagogue and the Church, which the Lord God speaks to Rebecca the wife of
Isaac, Genesis 25.
Two Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from
thy Bowels, and one people shall be stronger then the other people, and the
elder shall serve the younger. O Master, Rebecca only was the mother of Jews
and Gentiles. The Elder people and firstborn was our Synagogue, which was
great and glorious, with a rich dowry of honor, and the knowledge of God
bestowed upon it. The younger and last-born people, and less in Gods account,
were the Gentiles, drowned in infidelity and ignorance. Yet all this
notwithstanding, O Master, if God have slain Israel, as the Prophet Esaias is
plain in it, then was the total subversion of the Synagogue, which was the
elder, and it was brought to serve the Gentiles, which were the younger, that
the word might be fulfilled which God spoke to Rebecca, One people shall be
stronger than the other. For the glory of the Church God spoke by the mouth of
David, Psalm. 45.
The Kings daughter stands at thy right hand in a vesture of gold, wrought
about with diverse colors. The right exposition of this, O Master, begets this
sense, that the Church of the Gentiles is here honored with the name of a
Queen, and the diverse Colors of the garment, wherewith she is adorned,
signify and set forth the diversity of Languages and people, by which she is
served. For all Tongues and Languages in the Church, conspire with a
concordance of a true exposition of the Law, the Psalter, and the book of all
the Prophets. As for out Synagogue it has but one Tongue or Language, and her
garment is not set out with many Colors, but only one color, that of her own
Hebrew idiome and language.

CHAP. XXIII. He proves the same thing by the words of the Prophet Malachie.
THose words of the Prophet Malachie so often brought, O Master, I cannot so
shift as to rid my memory of them, and thence springs my fear, that God should
say to the Synagogue, I have no pleasure in your sacrifices, for from the
rising of the Sun, etc. For Water, Wine, and fine Flour, the Elements of the
Gentiles sacrifice, are clean things of their own nature, and need none of our
cleansings, and purifying potions to prepare them, and make them ready. But our
Synagogue must of necessity have continual employments, in washing the Flesh
of Sacrifices, and cleansing the Entrals of Beasts, which are to be sacrificed.
Nay, and there must be many purifyings of the Altar, and place of the
sacrifice, to make clean from the fatt and blood of other sacrifices, otherwise
it would breed a loathsome abhorring to see them, and meddle with them. This of
Bread, and Wine, and Water, is a neat and cleanly sacrifice, subject to none of
these indecencies, and loathsome turpitude. For my part, O Master, I must
confess that Gods meaning is of this sacrifice in Salomons Proverbs, Pro. 15.
Better is a morsel of bread with love, then a stalled Ox with hatred. This
Morsel of love, O Master, is that morsel of the Gospel commended to us,
meeknes, that is, reciprocal and mutual forgiving of injuries, one to pardon
another; and the fat Ox with hatred, is our practice of eye for eye, and secret
slaying of our enemies. And from these premises I draw this conclusion, that
the Churches bread is better than the Synagogues Ox, the one being a sacrifice
of love, the other of hatred, of which God says, Better is a morsel, etc.
Another way God fitly likens the Church to a loving Hind, Pro. 5. 19.
by the mouth of Solomon, Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, let
her breasts satisfy (or inebriate) thee at all times, and be thou ravished
always with her love. The Church is this Hind so beloved of God, of whom it
is written, she is the most dearly beloved Hind, and has no equal in
nobility and favor. He adds, O Master, Let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times, and be thou ravished always with her love. In which words is delivered a
plain significancie of the lastingnesse of the Churches sacrifice for all
times, and that it shall abide for ever. Here also God compares the Church to a
mother, giving suck to Children; and in this that he says, Let her Breasts at
all times satisfy thee, and make thee drunken, he clearly denotes the matter
of the Sacrament, in one of the Elements, which is Wine, though in a spiritual
way. And by Breasts he notes the rest of the substance of the Sacrament, that
it contains pleasant nourishment, and is a sufficient Sacrament, (as the
Mothers Breasts are sufficient for the Child) which sacrifice the Church at
this present enjoyes, and is ravished with it. As for us, our Synagogue has
remained a widow this thousand years, quite deprived of her sacrifice. This
dear respect which God bears to the Church, comes from Christ the Lord; His are
the breasts, from whence run those streamy fluents of Wine, and from thence
flows everlasting joy. Here is not a word or title of giving flesh, or fat, or
blood, the ingredients of our laborious ahd toilsome sacrifice. The Synagogue,
as a miserable widow, had another husband, even God himself; but now she has
lost both her holy house, and her holy husband. The Church on the other side,
like a straying Hind, ranged in the Desert, and had no husband, yet God has
found her, and is become in stead of an husband to her. As the strong and
glorious God speaks by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 54. 1
More are the children of the desolate, than the Children of the married wife.
Esaias 43.
That Prophet again says, I will make rivers in the wilderness, to give drink
to my chosen people. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have
been weary of me, O Israel. Even thus, O Master, have we shaken off all
obedience: we have been earlesse, and would not hear; eyelesse, and would not
see, which has produced this Captivity, that with a drowning flood has run
over us a thousand years. I am afraid, O Master, for our Law, which gives way
to revenge, and has furious anger made ready, in calling for eye for eye, etc.
whereas the beloved Hind, having one dear Lover, is ruled by a sweeter rule,
which he has given her in his glorious Gospel, the fifth Chapter by Matthew, If
any smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other also. Psalm. 31.
David speaks in the Psalm, O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid
up for them that fear thee, and which thou have wrought for them that trust in
thee, before the sons of men. It is clear, O Master, that the people of the
Synagogue stood in fear of those Legal penalties, Exodus 21.
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, because execution did presently
w^it upon the Offender. How much better do the people of the Church, that
trusting in the goodness of God, being smitten on the face, they do not answer
with their Fist, smiting again? wherefore God has graciously laid up for those
Gentiles, his abundant goodness, which he altogether hides from the Jews.
Notwithstanding, we are Gods people.

CHAP. XXIIII. He shows the Christians manner of singing is acceptable to God.
I Stand in fear, O Master, of that speech of Esaias, for he seems to speak it of
the Apostles, They shall sanctify the holy One of Jacob [they shall manifest]
and they shall fear the God of Israel. Esa. 29. 23
[They shall preach or publish the God of Israel.] The Jew has manifestabunt
for sanctificabunt; and evangelizabunt for our timebunt. In stead of
murmurantes, he has it Musici scient Leges.
They that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding, and they that murmured
shall learn doctrine: [or the Musicians shall learn the Laws. We see it with
mid-dayes clearness, O Master, that now, for a thousand years, the ignorant
Musicians are become Doctors, and Teachers of our Law. Who are the ignorant
ones, but the Gentiles? Who are these Musicians, but the Christians, who chant
and sing our Book of Psalms, and the Prophets, in their Churches? Of the
Musicians and singers, we have God speaking by David, Sing unto the Lord a new
song, for he has done mavelous things. What, I beseech you, O Master, is
this new song, but the new Testament? and what is the old song, but our old
Law? Of these Musicians God speaks more by the Prophet David, Sing unto the
Lord all the whole earth, sing a Psalm of praise to his Name. Again, All the
families of the earth shall sing and praise thy Name, or, All the families of
the Nations. Where this carries a mark of special note, that it is not
singularly said, All the families of Israel, but the phrase universally spreads
it self to all the families of the Gentiles. Of this musical and Psalm-singing
people, are David's words in another place, Blessed are the people that knows
the song (ours ^ath it, Psa. 89.
That knows the joyful sound) they shall walk in the light of thy countenance.
That also is to the same purpose, The Gentiles, or Nations, shall sing a song
to thee in the house of ^y God. In this place he names a Song, by way of
Antonomasia, naming a Song in general, ^ut intending their particular kind of
singing. As for us, we have lost our music, it is now (...) thousand years,
since we Jews sung a Song (...) our holy House. Of these singers speaks David,
They shall sing praises in the house of God for ever. The 137 Psalm questioned
our singing, How shall they sing the Lords song in a strange Land? Alas, O
Master, for the vacuity and emptiness of our vain hopes, who think of a name
and a Country, when we have lost both. God himself tells us this by the Prophet
Amos, Israel is fallen, she shall rise n^ more: the virgin Israel is forsaken
upon he^ Land, there is none to raise her up. The same Prophet in the ninth
Chapter says, Amos 9.
There sha^ come such tribulation, that he who escapes sha^ not be delivered;
though they hide themselves i^ the top of Carmel, I will search and take the^
out thence; though they be hid from my sight i^ the bottom of the sea, thence
will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them. Though they go into
captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall
slay them. And (...) will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and no^ for good.
This has the Lord said and done to us, and now, for a thousand years of
miserie^ we have hung by our Harpes, and left all ou^ singing of Psalms,
mourning befitting us more then music. Notwithstanding, though we^ cannot
sing, yet this we can say, God is our God, and we are his people.

CHAP. XXV. The Jews unjustly find fault with the Christians practice of
singing.
GOD has spoken, O Master, of the Christians singing, by the mouth of David,
the sweet singer of Israel, Psa. 47. 1.
saying, Clap your hands all ye people, Psa. 100.
sing unto God in the voice of melody. In another place, Make a joyful noise
unto the Lord all ye lands, serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his
presence with a song. In another place, Psa. 96.
Sing unto the Lord all the whole earth, declare his salvation from day to day.
I am under great fear, O Master, by that which God speaks in the mouth of
Jeremy, Teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbor lamentation,
for death is come up into our windows. Together with this of our learning that
sad lesson of mourning, he speaks of those Musical children by the Prophet
David, Psalm. 148.
Kings of the earth and all people, princes, and all judges of the earth, young
men and maidens, old men and Children, let them praise the name of the Lord.
Psa. 50.
And, who so offers praise, he glorifieth me. As if he plainly said, The
sacrifice of the flesh of Goats (such was our sacrifice) does not honor me,
but in the sacrifice of praise (such as is the Gentiles) am I glorified. The
Prophet Esaias agrees with it, when he says, See above in chap. 24 concerning
this place of Esaias.
The musicians shall learn the Scriptures, and all the Psalms of David shall
they sing in a metricall way, as it is varied by musical Tones, some Acute and
Sharp, some Grave. About all which, whiles I labor with the strength of my
best consideration, me thinks I judge with the least error, when I conclude we
are in a great error, about their Sacrifice of praise, which they offer up by
singing in the Church of God. Especially, when I further discern, that there
are precepts of, and examples for this singing, in the Law of Moses, and in the
Prophet David, who has called for the praising God with Organs, and Harp, and
with loud Cymbals; and, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord Jesus
Christ. Psalm. 150.
That for Precept. Lord Jesus Christ is not in the Psalm.
Example is not awanting, for David danced before the Ark, with his Harp,
having his head uncovered, for which his rash-tongued wife Michol, was bold to
reprove him; 2 Samuel 6. 20.
but she got this sharp and tart reply from him, O foolish woman, does not the
Lord see thee despising me, whiles I sing praises to him? The Children of
Israel also sounded a Trumpet, whiles they bore the Arc. Now tell me, O
Master, what parts act we? Are not we the foolish Michol, that mock and jeet at
the Christians singing solemnities? And do not the Christians act David's part,
dancing and rejoicing before the Lord in their Humiditie, Especially,
considering how God propounds it, Let every thing that has breath praise the
Lord. If it had been precisely thus written, let every Israelite praise the
Lord, then our insultation over others might have had some better ground.
Neither is that of Esaias any disadvantage to them, that he says, The Nations
(or Gentiles) are before God as nothing. Esaias 40. 17
For this is to be applied to the Gentiles in their first estate, as they once
were drowned in darkness and ignorance of God, before the coming of the Just
One. Then indeed they were Pagans, and Idolatrous people; and none of those
Nations that have found the Lord, which offer unto him every day a pure
offering in the East and West, as above out of the Prophet Malachie, has been
alleged. And certainly, O Master, we are heirs of a great error about this
thing. Notwithstanding all this, we belong unto God.

CHAP. XXVI. He proves the Apostasy of the Jews from God.
UNder an oppression of no small fear I fall prostrate, O Master, and this
troubles me, that like wicked Apostates we fell off from God, at the first
coming of that Just One, according to all those Authorities hitherto alleged,
and to which expressly do consent all that we find written in the Books of
the Law and the Prophets. From this out Apostasy is it that God stretches out
our misery to such a length of days, and has brought upon us this
Captivity, whiles we in vain expect another Savior, besides that Just One,
which nothing avails, nor is any thing to the purpose. Herein we have a sign
with plenary evidence, that this general captivity is laid upon us, for some
general sin, which all of us have had our hands in: which sin, while it
abides and sticks with us unrepented of, fierce wrath must needs abide upon our
Nation, and we remain hopeless. Yet we look for some other Savior. But oh the
idleness, and inanitie of our expectations, how little do they profit us?
Suppose we go about to affirm, that ours is not a general Captivity, and that
in some part of the world, we have a King and Prince over us, we shall quickly
be proved worthy to be reproved for liars, convict by our own Law; for if we
Jews should have a King and Prince over us in any part of the world, go to
then, let us see what he is; he must be descended of some one Tribe; if of any,
it should be of the Tribe of Judah. Of Judahs Tribe it cannot be, God having
definitively determined against it, that there should be no King of Judah out
of that Tribe for ever. Ierem. 17.
Whence Jeremie the Prophet says, The sin of Judah is writ with a Pen of
Iron, and the Point of a Diamond, it is graven upon the Table of their heart.
That which is written with such a Pen, as Iron, in such a Book as an Adamantine
stone, how can we look that it should ever be expunged? It shall never be
blotted out, seeing the strong and glorious God has thus spoken by the mouth
of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 3. 2.
The Lord, the Lord of Hosts takes away from Jerusalem and Judah the Judge,
Our Trans. has it, the Judge and the Prophet and the Prudent.
and the Prophet, and the Prince. Likewise the Prophet Hosea says of us, The
Children of Israel shall abide without a King, without a Prince, without a
sacrifice, without an Image, without an Ephod, without Teraphim. We know well,
O Master, that, from the beginning of the world, God had* always some Saints
of great account, and holy before him. Toward the beginning of the world the
lives of men are reckoned up with many figures, and extended to many years, as
M^thusalem, Enoch, and the rest, yet none of these ever came to be Millenaries,
either reaching to, or above a thousand years. Yet we have large reckoning
amongst our selves, finding our Messiah* or Christ promised to us, to outstrip
that unattained number. We please our selves with saying, that our Messiah was
born in Babylon, in the seventie years Captivity, which by computation will
arise to an higher number of years; for by this at this day, he must be a
thousand and fifty years old. This Fable and Fallacy, for it is no
Prophecy, though we know not how with any weapons of reason to defend, yet
with bold assertions we aver it for a truth in our Synagogues, when we are
none but Jews together, and not a stranger among us. But you may hear the
public doctrine of the Christians saying otherwise, Of Zion it shall be said,
this and that Man was born in her, Psa. 87.
and the most High shall establish her. In these words he names Mary the Lady,
under the name of the City, and says, a man was born in her. He says that
man emphatically was born in her, he does not say, this or that Israelite.
Whereby he gives light to us to understand, that the Son of Marie never was in
the Loins of any man. In the second Book of Samuel and the seventh Chapter, God
manifestly declares this, when he says to David, When thy days be fulfilled,
and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up thy Seed after thee, which
shall proceed out of thy Bowels, and I will be his Father, and he shall be my
Son. It was never among possibilities, O Master, that any should come out of
the Bowels of his Father, therefore to this end is it here set down ^o
expressly, to show that Christ was not to ^e conceived in woman, after the
ordinary ^ay of other men, by any Seed, which should ^roceed from the Loins of
man, as the rest ^f men do, descending from David, or others. ^o the same
effect God speaks by David, from the Womb, Psalm. 110.
before the morning, have I be^otten thee. As if the great and glorious God
should say, From the womb, that is, of his ^wn will he begot his Christ, the
operation ^f the Holy Ghost effecting, it without the ^eed of man, not after
the common regular ^urse of humane generations. This is that doctrine of
verity of the Christians faith, which is hid as a mystery from us, and our
^ow apprehensions will not give it entrance ^^d belief. For our infidelity in
this point (...) all this fallen on us, that we groan under; ^his is the gate
that lets in our misery. Af^^r the same manner does David set forth Christ to
be borne, Psa. 132.
The Lord has sworn in ^uth unto David, Of the fruit of thy Body will ^set
upon thy Throne. Notwithstanding all ^is, we belong to God.

CHAP. XXVII. He concludes with alleging some sayings of the Saracens,
touching Jesus, and Marie his Mother.
VErily, O Master, though the Christian do not fight against us with swords
taken out of the Saracens Scaberds, and wha^ the Alcoran and the expositions
thereof have for their defense, (which they neglect to do knowing our faith
feeds not upon Saracen Chafe, neither do they themselves give any credit to
it) yet they might find something which might much weary and weaken us, an^
fortify themselves by the allegation of the Sarazens Doctrine concerning
Jesus, and Mar^^ his blessed Mother. It is the general voice (...) all the
Saracens, that Jesus was the Messia^ whom the foregoing Prophet foretold should
come, and as touching his Genealogy and (...) degree, they prefer him before
their own God Mahomet. They stick not to confesse^ that the Parents of Mahomet
were Idolaters an^ wicked ones, and at the best blazon the^ Arms, but among the
Children of Hagar, th^^ Bond-maid, from whom they sprung. Yet willingly they
grant, that the Messiah by a dire^^ Line draws his Pedigree from Isaac, who^^
Son he was, to the Prophets and just men, and so he descends to the blessed
Marie his Virgin mother. In the Alcoran this testimony of the Family of Adamar
is found touching Marie, The Angel Gabriel said to Marie, O Marie, God has
chosen thee, and taught thee grace, and has in his choice preferred thee
before all other women of all ages; and has placed thee as a new medium or
mean, dividing betwixt earthly men, and the Angels of God in the Paradise of
delights. Moreover, all the Saracens speak-it for a truth, That Christ, or the
Messiah, had power from God to work Miracles, to heal every disease, and
infirmity, to cast out Devils, raise the dead, to know the secrets of all
hearts; yea, they believe all those Miracles to be done by him, which the
Gospel records of him. This the Alcoran in the forenamed Chapter expressly
testifies, That the Messiah knew, and does know all things, yea the very
sectets of hearts. The words of Mahomet are just to this purpose, who says,
Eise (that is Jesus) knew every Book, and all wisdom, and the whole Law of
Moses, he knew what men did eat and drink in their houses, and what they laid
up in their Treasuries. Besides, they say of Christ, or the Messiah, that
whiles he was in the world he despised riches, and abandoned all carnal
delights, neither had he any Concubines, which are the occasions of sin, and
a cause of disobedience. Withal their Alcoran has adopted and taken into it
that speech of the Gospel, The Foxes have holes, Luke 9.
and the birds of the air have nests. These things, thought, I confess, they
carry no authority for their sakes who say them, being Saracens, yet are they
consonant (as may appear by our former discourse) to those things the Prophets
foretold, of the first Coming of the Messiah. They say in their Alcoran, That
Eise, that is Jesus, is the Word of God: and this to be called the Word of God,
is accounted the proper name of Jesus Christ among the Saracens: in so much as
no other man is thus named, but Jesus only, whom in the Arabic tongue they
call Eise. This we further find in their Alcoran, God said to Eise, I am thy
sufficiency, I will lift thee up unto my self, and I will purify thee from the
unbeleevers. Consider now, O Master, how the Jewish Nation are redacted and
brought to such a paucitie and smalnesse of number, by their thousand years
Captivity, that they are become the fewest of any Nation on the earth. zach. 2.
The Saracens are exceedingly multiplied, and daily increase. The Faith of
Christ has filled the whole world, only we are bandied and dispersed all over
the earth by our angry God; we remain the fewest of any people, Genesis 49.
Reubens curse being fallen on us, which his father pronounced against him, Ne
crescas.
Thou shall not excel, or increase. We increase not at all, but the
Christians, whom we hate above all Nations, they increase above all others, and
all our hatred of them is in vain. A conjoined testimony of many witnesses
stand up against us: The Christians witness against us, so do the Saracens
also: the Alcoran, and the Gospel of Christ, which we will not believe. Which
Alcoran, in my judgment, has no validity or strength in it, seeing it
contains manifest contradictions, as thou well know, and as it clearly is
evident, the Composers of it were very ignoramusses in the matter both of the
old and new Testament. But letting that pass, what shall we say to the
Gospel of the Christians, how shall we escape that, laying this down as a
presupposed truth, that Christ, or the Messiah is already come? The belief of
this principle contains nothing in it, that it is contrary to Prophets, or to
our Law; yea, of it we may affirm, that it is the Lamp, that gives light to
all the Prophets, manifesting them, and fulfilling the promises contained in
the Law, if we understand those promises aright to be meant of spiritual
blessings, as the doctrine of the Christians conceives of them spiritually.
Nevertherlesse, O Master, in all these my doubts, my anxious soul has recourse
to thee, especially, that thou would assist me with thy skill about those
knots, which before have been excerpt, and alleged by me out of the Prophets,
forasmuch as I know, thou, who art skilled in the Arabic, wilt account the
testimony out of the Alcoran no stronger than a lie, and esteem it as a Rush.
Thou perfectly know the vanity of Mahomet, who called himself a Prophet,
but he did not Prophecy, or foretell any things to come; he called himself a
Messenger sent from God, a good one surely he was, who being a corrupt and
ignorant fellow, (much unlike a Messenger of God) taught things contrary both
to God, and his Scriptures.

The end of the Epistle of Rabbi Samuel, which be writ to Rabbi Isaac, Master
of the Synagogue.
CHAP. I. Annotations upon the Epistolarie discourse of Rabbi Samuel the
Israelite, born in a City of the Kingdom of Marocco.
IN the first Chapter, and in many other, he mentions the continuance of their
Captivity, from the vastation of Jerusalem, to be in length a thousand years,
and upwards, so that it seems the Book being Translated about the year 1239,
Alstedius places him about the year 1090 in Chronol. Theol. So has the Note
before the Book in Micropresbeutico.
had been hid and kept secret by the Jews, from coming into public light
some 230 years, and above. It may appear, more then by conjecture, that it was
first writ about the thousand years after the entrance into their Captivity,
and the Jews seeing it like a lightsome house, and full of Candles, clearly
showing Christ to be the Messiah, and that he was already come, and by them had
been Crucified, they fearing if it came into open view, it might pluck away the
Jewish vail of opposition to Christ, from many hearts, as plainly demonstrating
their sin, and the hidden verity of Christ the Savior, they put this Candle
or Torch under a Bushel, and kept it close many years, till this Translator
lighting upon it, did publish and set it on a Candlestick, that it might give
light to the whole house, both of Jews and Gentiles, in the Roman language,
which is become almost oecumenicall, understood of all sorts. For they thought
of this Book, as their wicked forefathers thought of Lazarus, It were good to
put him to death, because by reason of him (being raised from the dead by
Christ) many of the Jews would go away from them, John 12. 10, 11.
and believe on Jesus.

The Hebrew Doctors inquire earnestly what this sin should be, few of them
have so much flesh and softness in their heart, as to yield with our Samuel,
that it was the sin of slaying Christ, for they invent vain effugia's, and
ways of avoidance of the thought of this sin. R. Solomon runs back to the
Wilderness, and says, The molten Calfe is still punished, God is yet scourging
them for that Idolatry. Hereupon one teaches the Jews, in every misery of
theirs, to think of it. No punishment lights on thee O Israel, in which there
is not put an Ounce of the molten Calf. But this sin God had pardoned long
before Christ's time. Others of them do name some great sins of some
Particular men, but look not at the great sin of the whole Nation. Some
conclude it to be a secret and hidden sin, which is not known, that brings all
these known punishments upon them at this day.

The great Rambam, the Oracle of Jewish Learning, the excellent second Moses,
speaks his mind, Jesus Nazaretus visus est es^e Messiah, ac sententia ludicum
interfectus, causa fuit ut dest. ueretur I^rael glad^o. Marfil. Fic^n. in lib.
d^ Christ. Relig c. 27
as he is quoted by Ficinus, out of of his Book of the Ordinary Judges; Jesus
of Nazareth seemed to be the Messiah, and being put to death by the sentence of
the Judges, was the cause why Israel was destroyed by the sword. But Ficinus is
mistaken, for he means not honestly there, but as a Jew, hating Christ and
Christians; his meaning is, That Christ was the Ringleader to rebellions and
raising of seditions, stirring up the people to shake off the Roman yoke and
Empire, which brought the Romans to destroy them with ^he sword. This was his
poisonous meaning, though one of the best of the Jews. The learned Coch in his
Annotations to the Gemar. Sanhedrin, Chap. 11. sect. 37. thus senses it far
from Ficinus his meaning.

This Jew rightly collects, The first Digression*
and concludes, that that sin which brings a longer plague, and heavier
judgment, than any that went before, must needs be a greater sin than that
which brought their 70 years Captivity, and what can be greater than Idolatry,
and slaying of the Prophets, save their slaying of their Savior Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, the Prince of the Prophets, and the Center in whom all the
Prophecies meet?

He says further, that none of the Prophets do tell of their return out of
this Captivity, he is more to blame then, Nondum omnium ^^^rum (...),
occiderunt.
that at the end o^ every Chapter does say, Notwithstanding whatsoever fall
out, we belong to God. If no Prophet show, that, being thus cast off, they
belong to God, (...) quoque (...). Cecidisse ^os, non ex^idisse c^rtum est.
why does he without the ground of Prophecies build upon such a thing? But
herein he is in an error; many, yea, all the Prophets d^ speak of their
return, and the Calling of the Jews. As Moses, Genesis 49. 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 30. 3* 6,
8. Esaias 11. 11, 12. Esaias 45. 22. and 25* Esaias 59. 20, 21. Vt el^ganter Cunaeus
de Repub.
Ierem. 16. 14. Ierem. 23. 3, 4* Ier. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Hosea
1* last verse. Hebr. Lib. 1. cap. 18.
Hos. 3. 4, 5. Mic. 2. 12. Mic. 4. 6* Mic. 5, 5, 6, 7. Medras sir Hassirim,
Rab. Isaac ut habetur apud Porcherum in victor.
Zephan. 3. 11, 12, 13. and 19. 20. Amos 9. 14, 15. Zach. 11. 16. And among ou^
Prophets, none so full as Paul, Romans 11. Besides, as Paul speaks to them in
Titus, One of themselves, a Prophet of their own has said it. Cont. Heb. p. 2.
c. 10.
Upon these words in the Canticles, Open to me my Sister, my Love* my Dove, my
undefiled, they write thus, The holy and blessed God said to Israel, O my
Children, set open to me but one little Cranie of repentance, though it be no
bigger than a Needles eye, and I will so largely open a way to you, that shall
let in your Chariots and Carriages with four Wheels. Out of Rabbi Levi they
have this also, If Israel would but repent one day, they should forthwith be
redeemed, and presently their Messiah the Son of David should come unto them.
And indeed, their impenitency is their hardest Prophecy against them. Let them
but repent, and it will turn the Captivity of Zion.

Note the Conclusion of every Chapter, The 2. Digression.
and the beginning of every Chapter are the same. Every Chapter begins with I
fear, O Master. Their great Rabbis were called Masters by the rest, who
admired their learning, sat at their feet, received their instructions, as the
Oracles of wisdom. About our Saviors time they begun not only to enlarge
their Phylacteries, but to enlarge their Titles of Dignity also, and to
advance their Doctors with great names, as Rab, Ribbi, Rabban, Rabbi, which
makes our Savior note their pride in it. Those that had taken degrees in
learning, and were set into a Doctors or Teachers place to teach others, then
had the name of Rabbi, their great Master, or learned Doctor of the Chair, for
such taught in Chaires, and their Scholars sat at their feet, learning, and
hearing their Documents, ^hachanim.
as Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. Sometimes they call them their
wise men, sometimes Masters, sometimes Fathers. Constan. ^ Emper. in Commen. ad
^^chiadae Paraphras. in Daniel c. 1 Buxto^ff. ^un. in vit. Mosis Maimon
praefix. More Nevoch. Comment. in Middoth cap. 3. sect. 5.
Rambam, Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon, and Ramban, which is Rabbi Moses Ben Nahman,
these two famous ones were called duo Domini, The two great Masters. And this
Moses Maimonides was so famous for learning, that they add to his Titles, and
some called him The Doctor of righteousness, and the great light of the
Captivity. A Doctor among them R. Judas is of such fame, that they call him,
by way of eminency, Ribbi, or Hannasi the Prince, Haccadosh, R. Judas the
Holy. So among the Pontificians, they Idolize their great doctors, one must be
the Master of the Sentences, another must be the Angelical Doctor, a third the
Seraphicall Doctor, this the Profound, and that the Irrefragable Doctor,
another the Doctor of Subtilties; one is called Gomestor, the great devourer of
the Scriptures, as if he had eaten up the Bible for his many Quotations of it.
another is called Speculator, as Durandus Hales, or Alensis the Englishman, the
Master of Bonaveuture and Aquinas, he was (to his high praise in those times)
called, Alstod. in Chronol.
Fons vitae, The Fountain of life, and the irrefragable Doctor. So that to the
praise of Englishmen, Scolast. ad cap* ^7.
by the confession of the Learned of other Nations, it is upon Record, that not
only Bonaventure and Aquinas, and the rest, carry all the glory of Angelical
and Seraphicall learning, but even our Englimen have been Tutors to the best of
them, and have been as it were Fountains to their Seraphicall Streams: though
Fons vitae be a Title too Hyperbolicall, and too near to Blasphemy.

Petrus Cluniacensis and Bid our Countreyman too, go not in any Writings
without their Title of Venerable Peter of Clunie, and Venerable Bede. Dionysius
a Rickel, he is the Ecstaticall Doctor, Alanus he is the Universal Doctor. All
Religions, Sects, and sorts of People are ready to get their Doctors and
Teachers into too high Chairs of estimation and praises, even to Homar and Hali
among the Turks and Persians, Chud and Tzalet or Salech, Synaip and Hedres,
Dualkiphil and Locman, of which last the Proverb is, He is as wise as Locman,
Saracen.
when they will name a second Solomon. Chatechis.
The very deceived of our days do name their Teachers Apostolical men, and
men as full of new light as any, when it is indeed old darkness and
deliration: though their breath be poison, and their doctrine blasphemy, and
their visions made up of boldness and impudence, yet their deceived Proselites
are ready to call and count them as that marble Statue of Rome, Io. Iac.
Boisard. in Topogr. Romae.
Buccam Veritatis, the very mouth and cheeks of Truth. Among the Jewish dotages
this is none of the least, that what their great Rabbis and Masters write,
Buxtorff. in Synagog. Iud. cap. 1. ex* Tractat. Erubhin.
and set down they must believe, as this hard Statute of theirs will make it
appear. Thus they write, Whosoever mocks at, or despises what our wise men and
great Rabbis have spoken, he shall be tormented in hot boiling dung in Hell.
This is to make a Statute of doting. Some of them say, They that give
themselves to the study of the Bible, there is some little virtue in it, or
rather none at all; but they who study Tradition, or the secondary Law of the
Fathers, there is virtue, for which a reward is due, They who study the
Gemara, the Talmudick Writings, there is more excellent virtue for them than
others. We are furnished by them with Stories for this: as that R. Eleeser being
sick, his Disciples visiting him, said to him, O master, teach us the ways of
life, that we may obtain the life of the world to come. The sick Doctor
answered thus, Be admonished to honor your fellow-schollers, and draw back
your children from the study of the Bible, and place them betwixt the Knees of
the wise masters. Aegroti somnia! We leave these dotages, and pray they may
recover their right senses, which will lead them to these three Rules. Esaias 8.
20.
To the Law and to the Testimony, etc. me, Mat. 15. 9.
teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of men. John 5. 39.
3. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life.

Yet would I not have any build upon this those bold and blind outcries, The
3. Digression.
Away with the Rabbis and all Hebrew writings, it is lost labor and learning
to study them, there is nothing sound, all is fabulous and vain in them, of no
use for a Divine. Give that Head some Hellebore to purge folly. It is as if one
should say, What should a man do sowing Seed, for there are much Straw, Chafe
and Weeds that grow up with it? Non coeco zelo in fans ipse, ut aiunt, una cum
lavacri sordibus est effundendus.
But a wise Husbandman will say, I get much good Corn, and therefore I will
bestow some labor for the Corns sake, to thresh and winnow it, and rid ^it of
straw, chafe and Weeds. Though there be much Chafe in the Hebrew Doctors,
Schickard. apud Glassiam.
yet there is much good grain and fruit of profitable use; and why may we not,
as husbandmen, learn to thresh, and winnow them, and read them with a fan?

For that kind of learning the less I know ^it the more I admire it, and wish
time and leisure to recover what former years have lost, Paul Fagius in
praefat. Eliae Thisbi.
^icking the glass without, when I cannot come to the precious liquor within.
I judge in the want of it, Iunius in Orat. de ling, Hebr. Antiq. and praest.
one piece of a complete Divine is awanting. Now we are subject to despise it,
because Hebrew and Jewish learning requires more study and judgment, Tom. 1.
then looking upon some common Latin and English Authors, Glassius in Orat de
Hebr. ling. util.
an easy kind of study, and almost vulgarly attainable. Good account may be
given of this by some reasons, that will make it appear to be that which should
be above the contempt of ignorance. hic magister non tenetur. Nihil aliud est
Theologus, qua^ Grammaticus verbi Divini.
lingua sancta, the sacred and holy Language, Drus in Epist ad Senate.
Antverpiens.
as being used by God He was no Pamphlet nor trivial Doctor that said, A
Divine was nothing else but a Gramarian of the Word of God, the Bible being the
Grammar of Divinity. Moses Maimonides carries the palm, Scaliger ad S^^ph.
Vbert. Buxtorf. in praefat. ad Mor. Nevoch.
having freed himself from many Jewish dotages, fables and Traditions. The
Heroes of learning Scaliger, Casauben, and others, will tell us his Book of
More Nevochim, or Doctor perplexorum, is as good as the weight in Gold, and is
exceeding necessary for Christian Divines. Exodus 6. 3. Ruth 4. 7. Esaias 1. 29.
Esaias 12. 13. Ier. 16. 7. Ezekiel. 8. 14. Ezekiel. 9. 4. Matthew. 5. 22. Matthew. 21. 9.
Matthew. 23. 7, 8. Matthew, 26. 23. Mark 7. 11. Romans 5. 7. John 7. 37. John 3. 29.
2 Timothy 3. 8. Revel. 3. 4. and an hundred more, in which a man shall stray and
stumble, unless he use their help. Ask Ainsworth, Seldom, Weemse, whether they
borrow not much light from them. A saepius collectis, ac transfusis
collectaneis, velut e decima lacuna suffurari, ut pene nihil resipiant sui
fontis. Eras. in compend. Theolog. R. Iose.
then to take them at a second, or rather a tenth hand? Water in the very
Spring is better had, then to be glad of it after it run through ten Channels.
It is better to see with our own eyes, then to have our Spectacles hang at
other men's Girdles. We may to good purpose make use of that Jewish saying, Let
my soul be among the Collectors of Alms, rather than among the Distributors
of them. Or as Valla, I had rather be a Be that flies far to gather matter
for Honey, then a Pismire, that gathers but from the next Corn field. Julian
apud Theodoret.
and to cry out with a friend of theirs, Proprijs calamis configimur. What a
glory was it to those two Christian Divines, Vatablum and Mercerum Lutetiae
docentes ipsi Iudaei sunt admirati.
Mercer and Vatablus, that when they were Professors at Paris, the very Jews
did admire them for their great skill in the Hebrew, and being so perfectly
ready and read in all their Writings?

Thus I have endeavored to show, Chamier. de Authen. edit Can. Panstrat. l 12.
c 9.
that Jewish questions and vanities, being avoided, their learning is of much
use in Divinity, whatsoever is said by some; Allo glaux, allo corone
pthengetai.
The Crow cries one thing, and the Owl another. Every Chapter also ends with
this, Attamen Dei sumus, Yet we belong to God, in all estates we Jews are Gods
peculiar people. There is a truth in it, they were Gods people by Covenant at
first, and they shall be called home to the Covenant of Grace at last, when
they shall look upon Christ whom they have pierced: but for the present state
of them, standing out against God, and hating Jesus Christ, God calls them
Loammi, Hos. 1. 9.
Not my people. As concerning the Gospel they are enemies, Romans 11. 28.
but as concerning Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake.

CHAP. II.
IN the second Chapter the Jew reasons the case, inquiring why they observe
some Legalities, as Circumcision, Sabbath, and others, but omit Sacrificing,
Altars, Unction and Incense. 3. He takes away a reason that might be given by
some, why they used not Altars, and Incense, because they were strangers, and
under the Government of Kingdoms, and States, that would not suffer them to
have that liberty. But this he answers to, that it is no good reason; for
Kings and States that suffer them to have Synagogues and meetings, and
communion in a Jewish manner, would permit them this also as well as the
former: they who grant a greater thing, in all likelihood will not deny them a
lesser matter. So that the conclusion he would make, is this, God in his anger
has bereft us of King, Priest, Temple, Altars, Sacrifice, the great things of
our Law, therefore he would have us leave all other our Jewish Rites also,
because it is manifest for our sins he would have us deprived of all, and
besides turn us to Christ, who has put an end to all Judicial observances.
Many of the Jews acknowledge, that Sacrifices and Ceremonies were not to be
perpetual, but to continue for a time only, and by the Messiah to be
abrogated. In their Talmud they have this to that purpose, Hieron. de S. fide
in Hebraeom. l. 1. c. 9. Ex Berescit R^^ba.
In the world to come all sacrifices shall be annihilated, except the sacrifice
of Confession, i. e. of praise. So the Egyptian Moses writes, that in the time
of the Messiah all things shall be licensed, which were prohibited: According
to that saying, The Lord loses them that are bound up, and there cannot be a
greater proof than this, that even mulier menstruata shall be licensed by God
at that time. In the Talmud, speaking of unclean things, as the Sow, it is
questioned, Why is a Sow called Hazer? It is answered, Because God will return
it once to Israel, that is, give them liberty to eat of it; Hazire signifying
reversion or returning. Wherefore, by the judgment of diverse of their Doctors,
they do at this day unlawfully in counting any meats unclean by the old Rule
of their Law, seeing the Messiah was believed should set these very Creatures
at liberty, that they should not be bound up from free use by any Bond of
Ceremonial uncleanness, as they were heretofore. When the Vail of the Temple
was rent, all Legal Ceremonies were to be rent also.

The Jews acknowledge they have nothing to do now with Sacrifices, The 4.
Degression.
as their Ancestors had, because they are scattered from their own land, and
their Temple is destroyed, which was the place destined for Sacrifices to be
offered up to God, yet instead of Sacrifices they will do something, they
redeem their Sacrifices with words, and comfort themselves with this, as if God
did accept it as well as any Sacrifice, that they read over Gods precepts in
the Law about the kinds and manner of Sacrificing, and so they make use of, or
rather abuse those words of the Prophet, We will offer up to God the calves of
our lips; Hos. 14. Wofgang.
Which were a good Sacrifice, Capito in Hos. 3.
if they were good lips, confessing Christ, and guided by holy hearts, only
relying, and trusting in the all-meriting Sacrifice of Christ's blood. Their R.
Simeon says, they despised three things, and cast them off in that speech, 2
Sa. 20. 1.
We have no part in David, nor have we inheritance in the son of Iesse: 1.
The Kingdom of Heaven. 2. The house of David. 3. The Temple of the Lord. But
the later Jews have cast off these three things far more despitefully, in
casting off Christ; And having thrown off God and his Temple, why may he not
throw away them and their sacrifices? -- The conclusion is against the Jews,
that they do against ground and reason retain some part of their Jewish
service, and let other parts be lost; as that of Altars, ointment and
sacrifice. If one be good, all is good, because all is of the same root. If God
have abolished some, he would have them abolish all; and he grants the Jews are
non-plust, and have nothing to say in this argument, when it is urged by the
Christians.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter the Translator tells us he finds much diversity in the
Phrases of the Scripture, as they are in the Original Hebrew, and as he finds
them quoted by his Rabbi Samuel, who being among the Turks follows the Arabicke
Bible, and therefore he would have the Reader note, that he quotes the
Scriptures according to R. Samuels Book, that he may prove himself a faithful
interpretour.

It is a pretty note of R. Samuel, that the first Captivity is called but a
Transmigration, or a passing over into another Land; which seems to be a word
of hope, that promised them they should come back again. But this last is named
by a hopeless name, a desolation, to let them see it is a perpetual
Captivity. That of transmigration or removing, may be seen 2 King. 17. 23. 2
King. 24. 3. But this is a desolation, Dan. 9. 27. and the abomination of
desolation.

A twofold misery he finds to pursue this Captivity more than the other.

1. In the other they had Prophets in Babylon, to comfort them, Ezekiel,
Haggai, Zachary; but in this Captivity, no true Prophets preach deliverance:
Prophecy and Vision cease.

2. Again, in that other Captivity they were all together in one Kingdom, and
company of known friends and Contrymen, breaks the strong waves of an evil;
but here they are dispersed into all Countries, and can converse with few of
their own, but mere strangers, both by Country and Religion. And this is a sad
thing, that they sit solitary like a Sparrow upon the house top. This the Lord
threatened, to make their Chain heavy: The Lord shall scatter thee among all
the people from one end of the earth even to the other, Deuteronomy. 28. 64.
etc.

This Samuel acknowledges, The 5. Digression.
and calls Daniel a Prophet of God, which diverse of the great and learned Jews
will not admit, yet he all over honors him, and quotes his Prophecy in this
matter of the Messia. It seems this man had rather cleave to Christ, who calls
him a prophet, Matthew. 24. 15. then to his great Talmudists and Rabbis, who
will needs be great, by lessening some of Gods greatest Prophets. Porchetus, a
great and deep inquirer into Hebrew Learning, proves by Jewish Tradition, that
Daniel was held by them a Prophet; and be further faith, that among the Jews
none could be found so strangely foolish, to deny the Spirit of Prophecy to
Daniel, but only one wicked Sadduce, called Porphyrius; who being convict with
the clearness of his Prophecy concerning Christ, he falls like a bitter Dog
a barking against the truth and sanctity of Daniels Prophetical testimony. Of
this Porphyrie Hierome speaks in his Epistle proaemiall to the Comment on
Daniel, Porchet. victor. contra Hebr. part. 1, c. 3.
to Pammachius and Marcella, where he says this Porphyrie writ his twelfth
Book against Daniel, whom Eusehius confuted in three Volumes. But besides
Porphyrie, Porchetus might have seen some more denying Daniel properly to be
called a Prophet of God, as the great Moses Ben Maimon, who says, our Nation
with an unanimous consent has placed the book of Daniel in Kethubhim, among
the holy Writers, More Nevochim. part. 2. c. 45
but not among the Prophets. And the same account and reckoning they make of
David's Psalms, Salomons Books, Esther, Job, and the Books of Chronicles. In
annotat. ad Rab.
They say these were writ as they were moved by the holy Spirit, Iacchiad. in
Paraphr. in Daniel, cap. 1. annotat. 1.
but it was not vera and pura Prophetia. But who will may see against this,
Daniel proved to be a Prophet of God, out of Moses Ben Maimons own Characters
of a Prophet, by Constantine L' Emperor.

Against this opinion, which makes Daniel a Prophet, but metaphorically, or by
way of Translation, Guil. Vorstius may be looked after also, in his Annotations
on Maimonides de fundam Legis ad cap. 7. Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr, lib. 3. cap. 7.

CHAP. IV.
HE rightly speaks of the blindness of the Jews, so their estate in the new
Testament is called: Ioh. 9. 39.
For judgment am I come into this world, says our Savior, that they which see
not, might see, and that they which see might be made blind. God has given
them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, etc. Blindness in
part is happened unto Israel, Romans 11. 8. and 25.
until, etc. That which is here said, that it is perpetual, Paul says better
for them then R. Samuel, It shall not be always, but till the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in, and then all Israel shall be saved.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter he is very earnest to apply that prophecy of Amos, the
selling of the Righteous for Silver, to be Isreal's sin, in selling Jesus the
Righteous Son of God for thirty pieces of Silver. Micronym.
Our Christian interpretors and Expositors, Carthus.
do not go that way, to apply it only to Christ, Parcus Tarnovius.
but make it to be the sin of injustice, and cruel oppression against the poor
and needy, selling away their person and Cause for Bribes. Some have a glance
at this Jewish exposition, A lapide in loc.
yet cannot fully like it: though this Jew found the Christians in his days
much bent to expound it as he does, and let him be witty this way, to apply
all to the Jews sin, if so be it may heal their sore.

CHAP. VII.
THe seventh Chapter arises out of his former discourse, and he lays it down,
that the Prophet Amos his Just man sold for silver, is Jesus the Just, the
Savior of the Christians, he believes it is meant of no other, This indeed is
true, Amos does directly and especially point at this sin in this place. Here
the Jew is more against his own Jews, than the Christians are, and it shows his
pious intention, to find out the grievousnesse of their sin, that takes up
any Scripture, that may seem to indigitate it, to bring his people to
repentance.

In this Chapter he admirably, and with a Beam of Christian light, applies the
53 of Esaias to Jesus Christ, and as a Christian Expositor, opens diverse things
in it. As likewise that excellent and Torchlike place of Zachary, which gives
clear light in this truth, Zach* 12.
undenyably looking at Christ. The Chaldee Paraphrast and Gen^ara.
For other Scriptures look at his good meaning, and pardon his Application.
Babylon.
That 53. of Esaias exceedingly straitens the learned Jews, Grotius de veritat.
and puzzles them in their Expositions, Christ Relig. in annotat. ad lib. 5.
to make it fit for some other, rather than Christ Jesus, but diverse of them
are enforced to apply it to Christ.

Of the Application of the 53 of Esaias to Christ the Messiah, The 6. Digression.
Hieronymus de sancta fide, a converted Jew, gives us his sure word, that
diverse of their Rabbis go that way; Hieron. de sanct. fid. in Hebraeo.
as R. Osua in Sanhedrin, and R. Jose Galiaeus in a Book called Zifrat. Mast
lib. 1. cap. 11.
Lord Morney brings in others of their Doctors, fitting this Chapter to him, as
R. Vla, veniat, sed absit ut videam, Let him come, but far be it from me that
I should see him, meaning, his wounds and sufferings will be so grievous, as
men will hide their faces from him. Mornaeus in cap. 30. lib. de verit. Christ.
Relig.
And upon Ruth, on these words, Dip thy morsel in the Vinegar, their Midrasch,
or Commentary has it, The morsel is the bread of the King Messiah, who shall
be broken for our sins, and shall endure great torments, Porchetus.
as was foreteld by Esaias. To stop the mouths of all Jews, R. Simeon the son
of Johni, a chief one of them, writes as if he were clothed with the Sun:
Woe (says he) to the men of Israel, for they shall slay the Christ. And, God
shall send unto them his son, clothed with man's flesh, that he may wash and
cleanse them, and they shall slay him. R. Iohanan pitches truly upon the very
time of Jesus Christ's exercising his Ministry upon earth, agreeable to the
History Evangelicall of his life: Three years and a half (says he) the
presence of God did cry upon Mount Olivet, Seek the Lord while he may be
found, and call upon him while he is near. Which is ^ust the common computation
of the time of Jesus Christ's preaching, from his Baptism to his Passion.

Here let it be noted once for all, The ^. Digression.
that this Doctor does altogether call Christ the Just or Righteous One,
Postel. de Orb. Ter. concord.
an excellent name agreeing with the Scripture, that calls him so, proving, in
him there was no sin, no unrighteousness, ^o guile, and therefore he was fit
to be Jehovah Tsidkenu, The Lord our Righteousness. Acts 3. 14.
Peter preaching to the Jews concerning Christ, says, They denied the holy
One, Acts 7. 52.
and the Just; and Stephen in his Sermon calls him the Just One. So Ananias
called Christ that Just One. Acts 22. 14
Among the Jewish Doctors it is ordinary, to call Christ by this name, Vide
Porchet* in Victor contr.
by way of excellency. The earth (says one of them) stands but upon one
Pillar, Hebr (...). 2. cap. 11.
and the Just One is his Name; as it is in the Book of Proverbs, Chap. 10.

In the end of the Chapter the Jew alleges the agreement of the Gospels
relation to the Prophets prediction, concerning Christ's death, wherein like a
Christian he flies from the Jews, and clothes himself with the Christians
Armor of light, believing the Gospel, which professed Jews hate with an
indeleble hatred.

CHAP. IX, X, XI.
IN these Chapters he proves that Christ shall have a double coming; First, in
baseness and humility; then secondly, in Majesty and glory. Sometimes only he
teaches Scripture to speak more then is intended; as in that place of Esaias,
because it is said, Awake, Awake, twice, he will have it to mean Christ's double
Coming: And that of David, For he comes, for he comes, is twice repeated,
because Christ shall twice appear, says R. Samuel. But the truth is clearer,
then that he need these witty (though sometimes weak) allegations.

That Christ's second coming shall be to judgment, and with Fire, and glorious
Majesty, he rightly and Orthodoxly holds and proves. It is a rare Testimony to
the credit of our Christian Baptism, that he calls it the Well of salvation,
Esaias 12.
spoken of by Esaias the Prophet. Nay further, behold this Jew turned perfect
Christian, for he confesses the summary of the Gospel, the chief sentence of
it, to be very true, which is this, This, without all doubt, (says he) is to
be held, that none are saved, but those that believe Christ's first coming, and
those that believe not, there is no ground for them to hope for salvation at
his second coming. This is the maine matter of faith in the New Testament,
Matthew. 16.
so that this Jew confesses like Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God. And I see no reason, but it may be said to him, as to Peter, Blessed art
thou Samuel the Israelite, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. He affirms the very same that is
affirmed in the Gospel, John. 3. 3^.
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, 1 John 5. 11, 12.
and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.

In the tenth Chapter we have some places brought in to prove the second
coming of Christ, The 8. Digression.
which will not bear it, and yet diverse of our Christian Expositours have taken
leave to be mistaken, as well as this Jew, or rather worse; and so much the
worse, because they cry out of all, which will not sing to their Violl, Cramer
in Schol Prophet. clas. 3
when they themselves are out of tune. Cramer undertaking the clearing of
Prophecies concerning Christ, finding fault with those that do not make Zach.
14. 3, 4, 5, etc. to be meant of Christ's Ascension, and the cleaving of the
Mount of Olives, etc. to be meant of the Apostles sending out to the Gentiles,
he names among the rest our Marochian, in this place applying Zachary to the
second coming of Christ. Surely it is not meant of Christ's second coming, but
(as Calvin has it) of an illustrious presence, and manifestation of God in his
power and might, evident to all, that Jerusalem shall not be in a shady Valley,
but shall be conspicuous, and open to a glorious view for all Nations to see
it, Haec particula ad posteriore^ adventum accommodari potest: proprie tamen
pertinet ad priorem: quia de nuntio foederis loquitur id est, de institutione
Legis Evangelicae. Fe^. a Figveiro in Malach.
and admire it. It is true, Samuel is mistaken, and so is Cramer too, for
because there is mention of the Mount of Olives, it does not follow, that
therefore Christ's Ascension must be pointed at. But the Lutherans, Cramer,
Hunnius, and others, plow deep furrows upon Calvin's back, because he will not
swear to their Interpretations. Our Christian Moore makes use of the third of
Malachie too, to prove Christ's second coming; But who may abide the day of his
coming? Diverse of ours are also to be blamed for this, that wheresoever in
Scripture they meet with a terrible day of the Lord, they presently apply it to
the day of Judgment: yet he sees little that sees not this to be meant of
Christ's first coming, whose preaching, and pure doctrine of Gospel, was
terrible to profane ones, and Hypocrites, Scribes and Pharisees. Besides, it
signifies the misery, sorrow and captivity, which should befall the Jews in,
and after the coming of Christ, not by Christ's fault, but by their impiety
and infidelity, rejecting Christ: so as his coming proves terrible to them.

In the end of the 11 chapter, he has two excellent things concerning Christ,
wherein he speaks Christianisme most Christianly, and brushes himself clean of
the least Jewish moat.

1. He concludes it from Scripture, that Christ, and Christ alone, is the True
and Righteous One: All men, best of men, were sinners, but Christ was
sinnlesse. And in this he preferrs him before Moses, and all other holy Ones,
which no Jew will do, just as Christ is preferred in Hebr. 3.

2. He makes disobedience and infidelity in Christ, the damning sin. This he
proves as the Author to the Hebrews proves it: compare his words and those of
Hebr. 10. 28, 29. and you shall see such an agreement, as if he had proposed
those words, and that Text to be followed, He that despised Moses Law, dyed
without mercy, under two or three witnesses. He has it like to that: If they
were worthy of death who believed not Moses, who was two degrees behind
Christ, he was but a temporary Savior, and he was a sinner; Of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, etc. how much more (says our
Samuel) are they worthy of this Iudicatorie of fire, who believe not, nay, who
blaspheme this Christ, who is a Righteous One, and who saves eternally. O that
this lightsom beam of truth had pierced the hearts and breasts of all the
dark-spirited Jews! O that all of them saw with Samuels eyes! The Lord persuade
these Israelites to dwell in the Tents of Samuel, and to come and see.

CHAP. XII.
THe Ascension of Christ he proves and believes, which no stone-hearted Jew
will by any means admit into thoughts of probability; for they are so far
from believing his glorious Ascent into Heaven, that they make his Descent into
Hell their chief and unquestioned Article, with the most horrible blasphemy
affirming, that our Christ is tormented in Hell, in boiling and scalding (Zoah)
Dung, because he rejected, and despised the Traditions and Doctrines of their
holy Elders and Chachamims. Yea, they make him a false Prophet, and to be a
profane wretch, as Esau. And in the most secret Books and Papers kept among
the Jews, (which they will not let every eye see, but such as are rightly
Jewish, that is, stiff enemies of Jesus) this they teach and write, That the
soul of Esau entered into the body of Christ, and so he was just such a wretch
as Esau, or Edom. And this may perhaps be one main reason, why they call all
Christians Edomites, as thinking we follow, and put our trust in Christ, who
is as Edom with them. The 9. Digression.
He applies the 24 Psalm to the Ascension of Christ, which diverse Christian
Expositours by Prophecy will have pointed at, and by allegory allude to. This
Author makes some ask the question, Who is this King of glory? And he sets the
Angels to answer the question, Hieronym. in Psalm.
The Lord of Hosts he is the King of glory. This way Jerome goes, making a
Dialogue betwixt Angels and Devils. Stapulensis Schol. in Dyonvs. Areop^g^t.
Who is the King of glory, say the Devils? The good Angels answer, The Lord of
Hosts, mighty in Battle, Baptist Folengius in Psalm.
he is the King of glory. This Jew (it seems) had studied not only the
Christians Gospel, Barth. a Koppen. in Psa. 24.
but Christian Interpretours, and Expositours of the Bible. And though this be
no strong proof of Christ's Ascension, Piscator. in Psalm.
(but rather David's Song about the building, and setting up the Temple, and the
glorious gates thereof, for the Lord of Hosts to come enter and dwell in it)
yet the Jew shows us how willing he is, to admit the doctrine of Christ's
Ascension, and to follow Christian Doctors.

This Jew, though he sometimes uses the Scriptures, The 10. Digression
with meanings and applications scarce genuine, yet in his application of the
63 chapter of Esaias, verse. 1. to the exaltation and triumph of Christ over his
enemies, he has done more rightly, than many of our writers and Christian
Preachers, who commonly do apply this place (by a vulgar and received error)
to the Passion of Christ. How often have we heard these words quoted thus, He
trodd the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone, that is, He alone suffered,
and underwent his Fathers wrath for us? If it had been meant of Christ's
Passion, it would have been passively, I was trodden in the Winepresse alone;
and not Actively, I have trodd it. and in his Triumph to show himself, with
garments all stained with the Blood of his Enemies, this is glorious raiment
indeed. The triumph of the righteous is, Psalm. 58. 10
they shall wash their feet in the blood of the wicked. Mighty to save, that
is, to preserve his; he does not say, Mighty to suffer. Garments like him that
treads the Wine-Fatt; the blood of enemies, like the juice of Grapes pressed,
are sprinkled on him that presses them. I will tread them in mine anger, and
trample them in my fury. If it were of Christ's Passion, it should be, I am
trodden in Gods anger, and trampled in his fury. The day of vengeance is in my
heart, that is, Like a Conqueror I will now take vengeance of mine enemies.
Lament. 1. 15. Now Christ says, He trod, and was not trodden. Edom, and Bozra:
by Edomites conquered and destroyed, he sets out, under that particular name,
Christ's universal conquest and triumph over all the enemies of the Church. And
in this Exposition, this Jew applies the Prophecy better then many among us.
It is true, diverse of the Ancients have swallowed this without chewing, Of the
Ancients, yet Origin in Matthaeum 15. Tract. applies it to Christ's Ascension
and triumph.
to be meant of Christ's Passion, but whosoever looks into the Text, and the
Phrases of it, will see it rather points at Christ's Resurrection and Triumph,
then his Passion. We are too prone to take these (...) upon trust without
examination. The Fathers were more excellent, and so the Ancients, for sound
piety, then for sound Exposition, and dextrous Application of Scriptures. Why
may not David sometimes lay by the Spectacles of his ancient Fathers, and say,
I have more understanding than my Teachers. Ps. 119. 99.
The learned and judicious Mercer confesses, Nostri minus recte de passione
Christi exponant. Joan.
that our Divines are asleep, when they expound this of the Passion of Christ.
Daniel Cramerus quotes the very place of R. Samuel, to maintain this Prophecy,
Mercer in Comment. ad Cantic. c. 5. v. 10.
as appertaining to Christ's, against the Jews. He handles the controversy of
the Blood here, whether is meant the Blood of Christ, Cramer. in Schola
prophet. Class. 3.
Passions or of his Enemies Passion, and would reconcile both, as making
Christ's victory to begin with his own Blood, and end with his enemies blood:
and referres to the disputes of Lyra and Burgensis about it. Only in an heat
he falls foul upon Calvin, as did Hunnius, and must needs be very angry with
him, because he will not altogether expound Scriptures, as they do. Praestat,
says he, ut Calvinum, qui solus sapere vult, solum relinquamus, ut solus
sapiat. But his passion clouds his eyes, for others beside Calvin have seen
that common way to have but poor grounds, as Junius and Tremelius, Mercer,
Tarnovius, Musculus. This I say, not to disallow and throw by the Ancients in
all things, but only to stir up Divines that have eyes, to use their eyes.
Vide Ta^novium in excitat. Biblio. page 418. edit. 2
Pelargus and others have cited diverse of the Ancients, applying this to the
Cross, and make it, Torcular passionis Christi; but their meaning is no way
literally or directly to be found here.

Observe how fitly this Jew applies it to their Captivity, The 11. Digression.
Whom has he trod in his wrath but us Jews? We are they that have been in the
Winepresse this thousand years. Yet O the fearful wish of this Jew, that
though he be convinced to be a Christian, yet he wishes the Candles of
conviction were blown out; here he speaks like a Jew indeed, that hates the
clear prophesies of Christ. Would to God (says he) when we slew the Prophet
Esaias, we had blotted out this testimony of his, so manifestly pointing at
Christ, that it might not be read and seen against us. Here he writes out of an
exceeding natural love to his contrymen and kindred the Jews in an ecstasy
of Passion. The Apostle Paul has an extraordinary vote and desire another way,
Romans 9.
and beyond rule, when he thinks of the misery of his countrymen and kindred
the Jews. This is to be believed, the Jews will not lose, nor blot out any
part of the Old Testament, no not that which seems most against them, though
this man in a passion write thus; for they most charily preserve it as their
lives, and will not suffer it to be corrupted or mutilated in a word, syllable,
or letter: Yea, so religiously do they devote themselves to the letter and
writing of the Bible, Sal. Glassius in Philolog. Sac. lib. 1. tract. 1. de Text
Hebr. in vet. Test. puritate.
that they say, if a man through ignorance, malice or impiety, should change
one word in the Bible, there is great danger the Lord for that inexpiable
offense should throw the world back again into its ancient indigested Chaos of
confusion, because God created this world only for the Scriptures sake.
Spanhem. in Dub. Evang. p. 2. ^ub. 88, 89
So exact are they, that no part of the Bible be either lost or corrupted, that
they have noted down in their Masora, which they call The Hedge or Fence of the
Law, not only every word how often it is used, but how often it is in the whole
Old Testament to be found with such a Prick, or with such an Accent. Nay
further, and which is a miracle of diligence and faithfulness, they have set
down how many Verses there are in every Book, and have numbered how often every
letter is used in the Bible. As the letter Aleph or A is found by number to be
42377 times. Beth or B 38218 times, and so have they taken notice of the rest,
to remember how often each letter is used. This doing, quickly would be
discovered their unfaithfulness in leaving out or corrupting the Scriptures,
and that by the Candlelight of their own industry. Hereupon Austi calls the
Jews Capsarios nostros, Austin in O^at cont. Iud. Pagan and Arian.
The Christians Library or Bible-keepers, because they with mavelous
diligence have preserved the Old Testament from corruption and loss, even in
corrupting and losing times; and are as wooden Candlesticks to the Gentiles,
holding out the light of the Law. He quotes the 49 Chapter of Genesis, which he
calls the Book of the Generation of the Creatures of Judah, that is, Of the
Children and Offspring of Judah. Well may I here take occasion to give a
reason, why men only sometimes are called the Creation, and the Creatures, and
whence it arises. To which purpose our understandings may well and soundly take
hold on this, that the word which signifies creatures, properly in common use
among the Hebrews, signifies only men sometimes, (...), as being the
excellentest of subsolar Creatures. The same Phrase and manner of speaking is
much taken up in the Oriental Languages. Isaac Casaub. in Epist. lib. Car
Labbaeo, Epist. 24. see Schindler in pentaglott. in Bara.
I shall call in my Witness, and he may stand for two or three, he is of such
standing and perfection in the Academie of most exquisite learning, it is
Hortibonus, or Casaubon. In the Arabic Geographie (says he) in abundance of
places we find the frequencie and fullness of Cities thus described, the
Author says, that in them there are many Creatures, Plerumque de hominibus
maxim in plurali usurpatur Coch. in Tit. Maccoth. c. 3.
that is to say, Men. This may well agree with our Samuel, who writ in Arabic,
and this may be a good note affixed to the latter end of the 16 Chapter of
Marks Gospel, to the illustration of it, Go into the whole World, and preach
the Gospel to every Creature.

CHAP. XIII.
THe corporal Ascension of Christ he goes about to prove by those Scriptures,
that speaks of the exaltation and elevation of God, which he says must
properly be meant of Christ, according to his humane nature, because the mere
Deity is subject to none of these Sites or Postures. That of Psalm 68 is
applied to the Ascension of Christ by S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.
so that R. Samuel the Jew is not ashamed to follow S. Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.
in believing and asserting the same truth.

He quotes something out of the Prophet Aser in his second Chapter, The 12.
Digression
but he forbears the prosecution of it upon this reason, because that Prophecy
is lost, and is not to be found. The Translatour he brings his judgment about
the Prophet Aser, and reproves the ignorance of R. Samuel, that he should think
the Prophet Aser to be lost, when he is not. And his reason is, that the
Prophet Aser and Haggai are all one, only Haggai is the Hebrew Name, and Aser
the Arabicke name of the same Prophet, which R. Samuel did not know, or at
least did not call to mind when he writ so. Now it were good to unpire the
matter betwixt Alphonsus the Spanyard, and Samuel the Jew, and upon looking
into it, the Translator will be found in some fault. Suppose there be some
agreement betwixt Haggai and Aser, in their signification. Haggai signifying
one that solemnizes and keeps a holy, and joyful day of solemnities, that
rejoices festivally: and Aser coming of a Verb that signifies to make blessed
and happy, which may accord in this, that the days of re-edifying the Temple,
and Jerusalem, in which times Haggai prophesied, were holy, festival and
blessed days. Though there be some similitude, must there be Identitie? How
does Alphonsus know that Aser and Haggai in the Arabic Tongue are the same
Prophet? This may be disproved two ways. Samuel writ in Arabic, lived among
the Arabians, and being both a Jewish and an Arabic Doctor, he was likely to
know as well as Alphonsus the names of Prophets in the Old Testament, both in
Hebrew and Arabic. Aser and Haggai be all one, then let the Spanyard show us
this that he quotes in the Prophecy of Haggai, of a man ascending from the
midst of the Sea, and coming up to Heaven. He must coin a new Prophecy of
Haggai, if he will find this in it, for our Old Prophet, neither in first, or
second, (...) Chapter has any such thing. However we speak of this obscure
Prophet Aser, which cannot be found what he was, yet we may well conclude for
the Author against the Translatour, that these words are not to be found in
the Prophet Haggai.

Since these Notes I have found something that is like this which is quoted,
but neither in R. Samuels obscure Aser, nor Alphonsus the Translators Haggai
chap. 2. but in the Apocryphals of Esdras, 2 Esd. 13. 2, 3.
Lo, there arose a wind out of the sea, and lo, that man waxed strong with the
thousands of heaven. Iunius reads it, Quidam ut ventus, A certain man as the
wind came from the sea. It should be translated a Man, not a wind that did
rise out of the Sea; so the third Verse intimates, that man waxed strong, not
that wind. For rising of the wind is not the thing, but the comparison
accompanying and illustrating the appearance of the man. I think (pardoning the
error of the Authors and Translators Quotation, both of the Name, and the
Book, and Chapter) I am the Oedipus of this Riddle. And it may well be his
meaning was of this place, for in this book he does (besides this) make use of
the Apocrypha, as Chap. 19. he quotes a place out of Jesus the son of Syrach,
and in chap. 20. he has out of the same Book. Besides, he is subject to some
mistakes, for in that 20 chapter he calls it Salomons writing, when it is the
Son of Syrachs: and in this 13 chapter he quotes a place in Esaias, when it is
in Jeremy, -- Aliquando bonus dormitat Hebraeus, calling Esdras Aser.

Among those were assumed into heaven, he names Methusalem, and takes it for a
thing granted and known among the Jews. But we must believe Moses, who says,
that Methusalem when he had lived nine hundred sixty nine years, Genesis 5. 27.
dyed, he does not say he was translated, which he had newly said of Enoch his
Father. August. de Civ. D. lib. 15. cap. 11.
The Greeks error is, that he lived 14 years after the flood, and was with
Noah in the Ark, which error comes out of the Septuagints false computation.
And some of the Jews (it seems) are in this error, that because his Father was
taken into heaven in his body and soul, so was Methusalem too. But they that
compute and reckon according to the Hebrew numbering of the years, do agree,
that Methusalem dyed that very year the flood came. Others think he dyed six
years before the flood. He concludes the Chapter with asserting the wonderful
birth of Christ, born of a Virgin, without a man, to be a very truth, and
plainly foretold by the Prophets of God. Wherein he grants for a truth one of
those six things, which are the main Controversies betwixt the Jews and
Christians. Ludovic.
He takes indeed one place to prove the birth of Christ by a Virgin, Carret. in
Epist. seu libro visor. divin.
which I dare not say flatly that the Prophet did speak it with any relation to
the birth of Christ. Ierem. 31.
It is that of Ieremies, The Lord shall create a new thing upon the earth, a
woman shall compass a man. I know the stream of Expositours runn that way, to
make it point at Christ's Incarnation, both ancient and modern, which made that
Lutheran Beadle provide so terrible a whip for Calvin, and lasht him with
Calvinus Iudaizans, Calvin turned Jew, because he knew no reason why these
words (and other places of Scripture) should be thought a plain Prophecy of
Christ. Neither the consequents, or the Antecedents do give any great light to
that sense. And let a man perpend and consider it well, whether the
interpretation of Calvin be so strange a thing to the meaning of the Prophets
discourse and Sermon. He is speaking of Gods delivering his people from the
power of Chaldeans, and it shall be so wonderful, The word Sabab does not
only signify to embrace lovingly, but in an hostile manner as an enemy, to
encompase, besiege and straiten* So is the word used in Psa. 22. 13. and 17. It
is also plainly taken for besieging Eccles. 9. 14.
that he says A woman shall compass a man; that is, the weak and low-brought
Israelites, that may seem to be compared to women, being furnished with new
strength from God, shall prevail against the Chaldeans their potent enemies,
that are strong men; and thus women may be said to bring men into straits.
Others besides Calvin have thought this sense to be more litterall and proper
to that place then to expound it of Christ's Birth. The L. shall create a new
th. up. e. a w^m. shall comp. a man: that is, This wonderful and new thing
will the Lord bring to pass, the Church of the Jews, that like a wandering and
strange woman is departed from the Lord by rebellion and Idolatry, to whom she
was betrothed once, (...)
she shall come with bitter repentance, returning to her first Husband, and
embracing him again graciously whom she had vilely forsaken. This is that new
and wonderful thing that the Lord should create in this impenitent and wicked
people, a new heart to return unto him. This is commonly called A new Creation.
And if in this Calvin play the Jew, then Luther was a Jew, and diverse others,
who could not with their best eye sight, spy the Incarnation of Christ plainly
and clearly in that Text of the Prophet. And if we do not take that piece to
confirm Christ's spotless birth, yet do we not want clear proofs and
Prophecies against the gainsaying Jews, to make it appear as noonday.

Against the applying of the Scriptures unduly and unproperly to Christ, the
words of the ancient Pelusiot are ponderous, and precious; This course (says
he) puts harness upon the Gentiles and Heretics in their contentions with
us; for when we torture and wrest the Scriptures, which are not meant of
Christ, to bring them to point at him, we bring suspicion upon those other
Scriptures, which (without any wresting or wringing) do lay plainly their
meaning in Christ's bosom. Thom p. 1. (...)
And the great Schoolmaster Aquinas writes with a Quill of the same Wing,
Qu^madmodum advocatus causam perd (...) vulgares and triviales concionatores
saepe numero concionem habent co^tra hereticos, and eos imprudenter adjuva^t.
Sic arma capienda sunt ut hostis vulnera se^tiat. Nic. Clenard. epist. Abbati
Tongellarensi lib 1. Fesae.
When a man, (says he,) going about to make proof of the Christian faith,
shall bring reasons whose clearness is not convictive, and in a sort coactive,
that they cannot be denied, he lays himself open to the scorn and derision of
Infidels and unbeleevers, for they will presently conclude, that we lean upon
these Reeds, and that these weak reasons are the inducements to our faith, and
the grounds our belief lies upon. Whence we draw a Theological Canon, That
Divine truths must be urged and confirmed by indubitate and clear Testimonies,
else it turns to the detriment of the sayers, and it will not convince the
gainsayers.

CHAP. XVI.
SPeaking of Jews reprobation, and Gentiles election, he tells of the Jews proud
boasting that they are the sons of Jacob and Israel; pride and contempt of
all people in the world besides themselves, R Iachiad. in Paraphras. in Dan.
cap. 7. Constant l' Emper. in Annotat. ad R. Iachiad ubi citar Abrabane (...).
is the proper fault of the Jews. He reasons the case here well, Why should
they thus contemn and scorn the Gentiles? They say, they only are Gods
portion, and only fall under the care of his Providence; and the Gentiles run
at large without the guidance of Gods Providence: There is a saying much in the
mouth of the Jews, Omnes sectarij subito pereant.
yea, their Land of Canaan is the only fit and apt place in the world to be
the subject of Gods providence. With them, only the Jews shall rise again, and
the Gentiles shall have no resurrection. David shall confirm this their opinion
in his first Psalm. In Maimonides his 13 Articles, he says, They shall all
perish that do not believe them Grotius in Annotat. ad lib. 2. ver. Christ.
Relig.
In their Talmud they say, It is not murder if a Jew kill a Gentile; nor is it
perjury if he falsify his promise to him, confirmed by oath. Yea, their Talmud
commands them to hold the Christians in esteem as bruit beasts, and no
otherwise to use them, then as they use beasts. These, and many such like,
lets us see how the Jews pride themselves, and cast the Christians and Gentiles
low enough in the Court of honor.

A learned Jew of these times treating of the Resurrection, Menas^h Ben Israel,
de Resur. lib. 2. cap. 9.
has a Chapter on this Head, An etiam Gentes resurgent, Whether the Gentiles
shall rise again, or no; he indeed concludes, they shall. What is the reason
that the Jews every year on the eight day of the month Tebeth, which answers
to our December, (...).
do keep a solemn Fast, sorrowing and humbling themselves, in the remembrance
of the Scripture translated by them into the Greek at the instance of
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus? Do they execrate and abhort the memory of that act? It
seems it is out of mere hatred and envy that any good, or any knowledge of God
should be scattered among the Gentiles. Act. 22. 21. 22.
We hear of old they could not endure to hear Paul to speak one word more, 1
These. 2. 16
when they heard this from him, that the Lord said to him, Depart, for I will
send thee far hence unto the Gentiles; so soon as this is mentioned, then they
cry out Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he
should live. In their Stories, Pet. Clu^^. ac. ex Talmud.
as that of R. Iosue Ben Levi, that was up and down heaven and Hell, he finds
Christians, and abundance of all Nations in Hell, but we hear tell of no Jews
there. It is well that God follows not the Jews rule, that scorn all but their
own people, But in every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness,
and Gentile as well as Jew, is accepted with him.

CHAP. XVIII.
HE admirably agrees with S. Paul in the Application of the nineteenth Psalm to
the preaching of the Gosspell by the Apostles, Their sound is gone out into all
the earth, and their words into the ends of the world.

CHAP. XIX.
HE applies the Prophecy of Joel about the Old men dreaming dreams, and the
young men seeing Visions, to the Apostles, and the abundant knowledge of God
they had above former times, just as S. Peter applies it Acts 2. so that he is
an Asserter of the truth with Paul, he applies the predictions of the Prophets
Evangelically with S. Peter, and will needs discover himself a Christian every
way. He makes one notable observation concerning the faith of Christ, That of
the Apostles of Christ that embraced the Faith, not one of them did ever recant
and return to embrace the Jews faith any more. Josephus the Jew does highly
applaud the followers of Christ for their constancy. Writing of Christ, he
says, There was at that time one Jesus a wise man, if it be lawful to call
him a man. Mark how this Jew inclined to think there was a Deity in Christ, and
something super humane. He proceeds. This same Jesus did bring to pass
incredible works, and he was a Master to men that did receive the truth with
much delight and pleasure in it. (...). Antiq. ^ud lib. 1^. cap. 14.
Many Jews, and many Greeks did he draw unto him. This is he that was called
Christ, whom when Pilate had caused to be crucified, being accused of the chief
of our Jewish Nation, yet they that loved him at first, would never give over
loving him, and cleaving to him. A rare testimony is this of the constancy of
Christian Disciples and Followers of Christ. I omit that he says of him, that
he appeared alive again after three days, according as the Divine Prophets had
foretold these, and many other admirable things concerning him. Is not Josephus
here turned Christistian too, making this to be him the Prophets spoke on?

CHAP. XX.
IN the twentieth Chapter he commends the purity and cleanness of the
Christian Rites and service by Bread and Wine, and prefer^s it before the
meddling with the flesh and fat of Beasts slaughtered for Sacrifice by Jews. He
makes Scriptures of the Old Testament plainly beforehand point at the bread
and Wine in our Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Only he puts in Water as well
as Bread and Wine into that Sacrament, and will make good that new practice of
mixed Wine by an old proof from Salomons Proverbs, where Wisdom propounds mixed
Wines: and so it was applied to his hand long before him by S. Cyprian. Cyprian
Epist. 4. Caecilio lib. 2.
And Cyprian indeed does speak of mixing Wine with the Water in the Sacrament,
and in that Epistle Dominica Traditio servetur, at which the Papists shout for
joy more then Boys when they have found the black in the Bean, as imagining
this to be a strong ground for their weak opinion of unwritten Traditions. But
herein our Romanists run away like Boys with a wrong errand, for though
Cyprian commend the mixing of Wine and Water, as Dominicam Traditionem, yet
does he not mean an unwritten Tradition, for he goes to prove it from the
Scriptures, Ration. Divin. offic. lib. 2. c. 30.
as from that of Water and Blood issuing from our Saviors side on the Cross.
And he says at the Institution our Savior gave a mixed Cup. Consecratio
valida est cum solo^ino.
You may see Durands, and the Papists foolish mysteries in their mixing of
water with their Wine. Tolet. lib. 2 de Institut Sacerdot. cap 25.
In vino sanguis Christi, in aqua populus repraesentatur. And it is very true
the Fathers in former times of old did use Vinum baptizatum, Whitaker (...)
d^sput. de Sa^^ Scrip cont. 1. Quaest. 6. cap. 12.
or Crama Eucharisticum, Wine tempered with Water, as some call it, because in
the places where they lived the Wine was so strong it had need to be
well-tempered with water, at those times especially when they studied the most
sobriety and temperance, in drawing near into fellowship with Christ. Now
Cyprians intent was not so much to prove, that we ought to use Water with our
Wine, as to disprove the judgment and practice of the Water-Heretiques, Theod.
Balsamon in schol. ad Synod. in Truilo Can. 32.
the Aquarii, that did contend only water was to be used in the Sacrament, and
so did celebrate. These Aquarij were also called Hydroparastatae, an ancient
Heresy, that defended water was only to be used in the Sacrament. The
Armonians that said, only Wine without water was to be used, were both in
ancient times counted Heretics. Moreover, beyond all this, the Ancients some
of them did not only mix cold Water, but (which some not acquainted with
antiquity will wonder at) they did mix hot water, or boiling water with the
Wine. And this hot water they thus infused in way of devout significancy, to
mind the faith of the Receivers, that the Blood and water which flowed from
Christ's Side, were not dead and cold Elements, but that they were lively and
effectual; even hot water and blood, issuing from one, had yet the heat of
life in him.

CHAP. XXIII.
HE has a notable way to follow Allegories, and indeed the Genius of those
times made many Christians in their writings on Scripture altogether
Allegorical. That of Solomon, Better is a morsel of Bread with love, then a
stalled Ox with hatred, is a Pool well fisht, when he can catch this Fish in
it, that it means the Christians bread in the Sacrament is more acceptable to
God, then the Jews killing a fat Ox for a Sacrifice. This Jew, as ou^ Savior
said of the young man that came to him, and answered prudently, may well have
it said of him, Verily he is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven; for here he
commends the New Testament, and gives an Epithet as high as he can to the
Gospel of S. Matthew, calling it, The glorious Gospel. And in it he praises
that Statute of patience our Savior will have observed by his subjects, If any
man smite thee on the one Cheek, 16. Digres.
turn to him the other also. This is better testimony, and fairer language,
then the rabble of the Rabshakeh Jews, both cursing and cursed, do commonly
give, who call the Gospel which is Evangelium, in scorn, Aven Gillaion, the
Volume of lies, or va^ities. His perfidious fellow Rabbis will ^ot thank him
for writing so to the credit of the Gospel, Munster. in Annotat. ad Hebr.
or praising any of the Pre^epts or Lessons of Christ; Evangel.
they can read ^im another Lecture out of a Book among them called Toledoth,
Matthew. c. 1.
Jesus, Sed patibulo affixus interiit.
wherein they ^each to blaspheme high enough, Quid istud ad causam?
and then they speak (as they think) well enough of Christ. Arnobius.
That book is full of blasphemies, Wolsius in memorab. lect. Tom. 2 centen 16.
calling Christ Talui, De voce Halma Virgin and Iudeorum conv. tijs vide
Iunium in Parallel lib. 1. par. 4.
A Gallows Clapper, or A hanged Thief; Mariam, Harriam, Mary the blessed mother
of Christ they call An ^heap of Dung. In their calling Mary (as my Author has
it) Harriam, I know not whether he do not rather mean Chorim, which is
obscene and filthy in the sense of it. As for Hariah it signifies A woman great
with Child, and if they call her so, they do it to blot her Virginity, as if
she were begot with Child by man, Munster. in Annotat* ad. Hebr.
and so (with mouths running over with blasphemy and lies) they call her
Sonah, Evangel.
a Whore, or unchaste woman, Matthew. c. 1.
the polluted one of the world. Sonah is the word by which Rahab is called
(...). 2. 1.
The Apostles and Martyrs of Christ they call Lenones: the Bread in the
Sacrament, A polluted Body; the Church, Error, and Preaching, Howling. They
call our Festival of the Lord Day, the day of ruin and destruction; Domus
cloacarum diruat Deus Hieron. de sanc. fid.
the Christians little ones they call Vermin, or creeping things. They are
commanded when they pass by the Churches or Oratories of Christians, to say
this, The Lord destroy these houses of Office. Out of the word Jesu they make
the number by the Letters of 316. and there they have Curses and blasphemies
scarce to be named. O^ the patience of the just Jesus, that endures these
wretches Hellish Blasphemies, and does not suddenly let the Ocean of his wrath
on earth carry them with a strange Wave to the Ocean of everlasting fire in
Hell.

CHAP. XXVI.
IN this Chapter, that God has let the Jews fall from him by a flatt
Apostasy, is the thing he would leave as a true conclusion in the conclusion
of his Book, drawn from all the pre-cited Authorities, for them deeply to weigh
and consider. Two things I specially mind in his Confession, which are mere
Jewish vanities. is, that the Jews in their empty imaginations among themselves
in their Synagogues, do whisper this as a truth, which is a clear lie, That
their Messiah was born in the Babylonian Captivity, though he do not yet
manifest himself to Israel. For the first of these, how vainly they look after
other Saviors, I shall prove by an Historical exemplification annexed to that
speech of our Saviors to the Jews, John 5. 46.
to verify it, I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not, if another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. Our Samuel could give us in a
large Catalogue, how often the Jews have been gulled with Pseudo-Messiahs, and
false-Christs, that came in their own name; and the poor Jews have madly doted
on them, as the only promised Messiah. 17. Digres.
I shall endeavor to give some account of the notablest delusions that that
people has groaned under in this kind. There were of these false-Christs,
seducing many, some before the destuction of Jerusalem, and some after, which
for methods and orders sake, we will in that manner reckon up.

Theudas mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 5. 3^*
who rose up, boasting himself to be some body, to whom a number of men, about
400 joined themselves, who was slain, and all, as many as obeyed him, were
scattered and brought to naught. Gerhard. Harmoniae Evangel. cap. 100.
There is some difference about the time when this was, and whether Gamaliel
mentioning one Theudas, and Josephus writes of another, not this same. This
Theudas that Josephus speaks of was when Cuspius Fadus was President of Syria,
about the 46. year of Christ, and this in the Acts, it is thought, was of
another, and of another time. Josephus and Eusebius out of him, relates it
thus, One Theudas a Magitian persuaded a great multitude of people, Eusebius. hist.
that taking all their wealth with them, Eccles. l. 2. c. 11.
they should follow him to the River Jordan, and he being a Prophet, (at least
inspired so with his own boastings) they should see him divide the Streams
with a word of his mouth, whereby they should easily pass over; with which
promise he deceived very many. But Fadus sent some Troops of Horse out against
them, that they gained little by this dotage, for they suddenly setting upon
them, slew many, took many alive, and among the rest Theudas himself, whose
head being cut off, they brought to Jerusalem. Judas of Galilee was a captain
to some Rebels also, Hegesip. excid. Hierosol. lib. 3. cap. 14.
promising to free the people from paying servile taxes to the Roman Emperor,
whom they followed; but I know not whether he may be accounted among the false
Christ's. I omit another, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 5.
that (as a cunning Impostor) led abundance of people after him to Mount
Garazin, and deceived many Samaritans, whom Pilate set upon, and slew them, and
brought their business to naught.

Barcochah, or Benchochab, that is, The son of the Star, for he made himself
the Messiah, and said that Scripture was spoke of him, Numb. 24. 17.
There shall come a Star out of Jacob, etc. Rabbi Akiba, a famous Doctor
among them as any in those times, when he saw him, he said, This is the King,
the Messiah. Of this Akiba they say Moses spoke that, O my Lord, send I pray
thee by the hand of him whom thou will send. Now this Barcochab was in
Jerusalem before the destruction of it, as is said, and Akiba applied unto him
that of the Prophet Haggai, The desire of all Nations shall come. This man's
arising and reigning they judge was not long after the Passion of Christ.
Galatin. l* 4 de Arcan. Cathol. ver. c. 20.
To him not only the common people, but the chief Doctors and Rabbis did give
consent and counsel, and did aid him against the Romans, until he perished,
and caused many to perish, so as afterward they said his name was not
Bencochab, but it was Bencozbi, The son of a lie.

Simon Magus would needs act the part of a false-Saviour, Hierom. in c. 24.
Matthew Aug de Haeres.
and carried many after him, exceedingly bewitching and seducing the Samaritans
and many others, saying of himself that he was the great power of God, Daneus
in Aug.
the Word of God, the fair one, the Comforter, the Almighty, the All things of
God. He said of himself, That he was God the Father that gave the Law on Mount
Sinai; Hegesipp. excid Hierosol. lib. 3. c. 2.
that Christ did not suffer really in the flesh, but he himself was Christ, and
he called a Whore that went about with him, one Helena, the Holy Ghost.

Jerusalem some 48 years and an half, Porchet.
was that other notable Cheat called Bencozbi, Galati^.
a second famous Impostor of the same name with the former; Genesis brard.
so blind and madd were the Jews, Gerhard.
that they never remembered how sore they paid for the entertaining of the
other, that had the same name and folly. I know the Jews write somewhat
confusedly concerning these Barcochabs, and for most part mention little of the
first, but attribute all to this last; yet others find out there were two of
them, and that out of their Writings. Very much is said of this last, whose
doings swallow up the memory of the first. The Jews that remained after
Jerusalem was destroyed, made a City called Bitter, the Metropolis and chief
seat of the Kingdom, and took this false Christ for their King. Nay, R. Akiba,
they write, was blinded the second time, and proclaimed this Barcochab the
Messiah also. The Emperor Adrian besieged them in the City Bitter three years
and an half, at length he took it, and the head of Barcozbi was smitten off: in
which War 45000 Jews were slaughtered; but make room for the Jew, his mouth
runns over, and he cannot speak a lie, but it must be of the first magnitude,
and exceed all lies, for they write, that the Emperor Adrian slew in Bitter
four hundred times ten thousand, till the blood of the slain, like a river,
rolled great stones in the stream of it, and carried them into the Sea, which
was four miles distant from the City. Nay, that all liars may take a pattern,
the Emperor Adrian (they say) had a Vineyard 18 miles in length, and 18 in
breadth, and yet he hedged it about with the bodies of them that were slain in
Bitter. Many other Hyperboles, none of the least, they have about this
Barcozbi, which I omit. In the Talmud they write, that Barcozbi said to the
Rabbis, In Gemara Sanhedrim. cap. 11. sect. 15. ex verse. Io. Coch.
I am the Messiah. The wise Masters of the Jews said to him again, It is
written of the Messiah, [quod odorans erit and judicans] He shall smell and
judge, R David. Ganz Porchet. in victor. cont. hebr. part. 1. cap. 10.
Esaias 11. 3. That is, he shall judge by smelling who is innocent, and who is
guilty; Let us see therefore whether thou be able to judge by smelling; and
when they saw his smelling was without this judgment, they slew him. This will
scarce agree with so great a slaughter of Barcozbi, and all his people, by
Adrians Forces. But certain it is, many Jews were now sacrificed to the Romans
fury by their sword, that the Lord might thoroughly execute his wrath upon them.
This false Christ, they say, his reign and rule was some thirty years and a
half, and some make it foretold in those words of Daniel, Dan. 11. 34* Rab
Iachiad paraph. in Daniel.
paraphrasing them thus, Now when they shall fall (that is, the Israelites in
the destruction of the Temple under Titus) they shall be helped with a little
help in the Kingdom of Bitter, (which remained to the 52 year after the
destruction of the Temple) and many Israelites shall join with them in Bitter:
but with flatteries, etc. Of this Barcozbi all our writers make mention, that
speak of those times, and say, he tormented Christians (whiles he had power)
with all kind of punishments, Justinius Martyr.
and put many to death, Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. cap. 8.
if they would not deny and blaspheme Christ. He is called by Eusebius,
Barchochebas, (...). He is called by Hierome in his Catalogue of Church
Doctors, Hierom. in Catalog.
that were Writers of Books, Mellific. histor. P^tavius in Rationar.
in the life of one Agrippa, surnamed Castor, Chocibus; and in that Book made
Greek by Sophronius, Temp.
(...); others call him Cuziba, Mornaeus.
but under all these names is meant this son of a lie, Io: Phison.
Barcozbi, who named himself the son of a star; Dugo in Christian. Institut.
if he were, it was like the bitter Starr Absynthites, or Wormwood, that in the
City Bitter brought such sore destruction upon his Countrymen. And yet Rabbi
Lipman, the most blasphemous of all Jewish Doctors, was not ashamed to write,
that this Bencozbi was one of the lawful and right Princes of Israel, and of
the family of David; and his reason is, because when he said, I am the
Messiah, the Rabbis never asked him, Art thou of the Family of David? He
judges they took it for granted, that he was so. But this may well beseem the
lying lip of Lipman, Writ about the year 1549.
who has writ a Book called Nitzachon, Buxtorf. in Biblioth.
or, his book of victory and triumph over the Gospel of Christ; Rabbinica.
in which the blasphemous Spider will needs find lies, falsehoods, and vain
things, and poisonous untruths, to make Christ and our Religion ridiculous.
Some learned Christians have answered blasphemous Hebrew, and his Nitzachon, as
Munster in his Annotations to the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew. Postellus follows
Munster, and we shall shortly see with us the learned Constantine L'Emperour,
fully confuting this Nitzachon, so as to make such blaspheming Jews leave all
their cursed croaking and coaxation, (...).
and make them as mute as the Seriphian Froggs, and give no croaking sounds at
all. Of Rabbi Akiba they write, that his Companions some nine were taken with
him when Gozbi perished, and they were put to cruel deaths, ^. Gen^. in
Annotat. ad Mos. Maimon. (...).
for Akiba (if we durst believe them) was put to death by an Iron Comb, with
which his flesh was torn off his body. And thus far we have gone to show the
Tragedy of Bencochab, and Jewish dotage.

Theodosius the second, came Moses of Crete to act his part of a false Savior,
Ann. 434.
giving out he was sent from Heaven, and was a second Moses, he would lead all the Jews that followed him, through the sea to the Continent, dry-shod. For a
year together he persuaded them in their Cities and Towns, to leave all their
riches and follow him, and he would carry them to the promised Land. At an
appointed day to pass the Sea, great multitudes of men, women and Children
repair to him, whom he brings to an high Promontory hanging over the Sea, he
bidds them cast themselves down, which multitudes did, Soc^a. hist.
and perished, being dashed in pieces on the Rock, Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 3^.
or drowned in the Sea. Many were saved, that were about to cast themselves
down, by some Christian Merchants and Fishers, that dissuaded them from so madd
and murderous an Act, and who helped to draw many out of the Sea, and saved them
from drowning. The Jews seeing the great Delusion, thought to lay hands upon
the Impostor, but their false Moses, as if he had been a true Devil, was gone
and vanished they knew not whether, nor how. This was an occasion to bring many
Jews to embrace the Christian faith, and to leave the way of Judaism, subject
to such dangerous and costly deceits.

Moses Mamonides makes mention, who arose in the Southern parts, and told the
people he was the forerunner of the Messiah, and that in those parts he should
shortly appear, and he invited them, Come ye with me, and let us go meet the
Messiah, Ex Epist. R. Mos. ad Iudae^s in Marsili^.
for he has sent me unto you, that I may prepare the way before him. After a
year he was taken, they that did cleave to him fled away, and an Arabian King
that took him, asking him why he did this, and he answering, I did it by
command from God: he further demanded, What Miracle or wondrous thing can
thou do to confirm this? He replied, My Lord the King, cut off my head, and
after that I will rise again, and live as I did before. The King said, Thou
can not do a greater thing then this, bring but this to pass, and then I and
all the world shall believe thy sayings are true and good, and that our
Ancestors have inherited vanity and lies, which profited them not. His head by
the Kings appointment was cut off, but he never yet was as good as his word, to
appear alive again, though some Jews are so devoid of judgment, as to expect
his reviving, and look for his appearing. (...).


There was Rex Thaborius, one called the King of Thabor, that would needs be a
Messiah, whom Charles the fifth caused to be burnt. Maimonides reckons up four
more obscure false Christ's, that did arise among the Jews in Spain and France,
and brought misery upon themselves and the Jews.

David El-David, Ann. ^^35
or David Elroi, in the City Omadia, subject to the King of Persia; he had
some Power by Praestigiation and Magique, whereby he did work great Signs, and
mavelous things, and gathered people to make war with all Nations. Buxtorf
ex lib* Scheb. Iud.
Some said this great power of his was from the special virtue of God in him,
and as he called himself, Gul. Vorst. ex Mose Maimon.
so they counted him the Messiah, as he said to the King of Persia, I am the
Messiah, and God has sent me to deliver the Children of Israel. The King cast
him in Prison, and said, If thou can deliver thy self; I shall know thereby
whether thou be the Christ or no: if thou do not deliver thy self, I will put
thee to death, because thou art a fool. But the Jugler got from Bonds, and
though the King sent Horsemen, and great strength to take him, yet they
returned, and said, they could do nothing; for they fable, that in one day he
could pass over as much ground as would serve one ten days ordinarily to
travel, by the Art of Schemamphoras. Hereupon the King himself and his Nobles
did assay to overtake, and take him, and coming to a rivers side they called
on him, though they saw him not; he answered, Are ye not fools? Behold, I go my
journey, if you have any power, follow me. He spread his Handkerchief upon the
flood Gozan, and so he presently passed over, the King and his servants seeing
it, and beholding it. Then the King broke out, No man can do this, but he whom
the King of the world has ordained King; and he would needs make him King, but
that his Nobles endeavored to persuade him, that many such things might be
done by mere Magique, and eye-delusion. At length the Jews (to prevent the
great misery that was coming upon them by reason of him) used means to get him
to a Feast and banquet; Benjamin. in Itinerar.
after which (being asleep in his drunkenness) his head was cut off, and there
was the end of the cheat-Saviour.

Pet. Cluniac. lib. contra Iud. c. 4.
and then I leave this doting upon false Christ's. A King in Africa made war
against the King of Marocco, who often having the day, (to get a better part in
the hearts of his people) by a fained humility, he would needs ride always
upon an Ass, which got him a name, that he was called The King of Asses. The
fame of which, meeting with the Jews ears, (most shut to the true Christ, most
open to false Christ's) they presently erect their hearts with hope, and are
ready to say as Andrew, We have found the Messiah. Many of them affirmed, the
King of whom Zachary prophesied, Zach. ^.
he should come riding upon an Ass, was now come. Thus the Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribb, but the Jews will not know, nor
consider, but are ready to follow every Ass, sooner then to embrace Christ. I
suppose, one may probably guess, this may be he that was called Bejezid, Leo
African. in descrip. Afric.
the Preacher; who was famous for this Title, Asininus Eques, the Knight of the
Ass, and had an Army of 40000. By this time we have made R. Samuels words
good, that they have in vain looked for a Savior, and yet all their profit
has been put in a bag with holes. 18 Digres.


Methusalem, the greatest Heir of gray hairs and long life upon earth, had his
thread spun forth to 969 years, none had more. But if Christ were born in the
desolation of the second house, at the time of Samuels writing his Book, he
should be a thousand and fifty years old, and who but a Jew can have a faith
big enough to receive and believe such a fable? Diverse do believe their
Messiah was born then, and that he is kept secret by God, and must hereafter be
manifested to Israel. Munster. de fide Iudeor.
Well, where is this Messiah all this while? Some say, God keeps him in the
Garden of Paradise, till the time appointed come; and in Paradise, if one could
get in, they might find him fast tied to the hair of a woman, nay, and they
have Scripture for it too in Canticles 7. 5. Thine head upon thee is like
Carmel, and the hair of thine head like Purple, the King is held in the
Galleries. You must here favor their Interpretation, and take the Galleries
for Paradise, and take the King for the Messiah; and then you must suppose,
when its said. He is held in the Galleries, that he is held by a woman's hair,
which is here said to be like Purple. Rabbi Solomon, though he have a wise
name, is not ashamed to have too much respect to this wise Exposition. Others
say he is all this while about the City of Rome, in Gemara sanhedr. c. 11.
sect. 33.
and he sits among the Beggars, and Lepers, and such as are full of sores and
botches; or he lies in Vaults, and places under the earth, rent and gnawed by
Dogs; and he shows his wounds, the effects of those gnawings* and that he
suffers all this for the iniquities and sins of the Jews, Pet Cluniac. contr.
Iud. c. 3.
according as they say it is written, He was wounded for our iniquities, for
our sins was he bruised, Esaias 53. Mark how they see, and yet are blind; they
see that Prophecy points at Christ, and will not see it fulfilled in our
Christ. Many blind guesses, and bold predictions they have had, setting down a
year, when the Messiah should appear, but all of them have left them liars, and
added to their misery perpetual frustrations. Rabbi Solomon gave them hopes,
that their new Law should begin at the devastation of the Temple, about 1390.
but herein he had Daniel his strong adversary, and they failed in their
waiting. Postel. de concord. orb t^^rae lib. 4.
One Zaadias gave them hopes at the year 1200, but there their Egg was addle
also, and brought them forth nothing but wind. They had a general appointment
of a public repentance among all the Jews, men, women and Children, old and
young, all over in the Captivity, Munster.
kept almost a whole year in humiliation, never such humbling so solemnly,
since their humbling in the year of Christ 1502, for the coming of their
Christ; and yet all this was answered with a nullity of any Sign, Miracle,
Whisper, concerning any new Savior; and they were forced to conclude, All our
supplications, humiliations, and prayers are nothing but emptiness, and
rejected of God. Rabbi Abraham Avenares set down a year for their Messiah to
come 1444, Vossius de Orig Idololat lib. 2. c. p. 48.
when Jupiter and Saturn should meet in Cancer; but his Astrology was a mere
Cancer, proved Cripple, and creeping too short of performance. Abravenel sets
down another year in the conjunction of Pisces, and they caught no fish in
their Net that year 5224. At length they are come to a wise resolution, In
Gemara Sanhedr. cap 11. sect. ^0.
Let their Bones be broken, and let them breath their last, Vae determinantibus
tempus adventus Messiae.
that compute years, and set down any periods or limits of time. They have been
so often gulled, they will hearken to no conjectures any more. It were well
they would make this Resolution as Brass, Mornaeus de verit.
and strong as Iron. Christ. relig. cap. 29.
Themselves in this Confession grant they are in a Cloud of confusion, and and
that they are blinded of God, and know not what to do. Nor are they such as
deny large Confessions of the blindness of their times; for if the first were
the sons of men, we are, they say, mere Asses, nay, we are not so good as an
Ass. R. Afhu, being asked when the Messiah should come by a profane and
wicked man, Porchetus ex R. Zera.
he answered, Then when darkness shall possess you. He said to him, Thou
curses me; but he replied again, It is the word of the Scripture, Behold,
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord
shall arise upon thee, Gemar.
and his glory shall be seen upon thee, Esaias 60. 2. Sanhedr. cap. 11. sect. 36.
In which he plainly confesses, no marvel if the Jews stumble, because they
shall be left in a thick spiritual Mist of blindness. Esaias 6.
Blindness in part is happened to Israel, To. 11. 25.
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Figveiro in Malac.
They frame their faith into an imagination of two Messiahs that shall come,
Porchet.
the one the son of Joseph, the other the son of David; His glory is like
the firstling of a Bullock, Deu. 33. 17. that is, the son of Joseph. Zach. 9.
9. He is lowly, riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the Foal of an Ass;
Buxtorf.
this is their Messiah the son of David. Both these they will needs find in
the 32 of Esaias, Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, Man^^s^h Ben Israel.
de resur. mort. l 3. c. 5.
that send forth thither the feet of the Ox and the Ass. These two are both
but one Jesus Christ, for he was the son of Joseph that was betrothed to his
Mother, his son, not by the flesh, but by education and bringing up. Rursus l.
3. c. 11.
Besides, he was the son of David by the glorious Virgin his Mother, who by the
flesh descended from the Seed of David. Messiah the son of Joseph being dead,
Messiah the son of David (they believe) shall raise him again. Their Messiah
shall make them great Feasts, and Marry a Wife, Kings daughters shall be among
his honorable women: on his right hand shall stand his Queen in Gold of Ophir.
The Kings of the world will think themselves highly honored, if any of them
could get the Messiah to marry their daughter. He shall beget Children, and see
his childrens children, and after he shall die as other men: but his children
shall rule and reign over Israel. And whiles they are thus under their Messiah,
the Christians shall do all their works and drudgery without any wages, Earth
shall bring forth fruits for them presently after they are sown; all kind of
pleasure and peace shall they have, etc. Thus they grow up from dotage to
dotage, and wander without end, in the framing to themselves a carnal Savior,
and a sensual salvation. Let the 11 Chapter of the Gemara of the Sanhedrin be
perused, and there is enough from the Jews to stop the mouths of the Jews
concerning the expectation of any other Messiah besides Jesus Christ. My
intentions are not a f^ll confutation of them, but only the confirmation of
Samuels Arguments.

CHAP. XXVII.
HE pleads against the Jews, that they (through incredulity and obstinacy) will
not receive Christ, by the testimony of Saracens and Mahumetans concerning him:
Whence we note, 19 Digres.
that Christ's bitterest and blasphemousest enemies are the Jews, his own
Countrymen, and Brethren after the flesh. Venit ad suos, and sues eum non
receperunt, as the Waldenses in their Writings have it. Socra. hist Eccles. l.
5 c. 20.
They are pertinacious and st^ffe-hearted, nothing will convince them.
Sabbatius a Jew was baptized and made a Christian Minister, R. David Ganz. in
Tzemach David, seu Chronol. sacro prophan.
he yet afterward did secretly abide in his Jewish infidelity. When any of
their Zealots are put to death for some pranks against Christ, and Gospel, as
blasphemy or perfidiousnesse, yet if their Writers mention it, their evil
deaths are commonly set out with this phrase, Idem*
He was slain [propter sanctificationem Dei] for the sanctifying of God;
Hebrae^ quidam contra a^^mi (...) tentiam baptizat^ abluerunt baptismu^ Cedren
ad Imperat I^eon. (...) reg^. Hector Pintus in Ezechiel, c. 1. 16.
as they say of R. Mordechai at Norenberge. R. Ganz relating how five thousand
Jews were put to death, he says they were burnt in fire [propter
sanctificationem Dei, neque stultitiam vel peccatum tribuerunt Deo] nor charged
they God with sin or folly, that is, They did not renounce their Judaisme. R.
Amnon publicly sanctified the Lord by his death. So Rabbi Abraham
sanctificavit seipsum propter nomen proprium, seu Dei. A Christian disputing
with Jews at Rome, when by Scripture he clearly convinced them, yet they
remitted nothing of their pertinacie; nay one of them answered, Although thou
should show it to me as clear as the Noone-dayes light, that Christ is the
Messiah, yet I am resolved of one thing, I will not believe it.

It is reported at Coleine there was a Jew (as was thought) converted to the
Christian Faith, initiated by Baptism, growing up to many years, a little
before his death he rejected with execration the Christian Religion, and
professed his Jewish mis-belief, which, it was judged, he had abandoned.
Hereupon dying they made this Emblem be infixed on his Tomb; Lau Bayer link.
in theatr. Mag.
a Mouse is represented pursuing a Catt, with this Inscription, Quando mus
felem capiet, Iudaeus etiam conversus manebit Christianus; When a Mouse shall
catch a Cat, then a Jew, converted to be a Christian, will remain a firm
Christian. By which it is in a manner concluded, that it is amongst
incredibles, to think that any Jew will heartily convert and turn to Christ.
Yet God has a time, and a power, and a way to raise up these stones, and make
them children to Abraham. Vsquequo Domine. O for the time when the Jews shall
be seen mourning over Jesus, whom they have pierced!

The last thing is induction of Alcoran Testimonies concerning Christ, some
have done it besides this man, as Dionysius a Rickel. It was the good intent of
the Jew, to shame his Countrymen any way out of their infidelity, and might be
provoked by the very Turks to think and speak better of Christ. 20 Digres.
But here is the Poison, if they write one syllable of truth concerning Christ,
they line it with so many Lies, as makes it abominable. Euthimius in Panopl.
Dogmat. Sylb^rg^i Saruc^nica seu Mahometica. Postell. Concord. Orb. Terrae
This is one of their sentences concerning Christ, The Word of God, and his
Spirit entered into Mary the sister of Moses and Aaron, and she without Seed did
bring forth Jesus Christ, who was a Prophet and servant of God. Mark what
non-Divinity is here, not speaking as the Gospel speaks, The Word of God and
Spirit entered into Mary. Mark what nonsense and non-reason is here, that Mary
the Mother of Christ was the same with Miriam the sister of Moses and Aaron,
whereas that Miriam lived thousand^ of years before Mary Christ's Mother was
born. I could allege some good sayings of theirs concerning Christ, but that
the Devil is to be rebuked speak he never so well. Ex lib. Suneh In So^a
E^nesae.
They say Jesus the son of Mary shall descend from Heaven to earth in the day
of the Resurrection, and shall judge the world in it with just judgment. In
Teschere Elimam.
Again, Jesus shall slay men, and shall bring forth Gog and Magog, and they
shall die, but Jesus shall remain alive, and they that partake of his faith.
What ever they say of Christ it matters not, for though they make him great,
yet they put him but as a Servingman to Mahomet, whom they always exalt
higher. It is verily believed, they say, by many wise and learned Heads,
Richard. ord. Praedicat. in confutat. Alcorani c. 13
even in Arabia, and followed with reasons to prove it, that the first Author
of the Alcoran was not man, but the Devil, exceedingly envying the Faith of
Christ in the Oriental Parts very much spreading, and Idolatry decaying, to
the destruction of which Christian faith this Hellish invention he supposed
might mightily prevail. A Religion it is full of vanity, so as their Alcoran
may well without tongue-stumbling be called Acheron, there are so many both
doltish, and Devilish untruths and vanities in it. This we write not from vain
hearsayes, and far off reports, their Alcaron, and other Mahumetan Volumes of
Divinity being translated long since into the Latin Tongue, and to be found
amongst us. The like did Postellus undertake.
Yet if any desire sufficient witness, the learned Clenard of Lovan will be
admitted by all to speak truth in this, as being beyond exception, who lived
amongst them a long time, spending his last studies and age in Africa, of
purpose to learn the Arabic Tongue, Clenard. in Epist. ad Carolum Cae^arem
August.
and to confute the Alcaron in its own Language, if God had given him extent of
life to perfect his intents. These he relates as parts and Parcels of their
Divine Volumes. Mahomet had a far greater spirit of prophecy then Christ.
Mahomet had but just 14 white Hairs in his head and Beard. Mahomet, he would
commend her to God, and give her a place in Paradise, he smiled on her, and
said, not one old woman enters Paradise. Not to name the Paradise promised to
them to be like a pleasant place provided for lusts of Boys, and fair women;
that the Sun and Moon ride upon Horses; that when the Moon was in pieces
Mahomet sewed it together again. In the Chapter Elgem is written, that the
Devils are pleased with the Alcoran, and much delighted in it. It is much for
their credit to make their Alcoran the Devils, and to say it pleases them. Such
as this is their Divinity, or Vanity rather, which should call for our Tears
rather then our Laughter, considering how far this Doctrine of Soul-delusion,
Quid enim est hod^e Christiani^mus, si sp^ctes Gentes Mahometi? nimirum quod
olim Iudaea comparata mundo reliquo. Clenard lib. 1.
and Damnation is spread. For profession of Christianity, if we look at
Mohammedan Kingdoms, and Countries, carries no larger bulk, then as Jewrie once
compared to the whole world besides. And now (to our shame) these latter times
are become the sink of all Heresies, some are become so unchristian, as they
are almost Mahometans by faith and doctrine. For are there not amongst us that
are Arians, Epist. Iac. La^^mo praeceptori.
Socinians, Puccians, Antitrinitarians, and do not all these conspire in diverse
points of Religion with the very Turkish Alcoran? Was it not Sergius a
Nestorian, and John an Arrian, that helped to compile and make the Alcoran? Do
not the Arians and Socinians say as scornfully of the eternal Godhead of
Christ, as the Mahometans do, How could God have a son since he has not a
Wife? Did not Servetus (a father of the Socinians) say, So^in. in epist. ^. ad
Dudith.
that the Alcoran of Mahomet, and the Doctrine of the Church might well be
reconciled, Puccius de univers. Redemp.
if the doctrine of the Trinity were but left out? Our Puccians, Socinians,
and others among us, say, that all men, whether Lutherans, Calvinists,
Anabaptists, Arians, so they live piously and honestly, without doubt shall be
saved? So says the Turkish Alcoran, that every one of good life, See
Rutherfords Survey.
whether Jew or Christian, and that worships God, shall be made partaker
undoubtedly of the Divine love.

Immortality of the soul is more slighted by some of ours, Azoar. 12.
then ever it was by the Mahometans. Beza ep. 81* Me^ch. Adam in vita Gerlachii.
And this is notoriously known in the world amongst Divines, that if any
Christians turn Mahometans, they begin with Arianisme, and Socinianisme, and
then Turcisme is not so strange a thing. Calovi^s in Pseudo Theol. Socin. ort.
John Paul Alciat, and Adam Neuser, after (with Socinus) they had oppugned the
Doctrine of the Trinity, they turned Turks, and embraced the Doctrine of
Mahomet. It is the just hand of God, that they who curiously and scornfully
touch that flaming mystery of Faith, God manifest in the flesh, and the high
Doctrine of the Persons, whiles they cannot find it in reason, they burn both
their reason and religion in the flame, Mortuis autotibus hujus veneni, scelera
tamen eorum, and doctrina non moriuntur.
and choose to deny the doctrine, because they cannot descrie it by humane
reason. Thus the ancient Monsters of Blasphemy, though they be dead, yet their
errors and wickedness die not. I conclude with that of Petrarch, which,
Phaebadius Episc. in lib contra Arian.
O that it had the like or better operation in our hearts, and if our hearts be
right, they will thus rise; The more, says he, I hear spoken against Christ,
it makes me love Christ the more, Petrarc. de ignorantia suiips. and multor.
and grow firmer in the Faith* [Saepe me Christum ipsum Testor de Christiano
Christianissimum Haereticorum fecere blasphemiae;] I call Christ to witness,
oftentimes the blasphemies of Heretics of Christian have made me most
Christian; have brought me from a less degree, to a more high degree in the
Christian Faith.

To sum up all, consider but how this Jew has (like a Christian) professed
Christ's sinnlesse Conception and Birth of a Virgin, his Divinity, that he is
the Son of God, the Righteous One; that he lived poorly, by the Jews was
miserably Crucified, that he was Buried, rose again, ascended into Heaven; that
he shall come again gloriously to judge the world; that he has cast off the
Jews because they will not believe in him; that he believes the Gospel to be a
glorious truth, and the Christian Religion only pleasing to God, and all
Jewish Rites abominable: and lastly, that he writes none can be saved that do
not believe this, that Christ is the Son of God, and the alone promised
Messiah; and for not receiving this, the Jews are captived and accursed, and
under Gods great wrath, whiles they look for salvation by any other. All this
considered, what hinders but we may be bold to say of R. Samuel, Behold a
Christian Israelite indeed, in whom remains no Jewish guile.

Tertul. lib. de Anima.
Solemn Aquila confitetur, negat Noctua. The Creed of Rabbi Samuel, or Articles
of his Faith, 21. Digres.
accordingly as he professes them in this Book, as may be found dispersed in
the Chapters, out of which I have reduced it into this form.
Mary without sin, and without Man. Jesus Christ; and that the Service and
Sacraments of the Gentiles (according to the Gospel) are acceptable to God.
Jews do blindly and vainly wait for another Savior, and that we shall never be
delivered from our misery, till we look upon him whom we have pierced. Jews was
plainly foretold by the Prophets, and begun to come to pass after the death of
Jesus. Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, and Jew and Gentile, and that the
unbelieving Jew cannot be saved, but must go into everlasting death; and they
that believe in Jesus Christ into everlasting life.

John 1. 41. and 45. We have found the Messiah, which is, being iwterpreted,
the Christ.

We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus
of Nazareth the son of Joseph.

Vivit in excelsis Christus, nec vivere vellem,
Si non Immanuel viveret ille meus.
A Postscript Addition to the Annotations.
Add this to the reading of the third Digression in the first Chapter.
TOuching Hebrew learning, and studying Jewish Authors, it is to be taken heed
by us, that want of insight into them do not make us blindly to condemn all
that is in them. Toward which well may we set down what a Roman Doctor once
said of this way of Learning; He being asked what the Cabala was, (which is the
Jews Theology, Ore tradita, Aure accepta) he answered, it was a certain
perfidious and devilish man, Io. Picus Mirand. in Apolog. ad Conclus. 5.
whose name was Cabala, and this man had written many things against Christ;
hereupon the followers of this man were afterward called Cabalists. This man
was out of all danger of what was said of Paul, that too much learning should
make him madd. Ignorance, the less it judges, the more it accuses and speaks
evil. Whether the Jews live among us, or no, it is very expedient we should be
able to defend our selves, and confute them out of Scriptures, and out of their
Writings too, for how great a blott would it be to have them stop our mouths.
Pelican, that famous German Divine, Melch. Adam. in vit.
the great Magazine of Hebrew Learning, Pellicani.
confesses, that ever since he was a Boy of eleven years age, he much longed to
learn the Hebrew Tongue, and that which stirred up his earnest appetite was
this: He at that age, being among some other Boys, heard a Doctor of Divinity
disputing with a Jew about the Christian Faith, and the Christian Divine was
much confounded in making his answers to the Jew; yea, and withal a Jewish
woman set upon him, and set him very hard also. Hereupon he was much
astonished, and exceedingly grieved at it, as a stumbling block of offense to
his conscience, seeing the Christian Faith by this Doctor underpropt with such
unsolid and weak Arguments, as Jews could overthrow them in the disputes of
learned Divines. This made him long to be more deeply ^^^red into Hebrew
letters, and more able to maintain the only truth, in which he grew like Saul,
he was higher then most of the Divines of his time in this Learnings stature.

Additions to the sixth Digression in the seventh Chapter.
THough we have shown the fifty third Chapter of Esaias to be meant of Christ
the Son of God, and that out of the Confessions of Jews; yet because we have
light upon more lightsom evidence since that was first Writ, I thought good to
add something here, because that Chapter is a clear Star as it were, set in
heaven by God, to guide the Jews to Jesus, if they be not in love with wilful
blindness. Let us hear him that was once a Jew speak, and tell us how, and by
what means he was induced to lay hold on the Christian Faith, and convert to
Christ, and this is Johannes Isaacus a German Jew, and after a Christian
Professor at Coleine in the year 1558. these are his words, This I do
ingenuously profess, that that very Chapter, the fifty third of Esaias, Joan.
Isaac. in defens.
did draw me to the Christian Faith. For more (says he) then a thousand times
have I read that Chapter through, Heb. verit. sacr. Scrip. contr. Lindanum, l. 2.
and I have very accurately compared it with many Translations, by which I have
found there is an hundred times more mystery concerning Christ contained in
the Hebrew Text, then can be found in any other Translation. And then he
declares, how at Frankford he disputed with five Rabbis, whom, with arguing
out of that Chapter, he so did drive into straits, and stop their mouths, that
they had not a word to answer against his Arguments and Reasons.

Diego Payva Andradius, the great Defender of the great offending Council of
Trent, Andrad. in defens.
brings us in more Jewish witness for this Chapter against the Jews; Council.
I know here some (says he) of no vulgar learning among Hebrews, Trident. lib.
4.
that inhabit the inner Africa, that were induced by the reading of the fifty
third Chapter of Esaias only, to leave house, Country, friends, fair Estates,
Parents, and with inflamed desires of soul to consecrate themselves to Christ.
I asked (says he) some of these Jews, that came out of Africa into Portugal,
to be entered among Christians by Baptism, what it was in that 53 of Esaias, that
did so much trouble them, that they could not deny those things to be true
concerning Jesus Christ the Son of God, which are delivered by us, to which
they returned me this answer, always that which we translate and read
percussum a Deo, smitten of God, they use to interpret, percussus Deus ipse and
humiliatus, God himself was smitten and humbled. By which words they assure
themselves, that whole Chapter is to be understood not of of some man, but of
God himself made man, that he might blot out our sins.

I conclude this with that of A Lapide the Jesuit, Cor. a lap. in Isai. cap.
53.
that which (says he) is translated by the Syrians percussum Dei, or a Deo,
smitten of God, out of the Hebrew may be turned thus, percussum Deum and
humiliatum, God smitten and humbled, Mucke elohim umeunne. This very same thing
(says he) did a famous Jew tell me himself at Rome. We see when God opens Jews
eyes, they stand not so much upon Grammar, but here neglect that, to pitch upon
the substantial truth, and ask not leave at the Rules of Art, when God is
bringing them to the Rule of Faith.

FINIS.

