C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Againsthe Resetting of Tenants, or Servants without
Testificats.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Council,
Pursevants, or Messengers of Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constute, Greetings
Forasmuch, as We have for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, as it
is now established by the Laws of thi^ Our ancient Kingdom, taken care that all
unlawful Meetings, upon pretense of Religion, may be restrained, by which many
of the Commons of that Our Kingdom, have been for several years withdrawn from
their Paroch Churches, and been thereby deprived of the appointed means for
their establishment in the true Fear of God, and the Duty they ow to Us, and
Our Government, and have b^n seduced to keep seditious Field-Conventicles in a
tumultuous way, and other Disorderly Meetings, where they may and do actually
hear, declared T^^^^nours, Intercommuned and Vagrant Preachers, and any who
without license or authority, do impiously asume the holy Orders of the Church,
and ^ake it their business to diffuse amongst the unwarry and credulous
multitude seditious and false doctrines, and pernicious principles, which are
destructiv^ to all Order and Constitution of Societies, by which these who
frequent those Meetings, are observed to be corrupted and poisoned with an open
and o^stinate contempt of all authority Civil or Ecclesiastic, and to be led
into most irregular prastices, which are inconsistent with, all Order and
Government, ^^d are not to be allowed in any Protestant or Christian Church:
For remeding of which growing evils, and vindicating Our Authority and Laws
fr^^ such gross violations and affronts, We have commanded a Band to be
subscribed, whereby Heretors, Life^enters, and Masters are obliged for their
^enents, Servants, and others living upon their Lands and they for themselves,
for obeying such Laws as may secure against schism and separation; and (...)
the same be eluded, and the Heretors, Liferenters, and Masters prejudged by the
Tenants, Servants, and others foresaids, deserting such as t^ke the said Band,
nor least the said Tenants Servants or others, may be encouraged not to take
the same upon expectation that after they are removed by their Masters, or run
away from their Masters, for not taking the Band or for going to Conventicles,
withd^awing from public Ordinances, or upon any other account provided against
by the Masters Band, they may or will be sheltered others: We therefore, with
advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Require and Command, That
no Tenants, Servants or other ^oresaids whatsoever within this Kingdom, be
resett upon another man's ground or in his service, without a Testificate from
the Heretor, Master, or from the Ministere of the Paroch where they live, that
they have lived orderly, in manner foresaid, Declaring hereby, That whatsoever
Heretors, Lif(...)enters, or Master, shall receive any such Tenants, or
Servants, or others foresaids, without such a Testificate, they shall be liable
to such Fines as Our Privy Council shall think fit to inflict suitable to
their Guilt, both for repairing the Damage done to the Heretor, Liferenter, or
Master, and for unishing their Conterant of this Our Proclamation: And to the
effect, Our pleasure in the premises may he made known to all persons
concerned: OUR WILL is herefore, and we charge you strictly and command, That
incontenent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh
and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, with all Solemnities requisite, make Publication of the
Premises, that none of Our Leiges may pretend ignorance thereof. And Ordain
these presents, and the Band, and Act of Council underwritten, to be printed,
and subjoyned hereunto: The which to do, We committt to you conjunctly and
severally. Our full power by those Our Letters, delivering them by you duly
execute and indorsed again tothe Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of February, 1678. and
of Our Reign, the thirtieth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilli. Al.
Gibsone Cls. Sti.Concilii.

Follows the Tenor of the Band mentioned in the foresaid Proclamation.
I (...) under subscribing, do faithfully bind and oblige me, that I, my Wife,
Bairns, and Servants, respectively shall no ways be present at any
Conventicles, and disorderly Meetings in time coming, but shall live orderly in
obedience to the Law, under the Penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament
made thereanent, As also I bind and oblige me, that my whole Tenants and
Cottars respectively their Wives, Bairns, and Servants, shall likewise refrain
and abstain from the said Conventicles and other illegal Meetings, not
authorized by the Law, And that they shall live orderly in obedience to the
Law; And further, the I nor they shall not resett, supply, or commune with
forfeited Persons intercommuned Ministers, or vagrant Preachers, but shall do
our outmost endeavor to aprehend their persons: And in case my said Tenants,
Cottars, and their foresaids shall contraveen, I shall take and apprehend any
person or persons guilty thereof, and present them to the Judge ordinar^, that
they may be fined or imprisoned therefore, as is provided in the Acts of
Parliament made thereanent; otherwise I shall remove them and their families
from off my ground, and if I shall failie herein, I shall be liable to such
penalties as the said Delinquents have incurred by the law. Consenting to the
Registration hereof in the Books of His Majesty's Privy Council, or Books of
any other Judges competent. That Letters and executorials may be direct
hereupon in form as effeirs, And constitutes my Procurators.

Edinburgh, the eleventh day of February, 1678.
THE Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council do declare, that the Heretors
Liserenters and Masters, Who have subscribed, or shall hereafter subscribe the
Band above written: Obliging them for their Tenants, and others therein
specified, shall be only liable for the penalties by the delinquencies, of
their Tenants, and others foresaids, in case the Tenets, and others for whom
they are bound shall bepursued and convict within year and day after the
committing of the Delinquencies without prejudice to pursue the Tenants, or
others foresaids, themselves at any time thereafter as accords: Extracted by me,

Al. Gibsone, Cls. Sti, Concilii.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
Sacred Majesty, 1678.


