His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday the
10th of February, 1667.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am glad to see you here again, to tell you what I have done in this
Interval, which I am confident you will be pleased with, since it is so much
for the Honor and Security of this Nation: I have made a League Defensive with
the States of the United Provinces; and likewise a League for an efficacious
Mediation of Peace between the two Crowns, into which League that of Sweden by
its Ambassador has offered to enter as a Principal. I did not at Our last
Meeting move you for any Aid, though I lie under great Debts contracted in the
last War; but now the Posture of Our Neighbors abroad, and the Consequence of
this New Alliance will oblige Me for Our Security to set out a considerable
Fleet to Sea this Summer; and besides, I must Build more Great Ships; and it is
as necessary that I do some things in order to the Fortifying some of Our
Ports. I have begun something My self in order to these Ends; but if I have not
your speedy Assistance, I shall not be able to g^ through with it: Wherefore I
do earnestly desire you to take it into your speedy Consideration; for the loss
of a little time now, may beget a Prejudice not to be repaired. And for the
settling a firm Peace as well at home as abroad, one thing more I hold My self
obliged to recommend to you at this present; which is, That you would seriously
think of some Course to beget a better Union and Composure in the minds of my
Protestant Subjects, in Matters of Religion; whereby they may be induced, not
only to submit quietly to the Government, but also cheerfully give their
assistance to the Support of it.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


