CR
DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Against the REBELS in IRELAND.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our loving Subjects of England and Ireland, Greeting.
We taking notice by the Information of the Lords and Commons, now Assembled
in Parliament, That after the vast expense of Blood and Treasure for the
suppressing of the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, begun in October, 1641.
There are yet many of the Natives of that Our Kingdom, deeply guiltly of that
Rebellion, who have of late br^ke out into new Acts of Force and Uiolence, some
Murdering, Robbing, and Despoiling several of Our English Protestant Subjects
there planted, and others of them by force Entering upon, and Disquieting the
Possessions of several Adventurers and Soldiers there, to the great and
manifest disturbance and hinderance of Our English Plantation. And being very
sensible of the innocent blood of so many thousands of Our English Protestant
Subjects, formerly slain by the hands of those barbarous Rebels, and of new
mischiefs of the same kind, likely to fall out, as the sad issue and
consequents of so unhappy beginnings. Do therefore, by the advice of the said
Lords and Commons, now assembled, As Well to testify Our utter abhorring of the
said late Rebellion, as to prevent the like for the future, And for the present
establishment of the Peace of that Our Kingdom, hold it Our duty to God and the
whole Protestant Interest, to Command, Publish, and Declare, And do by this
Our Proclamation, accord^ngly, Command, Publish and Declare, That all Irish
Rebels (other then such as by Articles have liberty to reside in these Our
Dominions, and have not since forfeited the benefit thereof) now remaining in,
or which hereafter shall resort to England or Ireland, be forthwith
apprehended, and proceeded against as Rebels and Traitors according to Law. And
that the Adventurers and Soldiers, and other Our Subjects in Ireland, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, who on the first day of January
last past were in the Possession of any of the Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of any the said Irish Rebels, shall not be
disturbed in such their Possessions, until We, by the advice of the Lords and
Commons, now assembled as aforesaid, or such Parliament as We shall call in
England or Ireland, shall take further Order, or that they be Legally evicted,
by due course of Law: And all Our Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, and
other Officers, both Civil and Military, both in England and Ireland, are
hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the execution of this Our
Proclamation, as often as occasion shall require.

Given at our Court at Whitehall the first day of June 1660. In the Twelfth
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Christopher Barker and John Bill, Printers to the KINGS
most excellent Majesty. 1660.


