C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For a General Fast.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, being deeply sensible of the sad and calamitous Condition
of this Our Kingdom, occasioned chiefly by the impious and malicious
Conspiracies of a Popish Party, who have not only Plotted and intended the
Destruction of Our Royal Person, but the total Subversion of Our Government,
and of the true Protestant Religion within this Realm by Law established (All
which the many and grievous Sins of this Nation have most justly deserved) Have
most humbly besought Us, That by Our Royal Proclamation, a Day may be Solemnly
set apart; wherein all Our Loyal Subjects may by Fasting and Prayer, seek a
Reconciliation with Almighty God, and with humble and penitent hearts implore
him by his power and goodness, to Infatuate and Defeat the wicked Counsels and
Imaginations of Our Enemies, and to continue his Mercies, and the Light of his
Gospel to this Kingdom, and particularly to bestow his abundant Blessings upon
Our Self, and this present Parliament, that their Consultations and Endeavors
may produce Honor, Safety and Prosperity to Us, and to Our People: We have to
this their humble Request most readily inclined; And do by this Our Royal
Proclamation Command a General and Public Fast to be kept throughout this
whole Kingdom, in such manner as is hereafter directed and prescribed, that so
both Prince and People may send up their Prayers and Supplications to Almighty
God, to and for the purposes aforesaid. And to the end that so Religious an
Exercise may be performed at one and the same time, We do hereby Publish and
Declare to all Our loving Subjects, and do straightly Charge and Command, That on
Friday, being the Eleventh day of April next, this Fast shall be Religiously
kept and Celebrated throughout Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed. And that the same may be performed with all Decency
and Uniformity, We, by the Advice of our Reverend Bishops, have Directed to be
Composed, Printed and Published, such a Form of Divine Service, as We have
thought fit to be used in all Churches and Places at the time aforesaid, and
have given Charge to our Bishops to disperse the same accordingly. All which We
do hereby expressly Charge and Command shall be Reverently and Decently observed
by all Our loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor of Almighty God, and
would avoid his Wrath and Indignation against this Land, and upon pain of
undergoing such Punishments as We may justly inflict upon all such as shall
contemn or neglect so Religious a Duty.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty eighty day of March 1679. In the
one and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679.


