C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Recalling and Prohibiting Seamen from the Service of
Foreign Princes and States.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been advertised, That diverse
Mariners, and other Seafaring men (His Majesty's Natural born Subjects) have
betaken themselves to the Service of Foreign Princes and States, to the great
disservice of His Majesty and their native Countries, and whereby His said
Majesty and His Realms, are unfurnished of Men of their Sort and Calling, if
there shall be cause to use them. Therefore for redress thereof for the
present, and preventing the like for the future, The Kings most Excellent
Majesty by this His Royal Proclamation, with the Advice of the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, does Will, and Straightly Charge and
Command all and singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen,
Shipwrights, and other Seafaring men whatsoever, and wheresoever (being His
Majesty's Natural born Subjects) who are in the Service of any Foreign Prince
or State, or do Serve in any Foreign Ships or Vessels, That forthwith they do
withdraw themselves, and depart from such Foreign Services, and return home to
their Native Countries, and Lawful Vocations. And further, His Majesty does
hereby Prohibit and Forbid all and singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners,
Seamen, Shipwrights, and other Seafaring men whatsoever (being His Majesty's
Natural born Subjects) from Entering themselves; And does hereby Straightly Charge
and Command them and every of them, from henceforth to forbear to Enter
themselves into Pay, or otherwise betake themselves to the Service of any
Foreign Princes or States, or to Serve in any Foreign Ship or Vessel without
License had and obtained in that behalf. To all which His Majesty does and will
expect due Obedience and Conformity; And does hereby Publish and Declare, That
the Offenders to the contrary shall not only incur His Majesty's just
Displeasure, but be proceeded against for their Contempt, according to the
utmost severities of Law, by Seizure of their Goods, Persons, and Estates
wheresoever they shall be found, and otherwise. And further, His Majesty does
hereby Authorize and Command all and every the Captains, Masters, and other
Officers Serving and Employed in any of His Majesty's Ships or Vessels at Sea,
to stop, and make stay of all and every such person and persons as shall
endeavor to Transport or Enter themselves into the Service of any Foreign
Prince or State, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this His Majesty's
Royal Proclamation, and also to Seize upon, take, and bring away all such
Mariners, Seamen, and other persons aforesaid, as shall be found to be
Employed, or Serving in any Ships or Vessels, of or belonging to any Foreign
Prince or State, or to any Merchant or other person or persons, other than to
His Majesty or His Subjects.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Tenth day of January 1671/2. In the
Twenty third year of Our Reign.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1671/2;.


