(...) ^ MAL ^ Y ^ (...)

DIEV ET MON ^ DRO^^

By the King. A PROCLAMATION For Recalling and Prohibiting Seamen from Serving
of Foreign Princes and States.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty having been advertised, That great numbers of
Mariners, and other Seafaring men, His Majesty's natural born Subjects, have
betaken themselves to the Service of Foreign Princes and States, to the great
disservice of His Majesty and this Kingdom, and whereby His Majesty and this
Kingdom are unfurnished of men of their sort and Calling: Therefore for redress
thereof for the present, and preventing the like for the future, The Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by this His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of His Privy
Council) does Strictly Charge and Command all Masters of Ships, Pilots,
Mariners, Seamen, and other Seafaring men whatsoever, and wheresoever, (being
His Majesty's natural born Subjects) who are in the Service of any Foreign
Prince or State, or do Service in any Foreign Ships or Vessels, that forthwith
they, and every of them, do withdraw themselves, and depart from such Foreign
Services, and return home to their native Countries. And further, His Majesty
does hereby Strictly Prohibit and Forbid all Masters of Ships, Pilots,
Mariners, Seamen, and other Seafaring men whatsoever (being His Majesty's
natural born Subjects) from Entering themselves; And does hereby Strictly Charge
and Command them and every of them, from henceforth to forbear to Enter
themselves into Pay, or otherwise betake themselves to the Service of any
Foreign Princes or States, or to Serve in any Foreign Ship or Vessel, without His
Majesty's Special License first had and obtained in that behalf: To all which
His Majesty does and will expect due Obedience and exact Conformity; And does
hereby Publish and Declare, That the Offenders to the contrary shall not only
incur His Majesty's just Displeasure, but be Proceeded against for their
Contempt, according to the utmost Severities of Law. And further, His Majesty
does hereby Authorize and Command all His Officers and Ministers in his
respective Ports, and all Captains, Masters, and other Officers serving and
employed in any of His Majesty's Ships or Vessels at Sea, to Stop and make Stay
of all such person and persons as shall endeavor to Transport or Enter
themselves into the Service of any Foreign Prince or State, contrary to the true
intent and meaning of this His Majesty's Royal Proclamation, and also Seize
upon, Take, and bring away all such Mariners, Seamen, and other Persons
aforesaid, as shall be found to be Employed, or Serving in any Ships or Vessels
belonging to any Foreign Prince or State, or to any Merchant, or other Person or
Persons, other then to His Majesty or His Subjects.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Three and twentieth day of March 1677/8.
In the Thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1677/8.


