C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Publishing the PEACE between His Majesty and the States
General of the United Netherlands.
CHARLES R.

WHereas a Peace has been Treated and Concluded at Westminster betwixt His
Majesty, and the States General of the United Netherlands, and the
Ratifications thereof exchanged, and Publication thereof made at the Hague, the
Twenty fourth day of February / sixth day of March 1671/4. In conformity
thereunto His Majesty has thought fit hereby to Command, That the same be
Published throughout all His Majesty's Dominions.

And His Majesty does Declare, That no Acts of Hostility or Force are to be
committed by any of His Majesty's Subjects, upon any the Subjects of the said
States General within the several Limits hereafter mentioned, from and after
the several days and times hereby also specified; viz. after the Eighth /
Eighteenth day of March next ensuing, from the Soundings to the Naz in Norway;
after the Seventh / Seventeenth day of April 1674. from the Soundings aforesaid
to the City of Tanger; after the Fifth / Fifteenth day of May next following in
the Ocean, Mediterranean, or elsewhere, betwixt the said City of Tanger and the
Aequinoctial Line; And lastly, after the Twenty fourth day of October/Third day
of November next ensuing, in any part of the World: And that whatsoever Actions
of Hostility and Force shall be committed by any of His Majesty's Subjects,
against any the Subjects of the said States General after the days aforesaid,
upon color of whatsoever former Commission, Letters of Marque, or the like,
shall be deemed as Illegal, and the Actors obliged to make Reparation and
Satisfaction, and be punished as Violaters of the Public Peace. And hereof His
Majesty wills and commands all His Subjects to take notice, and govern
themselves accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Seven and twentieth day of February
1673/4. in the Six and twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1673/4.


