C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Enforcing the Laws against Conventicles, and for
Preservation of the Public Peace, against Unlawful Assemblies of Papists and
Non-Conformists.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Our Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
have lately been humble Petitioners to Us to issue forth Our Proclamation for
Enforcing the Laws against Conventicles, and that Care might be taken for
preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom against unlawful Assemblies of Papists
and Non-Conformists; Having seriously considered and weighed the said humble
Suit of Our said Commons, and upon Information that diverse persons in several
parts of this Realm, abusing the Clemency which has been used toward persons
not Conforming to the Worship and Government Established in the Church of
England (even whilst it was under Consideration, to find out a way for the
better Union of Our Protestant Subjects) have of late frequently and openly, in
great numbers, and to the great disturbance of Our Peace, held unlawful
Assemblies and Conventicles; We have thought good to Declare, That We will by
no means permit such notorious Contempts of Us and Our Laws, to go unpunished.
And therefore We do by this Our Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of Our
Privy Council) Require, Charge and Command all Lords Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize and
Jail-delivery, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers
whatsoever, That they be circumspect and vigilant, each of them in their
several Charges and Jurisdictions, to Enforce, and put in Execution, all the
Laws now in force against unlawful Conventicles. And further, Our Will and
Pleasure is, And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command Our said Magistrates
and Officers, That they and every of them in their several places, do take care
for the preservation of the Peace of this Kingdom, against unlawful Assemblies
of Papists and Non-Conformists.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Tenth day of March, In the Twentieth year
of Our Reign. 1667/8.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667/8.


