CR
DIEV ET MON DROIT
(...) QVI^MAL^Y^ PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For calling Home such of His Majesty's Subjects as are now
abroad in the Dominions or Service of His Majesty's Enemies.
CHARLES R.

ALthough His Majesty's late Declaration of War, against the States of the
United Provinces, be in it self a sufficient Warning to all His Majesty's
Subjects, now inhabiting in any part of the Dominions of the United Provinces,
or employed in the Service of the States General, to withdraw themselves with
all possible speed, least they incur the dangers of the Law in being found to
have adhered to His Majesty's Enemies. Yet because it is possible that some of
His Majesty's good Subjects now remaining in those parts may neither know the
hazards they run by continuing there, nor the advantages they shall Receive by
an early and useful returning into His Majesty's Service; His Majesty therefore
by advice of His Council has thought fit to Declare His Royal Will and
Pleasure, and does hereby require and command all and every of His Subjects now
living within the Dominions of the States of the United Provinces, or any way
employed in their Service, That they do return Home with all convenient speed,
upon pain of being proceeded against, according to the utmost rigor of Law for
such their Treasonable adherence, and of ineurring the Loss and Forfeiture of
all their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, which shall be found in any of
his Majesty's Realms. And if any of His Majesty's Subjects who have heretofore
fled from His Majesty's displeasure, and are now remaining in those parts,
shall be desirous to deserve His Majesty's Grace and Favor hereafter, by
performing to His Majesty any acceptable and signal Service, His Majesty does
hereby Declare, That such person shall not only be received to Pardon,
whatsoever his former Crimes were, but shall also at his return receive from
His Majesty a Gracious and very ample Reward of such His Service.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the 29th day of March 1672. In the 24th year
of His Majesty's Reign. God save the King.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1672.


