C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For a General Fast.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, have by their Address to Us, made known unto Us, That
they are deeply sensible of the sad and calamitous Condition of this Our
Kingdom, occasioned by the Impious and Horrid Conspiracies of Popish Party, who
have not only plotted and intended the Destruction of Our Royal Person, but the
total Subversion of the Government and true Religion established amongst us,
and that the same detestable Machinations are still obstinately prosecuted by
them, as well by fomenting Divisions amongst Our Loyal Protestant Subjects, as
all other the most wicked Contrivances, notwithstanding the many Discoveries
thereof by Gods great Mercy and wonderful Providence lately brought to light.
All which dreadful Judgments are now impending over us most deservebly for our
many and grievous Sins, and cannot otherwise in humane reason be prevented, but
by the particular Blessing of God upon the Consultations and Endeavors of Our
great Council now Assembled in Parliament; Have most humbly besought Us that a
day may be most Solemnly set apart, wherein Our Self and all Our Loyal Subjects
may by Fasting and Prayer endeavor a reconciliation with Almighty God, and
with humble and penitent hearts implore him by his Power and Goodness, to
divert those Judgments, and defeat the wicked Counsels and Devices of Our
Enemies, to Unite the hearts of Our Loyal Posterities, and more especially to
bestow his abundant Blessings on our Self and this present Parliament, that our
Consulations and Endeavors may produce Honor, Safety and Prosperity to Our
Self and Our People: We have to this their humble Request most readily
inclined, and do by this Our Royal Proclamation Command a General and Public
Fast to be kept throughout this whole Kingdom, in such manner as is hereafter
directed and prescribed, that so both We and Our People may send up Our Prayers
and Supplications to Almighty God, to, and for the purposes aforesaid. And to
the end that so Religious an Exercise may be performed at one and the same
time, We do hereby Publish and Declare to all Our Loving Subjects, and do
straightly Charge and Command, That on Wednesday, being the Two and twentieth day
of December instant, this Fast shall be religiously kept and celebrated
throughout Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed. And that the same may be performed with all Decency and Uniformity, We,
by the Advice of Our Reverend Bishops, have Directed to be Composed, Printed
and Published, such a Form of Divine Service as We thought fit to be used in
all Churches and Places at the time aforesaid, and have given Charge to Our
Bishops to Disperse the same accordingly. All which We do hereby expressly
Charge and Command shall be Reverently and Decently observed by all Our Loving
Subjects, as they tender the Favor of Almighty God, and would avoid his Wrath
and Indignation against this Land, and upon pain of undergoing such Punishments
as We may justly instict upon all such as shall contemn or neglect so Religious
a Duty.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Second day of December, 1680. In the Two
and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.


