By the King. A PROCLAMATION
For calling in, and suppressing of two Books written by John Milton; the one
Entitled, Johannis Miltoni Angli pro Populo Anglicano Defensio, contra Claudii
Anonymi alias Salmasii, Defensionem Regiam; and the other in answer to a Book
Entitled, The Pourtraicture of his Sacred Majesty in his Solitude and
Sufferings. And also a third Book Entitled, The Obstructors of Justice,
written by John Goodwin.
CHARLES R.

WHereas John Milton, late of Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, has
Published in Print two several Books (...) one Entitled, Johannis Miltoni
Angli pro Populo Anglicano Defensio, contra Claudii ^nonymi, alias Salmasii,
Defensionem Regiam. And the other in Answer to a Book Entitled, The
Pourtraicture of his Sacred Majesty in his Solitude and Sufferings. In both
which are contained sundry Treasonable Passages against Us and Our Government,
and most Impious endeavors to justify the horrid and unmatchable Murder of
Our late Dear Father, of Glorious Memory.

And whereas John Goodwin, late of Coleman-Street, London, Clerk, has also
published in Print, a Book Entitled, The Obstructors of Justice, written in
defense of his said late Majesty. And whereas the said John Milton, and John
Goodwin, are both fled, or so obscure themselves, that no endeavors used for
their apprehension can take effect, whereby they might be brought to Legal
Trial, and deservedly receive condign punishment for their Treasons and
Offenses.

Now to the end that Our good Subjects may not be corrupted in their Judgments,
with such wicked and Traitrous principles, as are dispersed and scattered
throughout the beforementioned Books, We, upon the motion of the Commons in
Parliament now assembled, do hereby straightly charge and Command, all and
every Person and Persons whatsoever, who live in any City, Borough, or Town
Incorporate, within this our Kingdom of England, the Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in whose hands any of those Books are, or hereafter
shall be, That they, upon pain of Our high Displeasure, and the consequence
thereof, do forthwith, upon publication of this Our Command, or within Ten days
immediately following, deliver, or cause the same to be delivered to the Mayor,
Bailiffs, or other chief Officer or Magistrate, in any of the said Cities,
Buroughs, or Towns Incorporate, where such person or persons so live; or, if
living out of any City, Borough, or Town Incorporate, then to the next Justice
of Peace adjoining to his or their dwelling or place of abode; or if living in
either of Our Universities, then to the UiceChancellor of that University where
he or they do reside.

And in default of such voluntary delivery, which We do expect in observance of
Our said Command, That then and after the time before limited, expired, the
said Chief Magistrate of all and every the said Cities, Buroughs, or Towns
Incorporate, the Justices of the Peace in their several Counties, and the
UiceChancellors of Our said Universities respectively, are hereby Commanded to
Seize and Take, all and every the Books aforesaid, in whose hands or possession
soever they shall be found, and certify the names of the Offenders unto Our
Privy Council.

And We do hereby also give special Charge and Command to the said Chief
Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, and Uice-Chancellors respectively, That ^^y
cause the said Books which shall be so brought unto any of their hands, or
seized o^ taken as aforesaid, (...) virtue of this Our Proclamation, to be
delivered to the respective Sheriffs of those Counties where they respectively
live, the first and next Assizes that shall after happen. And the said Sheriffs
are hereby also required, in time of holding such Assizes, to cause the same to
be publicly burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman.

And We do further straightly Charge and Command, That no man hereafter presume
to Print, Uend, Sell, or Disperse any the aforesaid Books, upon pain of Our
heavy Displeasure, and of such further Punishment, as for their presumption in
that behalf, may any way be inflicted upon them by the Laws of this Realm.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 13th day of August, in the Twelfth year of
Our Reign, 1660.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660.


