C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Discovery and Apprehension of several Traitorous
Conspirators herein named.
CHARLES R.

WHereas George Rumford of Durham, Robert Davers, alias Danvers, Colonel Thomas
Wogan, John Mason, lately escaped out of the Tower of York, William Leving late
escaped out of the Tower of London, Edward Carry, alias Carew, lately escaped
out of the hands of one of Our Messengers, Roger Jones and Nathaniel Strange,
being persons engaged in the late Horrid and Treasonable Conspiracy in the
Northern and other parts of this Our Kingdom, and being conscious of their own
guilt, have fled or withdrawn themselves from Justice, and do privately lurk
and obscure in places unknown, whereby they cannot be apprehended and brought
to a legal Trial for their Offenses: We therefore have thought fit (by and with
the Advice of Our Privy Council) to publish the same to all Our loving
Subjects, not doubting of their care and forwardness in their apprehension. And
We do by this Our Proclamation Command and Declare, That all and every the
persons before named, within Fourteen days after the publication hereof,
personally appear and render themselves to some of Our Privy Council, or of the
Justices of Peace, or Sheriffs of Our Counties of England and Wales, under pain
of being proceeded against as guilty of High Treason according to Law. And We
do hereby Require and Command, as well all and singular Our Judges, Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables and headboroughs, as also all the
Officers and Ministers of Our Ports, and other Our Subjects whatsoever within
Our Realms of England, Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, and all other
Our Dominions and Territories, to be diligent in enquiring and searching for
the said persons in all places whatsoever, as well within Liberties as without:
whom, or any of them, if they shall happen to take, Our further Will and
Pleasure is, That they cause them so apprehended, to be safely carried before
the next Justice of the Peace to the place where he or they shall be Arrested,
whom We do hereby straightly Command to Commit them to Prison, and presently
inform Us, or some of Our Privy council of their said Apprehension. And We do
hereby straightly Charge and forbid all Our loving Subjects, of what degree or
quality soever, That they do not presume to Entertain or Harbor any of the
persons aforesaid, but that they use their utmost endeavors to Apprehend them.
And we do hereby Declare and Publish, That if any person or persons after this
Our Proclamation published, shall directly or indirectly Conceal, Harbor,
Keep, Retain or Maintain the said persons, or any of them, or shall Contrive or
Connive at any means whereby they or any of them may escape from being Taken or
Arrested, or shall not use their best endeavors for their Apprehension, as
well by giving due Advertisement to Our Officers, as by all other good means,
We will (as there is just cause) proceed against them that shall so neglect
this Our Commandment, with all severity, according to Justice and their
demerits.

Given at our court at Whitehall, the Seven and twentieth day of July 1664. in
the Sixteenth year of our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


