By the King.
C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For a General Fast.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
having been made acquainted by His Majesty, That there is Information given of
an Horrible Design against His Sacred Life; And being very sensible of the
fatal Consequence of such an Attempt, and of the dangers of the Subversion of
the Protestant Religion, and Government of this Realm (which God in his
infinite Mercy has hitherto prevented, and it is to be hoped will prevent for
the future) have most humbly besought His Majesty, That a Solemn Day of Fasting
and Humiliation may be appointed, to Implore the Mercy and Protection of
Almighty God to His Majesty's Royal Person, and in Him to all His Loyal
Subjects; and to pray that God will bring to light more and more all secret
Machinations against His Majesty and the whole Kingdom: The Kings most
Excellent Majesty, out of His own Religious Disposition, has readily inclined
thereunto; And does therefore by this His Royal Proclamation, Command a General
and Public Fast to be kept throughout this whole Kingdom, in such manner as is
hereafter Directed and Prescribed, that so both Prince and People may send up
their Prayers and Supplications to Almighty God, to and for the purposes
aforesaid. And to the end that so Religious an Exercise may be performed at one
and the same time, His Majesty does hereby Publish and Declare to all His
Loving Subjects, and does straightly Charge and Command, That on Wednesday being
the Thirteenth day of November next, this Fast shall be Religiously kept and
celebrated throughout His Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed. And that the same may be performed with all Decency and
Uniformity, His Majesty, by the Advice of His Reverend Bishops, has Directed
to be Composed, Printed and Published, such a Form of Divine Service as he
thinks fit to be used in all Churches and Places at the time aforesaid, and
has given Charge to His Bishops to Disperse the same accordingly. All which
His Majesty does expressly Charge and Command shall be Reverently and Decently
observed by all His Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor of Almighty God,
and would avoid his Wrath and Indignation against this Land, and upon pain of
undergoing such Punishments as His Majesty may justly inflict upon all such as
shall contemn or neglect so Religious a Duty.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty Fifth day of October, 1678. in the
Thirtieth year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


