DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Prevention of Disorders which may be Committed by Soldiers.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings Most Excellent Majesty having found it necessary during the present
War, to raise more Soldiers, and to form them into Regiments, and dispose of
them in several Quarters until there should be occasion for their Service
against the Enemy; And being desirous that during their continuance in their
Quarters no kind of Rudeness or Misdemeanour should be committed by any of His
Soldiers to the grievance or dissatisfaction of any of His Subjects; Has
thought fit, by Advice of His Privy Council, to Publish this His Royal
Proclamation, and does hereby straightly Charge and Command all and every the
Officers in any Troops or Regiments that they forthwith repair unto their
several and respective Quarters, and continue and abide there without presuming
to depart from thence, unless His Majesty's License in that behalf under His
Royal Sign Manual shall be first had and obtained. And His Majesty's further
Pleasure and express Command is, That all Officers and Soldiers do take strict
Care that no Violence or Injury be offered to any of His Majesty's Subjects
either in their Persons or Estates, Nor any kind of Disorder committed or
suffered within the several Quarters: And for the better prevention of all
Abuses of this kind, His Majesty does hereby require all and every His loving
Subjects, when and as often as they shall receive any kind of Injury or Abuse
from any of the Soldiers under His Majesty's Day, forthwith to make their
Complaints unto the Officer, or Officers, under whom such Soldiers shall
serve; which Officer upon such Complaint made shall immediately relieve the
Complainant; or otherwise, wherein the case shall so require, deliver up the
Offender to the Civil Magistrate, to be proceeded against according to Law: And
it upon such Complaint made, the Complainants shall not find a present
satisfaction and redress, or a delivery of the Offender as aforesaid, That then
they cause Information thereof to be given to some Justice of the Peace, who
shall take the same upon Oath, and certify it unto one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, to the end the same may be brought before His
Majesty, who will Graciously vouchsafe to hear the matter Himself, And not
only give the Petitioner a full and ample relief, But likewise severely punish
the Officer who shall be found to have been negligent in his Duty, or shall
suffer any just Complaint to pass without a due and timely redress. And it is
His Majesty's Pleasure, That this Proclamation be set up, and remain affixed in
all Market Towns within this Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Fourth day of December, In the Four and
twentieth Year of Our Reign. 1672.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1672.


