DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For a General Fast.
CHARLES R.

FOr the imploring a Blessing from Almighty God upon His Majesty and all His
Dominions, and for the averting of those Judgments which our manifold sins and
provocations have most justly deserved; The Kings most Excellent Majesty has
thought fit, and does hereby Command, That a General Fast, and day of solemn
Humiliation be kept and observed throughout this His Majesty's Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. And to the intent
the same may be performed with all Decency and Order, His Majesty does hereby
Publish and Declare to all his loving Subjects, and does strictly Charge and
Command, That on Wednesday being the Tenth day of April next, this Fast shall
be religiously observed and kept within the Cities of London and Westminster,
and other Places within the weekly Bills of Mortality; wherein His Majesty in
His Royal Person, and with His Royal Family and Household will give Example to
the rest of His People; and that on Wednesday the Four and twentieth day of the
said Month of April, the like be observed and kept throughout the rest of this
His Majesty's Kingdom of England, the Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed. And His Majesty does most strictly Charge and Command all His
loving Subjects, That they do with all Christian Reverence observe and perform
the same, according to the Directions that shall be given in a Form of Prayer
to be by Our Order and Command Published and dispersed for that purpose, as
they tender the Honor of Almighty God, and would avoid his just Wrath and
Indignation against this Land, and upon Pain of receiving such punishment as
His Majesty may justly inflict upon such as shall contemn or neglect so
Religious and necessary a Duty.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Thirtieth day of March 1678. In the
Thirtieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


