royal coat of armsBy the King. A PROCLAMATION FOR A General FAST Throughout
this Realm of England.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, after many years of Health, and many
great and miraculous Mercies afforded to this Kingdom, to visit the Cities of
London and Westminster, and places adjacent with the Plague and Pestilence,
which by the spreading thereof into several Parishes, and other the more remote
parts of this Kingdom, seems to threaten a general and most dreadful
Visitation: To the end therefore that Prayers and Supplications may every where
be offered up unto Almighty God for the removal of this heavy Judgment, and
that some Solemn Days and Times may be set apart for the performance of these
and other Religious Duties;

His Majesty is pleased, by the Advice of His Privy Council, to Declare, and
does hereby publish and declare his Royal Will and Pleasure, That Wednesday
next being the Twelfth day of this instant July, shall be observed and kept
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and places adjacent, as a Day of
Fasting and Humiliation; And Wednesday three Weeks after being the Second day
of August, shall be observed and kept in like manner in all parts of this
Realm; and so from thence forward every First Wednesday of every Month
successively, until it shall please God to withdraw this Plague and grievous
Sickness.

And that the solemnization of these days may be with such Order and Decency as
is requisite, His Majesty by the Advice of His Reverend Bishops has directed
to be Composed, Printed and Published the Form of such Prayers as His Majesty
thinks fit to be used in all Churches and Chapels at these public Meetings,
and also upon Wednesdays in every Week; And has given charge to His Bishops to
disperse the same through the whole Kingdom. All which His Majesty does
expressly charge and command shall be reverently and devoutly performed by all
His loving Subjects, as they will answer to God for the neglect of so great a
Duty and Service, and upon pain of being proceeded against as wilful Breakers
and Contemners of this His Royal Will and Command.

And His Majesty does further declare, That upon all and every the said Days of
Fasting and Humiliation, there shall be a Collection made of the Alms and
Charitable Benevolence of the several persons in the respective Churches and
Chapels then Assembled: Which Collections shall be paid in to the Bishops of
the several Dioceses wherein such Collection shall be made, or to such Persons
as the Bishops shall appoint to receive the same.

And the Bishops shall take care, That the Moneys so collected and paid in, be
in the first place applied to the Relief of such places as shall be visited
with the Plague within the Diocese wherein such Collections shall be made. And
the Overplus, if any be, shall be paid in to the Bishop of London, or such as
he shall appoint to receive the same, and be applied to the Poor who are sick
and visited with the Plague in London or Westminster, or the parts adjacent.

And lastly, His Majesty does Command, That the respective Preachers on the
said Fast-days do earnestly exhort the people in the several Parishes to a Free
and Cheerful Contribution toward the Relief of their Christian Brethren, whom
it has pleased God to visit with Sickness.

Given at Our Court at St. James's this Sixth day of July, in the Seventeenth
year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1665.


