C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For a THANKSGIVING for the late VICTORY BY His Majesty's Naval
Forces.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God in his late Providence toward Us and Our
People, to manifest at once the glory both of his Power and Mercy, in giving Us
a happy Victory over Our Adversaries at Sea, filling the hearts of Us and Our
People as full of joy and thankfulness, as becomes so transcendent a Mercy; We
cannot upon the due consideration hereof, but with all humility admire and
adore the mercy and goodness of God in this his signal manifestation thereof;
and We look upon it as an invitation from Heaven to Us and all Our People unto
most entire thankfulness for the same. And to the end some Solemn time may be
set apart for the public performance of this Duty; and that We and all Our
Subjects in England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, may pay Our
just tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, We do hereby Publish
and Declare, and also strictly Charge and Command, That Tuesday the Twentieth
day of this instant June be set apart and observed as a day of Public
Thanksgiving in the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and
other places adjacent. And that Tuesday the Fourth of July next, the like be
kept and duly observed through the rest of this whole Realm of England, and
Dominion of Wales. And for the more orderly performance thereof, We by the
advice of Our Reverend Bishops, have directed to be Composed, Printed and
Published, the Forms of such Prayers and public Thanksgivings, as We have
thought fit to be used in all Churches and places at these public Meetings;
and have given charge to Our Bishops to disperse the same throughout the whole
Kingdom. And We do also direct and appoint, That this Our Proclamation be
publicly read in all Churches and Chapels, on some Lord's Day precedent to the
said days of Thanksgiving hereby appointed, to the end that notice may be taken
thereof, and due thanks and praise may upon the said days be offered up unto
Almighty God; And that humble supplications be poured out before him for his
continual assistance, and improvement of this and all his mercies to the honor
of his great Name, and the peace and benefit of Us and Our People; Willing and
strictly Commanding all persons within Our said Realm and Dominions, with all
sobriety, reverence, and thankfulness to observe this day, as becomes so solemn
an occasion.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourteenth day of June, 1665. in the
Seventeenth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty 1665.


