C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Recalling and Prohibiting Seamen from the Services of
Foreign Princes and States.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been advertised, That great
numbers of Mariners, and other Seafaring men, His Majesty's natural born
Subjects, have betaken themselves to the Services of Foreign Princes and
States, to the great Dis-service of His Majesty and their Native Countries; and
whereby His said Majesty and His Realms are unfurnished of men of their sort
and calling, if there shall be cause to use them:

Therefore, for redress thereof at present, and preventing the like for the
future, The Kings most Excellent Majesty by this His Royal Proclamation, with
the Advice of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, does
Will and straightly Charge and Command, all and singular Masters of Ships,
Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, Shipwrights, and other Seafaring men whatsoever and
wheresover, being His Majesty's natural born Subjects, who are in the Service
of any Foreign Prince or State, or do serve in any Foreign Ships or Vessels,
That forthwith they do withdraw themselves, and depart from such Foreign
Services, and return home to their Native Countries and lawful Vocations.

And further His Majesty does hereby prohibit and forbid all and singular
Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, Shipwrights, and other Seafaring
men whatsoever, being His Majesty's natural born Subjects, from Entering
themselves. And does hereby straightly Charge and Command them, and every of
them, from henceforth to forbear to enter themselves into pay, or otherwise
betake themselves to the Service of any Foreign Princes or States, or to serve
in any Foreign Vessel or Ship, without License had and obtained in that
behalf. To all which His Majesty does, and will expect due obedience and
conformity: And does hereby Publish and Declare, That the Offenders to the
contrary, shall not only incur His Majesty's just displeasure, but be proceeded
against for their contempt according to the utmost severities of Law. And
further, His Majesty does hereby Authorize and Command all and every the
Captains, Masters, and other Officers, serving and employed in any of His
Majesty's Ships or Vessels at Sea, to stop and make stay of all and every such
Person and Persons as shall endeavor to Transport or Enter themselves into the
Service of any Foreign Prince or State, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this His Majesty's Royal Proclamation; And also to Seize upon, take,
and bring away, all such Mariners, Seamen, and other Persons aforesaid, as
shall be found to be Employed or Serving in any Ships or Vessels, of, or
belonging to any Foreign Prince or State, or to any Merchant, or other Person
or Persons, other than to His Majesty or His Subjects.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 30th day of May, 1664. in the Sixteenth
year of Our Reign.
LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


