By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of Robbers or Highway-men, and for a
Reward to the Apprehenders.
CHARLES R.

WE minding to Secure all Our Loving Subjects in Traveling and Going about
their Lawful Occasions, Do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and
Pleasure to be, and We do hereby Command all Our Officers of Justice, and other
Our Loving Subjects, That they use their utmost Diligence and Endeavor for the
Apprehending all Robbers, or Highway-men. And whereas We have sufficient and
credible Information, That James Husbands, William Hill, John Ashburnham,
William Hancock, Henry Bugby, William Blocksom, Andrew Edwards, Philip King,
William Harvey, John Nevison, and Francis Morley, are persons notoriously known
to be such as do daily commit such Offenses in Despite and Defiance of the Law,
and are some of them Indicted, to the end they may be proceeded against
according to Law: And for the Encouragement of such as shall Apprehend any of
the Offenders above named, or any other such Offender or Offenders, We are
Graciously pleased, and do hereby Declare, That any Person or Persons who shall
at any time within the space of One whole Year next after the Date hereof,
Apprehend any of the Persons above named, or any other Robber or Highway-man,
and cause him to be brought into Custody, shall within Fifteen days after his
Conviction, have a Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so Apprehended
and Convicted. And all and every Sheriffs, and Sheriff of the respective
Counties and Sheriffwicks where such Conviction shall be had, are, and is
hereby Required, upon the Certificate of the Judge, or Two or more Justices of
the Peace, before whom such Person or Persons shall be Convicted of such
Apprehension and Conviction, to pay unto the Person or Persons who shall
Apprehend such Offender or Offenders, the Reward aforesaid, within the time
aforesaid, for each and every Offender so Apprehended and Convicted as
aforesaid, out of Our Moneys Received by such Sheriff or Sheriffs in that
County where such Conviction shall be, which shall be allowed unto him or them
upon his or their Accounts in the Exchequer: For the Allowance whereof, this
Proclamation shall be a sufficient Warrant. And lastly, We do hereby Charge and
Command all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take notice
of this Our Royal Proclamation, and give due Obedience thereunto, and also to
be Aiding and Assisting in all things tending to the Execution thereof, as they
tender Our Displeasure, and upon pain of being proceeded against as Contemners
of Our Royal Authority.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this One and thirtieth day of January 1682/3.
And in the Five and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1682/3.


