C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehension of George Duke ^ ^ckingham.
CHARLES R.

FOrasmuch as it appears to Us that George Duke (...) ^^^^ingham, who was of
Our Privy Council, and otherways employed (...) great Trusts relating to Our
Person and the Public, and not (...) ^ound by common Duty and Allegiance, but
further obliged by espec(...) (...) extraordinary ties of Gratitude and
Fidelity to Our Crown, has notwithstanding held and maintained Secret
Correspondences by Letters, (...) other Transactions tending to raise Mutinies
in some of Our Forc(...) (...) stir up Seditions amongst Our People, and other
Traitorous Designs and Practices; And whereas for prevention of the mischievous
consequences that might thereon ensue, especially as the present state of
Affairs now are; and intending the matter might be (...)ined, and the said Duke
be brought to answer what should be objected against him, We did give order to
one of Our Sergeants at Arms to use all diligence to Apprehend him; in the
execution of which Command, Our Minister was ill treated, and Contemptuously
resisted, not without the knowledge and direction of the said Duke himself, as
We have just cause to believe, and he (as conscious of his demerits) secretly
escaped, and has withdrawn himself, and does hide and obscure in places
unknown: We therefore (by the Advice of Our Privy Council) do by this Our
Proclamation (whereof he ought and shall be presumed to take notice) Enjoin and
Command the said Duke with all speed, after the Publication hereof, to render
himself ^o one of Our Secretaries of State, or to Our Lieutenant of the Tower.
And We do hereby straightly Charge and Command all Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers and Subjects whatsoever, to
be diligent, and use their best endeavors to Search for, and Apprehend the
said Duke, in all places whatsoever, and that they safely Convey him to one of
Our Secretaries of State, or to Our Lieutenant of Our Tower, that he may be
brought to answer such things as shall be objected against him, and for such
further course to be taken with him, as shall be agreeable to Law and Justice.
And We do further Declare, That if any person or persons after the publication
hereof, shall directly or indirectly conceal or harbor the said Duke, or shall
not use their best endeavor for his Discovery and Apprehension, We will (as
there is just cause) proceed against them with all severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 8th day of March, In the Nineteenth year
of Our Reign, 1666/7.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, His
Majesty's Printers, 1666/7.


