CR
DIEV^ET^MON DROIT.
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehension of Captain Don
Philip Hellen, alias Fitzgerald.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it has been represented unto Us by the humble Petition of Martin
Stamp, and due proof made by the Testimony of credible Witnesses, That Timothy
Stamp, Brother of the said Martin, being a Merchant, was in December* 1672.
taken by a Spanish Man of War, and his Ship, called the Humility of London, and
the Goods therein, to the value of Five thousand pounds, carried into the Port
of Havana; But the Governor of the place not finding cause for the Detainer of
the said Ship, restored the same, with promise of Satisfaction for the Damage
sustained, and a Protection against all Spanish Ships; Yet during the restraint
of the said Ship, a Man of War was fitted out under the Command of Don Philip
Hellen, alias Fitzgerald (Our Natural born Subject) who retook the said Ship
within Musket shot of the Castle of Havana, and after Tortured and Murdered
the said Timothy Stamp, and most of his men; some they hanged until they were
half dead, and then cut them with their swords, afterw^^s hung them up again
until they were almost dead, then cut them in pieces with an Ax; others had
their Arms cut off, and were cleft down with Axes; And afterward the said Don
Philip Hellen, alias Fitzgerald, and his Company shared the said Ship and
Goods; And the like Barbarous cruelty the said Don Philip Hellen, alias
Fitzgerald has since exercised upon other Our Subjects: We have therefore
thought fit (with the advice of Our Privy Council) to publish the same to all
Our loving Subjects, and doubt not of their care and forwardness in the
discovery and apprehension of the said Fitzgerald: And We do by this Our
Proclamation (whereof he ought and shall be presumed to take notice) Enjoin and
Command the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitzgerald, within Six Months after
the publication hereof, to render himself to one of Our Principal Secretaries
of State, or to the chief Governor of the Island of Jamaica, or to the chief
Governor of some other of Our Foreign Plantations, to receive and undergo such
Order as shall be gi^^ concerning him. And We do hereby further publish and
declare, That if the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitzgerald, shall not
within the time aforesaid, render himself accordingly, then if any person or
persons whatsoever shall at any time after apprehend and bring him dead or
alive to one of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or to the Governor of Our
Island of Jamaica, or to the chief Governor of any other of Our Foreign
Plantations, he or they so apprehending and bringing him, shall have a reward
of One thousand Pieces of Eight. And We do also strictly Charge and Command all
Our Officers and Ministers, as well Military as Civil, and other Our Subjects
whatsoever, to be diligent, and use their best endeavors to search for and
apprehend the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitzgerald, in all places
whatsoever, as they will answer the neglect thereof at their perils. And We do
hereby further publish and declare, That if any of Our Subjects shall after the
publication of this Our Proclamation, directly or indirectly conceal or harbor
the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitzgerald, or shall not use his or their
best endeavors for his discovery and apprehension, as well by giving due
advertisement to Our Officers, as by all other good ^eans, We will (as there is
just cause) proceed against them that shall so neglect this Our Command, with
all severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the First day of October 1675. In the Seven
and twentieth year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.


