By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the better ordering of those who repair to the Court for
their Cure of the Disease called the King's Evil.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the grace and blessing of God, the Kings and Queens of this Realm
by many ages past, have had the happiness by their Sacred Touch, and Invocation
of the Name of God, to cure those who are afflicted with the Disease called the
King's Evil; and His now most Excellent Majesty in no less measure then any of
His Royal Predecessors has had good success herein, and in His most gracious
and pious Disposition is as ready and willing as any King or Queen of this
Realm ever was in any thing, to relieve the distresses and necessities of His
good Subjects; yet in His Princely, Wisdom foreseeing that in this (as in all
other things) order is to be observed, and fit times are necessary to be
appointed for the performing of this great work of Charity, His most Excellent
Majesty does hereby publish and declare His Royal will and pleasure to be, That
whereas heretofore the usual times of presenting such persons for this purpose,
have been prefixed by His Royal Predecessors; that from henceforth the times
shall be from the Feast of All Saints, commonly called Alhallontide, to a week
before Christmas, and in the month before Easter, being times more convenient
both for the temperature of the season, and in respect of any contagion which
may happen in this near access to His Majesty's Sacred Person.

And His Majesty does accordingly will and command, that from the time of
publishing this Proclamation, none presume to repair to His Majesty's Court to
be healed of that Disease, but only at, or within the times for that purpose
hereby appointed as aforesaid. And His Majesty does further will and command,
That all such as hereafter shall come, or repair to the Court for this purpose,
shall bring with them Certificates under the hands of the Parson, Vicar, or
Minister, and Churchwardens of those several Parishes where they dwell, and
from whence they come, testifying according to the truth, that they have not
any time before been Touched by the King, to the intent to be healed of that
Disease. And His Majesty does straightly charge all Justices of the Peace,
Constables, and other Officers, That they do not suffer any to pass, but such
as have such Certificates, upon pain of His Majesty's displeasure: And to the
end that all His loving Subjects may the better take knowledge of this His
Majesty's pleasure and command, His will is, That this Proclamation be
published and affixed in some open place in every Market Town of this Realm.

Given at Our Court of Hampton Court, the Fourth day of July, 1662. in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.


