By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of Robbers or Highway-men, and for a
Reward to the Apprehenders.
CHARLES R.

WE minding to secure all Our loving Subjects in Traveling and going about
their Lawful Occasions, do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and
Pleasure to be; And We do hereby Command all Our Officers of Justice, and other
Our loving Subjects, That they use their utmost diligence and endeavor for the
Apprehending all Robbers or Highway-men, to the end they may be proceeded
against according to Law. And for the encouragement of such as shall Apprehend
any such Offender or Offenders, We are Graciously pleased, and do hereby
Declare, That such person or persons, who shall at any time before the First
day of February next, Apprehend any Robber or Highway-man, and cause him to be
brought into Custody, shall within Fifteeen days after his Conviction, have a
Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so Apprehended and Convicted: And
all and every Sheriffs and Sheriff of the respective Counties and Sheriffwicks
where such Conviction shall be had, are, and is hereby required, upon the
Certificate of the Judge, or of Two or more Justices of the Peace, before whom
such person or persons shall be Convicted, of such Apprehension and Conviction,
to pay unto the person or persons who shall Apprehend such Offender or
Offenders, the Reward aforesaid, within the time aforesaid, for each and every
Offender so Apprehended and Convicted as aforesaid, out of Our Moneys received
by such Sheriff or Sheriffs in that County where such Conviction shall be,
which shall be allowed unto him or them upon his or their Account in the
Exchequer; For the Allowance whereof, this Proclamation shall be a sufficient
Warrant. And lastly, We do hereby Charge and Command all Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and
other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take notice of this Our Royal
Proclamation; and give due Obedience thereunto, and also to be Aiding and
Assisting in all things tending to the Execution thereof, as they tender Our
Pleasure, and upon pain of being proceeded against as Contemners of Our Royal
Authority.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 20th day of June 1677, in the Nine and
twentieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1677.


