By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the effectual prosecution of His Majesty's Commission for
the Providing and Making of Saltpeter and Gunpowder.
CHARLES R.

WE having more then ordinary occasion to provide good and sufficient
Saltpeter and Powder to furnish Our Stores, for the Defense and Safety of Our
Realms and Dominions, have by Commission lately issued under Our Great Seal of
England, committed the Management thereof unto Our Right Trusty and
well-beloved John Lord Berkeley, Baron of Stratton, and Our Trusty and
well-beloved Sir John Duncombe Knight, Thomas Chicheley Esquire, Commissioners
for the Execution of the Office of Our Ordnance, William Leg Lieutenant of Our
Ordnance, John Evelyn Esquire, Edward Sherborn Esquire, Clerk of Our Ordnance,
and Jonas Moor Esquire; of whose care and fidelities We are well assured:
Giving them Power by their Deputies and Workmen, to work all Saltpeter and
Gunpowder to be made of Saltpeter dug within Our Realms and Dominions, and
between the hours of Sunrising and Sunsetting, to search for and dig
Saltpeter in all convenient places, as well in Our own as Subjects Lands; but
not in any part of Dwelling-houses inhabited, or to break down Walls, or hazard
Foundations, or dig in any Threshing or Maulting-Floors without consent of the
Owners, nor in Dovehouses, Stables, or other Outhouses, but at convenient
times of the day: with power by Warrant from the Justice of Peace to take up
such Carts and Carriages as shall be useful and necessary to carry on the said
Work, paying Eight pence per mile for every Lunn they shall carry, according to
the late Act of Parliament concerning Carriages, and to provide convenient
Houses, Stables. Rooms, Yards, void places, Water, and other necessaries, and
to Erect and set up Furnaces and Vessels fit for the making of Saltpeter,
agreeing with the Owners; and if they be unreasonable in their demands, the
next Justice of the Peace to settle the same: And the said Deputies or Workmen,
or any Beasts or Carriages employed in the said Works, are not to be Pressed
for any other Service: And they are to repair and make good the places dug,
or any way defaced: And if any difference arise, to be composed by the two next
Justices of the Peace to the place, if it be not in a City or Town-Corporate;
and if there, by the Mayor, Aldermen, or thief Officer: And if they cannot
determine the same, to certify to the Lords of the Privy Council the names of
the Offenders, with their Offenses, that such further course may be therein
taken, as shall be thought fit, as by Our said Commission (amongst other
things) may appear. Now to the end so necessary a Work may not be obstructed,
and to the intent Our said Commission may be duly observed, We have thought
fit to publish the same by this Our Royal Proclamation. And We do hereby Will,
and straightly Charge and Command all and singular Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, and all other Our Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever, to
be Aiding and Assisting, and give due Obedience and Conformity in all things,
in or concerning the Execution of the said Commission, as they tender Our high
Displeasure, and will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 16th day of July, 1666. In the Eighteenth
year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1666.


