By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of Robbers or High-way-men, and for a
Reward to the Apprehenders.
CHARLES R.

WE minding to secure all Our Loving Subjects in Traveling and going about
their Lawful Occasions, Do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and
Pleasure to be, And We do hereby Command all Our Officers of Justice, and other
Our Loving Subjects, that they use their utmost Diligence and Endeavor for the
Apprehending all Robbers or High-way-men, to the end they may be proceeded
against according to Law. And for the Encouragement of such as shall Apprehend
any such Offender or Offenders, We are graciously pleased, and do hereby
Declare, That such Person or Persons, who shall at any time before the Fifth
day of May next, Apprehend any Robber or High-way-man, and cause him to be
brought into Custody, shall, within Fifteen days after his Conviction, have a
Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so Apprehended and Convicted. And
all and every Sheriffs and Sheriff of the respective Counties and Sheriffwicks
where such Conviction shall be had, are, and is hereby required, upon the
Certificate of the Judge, or Two, or more Justices of the Peace before whom
such Person or Persons shall be Convicted, of such Apprehension and Conviction,
to Pay unto the Person or Persons who shall Apprehend such Offender or
Offenders, the Reward aforesaid, within the Time aforesaid, for each and every
Offender so Apprehended and Convicted as aforesaid, out of Our Moneys received
by such Sheriff or Sheriffs in that County where such Conviction shall be,
which shall be Allowed unto him or them upon his or their Accounts in the
Exchequer: for the Allowance whereof, this Proclamation shall be a sufficient
Warrant. And lastly, We do hereby Charge and Command all Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and
other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take notice of this Our Royal
Proclamation, and give due Obedience thereunto, and also to be aiding and
assisting in all things tending to the Execution thereof, as they tender Our
Displeasure, and upon pain of being proceeded against as Contemners of Our
Royal Authority.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Fourteenth day of May 1681. In the Three and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1681.


