C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Re-printing, Publishing, and Using of a Book,
Entitled, God and the King.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the special Command of Our late Royal Grandfather, King James (of
blessed memory) there was Compiled and Printed a Book or Treatise, Entitled,
God and the King; or a Dialogue, Showing that the King of England being
Immediate under God, within his Dominions, does rightfully claim whatsoever is
required by the Oath of Allegiance: which said Book or Treatise, being
universally dispersed through these Realms and Dominions, did in those times
(by the blessing of Almighty God) prove an effectual means, both for the
instruction of the People in their Duty and Allegiance, and for avoiding the
Penalties of the Laws and Statutes made and provided concerning the same. In
respect whereof, and to the end Our loving Subjects may not be ignorant of, but
rightly understand the said Duty, and the true meaning thereof, which by reason
of the late times of Libertism and Distraction has been by many too much
neglected, and not duly considered, We have been graciously pleased to Direct,
That the said Book or Treatise be forthwith reprinted and published. And Our
further Will and Pleasure is, and We do by this Our Royal Proclamation (by and
with the Advice of Our Privy Council) Will and Command all and every the
Archbishops, Bishops, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other Officers and
Ministers whatsoever within these Our Realms and Dominions, That they and every
of them respectively, within their several Diocese, Limits, Liberties and
Jurisdictions, do (by such ways and means, as they in their Wisdoms and
Discretions shall think fit) advise and direct all Schoolmasters and Teachers
of the English and Latin Tongue, to teach their Scholars the said Book or
Treatise, either in Latin or English, according to their respective
capacities. And also, that it be recommended to all Masters of Families and
Apprentices to have one of the said Books or Treatises, with advice to read and
be instructed in the same, and the contents and true meaning thereof, thereby
to enable themselves to understand and perform the said Oath, and avoid the
Penalties of the Laws and Statutes made and provided against such as infringe
or neglect the same. And for the better encouragement of Our Subjects in so
good and necessary a work; We do by these presents straightly Charge and Command
all Printers, Stationers and Booksellers, and all other persons whatsoever,
That they or any of them do not at any time or times hereafter ask, take, or
demand for the said Book or Treatise, above the price or sum of six pence of
lawful money of England, as they tender Our pleasure, and will answer the
contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, December the fifth, 1662. in the Fourteenth
year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.


