DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES R.
Right Trusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well.
WHereas Our Royal Father of Blessed Memory, did in the Year One thousand six
hundred thirty and two, Constitute and Establish a Society of Fishers, and
declared, That He was resolved by all good occasions, favorably to Assist, and
graciously Accept the forwardness of all those that should express their Zeal
to His Majesty's Service in so general and public an undertaking, It being
then Resolved and Concluded by His Majesty, that it was very honorable and
necessary for this Kingdom. Now that the true Managing, and most advantageous
prosecution thereof, is by experience discovered by Philip late Earl of
Pembroke and Mountgomery, and his Associates, who did cause sundry
Fishing-Vessels to be provided and built, which employed many Families in
making of Nets and other Provisions (one Vessel employing Twenty Families in
work) besides the breeding of Country-Youths to be made serviceable Mariners in
short time, as by the Book called The Royal Herring Buss Fishings presented
unto Us, does plainly appear. And whereas We are informed, that the Nation does
abound with great numbers of poor Families and Vagrants, who for want of
employment are like to perish, unless some speedy care be taken for their
relief; and that the several Wards and Suburbs of this Our City of London, and
Hamlets adjacent, are burdened with multitudes of poor people, not only which
are born in the said places, but such as come out of sundry Countries to seek
Relief. For redress whereof, We do hereby recommend unto the care of you Our
Lord Major of the said City, to advise with each Alderman, and cause his
Ward-moot Inquest to give in a particular of all the poor Inhabitants within
his Ward, what their employment is, and how many are without employment, and
present the same to the rest of the Inhabitants in his Ward, with a Copy
thereof, and excite them to a free Subscription for raising a stock to buy Hemp
and Clap-boards to make Herring Fishing-Nets and Barrels, for the furnishing
and fitting out of one Buss or Fishing-Vessel to belong to the said Ward; which
will give all the Poor and Vagrants employment, the said Ward husbanding the
same to their best advantage. The which We shall in like manner recommend to
all the Counties, Cities, and Towns within Our Dominions, whereby to make it a
National employment for the general good, and will give all fitting assistance
unto the Undertakers for their encouragement; that so when Provisions shall be
made ready, and Storehouses built in commodious places about the River of
Thames, (where breaches have been made) and the like, in the several Ports;
Magazines may be fitted with Nets, Cask, Salt, and all things in readiness, the
Busses may all go forth to Our Island of Sheetland as their Rendezvous to keep
together in their Fishing, according to certain Orders prescribed in the
aforesaid Book; and to take that privilege of the Fishing-grounds which
belongs to Us before all Nations whatsoever. And so We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal this Three and twentieth day of July, in the
Twelfth year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty's Command. Ed. Nicholas.
To Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved, the Lord Major of Our City of London, to
be Communicated to the Court of Aldermen.



London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


