C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A PROCLAMATION, Prohibiting the keeping of the Fair at Bristol, commonly
called St. Paul's Fair.
CHARLES REX,

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, out of His Princely and Christian care of
His loving Subjects, upon the Petition of the Major, Citizens, and Inhabitants
of the City of Bristol, Praying, That the Fair usually held in or near that
City, on the Five and twentieth day of January, commonly called St. Paul's Fair,
may be put off for this Year, In regard it would be the occasion of great
concourse or People from London, and several other parts of this Kingdom, that
have been Infected with the Plague; Which (although the Contagion be now in a
very great measure ceased through Gods mercy) may be the occasion of danger, to
that and other parts of the Land, which have hitherto (praised be God) stood
clear and free; Has, with the Advice of Hi Privy Council thought good
(accordingly) by this open Declaration of His Pleasure, and necessary
Commandment, not only to Admonish and Require all His loving Subjects, to
forbear to resort, for this time, unto the said Fair kept at Bristol, commonly
called St. Paul's Fair; But also to enjoin the Lord or Lords of the said Fair,
and others interested therein, That he and they forbear to hold the same, or
any thing appertaining thereunto, at the said time accustomed, or any other
time for this present Year, upon pain of such punishment, as for a Contempt so
much concerning the general Safety of His People, they shall be adjudged to
deserve, which they must expect to be inflicted with all severity: And to that
purpose does hereby Charge and Enjoin, under like Penalty, all Citizens and
Inhabitants of the City of London, That none of them shall repair to the said
Fair, called St. Paul's Fair, this present Year: His Majesty's intention being,
and so hereby Declaring Himself, That no Lord of the said Fair, or other,
interested in the Profit thereof, shall by this necessary and temporary
Restraint, receive any prejudice in the right of his or their said Fair, or
Liberties thereunto belonging, Any thing before mentioned notwithstanding.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the One and twentieth Day of December, 1665. In
the Seventeenth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
OXFORD: Printed by Leonard Lichfeild, Printer to the University For John Bill,
and Christopher Barker, Printers to His Majesty, Anno Dom. 1665.


