HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT

By the King. A PROCLAMATION Touching Mariners, Seamen and Soldiers, which
are to serve in His Majesty's Navy.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for many weighty and important
reasons, has prepared a Royal Navy, which is now ready to set to Sea, and to
be employed on such designs as His Majesty, by the Advice of His Council, has
or shall direct, for the Honor and Safety of His Majesty's Realms and
Dominions. And whereas by the Laws of this Realm, every Mariner, Seaman and
Soldier, receiving Press-money to serve the King in any of His Ships, and
after refusing to serve, or absenting himself at the time and place appointed
unto him for his Service, does incur the danger and penalty of Felony, and is
to be punished, and forfeit as a Felon. Nevertheless His Majesty is informed
that several Mariners, Seamen and Soldiers Pressed for His Service, and
having received Press-money, do neglect to repair to, and disert the said
Service, whereby His Ships may be unfurnished, and His Service disappointed, to
the Dishonor of His Majesty, and danger of His People, especially in this time
when Foreigners are ready prepared to infest His Dominions, and deprive His
Subjects of their privilege of Trade, and other Interest. His Majesty
therefore in His Princely Wisdom and Providence, foreseeing the inconveniences
which may ensue, has thought fit, with the Advice of His Privy Council, to
publish this His Royal Proclamation, and does hereby straightly Charge and
Command all Mariners, Seamen and Soldiers, who are, or shall hereafter be
Pressed for His Service in any Ships or Vessels belonging to the said Navy, and
have received, or shall receive Press-money for that purpose, That they duly
repair and come to the places, and at the times appointed unto them, and there
continue in the Service unto which they are or shall be respectively Commanded,
upon pain of death, and all such other Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as by
the Law can be inflicted or imposed upon them: And for the speedy and effectual
prosecution of such Offenders, His Majesty has thought fit, and does intend
forthwith to issue Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for their Legal Trial and
Punishment according to Justice. And for the better execution of this His Royal
intention, does hereby Charge and Command all and singular Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Bailiffs,
Constables, Headboroughs, and other His Officers, Ministers and Subjects
whatsoever, within any of His Realms or Dominions, with all care and diligence
to make search for, discover and apprehend all and every person and persons
offending as aforesaid; and such as shall be apprehended, forthwith to Commit,
or cause to be Committed to the next Goal of the County, City, or place where
they shall be so apprehended, there to remain until they shall be duly
proceeded against, and delivered by course of Law: And that the names of the
persons so Apprehended and Committed, be forthwith sent to His Majesty or Privy
Council, that care may be taken for their speedy prosecution accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 23d day of November, 1664. in the 16th
year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


