HIS Majesty being given to understand, that the late King his most Dear
Brother of Blessed Memory Deceased, had given Order for Reprinting several
Treaties of Peace and Commerce Concluded between Him and other Princes and
States, which were not to be had without great difficulty, by reason that few
Copies remain of the former Impressions of them; His Majesty is pleased to
Direct, That the said Treaties be forthwith Reprinted. Given at the Court at
Whitehall the First day of March 1684/5.

SUNDERLAND.

SEVERAL TREATIES OF PEACE and COMMERCE Concluded between the late KING Of
Blessed Memory Deceased, AND OTHER PRINCES and STATES.

Reprinted and Published by His Majesty's Especial Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: and by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.

Table of the TREATIES.
TReaty of Peace and Commerce with Spain, 1667. Page 1. Treaty of Peace with
France, 1667. page 39. Treaty of Peace with Denmark, 1667. page 49. Treaty of
Peace with Holland, 1667. page 55. Treaty of Navigation and Commerce with
Holland, 1667. page 79. Treaty of Navigation and Commerce with Holland, 1667/8.
page 93. Treaty of Friendship and Commerce with Savoy, 1669. page 107. Treaty
with Spain for settling Differences in America, 1670. page 123. Treaty of
Alliance and Commerce with Denmark, 1670. page 131. Treaty of Peace with Tunis,
1674/5. page 157. Treaty of Peace and Commerce with Tripoli, 1676. page 163.
Treaty of Peace with Holland, 1673/4. page 177. Treaty Marine with Holland,
1674. page 185. Explanatory Declaration of the Marine Treaties with Holland,
167^. page 201. Capitulations and Articles of Peace with the Ottoman Empire,
1675. page 203. Treaty Marine with France, 1676/7. page 243. Treaty of Peace
and Commerce with Algiers, 1682. page 257.
Articles of Peace, Commerce, and Alliance, between the Crowns of Great Britain
and Spain, Concluded in a Treaty at Madrid the 13/23 of May, in the Year of our
Lord God, 1667.
I.
FIrst, It is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day forward there shall be
between the two Crowns of Great Britain and Spain, a General, Good, Sincere,
True, A perfect Friendship and Peace.
Firm and Perfect Amity, Confederation and Peace, which shall endure for ever,
and be observed inviolably, as well by Land, as by Sea and Fresh-waters; and
also between the Lands, Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories,
belonging unto, or under the Obedience of either of them; And that their
Subjects, People, and Inhabitants respectively, of what condition, degree or
quality soever, from henceforth reciprocally, shall help, assist, and show to
one another all manner of Love, good Offices, and Friendship.

II.
That neither of the said Kings, nor their respective People, Subjects or
Inhabitants within their Dominions, upon any pretense, may in public or
secret, do, or procure to be done, any thing against the other, in any Place,
by Sea or Land, nor in the Ports or Rivers of the one or the other, but shall
treat one another with all Love and Friendship; Free Passage and Trade.
and may by Water and by Land, freely and securely pass into the Confines,
Countries, Lands, Kingdoms, Islands, Dominions, Cities, Towns, Villages, Walled
or without Wall, Fortified or Unfortified, their Havens and Ports (where
hitherto Trade and Commerce has been accustomed) and there Trade, Buy and
Sell, as well of and to the Inhabitants of the respective Places, as those of
their own Nation, or any other Nation that shall be or come there.

III.
That the said Kings of Great Britain and Spain, shall take care that their
respective People and Subjects from henceforward do abstain from all Force,
Violence or Wrong; and if any Injury shall be done by either of the said Kings,
or by the People or Subjects of either of them, to the People or Subjects of
the other, against the Articles of this Alliance, or against common Right,
there shall not therefore be given Letters of Reprisal, Marque, or
Counter-marque by any of the Confederates, until such time as Justice is sought
and followed in the ordinary course of Law: Letters of Marque, when to be
granted.
But if Justice be denied or delayed, then the King whose People or Inhabitants
have received harm, shall ask it of the other, by whom (as is said) the Justice
shall have been denied or delayed, or of the Commissioners that shall be by the
one King or the other appointed to receive and hear such Demands, to the end
that all such Differences may be compounded in Friendship, or according to Law.
But if there should be yet a delay, or Justice should not be done, nor
Satisfaction given within six Months after having the same so demanded, then
may be given Letters of Reprisal, Marque or Counter-marque.

IV.
That between the King of Great Britain, Free Trade and Commerce.
and the King of Spain, and their respective People, Subjects and Inhabitants,
as well upon Sea as upon Land and Fresh Water, in all and every their Kingdoms,
Lands, Countries, Dominions, Confines, Territories, Provinces, Islands,
Plantations, Cities, Villages, Towns, Ports, Rivers, Creeks, Bays, Straights
and Currents, where hitherto Trade and Commerce has been accustomed, there
shall be free Trade and Commerce, in such way and manner, that without safe
Conduct, and without general or particular License, the People and Subjects of
each other may freely, as well by Land as by Sea and Fresh Water, Navigate and
go into their said Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions, and all the Cities, Ports,
Currents, Bays, Districts, and other Places thereof, and may enter into any
Port with their Ships laden or empty, Carriage or Carriages wherein to bring
their Merchandise, and there buy and sell what and how much they please, and
also at just and reasonable Rates provide themselves with Provisions and other
necessary things for their subsistence and Voyage; and also may repair their
Ships and Carriages, and from thence again freely depart with their Ships,
Carriages, Goods, Merchandise and Estate, and return to their own Countries, or
to such other Place as they shall think fit, without any Molestation or
Impediment, so that they pay the Duties and Customs which shall be due, and
saving to either side the Laws and Ordinances of their Country.

V.
Item, No Customs to be paid but what the Natives pay.
It is likewise Agreed, That for the Merchandises which the Subjects of the
King of Great Britain shall buy in Spain, or other the Kingdoms or Dominions of
the King of Spain, and shall carry in their own Ships, or in Ships hired or
lent unto them, no new Customs, Toll, Tenths, Subsidies, or other Rights or
Duties whatsoever shall be taken or increased, other then those which in the
like case the Natives themselves, and all other Strangers are obliged to pay;
and the Subjects aforesaid buying, selling and contracting for their
Merchandises, as well in respect of the Prices, as of all Duties to be paid,
shall enjoy the same Privileges which are allowed to the natural Subjects of
Spain; and may buy, and lade their Ships with such Goods and Merchandises;
which said Ships being laden, and Customs paid for the Goods, shall not be
detained in Port upon any pretense whatsoever; nor shall the Laders, Merchants
or Factors who bought and loaded the Goods aforesaid be questioned after the
departure of the said Ships, for any matter or thing whatsoever concerning the
same.

VI.
And to the end that the Officers and Ministers of all Cities, Tables or Lists
of the Duties to be put up.
Towns and Villages belonging to either, may neither demand nor take from the
respective Merchants and People, greater Taxes, Duties, Stipends, Recompenses,
Gifts, or any other Charges then what ought to be taken by virtue of this
Treaty; and that the said Merchants and People may know and understand with
certainty what is ordained in all things touching this; It is Agreed and
Concluded, That Tables and Lists shall be put up at the Doors of the
Custom-houses and Registries of all the Cities, Villages and Towns of, or
appertaining to one or the other King where such Rights and Excises or Customs
are usually paid; in which, how much, and of what quality such Rights, Customs,
Subsidies and Payments, either to the Kings or any the aforesaid Officers are
allowed, shall be put down in Writing, declaring as well the Species of what is
Imported, as what is carried out. And if any Officer, or any other in his name,
upon any pretense whatsoever, in public or secret, directly or indirectly,
shall ask or receive of any Merchant or other person respectively, any sum of
Money or other thing, by the name of Right, Due, Stipend, Allowance, or
Recompense (though it be by the way of voluntary Donative) more or otherwise
then aforesaid, the said Officer or his Deputy being in such manner guilty, and
convict before a competent Judge in the Country where the Crime is committed,
shall be put in Prison for three Months, and shall pay thrice the value of the
thing so received; of which the half shall be for the King of the Country where
the Crime is committed, and the other half for the Denunciator, for the which
he may sue his Right before any competent Judge of the Country where it shall
happen.

VII.
That it shall be lawful for the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, All
kind of Goods freely to be Imported into Spain.
to bring out, and carry into Spain, and all or any Lands and Dominions of the
King of Spain (where heretofore they have used Trade and Commerce) and Trade
there with all kind of Merchandise, Clothes, Manufactures, and things of the
Kingdom of Great Britain, and the Manufactures, Goods, Fruits, and Kinds of the
Islands, Towns and Plantations to him appertaining, and what shall have been
bought by English Factors on this side, or farther on the other side of the
Cape of Buena Esperanca, without being enforced to declare to whom, or for what
Price they sell their said Merchandise and Provisions, or being molested for
the Errors of the Masters of the Ships, or others, in the Entry of the Goods;
and at their pleasure to return again out of the Dominions of the King of
Spain, with all, or any Goods, Estates and Merchandise, to any of the
Territories, Islands, Dominions and Countries of the King of England, or to any
other Place, To pay only for the Goods Landed.
paying the Rights and Tributes mentioned in the antecedent Chapters; and the
rest of all their Lading which is not brought to Land, they may detain, keep
and carry away in their said Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels again, without
paying any Right or Imposition whatsoever for it, as if therewith they had
never been within any Bay or Port of the Catholic King. And all the Goods,
Prize Goods to be esteemed as English.
Estates, Merchandise, Ships or other Vessels, with any things introduced into
the Dominions or Places of the Crown of Great Britain as Prizes, and judged for
such in the said Dominions and Places, shall be taken for Goods and Merchandise
of Great Britain, comprehended so by the intention of this Article.

VIII.
That the Subjects and Vassals of the Most Serene King of Great Britain may
bring and carry to all and singular the Dominions of the King of Spain,
East India Goods to be freely Imported into Spain.
any Fruits and Commodities of the East Indies, it appearing by Testimony of
the Deputies of the East-Indy Company in London, that they are of, or have come
from the English Conquests, Plantations or Factories, with like Privilege, and
according to what is allowed to the Subjects of the United Provinces, by the
Royal Cedulas of Contravando bearing date the 27. of June, and the 3. of July
1663. and published on the 30. of June, and 4. of July the same Year. And for
what may concern both the Indies, and any other Parts whatsoever, The English
to have all Privileges granted to the Dutch by the Treaty of Munster 1648.
the Crown of Spain does grant to the King of Great Britain and his Subjects,
all that is granted to the United States of the Low Countries and their
Subjects, in their Treaty of Munster 1648. Point for Point, in as full and
ample manner as if the same were herein particularly inserted, the same Rules
being to be observed whereunto the Subjects of the said United States are
obliged, and mutual Offices of Friendship to be performed from one side to the
other.

IX.
That the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, And to have all the
Privileges granted to the English residing in Andaluzia 1645.
Trading, Buying and Selling in any of the Kingdoms, Governments, Islands,
Ports or Territories of the said King of Spain, shall have, use, and enjoy all
the Privileges and Immunities which the said King has granted and confirmed
to the English Merchants that reside in Andaluzia, by his Royal Cedulas or
Orders, dated the 19. day of March, the 26. day of June, and the 9. day of
November 1645. His Catholic Majesty by these Presents reconfirming the same
as a part of this Treaty between the two Crowns. And to the end that it be
manifest to all, It is consented, That the said Schedules (as to the whole
substance thereof) be passed and transferred to the body of the present
Articles, in the name and favor of all and singular the Subjects of the King
of Great Britain, residing and Trading in any Places whatsoever within His
Catholic Majesty's Dominions

X.
That the Ships, or any other Vessels that shall belong to the King of Great
Britain or his Subjects, Navigating into the King of Spain's Dominions, or any
of his Ports, shall not be visited by the Judges of Counterband, or by any
other Officer or Person, by his own, or by any other Authority; nor shall any
Soldiers, English Ships, how to be visited in Port.
Armed men, or other Officers or Persons, be put on Board any of the said Ships
or Vessels; nor shall the Officers of the Custom-house of the one or the other
Party, search in any Vessels or Ships belonging to the People of the one or the
other, which shall enter into their Regions, Dominions, or respective Ports,
until their said Ships or Vessels are unladen, or until they have carried on
Shore all the Lading and Merchandise which they declare they resolve to
disembarque in the said Port; nor shall the Captain, Master, or any other of
the Company of the said Ships be Imprisoned, or they or their Boats detained on
Shore; but in the interim, Officers of the Custom-house may be put on Board the
said Vessels or Ships, so they exceed not the number of three for each Ship, to
see that no Goods or Merchandise be Landed out of the said Ships or Vessels,
without paying such Duties as by these Articles either Party is obliged to pay;
which said Officers are to be without any charge to the Ship or Ships, Vessel
or Vessels, their Commanders, Mariners, Company, Merchants, Factors, or
Proprietors. And when it happens that the Master or Owner of any Ship shall
declare the whole Lading of his said Ship is to be Discharged in any Port, the
Entry of the said Lading shall be made in the Custom-house, after the usual
manner; and if after the Entry made, any other Goods be found in the said Ship
or Ships, more then what are contained in the said Entry, eight working Days
shall be allowed them on which they may work (which shall be reckoned from the
Day they began to unlade) to the end that the concealed Goods may be Entered,
and the Confiscation of them prevented: and in case that in the time limited,
the Entry or Manifestation of them shall not have been made, then such
particular Goods only, which shall be found as aforesaid, though the unlading
be not finished, shall be Confiscated, and not any other; nor shall other
trouble be given, or punishment inflicted on the Merchant or Owner of the Ship;
and when the Ships or Vessels are reladen, they may have freedom to go out
again.

XI.
That the Ship or Ships appertaining to the one or the other King, English not
obliged to Register or Pay for any Goods but such as they shall unlade.
or to their respective People and Subjects, that shall enter into any Ports,
Lands or Dominions of the one or the other, and shall Discharge any part of
their Goods and Merchandises in any Port or Haven, being consigned with the
rest to other Places within or without the said Dominions, shall not be obliged
to Register or Pay the Rights of any other Goods or Merchandise, then of that
which they shall unlade in the said Port or Haven, nor be constrained to give
Bond for the Goods they shall carry to other Places, nor any other Security, if
it be not in case of Felony, Debt, Treason, or other capital Crime.

XII.
Whereas the one moiety of the Custom of all Foreign Goods and Merchandises
Imported into England, is allowed and returned back to the Importer, if the
said Goods be Exported out of the said Kingdom within twelve Months after the
first Landing, upon Oath made that they are the same Goods which paid Custom in
wards, and that if they be not Re-shipt within the said twelve Months, Goods
Landed which have paid Custom, and shall afterward be carried to any other
Place, to pay no surther Duties.
yet they may at all times be Exported without paying any Custom or Duty
outward: It is therefore Agreed, That if any the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain shall hereafter Land any Goods or Merchandise, of what growth or nature
soever they be, in any of the Ports of his Catholic Majesty, and having
Entered them, and paid the Custom which by this Treaty ought to be paid, and
shall afterward desire to Transport them, or any part of them, to any other
Place whatsoever, for a better Market, it shall and may be lawful for him or
them so to do freely, without paying or being demanded any other Custom or duty
at all for the same, he or they making Oath, if required thereunto, that they
are the same Goods for which Custom was paid at their Landing: And in case that
the Subjects, People and Inhabitants of the Dominions of either part shall
unlade, or have in any City, Town or Village respectively, any Goods,
Merchandises, Fruits or Estates, and have paid the Customs due, according to
what has been declared, and after that, not being able to put them off, shall
resolve to remit them to some other City, Town or Village of the said
Dominions, they may not only do it without difficulty or impediment, and
without paying other Rights then what were due at their Entry, but likewise the
Custom or Rights shall not be paid again in any other part of the said
Dominions, bringing Certificates from the Officers of the Custom-house, that
they were paid before in the due form. And the chief Farmers and Commissioners
of the King of Spain's Rents in all Places, or some other Officer or Officers
to be appointed for that purpose, shall at all times permit and suffer the
Transportation of all such Goods and Merchandises from Place to Place, and give
sufficient Certificate to the owners thereof, or their Assigns, of their having
paid their Custom at their first Landing, whereby they may be carried to, and
Landed at any other Port or Place of the said Jurisdiction, free from all
Duties or Impediments whatsoever, as aforesaid, saving always the Right of any
third person.

XIII.
That it shall be lawful for the Ships belonging to the Subjects of the one or
the other King, to Anchor in the Roads or Bays of either, without being
constrained to enter into Port; and in case they be necessitated to enter
thereinto, either by distress of Weather, fear of Enemies, Pirates, or any
other Accident, in case the said Ships be not bound to an Enemies Port, and
carrying thither Contraband Goods (whereof without some clear proof, they shall
not be questioned) it shall be lawful for the said Subjects to return to Sea
freely when they please, with their Ships and Goods, so as they do not break
Bulk, or expose any thing to Sale; and that when they cast Anchor, Ships to
Anchor freely in any Port or Road.
or enter the Ports aforesaid, they be not molested or visited; and it shall
suffice that in this case they show their Passports or Sea-papers, which being
seen by the respective Officers of either King, the said Ships shall return
freely to Sea without any molestation.

XIV.
And if any Ship or Ships belonging to the Subjects and Merchants of the one or
the other, entering into Bays, or in the open Sea, shall be Encountered by the
Ships of the said Kings, or of Privateers their Subjects; Ships how to be
visited at Sea.
the said Ships, to prevent all Disorders, shall not come within Canon-shot,
but shall send their Longboat or Pinnace to the Merchant-Ship, and only two
or three Men on Board, to whom the Master or Owner shall show his Pasports and
Sea-Letters, according to the Form which shall be inserted at the end of this
Treaty, whereby not only the Ships Lading, but the Place to which she belongs,
and as well the Master and Owners Name, as the Name of the Ship may appear; by
which means the quality of the Ship, and her Master or Owner will be
sufficiently known, as also the Commodities she carries, whether they be
Contraband, or not; to the which Passports and Sea-Letters, entire faith and
credit shall be given, so much the rather, for that as well on the part of the
King of England, as of the King of Spain, some Counter-signs shall be given (if
it shall be found necessary) whereby their authenticalness may the better
appear, and that they may not be in any wise falsified.

XV.
If any prohibited Merchandise or Goods shall be Exported from the Kingdoms,
Prohibited Goods Exported, to be Confiscated.
Dominions and Territories of either of the said Kings, by the respective
People or Subjects of the one or the other, in such case the prohibited Goods
shall be only Confiscated, and not the other Goods; neither shall the
Delinquent incur any other Punishment, except the said Delinquent shall carry
out from the respective Kingdoms or Dominions of the King of Great Britain, the
proper Coin, Wool, In case Coin, Wool or Fullers-Earth be Exported, the Laws
of the Country to take place.
or Fullers-Earth of the said Kingdoms, or shall carry out of the respective
Kingdoms or Dominions of the said King of Spain, any Gold or Silver, wrought or
unwrought; in either of which cases the Laws of the respective Countries are to
take place.

XVI.
That it shall be lawful for the People and Subjects of both Kings, Ships to
remain freely in each others Ports, and depart again.
to have access to the respective Ports of the one and the other, and there
remain, and depart again with the same freedom, not only with their Ships, and
other Vessels for Trade and Commerce, but also with their other Ships fitted
for War, Armed, and disposed to resist and engage the Enemy, and arriving by
stress of Weather to repair their Ships, or furnish themselves with Provisions;
so that entering willingly, they be not so numerous, that they give just
occasion of suspicion, to which end they are not to exceed the number of Eight,
nor continue in their Havens, nor about their Ports, longer time then they
shall have just cause, for the repair of their Ships, to take in Provisions or
other necessary things, much less be the occasion of interrupting the free
Commerce, and coming in of other Ships, of Nations in Amity with either King;
Concerning Men of War coming into Ports.
and when an unusual number of Men of War by accident shall come unto any Port,
it shall not be lawful for them to come into the said Ports or Havens, not
having first obtained permission of the King unto whom the said Ports do
belong, or the Governors of the said Ports, if they be not forced thereinto by
stress of Weather or other necessity, to avoid the danger of the Sea; and in
such ease they shall presently acquaint the Governor or chief Magistrate of
the Place with the cause of their coming; nor shall they remain there any
longer time then the said Governor or Magistrate shall think convenient, or do
any act of Hostility in such Ports, that may prove of prejudice to the one or
the other of the said Kings.

XVII.
That neither the said King of Great Britain, nor the King of Spain, by any
Mandate general, nor particular, nor for any cause whatsoever, shall Embarque
or detain, hinder or take for his respective Service, No Merchants, Pilots,
etc. to be Pressed.
any Merchant, Master of a Ship, Pilot or Mariner, their Ships, Merchandise,
Clothes or other Goods belonging unto the one or the other, in their Ports or
Waters, if it be not that either of the said Kings, or the Persons to whom the
Ships belong, be first advertised thereof, and do agree thereunto; Provided,
that this shall not be construed to hinder or interrupt the ordinary course of
Justice and Law in either Country.

XVIII.
That the Merchants and Subjects of the one and the other King, their Factors
and Servants, Merchants, Seamen, etc. to have liberty, to carry Arms.
as also their Ships, Masters or Mariners, may as well going as coming, upon
Sea and other Waters, as in the Havens and Ports of the one and the other
respectively, carry and use all kind of Arms, Defensive and Offensive, without
being obliged to Register them, as also upon Land to carry and use them for
their Defense, according to the custom of the Place.

XIX.
That the Captains, About Differences between Captains and Masters of Ships,
and their Men.
Officers and Mariners of the Ships belonging to the People and Subjects of
either Party, may not commence an Action, nor hinder or bring trouble upon
their own Ships, their Captains, Officers or Mariners in the respective
Kingdoms, Dominions, Lands, Countries or Places of the other, for their Wages
or Salaries, or under any other pretense. Nor may they put themselves or be
received, by what pretext or color soever, into the Service or Protection of
the King of England, or King of Spain, or their Arms; but if any Controversy
happen between Merchants and Masters of Ships, or between Masters and Mariners,
the composing thereof shall be left to the Consul of the Nation, but after such
manner, as he who shall not submit to the Arbitrament, may appeal to the
ordinary Justice of the Place where he is subject.

XX.
And to the end that all Impediments be taken away, Concerning Trading to
Flanders.
and that the Merchants and Adventurers of the Kingdoms of Great Britain be
permitted to return to Brabant, Flanders, and other the Provinces of the
Low Countries, under the Jurisdiction of the King of Spain; Forasmuch as it
has been thought convenient, that all, and any the Laws, Edicts, and Acts by
which the Importation of Cloth, or any Cloth, or any other Woollen Manufacture,
of what kind soever, Dyed or Undyed, Milled or Unmill'd, into Flanders, or the
other Provinces, has been prohibited, be revoked and disanull'd; and that if
any Right, Tribute, Imposition, Charge or Money, has been, with permission, or
otherwise, put upon Cloths, or any of the aforesaid Woollen Manufactures so
Imported (except the ancient Tribute upon every piece of Cloth, and
proportionably upon every other Woollen Manufacture, agreeable to the ancient
Treaties and Agreements between the then Kings of England, and the Dukes of
Burgundy, and Governors of the Low Countries) the same should be altogether
void, and no such Tribute or Imposition from henceforth imposed, or put upon
the said Clothes or Manufactures, for no cause or pretext whatsoever; And that
all the English Merchants, Trading in any of the said Provinces, their Factors,
Servants, or Commissioners, should enjoy from henceforward, all the
Privileges, Exemptions, Immunities and Benefits, which formerly have been
agreed and given by the aforesaid ancient Treaties and Agreements, between the
then Kings of England and the Dukes of Burgundy, and Governors of the
Low Countries: It is therefore Agreed, That Deputies shall be named by the King
of Great Britain, who meeting with the Marquess of Castelrodrigo, or the
Governor of those Provinces for the time being, or any other Ministers of the
King of Spain, sufficiently authorized in this behalf, shall friendly Treat and
Conclude hereupon; and also such further Privileges, Immunities, and necessary
Exemption, suitable to the present state of Affairs, shall be granted for the
encouragement of the said Merchants and Adventurers, and for the security of
their Trade and Commerce, as shall be agreed upon in a special Treaty, that
shall be made between both the Kings, touching this Particular.

XXI.
The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and Dominions of the Most Serene
Kings of Great Britain and Spain respectively, Freedom of Trade to Places in
Amity or Neutrality with either Party.
shall with all security and liberty Sail to, and Traffic in all the Kingdoms,
Estates, or Countries, which are or shall be in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality
with the one or the other.

XXII.
And they shall not be disturbed or disquieted in that liberty, Not to be
disturbed in that liberty.
by the Ships or Subjects of the said Kings respectively, by reason of the
Hostilities which are or may be hereafter between either of the said Kings, and
the aforesaid Kingdoms, Countries, and States, or any of them, which shall be
in Friendship or Neutrality with the other.

XXIII.
And in case that within the said Ships respectively, be found by the abovesaid
means, any Merchandise here under mentioned, Contraband Goods, and no other, to
be Confiscated.
being of Contraband, and Prohibited, they shall be taken out and Confiscated,
before the Admiralty, or other competent Judges; but for this reason the Ship,
and the other free and allowed Commodities which shall be found therein, shall
in no wise be either Seized or Confiscated.

XXIV.
Moreover, for better prevention of the Differences which might arise touching
the meaning of forbidden Merchandise, and of Contraband; It is Declared and
Agreed, What are Contraband Goods.
That under this Name shall be comprehended all Firearms, as Ordnance,
Muskets, Mortar-pieces, Petards, Bombs, Grenades, Fire-crancels, Fireballs,
Musquet-rests, Bandeliers, Gunpowder, Match, Saltpeter, and Bullets; Likewise
under the Name of forbidden Merchandise, are understood all other Arms, as
Pikes, Swords, Pots, Helmets, Backs and Breasts, Halberds, Javelins, and such
like Armor; Under this Name is likewise forbidden the Transportation of
Soldiers, Horses, their Harnesses, Cases of Pistols, Holsters, Belts, and
other Furniture, formed and composed for the use of War.

XXV.
Likewise, Exceptions to the abovementioned Article.
to prevent all manner of Dispute and Contention, It is Agreed, That under the
Name of forbidden Merchandise, and of Contraband, shall not be comprehended
Wheat, Rye, Barley, or other Grains, or Pulse, Salt, Wine, Oil, and generally
whatsoever belongs to the sustaining and nourishing of life, but they shall
remain free, as likewise all other Merchandises not comprehended in the
preceding Article; and the Transportation of them shall be free and permitted,
although it be to the Towns and Places of Enemies, unless such Towns and Places
be Besieged, and blocked up, or surrounded.

XXVI.
It is also Agreed, Goods belonging to either Party found on Enemies Ships, to
be Confiscated.
That whatsoever shall be found Laden by the Subjects or Inhabitants of the
Kingdoms and Dominions of either of the said Kings of England and Spain Aboard
the Ships of the Enemies of the other, though it be not forbidden Merchandise,
shall be Confiscated, with all things else which shall be found within the said
Ships, without exception or reserve.

XXVII.
That the Consul which hereafter shall reside in any of the Dominions of the
King of Spain, The power of the respective Consuls.
for the help and protection of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
shall be named by the King of Great Britain, and he so named, shall have and
exercise the same Power and Authority in the execution of his Charge, as any
other Consul has formerly had in the Dominions of the said King of Spain; and
in like manner the Spanish Consul residing in England, shall enjoy as much
Authority as the Consuls of any other Nation have hitherto enjoyed in that
Kingdom.

XXVIII.
And that the Laws of Commerce that are obtained by Peace, may not remain
unfruitful, as would fall out if the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
when they go to, come from, or remain in the Dominions or Lordships of the King
of Spain, by reason of their Commerce or other Business, Merchants not to be
molested for Religion.
should be molested for case of Conscience; therefore that the Commerce be
secure, and without danger, as well upon Land as at Sea, the said King of Spain
shall provide, that the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain shall not be
agrieved contrary to the Laws of Commerce, and that none of them shall be
molested or disturbed for their Conscience, so long as they give no public
scandal or offense; And the said King of Great Britain shall likewise provide,
for the same reasons, that the Subjects of the King of Spain shall not be
molested or disturbed for their Conscience against the Laws of Commerce, so
long as they give no public scandal or offense.

XXIX.
That the People and Subjects respectively of one Kingdom, Merchandises to be
paid for only in such Coin as shall be agreed upon.
in the Dominions, Territories, Regions or Colonies of the other, shall not be
compelled to sell their Merchandise for Brass-metal-Coin, or exchange them for
other Coin or things, against their will; or having sold them, to receive the
payment in other Species then what they bargained for, notwithstanding any Law
or other Custom contrary to this Article.

XXX.
That the Merchants of both Nations, and their Factors, Servants and Families,
Commissioners, or others by them employed; as also Masters of Ships, Pilots and
Mariners, may remain freely and securely in the said Dominions, Kingdoms and
Territories, of either of the said Kings, and also in their Ports and Rivers;
Merchants, etc. freely to enjoy their Houses, Warehouses, etc.
And the People and Subjects of the one King, may have, and with all freedom
and security enjoy, in all the Lands and Dominions whatsoever of the other,
their proper Houses to live in, their Warehouses and Magazines for their Goods
and Merchandise, which they shall possess during the time for which they shall
have taken, hired, and agreed for them, without any Impediment.

XXXI. To employ such Proctors, Agents, etc. as they shall think fit.

The Inhabitants and Subjects of the said Confederate Kings, in all the Lands
and Places under the Obedience of the one or the other, shall use and employ
those Advocates, Proctors, Scriveners, Agents and Solicitors, whom they think
fit, the which shall be left to their choice, and consented to by the ordinary
Judges, as often as there shall be occasion; and they shall not be constrained
to show their Books and Papers of Account to any Person, if it be not to give
Evidence for the avoiding Lawsuits and Controversies; neither shall they be
Embarked, Detained, or taken out of their hands, upon any pretense whatsoever.
And it shall be permitted to the People and Subjects of either King, in the
respective Places where they shall reside, to keep their Books of Account,
Books of Account not subject to any Inquisition.
Traffic and Correspondence in what Language they please, in English, Spanish,
Dutch, or any other, the which shall not be molested, or subject to any
Inquisition. And whatsoever else has been granted by either Party, concerning
this Particular, to any other Nation, shall be understood likewise to be
granted here.

XXXII.
That in case the Estate of any person or persons shall be Sequestered or Seized
on by any Court of Justice or Tribunal whatsoever, About Confiscation of
Estates.
within the Kingdoms and Dominions of either Party, and any Estate or Debt
happen to lie in the hands of the Delinquents belonging bona fide to the People
and Subjects of the other, the said Estate or Debts shall not be Confiscated by
any of the said Tribunals, but shall be restored to the true Owners in specie,
if they yet remain, and if not, the value of them (according to the Contract
and agreement which was made between the Parties) shall be restored within
three Months after the said Sequestration.

XXXIII.
That the Goods and Estates of the People and Subjects of the one King, Estates
of those that die, to be kept for the Heirs.
that shall die in the Countries, Lands and Dominions of the other, shall be
preserved for the lawful Heirs and Successors of the Deceased; the Right of any
Third person always reserved.

XXXIV.
That the Goods and Estates of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
Concerning the Estates of those that die Intestate.
that shall die without making a Will in the Dominions of the King of Spain,
shall be put into Inventory with their Papers, Writings, and Books of Account,
by the Consul or other public Minister of the King of Great Britain, and
deposited in the hands of two or three Merchants that shall be named by the
said Consul or public Minister, to be kept for the Proprietors and Creditors;
and neither the Cruzada, nor any other Judicatory whatsoever, shall intermeddle
therein; which also in the like case shall be observed in England toward the
Subjects of the King of Spain.

XXXV.
That a decent and convenient Burial-place shall be granted and appointed to
bury the Bodies of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, The English to
have a Burial-place for their Dead.
who shall die within the Dominions of the King of Spain.

XXXVI.
If it shall happen hereafter that any Difference fall out (which God forbid)
between the King of Great Britain and the King of Spain, whereby the mutual
Commerce and good Correspondence may be endangered, the respective Subjects and
People of each Party shall have notice thereof given them in time, that is to
say, the space of Six months, to Transport their Merchandise and Effects,
without giving them in that time any molestation or trouble, or Retaining or
Embarquing their Goods or Persons.

XXXVII.
All Goods and Rights concealed or Embarked, In case of any Difference between
the Crowns, Six months notice to be given.
Movables, Immoveables, Rents, Deeds, Debts, Credits, and the like, which have
not with a formal notice of the cause, and by a legal Condemnation, according
to the Ordinary Justice been brought into the Royal Exchequer at the time of
concluding this Treaty, shall remain at the full and free disposal of the
Proprietors, their Heirs, or of those who shall have their Right, with all the
Fruits, Rents and Emoluments thereof, and neither those who have concealed the
said Goods, nor their Heirs shall be molested for this cause by the Exchequers
respectively; but the Proprietors, their Heirs, or those who shall have their
Right, shall have for the said Goods and Rights their Action at Law, as for
their own proper Goods and Estate

XXXVIII.
It is Agreed and Concluded, English to have all Privileges granted, or to be
granted to any other Stranger, and reciprocally the Spanish to enjoy the like.
That the People and Subjects of the King of Great Britain, and of the King of
Spain, shall have and enjoy in the respective Lands, Seas, Ports, Havens, Roads
and Territories of the one or the other, and in all Places whatsoever, the same
Privileges, Securities, Liberties and Immunities, whether they concern their
Persons or Trade, with all the beneficial Clauses and Circumstances which have
been granted, or shall be hereafter granted by either of the said Kings, to the
Most Christian King, the States General of the United Provinces, the
Hans-Towns, or any other Kingdom or State whatsoever, in as full, ample, and
beneficial manner, as if the same were particularly mentioned and inserted in
this Treaty.

XXXIX.
In case any Difference or Dispute shall happen on either side concerning these
Articles of Trade and Commerce, How to proceed in case any Dispute happen about
these Articles.
by either the Officers of the Admiralty or other Person whatsoever, in the one
or the other Kingdom; The Complaint being presented by the Party concerned, to
their Majesty's, or to any of their Council, their said Majesty's shall cause
the Damages forthwith to be repaired, and all things, as they are above Agreed,
to be duly executed; And in case that in progress of time any Frauds or
Inconveniences be discovered in the Navigation and Commerce between both
Kingdoms, against which sufficient Prevention has not been made in these
Articles, other Provisions may be hereafter mutually Agreed on, as shall be
judged convenient, the present Treaty remaining still in full force and vigor.

XL.
It is likewise Accorded and Concluded, That the Most Serene and Renowned Kings
of Great Britain and Spain shall sincerely and faithfully observe and keep, and
procure to be observed and kept, by their Subjects and Inhabitants
respectively, all and singular the Capitulations in this present Treaty Agreed
and Concluded: Neither shall they directly or indirectly infringe the same, or
consent that the same shall be infringed by any of their Subjects or
Inhabitants. About the Ratifications.
And they shall Ratify and Confirm all and singular the Conventions before
Accorded by Letters Patents reciprocally, in sufficient, full and effectual
Form, and the same so formed and made, shall interchangeably deliver, or cause
to be delivered faithfully and really, within Four months after the Date of
these Presents; and they shall then, as soon as conveniently may be, cause this
present Treaty of Peace and Amity to be published in all Places, and in the
manner accustomed.

Dated at Madrid, the 13/23 day of May, in the Year of our Lord, 1667.
The Form of Letters which ought to be given by the Towns and Seaports, to the
Ships and Vessels setting Sail from thence.
TO all unto whom these Presents shall come; We the Governors, Consuls, or
chief Magistrate or Commissioners of the Customs, of the City, Town or Province
of N. do testify and make known, That N. N. Master of the Ship N. has before
Us, under solemn Oath declared, That the Ship N. of (...) Tun (more or less) of
which he is at present Master, does belong to the Inhabitants of N. in the
Dominions of the Most Serene King of Great Britain. And We, desiring that the
said Master may be assisted in his Voyage and Business, do entreat all Persons
in general and particular, who shall meet him, and those of all Places where
the said Master shall come with the said Ship and her Merchandise, that they
would admit him favorably, treat him kindly, and receive the said Ship into
their Ports, Bays, Havens, Rivers and Dominions, permitting her quietly to
Sail, Pass, Frequent, and Negotiate there, or in any other Places, as shall
seem good to the said Master, paying still the Toll and Customs which of Right
shall be due. Which we will acknowledge gratefully upon the like Occasions. In
witness whereof, We have Signed these Presents, and Sealed them with the Seal
of our Town.

WILL. GODOLPHIN. Don PEDRO FERNANDEZ del Campo y Angulo.


The Copy of a Patent containing several Gracious Privileges lately Granted by
the High and Mighty Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, etc. Which are Confirmed
by the foregoing Treaty, and whereof mention is made in the ninth Article of
the said Treaty.
DON PHILIP, By the Grace of God King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, the two
Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarre, Granado, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
Majorca, Sivilla, Sardinia, Cordoua, Corsega, Murica, Jaen, the Algarves,
Algesira, Gibraltar, the Islands of the Canaries, the East and West Indies,
Islands, and firm Land of the Ocean Sea, Archduke of Austria, Duke of
Burgundy, Brabant, and Milan, Earl of Haspurg, Flanders, Tiroll, and Barcelona,
Lord of Biscay and Molina, etc.

WHereas on the behalf of you Richard Anthony, Consul of the English Nation,
for your self, and in the Name of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, it
has been showed unto me, That by virtue of the Peace which is Concluded in
this and that Realm, you do Reside and Trade in Andaluzia, and specially in the
Cities of Sivil, St. Lucar, Cadiz, and Malaga, desiring Me to be pleased to
Confirm unto you the Privileges, Exemptions and Faculties which do belong unto
you as well by the Articles of the said Peace, as by the Confirmations thereof,
and other Favors and Graces which My Lord and Father of glorious Memory did
Grant unto you, and all such others which have been given you by the Crowns of
My Realms of Castile and Portugal, and to Command that they may be in, and for
all things observed and accomplished unto you without any Limitation, and for
further assurance to Grant them anew unto you, with the Qualities, Amplitudes
and Declarations which shall be most convenient for you; and to set Penalties
upon such as shall contradict, and not observe them unto you; and to the end it
may be known what they are, to grant them Copies thereof, or of that which My
Favor shall be; And I taking the Premises into Consideration; and because for
the Occassions which I have for My Wars, you have offered to Serve me with 2500
Ducats of Silver, to be paid 1000 in ready Money, and theremaining 1500 in the
Month of April of this Year; whereof the Licentiate Francis Moreno, which in
reversion of Don Anthony de Campo Redondo y Rio, Knight of the Order of
Santiago, one of My Council and Chamber, and of the Treasury, in your Name, and
by virtue of your Power, did acknowledge a Writing of Obligation in form before
John Cortez de la Cruz, My Notary, I do hold it for good; And by these Presents
of My own motion, and certain knowledge, and Royal and absolute Power, which I
in this behalf will make use of, and do use as an absolute King and Lord, not
acknowledging any Superior in matters Temporal, do Confirm and Approve the
Privileges, Exemptions, and Faculties which do belong unto you as well by the
Articles of the said Peace, as by the Confirmation thereof; and also the other
Favors and Graces which My Lord and Father did Grant unto you, and others
whatsoever, which have been given by My Crowns of Castile and Portugal unto the
said Subjects, in and for all things as therein, and every thing and part
thereof is specified, contained and declared, to the end they may be firm,
stable, and of value, and be observed, kept and accomplished unto you: For my
deliberate intent and will is, that all those of the said Nation shall enjoy
thereof without any limitation, in such manner, that, during the time the said
Englishmen shall reside in Andaluzia, neither you nor they may be charged with
any Office or public Charge, nor Council, Tutorship, Curatorship, Receivers or
Treasurers, although they be of Customers and Millions, or other Services which
concern my Royal Treasury; and much less they may demand of you any Loans or
Donations, or take from you any Rights, or your Rents, Horses, or Slaves: And
to do you the more Favor or Grace according to that which is Agreed by the
said Peace, I do will and promise, that you shall and may Deal and Trade
freely, and Sell your Merchandise and Fruits, and Buy those of my Realms, and
carry them forth, observing that which is Ordained and Commanded by the Laws
and Statutes which make mention thereof, and paying to my Royal Treasury the
Duties or Customs which ought to be paid, prohibiting, as I do Prohibit and
Command, not to take from you by force any Merchandises, Wheat, or Barley,
although it be for the making ready or furnishing my Armies, Fleets, or
Gallions, nor for Purveyors or Stewards; and the Privileges are to be
concerning the Wheat and Barley according to the Tun; and concerning the other
Things and Merchandises, as you shall Conclude and Agree: but they may not take
them out of your possession until they have paid for them, unless for the same
there be leave given, that they do not molest and trouble you. And forasmuch as
many of you do Treat to bring into the Ports of Andaluzia, the City of Sivil,
and other Places, great quantity of New Foundland Fish, and other sorts of dry
and salted Fish, because they are Victuals which are very necessary; and that
you have been and are put to great Charges, and are much troubled, I do Will
and Command to be kept the Ordinance of the City of Sivil, whereby it is
Ordained, That those which come in with dry or salted Fish, there shall not be
any Price or Rate set upon them, but they shall be permitted to sell at such a
Price as they shall think good; and it shall not be necessary to manifest them
any more then unto my Officers which receive my Royal Rents: and if the Ships
wherein the said Fish is brought be great Ships, that they cannot go up the
River, and that the same be put into Barques or Lighters, the Judge of the
Admiralty, nor any other person, may not put any Waiters or Keepers into the
Barques or Lighters at the Charge of the Owners of them.

And I do also Command, That if the said Fish shall appear to be rotten, and
that it cannot be spent, that it be burnt, or thrown into the Sea; and that for
this cause there shall not be any Cause or Action commenced against the Owners
thereof, or persons which shall sell it, nor they shall not be Imprisoned, nor
Informed against: And forasmuch as the Administers of the Customs, and others
of diverse Duties which are received for the Fruits and Merchandises, do use
when any body does Inform, to have the person Imprisoned which shows himself
to be party, whereby happens to Men of Trade great Discredit, Charges, and
Vexations; My Will is, and I do Command, That in the said Information there
shall be only proceeded against the Merchandises, and not against the Persons;
but they shall be permitted (as I do permit them) to make, and they shall make
their Defenses in the said Vexation. And forasmuch also, as according to an
Article of the said Peace, which makes mention of Matters in Religion,
notwithstanding that in some Suits they should declare whether they be
Roman Catholics or not, excusing themselves to give Faith to others which they
take as Parties or as Witnesses;

I do also Command, That concerning this Matter there be not done, nor there
shall not be done, any thing with those which are born in the said Realm, but
only that the said Condition be kept and accomplished, and that no such
Questions be put unto them, giving unto the Oaths which they shall take in
Judgment Court, and without, the same Faith and Credit which should be given in
case they were Spaniards; and herein you shall not receive any trouble or
molestation, nor there shall not be any grievance done unto you: And whereas
for the justification of some Causes, the Judges and Justices do pretend that
the Merchants of the said Nation should exhibit Books of their Contractions or
Dealings; I do Will and Command, That the Books of the Merchants of the said
Nation shall not be taken out of their hands for any cause whatsoever, but they
shall keep and show them in their Houses, to take out the Parcel which shall be
appointed, and others shall not be demanded of them, nor there shall not be any
other Papers taken from them, upon Penalty that he which shall do here against,
shall be punished according to Law.

And forasmuch as the Merchants do dispatch the Merchandise from the
Custom-house of the said City of Sivil of all Duties, and because there are
many which do make up a Sheet, which is Subscribed and Signed by all the
Officers, and remains in the hand of the Alcayde of the Custom-house; for
that by virtue thereof the Merchandises are permitted to go forth, which are in
Fardels, Packs, Trunks and Cases; and afterward when they have taken them
forth, and put them into their Houses and Warehouses, the chief Keeper of the
Custom-house, and the Officers of the half per Cent. do visit the House and
Goods, troubling and molesting them, demanding of them the Dispatches, it
seeming unto them that they may detain them, because they left the Dispatch in
the hands of the said Alcayde of the Custom-house; I do Prohibit and Command,
That the Houses of the said Merchants shall not be visited, nor the Dispatches
shall not, nor may not be demanded of them, in regard they have them not in
their hands; and this is to be understood, and is understood of Houses which
are within the Walls of the said City; And to the end it may be known to you
which are of the English Nation, there is to be delivered unto you Copies of
the said Privileges and Exemptions which do concern you, and which were
Granted unto you, as well by the Articles of Peace, as by any other manner. And
for execution and accomplishment of all the Premises, I do Command those of my
Council, and those of my Councils, Assemblies and Tribunals of my Court, and
the Presidents and Judges of my Audiences, Alcaydes, and Officers of my House
and Court, and Chanceries, and the Regent and Judge of the Court of Degrees of
the City of Sivil, and chief Alcaldes of the Precincts thereof, and all the
Corrigidors, Assistants, and Governors, chief Justices and Ordinaries, as well
in the said Cities of Sivil, Cadiz, Malaga, and St. Lucar de Barameda, as of
all other Cities, Towns and Places of these my Realms and Dominions, and all
other Judges and Justices whatsoever, of what Quality or Condition soever they
may be, whom principally or incidentally may concern in any manner the
accomplishment or performance of that which is contained in this Patent, that
presently so soon as they shall be by virtue thereof required, or the Copy
thereof Signed by a Notary public, that there be thereunto given as much
faith, as unto the Original; and that every one in the Place where it shall
concern him do observe, and accomplish, and cause the same to be observed,
accomplished, and executed, in and for all things as therein is contained, and
they shall not in all nor in part put upon you any Impediments, nor any other
Difficulties or Doubts, nor do any thing against the tenor and form thereof,
nor consent or give way that it be interpreted, limited or suspended in all or
in part, or that to the contrary be given any Sedidas, Provisions, or other
Dispatches: but for observation thereof, in the Place which shall concern every
one, they shall give order, and ordain to deliver unto you those which shall be
necessary: And for more firmness and validity of the Favor and Grace which by
this my Patent I do Grant you, and that at all times this Favor may be certain
and sure unto you, you are to keep or have a Judge Conservator in Andaluzia,
especially in the said Cities of Sivil, Malaga, Cadiz, and St. Lucar de
Barameda, unto whom I am to give sufficient Commission for keeping and
accomplishing the said Privileges, Liberties and Exemptions, who shall
constrain and compel all and whatsoever persons, of what sort or quality they
may be that shall concern the said Nation, as well those which shall be
Defendants accused, as those which shall be Plaintiffs, although the persons
which shall accuse them, and which shall be accused by them, have private
Judges, as well by Consent as Agreement which they may have made by Preeminence
or Privilege which they hold, to the end the said Judge Conservator may only
take knowledge privately of the said Courts, and not any other Judge or
Tribunal, although it be by way of excess or notorious Justice, or in any other
matter or form; which Judge Conservator is now Doctor Don Francisco de Vergara,
Judge of my Court de les Grados, of the City of Sivil, the time that he shall
assist therein, and in his absence the Licentiate Don Francisco de Modrano,
Judge of the same Court, who for the Suits which shall be commenced in the said
Cities of Cadiz, Malaga, and St. Lucar, is to Subdelegate his Conservatorship,
in the person which by the said Nation shall be propounded or named, that he
may effect the same to the conclusion, and they shall be referred unto him to
be determined: and of that which he shall determine, the Appeal is to be made
to my Council, and not to any other Court.

And forasmuch as my Will is, That every one in his time shall have primative
Commission, and Jurisdiction to protect and defend you concerning all the
Contents of this my Patent, that all the same may be kept and accomplished in
the form which I do offer the same unto you, I have found good to charge, as by
these Presents I do charge them with the protection and defense hereof: And I
do Command them to see or peruse this my Patent, and the Qualities, Conditions,
Preeminencies, and Amplifications therein contained, and to cause all the same
to be kept, accomplished and executed, in such form and manner, and according
as therein is contained and declared, without consenting or giving way, that in
all, or in part there be made unto you any Doubt or Difficulty, and before the
said Don Francisco de Vergara, or in his absence, before the said Francis de
Medrano (and not before any other Judge) privately in the first instance, are
to pass, and be followed all the Causes and Suits, which concerning the
Premises, or any thing or part thereof shall be moved and caused, and the
execution and punishment of those which shall not be obedient; For my Will is,
that the knowledge and determination of all the Contents in this my Patent, is
in all things privately to concern, and shall concern them; proceeding in all
things against those which shall be culpable, and executing for the same the
Penalties which are mentioned by Law, reserving as I do reserve, the
Appellations which shall be put in upon their Acts and Sentences, to my
Council, and not any other Court, without that any of other my Councils,
Tribunals, Courts, Chanceries, or any other Judges or Justices of my Realms or
Dominions, of whatsoever quality they be, may meddle, or shall meddle
therewith, or in the use or exercise of the Jursdiction privative in the said
first instance, which by this my Patent I do Grant unto them, by way of excess,
appellation, or any other recourse or manner; the which and every of them, I do
inhibit and hold for inhibited the knowledge thereof, and do declare them for
incompetent Judges thereof: for which and every thing, and part thereof, I do
give them the most sufficient Power, and most ample Commission, which according
to Law is required and necessary, with the Incidencies and Dependencies,
Annexities; and after them the said English Nation of the said City of Sivil,
may name in the said Commission one of the Judges of the said Audience, which
the said Nation shall choose: And I do Command the President, and those of my
Council of the Chamber, that Presenting before them their Nomination (the case
happening) to make void the said Commission, by Promotion or Vacation of the
said Don Francisco de Vergara, and Don Francis de Medrano, or to dispatch it in
any other manner, by Ordinary to him that shall be therein nominated, in the
form according, and as by this my Patent is declared. And that it may be the
better accomplished, I do from this time give them Power and Authority, that
they may Subdelegate, and they shall Subdelegate this Commission, for the
Business and Suits which shall be offered in the said Cities of Cadiz, Malaga,
and St. Lucar de Barameda, in the Person which by you shall be propounded unto
them, that they may substantiate them for a conclusion, and remit the Suits and
Causes unto them to be determined, in such manner as they shall find good and
convenient, for the security of that which is contained in this my Patent. And
I do charge the most excellent Prince Don Balthazar Charles, my most dear and
most beloved Son, and do Command the Infants, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Richmen, Commanders, and Under-Commanders, Governors of Castles, strong
Houses, and Plains, and those of my Council, Presidents, and Judges of my
Courts, Alcaydes, and Officers of my House, Court and Chanceries, and all the
Corrigidors, Assistants, Governors, Alcaldes, Mayors, and Ordinaries, and
whatsoever Judges and Justices of these my Realms and Dominions, to observe and
accomplish, and cause to be observed and accomplished, this my Patent, and the
Favor or Grace which thereby I do Grant you, and against the tenor and form
thereof, not to do or pass, now, nor at any time, in any manner perpetually for
evermore. Nor to consent or give way to be limited or suspended unto you, all
or part thereof, notwithstanding whatsoever Laws or Statutes of these my Realms
and Dominions, Ordinances, Style, Use, or Custom of the said Cities of Sivil,
Cadiz, Malaga, or St. Lucar, or any other thing which is or may be to the
contrary; the which for this time, for so much as concerns this matter, holding
the same here for inserted and incorporated, as it were word for word written,
I do dispense, abrogate, derogate; cancel, annihilate, and make void and of
none effect, remaining in full force and effect for all other things
henceforward. And for this my Patent Jeronimo de Canencia, Auditor of Accounts
in my chief Office of Accounts, and my Secretary of the Mediaenate, shall take
a Copy, at whose Charge is the Account and reason of this Right. And I do
declare, that for this Favor you have paid the Duty of the Mediaenate, which
amounts to Thirty and five thousand one hundred fifty and five Maravediz in
Silver: which Sum you are to pay from Fifteen to Fifteen years perpetually, and
in case they do accomplish or end, you may not make use of this Favor, until
such time as it shall first appear that you have satisfied this Duty. And you
are also to pay the Judge Conservator, which shall be named, his Salary, or to
help to bear his Charges, which he shall enjoy for his labor or pains in the
said Business, before you shall enjoy thereof, which is to appear by
Certificate of the Office of this Duty.

Given in Saragosa, the Nineteenth day of March, Anno 1645.
I The King, I Anthony Carnero, Secretary of the King our Lord, did cause it to
be written, by his Commandment. Registered, Michael de Lariaga, Lieutenant of
the Lord High Chancellor. Michael de Lariaga. The Copy was taken Jeronimo de
Canencia; Don John Chumazero y Carillo, Doctor. Don Anthony de Campo Redondo y
Rio, Licenciate. JOSEPH GONSALES.

THis Copy does agree with that out of which it was taken, which for this
effect was exhibited unto me by William Bland, dwelling in the City of Sivil,
who took it away again with him the 11. of April, Anno 1645.

Joseph de Pineda, Notary Public of the City of Sivil for the King.



Articles of Peace and Alliance between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
Lewis XIV. The Most Christian King. Concluded the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
I.
THat there be an Universal, Peace and Amity restored.
Perpetual, True and Sincere Peace and Amity between the Most Christian King
and the King of Great Britain, their Heirs and Successors, and between the
Kingdoms States, and Subjects of both; and that the same be so sincerely and
seriously observed and kept, that one shall promote the Honor and Advantage of
the other; And that a faithful Neighborhood, and secure observation of Peace
and Friendship may flourish again on every side.

II.
That all Enmities, Hostilities, Discords and Wars between the said Kings and
their Subjects, cease and be abolished; Cessation of Hostilities.
so as they both do forbear and abstain hereafter from all Plundering,
Depredation, Harm-doing, Injuries and Infestation whatsoever, as well by Land
as by Sea, and in Fresh-waters, every where; and especially through all Tracts,
Dominions and Places of eithers Kingdoms and Territories, of what Condition
soever they be.

III.
That all Offenses, All Injuries to be forgotten.
Injuries, Damages, which either of the said Kings or their Subjects have
suffered from the other during this War, be buried in Oblivion; so that neither
in regard of them, nor for the cause or pretense of any other thing, neither
Party, nor the Subjects of either, shall hereafter do or cause to be done or
made, any Hostility, Enmity, Molestation or Hindrance to the other, by himself
or by others, secretly or openly, directly or indirectly, by color of Right or
way of Fact.

IV.
That the use of Navigation and Commerce be free between the Subjects of both
the said Kings, Freedom of Trade and Navigation.
as it was anciently in the time of Peace, and before the Denunciation of the
late War; so that every one of them may freely come into the Kingdoms,
Provinces, Marts, Ports and Rivers of either Party, bringing their Merchandise,
and Conversing and Trading there without Molestation.

V.
That all Prisoners on either side, Prisoners released.
of what Degree, Dignity or Condition soever, be forthwith set at liberty
without Ransom or any other Price of their Freedom; Provided they pay what is
lawfully due for Diet or other Cause.

VI.
That all Proclamations and Acts which by reason of this War either Party has
published,, All Acts made against the liberty of Trade, Revoked.
to the prejudice of either, against the liberty of Navigation and Trade, be
abrogated on both sides.

VII.
That the Most Christian King shall with all speed, or at the furthest within
Six months, to be reckoned from the Day of Subscribing this present Agreement,
Restitution of St. Christophers.
restore unto the King of Great Britain, or unto such as to that purpose shall
receive his Commands duly Passed under the Great Seal of England, that part of
the Isle of St. Christophers which the English possessed the First of January
1665. before the Declaration of the late War; and to that end the said Most
Christian King shall immediately upon the Ratification of the same Agreement,
deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said King of Great Britain, or such
Ministers of his as shall be thereunto appointed, all necessary Instruments and
Orders duly dispatched.

VIII.
But if any of the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain shall have sold
the Goods which he possessed in that Island, If any person have sold his Goods
there, he shall repay the Money before he be restored.
and the Price of the Sale has been paid unto him; he shall not be restored
and put into possession of those Goods by virtue of the present Agreement,
before he has actually paid back the Price or the Money he has received.

IX.
But if it happen (which yet is not known hitherto) that the Subjects of the
said Most Christian King are beaten out of the said Island of St. Christophers,
by the Subjects of the abovementioned King of Great Britain, before or after
the Subscription of the present Agreement: Nevertheless, All things in that
Island to be put in the same state as they were in 1665.
things shall be restored unto that state and condition wherein they were in
the beginning of the Year 1665. that is, before the Declaration of the War now
determining: and the said King of Great Britain, as soon as he has notice
thereof, shall without any delay deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
abovementioned Most Christian King, or his Ministers thereunto appointed, all
Instruments and Orders duly made, which are necessary for that Restitution.

X.
Also, Restitution of Acadia to the French.
That the said King of Great Britain do likewise restore unto the said Most
Christian King, or unto such as to that purpose shall receive his Command duly
passed under the Great Seal of France, the Country which is called Acadia,
lying in North- America, which the said Most Christian King did formerly enjoy:
And to that end, the said King of Great Britain shall immediately upon the
Ratification of this Agreement, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said
Most Christian King, or such Ministers of his as shall be thereunto appointed,
all Instruments and Orders duly dispatched, which shall be necessary to the
said Restitution.

XI.
But if any of the Inhabitants of that Country called Acadia, Such Inhabitants
as shall desire to leave the Place, may.
shall rather desire to be hereafter under the Dominion of the King of Great
Britain, it shall be lawful for such to depart within the space of One year, to
be counted from the Day of the Restitution of that Country, and to sell,
alienate, or otherwise dispose as they please, their Lands, Grounds, Slaves,
and all their Goods moveable or immovable; and such persons as shall Contract
with them for the same, shall be forced to make good such Contracts by the Most
Christian Kings Authority: But if they shall rather choose to carry away with
them their Money, Housholdstuff, Vessels, Slaves, and all their Movables; it
shall be free for them so to do, without any hindrance or molestation
whatsoever.

XII.
Also the Most Christian King shall in like manner restore unto the King of
Great Britain the Islands called Antigoa and Monsarat (if they be in his power)
and any other Islands, Countries, Reciprocal Restitution of Places taken.
Forts and Colonies, which may have been gotten by the Arms of the Most
Christian King, before or after the Subscription of the present Treaty, and
which the King of Great Britain possessed before he entered into the War with
the States General (to which War this Treaty does put an end.) On the other
side, the said King of Great Britain, shall after the manner aforesaid, restore
unto the abovementioned Most Christian King all Islands, Countries, Forts, and
Colonies, any where situate, which might be gotten by the King of Great
Britains Arms, before or after the Subscription of the present Agreement, and
which the Most Christian King possessed before the First of January, 1665.

XIII.
But if any of those Servants and Slaves that Served the English in that part
of the Isle of St. Slaves and Servants may return to their Masters, if not sold.
Christophers which belonged to the foresaid King of Great Britain, as also in
the Islands called Antigoa and Monsarat, when they were taken by the Arms of
the foresaid Most Christian King, shall desire to return again unto the
Subjection of the English (yet without all force or constraint) it shall be
free and lawful for them so to do within the space of six Months, to be
reckoned from the Day on which the same Islands shall be restored. But if the
English before they went off of the said Islands, sold some Servants, and the
Money was paid for them; those Servants are not to be restored upon other
Terms, but that the Price be restored and repaid.

XIV.
In like manner, Soldiers, Laborers, etc. the same.
if some of the foresaid King of Great Britain's Subjects (who were not
reckoned amongst Servants and Slaves) shall hire themselves in the quality of a
Soldier, a Labourer, or under whatsoever other Title, to the foresaid Most
Christian King, or any one of his Subjects that dwells in the foresaid
Islands, Covenanting for Wages by the Year, the Month, or the Day; After the
Restitution of the Island or Islands, such hiring of ones self or Obligation is
to cease, Wages being received after the Rate of Labor already performed, and
it shall be free for them to return unto their Countrymen, and live under the
Dominion of the King of Great Britain.

XV.
Whatsoever is resolved concerning the foresaid Islands, Articles of
Restitution to extend to all Places.
it is to be understood that it is in like manner resolved concerning all other
Islands, Forts, Countries, and Colonies, and the Subjects and Servants living
therein, whom and which the abovementioned Most Christian King shall have
gotten by his Arms, or shall get before or after the Subscription of this
Treaty, if so be the said King of Great Britain possessed them before he entered
into the War with the States General, which War is ended by this Treaty. On the
other side, the same is also understood to be resolved in relation to those
Islands, Countries, Forts, and Colonies, and Subjects and Servants living
there, who or which belonged unto the abovementioned Most Christian King
before the First of January, 1665. and whom or which the abovementioned King
of Great Britain shall have gotten, or shall get by his Arms before or after
the Subscription of this Treaty.

XVI.
That all Letters as well of Reprizal, Letters of Marque revoked.
as of Marque and Countermarque, which hitherto have been granted on either
Side for any Cause, shall be and be held null and void; Nor shall any the like
Letters be hereafter granted by either of the said Kings against the Subjects
of either; unless it be first made manifest that Right has been denied; and
unless he who desires Letters of Reprizal to be granted unto him, do first draw
and present his Petition to the Minister residing in the Name of that Kingdom
against whose Subjects those Letters are desired; that he within the space of
four Months, or sooner, may enquire into the contrary, or procure that
Satisfaction be with all speed made from the Party offending to the
Complainant. Not to be granted but four Months after the denial of Justice.
But if that Kingdom against whose Subjects Reprizals are demanded, have no
Minister residing there, Letters of Reprizal are not to be granted till after
the space of four Months, to be reckoned from the Day whereupon his Petition
was made and presented to the King against whose Subjects Reprizals are
desired, or to his Privy Council.

XVII.
Then to cut off all matter of Quarrel and Contentions which might arise in
regard of the Restitution of Ships, Merchandise, and other Movables which
either Party may complain to be taken and detained from the other in Countries
and Coasts far distant, after the Peace is concluded, and before it be
notified; This Peace, when to take effect.
All Ships, Merchandise, and other Movables which shall or may be gotten by
either Side after the Subscription and Publication of the present Agreement,
within the space of Twelve Days in the Neighboring Seas; within the space of
Six Weeks from the said Neighboring Seas unto the Cape of St. Vincent; then
within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape on this side of the
Aequinoctial Line or Equator, as well in the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea, as
elsewhere; Lastly, within the space of Six Months beyond the Bounds of the
foresaid Line through the whole World; shall be and remain unto the Possessors
without any exception, or further distinction of Time or Place, or any
consideration to be had of Restitution or Compensation.

XVIII.
But if (which God of his mercy forbid) the Differences now Composed between
the said Kings should at any time fester, In case of a future War, Six Months
to be allowed the Merchants to Transport their Goods.
and break out again into open War, the Ships, Merchandise, or any kind of
Movables of either Party, which shall be found to be and remain in the Ports,
and under the Command of the adverse Party on either Side, shall not be
Confiscated, or made obnoxious to any Inconvenience, but the space of Six
Months shall entirely be allowed to the Subjects of either of the said Kings,
that they may carry away and Transport the foresaid things, and any thing else
that is theirs, whither they shall think fit, without any molestation.

XIX.
Under this present Treaty of Peace shall be comprehended those who shall be
named by either Party with common consent before the Exchange of Ratifications,
or within Six Months after. Who shall be comprehended in this Treaty.
But in the mean time both Parties are well pleased that the King of Sweden as
Mediator, be comprehended, and he is comprehended.

XX.
Lastly, Ratifications Exchanged.
The Solemn Ratifications of this present Agreement and Alliance, made in due
Form, shall be delivered on both Sides, and mutually and duly Exchanged at
Breda within the space of Three Weeks, to be reckoned from the Day of the
Subscription.

Done at Breda the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
Articles of Peace and Alliance between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
Frederick III. King of Denmark and Norway, Concluded 21/31 day of July, 1667.
I.
FIrst, It is Covenanted, Perpetual Peace.
Concluded and Agreed, That there be from this Day a perpetual, firm, and
inviolable Peace between the Most Serene and Most Mighty Prince, Charles the
Second, King of Great Britain, and the Most Serene and Most Mighty Prince
Frederick the Third, King of Denmark and Norway, between their Heirs and
Successors, and their Kingdoms, Principalities, Earldoms, Islands, Cities,
Forts, Lands, Subjects and Inhabitants of what State and Quality soever: And so
as to maintain and promote each others good no less then their own, and to
avert and hinder with all possible study the damage and destruction of one
another. And in this respect it shall be free for the Subjects of either King
to exercise a mutual Navigation and Commerce without molestation, and with
their Merchandises to come to each others Kingdoms, Provinces, Marts, Ports,
and Rivers, and there to abide and Traffic.

II.
At this present shall cease between the aforesaid Kings, Hostilities to cease,
when and where.
and their Kingdoms, Principalities, Earldoms, People, and Subjects, both by
Land and Sea, all Enmity, War, and Hostility, that is to say, in the Northern
Ocean, and in the Baltic Sea and the Channel, within Twenty one Days; from the
Mouth of the said Straight or Channel to the Cape of St. Vincent, within Six
Weeks; and then within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape on this side
the Aequinoctial Line or Equator, as well in the Ocean as the Mediterranean
Sea: Finally, within the space of Eight Months beyond the Bounds of the
aforesaid Line all over the World, without any exception or further distinction
of Time or Place; all Days, Weeks, and Months to be computed from the
Subscription of the present Agreement; Restitution of what shall be taken after
these Terms respectively.
and the Publication of the fame here made at Breda. And whatsoever shall be
taken and seized after the aforesaid Days by either King or their Subjects, to
whom Commissions have been granted, it shall be wholly restored back again to
him or them from whom the same was taken; and furthermore, full Satisfaction
shall be made for the Damages to him or them thereby arising, or the Charges
they have been at; and every person herein offending shall be punished as his
Offense deserves.

III.
It is also Agreed and Concluded, Injuries to be forgotten.
That all Differences on both Sides, Suspicions, and Ill Will, both on the part
of the Most Serene King of Great Britain, and on the part of the Most Serene
King of Denmark, etc. and likewise for singular the Ministers, Officers, and
Subjects of them, be buried and abolished by a perpetual Oblivion. And further
from this present shall expire, be annulled and for ever cancelled all Damages,
Offenses, Injuries by Word or Writing, that either the one has done the other,
or has been suffered by the one from the other, from the very first beginning
of the now ceasing War to this Day, and the determined point of Time wherein
all Dissentions, Discords, Differences and Enmities shall cease and be laid
aside: By name, the Assault and Defense made at Bergen in Norway, and in whole,
whatsoever either followed from thence, or does thereon depend; in such manner,
as that neither of the said Parties by reason of any Damage of this kind,
Offense, or Charges, do under any pretense whatsoever cause the other any
trouble, much less for this cause endeavor or attempt any kind of Hostility.

IV.
All Prisoners on both Sides of whatsoever Fortune or Rank, Prisoners to be
released.
shall be forthwith set at liberty without any Ransom.

V.
All Ships, Goods, or the like, Concerning the Goods and Debts that have been
Confiscated.
that in this turbulent Season, in the heat of this very War between both the
abovementioned Kings and their Subjects, have been taken by the one from the
other, or that either Party has Confiscated and Seized of the Goods and
Pretensions of Persons or Subjects of the other Nation; as also all the
Expenses of War on both Sides, shall be compensated by a like mutual Abolition.
In such manner, as are together comprehended in this Compensation, those Debts
of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, which have been on the part of
Denmark Confiscated; but in this sense, That whatever Debts of this kind unto
the Tenth Day of May Old Style, and Twentieth New Style, by virtue of
Confiscation or Reprisals have been by Subjects paid and Received, do remain
utterly abolished and satisfied; and that it be not lawful for the Creditors of
such Debts for the future to pretend any thing upon this account, much less to
urge payment of such for any reason, or under any pretense whatsoever. But of
such Debts as on the said Day have not been paid and received, it shall be
lawful for the Creditors, Subjects of the King of Great Britain, to demand and
prosecute the Payment, Abolition of a Debt due from Denmark to the Parliament
of England.
by the ordinary way of Justice. Excepting nevertheless 120000 Rixdollars, more
or less (namely accruing from a certain Controversy, which arose between
Christian the Fourth of most glorious Memory, King of Denmark and Norway, and
the Parliament of England, by reason of sending Aid to Charles the First of
most glorious Memory, King of Great Britain) for which the King of Denmark and
Norway bound himself, and gave his Bond to a Company of certain English
Merchants Trading at Hamburgh, and there either now living, or that have
heretofore lived; which Claim of 120000 Rixdollars or thereabouts, being
Confiscate, shall be now by virtue of the present Treaty accounted as null,
dead, and utterly abolished; in such manner, that the Creditors of that Debt
are not either now, or at any time hereafter therefore to demand or pretend any
thing. In like manner as is also Covenanted and Agreed in most significant
Words, That no Pretension shall be at any time made, by reason of such Ships
and Goods so Seized, and Debt or Money Lent, in such manner as aforesaid
Abolished and Confiscated; but that all shall on both Sides by a Solemn
Compensation be for ever accounted as null and void; Yet so, that Lands and
immovable Goods be not comprehended in the aforesaid Voidance and Annullation,
but that they be without any difficulty or impediment restored back to those,
who before the Denouncing of the present War were the Possessors and
Proprietors of them.

VI.
It is Covenanted and Agreed on both Sides, That under the last mentioned
Compensation, neither Countries, nor Islands, nor Cities, nor Forts, nor Ports,
nor other like Places, are to be understood. But if it shall be found,
Restitution of Places.
That either Party during this War has either taken any such, in or out of
Europe, or may yet take within the time limited in the second Article,
whatsoever it be, it shall be without any Compensation and Loss, together with
all, even the smallest things thereto appertaining, forthwith restored to him
whose it was before, and in the same Condition wherein it was then when it was
taken, without tergiversation, delay, or any kind of pretense.

VII.
Under this present Treaty of Peace shall be comprehended those, Who shall be
comprehended in this Treaty.
who before the Exchange of Ratifications, or afterward within Six Months
shall be by common Consent nominated by both Parties. And as the Covenanting
Parties do thankfully acknowledge the Friendly Offices and unwearied
Endeavors, whereby the Most Serene King of Sweden interposing his Mediation,
has through the Assistance of God promoted and carried on this beneficial Work
of Pacification unto the desired Conclusion; So to testify their like
Affection, It is Decreed and Covenanted by the common Consent of all the
Parties, That his abovementioned Majesty of Sweden, with all his Kingdoms,
Dominions, Provinces and Rights, be included in this Treaty, and comprehended
in the present Pacification, after the best and most effectual manner that may
be.

VIII.
Lastly, These Articles to be observed by both Kings.
It is Concluded, Covenanted and Agreed, That the foresaid Most Serene and Most
Potent Kings shall sincerely and bona fide observe all and singular the
Articles contained and established in this present Treaty, and shall cause the
same to be observed by their Subjects and Inhabitants, neither shall they
directly or indirectly transgress them, or suffer them to be transgressed by
their Subjects or Inhabitants directly or indirectly: And they shall Ratify
and Confirm all and every thing as they are above Covenanted, Ratifications to
be Exchanged.
by Letters Patents Subscribed with their Hands, and Corroborated with their
Great Seals, conceived and written in sufficient, valid, and effectual Form,
and shall reciprocally deliver, or cause the same to be delivered here at
Breda, bona fide, really and effectually within the space of Four Weeks next
ensuing the Date of these Presents, or sooner if it may be done.

Breda the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
Articles of Peace and Alliance between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the High and Mighty Lords the States
General of the United Netherlands, Concluded the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
I.
FIrst, A firm Peace concluded.
That from this Day there be a true, firm, and inviolable Peace, sincere
Friendship, a nearer and straiter Alliance and Union between the Most Serene
King of Great Britain, and the High and Mighty States General of the United
Provinces of the Netherlands, and the Lands, Countries and Cities under the
Obedience of both Parties, wheresoever situate, and their Subjects and
Inhabitants, of what Degree soever they be.

II.
Also, That for the time to come, all Enmities, Enmities to cease.
Hostilities, Discords and Wars between the said Lord the King, and the
foresaid Lords the States General, and their Subjects and Inhabitants, cease
and be abolished; And that both Parties do altogether forbear and abstain from
all Plundering, Depredation, Harm-doing, Injuries and Infestation whatsoever,
as well by Land as by Sea, and in Fresh-waters, every where; and especially
through all Tracts, Dominions, Places and Governments (of what Condition soever
they be) within the Jurisdiction of either Party.

III.
Also, Injuries to be forgiven.
That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, Losses, which His said Majesty and His
Subjects, or the foresaid States General and their Subjects have on either Side
sustained during this War, or at any time whatsoever heretofore, upon what
Cause or Pretense soever, be buried in Oblivion, and totally expunged out of
Remembrance, as if no such things had ever past.

Furthermore that the foresaid Peace, Both Parties to keep what they have.
Friendship and Alliance may stand upon firm and unshaken Foundations, and that
from this very Day all Occasions of new Dissension and Difference may be cut
off; It is further Agreed, That both the^ Parties and either of them, shall
keep and possess hereafter with plenary Right of Sovereignty, Propriety and
Possession, all such Lands, Islands, Cities, Forts, Places, and Colonies (how
many soever) as during this War, or in any former Times before this War, they
have by Force of Arms, or any other way whatsoever, gotten and detained from
the other Party; and that, altogether after the same manner as they had gotten
and did possess them the 10/20 day of May last past, none of the same Places
being Excepted.

IV.
Moreover, Ships, Goods, etc. to remain to the Possessors.
That all Ships, with their Furniture and Merchandise, and all Movables, which
during this War, or at any time heretofore have come into the Power of either
of the forementioned Parties or their Subjects, be and remain to the present
Possessors, without any Compensation or Restitution; so as each one become and
remain Proprietor and Possessor for ever of that which was so gotten, without
any Controversy, or Exception of Place, Time, or Things.

V.
Moreover, That all Actions, Suits, and Pretensions, whatsoever they be, or in
what manner soever they have been restrained, circumscribed, defined or
reserved in any Articles of Peace or Alliance already made, (and especially in
the fifteenth Article of that Treaty which was Signed in the Year 1662.) which
His said Majesty and the said States General, or their Subjects, may or would
prosecute or move against one another about such matters or things as have
happened during this War, or in any former Times as well before as after the
foresaid Treaty of 1662. until the Day of this present Alliance, be and remain
void, obliterated and disannulled; All Actions, Suits, and Pretensions,
renounced.
As His said Majesty and the said States General shall declare, and they do
hereby declare, That by virtue of these Presents, they will for ever totally
renounce, even as hereby they do renounce all such Actions, Suits and
Pretensions for themselves and their Successors, so as in regard of them
nothing more may or ought ever to be urged on either Side, and nothing to be
moved thereupon hereafter.

VI.
But if after the 10/20 day of May, Places taken since the 10/20 of May, to be
restored.
expressed in the precedent third Article, or after the Peace is made, or this
Treaty Signed, either Party shall intercept and get from the other any Lands,
Islands, Cities, Forts, Colonies, or other Places whatsoever, all and every of
them, without any distinction of Place or Time, shall be restored bona fide in
the same state and condition wherein they shall be found to be at the Time
whenever it shall be known in those Places that the Peace is made.

VII.
But to avoid all matter of Strife or Contention hereafter, that uses
sometimes to arise concerning the Restitution or Liquidation of such Ships,
Merchandise, and other Movables, as both Parties or either of them may pretend
to have been taken or gotten in Places and Coasts far distant, after the Peace
is concluded, and before it be notified unto those Places; Hostilities, when to
cease.
It is Agreed, That all such Ships, Merchandise, and other Movables, which may
chance to fall into either Parties hands after the Conclusion and Publication
of the present Instrument, in the Channel or British Sea, within the space of
Twelve Days, and the same in the North Sea; and within the space of Six Weeks,
from the Mouth of the Channel unto the Cape of St. Vincent; as also within the
space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape, and on this side the Aequinoctial Line
or Equator, as well the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea, as elsewhere; and from
thence within the space of Eight Months, beyond the terms of the foresaid Line
throughout all the World; shall be and remain unto the Possessors, without any
exception or further distinction of Time or Place, or any regard had to the
making of Restitution or Compensation.

VIII.
It is also Agreed, Letters of Marque revoked.
That under the foresaid Renunciation and Stipulation, all Letters whatsoever
of Reprizal, Marque and Counter-Marque, both general and particular, and others
of that kind, by virtue whereof any Hostility may be exercised for the future,
ought also to be reckoned and comprehended; and by the Public Authority of
this Alliance they are inhibited and revoked. And if any persons of either
Nation, after such Revocation, shall nevertheless, under pretense or authority
of such Letters or Commissions already revoked, design any new Mischief, or act
any Hostility, after the Peace is made, and the Times specified in the
precedent seventh Article are elapsed; they are to be looked upon as Disturbers
of the Public Peace, and punished according to the Law of Nations, besides an
entire restitution of the Thing taken, or full satifaction of Damages, to which
they shall be liable; notwithstanding any Clause whatsoever to the contrary,
which may be inserted in the said Letters revoked as aforesaid.

IX.
And whereas in Countries far remote, Liberty of Trade restored in Africa and
America.
as in Africa and America, especial in Guiney, certain Protestations and
Declarations, and other Writings of that kind, prejudicial to the Liberty of
Trade and Navigation, have been emitted and published on either Side by the
Governors and Officers in the Name of their Superiors; It is in like manner
Agreed, That all and every such Protestations, Declarations, and Writings
aforesaid, be abolished, and held hereafter for null and void; and that both
the abovementioned Parties, and their Inhabitants and Subjects, use and enjoy
the same Liberty of Trade and Navigation, as well in Africa as in America,
which they used and enjoyed, or of right might use and enjoy at that time when
the Treaty of the Year 1662. was Subscribed.

X.
Also, All Prisoners set free.
That Prisoners on both Sides, one and all, of what Degree, Dignity, or
Condition soever they be, shall be set at Liberty, without Ransom or any other
Price of their Freedom; Provided satisfaction be made by them for Debts which
they have contracted for Diet or any other lawful Cause.

XI.
That the said King of Great Britain, Mutual Defense.
and the said States General remain Friends, Confederate, United and Allied,
for the defense and preservation of the Rights, Liberties, and Immunities of
either Ally and their Subjects, against all whomsoever, who shall endeavor to
disturb the Peace of eithers State by Sea or Land, or such as living within
eithers Dominions, shall be declared Public Enemies to either.

XII.
That neither the said King of Great Britain, Not to Treat or Attempt any thing
against each others prejudice, nor any way to favor the same.
nor the said States General shall Act, Do, Endeavor, Treat or Attempt any
thing against the other, or the Subjects of either, any where by Land or Sea,
or in any Ports, Liberties, Creeks, or Fresh-waters, upon any occasion
whatsoever; And that neither they nor the Subjects of either of them, shall
give, afford, or supply any Aid, Counsel or Favor, nor consent that any thing
be Done, Treated or Attempted by any other whosoever, to the harm or prejudice
of the other, or the Subjects of either; but shall expressly and actually
oppose, contradict, and really hinder all whomsoever, Residing or Dwelling in
either the respective Dominions, who shall Act, Do, Treat, or Attempt any thing
against either of them.

XIII.
That neither the said King, Rebels not to be Assisted.
nor the said Commonwealth, nor any of the Subjects of either, Inhabiting or
Residing within their Jurisdiction, shall cherish and assist the Rebels of
either Party with any Succor, Counsel or Favor whatsoever; but shall expressly
oppose, and effectually hinder all persons Abiding, Residing, or Dwelling in
either of their Dominions, from supplying or furnishing any of those foresaid
Rebels by Sea or Land, with any Succor or Assistance, either in Men, Ships,
Arms, Warlike Furniture, or other prohibited Goods, or with Money, Provisions,
or Victuals: And all Ships, Arms, Warlike Furniture, or other forbidden Goods,
also Money and Provisions belonging to any person or persons whatsoever, which
shall be supplied or furnished contrary to the meaning of this Article, shall
be Confiscate and Forfeited to that Party where the persons offending shall be:
And those who shall wittingly and willingly Act, Commit, Attempt, or Adviseany
thing contrary to the sense of this Article, shall be judged Enemies of both
Parties, and shall be punished as Traitors, there where the Offense shall be
committed. But as touching the specification of Prohibited or Contraband Goods,
it shall be provided for hereafter.

XIV.
That the said King of Great Britain, and the said States General shall
mutually, To Assist each other against Rebels.
sincerely, and faithfully (as there is occasion) Assist each other against the
Rebels of either, by Sea or Land, with Men and Ships, at the Cost and Charges
of the Parties who desire the same, in such proportion and Manner, and upon
such Conditions, as afterward shall be Agreed, and the present Occasion shall
require.

XV.
That neither the said King, Rebels and Fugitives not to be received.
nor the said Commonwealth, nor the Subjects of either, shall in any of their
Jurisdictions, Countries, Lands, Havens, Seaports, Creeks, receive any Rebel
or Rebels, Fugitive or Fugitives of the other Party, declared, or to be
declared, nor shall give or yield unto such declared Rebels and Fugitives in
the Places aforesaid, or elsewhere, though without their Lands, Countries,
Havens, Seaports, Creeks or Jurisdictions, any Help, Counsel, Lodging,
Soldiers, Ships, Money, Arms, Ammunition or Victuals: As also neither of the
States shall permit that such Rebels or Fugitives be received by any person or
persons within their Jurisdictions, Countries, Lands, Seaports, Havens,
Creeks, nor suffer that any Help, Counsel, Lodging, Favor, Arms, Ammunition,
Soldiers, Ships, Moneys or Provision be given or yielded to such Rebels and
Fugitives; but shall expressly and effectually oppose, and really hinder the
same.

XVI.
That in case either of them by their public and authentic Letters shall make
known and declare unto the other, Rebels or Fugitives, upon notice, to be
Banished.
that any person or persons are or have been a Rebel or Rebels, Fugitive or
Fugitives, and that they or any of them have been received, or reside, lie hid,
or seek shelter in their Jurisdictions, Lands, Countries, Seaports, or in any
of them; then that Party who shall have received such Letters, or to whom such
notice shall be given, or declaration made, shall within the space of Twenty
eight days, to be accounted from the day that such notice was given, be bound
to Charge and Command such Rebel or Rebels, Fugitive or Fugitives, to withdraw
and depart out of their Jurisdictions, Lands, Dominions, Countries, and every
of them: And in case any of the said Rebels or Fugitives do not withdraw and
depart within Fifteen days after such Charge or Command so given, then that
they be punished with Death, and loss of Lands and Goods.

XVII.
That no Rebel of the said King of Great Britain shall be received into any of
the Castles, Rebels not to be received or harbored.
Cities Havens, Jurisdictions, or other Places Priviledg'd or not Priviledg'd,
which any person of what Dignity or Degree soever he be, or shall be, has
within the Dominions or Territories of the United Provinces, by what Right or
Title soever he does or shall hold or possess the same, nor be permitted to be
received into, or remain in them, by any person, of what Quality or Degree
soever he be. Neither shall the said States General permit or suffer, that in
any of the aforesaid Places, any Assistance, Counsel or Favor with Ships,
Soldiers, Money or Provision, or in any other manner, be given or afforded
unto any such Rebel, by any person of what Degree or Quality soever he be, but
shall openly and expressly forbid, and effectually hinder the same. And if any
person or persons, of what Degree or Quality soever they be, dwelling or
remaining within the Dominions of the said United Provinces, or under their
Command, shall Act any thing contrary to this Agreement, That then all and
singular such persons so doing, shall for term of their Lives respectively,
lose and forfeit all such Castles, Towns, Villages, Lands, and other Places
which they or any of them at that time have or pretend to have, by what Right
or Title soever. In like manner, no Rebel of the said States of the United
Provinces shall be received into any Castles, Towns, Havens, or other Places,
or any of them, Priviledg'd or not Priviledg'd, which any person or persons, of
what Degree or Quality soever they be, and by what Right or Title soever he or
they do or shall hold and possess, within the Kingdoms or Dominions of His said
Majesty of Great Britain: Nor shall such Rebel be suffered to be received by
any person or persons whatsoever, or there to remain; neither shall the King of
Great Britain permit or suffer, that any Counsel, Assistance, or Favor in any
of the said Places with Ships, Men, Money, Victuals, or in any other manner be
given or afforded unto any such Rebel, by any such person or persons, of what
Degree or Quality soever they be, but shall openly and expressly forbid, and
effectually hinder the same. And in case any of the Subjects of the said King,
or within his Dominions, shall do or attempt any thing against this Agreement,
That all and every person so offending, shall in like manner for their
respective Lives lose and forfeit all such Castles, Cities, Towns, Lands, and
other Places which they or any of them at that time has, or shall pretend to
have, by any Right or Title whatsoever.

XVIII.
That the said King of Great Britain and His Subjects, Freedom of Passage and
Trade.
and all the Inhabitants of His Majesty's Dominions, and also the said United
Provinces and their Subjects and Inhabitants, of what Rank or Condition soever
they be, shall be bound to use each other kindly and friendly in every thing;
so that they may freely and safely pass by Land or by Water into each others
Countries, Cities, Towns Walled or Unwalled, Fortified or not Fortified, and
their Havens, and all other their Dominions situate in Europe, to continue and
abide therein so long as they shall please, and may there buy so much
Provisions as are necessary for their use, without any hindrance: and that
likewise they may Trade and Traffic in Goods and Commodities of all sorts, as
to them shall seem fit, and them to Export and Import at their pleasure, paying
the usual Duties, saving to each Country their particular Laws and Customs. No
more Customs to be paid, but what other Foreign Nations pay.
Provided that the Subjects and Inhabitants of either Side exercising their
Trade in each others Countries and Dominions, shall not be obliged hereafter to
pay any more Customs, Impost, or other Duties, then according to that
proportion which other Foreign Nations Trading in the said Places do usually
pay.

XIX.
That the Ships and Vessels of the said United Provinces, as well Men of War as
others, Dutch to Strike.
meeting any Men of War of the said King of Great Britain's in the British
Seas, shall Strike the Flag, and Lore the Top-Sail in such manner as the same
has been formerly observed in any Times whatsoever.

XX.
And for the greater freedom of Commerce and Navigation, No Pirates to be
Protected.
it is Agreed and Concluded, That the said King of Great Britain, and the said
States General, shall not receive into their Havens, Cities and Towns, nor
suffer that any of the Subjects of either Party do receive Pirates or
Sea-Rovers, or afford them any Entertainment, Assistance or Provision, but
shall endeavor that the said Pirates and Sea-Rovers, or their Partners,
Sharers and Abettors, be found out, Apprehended, and suffer condign Punishment
for the terror of others: And all the Ships, Goods, and Commodities
Piratically taken by them, and brought into the Ports of either Party, which
can be found; nay although they be sold, shall be restored to the right Owners,
or Satisfaction shall be given either to their Owners, or to those who by
Letters of Attorney shall challenge the same; Provided the Right of their
Propriety be made to appear in the Court of Admiralty by due Proofs according
to Law.

XXI.
It shall not be permitted to the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain,
and the Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and Countries under His Obedience, or to
the Inhabitants and Subjects of the said United Provinces, to do or offer any
Hostility or Violence to each other, The Subjects of either Party not to take
Commissions from any Prince in War with the other Party.
either by Land or by Sea, upon any pretense or color whatsoever: And
consequently it shall not be lawful for the said Subjects or Inhabitants to get
Commissions or Letters of Reprizal from any Prince or State, with whom either
of the Confederates are at Difference, or in open War; and much less by virtue
of those Letters to molest or damnifie the Subjects of either Party. Neither
shall it be lawful for any Foreign Private Men of War, who are not Subjects to
one nor the other Party, having Commissions from any other Prince or State, to
Equip their Ships in the Harbors of either of the aforesaid Parties, or to
sell or ransom their Prizes, or any other way to Truck, as well the Ships and
Goods, as any other Lading whatsoever. And it shall not be lawful for them to
buy any Victual, but what shall be necessary to bring them to the next Port of
that Prince from whom they obtained their said Commissions. Concerning other
Privateers and their Prizes.
And if perchance any of the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain or of
the said States General, shall buy or get to themselves by Truck, or any other
way, such Ship or Goods which have been taken by the Subjects of one or the
other Party; in such case the said Subject shall be bound to restore the said
Ship or Goods to the Proprietors without any delay, and without any
Compensation or Reimbursement of Money paid or promised for the same; Provided
that they make it appear before the Council of the said King of Great Britain,
or before the said States General, that they are the right Owners or
Proprietors of them.

XXII.
That in case the said King of Great Britain, Notice to be given of any Treaty
with any other Prince.
or the said States General do make any Treaty of Amity or Alliance with any
other Kings, Republics, Princes, or States, they shall therein comprehend each
other and their Dominions, if they desire to be therein comprehended; and shall
give to the other notice of all such Treaties or Friendship and Alliance.

XXIII.
That in case it happen during this Friendship, If any thing be done in
Contravention to this Treaty by any of the Subjects of either Party, he or they
shall be punished.
Confederacy and Alliance, any thing shall be done or attempted by any of the
Subjects or Inhabitants of either Party against this Treaty, or any part
thereof, by Land, Sea, or Fresh-waters, That nevertheless this Amity and
Alliance between the said Nations shall not thereby be broken or interrupted,
but shall remain and continue in its full force; and that only those
particular persons shall be punished, who have committed any thing against this
Treaty, and none else; and that Justice shall be rendered, and Satisfaction
given to all persons concerned, by all such who have committed any thing
contrary to this Treaty, by Land or Sea, or other Waters, in any part of
Europe, or any Places within the Straits, or in America, or upon the Coasts of
Africa, or in any Lands, Islands, Seas, Creeks, Bays, Rivers, or in any Places
on this side the Cape of Good Hope, within Twelve Months space after Justice
shall be demanded; And in all Places whatsoever on the other side the Cape (as
has been abovesaid) within Eighteen Months next ensuing after demand of
Justice shall be made in manner aforesaid. But in case the Offenders against
this Treaty do not appear, and submit themselves to Judgment, and give
Satisfaction within the respective Times above expressed, proportionable to the
distance of the Places, they shall be declared Enemies of both Parties, and
their Estates, Goods, and Revenues whatsoever, shall be Confiscated for due and
full Satisfaction of the Injuries and Wrongs by them offered; and their Persons
also, when they come within the Dominions of either Party, shall be liable unto
such Punishments as every one shall deserve for his respective Offenses.

XXIV.
That the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, and those which are under
His Jurisdiction, The Subjects of either Party to Travel freely in each others
Territories in Europe.
may freely and securely Travel in all the Provinces of the Low Countries, and
all their Dominions in Europe, and through them by Sea or Land pass to other
Places there or beyond them, and through all Quarters of the United Provinces,
Cities, Forts, or Garrisons whatsoever, which are in any Parts of the United
Provinces, or elsewhere in their Dominions in Europe, as well they themselves
exercising Trade in all those Places, as their Agents, Factors and Servants may
go Armed or Unarmed (but if Armed, not above Forty in a Company) as well
without their Goods and Merchandises as with them, wheresoever they please. The
People also and Inhabitants of the United Provinces shall enjoy the same
liberty and freedom in all the Dominions of the said King in Europe; Provided
that they and every of them do in their Trade and Merchandising yield Obedience
to the Laws and Statutes of either Nation respectively.

XXV.
That in case the Merchant-Ships of the Subjects of either Nation shall by
Storm, Pirates, Freedom of Ports.
or any other Necessity whatsoever, be driven into any Haven of either
Dominion, they may depart securely and at their pleasure, with their Ships and
Goods, without paying any Customs or other Duties; Provided they break no Bulk,
nor sell any thing; nor shall they be subject to any Molestation or Search,
provided they do not receive on Board any Persons or Goods, nor do any thing
else contrary to the Laws, Ordinances or Customs of the Places where they (as
aforesaid) shall happen to arrive.

XXVI.
That the Merchants, Seamen, etc. nor to be Pressed.
Masters and Seamen of either Party, their Ships, Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises, shall not be Arrested or Seized in the Lands, Havens, Roads or
Rivers of the other, to Serve at War, or any other use, by virtue of any
general or special Command, unless upon an extraordinary Necessity, and that
just Satisfaction be given for the same; but so as the same shall not derogate
from the Seisures and Arrests duly made in the ordinary Courts of Justice of
either Nation.

XXVII.
That the Merchants on both Sides, Seamen, etc. to carry Arms.
their Factors and Servants, and also the Masters and other Seamen, as well
going as returning by Sea and other Waters, as also in the Havens of either
Party, or going on Shore, may carry and use for the defense of themselves and
Goods, all sorts of Weapons, as well Offensive as Defensive; but being come
into their Lodgings or Inns, they shall there lay by and leave their Arms,
until they be going on Board again.

XXVIII.
That the Men of War, To Convoy each other.
or Convoys of either Nation, meeting or overtaking at Sea any Merchants Ship
or Ships belonging to the Subjects or Inhabitants of the other, holding the
same Course, or going the same Way, shall be bound as long as they keep one
Course together, to protect and defend them against all and every one who would
set upon them.

XXIX.
That if any Ship or Ships of the Subjects or Inhabitants of either Nation, or
of a Neuter, About Ships taken in either Parties Harbors.
be taken by a third Party in the Harbors of either, not being of the Subjects
or Inhabitants of either Nation, they in or out of whose Haven or Jurisdiction
the said Ships shall be taken, shall be bound to endeavor with the other
Party, that the said Ship or Ships be pursued, brought back, and restored to
the Owners; but all this shall be done at the Charges of the Owners, or whom it
concerns.

XXX.
That Searchers and other like Officers on both Sides shall regulate themselves
according to the Laws of either Nation, Searchers, etc. to regulate themselves
according to the Laws of the Country.
and shall not impose or demand more then they are allowed by their Commissions
and Instructions.

XXXI.
That if any Injury be done or practiced by either Nation, or the Subjects or
Inhabitants of the same, against the Subjects or Inhabitants of the other, or
against any of the Articles of this present Treaty, or against common Right; No
Letters of Marque to be granted but upon denial of Justice.
yet nevertheless no Letters of Reprisal, Marque or Counter-marque shall be
granted by either Side, till Justice has been first demanded according to the
ordinary course of Law; but in case Justice be there denied or delayed, then
that the said King of Great Britain and the said States General, or
Commissioners of that Nation whose Subjects and Inhabitants have suffered the
Wrong, shall publicly require Justice from that other Party, where (as
abovesaid) it was denied or delayed, or from that Power appointed to hear and
decide such Differences, that there may be a friendly Composure, or due Process
of Law. But if still there happen more delays, and neither Justice be
administered, nor Satisfaction given within Three months after such Demand, that
then Letters of Reprisal, Marque or Counter-marque may be granted.

XXXII.
It is also Agreed, In case of a future War, Six Months to be allowed for
Ships, etc. to go away.
If at any time it happen (which God of his mercy forbid) that the Differences
now Composed between His said Majesty and the said States General, should
fester, and break out again into open War, that then those Ships, Merchandise,
or any kind of Movables of either Party, which shall be found to be and remain
in the Ports, and under the Command of the adverse Party on either Side, shall
not for all that be Confiscated, or made obnoxious to any Inconvenience; but
the space of Six Months shall entirely be allowed to the Subjects and
Inhabitants of either Party, that they may have leisure to Transport from
thence the forementioned things, and any thing else that is theirs, whither
they shall think fit, without any kind of Molestation.

XXXIII.
That they who have obtained private Commissions from either Party, Privateers
to give Caution.
before they receive such Commissions, shall give good and sufficient Caution
before the Judge of the Court where they receive such Commissions, by
responsible Men, who have no part or share in such Ships, that they shall do no
Damage or Injury to the Subjects or Inhabitants of either Side.

XXXIV.
It is also Agreed and Concluded, Each Party to to have free access to the
others Ports.
That the Subjects and Inhabitants of either Party shall always have free
access to each others Seaports, there to remain, and from thence to depart
with the same freedom; and not only with their Merchant-Ships and Lading, but
also with their Men of War, whether they belong to the said King or States
General, or unto such as have obtained private Commissions, whether they arrive
through violence of Tempest, or other Casualty of the Seas, or to mend their
Ships, or to buy Provision, so they exceed not the number of Eight Men of War,
when they come there voluntarily, nor shall remain or abide longer in the
Havens or Places adjacent, then they shall have a just cause to repair their
said Ships, or to buy Victuals or other Necessaries: Concerning Men of War
coming to any Port.
And if a greater number of Men of War should upon occasion desire to come unto
such Ports, they shall in no case enter thereinto, until they have first
obtained leave from those to whom the said Havens do appertain, unless they be
forced so to do by Storm, or some force or necessity, whereby they may avoid
the danger of the Sea: In which case also they shall presently make known the
cause of their coming unto the Governor or chief Magistrate of the Place, and
shall stay no longer then the said Governor or chief Magistrate shall permit
them, and shall not do any Acts of Hostility or other Prejudice in the
aforesaid Havens during their abode there.

XXXV.
Furthermore it is Agreed and Concluded, This Treaty to be observed.
That both Parties shall truly and firmly observe and execute this present
Treaty, and all and every the Matters contained therein, and effectually cause
the same to be observed and performed by the Subjects and Inhabitants of either
Nation.

XXXVI.
Also for further caution and assurance that this Treaty and Confederacy shall
be duly and bona fide observed on the part of the said States General of the
United Provinces and their People, It is Concluded and Agreed, as also the said
States General by these Presents do agree, and firmly obblige and bind
themselves, Stateholder of Holland to Confirm this Treaty.
That all and every one whom they, or the States of the Provinces shall at any
time choose, appoint, or make Captain General, Governor, or chief President, or
Stateholder, General of Armies or Military Forces by Land, or Admiral or
General of the Fleets, Ships, or Forces at Sea, shall be bound and obliged by
Oath to Confirm this Treaty, and all the Articles thereof, and promise sacredly
upon Oath, That they shall, as far as it is possible, religiously observe and
execute the same, and as much as concerns them, cause the same to be observed
and executed by others.

XXXVII.
Under this present Treaty of Peace those shall be comprehended, Who to be
comprehended in this Treaty.
who shall be named by either Party with common Consent before the Exchange of
Ratifications, or within Six Months after. But in the mean time, as the
Covenanting Parties do thankfully acknowledge the Friendly Offices, and
unwearied Endeavors, whereby the Most Serene King of Sweden interposing his
Mediation, has through the Assistance of God promoted and carried on this
beneficial Work of Pacification unto the desired Conclusion; So to testify
their like Affection, It is Decreed and Covenanted by the common Consent of all
the Parties, That his abovementioned Majesty of Sweden, with all his Kingdoms,
Dominions, Provinces and Rights, be included in this Treaty, and comprehended
in the present Pacification, after the best and most effectual manner that may
be.

XXXVIII.
It is also Covenanted, Concluded, and Agreed, About the Ratifications.
That the present Treaty, and all and every thing and things therein contained
and concluded, shall be Confirmed and Ratified by the said King of Great
Britain, and the said States General of the United Provinces, by Letters
Patents on both Sides, Sealed with the Great Seal in due and authentic Form,
within Four Weeks next ensuing, or sooner, if it can be done; and that within
the said time the Ratifications on both Sides shall be Exchanged at Breda; and
that presently after the Delivery and Exchange of the same, this Treaty and
Alliance shall be published in such Form and Place as is usual.

Done at Breda the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
THE SEPARATE ARTICLE.
IF it happen that any Tapistry, Hangings, Carpets, Pictures, or
Houshold-Furniture of what kind soever, or Precious Stones, Jewels, Rich
Curiosities, or other Moveable Goods whatsoever, belonging to the King of Great
Britain, either now are, or hereafter shall be found to be in the hands or
power of the said States General, or of any of their Subjects; the said States
General do promise, that they will in no wise protect the Possessors of any
Movables appertaining unto the said King; which Goods may be taken from them
in such manner, that they who shall make difficulty to restore them freely, may
not be dealt withal by any means contrary to Equity and Justice. And the said
States do promise to use their most effectual Endeavors, that a plain and
summary way of Proceeding may be taken in this Affair, without the ordinary
Form and Method of Process usually observed in Courts; and that Justice be
administered, whereby His said Majesty may be satisfied as far as possibly may
be, without the wrong of any one.

Also, That if any of those who are guilty of that horrible Treason and
Parricide committed upon King CHARLES the First of most blessed Memory, and
lawfully Attainted, Condemned, or Convicted of the same, either now are in the
Dominions of the said States General, or shall hereafter come thither; as soon
as ever it shall be known or signified to the said States General, or any of
their Officers, they shall be apprehended, put into Custody, and sent Prisoners
into England, or delivered into the hands of those whom the said King of Great
Britain shall appoint to take charge of them, and bring them home.

Done at Breda the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
His Majesty's Declaration concerning the Restoring of all Places, Forts, etc.
which his Subjects shall have taken or recovered from the Dutch after the 10/20
day of May last past.
CHARLES the II. by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. We do hereby make known and testify unto all and
every person and persons, whom it does or may any way concern, That whereas in
the Treaty of Peace Concluded at Breda the 21/31 day of July, 1667. between Us
and the High and Mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, it is
Agreed in the third Article, That each Party is to hold and possess for the
time to come, with plenary Right of Sovereignty, Propriety and Possession, all
such Lands, Islands, Cities, Forts, Places, and Colonies, as during this War,
or in any former Times before this War, they have by force of Arms, or any way
whatsoever gotten or detained from the other Party, after the very same manner
as they had seized and did possess them on the 10/20 day of May last past, not
excepting any of the said Places. And whereas furthermore, for the avoiding of
all matter of Strife and Contention, which uses sometimes to arise by reason
of Restitutions, it is also Agreed in the sixth Article, That if either Party
shall intercept and get from the other any Lands, Islands, Cities, Forts,
Colonies, and other Places after the said 10/20 day of May last past, all and
every of the Premises (without any distinction of Time and Place) are
forthwith to be restored in the very same Condition wherein they shall be found
to be at the time whenever certain notice shall come to those Places that the
Peace is renewed: We do hereby Require and Command all Our Governors, Officers,
Commanders and Soldiers, both by Sea and Land, of what Quality and Condition
soever they be, as well within Europe, as without, that they do not only
forbear, and totally abstain from all Hostility according to the Tenor of the
foresaid Treaty; but also if at any time it shall happen or come to pass, that
any Lands, Islands, Cities, Forts, Colonies, and other Places wheresoever
situated, shall be taken from the United Netherlanders, or recovered from them
and brought under Our Power, after the expiration of the said 10/20 day of May,
That they restore them all without any delay or excuse, unto those Persons who
shall exhibit these Letters Patents, in such Condition as they shall be found
in at the Time when the renewing of the Peace shall be notified there, without
any Diminution, Detraction, Waste or Embezilment whatsoever, upon pain of Our
highest Displeasure.

Given at Westminster the Nine and twentieth day of July Old style, and Eighth
day of August New style, in the Year of our Lord, 1667. and of Our Reign the
Nineteenth.
Articles of Navigation and Commerce between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the High and Mighty Lords the States
General of the United Netherlands, Concluded the 21/31 day of July, 1667.
WHereas by those Articles of Peace, Preface.
Union and Alliance which are this Day Concluded between His Majesty the King
of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Provinces, it is
specially and carefully provided, That all the dismal and calamitous effects of
War may forthwith cease, and that the Peace so much desired by all, may be
restored in all Kingdoms and Dominions of both Parties, and unto all their
Subjects and Inhabitants: And the measure of Time and Affairs has not
permitted them to weigh in an equal Balance, and thereby exactly to Adjust all
and every thing and things which were to be observed and considered about the
foresaid Articles, especially about those which belong to the Rules of free
Navigation and Trade; and that it may be feared, the Inhabitants and Subjects
of both Parties may fall back again into new Quarrels and Dissentions, and the
Differences now Composed may bleed afresh, if they be not bound up by some
certain Laws about those things which concern Navigation and the (...) Trade:
Therefore by the Mediation and Endeav^^ (...) the Swedish Ambassadors, the
forementioned (...) have further Agreed unto these Separate Art (...)

I.
THat all such Proclamations and Acts of State which either Party has
published, All Acts, etc. contrary to the liberty of Trade, abrogated.
by reason of this War, to the prejudice of the other Party, against the
liberty of Navigation and Trade, be abrogated on both Sides.

II.
That for the Elucidation of that Act which the King of Great Britain caused to
be published in the Year 1660. What Goods the Dutch may bring in their Ships
into England.
For the Encouragement of Navigation in his own Subjects, whereby Strangers are
prohibited to Import any Commodities into England, but such as are of their own
Growth or Manufacture; it may be lawful for the States General, and their
Subjects, to carry also into England in their Ships, all such Commodities as
growing, being produced, or manufactured in Lower or Upper Germany, are not
usually carried so frequently and commodiously unto Seaports (thence to be
Transported to other Countries) any other way but through the Territories and
Dominions of the United Netherlands, either by Land or by Rivers.

III.
Whereas the King of Great Britain has heretofore pressed, That Merchandise
and Commodities on both Sides might be reduced to a certain and convenient
Rule; the States General also have always aim at the same Mark, That
Merchandise should be bounded and circumscribed within some certain Laws of
perpetual Observation; And yet that Business seems to require longer attention
and labor, then that it can be speedily dispatched to the satisfaction of both
Parties; Commissioners for the Regulation of Trade to be appointed.
They are both content to remit the same unto a fitter Occasion, that
Commissioners on both Sides may meet together as soon as may be after this Peace
is Concluded, who may Resolve and Agree about specifying and circumscribing the
Species of Commodities, and the Laws of Navigation, and may set the same down
in new and mutual Covenants. Yet lest in the mean time the Inhabitants and
Subjects of both Parties should be in suspense and doubt, as not knowing what
kinds of Commodities it may be lawful or unlawful to carry or supply unto the
Enemy of either Party, after the manner and form of Warlike Provisions or
Succors, or under the title or pretense of Merchandise; It is likewise
Covenanted and Agreed, That the Treaty of Navigation and Commerce made between
the Most Christian King, and the said States General (beginning from the 26.
unto the 42. Article inclusively) in that manner and tenor wherein they follow
here inserted in the French Language, may provisionally serve for a Rule and
Law, and so make way for the perfecting of a larger and fuller Treaty
concerning Maritime Commerce between the abovementioned Parties.

The foresaid Articles follow.

26.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of France may with all safety and freedom
Sail and Traffic in all the Kingdoms, Freedom of Trade with Places in Peace,
Amity, or Neutrality.
Countries and Estates which are or shall be in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality
with France, without being troubled or disquieted in that Liberty by the Ships,
Galleys, Frigates, Barques, or other Vessels belonging to the States General or
any of their Subjects, upon occasion and account of the Hostilities which may
hereafter happen between the said States General and the abovesaid Kingdoms,
Countries and Estates, or any of them, which are or shall be in Peace, Amity,
or Neutrality with France.

27.
This Transportation and Traffic shall extend to all sorts of Merchandise,
except those of Contraband.

28.
This term of Contraband Goods is understood to comprehend only all sorts of
Firearms and their Appurtenances; Contraband Goods.
as Cannon, Muskets, Mortar-Pieces, Petards, Bombs, Grenades, Saucisses,
Pitched Hoops, Carriages, Rests, Bandeliers, Powder, Match, Saltpeter,
Bullets, Pikes, Swords, Morions, Head-pieces, Cuirasses, Halberts, Javelins,
Horses, great Saddles, Holsters, Belts, and other Utensils of War.

29.
In this quality of Contraband Goods these following shall not be comprehended;
Wheat, Corn, etc. no Contraband Goods.
Wheat, Corn, and other Grain, Gums, Oils, Wines, Salt, nor generally any thing
that belongs to the nourishment and sustenance of Life, but shall remain free
as other Merchandise and Commodities not comprehended in the precedent Article;
and the Transportation of them shall be permitted even unto Places in Enmity
with the said States General, except such Cities and Places as are Besieged,
Blocked up, or Invested.

30.
It has been Agreed, That the Execution of what is abovesaid shall be
performed in the manner following; Ships entering into Port with intention to
pass to an Enemies Port, not to be Scarched upon showing their Passports.
That the Ships and Barques with the Merchandise of his Majesty's Subjects,
being entered into any Port of the said States General, and purposing to pass
from thence unto the Ports of the said Enemies, shall be only obliged to show
unto the Officers of the Port of the said States out of which they would go,
their Passports, containing the Specification of the Lading of their Ships,
attested and marked with the ordinary Seal and Signing acknowledged by the
Officers of the Admiralty of those Places from whence they first came, with the
Place whither they are bound, all in the usual and accustomed Form: After which
showing of their Passports in the Form aforesaid, they may not be disquieted
nor searched, detained nor retarded in their Voyages, upon any pretense
whatsoever.

31.
The same course shall be used in regard of the French Ships and Barques which
shall come into any Roads of the Countries under the Obedience of the said
States, The same concerning Ships coming into Roads, not to give an account of
their Lading.
not intending to enter into the Ports, or being entered thereinto, not to
unlade and break Bulk; which Ships may not be obliged to give account of their
Lading, but in case of suspicion that they carry unto the Enemies of the said
States any Contraband Goods, as was abovesaid.

32.
And in case of such apparent suspicion, Nor to show Passports but in case of
suspicion.
the said Subjects of His Majesty shall be obliged to show in the Ports their
Passports in the Form above specified.

33.
But if they were come within the Roads, Ships at Sea, how to be Visited.
or were met in the open Sea by any of the said States Ships, or Private Men of
War their Subjects; for avoiding of all Disorder, the said Ships of the United
Provinces shall come no nearer unto the French Barques then within Cannon-shot,
and may send their Longboat or Shallop on Board the French Ships or Barques,
and cause only two or three Men to go on Board, unto whom the Passports and
Certificates shall be shown by the Master or Pilot of the French Ship, in the
manner above specified, according to the Form of the said Certificates which
shall be inserted at the end of this Treaty; by which Passports and
Certificates proof may be made not only of the Lading, but also of the Place of
the Abode and Residence as well of the Master and Pilot, as of the Ship it
self; to the end that by these two ways it may be known whether they carry
Contraband Goods; and that the quality as well of the said Ship as of its
Master and Pilot may sufficiently appear: Unto which Passports and Certificates
entire faith and credit ought to be given. And to the end that their validity
may be the better known, and that they may not be in any wise falsified and
counterfeit, certain Marks and Countersigns of His Majesty and the said States
General shall be given unto them.

34.
And in case any Merchandise and Commodities of those kinds which are before
declared to be Contraband and forbidden, Contraband Goods found on Board, to be
Confiscated only, and no other.
shall by the means aforesaid be found in the French Vessels and Barques bound
for the Ports of the said States Enemies; they shall be unladen, and declared
Confiscate before the Judges of the Admiralty of the United Provinces, or other
competent Officers; But so, that the Ship and Barque, or other free and allowed
Goods, Merchandise and Commodities found in the same Ship, may not for that
cause be in any manner Seized or Confiscate.

35.
It was furthermore Agreed and Covenanted, Goods found in an Enemies Ship, to
be Confiscated.
That whatsoever shall be found Laden by His Majesty's Subjects upon a Ship of
the Enemies of the said States, although the same were not Contraband Goods,
shall yet be Confiscate with all that shall be found in the said Ship, without
exception or reservation; But on the other Side also, all that shall be and
shall be found in the Ships belonging to the Most Christian Kings Subjects,
Free Ship free Goods, except Contraband.
shall be free and discharged, although the Lading or part thereof belong to
the said States Enemies; Except Contraband Goods, in regard whereof such Rule
shall be observed as has been ordered in the precedent Articles.

36.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of the said United Provinces shall
reciprocally enjoy the same Rights, All Rights and Exemptions to be enjoyed
reciprocally.
Liberties and Exemptions in their Trade and Commerce within the Ports, Roads,
Seas, and Estates of His said Majesty, (as has been newly said) which His said
Majesty's Subjects shall enjoy in those of the said States, and in open Sea; It
being to be understood, that the equality shall be mutual every way on both
Sides: And even in case the said States should hereafter be in Peace, Amity,
and Neutrality with any Kings, Princes and States, who should become Enemies to
His said Majesty, either of the Parties are mutually to use the same Conditions
and Restrictions expressed in the Articles of this present Treaty, which regard
Trade and Commerce.

37.
And the more to assure the Subjects of the said States, Captains of Ships not
to molest the others Subjects.
that no violence shall be offered them by the said Ships of War, all the
Captains of the Kings Ships, and others His Majesty's Subjects, shall be
charged and enjoined not to molest or endamage them in any thing whatsoever,
upon pain of being punished and made answerable in their Persons and Goods for
the Damages and Interests suffered, and to be suffered, until due Restitution
and Reparation be made.

38.
And for this cause the Captains and Capers shall from henceforth every one of
them be obliged before they go out, Captains and Privateers to give Security.
to give good and sufficient Security before competent Judges, in the Sum of
Fifteen thousand Livres Tournois, to answer every one by himself for the
Miscarriages they may commit in their Courses at Sea, and for their Captains
and Officers violations of this present Treaty, and of the Orders and
Proclamations of His Majesty which shall be published by virtue, and in
conformity of the Regulation therein made; upon pain of being Cashiered, and
forfeiting the said Commissions and Licenses: Which shall in like manner be
practiced by the Subjects of the said States General.

39.
If it should happen that any of the said French Captains should make Prize of
a Vessel laden with Contraband Goods, as has been said, About Prizes Laden
with Contraband Goods.
the said Captains may not open nor break up the Chests, Mayls, Packs, Bags,
Cask, and other Boxes, or Transport, Sell, or Exchange, and otherwise alienate
them, until they have Landed in the presence of the Judges of the Admiralty,
and after an Inventory has by them been made of the said Goods found in the
said Vessels; unless the Contraband Goods making but a part of the Lading, the
Master or Pilot of the Ship should be content to deliver the said Contraband
Goods unto the said Captain, and to pursue his Voyage: In which case the said
Master or Pilot shall by no means be hindered from continuing his course and the
design of his Voyage.

40.
His Majesty being desirous that the Subjects of the said States may be used in
all Countries under his Obedience as favorably as his own Subjects, Judgments
upon Prizes to be given with all Equity.
will give all necessary Orders, that Judgments and Decrees upon Prizes which
shall happen to be taken at Sea, may be given with all Justice and Equity, by
Persons not suspected nor concerned in the Matter under debate: And His Majesty
will give precise and effectual Orders, that all Decrees, Judgments, and Orders
of Justice already given and to be given, may be readily and duly executed
according to their Forms.

41.
And when the Ambassadors of the said States General, or any other of their
Public Ministers Residing in His Majesty's Court, Upon complaint of Judgment,
a Review to be granted within Three Months.
shall make Complaint of the Judgments which shall be given, His Majesty will
cause a Review to be made of the said Judgments in His Council, to Examine
whether the Order and Precautions contained in the present Treaty have been
followed and observed, and to provide for the same according to reason; which
shall be done within the space of Three Months at the farthest: The Goods
reclaimed, not to be unladen but by consent.
Nevertheless neither before the first Judgment, nor after it, during the time
of the Review, the Goods and Effects which are claimed, may not be sold or
unladen, unless it be with consent of the Parties interessed, to avoid the
spoiling of the said Commodities, if they be perishable.

42.
When Process shall be moved in the first or second Instance between those that
have taken the Prizes at Sea, Persons interessed in a Ship taken, obtaining a
favorable Judgment, to have its Execution upon Security.
and the persons interessed therein, and the said interessed persons shall come
to obtain a favorable Judgment or Decree, the said Judgment or Decree shall
have its Execution upon Security given, notwithstanding the Appeal of him that
took the Prize; But the same shall not hold on the contrary. And that which is
said in this present, and in the precedent Articles, for the causing of good
and speedy Justice to be done unto the Subjects of the United Provinces in the
matter of Prizes taken at Sea by His Majesty's Subjects, shall be understood
and practiced by the States General, in regard of Prizes taken by their
Subjects from those of His Majesty.

IV.
It is also Covenanted, That these above-written Separate Articles,
Ratifications Exchanged within Four Weeks.
and all and every thing therein contained and concluded, shall be Confirmed
and Ratified by the said King of Great Britain, and the said States General of
the United Provinces, by Letters Patents of both Parties, Sealed with their
Great Seal in due and authentic Form, within Four Weeks next ensuing, or
sooner, if it may be; and mutual Instruments shall be Exchanged at Breda within
the foresaid time; and the same shall be Published after the Delivery and
Exchange thereof, in the usual Form and Place.

Done at Breda the 21/31 day of July, 1667.

A Form of the Passports and Certificates that ought to be given in the
Admiralty of France, to the Ships and Barques that go out thence, according to
the Article of the present Treaty.
CAEsar Duke of Vendome, Peer and Great Master, Chief and Superintendant
General of the Navigation and Commerce of France: To all who shall see these
Presents, Greeting.

We do make known, That we have granted leave and permission to (...) Master
and Conductor of a Ship called (...) of the City of (...) of the Burden of
(...) Tuns or thereabouts, being at present in the Port and Haven of (...) to
go to (...) Laden with (...) after Search shall have been made of his Ship, and
he before his Departure shall make Oath before the Officers that Exercise the
Jurisdiction of Maritime Causes, That the said Vessel does belong to one or
more of his Majesty's Subjects, an Act whereof shall be put at the bottom of
the Presents, as also to keep and cause to be kept by those Aboard him, the
Orders and Rules of the Marine, and shall put into the Registry the Roll Signed
and Certified, containing the Names and Surnames, the Nativity and Habitation
of the Men that are Aboard him, and of all that shall Imbarque themselves, whom
he may not take on Board without the knowledge and permission of the Marine
Officers; and in every Port or Haven where he shall enter with his Ship, shall
make appear to the Officers and Marine Judges concerning the present License,
and shall make them faithful relation of what has been done, and has passed
during his Voyage, and shall carry the Flags, Arms, and Colors, both the Kings
and Ours, throughout his whole Voyage.

In witness whereof, We have Signed these Presents, and caused the Seal of Our
Arms to be put thereunto, and the same to be Countersigned by Our Secretary of
the Marine, the (...) day of (...) One thousand six hundred (...) Signed Caesar
of Vendome. And underneath, By my Lord Matharel, and Sealed with the Seal of
the Arms of the said Lord Admiral.

A Form of the Act containing the Oath.
WE (...) of the Admiralty of (...) do certify, That (...) Master of the Ship
named in the Passport above, has taken the Oath therein mentioned. Made at
(...) the day of (...) One thousand six hundred, etc.

Another Form of the Certificates that ought to be given by the Cities and
Seaports of the United Provinces, to the Ships and Barques that go from
thence, according to the Article abovesaid.
TO the Most Serene, Most Illustrious, Illustrious, Most Mighty, Most Noble,
Honorable, and Prudent Lords, Emperors, Kings, commonwealths, Princes, Dukes,
Comties, Barons, Lords, Burgomasters, Sheriffs, Counselors, Judges, Officers,
Justices and Regents of all good Cities and Places, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular, who shall see or read these Presents. We Burgomasters and Governors of
the City of (...) do make known, That (...) Ship-Master appearing before Us,
has declared by solemn Oath, that the Ship called (...) containing about (...)
Lasts, of which he is at present the Master, belongs to Inhabitants of the
United Provinces, So help him God: And as we would willingly see the said
Ship-Master assisted in his just Affairs, We do request you all in general and
particular, that where the abovesaid Master shall arrive with his Ship and
Goods, it may please them to receive him courteously, and use him in due
manner, suffering him upon the usual Rights of Tolls and other Charges, in,
through, and nigh your Ports, Rivers and Territories, permitting him to Sail,
Pass, Frequent and Trade there where he shall think fit. Which we shall
willingly acknowledge.

In witness whereof We have caused the Seal of Our City to be thereunto put.
Articles touching Navigation and Commerce between the Most Serene and Mighty
Prince, Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Netherlands, Concluded at the Hague the 7/17
Febr. 1667/8.
WHEREAS, Preface.
by the Blessing of Almighty God, for the mutual Safety of the two Parties, as
well as the common Good of Christendom, a Perpetual Defensive Treaty was
Concluded, and Signed on the 23. day of January last past between the Most
Serene and Most Potent Prince Charles the Second, and the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Netherlands, with Stipulation of considerable
Succors, to be mutually given by the Parties, as well by Sea as Land: And
whereas the said King and States did on the same Day, and by another
Instrument, readily Enter into a Solemn Treaty and Agreement, for Composing the
Affairs of their Neighbors, and restoring Peace to Christendom; so as nothing
seems now remaining that can at any time hereafter interrupt a Friendship and
Alliance renewed with so equal Desires, unless such Controversies as may
otherwise hereafter happen to arise about determining the different sorts and
natures of Merchandise, which being left dubious and uncertain, would give
occasion to the further growth of such Differences: And therefore that it may
appear with what Sincerity and good Faith the said King, and the said States,
desire to Preserve and Entertain, not only for the Present, but to all
Posterity, the Amity they lately Contracted between them; they have at last,
for the taking away all Grounds, not only of Differences and
Misunderstandings, but even of Questions and Disputes; and so utterly to cut
off the Hope and Expectation of those, whoever they are, that may think it
their Interest by new Controversies, to endeavor the disturbance or
interruption of the said Peace, mutually Agreed on these following Articles,
which are to be on both Sides, and for ever observed as the Measure and Rule of
such Maritime Affairs, and mutual Settlement of Trade, or at lest so long, till
by the joint Consent of both Parties, Commissioners be appointed, and do meet
in order to the framing a more full and ample Treaty concerning this Matter,
and the Laws and Rules of Commerce and Navigation; as by farther Experience
shall be found most advantageous to the common Good of both Parties.

I.
ALL the Subjects and Inhabitants of Great Britain may with all safety and
freedom, English to Trade freely with any Country in Peace or Neutrality with
them.
Sail and Traffic in all the Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates, which are or
shall be in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with Great Britain, without being
troubled or disquieted in that Liberty by the Ships of War, Galleys, Frigates,
Barques, or other Vessels belonging to the States General, or any of their
Subjects, upon occasion and account of the Hostilities which may hereafter
happen between the said States General, and the abovesaid Kingdoms, Countries,
and Estates, or any of them, which are or shall be in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with Great Britain.

II.
This freedom of Navigation and Traffic shall extend to all sorts of
Merchandise, To extend to all Goods but Contraband.
except those of Contraband.

III.
This term of Contraband Goods is understood to comprehend only all sorts of
Firearms and their Appurtenances; as Cannon, Muskets, What Goods are
Contraband.
Mortar-Pieces, Petards, Bombs, Grenades, Fire-crancels, Pitched Hoops,
Carriages, Rests, Bandeliers, Powder, Match, Saltpeter, Bullets, Pikes,
Swords, Morions, Head-Pieces, Coats of Mayl, Halberts, Javelins, Horses, great
Saddles, Holsters, Belts, and other Utensils of War, called in French,
Assortissemens servans al usage de la Guerre.

IV.
In this quality of Contraband Goods, Corn, Wheat, etc. not Contraband.
these following shall not be comprehended; Corn, Wheat, or other Grain, and
Pulse; Oils, Wines, Salt, or generally any thing that belongs to the
nourishment and sustenance of Life, but shall remain free as other Merchandise
and Commodities not comprehended in the precedent Article; and the
Transportation of them shall be permitted even unto Places in Enmity with the
said States General, except such Cities and Places as are Besieged, Blocked up,
or Invested.

V.
It has been Agreed, English Ships going to an Enemies Port, not to be
molested, upon showing their Passports.
for the due Execution of what is abovesaid, That the Ships and Barques of the
English, Laden with Merchandise, being entered into any Port of the said States
General, and purposing to pass from thence unto the Ports of their Enemies,
shall be only obliged to show unto the Officers of the Port of the said States,
out of which they would go, their Passports, containing the Specification of
the Lading of their Ships, attested and marked with the ordinary Seal of the
Officers of the Admiralty of those Places from whence they first came, with the
Place whither they are bound, all in the usual and accustomed Form: After which
showing of their Passports in the Form aforesaid, they may not be disquieted
nor searched, detained nor retarded in their Voyages, upon any pretense
whatsoever.

VI.
The same course shall be used in regard of the English Ships and Vessels which
shall come into any Roads of the Countries under the Obedience of the said
States, Ships coming into Roads, not obliged to give an account of their
Lading, but upon suspicion of carrying Contraband Goods;
not intending to enter into the Ports, or being entered thereinto, not to
unlade and break Bulk; which Ships may not be obliged to give account of their
Lading, but in case of suspicion that they carry unto the Enemies of the said
States any Contraband Goods, as was abovesaid.

VII.
And in case of such apparent suspicion, In which case to show their Passports.
the said Subjects of his Majesty shall be obliged to show in the Ports their
Passports in the Form above specified.

VIII.
But if they were come within the Roads, Concerning Searching Ships at Sea.
or were met in the open Sea by any of the said States Ships, or Private Men of
War their Subjects; for avoiding of all Disorder, the said Ships of the United
Provinces or of their Subjects, shall not come near within Cannon-shot of the
English, but shall send out their Longboat, and cause only two or three Men
to go on Board the English Ships or Vessels, unto whom the Passports and
Certificates of the Propriety of the Ships shall be shown by the Master or
Captain of the English Ship, in the manner above specified, according to the
Form of the said Certificates which shall be inserted at the end of this
Treaty; Upon producing their Passports, not to be mole^^ed.
by which Passports and Certificates proof may be made not only of the Lading,
but also of the Place of the Abode and Residence of the Master or Captain, and
Name of the Ship it self; to the end that by these two ways it may be known
whether they carry Contraband Goods; and that the quality as well of the said
Ship, as of its Master or Captain may sufficiently appear: Unto which Passports
and Certificates entire faith and credit shall be given. And to the end that
their validity may be the better known, and that they may not be in any wise
falsified and counterfeit, certain Marks and Countersigns of his Majesty and
the said States General shall be given unto them.

IX.
And in case any Merchandise and Commodities of those kinds which are before
declared to be Contraband and forbidden, Contraband Goods found on Board, to be
Confiscated only, and no other, nor the Ship.
shall by the means aforesaid be found in the English Ships and Vessels, bound
for the Ports of the said States Enemies; they shall be unladen, Judicially
proceeded against, and declared Confiscate before the Judges of the Admiralty
of the United Provinces, or other competent Officers: But so that the Ship and
Vessel, or other free and allowed Goods, Merchandise, and Commodities found in
the same Ship, may not for that cause be in any manner Seized or Confiscate.

X.
It is furthermore Agreed and Covenanted, Free Ship free Goods, and per contra.
That whatsoever shall be found Laden by his Majesty's Subjects upon a Ship of
the Enemies of the said States, although the same were not Contraband Goods,
shall yet be Confiscate with all that shall be found in the said Ship, without
exception or reservation: But on the other side also, all that shall be found
in the Ships belonging to the King of Great Britain's Subjects, shall be free
and discharged, although the Lading or part thereof belong to the said States
Enemies; except Contraband Goods, in regard whereof such Rule shall be observed
as has been ordered in the precedent Articles.

XI.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of the said United Provinces shall
reciprocally enjoy the same Rights, All Privileges to be enjoyed reciprocally.
Liberties and Exemptions in their Trade and Commerce upon the Coasts, and in
the Ports, Roads, Seas, and Estates of his said Majesty, (as was now said)
which his said Majesty's Subjects shall enjoy in those of the said States, and
in open Sea; It being to be understood, that the equality shall be mutual every
way on both Sides, even in case the said States should hereafter be in Peace,
Amity and Neutrality with any Kings, Princes, and States, who should become
Enemies to his said Majesty, so that either of the Parties are murually to use
the same Conditions and Restrictions expressed in the Articles of this present
Treaty, which regard Trade and Commerce.

XII.
And the more to assure the Subjects of the said States, Captains and
Privateers liable to make good any Damage they shall do.
that no violence shall be offered them by the Ships of War belonging to his
Majesty of Great Britain, or his Subjects, all the Captains of the Kings Ships,
and all his Majesty's Subjects, that set out private Men of War, shall be
charged and enjoined not to molest or endamage them in any thing whatsoever,
upon pain of being punished and made answerable in their Persons and Goods for
all Costs and Damages, until due Restitution and Reparation be made.

XIII.
And for this cause the Captains and Capers shall from henceforth every one of
them be obliged before they go out, To give Security to that end.
to give good and sufficient Security before competent Judges, in the Sum of
Fifteen hundred pounds Sterling, or Fifteen thousand Livres Tournois, that they
will give full satisfaction for any Injuries or Wrongs they may commit in their
Courses at Sea, and for their Captains and Officers that shall violate this
present Treaty, and the Orders and Proclamations of His Majesty which shall be
published by virtue, and in conformity to the Regulation therein made; upon
pain of forfeiting their said Commissions and Licenses: Which shall in like
manner be practiced by the Subjects of the said States General.

XIV.
If it should happen that any of the said French Captains should make Prize of
a Vessel laden with Contraband Goods, Contraband Goods taken, not to be opened
but in presence of the Officers of the Admiralty.
as has been said, the said Captains may not open nor break up the Chests,
Mayls, Packs, Bags, Cask, or Sell, or Exchange, or otherwise alienate them,
until they have Landed them in the presence of the Judges or Officers of the
Admiralty, and after an Inventory by them made of the said Goods found in the
said Vessels; unless the Contraband Goods making but a part of the Lading, the
Master of the Ship should be content to deliver the said Contraband Goods unto
the said Captain, and to pursue his Voyage: In which case the said Master shall
by no means be hindered from continuing his course and the design of his Voyage.

XV.
His Majesty being desirous that the Subjects of the said States may be used in
all Countries under his Obedience as favorably as his own Subjects, Judgments
upon Prizes to be given equitably.
will give all necessary Orders, that Judgments and Decrees upon Prizes which
shall happen to be taken at Sea, may be given with all Justice and Equity, by
Judges not suspected nor concerned in the Matter under debate: And His Majesty
will give precise and effectual Orders, that all Decrees, Judgments, and Orders
of Justice already given and to be given, may be readily and duly executed
according to the tenor of them.

XVI.
And when the Ambassadors of the said States General, Upon complaint of
Judgment, a Review to be granted within Three Months.
or any other of their Public Ministers Residing in his Majesty's Court, shall
make Complaint of the Judgments which shall be given, his Majesty will cause a
Review to be made of the said Judgments in His Council, to Examine whether the
Order and Precautions contained in the present Treaty have been followed and
observed, and to provide for the same according to Right and Equity; which
shall be done within the space of Three Months at the farthest: The Goods
reclaimed; not to be sold or unladen but by consent.
Nevertheless neither before the first Judgment, nor after it, during the time
of the Review, the Goods and Effects which are reclaimed, may not be sold or
unladen, unless it be with the consent of the Parties interessed, to avoid the
spoiling of the said Commodities, if they be perishable.

XVII.
When Process shall be moved in the first or second Instance between those that
have taken the Prizes at Sea, and the persons interessed therein, The
interessed in a Ship taken, obtaining a favorable Judgment, the same to have
its Execution upon Security.
and the said interessed persons shall come to obtain a favorable Judgment or
Decree, the said Judgment or Decree shall have its Execution upon Security
given, notwithstanding the Appeal of him that took the Prize; But the same
shall not hold on the contrary, where the Sentence goes against the Claimers.
And that which is said in this present, and in the precedent Articles, for the
causing of good and speedy Justice to be done unto the Subjects of the United
Provinces in the matter of Prizes taken at Sea by His Majesty's Subjects, shall
be understood and practiced by the States General, in regard of Prizes taken by
their Subjects from those of His Majesty.

XVIII.
But since the Conveniences and Inconveniences of Things and Agreements cannot
be discovered but in procedure of Time, and by Observations drawn from mutual
Experience, Commissioners to be appointed for the supplying of what shall be
found wanting in this Treaty.
It is therefore Agreed between the said King of Great Britain and the said
Lords the States of the United Netherlands, That at any time hereafter, when
both Parties shall so think it fitting, certain Commissioners by each Party
respectively chosen, shall meet by the common Consent of both; who shall make
it their Care and Business to supply what ever shall be found wanting in the
aforementioned Articles, to change or limit what ever shall not be convenient
and commodious for both, and fully complete a further Treaty both concerning
these things, and all other the Laws of Navigation.

XIX.
All these Agreements, Ratification within Four Weeks.
and all and every thing therein contained, shall be Confirmed and Ratified by
the said King of Great Britain and the States General of the United Provinces,
by Letters Patents of both Parties, Sealed with their Great Seal in due and
authentic Form, within Four Weeks next ensuing, or sooner if it may be, and
mutual Instruments shall be Exchanged by each Party within the time aforesaid.

Here follow certain Forms whereof mention is made in the Eighth Article.
A Form of the Certificates that ought to be given by those that have the
ordinary Power of the Admiralty of England, to the Ships and Vessels that go
out thence, according to the Eighth Article of the present Treaty.
High Admiral of England, To all who shall see these Presents, Greeting.

These are to certify, That we have granted leave and permission to (...)
Master and Captain of the Ship called (...) of the City of (...) of the Burden
of (...) Tuns, or thereabouts, being at present in the Port and Haven of (...)
to go to (...) Laden with (...) after Search shall have been made of his Ship,
and he before his departure shall have made Oath before the Officers that
Exercise the Jurisdiction of Maritime Causes, That the said Vessel does belong
to one or more of his Majesty's Subjects, an Act whereof shall be put at the
bottom of these Presents, as also to keep and cause to be kept by those Aboard
him, the Orders and Rules of the Marine, and shall put into the Registry a List
Signed and Certified, containing the Names and Surnames, the Nativity and
Habitation of the Men that are Aboard him, and of all that shall Imbarque
themselves, whom he may not take on Board without the knowledge and permission
of the Marine Officers; and in every Port or Haven where he shall enter with
his Ship, shall show the Officers and Marine Judges this his present License,
and having finished his Voyage, shall make faithful relation of what has been
done, and has passed during all the time of his said Voyage, and shall carry
the Flags, Arms, and Colors of his Majesty throughout his whole Voyage.

In witness whereof, We have Signed these Presents, and caused the Seal of Our
Arms to be put thereunto, and the same to be Countersigned by Our Secretary of
the Marine, the (...) day of (...) One thousand six hundred (...) Signed And
underneath, By (...) and Sealed with the Seal of the Arms of the said High
Admiral.

A Form of the Act containing the Oath to be taken by the Master or Captain of
the Ship.
WE (...) of the Admiralty of (...) do certify, That (...) Master of the Ship
named in the Passport above, has taken the Oath therein mentioned. Given at
(...) the day of (...) One thousand six hundred, etc.

In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our Hands.

The Form of the Certificates that ought to be given by the Burgomasters of the
Cities and Seaports of the United Provinces, to the Ships and Vessels that go
from thence, according to the Eighth Article abovesaid.
TO the Most Serene, Most Illustrious, Most Mighty, Most Noble, Honorable, and
Prudent Lords, Emperors, Kings, Commonwealths, Princes, Dukes, Comtes, Barons,
Lords, Burgomasters, Sheriffs, Counselors, Judges, Officers, Justices and
Regents of all Cities and Places, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, who shall
see or read these Presents. We Burgomastersand Governors of the City of (...)
do certify, That (...) Ship-Master appearing before Us, has declared by
solemn Oath, that the Ship called (...) containing about (...) Lasts, of which
he is at present the Master, belongs to Inhabitants of the United Provinces,
So help him God: And as we would willingly see the said Ship-Master assisted in
his just Affairs, We do request you, and every of you where the abovesaid
Master shall arrive with his Ship and Goods, that you will please to receive
him courteously, and use him kindly, admitting him upon paying the usual Dues,
Tolls and other Customs, to enter into, remain in, and pass from your Ports,
Rivers and Territories, and there to Trade, Deal and Negotiate in any Part or
Place, in such sort and manner as he shall desire. Which we shall most readily
acknowledge in the like occasion. In witness whereof We have caused the Seal of
Our City to be thereunto put.

In Witness and Confirmation of all and every part whereof, We the
Commissioners of His said Majesty the King of Great Britain, and of the said
Lords the States General, having sufficient Power given us thereunto, have
Signed these Tables, and Sealed them with our Seals. At the Hague in Holland
the 17. of Febr. in the Year One thousand six hundred sixty eight. De Gellicum,
B. d' Asperen, John de Wit, Van Crommon, G. Hoolck, V. Vnckell, Jan. Van
Isselmuden, L. T. Van Starckenborck.


A Treaty of Friendship and Commerce, between His Majesty of Great Britain,
etc. and the Most Serene Prince the Duke of Savoy, Concluded at Florence the
19th day of September, 1669.
The Instrument of Commerce with the Duke of SAVOY.
THe convenient Situation of the Port of Villa Franca in the Mediterranean Sea,
and the Capacity of the same, together with the Security of it in all respects;
have been efficacious Motives to His Most Serene Highness the Duke of Savoy,
for the Exhibiting and Pronouncing the same Free to the whole World: with a
Belief, that it might in time prove advantageous to the Public, and to His
Royal Highness in particular. But it so falling out, that the vigor of things
which are established by the best Counsel, in process of time, are rendered
languid and subject to mutation: It has therefore pleased His Royal Highness,
not only to reconfirm the Free State and Condition of his Port; But over and
above to offer the same to His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. increased with
new Privileges, and augmented with inviolable Capitulations. To these Motives
a most valid and reciprocal Inducement joins it self: To wit, the Luxuriant
Fertility of Soil, which is obvious in the Kingdoms and other Plantations which
are under the Dominion of His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. As also in the
Dominions of His said Royal Highness: which superfluity, since it is so
properly and naturally transmitted, and emptied into the mutual Territories,
with the reciprocal fruit, and advantage of the Subject: 'Twas easy for both
Princes between whom there passed long since the Ties of an Ancient Friendship,
confirmed by repeated Alliances, and by late conjunction in Blood; to entertain
thoughts of superadding the new Tie of mutual Commerce, by which they might
upon the score of advantaging their Subjects, further Oblige, and reciprocally
Engage themselves to each other. To this end and purpose it has pleased His
Most Excellent Majesty by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
to constitute Sir John Finch Knight, now Resident for His Majesty of Great
Britain with the Great Duke of Tuscany, His true and lawful Attorney, with a
Plenipotentiary Power, as appears out of the Letters Patents themselves. And to
the same intent and purpose His Royal Highness has thought good to invest with
the same Power and Authority Signor Joseph Maurice Philippone, His Counselor,
Auditor, and Procurator General of His Revenue: As is likewise apparent from
the Letters Patents of His Royal Highness: Both which Plenipotentiaries, after
several Meetings, have finally Concluded as follows.

ARTICLES COVENANTED.
I.
FIrst, The Peace Confirmed.
Since Commerce was always the Companion of Peace, That Peace which for many
Years was never interrupted by War, is now Ratified, Established, and
Confirmed, between the Most Potent Monarch CHARLES the Second, King of Great
Britain, etc. and His Royal Highness CHARLES EMANVEL the Second of that Name,
Duke of Savoy, etc. Both whose Subjects are obliged as well by Sea as Land,
upon all occasions, to perform to each other all Actions of mutual Civility and
Kindness.

II.
Secondly, It shall be permitted to, English to Import freely all sorts of
Goods, and Land them without Confiscation or Imposition.
and lawful for all sorts and kinds of Ships and Vessels, belonging to his
Majesty the King of Great Britain, etc. or any of his Subjects, to conduct and
bring into the Ports of Villa Franca, Nizza, or S. Hospitio, all things
whatsoever, or all kinds of Merchandise, whether produced by Nature, or made by
Art, in any part of the World: All which things or Merchandise so brought,
shall freely and lawfully by the Captains or Masters, or any under them, or by
the Merchants or Factors, his Majesty's Subjects, be Landed and brought into
the Houses of the said Merchants or Factors, or into any Magazines, or
Warehouses out of their Houses in the said Ports; and there conserved and kept
by them as long as they please, without Confiscation, Imposition of Custom, or
Exaction of any Duty whatsoever. To Reexport what they cannot sell.
Furthermore, if all the said things, or any part of them, shall not be sold in
the said Ports, it is and shall be lawful for the said Captains, Masters,
Merchants, or Factors, his Majesty's Subjects, freely to send all or any part
of the said things by Sea to whatsoever other Place they please, without paying
any Custom, Duty, or any sort of Imposition whatsoever.

III.
Thirdly, That all and every sort and kind of things, Goods sold, and sent
elsewhere by Sea, to pay no Imposition.
and Merchandise which shall be sold in Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio,
and after the Sale made shall be dispeeded or sent by Sea into the Territories
of any other Prince, both in respect of the Seller and Buyer, shall always be
free and clear from all Custom, Duty, or Imposition whatsoever: But as to all
those things and Merchandises which after the Sale made in the said Places, But
such as are carried by Land, to be exempt for Ten years only.
shall pass by Land into the Territories of any other Prince, it is also
Covenanted and Agreed, That during the space of Ten years to ensue from the day
of the Publication of this present Agreement, all such Goods shall be free and
clear from all Custom, Duty, or Impost whatsoever for their Passage by Land,
and from any other Penalty whatsoever, both in respect of the Buyer and Seller;
After which, to pay one half of what is Imposed by the Tariffe of 1633.
Which Ten years being expired, if his Royal Highness will not further Confirm
this freedom of Passage according to the aforesaid Form and Manner: In such
case for all and every the said things, which after Sale made pass by Land as
aforesaid, shall be paid only one half of the Imposition or Duty which is
exacted for Passage in the Rates or Tariffe Printed in the end of the Order
published the 30th October, 1633.

IV.
Fourthly, Goods coming from any of the Kings Dominions, to be freely sold in
all the Dukes Territories.
All and every sort and kind of things or Merchandise which are produced by
Nature, or made by Art, in any of his Majesty's Kingdoms, or in any Plantations
of the West or East Indies, or any other Territories which at present are, or
hereafter shall be under the Dominion of his Majesty, may and shall be freely
sold by the Subjects of his Majesty, throughout all the Dominions of his Royal
Highness, and any part of his Territories or Places of Jurisdiction, without
any Prohibition or Penalty, What Goods excepted;
notwithstanding whatsoever Law or Edict to the contrary, Excepted always, and
only, Salt, Tobacco, Gunpowder, Match, Birding-shot, Bullets, Whalebone, Cards
of all sorts; because it is the Custom to Farm out the Liberty of selling these
mentioned things, Which may yet be sold to the Farmers of the Liberty of
selling those Goods.
as Monopolies to particular Persons: Notwithstanding free leave is granted to
his Majesty's Subjects, according to what is expressed in the second Article,
to receive and keep within their Houses, or Warehouses, all the aforesaid
forbidden Commodities, without any Custom, Duty or Penalty: Nay further, free
leave is granted to his Majesty's Subjects to sell the said forbidden
Commodities to the Monopolists or Farmers themselves, But all sorts of
Merchandise (except the aforesaid Prohibited ones) which shall be introduced
and brought into the Ports of Villa Franca, Nizza, or S. Hospitio, when they
shall be extracted out of the said Ports, to the end that they may be vented
and sold within the Dominions of his Royal Highness, he alone that extracts
them, All other extracted to be sold, to pay half Custom of what is specified
in the Tariffe.
whether he be the Buyer or the Seller, shall pay only one half of that Custom
or Duty which is specified in that Book of Rates or Tariffe, a Printed Copy of
which underwritten by the Procurator of his Royal Highness was by him
delivered to Sir John Finch, which Duty or Custom once paid, nothing more shall
be paid within the Dominions of his Royal Highness, either by the Buyer or the
Seller, for the said Goods or Merchandise: with express Declaration, All
Woollen Manufactures, or other Goods, not specified in the Tariffe, to pay One
and a half per Cent.
that for all Woollen Manufactures, or whatsoever Commodities aforesaid, which
as it appears are not specified in the aforesaid Books of Rates or Tariffe,
shall be paid Duty or Custom, one and a half per Centum, that is half only of
the Three per Centum imposed upon all Commodities which are not specified in
the mentioned Book of Rates, by the last Article or Lines of it, which Duty or
Custom being once paid, nothing more shall be paid neither by the Buyer nor
Seller, within the Dominions of his Royal Highness.

V.
Fifthly, It is Covenanted and Agreed, That all sorts of Ships and Vessels
belonging to his Majesty of Great Britain, etc. or any of his Subjects, which
shall set Sail from England, or any Place under the Dominions of his Majesty,
or out of his Majesty's Dominions, not being infected with the Plague, and
shall arrive at the Ports of Nizza, Ships arriving with Bills of Health, to be
admitted to immediate Prattick.
Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio, with Certificates or Patents of Good health,
having in their Voyage had no Commerce with any Places or Persons suspected to
be infected with the Plague; are, and ought to be, free and clear from making
Quarantena, or any days whatsoever of purgation: and there shall be immediately
granted to the Persons in the said Ships, present and free Commerce or
Prattick; and all things and Merchandise of whatsoever sort or kind, brought by
the said Ships, shall immediately without any delay, be permitted freely to be
Landed, and carried into the Houses or Warehouses of the Merchants his
Majesty's Subjects in Nizza, Villa Franca, But without such Certificates, to be
subject to the Quarantena.
or S. Hospitio; But if the abovementioned Ships shall arrive without a
Certificate or Patent of Good health, or if in their Voyage they shall have
practiced or had Commerce with any Persons or Places suspected of the Plague:
In such case both Persons and Goods shall be subject to Quarantena or
Purgation; but the days of Quarantena or Purgation shall be shortened both in
respect of the Persons and Goods, as much as the care of preserving the Public
Health can possibly permit; The Lazaretto Duties not to be altered but by the
Consul and Merchants consent.
but what Merchandise is subject to the Lazaretto, or to make Purgation, as
also the Lazaretto Duties or Expense of Goods that make Purgation, is with
other Particulars contained in a Paper of the Rates of the Lazaretto Duties at
the end of this Instrument, which never canor may be changed or altered without
the consent of the Consul, and the major part of the Merchants residing in the
said Ports.

VI.
Sixthly, The Kings Subjects to enjoy the Privilege of Protection against
Strangers, not one another.
Because Ports which are called Free are wont to give Protection and Refuge to
Bankrupts, or Persons that Fail and Break with other Men's Estates; The same
Piety of his Majesty which Protects those who are good, Punishes them that are
bad; Therefore as to what concerns his Majesty's Subjects, it is Covenanted and
Agreed, notwithstanding whatsoever Edicts published, That his Majesty's
Subjects be wholly deprived, and utterly cut off from enjoying that Protection
which is commonly called Safe Conduct; reserving to every Subject of his
Majesty his proper Right; Likewise all his Majesty's Subjects shall be deprived
of the benefit of Protection or Safe Conduct, who shall commit any Crimes
whatsoever against his Majesty, as also all of his Majesty's Subjects, whether
Master, Mariners, or others, who shall be guilty of Barratry; to whom, as also
to all Pirates and Robbers at Sea who are his Majesty's Subjects, all License
shall be denied of Selling Goods or Merchandise, or Contracting for them in the
said Ports: But in regard all that is mentioned in the foregoing part of this
Article, relates only to his Majesty's Subjects, it is Covenanted likewise and
Agreed in favor of the said Subjects, that they shall fully and entirely
against all Strangers, (as well as all Strangers against them) enjoy the
Privilege of Safe Conduct or Protection promised, and published in the Edict
of a Free Port, By his Royal Highness.

VII.
Seventhly, English Inhabiting in the Port of Nizza, etc. to be free from Taxes.
All the Subjects of his Majesty who live at Nizza, Villa Franca, or S.
Hospitio in order to Trade or otherwise, are declared free and clear from all
Tributes, Taxes, or Levies of Moneys, which are or shall be Imposed by his
Royal Highness.

VIII.
Eighthly, Not to be Subject to Arrests, etc. without a Legal preceding
Citation.
It Is likewise declared, That the Persons of his Majesty's Subjects residing at
Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio, shall not be liable or subject to Arrest
or Imprisonment, or their Goods to Seizure or Sequestration for any Civil
Causes, unless a Legal Citation has first preceded; But in Criminal Causes,
which are punished with Death or Corporal Punishment, they shall be subject to
Imprisonment without Citation.

IX.
Ninthly, Liberty of Conscience.
It is permitted, and shall be lawful to all and every one of the Subjects of
his Majesty of Great Britain, etc. dwelling in the said Ports to live in their
own Religion, after the same manner that is permitted either at Genoua, or
Legorn, and a convenient and decent Place of Burial shall be allotted and
assigned for the Interrment of such of his Majesty's Subjects, as shall decease
in the said Places.

X.
Tenthly, About the Deciding of Controversies.
Since that nothing does more torment any Man then Controversies in Law before
Tribunals of Judicature, in regard of the great Expense both of Time and Money;
But more especially one who is a Stranger to the Customs of the Place, and an
Alien to the Laws: Therefore it is Covenanted and Agreed between his Majesty of
Great Britain, etc. and his Royal Highness, That all Differences or
Controversies whatsoever, which shall arise between Subject and Subject of his
Majesty, or between the said Subjects and any Person that is no Subject of his
Majesty, shall be only Pleaded before, A Judge to be chosen, and called the
Delegate of the English Nation.
and be Decided only by a Judge who shall be called the Delegate of the English
Nation, which Delegate shall always be chosen by the Subjects of his Majesty
who live at Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio; Provided always, that the
Election be made out of the number of those Ministers of his Royal Highness
which Constitute the Consuls of the Sea: The Delegate so chosen shall be
continued during the Pleasure of the National Electors; Provided that this
Continuation be no longer time than what is limited by his Royal Highness for
the Period of the Office of the rest of the Consuls of the Sea. When this
Delegate is Elected, the Nation shall Present him to his Royal Highness, with a
Petition, that by his Authority he may be appointed to Exercise this Charge; By
which Authority being Constituted, To Decide all Controversies.
he shall with brevity and expedition Decide and Determine all the aforesaid
Controversies, without the Formality of Legal Processes, according to the
validity and weight of Reason, having regard only to the truth of the Fact: No
Appeal but to the Tribunal of the Consuls of the Sea.
And all this shall be done without any Costs, Charges, or Expense, except only
the bare payment of the Writing. From the Sentence given by this Delegate there
shall no Appeal be made or allowed, except to the Tribunal of the Consuls of
the Sea residing at Nizza, where the Delegate himself is to be one, and sits as
one of the Judges, from which Tribunal no Appeal is to be admitted. But if in
the progress of time, his Majesty's Subjects in the said Ports become numerous,
(which is to be hoped, from the good and well composed Laws) i^ any
Inconvenience be found in the Deciding of Controversies according to the manner
prescribed; then as to whatsoever Controversies which shall happen and arise
only between Subject and Subject of his Majesty, the following Rule for an
unappealable Deciding of them shall be Established and Confirmed between his
Majesty and his Royal Highness, which then is to be in full force and vigor
from that time which his Majesty shall require it of his Royal Highness. The
Form or Rule is this: The Subjects of his Majesty shall choose out of the
number of the English Nation Three, Controversies amongst the English to be
Decided by Arbitration.
which for Life and Manners are esteemed Men of the greatest Integrity amongst
them; these Three they shall humbly Present to his Royal Highness, that he may
benignly please to appoint One of them, who under the Title of Delegate of his
Royal Highness, is to Exercise the Office which shall immediately be declared:
By whose Authority when he shall be Constituted, and to that purpose has
obtained Letters from his Royal Highness, he shall notwithstanding be incapable
of Exercising his Charge, till he has first taken Oath before the already
mentioned National Delegate; or, in his absence, before some other of the
Consuls of the Sea residing at Nizza for his Royal Highness. These things
premised, when a Controversy or Difference shall arise or happen, the I
laintiff and the Defendant shall each of them choose two Arbitrators, whom they
shall declare and constitute to be such before the Delegate of his Royal
Highness, to every one of which the Delegate shall administer an Oath upon the
holy Evangelists, to this purpose; That they will according to the utmost of
their power, laying aside all nespect of Persons, and according to good
Conscience and best Rule of Justice, give their Sentence of Arbitration
Righteously and Faithfully. After which Oath they may convene, as occasion
offers, but always in the presence of the said Delegate; which Delegate shall
have no Voice in case that the major part of the four Arbitrators agree in
their Arbitration; which if they do, the Decision so made shall be valid and
firm: But if the Arbitrators by reason of their equality of Votes agree not;
then the Delegate of his Royal Highness, having first taken the same Oath the
Arbitrators did, before one of the Consuls of the Sea at Nizza, shall have a
Vote amongst the other four Arbitrators, and the Decision shall be on that side
which has the majority of Votes, to all purposes valid and firm. In both Cases
the Decision thus Amicably made, shall be transmitted to his Royal Highness
within the space of One month, that by his Authority it may have its full
force, and be put in Execution. This Delegate shall be further obliged to make
Writings or Records, as Delegate of his Royal Highness, and it shall be his
Charge carefully to keep and preserve the same. He shall be continued three
years in his Office, and be obliged to give an Account to the Delegates that
succeeds him, of all matters that were Transacted under him.

XI.
Eleventhly, If any English die Intestate, who shall take care of his Estate.
If any Subject of his Majesty shall die in the said Ports without making his
Will, or shall appoint by his Will one to be Executor who lives in none of the
said Ports, the whole Nation shall be convened, and by them some Persons shall
be chosen of good Life, Fame, and Credit; who together with the Delegate of his
Royal Highness his Majesty's Subject, and the Consul of the Nation, shall take
care of the Estates of the Person deceased, so that it may not be embezelled,
but kept for them to whom of right it does belong: Which Persons so elected by
the Nation, shall be, before the Tribunal of the Consuls of the Sea residing at
Nizza, Constituted and appointed Administrators to the Intent aforesaid, of the
Goods of the Deceased: And to this end they shall have full Power to demand and
keep whatsoever of right belonged to the Person deceased, and also to pay and
discharge whatsoever of right was due from the deceased Person to any other.

XII.
Twelfthly, English Mariners leaving their Ships, to be restored to their first
Captain or Master.
All Mariners, Subjects of his Majesty, who shall desert their own Captain or
Master, and enter into any other Ship or Vessel, upon complaint made to the
Officer of his Royal Highness at Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio, shall be
taken from the Ship that received them, and be restored to their first Captain
or Master. If any Mariner deserts his own Captain or Master, and retires into
any public or private House of any of the Inhabitants in the said Ports, and
shall be concealed by the Inhabitant, he shall be forcibly taken out of the
House, and the Housekeeper Fined Twenty Dollars for every such Offense; About
Mariners lying on Shore, or running in Debt.
If any Mariner shall lie all Night on Shore in any public or private House,
without leave in Writing under the Hand of his Officer, the Housekeeper
Lodging him shall pay Ten Dollars; If any Mariner contracts a Debt with, or
runs in Debt to any Inhabitant of the said Ports, above the Sum of One Dollar,
without License in Writing from his Captain or Master, his Creditor shall lose
it: But if any Mariner does get one to be Bound for the Debt, who is not a
Mariner, the Mariner shall be let go; But the Person that is Bound for him may
be retained for the Debt.

XIII.
Thirteenthly, It is Covenanted and Agreed, English Men of War to be treated
with all respect.
That all Ships of War belonging to his Majesty, whenever they shall come
into the said Ports, shall in every Point be received with the same Honor as
any Ships or Vessels whatsoever belonging to whatsoever Monarch or Prince;
During the abode of his Majesty's Ships in the said Ports, nothing necessary or
convenient shall be denied them, they paying a competent Price for it; Victuals
for the said Ships to pay no Custom but the first Cost.
And as for their Victualling, License is granted to any Person deputed to
Victual the Ships throughout all the Dominions of his Royal Highness, to
Contract for, and Buy all things necessary and convenient for sustenance, and
to cause all the said things so bought, to be brought into the said Ports,
without any Custom, Duty, or Impost, paying for them only the first Cost; And
it is further Covenanted, The said Ships being in Port, to be protected against
all Violence.
That the said Ships of War of his Majesty, during their abode in the said
Ports, shall be Protected and Defended against any whomsoever that would
attempt any Violence or Hostility against them.

XIV.
Fourteenthly, Since in this Instrument of Commerce there has been mention made
of certain Fiscal Orders or Tariffes, commonly called Books of Rates or Public
Duties: One of which Printed the Tenth of December, One thousand six hundred
and fifty one, contains the Customs or Duties which are to be paid for all
Commodities whatsoever, which are sold within the Dominions of his Royal
Highness. A Second contains at the end of the General Order of the Porto
Franco, (the Thirtieth of October, One thousand six hundred thirty three) The
Duties that are to be paid for Passage by Land through the State of his Royal
Highness. And the Third, and the Last, underwritten by the Procurator of his
Royal Highness, contains the Lazaretto Duties or Expenses which are to be paid
for the Purging of Goods that make Quarantena; All which three Books of Rates
and Duties are to be Regulated according to the Limitations and Restrictions in
the foregoing Articles: Tariffes not to be changed, but by consent of the
Consul and English.
It Is Covenanted, That the said Tariffes, or Rates and Duties, shall never be
changed or altered without consent of the Consul and the major part of the
English Merchants and Factors residing in the said Ports. It Is also further
Covenanted, Officers of the Customs exacting any thing more then what by the
Tariffes is prescribed, to be punished.
That the Merchants and Factors, Subjects of his Majesty, shall be dispatched
with all Expedition in the several Places where Customs or Duties are to be
paid, and that none of the said Subjects shall be at any time liable to
Revision of Accounts under pretense of Defraudation. And if any Officer of his
Royal Highness by way of Reward, Voluntary Donative, or any other way
whatsoever, shall exact or receive any Sum or Value beyond what is appointed in
the mentioned Tariffes or Rates, limited as in the aforesaid Articles: The
Person so offending shall be Imprisoned the space of Three months or more, if
his Royal Highness think fit, and shall pay three times the full value of what
he so demanded or received; one half of which shall be applied to his Royal
Highness, and the other half to the Accuser or Informer.

XV.
Fifteenthly and Lastly, English to enjoy all the Immunities mentioned in the
Publication of this free Port, and all others which may be granted to any other
Nation.
It Is Covenanted and Agreed, That all Immunities, Privileges, and Concessions,
which in the General Publication of a Free Port made by his Royal Highness are
not mentioned or specified in the foregoing Articles, shall be for the full
Advantage of his Majesty's Subjects to all intents and purposes, be understood
to be expressly mentioned and contained in the Body of this present Instrument:
And whatsoever for the future of Immunity, Privilege or Advantage, shall be
granted to any other Kingdom or State, all and every of the said Immunities,
Privileges, and Advantages are and shall be as fully with all their
Circumstances granted to his Majesty's Subjects, as if they were expressly
Covenanted and Agreed for in this present Instrument.

For the full and undoubted Confirmation of which, and af all the foregoing
Articles, the abovenamed Procurators of his Majesty of Great Britain, etc. and
his Royal Highness, having diligently read and weighed all the abovesaid
Fifteen Articles, have hereunto put their Hands and Seals, at Florence the
Nineteenth day of September, the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
sixty nine. L. S. John Finch. L. S. Joseph Maurice Filippone.


A Treaty for the Composing of Differences, Restraining of Depredations, and
Establishing of Peace in America, between the Crowns of Great Britain and
Spain, Concluded at Madrid the 8/18 day of July, in the Year of our Lord 1670.
WHereas for many Years past the good Understanding and Correspondence between
the English and Spanish Nations having been disturbed in America, Preface.
It pleased the Most Serene and Powerful Prince Charles, King of Great Britain,
etc. in order to the Restoring and Regulating the same, for the future to send
into Spain his Envoy Extraordinary Sir William Godolphin Knight, with full
Authority and Power to make any Treaty convenient and proper for that end: And
likewise the Most Serene and Powerful Charles, King of Spain, etc. and the
Queen Regent Maria-Anna, etc. for the carrying on a Work of so much Piety and
Public Good, Deputed on their Part the Earl of Penaranda, Councellor of State,
and President of the Indies, to Confer, Treat and Conclude thereupon with the
said Sir William Godolphin: At length they mutually Refolved and Agreed upon
the Articles of the following Treaty in Virtue of their several Commissions.

I.
First, The Treaty of 1667 Confirmed.
It is Agreed between the abovementioned Plenipotentiaries Sir William
Godolphin and the Earl of Penaranda, in the Names of the Most Serene Kings
respectively their Masters, That the Articles of Peace and Alliance made
between the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain in Madrid on the 13/23 of May
1667, or any Clause thereof, shall in no manner be deemed or understood to be
taken away or abrogated by this present Treaty; but that the same shall remain
perpetually in their ancient force, stability and vigor, so far forth as they
are not contrary or repugnant to this present Convention and Articles, or to
any thing therein contained.

II.
That there be an Universal Peace, An Universal Peace as well in America as
elsewhere.
true and sincere Amity in America, as in the other Parts of the World, between
the Most Serene Kings of Great Britain and Spain, their Heirs and Successors,
and between the Kingdoms, States, Plantations, Colonies, Forts, Cities, Islands
and Dominions, without any distinction of Place belonging unto either of them,
and between the People and Inhabitants under their respective Obedience, which
shall endure from this Day for ever, and be observed inviolably, as well by
Land as by Sea and Fresh-waters, so as to promote each the Welfare and
Advantage of the other, and favor and assist one another with mutual Love; and
that every where, as well in those remote Countries as in these which are
nearer, the faithful Offices of good Neighborhood and Friendship may be
exercised, and increase between them.

III.
Also, All Enmities and Depradations to cease.
that for the time to come, all Enmities, Hostilities and Discords between the
said Kings, their Subjects and Inhabitants cease and be abolished: And, that
both Parties do altogether forbear and abstain from all Plundering,
Depredation, Injuries and Infestation whatsoever, as well by Land as by Sea and
in Fresh-waters, every where.

IV.
The said Most Serene Kings shall take care that their Subjects do accordingly
abstain from all Force and Wrong-doing: Letters of Mart Reveked.
And they shall Revoke all Commissions and Letters of Reprisal and Mart, or
otherwise containing License to take Prizes, of what condition or kind soever,
being to the Prejudice of the one or other of the said Kings, or of their
Subjects, whether the same have been given or granted by them unto Subjects or
Inhabitants, or unto Strangers; and shall declare the same to be void and of no
force, as by this Treaty of Peace they are declared so to be: Reslitution for
Losses contrary to this Treaty.
And whosoever shall do any thing to the contrary, he shall be punished not
only Criminally according to the merit of his Offense, but shall also be
compelled to make Restitution and Satisfaction for the Losses to the Parties
damnified, requiring the same.

V.
And furthermore, Renunciation of all Leagues, etc. contrary to this Peace.
the said Kings shall Denounce, as by the Tenor of these Presents every of them
has and does Renounce, whatsoever League, Confederation, Capitulation, and
Intelligence made by what manner soever in the Prejudice of the one or the
other, which does or may repugn against this Peace and Concord, and all and
singular the Contents thereof: All which and every of them, so far as they do
concern the Effect aforesaid, said, they shall annul and make void, and declare
to be of no force or moment.

VI.
The Prisoners on both Sides, Prisoners released.
one and all, of what Degree or Condition soever, detained by reason of any
Hostilities hitherto committed in America, shall be forthwith set at liberty,
without Ransom, or any other Price of their Freedom.

VII.
All Offenses, All Injuries to be forgotten.
Damages, Losses, Injuries, which the Nations and People of Great Britain and
Spain have at any time heretofore, upon what Cause or Pretext soever suffered
by each other in America, shall be expunged out of remembrance, and buried in
Oblivion, as if no such thing had ever past.

Moreover, English to keep what they possess at present in America.
It is Agreed, That the Most Serene King of Great Britain, his Heirs and
Successors, shall have, hold, keep and enjoy for ever, with plenary Right of
Sovereignty, Dominion, Possession and Propriety, all those Lands, Regions,
Islands, Colonies and Places whatsoever, being or situated in the West Indies,
or in any part of America, which the said King of Great Britain and his
Subjects do at present hold and possess; So as that in regard thereof, or upon
any Color or Pretense whatsoever, nothing more may or ought to be urged, nor
any Question or Controversy be ever moved concerning the same hereafter.

VIII.
The Subjects and Inhabitants, Merchants, Captains, Masters of Ships, Mariners
of the Kingdoms, Provinces and Dominions of each Confederate respectively,
shall abstain and forbear to Sail and Trade in the Ports and Havens which have
Fortifications, Castles, Magazines or Warehouses, Sailing to, or Trading in
each others Ports in America, forbidden;
and in all other Places whatsoever possessed by the other Party in the
West Indies; to wit, The Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall not Sail
unto, and Trade in the Havens and Places which the Catholic King holds in
the said Indies: Nor in like manner shall the Subjects of the King of Spain
Sail unto, or Trade in those Places which are possessed there by the King of
Great Britain.

IX.
But if at any time hereafter either King shall think fit to grant unto the
Subjects of the other any general or particular License or Privileges of
Navigating unto, Except by License.
and Trading in any Places under his Obedience who shall grant the same, The
said Navigation and Trade shall be exercised and maintained according to the
Form, Tenor and Effect of the said Permissions or Privileges to be allowed and
given; For the Security, Warrant and Authority whereof, this prsent Treaty and
the Ratification thereof shall serve.

X.
It is also Agreed, In case the Ships of either Party be sorced into the others
Harbors in America, they shall be protected, and have leave to buy Victuals,
and freely go away again.
That in case the Subjects and Inhabitants of either of the Confederates, with
their Shipping (whether public and of War, or private and of Merchants) be
forced at any time through stress of Weather, pursuit of Pirates and Enemies,
or other Inconvenience whatsoever, for the seeking of Shelter and Harbor, to
retreat and enter into any of the Rivers, Creeks, Bays, Havens, Roads, Shores,
and Ports belonging to the other in America, they shall be received and treated
there with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly protection and
help: And it shall be lawful for them to refresh and provide themselves at
reasonable, and the usual Rates, with Victuals and all things needful, either
for the sustenance of their Persons, or reparation of their Ships, and
convenience of their Voyage; And they shall in no manner be detained or hindered
from returning out of the said Ports or Roads, but shall remove and depart,
when and whither they please, without any let or impediment.

XI.
Likewise, In case of Shipwreck, Persons saved not to be kept Prisoners.
if any Ships belonging to either Confederate, their People and Subjects, shall
within the Coasts or Dominions of the other stick upon the Sands, or be
Wracked, (which God forbid) or suffer any Damage, the Persons Shipwrack'd and
cast on the Shore shall in no sort be kept Prisoners, but on the contrary, all
friendly Assistance and Relief shall be administered to their Distress, and
Letters of Safe Conduct given them for their free and quiet Passage thence, and
the return of every one to his own Country.

XII.
But when it shall happen, In case three or four Ships come together into any
Port, not to stay without leave from the Governor, nor to Trade.
that the Ships of either (as is abovementioned) through danger of the Sea, or
other urgent Cause, be driven into the Ports and Havens of the other, if they
be three or four together, and may give just ground of Suspicion, they shall
immediately upon their arrival acquaint the Governor or chief Magistrate of the
Place with the Cause of their coming, and shall stay no longer then the said
Governor or chief Magistrate will permit, and shall be requisite for the
furnishing themselves with Victuals, and Reparation of their Ships: And they
shall always take care not to carry out of their Ships any Goods or Packs,
exposing them to Sale, neither shall they receive any Merchandise on Board, nor
do any thing contrary to this Treaty.

XIII.
Both Parties shall truly and firmly observe and execute this present Treaty,
Both Parties shall cause this Treaty to be kept.
and all and every the Matters therein contained, and effectually cause the
same to be observed and performed by the Subjects and Inhabitants of either
Nation.

XIV.
No private Injury shall in any sort weaken this Treaty, No Reprisals but in
case of denying, or unreasonably delaying Justice.
nor beget Hatred or Dissentions between the foresaid Nations, but every one
shall answer for his own proper Fact, and be prosecuted thereupon; Neither
shall one Man satisfy for the Offense of another by Reprisals, or other such
like odious Proceedings, unless Justice be denied or unreasonably delayed, in
which case it shall be lawful for that King, whose Subject has suffered the
Loss and Injury, to take any Course according to the Rules and Method of the
Law of Nations, until Reparation be made to the Sufferer.

XV.
The present Treaty shall in nothing derogate from any Preeminence, This Treaty
not to prejudice eithers Dominion in those Seas.
Right or Dominion of either Confederate in the American Seas, Channels or
Waters, but that they have and retain the same in as full and ample manner, as
may of right belong unto them: But it is always to be understood, that the
Liberty of Navigation ought in no manner to be disturbed, where nothing is
committed against the genuine sense and meaning of these Articles.

XVI.
Lastly, Ratification.
The solemn Ratifications of this present Treaty and Agreement, made in due
Form, shall be delivered on both Sides, and mutually Exchanged within the space
of Four Months from this Day; And within Eight Months, to be computed from the
said Exchange of the Instruments, (or sooner if possible) they shall be
Published in all convenient Places throughout the Kingdoms, States, Islands and
Dominions of both Confederates, as well in the West Indies as elsewhere.

In Testimony of all and singular the Contents hereof, We the abovementioned
Plenipotentiaries have Signed and Sealed this present Treaty, at Madrid the
8/18 Day of July, in the Year of our Lord 1670. The Count of Penaranda, L. S.
William Godolphin, L. S.


Articles of Alliance and Commerce between the Most Serene and Potent Prince
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. And the Most Serene and Potent Prince
Christian the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmark, Norway, etc.
Concluded at Copenhagen the 11th day of July, 1670.
I.
THat there be between the two Kings, their Heirs and Successors; As also their
Kingdoms, Principalities, Provinces, Estates, Counties, Islands, Cities,
Subjects and Vassals, of what Condition, Dignity and Degree soever, by Land and
Sea, in Rivers, Fresh-waters, and all Places whatsoever, as well in Europe as
out of Europe; now and for the time to come, a sincere, A perfect Peace and
Friendship.
true and perfect Friendship, Peace and Confederation; So as that neither Party
do any Wrong, Injury or Prejudice to the Kingdoms, Principalities, Provinces,
and Estates, or to the Inhabitants and Subjects of the other; nor suffer any to
be done by others, as much as in him is: But rather live as Friends together,
using each other with Good Will and Respect; And promoting upon all Occasions
the Interests and Advantages of each other, and their Subjects, as if they were
their own: And preventing and hindering with all their power, by their
Assistance and Advice, any Damage, Wrong and Injury that may be offered them.

II.
Neither of the foresaid Kings and their Heirs shall consent to any thing that
may be to the Prejudice or Detriment of his Allie; Not to consent to any thing
prejudicial to each other.
but if either of the Kings shall know that any thing is Proposed, or is in
Agitation or Contrivance, or that will be Proposed, Agitated, or Contrived,
which may tend to the Detriment of the other; He shall be obliged to signify
the same unto him without delay, and in the mean time to hinder and prevent it
by all ways possible.

III.
The foresaid Kings for themselves, Not to Assist each others Enemies, if
Aggressors.
their Heirs and Successors, mutually do undertake and promise, That they will
not aid or furnish the Enemies of either Party, that shall be Aggressors, with
any Provisions of War, as Soldiers, Arms, Engines, Guns, Ships, or other
Necessaries for the use of War, or suffer any to be furnished by their
Subjects: But if the Subjects of either Prince shall presume to act contrary
hereunto, then that King, whose Subjects shall have so done, shall be obliged
to proceed against them with the highest severity, as against Seditious
persons, and Breakers of the League.

IV.
It is further Covenanted and Agreed, To Assist Denmark if Invaded.
That if at any time hereafter any Prince or State shall Invade, or by any
Hostile way Attempt upon the Hereditary Kingdoms, Provinces, Counties, Towns,
Islands, Territories or Dominions of the King of Denmark which he now
possesses, then the King of Great Britain shall Assist the said King of
Denmark in time, with such number of Land Forces and Ships of War, against such
Aggressor, as shall suffice to repel the Force, and as the State of the said
Kings Affairs shall require. Each Party to be comprehended in any Treaty made
with others.
And the said King of Great Britain shall therefore with all his Power
endeavor to hinder, that by such Invasion or Disturbance the King of Denmark
be not prejudiced in any wise in his Kingdoms, Dominions or Rights. And if the
said King of Great Britain, or the said King of Denmark, shall Contract or make
any League, Alliance or Union with any other King, Prince, Commonwealth or
State, they shall respectively endeavor to comprehend therein each other, and
their Dominions, (as much as in them lies) if they shall desire to be
comprehended.

V.
It shall be lawful for the Subjects of both Kings with their Commodities and
Merchandise both by Sea and Land, Freedom of Trade.
in time of Peace without License or Safe Conduct general or special, to come
to the Kingdoms, Provinces, Mart-Towns, Ports and Rivers of each other, and in
any Place therein to remain and Trade, paying usual Customs and Duties;
Reserving nevertheless to either Prince his Superiority, and Regal Jurisdiction
in his Kingdoms, Provinces, Principalities and Territories respectively.

VI.
It is notwithstanding Covenanted and Concluded, English not to come to
Prohibited Ports, but by License or stress of Weather.
That the Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall in no wise come to the
Prohibited Ports, of which mention is made in precedent Treaties, nor Colonies,
without the special License of the King of Denmark first desired and obtained;
unless they shall be compelled to make thither, and enter therein, by stress of
Weather, or pursuit of Pirates, in which case neither shall it be lawful for
them to buy or sell. Nor the Danes to any of the Plantations.
As also in like manner the Subjects of the King of Denmark shall not come to
the British Colonies, unless by special License of the King of Great Britain
first desired and obtained.

VII.
It shall be lawful for the Subjects of the Most Serene King of Denmark to
bring into their own Stores and Warehouses in England, Danes to bring in all
things of their own Growth or Manufacture into England, Scotland, or Ireland,
and such as come from the Elbe.
Scotland, and Ireland, and other the Ports of the King of Great Britain in
Europe, such Commodities as now, or hereafter shall be of the Growth and
Production of the Estates, Countries and Dominions subject to the King of
Denmark, or of the Manufacture thereof, and likewise such as come from any part
of the River of Elbe.

In like manner shall it be lawful for the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain to Import and bring into Denmark, The like liberty to the English in
the King of Denmark's Dominions, except Ports Prohibited.
Norway, and all other Ports and Colonies not prohibited of the King of
Denmark, all kinds of Merchandise which now or hereafter shall be produced or
made in the Kingdoms, Countries and Estates under the Subjection of the King of
Great Britain. In case any Strangers have hereafter liberty to bring all sorts
of Goods into Prohibited Ports, both Parties respectively to have the same
Privilege.
But if at any time hereafter it be permitted to any Foreign Nations, to bring
all kinds of Commodities without exception, into England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and other the Ports belonging to the King of Great Britain, then the
same also shall be lawful for the Subjects of the King of Denmark: Which in
like manner shall be permitted to the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
upon the like occasion, in the Prohibited Ports and Colonies of the King of
Denmark.

VIII.
It is also Covenanted and Agreed, The English to pay no greater Duries then
other Strangers, except the Swedes.
That the People and Subjects of the King of Great Britain Sailing to any the
Hereditary Kingdoms, Countries, or Dominions of the King of Denmark, or Trading
in the same, shall pay no more or greater Customs, Tribute, Toll, or other
Duties, nor in any other manner then the People of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, and other Strangers, (the Swede only excepted) Trading thither,
and paying lesser Customs, do or shall pay; And in going, returning, and
staying, as also in Fishing and Trading, and all other things shall enjoy the
same Liberties, Immunities, and Privileges, which the People of any Foreign
Country in the said Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of Denmark, abiding and
Trading, do or shall enjoy: And so on the other side, Danes to pay no greater
Custom in England then any other Strangers.
the People and Subjects of the King of Denmark, shall have and enjoy the same
Privileges, in the Countries, and Territories of the King of Great Britain; to
wit, That the People and Subjects of the King of Denmark, Sailing to any the
Kingdoms, Countries or Dominions of the King of Great Britain, or Trading in
the same, shall not pay any more or greater Customs, Tributes, Toll, or other
Duties, nor in any other manner then the People of the United Netherlands, or
other Strangers Trading thither, and paying lesser Customs, do or shall pay:
And in going, returning and staying, as also in Fishing and Trading, and all
other things, shall enjoy the same Liberties, Immunities and Privileges, which
the People of any other Foreign Country in the said Kingdoms and Dominions of
the King of Great Britain, Abiding and Trading, do or shall enjoy: But so, as
that the Power of each King of Making or Altering Customs, or other Duties, as
they shall see occasion, in their respective Kingdoms, Countries, Dominions,
and Ports, remain full and entire; Provided the foresaid equality be strictly
observed on both Sides in manner aforesaid.

IX.
It is also Covenanted, Leave to bring all Goods into their proper Storehouses
respectively.
That when the Subjects of either King have Imported their Commodities into the
Dominions of the other, have paid the usual Customs for them, and undergone
their Search, it shall be free and lawful for them, to bring their said
Commodities into their own proper Storehouses and Cellars, or into Places which
they shall think most fit and convenient, and there Store them; Nor shall any
Magistrate or Officer of any the Cities or Ports of either, impose upon them
any Cellars or Storehouses without their consent.

X.
The Subjects of either Crown Trading upon the Seas, Neither Party obliged to
come into any Port where he is nor bound, nor (being forced in) obliged to
unlade or sell any part of his Goods.
and Sailing by the Coasts of either Kingdom, shall not be obliged to come into
any Port, if their Course were not directed thither; but shall have liberty to
pursue their Voyage without hinderance or detention whithersoever they please.
Nor shall they, being by Tempest forced into Port, and there remaining, be
obliged to unlade their Cargo, or to barter or sell any part thereof; But it
shall be lawful for them to dispose of it as they shall think fit, and to do
any other thing which they shall judge most for their advantage: Provided
nothing be done that may be to the defrauding of either Prince of his due
Rights and Customs.

XI.
It is also Agreed, That after any Planks, Masts, Concerning Timber prohibited
to be Laden on Board any English Ship.
and other sorts of Timber, have been once put on Board the Ships of the
Subjects or People of the King of Great Britain, they shall not be liable to
any further Search; But all Search or Scrutiny shall be made before; And if
then, either Oaken or other prohibited Timber be found, it shall be presently
stopped and detained upon the Place before it be put on Board the Ships; Nor
shall the People of the said King of Great Britain, or his Subjects, be
therefore molested in their Persons or Estates by Arrest, or other Detention
whatsoever; But only the Subjects of the King of Denmark, who shall have
presumed to Sell or Alienate any the like prohibited Timber, shall be punished
in due manner. And the People and Subjects of the King of Great Britain, shall
have, possess and enjoy all and singular the Contents and Concessions of this
Article, without any Molestation or Interruption, so long, and for all such
time as the Subjects or any of the People of the United Netherlands, shall
hold, possess, and enjoy, or might, or ought to hold, possess, and enjoy the
same or like Privileges by any Treaty already made, or to be made, or by any
Contract, Agreement or Permission.

XII.
It is also Concluded and Agreed, That all Ships belonging to the Subjects of
the King of Great Britain, English Ships passing the Sound, to have the Benefit
of deferring the Payment of their Custom till their return.
and Merchants in their Passage through the Sound under the Most Serene King of
Denmark and Norway, etc. shall enjoy after the same manner the Benefit and
Privilege of deferring the Payment of their Customs until their return, as
they held and enjoyed in former years last preceding the late War; But so
nevertheless, that the said Ships and Merchants bring with them Certificates
under the Seal of the Officers of the said King of Great Britain deputed
thereunto, testifying the said Ships to belong to Subjects of the King of Great
Britain; And likewise that before their Passage they give sufficient and good
Security for paying the same in Place convenient, to the Collectors of the
Customs of the said King of Denmark, at their return, or if they shall not
return, within Three Months time at the farthest, if they do not pay the same
at their said first Passage.

XIII.
And furthermore it is Agreed, Goods Landed at Elsineure to be Transported
elsewhere, to pay no Duties but what the Dutch pay.
That whatsoever Merchandise the Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall
Land at Elsignore, and there lay in their Storehouses, to no other end then to
put on Board again entire, and Transport them to other Parts, they shall be
obliged to pay only the same Duties for such Merchandise, and no more, then is
wont to be paid in this case by the Dutch Nation, or any other Strangers: Which
shall be reciprocally observed to the Subjects of the King of Denmark after the
same manner in England.

XIV.
Also it is Agreed, That the Ships and Subjects of the King of Great Britain
shall have their Dispatch at Elsignore as soon as they arrive there, English
Ships and Subjects to be dispatched at Elsineure.
without delay, no Ships, of what Nation soever, having preference before them
in this behalf: Except the Inhabitants of certain Places, who have anciently
held a Privilege to that purpose, and still do.

XV.
If any Subject of either Prince shall happen to die in the Dominions or
Territories of the other, Either Princes Subject dying in the others Dominions,
his Estate to be preserved, etc.
it shall be lawful for him to dispose of his Estate, both Money and Goods, in
any manner whatsoever: And if any one die within the Kingdoms or Provinces of
the other Prince without making any such Dispositions, then the Goods by him
left, moveable or immovable, of whatever nature or condition the same shall
be, shall be faithfully preserved for the use of the right Heir, and for
satisfaction of such Debts as the Party deceased was justly bound to pay: And
to that end, so soon as any Subject of either Prince shall die in the other
Princes Dominions, the Consul or Public Minister then Residing there, shall
have right to possess the said Moneys and Goods, and shall make Inventories of
the same before some Magistrate of the Place; Which Goods shall afterward
remain in his hands, to be answered to the Heirs and Creditors as aforesaid;
But if no such Consul or Public Minister shall be there, then it shall be
lawful for two Merchants of the same Country with the Party deceased to possess
the Goods left by him, to preserve them, and in like manner to answer them to
the Heirs and Creditors. Which notwithstanding is to be so understood, that no
Papers or Books of Accounts are by this Article to be exposed to the inspection
of the said Magistrate, but only the real Goods and Merchandise of the
Deceased; And that the said Magistrate within the space of Forty eight hours,
after notice given, and request made, shall be obliged to be present, otherwise
the said Inventories shall be made without him.

XVI.
It shall be lawful for either of the Confederates and their Subjects or People
to Trade with the Enemies of the other, Freedom of Trade with each others
Enemies, unless in Ports Besieged, and Contraband Goods.
and to carry to them, or furnish them with any Merchandises (Prohibited only,
which they call Contrabanda, excepted) without any impediment, unless in Ports
and Places Besieged by the other; Which nevertheless if they shall so do, it
shall be free for them either to sell their Goods to the Besiegers, or betake
themselves to any other Port or Place not Besieged.

XVII.
It is also Agreed, Any Merchant to reside freely where he Trades.
That it shall be free and lawful for the Subjects of either Prince, Trading in
the Dominions or Ports of the other, there to remain and reside for the buying
and selling Commodities, without any restriction of Time, or Limitation to be
imposed upon them by any Officers or Magistrates of the said Dominions or
Ports, they paying the accustomed Duties for all Goods and Merchandise by them
Imported or Exported; And further provided that they Trade with none but such
as are Citizens, or Burgers of some City or Town within the Kingdoms of Denmark
or Norway, and that only by Wholesale, and not by Parcels or Retail.

XVIII.
Furthermore, Duties to be paid according to the Printed Tariffes.
for the better encouragement of Trade and Commerce, and for the utter avoiding
of all Frauds and Disputes that may arise between the Officers of Ports and
Merchants, It is Agreed and Concluded, That all and singular Duties shall be
demanded and paid according to the Printed Tariffe, (or Book of Rates) wherein
shall be comprised all Customs and Duties to be paid, as well for Goods in the
respective Ports, as for Passage through the Sound: And to the end that this
may be the more strictly observed, both Kings shall not only enjoin his
Officers and Collectors of his Customs under the highest Penalty, not to do any
thing that may frustrate or elude this Agreement; But also that they do not by
Molestation or Exaction, cause any Trouble, or offer any Injury to the Subjects
of either King.

XIX.
Moreover, it is Concluded and Agreed, English Ships Trading to Norway, to be
remeasured.
That the King of Denmark shall constitute the Overseers of his Customs or
others, Commissioners for re-measuring all Ships belonging to the Subjects of
the King of Great Britain Trading in Norway, according to their Burden and
Content, so as that what has been hitherto not rightly observed, either in
excess or defect, may be hereafter reduced into better order.

XX.
But lest such freedom of Navigation or Passage of the one Allie and his
Subjects and People, Passports and Certificates to be given to Ships.
during the War that the other may have by Sea or Land with any other Country,
may be to the prejudice of the other Allie, and that Goods and Merchandise
belonging to the Enemy may be fraudulently concealed under color of being in
Amity; For the preventing of Fraud, and clearing all Suspicion, it is thought
fit, That the Ships, Goods and Men belonging to the other Confederate in their
Passage and Voyages, be accompanied with Letters of Passport and Certificate;
The Forms whereof to be as follows;

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, etc.
CHRISTIAN the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmark and Norway, etc.
BE it known unto all and singular to whom these Our Letters of Safe Conduct
shall be shown, Form of the Pass.
That (...) Our Subject and Citizen of Our City of (...) has humbly
represented unto Us, that the Ship called (...) of the Burden of (...) Tuns,
does belong unto them and others our Subjects, and that they are sole Owners
and Proprietors thereof, and is now Laden with the Goods which are contained in
a Schedule which she has with her from the Officers of Our Customs, and do
solely, truly and really belong to Our Subjects or others in Neutrality, bound
immediately from the Port of (...) to such other Place or Places, where she may
conveniently Trade with the said Goods, being not Prohibited, nor belonging to
either of the Parties in Hostility, or else find a Freight; Which the foresaid
(...) Our Subject having Attested by a Writing under his Hand, and Affirmed to
be true by Oath, under Penalty of Confiscation of the said Goods, We have
thought fit to grant him these Our Letters of Safe Conduct: And therefore We do
hereby respectively pray and desire all Governors of Countries and Seas, Kings,
Princes, Commonwealths, and free Cities, and more especially the Parties now in
War, and their Commanders, Admirals, Generals, Officers, Governors of Ports,
Commanders of Ships, Captains, Freighters, and all others whatsoever having any
Jurisdiction by Sea, or the Custody of any Port, whom the Ship aforesaid shall
chance to meet, or among whose Fleet or Ships it shall happen to fall or make
stay in their Ports that by virtue of the League and Amity, which We have with
any King or State, they suffer the said Master with the Ship, (...) Persons,
Things, and all Merchandise on Board her, not only freely and without any
Molestation, Detention, or Impediment, to any Place whatsoever to pursue his
Voyage, but also to afford him all Offices of Civility, as to Our Subject, if
there shall be occasion; Which upon the like or other occasion We and Ours
shall be ready to return.

Given the (...) day of (...) in the Year (...)
WE the President, Form of the Certificate.
Consuls and Senators of the City of (...) do Attest and Certify, That on the
(...) day of (...) in the Year (...) Personally before Us came and appeared
(...) Citizen and Inhabitant of the City or Town of (...) and under the Oath
wherein he stands bound to our Sovereign Lord the King, did declare unto Us,
That the Ship or Vessel called (...) of the Burden of (...) Tuns does belong
to the Port, City or Town of (...) in the Province of (...) And that the said
Ship does justly belong only to him and others, Subjects of Our said Sovereign
Lord, and now bound directly from the Port of (...) Laden with Goods mentioned
in a Schedule received from the Officers of the Customs, and that he has
affirmed under the Oath aforesaid, that the forementioned Vessel with her Goods
and Merchandise does only belong to Subjects of his Majesty, and does carry no
Goods prohibited, which belong to either of the Parties now in War.

In Testimony whereof We have caused this Certificate to be Subscribed by the
Syndic of Our City, and Sealed with Our Seal. Given, etc.

When therefore the Merchandise, Goods, Ships, or Men of either of the
Confederates and their Subjects and People, shall meet in open Sea, Straights,
Ports, Havens, Lands and Places whatsoever, the Ships of War, whether public
or private, or the Men, Subjects and People of the other Confederate; Upon
exhibiting only the foresaid Letters of Safe Conduct and Certificate, Ships not
to be Searched upon producing their Certificates.
there shall be nothing more required of them, nor shall Search be made after
the Goods, Ships or Men, nor shall they be any other ways whatsoever molested
or troubled; but suffered with all freedom to pursue their intended Voyage; But
if this solemn and set Form of Passport and Certificate be not exhibited, or
that there be any other just and urgent cause of suspicion; Then shall the Ship
be Searched, which is nevertheless in this case only understood to be
permitted, and not otherwise. If by either Party any thing shall be committed
contrary to the true meaning of this Article, against either of the
Confederates, each of the said Confederates shall cause his Subjects and People
offending to be severely punished, and full and entire Satisfaction to be
forthwith given, and without delay, to the Party injured and his Subjects and
People for their whole Loss and Expenses.

XXI.
It is also Concluded and Agreed, English Ships passing by Gluckstad and other
Places upon the Elbe, to be free from all Customs and Search.
That all Ships of Subjects and People of the King of Great Britain, together
with their Lading and Merchandise, passing by the Port of Gluckstad, or other
Places and Towns under the Dominion of the King of Denmark, situate upon the
Elbe Stream, both going and returning, shall be free and exempt from all
Custom, Impost, Search, Seizure and Molestation, except only the case of Search
in the time of War, when the King of Denmark has War with any other King or
State.

XXII.
If the Subjects of either Prince be hurt or injured in the Territories of the
other; Any Injury done to either Parties Subjects in the others Territories, to
be punished according to the Laws of the Country.
Then the King of that place where the Injury is done, shall take care that
speedy Justice be administered according to the Laws and Customs of the Country;
And that the Persons guilty be duly punished, with Satisfaction to be made to
the Party wronged.

XXIII.
It is also Agreed, No Ships, or Goods Laden on Ships belonging to either
Party, to be adjudged Prize, but by due form of Law.
That no Ships whatsoever, Vessels, or Merchandise Laden on Ships of whatsoever
nature, kind or quality, howsoever taken, belonging to any the Subjects of
either of the aforesaid Kings, under any color or pretense whatsoever, be
adjudged Prize, unless by a Judicial Examination and Process in form of Law, in
a Court of Admiralty for Prizes taken at Sea in that behalf lawfully
Constituted.

XXIV.
Both Parties shall cause Justice and Equity to be Administered to the Subjects
and People of each other, Justice to be Administered according to the Laws of
each Country respectively.
according to the Laws and Statutes of either Country, speedily, and without
long and unnecessary Formalities of Law and Expenses, in all Causes and
Controversies, as well now depending, as which may hereafter arise.

XXV.
If the Ships of either of the Confederates, In case of Shipwreck, the Goods to
be preserved for the Owners.
and their Subjects and People, whether they be Merchantmen, or Men of War,
shall happen to run on Ground, or fall upon Rocks, or be forced to lighten
themselves, or shall otherwise suffer Shipwreck (which God forbid) upon the
Coasts of either King, the foresaid Ships with their Tackle, Goods and
Merchandise, or whatsoever shall be remaining of them, shall be restored to
their Owners and Proprietors; Provided they or their Agents and Proctors do
claim the said Ships and Goods within the space of a year and a day after such
Shipwreck suffered, saving always the Rights and Customs of both Nations. The
Subjects also and Inhabitants dwelling upon the said Coasts and Shores, shall
be obliged to come in to their help in case of danger, and as much as in them
lies to give their assistance; And shall do their utmost endeavor either for
the freeing of the Ship, or saving the Goods, Merchandise and Apparel of the
said Ship, and what else of the same they shall be able, and for the conveying
the same into some safe place in order to be restored to the Owners; they
paying Salvage, and giving such Recompense to the persons by whose assistance
and diligence the said Merchandise and Goods shall have been recovered and
preserved, as they shall deserve. And finally both Parties, in case of such
misfortune, shall see observed on their Side, what they would desire to have
observed and done on the other Side.

XXVI.
The Commanders of Ships, or Governors, Ships, Commanders of Ships, Goods, etc.
not to be Arrested but for the defense of the Kingdom, and except in cases of
Debt.
Soldiers, Mariners and Company belonging to the same; As also the Ships
themselves, and the Goods and Merchandise on Board them, shall not be detained
by any Arrest or Seizure upon any Warrant either General or Special, or for any
cause, unless for the defense and preservation of the Kingdom; Which yet shall
not be understood to be meant of Arrests laid by Authority of Law, for Debt
contracted upon any other lawful occasion whatsoever, in which case it shall be
lawful to proceed according to the Rules of Justice and Law.

XXVII.
It shall be free for the Merchants of both Kingdoms, their Factors and
Servants, and also the Masters and Mariners of Ships upon the Sea, Merchants,
Mariners, etc. to have the liberty of wearing or carrying Arms.
and in other Waters, as likewise in the Ports, and upon the Coasts and Lands
of either Confederate, going, returning and walking, for the defense of their
Persons and Goods, to carry any kind of portable Arms, as well offensive as
defensive, so that they give no just cause of suspicion to the Commanders and
Magistrates of any Place, of any Plots or Contrivances against the public or
private Peace.

XXVIII.
The Convoys or Ships of War of either Party, Benefit of each others Convoys.
meeting in their Voyage, or overtaking any Merchants Ships, or others
belonging to the other Confederate or his Subjects, and making the same Course
at Sea, in Europe or out of Europe, shall be obliged to guard and defend them
as long as they shall hold the same Course together.

XXIX.
For the greater security of Commerce and freedom of Navigation, Pirates not to
be protected.
it is Concluded and Agreed, That neither Part, as much as may be, and shall
lie in their powers, shall permit that public Pirates or other Robbers upon
the Sea, in any the Ports of the other Kingdom or Country, have their
Receptacles or Retreats, or shall suffer that any of the Inhabitants, or People
of either Prince, do receive them into their Houses, or supply them with
Provisions or be otherwise assisting to them; But on the contrary, shall
endeavor that the said Pirates or Robbers, and their Partisans and
Accomplices, be apprehended and punished according to their demerit, and the
Ships and Goods, as much as can be found of them, restored to the lawful Owners
or their Agents, provided their Right be made appear by due proof of Law in the
Court of Admiralty.

XXX.
It is Concluded and Agreed, Freedom of access to each others Ports.
That there shall be at all times free access for the Subjects and People of
either Party, to the Ports and Coasts of both Princes, and it shall be lawful
for them to remain therein, and from thence again to depart, and also to pass
through the Seas and Territories whatsoever of either King respectively (Not
committing any Waste or Injury) not only with Merchant-Ships, and Ships of
Burden, but also with Ships of War, whether the same be upon the Public
Account, or Acting by private Commissions; whether they enter by reason of
Tempest, and for avoiding the danger of the Sea, or to Refit or buy Provisions:
But Men of War not to exceed six in number, except forced in, and then to give
notice to the Magistrate.
So that they exceed not the number of six Ships of War, if they enter of their
own accord, nor shall they remain longer in or about the Ports then shall be
necessary for the Refitting of their Ships, buying Provisions or other
Necessaries: And if they should upon occasion desire to come into the said
Ports with a greater number of Ships of War, it shall in no wise be lawful for
them to enter thereinto without first giving timely notice by Letter of their
coming, and obtaining leave of those to whom the foresaid Ports belong. But if
by force of Tempest or other urgent Necessity, they shall be compelled to put
into Harbor, in such case, without any precedent notice, the Ships shall not
be restrained to a certain number; but with this Condition nevertheless, That
their Admiral or Commander in chief presently after his Arrival, shall make
acquainted the chief Magistrate or Commander of the Place, Haven or Coast
whether they are come, with the cause of his coming; Nor shall he stay longer
there then shall be permitted him by the chief Magistrate or Commander, and
shall not act or attempt any Hostility in the Ports whereinto he has betaken
himself, or any thing prejudicial to him of the two Confederates to whom they
shall belong.

XXXI.
It shall not be lawful for the Subjects of either King, Neithers Subjects to
take Letters of Mart from any Prince or State in War with the other
or the Inhabitants of the Kingdoms or Lands under their Obedience, to procure
of any Prince or State who is at Difference, or in open War with either of the
Confederates, Letters Patents, called Commissions or Reprisals, much less by
virtue of such Letters to molest or damnifie the Subjects of either. Both the
said Kings shall strictly prohibit their Subjects respectively, that they do
not procure or accept from other Princes or States any such Commissions; But
shall, as much as in them lies, forbid and hinder the committing of any
Depredations by virtue of such Commissions.

XXXII.
If any Ship or Ships belonging to the Subjects of either King be taken in the
Ports of either by a third Party, Ships taken in in Port by a third Party, to
be restored.
they in whose Port, or within whose Jurisdiction whatsoever the foresaid Ships
shall be taken, shall be mutually obliged to use their endeavor together with
the other Party, for the finding and retaking the said Ship or Ships, and
restoring them to the Owners; Which nevertheless shall be done at the Charge of
the said Owners, or the Parties interested.

XXXIII.
But if also in the Ships taken by the Subjects of either Confederate, Seamen
taken on Board any Prize, and being Subjects of either Crown, to be set free.
and brought into any Port belonging to the other, there be found any Seamen or
other persons who are Subjects of that Confederate into whose Ports or Rivers
the Prize shall be brought, they shall be civilly used by those who have taken
them, and restored to their liberty forthwith, and without Ransom.

XXXIV.
But if a Ship of War or any other, A Ship Laden with prohibited Goods, if
taken, no Bulk to be broken till an Inventory made in the Admiralty.
Laden with prohibited Goods belonging to the other Crown, happen to be taken;
It shall not be lawful for the Captains or Commanders who have taken her, to
open or break up any Chests, Tons or Bails on Board the said Ship, nor likewise
to Transport, or otherwise alienate any of her Merchandise, until they have
been first put on Shore, and an Inventory thereof made before the Judges of the
Admiralty.

XXXV.
And for the greater security of the Subjects of both Kings, No Injury to be
done by any Men of War to the other, in case of any, the Causes to be Tried in
the Admiralty Courts, or by Commissioners to be appointed by the Kings.
and for preventing of all violence toward them from the said Ships of War;
All Commanders of any the Ships of War belonging to the King of Great Britain,
and all other his Subjects whatsoever, shall be strictly charged and required,
that they do not molest or injure the Subjects of the King of Denmark; If they
shall do otherwise, they shall be liable to answer it in their Persons and
Estates, and shall therein stand bound until just Satisfaction and Compensation
shall be made for the Wrongs by them done, and the Damage thereby sustained or
to be sustained: In like manner shall all Commanders of the Ships of War
belonging to the King of Denmark, and all other his Subjects whatsoever, be
straightly under the same Penalties charged and required that they do not molest
or injure the said Subjects of the King of Great Britain; Provided
nevertheless, that all the foresaid Actions be Examined and Adjudged by due and
legal proceeding in the Court of Admiralty of both Kings; Or if it shall rather
seem meet to either of the Parties, being a Stranger in the Place where the
Controversy is to be Decided, they shall be Examined before certain
Commissioners, which both Kings so soon as they shall be desired, shall appoint
to that end, that so Proceedings by this means may be not only carried on
without great Expenses, but also ended within Three months at farthest.

XXXVI.
Both Kings shall take care, Sentence concerning Prizes to be given according
to Justice.
That Judgment and Sentence in things taken at Sea, be given according to the
Rules of Justice and Equity by Persons not suspected or interested, and being
once given by such Judges as aforesaid, they shall straightly charge and require
their Officers and whom it shall concern, to see the same put in due Execution
according to the form and tenor thereof.

XXXVII.
If the Ambassadors of either King, Upon complaint of any Sentence, a Review to
be made.
or any other Public Ministers residing with the other King, shall happen to
make complaint of any such Sentence, that King to whom complaint shall be made,
shall cause the said Judgment and Sentence to be Reheard and Examined in his
Council; That it may appear whether all things requisite and necessary have
been performed according to the Rules of this Treaty, and with due caution: If
the contrary shall happen, it shall be redressed, which is to be done at the
farthest within Three months time.

Neither shall it be lawful either before the giving of the first Sentence, No
Goods to be sold before Sentence, but by consent, or to prevent perishing.
or afterward during the time of Re-hearing, to unlade or sell and make away
the Goods in Controversy, unless it happen to be done by consent of Parties,
and to prevent the perishing of the said Goods and Merchandise.

XXXVIII.
The said Kings shall have in each others Court their Ministers, and in certain
Ports their Consuls, Consuls to be appointed.
for the better and more easy communicating and proposing such things as they
shall think advantageous to the public Interest, or private Concerns of any
particular person.

XXXIX.
No private Injury shall in any wise letten this Treaty, No private Injury to
break this Treaty;
nor shall raise any Discord or Hatred between the foresaid Nations, but every
Man shall answer for his own Doings, and shall be responsible therefore; Nor
Reprizals to be granted, but upon denial or delay of Justice.
Nor shall one Man suffer for that which another has offended in, by having
recourse to Reprisals, or such like rigorous Proceedings, unless Justice be
denied or delayed longer then is fitting. In which case it shall be lawful for
that King, whose Subject has received the Injury, to proceed according to the
Rules and Prescriptions of the Law of Nations until Reparation be made to the
Party injured; Provided notwithstanding that he have first in due manner
advertised the other King thereof.

XL.
Also it is Agreed, English to enjoy all Privileges enjoyed by any Strangers
in Denmark, the Swedes only excepted.
That if the Hollander, or any other Nation whatsoever (the Swedish Nation only
excepted) has already, or shall hereafter obtain any better Articles,
Agreements, Exemptions or Privileges then what are contained in this Treaty
from the King of Denmark, that the same and like Privileges shall be likewise
granted to the King of Great Britain and his Subjects, effectually and fully to
all intents and purposes; And on the other side, if the Hollander or any other
Nation whatsoever, has or shall obtain from his Majesty of Great Britain, any
better Articles, Agreements, Exemptions or Privileges then what are contained
in this Treaty, that the same and like Privileges shall be granted to the King
of Denmark and his Subjects also, in most full and effectual manner.

XLI.
It is also Concluded, Former Treaties not contrary to this, Confirmed.
That former Treaties and Leagues at any time heretofore made between the
foresaid Confederates or their Predecessors Kings, as well for the Kingdoms of
Great Britain, etc. as for the Hereditary Kingdoms of Denmark and Norway, etc.
respectively, be not in the least reputed or taken to be broken and Abolished
by any Agreement, Covenants or Articles in the present Treaty contained; But
that the same remain in full force, effect and virtue, so far as they are not
contrary or repugnant to the present Treaty, or any Article therein contained.

XLII.
Finally, it is Covenanted, Concluded and Agreed, That the foresaid Kings shall
sincerely and bona fide observe all and singular the Articles contained and set
down in this Treaty, and shall cause them to be observed by their Subjects and
People; Nor shall transgress the same directly or indirectly, or suffer the
same to be transgressed by their Subjects or People, Ratifications to be
Exchanged within Three months.
and shall Ratify and Confirm all and singular the Premises as before Agreed,
by Letters Patents Subscribed with their Hands, and Sealed with their Great
Seals in good sufficient and effectual Form, and shall deliver the same
reciprocally within Three months after the Date of these Presents, or cause
them to be delivered, in good faith and reality, and with effect.

Given at Copenhagen the 12th day of July, 1670.
Articles of Peace between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince, Charles the
Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. and the Most Excellent Signors, Mahomet Bashaw, the
Duan of the Noble City of Tunis, Hagge Mustapha Dei, Morat Bei, and the rest of
the Soldiers in the Kingdom of Tunis, Concluded by Sir John Lawson Knight, the
Fifth of October 1662. Renewed and Confirmed the Fourth of February 1674/5.
Artic. I.
THat all former Agrievances and Losses, An Amnesty and Freedom of Trade.
and other Pretenses between both Parties, shall be void and of none effect,
and from henceforward a firm Peace for ever, free Trade and Commerce shall be
and continue between the Subjects of his Sacred Majesty the King of Great
Britain, etc. and the People of the Kingdom of Tunis, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging.

II.
That the Ships on either Part shall have free liberty to enter into any Port
or River belonging to the Dominions of either Party, Freedom of Ports.
To pay no Duties but for what is vented.
(paying Duties only for what they shall sell) Transporting the rest without
any trouble or molestation, and freely enjoy any other Privileges, accustomed:
And the late Exaction that has been upon the Lading and Unlading of Goods at
Goletta and the Marine, Exaction at Goletta to be reduced as heretofore.
shall be reduced to the ancient Customs in those Cases.

III.
That there shall be no Seizure of any Ships of either Party at Sea or in Port,
Ships to pass quietly.
but that they shall quietly pass without any molestation or interruption, they
displaying their Colors. And for prevention of all Inconveniences that may
happen, the Ships of Tunis are to have a Certificate under the Hand of the
English Consul there, that they belong to the Place; which being produced, the
English Ship shall admit two Men to come on Board them peaceably, Passengers
and Goods of other Nations on Board English Ships, to be free.
to satisfy themselves that they are English; and although they have
Passengers of other Nations on Board, they shall be Free, both them and their
Goods.

IV.
That if any English Ship shall receive on Board them any Goods or Passengers
belonging to the Kingdom of Tunis, English Ships to defend Goods or Passengers
belonging to Tunis on Board them.
they shall be bound to defend them and their Goods, so far as lies in their
power, and not deliver them unto the Enemy.

V.
That if any of the Ships of either Party shall by accident of foul Weather,
Goods of Ships cast away, and Persons, to be free, and saved.
or otherwise, be cast away upon the Coast belonging to either Party, the
Persons shall be free, and the Goods saved, and delivered to the Proprietors
thereof.

VI.
That the English that do at present, English Inhabiting at Tunis may have
liberty to leave the Place.
or shall at any time hereafter; Inhabit in the City or Kingdom of Tunis, shall
have free liberty when they please, to Transport themselves with their Families
and Children, although born in the Country.

VII.
That the People belonging to the Dominions of either Party, shall not be
abused with ill Language, Those that abuse the Subjects of either Party, to be
punished.
or otherwise ill treated, but that the Parties so offending shall be punished
severely according to their desert.

VIII.
That the Consul, English not obliged to Address to any for Justice. but the
Dey.
or any other of the English Nation Residing in Tunis, shall not be forced to
make his Addresses in any Difference unto the Court of Justice, but unto the
Dey himself, from whom only they shall receive Judgment.

IX.
That the Consul, No English obliged to pay the Debts of another.
or any other of the English Nation, shall not be liable to pay the Debts of
any particular persons of the Nation, unless obliged thereunto under his Hand.

X.
That all the Ships of War belonging unto the Dominions of either Party,
Freedom of Ports for Repairing, etc.
shall have free liberty to use each others Ports for Washing, Cleansing and
Repairing any their Defects, And to buy Victuals and Necessaries without paying
Custom.
and to buy and to Ship off any sort of Victuals alive or dead, or any other
Necessaries, at the Price the Natives buy it in the Market, without paying
Custom to any Officer.

XI.
That in case any Ships of War belonging to the Dominions of Tunis, English
taken on Board Foreign Ships, if Passengers, to be free, if Mariners, to be
Slaves.
shall take in any of their Enemies Ships any Englishman Serving for Wages,
they are to be made Slaves, but if Merchants or Passengers, they are to enjoy
their Liberty and Goods free and entire.

XII.
That if any Ship of War belonging to the Kingdom of Tunis, English Ship not
wearing English Colors, if taken, to be Prize.
Fighting under his own Colors, with any Ship not wearing English Colors, and
shall surprise under the same the said English Ship, shall be Prize,
notwithstanding the Peace.

XIII.
That in case any Slave in the Kingdom of Tunis, A Slave getting on Board any
English Ship, the Consul not liable to pay his Ransom, unless upon notice given.
of any Nation whatsoever, shall make his escape and get on Board any Ship
belonging to the Dominions of his Sacred Majesty the King of Great Britain,
etc. the Consul shall not be liable to pay his Ransom, unless timely notice be
given him, to order that none such be Entertained; and then if it appear that
any Slave has so got away, the said Consul is to pay to his Patron the Price
for which he was sold in the Market; and if no Price be set, then to pay Three
hundred Dollars and no more.

These Articles aforementioned are to remain firm for ever, This Treaty to be
perpetual, and in Particulars not mentioned here, the Capitulations with the
Grand Signor to be observed.
without any Alteration; and in all other Particulars not mentioned in these
Articles, the Regulation shall be according to the Capitulations General with
the Grand Signior.

Signed and Sealed in the presence of the Great God. (L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.)
(L. S.)


WHereas there were Articles of Peace between his Sacred Majesty the King of
Great Britain, etc. and the Most Excellent Signiors, Mahomet Bassa, the Duana
of the Noble City of Tunis, Hagge Mustapha Dey, Morat Bey, and the rest of the
Soldiers in the Kingdom of Tunis,

Made and Concluded by the said Most Excellent Signiors on the one Part, and by
Sir John Lawson Knight, on the other Part, the Fifth day of October 1662.


WE the Most Excellent Signiors, The Treaty in 1662, Renewed.
present Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tunis, Mustapha Bassa,
Hagge Mami Dei, the Duana, Morat Bei, Mahomet Hosse Bei, and the rest of the
Soldiers in the Kingdom of Tunis, have Seen, Perused and Approved the said
Articles, and do now by these Presents Accept, Approve, Ratify and Confirm all
and every the aforementioned Articles of Peace, in the same Manner and Form as
they are Inserted and Repeated in the said Articles, the which are hereunto
adjoining, hereby firmly promising on Our Faiths, Sacredly to maintain the said
Peace and Agreement Our Selves, and do cause all Our People of what Degree or
Quality soever, punctually and inviolably to observe and keep all and every the
Articles thereof for ever; And if any of Our said People shall at any time
violate and break any part of the said Articles, they shall be punished with
greatest Severity at their Return into the Dominions of Tunis.

Confirmed and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, in Our House in the
Noble City of Tunis, the last Day of the Moon Delcadi, and the Year of Hegira
1085, being the Fourth Day of February Old Style, and the Year of the Lord
Jesus Christ 1674/5. (L. S.) Divan. (L. S.) Hosse Bey. (L. S.) Morat Bey. (L.
S.) Bashaw. (L. S.) Dey. (L. S.) Hamitt Bey.


Articles of Peace and Commerce between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. and the Most Illustrious Lords,
the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, Divan, and Governors of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli;
Concluded by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean Seas, the First day of May 1676.
Article I.
IN the first place, A perpetual Peace.
it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day and for ever forward, there be
a true, firm, and inviolable Peace between the Most Serene King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. and the Most
Illustrious Lords the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, Divan, and Governors of the City and
Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, and between all the Dominions and Subjects of
either Side, and that the Ships or other Vessels, and the Subjects and People
of both Sides shall not henceforth do to each other any Harm, Offense or Injury
either in Word or Deed, but shall Treat one another with all possible Respect
and Friendship.

II.
That any of the Ships or other Vessels belonging to the said King of Great
Britain, English Ships to come freely to Tripoli.
or to any of his Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the Port of Tripoli,
or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, or Dominions thereunto
belonging, freely to Buy and Sell without the least Disturbance, paying the
usual Customs as in former Times has been paid for such Goods as they Sell: To
pay Customs only for the Goods they sell.
and for the Goods they Sell not, they shall have free liberty to carry on
Board their own Ships, without paying any Duties for the same, and when they
please they shall freely depart from thence without any Stop, Hindrance or
Molestation whatsoever.

III.
That all Ships and other Vessels, All Persons and Goods belonging to the
Subjects of other Nations on Board the Ships of either Party, to be free.
as well those belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of his
Majesty's Subjects; As also those belonging to the Kingdom or People of
Tripoli, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffic where they please, without
any Search, Hindrance or Molestation from each other; and that all Persons or
Passengers of what Country soever, and all Moneys, Goods, Merchandises, and
Movables, to whatsoever People or Nation belonging, being on Board of any the
said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly free, and shall not be Stopped, Taken or
Plundered, nor receive any Harm or Damage whatsoever from either Party.

IV.
That the Tripoli Ships of War, How Ships shall be Visited at Sea.
or other Vessels thereunto belonging, meeting with any Merchants Ships or
other Vessels of the King of Great Britain's Subjects, not being in any of the
Seas appertaining to his Majesty's Dominions, may send on Board one single Boat
with but two Sitters, besides the ordinary Crew of Rowers: and no more but the
two Sitters to enter any of the said Merchants Ships, or any other Vessels,
without the express leave from the Commander of every such Ship or Vessel; and
then upon producing unto them a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High
Admiral of England, the said Boat shall presently depart, and the Merchants
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, shall proceed freely on her or their Voyage.
And although the Commander or Commanders of the said Merchant Ship or Ships,
Vessel or Vessels, produce no Pass from the Lord High Admiral of England, yet
if the major part of the said Ships or Vessels Company be Subjects to the said
King of Great Britain, the said Boat shall presently depart, and the Merchant
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, shall proceed freely on her or their Voyage;
And if any of the said Ships of War or other Vessels of his said Majesty,
meeting with any Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels belonging to Tripoli, if the
Commander or Commanders of any such Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, shall
produce a Pass firmed by the chief Governors of Tripoli, and a Certificate from
the English Consul living there, or if they have no such Pass or Certificate,
yet if the major part of their Ships Company or Companies be Turks, Moors, or
Slaves belonging to Tripoli, then the said Tripoli Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels shall proceed freely.

V.
That no Commander or other Person of any Ship or Vessel of Tripoli shall take
out of any Ship or Vessel of his said Majesty's Subjects, No person whatsoever
to be taken out of any English Ship.
any Person or Persons whatsoever, to carry them any where to be Examined, or
upon any other Pretense, nor shall use any Torture or Violence unto any person
of what Nation or Quality soever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel of his
Majesty's Subjects, upon any pretense whatsoever.

VI.
That no Shipwreck belonging to the said King of Great Britain, Goods of a Ship
cast away, to be saved.
or to any of his Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging to
Tripoli, shall be made or become Prize; The Men not to be made Slaves.
and that neither the Goods thereof shall be Seized, nor the Men made Slaves,
but that all the Subjects of Tripoli shall do their best Endeavors to save the
said Men and their Goods.

VII.
That no Ship or any other Vessel of Tripoli shall have permission to be
delivered up, No Tripoli Ship shall be used against the English.
or to go to any other Place in Enmity with the said King of Great Britain, to
be made use of as Corsairs or Sea-Rovers against his said Majesty's Subjects.

VIII.
That none of the Ships or other smaller Vessels of Tripoli shall remain
Cruising near his Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier, No Tripoli Ship to
Cruise near Tangier, or disturb the Commerce of it.
or in sight of it, nor other way disturb the Peace and Commerce of that Place.

IX.
That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, No English Ship brought in as Prize, or
Men or Goods to be sold at Tripoli.
Algier, Tittuan, or Sally, or any other Place being in War with the said King
of Great Britain, bring any Ships, Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of
his said Majesty's, Subjects to Tripoli, or to any Port or Place in that
Kingdom, the Governors there shall not permit them to be sold within the
Territories of Tripoli.

X.
That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain do come to
Tripoli, English Men of War may dispose of their Prizes at Tripoli.
or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, with any Prize, they may freely
sell it, or otherwise dispose of it at their own pleasure, without being
molested by any; And that his Majesty's said Ships of War shall not be obliged
to pay Customs in any sort; Not to pay Custom.
And that if they shall want Provisions, Victuals, May buy Provisions, etc.
or any other things, they may freely buy them at the Rates in the Market.

XI.
That when any of his Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before Tripoli,
English Men of War coming to Tripoli, all Slaves to be secured, and if they
escape then, not to be required back again, nor any English obliged to pay for
them.
upon notice thereof given to the English Consul, or by the Commander of the
said Ships, to the chief Governors of Tripoli, public Proclamation shall be
immediately made to secure the Christian Captives; and if after that any
Christians whatsoever make their escape on Board any of the said Ships of War,
they shall not be required back again, nor shall the said Consul or Commander,
or any other his said Majesty's Subjects, be obliged to pay any thing for the
said Christians.

XII.
That if any Subjects of the said King of Great Britain happen to die in
Tripoli, or its Territories, Estates of English dying there, not to be seized.
his Goods or Money shall not be Seized by the Governors or any Minister of
Tripoli, but shall all remain with the English Consul.

XIII.
That neither the English Consul, No one Englishman obliged to pay the Debts of
another.
nor any other Subject of the said King of Great Britain, shall be bound to pay
the Debts of any other of his Majesty's Subjects; except that they become
Surety for the same by a public Act.

XIV.
That the Subjects of his said Majesty in Tripoli or its Territories,
Differences of the English, where to be Determined.
in matter of Controversy, shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction but that
of the Dey or Divan, except they happen to be at Difference between themselves;
in which case they shall be liable to no other Determination but that of the
Consul only.

XV.
That in case any Subject of his Majesty, English, how to be punished for
hurting a Turk or Moor.
being in any part of the Kingdom of Tripoli, happen to strike, wound or kill a
Turk or a Moor, if he be taken, he is to be punished in the same manner, and
with no greater severity then a Turk ought to be, being guilty of the same
Offense; The Consul not answerable.
but if he escape, neither the said English Consul, nor any other of his said
Majesty's Subjects, shall be in any sort questioned or troubled therefore.

XVI.
That the English Consul now, English Consul to have all liberty;
or at any time hereafter living in Tripoli, shall be there at all times with
entire freedom and safety of his Person and Estate, and shall be permitted to
choose his own Druggerman and Broker, and freely to go on Board any Ship in the
Road, as often and when he pleases, and to have the liberty of the Country; And
that he shall be allowed a Place to Pray in, And a Place to Pray in.
and that no man shall do him any Injury in Word or Deed.

XVII.
That not only during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, The English
to have free liberty to depart with their Estates as well in Peace, as in case
of a Breach.
but likewise if any Breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King
of Great Britain and the City and Kingdom of Tripoli, the said Consul, and all
other his said Majesty's Subjects Inhabiting in the Kingdom of Tripoli, shall
always, and at all times both of Peace and War, have full and absolute liberty
to depart, and go to their own or any other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel of
what Nation soever they shall think fit, and to carry with them all their
Estates, Goods, Families and Servants, although born in the Country, without
any interruption or hindrance.

XVIII.
That no Subject of his said Majesty, English Passenger from Port to Port found
on Board an Enemies Vessel, not to be molested.
being a Passenger from or to any Port, shall be any way molested or meddled
with, although he be on Board any Ship or Vessel in Enmity with Tripoli.

XIX.
That whereas a War has lately happened between the Most Serene King of Great
Britain, etc. and the Most Illustrious Lords, Halil Bashaw, Ibraim Dey, Aga,
Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, by
reason of the Injuries done unto the King of Great Britain and his Subjects, by
the Government and People of Tripoli, We Halil Bashaw, Ibraim, Dey, Aga,
Renewal of the Peace.
Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, do
acknowledge the Injuries done, and that the breach of the Peace between his
Most Excellent Majesty the King of Great Britain and Us of Tripoli, was
committed by Our Subjects, for which some are Banished, and some fled from our
Justice; And for further satisfaction to his Most Excellent Majesty for the
breach of Articles, (We are sorry for the same) and do by these Engage to set
at liberty and deliver unto the Right Honorable Sir John Narbrough Knight, All
English Captives to be released.
Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas, all English Captives
residing in the City and Kingdom of Tripoli, and Dominions thereunto belonging,
without paying any Ransom for them: And likewise by setting at liberty, and
delivering unto the said Sir John Narbrough Knight, all other persons taken
under English Colors, 8000 Dollars to be paid to Sir John Narbrough.
without paying any Ransom for them, and by paying Eighty thousand Dollars in
Moneys, Goods and Slaves to the aforesaid Sir John Narbrough Knight. And
moreover, We do Engage our selves and Successors, That if any Injury for the
future be done contrary to these Articles by the Government and People of
Tripoli, to the King of Great Britain and his Subjects; If upon demand and
denial of satisfaction to the King for Injuries, a War happen, the King is to
be paid the Charge of the War.
if upon demand of satisfaction from the Government and People of Tripoli, We
or they do refuse or deny to give satisfaction therefore, so that a War be
occasioned thereby between the King of Great Britain and the Government and
People of Tripoli, We do Engage Our selves and Successors to make Restitution
for the Injuries done; and likewise to make satisfaction to the King of Great
Britain for the full Charge and Damage of that War.

XX.
That no Subject of the King of Great Britain, No English to be forced to turn
Turk.
etc. shall be permitted to turn Turk or Moor in the City and Kingdom of
Tripoli (being induced thereunto by any surprisal whatsoever) unless he
voluntarily appear before the Dey or Governor with the English Consuls
Druggerman, three times in twenty four hours space, and every time declare his
resolution to turn Turk or Moor.

XXI.
That at all times when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britain, etc.
English Man of War carrying a Flagg at the Main Topmast Head, to be Saluted
first by the Castle.
carrying his said Majesty's Flag at the Main-Top-Mast Head, appear before the
said City of Tripoli, and come to Anchor in the Road, that immediately after
notice thereof given by his said Majesty's Consul or Officer, from the Ship,
unto the Dey and Government of Tripoli, they shall in Honor to his Majesty,
cause a Salute of One and twenty Cannon to be Shot off from the Castle and
Forts of the City; and that the said Ship shall return an Answer by Shooting
off the same number of Cannon.

XXII.
That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles by Us Halil
Bashaw, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Amnesty for all Injuries past.
Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli, all Injuries
and Damages sustained on either Part, shall be quite taken away and forgotten,
and this Peace shall be in full force and virtue, and continue for ever:
Satisfaction to be made for Injuries committed before the Notification of this
Peace.
And for all Depredations and Damages that shall be hereafter committed or done
by either Side, before notice can be given of this Peace, full satisfaction
shall be immediately made, and whatsoever remains in kind, shall be instantly
restored.

XXIII.
That whenever it shall happen hereafter, Satisfaction to be immediately made
for all Injuries, and the Peace not to be broken till Satisfaction be denied.
that any thing is done or committed by the Ships or Subjects of either Side,
contrary to any of these Articles, Satisfaction being demanded therefore, shall
be made to the full, and without any manner of delay; and that it shall not be
lawful to break this Peace, until such Satisfaction be denied: And Our Faith
shall be Our Faith, and Our Word Our Word; and whosoever shall be the cause of
breaking of this Peace, shall assuredly be punished with present Death.

Confirmed and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, the 5th day of March Old
Style, and the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1675/6. being the last day of the
Moon Zelhedga, and the Year of the Hegira One thousand eighty six, 1086. (L.
S.) (L. S.) Bashaw. (L. S.) Dey. (L. S.) Divan.


WHereas there were Articles of Peace and Commerce between the Most Serene and
Mighty Prince Charles the Second, Confirmation of the former Peace.
by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Christian Faith, etc. and the Most Illustrious Lords, Halil Bashaw, Ibraim Dey,
Aga, Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary,
lately Made and Concluded by the said Lords on the one part, and by Sir John
Narbrough Knight, Admiral of his said Serene Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean Seas on the other part, and by them Confirmed and Sealed in the
Presence of Almighty God, the Fifth day of March Old Style, and the Year of our
Lord Jesus Christ 1675/6, being the last day of the Moon Zelhedga, and the Year
of the Hegira One thousand eighty six, 1086. Since which time of Confirming and
Sealing the aforesaid Articles of Peace and Commerce, the aforesaid Lord Ibraim
Dey being fled away from his said Government of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli
in Barbary, Now therefore We Halil Bashaw, Aga, Divan, Governors, Soldiers and
People of the aforesaid City and Kingdom of Tripoli, have chosen and elected
Vice Admiral Mustapha Grande to be Dey of the said City and Kingdom of Tripoli
in Barbary, to succeed Ibraim Dey in the aforesaid Government. And now We the
said Halil Bashaw, Mustapha Dey, Aga, Divan, Governors, Soldiers and People of
Tripoli aforesaid, having seen the aforesaid Articles of Peace and Commerce,
which were lately Made and Concluded as aforesaid, and having seriously
perused, and fully considered all Particulars therein mentioned, do fully
approve of all and every of the aforesaid Article and Articles of Peace; And We
and every one of us do now by these Presents Consent and Agree to and with Sir
John Narbrough Knight aforesaid, for the Just and Exact keeping and performing
all of the said Articles, and do Accept, Approve, Ratify and Confirm all and
every of them, in the same manner and form as they are inserted and repeated in
the preceding Articles aforesaid; Hereby firmly Engaging our Selves and
Successors, assuring on our Faith, sacredly to maintain, and strictly to
observe, perform and keep inviolably all and every the aforesaid Article and
Articles of Peace and Agreement for ever: And to cause and require all Our
Subjects and People, of what Degree or Quality whatsoever, within the City and
Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, or Dominions thereunto belonging, both by Sea
and Land, punctually, inviolably, carefully and duly to observe, keep and
perform all and every the aforesaid Article and Articles thereof for ever; And
our Faith shall be our Faith, and our Word our Word; and whosoever shall at any
time violate and break any part of the said Article or Articles of Peace, they
shall assuredly be punished with greatest severity, and his or their Heads
shall be immediately cut off, and forthwith be Presented unto any Officer whom
the Most Serene King of Great Britain, etc. shall authorize to make demand
thereof.

It is farther Agreed, English Trading on English Ships, to pay One per Cent.
less Custom, as others.
That the Subjects belonging unto the Most Serene King of Great Britain, etc.
Trading unto the Port of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary aforesaid,
or unto any Port or Place of the Dominions thereunto belonging, in any
Merchants Ship or other Vessel belonging unto the said Serene Kings Subjects,
shall not pay so much Custom by One per Cent. for whatsoever Goods or
Merchandises they sell or buy, as other Nations do for the Custom of the like
Goods or Merchandise, notwithstanding whatsoever is specified in the second
Article aforesaid, to the contrary.

And that the Most Serene King of Great Britain's Consul Residing in Tripoli
aforesaid, The Consul to have leave to put the Kings Flagg on the Top of his
House, and in his Boat.
shall have liberty at all times when he pleases, to put up his said Serene
Majesty's Flagg on the Flagg-staff on the Top of his House, and there to
continue it spread as long time as he pleases. Likewise, the said Consul to
have the same liberty of putting up, and spreading the said Flagg in his Boat,
when he passes on the Water, and no Man whatsoever to oppose, molest, disturb
or injure him therein either by Word or Deed.

These and all other preceding Articles are to remain firm for ever, without
any Alteration; Particulars not mentioned here, to be according to the
Capitulations with the Grand Signior.
and in all other Particulars not mentioned in any of these Articles, the
Regulation shall be according to the Capitulations General with the Grand
Seignior.

Confirmed likewise and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, at Our Castle
in the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, the First day of May Old
Style, and the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, One thousand six hundred and
seventy six, being the Six and twentieth day of the Moon Zaphire, and the Year
of the Hegira, One thousand eighty seven. 1087. (L. S.) Bashaw. (L. S.) Dey.
(L. S.) Divan. (L. S.) Admiral.


Articles of Peace between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince, Charles the
Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. and the High and Mighty Lords the States General of
the United Netherlands; Concluded at Westminster the 9/19 day of February,
1673/4.
I.
IT is Concluded and Agreed, A firm Peace.
That from this Day there shall be a firm and inviolable Peace, Union and
Friendship betwixt his Majesty the King of Great Britain, and the High and
Mighty Lords the States General of the United Provinces, and betwixt all their
Subjects, whether within Europe or without, in all Regions and Places
whatsoever.

II.
That this good Union betwixt the abovesaid King and the said States General
may the sooner take its effect, it is by them Agreed and Concluded, All
Hostilities and Letters of Mart to cease upon the Publication of this Treaty.
That immediately upon the Publication of this Treaty of Peace, all Actions of
Hostility shall on both Sides be immediately forbid, and no Commission,
Instruction, or Order, privately or publicly, directly or indirectly, be on
either Side given or countenanced, for the Infesting, Attaquing, Fighting, or
Spoiling of each other, their Dominions or Subjects; but on the contrary, all
peaceable and amicable Comportments enjoined to the Subjects of both Nations.

III.
But in respect the Distances of Places are so different, that the Orders and
Commands of the respective Sovereigns cannot at the same time reach all their
Subjects, it has been thought fit to appoint these following Limits for the
committing any Acts of Hostility or Force upon each other: When Hostilities
shall cease in the several Parts of the World.
viz. That after the expiration of Twelve days next following the Publication
of this Treaty, no Hostility shall be acted from the Soundings to the Naz in
Norway; nor after the term of Six weeks, betwixt the Soundings and Tangier; nor
after the term of Ten weeks, betwixt the said Tangier and the Equator, neither
in the Ocean, Mediterranean, or elsewhere; nor after the term of Eight months,
in any part of the World: And whatsoever Actions of Hostility and Force shall
be committed after the expiration of the aforesaid terms, upon color of
whatsoever former Commission, Letters of Mart, or the like, shall be deemed as
Illegal, and the Actors obliged to make Reparation and Satisfaction, and
punished as Violators of the Public Peace.

IV.
That the aforesaid States General of the United Provinces, Article for
Striking.
in due acknowledgment on their part of the King of Great Britain's Right to
have his Flag respected in the Seas hereafter mentioned, shall and do Declare
and Agree, That whatever Ships or Vessels belonging to the said United
Provinces, whether Vessels of War or others, or whether single or in Fleets,
shall meet in any of the Seas from Cape Finisterre to the Middle Point of the
Land Van Staten in Norway, with any Ships or Vessels belonging to his Majesty
of Great Britain, whether those Ships be single or in greater number, if they
carry his Majesty of Great Britain's Flag or Jack, the aforesaid Dutch Vessels
or Ships shall strike their Flag and lower their Top-sail in the same manner,
and with as much Respect as has at any Time, or in any Place been formerly
practiced toward any Ships of his Majesty of Great Britain or his
Predecessors, by any Ships of the States General or their Predecessors.

V.
Whereas the Colony of Surinam, Concerning Surinam.
and the Articles made upon the Surrender thereof 1667, betwixt William Biam,
then Governor thereof for his Majesty of Great Britain, and Abraham Quirini
Commander for the States General, have in the Execution of them administered
much occasion of Dispute, and contributed much to the late Misunderstanding
betwixt his Majesty and the said States General; The Articles made by Colonel
Biam to stand good.
to remove all Grounds of future Mistakes, the said States General do by these
Agree and Covenant with the said King of Great Britain, That not only the
forenamed Articles shall be Executed without any manner of Tergiversation or
Equivocation; but that likewise it shall be free for his Majesty to Depute one
or more Persons thither, English at Surinam to be permitted to leave the Place,
and bring away their Estates.
to see the Condition of his Subjects there, and to adjust with them a Time for
their Departure; And that it shall be lawful for his Majesty to send one, two,
or three Ships at one time, and thereon to Embarque and carry away the said
Subjects, their Goods and Slaves; And that the then Governor there for the
States General shall not make or execute any Law, whereby the buying or selling
of Land, paying of Debts, or commutation of Goods, shall be otherwise qualified
to the English, then it has or shall be to all other Inhabitants of the
Colony; but that during their stay, they shall enjoy the same Laws and
Privileges of suing for Debts, and paying their Debts, making Bargains and
Contracts, as has been usually practiced amongst the other Inhabitants; And
that whenever his Majesty of Great Britain shall desire of the States General
sufficient and authentic Letters to the Governor of the said Colony, to
suffer the said English to depart, and permit the coming of the said Ships, the
said States General shall within the space of fifteen days after such Demand,
deliver unto whomsoever Deputed by his Majesty of Great Britain for that
purpose, full and sufficient Letters and Instructions to their Governor there,
for permitting the arrival of the Ships, as well as the Embarquing of such of
his Majesty's Subjects as shall declare themselves willing to go away, with
their Goods and Slaves, to be Transported where his Majesty shall direct.

VI.
It is Agreed and Concluded, Concerning the restitution of Places.
That whatever Country, Island, Town, Haven, Castle, or Fortress, has been, or
shall be taken by either Party from the other, since the beginning of the late
unhappy War, whether in Europe or elsewhere, and before the expiration of the
Times above limited for Hostility, shall be restored to the former Owner in the
same Condition it shall be in at the time of the publishing this Peace; after
which time there shall be no Plundering of the Inhabitants, or demolishing of
the Fortifications, or carrying away the Artillery and Ammunition belonging to
any Fort or Castle at the time of its having been taken.

VII.
That the Treaty of Breda made in the Year 1667, All preceding Treaties to
continue in force.
as all other former Treaties Confirmed by the said Treaty, be Renewed, and
remain in their full force and vigor, so far forth as they contradict nothing
in this present Treaty.

VIII.
That the Marine Treaty made at the Hague between the two Parties in the Year
1668, Marine Treaty of 1668 to continue in force for Nine months, and the
Consideration of a new one to be referred to Commissioners.
be continued for Nine months after the Publication of this present Treaty,
unless it shall be otherwise Agreed on by a subsequent Treaty; and that in the
mean time the Consideration of a new one be referred to the same Commissioners
to whom the Trade in the East Indies is referred in the subsequent Article.

But if such Commissioners within Three months after their first meeting shall
not agree upon a new Marine Treaty, In case the Commissioners shall not Agree
within three months, it shall be left to the Arbitration of Spain.
then that Matter shall also be referred to the Arbitration of the Most Serene
Queen Regent of Spain, in the same manner as the Regulation of the East India
Trade is referred to her Majesty in the said Article next following.

IX.
In respect that upon the mutual, free, Concerning a Regulation of Commerce in
the East Indies
and undisturbed enjoyment of Trade and Navigation, not only the Wealth, but
the Peace likewise of both Nations is most highly concerned; there ought
nothing to be so much the care of both Parties, as a just Regulation of Trade,
and particularly in the East Indies; and yet in respect that the weightiness of
the Matter requires much time to make firm and durable Articles to the Content
and Security of the Subject on both Sides; and on the other side, the bleeding
Condition of most part of Europe, as well as of the two Parties concerned,
earnestly demand a speedy Conclusion of this Treaty, the King of Great Britain
is pleased to condescend to the Desires of the States General, to have the
Consideration of the same referred to an equal number of Commissioners to be
nominated by each Party, the said States General Engaging themselves to send
those of their nomination to Treat at London with those to be nominated by his
Majesty; Commissioners to be sent to London to Treat about the same.
and this within the space of Three months after the Publication of this
Treaty; The number to be nominated by each, to consist of six Persons; And in
case that after Three months from the time of their first Assembling, they
shall not have the good success to conclude a Treaty, the Points in difference
betwixt them shall be referred to the Arbitrament of the Most Serene Queen
Regent of Spain, who shall nominate eleven Commissioners; and whatsoever the
major part of them shall determine as to the remaining Differences, shall
oblige both Parties; Provided still, that they deliver their Judgment within
the space of Six months from the day of their Assembling; which shall likewise
be within the space of Three months after the said Most Serene Queen Regent of
Spain has accepted of the being Umpire.

X.
That whereas the Most Serene Queen Regent of Spain has given Assurance to his
Majesty of Great Britain, 800000 Patacoons to be paid to his Majesty.
That the said States General should upon the making of the Peace, pay unto his
said Majesty the King of Great Britain, the Sum of 800000 Patacoons, The said
States General do Promise and Covenant to pay the said 800000 Patacoons in this
following manner, viz. A fourth part as soon as the Ratification of this Treaty
shall be mutually Exhibited, and the rest the three ensuing Years by equal
Portions.

XI.
The aforesaid Most Serene King of Great Britain, and the said High and Mighty
States General of the United Provinces, shall observe sincerely, and bona fide,
all and singular the Matters Agreed and Concluded in this present Treaty, and
cause the same to be observed by their Subjects and Inhabitants; nor shall they
directly or indirectly violate any of them, or suffer them to be violated by
their Subjects or Inhabitants: About the Ratification;
And they shall Ratify and Confirm all and every thing as before Agreed, by
Letters Patents Subscribed with their Hands, and Sealed with their Great Seals,
conceived and written in sufficient, valid, and effectual Form; and shall
deliver, or cause the same to be delivered reciprocally, within Four weeks
after the Date of these Presents, (or sooner if it may be) bona fide, really,
and with effect.

XII.
Lastly, And Publication.
As Soon as the said Ratifications shall have been duly and mutually Exhibited
and Exchanged, the Peace shall be Proclaimed at the Hague within Four and
twenty hours after the Delivery and Exchange there made of the said
Ratifications.

Done at Westminster the 9/19 day of February 1673/4.
A Treaty Marine between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince, Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. and the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Netherlands, to be observed throughout all and every the Countries and Parts of
the World, by Sea and Land, Concluded at London the First day of December 1674.
S.V.
Article I.
THat it shall and may be lawful for all and every the Subjects of the Most
Serene and Mighty Prince, English to Trade freely to all Places in Amity or
Neutrality with the States.
the King of Great Britain aforesaid, with all freedom and safety to Sail,
Trade, and Exercise any manner of Traffic in all those Kingdoms, Countries,
and Estates, which are, or at any time hereafter shall be in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with his said Majesty; So that they shall not be any ways hindered or
molested in their Navigation or Trade, by the Military Forces, nor by the Ships
of War, or any other kind of Vessels whatsoever, belonging either to the High
and Mighty States General of the United Netherlands, or to their Subjects, upon
occasion or pretense of any Hostility or Difference which now is, or shall
hereafter happen between the said Lords the States General, and any Princes or
People whatsoever in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with his said Majesty: And
likewise, that it shall and may be lawful for all and every the Subjects of the
said High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United Netherlands, Dutch
to Trade freely to all Places in Amity or Neutrality with England.
with all freedom and safety to Sail, Trade, and Exercise any manner of
Traffic in all those Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates, which are, or at any
time hereafter shall be in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with the aforesaid Lords
the States; So that they shall not be any ways hindered or molested in their
Navigation or Trade, by the Military Forces, not by the Ships of War, or any
other kind of Vessels whatsoever, belonging either to the Most Serene and
Mighty King above mentioned, or to his Subjects, upon occasion or pretense of
any Hostility or Difference, which now is, or shall hereafter happen between
his said Majesty, and any Princes or People whatsoever, in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with the said Lords the States.

II.
Nor shall this freedom of Navigation and Commerce be infringed by occasion or
cause of any War, This freedom to extend to all Commodities not prohibited.
in any kind of Merchandises, but shall extend to all Commodities which shall
be carried in time of Peace; those only excepted which follow in the next
Article, and are comprehended under the Name of Contraband.

III.
Under this Name of Contraband or Prohibited Merchandises shall be comprehended
only Arms, What Goods are prohibited.
Pieces of Ordnance, with all Implements belonging to them, Fireballs, Powder,
Match, Bullets, Pikes, Swords, Lances, Spears, Halberds, Guns, Mortar-Pieces,
Petards, Grenades, Musquet-rests, Bandeliers, Saltpeter, Muskets,
Musket Shot, Helmets, Corslets, Breast-plates, Coats of Mail, and the like
kind of Armature, Soldiers, Horses, and all things necessary for the Furniture
of Horses, Holsters, Belts, and all other Warlike Instruments whatsoever.

IV.
These Merchandises following shall not be reckoned among Prohibited Goods,
viz. All kind of Cloth; What Goods are not prohibited.
and all other Manufactures woven of any kind of Wool, Flax, Silk, Cotton, or
any other Material; all sorts of Clothing and Vestments, together with the
Materials whereof they use to be made; Gold and Silver, as well Coined as not
Coined; Tin, Iron, Lead, Copper, and Coals; as also Wheat, Barley, and all
other kind of Corn or Pulse; Tobacco, and all kind of Spices, Salted and Smoked
Flesh, Salted and Dried Fish, Butter and Cheese, Beer, Oils, Wines, Sugars, and
all sort of Salt; and in general, all Provision which serves for the
nourishment and sustenance of Life; likewise all kind of Cotton, Hemp, Flax and
Pitch; and Ropes, Sails and Anchors; also Masts and Planks, Boards and Beams of
what sort of Wood soever, and all other Materials requisite for the Building or
Repairing Ships, but they shall be wholly reputed amongst free Goods, even as
all other Wares and Commodities which are not comprehended in the next
precedent Article; Liberty of Trade unto Places in Enmity with the other Party.
So that the same may be freely Transported and carried by the Subjects of his
said Majesty, even unto Places in Enmity with the said States, as also on the
other side, by the Subjects of the said States, to Places under the Obedience
of the Enemies of his said Majesty; Except only Towns or Places Besieged,
Environed, or Invested, in French, Blocquees ou Investies.

V.
And that all manner of Differences and Contentions on both Sides by Sea and
Land, may from henceforth cease and be utterly extinguished, It is Agreed,
Ships only to show their Passports.
That all kind of Ships and Vessels whatsoever, belonging to the Subjects of
his said Majesty, entering or being entered into any Road or Port under the
Obedience of the Lords the States, and purposing to pass from thence, shall be
only obliged to show unto the Officers acting in the Ports of the said States,
or to the Captains of the States Ships, or of Private Men of War (if any happen
there to be) their Passport, commonly called a Sea-brief (the Form whereof is
added at the end of these Articles;) nor shall any Money or any thing else be
exacted from them under that Pretense; But if any Ship belonging to the
Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain, shall in the open Sea, or elsewhere
out of the Dominions of the said States, meet the Ships of War of the said
Lords the States, or Private Men of War of their Subjects, the said Ships of
the Lords the States, or of their Subjects, shall keep at a convenient
distance, How to be Visited.
and only send out their Boat, and it shall be lawful for them only with two or
three Men, to go on Board the Ships and Vessels of the Subjects of his Majesty,
that the Passport (or Sea-brief) of the Propriety thereof according to the Form
hereafter specified, may be shown to them by the Captain or Master of such Ship
or Vessel belonging to the Subjects of his Majesty; and the Ship which shall
show the same shall freely pass, and it shall not be lawful to molest, search
detain, or divert the same from her intended Voyage: And all the Subjects of
the Lords the States shall enjoy in all things, the same Liberty and Immunity,
they in like manner showing their Passport (or Sea-brief) made according to the
Form prescribed at the latter end of this Treaty.

VI.
But if any Ship or Vessel belonging to the English, Ships going to Enemies
Ports, to show their Concquets besides their Passports.
or other Subjects of his Majesty, shall be met making into any Port in Enmity
with the Lords the States; Or on the other side, if any Ship belonging to the
United Provinces of the Netherlands, or other Subjects of the Lords the States,
shall be met in her Way making into any Port under the Obedience of the Enemies
of his said Majesty, such Ship shall show, not only a Passport (or Sea-brief)
according to the Form here under prescribed, wherewith she is to be furnished,
but also her Cocquets expressing the Contents of the Goods on Board, given in
the usual Form, by the Officers of the Customs in the Port from whence she
came, whereby it may be known whether she is Laden with any Merchandises
Prohibited by the third Article of this Treaty.

VII.
But if by the showing the abovesaid Cocquets expressing the Contents of the
Goods on Board, If prohibited Goods be found to be in any Ship, what to be done.
given in the usual Form by the Officers of the Customs in the Port from whence
she came, (concerning the showing whereof it is above Agreed) either Party
shall discover any kind of Merchandises which in the third Article of this
Treaty are declared to be Contraband or Prohibited, Consigned to any Port under
the Obedience of their Enemies, it shall not be lawful to open the Hatches of
such Ship in which the same shall happen to be found, whether she belongs to
the Subjects of his Majesty, or of the Lords the States; nor to unlock, or
break open the Chests, Mails, Packs, or Casks in the same, nor to convey away
any the least part of the Merchandises, before the whole be first Landed in the
presence of the Officers of the Admiralty, and Inventaried; neither shall it be
any ways lawful to Sell, Exchange, or otherwise to Alienate the same, until
such Prohibited Goods are rightly and lawfully Proceeded against, and that the
Judges of the Admiralty have by their respective Sentences Confiscated the
same: The Ship and the other Commodities not forfeited therefore.
Provided always, That as well the Ship it self, as the rest of the Commodities
found in the same, which by this Treaty are to be reputed Free, shall not upon
pretense of their being infected by such Prohibited Goods, be detained, much
less Confiscated for lawful Prize; But if not the whole, but a part only of the
Lading consists of Contraband or Prohibited Commodities, and that the Master of
the Ship shall be willing and ready to deliver them to the Captor who Seized
the same, in that case the Captor shall not compel the Ship to go out of her
Course, to any Port he thinks fit, but shall forthwith dismiss her, and upon no
account hinder her from freely prosecuting her designed Voyage.

VIII.
It is further Agreed, Free Ship free Goods; and e contra.
That whatsoever shall be found Laden by his Majesty's Subjects, upon any Ship
whatsoever belonging to the Enemies of the Lords the States, although the same
be not of the quality of Contraband Goods, may be Confiscated; But on the
contrary, all that which shall be found in the Ships belonging to the Subjects
of his Majesty, shall be accounted Clear and Free, although the whole Lading or
any part thereof, by just Title of Propriety, shall belong to the Enemies of
the Lords the States; Except always Contraband Goods, which being intercepted,
all things shall be done according to the Meaning and Direction of the
precedent Articles; And by the same reason, whatsoever shall be Laden by the
Subjects of the Lords the States, in any Ship whatsoever belonging to the
Enemies of his Majesty, although the same be not of the quality of Contraband
Goods, may be Confiscated; But on the other side, all that which shall be found
in the Ships belonging to the Subjects of the Lords the States, shall be
accounted Clear and Free, although the whole Lading, or any part thereof, by
just Title of Propriety, shall belong to the Enemies of his Majesty; Except
always Contraband Goods, which being Intercepted, all things shall be done
according to the Meaning and Direction of the precedent Articles. Goods Laden
before War is Declared by either of the Parties against a third State, in whose
Ship the said Goods are, not to be forfeited.
And least any Damage should by Surprise be done to the one Party who is in
Peace, when the other Party shall happen to be Engaged in War, It is Provided
and Agreed, That a Ship belonging to the Enemies of the one Party, and Laden
with Goods of the Subjects of the other Party, shall not infect or render the
said Goods liable to Confiscation, in case they were Laden before the
expiration of the Terms and Times hereafter mentioned, after the Declaration or
Publication of any such War; viz. If the Goods were Laden in any Port or Place
between the Places or Limits called the Soundings, and the Naz in Norway,
within the space of Six weeks after such Declaration; Of Two months between the
said Place the Soundings, and the City of Tangier; and of Ten weeks in the
Mediterranean Sea; Or within the space of Eight months in any other Country or
Place of the World; So that it shall not be lawful to Confiscate the Goods of
the Subjects of his Majesty taken or seized in any Ship or Vessel whatsoever of
any Enemy of the Lords the States, upon that Pretense, but the same shall be
without delay restored to the Proprietors, unless they were Laden after the
expiration of the said Terms of Time respectively; but so that it may not be
lawful for them afterward to carry to Enemies Ports, the said Merchandises
which are called Contraband, and for the reason aforesaid shall not be liable
to Confiscation; Neither on the other side, shall it be lawful to Confiscate
the Goods of the Subjects of the Lords the States taken or seized in any Ship
or Vessel whatsoever of an Enemy of his Majesty, upon that Pretense; but the
same shall be forthwith restored to the Proprietors thereof, unless they were
Laden after the expiration of the said Terms of Time respectively; But so, that
it may not be lawful for them afterward to carry to Enemies Ports, the said
Merchandises which are called Contraband, and for the reason aforesaid shall
not be liable to Confiscation.

IX.
And the more to assure the Subjects of his Majesty and of the said States,
that no Injury shall be offered to them by the Ships of War, or Private Men of
War of either side, all the Captains of the Ships, as well of his Majesty as of
the said States, Privateers and Companies to make Restitution in case of a
Contravention.
and all their Subjects who shall set out Private Men of War, and likewise
their Privileged Companies, shall be enjoined not to do any Injury or Damage
whatsoever, to the other; which if they do, they shall be punished, and
moreover be liable to satisfy all Costs and Damages, by Restitution and
Reparation, upon Pain and Obligation of Person and Goods.

X.
For this cause all the Commanders of Private Men of War, Privateers to give
Security.
shall from henceforth be obliged before they receive their Commissions, to
Enter before a competent Judge, good and sufficient Security by able and
responsible Men, who have no Part or Interest in such Ship, in the Sum of
Fifteen hundred pounds Sterling, or Sixteen thousand five hundred Gilders; and
when they have above One hundred and fifty Men, then in the Sum of Three
thousand pounds Sterling, or Three and thirty thousand Gilders, that they will
give full Satisfaction for any Damages or Injuries whatsoever, which they or
their Officers, or others intheir Service, shall commit in their Courses at
Sea, contrary to this present Treaty, or any other whatsoever, between his
Majesty and the said States, and upon pain of Revocation and Annulling their
said Commissions, in which it shall be always inserted, that they have given
such Security as abovesaid; And likewise it is Agreed, That the Ship it self
shall be also liable to make Satisfaction for Injuries and Damages done by her.

XI.
His Majesty and the said States being desirous that the Subjects of each other
may be mutually Treated in all Countries under their Obedience respectively,
Judgments upon Prizes to be given according to Justice.
with the like kindness as their own Subjects, will give all necessary and
effectual Orders, the Judgments upon Prizes taken, be given according to the
Rule of Justice, and Equity, by Judges beyond all suspicion, and not any way
concerned in the Cause under Debate; And his Majesty and the said States will
likewise give strict Orders that all Sentences already given, and which shall
be hereafter given, be (according to the Tenor thereof) duly put in Execution,
and obtain their Effect.

XII.
And whenever the Ambassadors of the said Lords the States, Upon complaint
against Sentences, the same to be Reviewed within Three months.
or any other their Public Ministers, Resident at the Court of his Most Serene
Majesty of Great Britain, shall complain of the unjustness of Sentences which
have been given, his Majesty will cause the same to be Reviewed and Examined in
his Council, that it may appear whether the Orders and Precautions prescribed
in this Treaty have been observed, and have had their due Effect, and will also
take care that the same be fully provided for, and that Right be done to the
Party complaining, within the space of Three months; And likewise when the
Ambassadors, or other Public Ministers of his Majesty, Resident with the
States General, shall complain of the unjustness of Sentences, the said States
will cause a Review and Examination thereof to be made in the Assembly of the
States General, that it may appear whether the Orders and Precautions
prescribed in this Treaty have been observed, and have had their due Effect,
and they will likewise take care that the same be fully provided for, Goods not
to be sold before Sentence, or during the Review.
and that Right be done to the Party complaining within the space of Three
months: Nevertheless it shall not any ways be lawful to Sell or Unlade the
Goods in Controversy, either before the Sentence given, or after it, during
the Review thereof, on either Side, unless it be with the consent of the
Parties interessed.

XIII.
A Suit being Commensed between the Takers of Prizes on the one Part, Sentence
in case of Prizes being given for the Reclaimer, shall be put in Execution
notwithstanding the Appeal.
and the Claimers thereof on the other, and a Sentence or Decree being given
for the Party Reclaiming, the said Sentence or Decree (upon Security given)
shall be put in Execution, notwithstanding the Appeal made by him that took the
Prize, which shall not be observed, in case the Sentence shall be given against
the Claimers.

XIV.
And whereas the Masters of Merchants Ships, No Master or Mariner of a Ship
taken, to be used cruelly, or tortured.
and likewise the Mariners and Passengers, do sometime suffer many Cruelties
and barbarous Usages, when they are brought under the power of Ships which take
Prizes in time of War, the Takers in an inhumane manner Tormenting them,
thereby to extort from them such Confessions as they would have to be made, It
is Agreed, That both his Majesty and the Lords the States General, shall by the
severest Proclamations or Placaets, forbid all such heinous and inhumane
Offenses, and as many as they shall by lawful Proofs find guilty of such Acts,
they shall take care that they be punished with due and just Punishments, and
which may be a Terror to others; And shall Command that all the Captains and
Officers of Ships, who shall be proved to have committed such heinous
Practices, either themselves or by instigating others to act the same, or by
conniving while they were done, shall (besides other Punishments to be
inflicted proportionably to their Offenses) be forthwith deprived of their
Offices respectively; If they have been Tortured, the Ship and Lading shall be
free.
And every Ship brought up as Prize, whose Mariners or Passengers shall have
suffered any Torture, shall forthwith be dismissed and freed, with all her
Lading, from all further Examination and Proceedings, against her, as well
Judicial as otherwise.

XV.
It is also Agreed, Neither Parties Subjects to take Commissions from a third
Party.
That the like severity of Punishments shall be inflicted upon those, who
contrary to the meaning of the One and twentieth Article of the Treaty of Peace
Concluded at Breda, shall take Commissions from Enemies, to seize the Ships of
either Allie (or Party) contrary to what is Provided in the said Article.

XVI.
Lastly, To be Ratified within Two months;
It is Agreed and Concluded, That this present Treaty, and all and singular the
things therein contained, shall be with all convenient speed on both Sides
Ratified and Confirmed, and that the Ratifications thereof shall be within Two
months from the Date hereof, rightly and reciprocally Exchanged between both
Parties; And Copies to be sent to all Colonies, etc.
And also that the said Treaty shall within One month after such Exchanging of
the Ratifications, be delivered in due and authentic Form to the Governors of
the English East India and Africa Companies, and to the Directors of the Dutch
East and West India Companies, and shall with the first Convenience be also
sent by his said Majesty, and by the said Lords the States, to their respective
Governors and Commanders in Chief of their Colonies and Plantations in every
Part of the World out of Europe, to the end that it may be by them, and all
others within their Domions and under their Power, punctually observed and
fulfilled.

The Form of the Passport (or Sea-brief) to be asked of, and given by the Lord
High Admiral, or by those to whom the Exercise of Admiralty-Jurisdiction is
ordinarily committed, or by the Mayor or other chief Magistrate, or by the
Commissioners, or other principal Officers of the Customs in their respective
Ports and Places within His Majesty's Dominions, to the Ships and Vessels
Sailing out thence, according to the Purport of the Fifth Article.
TO all unto whom these Presents shall come, Greeting. We (...) Lord High
Admiral of (...) We (...) Lords Commissioners Executing the Office of the Lord
High Admiral of (...) or We (...) Judge of the High Court of the Admiralty of
(...) (...) or We (...) the Mayor, or other Magistrate of (...) or We (...)
Commissioners, or principal Officers of the Customs in the City or Port of
(...) Do Testify and make known, That (...) Master or Commander of the Ship
called the (...) (...) has appeared before Us, and has declared by solemn
Oath, That the said Ship or Vessel containing about (...) Tons, of which he is
at present Master or Commander, does belong to the Inhabitants of (...) within
the Dominions of the Most Serene and Mighty Prince, the King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. So help him God. And
in regard it would be most acceptable to Us, that the said Master or Commander
be assisted in his just and lawful Affairs, We do request you, and every of
you, wheresoever the said Master or Commander shall arrive with his Ship, and
the Goods Laden on Board and carried in her, that you would please to receive
him courteously, and use him kindly, and admit him, upon paying the lawful and
usual Customs and other Duties, to enter into, remain in, and pass from your
Ports, Rivers, and Dominions, and there to enjoy all kind of Right of
Navigation, Traffic, and Commerce, in all Places where he shall think fit;
Which We shall most willingly and readily acknowledge upon all Occasions:

In Testimony and Confirmation whereof, We have with Our Hand Signed these
Presents, and caused them to be Sealed with Our Seal: Dated at (...) (...) in
(...) the (...) day of (...) in the Year of our Lord (...)
The Form of the Passport (or Sea-brief) to be asked of, and given by the
Burgermasters of the Cities and Ports of the United Netherlands, to the Ships
or Vessels Sailing from thence, according to the Purport of the Fifth Article.
TO the most Serene, most Illustrious, most Mighty, most Noble, most Honorable,
and most Prudent Emperors, Kings, Governors of Commonwe^lths, Princes, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, Lords, Burgermasters, Schepens, Counselors, Judges, Officers,
Justices, and Rulers of all Cities and Places, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular, to whom these Presents shall be shown; We the Burgermasters and Rulers
of the City of (...) do Certify, That (...) Master or Skipper of the Ship
(...) appeared before Us, and declared by solemn Oath, That the said Ship
called the (...) containing about (...) Lasts, of which he is at present Master
or Skipper, belongs to the Inhabitants of the United Netherlands: So help him
God. And in regard it would be most acceptable to Us, that the said Master or
Skipper be assisted in his just and lawful Affairs, We do request you and every
of you, wheresoever the said Master or Skipper shall arrive with his Ship, and
the Goods Laden on Board and carried in her, that you would please to receive
him courteously, and use him kindly, and admit him, upon paying the lawful and
usual Customs and other Duties, to enter into, remain in, and pass from your
Ports, Rivers, and Dominions, and there to enjoy all kind of Right of
Navigation, Traffic, and Commerce, in all Places where he shall think fit;
Which We shall most willingly and readily acknowledge upon all Occasions:

In Testimony and Confirmation whereof We have caused the Seal of Our City to
be hereunto put: Dated at (...) in (...) the (...) day of (...) in the Year of
our Lord (...)
In Testimony and Confirmation of all and singular the Premises, We the
Commissioners of his Majesty and the Lords the States General aforesaid, being
sufficiently Empowered thereunto, have to these Presents Subscribed Our Names,
and Sealed them with Our Seals, At London, the First day of December, 1674.
Tho. Culpeper G. Downing Richard Ford Will. Thomson John Jollife John Buckworth
J. Corver G. Sautyn Samuel Beyer And. Van Vossen P. Duvelaer M. Michielzen.


Explanatory Declaration upon certain Articles of the Marine Treaties,
Concluded between His Majesty and the States General of the United Provinces,
Febr. 17. 1667/8, and December. 1. 1674.
WHereas some Difficulty has arisen concerning the Interpretation of certain
Articles, as well in the Treaty Marine which was Concluded the First day of
December 1674, as in that which was Concluded the 17th of Febuary 1667/8,
between his Majesty of Great Britain on the one Part, and the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries on the other, relating to the Liberty
of their respective Subjects to Trade unto the Ports of each others Enemies; We
Sir William Temple Baronet, Ambassador Extraordinary from his said Majesty of
Great Britain, in the Name, and on the Part of his said Majesty; and We William
Van Heuckelom, Daniel Van Wyngaerden, Lord of Werckendam, Gaspar Fagel,
Counselor and Pentioner of Holland and West-Friesland, John de Mauregnault,
John Baron of Reed, and Renswoude, William de Haren, Gretman of the Bilt,
Henry Ter Borgh, and Luke Alting, Deputies in the Assembly of the said States
General for the States of Guelderland, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, Friesland,
Overissell, Groningen, and the Omlands, in the Name, and on the Part of the
said States General, have Declared, as We do by these Presents Declare, That
the true Meaning and Intention of the said Articles, is, and ought to be, That
Ships and Vessels belonging to the Subjects of either of the Parties, can and
might, from the Time that the said Articles were Concluded, not only Pass,
Traffic and Trade from a Neutral Port or Place to a Place in Enmity with the
other Party, or from a Place in Enmity to a Neutral Place, But also from a Port
or Place in Enmity, to a Port or Place in Enmity with the other Party, whether
the said Places belong to one and the same Prince or State, or to several
Princes or States, with whom the other Party is in War. And We declare, That
this is the true and genuine Sense and Meaning of the said Articles, pursuant
whereunto We understand, That the said Articles are to be observed and executed
on all occasions, on the Part of his said Majesty and the said States General,
and their respective Subjects; Yet so, that this Declaration shall not be
alleged by either Party for Matters which happened before the Conclusion of
the late Peace in the Month of February 1673/4. And We do promise, That the
said Declaration shall be Ratified by his said Majesty, and by the said States
General, and that within Two months, or sooner if possible, reckoning from the
day and date of this Declaration, the Ratifications of the same shall be
brought hither to the Hague, to be here Exchanged.

In witness whereof We have Signed these Presents at the Hague, this 30th day
of December 1675. (L.S.) W. Temple. (L.S.) W. Van Heuckelom. (L.S.) D. Van
Wyngaerden. (L.S.) Gasp. Fagel. (L.S.) Jo. Mauregnault. (L.S.) John Baron van
Reed vry Here van Renswoude. (L.S.) W. Haren. (L.S.) H. Ter. Borgh. (L.S.) L.
Alting.


Capitulations and Articles of Peace between the Majesty of the King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc. and the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, as they
have been Augmented and Altered in the Times of several Ambassadors.
ACcording to my Imperial Command let it be observed, and let no Act be
permitted contrary hereunto. MAHOMET.

THE Command of this Sublime, and Lofty, Imperial Signature, preserved and
exalted by Divine Providence, whose Triumph and Glory is renowned through all
the World.

By the Favor of the Nourisher of all things, and Mercy and Grace of the
Merciful, I that am the powerful Lord of Lords of the World, whose Name is
formidable upon Earth, giver of all Crowns of the Universe, Sultan Mahomet Han,
Son of Sultan Ibrahim Han, Son of Sultan Ahmet Han, Son of Sultan Mahomet Han,
Son of Sultan Murat Han, Son of Sultan Selim Han, Son of Sultan Soliman Han,
Son of Sultan Selim Han.

To the Glorious amongst the great Princes of Jesus, reverenced by the high
Potentates of the People of the Messiah, sole Director of the important Affairs
of the Nazarene Nation, Lord of the Limits of Decency, and Honor of Greatness
and Fame, Charles the Second, King of England and Scotland, that is, of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, whose End and Enterprises may the Omnipotent God
conclude with Bliss and Favor, with the Illumination of his holy Will.

In Times past the Queen of the aforesaid Kingdoms sent diverse of her esteemed
Gentlemen, and Persons of Quality, with Letters and Ships to this Imperial High
Port (the Refuge of the Princes of the World, and the Retreat of the Kings of
the whole Universe) in the happy Times of famous memory of my Ancestors now
placed in Paradise, whose Souls be replenished with Divine Mercy; which
Gentlemen and Presents were gratefully accepted, making Declaration, and
offering in the Name of the said Queen, an entire good Peace, and pure
Friendship, and demanding that their Subjects might have leave to come from
England into our Ports. Our said Ancestors of happy memory did then grant their
Imperial License, and gave into the hands of the English Nation diverse especial
and Imperial Commands, to the end that they might safely and securely come and
go into these Dominions, and in coming or returning either by Land or Sea in
their Way and Passage, that they should of no man be molested or hindered. After
which Time in the Days of our Grandfather Sultan Mahomet Han of famous memory
(unto whose Soul be granted Divine Absolution) it being anew desired, That the
Subjects, Merchants, and their Interpreters, might freely and securely come,
Merchandise, and Negotiate through all the Parts of this Imperial Dominion, and
that such Capitulations, and other Privileges, and Imperial Commands, as had
been granted unto the Nation of the Kings and Princes in Peace and Amity with
this high Port, as France, Venice, Poland, and others, might also be granted to
the Subjects of the said Queen, and all others coming under the English Banner;
in confirmation of which Request, were given and confirmed by our Ancestors of
famous memory, the Imperial Capitulations and Privileges succeeding, to say,
It is Commanded, etc.

I.
FIrst, That the said Nation, Our Ships may Trade in all Parts, etc.
and the English Merc^ants, and any other Nation or Merchants which are or
shall come under the English Banner and Protection, with their Ships small and
great, Merchandise, Faculties, and all other their Goods, may always pass safe
in our Seas, and freely and in all security may come and go into any part of
the Imperial Limits of our Dominions in such sort, that neither any of the
Nation, their Goods and Faculties shall receive any hindrance or molestation
from any person whatsoever.

II.
The said Nation shall and may in like manner freely and securely come and go
by Land through all the Imperial Limits of our Dominions, Travel freely.
so that neither to their Persons, Beasts, Goods, or Faculties, shall any
trouble or Impediment be given, nor any Injury be done unto them, but they
shall always at their own pleasures safely and securely Traffic in all parts
of our Dominions.

III.
And if it happen that any of the said Nation coming into our Dominions by
Land, The same.
or passing into any other Country shall be stayed or Arrested by any of our
Ministers, such persons shall be set free and at liberty, and afterward shall
receive no hindrance in his Journey.

IV.
All English Ships or Vessels, small or great, shall and may at any time safely
and securely come and Harbor in any of the Scales and Ports of our Dominions,
and likewise may from thence depart at their pleasure, without detention or
hindrance of any man.

V.
And if it shall happen that any English Vessel, Distress of Ships.
great or small, fall into any Misfortune, danger of Sea, or any other
Necessity, all the Vessels, as well Imperial, as belonging to private Men, that
shall be near or present, as also all others that inhabit the Seas, shall give
them help and succor; and being come into our Ports or Scales, they shall
freely stay in them as long as they please, Freedom to take Provisions.
and for their Money provide for them of all Necessaries, and Provision, and
may take Water without the let or hindrance of any man.

VI.
And if it shall happen that any of their Ships shall have suffered Shipwreck,
Cases of Shipwreck.
or been broken, or in distress, shall be cast upon any Coast of our Dominions;
in which case all Beglerbegs, Caddees, Governors, Ministers, and other our
slaves, shall give them all assistance, succor and help; and whatsoever Goods
and Faculties shall be saved or recovered in the said Ships, shall be restored
to the English, and if they shall be informed that any part of their Goods and
Faculties shall be stole or taken away, our said Ministers with all diligence,
shall make sufficient Search and Examination to find out and recover the Goods,
and restore them to the English.

VII.
The English Merchants, Interpreters, Brokers, The English and their Dependants
to Travel freely.
and all other Subjects of that Nation, whether by Sea or Land, may freely and
safely come and go in all the Ports of our Dominions, or returning into their
own Country, all our Beglerbegs, Ministers, Governors, and other Officers,
Captains by Sea of Ships, and others whomsoever our Slaves and Subjects, we
Command that none of them do or shall lay hands upon their Persons or
Faculties, or upon any pretense shall do them any hindrance or Injury.

VIII.
If any Englishman, either for his own Debt, One Englishman not to answer for
the Debt of another, unless he be his Surety by Hoget.
or for Suretiship, shall absent himself, or make escape away, or shall be
Bankrupt, the Creditor shall only pretend his Debt upon his own Debtor, and not
of any other English; and if the Creditor have not authentic Hoget or Bill of
Suretiship made by an Englishman, he shall not pretend his Debt of any other
Englishman.

IX.
In all Causes, Businesses and Occasions which shall occur between the said
Nation, their Merchants, Interpreters and Brokers, or Servants, and any other
whatsoever, that is to say, In selling or buying, in paying or receiving, in
giving or taking Security, In all Businesses nothing of force without Hoget.
or Pledge, Debt or Credit, and all other such things which appertain to the
Ministers of the Law and Justice, they may always (if they please) in such
Occasions go to the Caddee, who is the Judge of the Law, and there make a
Hoget, or public authentic Act with Witness, and Register the same, and take
a Copy of the same to keep by them, to the end that if in the future any
Difference or Pretense shall arise between the said Parties, they may both have
a recourse to the said Hoget and Act. And when the Pretense shall be
conformable to the tenor of the Hoget Registered, then it shall be accordingly
thereunto observed: And if the Plaintiff has not in his hands any such
authentic Hoget, but only brings partial Witness, which makes Cavils or
Pretenses, our Ministers shall not give ear to them, but observe the written
authentic Hoget.

X.
And if any one within our Dominions shall accuse any Englishman to have done
him wrong, No Plea to be made against an Englishman without knowledge of the
Ambassador or Consul.
and shall therefore raise any Pretense upon him by violent or partial Witness,
our Ministers shall not give ear unto them, nor accept them, but the Cause
shall be advised to the Ambassador or Consul Resident of the English Nation, to
the end that the Business may be decided with his knowledge, and in his
presence, that the English may always have recourse to their defense and
protection.

XI.
If any Englishman, No Englishman to be molested for another without being
Pledge.
having committed an Offense, shall make his escape, or absent himself, no
other Englishman, not being Pledge, shall be taken or molested for him.

XII.
All Englishmen, Englishmen not to be Slaves.
or Subjects of England, which shall be found Slaves in our State, or shall be
demanded by the Ambassador or Consul, the Cause shall be duly Examined, and
such persons as are found truly to be Subjects of England shall be set free,
and delivered to the Ambassador or Consul.

XIII.
All Englishmen, No Harach demanded.
and all other Subjects of the Crown of England, which shall dwell or reside in
our Dominions, whether they be married or single, may buy, sell, and Traffic,
and of them shall no Harach, or Head-money be demanded.

XIV.
The English Ambassador, Resident in Aleppo, The Ambassadors power to
coustitute Consuls.
Alexandria, Tripoli of Suria, or Tunis, Algier, Tripoli of Barbary, in Smyrna,
the Ports of Cairo, or any other Parts of our Dominions, may at their pleasure
establish their Consuls, and in like manner remove them, or change and appoint
others in their places, and none of our Ministers shall oppose, or refuse to
accept them.

XV.
In all Causes concerning Law and Justice between the English Nation and any
other, No Process without the Interpreter.
in the absence of their Interpreters, the Judges, nor any other of our
Ministers, shall not proceed to give Sentence.

XVI.
If there happen any Controversy amongst themselves, The Turks not to meddle
in Differences between the English.
the Decision thereof shall be wholly left to their own Ambassador or Consul,
according to their own Right and Laws, and with no such Causes our Ministers
shall intermeddle.

XVII.
Our Armada of Galleys, Ships, or any other Vessels of our Empire, Our Ships
not to be detained at Sea by the Turks Armada.
which at Sea meet, or find any English Ship, they shall not do them, nor
suffer to be done to them the least injury or trouble; nor shall they stay
them, demand, pretend, or take any thing from them, but shall salute and show
good and mutual Friendship the one to the other, without offense.

XVIII.
All those particular Privileges and Capitulations, All Privileges granted to
other Nations, granted also to the English.
which in former Times have been granted to the French, Venetians, or any other
Christian Nation, whose King is in Peace and Friendship with this Port, in like
manner, the same were granted and given to the said English Nation; to the end,
that in time to come, the Tenor of this our Imperial Capitulations may be
always observed by all men; and that none may, in any manner, upon any
pretense, presume to contradict or violate it.

XIX.
If the Pirates, Against Turkish Pirates.
or Levents, who infest the Seas with their Frigates, shall be found to have
taken any English Vessel, or to have robbed or spoiled their Goods and
Faculties: Also if it shall be found, that in any of our Dominions, any shall
have violently taken Goods of any Englishman, our Ministers shall with all
diligence seek out such Offenders, and severely punish them, and cause that all
such Goods, Ships, Moneys, and whatsoever has been taken away from the English
Nation, shall be presently, justly, and absolutely restored to them.

XX.
All our Beglerbegs, Begs, Captains, Masters of Imperial Ships, and other
private Judges, Governors, Customers, Farmers, and all our Ministers, Subjects
and Slaves, shall always obey and keep the Tenor of these our Sworn
Capitulations, and shall with all observance respect the Friendship and good
Correspondence established on both Parties, every one in particular taking
especial care not to commit any Act contrary thereunto. And as long as the said
Queen of England, according to this present Agreement of sincere Friendship,
and good Correspondence, shall show her self, and remain with us in Peace,
Friendship, and League, firm, constant, and sincere; We do promise also on our
Parts reciprocally, that this Peace, Friendship, Articles, Capitulations, and
Correspondence in the forewritten Form, shall be for ever of us maintained,
observed, and respected; and of no man any part thereof shall be contradicted
or infringed: All which abovementioned Articles of Peace and Friendship were
Concluded, Signed, and an Imperial Capitulation granted and confirmed by our
Ancestors of happy memory.

Since which time his Majesty of England, James, deceased in the time of our
Grandfather of happy memory, Sultan Achmet Han, having sent unto our Imperial
Throne his Ambassadors, Letters and Presents, which were most acceptable, and
desired that the already Contracted Peace and Friendship, and good
Correspondence made with our Grandfathers, and the Capitulations, Articles, and
Privileges above written, should be again Ratified, and the said Peace and
Friendship renewed; farther requesting, that certain Articles very necessary
should to the same Capitulations be added. The Desire of his Majesty being
deelared in the Imperial Presence of our said Grandfather Sultan Achmet Han,
was presently granted: And he gave express Command and Order, that the said
Peace and Friendship should be renewed and fortified, and the ancient
Capitulations and Privileges confirmed; and that the new desired Articles
should be inserted, and added to the Imperial Capitulations: Granting farther
to the English Nation, all those Articles and farther Privileges which were
given, and written in any Capitulations with other Nations, Potentates, or
Kings in Peace and Amity with this Imperial Port: And by this Imperial Command
he gave order that these his Imperial Commands should be obeyed of all men, and
the Tenor of them duly observed. The Articles which then were granted, and
added to the Capitulations, were these following.

XXI.
That our Ministers shall not demand, No Custom to be taken on Moneys. None to
force change of Moneys.
or take of the said English Nation any Custom, or other Duties of all the
Dollars and Chequeens they, or any under their Banner shall bring in, or
Transport from Place to Place, or carry out of our Dominions; and that neither
Beglerbegs, Begs, Caddees, Treasurers, Mint-Masters, or other, shall take and
demand either Dollars or Chequeens, from the said Nation, to change them into
small Aspers; nor shall give or do them any violence or trouble thereupon.

XXII.
The English Nation, and all those that come under their Banner, their Vessels,
small and great, shall and may Navigate, Traffic, Buy, Sell, and abide in all
Parts of our Dominions; No Ammunition to be carried in our Ships.
and excepting Arms, Gunpowder, and other such prohibited Commodities, they may
load and carry away in their Ships whatsoever of our Merchandises, at their own
pleasure, without the impeachment or trouble of any man; and their Ships and
Vessels may come safely and securely to Anchor at all times, and Traffic at
all times in every part of our Dominions, Provisions may be bought for our
Ships.
and with their Money buy Victuals, and all other things, without any
contradiction or hindrance of any man.

XXIII.
And if any Difference shall happen with any of the said English Nation, by
Suit in Law, No Process to be made without presence of the Ambassador, etc.
or any other Controversy, the Caddees, or any other Ministers of our Justice,
shall not hear nor decide the Cause, until the Ambassador, Consul, or
Druggerman of the said Nation shall be present.

XXIV.
All Differences, Suits of Law above 4000 Aspers, to be heard above.
or Suits of Law depending with the said Nation, which shall exceed the value
of 4000 Aspers, shall always be heard and decided at our Imperial Port.

XXV.
The English Nations Consul, No Consul to be imprisoned, nor dismissed, etc.
or Resident in any Port of our Dominions, being established by the Ambassador,
Resident for the English Nation, our Ministers shall have no power to Imprison,
or Examine, or Seal up their Houses, nor to dismiss or displace them from their
Charge and Office; but in case of any Difference or Suit with the Consul, there
shall be made a Certificate to the Imperial Port, to the end that the
Ambassador may protect and answer for them.

XXVI.
When any Englishman, The Goods of Englishmen dying, not to Escheat, etc.
or other under their Banner, shall die in our Dominions, with their Goods or
Faculties, or any thing that belonged unto them, our Escheators, Caddees, or
other Ministers, upon pretense they are Goods of the Dead, without any Owner,
shall not meddle, take or seize any part thereof, but they shall always be
consigned, and remaining to such other English as the Deceased shall by his
Testament assign; and if he died Intestate, then the English Conful shall take
and receive his Faculties and Goods; and if there be no Consul, the English
Resident there shall take the Possession; and in case there be neither Consul,
nor English, the said Goods and Faculties whatsoever, shall be received into
the custody of the Caddee of that Place; and having advised the English
Ambassador thereof, the said Caddee shall resign all the said Goods unto such
Persons as the Ambassador shall send with Commission to receive them.

XXVII.
All these Privileges, and other Liberties granted to the English Nation, and
those who come under their Protection, by diverse Imperial Commands, whether
before or after the Date of these Imperial Capitulations, shall be always
obeyed and observed, and shall always be understood and interpreted in favor
of the English Nation according to the Tenor and true Contents thereof.

XXVIII.
Neither the Officer called the Cassam, or Gatherer of the Caddees Duties, in
case of Death, nor the Caddee, In cases of Death, the Caddee not to meddle.
shall pretend or take of the said English Nation, any kind of Tenths, or
Casmets, or Fee of Division.

XXIX.
The Ambassador of the King of England, No Janizary, etc. to be imposed on us
without our consent.
or Consul Residing in our Dominion, shall and may take into their Service any
Janizary, or Interpreter, at their own charge and choice; and no Janizary, nor
other our Slaves, shall put themselves, or intermeddle with their Service
against their liking or consent.

XXX.
The Ambassador of his Majesty of England, and Consul, and the English Nation
Residing in our Empire, for the use of their own Persons and Families, For
making Wine.
making Must or Wine in their own Houses, none of our Ministers, Caddees, or
Janissaries, shall molest or hinder them, or demand any Duties or Money, or do
them any violence or impediment.

XXXI.
In the Port of Constantinople, Aleppo, Alexandria, Customs paid in one Port,
are not to be demanded in another.
Scio, Smyrna, and in other Parts of our Dominions, the English Merchants
having paid the Custom of their Merchandise, according to the Tenor of the
Imperial Capitulations, no man shall molest or trouble, or take from them any
thing more; and whatsoever Merchandise shall be laden upon their Ships, and
brought in our Dominions, and Landed at any Scale, they being desirous to lade
it again, and to Transport it to any other Scale or Port, the same Goods
arriving in the second Place and Scale, and being there unladen, neither the
Customer nor Farmers, nor any other our Officers, shall pretend or take again
any Customs, or Gabels of the said Merchandise; that the said Nation may always
freely and securely Trade, and follow their Business.

XXXII.
Neither of the English Nation, No Hassapie Duties.
nor of any Trading under their Banner, there shall not be demanded nor
gathered one Asper, nor any Money in the name of Imposition Hassapie, or
Compositions for Flesh for the Janissaries.

XXXIII.
There having been in Times past a Difference between the Ambassador of the
Queen of England, and the French Ambassador, both Resident in our Port, about
the Merchants of the Dutch Nation; both which Ambassadors sent their Petitions
to our Imperial Stirrup, and made Request, That the said Dutch Merchants,
coming into our Dominions, should pass under their Banner; which Request of
both Ambassadors was granted under our Imperial Seal; notwitstanding Sinan
Bassa, the Son of Cigala, Captain of the Sea, now deceased, as Admiral, and
practiced in Maritime Cases, having advised the Imperial Majesty, that it was
fit and convenient that the Dutch Nation should be assigned to the Protection
of the Ambassador of England, and that it should be so written in their
Capitulations: which Opinion being by all the Viziers approved, by Express
Order, and Imperial Authority, it was Commanded, That the Dutch Merchants of
the Provinces of Holland, Zealand, Friezland, and Guelderland; that is, All
Strangers to come under the English Protection.
the Merchants of those four Provinces, Trading in our Dominions, shall always
come under the Banner of the Queen of England, as all other English do; and
that of all the Goods and Merchandise which they shall or do Import or Export
to and from our Dominions in their Vessels, they shall pay the Duties of
Consulage, and all other Duties, to the Ambassador or Consul of the Queen of
England; and that never hereafter the French Ambassador or Consul shall
insinuate nor intermeddle herein: And accordingly it was Commanded, that for
the time to come it should be ruled and observed, according to this present
Capitulation.

After which, there being arrived another Ambassador at this High Port, sent
from the King of England with Letters and Presents, which were most acceptable,
the said Ambassador did make Request, that certain other necessary Articles
should be added, and written in the Imperial Capitulations; of which the first
was, As in Times past, in the Days of one of our Forefathers of famous memory,
Sultan Soliman Han, there was granted a certain Capitulation and Privilege,
That the Merchants of the Spanish Nation, Portugal, Ancona, Sevilla, Florence,
Catalonia, and all sorts of Dutchmen, and other Merchant-Strangers, might
safely and securely go and come through all the Places of our Dominions, and
Trade and Traffic; granting unto them moreover, that in any part of our Empire
they might establish their Consuls: But it being that every Nation apart was
not able to defray the Charges and Maintenance of a Consul, it was then left to
their will and choice, to come under the Banner of such Ambassador or Consul as
should best like them, provided that it were an Ambassador or Consul of a King
in Peace and Amity with our High Port; upon which Grant, and other Privileges
given them, there were often granted diverse Imperial Commands and
Constitutions, being so desired by Merchant-Strangers, who of their own will
elected to Trade under the Banner and Protection of the Ambassador and Consul
of the King of England. And whilst in all Scales and Ports in these Parts, they
had refuge to the Banner and Protection of the English Consuls: It seems that
the French Ambassador by some means having a new gotten into their
Capitulations, that the said Merchant-Strangers should come under their Banner,
did endeavor to force them in all Scales to their Protection; for which cause
the Controversy was again renewed and referred to our Divan, or Great Council,
which after a due Examination, and a new Election, permitted to the will and
choice of the said Merchants, they again did desire to be under the Protection
of the Ambassador of the King of England, notwithstanding it being made known
to the Imperial Port, that as yet the French Ambassador did not desire to
molest the said Merchants, nor to force them under his Protection, the first
Article written in the French Capitulations, that the Merchant-Strangers should
come under their Protection, was by the Imperial Command made void and
annulled: And to the end, that according to the ancient Custom of the said
Merchant-Strangers, they should always come under the Banner and Protection of
the Ambassador or Consuls of England; and that never hereafter they should be
vexed or troubled by the French Ambassador in this Point, the said Ambassadors
of his Majesty of England having desired that this Particular should be
written, and Enrolled in this new Imperial Capitulation, this present Article
was accordingly Inserted, and by the Imperial Authority it is Commanded, That
for ever in time to come, Merchants of the said Princes, in the mentioned Form,
and according to this Imperial Command in their hand, shall always be under the
Banner and Protection of the Ambassador and Consuls of England.

XXXIV.
There shall never be permitted or granted any Imperial Commands contrary to
the Tenor and Articles of this Imperial Command or Capitulation, No Imperial
Command contrary to these Articles to be granted.
nor in prejudice of this our Peace and Amity, but in such occasion the cause
shall first be certified to the Ambassador of England Residing at the Port; to
the end that he may answer and object any scandalous Action, or other Pretense,
which might infringe the Peace and League.

XXXV.
The English Merchants of all the Merchandise which they shall bring or
Transport in their Ships, For enforcing Consulage.
having paid the Custom, they shall also pay the Right of Consulage to the
English Ambassador or Consul.

XXXVI.
The English Merchants, Permission to Trade in all Parts of the Turks Dominions.
and all under their Banner, shall and may safely, throughout our Dominion,
Trade, Buy, Sell, (except only Commodities prohibited) all sorts of
Merchandise; likewise either by Land or Sea they may go and Traffic, or by the
way of the River Tanais in Moscovia, or by Russia, and from thence may bring
their Merchandise into our Empire; also to and from Persia they may go and
Trade, and through all that part newly may go and Trade, and through those
Confines, without the impediment or molestation of any of our Ministers; and
they shall pay the Custom, and other Duties of that Country, and nothing more.

XXXVII.
The English Merchants, Three per Cent. Custom.
and all under their Banner, shall and may safely and freely Trade and
Negotiate in Aleppo, Cairo, Scio, Smyrna, and in all Parts of our Dominions;
and according to our ancient Customs of all their Merchandise, they shall pay
Three, in the Hundred for Custom, and nothing more.

XXXVIII.
The English Ships which shall come to this our City of Constantinople, Vessels
forced by Weather.
if by fortune of Seas, or ill Weather they shall be forced to Coffa, or to
such like Port, as long as the English will not unlade and sell their own
Merchandise and Goods, no man shall enforce them nor give them any trouble or
annoyance; but in all Places of danger, the Caddees, or other of our Ministers,
shall always protect and defend the said English Ships, Men, and Goods, that no
damage may come unto them, and with their Money may buy Victuals and other
Necessaries; and desiring also with their Money to hire Carts or Vessels, which
before were not hired by any other, to Transport their Goods from Place to
Place; no man shall do them any hindrance or trouble whatsoever.

XXXIX.
The English Nation, Goods not Landed, to pay no Custom.
of all the Merchandise which in their Ships shall be brought to
Constantinople, or to any other part of our Dominions, which they shall not
desire of their own accord to Land or Sell, of such Goods there shall not be
demanded or taken any Custom at arrival at any Port; and having Landed their
Merchandise, and paid their Customs and other Duties, they may quietly and
safely depart without the molestation of any man.

XL.
In regard English Ships coming into our Dominions, Idem.
do use oftentimes to touch in some part of Africa, and there take in Pilgrims
and Mohammedan Passengers to Transport them to Alexandria; and arriving at that
Port, it seems that the Customers and other Officers do pretend to take
Custom of all Goods which are found in their Ships, before the Merchants are
willing to Land any; by occasion of which molestation they have forborne to
Transport any Pilgrims. And in like manner, their Ships which come to
Constantinople, and carry diverse Merchandise, to Transport part thereof to
other Places, the Customers and Farmers would enforce to Land, and pretend to
take Custom thereof: Wherefore we do Command, That all the English Ships which
with their Merchandise shall come into this Port of Constantinople, Alexandria,
Tripoli of Suria, Scanderoon, or into any Port whatsoever of our Empire;
according to use, they shall pay only Custom of such Goods, which with their
own will they shall design to sell, and such other Merchandise as they
discharge not from their Ships willingly, our Customer shall not demand, nor
take Custom, nor other Duties, but they may Transport them whithersoever they
please.

XLI.
And if it shall happen that any of the said English Nation, Matters of
Manslaughter.
or any under their Banner, shall commit Manslaughter, Bloodshed, or any other
like Offense, or that there shall happen any Cause appertaining to the Law or
Justice, until the Ambassador or Consul shall be present to Examine the Cause,
the Judges, nor other Ministers, shall not Decide nor give any Sentence, but
such Controversy shall always be declared in the presence of the Ambassador or
Consul, to the end that no man be Judged or Condemned contrary to the Law, and
the Capitulations.

XLII.
Whereas it is written in the Imperial Capitulations, that the Goods Landed out
of any English Ship, which shall come into our Dominions, and pay Custom, ought
also to pay the Duty of Consulage to the English Ambassador or Consul,
Foreigners Consulage to be paid.
it seems that diverse Mohammedan Merchants, Sciots, and other Merchants in
Peace and Amity with this Imperial Port, and other Merchant-Strangers, do deny
and refuse to pay the Right of Consulage; wherefore it is Commanded, That all
the Merchandise which shall be Laden upon their Ships, and have paid Custom, be
they Goods of whomsoever, according to ancient Imperial Capitulations, they
shall pay the Right of Consulage to the Ambassador or Consul of England without
any contradiction.

XLIII.
That English Merchants which Trade at Aleppo, Silk to pay the Custom as
Venetians and French.
and those under their Banner, of all the Silk which they shall buy, and Lade
upon their Ships, shall pay the Custom and other Duties, as the French and
Venetian Merchants do pay, and not one Asper or Farthing more.

XLIV.
As the Ambassadors of the King of England, which shall be Resident in this
Imperial Court, are the Representatives and Commissioners of the Person of his
Majesty, so the Interpreters are to be esteemed the Commissioners of the
Ambassador: therefore for such matter as the Interpreters shall Translate or
Speak in the Name, Interpreters to have License to speak the sense of the
Ambassador, or Consul.
or by the Order of the Ambassador, it being found that that which they have
Translated be according to the Will and Order of the Ambassador or Consul, they
shall be always free from any Imputation or Punishment: And in case they shall
commit any Offense, our Ministers shall not put any of the said Interpreters in
Prison, nor beat them without knowledge of the Ambassador or Consul. Druggermen
dying, etc.
In case any of the English Interpreters shall die, if he be an Englishman, all
his Goods or Faculites shall be possessed by the Ambassador or Consul of
England; but if he shall be a Subject of our Dominion, they shall be consigned
to his next Heir, and having no Heir, they shall be taken into our Exchequer.
And as in this Particular, so also in all other the abovementioned Articles
and Privileges granted by our Forefathers of happy memory, it is expressly
Commanded and Ordained, That all our Slaves shall ever obey and observe this
Imperial Capitulation, and that the Peace and Amity shall be respected and
maintained, without any violation whatsoever.

XLV.
Since which time of our Forefathers of famous memory, No Command valid against
the Capitulations.
and the grant of these abovementioned Capitulations, Articles and
Establishment of Peace and Amity, the said King of England having in the time
of our Grandfather of happy memory, Sultan Mahomet Han, sent one his well
desired Ambassador, a Person of Quality, to this high Port, to Confirm this
Peace, Articles and Capitulations: which Ambassador did declare, That
oftentimes there were to diverse Persons Imperial Commands granted,
surreptitiously procured contrary to the Tenor and Articles of the Imperial
Capitulations; which being without our knowledge presented to our Judges and
Governors, and the Dates of such Commands being more fresh than those of our
Imperial Capitulations, the Judges and Ministers do put in Execution the
private Commands prejudicial and contrary to these Imperial. To the end
therefore, that for the time to come, such Commands shall not be accepted of
any, but that the Imperial Capitulations might be always observed and
maintained, according to the sincere meaning; the said Ambassador demonstrating
the sincerity of his Majesty and his Request herein to our Imperial knowledge,
which was most acceptable: In conformity thereunto it was expressly ordered,
That all such Commands which already have been, or shall hereafter be granted,
which are or shall be repugnant to the Tenor of this Imperial Capitulation,
whatsoever such Commands shall be, when Presented before our Caddees or other
Ministers, should never be excepted or put into Execution, but that always the
Tenor of the Imperial Capitulations shall be observed: Such Commands to be
taken away.
And whosoever shall Present such Command contrary to the Capitulations, they
shall be taken from him, and in no wise be of any force or validity. In which
time also on the Part of our said Grandfather, all the above-written
Privileges, Articles and Capitulations, were Accepted and Ratified, and the
Peace, Amity, and good Correspondence anciently Contracted, was anew of him
Confirmed and Established.

XLVI.
In the time of the Inauguration of Sultan Osman Han in the Imperial and high
Throne, the King of England did again send a famous and Noble Gentleman, his
Ambassador, with Letters and Presents, which were most acceptable. And the said
Ambassador desiring in the Name of his King and Lord, that the ancient
Capitulation, Articles, and Contracts, granted in the days of our Forefathers,
should be of him renewed and confirmed, and the ancient Peace and Amity anew
fortified and established, which his Request was to the said Sultan Osman most
acceptable. And the ancient Capitulations, Articles, Privileges, herein
written and confirmed, and the long since contracted Peace and Amity by him
promised and accepted.

XLVII.
After whom in like manner, in the days of Sultan Osman Han, the King of
England having again sent unto this high Port his Ambassador, the Excellent and
Honorable Sir Thomas Roe, Knight, with his Letters and Presents, which were
most acceptable; and proffering in the Name of the King his Lord, all good
Terms of Friendship and good Correspondence: And desiring that the ancient
Capitulations, and all the Articles from his Ancestors, and from himself
formerly granted to the English Nation, might be anew confirmed, and the Peace
and League long since between both Parties contracted and ratified; and that
some other Articles very necessary might be added to the Imperial
Capitulations, and diverse others already granted might be renewed, amended, and
in a better Form explained, which his Request and Demand was very acceptable
unto him; and in conformity thereunto, the ancient Imperial Capitulations, and
all the Articles and other Privileges in them often confirmed, and the Peace,
Amity, and good Correspondence contracted in the times of his Ancestors,
Grandfather and Father, and himself confirmed, were again by Sultan Osman then
ratified, established, promised and accepted, whereupon by him there was
express Command given, that for the time to come the Tenor of his renewed
Capitulations should be of every one observed, and that all men should be
careful and respectful to the said Peace and Friendship established and
contracted on both Parts, and that no man should presume to violate, or to do
any Act contrary thereunto, which Ambassador did often declare that the
Caddees, and other of our Ministers, in many Places and Provinces, contrary to
the Imperial Capitulations and Will of the Imperial Majesty, have imposed and
laid diverse Taxes, Burdens, and Moneys upon the said English Nation, and those
under their Banner, for which cause as it is above declared, it being found
necessary to make additions of some new Articles in the said Imperial
Capitulation, of which the said Ambassador made declaration in Writing, and
presented the same to the Imperial Presence: The said Sultan Osman Han with his
Imperial Hand and Seal did presently give express order and command, That in
the time to come all those Articles and Privileges which were already in the
Imperial Capitulations, and those Articles which now are therein by our order
newly added, shall be of all our Subjects and Slaves duly obeyed and observed,
according to the sincere meaning of this our Imperial Capitulations.

XLVIII.
In as much as it is publicly known, That certain Pirates of Tunis and Algier,
contrary to our Imperial Capitulations, Mind and Will, do take and rob in the
Seas the Ships, Merchandise, and Men, Subjects to his Majesty of England, and
of other Kings and States in League with this our Imperial Port, to the great
Damage and Injury of the said English Nation, We do Command, Against the
Pirates of Barbary.
and by these Presents we do Ordain, That several Imperial Commands be given
for the entire restitution of all Goods and Merchandise to the English Nation
so taken away: And that all such English as have been taken and made Slaves, or
imprisoned by the said Pirates, shall be immediately set free. And after the
Date of this our Imperial Capitulations, if it shall be known that the said
Pirates of Tunis and Algier shall rob them again, and shall use and continue
their outrages, and will not restore their Goods and Men, We do Command that
the said Pirates be not received into any Port of our Dominions, especially
into the Scales of Tunis, Algier, Modon, or Coron. Our Beglerbegs, and other
Ministers, shall not suffer them to enter, nor harbor, nor receive them, but
the Beglerbegs, Caddees or other Ministers, shall persecute, banish, and punish
them.

XLIX.
Being informed that in our Dominions many of our Customers and other Officers
in Aleppo, contrary to the Imperial Capitulations, under color of taking
Custom and Rest upon Silk of the English Merchants, have violently taken from
the said Merchants a great Sum of Money. And whereas in the Imperial
Capitulations it is written, No Rest to be taken.
that for Silk which the English shall buy in Aleppo, they shall pay as the
French and Venetian Merchants do, and no more; Notwithstanding the said
Customers, besides the Two and half per cent. for Custom and Rest, have taken
from that Nation a great Sum of Money lately under Name of Rest, wherefore we
Command that this Business shall be examined, and that the said Money be
restored back, and for the time to come, the ancient Custom may be kept; and
that this Nation shall only pay as the French and Venetian do, and that never
be taken one Asper by Name of such Imposition.

L.
Whereas the English Merchants Resident in Galata, ordinarily buy diverse Goods
and Merchandise before they can Lade or send them away upon their Ships, and do
pay unto the Customers the Custom of the said Goods, receiving a Bill, or
Acquittance to have paid the same, and after carry the same Merchandise to
their own Warehouses: In the mean time before they can Load and send away the
said Goods; it happens, that either the Customer dies, or is removed from his
Charge, and the new Customers will not accept of the said Acquittances, but
pretend another Custom, troubling and molesting of them many ways. The
Discharge of one Customer a sufficient Acquittance against him that succeeds.
Wherefore We do Command, That of all the Merchandise which they shall buy, it
appearing really that he has paid once his Custom, the Customer shall accept
of the said Acquittances, and shall not demand of the Merchant a second Custom.

LI.
It being usual to buy in Angora, Chamblets, Mohairs, Silks, and other sorts of
Merchandise which they Transport to Constantinople, and other Places of our
Dominions, and pay their Customs, taking Acquittances for the same, and so put
the Goods into their own Warehouses; And after being desirous to Ship them
away, the Customers do demand again the Custom, Therefore for the time to come,
No Custom to be paid twice.
when the said Merchants shall desire to Lade such Goods, and it be true that
they have already paid their Custom of such Merchandise, they shall not demand
any second or new Customs, Provided that the said Merchants do not mingle their
Goods; which have not paid Custom with those which have already paid Custom.

LII.
The English Merchants of all the Merchandise which they shall bring into our
Dominions, and of the Merchandise which they carry out of our Dominions, as
Silk, Chamblets, and other Goods, having paid the Custom, and not sold the
Goods unto another; And being afterward to Ship it away for Scio, Smyrna, or
any other Scale, and the said Goods there arriving, the Customers and Officers
shall always accept of their Acquittances, which they have in their hands, and
shall not take other Custom of their Merchandise.

LIII.
The English Merchants of all the Commodities which they shall bring to
Constantinople, or to any other Port of our Dominions, and of all such as they
shall Transport, Mestaria to be paid at Galata.
the Mestaragi of Galata and Constantinople shall take their Mestaria or
Brokidge according to the ancient Canon and Usance; that is of such Merchandise
as of old Custom was wont to pay it, of such they shall only take Mestaria,
but of such Merchandise as was not anciently accustomed to pay it, shall not be
taken Mestaria contrary to the ancient Canon. No Duties to be raised above the
accustomed Usance.
Farther upon the English Merchandise, there shall not be made or laid any
Impositions or other Duties, nor from the said Nation shall not be taken one
Asper more, which shall be contrary to the ancient Canon and accustomed Usance.

LIVE.
The English Nation shall and may freely come into all the Ports of our
Dominions to Negotiate and bring in Cloth, Kersie, Spice, Tin, Lead, and all
other Merchandise, and no man shall do them any hindrance or molestation. In
like manner, except only Goods prohibited, they shall and may buy, and Export
all sort of Merchandise without the prohibition or molestation of any man; and
the Customers and other Officers, the said Nation having paid their Custom
according to this Imperial Capitulation, and the ancient Use, shall not demand
of them any thing more. In the time of the happy memory of my Uncle Sultan
Murat Han, the King of England sent his Ambassador Sir Sackville Crow Baronet,
with his Present and Letter, which was received in good part; and the time of
his Embassy being expired, Sir Thomas Bendish arrived to Reside at the Port,
with his Present and courteous Letter, the which was in like manner well
accepted; And the said Ambassador having tendered the Imperial Capitulations
formerly granted, that according to the ancient Canon they might be renewed; It
is hereby again commanded, that all the Points, and particular Articles
therein, be observed and maintained.

LV.
And because contrary to the sense and tenor of them, No Goods to be forced
violently out of the Ships.
the Ships of the English Merchants before they arrive at the Scale, several
Officers did go upon them, and violently force out of the Ships the Goods of
the Merchants, taking away the choice of them without agreeing for the Price,
or making any Account with the Owners.

LVI.
And farthermore the said Merchants having once paid the Custom for their
Goods at the Custom-house, Abuses to be redressed in Customs.
and being desirous to Transport the same Goods into another Scale, the
Customers did hinder and detain them, until he received another second Custom
for them.

LVII.
And whereas in the Imperial Capitulations it is expressed, In hearing of
Lawsuits.
That in all the Differences and Suits with the English Nation our Magistrates
are not to hear nor decide the Cause, unless their Ambassador or Consul be
there present. Of late our Judges without the knowledge of their Ambassador
have Condemned, Imprisoned, and taken Presents from the English Nation, which
is a great Wrong done to them.

LVIII.
Also whereas in the Imperial Capitulations, No Customs upon Money.
it is ordered, That the Customers shall not take any Custom for such Gold and
Dollars as by the English Nation shall be brought in, or carried out of our
Imperial Dominions, and that the Merchants are to give only Three per cent.
for the Custom of their Goods, and no more; the Customers notwithstanding do
pretend to take Custom for their Chequeens and Dollars; and to take more Custom
then their due for their Raw Silks, Raw Silks.
which they buy; and of the Goods which they Land at Scandaroon to carry up to
Aleppo, they demand Six per cent. which unjust Exactions have been heretofore
rectified and redressed with an express Hattersheriffe. But being now again
informed that the said English Merchants are as before wronged, by reason that
the Customers do value and estimate the Goods of the English Merchants more
then they are worth; and though the Customers are to have but Three per cent.
yet by an over valuation of the Goods they take from them Six per cent. And the
Servants of the Custom-house, under pretense of small Duties and Expenses,
wrongfully take great Sums of Money from them; And a greater number of Waiters
being put Aboard the English Ships then heretofore have been used, A greater
number of Guardians not to be put Aboard our Ships then usual.
the Charges thereof are a great Expense to the Merchants and Masters of Ships
that sustain it. To all which we being requested for a Redress, do Command,
That when the Customers do set great values upon their Goods, the Merchant
offering to them according to the Rate of Three per cent. in specie, of the
same Goods, the Customers shall not refuse, but accept the same. And being
desired by the English Ambassador that the above specified Abuses and Injuries
should be rectified, We do Command, That contrary to the Imperial Capitulations
the English Merchants be neither in the foregoing Particulars, nor in any other
manner troubled, nor their Privileges unjustly infringed.

The Ambassador of the King of Great Britain Sir Heneage Finch Knight, Earl of
Winchelsea, Viscount Maidston, Baron Fitzherbert of Eastwell, Lord of the Royal
Manor of Wye, and Lieutenant of the County of Kent and City of Canterbury,
whose end may it terminate with bliss; did arrive with his Presents, and with
all sincerity and affection was accompanied with Letters amply expressing the
good Friendship and Correspondence; and that abovesaid Ambassador has
Presented the Capitulations that they might be renewed according to the Canon.
And that some Articles of great consideration which were before in the
Capitulations, may be more punctually observed, the said Ambassador did desire
that they might be again renewed, and more plainly expressed in the Imperial
Capitulations. His Request was graciously accepted; one of which Points is this.

LIX.
That the Galleys, and other Vessels of the Imperial Fleet, departing the
Dominions of the Grand Signor, and meeting on the Sea with the Ships of
England, they shall in no wise give them molestation, nor detain them in their
Voyage, nor take from them any thing whatsoever, but ought always to show to
one another good Friendship, without doing the least Damage. The Pirates of
Barbary not to Search our Ships for Strangers Goods.
And it being thus declared in the Imperial Capitulations, Beyes and Captains,
who Sail upon the Seas, and those of Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli, meeting
English Ships which Sail from one Port to another, ought not to take from them
any Money or Goods, upon pretense that their Ships Transport Enemies Goods, and
thereupon Search them, and with this color molest, and detain them from
prosecution of their Voyage, so that only at the Mouth of the Castles, and in
the Ports where the Searchers belonging to the Customs usually come Aboard,
their Goods shall be Examined, but on the Sea they shall be liable to no
farther Search or Inquisition.

LX.
And contrary to the Articles of the Imperial Capitulations, Customs being
paid, the Customer not to deny the Teschere.
the Goods of the English Nation ought to receive no molestation, having once
paid the Custom, nor shall the Customers deny to give the Teschere, or
Certificate, that the Custom is paid for; upon complaint hereof We strictly
Command, that the aforesaid Customers do not defer immediately upon demand to
give the Teschere or Certificate.

LXI.
And the Custom being once paid of any sort of Merchandise not sold in that
Port, A second Custom not to be demanded.
which is to be Transported to another Scale, entire credit shall be given to
the Teschere, and a second Custom shall not be so much as farther pretended.

LXII.
In Aleppo, All Goods in English Ships, as well as those of the Growth and
Manufacture of England, not to pay above Three per cent. Custom.
Cairo, and other Parts of the Imperial Dominions, the English Merchants and
their Servants may freely and frankly Trade, and for all their Goods and
Merchandise pay only Three per Cent. according to the former Custom, and the
Imperial Capitulations, whether the Goods be brought by Sea or by Land. And
though the Customers and Farmers, upon the arrival of the Goods at the Scale,
to give molestation and trouble to the English Nation, pretend that the Goods
of the Growth and Manufacture of England ought only to pay Three per Cent. but
Goods brought from Venice and other Places, are obliged to pay more, and with
this color and pretense occasion suits, and troubles to the English; wherefore
in this Point let the Imperial Capitulations be observed as in former Times,
and our Officers ought in no wise to permit the contrary hereunto.

LXIII.
An Englishman becoming indebted, Without Pledge or Suretiship one Englishman
not to answer for another.
or having made himself Pledge for another, who is either failed, or run away;
the Debt ought to be demanded of the Debtor; And if the Creditor have no Hoget
that such an one according to the Law has made himself Pledge and Security,
the Debt shall not be demanded of the other, which Article is already declared
in the Capitulations.

LXIV.
Whereas sometimes an Englishman living in a Country, to free himself from a
Debt, Bill of Exchange not accepted, cannot be enforced.
draws a Bill of Exchange upon another Englishman who has no Effects of his in
his hands; and the Person to whom the Money is payable being a Man of Power and
Authority, brings his Bill, and contrary to the Law, and the Capitulations,
demands and forces payment of the Bill. In which case the Merchant accepting
the Bill, shall be obliged to satisfy it, but not accepting of it, he shall be
liable to no farther trouble.

LXV.
And the Interpreters of the Ambassador of England being free by the Articles
declared in the ancient Capitulations, of all Angaria, or Taxes; Druggermen
free of all Angaria, and the Cassam.
by virtue also of this present Article, when any of the said Interpreters die,
their Goods or Estate shall not be subject to the Custom, but shall be divided
amongst the Creditors, and Heirs.

LXVI.
And the King of England being a true Friend to this our happy Port, Ten of the
Ambassadors Servants free of Harach.
To his Ambassador who Resides here, ten Servants, of what Nation soever, shall
be allowed free from Harach or Taxes, or molestation of any man.

LXVII.
An Englishman turning Mohammedan, The Estate of Principals in the hand of a
Renegade, to be delivered to the Ambassador or Consul.
and having Goods or Estate in his hands belonging to his English Principals,
those Goods or Estate shall be delivered into the hands of the Ambassador or
Consul, that they may convey, and make them good to the true Owners.

The late Ambassador of the King of England who Resided in our high Port being
dead, Sir John Finch Knight, a prudent Man, and one of the Council of Foreign
Trade, is appointed to succeed him in the Charge of the Embassy: And notice
being given to our Noble Presence, that the said Ambassador was arrived with
the Royal Letters and the usual Presents, they were acceptable to us. And the
aforesaid Ambassador having made known to us, that in the Capitulations already
granted, there were several Expressions so full of ambiguity, that they needed
further Explication; and to this end having requested of us, in the behalf of
the King his Master, that the Capitulations might be renewed, and that such
Explications and additional Articles as were necessary might be added to them;
the Request of the said Ambassador being made known to us, we have consented to
it: And we do Command, and be it Commanded, That the Additions desired be added
to the former Capitulations; of which one is,

I.
THE Nisani Sheriff (that is) the Imperial Command, upon which was put the
Hattersheriff (that is) the Hand of the Emperor Sultan Ibrahim Han (whose Soul
rest in Glory) in the Year 1053. which Command declares, that anciently the
English Ships that came to Scanderoon, did pay for every Cloth of London for
the Custom of Scanderoon forty Para's; and for a Piece of Kersey six Para's;
and for every Bundle of Cony-Skins six Para's; and for Tin and Lead, for every
Quintal of Damascus or Cantaro fifty seven Para's and a half for Custom; which
Goods afterward arriving in Aleppo did pay for the Custom of Aleppo, for every
Cloth of London eight Para's, for a Piece of Kersey eight Para's and one sixth,
for every Bundle of Cony-Skins eight Para's and one sixth, for Tin and Lead for
every Battman of Aleppo one Para for Custom. And the said Nation buying Goods
and Transporting them, for what they bought in Aleppo and Exported, did pay for
raw Cloth of Linen or Chilis, for Cordovans, for Horasani Hindi, for every Bale
of each two Dollars and a half; and for every Bale of Cotton-Yarn a Dollar and
a quarter, and for a Bale of Gauls a quarter of a Dollar; and for every Bale of
Silk, ten Osmani (of which fourteen makes a Dollar) for Rhubarb, and such like
Drugs, three Dollars for every hundred, according to the estimate of the chief
in that Art. The said Goods carried to Scanderoon, and there laden upon their
Ships, did pay for Raw Linen Cloth, or Chilis, for Cordovans, each a Dollar and
a half the Bale for the Custom of Scanderoon; for Hora sani Hindi and
Cotton-Yarn, three quarters of a Dollar the Bale, for a Bale of Gauls one
quarter of a Dollar, for Rhubarb and like Drugs, according to the esteem of
Druggists, three quarters of a Dollar the Bale; and nothing more is to be, or
ought to be paid, according to the tenor of this sublime Command: And if the
Tefterdar shall give any Command contrary to this, let it not be obeyed, but be
esteemed invalid: But let every thing be observed conformable to this Imperial
Command and Imperial Capitulations.

II.
The English Merchants for all Goods Exported or Imported paid Three per cent.
only, and never ought to pay an Asper more, it being so specified in the
Imperial Capitulations: But there having in the Scales of Constantinople and
Galata arose Contrasts and Differences with the Customers concerning the
Londra's, or Cloth brought from London, and other sorts of Cloth of the English
Manufacture, they shall pay according to the accustomed and ancient Canon, and
as they have always hitherto paid, that is to say of full Aspers, or short
Money, of which Aspers eighty make a Piece-of-eight, and seventy a Lion Dollar,
Aspers one hundred forty and four, for every Piece of Cloth of English
fabric, whether fine or course, and of whatsoever Price, and the Customer
shall not demand more, nor ought not to take more: But the Cloth that comes
from Holland and other Countries, viz. Londrini, Says and Scarlets, and other
sorts of Cloth not English fabric, shall pay for the future that which
hitherto has been the accustomed Duty. And at the Scale of Smyrna shall be paid
according to the ancient Custom and Use of full Aspers, or short Money, of
which Aspers eighty make a Piece-of-eight, and seventy a Lion Dollar; Aspers
one hundred and twenty for every Piece of English Cloth, whether fine or
course, whether Londra or not, provided that it be of the fabric of England:
And the Customer shall not demand, nor ought not to take, one Asper more, and
let no Innovation be made upon the Custom of the said Cloths.

III.
The Capitulations being known, which commands, that the English having a
Controversy, the import of which is above four thousand Aspers, that the Cause
shall be brought to the Porta, and tried no where else; if at any time the
Caddi or Ministers of any Place would detain any Merchant, or hinder any
Englishman that comes upon a Ship, from prosecuting their Voyage by reason of
any Money imposed upon them, or pretended from them, if the Consul of the Place
will be Security to answer the Pretensions made before the Porta, such Persons
shall be free and at liberty to prosecute their Voyage; and they that pretend
any thing of them, let them come to the Divan for to be judged, and let the
Ambassador defend them from those that come to demand; but if the Consul will
not be Security, then let the Judge of the Place give Sentence.

IV.
In Constantinople, Scanderoon, Smyrna, and Cyprus, and all other Ports and
Scales of my Empire, whatsoever English Ships shall arrive, they shall pay
three hundred Aspers for Anchorage or Port Charges, and there shall not, nor
ought not to be taken or paid one Asper more.

V.
An Englishman coming with Effects, and turning Mussulman, the Ambassador or
Consul knowing that such Effects do belong to other English Merchants, let all
the Money and other Effects be taken out of the hand of such a Mussulman, and
consigned to the Ambassador; to the end that he may transmit them to whom they
do belong, that by this means no Goods of other men may remain in the hands of
such a Mussulman, and let not this be hindered by the means of any Caddi, or
other Judges or Ministers.

VI.
Any of the aforesaid English Nation buying Chamblets, Moehairs, or
Grogran-Yarn in Angora or Begbazar, if they will Export the said Goods from
those Places, after having paid Three per cent. for the Custom of such Goods
they Export, let them not be molested for Skraz Batch, that is, for Passage or
Exportation; and there neither shall nor ought to be taken upon the account of
any such Demand one Asper.

VII.
Any English Merchant being to receive from his Debtor any Sum of Money, if the
said Debt be recovered by the means and help of an Assistant or Chiaus, he that
recovers the Debt shall pay no more than what is paid to other Caddi's, which
is two Aspers only, and not one Asper more.

VIII.
There passing good Correspondence between Us and the King of England; out of
regard of this good Friendship, We do grant that two Ships lading of Figs,
Raisins or Currants may be yearly Exported for the use of his Majesty's
Kitchen, if there be not a dearth and scarcity of such Fruit in the Country;
which we allow to be bought with their Money that Export them at the Scale of
Smyrna, Salonica, or any other Scale or Port of our Empire, paying Three per
cent. Custom, which being paid, no person shall give to them that lade them,
any molestation or hindrance.

IX.
It being represented to Us, that the English have been accustomed hitherto to
pay no Custom nor Mezan for any Silk they bought in Smyrna (that of Prussia and
Constantinople excepted) viz. for the Silk of Giorgia, Persia, or Armenia; if
really there is any such Use and Custom, and the thing is not of prejudice to
the Empire, let there in Smyrna for the future be demanded neither Custom nor
Mezan for the said Silk, but to the English Merchants let all kindness be used
and shown. And the Ambassador having made instance to Us that the foregoing
Articles might be put into the Capitulations, his Request is granted, and
conformable to the former Imperial Sign and Capitulation, let now in conformity
of what was passed, and of my Imperial Command, be renewed and granted this
present Imperial Capitulation: which We command so long as Charles the Second
King of England (whose end may it terminate in happiness) maintains good
Friendship and Correspondence with Us, according to what has been maintained
with our Ancestors, and to which We on our Part are not wanting, with all
tenderness entertaining this Friendship.

And we do Swear and Promise by Him that has Created the Heaven and the Earth,
and all the Creatures; by the Creator the one God We do Promise, that nothing
shall be done contrary to this Imperial Capitulation; and accordingly every one
is to obey our Imperial Sign.

Given in the middle of the Moon Gemaziel Akir 1086. in the Imperial City of
Adrianople, being in the Month of September 1675. The Grand Signor writes above
with his own Hand as follows.

Let every thing be observed in Conformity to Our IMPERIAL COMMAND, and
contrary to it let nothing be done.

A Treaty Marine between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince Lewis XIV. the Most
Christian King, Concluded at St. Germains in Lay, the Twenty fourth day of
February 1676/7.
Artic. I.
THat it shall and may be lawful for all and every the Subjects of the Most
Serene and Mighty Prince the King of Great Britain aforesaid, English to have
freedom of Trade to all Places in Friendship or Neutrality with England.
with all Freedom and Safety to Sail, Trade, and Exercise any manner of
Traffic in all those Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates, which are, or at any
time hereafter shall be in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with his said Majesty:
So that they shall not be any ways hindered or molested in their Navigation or
Trade by the Military Forces, nor by the Ships of War, or any other kind of
Vessels whatsoever, belonging either to the Most Christian King, or to his
Subjects, upon occasion or pretense of any Hostility or Difference which now
is, or shall hereafter happen between the said Most Christian King, and any
Princes or People whatsoever, in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with the said King
of Great Britain. The like to the French Subjects.
And likewise, that it shall and may be lawful for all and every the Subjects
of the said Most Christian King, with all Freedom and Safety to Sail, Trade,
and Exercise any manner of Traffic in all those Kingdoms, Countries, and
Estates, which are, or at any time hereafter shall be in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with the aforesaid Most Christian King: So that they shall not be
any ways hindered or molested in their Navigation or Trade, by the Military
Forces, nor by the Ships of War, or any other kind of Vessels whatsoever,
belonging either to the King of Great Britain above mentioned, or to his
Subjects, upon occasion or pretense of any Hostility or Difference which now
is, or shall hereafter happen between his said Majesty and any Princes or
People whatsoever, in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with the said Most Christian
King.

II.
Nor shall this Freedom of Navigation and Commerce be Infringed by occasion or
cause of any War, To extend to all Commodities but Contraband.
in any kind of Merchandises, but shall extend to all Commodities which shall
be carried in time of Peace; those only excepted which follow in the next
Article, and are comprehended under the name of Contraband.

III.
Under this name of Contraband, What Goods are Contraband.
or prohibited Merchandises, shall be comprehended only Arms, Pieces of
Ordnance, with all Implements belonging to them, Fireballs, Powder, Match,
Bullets, Pikes, Swords, Lances, Spears, Halberds, Guns, Mortar-Pieces, Petards,
Grenades, Musquet-Rests, Bandeliers, Saltpeter, Muskets, Musket Shot,
Helmets, Corslets, Breastplates, Coats of Mail, and the like kind of Armature,
Soldiers, Horses, and all things necessary for the Furniture of Horses,
Holsters, Belts, and all other Warlike Instruments whatsoever.

IV.
These Merchandises following shall not be reckoned among prohibited Goods,
(viz.) What Goods shall not be looked upon as Contraband
all kind of Cloth, and all other Manufactures woven of any kind of Wool,
Flax, Silk, Cotton, or any other Material; all sorts of Clothing and Vestments,
together with the Materials whereof they use to be made; Gold and Silver, as
well Coined as not Coined, Tin, Iron, Lead, Copper, and Coals, as also Wheat
and Barley, and all other kind of Corn or Pulse, Tobacco, and all kind of
Spices, salted and smoked Flesh, salted and dried Fish, Cheese, Butter, Beer,
Oils, Wines, Sugars, and all sort of Salt, and in general all Provision which
serves for the nourishment and sustenance of Life; Likewise all kind of Cotton,
Hemp, Flax and ^itch, Ropes, Sails and Anchors, also Masts and Planks, Boards
and Beams, of what sort of Wood soever, and all other Materials requisite for
the building or repairing Ships, but they shall be wholly reputed amongst Free
Goods, even as well as all other Wares and Commodities which are not
comprehended in the next precedent Article; so that the same may be freely
Transported and carried by the Subjects of the Most Serene King of Great
Britain, Freedom of Trade not only from one Place in Neutrality to another, or
from a Neutral Place to one in Enmity, but also from one Port in Enmity to
another likewise in Enmity with either of the Parties;
not only from one Neutral Place to another Neutral Place; or from a Neutral
Port or Place, to a Place in Hostility with the Most Christian King, or from a
Place in Hostility with him to a Neutral Place; but also from one Place in
Enmity with the Most Christian King, to another Port or Place in Enmity with
him; Be it that such Ports or Places do belong to the same Prince or State,
Enmity to another likewise in Enmity with either of the Parties;
or to several Princes or States with whom the Most Christian King shall happen
to be in War: And in like manner, that the same may be freely Transported by
the Subjects of the Most Christian King, not only from one Neutral Place to
another Neutral Place, or from a Neutral Port or Place to a Place in Hostility
with the King of Great Britain, or from a Place in Hostility with him, to a
Neutral Place; But also from one Place in Enmity with the King of Great
Britain, to another Port or Place in Enmity with him; Be it that such Ports or
Places do belong to the same Prince or State, or to several Princes or States
with whom the King of Great Britain shall happen to be in War, Except Places
Besieged or Invested.
except only Towns or Places Besieged, Environed, or Invested, in French,
Blocquees ou Investies.

V.
And that all manner of Differences and Contentions on both Sides, by Sea and
Land, may from henceforth cease and be utterly extinguished; It is Agreed,
Ships coming into any Port, and intending to go further, only to show their
Passports
That all kind of Ships and Vessels whatsoever belonging to the Subjects of his
said Majesty of Great Britain, entering or being entered into any Road or Port
under the Obedience of the Most Christian King, and purposing to pass from
thence, shall be only obliged to show unto the Officers acting in the Ports of
the said Most Christian King, or to the Captains of the Most Christian Kings
Ships, or of Private Men of War (if any happen there to be) their Passport,
commonly called a Sea-Brief, (the Form whereof is added at the end of these
Articles;) nor shall any Money, or any thing else be exacted from them under
that pretense: But if any Ship belonging to the Subjects of his Majesty of
Great Britain, shall in the open Sea or elsewhere, out of the Dominions of the
said Most Christian King, meet the Ships of War of the said Most Christian
King, or Private Men of War of his Subjects, the said Ships of the Most
Christian King, shall keep at a convenient distance, and only send out their
Boat, Ships how to be visited at Sea.
and it shall be lawful for them only with two or three Men to go on Board the
Ships and Vessels of the Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain, that the
Passport (or Sea-Brief) of the Propriety thereof, (according to the Form
hereafter specified) may be shown to them by the Captain or Master of such Ship
or Vessel belonging to the Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain: And the
Ship which shall show the same shall freely pass; and it shall not be lawful to
molest, search, detain or divert the same from her intended Voyage: And all the
Subjects of the Most Christian King shall enjoy in all things the same Liberty
and Immunity, they in like manner showing their Passport (or Sea-Brief) made
according to the Form prescribed at the latter end of this Treaty.

VI.
But if any Ship or Vessel belonging to the English, Ships going to Places in
Enmity with the other Party, to show their Cocquets besides their Passports.
or other Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain, shall be met by any Man of
War making into any Port in Enmity with the Most Christian King; or on the
other Side, if any Ship belonging to the Most Christian King, or others
Subjects of the said Most Christian King, shall be met in her Way making into
any Port under the Obedience of the Enemies of his said Majesty of Great
Britain, such Ship shall show not only a Passport (or Sea-Brief) according to
the Form hereunder prescribed, wherewith she is to be furnished, but also her
Cocquets, expressing the Contents of the Goods on Board, given in the usual
Form by the Officers of the Customs in the Port from whence she came, whereby
it may be known whether she is laden with any Merchandises prohibited by the
third Article of this Treaty.

VII.
But if by the showing the abovesaid Cocquets expressing the Contents of the
Goods on Board, If prohibited Goods be found in a Ship, what to be done.
given in the usual Form by the Officers of the Customs in the Port from whence
she came (concerning the showing whereof it is above Agreed) either Party shall
discover any kind of Merchandises which in the third Article of this Treaty are
declared to be Contraband, or Prohibited, consigned to any Port under the
Obedience of their Enemies, it shall not be lawful to open the Hatches of such
Ship in which the same shall happen to be found, whether she belongs to the
Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain, or of the Most Christian King; nor to
unlock or break open the Chests, Mails, Packs, or Casks in the same; not to
convey away any the least part of the Merchandises, before the whole be first
Landed in the presence of the Officers of the Admiralty, and Inventaried;
neither shall it be any ways lawful to Sell, Exchange, or otherwise to Alienate
the same, until such Prohibited Goods are rightly and lawfully proceeded
against; and that the Judges of the Admiralty have by their respective
Sentences Confiscated the same: The Ship and the other Goods not to be
forefeited.
Provided always, that as well the Ship it self, as the rest of the Commodities
found in the same, which by this Treaty are to be reputed Free, shall not upon
pretense of their being Infected by such Prohibited Goods, be detained, much
less confiscated for lawful Prize; but if not the whole, but a part only of the
Lading consists of Contraband or Prohibited Commodities, and that the Master of
the Ship shall be willing and ready to deliver them to the Captor who seized
the same; in that case the Captor shall not compel the Ship to go out of her
Course to any Port he thinks fit, but shall forthwith dismiss her, and upon no
account hinder her from freely prosecuting her designed Voyage.

VIII.
It is further Agreed, That whatsoever shall be found Laden by the Subjects of
his Majesty of Great Britain, upon any Ship whatsoever belonging to the Enemies
of the most Christian King, although the same be not of the quality of
Contraband Goods, may be Confiscated: But on the contrary, all that which shall
be found in the Ships belonging to the Subjects of his Majesty of Great
Britain, shall be accounted clear and free, Free Ship free Goods, and e contra.
although the whole Lading, or any part thereof, by just Title of Propriety
shall belong to the Enemies of the most Christian King; except always
Contraband Goods; which being Intercepted, all things shall be done according
to the Meaning and Direction of the precedent Articles; and by the same Reason,
whatsoever shall be found Laden by the Subjects of the most Christian King in
any Ship whatsoever belonging to the Enemies of his Majesty of Great Britain,
although the same be not of the quality of Contraband Goods, may be
Confiscated; but on the other Side, all that which shall be found in the Ships
belonging to the Subjects of the most Christian King, shall be accounted clear
and free, although the whole Lading, or any part thereof, by just Title of
Propriety shall belong to the Enemies of his Majesty of Great Britain; except
always Contraband Goods, which being Intercepted, all things shall be done
according to the Meaning and Direction of the precedent Articles: And least any
Damage should by Surprise be done to the one Party who is in Peace, when the
other Party shall happen to be engaged in War, it is Provided and Agreed, That
a Ship belonging to the Enemies of the one Party, and Laden with Goods of the
Subjects of the other Party, shall not Infect or render the said Goods liable
to Confiscation, in case they were Laden before the expiration of the Terms and
Time, hereafter mentioned, after the Declaration and Publication of any such
War; Goods Laden before War is Declared by one of the Parties against a third
Party, not to be forfeited.
(viz.) If the Goods were Laden in any Port or Place between the Places or
Limits called the Soundings and the Naz in Norway, within the space of Six
Weeks after such Declaration; of Two Months between the said Place the
Soundings and the City of Tangier; and of Ten Weeks in the Mediterranean Sea;
or within the space of Eight Months in any other Country or Place of the World;
So that it shall not be lawful to Confiscate the Goods of the Subjects of his
Majesty of Great Britain, taken or seized in any Ship or Vessel whatsoever of
any Enemy of the most Christian King upon that Pretense, but the same shall be
without delay restored to the Proprietors, unless they were Laden after the
expiration of the said Terms of Time respectively; but so that it may not be
lawful for them afterward to carry to Enemies Ports the said Merchandises
which are called Contraband; and for the Reason aforesaid shall not be liable
to Confiscation; neither on the other side shall it be lawful to Confiscate the
Goods of the Subjects of the most Christian King, taken or seized in any Ship
or Vessel whatsoever of an Enemy of his Majesty of Great Britain upon that
Pretense, but the same shall be forthwith restored to the Proprietors thereof,
unless they were Laden after the expiration of the said Terms of Time
respectively; but so that it may not be lawful for them afterward to carry to
Enemies Ports the said Merchandises which are called Contraband, and for the
Reason aforesaid shall not be liable to Confiscation.

IX.
And the more to assure the Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain, and of
the most Christian King, Privateers and Companies to make Satisfaction in case
of Contravention.
that no Injury shall be offered to them by the Ships of War, or Private Men of
War of either Side, all the Captains of the Ships as well of his Majesty of
Great Britain, as of the most Christian King, and all their Subjects who shall
set out Private Men of War; And likewise their Privileged Companies shall be
enjoined not to do any Injury or Damage whatsoever to the other; which if they
do, they shall be punished; and moreover be liable to satisfy all Costs and
Damages by Restitution and Reparation, upon Pain and Obligation of Person and
Goods.

X.
For this cause all the Commanders of Private Men of War shall from henceforth
be obliged before they receive their Commissions, Privateers to give Security.
to enter before a competent Judge, good and sufficient Security, by able and
responsible Men, who have no Part or Interest in such Ship, in the Sum of
Fifteen hundred Pounds Sterling, or Sixteen thousand five hundred Livres, and
when they have above One hundred and fifty Men, then in the Sum of Three
thousand Pounds Sterling, or Three and thirty thousand Livres, that they will
give full Satisfaction for any Damages or Injuries whatsoever, which they or
their Officers, or others in their Services, shall commit in their Courses at
Sea, contrary to this present Treaty, or any other whatsoever, between his
Majesty of Great Britain, and the said most Christian King, and upon the pain
of Revocation and Anulling their said Commissions; in which it shall be always
inserted, that they have given such Security as abovesaid; and likewise it is
Agreed, that the Ship it self shall be also liable to make Satisfaction for
Injuries and Damages done by her.

XI.
His Majesty of Great Britain, and the said most Christian King, being desirous
that the Subjects of each other may be mutually Treated in all Countries under
their Obedience respectively, with the like kindness as their own Subjects,
will give all necessary and effectual Orders, In cases of Prizes, Justice to be
administered.
that Judgments upon Ships and Merchandise taken at Sea, be given according to
the Rule of Justice and Equity, by Judges beyond all Suspicion, and not any
ways concerned in the Cause under Debate. And his Majesty of Great Britain and
the most Christian King, will likewise give strict Orders, that all Sentences
already given, and which shall be hereafter given, be according to the Tenor
thereof duly put in Execution, and obtain their Effect.

XII.
And whenever the Ambassadors, or other Public Ministers of the King of
Great Britain, Residing in the Court of the most Christian King, shall complain
of the unjustness of Sentences which have been given concerning Ships or
Merchandise taken at Sea, In case of Complaint against Sentences upon Prizes,
the French King to cause the said Sentences to be Revised in his Privy Council.
and belonging to the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, then the said most
Christian King on Demand of the said Ambassadors or Ministers of the King of
Great Britain, shall cause the said Sentences to be Reviewed and Examined in
his Privy Council, and shall Confirm or Revoke the Sentences wheresoever given:
And likewise the said most Christian King shall take care that Right be done to
the Party complaining within the space of Four Months, to be accounted from the
Day of making such Demand. In like manner, if the Ambassadors, And the King of
England to appoint Commissioners to the same purpose.
or other Public Ministers of the most Christian King Residing in the Court of
the King of Great Britain, shall complain of the unjustness of Sentences which
have been given concerning Ships or Merchandise taken at Sea, belonging to
Subjects of the said most Christian King, the said King of Great Britain shall
forthwith Commissionate under his Great Seal, Nine of his Privy Council to
Adjudge such Matters, and to Confirm or Revoke the Sentences wheresoever given;
and the said Commissioners shall meet within the space of One Month from the
Day of deliveirng the Complaint: And likewise the King of Great Britain, shall
take care that Right be done the Party complaining within the space of Three
Months, to be computed from the first Day of the meeting of the said
Commissioners.

XIII.
A Suit being Commenced between the Takers of Prizes on the one Part, Sentence
against a Privateer to be put in Execution, notwithstanding his Appeal.
and the Claimers thereof on the other, and a Sentence or Decree being given
for the Party Reclaiming, the said Sentence or Decree, (upon Security given)
shall be put in Execution, notwithstanding the Appeal made by him that took the
Prize: which shall not be observed in case the Sentence shall be given against
the Claimers.

XIV.
And whereas the Masters of Merchant Ships, and likewise the Mariners and
Passengers do sometimes suffer many Cruelties and barbarous Usages, when they
are brought under the power of Ships which take Prizes in time of War, the
Takers in an Inhumane manner tormenting them, thereby to extort from them such
Confessions as they would have to be made, No Master or Seamen to be Tortured.
it is Agreed, That both his Majesty of Great Britain and the most Christian
King, shall by the severest Proclamations or Edicts, forbid all such heinous
and inhumane Offenses, and as many as they shall by lawful Proofs find guilty
of such Acts, they shall take care that they be punished with due and just
Punishments, and which may be a terror to others; and shall command that all
the Captains and Officers of Ships who shall be proved to have committed such
heinous Practices, either themselves, or by instigating others to act the same,
or by conniving while they were done, shall (besides other Punishments to be
inflicted proportionably to their Offenses) be forthwith deprived of their
Offices respectively; Upon proof of Torture, the Ship to be forthwith
Discharged.
and every Ship brought up as Prize, whose Mariners or Passengers shall have
suffered any Torture, shall forthwith be dismissed and freed with all her
Lading, from all further Examination and Proceeding against her, as well
Judicial as otherwise.

XV.
It is also Agreed, Those that take Commissions from the Enemies of either
Party against the other, to be punished.
That the like severity of Punishments shall be inflicted upon those who shall
take Commission from Enemies to Seize the Ships of either Ally or Party.

XVI.
Lastly, It is Agreed and Concluded, This Treaty to be Ratified in Two Months.
That this present Treaty, and all and singular the things therein contained,
shall be with all convenient speed on both Sides Ratified and Confirmed, and
that the Ratifications thereof shall be within Two Months from the Date hereof
rightly and reciprocally Exchanged between both Parties.

Dated at St. Germains in Lay the Twenty fourth day of February, in the Year
of our Lord 1677.
The Form of the Passport (or Sea-brief) to be asked of, and given by the Lord
High Admiral, or by those to whom the Exercise of Admiralty-Jurisdiction is
ordinarily committed, or by the Mayor or other chief Magistrate, or by the
Commissioners, or other principal Officers of the Customs in their respective
Ports and Places within the Dominions of the King of Great Britain, to Ships
and Vessels, according to the Purport of the Fifth Article.
TO all unto whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
We (...) Lord High Admiral of (...) We (...) Lords Commissioners Executing the
Office of the Lord High Admiral of (...) or We (...) the Mayor, or other
Magistrate of (...) or We (...) Commissioners, or principal Officers of the
Customs in the City or Port of (...) Do Testify and make known, That (...)
Master or Commander of the Ship called the (...) has appeared before Us, and
has declared by solemn Oath, That the said Ship or Vessel containing about
(...) Tons, of which he is at present Master or Commander, does belong to the
Inhabitants of (...) within the Dominions of the Most Serene and Mighty Prince,
the King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
So help him God. And in regard it would be most acceptable to Us, that the said
Master or Commander be assisted in his just and lawful Affairs, We do request
you, and every of you, wheresoever the said Master or Commander shall arrive
with his Ship, and the Goods Laden on Board and carried in her, that you would
please to receive him courteously, and use him kindly, and admit him, upon
paying the lawful and usual Customs and other Duties, to enter into, remain in,
and pass from your Ports, Rivers, and Dominions, and there to enjoy all kind of
Right of Navigation, Traffic, and Commerce, in all Places where he shall think
fit; Which We shall most willingly and readily acknowledge upon all Occasions:

In Testimony and Confirmation whereof, We have with Our Hand Signed these
Presents, and caused them to be Sealed with Our Seal: Dated at (...) the (...)
day of (...) in the Year of our Lord (...)
And the like Form of Passport (mutatis mutandis) shall be used by the Subjects
of the most Christian King.

Articles of Peace and Commerce between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. and the Most Illustrious Lords,
the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, and Governors of the famous City and Kingdom of Algiers
in Barbary: Concluded by Arthur Herbert Esquire, Admiral of of his Majesty's
Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas, on the Tenth day of April Old Style, 1682.
Artic. I.
IN the first place it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day, Firm Peace.
and for ever forwards, there be a true, firm and inviolable Peace between the
most Serene King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Christian Faith, etc. and the most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, and
Governors of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, and between all the Dominions and
Subjects of either Side, and that the Ships or other Vessels, and the Subjects
and People of both Sides shall not henceforth do to each other any Harm,
Offense or Injury either in Word or Deed, but shall Treat one another with all
possible Respect and Friendship.

II.
That any of the Ships or other Vessels belonging to the said King of Great
Britain, Liberty of coming in, or Trading to Algiers, paying Ten per Cent.
Custom.
or to any of his Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the Port of Algiers,
or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, there freely to Buy and Sell,
paying the usual Customs of Ten per Cent. as in former Times, for such Goods as
they sell, and the Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on Board
without paying any Duties for the same; And that they shall freely depart from
thence whenever they please, Contraband Goods to pay no Duties at Algiers.
without any stop or hindrance whatsoever. As to Contraband Merchandises, as
Powder, Brimstone, Iron, Planks, and all sorts of Timber fit for Building of
Ships, Ropes, Pitch, Tar, Fusils, and other Habiliments of War, his said
Majesty's Subjects shall pay no Duty for the same to those of Algiers.

III.
That all Ships and other Vessels, English Ships, and all Persons and Goods
whatsoever on Board, to pass the Seas freely
as well those belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of his
Majesty's Subjects, as those belonging to the Kingdom or People of Algiers,
shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffic without any Search, hindrance or
molestation from each other; and that all Persons or Passengers, of what
Country soever, and all Moneys, Goods, Merchandises and Movables, to
whatsoever People or Nation belonging, being on Board of any of the said Ships
or Vessels, shall be wholly free, and shall not be stopped, taken or plundered,
nor receive any harm or damage whatsoever from either Party.

IV.
That the Algier Ships of War or other Vessels meeting with any Merchants Ships
or other Vessels of his said Majesty's Subjects, Manner of Visiting Ships at
Sea,
not being in any of the Seas appertaining to his Majesty's Dominions, may send
on Board one single Boat with two Sitters only, besides the ordinary Crew of
Rowers, and that no more shall enter any such Merchant Ship or Vessel, without
express leave from the Commander thereof, but the two Sitters alone, and that
upon producing a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of
England and Ireland, or of the Lord High Admiral of Scotland, for the said
Kingdoms respectively, or under the Hands and Seals of the Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of any of the said Kingdoms, that the
said Boat shall presently depart, and the Merchant Ship or Vessel shall proceed
freely on her Voyage, and that although for the space of Fifteen Months next
ensuing after the Conclusion of this Peace, the said Commander of the Merchant
Ship or Vessel produce no such Pass, yet if the major part of the Seamen of the
said Ship or Vessel be Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, the said
Boat shall immediately depart, and the said Merchant Ship or Vessel shall
freely proceed on her Voyage; But that after the said Fifteen Months, all
Merchants Ships or Vessels of his said Majesty's Subjects shall be obliged to
produce such a Pass as aforesaid. And any of the Ships of War or other Vessels
of his said Majesty, meeting with any Ships or other Vessels of Algiers, if the
Commander of any such Algier Ship or Vessel shall produce a Pass Firmed by the
chief Governors of Algiers, and a Certificate from the English Consul living
there, or if they have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if for the space of
Fifteen Months next ensuing the Conclusion of this Peace, the major part of the
Ships Company be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to Algiers, then the said
Algier Ship or Vessel shall proceed freely; But that after the said Fifteen
Months, all Algiers Ships or Vessels shall be obliged to produce such a Pass
and Certificate as aforesaid.

V.
That no Commander or other Person of any Ship or Vessel of Algiers shall take
out of any Ship or Vessel of his said Majesty's Subjects, No person to be taken
our of any English Ship, nor Tortured.
any person or persons whatsoever, to carry them any where to be Examined, or
upon any other pretense; nor shall they use any Torture or Violence to any
person of what Nation or Quality soever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel of
his Majesty's Subjects, upon any pretense whatsoever.

VI.
That no Shipwreck belonging to the said King of Great Britain, No Shipwracks
to be Prize, nor the Goods or Men to be Seized.
or to any of his Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging to
Algiers, shall be made or become Prize, and that neither the Goods thereof
shall be Seized, nor the Men made Slaves; but that all the Subjects of Algiers
shall do their best endeavors to save the said Men and their Goods.

VII.
That no Ship, Algerine Ships not to go to Sally, or other Place in Enmity with
the King, to be used against the English.
nor any other Vessel of Algiers shall have permission to be delivered up, or
go to Sally, or any Place in Enmity with the said King of Great Britain, to be
made use of as Corsairs or Sea-Rovers against his said Majesty's Subjects.

VIII.
That none of the Ships or other smaller Vessels of Algiers shall remain
Cruising near or in sight of his Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier,
Algerines not to Cruise in sight of Tangier or other Place of his Majesty's.
or of any other his Majesty's Roads, Havens or Ports, Towns and Places, nor
any ways disturb the Peace and Commerce of the same.

IX.
That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Tripoli, English made Prize by those of
Tunis, etc. not to be sold at Algiers.
or Sally, or of any other Place, bring any Ships, Vessels, Men or Goods
belonging to any of his said Majesty's Subjects, to Algiers, or to any Port or
Place in that Kingdom, the Governors there shall not permit them to be sold
within the Territories of Algiers.

X.
That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain do come to
Algiers, Kings Ships may sell their Prizes at Algiers.
or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom with any Prize, they may freely
sell it, or otherwise to dispose of it at their own pleasure, without being
molested by any: And that his Majesty's said Ships of War shall not be obliged
to pay Customs in any sort; Not to pay any Customs.
and that if they shall want Provisions, Victuals, May buy Provisions.
or any other things, they may freely Buy them at the Rates in the Market.

XI.
That when any of his said Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before Algiers,
The Kings Ships coming to Algiers, Proclamation shall be made, and if after
that any Slaves escape, they shall not be required back, nor be answered for.
upon notice thereof given by the English Consul, or by the Commander of the
said Ships to the chief Governors of Algiers, public Proclamation shall be
immediately made to secure the Christian Captives; And if after that any
Christians whatsoever make their escape on Board any of the said Ships of War,
they shall not be required back again, nor shall the said Consul or Commander,
or any other his Majesty's Subjects be obliged to pay any thing for the said
Christians.

XII.
That from and after the time that the Ratification of this Treaty by the King
of Great Britain shall be delivered to the chief Governors of Algiers, No
English shall be bought sold, or made Slaves at Algiers.
no Subjects of his said Majesty shall be bought or sold, or made Slaves in any
part of the Kingdom of Algiers, The King not obliged to Redeem his Subjects now
in Slavery.
upon any pretense whatsoever. And the said King of Great Britain shall not be
obliged by virtue of this Treaty of Peace to Redeem any of his Subjects now in
Slavery, or who may be made Slaves before the said Ratification; But it shall
depend absolutely upon his Majesty, or the Friends and Relations of the said
Persons in Slavery, without any limitation or restriction of time, to Redeem
such, and so many of them from time to time, as shall be thought fit, agreeing
of as reasonable a Price as may be, with their Patrons or Masters for their
Redemption, without obliging the said Patrons or Masters against their wills to
set any at Liberty, whether they be Slaves belonging to the Beylicque or Gally,
or such as belong to the Bashaw, Dey, Governor, Aga, or any other Persons
whatsoever. English Caprives, when Redeemed, to have abatements of certain Dues.
And all Slaves being his Majesty's Subjects, shall, when they are Redeemed,
enjoy the advantage and benefit of abatements of the Duty due to the Royal
House, and of the other Charges, by paying such reasonable Sums as any Slaves
of other Nations usually pay when they are Redeemed.

XIII.
That if any Subject of the said King of Great Britain happen to die in
Algiers, Goods of English dying at Algiers, not to be Seized.
or in any part of its Territories, his Goods or Moneys shall not be Seized by
the Governors, Judges, or other Officers of Algiers (who shall likewise make no
Enquiry after the same) but the said Goods or Moneys shall be possessed or
received by such person or persons whom the Deceased shall by his last Will
have made his Heir or Heirs, in case they be upon the Place where the Testator
deceased. Their Estates to be kept for their Heirs.
But if the Heirs be not there, then the Executors of the said Will, lawfully
constituted by the Deceased, shall after having made an Inventory of all the
Goods and Moneys left, take them into their custody without any hindrance, and
shall take care the same be remitted by some safe way, to the true and lawful
Heirs; and in case any of his said Majesty's Subjects happen to die, not having
made any Will; English Consul to have a care there of.
the English Consul shall possess himself of his Goods and Moneys upon
Inventory, for the use of the Kindred, and Heirs of the Deceased.

XIV.
That no Merchants being his Majesty's Subjects, English not obliged to buy
Goods against their wills.
and Residing in, or Trading to the City and Kingdom of Algiers, shall be
obliged to buy any Merchandises against their Wills; but it shall be free for
them to buy such Commodities as they shall think fit, No Ships to be obliged to
lade or carry Goods against their will.
and no Captain or Commander of any Ship or Vessel belonging to his said
Majesty's Subjects, shall be obliged against his Will to Lade any Goods to
carry them, or make a Voyage to any Place he shall not have a mind to go to:
And neither the English Consul, nor any other Subject of the said King, English
Consul not obliged to pay the Debts of another Englishman.
shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of his Majesty's Subjects, except
that he or they become Sureties for the same by a public Act.

XV.
That the Subjects of his said Majesty in Algiers, or its Territories, English
to be subject to no Jurisdiction but that of the Dey or Divan. Differences
between the English to be determined by the Consul.
in matter of Controversy, shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction but that
of the Dey, or Duan, except they happen to be at Difference between themselves,
in which case they shall be liable to no other Determination but that of the
Consul only.

XVI.
That in case any Subject of his said Majesty being in any part of the Kingdom
of Algiers happen to Srike, English striking or killing a Turk, to be punished
with no greater severity then a Turk; if he escapes, no other to answer for him.
Wound, or Kill a Turk or a Moor, if he be taken, he is to be punished in the
same manner, and with no greater severity then a Turk ought to be, being guilty
of the same Offense; but if he escape, neither the said English Consul, nor any
other of his said Majesty's Subjects, shall be in any sort questioned and
troubled therefore.

XVII.
That the English Consul now, Liberties of the English Consul.
or at any time hereafter living in Algiers, shall be there at all times with
entire freedom and safety of his Person and Estate, and shall be permitted to
choose his own Druggerman and Broker, and freely to go on Board any Ships in
the Road, as often and when he pleases, and to have the liberty of the Country;
And that he shall be allowed a Place to Pray in, and that no man shall do him
any Injury in Word or Deed.

XVIII.
That not only during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, The English
at all times to have liberty to go away with their Estates.
but likewise if any Breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King
of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Algiers, the said English Consul, and all
other his said Majesty's Subjects Inhabiting in the Kingdom of Algiers, shall
always, and at all times, both of Peace and War, have full and absolute liberty
to depart and go to their own, or any other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel,
of what Nation soever they shall think fit, and to carry with them all their
Estates, Goods, Families and Servants, without any interruption or hindrance.

XIX.
That no Subject of his said Majesty, English Passenger on Board a Ship in
Enmity with Algiers, not to be molested, and so neither an Algerine on Board a
Ship in Enmity with England.
being a Passenger, and coming or going with his Baggage, from or to any Port,
shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on Board any Ship or
Vessel in Enmity with Algiers; And in like manner no Algerine Passenger being
on Board any Ship or Vessel in Enmity with the said King of Great Britain,
shall be any way molested, whether in his Person, or in his Goods which he may
have Laden on Board the said Ship or Vessel.

XX.
That at all times when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britains, English
Admiral to be Saluted first.
carrying his said Majesty's Flag at the Main-Top-Mast-Head, shall appear
before Algiers, and come to an Anchor in the Road, That immediately after
notice thereof given by his said Majesty's Consul, or Officer, from the Ship
unto the Dey and Government of Algiers, they shall in Honor to his Majesty,
cause a Salute of One and twenty Cannon to be Shot off from the Castles and
Forts of the City, and that the said Ship shall return an Answer by Shooting
off the same number of Cannon.

XXI.
That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles by the Bashaw,
All Injuries to be forgotten, and Satisfaction to be made for Damages committed
afterward.
Dey, Aga, and Gover nors of Algiers, all Injuries and Damages sustained on
either Part, shall be quite taken away and forgotten, and this Peace shall be
in full force and virtue, and continue for ever. And for all Depredations and
Damages that shall be afterward committed or done by either Side, before
notice can be given of this Peace, full Satisfaction shall immediately be made,
and whatsoever remains in kind, shall be instantly restored.

XXII.
That in case it shall happen hereafter that any thing is done or committed
contrary to this Treaty, This Peace not to be broken in case of any
Contraven^^on, but Satisfaction to be first demanded.
whether by the Subjects of the one or the other Party, the Treaty
notwithstanding shall subsist in full force, and such Contraventions shall not
occasion the Breach of this Peace, Friendship, and good Correspondence, but the
Party injured shall amicably demand immediate Satisfaction for the said
Contraventions before it be lawful to break the Peace; and if the Fault was
committed by any private Subjects of either Party, they alone shall be punished
as Breakers of the Peace, and Disturbers of the Public Quiet. And Our Faith
shall be Our Faith, and Our Word Our Word.

Confirmed and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, the Tenth day of April,
in the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ One thousand six hundred and eighty two:
And in the Year of the Hegira One thousand ninety three, and the Eleventh day
of the Moon Abril. (L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.)


WHereas on the Tenth day of April 1682. there was a Treaty of Peace Concluded
between the Most Serene King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Christian Faith, etc. and the Most Illustrious Lords the Bashaw, Dey, Aga,
and Governors of the City and Kingdom of Argiers, to which Treaty there was
annexed a Form of Passes for the Ships belonging to the Subjects of the said
King of Great Britain; It is hereby Agreed and expressly Declared, That the said
Form annexed to the said Treaty being no part thereof, the Lords High Admirals
or Commissioners of the Admiralty of his said Majesty's Dominions, are at full
liberty in giving the said Passes, to use the Form of Words hereunto annexed,
which shall be good and sufficient to all intents and purposes.

Confirmed and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God the Fifth day of March,
in the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ One thousand six hundred eighty and two,
being in the Year of the Hegira One thousand ninety four, and the Seventeenth
day of the Moon Moolout. (L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.)


Form of the Pass.
Suffer the Ship (...) to pass with her Company, Passengers, Goods and
Merchandises, without any Let, Hindrance, Seizure or Molestation, the said Ship
appearing unto Me (or Us) by good Testimony, to belong to the Subjects of Our
Sovereign Lord the King, and to no Foreigners.

Given under My Hand (or Our Hands) and the Seal of My (or Our) Office of
Admiral, at (...) the (...) day of (...) in the Year of our Lord One thousand
six hundred eighty (...)
To all Persons whom these may concern.
By Command of (...)

Note,
THat the late Commission of the Admiralty of England having been determined,
and the Administration of the Affairs thereof (and particularly that of Signing
Passes) taken into his Majesty's own Royal Hand, the Form of the forementioned
Pass has received the following Alterations; Viz.

JAMES the Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Persons whom These may concern, Greeting.
Suffer the Ship (...) to pass with her Company, Passengers, Goods and
Merchandises, Locus Sigilli.
without any Let, Hindrance, Seizure or Molestation; The said Ship appearing
unto Us by good Testimony to belong to Our Subjects, and to no Foreigner.

Given under Our Sign Manual, and the Seal of Our Admiralty, at Our Court at
(...) (...) this (...) day of (...) In the Year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred Eighty JAMES R.

By His Majesty's Command S. Pepys.

FINIS.

