DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Requiring all Officers or Soldiers that served under the
Armies of the late Usurped Powers, and have been Disbanded, Cashiered or Turned
out, to depart the Cities of London and Westminster before the Fourth of
December next.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We have been informed that diverse of the late Disbanded Officers, and
Soldiers, and several other persons heretofore Cashiered and turned out of the
late Army (many whereof being persons of desperate fortunes and designs) do now
remain in and about Our Cities of London and Westminster, and have their daily
meetings, and are frequently Plotting and Contriving wicked Designs and
Practices against Our Royal person, and the peace and Government of this Our
Kingdom. We taking the same into Our serious Consideration, and for preventing
the evil consequences thereof, have thought fit, upon the humble Desire of Our
two Houses of Parliament, to publish and Declare, and do hereby publish and
Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That all and every person and persons
being heretofore an Officer or Soldier, serving in any of the Armies of the
late Usurped Powers, and have been Disbanded, Cashiered, or Turned out of any
of the said Armies (who are not under Imprisonment, or other legal restraint,
or have not their constant habitations and families within Our Cities of London
and Westminster, or the Suburbs thereof, or who shall not procure or obtain a
License from Us, or any three or more of Our Privy Council in this behalf) do
on or before the Fourth of December next, depart out of the said Cities of
London and Westminster, and the Liberties and Suburbs thereof. And We do hereby
Charge and Require them and every of them to depart accordingly, and not to
return again, or come within Twenty miles of the same Our cities of London and
Westminster, or either of them, from this time until after the Twenty fourth
day of June next ensuing. And that they, or any of them, do not, or shall not,
in the mean time, wear, use, carry, or ride with any Sword, Pistol, or other
Arms or Weapons: And herein We do and shall expect, from all persons concerned,
a due and punctual Submission and Conformity at their perils, and upon pain of
Our high Displeasure. Willing and hereby Commanding the Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, and other Our Officers and Ministers, of and in the several
Counties, Cities and Places of this Our Kingdom, to apprehend and seize the
persons, and take away the Arms and Weapons of all such as shall be found
Faulty, or Offenders, in, or contrary to the purport true intent and meaning of
this Our Royal Proclamation, and them to bring before the Lords of Our Privy
Council, to be further proceeded against for their Contempts, according to
Justice.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty eighth day of November, 1661. in
the Thirteenth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by Roger Norton, One of the Printers to the KING'S most
Excellent MAJESTY, 1661.


