Treaty of Marine, Between the Illustrous and Most Mighty KING CHARLES THE
SECOND, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc. AND THE High and Mighty LORDS, the STATES
GENERAL, of the UNITED NETHERLANDS. To be observed, in all the several parts
throughout the whole World, by Land, and by Sea. Concluded in London, the
first of December 1674.

In the Savoy, Printed by the Assings of John Bill, and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Majesty. 1675.

Treaty of Marine, Between the Illustrous and most Mighty KING CHARLES THE
SECOND, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc. And the High and Mighty LORDS, the STATES
GENERAL, of the UNITED NETHERLANDS, To be observed, in all the several
parts, throughout the whole World, by Land, and by Sea, Concluded in London,
the first of December 1674.
WHereas by the Treaty Concluded at Westminster, the 9/19 of Febr. 1674.
between the Illustrous and most mighty King, Charles the second, by the Grace
of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defendor of the faith
etc. And the High and Mighty States General, of the united Netherlands: it is
agreed, by the Eigth, and Nineth Article, That six Commissionors to be named on
the part of the said. Illustrous King of Great Britain, with the like
number on the part of the Lords the States General, to be sent to London, A
treaty shoules bemade, And whereas Thomas Lord Culpeper, George Downing,
Knight and Baronet, Richard Ford, William Thompson Knights, John Iollif, and
John Buck worth Esquires, are to that End appointed, by the aforenamed
Illustrous King of Great Britain, As also that John Corver, and Giles
Sautin, Schepen, and Council of the City of Amsterdam, Samuel Beyer, and
Andrew van Vossen, Council, and Recorder, of the respective Cities of
Rotterdam, and Enckhuysen, Pieter Duyvelaer, late Burghemaster of Middelburgh,
And Michel Michelson, Schepen and Council of the City of Flushing,
Commissionors sent to London, on the part of the Lords States General, have
had Several meetings, and debates, touching that matter, have finally by
virtue of their full powers (incerted at the End of this treaty) in order to
the aforesaid Articles unanimously Consented, and agreed, on the following
Articles, of A Treaty, of Marine, to be observed in all the Several parts of
the World, by Land, and by Sea,

I.
All and Every the subjects, of the most serene, and Mighty King of Great
Britain, beforenamed, shall with all safety, and Freedom, Sail, and Traffic,
with All manner of Marchandises, in all Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates, which
are, or shall be, in Peace, Amity, or Newtrallitie, with the said King, without
being troubled, or disquieted in that liberty, by any of the Ships of War, or
other Vessels, belonging unto the States General, or any of their subjects,
under Color of any Emnity, or difference, which now, or hereafter, might
happen, to arise, between the States General, and any Nation, which shall be
in Peace and Newtralitie with the said King: In like manner, all and Every the
subjects of the States General, shall with all Safety, and Freedom, Sail,
and Traffic, with all Manner of Marchandises, in all the Kingdoms, Countries,
and Estates, which are, or shall be, in Peace, Amity, or Newtrallitie, with te
said States, whout being troubled, or disquited, in that liberty, by any of
the Ships of War, or other Vessels, belonging to the said King, or any of his
subjects, under Color of any Emnity, or difference, which now, or hereafter,
might happen to arise, between the said King, and any Nation, which shall be in
Peace, and Newtrallitie, with the said States.

II.
This Freedom of Navigation, and Traffic, shall extend, to all sorts of
Marchandises, which may be transported in times of Peace, and shall not be
disturbed under any pretense of war, Savenig only suck goods, as are declared
Contrabande, in the following Article.

III.
Under the name of Contrabande, or wares forbidden, are only comprehended,
Arms, Muskets or Barrels, and their appurtenances, Fireworkes, Gunpowder,
Match, Ball, Swords, Lances, Pikes, Halbards, Canon, Mortar-peeses, Petards,
Grenades, Rest, Bandeliers, Saltpeter, Muskets Bullets, Morions, Headpeeses,
Brestplates, Quirasses, and such like Arms, Soldiers, Horses, and all Manner
of vtensils belonging to horse, Holsters, Belts, and whatsoever elce may be
needful in War.

IIII.
Amongst the wares forbidden, or Contrabande, these following shall not be
included, viz Cloth, and all Manufactures Made of Wool, Linen, Cotton, or any
other Stuffes, all Manner of clothes, or clothings, with the Stuffes whereof
they are made; Gould or Silver, Coined, or Uncoined, Tinn, Iron, Lead, Copper,
Coals, Wheat, Barley, and all other Kind of Corn, Tobacco, and all manner
of Spice, Salted, and dried Flesh, or Fish, Cheese, or Butter Beer, Oil,
Wine, Sugar, and al Kind of Salt, as also all manner of things useful for
the food of mankind, furthermore, Hemp, Tar, Pitch, all sorts of Roapes,
Sails, Anckers, Masts, Plancks for Schipping, Deals, and Balkes of all
Sorts, and Generally, all things necessary for building, or repairing of
ships, Yea all manner of wares, and Merchandise, shall be Accounted free, which
are not Expressed, in the foregoing Article, and the transportation of them
shall be permitted, by any of the Kings subjects, Even unto places in Emnity with
the States, as also in like manner, by any of the subjects of the States, unto
places In Emnity with the King, Except such Cities, and places, as are
besiedged, blocked up, or Invested.

V
And to remove all manner of differences, or discontents, which might happen,
by Land, or Sea, it is agreed, that all Ships, belonging unto the subjects of
the said King, which shall enter Into any road, or port, belonging unto the
States, and purposing te pass from thence, schalbe only obliged, to show unto
the Officers off such port, or in case there be any Ships of war, or other
Ships having Commission, unto the Chief Commandors thereof, their pasports,
without paying, or giveing, ought unto them, But in Case they shall meet with
any of the States Ships of war, or others having Commission, at Sea, without
the Territories of the said States, they shall keep at A reasonable distance,
and shall only with two or three men in their boat, go aboarde of such Ship,
or Vessel, as shall belong unto any of the Kings subjects, to see the Pasports,
Containg the Lading of such Ship, which being showed, by the Captain or Master
of such Vessel, they may not be hindered, retarded, or forced, to alter his
course, And the subjects of the States General, shall Enjoy the like freedom,
Havinge showed their Pasports, in manner, as aforesaid, the Content whereof
shall be, as hereafter is Expressed.

VI.
But if any Ship belonging unto the subjects of the said King, shall sail to
any port, in Emnity with the States, or any Ship belonging unto any subject of
the States, shall sail to any port, In Emnity with the said King, be met at
sea, such Ship, shall not only show his pasports, in form as hereafter is
Expressed, which he shall be obliged to have, but also Certificates made by the
Customer of that port, from whence he shall set sail, Containing the Lading of
such Ship, to the End it may be known, Whether he have any Marchandises in his
Ship, which are forbidden by the third Article of this treaty.

VII.
And in Case any goods or Marchandises, which are before declared to be
contrabande, or forbidden, befound or discovered, by viewing of the said
Certificates, to be made by the Customer of that port from whence such Ship
shall set sail, and be bound to any port in Emnity with the other party, the
Commander in chief of that Ship where such goods are found, Whether hebe A
subject of the said King, or of the States, shall not break open the said
Trunkes, Cases, Packs, or Fatts, Wherem such goods are, but in presence of
surveyors, appointed by the Judges of Sea affairs, to be by them Inventorised,
Yet none of them shall be sold, disposed of, or alienated, before Judicial
proceedings be made, and that the Judges of sea Causes, shall by their sentence
have Condemned the same, Yet the Ship and all other Marchandises which be-found
therein, and are not forbidden by this treaty, shall be free, and not detained,
or Confiscated, under any Pretense of Contraband goods Whatsoever, And in case
some part of the Lading only be forbidden, and Contrabande goods, the
Commandor in Chife of such Ship, showing him self willing, and ready, to
deliver such unto him, that shall have found them, shall not in such case be
forced, to Enter Into any port, but left al liberty, nor any wise hindered,
in the prosecution of his Intended voyage.

VIII.
It is further agreed, that all Goods belonging to subjects of the said King,
which shall be found in Ships belonging to Ennemies of the States, though
otherwise free, shall be Confiscable, and on the Contrary free, whatsoever shall
be laden in Ships which belong unto subjects of the said King, though the whole
Lading, or any part thereof, might belong unto th'Ennemies of the States,
Contra band goods Excepted, which being seized, shall be proceeded aganist, as
in th'aforegonig articles, In likemanner, what goods soever, belonging to the
subjects of the States General, which shall be found laden in any Ship,
belonging to th'Ennemies of the said King, though otherwise free, shall be
Confiscable, and on the Contrary free, whatsoever shall be laden in Ships which
shall belong unto subjects of the States, though the whole Lading, or any part
thereof, might belong unto th'Ennemies of the said King, Contra band goods
Excepted, which being seized shall be proceeded against, as in th'aforegoeing
articles, But to The End, that no unexpected damage bedone, by the one being In
peace, when the other may be in war, it is provided and agreed, that any Ship
belonging to th'Ennemy of the other, and laden with goods belonging to the
subjects of the other, the said goods shall not thereby be confiscable, in case
they were laden, before the day, and time agreed upon, after declaring and
publication of such war, viz if the goods were laden between the Soundings,
and the ness in Norway, within six Weeks, after such declared war, from the
said Soundings, to the City of Tanger, within two Months, and ten Wekes
within the Mediteranean Sea, or within Eight Months, in all other Coasts, and
places of the World, Where fore the goods, which shall be found laden in Ships
belonging to th'Ennemy, and appertaining unto the subjects of his Majesty,
shall not be forfeited, but immediately delivered unto the owners thereof,
unless they were laden, after the day, and time, limited, within the several
districts, aforesaid, Yet so as the said wares which are called Contrabando,
and for the said reason confiscable, shall not be transported to any port
belonging to th'Ennemy, In like manner, the goods which shall be found laden, In
Ships belonging to th'Ennemy, and appertaining unto the subjects of the States,
shall not be forfeited, but Immediately delivered unto th'owners thereof, unless
they were laden, after the day and time limited, within the several
districks, aforesaid, Yet so as the said wares, which are Called Contrabando,
and for the said reason Confiscable, shall not be transported to any port
belonging unto th'Ennemy.

IX.
And to The End that his Majesty's and the States subjects, may be secured from
damage, by Each others Ships of war, or having private Commissions, all
Commandors in chief, of any his Majesty's, or the States Ships of war, as
also all their subjects Having private Commissions, and such as have
Priveledge to Navigate to and fro, shall be Commanded to abstain from doing of
any damage to Each other, and In case they do otherwise, they shall be
punnished, and moreover be obliged to repair the damage, where unto their
persons, and goods, shall be liable.

X.
Wherefore all Commanders in Chief, of private men of war, shall before they
have their Commissions, give suffitient security, by ablemen, that are not
owners, or otherwise Interessed therein, in the sum of fifteen hundred
pounds sterling, or Sixteen Thousand five hundred Guildens, that they will
give full satisfaction for any injuries, or wrongs, which that Ship may Commit
in their Courses at Sea, and for their Captains, and Officers, which shall
violate this present treaty, or any other between his Majesty and the said
States, under penalty, of forfeiting their said Commissions, In which the said
Caution shall be incerted as aforesaid, And moreover it is agreed, that the Ship
shall be obliged, to satisfy, and repair, all such injury, and damage, as
shall be committed.

XI.
His Majesty, and the said States, shall treat Each others subjects, within
their respective territories, with the like favor, and shall when any prizes
are-taken, give their Commands, That Justice bedone, according to the rules of
Equity, and Justice, by Judges unsuspected, and unconcerned, in the matter
under debate, And his said Majesty, and the States, shall give strict orders,
that all decrees, Judgments, and orders, already given, and to be given, shall be
Executed, according to the tenure of them.

XII.
When the Ambassadors of the said States General, or any other of their
public Ministers, residing at his Majesty's Court, shall make Complainte, of
the Judgments which shall be given, his Majesty will cause a review to bemade,
of the said Judgment, in his Council, to Examine, whether the order, and
precautions, Contained in the present treaty, have bin followed and observed,
and will also provide, that Every plaintiff shall have Justice done him, within
the space of three Months at the farthest, And when in like manner, his
Majesty's Ambassador, or other public Minister Residing with the States shall
make Complainte of the Judgments which shall be given, the States General, shall
cause A review to be made, of the said Judgment, in the assembly of the States
General, to Examine, whether the order, and precautions, contained In the
present treaty, have bin followed and observed, nevertheless It shall not be
lawful, either before, or after, any decree, the review Yet pendant, to
unlade, or sell, any of the goods in dispute, Without the consent, of parties
concerned therein,

XIII.
The case depending, between the takers of prizes, and the claymors, or
defendants, if it be decreed in favor of the defendant, such decrees shall have
its Execution under caution given, notwithstanding the taker may have appealed,
which rule shall not be followed when A decree is past against the defendant.

XIV,
And because Masters of Merchants Ships, and their Mariners, do many times
suffer barbarous cruelties, when in times of war, they fall in the hands, of
Capers, by forceing of them to confess what they Would have, It is agreed, that
his Majesty, and the States General, shall straightly forbid, such
unchristian like Actions, and such as shall be convinced by lawful witnesses,
shall be punnished severely, in terror to others, and all Commanders in chief
of Ships, which shall upon due proof have committed such villainous acts, by
them selves, or others, at their Instigation, or connive at such actions, being
acted, shall above the punnishint to be Inflicted, beturned out of their
service, and such Ship as shall betaken, and brought in as prize, whereof the
Master, or Mariners shall have suffered any torture, shall Immediately be
restored, and freed from any further Inquisition, or Encumbrance whatsoever,
with all her lading.

XV.
It is also agreed, that severe punnishment, shall likewise be Inflicted, on
those who shall transgress against the 21 Article of the treaty of peace
concluded at Breda, by taking of Commissions from An Ennemy, to rob the Ships
of an allie, otherwise then is Expressed in the said Article.

XVI.
Lastly it is agreed, and concluded, that this present treaty, and Every
particular clause therein, shall be ratefied, and confirmed, as soon as possibly
it may, and that the respective ratifications, shall be Exchanged within two
Months after the date hereof, And that the said treaty, whin one Month after
the said ratification shall be Exchanged, shall be delivered in due form unto
the Chief directors of the English Companies, trading to The East Indies and
Africa, as also to the directors of the East, and West India Companies of the
Netherlands, And that his Majesty, and the States General, shall give Notice
hereof, to all their respective Governors, and Commanders, of Collonies, and
places, In any part of the World, as soon as possibly it maybe, to The End
that Every one, within the Limits of his Command, may precisely observe and
Execute the same.

In all which and Every particular therein Contained We the Commissioners on
the behalf of his Majesty, and the States General beforenamed, by virtue of
the power granted unto us have subscribed our Names unto these Articles and
Sealed them with our seals:

In London the first of December 1674. And was Signed. Th. Culpeper, (L. S.) G.
Downing, (L. S.) Richard Ford. (L. S.) Will. Thomson (L. S.) John Iollif. (L.
S.) John Buckworth. (L. S.) (L. S.) I. Corver. (L. S.) G. Sautijn. (L. S.)
Samuel Beyer. (L. S.) And. van Vossen. (L. S.) Petrous Duvelaer. (L. S.) Mich.
Michielsen.


FIN.

