blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE

By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Safeguard and Protection We owe to such of Our own Subjects, and
to all others in League and Amity with Us, as pass and repass the Seas
belonging to these Our Kingdoms, has been always a principal part of Our Royal
Care and Concern; And whereas We find already, that the Freedom and Security of
Navigation and Commerce to and fro Our Ports (in this time of Hostility between
Our Neighbor Princes) has been much disturbed; Nay, the Reverence due to Our
Ports, Harbors, and other Places under Our own immediate Protection, has been
violated by the Piratical Practices, Depredations and Insolences of Private
Men of War, and others pretending Commission for the present Hostilities: We
have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, after an exact view first
taken of the Rules, Ordinances and Provisions made upon the like occasions by
Our Royal Progenitors, to revive, establish, ratify and publish to all the
World these Rules and Ordinances following. Our Royal Will and Pleasure
therefore is,

ipso facto Confiscate, and proceeded against in Our High Court of Admiralty,
to Sentence and Condemnation, according to Law, notwithstanding any Commission
of War, or Letters of Reprizals such Offenders may have, or pretend to have for
their Justification.





James Duke of York Our High Admiral, in that behalf.



Bona Piratarum ought to be, and of being further proceeded against and
punished in Our High Court of Admiralty, as Abetters and Accomplices of Pirates,
and as Receivers of Pirates and their Goods, ought to be by the Laws and
Customs of the Sea in that behalf.

James Duke of York Our High Admiral of England, in due form first obtained.
And We do hereby Charge and Command all Officers, Mariners and Seafaring-men
whatsoever, that are now in any such Service, to leave the same forthwith, and
to get their Appearance and Return to their native Country, Recorded in Our
High Court of Admiralty, or before some of Our Officers thereunto Empowered,
upon pain of being reputed and punished as Pirates. And in case any Officer or
Mariner neglecting to return upon these Our Summons, happen at any time
hereafter to come into any Port or Place of Our Dominions, We do hereby Charge
and Require all Vice-Admirals, and Our Officers in Ports and Maritime places,
to apprehend and seize such person or persons, and him or them so seized, to
Commit to the next Goal, there to remain until further Order, and the
Certificate thereof to return with all speed into Our High Court of Admiralty,
to the end that the Offender or Offenders may be proceeded against according to
the Laws of this Our Realm in that behalf provided.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighth day of February, in the Twentieth
year of Our Reign, 1667/8.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


