A CHARACTER Of His most Sacred Majesty Charles the Second, KING of Great
BRITAIN France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. Written by Dr
CHARLETON, Physician in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Who most Religiously affirms, Se non diversas spes, sed incolumitatem Caesaris
simpliciter spectare.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor on the lower walk of the
New Exchange, 1661.

AN Imperfect Pourtrait OF His Sacred MAJESTY.
SENECA the Rhetorician reports a misfortune that befell his dear Friend,
Porcius Latro (whom nevertheless he calls Declamatoriae Virtutis unicum
Exemplum) which was, that brought from the shady Schools to Plead in public,
in defense of Rusticus Porcius, a near kinsman of His; He was so surprised with
a fit of extreme bashfulnesse, that he began with a Solecism, and fell into
confusion. So hard is it for one bred up in obscurity, and accustomed only to
private Exercises of his Wit, to conserve the serenity of his Understanding,
and faithfulness of his Memory, when he comes to struggle with Arguments of
public use and importance.

This man's Example may be my Excuse, and I take liberty to lay hold of his
failing then, to extenuate my own failing now. For, if He, who was so great a
Master in the Art of Speaking well, and of so prodigious Abilities both Native
and Acquired, found himself at a loss in the delivery of his Conceptions in a
matter common and ordinary: well may I, a person of mean parts, and obscure
conversation, find the like disorder in my Faculties, in my present Attempt.
Nay, more favor is due to my Astonishment, than was to his. Our occasions,
indeed, are different; but the disadvantage is greater on my side. His
business at that time, was to vindicate a private man, his Equal: I have
proposed to my self to adumbrate the Excellencies of a Prince, one as much
Superior to all others in the divine Endowments of his Mind, as in the Height
of his Condition. His Argument low, and familiar: Mine such, that, Divinity it
self only excepted, nothing is more noble, nothing more sublime. Philosophers
teach, and Experience confirms, that Objects too strong and excellent hurt and
weaken the outward Senses: and the same holds good also of the Internal, the
Mind sometimes encountering Objects, whose exceeding Brightness does so much
the more dazel her Eye of Reason, by how much the more she dares to look upon
them. No wonder, therefore, if so weak an Understanding as mine is, addressing
it self to contemplate the resplendent Glories of a King (whom Providence
Divine seems to have sent into the World on purpose to refine the Age by his
Example) be forced to confess its dimnesse and incompetency. The Difficulties
I meet with, are many and great. When I consider, How many things occurr to be
spoken of, and how few words I ought to use: my trouble is not so much, what I
should mention, as what I should pretermit; nor is it easy to make a choice,
where all parts of my Subject are equally transcendent. Here, Copiousness of
matter, which in all other occasions is a Help, proves my Impediment: and I am
reduced to this straight, either to be Sacrilegious in omitting Some
particulars, or Profane in attempting to describe All. Besides, all Language
must come as far short of this King's Perfections, as they exceed others
Imitation: nor is it less difficult to advance Words agreeable to His Merits,
than it is for Envy to Eclipse them. This considered, I deny not, but what
Seneca said concerning the Divine Being, Deum colit, qui novit, he worships God
best, who most contemplates and admires the super-excellent Proprieties of His
Nature; may be true likewise if accommodated to this Vicegerent of God, His
Sacred MAJESTY, and it may be well enough said, Regem colit, qui novit, that
man does best celebrate the King's Goodness, who by Reverence, Love, and
Obedience, shows himself most sensible of it. And, therefore, I accordingly
confess, that Silence and Admiration are the most proper Expressions Subjects
can use, to testify their Veneration of so Incomparable a Prince.

But, since His MAJESTY so often speaks to us in Blessings, it were an
Ingratitude unpardonable in Us, never to answer Him, at least in our
Acknowledgments. To Good and Pious Kings there are owing as well Offerings of
affectionate Loyalty, as Tributes of Duty; and God has given them as great a
right to the Homage of the Heart, as to that of the Knee of every Subject.
Reflecting upon this, together with the infatuation of some Evill-minded men
(either so obdurate, as not to feel; or so depraved, as to contemn their own
great Happiness in being under His MAJESTY's blessed Government) who by their
impious breath seek at once to stain the Honor of the Head, and re-inkindle the
coals of Sedition and Rebellion in the Body of the State: I hope, I shall not
offend, if I suffer my self to be so far transported by the devote Respects I
bear to His MAJESTY's Fame, and the just Zeal I have for the Peace and
Prosperity of my Country, as briefly to acknowledge the admirable Virtues of
the One, and so the high Felicity of the Other. I say, to Acknowledge; because
to Commend, or Ascribe, is impossible; it being the prerogative of His Virtues,
that they are Endowments, not Attributes. I am not so ignorant, as not to
understand, that among all Good Men His Majesty's Honor is as highly Sacred,
so impregnably Secure, and above all necessity of Vindication; nor so vain, as
to expect ought I can say should be of such force, as to convert those unhappy
Wretches, upon whom the more powerful influence of His Mercy and Goodness has
hitherto been lost. All the Design of this Paper, therefore, is to be a Free
Oblation brought by a Loyal Heart to the Altar of His MAJESTY'S most
illustrious Name; and all its Hopes are, so to be accepted.

This being premised to clear the Readers Eyesight, I shall now adventure to
set before him an imperfect Pourtraicture of His most Excellent MAJESTY, in
some few of His Royal Virtues and Graces, those especially which have a more
immediate influence upon His Government, and chiefly import the welfare and
happiness of all who live under it. And well may I call it an Imperfect
Pourtrait, since it was taken by an unskilful hand, at an half-light, and at
great distance; and since it is drawn, as in too small a Model, so likewise in
faint and dead Colors; and therefore comes as much short of the inimitable
Beauty of the Original, as a Sun painted does of the true one. However, thus
much of Resemblance there is in it, that it contains nothing which is not
plainly visible in His Majesty's Actions: so that every judicious Eye might
soon have discerned whose Image it bears, though the Front had wanted the
Ornament of His Glorious Name; and I am obliged to believe, that every
ingenious person has such lively sentiments of his Goodness imprinted upon
his Heart, as amount to a Representation in most things agreeable to this. So
that were I as well secured from being condemned of Disparagement, as I am from
being accused of Flattery, I should think my Errors much more Venial than now
they are.

Before we can look upon this inestimable Jewel, our Eyes are arrested by the
correspondent Goodlinesse of the Cabinet wherein it is lodged. For His MAJESTY's
PERSON, therefore, if it be true (as doubtless it is) that Masculine Beauty
does consist rather in the due Shape and Symmetry of parts, than in Color; and
that the most charming Amiableness of the Body results chiefly from a decent
vivacity and gracefulness of Motion: then, certainly, may we give credit to our
sight, which assures us, His MAJESTY is one of the Comeliest Personages of the
Age. Which yet I mention not out of an opinion, that Eminent Virtue always
chooses the fairest Tenements of flesh to dwell in; for, that is no general
Rule to judge by: but, because it is most certain, that her loveliness is most
conspicuous in a Body that is Comely, though not of delicate Features, and
which has rather Dignity of Presence, than Beauty of Aspect; like a rich
Stone, which is then set to most advantage of its luster, when it is set plain.
All men allow, there is a very near Affinity and Consent betwixt the Body and
its Inmate, the Mind; and as Nature, when she erreth in the Fabric of the one,
is seldom observed to compensate that defect with extraordinary Qualities of
the other: so contrariwise, where She is exact in the one, She as seldom fails
to give proportionate perfection to the other. As is eminently Exemplified in
His MAJESTY, betwixt the several Accomplishments of whose Body and Mind there
is so rare a Harmony, that they reciprocally grace each other.

Nor is it fit we should proceed, without a glance of Reverence upon the Memory
of that refulgent Rock from whence this Gemme was taken; I mean His MAJESTY'S
Royal FATHER, who, by the Confession of even His Enemies (yet those were savage
Beasts in Human shape) well deserved to be enrolled in the Eternal Registers of
Fame, the Greatest, Wisest, most Pious, most Christian King of the Age in which
he lived. A Prince, into whose truly Heroical breast Divinity had infused a
Soul so pure and white, that not with sufficient caution reflecting upon the
great depravity of the Times, and corruption of Men's Manners, He as freely
confided in the faith of Others, as His own Uprightness and Sincerity
suggested to Him, they ought to have confided in His: nor was He capable of
being deceived, otherwise than through His own exceeding Goodness. A Prince so
Just, He scarce knew Wrong, but what He suffered: nor is it easy for Malice to
find wherein He ever did an Injury, unless in conferring upon some Men
Benefits so great, they understood not how to use them as they ought. Hanc
unam, Caesar, habeo a Te injuriam; effecisti ut viverem, and morerer ingratus,
was Furnius his Complement to Augustus, for pardoning his Father, who had been
in Arms against him: and there were, who returned the same to This Good King,
though in the worst sense; abusing the power and trust they had received from
Him to His ruin, and by the destruction of the Benefactor, cancelling those
Obligations, which were too great to be requited. So dangerous even to their
Fountain are the Streams of Favor and Bounty, where they flow upon persons, in
whom Ambition is confederate with Ingratitude. In a word, He was a Prince, who
lived Innocently, ruled Justly, and died Holily: being, after sundry
Afflictions (and those so sharp ones too, as no Patience but His could have
conquered them) restored to Heaven by a most glorious Martyrdom, inflicted by
the barbarous hands of most accursed Traitors and Regicides. And, certainly,
the Virtues of such a Father cannot but be derived to His MAJESTY by the right
of Nature, the Inheritance of His Royal Blood. Besides, The Memory of a Good
and Merciful Prince deceased, does always highly endear His Progeny, and
redouble upon His Son, who succeeds Him, the Fidelity and Affections of His
People.

Among all the Characters of the Deity, that remain impressed upon Man's Soul,
the most excellent, and that by which she does best testify her Original, is
that which the Grecians call (...), the Latins Humanitas, and we Goodness of
Nature; being a certain inherent disposition of the Mind to affect and desire
the weal of all Mankind, and answering that highest of Theological Virtues,
Charity. This Virtue His MAJESTY has as well in the Habit, as in the
Inclination, in so full a measure, that it seems the Master Ingredient in His
Composition. Insomuch that it is harder for Him to be offended, than to pardon;
more agreeable to His nature to confer Benefits, than to resent Injuries. He is
Gracious even to Strangers; which shows, that though His Dominions be an Island
separate from the rest of the World, yet His generous Heart is none, but a vast
Continent joined to all Lands: nor is it more His Care of His Subjects (though
that also be greater for them than for Himself) than His Kindness to them,
which by so strong a Title denominates Him the FATHER of His Country. All we,
who are His Subjects, with joy acknowledge our selves strictly bound to Him, by
His Laws, and our Allegiance: but by His courteous stooping beneath His Height,
and Majesty not hard to be approached, even such find and confess themselves
more strictly bound, who otherwise are most Free. So Universal is the
Sovereignty of His Goodness, that Princes have wished themselves under His
Command: and Ambassadors not willingly return home to their Masters; finding
Here, if not more of Protection, yet more of Encouragement and honorable Hopes,
than in their own Countries. The just and equitable desires of His People, He
does rather anticipate, than expect, but never delay: and whomsoever, Strangers
or Natives, Fame inviteth to behold the Magnificence of His Court, His
Affability most gratefully admits; nor do they ever depart from His Presence
sad, unless it be because they are to depart. For, what Horace said to
Augustus Caesar, is more due to His MAJESTY, Instar veris enim, vultus ubi Tuus
Affulsit, populo gratior it dies,
Et soles melius nitent.
The luster of His Royal sight
Makes the day pass with more delight,
And Suns to shine more bright.
So powerful in their operation upon the Affections of even the vulgar, are the
beams of MAJESTY, when mitigated by a gracious Aspect, and conjoined with the
Emanations of a Benignity diffusive upon all. But, this makes but one Twist in
that manifold Chord, by which our Hearts are fastened to His MAJESTY's
Footstool. For,

He is, moreover, a KING of so Mild, and withal so Great a Spirit, that His
Severity (if He has any) is concealed, but Clemency visible to all. Whence it
comes, that He punishes but rarely, never with Rigor; being better pleased
with Atonement made by Tears, than Expiation by Blood. For Offenses against
His sacred Person, He yet has punished none: for offenses against His Laws,
very few; and those Villains of desperate contumacy, such as appeared to have
made a Vow, never to repent, never to be innocent. Nor did He punish These, but
(like the impartial Law) that by their Example others might be deterred from
committing the like horrid Crimes, and that the Good might live in more
security, the Bad being taken away. ^osmus Duke of Florence had a desperate
saying, That we are commanded to forgive our Enemies, but no where commanded to
forgive our Friends; intimating, that Wrongs from a Friend are unpardonable.
But His MAJESTY shows His Spirit to be of a more Christian temper, detesting
such unchristian Policy; For He has pardoned as well Secret, as Professed
Enemies, and extended His Mercy not only to the Weaknesses of His Friends, but
even to their Neglects and Perfidiousnesse. Which seems to be a chief reason,
why the wounds of our State heal so fast; that otherwise might have remained
long green, and perhaps have fester'd. In a word; His MAJESTY's Fortune is so
Sublime, He cannot want the Solace of Revenge; His Mind so Generous, He cannot
be delighted with it: well remembering, that it is a Princes part to remit
offenses; and as well understanding, that no Ornament is more worthy and
becoming the Head of a King, than that Civic Crown, with this Inscription, FOR
SUBJECTS SAVED.

He is a KING, whom God has endowed with that Perspicacity of Wit, and a
Judgment so discerning; and (what is most happy in a King) brought up and
exercised from His Childhood, in those various encounters of adverse Fortune,
in Exile, Travels, Cares, Hardships, Wants, and continual Dangers: that we may
fafely prophecy, that hereafter no Disaster shall occurr to disturb the Peace
of His Reign, that can be inscrutable to His Wisdom, or insuperable to His
Fortitude.

For the Latter of these two Virtues; certainly, no man ever gave clearer proof
of it in himself, than His MAJESTY has done: The greatest part of His Life
hitherto having been no other but a continued Triumph over the sharpest
Afflictions and Calamities; in all which He has born Himself with such
undaunted Courage, and bravery of Resolution, as if he had at once Fragilitatem
Hominis, and Securitatem Dei. Which the Stoics themselves allow to be the
highest command over Nature, and most Heroical pitch of Magnanimity, of which
Mortality is capable. Of his Active Valor likewise, other Nations besides this
have had more than sufficient Experience: and He has more than once
demonstrated, that of all the Passions, His Breast is least capable of that of
Fear, unless of doing Evil. Insomuch that those of His Followers, who had the
Honor to attend Him upon a Charge, have found it a harder task, to withold
Him from too far endangering His Sacred Person, than to beat the Enemy.

And as for the Former, viz. His Wisdom; though that be as plainly visible in
His MAJESTY's so speedy and dextrous Composure of the many and great
Distractions of these Nations, since His most happy Restitution; as our
Madness, in forcing Him so long to remain in foreign Countries, was in the
extreme Miseries we suffered the while: yet I ask leave to instance it in one
or two Particulars, which being the proper Effects, may well be alleged as
certain Signs of great Wisdom and Sagacity in a Prince. First, then, Principis
est virtus maxima, nosse suos;
it is an infallible Oracle of Time, that nothing does more demonstrate and
commend the judgment of Princes, than their Election of Grand Officers, and
public Ministers, of eminent parts and singular abilities in their several
Functions; such as may not only comport with the dignity of their Places, but
also increase and illustrate it. And it is in vain for Rulers to take counsel
concerning Matters, if they take no counsel likewise concerning Persons fit to
manage them: Matters being as dead Images, and the life of the Execution of
Affairs wholly resting in the good choice of Individuals. Now, if we reduce all
men more immediately entrusted by Princes, to four Orders or Degrees; viz.
Participes curarum, such upon whom the Sovereign discharges the greatest
weight of his affairs of State; Duces Militiae, principal Captains or Leaders
of His Forces; Gratiosos, Favorites, such as are a solace to Himself, and
harmless to the People; and Negotiis Pares, such as hold great Places, and
execute them with sufficiency: and then reflect upon the admirable choice His
MAJESTY has at present made in all th^se; we shall soon be convinced, that His
natural Abilities are improved to a high degree of Perfection by Observation
and Experience, and that He is deeply read in the Natures and dispositions of
Men; one of the most important points in the Art of Government.

Secondly, it is a sound Maxim in Politiques, That in difficult and corrupt
times, one of the most effectual Antidotes against the Contagion of popular
Discontentments and Seditions, is for a Prince to nourish Hopes, and so to
order matters, as that unquiet and tumultuous Spirits may be calmed by
Expectation, where they cannot presently be laid by Satisfact on. And of this
Preservative His MAJESTY, like a skilful Esculapius of the State, has made
good use, since God so miraculously brought Him to the Execution of His Kingly
Office. For, observing the diversity of Factions, and multitude of Exorbitant
and Male contented Spirits swarming in His Kingdoms; and finding it not only
unsafe to the public, but also impossible, at once to gratify Interests
manifestly repugnant each to other, and to content men who were so immodest and
unreasonable, as to make themselves Judges of what was fit for Him to grant,
and measure the Equitablenesse of their Desires by no other Rule but that of
their own and their Parties advantage: He has had most timely recourse to this
Expedient, and handled things in so prudent a manner, that no Evil, either
present, or impendent, has appeared so peremptory, but that it still has had
some outlet of Hope; thereby leaving no party to shipwreck themselves upon the
Rock of Despair, and most wisely imitating Epimetheus, who when Griefs and
Evils of all sorts flew abroad out of Pandora's Box to infect Mankind, at last
shut the lid, and kept Hope in the bottom. Now, This, as it shows the
Universality of His MAJESTY's Care, and His willingness to include all men in
the Circle of His Providence: so does it show likewise the profoundnesse of His
Judgment, in that He estimates His Concessions rather by the real Utility, than
the Importunity of Suitors; and that He is not forgetful of that Saying of
Seneca (2 de Benef.) Sunt quaedam nocitura impetrantibus, quae non dare, sed
negare, beneficium est.

To these may be added a Third Instance of His MAJESTY's extraordinary
Sufficiency in the Sacred Mysteries of Empire; and that is, His great
Preparations to improve the principal Dowry of this His Kingdom of Great
Britain, the Vantage of Strength by Sea, that Nature has given it. The daily
increase of His Royal Navy speaks Him to be of that opinion, which Cicero (in
Epist. ad Atticum) ascribes to Pompey the Great, where he says, Confilium
Pompeii plane Themistocleum est, putat enim, qui Mari potitur, eum Rerum etiam
poti^i: Which, doubtless, is true, the vast excess of Power His MAJESTY has
in that particular above all Princes and States of Europe, duly considered: as
well because he that is Master of the Sea, is at liberty to begin or end a
War, where, when, and upon what Terms He pleases; as because the Wealth of
both Indies seems in great part but an Accessory to the Sovereignty of the
Seas. But, why do I single out Particular testimonies of that Prudence, which
is in it self General, and runs in full streams through all His MAJESTY's
Counsels and proceedings? Especially when it is already visible to the world,
that in Nature nothing is so Sublime, But it may be comprehended by His
MAJESTY's vast Understanding; nothing so Mean, as to escape His Curiosity.
Wherefore, as the sacred Scripture says of the wisest King, that his Heart was
as the sands of the Sea; which, though one of the largest bodies in the bulk or
mass, is yet made up of the smallest particles: so may I say of His MAJESTY,
to whom God has given an Intellect so exceeding capacious, as it seems able to
comprehend the Greatest matters, and to apprehend the Smallest, and not to
suffer them to escape His Observation.

As Wisdom appears to direct His Counsels, so does JUSTICE to regulate His
Power; which accordingly he uses to no other end, but the vindication of
Right, and suppression of Wrong. If, with Moralists and Civil Lawyers, we
understand Justice to be Constans and perpetua voluntas jus suum cuique
tribuendi, a constant and unalterable Will of giving to every man what is his
due; and grant that the Precepts, or (rather) duties of a man perfectly just,
are all comprehended in these Three, Honest vivere, Alterum non laedere, Suum
cuique tribuere: then may we safely conclude His MAJESTY to be s^rictly Just.
For, He lives uprightly, does injury to none, gives every man his due: as is
evident from hence, that in so short (and, as he might have made it, to Himself
so advantageous) a time, no Prince ever took more care, or made better
prov^sion to redress public Wrongs and Oppressions, than He has done; and
from hence, that even in matters appertaining to His Royal Prerogative, He
still has referred Himself to the Determination of the Law, which, as it is in
it self the Rule of Justice, so does He make it the Rule of His Will; in all
deliberations keeping His Eye rather upon the Equity, than the Utility of the
thing proposed. Plato, I remember, in his Dialogue betwixt Euthryphro and
Socrates, concerning Sanctity, brings in the Former speaking to the Latter in
these words; Iusti partem, O Socrates, sanctum and pium essereor; quae scilicet
circa* Deorum curam versatur; eam vero quae ad Hominum curam pertinet, reliquam
esse justitiae partem: plainly importing, that Justice has Two main Branches,
one that points upwards, and contains a due care of the Worship of God; another
that shoots forth in a straight line, and extends it self to a care of the good
and welfare of Men in Societies. Now if we reflect upon what His MAJESTY has
already done in both these Respects, we cannot but acknowledge Him to be a Just
Prince, also according to this Opinion of Plato. For,

As to the First; He is a KING, to whom no Interest is so dear, no Care so
constant, as that of RELIGION, and the true Worship of God. Which (that I may
omit His interior Piety, and impregnable Constancy in the Faith, in which He
was educated) is unquestionably evident in this, that though it be not long
since Providence Divine restored Him to the Throne of His Royal Progenitors;
yet has He already restored God to His Country, to God his Temples, to Temples
their Sacred Things, to Sacred Things Reverend Prelates, to Prelates their
Dignities with security: and this by a Zeal most noble, a Prudence admirable,
and a Felicity not only to Posterity, but even to Us, who are at this day blessed
therewith; well nigh incredible. Nor does it seem, that Reason of State, or a
consideration of the near Sympathy that always is between the State Civil, and
the State Ecclesiastical, (which even the Scripture intimates in that saying,
translato Sacerdotio, necesse est ut and Legis fiat translatio) alone induced
His MAJESTY to the restitution of Episcopacy: but rather a judicious Piety,
grounded upon a strong assurance, that of all Orders in the Church, none is
more Ancient, none more Sacred and Venerable, none more beneficial to the peace
and unity of it, than that of Bishops. Moreover, what by gentle Counsels, what
by convincing Arguments, what by His own great Example; His MAJESTY has
reduced to their Wits again, and almost to Conformity with both the Doctrine
and Discipline of Holy Church, no small number of Fanatiques: a most refractary
Sect of People, who so make themselves Arbiters of Religion and Governors,
that they measure their Duties to Both, not by the rule of Precepts Divine, not
by their Countries Laws and Rites; but only by their own delusive Dreams,
which, like Furies, drive them headlong upon all the absurdities and
extravagances of a distracted Superstition. Yea, (what is yet more horrid) they
seem to o^tvy the Devil himself in Blasphemy. For, He said, I will ascend, and
be like the Highest: but they personate God, and bring Him in saying, I will
^^scend, and be like the Prince of Darkness; in that they pretend the
inspiration of His Holy Spirit, to justify their cruel and execrable actions
of taking up Arms against their Sovereign, murdering their fellow Subjects,
and attempting to subvert Government.

As to the Other; His MAJESTY is a KING, who has as it were by His very
Presence, brought present Remedy to the inveterate and otherwise n^urable
Distempers of Great Britain: and like Jupiter the Preserver, as it were in a
moment recomposed His Country, almost torn in pieces by Civil Discords and
Factions. Nine months are not yet fully past, when we beheld before our eyes
the Image of a Commonwealth most sad and deplorable, when all things appeared
doleful, troubled and confused; and when we complained, that to complete our
Calamities nothing remained, but the total Extirpation of Three famous Nations:
and yet at this thrice happy day, so has His MAJESTY changed the condition of
His three Kingdoms, that all things are not only in a deep Quiet, but also in
Prosperity; the Laws are so religiously observed, that we find our selves in
the arms of a most delightful Peace; nor can we imagine what is wanting to our
highest Liberty, unless it be the License of destroying our selves. Iam Fides,
et Pax, et Honor, Pudorque
Priscus, et neglecta redire Virtus
Audet, apparetque beata pleno
Copia cornu.
Now Faith, and Peace, and Shame begin
To rise again, as from the dead:
Now ancient Virtue dares come in,
And show her long-neglected head:
And blessed Plenty, with her load,
Appears abroad.


Under His Majesty's Administration of the State, now does deep and rich
Security thrive; Right thrives, placed above all Injury; the Studies of
Learning thrive, and the Honors of those Studies: and All His sober and
ingenuous Subjects are ready to make this twofold grateful Confession, that
they are Happy, and that to these Blessings nothing can be added, unless that
they may be Perpetual.

These are Great things, You Will say: and yet, truly, they make but a part of the
inestimable Benefits we have received from His MAJESTY; while He, (as if
observing the precepts of that Platonique Justice, which of all others
described by Men, seems to be the most Perfect and Difficult) dividing His
Cares betwixt our Spiritual and Temporal Good, has been so wonderfully
successful in them, that it must be wholly our own fault, if we be wanting in
either.

In fine, He is a KING, in whom Clemency and Justice, Piety and Fortitude,
Modesty and Magnanimity, (Virtues that seldom co-habit in one breast) are with
so perfect an Union married together: that they conspire to give more luster to
His Crown, than that can to His Royal Head; that Men are compelled to place
their Veneration, rather upon His Person and Divine Endowments of Mind, than
upon His Fortune; that He is become at once the Glory and Envy of Kings; that
supreme Sovereignty is his due, as much by Merit, as by Fate; and (in a word)
that no man can propose to His MAJESTY an Example more worthy His imitation in
the future, than that of Himself in the present. To conclude, therefore; as
Astro^omers observe, that when three of the Superior Luminaries meet in
Conjunction, that Aspect always produces Effects singularly good and happy to
Mankind: so may we, upon more certain grounds, be confident, that this great
Conjunction of so many Godlike Virtues and Graces, that like stars of the first
magnitude, shine together in the firmament of His Majesty's Royal Mind, cannot
but have so benign an influence upon His Government, as to make it highly
Glorious to Himself, and perfectly Happy to His People.

His Majesty's vast Goodness, and therein our own great Happiness thus
considered; what can we do less than to Love, Honor and Obey Him? Gratitude
obliges us to acknolwedge Him to be the Preserver of Great Britain, Hope of
Europe, supporter of the Faith truly Apostolic, Example of Princes, and the
Love and Delight of all Good Men. And our own Interest, as well as Loyalty,
obliges us to endeavor His defense and preservation to the utmost of our
power; and withal, to make it our daily Prayer to God Almighty, that He would
be pleased to establish and preserve His Most Excellent MAJESTY in the Rule of
these His Kingdoms, which by His Virtue begin to recover that Glory and
Felicity they so long enjoyed under the Scepters of His Royal Ancestors; to
make His Renown immortal by the greatness of His Actions and Achievements;
and after a long and prosperous Reign, to put Him in possession of a Celestial
Crown, in the same instant He shall see good to translate Him from His
Terrestrial one. And to this Prayer, I am well assured, there are none, who are
not Enemies to God, to Government, to the Peace of their Country, to
Themselves; but will, with all sincerity of Devotion, and fervency of spirit,
say, Amen.

Tyrannorum caede, and Clementis Principis succedentis imperio nihil jucundius,
nihil utilius subditis accidere potest. Herodian. Lib. 2.
FINIS.

