THE Royal Charter OF Confirmation Granted by KING Charles II. To the CITY of
LONDON.

Wherein are Recited Verbatim, All the CHARTERS to the said CITY, granted by
His Majesty's Royal Predecessors, KINGS and QUEENS of ENGLAND.

Taken out of the RECORDS, And exactly Translated into English By S. G. Gent.

TOGETHER With an Index or Alphabetical Table, and a Table explaining all the
Obsolete and Difficult Words in the said CHARTER.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Lee and Benjamin Alsop, at the Feathers in
Lombard Street, near the Post Office, and at the Angel in the Poultrey over
against the Stocks-market.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON Knight, Lord Mayor Of the CITY of
LONDON.
My Lord,
THe Principle Inducement to the making your Lordships Name Preliminary to the
ensuing Publication, proceeds from a Contemplation in me, that nothing could be
more proper in the prosecuting such an Attempt, than to Dedicate that to your
Lordship, which comprehends, not only the Royal Charter. and Privileges,
granted by Our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, but also those of
all his Royal Ancestors and Predecessors, to one of the most Ancient and
Glorious Cities in Europe, in which City your Lordship now attains the Highest
and most Eminent Place of Honor and Authority. And the main reason of the
Publication it self receives its Rise, First, From a Desire in me, to make it
appear to my Fellow Subjects, how far this Famous and Celebrated Metropolis,
has been Esteemed and Honored by those Great Monarchs of this Isle, who have
been pleased again and again to illustrate the same, by many Eminent Sanctions
under the Great Seal of England (for I may be bold to aver that no City or
Corporation in the Christian World (and so consequently in the Universe) did
ever arrive to a more immense Greatness than this City of London has derived
from the Gracious Inclinations of the Prince, which have been validated by so
many Acts of Parliament, and their Laws and Franchises thereby made (as it
were) unalterable, by the unanimous Consent of the King, Lords and Commons, the
Body of the whole Nation, for the establishing to them a more lasting Estate
and Condition of Wealth and Prosperity in Ages to come:) And Secondly, To the
intent that the several Members of this great Body might the better know how to
yield an Entire Obedience to those sacred Laws, under which they are so
strictly bound for the Commonweal of the City; and so live in Peace and Quiet
under the Government of an Indulgent and Gracious Prince, to whom they owe
their Protection and Support. For these Reasons, my Lord, I hope you will
vouchsafe to grant me your Pardon for this Presumption, and accept the same as
the Offering of him, who is a hearty Well-wisher to the Prosperity of this
Great and Opulent City, and who shall ever remain, with all respect,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Humble and Devoted Servant S. G.

A TABLE OF Obsolete and Difficult words contained in the Charter.
AMerciament, a pecuniary punishment in Court of an Offender against the King,
or any other Lord. Avoir-du-pois, a French word signifying in our Common Law
two things: 1. A kind of Weight different from that called Troyweight, which
contains but twelve ounces to the pound, whereas this contains sixteen. 2. It
signifies such Merchandises as are weighed by this Weight. Brid-toll (or
Bridgetoll) a Duty or Tax for passing over a Bridge. Blank-sterling, from the
French word Blanch, i. e. white, a Coin that was coined in the parts of France
by King Henry the fifth, when they were subject to England, the value whereof
was 8 d. These were forbidden to be current within* this Realm 2 H. 6. The
reason why they were called Blanks, was to distinguish this Coin by its color
from a certain piece of Gold which was then coined at 22 s. Childwite, an old
Saxon word signifying a power to take a Fine of your Bondwoman begotten with
child without your consent. Corody, A sum of money, or allowance of meat and
drink due to the King out of an Abbey or Religious House whereof he is Founder,
toward the maintenance of such one of his servants as he shall think fit to
make a Pentioner there. Dane-guilt, a Tribute laid upon our Ancestors of 12 d.
for every Hide of Land throughout the Realm, by the Danes, for clearing the
Seas (as they pretended) of Pirates. Denizen, i. e. an Alien born, enabled by
the King's Letters Patents to purchase Lands, hold Offices, etc. and his Heirs
to inherit. But this difference lies, That a person naturalized by Act of
Parliament, may inherit Lands by descent, which a Denizen cannot, though his
Heirs may inherit from him. Deodand, In Latin, signifies a thing given or
forfeited to God for the pacification of his wrath, for any accident whereby a
Christian comes to his death without the default of any reasonable creature. As
if a Horse kill his Keeper, or a Cart run over a man, the Creatures and
Instruments are forfeited to the King to be distributed to the poor. Flackmote,
or Folkmote, a Saxon word, signifying a Court holden in London, wherein all the
people of the City did complain of Irregularities and Mis-governments within
the City. Frank-pledge, a Pledge or Surety for Freemen of fourteen years of age
(except Clerks and Knights) their finding Sureties toward the King and His
Subjects, or else they were to be sent to prison. Guild, a Fraternity or
Company combined together by Orders and Laws made among themselves by the
Prince's License. Husting, a French word, signifying the principal or highest
Court in London. Jeresgive, an ancient Tax or Toll in the time of the Saxons.
Infangtheft, a Saxon word, signifying a Liberty granted to certain Lords of
Manors to judge any Thief taken within their Fee. Keddals, Wares for Fishing.
Lastage, or Lestage, i. e. a Burden, a Custom challenged in Fairs and Markets
for carrying of things. Whence comes a Last of Herrings, a Last of Pitch and
Tar, etc. Miskenning, Changing of Speech in Court. Murage, a Contribution
gathered for repairing old Edifices or Walls. Outfangtheft, a Liberty granted
to the Lord to try any Thief taken out of his Fee. Passage, The Hire a man pays
for Transport over the Seas. Portsoken, The Liberties within the Port of
London. Pannage, or Pawnage, or Herbage, A Duty given to the King for Pasturage
of Cattle; as also for Fruits, Trees, Masts, Hedgerowes, etc. Pontage,
Contribution toward the repairing of a Bridge. Pypowder, In Latin, Curia
Pedis pulverizati, a Court held in Fairs for redressing all Disorders committed
therein. Soke, The Liberty in Court allowed to Tenants. Scotale, Punishment of
an Officer who does keep an Alehouse, causing men to come to his house, and
spend their money for fear of displeasure. Taillage, From the French word
Taille, i. e. a piece cut out of the whole, signifying the paying a part or
share of a man's substance by way of Tribute, Toll or Tax. Took, Seems to come
from the River Teuke, unde Teukesbury. Treasure-trove, All Treasure found which
has no lawful Owner, belongs to the King, in whose grounds soever the same is
taken. Tronage, Toll or Duty for weighing Goods. Withernam, In the Common Law
is the taking or driving a Distress to a hold, or out of the County where the
Sheriff cannot come, upon a Replevin to make deliverance thereof to the party
distreined.
The TABLE.
ACquittal of Murder. page 5, 10, 25, 33 Acquittal of Duties in Thames claimed
at the Tower. 15, 23 Acquittal of Toll, Tollage, Custage and Custom. 3. 6. 11.
26. 32. 46 Account. The Mayor to account in the Exchequer. 13. 14. 44 Allowance
of the Sheriffs in the Excheq. 14. 31 Aids. Citizens not to war out of the
City. 39 Aids, vide Subsidies. Amerciaments. 5. 7 Of the Sheriffs of London to
be as other Sheriffs. 38 Their Amerciaments not to exceed 20 l. 20 In
Southwark. 68. 108 Aldermen not to be put upon Assizes, Attaints or Juries. 63
Aldermen not to be Collectors. 64 Aldermen past the Chair, to be Justices of
the Peace. 58 Apples Measurage. 116 Assize of Aie and Beer in Southw. 67. 102
Attachments for Debts. 4 Attachm. to be made by the City Officers. 68 In
Southwark. ibid. Aldermen past the Chair to be Justices in Southwark. 110
Alehouses. Recognizances for suppressing them. 159 Appearance at Sessions, and
Recognizances about it. ibid. Aliens to keep no houses in London. 55
Battle. 3. 5. 7. 10. 25. 33 Beams and Weights. 36. 88. to 92 Bartholomews in
Smithfield great and less. 128. 136. 182 Blackfriars. 136 Blackfriars exempt
from Taxes and Fifteenths. 129 Beadle of the Court of Requests. 181 Bethlem
Hospital. 183. 185 Brokers. 53. 55 Brokers. The Office recited. 182 Brid-toll.
To be free thereof. 6. 8. 12. 26 Buildings and new Erections. 166 Bastards.
Recognizances concerning them. 159
Certificate of the Custom of London to be Ore tenus. 60 City of London the
King's Chamber. 137 City and the Extent thereof. 127. 138. 140 Cold-Harbour.
128. 138. 144 Coals, and the weighing them pertains to the City. 139. 141 No
Market thereof to be in Lighters. 144 Against the forestalling them. ibid.
Measuring them pertains to the City. 117 Notice of the quantity to be given by
the Mayor to the King. 142 Corn, and the measuring the same. 119 Childwite. To
be free of the same. 6. 8. 26 Clerk of the Market in Southw. 68. 107. 110 Of
the Court of Request. 180 Confirmation of all former Charters with an
Exception. 147 Coroner of London. 77 Place of London distinct from the Chie
Butler's Place. ibid. Of Southwark. 107 Claims of Liberties undecided. 45
Charter of Edw. 4th. confirmed by Act of Parliament. 3 H. 8. 74 Charters of
King Hen. 6th. made void. 151 Court of Conscience and Request. 180 Conservator
of the River of Thames. 118 Confirm. of the Customs of Lon. 6. 8. 12. 48. 118
Court of Requests of London. 180 Court of Pypowders in Southwark. 68. 102
Combat no Citizen to make Combat. 2 Common Crier or Outroper for Sale of
things. 193 Customs of Lon. confirmed. 6. 8. 12. 30. 48. 51 Custom of
Merchandise to be paid before put to sale. 35 Customs of Lon. to be certified
by the mouth of the Recorder. 60. 175 To be enjoyed according to Mag. Charta.
50 Circuits, how the Citizens are to be regulated in them. 46 Confirmation of
all former Charters. 124. 203 Crown Pleas, vide Pleas of the Crown.
Debts to Citizens of Lon. 4. 5. 7. 26. 35 Dane-guilt. 3 Debts to be enrolled
in the Exchequer. 36 Deodands in Southwark. 101 Device in Mortmain. 42
Discharge themselves of Pleas of the Crown, vide Pleas, etc. Doubts concerning
the Char. of Hen. 7th. 152 Dukes Place. 133
Escheator of the Mayor of London to be Escheator. 43. Of the King not to
intermeddle in Land. ib. Exchequer, no Citizen to be sued there; except it
concern the King. 48 Escheats in Southwark. 66. 107 Estraies in Dukes Place.
136 Execution of Writs in Southwark. 67. 102
Fee-Farm paid for the Sheriffwick of Middlesex. 14. 20 Felons goods in
Southwark. 66. 103 to 108 Taken in Southwark to be carried to Newgate. ibid.
Fee-Farm of Southwark. 113 Felons Goods in Dukes-Place, vide Treasure there. In
London. 136. 176 Fees for weighing of Coals. 141 Garbling of things not
formerly Garbled. 169 Gawging of things not formerly Gawged. ibid. Weighing.
172 Fair in West-Smithfield. 163 in Southwark. 68. 102 Fines and Amerciaments
concerning the River of Thames. 161 By the Mayor. 161 By Commissioners of
Sewers. 162 Foreign Tenures. 25. 33 Foreign Bought and Sold, vide Goods
Foreign, etc. Forestalling Goods. 35 Forestalling and Regrating Coals. 143
Forfeitures, Customs of London not to be Forfeited. 6 Forfeiture of
Recognizances, vide Recognizances. Of Goods put to Sale before Custom is paid.
35. Of Wares Forestalled, vide Forestalling. Free from Scot and Lot and
Daneguilt. 2 From Murder, vide Murder. From Toll. 5. 7. 11 From Toll all over
England. 32. 34 Freemens Widows, vide Widows. Freedom to be taken by certain
Persons. 178 Fugitives goods in Southwark, vide Treasure there.
Gates and Customs of them. 56 Gathering of the Toll in London, vide Toll.
Garbling Office. 76. 167 Gawgers Office. 76. 81. 189 Guilt, Dane-Guilt. 2 Goods
disclaimed in Southwark, vide Treasure there. Goods waved in Dukes-Place. 148
Goods Foreign bought and sold in the City, Forfeited. 79 Jail-delivery, and
Recogn. for appearing. 177
Handiworks in Southwark, vide Treasurer Trove there. Huntings. 4. 6. 11. 26
Hustings. 4. 6. 7. 11. 25
Infangtheft. 41 Inquisition to be taken at St. Martins, vide St. Martins.
Jeresgive, vide Bridtoll. Jews. 37 Issue upon the Customs of London, vide
Customs of London. Justices, one Alderman in Middlesex, another in Surrey to be
named by the Mayor. 177 The Mayor, Recorder, etc. Justices of Peace, and of
Oyer, etc. 154. 57. 58. 135 Four may hold Sessions. 155 Of Land. to hold
Jurisdict. in Blackfriars, White-Fryers, Dukes-Place, etc. 133 In Southwark.
110 Issues pardoned. 165 Intrusions pardoned. 185 Justice. City to appoint a
Justice for Pleas. 3 Inmates. 145
Keddals, vide Wares: Keeper. No Keeper to be set over the City. 47
Laws. The City to enjoy their Laws. 1 Lands, and the Plea of Lands. 3 Lestage,
vide Acquittal of Toll. Leaden Hall. 70 Letters Patents to be sealed without
charge. 136 License to purchase five Acres of Ground in St. Giles's in the
Fields. 187 Liberties of London restored. 125, etc. Liberties confirmed. 120.
41. 22. 59 Not to be against Law. 37 To be Recorded before the Justices. 45 Not
to be impeached by the Stat. of York. 50 Not to be forfeited, vide Forfeitures.
License to purchase Land in Mortmaine. 72 Lighters of Coals. 138. 144 Lodging
not to be taken by force. 3. 7. 25. 34 Lot, vide Free of Lot, etc. Ludgate. 56
Liberties confirmed with exceptions, vide Confirmation. Middlesex. The
Sheriffwick thereof. 2. 13 Miskenning. 3. 5. 7. 11. 25 Mayor. The choice. 17.
22 To be presented to the King. ibid. To name two Aldermen to be inserted in
the Commission of Peace in Middlesex, London and Surrey. 177 To the Barons of
the Exchequer. 38 At the Tower. ibid. To be Justice at Newgate. 41 To be
Escheator in London. 44 To be Justice of Peace, and of Oyer and and Terminer.
58 To be Justice in Southwark. 110 To Measure Coals, Corn, etc. 116, etc. To be
yearly chosen. 17 Magna Charta recited. 40 Medway River. 15. 23. 45. 115 Maces
to be born by the Sergeants of Land. 52 Market not to be within 7 miles of
London. 47. 175 In Southwark. 110 Not to be in Lighters. 144 The Mayor Clerk of
the Market in Southwark. 107 Marshal of the K. not to meddle in Land. 43
Merchant strangers not to sell by retail. 55 To sell in forty days, and not to
keep houses. 43. 54 Merchants of Almaine. 63 Martins le Grand. Inquisit. to be
there. 48. 82 Murage, quit thereof. 38 Murder, free thereof. 2. 5. 7. Newgate.
56 Non-User of the Customs, no forseiture of them. 121 Names of the
Corporations of London. 124
Oath; none to be taken by the Sheriffs in the Exchequer, except, etc. 44 To be
administered by the Mayor, etc. For discovering concealed Goods. 208 Office of
Packing 75. 197 Of Seavage. 202 Of Portage. 76. 198 Of Outroper or Common
Crier. 173 Of Garbling, vide Garbling. Of Gawging, vide Gawging. Of
Wine-drawer. 76 Of Measuring Coals, Corn, Salt, etc. 116 Of Conservator of the
River, vide Conservator. Of Common Crier, vide Common Crier. Of Clerk of the
Court of Conscience, vide Clerk. Of Register of Brokers, vide Brokers. Officers
of London to have the same power in Southwark. 106 Offenders to be punished by
whom. 157 Onions and the measuring of them. 116 Oil, the Survey of it. ibid.
Outsangthest, vide Infangtheft.
Passage free thereof. 3 Pannage, vide Murage. 38 Packing. 75 Package the
Office created, and granted to the City. 197. 199 Pardon of Issues, Rents,
Profits and Intrusions 165. 166 Ileas of the Crown. 3. 5. 7. 25. 32 Citizens
not to be impleaded out of Lon. 3. 5. 6. 10. 25. 32. 43 In Fairs to be holden
by Citizens. 44 In Southwark to be tried in Lon. 104 Paul's. Money allowed for
the Liberty thereof. 31 Promises. 4. 6. 7. 25 Prizage of Wines. 47 Porcage
Office. 76 Port of London. 119 Poors House in Smithfield. 184 Plums; the
measuring of them. 116 Purveyor not to make prize of things in Lon. 47 Not to
be a Merchant. ibid. Pye-Powder Court in Southwark. 68. 102 Peace. Recognizance
concerning preservation thereof. 133. 155. 160
Queen-Hith. 29 The Farm thereof made by the Earl of Cornwall. ibid.
Recorder, a Justice of Oyer and Terminer. 58. 134 Of the Quorum. 134 In
Southwark. 110 Record. The Liberties and Customs. 60. 175 Return of Writs in
Southwark. 67. 102 Recogniz. forfeited, granted to the City. 160 Recognizances
of Citizens to be enrolled in the Exchequer. 36 Recognizances forfeited,
granted to the City, except Royal Issues. 159 For preserving of the Peace. 133.
155. 160 Concerning Bastards. 177 For Appearance at Jail-deliver, vide
Jail-deliver. Retail. 55 Restitution of Liberties. 125. 148 Roots measured.
116 Register of Brokers. 182
Sergeants of London may use Silver and Gold Maces. 52 Southwark granted to the
City in Parliament. 49 The Fee-Farm thereof. 113 Several Messuages granted the
City. 92 to 100. Treasure found, Waifes, Estrays, etc. 101 A Fair. 68
Inhabitants to be under the Government of the Mayor. 109 The Mayor etc. to be
Justices there. 110 Markets there. ibid. The Mayor to be Clark of the Market
and receive Tolls there. 107. 108 Marshalsea, etc. Excepted out of this Grant
of Southwark. 111 Summons there. 68 Salt; the measuring thereof. 116
Sheriffwick of Middlesex granted to the City. 2 Of London and Middlesex
granted. 13. 14 19 Sheriffs to be removed at pleasure of the Citizens. 14. 19
Accomptable in the Exchequer. 13. 19 If not Solvent, the City to answer their
dues to the King. 13. 19 Not to be amerced above 20 l. 13. 20 For criminal
offenses punished. ibid. To be allowed upon Account in the Exchequer what
shall, etc. 14. 21 To be presented at the Exchequer. 19 To be allowed upon
account of Paul's. 31 When to be presented to the Tower. 38 To be amerced as
other Sheriffs. 38. 42 Not to be charged with escapes of such as fly to
Churches. 43 To take no oath in the Exchequer, but to Account. 44 To have the
forfeiture of victuals. 47 Staynes; the Forest disforrested. 27 Subsidies, how
Citizens are to be taxed. 46 Strangers not to sell by retail. 55 Soil of the
Streets and Thames formerly granted to the City, and since made void. 150
Strayes in London. 176 Signs. 183 Sanctuary. 44 Summons to be made only by City
Officers. 43 Steward of the Kings House not to sit in Lon. ibid. Strangers not
to keep houses or be Brokers. 55 Sidney, Sir William's Patent cancelled. 85
Streets, Lanes, Alleys, Wastegrounds and Common Soil of the City reserved to
the King. 164 Sessions of Peace. 155
Taxes and Tallages who liable to them. 62. 63 Tenures. 5. 7. 25 Thames the
Mayor conservator thereof. 118 The Wares and Keddals to be removed. 9. 15. 23
Toll, Citizens to be Toll-free. 6. 7. 11. 25. 34 Tower. Customs taken by the
keeper thereof acquitted. 15 The Mayor and Sheriff to be presented there. 38
Tolls in London to be collected by whom. 64 In Southwark. 108 Tobacco. 169
Tonnage 70 Tronage. 5. 6. 86. 88 Treasure Trove in London. 176. In Southwark.
66. 101 In Dukes Place. 136 Thieves taken in Southwark, To be carried to
Newgate. 69. 103 Trial in London of actions in Southwark. 106
Victuals. No Purveyor or other Officer to set price. 47 The Sheriff to have
the forfeiture. 47 Forestalled, forfeited. 35 View of Franck-Pledg in
Southwark. 68. 103 Wares or Keddals to be moved out of the River. 9. 15. 23. 24
War, no Citizens to be compelled thereto. 44 Waifes in London. 176. in
Southwark. 66. 101 White-Friers. 128. 129. 133 Weavers. 18 Westminster their
liberties saved. 38 Weighing Wools at Leaden Hall. 70 Of Coals. 141 At the
Kings Beam. 36. 88 West-Smithfield 184 The House of Poor there. 208 Widows of
Freemen. 174 Wine-drawers. 76 Writs in Southwark. 67. 101 Withernam. 4. 7. 11.
26. 34. Warren of Staynes unwarrened 27 Wares Forestalled. 35
Some Errata and Defects which have escaped the Press.
PAge 4. l. 8. for Premises, read Promises. P. 6. l. 9. for Premises, read
Promises. P. 7. l. Uit. for Premises, read Promises. P. 35. l. 6. for the line
drawn, read questioned. P. 49. l. 1. for the line drawn, read City.
THE CHARTER OF King Charles the Second, Granted to the CITY of LONDON;
Translated into English.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these present Letters shall come greeting:
We have seen the Charter of Lord William, sometimes King of England, our
Progenitor, made in these words, William King, greet William Bishop, etc. We
have also seen a certain other Charter of the said Lord William our Progenitor,
made in these words; William King greet William Bishop, etc. We have also seen
another Charter of our most dear Father, Lord Charles the First, late King of
England, of blessed Will. Conq. chapter 1.
memory, made in these words, Charles by the grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these
present Letters shall come greeting: WE have seen the Charter of Lord William,
sometimes King of England, our Progentior, in these words, William, King greet
William, Bishop, and Godfrey Portgreve, and all the Burroughmen To enjoy your
Laws.
without London, French and English friendly, I give you to understand, that I
will that you enjoy all the Laws that you enjoyed in the days of King Edward:
And I will that each child be his Fathers Heir after his Fathers death. And I
will not suffer that any man do you wrong. God give you health.

We have seen also a certain other Charter Charter 2.
of the same William our Progenitor, made in these words, William, King,
greet William, etc.

We have also seen the Charter of the Henry 1.
Lord Henry, sometimes King of England, our progenitor, made in these words,
Henry by the grace of God, King of England, to the Bishop of Canterbury, and to
the Bishops and Abbots, Earls and Barons, Justices and Sheriffs, and to all his
faithful Subjects Choose the Sheriffs of Middlesex.
of England, French and English greeting KNOW ye, that I have granted to my
Citizens of London, to hold Middlesex to farm for three hundred pounds upon
account to them and their Heirs; so that the said Citizens shall place as
Sheriff whom they will of themselves, and shall place whomsoever, or such one
as they will of themselves for keeping of the Pleas of the Crown, and of Keep
Pleas of the Crown.
the pleading of the same, and none other shall be Justice over the same men of
London, and the Citizens of London shall not None to plead without Land. Free
from Scor, etc.
plead without the walls of London for any Plea. And be they free from Scot and
Lot, and Daneguilt, and of all Murder. And none of them shall wage Battle. And
if any Battle.
of the Citizens shall be impleaded concerning the Pleas of the Crown, the man
of Discharge of Pleas of Crown.
London shall discharge himself by his Oath, which shall be adjudged within the
City. And none shall lodge within the walls neither None lodge in the City per
force. Toll-free throughout England.
of my household, nor any other, nor Lodging delivered by force. And all the men
of London shall be quit and free, and all their goods throughout England, and
the Ports of the Sea, of and from all Toll, and Passage, and Lestage, and all
other Customs. Passage, Lestage. Churches and Citizens to enjoy their Cust.
And the Churches, and Barons, and Citizens, shall and may peaceably and
quietly have and hold their Sokes, with all their Customs, so that the
strangers that shall be lodged in the Sokes, shall give Custom to none but him
to whom the Soke appertain, or to his Officer whom he shall there put. And a
man of London shall not be adjudged in a merciaments of money, but of 100
shillings (I speak of the How Citizens shall be amerced. No Miskenning in the
Courts of the City. Hustings to sit every Monday.
Pleas which appertain to money.) And further, there shall be no more
miskenning in the Hustings, nor in the Flock-mote, nor in any other Pleas
within the City. And the Hustings may sit once in a week, that is to say, on
Monday. And I will cause my Citizens to have their Lands, Premises, Bonds and
Debts within the City, and without. And I Citizens to enjoy their goods, debts,
etc. according to the Law of the City.
will do them right, by the Law of the City, of the Lands of which they shall
complain to me. And if any shall take Toll or Custom of any Citizen of London,
the Citizens of London in the City shall take of the Borough or Town where Toll
or Custom was so taken, so much as the man of London gave for Toll, and as he
received damage thereby. And all Debtors which do Debts owing to Citizens to be
discharged in London.
owe debts to the Citizens of London, shall pay them in London, or else
discharge them themselves in London, that they owe none: But if they will not
pay the same, neither come to clear themselves that they owe Attachments in
Withernam for debts to Citizens.
none; the Citizens of London, to whom the debts shall be due, may take their
goods in the City of London of the Borough or Town, or of the County wherein he
remains who shall owe the debts. And the Citizens of London may have To hunt in
Essex, Surry, and Middlesex.
their Chases to Hunt, as well and fully as their Ancestors have had, that is
to say, in Chiltre and in Middlesex, and Surry; witness the Bishop of
Winchester, and Robert Son of Richard, and Hugh Pigott; and Almer of Totnes,
and William of Albsprima, and Hubert Roger Chamberlain, and William de Mount
Fitchett, and Hangul Taney, and John Ballett, and Robert Son of Steward of
West.

Furthermore, We have seen the Charter Henry 2.
of Lord Henry the second, sometimes King of England our Progenitor, made in
these words; Henry King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and Earl of
Anjou; To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs,
Ministers, and to all his faithful Subjects, French and English of all England
greeting; Know ye, that I have granted to my Citizens Citizens not to plead
without the walls, except in foreign tenures. Except Monyers. Acquit. of
Murder. Not wage Battle. To discharge themselves of Pleas of the Crown.
of London, that none of them plead without the walls of the City of London
upon any Pleas, except only of Pleas of foreign tenures (my Monyers and
Officers excepted.) Also I grant to them acquittal of Murder within the City,
and in Portsoken thereof. And that none of them shall wage Battle. And of the
Pleas of the Crown they may discharge themselves according to the old usage of
the City. No man shall take Lodging by force, or by delivery of the Marshal.
And also I have granted to them, That All the Citizens of London shall be quit
from Toll and Lestage throughout all England, and the Ports of the Sea: And
that none shall be adjudged for Amerciaments None amerced but according to the
Law of the City.
of money, but according to Law of the City, which they had in the time of K.
Henry my Grandfather. And that there shall be no miskenning in any Plea within
No Miskenning. Hustings once a week. Right to be done Citizens of their Lands.
this City. And that the Hustings shall be kept once a week, and they justly
have their lands, and tenures, and premises and all their debts, whosoever do
owe them; and that right be done them according to the Custom of of the City of
all their lands and tenures which be in the City, and of all their debts which
were lent at London, and of premises there made Pleas to be holden in London.
Also I do grant to them that they may have Hunting.
their Huntings wheresoever they had the same in the time of K. Henry my
Grandfather. And if any in all England shall take any Citizens Toll-free.
Custom or Toll of or from the men of London, after he shall fail of right; the
Sheriff of London may take goods thereof at London.

Furthermore, also for the advancement of Citizens free of Bridtoll, Childwit,
Jeresgive and Scotal. Confirmation of all Customs.
the said City, I have granted to them that they shall be free and quit of
Bridtol, Child wite, and Jeresgive, and Scotale, so as the Sheriff of London,
or any other Bailiff may take no Scotale. These aforesaid Customs I do grant
unto them, and all their Liberties and free Customs which they had in the time
of K. Hen. my Grandfather, whenever they had To hold of the K. and his heirs.
them more better and free, wherefore I will and steadfastly command that they
and their Heirs may have and hold all, these things aforesaid by inheritance of
me and my heirs; witness the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rob. Bishop of Land. Ph.
Bishop of Bath, Edward, Bishop of Lexon, Th. Chancellor, Rich. of Newberry, R.
of Warron, Rich. of St. Wall, Wash Mamot, Rich. of Lucy, Conar Son of Garold,
Mannell Bissett Loc Baillolio at Westminster.

WE have also seen the Charter of Lord Rich. 1. Chapter 1.
Rich. the first, sometimes K. of England, D. of Normandy, and Earl of Anjou to
his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Ministers,
and all others his faithful French and English people greet: KNOW Citizens not
to plead without the walls, except foreign Tenures.
ye, that we have granted to our Citizens of London, that none of them may
plead without the walls of the City of London for any Pleas, saving Pleas of
foreign tenures (except Monyers.
our Monyers and Ministers.) Also we have granted to them Acquittal of Murder
Acquit. of Murder.
within the City, and in Portsoken; and that none of them may wage Battle, and
that they may discharge themselves of the Pleas belonging to the Crown,
according to the Ancient Custom of the City; and that none may take any
Lodgings within the None take Lodgings by force.
walls of the City by force, or by delivery of the Marshal. This also we have
granted unto them, that all the Citizens of London be free from Toll and
Lestage, throughout all England and the Seaports, and that none be adjudged of
Amerciaments Amerced according to the Law of the City.
of money, but according to the Law of the City which they had in the time of
K. Henry, Grandfather to Henry our Father, and that there be no miskenning in
any Plea No Miskenning. Hustings once a week
within the City, and that the Hustings be kept only once a week, and they
justly have all their Lands and Tenures, and Premises, and all other their
debts whosoever do owe Right to be done the City.
them to them. And that right be done to them according to the Custom of the
City, of all their Lands and Tenures which they have within the City, and of
all their debts which shall be lent at London, and of promises there made, the
Pleas shall be holden at London; and if any in all England shall take Toll or
Custom of the men of London after that he shall fail of right, the Sheriff of
London may take goods therefore at London. Also we have granted unto them that
they may have their Huntings wheresoever they had the same in the time of King
Henry, Grandfather to Henry our Father. Furthermore, Also for the Advancement
of the City we have granted to them that they all be acquit of all Brid-Toll,
Childwite, and Jeresgive, and Scotale, so that no Sheriff of London, or any
other Bailiff shall make any Scotale. The said Customs we do grant to them and
all other liberties and free Customs which they had in the time of King Henry,
Grandfather unto Henry our Father, when as they more better and freely had the
same. Wherefore, we will and steadfastly command, that they and their heirs have
and hold all their things aforesaid of us and our heirs. Witness Hub.
Archbishop of Cant. R. Bishop of Lincoln, Ralph Earl of Chester. R. Earl of
Clarence, William Marshal, Roger Bigott, Jeophery Son of Peter, Hugh Bardolph,
William Brewer, William Warren, Given by the hand of William Bishop of Ely our
Chancellor at Winchester, 23 Apr. 5th. Year of our Reign.

WE have also seen a certain other Charter Rich. 1. Chapter 2.
of the said Lord Rich. By the Grace of God, K. of Engl. Duke of Normandy, and
Earl of Anjou. To his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Sheriffs, Stewards, Castle-keepers, Justices, Constables, Bailiffs, Ministers,
and all his Faithful Subjects greeting: Know ye all, that we, for the health of
our soul, and for the souls health of K. Henry our Father, and all our
Ancestors souls; and also for the common weal of our City of London, and of all
our Realm, Have granted and steadfastly commanded, that all wares that are in
the Thames be moved wheresoever they shall be within the Thames. And that no
wares be put any way within the Thames. Also we have clearly quit claimed all
that which the To remove all Wares in the Thames.
Keepers of our Tower of London was wont yearly to receive of the said wares.
Wherefore we will and steadfastly command, that no Keeper of the said Tower at
any time hereafter shall exact any thing of any one neither molest, or burden,
or any demand make of any person by reason of the said wares; for it is
manifest to us, and by our Right Reverend Father, Hubert Archbishop of Canter.
and other our Faithful Subjects, it is sufficiently given us to understand,
that great detriment and discommodity has grown to our said City of London and
also to the whole Realm, by occasion of the said wares; which thing, to the
intent it may continue for ever firm and stable, we do fortify by the
Inscription of this present page, and the putting to our Seal: These being
witnesses, John of Worcester, Hugh of Coventry, Bishops; John Earl of Morton,
Ralph Barl of Chester, Robert Earl of Leicester, Will. Earl of Arundel, Will.
of St. Mary's Church, Peter Son of Hereb, Matthew his Brother, Simon of Ryma,
Scherio de quincero. Given by the hand of Mr. Eustace Dean of Salisbury,
Vicechancellor then Agent at the Isle of Audlyer the fourteenth day of July, in
the eighth year of our Reign.

WE have also seen the Charter of Lord John. Chapter 1.
Jo. Sometimes King of England, our progenitor, in these words: John by the
Grace of God, K. of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Aquitain, and
Earl of Anjou; To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Sheriffs, Ministers, and all his Majesty's Faithful Subjects, French and
English greeting. Know Ye, that No Citizen to plead without the walls.
we have granted to our Citizens of London, that none of them shall plead
without the walls of the City of London, of no pleas, saving the pleas of
foreign tenures (our Monyers and Ministers excepted) also we have granted to
them Acquittal of murder within the City and in Portsoken; and none Not to
wage Battle.
of them shall wage Battle; and of the pleas belonging to the Crown they may
discharge themselves, according to the Ancient custom of the City. And that
within the walls of the City nor Portsoken, no man shall take any Lodging by
force or delivery of the Marshal. And also we have granted to them that all the
Citizens of London shall be quit from Toll or Lestage and every Quit of Toll.
other Custom throughout all our Lands on this side and beyond the Seas. And
that none shall be adjudged for Amerciaments Citizens to be amerced by the City
Law.
of money, but according to the Law of the City which they had in the time of
K. Henry, Grandfather to Henry our Father. And that there shall be no
miskenning in any No Miskenning. Hustings once a week.
Plea in the City. And that the Hustings shall be kept once every week, and
they justly have their Lands, and Tenures, and Premises, and all other their
debts, whosoever owe them. And that right be holden to them of their Lands and
Tenures, City to have their lands and debts.
which be within the City according to the Custom of the said City, and of all
their debts which shall be lent at London. And that Pleas, of all promises
there made be holden at London. And if any in any of our Lands on this side or
beyond the Seas shall take any Toll or any other Custom from the men of London
after that he shall fail of right, may take goods therefore at London And we do
grant unto them that they may have their Huntings wheresoever they had the same
in the time of King Henry Grandfather to our Father. Furthermore, for the
advancement of the said City, we have granted unto them that they shall be free
and quit of all Brid-Toll and Childwite, and of Jeresgive, and Scotale, so as
the Sheriff of London, nor any other Bailiff may make any Scotale. These
aforesaid Customs we do grant, and all other liberties and Grant of the
Customs they had in the Reign of Henry 1.
free Customs which they had in the time of K. Henry, Grandfather of Henry our
Father, when as more freely and better they had the same; wherefore we will and
steadfastly command, that they and their heirs may have and hold all these
things aforesaid Hold of the King and his Heirs.
hereditarily, and wholly of us and our heirs. Witness Hubert Archbishop of
Canter. our Chancellor, Will. of London, E. of Ely, G. of Gloucester, G. of
Winchester, Bishops; Godfrey, Son of Peter, Earl of Essex, Will. Marshal,
Earl of Pembrook, Homel, Earl of Warren, R. Earl of Clarence, Earl Roger, Lord
Bigot, Will. Earl of Arundel, Will. D. Braos, Roger Son of Roger, Hugh Borg,
Will. Bridge, Warren, Will. D. Warren, Stephen D. Truncham, Simon de
Paffiishil, given by the hands of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury our
Chancellor at Torham the 17. day of June in the first year of our Reign.

WE have seen other Charters of the aforesaid Jo. Chapter 2.
Lord John our progenitor made in these words; John by the grace of God, King
of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou, to
his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Rulers,
and to all his Bailiffs, and loving Subjects: Know Ye, that we have granted,
and by this our present writing confirmed to our Citizens of London, the
Sheriffwick of London and Confirmation of the Sheriffwick of Land. and
Middlesex. for 300 l. per annum*
Middlesex, with all the Customs and things to the sheriffwick belonging,
within the City and without, by land and by water, to have and to hold to them
and their heirs, of us and our heirs paying therefore 300 l. of blank sterling
money at two terms in the year, that is to say at the Easter Exchequer Paid at
Easter and Michaelmas.
150l. and at Michaelmas Exchequer 150 l. saving to the Citizens of London all
their liberties and free Customs. And further we Power to make Sheriffs, and to
remove them.
have granted to the Citizens of London, that they amongst themselves may make
Sheriffs whom they will, and may amove them when they will, and those whom they
make Sheriffs they shall present to our Sheriffs to be presentable and
accomptable to the Exchequer. Sheriffs non solvent the City to make it good.
Saving Liberties.
Justices of our Exchequer of these things which to the said Sheriffwick
appertain, whereof, they ought to answer us, and unless they shall sufficiently
answer and satisfy, the Citizens may answer and satisfy us the Amerciaments and
Farm, saving to the said Citizens their liberties as is aforesaid, and saving
to the said Sheriffs the same liberties which other Citizens have, so that they
which shall be appointed Sheriffs for the time being shall commit any offense
whereby they ought to incur any Amerciament of money, they shall not be
condemned for any more than to the Amerciament of 20l. and that without the
damage of other Citizens; if the Sheriffs be not sufficient fo the payment of
their Amerciaments: but if Sheriffs offending to be tried by the Citizens.
they do any offense where they ought to incur the loss of their lives or
members, they shall be adjudged, as they ought to be, according to the Law of
the Ci^^; and of these things which to the said Sheriffs belong, the Sheriffs
shall answer before our Sheriffs to answer in the Exchequer. Inducement of this
confirmation.
Justices at our Exchequer, saving to the said Sheriffs the liberties which
other Citizens of London have. Also this grant and confirmation we have made to
the Citizens of London for the amendment of the said City, and because it was
in ancient 300 l. per annum, the Ancient form.
times farmed for 300 l. Wherefore we will and steadfastly command, that the
Citizens of London and their heirs may have and hold Sheriffwick of Land. and
Middlesex at 300 l. per annum.
the Sheriffwick of London and Middlesex, with all the said Sheriffwick
belonging of us and our heirs to possess and enjoy hereditarily, freely and
quietly, honorably and wholly, by fee-farm of 300 l. And we forbid that none
presume to do any damage, impediment, or diminishment to the Citizens None to
harm them of what to the Sheriffwick belong. What shall be given away
appertaining to the Sheriffwick, to be allowed on account in the Excheq.
of London of these things which to the said Sheriffwick do or were accustomed
to appertain. Also we will and command that if we or our heirs, or any of our
Justices, shall give or grant to any person any of those things which to the
form of the Sheriffwick appertain, the same shall be accounted to the Citizens
of London in the acquittal of the said Farm at our Exchequer. Witness Edw. of
Ely, S. of Bath, Bishops; Will. Marshal, Earl of Pembrook, Ralph, Earl of
Chester, Will. Earl of Arundel, Robert, Son of Walter, Will. Son of Albin.
Given by the hands of H. Archbishop of Canter. our Chancellor at the good Town
upon Took the 5th. day of July in the first year of our Reign.

WE have seen one other Charter of the Joh. Chapter 3.
aforesaid Lord John our progenitor, made in these words, John by the Grace of
God K. of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Aquitain, and Earl of
Anjou; To his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs,
Stewards, Castlekeepers, Constables, Bailiffs, Ministers, and all his Faithful
Subjects greeting. Know Ye all, that we for our Souls health, and for the Souls
health of Hen. our Father, and all our predecessors, and also for the
Commonweal of our City of London, and of all our Realm, have granted and
steadfastly commanded that all the wares which are in the Thames, or in Medway
be amoved wheresoever they shall be within the Thames and Remove Wares in
Thames and Medway.
Medway, and that no wares from henceforth be put any where in the Thames or
Medway, upon forfeiture of ten pounds sterling, also we have clearly
quitclaimed all that which the Keepers of the Tower of London were wont yearly
to receive of the said wares. Wherefore we will and steadfastly Keeper of the
Tower not to exact any thing for wares.
command, that no keeper of the said Tower at any time hereafter exact any
thing from any body, nor trouble or molest any person by reason of the said
wares, for it is sufficiently manifest to us, and by the Right Reverend Hubert,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and by other our Faithful Subjects, it is
sufficiently given us to understand that very great detriment and discommodity
has grown to our said City of London, and also to our Realm by occasion of
these wares; which, to the intent it may continue both firm and stable for
ever, we do fortify the same by inscription of this present page, and putting
to our seal, these being Witnesses, William of Lona. Ed. of Ely, G. of
Winchester Bishops; Jeffery Son of Peter, Earl of Essex, William Marshal,
Earl of Pembroke, H. Earl of Warren, Earl Roger Pigott, R. Earl of Clare, Earl
de Braos, Robert Son of Roger, Hugh Board, William Brewer, Stephen Turnham,
William Warren, Simon of Pattishel, given by the hands of Hubert Archbishop
of Cant. our Chancellor at Shoreham, the 17 day of June in the first year of
our Reign.

WE have also seen a certain other Charter John. Chapter 4.
of the aforesaid Lord John made in these words, John by the Grace of God; K.
of England, Duke of Normandy, Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou. To his Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Rulers, and to all his
Keeper of Tower not to exact any thing for wares.
Faithful Subjects greeting; Know ye, that we have granted, and by this our
present writing confirm to our Barons of our City of London, that they may
choose to themselves every year a Mayor who to us may be faithful, discreet and
fit for Government of the City, so as when he shall be chosen to be presented
unto us or our Justice if we shall not be present, and he Mayor to be presented
to the K. or his Justice. At the end of the year to amove the Mayor and choose
another, or the same. Confirmation of all the Liberties. Saving the
Chamberlainship to the King.
shall swear to be faithful to us and that it shall be lawful to them at the
end of the year to amove him and substitute another if they will or the same to
retain, so as he be presented unto us or our justice if we shall not be
present. We have granted to the same our Barons, and by this our present
Charter confirmed that they well and in peace freely, quietly, and wholly, have
all their liberties which hitherto they they have used as well in the City of
London as without, and as well by water as by land and in all other places,
saving to us our Chamberlainship; wherefore we will and straightly command that
our aforesaid Barons of our aforesaid City of London, may choose unto themselves
a Mayor of themselves in manner and form aforesaid, and that they may have all
the aforesaid liberties well and in peace whole and fully with all things to
the same liberties appertaining as is aforesaid. VVitness, the Lords, P. of
Winton, William of Worcester, William of Ceventry, Bishops, William
Brigword, Peter Son of Herbert, Godfrey d'Lucy, and John Son of Hugh. Given by
the hands of Mr. Richard Harrister our Chancellor at the new Temple London, the
19th. day of May in the 16. year of our Reign.

Furthermore, We have seen a certain other Job. Char. 5.
Charter of the abovesaid Lord John made in these words; John by the Grace of
God K. of England Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Aquitain, Earl of
Anjou. To his Archbishops, Bishops Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs
and to all his Bailiffs, and Faithful Subjects greeting. Know ye that we at the
request of our Mayor and Citizens of London, have granted and by this our
present writing confirmed, that the Guild of Weavers shall not from henceforth
be in the City of London neither shall be at all maintained, but because we
have accustomed yearly to receive 18 marks in money every year of the said
Guild, our said Citizens shall pay unto us and our heirs twenty marks in money
for a gift at the feast of St. Michael at our Exchequer. VVitness Hubert
Archbishop of Cant. Earl of Ely, William of Albemarlo, Bishop Hugh of Gornar,
Robert of Harcourt, Thomas Basset, P. of Stoke, R of Remars, Given by the hands
of Hub Archbishop of Cant. at the Gormer the twentieth day of March in the 3d
year of our Reign.

WE have also seen a Charter of the Henry 3. Chapter 1.
Lord Henry the Third, sometimes King of England, our progenitor, made in these
Terms; Henry by the Grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Normandy and Aquitain, Earl of Anjou to his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Rulers, and to all his faithful subjects
greeting; KNOW ye that we have granted, and by these presents do grant and
confirm unto the Confirmation of the Sheriffwick of Land. and Middlesex.
Citizens of London, the Sheriffwick of London and Middlesex, with all the
Customs and things to the same Sheriffwick belonging within the City, and
without, by Land and by water, to have and to hold, to them and to their heirs,
of Paying yearly 300 l.
us and our heirs, paying therefore yearly to us and our heirs, three hundred
pound of blank money sterling, at two times of the year, that is to say, at the
Easter Exchequer, 150 l. and at Michaelmas Exchequer, 150 l. saving to the
Citizens of London all their Liberties and free Customs. And further, we have
granted Liberty to choose and remove the Sheriffs of Land. and Middlesex.
to the Citizens of London, that they among themselves may make Sheriff whom
they will, and may amove them when they will: And those whom they make Sheriffs
they shall present to our To present them at the Exchequer:
Justices, who may answer to us and our Justices in our Exchequer of those
things which to the Sheriffwick appertain, whereof they ought to answer us; and
unless they shall well answer and satisfy us, the Citizens of London shall
answer and satisfy the Amerciaments and the farm. If the Sheriffs do not
answer, the Citizens must:
Saving to the same Citizens their liberties as is aforesaid and saving to the
Sheriffs the same liberties which other Citizens have, so that if they which
shall be appointed Sheriffs for the time being commit any thing whereby they
ought to incur any Amerciament in money, they shall not be condemned for any
more then to the Amerciament of 20 l. and this without damage of other The
Amerciament of Sheriffs not to exceed 20 l.
Citizens, if the Sheriffs be not sufficient for the payment of their
Amerciaments; but if they do any offense whereby they ought to incur the loss
of their lives or members, they shall be judged as they ought to be adjudged
according to the law Sheriffs offending, to be tried by the City Law.
of the City, but of these things which to the Sheriffwick belong the Sheriff
shall answer before the Justices of the Exchequer; Saving to the Sheriffs the
liberties which other Citizens have. Also the grant and confirmation we have
made to our Citizens of London for the amendment of the said City, and because
it was anciently to be at the farm of 300 l. therefore we will and straightly
command that the Citizens of London and Citizens to hold the Sheriffwick of
Land. and Middlesex.
their heirs aforesaid may have and hold the Sheriffwicks of London and
Middlesex, with all that to the said Sheriffwicks belongs of us and our
heirs, and hereditarily, freely, and quietly, honorably, and wholly by the
farm of 300 l. per annum, At 300 l. per annum.
as the Charters of Lord John our Father, famous King of England which we have
seen does witness, and forbid that no person do presume to do any hurt,
impediment, or diminution to our said Citizens of things which to the said
Sheriffwick belong, or were accustomed to appertain. Also we do will and
command that if we or our heirs or any of our What the King takes away to be
allowed on account of the Farm.
Justices shall give or grant to any person any thing which to the farm of the
said Sheriffwick appertain, the same shall be accounted to the Citizens of
London in the acquittal of the said farm in the Exchequer yearly, as the
Charter of King John our Father which they have concerning the same does
reasonably testify, Witness Lord Eustace of London, P. of Winchester, Joslin of
Bath, Robert of Salisbury, Bishops, Herbert of Burgh, Earl of Kent, our
Justice, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, Richard Son of
Nicholas, Richard of Argentine, our Steward. Given by the hands of the Reverend
Ralph, Bishop of Chichester the 18 day of February, in the 11 year of our Reign.

WE have also seen a certain other Henry 3. Char. 2.
Charter of the same Lord Henry, made in these words; Henry by the Grace of
God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Aquitain, Earl of
Anjou. To his Archibishops, Bishops Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs
Rulers, Bailiffs, and his Faithful Subjects greeting. Know ye that we have
granted and by this present Charter confirmed to our Barons in our City of
London that they may choose to themselves a Mayor of themselves every year who
To choose a Mayor yearly.
may be to us faithful, discreet, and fit for the Government of the City, so as
when he is chosen he may be presented To present him to the King, or his
Justices.
unto us or our Justices, if we be not present and shall swear to be faithful
to us. And that it shall be lawful for them in the end of the year to amove To
amove the Mayor, and choose another.
him, and to substitute, or if they will to retain him still so as always that
he be presented to us or to our Justices if we be not present. Also we have
granted to the said Barons and by this present Charter confirmed that they may
have well and in peace freely, quietly, and wholly, all their liberties, To
enjoy their Liberties.
which hitherto they used as well in the City of London as without, and as well
on the Water as on the Land, and in all other places; Saving to us our
Chamberlainship: wherefore we will and Saving the Chamberlainship.
straightly command that our Barons of our said City of London may choose to
themselves a Mayor of themselves every year in manner aforesaid, and that they
have all their liberties well, and in peace, wholly, and fully, with all that
to the said liberties belongs as the Charter of the excellent Lord John King
of England which we have seen does reasonably testify. Witness the Lord Eustace
of London, P. of Winton, Jo. of Bath, Robert of Salisbury, Bishops; Hubert de
Burgo, Earl of Kent, our Justice, Gilbert de Clare of Gloucester and Hereford,
Ralph Son of Nicholas, R. of Argentine, our Steward. Given by the hands of the
Reverend Father Ralph Bishop of Chichester, the 18th. day of Feb. in the 11th.
year of our Reign.

WE have seen a certain other Charter Henry 3. Char. 3.
of the said Lord Henry our progenitor made in these words, Henry by the Grace
of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Aquitain, Earl of
Anjou. To the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs,
Stewards, Castle-keepers, Constables, Bailiffs, Ministers, and all his Faithful
Subjects greeting. Ye shall know that we for our souls health, and for the
souls health of King John our Father and for the souls health of all our
Ancestors, and also for the Commonweal of our Remove Wares out of Thames and
Medway.
City of London and of all our Realm have granted and strictly commanded that
all the wares which are in the Thames or in Medway shall be amoved and that no
wares from henceforth be put any where in the Thames or Medway, upon forfeiture
of ten pounds sterling. We have also quit-claimed all that which the Keepers of
our Tower Keepers of the Tower not to exact any thing for Wares.
of London was wont yearly to receive, of the aforesaid wares wherefore we will
and steadfastly command that no Keeper of the said Tower at any time hereafter
exact any thing from any or bring any demand, burden, or trouble to any person
by reason of the aforesaid wares, for it fully appears to us and it is
sufficiently given us to understand by the Right Reverend Father, Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, and by others our Faithful Subjects, that very Wares
in Thames hurt the City and Realm.
great hurt and discomodity has grown to the aforesaid City and also to our
said whole Realm by occasion of the aforesaid wares, which thing that it may
continue firm and stable for ever, we have fortified the same by the
inscription of the page and putting to our seal, as that Charter of the Lord
King John our Father which the Barons of London have from thence does
reasonably testify, Witness the Lord Eustace of London, Peter of Winton. Joslin
of Bath, R. of Salisbury Bishops, Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, and our
Justice, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Glecester, and Hereford, John Son of
Nicholas, R. D. Argentine, our Steward; given by the hands of the Reverend
Father, Ralph Bishop of Chichester our Chancellor at Westminster the 18th. day
of February, in the 11th. year of our Reign.

We have also seen a certain other Charter Henry 3. Char. 4.
of the abovesaid Lord Henry made in these words, Hen. by the Grace of God K.
of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitain, Earl of Anjou. To
all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices, Ministers,
and all our Faithful Subjects, French and English, greeting. Know ye that we
have granted to our Citizens of London, that none of them No Citizen to plead
without the Walls. Except Monyers. Acquittal of Murder. Not to wage Battle.
shall plead without the walls of the City of London, saving the Pleas of
foreign tenures (our monyers and Ministers excepted) And we have granted to
them acquittal of all murder within the City and Portsoken, and that none of
them shall wage Battle, and that they may discharge themselves of the Pleas
belonging to the Crown, according to the ancient custom of the City, and that
within the walls of the City and Portsoken, no man may take any lodging No
lodging to be taken by force.
by force or by delivery of the Marshal. This also we have granted to them that
all the Citizens of London be quit of Toll and Quit of Toll throughout England.
Lestage, and of all other Customs throughout all our Lands, on this side or
beyond the Seas. And that none be condemned of To be amerced according to the
Law of the City. No Miskenning.
any Amerciaments of money; but according to the Law of the City which they had
in the time of King Henry Grandfather to King Henry our Grandfather: And that
no miskenning be in any pleading in the City, and that the Hustings be kept
once only a week. And that they may justly Hustings once a week.
have all their Lands and Promises, and debts whosoever owe them to them, and
that right be holden to them of all their Lands and Tenures, which be in the
City according to the Custom of the City: And that Pleas be there holden of all
debts which be lent at London and of all promises Pleas of debt lent in London.
there made. And if any shall take any Toll or any other Custom of our men of
London, in any our Lands on this side or beyond the Seas, or in the Ports of
the Seas on this side or beyond the Seas, after that he shall fail of right,
the Sheriffs of London may take goods for the same: Also we do grant for
Hunting free.
them that they may have Hunting wheresoever they had in the time of King Henry
Grandfather to King Henry our Grandfather. Furthermore also for the amendment
of the said City we have granted to them Quit of Bridtoll, etc.
that they be all quit from Bridtoll, Childwite, Jeresgive, and of all Scotale,
so that our Sheriff of London, or any other Bailiff shall not make any Scotale.
These Customs aforesaid we do grant to them and all other liberties and free
Customs which they had in time of King Henry Grandfather to King Henry our
Grandfather, when as they had the same better and more freely, as the Charter
of the Lord John our Father which they have of the same Hold their Liberties of
the King and his Heirs.
does reasonably testify. Wherefore we will and steadfastly command that they
and their heirs may have and hold all these things aforesaid hereditarily of us
and our heirs these being witness, the Lord Eustace of London, Joslin of Bath,
Rich. of Salisbury, Peter of Winton, Bishops; Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, our
Justice, Gilbert of Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hereford, Ralph Son of
Nicholas, and Richard Argentine, our Steward, Henry de Capel and others. Given
by the hands of the Reverend Father Ralph Bishop of Chichester our Chancellor
at Westminster, the 16th. day of March in the 11th. year of our Reign.

WE have also seen a certain other Charter of the aforesaid Lord Henry made in
Henry 3. Char. 5.
these words; Henry by the Grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke
of Normandy, and Aquitain, Earl of Anjou. To his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Pri^rs, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Rulers, Ministers, Forresters, and
all Bailiffs, and Faithful Subjects greeting. Know ye that we have granted and
by this present Charter confirmed for us and our heirs unto our Archbishops,
Bishops, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, Freeholders, and to all of Stayns
Warren diswarrened, and disforrested.
the County of Middlesex, that all the warren of Stayns with the appurtenances
be unwarrenned and disforrested for ever so that all they aforesaid and their
heirs or successors may have all liberties and benefit of warren and forest in
the aforesaid warren, wherein they may till or plough all their lands, and cut
all their woods, and dispose the same at their will without the view or
contradiction of his warreners or Forresters, and all their Ministers, and
within the which no warrener or Forrester or Justice of our Forest shall or
may any thing meddle with their lands or woods neither with their herbage or
hunting, or Corn, neither by any summons or distress shall cause them their
heirs or successors to come before our Justices of the Forest or warreners by
occasion of the Lands and Tenements situate in those parts where the said
warren was wont to be, but that they and their heirs and successors and their
Lands and Tenements contained in the parts be quit and free of all exactions,
occasions, demands, and attachments, and of all things which belong to Warrens
or Forests, wherefore we will and steadfastly command, that all they heirs
holding Lands and Tenements within the said parts, and their heirs and
successors for ever have the aforesaid liberties and freedoms, and that their
Lands and Tenements aforesaid be unwarrened and disforrested for ever and quit
from all things which either to warren or Forest, warreners or Forresters
pertain as is aforesaid, these being witness, Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent,
our Justice of England, G. Earl of Gloucester, and Hereford, William Marshal,
Earl of Pembroke, P. d'Albemarco, Walter ^ Everin, Osbert Gifford, Richard
Argentine, John Son of Philip, Richard Son of Hugh, and others. Given by the
hand of the Reverend Father Rich. Bishop of Chichester our Chancellor at
Woodstock the 18th. day of August in the 11th. year of our Reign.

WE have seen a certain other Charter Henry 3. Char. 6.
of the said Lord Henry made in these words. Henry by the Grace of God, King of
England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou. To
all Archbishops, Bishops, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Rulers,
Ministers, and all Bailiffs, and his Faithful Subjects greeting. Know ye, that
we have seen a Covenant between the Earl of Cornwall, and the Mayor concerning
Queen Hith.
Covenant made between Rich. Earl of Cornwall our Brother on the one part, and
the Mayor and Commonalty of the City of London on the other part, in these
words; in the 30th. year of the Reign of Hen. the Son of King John, in the day
of the Translation of Saint Edward, this Covenant was made at Westmin. between
the Right Honorable man Richard Earl of Cornwall of the one part, and John
Gisors then Mayor of the City of London, on the Comonalty of the same City of
London on the other part, for and concerning certain exactions and demands
belonging to Queenhithe of the City of London, that is to say, that the said
Earl has granted for him and his heirs, that the said Mayor and all the Mayors
after him, and all the Comonalty of the said City may have and hold Queen Hith
granted to the City.
the said Queen Hith with all their liberties, Customs, and other things to
the same belonging, in Fee-farm, paying therefore yearly to the said Earl, his
heirs and Assigns 50 l. at two terms in the year at Clerkenwel, that is to say
at the close of Easter 25 l. And in Octabis of St. Michael 25. l. And for the
more surety thereof to the part of the Chirography remaining with the Mayor and
Commonalty of London, the said Earl has put his Seal; and to the writing
thereof remaining with the said Earl the foresaid Mayor and Comonalty have The
King confirms the grant of Queen Hith to the City.
set their common Seal. We therefore allowing and approving the said Covent, do
for us and our heirs grant and confirm the same, these same being Witnesses;
Ralph Son of Nicholas, Richard d'Grey, John and William his Brothers, Paul
Painr, Ralph d'Waunty, John Guband; Given by our hand at Windsor the 26th. day
of Feb. in the 31th. year of our Reign.

WE have also seen another Charter of Henry 3. Char. 7.
the aforesaid Lord Hen. made in these words; Hen. by the Grace of God K. of
England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou; To
his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs,
Rulers, Ministers, and all his Bailiffs, and Faithful People greeting: Know ye,
that we have granted for us and our heirs, and confirmed it by this our present
Charter, that our Mayor and Citizens of London may have and hold all their
liberties and free customs, Citizens to have their free Custom
which they had in the time of K. Hen. our Grandfather, and which they had by
Charters of our Ancestors, Kings of England, as they more freely and better had
the same, and they most freely and fully have and use the same for ever. Also
we have granted to the said Citizens, that every Mayor whom they shall choose in
our City of London, (we being not at Westminster) they may yearly present to
the Barons of our Exchequer, that he may be admitted by them as Mayor; so that
notwithstanding, at the next coming of us or our heirs to Westmin. or London,
he be presented to us or our heirs and so admitted Mayor. And we will, and
command for us and our heirs, that, out of the farm of our City vij l. per
annum allowed the Sheriff upon account for the Liberty of Paul's.
of London, there be allowed to our Sheriffs of the said City yearly in his
said Account 7 l. at our Exchequer, for the liberty of Saint Paul's London. And
that our said Citizens throughout all our dominions, as well on this side the
Sea as beyond, be quit of all Toll and Custom for ever, as in the Charter of
the aforesaid Kings is granted. And we forbid, upon our forfeiture, that none
presume henceforth to vex or disquiet the said Citizens contrary to this
liberty and our grant, these being Witnesses; the Reverend Father P. Bishop of
Hereford, Richard Earl of Cornwall our Brother, Peter de Salund, John Mansel
Provost of Beverly, Mr. William Kelken, Archif. Coventry, Bartino d'Cryel, John
d'Lassington, John d'Grey, Hen. d'Wengham, Robert Walreand, William d'Grey,
Nicholas, d' St. Mauro, William Gerumne, and others: Given by our hand at
Windsor the 12th. day of June in the 37th. year of our Reign.

MOREOVER, we have seen a certain Henry 3. Char. 8.
other Charter of the aforesaid Lord Henry, bearing date the 11th. day of
January in the 50th. year of his Reign, by which certain Charter, amongst other
things, the said Lord King Henry granted to the said Citizens of London, that
the said Citizens may traffic with their commodities and merchandises
wheresoever they please, Citizens Toll-free through England.
throughout his Kingdom and dominions, as well by Sea as by Land, without
interruption of him or his, as they see expedient; quit from all Custom, Toll
and paying, and may abide for their trading wheresoever they please in the same
his Kingdom, as in times past they were accustomed, till such time it be more
fully ordered by his Council, touching the state of the said City. As by the
said Letters patents amongst other things more fully appears.

WE have seen a certain other Charter Henry 3. Char. 9.
of the aforesaid Lord Hen. made in these words; Hen. by the grace of God King
of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain; To his Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Justices, Rulers, Ministers, and all
Bailiffs, and his Faithful Subjects greeting: Know ye, that we have granted to
our Citizens of London for us and our Heirs, whom of late we The Citizens taken
into the King's favor again upon submission.
have received again into our grace and favor, after diverse trespasses and
forfeitures of them and their Comonalty to us made, for the which, both for
life and member, and all other things belonging to the said City, they have
submitted themselves to our will, that none of them be compelled to plead out
of the walls of the said City for any None to plead out of the Walls.
thing, except foreign tenures, and except our monyers and Officers, and except
those things which shall happen to be done Except Monyers, and things against
the Peace.
against our peace, which, according to the common law of our Realm, are wont
to be determined in the parts where those trespasses were done, and except
pleas concerning merchandises, which are wont to be determined according to the
law Merchant in Boroughs and Fairs so, yet notwithstanding that those plaints
be determined in the Boroughs and Fairs by 4 or 5 of the said Citizens of
London, who shall be there present, saving to us the amerciaments in any wise
coming, which they shall faithfully answer us and our heirs upon pain of
grievous forfeitures. We have Acquittal of Murder.
also granted to our same Citizens acquittal of Murder in the said City and in
Portsoken. And that none of the said Citizens may wage Battle. And that, for
the pleas belonging to the Crown, chiefly those which may chance within the
said City and Suburbs thereof, they may discharge themselves To discharge
themselves of Pleas of the Crown, according to ancient custom.
according to the ancient custom of the said City. This notwithstanding except,
that upon the graves of the dead, for that which they should have said if they
had lived, it shall not be lawful precisely to swear. But in stead and place of
those deceased, which before their deaths, to discharge those which for
concerning the things belonging to the Crown were caled Not lawful to swear,
but the dead could have spoke it alive.
and received, there may other free and lawful men be chosen, which may do and
accomplish that without delay, which by the deceased should have been done if
they had lived. And that, within the walls Lodgings not to be taken forcibly.
of the City and in Portsoken, none may take lodgings by force or delivery of
the Marshal.

WE have also granted to our said Citizens throughout all our dominions,
wheresoever Citizens may dwell and trade any where in the Kingdom Free of Toll.
they come, to dwell with their Merchandises and things. And also throughout
all the Sea Ports, as well on this side as beyond the Seas, they shall be free
of all Toll and Lestage, and of all Customs, except every where our due and
Ancient custom and prizes of wines; That is to say, King's Custom of Wine.
of one Tun before the Must, and of one other behind the Mast at 20 s. the Tun,
to be paid in such form as we and our Anceston have been accustomed to have the
said prices. And if any in any of our Lands o^ this side or beyond the Seas, or
in the Ports of the Sea, on this side or beyond the Seas, shall take of the men
of London Toll or any Custom contrary to this our grant, (except the aforesaid
prizes) after he Withernam.
shall fail of right, the Sheriff may take goods therefore at London.

WE have also granted to them, that the Hustings once a week.
Hustings might be kept in every week once the week, and that only by one day;
or as not withstanding that those things within the same day cannot be
determined may continue till next morning and no longer; And that right be
holden to them for their Lands and Tenures within the same City according to
the Custom of the said Citizens to have right to their lands and tenures
according to Custom. Foreigners and Citizens may make their Attorneys. Pleas to
be held in London of money lent, and promises made there.
City. So as nevertheless, that, as well soreigners as others, may make their
Attorneys, as well in pleading as defending, as elsewhere in our Courts. And
they may not be -- by miskenning in any their pleas, that is to say, if they
have not declared altogether well. And of all their debts which were lent at
London, and promises there made, pleas be their holden according to the Just
and Ancient Custom. Furthermore; we do also grant toward the amendment of the
aforesaid City, that all be quit of Childwite and Jeresgive and from Scotale,
so that our Sheriffs of London, nor any other Bailiff, shall not make any
Scotale. And also, that the said Citizens Lands, debts and tenures.
may justly have and hold their Lands, Tenures, or Promises, and also their
debts whosoever do owe them. And No forestalling.
that no Merchant, or other, do meet with any Merchant, coming by land or by
water with their Merchandises or victuals toward the said City, to buy or sell
again, till they come to the said Upon forfeiture of imprisonment.
City, and there have put the same to sale, upon the forfeiture of the things
brought and pain of imprisonment; from whence (...) shall not escape without
great punishment: And that none show out their That none put their goods to
sale before Custom be paid.
wares to sell, who owe any Custom, ^ill the Custom thereof be levied, without
great punishment, and upon pain ^f forfeiture of all that commodity of him that
happens to do otherwise. And that No stranger to buy goods before weighed at
the King's Beam. Debts to be enrolled in the Exchequer.
no Merchant, Stranger, or other, may buy or sell any wares, which ought to be
weighed or troved, unless by our Beams or Trone, upon forfeiture of the said
wares. Moreover, those debts, which of their contracts or loans shall be due
unto them, may cause to be enrolled in our Exchequer for the more surety of
them, upon the recognizance of those who shall stand bound unto them in the
said debts. So as nevertheless, that no debts be enrolled upon the recognizance
of any person who is not there known; or unless it be manifested No debt to be
enrolled, but testified by six or four witnesses.
concerning his person by the testimony of six or four lawful men, who be
sufficient to answer as well for the debt as for the damages, which any may
have of such Recognizances, if the same happen to be falsely done under their
names; And for every pound to be enrolled in the Exchequer one penny to One
penny in the pound for every debt enrolled.
be paid to our use, for the charge of sustentation of those which must attend
to such inrolling: these liberties and free Customs we grant to them, to hold
to them and their heirs, so long as they shall well and faithfully behave
themselves to us and our heirs, together with all their just and reasonable
Customs, which in time of us and our predecessor^ heretofore they have had as
well for manner of pleading of their Tenure debts and promises as for all other
cause whatsoever concerning both them and the same City. So long as the Customs
be not contrary to right, law and Justice; Their Customs not to be against Law.
saving in all things the liberty of the Church of Westminster to the Abbots
and Monks of the fame place to them granted by the Charters of us and our
predecessors Kings of England. But as touching our Jews and Merchant strangers
Jews and strangers.
and other things out of our foresaid grant touching us or our said City, we
and our heirs shall provide as to us shall seem expedient. These being witness;
R. King of Almain our Brother, Edward our first Son, Roger of Mortimer, Roger
de Clifford, Roger Leybourn, Robert Watrand, Robert Aquiln. Mi. Godfrey,
Gifford our Chancellor, Walter de Merton, Mr. John Cheshil Archdeacon of
London, John de la lind, William de Aette, and others. Given by our hand at
Westminster the 26th. day of March, in the 52th. year of our Reign.

WE have seen a certain Charter which the Lord Edward the first sometimes Edw.
1.
King of England made to the aforesaid Citizens of London bearing date the
18th. day of April. in the 26th. year of his Reign, in which Charter amongst
other things it is contained, That whereas our said Citizens by the Charters of
our said progenitors have been accustomed hitherto to present every Mayor whom
they have chosen in the said City yearly before the Barons of the Exchequer
(our progenitor or we not being To present ^he Mayor to the Barons of the
Exchequer.
at Westminster) that he may be admitted by the said Barons as Mayor for us,
notwithstanding that at the next coming of our Progenitor, or of us unto
Westminster or London, he may be presented to our progenitors or to us, and so
admitted Mayor. We willing to show more ample favor to the said Citizens in
that behalf, do grant to them for us and our heirs, The Mayor of the said City
when he shall be chosen by the said Citizens, and also the Sheriffs of the said
City, when they likewise at the accustomed time shall be chosen by the said
Citizens, we and our The Mayor and Sheriffs in the absence of the King and
Barons to be presented to the Constable of the Tower.
heirs, and our Barons, not being at Westminster. or at Land. they may or shall be
presented and admitted to and by the Constable of our Tower of London yearly,
in such sort as they before were wont to be presented and admitted, so as
nevertheless that at the next coming of us or our heirs to Westminster or
London the said Mayor be presented to us or our heirs, and admitted for Mayor.
And also we have granted for us and our heirs to our said Citizens Citizens
quit of Pannage, Murage, etc.
that they and their successors Citizens of the said City be for ever quit and
free of Pannage, Pontage, and Murage throughout all the Realm, and all our
dominions. Sheriffs of Land. to be amerced as the Sheriffs of other Counties.
And that the Sheriffs of the said City as often as it shall happen them to be
amerced in our Court for any offense they shall be amerced according to the
measure and quantity of the offense as other the Sheriffs of our said Realm
have been amerced for the like offense. Wherefore we will and straightly charge
and Command for us and our heirs, that the said Citizens and their successors
have all the liberties, Citizens to enjoy their Customs.
freedoms, Quittals, and free Customs aforesaid, and them may and shall use
according to our confirmation, renovation, and grants aforesaid for ever as by
the aforesaid Charter (amongst other things) more fully appears.

WE have also seen certain Letters, Patents Edw. 2.
of Lord Edward Son of Edward sometimes King of England our progenitor, made in
these words; Edward by the Grace of God, King of England Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain. To all to whom these present Letters shall come greeting.
Know ye that whereas the Mayor and the good men of the City of London have of
late thankfully done us aid of armed footmen at our Castle of Leeds in our
County of Kent, and also aid of like armed The Aids granted to the King shall
not be prejudicial to the City, nor drawn into example.
men now going with us through diverse parts of our Realm for diverse causes. We
willing to provide for the indemnity of the said Mayor and men of our City of
London in this behalf have granted to them for us and our heirs that the said
aids to us so thankfully done shall not be prejudicial to the said Mayor and
good men, their heirs and successors, nor shall they be drawn into consequent
for time to come. In Witness whereof we have caused those our Letters to be
made Patents; Witness my self at Aldermanston the 12th. day of December in the
15th. year of our Reign.

WE have also seen the Charter of Edw. 3. Char. 1.
Lord Edward the third, sometimes King of England our progenitor, made in these
words: Edward by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke
of Aquitain; To his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons,
Justices, Sheriffs, Rulers, Ministers, and other his Bailiffs, and faithful
Subjects greeting. Know ye, that we for the bettering of our City of London and
for the good and laudable service which our welbeloved Mayor Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City heretofore have often done to us and our
progenitors with the assent of the aforesaid Earls, Barons, and all the
Commonalty of our Realm being called to this our present Parliament at
Westminster have granted and by this our Charter for us and our heirs confirmed
to the Citizens of the aforesaid City the liberties hereunder written, to have
and to hold to them and their heirs and successors for ever. First Magna Charta
recited.
whereas in the great Charter of the liberties of England it is contained that
the City of London may have all their Ancient liberties and Customs; And the
same Citizens at the time of the making of the Charter from the time of Saint
Edward King and Confessor and William the Conqueror, and of other our
progenitors had diverse liberties and Customs, as well by the Charters of those
our progenitors as without Charter by Ancient Custom, whereupon in diverse the
Circuits and other the Courts of our said progenitors as well by Judgments as
by statutes were invaded and of some of them adjudged: We will and grant for us
and our heirs that they may have the liberties according to the Usurpations of
their Liberties revoked.
form of the abovesaid great Charter; And that Impediments and usurpations to
them in that behalf made shall be revoked and Annulled. We have further granted
for us and our heirs to the said Citizens their heirs and successors aforesaid,
that the Mayor of the aforesaid City which for time shall be, shall be one of
the Justices to be assigned of the Jail-delivery of Newgate and be named in
every Commission thereof to be made. And that the said Citizens may have
Infangtheft and outfangtheft Infangtheft.
and Chattels of Felons, of all those which shall be adjudged before them
within the liberties of the same City, and of all being of the liberty
aforesaid at the aforesaid Goal to be adjudged. And whereas also by the
Charters of our progenitors it was granted to the same Citizens that they
should hold the Sheriffwick of London and Middlesex for 300 l. yearly to be
paid at our Exchequer and they are charged with the payment of 400 l. yearly
every year to be paid at our Exchequer for the Sheriffwicks contrary to the
form of the said Charters. We will and grant for us and our heirs that the said
Citizens their heirs and successors may henceforth the aforesaid Sheriffwicks
hold for 300 l. yearly, to be yearly paid at our Exchequer according to the
tenor of the aforesaid Charters, and that they be from henceforth acquitted of
the said 100 l. Furthermore we have granted for us and our Citizens may devize
in Mortmain, or otherwise, Lands in London.
heirs to the said Citizens that they their heirs and successors may bequeath
their tenements within the liberties of the aforesaid City as well in Mortmain
as in other manner as of Ancient time they have been accustomed to do. And
whereas in a certain Charter of the Lord Edward late King of England our
Father, to the said Citizens made (amongst other things) it is contained, that
the Sheriffs of the said City as often as they shall happen to be amerced for
any offense in the Court should be a merced according to the measure and
quantity of their offense as other the Sheriffs of our Realm were wont to be
amerced for like offenses; and the Sheriffs of the aforesaid City after the
Sheriffs of Land. shall not be amerced in other manner for escapes, then other
Sheriffs are wont to be.
making of that Charter were otherwise amerced for the escape of thieves then
othr Sheriffs were on this side Trent for such like escapes are amerced only as
it is said 100 s. we will and grant for us and our heirs that the Sheriffs of
the same City, which for the time shall be, in no wise be amerced or charged
for the escape of Thieves in any other wise then as other the Sheriffs on this
side Trent. And that the aforesaid Citizens shall not be charged for the
Custody of those that fly Sanctuary,
to the Churches within the aforesaid liberty for to have immunities otherwise
then of old has been accustomed to be charged any thing in the last circuit at
the Tower of London made or adjudged notwithstanding. And that the said
Citizens may remove and take away all the Wares in th Waters, of Thames and
Medway, and may have the punishments thereof to us belonging. Also we will and
command Merchant strangers to sell their commodities within 40 days. Not to
keep houses, but be with Hosts. The King's Marshal, S^e ward or Clerk not to
sit in London. No Citizen to plead out of the City. No Escheator to meddle
within Lon.
straightly, that all Merchant Straggers coming to England shall sell there
Wares and Merchandises within 40 days after their coming thither. And shall
continue and board with free hosts of the said City and other the Cities and
Towns in England, without any households or societies by them to be kept. And
also we will and grant for us and our heirs, that the Marshal, Steward or Clark
of the Market of our household may not sit from henceforth within the liberty
of the aforesaid City, nor Exercise any offense there, nor any way draw any
Citizen of the said City to plead without the liberties of the said City, of
any thing to happen within the liberties of the same. And that no Escheater or
other Officers may The Mayor made Escheator of London.
from henceforth Exercise the Office of the Escheator within the liberties of
the said City: But that the Mayor of the said City for the time being may do
the Office of the Escheator within the said liberty; so as always that he take
his Oath that he Take an Oath and Account.
Exercise the said Office, and that the answer thereof to us and our heirs as
he ought to do. And that the said Citizens from henceforth Citizens not to be
compelled to war out of the City.
shall not be compelled to go or send to war out of the said City. And that the
Constable of the Tower of London for the time being shall not make any prizes,
by land or by water, of victual or other thing whatsoever of the men of the
said City, nor of any other coming toward the said City, or going thence;
neither shall or may arrest or cause to be arrested the Ships or Boats bringing
victuals or other such like goods to or from the said City. And forasmuch as
the Citizens, in all good Fairs of England, were wont to have Fairs.
among themselves keepers to hold the Pleas touching the Citizens of the said
City Assembling at the said Fairs: We will and grant as much as in us is, that
the same Citizens may have such like keepers to hold such like Pleas of their
Covenants, Sheriffs of Land. not to take any Oath in the Exchequer, but upon
their Accounts.
as of Ancient time they had, (except the Pleas of Land and of the Crown.)
Furthermore we grant for us and our heirs, that the Sheriffs of the said City
for the time being shall not be compelled to take any Oath at our Excheq. but
upon the yielding up of their accounts. Also whereas the said Citizens, in the
Circuit of Henry Stanton and his fellow Justices of the Lord Edward late King
of England our Father last Circuit at the Tower of London were compelled,
contrary to their Ancient Customs, to claim their liberties and free Customs,
and thereupon did claim diverse liberties by the Charters of our said
progenitors, and of other their liberties and free Customs of old use and
custom, which said claims do as yet hang before us undecided: We will and grant
for us and our heirs, that Claims of Liberties undecided.
the same Citizens their heirs and successors may have the liberties and free
Customs, and may use them as of old time they were wont: And that they may
record their said liberties and free Customs, before us our Justices and other
Ministers whatsoever, in such sort as they were wont to do before the said
Circuit: Notwithstanding that the said Citizens in the said Circuit were
impeached upon some like record and liberties and free Customs aforesaid, and
also notwithstanding any statutes or judgments made or published to the
contrary. And that to the allowance of their Charters to be had before us in
One writ of Allowance. of their Charters to be sufficient for one Kings time.
our Exchequer and other Pleas whatsoever, one writ shall suffice in all Pleas
for every Kings time. And that no summons, Attachments, or Executions be made
by any the Officers whatsoever, of us or our heirs, by writ or without writ,
within the liberty of the said City, but only by Ministers of the said City.
And that the Sheriffs of the same City (which shall be toward the aid of the
fame of that City) may lawfully have the forfeitures of victuals and other
things, and Merchandises, according to the tenor of the Charter thereof made to
the said Citizens, and shall not be debarred thereof hereafter contrary to the
tenor of the same Charters. And that the same Citizens in the Circuits of the
Justices, from henceforth sitting at the Tower of London, shall be guided by
the same Laws and Customs whereby they were guided in the Circuits holden in
the time of Lord John and Henry sometimes Kings of England and other our
progenitors; and if any thing in the last circuit was done or attempted
contrary to their liberties and free Customs, we will not they be prejudicial
unto them, but that they may be guided as of old time they were. We have also
granted for us and our heirs, that the same Citizens from Citizens to be taxed
in Subsidies, as other Commoners, and not as Citizens.
henceforth in and toward subsidies, grants and contributions whatsoever to be
made to the use of us or our heirs shall be taxed and contributory with the
commonalty of our Realm, as common persons and not as men of the City. And that
they be quit of all other Tallages, and that the liberty of the said City shall
not be taken into the hands of us or our heirs for any personal Trespass or
judgment of any Minister of the said City: Neither shall a keeper in the said
City for that occasion be deputed, but the same Minister shall be punished
according to the quality of his offense. And that no purveyor and taker,
Officer and other Minister of us or our heirs or of any other, shall make any
prices, in the said No Purveyor of the Kings to make any price in Land. without
the consent of the party. No prices of wines of Citizens.
City or without, of the goods of the Citizens of the same City contrary to
their will and pleasure; unless immediately they make due payment for the same,
or else may have respit thereof with the good will of the seller. And that no
price be made of the wines of those Citizens by any the Citizens of us or our
heirs or otherwise against their wills, that is to say, of one Tun before the
Mast and another behind it, nor by any other means but shall be quit thereof
for ever. Furthermore we forbid No Purveyor to be a Merchant of the same goods
whereof he is Purveyer.
that any officer of us or our heirs shall Merchandise by himself or others
within the said -- or without of any thing touching their Offices. Also we
grant that the Lands and Tenements (lying without) of the said Citizens, which
have been, or hereafter shall be Ministers of the said City, be bound to keep
the said City harmless against us and our heirs of those things which concern
their Offices, as their tenements be within the said City; and that no Market
from henceforth shall be granted by us or our heirs to any within 7 miles in
Circuit No Market within seven miles of London.
of the said City. And that all inquisitions from henceforth, to be taken by
our Justices St. Martins Le grand.
or Ministers of the said City, shall be taken in Saint Martins in London and
not elsewhere; Except the Inquisitions to be taken in the Circuits at the Tower
of London, and for the Jail-delivery at Newgate, And that none of the freemen
of the said City shall be impleaded or troubled at our Exchequer or elsewhere
by bill; except it be by those things which touch us or our heirs. Wherefore we
will and straightly No Citizen to be impleaded in the Exchequer, unless it
concern the King.
command for us and our heirs, that the said Citizens their heirs and
successors have all their liberties and free Customs, and the same may use and
enjoy for ever in form aforesaid. These being witness; W. Archbishop of Cant.
J. Bishop of Ely our Chancellor, and others, Given at Westminster the 6th. day
of March in the 1st. year of our Reign.

WE have seen also certain other Letters, Edw. 3. Char. 2.
Patents of Lord Edward the 3d. King of England, made in these words. Edward by
the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain; To all to
whom these present Letters shall come greeting: Know ye, that whereas our well
beloved the Citizens of the City of London, by their Petition exhibited before
us and our Council in our present Parliament at Westminster assembled, have
given us to understand that Felons, Thieves, and other Malefactors and
disturbers of the peace who in the said -- and elsewhere have committed
man-slaughters, Robberies, and diverse other Felonies, privily departing from
the said City after those Felonies committed into the village of Southwark,
where they cannot be Attached by the Ministers of the said City, and there are
openly received, and so for default of due punishment are more bold to commit
such Felonies; and they have beseeched us that, for the confirmation of our
peace, within the said City bridling the naughtiness of the said Malefactors,
we would grant unto them the said village, to have to them their heirs and
successors for ever for the farm and rent therefore yearly due to us to be
yearly paid at our Exchequer: We having consideration to the Premises, with the
assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty being in our present
Parliament Southwark granted to the Citizens in Parliament.
aforesaid, have granted for us and our heirs to the said Citizens the said
village of Southwark with the appurtenances, to have and to hold to them and
their heirs and successors Citizens of the said City of us and our heirs for
ever, to pay to us by the year at the Exchequer of us and our heirs at the
accustomed times the farms therefore due and accustomed; In Witness whereof we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness my self at
Westminster the 6th. day of March in the first year of our Reign.

WE have also seen a certain other Charter of the same Lord Edward the 3d. in
these words; Edward by the Grace of Edw 3. Char. 3.
God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain. To all to whom
these present Letters shall come greeting Know ye, whereas in our Parliament at
York holden the morrow after the ascensio^ of our Lord in the ninth year of our
York Statute recited.
Reign. It was ordained and enacted that all Merchant Strangers and English
born and every of them of what estate or condition soever who would buy or sell
corn, wine, powderable wares, fish or other victual, All Merchant strangers as
English, should sell and buy in all Cities and Towns.
wools, cloth, wares, or other vend^ble things whatsoever; wheresoever they
we^^ either in Cities, Towns, Boroughs, Por^^ of the Sea, Fairs, Markets, or
other places in the Realm whether within liberties or without, might without
Impediment freely sell the same victuals or wares to whom they would as well to
foreigners a^ English born: The enemies to us and our Realm only excepted,
notwithstanding the Charters of liberties to any Cities or places aforesaid
granted to the contrary or custom or judgment upon the said Charters as in the
foresaid state is more plainly contained; yet nevertheless because in the
statutes as well in our said Parliament as in other Parliaments of our
Progenitors, sometimes Ks. of Engl. made by us and our progenitors, Citizens
enjoy their Customs according to Magna Charta.
with the common consent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of our
Realm, it was granted and established, That the great Charter of the liberty of
Engl. i^ in all singular its Articles should be maintained and firmly observed.
And in the same Charter amongst other things it is contained, the City of
London may have its ancient liberties and free customs unhurt; And it has been
the intent and meaning as well of us as our Progenitors, and yet is, that the
said great Charter in all the Articles thereof may be still observed, and that
by pretext of the said Stat. or any other, nothing shall be done to the
prejudice or infringment of the said Charter, or of any Article therein
contained, or of the ancient liberties or customs of the said City may be
unjustly burdened; touching their said liberties and free Customs contrary to
such intent with the consent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, assistant with
us in this our Parliament; Have granted for us and our heirs, that the Citizens
of the said City, their heirs and successors may have all their liberties and
free customs unhurt and whole as before these times they more freely had the
same: The aforesaid statute for the said Merchants made to the hurt of the
liberties and Customs of the said City notwithstanding. In Witness whereof we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents: Witness my self at
Westminster the 26th. day of March in the 11th. year of our Reign. Edw. 3.
Char. 4.


WE have also seen a certain other statute of the said Lord Edward the 3d. late
King of England, made in these words; Edward by the Grace of God, King of
England and France, and Lord of Ireland, To all to whom these our Letters shall
come greeting. Know ye, that we being worthily careful of the conservation and
increase of the name and honor of our City of London, and at the supplication
of the Mayor, Sheriffs and Commonalty of the said City to us humbly made, will
and grant for us and our heirs that the Sergeants of Land. may bear Maces of
Gold or Silver.
Sergeants appointed to bear the Maces i^ our said City, may lawfully carry
the^ of Gold or Silver, or Silvered or Garnished with the sign of our Arms or
othe^^ every where in the said City, and in the Suburb of the same and in the
County of Middlesex, and other places to the liberties of the said City
appertaining. And also without the said City to meet with us, our Mother,
Consort, or the Children of us or of our heirs or other Royal Persons, when we
or any of us shall come to the said City and also in going forth with us or any
of us when we shall depart from the said City, as also in the presence of us
our Mother, or Consort, or our Children when the said Mayor or Sheriffs, or
Aldermen of the said City, or any of them shall come to us or our heirs at or
without the command or warning of us or any of us; and as often as it shall
happen any of the said Sergeants to be sent to foreign places and without the
said City to do their Office at the command of us or o^ the Mayor or Sheriffs
aforesaid they may lawfully carry going and coming publicly as our own
Sergeant at Arms attending our presence do carry their Maces: Any Ordinance or
Commandment made to the contrary notwithstanding; In witness whereof we have
caused these our Letters to be made Patents; witness my self at Westminster the
10th. day of June, in the 28th. Year of our Reign of England, and of France the
15th.

WE have also seen certain Letters Patents Edw. 3. Char. 5.
of our Lord Edward, late King of England the third, in these words; Edward
King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, to all to whom these Letters
shall come greeting; Know Ye, That whereas, amongst other Liberties granted to
the Citizens of our City of London, by the Charters of our progenitors,
sometimes Kings of England, which we have confirmed, and by ours it has been
granted unto them, that all Merchants strangers coming Merchant strangers to
board, and not to keep houses.
into England, shall remain at board with the free Hosts of the City aforesaid,
and of other Cities and Towns in England, without keeping any houses or
societies by themselves: And that there should be no Brokers of any
Merchandises from henceforth, unless they were chosen thereunto by the
Merchants in the Mysteries Brokers to be chosen by the Merchants of the mystery.
in which the said Brokers exercise their Offices; and thereupon at the least
do take their Oaths before the Mayor of the said City. And also that the
Merchants who were not of the Freedom of the said City should not sell by
retail any Wines, or other wares within the said City, or the Suburbs thereof.
And now our welbeloved Subjects, the Mayor, Aldermen, and other Citizens of the
said City, have humbly beseeched us by their Petition exhibited in these words:
To our Lord the King and his good Council, do show the Liege, Mayor, Aldermen
and Petition of the Mayor and Aldermen to the King.
Commonalty of the City of London, that whereas they have often sued in diverse
Parliaments to have consideration how that they are impoverished and undone by
reason their Liberties by him and his progenitors to them granted, are
restrained, and great part taken away; and now at the last Parliament holden at
Westminster, it was answered to them, that they should declare their Griefs
specially and they should have good remedy therefore; of which Griefs (amongst
diverse others) these be; That every Stranger might dwell in the said City, and
keep a house, and be a Broker, and sell and buy all manner of Merchandises by
retail; and one Stranger to sell to another to sell again, to the great
inhancing the prices of Merchandises, and a cause to make them remain there
more than forty days: Whereas in time past no Merchant stranger might use any
of these points contrary to the Franchises of the said City before these times
had and used; by which Grievance the Merchants of the said City are greatly
impoverished, and the Navy impaired, and the Privities of the Land by the said
strangers discovered to our enemies by Spies and other strangers into these
houses received: May it therefore please your The prayer of the Petition.
Majestyand Council, to ordain in this Parliament, that the Merchants strangers
may be restrained in the points aforesaid, and the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons
in the said City may enjoy the said Franchises. We for the special affection we
bear to the said Citizens, willing to provide for the tranquillity and profit
of the said Citizens in that behalf, with the Assents of our Prelates, Nobles,
etc. Have granted for us The King's Grant to the City in Parliament.
and our Heirs to the said Mayor and Aldermen, and Citizens of the said City,
and their successors, upon condition that they put the said City under good
government, to our honor and profit of our Realm of England, and right govern
the same; That no strangers from henceforth shall sell any wares in the same
City or Suburbs thereof, Strangers to keep no house in London, nor be Broker.
by retail, nor shall keep any house, ^o^ be any Broker in the said City, or
the Suburbs thereof, any Statute or Ordinance made to the contrary
notwithstanding; saving always to the Merchants of High Almaine their
Liberties, to us and our progenitors to them granted and confirmed: In witness
whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness my self at
Westminster the fourth day of December, in the 50th. Year of our Reign of
England, and of our Kingdom of France the 37th.

WE have seen the Charter of our Lord Henry 4.
Henry the fourth, late King, bearing date the 25th. day of May, in the first
year of his Reign, made to the Citizens aforesaid, in which Charter is
contained amongst other things as follows; And moreover, of our ample grace
we have granted to us and our heirs as much as in us is, to the same Citizens,
their heirs and successors as aforesaid, that they shall have the custody
Citizens to have the keeping of the Gates of Newgate and Ludgate. Gathering
Tolls.
as well of the Gates of Newgate and Ludgate, as all other the Gates and
Posterns of the same City, and also the Office of gathering of the Tolls and
Customs in Cheap, and Billing sgate, and Smithfield, there rightfully to be
taken and accustomed; and also the Tronage, that is to say, Tronage.
the weighing of Lead, Wax, Pepper, Allom, Madder, and other like wares within
the said City for ever. As by the said Charters, amongst other things, more
plainly may appear.

WE have seen the Charter of Lord Edw. 4. Char. 1.
Edward the 4th. late King of England in these words, Edward by the Grace of
God King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland. To all Archbishops, etc.
greeting. Although as we understand such things altogether as ought to be
holden and determined by Conservators of the peace and Justices assigned for
hearing and determining diverse Felonies, trespasses and misdemeanors in all the
Counties of our Realm of England by the Kings Authority by virtue of the
Ordinances and Statutes of our Realm aforesaid, made for the good of the peace
and rule of our people have always, time out of mind, been used and well
affirmed and yet be in our City of London: Nevertheless to the end that from
henceforth one good certain and undoubted manner may be continually had in our
said City for the conservation of the peace and governing our people of the
same, And that the same may always be and remain a City of peace and
quietness; We will of our mere motion and by tenor of these presents do grant
for us, and as much as in us is, to to the Mayor and Commonalty of the City
aforesaid, and to the Citizens of the same and to their successors for ever,
that they may have and hold all and singular their Mayor and Citizens to enjoy
their Customs.
liberties and free Customs as whole and sound as ever they had and held them
in all time of our Progenitors. And further we grant for us and our heirs
aforesaid to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, and to their successors the
liberties and Authorities, acquittals and franchises underwritten; that is to
say, That from henceforth the Mayor and Recorder of the said City who now be,
and their successors, The Mayor, Recorder, and such Aldermen as have been
Mayors shall be Justices of the Peace.
and the Mayors and Recorders which for the time shall be as well those
Aldermen which before this time have been Mayors of the same City, as other
Aldermen who shall hereafter sustain the charge of Mayoralty and shall be
thereof dismissed as long as they shall there remain Aldermen for ever; shall
be conservators of the present peace of our City, and the peace of our
successors of the said City and liberties thereof as well by Land as by Water.
And To put all Ordinances for the preservation of the Peace in execution.
to keep or cause to be kept all Ordinances and Statutes, made and to be made
for the good of our peace and for the quietness, rule and government of our
people in all their Articles as well within the City aforesaid as the liberty
and Suburbs of the same, as well by Land as by Water, according to all the
force, form and effect of the same. And to chastise and punish whom they shall
find offending, contrary to the form and effect of the said Ordinances and
Statutes, as according to the form of the Ordinances and Statutes aforesaid
should be done. We will also and grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens and The Mayor, Aldermen and Recorder to be Justices of Oyer and
Terminer.
their successors, that the now Mayor and his successors aforesaid, and the
Recorder of the said City which for the time shall be, and such Aldermen as
aforesaid or four of the same, Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, of whom we will
that such Mayor for the time being and his successors, to Mayor to be of the
Quorum.
be one, be Justices, and have so assigned them Justices for us and our
successors forever; To enquire, hear and determine as often, and at such times
as to them shall seem meet, of all manner of Felonies, Trespasses, Forestalling
and Regratings, Extortions, and other Misdemeanors within the said City, or
the Liberties or Suburbs thereof, as well by Land as by Water, by whomsoever,
or after what manner soever done or committed, and which from henceforth shall
happen to be done: And also to hear and determine, and execute all and singular
other things which shall pertain to our Justices of the Peace within our Realm
of England. So always that the said Mayor and Citizens, and their Successors,
may have and hold all and singular their Ancient Liberties and Customs whole,
free and sound, the Premises in any thing notwithstanding, Given to our
Sheriffs of the City aforesaid for the time being, and to their Successors, and
to all whatsoever Citizens of the said City, which now be, The Sheriffs to
attend the Justices.
and which hereafter for the time shall be by tenor of these presents
straightly in commandment, that they be attendant, counselling, answering and
aiding the said Keepers of the Peace aforesaid, the now Mayor, Recorder, and to
their Successors, and to such Aldermen as aforesaid in all things they do, or
may pertain to the Office of conservator of the Peace, and ^^ such Justices
within the said City, and the Liberties thereof, according to the form
aforesaid, as often, and at such times as shall be by them, or any of them on
our behalf duly required: Saving always to the Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens Saving to the City their Customs.
of the same City, and to their Successors, their Customs, Liberties and
Franchises which we will and straightly command inviolably be observed in all
things as they and their predecessors before the making of these presents have
observed the same. And because we understand, that by the most ancient Custom
of the said City it is there had, and in the Circuits of the Justices of our
Progenitors, sometimes Kings of England, it is allowed to the said Citizens The
Custom of the City to be certified and recorded by word of mouth.
that the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City, for the time being, ought to
record all their ancient customs by word of mouth, as often and at such time as
any thing shall be moved in Act or question before any Judges or Justices
touching their Customs aforesaid, as in their claims in the last circuit of
Justices holden at our Tower of London it is more fully contained: We
considering the same thing, being willing rather to enlarge then diminish the
Custom of the said City, of our special grace have granted for us and our heirs
and successors unto the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens and their
successors, that whenever any issue shall be taken in any Plea of or upon the
Custom of the City of London, between any parties in pleading (yea though
themselves be parties) or if any thing in plea, act, and question, touching the
said Customs, be moved or happen before us or our heirs to be holden, the
Justices of the Common Bench, the Treasurer and Barons of our Exchequer or of
our heirs or before the Barons of such like Exchequer, or any other the
Justices of us or of our heirs which shall exact or require Inquisition,
Recognizance, certificate or trial; The same Mayor and Aldermen of the said
City for the time being and their successors shall Record, Testify, and declare
whether such be a Custom or not by the Recorder of the same City for the time
being by word of mouth. And that there may be speedy process by that Record,
certificate and declaration, such custom so alleged shall be allowed for a
custom, or accounted not for a custom without any Jury, therefore to be taken,
or further process thereupon to be made; and furthermore we have granted to
them the Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, that though they and their
successors or the said Mayor and Aldermen and their predecessors in times past,
or their successors hereafter, have for some cause perchance fully not used, or
abused any of the liberties, acquittals, grants, ordinances, articles, or free
customs, or other thing contained in these our writings or in other our
writings, or of our Progenitors, sometimes Kings of England, to No forfeiture
of the premises for non-user or abuser.
the same Mayor and Commonalty granted, notwithstanding we will not that the
same Mayor and Commonalty, Aldermen and Citizens, or their Successors, shall
therefore incur the forfeiture of any of the Premises; but that they and their
Successors may from henceforth fully enjoy, and use all and singular the
Liberties, Grants, Acquittals, Ordinances, Articles, Free Customs, and other
things whatsoever, so not used or abused in the Charters aforesaid contained,
and every of them, without Impeachment or Let of us or our Heirs, Justices,
Escheators, Sheriffs, or other our Bailiffs and Ministers, or of any other
whatsoever Ally, Statutes or Ordinances made, or Judgments given, or any other
Charters, or any the Charters of our Progenitors whatsoever in times past
granted to the contrary notwithstanding. And we, being willing further to do
the same Mayor and Commonalty a greater pleasure, and also for the bettering
and common profit of our said City, will and grant to the same Mayor and
Commonalty, and their Successors, All abiding within the City to be
contributary to Taxes.
That from henceforth all and singular Merchants, as well Denizens as Aliens,
abiding within the said City, and the Liberties and Suburbs of the same, and
exercising Merchandising or Occupations there by any means by themselves or
others, though they be not of the Liberty of the same City, shall be partakers,
shall be taxed, and contribute according to their faculties in Subsidies,
Tallages, Grants, and other Contributions whatsoever by any means to be
Assessed, for the need of us or of our Heirs, or of the said City, for the
maintenance of the state and profit of the same with the Citizens of the
sameCity; Yet notwithstanding, that this our present Grant be not in prejudice
or derogation of any Grants by us, or any Merchants of Almaine excepted, and
not to be grieved by this Grant.
of our Progenitors made or granted to those Merchants of Almaine, which have
an house in the City of London, which is commonly called the Guild Hall of the
Almaines, or their Successors. And further, because it is well known and
manifest, that those of the said City which are called, elected, and taken to
the degree of Aldermen proper for the conditions and merits requiring the same,
have sustained and supported great charges, cost and pains for the time they
make their abode and residence in the same City, being vigilant for the common
good, Rule and Government of the same, and for that cause oftentimes do leave
their possessions, and places in the Counties there, that therefore they, and
every of them may, without all fear of unquietness or molestation, peaceably
abide and tarry in such their houses, places and possessions, when they shall
return thither for comfort and Aldermen not to be put upon Assizes, Attaints or
Juries.
recreation sake. We have of our special grace granted to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and to their Successors aforesaid, that all and every of these
which be Aldermen of the said City, and their Successors, which for the time
shall be Aldermen there, for the term of their lives shall have this Liberty;
that is to say, That as long as they shall continue Aldermen there, and shall
bear the charge of Aldermen proper; and also those which before had been
Aldermen, and have also with their great costs and expenses born the Offices of
Mayoralty, shall not be put in any Assizes, Juries or Attaints, Recognizances
or Inquisitions out of the said City; and that they, nor any of them shall be
Tryer or Tryers of the same, although they touch us or our Heirs, or
Successors, or other whomsoever.

And that without that City neither they nor any of them be made Collectors
Aldermen of Land. not to be Collectors or Taxers out of the City.
or Collector, Assessor, Taxor, Overseer, or Comptroler of the Tenths,
Fifteens, Taxes, Tallages, Subsidies, or other charges or impositions
whatsoever to us our heirs or successors hereafter to be granted or given: And
if they or any of them be elected to any of the Offices or Charges aforesaid,
and that the same Mayor or Aldermen do deny, refuse, or not do the offices or
charges aforesaid; then they, or any of them, shall not by any means Aldermen
not to suffer for refusal of such Offices.
incur any contempt, loss, pain, fine, imprisonment, or forfeiture by occasion
of their so refusing or not doing, nor shall for that cause forfeit any issues
by any means. And further, as we understand, Lord Edward sometimes King of
Enland, the 3d. after the conquest, our Progenitor, with the assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm of England assembled in
Parliament holden at Westminster in the first year of his Reign, at the
Petition of the then Citizens of the said City, by his Letters* Patents granted
for him and his heirs to the same Citizens the Town of Southwark, with the
appurtenances to have and hold to them and their successors Citizens of the
same City, of the same our Progenitors and their heirs for ever, paying unto
him by the year, at the Exchequer of him and his heirs at the terms accustomed,
the farm therefore due and accustomed as in the said Letters Patents more fully
is contained: And now the Mayor and Commonalty of the same City and their
predecessors have and hold certain liberties and Franchises in the Town
aforesaid by virtue of those Letters Patents, and do use the same as their
predecessors have had and held them and have used and enjoyed them; And they
now fear that diverse Doubt in the use of some Liberties in Southwark.
doubts, opinions, varieties, and ambiguities, controversies and dissentions
may light and be likely to spring, grow, be imagined, holden, and had in time
to come in and about the use and exercise of such liberties and franchises, for
want of more clear and full declaration and expressing of the same, for that
diverse diversely interpret, judge, and understand; we therefore, to the end to
take away from henceforth and utterly to abolish all and all manner of causes,
occasions, and matters whereupon such opinions, ambiguities, varieties,
controversies, and dissentions may spring, be holde^, and moved in this behalf,
have of our special grace and from our mere motion granted to the said Mayor
and Commonalty of the said City which now be, and their successors Southwark
granted to the City of London. Waifes, Estrayes, Treasure, etc.
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizen^ of that City which for the time being shall
be for ever, the Town of Southwark with the Appurtenances, with all Chattels
called Waif and Estray, and also Treasure found in the Town aforesaid, and all
manner o^ handiwork, goods and Chattels of Trayton* Felons, Fugitives,
Outlawed, Condemned, convicted, and of Felons defamed, and denying the law of
our Land, wheresoever or before whomsoever Justice shall Goods disclaimed.
Escheats and Forfeitures
be done upon them: And also goods disclaimed, found or being within the Town
aforesaid; and also all manner of Escheats an^ forfeitures which may there
pertain unto us as fully and wholly as we should have them if the same Town
were in ou^ hands. And that it shall be lawful to the The Mayor, etc. to put
themselves in possession
same Mayor and Commonalty and to their successors by their deputy and
Ministers of the same Town to put themselves in possession of and in all the
handiworks and Chattels of all manner of Traitors, Felons, Fugitives, Outlaws,
condemned, convicted, and of Felons defamed and denying the Laws of our Land;
And also of and in all goods disclaimed, found and being within the same Town
and also of and in all the Escheats and forfeitures to us and to our heirs
there pertaining. And that the same Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens and their
successors by themselves or their deputy or Ministers may have in the Town
Assize of Bread.
aforesaid Assay, and Assize of Bread, Wine, Beer and Ale, and all other
victuals and things whatsoever saleable in the said Town, and also all and
whatsoever does and may Clerk of the Market.
appertain to the Office of Clerk of the Market of our house or of our heirs,
together with the correction and punishment of all persons there selling Wine,
Bread, Beer, Ale, and other victuals and of all other inhabiting and exercising
any Arts whatsoever and with all manner of Forfeitures and Fines.
forfeitures, fines, and amerciaments to be forfeited and all other which there
do and in any time to come may there pertain to us our heirs or successors. And
that they shall have in the said Town the execution of all manner of writs of
ours, or of our Execution and return of Writs to be by the City-Officers.
heirs and successors and of all other wr^ts, commandments, precepts, extracts,
and warrants with the return of the same by such their Minister or deputy whom
they shall thereunto choose; So always that the Clerk of the Market of our
house, or of the house of our heirs or the Sheriff or Kings Clerk of the
Market, nor the Sheriff of Surrey to intermeddle.
Escheator of the County of Surrey which now is or hereafter shall be, do not
by any means intermeddle, enter or do any execution. We have also granted to
the same Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens and their successors for ever that
they shall and may have yearly one Fair in the Town aforesaid for 3 days that
is to say, the 7th. 8th. and 9th. days of September; To be A Fair for three
days in the year.
holden together with a Court of Pypowders, and with all liberties and free
Customs to such Fair appertaining; and that they may have and hold there at
their said Courts, before their said Ministers or deputy the said 3 days, from
day to day, and hour to hour, from time to time, all occ^sions, plaints and
pleas of a Court of Pypowders together with all Summons, Attachments, Arrests,
Issues, Fines, redemptions and commodities and other rights whatsoever to the
same Summons and Attachments.
Court of Pypowders any way pertaining, without any impediment, let or
hindrance of us, our heirs or successors or other our Officers and Ministers
whatsoever; and also that they may have there a view of Franckpledg and
whatsoever there to pertains View of Frankpledg.
together with all Summons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Amerciaments, Fines,
Redemptions, Profits, Commodities, and other things whatsoever which there may
or ought therefore pertain to us our heirs or successors. And furthermore the
aforesaid Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens and their successors may by
themselves or by their Minister or deputy in the said Town appointed, take and
arrest all manner To carry to Newgate Thieves taken in Southwark.
of Felons, Thieves, and other Malefactors found within the said Town and may
lead them to our goal of Newgate safely to be kept until they shall be by
process of Law delivered. And further the said Mayor A Grant of what Liberties
the King had, or should have in Southwark.
and Commonalty and Citizens and their successors may for ever have in the Town
aforesaid all manner of liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Acquittals, Customs
and Rights, which we should or might there have if the said Town were and
remained in our hands, without any thing to be by any means given or paid to us
or our heirs, beside only ten pounds for the ancient farm therefore due, and
without Impeachment, Let molestation or disturbance of us or our heirs or
successors, Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs, Officers or Ministers of ours, or
of our heirs or successors whatsoever; The The right of the Archbishop of
Canterbury excepted.
rights, liberties and Franchises, of right belonging to the most Reverend
Father and Lord in Christ, Lord Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury and of other
persons there always saved; although express mention be not here made of the
true yearly value of the premises or of any other gifts or grants to the Mayor
or Aldermen, Sheriffs and Citizens, or to their Successors or any of them made
according to the form of the statute there of had, made and provided, or any
other statute, Ordinance, Act thing, cause or matter whatsoever not
withstanding. These being witness; The Reverend Father Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, William Archbishop of York, George of Exon Chancellor, and William
Bishop of Ely, and our dear Brother George of Clarence, and Richard of
Gloucester Dukes, and others; Given by our hand at Westminster; the 9th day of
November in the 2d. year of our Reign.

WE have also seen certain other Letters Edw. 4. Char. 2.
Patents of the same Lord Edward la^e King of England, the 4th. made in these
words, Edward by the Grace of God King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, To all to whom these present Letters shall come greeting. Know ye,
that for certain and notable causes us specially moving of our special grace
and certain knowledge we have granted to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens
of our said City Tonnage granted to the City.
of London, That the Tonnage and weigning, and measuring, laying up, placing,
and housing of whatsoever woolls by whomsoever from whatsoever parts brought or
to be be brought to the City aforesaid, or which have before time been
accustomed to be Weighing pf Woolls to be at Leaden Hall, and in no other place
within 3 miles.
brought to the staple of Westminster, shall from hence be and be made in the
place called Leaden Hall, within our City aforesaid and in no other place
within three miles of the said City. To have the laying up, placing, and
housing aforesaid, together with all sees, profits, and emoluments to the same,
laying up, placing and housing, or any of them due, used or accustomed to the
aforesaid Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the same City, and their
successors, for ever, without any account to be made, or any other thing
therefoe to us to be paid; although express mention be not in these presents
made of the clear yearly value or certainty of the premises or of any other
gifts or grants by us or our progenitors to the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens and their successors by any means made, or any other statute, Act,
ordinance or any other thing whatsoever made to the contrary notwithstanding;
In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness
our self at Westminster the 27th. day of August in the third year of our Reign.
Edw. Char. 3.


Moreover, we have seen certain other Letters Patents of the aforesaid Lord
Edward late King of England the 4th. made in these words; Edward by the grace
of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, to all to whom these
present Letters shall come greeting: Know ye, that whereas the sum of twelve
thousand nine hundred twenty three pounds nine shillings eight pence is by us,
amongst other things, due to our beloved and Faithful Subjects the Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of our City of London, as in the receipt of our
Exchequer more plainly appears, of which sum the said Mayor and Commonalty
are willing to remit and release unto us 1923 l. 9 s. and 8. p. To the intent
we should vouchsafe to grant them license, that they and their successors might
purchase Lands, Rents, and Services, and other possessions whatsoever to the
value of 200 marks by the year over all charges and reprizes, although they
should be holden of us of others, by any manner of service of whatsoever person
or persons willing to give, bequeath, or assign the same to them; to have and
to hold to the same Mayor and Commonalty and their successors aforesaid for
ever in form following: We inwardly pondering not only the premises but also
the manifold pleasures to us by the Mayor and Commonalty of the said City
before this time acceptably done, and willing (as we are bound) before all
other things wholly to pay and recompense our debts; have of our special grace,
and for that the License to purchase 200 Marks per annum in Mortmaine. License
to any to grant to the City 200 Marks per annum in Mortmaine.
said Mayor and Commonalty for them and their successors have remitted and
altogether released unto us the said sum of 1923 l. 9 s. 8 d. granted and given
license, and by these presents do grant and give license for us and our heirs
(as much as in us is) to the said Mayor and Commonalty that they and their
successors may purchase Lands, Revenues, Rents, Services, and other possessions
whatsoever to the value of 200 marks by the year, over all charges and reprizes
of any person or persons willing to give, grant bequeath, or assign the same
unto them, although they be holden of us or others by any manner of service in
full satisfaction and contentation of the said sum of 1923 l. 9 s. 8 p. to them
by us due, without any fine or fee to be paid to the use of us or our heirs, to
have and to hold to the same Mayor and Commonalty and their successors for
ever: and we have by tenor of these presents given special license to the same
person and persons, that he or she may give, grant, bequeath, or assign Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Possessions, and services to the yearly value aforesaid, over
and above all reprizes and charges as aforesaid unto the said Mayor and
Commonalty and to their successors as aforesaid for ever; without hindrance of
us or our heirs, our Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, or
other the Ministers of us or our heirs whatsoever: And this without any other
the Kings Letters Patents, or any inquisitions upon any writ of ad quod damnum,
Without other Writ of Ad quod damnum, etc.
or any other the Kings commandments in this behalf by any means to be had,
prosecuted and taken; The statute concerning Lands and Tenements not to be put
in Mortmain or any other statute act or ordinance made to the contrary
notwithstanding. To have as many writs ad quod damnum, etc.
And we also will and grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty, that they and
their successors may have so many and such writs ad quod damnum, and other
Royal Letters Patents Executory from time to time upon the license aforesaid in
full satisfaction and contentation of the said sum of 1923 l. 9 s. 8 d. In
Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness my
self at Westminster the 20th. day of June in the 18th. year of our Reign.

We have seen also other Letters Patents Edw. 4. Char. 4.
of Lord Edward late King of England the 4th. in these words; Edward by the
grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland; to all to whom
these present Letters Patents shall come greeting: Know ye, that whereas the
sum of 12923 l. 9 s. 8 d. is amongst other things due by us to our welbeloved
the Mayor and Commonalty of our City of London, as in the receipt of our
Exchequer more fully appears, This Charter confirmed by Parliament in the
third year of Henry 8.
of which said sum the Mayor and Commonalty are willing to remit and release
unto us the sum of 7000 l. to the intent that we should vouchsafe to grant to
the said Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors, the Offices and
Occupations 7000 l. the consideration of this Charter.
underwritten, to be had in form following: We inwardly pondering not only the
Premises, but also the manifold pleasures to us by the Mayor and Commonalty of
the said City before time acceptably done, and willing, as we are bound, before
all other things, to pay, or recompense our debts, have, of our special grace,
and for that the said Mayor and Commonalty have for them and their successors
remitted and released unto us 7000 l. parcel of the said 12923 l. 9 s. 8 d.
granted, and by these presents do grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
their successors, in full satisfaction and contentation of the said sum of 7000
l. to them by us due, the Offices or Occupations of packing all Grant of the
Office of Packing to the City.
manner of Wollen-Cloaths, Sheepskins, Calves-skins, Goat Skins, Vessels of
Amber, and of all other Merchandises whatsoever to be packed, tunned, piped,
barrelled, or any wise to be included, with the oversight of opening all manner
of Customable Merchandises arriving at the Port of Safety, as well by Land as
by Water, within the Liberties and Franchises of the said City and Suburbs of
the same, as well of the goods of Denizens as of Aliens, wheresoever they shall
be accustomed; And also the Office of packing all Woollencloaths, Sheepskins,
Lamb-skins, Goatskins, and Calves-skins, with kipping and poundring of the
same, and all Ambervessels, and of all other Merchandises to be packed, picked
and poundered in London, or the Suburbs of the sum, or to be carried by Land,
or to be Customed, as well concerning the goods of Merchants, Denizens, as of
Aliens; and also of the The Office of Portage.
Office of Carriage and Portage of all Woolls, Sheepskins, Tynn-bails, and
other Merchandises whatsoever, which shall be carried in London from the Water
of Thames, unto the houses of strangers, and contrariwise from the said houses
to the same Water, or of other Merchandises which ought to be carried, being in
any house for a time. And also the Office on Occupation of Garbling of all
manner of Office of Garbling.
Spices, and other Merchandises coming to the said City at any time which ought
Gawging.
to be Garbled. And the Office of Gawger within the said City. And also the
Office of Wine-drawers, to provide for the carrying Wine. drawer.
of Wines brought to the Port of the said City, and laid on Land wheresoever it
be, and elsewhere to be carried, to have the Occupations and Offices aforesaid,
and every of them, and the Dispositions, Ordinances, Oversights and Corrections
of the same; Together with all fees, profits and emoluments to the same Offices
or occupations and other the premises and every of them due, used and
accustomed to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the same City, and
to their successors for ever. And ^o be exercised by them or their Depuries.
also the exercising of the same Offices by themselves or by their sufficient
deputies, without any account or any other thing to us or our heirs therefore
to be given or made in full satisfaction and contentation of the said sum of
7000 l. And further, whereas our most dear Cozen Anthony The Coroners place of
London pretended to belong to the chief Butler of England.
Earl Rivers has of our grant by our Letters Patents, the Office of our chief
Butler of England under a certain form in the said Letters Patents specified,
by reason of which Office the Earl has granted and pretends to grant the
Office of Coroner within the said City and suburbs of the same. We likewise in
satisfaction and contentation of the said sum of 7000 l. Grant of the Coroners
place to the City.
to the said Mayor and Commonalty as is aforesaid due, Have of our special
grace granted to the same Mayor and Commonalty and their successors may
lawfully and safely grant the said Office of Coroner to any person who shall
please the said Mayor and Commonalty and their successors and may make a
Coroner there whom shall please them immediately, and as soon as the said
Office of chief Butler of England, of the Office of Coroner aforesaid shall
happen to be void or to come to our gife by the surrender of the said Earl, or
by any other Cause whatsoever. And we will by these presents that the same
Office of The Offices of Chief Butler and Coroner severed.
Coroner be from henceforth severally and distinctly, and altogether separated
from the Coroner so made by the said Mayor and Commonalty, or their successors,
may have full power and Authority to exercise and do all and singular things
which to the Office of Coroner within the said City and the suburbs of the
same, do pertain to be exercised and done, so that none other ou^ Coroner nor
of our heirs or successors shall by any means intermeddle within the said City
or the suburbs of the same, although express mention of the true yearly value
or certainty of the premises or any of them, or of any other gift or grants by
us or our progenitors to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, or to
their predecessors before this time by any means made, be not in these presents
made, or any statute, Act, Ordinance, or provision thereof made, published, or
ordained to the contrary, or any other thing whatsoever notwithstanding. In
witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Witness my
self at Westminster the 20th. day of June in the 18th. year of our Reign.

And whereas in and by certain Letters Henry 7.
Patents of Lord Henry late King of England the 7th. our progenitor made under
the great seal of England bearing date the 23d. day of July in the 20 year of
his Reign (amongst other things) it is recited that, of all time of which the
memory of man is not to the contrary, for the Common weal of the Realm and City
aforesaid, it has been used, and by Authority of Parliament approved and
confirmed, that no stranger from the liberty of the City may Merchanchandize
foreign bought and sold forfeit to the City.
buy or sell from any stranger from the liberties of the same City any
merchandise or wares within the liberties of the same City, upon forfeiture of
the same. The said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, and their predecessors by
all the time aforesaid have had and received and have been accustomed to
receive, perceive and have to the use of the same Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens, all and all manner of Merchandises and wares bought and sold within
the liberties of the same City as aforesaid, and forfeitures of the same
Merchandises and wares until of late past time they were troubled or molested:
The same Lord Henry the 7th. by his Letters Patents as aforesaid, for
pacifying, and taking away from henceforth controversies and ambiguities in
that behalf, and to fortify and by express words to explain and declare the
liberty and custom aforesaid to them the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens and their heirs and successors, and willing the said liberties to be
peaceably and quietly had, possessed and enjoyed to the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens and their successors with the forfeitures aforesaid
against the said late Lord K. Henry his heirs and successors granted and by his
said Charter confirmed to the same Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens and their
successors, that no stranger from the liberties of the same City may buy or
sell from any other stranger to the liberty of the same City any Merchandises
or wares within the liberties of the same City: And if any stranger to the
liberty of the same City shall sell or buy any merchandises or wares within the
liberty of the same City of any other stranger to the liberty of the same City,
that the same Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens and their successors may have,
hold and receive all and all manner of such like Merchandises and wares so
bought and to be bought, sold or to be sold within the liberty of the said
City, between whatsoever strangers to the liberty of the same City, as
forfeited, and all the forfeitures of the same and also penalties, fines, and
redemptions whatsoever any ways forfeited, lost or to be lost, or to be
forfeited or due thereon; to the use and profit of the same Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens and their heirs and successors without hindrance of the
same late King, his heirs or successors and without any account or any other
thing to be rendered or paid thereof to the said late King, his heirs and
successors any statute Act or ordinance of us or our progenitors made to the
contrary notwithstanding; although the same Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens
of the said City or their predecessors have before that time used, abused, or
not used those Customs and liberties, saving always that the great men, Lords
and Nobles, and Strangers may buy things in the gross for their own use, but
not to sell again.
other English and strangers of what condition soever they shall be, may freely
whatsoever Merchandises in gross for their families and proper uses within the
liberties of the said City, without any forfeiture, loss or hindrance
whatsoever, so that they do not sell again the said Merchandises to any other:
and further the same late King of his more ample grace by his said Letters
Patents amongst other things did give and grant to the Mayor, Commonalty and
Citizens of the same City of London and their successors, the Office of The
Office of Gawger.
Gawger within the said City, and the deposing, Ordering, Surveying, and
Correction of the same, To have, hold, exercise and occupy the said Office and
other premises, with all fees, profits, and emoluments to the same Office in
any manner belonging or appertaining to the same Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens by themselves, or by their sufficient deputy or deputies from the 22d.
day of August, in the first year of his Reign, for ever without any account to
be made thereof, or any other thing rendering and paying ^o the said Lord Henry
7th. his heirs of sucessors as by the said Letters Patents more plainly may
appear.

WE have also seen the Letters, Patents Henry 8. Char. 1.
^f Lord Henry the 8th. late King of England our progenitor made in these
words; Henry by the grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland; to all to whom these presents shall come greeting. Whereas Edward the
3d. sometimes King of England our progenitor by his Letters Patents amongst
other things has granted to the Citizens of the City of London, that all
Inquisitions from hence to be taken by the Justices and other the Ministers of
the men of the said City should be taken at great Saint Martins in London, and
not elsewhere, except inquisitions to be taken in Circuits in the Tower of
London, and for the Jail-delivery of Newgate. Know ye that we for some urgent
causes reasonable as moving at the petition of the Mayor and Commonalty
aforesaid, and of the Citizens of the same City, have of our special grace, and
from our certain knowledge and mere motion granted; And by these presents do for
us and our heirs (as much as in us is) grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty,
and unto their successors, and unto the same Citizens of the same City; that
all inquisitions by the Justices or other our Ministers, or of our heirs to be
from henceforth of the Inquisitions formerly taken in S. Martins to be in
London.
men of our City aforesaid, shall be taken at the Guild Hall within the City
aforesaid, or at any other place within the same City where it shall from time
to time be thought to our Justices for the time being before whom those
Inquisitions ought hereafter to be taken most expedient, and most convenient,
and not elsewhere, except inquisitions to be taken at the Circuits of Except
Inquisitions in Air in the Tower of London.
the Tower of London, and for the Jail-deliver at Newgate. In Witness whereof
we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents, Witness my self at
Westminster the 16th. day of June in the 10th. year of our Reign.

Moreover, we have seen other Letters Henry 8. Char. 2.
Patents of the same Lord Henry, late King of England our progenitor made in
these words; Henry the 8th. by the grace of God, King of England and France,
De^ender of the Faith and Lord of Ireland; ^o all to whom these present Letters
shall ^ome greeting, whereas we by our Letters Patents the date whereof is the
18th. ^ay of June in the 13th year of our Reign, ^ave of our special grace, and
from our certain knowledge and mere motion, given and granted for us and our
heirs forasmuch as in us then was to Sir William Sidney Knight, the Office of
Keeper of ^he great beam and common balance or weight within our City of
London for ^eighing of all Merchandises of Avoir ^u pois, and also all weights
whatsoever within the same City, which Office one William Stafford deceased,
lately exercised and occupied, by what name soever the ^^me Office was named or
known. And have ordained, made and constituted the said Sir William Sidney
keeper of the great beam, balance, and weight, and of all other weights
whatsoever, and also of the weights of all spices, wares, commodities,
Merchandises, and things in the City aforesaid, there to be weighed and
accustomed, and used to be bought and sold by weight. And have granted also by
our said Letters Patents to the said Sir William, Authority and power to make,
name and assign from time to time, all manner of Clerks, Porters, Servants and
Ministen of the great Beam and Balance, and of the Iron Beam, and of the Beam
of the Stillyard, and of the weights aforesaid, and also all other Clerks,
Porters, Servants, and Ministers to the same Office belonging, and also to
remove the same, or any of them and other or others to make, put and constitute
in his or their place, as often as to him shall seem expedient, To have, occupy
and exercise the Office and Office^ aforesaid, together with the Authority
aforesaid to the said Sir William Sidney by himself, or by his deputy, or
deputies, during our pleasure to his proper use and behoof, with all and
singular commodities, houses, advantages, profits, fees, and emoluments to the
said Office, in our time, or in the times of any our progenitors, Kings of
England, due and accustomed, pertaining, or belonging, in as ample manner and
form as any person, having or occupying such Office before this time had,
received or enjoyed the same: And have given and granted the same commodities,
houses, advantages, profits, fees, and emoluments, and all and singular the
premises for the exercise and occupation of the Office aforesaid, in manner and
form aforesaid to the said Sir William during our pleasure to the use and
behoof of the said Sir William, without account or any other thing to us or our
heirs in this behalf, for the premises to be made, given or paid; Although
express mention be not made of the true yearly value, or of any certainty of
the premises, or any grant or grants by us, or any of our progenitors to the
said Will. before this time made contained in the said Letters Patents above
specified, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Restraint or Provision before this
time made or provided to the contrary, or any other thing, cause or matter
whatsoever in any thing notwithstanding, as by the same our Letters Patents
fully appears; Which our pleasure in that behalf we will by these Sir William
Sidney's Patent cancelled.
shall be determined; And which Letters Patents the same William Sidney has
surrendered into our Chancery to be cancelled, to the intent we would vouchsafe
to grant our Letters Patents to the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of our City
of London. And because now of late we understand of the grievous complaint of
our welbeloved the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of our said City of London,
that the said Lord Edward sometime King of England the 2d. our progenitor by
his charter dated the 18th day of June in the 12th. year of his Reign, amongst
other things granted to the then Citizens of our said City, predecessors to the
now Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens aforesaid, that the weights and Beams for
the weighing of Merchandises between Merchants and Merchants, of which the
profits growing, and knowledge of the same pertain to the Commonalty of the said
City, should remain to be kept at the will of the Commonalty, in the custody of
two sufficient men of the same City expert in that Office to be thereunto
chosen by the Commonalty of the same City. And that they should in no wise be
committed to any others than to such as should be so chosen; as by the same his
Letters Patents which we have seen more fully appears. And because also the
Lord Henry sometimes King of England the fourth, our progenitor, by his Letters
Patents dated the 25th. day of May in the first year of his Reign, of his
favorable Grace amongst other things Tronage granted to the City by H. 4.
granted to the said Citizens of the said City Tronage, that is to say, the
weighing of Lead, Wax, Pepper, Allo^ Madder, and all other such wares within
the said City for ever: Which Letters Patents we of our special grace by our
charter dated the 12th. day of July in the first year of our Reign ratified and
confirmed to the same then Citizens, and to their successors, as by the same
our Letters Patents more fully appears: By which Letters Patents, and by the
continual keeping of the Office of Beam, Balance, Weights, and of other the
premises, time out of mind, by the said Citizens and their predecessors, and by
the exercise and occupation of the same within the said City without any
Keeping the Beams and Weights pertain to the City by prescription.
challenging, It is manifest and without any difficulty evident and apparent
unto us, that the said Office of the great Beam and common Balance ordained
for weighing between Merchants and Merchants, and the Office of keeping of the
great Balance or weight within our City of London for the weighing of all
Merchandises of Avoir du pois, and also of all weights whatsoever within the
said City, and also of all Spices Wares, Merchandises, and things in the City,
aforesaid there to be weighed, and also the Authority and power to make, name
and assign all and all manner of Clerks, Porters, Servants and Ministers of the
said great Beam and Balance, and of the Iron Beam and of the Beam of the
Stillyard and also all other Clerks; Porters, Servants and Ministers to the
said Office pertaining, and the Issues and revenues thereof coming, and all and
singular the premises pertaining, and of ancient right belonging to the Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens, we will in no wise be wronged. And to the end that
from henceforth all Ambiguity in such case might be taken away; And that the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their successors, may not in time
to come be impeached, impleaded, or grieved by us, or our heirs or successors
or any of our Justices or Ministers, of or for the premises, or any of them, we
will and grant to the now Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, and to their
successors, that the weights and Beams for weighing of Merchandises Weights and
Beams to be in the hands of persons chosen by the Commonalty.
between Merchant and Merchant, whereof the profits growing, and the knowledge
of them to pertain to the Commonalty of the City aforesaid, shall remain at the
will of the Commonalty of the same City, to be kept in the custody of good
sufficient men of the same City, expert in that Office, and to be thereunto
chosen by the Commonalty aforesaid, and that to others then so to be chosen i^
no wise they be committed: And that they shall have Tronage, that is to say,
Tronage.
the weighing of Wax, Lead, Pepper, Allom, Madder, and all other such like
wares within the said City for ever Willing also to do the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, a more ample pleasure in this behalf, we have of our favorable
grace, and from our certain knowledge and mere motion, given and granted, and by
these presents do give and grant to the same Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of
the City of London the aforesaid Office of keeper of the great Beam and common
Great Beam and common Balance.
Balance ordained for weighing between Merchant and Merchants, and also the
Office of the great Beam and weights within the said City for weighing of
Merchandises, of Avoir du pois, and also of all weights whatsoever within our
said City, and of all Spices, Wares, Merchandises and things in our said City
there to be weighed, by whatsoever name the said Office is named or known; And
do by these presents make, ordain and constitue the same Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their successors, keepers of the great Beam, Balance and Weights
aforesaid, and other Weights whatsoever; The Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens
ordained Keepers of the Beams and Weights.
and also the weighing of all Spices, Wares, Merchandises, and things in the
City aforesaid there to be weighed and accustomed to be bought and sold by
weight within our said City: And also we do give and grant to the Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens of our City aforesaid, Authority and Power to make,
name, and assign from time to time, all, and all manner of Clerks, Porters,
Servants and Ministers of the Great Beam and Balance, and of the To assign
Clerks of the several Beams.
Iron Beam, and of the Beam of the Still-Yard, and Weights aforesaid; and also
all other Clerks, Servants and Ministers to the same Office pertaining; and
also to remove them, or any of them, and to make, constitute and place other in
his or their place, as often as to them shall seem expedient, To have, occupy
and exercise the Office aforesaid, together with the Authority and Power
aforesaid, to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors, by themselves, their Deputy or Deputies for ever to their own
proper use and behoof, together with all and singular Commodities, Houses,
Advantages, Profits, Wages, Fees and Emoluments in our time, or in the times of
any of our Progenitors, Kings of England, due and accustomed, pertaining or
belonging to the same Office in as ample manner and form, as the same Citizens
and their Predecessors, or any other person or persons having, or occupying the
same Office before this time, had and received, or enjoyed the same: And also
we give and grant by these presents to the said Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens,
and to their Successors, the Commodities, Houses, Advantages, Profits, Fees and
Emoluments, and all and singular the Premises for the exercise and occupation
of the said Office, to the proper use and behoof of the said Mayor, Commonalty
and Citizens, and their Successors, without Account, or any other thing to us
or our Heirs to be delivered, made, given or paid in this behalf for the
Premises, or any of them in these Letters Patens specified and contained;
Although express mention be not in these presents made of the true value or
certainty of the Premises, or of their Gifts or Grants by us to the said Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens of the said City before this time made, or any Statute,
Act, Ordinance, Provision or Restraint thereof made, ordained or provided to
the contrary, or any other thing, cause or matter whatsoever in any wise
notwithstanding: In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made
Patents: Witness my self at W^stminster the 13th. day of April in the 22th.
year of our Reign.

WE have seen also the Letters Patents Edw. 6.
of Lord Edward late King ^f England the 6th. our progenitor, made in these
words; Edward the 6th by the grace of God King of England, France and Ireland,
Desender of the Faith, and and in Earth Supreme Head of the Church of England
and Ireland: To all to whom these present Letters shall come greeting; Know ye,
that for the sum of 647 l. 2 s. and 1 d. of Lawful The consideration of the
Charter.
money of England paid to the hands of the Treasurer of our Court of
Augmentation and Revenues of our Crown to our use by our welbeloved the Mayor
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, whereof we acknowledge us to
be fully satisfied and paid, and the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and
their successors to be thereof acquitted and discharged by these presents, and
for other causes and considerations us thereunto especially moving, have of our
special grace and from our certain knowledge and mere motion, and also with the
advice of our Council, given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens Grant of several
Messuages in Southwark. To the Mayor, etc.
of the City of London, all that our message or tenement with the
appurtenances now or late in the tenure of Simon Sebatson situate, and being
next our Mansion late Charles, late Duke of Suffolk in Southwark, in the County
of Surrey; and all that our message or tenement with the appurtenances next
the broad gate of the same our mansion in Southwark aforesaid; And all that our
close of ground called Moulters close, containing by estimation fifteen acres,
lying in Newington in our said County of Surrey; and all that our close of
ground containing by estimation 2 Acres now or late in the tenure of John
Parrow, lying and being in Saint Georges dunghill in the Parish of Saint George
in Southwark aforesaid; and also all that one close of ground late in the
tenure of John Billington, lying in Lambeth-marsh, in the parish of Lambeth in
the said County of Surrey; And also all those our 39 acres and three rods of
meadow with the appurtenances now or late in the tenure of William Basely,
lying and being in diverse parcels in the field called Saint Georges field in
the parish of Saint George in Southwark, in our said County of Surrey; And one
message or Tenement of ours situate near Broad Gates in Southwark aforesaid;
And all those our two messuages or tenements, and one Chamber, and three
stables, and one garden of ours, with all their appurtenances situate and
being in Southwark aforesaid; All and singular which Premises were sometimes
parcel of the possessions and hereditaments of Charles Duke of Suffolk; And all
other the messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions and Hereditaments
whatsoever with all their appurtenances in Scuthwark, in the said County of
Surrey, which were the aforesaid Charles Duke of Suffolk, and which were late
purchased by our dear Father Henry the 8th. late King of England of the same
Charles late Duke of Suffolk, except nevertheless always Exception of Southwark.
to us and our heirs, and successors all that our Capital message and
mansionhouse called Southwark place, in Southwark aforesaid late the said Duke
of Suffolks, and all gardens and ground to the same adjoining or appertaining;
And all our Park in Southwark aforesaid and And Park.
all the messuages; And all the buildings And Antedope.
and grounds called the Antilope there.

Furthermore, we give, and for the consideration aforesaid, with the Advice
aforesaid, do by these presents grant to the aforesaid Mayor, and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City of London, all that our Lordship Grant of the
Manor of Southwark belonging to the late Monastery of Bermonsey.
and Manor of Southwark, with their rights, members and appurtenances in the
said County of Surrey, late pertaining to the late Monastery of Bermondsey in
the said County: And all Messuages, Houses, Buildings, Barns, Stables,
Dove-Houses, Ponds, Pools, Springs, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Waste-street, Voidground-Rent,
Reversions, Services, Court Leet, view of Franck-pleadge, Chattels, Waives,
Strays, Free Warren, and all other Rights, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments,
and Hereditaments whatsoever, in Southwark aforesaid, to the said Lordship and
Manor of Southwark by any means belonging, or being before this time
accounted, known or taken as member and parcel of the said Lordship and Manor,
(except before excepted.) Furthermore we give, and for the consideration
aforesaid, and with the assent aforesaid, by these presents, do grant unto the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, all our Manor and Borough of
Southwark, with all their rights, members Grant of the Manor and Borough of
Southwark late belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
and appurtenances in the said County of Surrey, late parcel of the possessions
of the Archbishop and Archbishopric of Canterbury, and all our Annual Rent of
3 s. 2 d. ob. and the services going out of the Lands and Tenements sometimes
of John Burcetor Knight, and now or late in the tenure of William Glascock
Esquire in Southwark aforesaid: And all that our yearly rent of 3 s. and
service going out of the house or Tenement called the Swan in Southwark
aforesaid: And all that our yearly rent of four shillings ten pence, and the
service going out of the Message or Tenement called the Mermaid in Southwark
aforesaid: And all that the yearly rent of twenty pence a quarter, and the
service going out of the message or tenement called the Helmet in the Borough
of Southwark aforesaid, and all that our Annual Rent of sixteen shillings, and
the services going out of the message or tenement, called the Horse-head in
the Borough of Southwark aforesaid. And also all that our Annual Rent of six
shillings four pence, and the services going out of the Message or Tenement
called the Gleyne in Southwark aforesaid. And all that our Annual Rent of two
shillings a quarter, and the services going out of the Message or Tenement
called the Rose, and one Acre of ground lying in the Lock in Southwark: And all
that our Annual Rent of twenty pence a quarter, and the service going out of
one Message or Tenement called the Lamb in Southwark aforesaid, pertaining to
the Company of Fish-Mongers of London: And also that our Annual Rent of twenty
pence a quarter, and the service going out of one Message or Tement pertaining
to the said Society of Fish-Mongers in London called the Bale in Southwark
aforesaid: And all that Annual Rent of twenty pence a quarter going out of one
Message or Tenement pertaining to the said Society of Fish Mongers commonly
called the Flower de luce in Southwark aforesaid. And also that our Annual Rent
of 4 s. and the service going out of the twelve Acres of Land lying at the Lock
in Southwark aforesaid sometimes the Lord Wilfords, and now or late pertaining
to the said Society of Fishmongers: And all that our Annual Rent of 8. d. and
the Service going out of two Acres of Land of Giles Athorn called Tipping in
the Hole in Southwark aforesaid. And also all that our Annual Rent of 3 s. and
the service going out of one Message or Tenement, late Thomas Lord Paynings in
Southwark aforesaid. And all that our Annual Rent of 12 d. and the service
going out of the Message or Message now or late of William Maltons in
Southwark aforesaid. And all that our Annual Rent of 20 d. and the service
going out of the Message or Tenement called the White Heart in Southwark
aforesaid. And also all that our Annual Rent of 7 s. 4 d. and the service going
out of a Message or Tenement called the Crown in Southwark aforesaid, now or
late of the Masters of the Bridge-House, London. And also all that our Annual
Rent of 2 s. and the service going out ^f the Message or Tenement of the same
Masters of the Bridge-House, called the Chritopher in Southwark aforesaid, and
all that our Annual Rent of 12 d. and the service going out of the Lands and
Meadows of the Masters of the Bridge-House of London, lying and being at the
Lock called Carpenters ^all in Southwark aforesaid. And all that our Annual
Rent of 10 d. and the service going out of the Message or Tenement called the
Blew Mead in Southwark aforesaid. And all that our Annual Rent of 2 s. and the
service going out of one Message or Tenement now or late of William Salisbury
in Southwark: foresaid. And also all that our Annual Rent of 16 d. and the
service going out of a ^^tain Field of ground of four Acres of Land now or late
the Heirs of Robert Linled, lying and being in the Lock, and abutting upon the
Lands of the late Duke of Suffolk in Southwark aforesaid, and in Newington, or
in either them in the said County of Surrey. And ^^ our annual rent of 2 s. and
the service going out of a certain Field of ground, sometime John Solas Field,
and now or late the H^^^ of Robert Linled in Southwark, and Newton aforesaid,
or either of them. And all o^ annual rent of 20 d. and the services going out
of five acres of ground now or late (...) phen Middletons, lying and being at
the (...) of Southwark, and Newington aforesaid, or either of them. And all
that our annual (...) of 4 d. and the service going out of four cres of Land,
now or late William Champion lying and being in Southmead in Walm Field, in the
Parish of Newington, in our County of Surrey. And all that our annual rent of
20 d. and the service going ou^ the Message or Tenement called Ciro^
Southwark, and Newington aforesaid, and ^^ of them: And all other our Message
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, vices and Hereditaments whatsoever, which
were parcel of the Possessions, Rents and Revenues of the Archbishopric and
Bishopric of Canterbury in Southwark, in the said County of Surrey. We
furthermore give, and for the considerations aforesaid, and with the advice
aforesaid, do grant by these Presents to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens A Grant of the premises in as large manner as the Luke of Suffolk, or
any Abbot of Bermondsey or Archbishop of Canterbury did enjoy the same.
of the City of London, all and all manner of Woods, Underwoods, and Trees
whatsoever, growing and being of, in, and upon all and singular the premises,
and the soil and ground of the same; and also whatsoever, Reversions of all and
singular the premises, and every part thereof, and all the rents and yearly
profits whatsoever, reserved upon whatsoever Demises and Grants made of the
premises, or any part thereof by any means. We also give, and by these Presents
grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London,
all and singular the premises, with the appurtenances, as fully and in as ample
manner and form, as the said Charles late Duke of Suffolk, or any other Abbot
of the late Monastery of Bermondsey, or any Archbishop of Canterbury, or any of
them, or others before this time, having or possessing the said Mannours, and
other premises, or any parcel thereof, or being thereof seized, ever had, held,
or enjoyed, or ought to have or enjoy the same, or any parcel thereof; and as
fully, freely and wholly, and in as As largely as it came to Edward the 4. or
H. 8.
large manner and form, as all and singular the same came or ought to have come
to our hands, or to the hands of our most dear Father Hen. the 8. late King of
England, by reason or pretense of any Charter, Gift, Grant, or Confirmation, or
by reason or pretense of the dissolution of the said late Monastery, or by any
other means or right they came, or ought to have come, or as the same now be,
or ought to be in our hands. Know ye moreover, that we as well of our grace,
knowledge and motion aforesaid, and with the advice aforesaid, as for the sum
of five hundred Marks Consideration of five hundred Marks.
of lawful Money of England, paid into the hands of our Treasurer of our Court
aforesaid to our use by the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said
City of London, whereof we confess us to be fully satisfied, and the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, thereof to be
acquitted and discharged by these presents: Have given and granted, and by A
Grant of several things to the Mayor, etc.
these presents do give and grant for us, and our Heirs, to the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City aforesaid, and to their Successors in and
through all the Borough and Town of Southwark aforesaid, and in and through all
the Parishes of S. Saviors, S. Olaves, and S. Georges in Southwark; and i^ the
Parish, and through all the Parishes la^^ called S. Thomas Hospital, and now
called the Kings Hospital in Southwark aforesaid, and elsewhere soever in the
said Town and Borough of Southwark aforesaid, and in Kentish-street, and in
Blackman-street aforesaid, and the Parish of Newington, and elsewhere in the
said Town and Borough of Southwark, all Goods and Chattels waved, Estrays, and
Waifes, Estrayes, Treasure found.
all Treasure found in the Town and Precinct aforesaid, and all manner of
handywork, Goods of Traitors, Deodands. Goods of Felons, Deodands. Goods of
Fug^tives, Deodands. Goods of Outlaws, Deodands.

Goods and Chattels of all manner of Traitors, Felons, Fugitives, outlawed,
condemned, convicted, and of Felons defamed and put in exigent, Felons of
themselves, and Deodands, and denying the Law of our Land, wheresoever or
before whomsoever Justice ought to be done of them, and all goods disclaimed,
found, and being within the Borough, Town, Parishes, and Precincts aforesaid;
and also all manner of Escheats, and forfeitures to us and our Heirs, may there
pertain as fully and wholly as we should have them, if the said Town and
Borough were in the hands of us, or of our Heirs; and that it shall be lawful
to the same Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, by their
Deputy or Ministers of the same Town and Borough, to put themselves in seizin
of in all the handy-works and chattels of all manner of Traitors, Felons,
Fugitives, Outlawed, Condemned, Convicted, and of Felons defamed and denying
the Law of our Land, and of other premises; and also of and in all goods
disclaimed, found or being within the same Borough, Town, Parishes, or
Precincts aforesaid; and also of and in all Escheats and forfeitures to us and
our Heirs there pertaining. And that the same Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their Successors, by themselves, or their The Mayor and
Commonalty shall have the Assize of Bread, Wine, etc. within the Borough and
Parishes.
Deputy or Minister, or Ministers, shall have in the Borough, Town, Parishes
and Precincts aforesaid, the Assize and Essay of Bread, Wine, Beer and Ale, and
of all other Victuals and things whatsoever, set to sale in the Town aforesaid;
and also all and whatsoever does or may pertain to the Clerk of the Market of
our house, or of the house of our Heirs, together with the correction and
punishment of all persons selling Wine, Bread, Beer, Ale, and other Victuals
there to be sold, and of others there dwelling or exercising Arts howsoever;
and with all manner of forfeitures, fines, and amerciaments to be forfeited,
with all other things which therefore do or may there pertain to us, or our
Heirs or Successors in time to come: And that they shall have there the
Execution of all manner of Execution of Writs.
Writs of ours, or of our Heirs and Successors, and of all other Writs,
Commands, Extracts, and Warrants, with the Returns of the same by such their
Ministers Return of Writs.
and Deputies whom they shall thereunto choose; and that the same Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, shall every year have there,
and through all the Town, Borough, Parishes A Fair in Southwark for three days.
and Precincts aforesaid, one Fair or Mart to endure three days; that is to
say, the seventh, eighth, and ninth days of the Month of September to be holden
together, with a Court of Pye-powder, and with all Pie powder.
liberties and free Customs to such Fair pertaining: And that they may have and
hold therein, and at the said Court, before their Minister or Deputy, through
the said three days, from day to day, and hour to hour, and from time to time,
all the Actions, Plaints and Ples of the said Court of Pyepowder, together with
all Summons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Fines, Redemptions, and Commodities,
and other Rights whatsoever, to the same Court of Pyepowders, by any means
belonging, without any impediment, let, or disturbance of us, our Heirs or
Successors, or of other our Officers or Ministers whatsoever. And also that
they may have in and through all the View of Franckpledge.
Precinct aforesaid view of Franck-pledge, together with all Summons,
Attachments, Arrests, Issues and Amerciaments, Fines, Redemptions, Profits,
Commodities, and other things whatsoever, which therefore may or ought there to
pertain to us, our Heirs and Successors, by any means. And further, that the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, may by
themselves, or by their Minister or Deputy in the Borough, Town, Parishes or
Precincts aforesaid constituted, and to be constituted, take and arrest all
manner of Felons, Thieves, and other Malefactors To arrest Felons, etc. in
Southwark, and carry them to Newgate.
found within the Borough, Town, Parishes and Precincts aforesaid, and may
bring them to our Goal of Newgate, there to be safely kept, until by due
Process of Law they may be delivered. And furthermore that the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, may have in the Borough, Town,
Parishes and Precincts The Mayor, etc. to have the same Liberties as the King
should have if it were in his hands.
aforesaid, for ever all and all manner of Liberties, Privileges, Franchises,
Acquittals, Customs and Rights, which we or our Heirs should or might there
have, if the same Borough or Town were or remained in the hands of us, or our
Heirs. And further, we have of our grace, knowledge, and motion aforesaid, and
by the advice aforesaid granted, and by these presents do Pleas in London for
matters in Southwark.
grant, for us, our Heirs and Successors, to the said Mayor, and Commonalty,
and Citizens, and their Successors, that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, from henceforth for ever shall and may hold all and all manner of
Contracts and Demands whatsoever, within the Borough, Town, Parishes and
Precincts aforesaid, changing, happening and growing before the Mayor, and
Aldermen, and Sheriffs of the said City; and the Sheriffs of the said City for
the time being, or any of them, in the Guildhall of the Chamber of the
Guildhall and Hustings of the said City, or any of them to be holden by like
Actions, Bills, Plaints, Process, Arrests, Judgments, Executions, and other
things whatsoever, and at the same days and times, and in such like manner and
form as such happening in the said City have time out of mind been taken, held,
levied, prosecuted and executed in the Court before the Mayor, and Aldermen,
and Sheriffs of the said City, or in any of them. And that the Sergeants at
Mace of the City of London for the time being, which have used to execute and
serve any process or any other things in the said City, may be hereafter, make,
do, and execute any manner of process and do whatsoever things in the said
Borough, Town, Parishes, and Precincts, concerning all and singular things
arising and happening about such Pleas and Executions of the same within the
Precincts aforesaid, as by all the time aforesaid it has been used in the said
City of London. And that the Inhabitants of the Town and Borough, Parishes and
Precincts aforesaid, as concerning the Causes and matters there arising, may be
impleaded, and plead in the same City in form aforesaid, and in the Courts
aforesaid. And if the Men Impannelled and summoned in Jurors in Southwark
making default before the Mayor and Sheriffs to be amerced.
Juries, for Trials of such Issues, have not appeared before the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Sheriffs in the said Courts of the said City, that then such men
impannelled and summoned as aforesaid making default, shall be amerced by the
said Mayor or Sheriffs, and shall forfeit such issues upon them returned and to
be returned after the same or in like manner and form as the Men impannelled
and summoned in the said City for the like issues in the Courts of the said
City to be tried, have before this time forfeited, and have accustomed to
forfeit. And also that such amercements and issues forfeited, should be levied
by the Ministers of the said City, to the use of the Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their Successors, for ever. And also that the same Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens and their Successors shall and may from henceforth ever
have cognizance of all manner of The Mayor of London to have Cognizance of
personal Actions arising in Southwark.
Pleas, Actions, Plaints, and Suits personal happening or growing out of any
Court of Ours, or of our Heirs, before Us or Our Heirs, or before any of the
Justices, for or concerning any thing, cause or matter within the Town,
Borough, Parishes, and Precincts aforesaid, before the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs, or any of them in the said Courts of the said City, or any of them.
And that the Issues happening upon the said Pleas and Suits shall be tried in
the same Courts before the Mayor, and Aldermen, and Sheriffs, or any of them by
the Men of the same Borough or Town in such sort as Issues in the same City are
tried. And that the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors may for ever choose according to the form of Law, and may constitute
every year, or as often as, and in what times soever shall seem to them
expedient, two Coroners in the Borough or Town aforesaid. And that the said
Coroners and Mayor, etc. may choose two Coroners in Southwark.
either of them be elected and constituted, may and shall have full power and
authority to do and execute in the said Borough, Towns, Parishes, and Precincts
aforesaid all and singular things, which to the Office of Coroner in any County
of our Realm of England do or ought to pertein to be done and executed. And
that none other Coroners No Coroner of the King to intermeddle in Southwark.
of Us, Our Heirs or Successors shall enter into any thing, which to the Office
of such Coroner pertains to be done within the said Borough, Parishes, or
Precincts, neither shall at all intermeddle about any thing belonging to the
Office of Coroner happening within the Burough, Town, Parishes, or Precincts
abovesaid, and that the Mayor of the said City, for the time being, The Mayor
of London Escheator in Southwark.
shall be Our Escheator and Escheators of Our Heirs in the Borough, Parishes,
and Precincts aforesaid. And that he shall have full power and authority to
make his precept and Commandment to the Sheriff of the County of Surrey for the
time being, and do, execute and finish there, all and singular things which
appertain to the Office of Escheator in any County of Our Realm. And that none
other Escheator of No Escheator to intermeddle.
Our, or of Our Heirs, shall enter there into any thing, which to the Office of
Escheator appertains to be done, neither shall at all intermeddle with any
thing to the Office of Escheator there belonging. And that the Mayor of the
said City, for the time being The Mayor of London Clark of the Market in
Southwark.
shall be Clark of the Market, and of the Market of Our Heirs, within the
Borough, Town, Parishes, and Precincts aforesaid, and shall do and execute
therein all such things, which to the Clark of the Kings Clark of the Market
not to intermeddle.
Market appertains. And that the Clark of the Market of Our House, or of the
House of Our Heirs, or any other Clark of the Market intermeddle not there. And
that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors shall
and may from henceferth for ever, have, hold, enjoy, and use, as well within
the said Manor, as in the Town, Borough, Parishes, The Mayor of the city of
London to enjoy all Franchises, Tolls, etc. as any Bishop of Canterbury.
and Precincts aforesaid, as well all and singular Liberties and Franchises
aforesaid, as Tolls, Stallages, Pickages, and other our our Jurisdictions,
liberties, franchises and Privileges whatsoever, which any Archbishop of
Canterbury, and which the said Charles late Duke of Suffolk, or any Master,
Brethren or Sisters of the late Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark aforesaid,
or any Abbot of the said late Monastery of Saint Saviors, Saint Bermondsey
next Southwark aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, or any Prior and Convent of
the late Priory of Saint Mary Overy in the said County of Surrey, or any of
them ever had, held, or enjoyed in the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
other the premises or places aforesaid, or any of them, or which we have, hold
or enjoy by any ways or means whatsoever, as fully, freely, and in as ample
manner, as We, or Our most dear Father Henry the Eighth late King of England
had held and enjoyed, or ought to have, hold, and enjoy the same. And that none
of our Sheriffs, or any other None of the Kings Officers or Ministers to meddle
in Southwark.
Officer or Minister of Ours, or of our Heirs or Successors shall any way
intermeddle in the Town, Borough-Town, Parishes and Precincts aforesaid, or in
any of them contrary to this our Grant. And we with the advice aforesaid, do
further by these presents grant to the said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of
the said City of London, and to All the Inhabitants of Southwark to be under
the Magistracy of London, as Freemen thereof.
their Successors, that all and singular persons from time to time inhabiting
or refident within the Town, Borough, Parishes, and places aforesaid, shall
from henceforth be in the order, government and correction of the Mayor and
Officers of the City of London, and their Deputies for the time being, as the
Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City of London, be and ought to be by
virtue of the Charter before this time by any means made, granted and confirmed
by any of our Progenirors to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of
the said City and their Successors shall and may from henceforth have, hold,
and enjoy so many, so great, the same, such and the like rights, jurisdictions,
liberties, The Mayor of London to have the like jurisdiction in Southwark as in
London.
franchises and privileges whatsoever, in the Towns, Parishes and places
aforesaid, and in evere parcel thereof, as fully, freely and wholly as the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City enjoy and use, or may have
enjoy and use in the said City by virtue of any of the Charters and Grants
made, granted and confirmed by any of Our Progenitors, Kings of England, to any
Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City. And that the Mayor of the
same City for the time being, and the Recorde^ thereof for the time being,
after the sai^ Aldermen have exercised and born (...) charge of Mayor of the
said City, shall, b^ The Justices of Peace in London to be Justices in
Southwark.
Justices of our Peace, and of our Heirs, in the Town, Borough, Parishes, and
limits aforesaid, so long as the same, Aldermen shall (...) and remain Aldermen
of the said City, an^ every of them shall there do, and execu^^ all and
singular things, which other Justices of our Peace, and our Heirs may o^ and
execute within the said County of (...) according to the Laws and Statut^ of
our Realm of England. And that t^^ said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Cit^zens,
and their Successors shall have on every week, on Monday, Wednesday, Friday,
and Saturday within the Borough an^ Markets in Southwark font days in a week.
Town aforesaid one Market, or Markets t^ be there holden, and all things,
which to Market do appertain or may appertain forever. Except always, and
reserved to us, (...) Heirs and Successors out of these our Letter^ Patents,
all and all manner of Rights, Jurisdictions, Liberties, and Franchises
whatsoever, within the Walk, Circuit, and Precinct, over the Capital Message,
Garden and Park in Southwark aforesaid, and in a Gardens Curtilages and lands
to the sam^ Mansion, Gardens, and Park appertaining, an^ except and always
reserved the house Messaage or Lodging there called the Kings Ben^ and the
Garden or Gardens to the sa^^ pertaining with the appurtenances. So lo^^ as it
shall be used for a Prison, for the imprisoned as now it is. And except the
Message and Lodging there called the Marshalsea, and the Gardens to the same
belonging, with the Appurtenances, so long as it shall be used for a Prison, as
now it is. Provided also, that these our Letters Patents, nor any thing therein
contained, shall This Grant not to prejudice the Steward of the Kings House.
extend to the prejudice of the Officers of the Great Master Steward and
Marshal of our House, or of the House of our Heirs and Successors, to be
exercised within the Town, Borough, Parishes and Limits aforesaid be within the
Verge: Nor John Gate Knight, one of the Gent. of our Privy Chamber, of or for
Lands, Tenements, Offices, Franchises or Liberties by us or our Nor John Gate
during his life.
Father to the said John Gate granted during his life: Which Mannours, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Privileges, and all other the premises, are now extended to
the yearly Value of the Premises.
value of 35 l. 14 s. 4 d. To have, hold, and enjoy the said Mannours,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Woods,
Under-woods, Rents, Services, Reversions, Court-Leets, Views of Franck-pledge,
Chattels, waved Strays, free Warrens, and all and singular the said premises,
with the Appurtenances (except before excepted) to the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, and to their Successors
for ever. To be holden of us, and our Heirs and Successors, as of our Manor
of East-Greenwick in our County of Kent by fealty only in Fee-Soccage, and not
in Chief, for all services and demands whatsoever. We give also, and for the
consideration aforesaid do by these Presents grant to the said A Grant of all
the Rents, etc. of the Premises from Michael was without account.
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, all the
Issues, Rents, Revenues, and profits of the said Manor, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and all other the premises, with their Appurtenances, coming and
growing from the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel last past hitherto, to have
the same to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, of our gift, without
account or any other thing to us, our Heirs or Successors, by any means
therefore to be given, paid or made. And furthermore of our ample Grace we
will, and for us, our Heirs and Successors, do by these Presents grant to the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and to their Successors, that we, our
Heirs and Successors, will yearly for ever discharge, acquit, and save
harmless, as well the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors, as the said Mannours, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and all other
the premises, with their Appurtenances, and every part thereof, against us, our
Heirs and Successors, and against whatsoever The King to save the City harmless
against Corodies, etc.
persons, concerning all and all manner of Corodies, Rents, Fees, Annuities,
sums of Money, and charges whatsoever, by any means giving out, or to be paid
out of the premises, or to be charged thereupon. Saving the services hereby
reserved.
Saving the services above by these presents reserved, and the demises and
grants by any means made for terms of life, or years, of the premises or any
parcel whereupon the old Rent and more is reserved and shall be due yearly
during the terms aforesaid, and besides the Covenants in those Demises and And
the yearly Fee-farm.
Grants being: And saving 10 l. by the year of the Ancient Farm for the Town of
Southwark aforesaid by the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, due in our
Exchequer yearly to be paid and payable, willing, and by these presents by
straight Injunction commanding, as well our Chancellor, and General Overseers,
and Council of our said Court of Augmentations and Revenues of our Crown, and
all Receivers, Auditors, and others our Officers of ours or of our Heirs
whatsoever for the time being; That they, and every of them, upon the only
showing of these our Letters Patents, or of the Inrolments of the same, without
any other Writ or Warrant from Us or our Heirs by any means to be obtained and
prosecuted shall make, and cause to be made unto the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors, full
power, and due allowance, and manifest discharge of all such Corodies, Rents,
Fees, Annuities, and sums of Money whatsoever going out, or to be paid out of
the premises, or thereupon charged, or to be charged (except before excepted)
And these our Letters Patents, and the Inrolment of the same, shall be yearly,
and from time to time a sufficient Warrant and discharge, as well to the said
Chancellor and General Overseers, and to our Council of our said Court of
Augmentations and Revenues of our Crown, as to all Receivers, Auditors, and
other Officers and Ministers of ours, our Heirs and Successors whatsoever for
the time being in this behalf. We will also, and by these presents do grant to
the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, that
they may and shall have these our Letters Patents in due manner made and sealed
under our Great Seal of England, without fine or Fee, great or small, to Us in
our Hamper or elsewhere, to our use to be by any means given, paid or made,
although express mention be not in these presents made of the true yearly
value, or of the certainty of the premises, or of other gifts or grants of Us
or by any our Progenitors to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens
before this time made, any Statute, Act or Ordinance, provision or restraint
thereof, made, ordained, or provided to the contrary, or any thing, cause or
matter whatsoever in any thing notwithstanding. In witness whereof we have
caused these our Letters to be made Patents, witness my self at Westminster,
the 23. day of April, in the fourth year of our Reign.

We have also seen the Letters Patents of our most dear Father Lord James, late
King of England, etc. made in these words; James by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all
to whom our present Letters Patents shall come, greeting: Whereas our beloved
the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of our City of London, time out of mind
have had, exercised, and ought and have accustomed themselves to have and
exercise the Office Conservation of the Thames.
of Bailiff, and conservation of the water of Thames to be exercised and
occupied by the Mayor of the same City for the time being, during the time of
his Mayoralty, or by his sufficient Deputies, in, upon, and about the water of
Thames (that is to say) from the Bridge of the Town of Staynes in the County of
Middlesex, and toward the Extent of the Mayors Jurisdiction on the Thames.
^ast unto London Bridge, and from thence ^ a certain place called Kendall,
otherwise ^nland, otherwise Yeenleet toward the Sea, and East and in Medway,
and in the Port of Medway.
^e City of London aforesaid, and upon whatsoever Bank, and upon every Shore,
^d upon every Wharf of the same water ^ Thames within the limits and bounds
a^resaid, and in, upon, and about all and ^ery of them. And also for all the
time Fees and profits.
^resaid have had and taken, and ought ^d have accustomed to have and take to
^eir own proper use, by the Mayor of the ^e City for the time being, during the
time of his Mayoralty, or his sufficient Deputies, all wages, rewards, fees and
profits belonging to the same Office of Bailiff. And whereas the said Mayor and
Commonalty The Mayor, etc. to have the Office of measuring Coals and grain.
and Citizens from all the time aforesaid, have had, and exercised the Office
of measurer and measuring of all Coals and grain of whatsoever kind: And also
of all kind of Salt and all kind of Apples, Pears Plums and other Fruit
whatsoever; and also all kind of roots eatable of what kind Salt, Apples, etc.
soever, and of Onyons and of all other Merchandises Warcs, and things
whatksoever measurable, and the measuring of every of them, in, or unto the
said Poi^^ London, coming, carried, or brought upon the said water, in
whatsoever Ship, B^^ Barge or Vessel, floating, laden, and being on whatsoever
part of the said water ^ Thames, or upon whatsoever bank, sho^ or whart, of the
same water of Tham^ which shall come to arrive, abide, be (...) vered or laid
down from the said brid^ of the said Town of Stains Westward the said bridge of
London, and from them to the said place called Yendale otherw^ Y^nlett toward
the Sea, and East, and Medway, and in the said Port of the ^ of London
aforesaid, to exercise and (...) the same Office, by the Mayor of ^ said City,
for the time, during the ^ of his Mayoralty, or by his sufficient ^ puties. And
also for all the said time ^ have had and taken and ought to (...) and take to
their proper use, by the Mayor of the said City, for the time being, during his
Mayoralty. or by his sufficient Deputies all wages rewards Fees and Profits to
the same Office belonging. And To take Fees ^ and profits of the Office of
measuring of coals.
notwithstanding, they the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, of late times,
thereof have been disquieted, and in some measuring aforesaid unjustly hindered
and especially in the said Office or measuring Coals, supposing that Office to
the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, anciently not to appertain, neither by any
lawful grant or prescription, as yet to appertain or belong, whereas in truth
it does manifestly and plainly appear that the same Offices, and all other
premises to them of old time appertaining, and do now of right appertain, and
that they lawfully received Measuring of coals pertain to the City.
and enjoyed, and ought to have, take, and enjoy the wages and rewards, Fees
and perquisits thereof, We therefore to take away all controversies, and remove
all doubt in this behalf, and to the intent that the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Cititizens, may securely, freely, and quietly use, have,
exercise, and enjoy the Offices aforesaid, and every of them, and the measuring
aforesaid, and the Fees, Wages, Rewards, and Profits to the said Office and
Measuring belonging and all and singular, other the premises to them and their
successors for ever, without the contradiction, molestation, or hindrance, any
way of us our Heirs or Successors, Admiral of England, Justices, Escheators,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or other our Officers or Ministers whatsoever. And because
it is well pleasing to us, to show favor in this behalf to the same Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens, and rather increase, strengthen, and enlarge, then
diminish the Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions, Privileges, and free
Customs of the City of London aforesaid, of our special grace, and from our
certain knowledge and mere motion, we do by those presents, approve, allow,
ratify, and Confirmation of the premises, with the Fees to the Mayor and
Commonalty.
confirm for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, all and singular the Offices and
Measuring aforesaid, and other recited premises, and the Wages, Rewards, Fees,
and Profits, belonging or appertaining thereto, and the uses and Customs
aforesaid, to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, of the said City
aforesaid and their Successors. And further of our special grace and certain
knowledge, and mere motion, we have granted, and by these presents for Us, our
Heirs, and Successors, do grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their Successors, that they may exercise and execute the Power
granted to the (...) Mayor, etc. to con^erve the Thames.
said Office of Bailiff, and conservation of the water of Thames, by the Mayor
of the same City, for the time being, during the time of his Mayoralty or his
sufficient Deputies, from time to time, for ever, in, upon, or about the same
water of Thames (that is to say) from the Bridge of Staynes to the Bridge of
London, and from thence to a certain place called Yenland, otherwise Yeenleet
toward the Sea, and toward Extent of the mayors power on the Thames.
the East and Medway, and in the Port of the City of London aforesaid, and upon
whatsoever Bank, Shore and Wharf of the same water of Thames, within the limits
and bounds aforesaid, in, upon, and about every one of the same, and to have,
receive, and collect and enjoy all and singular wages, rewards, fees and
profits to the same Office of Bailiff pertaining Fees and profits of the
Offices to the use of the Mayor and Commonalty.
to the proper use of the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, by the
Mayor of the same City for the time being, during the time of his Mayoralty, or
by his sufficient Deputies, and also of our more ample grace, and from our
certain knowledge and mere motion we have given, and by these presents for us,
our Heirs and Successors, do grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their Successors, that they may peaceably and quietly The Mayor,
etc to enjoy the Office of measuring coals grain. etc.
from time to time for ever execute and exercise the aforesaid Office of
Measurer of all and singular Coals and Grain of what sort soever, and all kind
of Apples, Pears, Plumbs, and other Fruit whatsoever, and all Roots to be eaten
of whatsoever sort: And also of Onyons, and other Merchandises, Wares, and
things measurable, and the measuring of them, whatsoever in or to the Port of
the City of London coming carried or brought in whatsoever Ships, Boat, Barge,
or other Vessel floating, laden, remaining or being in any part of the same
River of Thames, and upon any Bank, or Shore, or Wharf of the same water of
Thames, happening to unlade, stay, remain, be delivered, or laid down from the
said Bridge of the Town of Staynes in the County of Middlesex, and toward the
West unto London Bridge aforesaid, and from thence to the said place called
Yendall, alias Yeenfleet, toward the Sea and East; and in Medway, and in the
said Port of the City of London, by the Mayor of the aforesaid City for the
time being, during the time of his Mayoralty, or by his sufficient Deputies.
And to have, receive, collect, and enjoy all and singular To receive the fees
and profi^s to the use of the Mayor, etc.
the wages, rewards, fees and profits whatsoever to the same office of
measuring belonging or appertaining to the use of the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Ci tizens, and their Successors, to be received and taken up by
the Mayor of the aforesaid City for the time being during the time of his
Mayoralty, or his sufficient Deputies, Without the let o^ the King, or any
other.
without the hindrance of Us, our Heirs or Successors, or any of our Officers,
Bailiffs or Ministers, or of our Admiral of England, or of our Successors, or
any others of our Subjects, or of our Heirs or Successors to be made to the
contrary: To have To have the said office without account.
hold, and enjoy the said Office, and all and singular the premises with all
and singular wages, rewards, fees, profits and appurtenances whatsoever to the
said Offices, and every or any of them belonging or appertaining to the
aforesaid Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors for ever,
by the Mayor of the aforesaid City for the time being during the time of his
Mayoralty, or his sufficient Deputies, to be exercised and executed without any
account, or any other thing to be rendered or made thereof to us, our Heirs No
other Water Bailiff. Conservator. or measurer may meddle.
or Successors: So as no other Bailiff or Conservator of the aforesaid water,
or measurer of Coals, Grain, Salt, Apples, Plumbs, Roots to be eaten, Onyons,
or other Merchandises or Commodities, or of any thing or things abovementioned
shall be, or shall in any ways intermeddle in the premises, or any of them. And
we willing to show to our said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens more ample
favor, of our especial grace, and from our certain knowledge and mere motion
for Us, our Grant of the said Offices, notwithstanding any nonuser or abuser of
the same.
Heirs and Successors grant, and by this our present Charter confirm unto the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, hitherto in
some case happening, have not used or peradventure have abused the offices
aforesaid, or any or some of the offices, or the measurage aforesaid, or any
thing or things to any or some of them appertaining or belonging:
Notwithstanding they the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors, from henceforth freely and peaceably shall use and enjoy the said
offices so not without hinderance used or abused, and every of them, without
the let or impediment of us, our Heirs or Successors, or of our Justices,
Escheators, Sheriffs, or other Bailiffs, Officers or Ministers of us, our Heirs
or Successors, any Statute or Ordinance made, or Judgment rendered, or any
Charters of us, our Progenitors or Predecessors in times past made or granted
notwithstanding: Although there be no express mention in these presents of the
true yearly value or certainty of the premises, or of any of them, or of other
gifts or grants by us, or by any of our Progenitors or Predecessors to the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, before
these times made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or
Restraint to the contrary thereof theretofore had, made, published, ordained or
provided, or any other thing cause or matter whatsoever notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, these our Letters we have caused to be made Patents: Witness
my self at Westminster the 20th day of August, in the third year of our Reign
of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the thirty ninth.

WE have seen also certain other Letters King James, Charter 2.
Patents of our said most dear Father of blessed memory, Lord James late King
of England, made in these words, James by the grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland King, defender of the Faith, etc. to all to whom
these present Letters shall come, Greeting. Whereas very many of our
Progenitors, sometimes Kings of England, of their especial Grace, and for free,
laudable, multiplied, and continued service done and expended in times past by
the Mayor. Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their
Predecessors: And also for diverse other urgent causes and considerations them
thereunto especially moving, Have given, granted, and confirmed to the Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors,
diverse liberties, privileges, franchises, Immunities, authorities,
jurisdictions, ordinances, Customs and quittances, as by the several Letters
Patents of our Progenitors and Predecessors, sometimes Kings of England, more
fully and manifestly is, and appears. WE also for and in consideration of the
high fidelity, constancy, and ready, and laudable service by the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of our said City of London, to us in the beginning of
our Reign, and continually ever since maniiested, faithfully done, and
expended. We have ratified and allowed, and for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
as much as in us is, do accept of and approve all and singular the Letters
Patents, Charters and Confirmations of our most famous Progenitors and
Ancestors to the same Mayor, and A Confirmation of all former Charters, etc. to
the City.
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London and their Predecessors, by
whatsoever name of incorporation before these times made, granted or connrmed,
and all and singular gifts, grants, confirmations, restitutions, customs,
ordinances, explanations, and all other things whatsoever in whatsoever Letters
Patents or Charters of our Predecessors, Progenitors or Ancestors Kings of
England, and also all and singular things in the said Letters Patents,
Charters, Grants, Confirmations, or any of them, contained, recited, confirmed
or explained, and all and singular jurisdictions, authorities, privileges,
quittances, and free customs and hereditaments whatsoever, which the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London or their
Predecessors, by the name of Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of The several
names of the corporations of London.
the City of London, or by the name of the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, or by the name of the Mayor, Citizens, and Commonalty of the City of
London, or by the name of the Mayor and Commonalty of the City of London, or by
the name of the Citizens of the City of London, or by the names of the Barons
of London, or by the names of the Barons of the City of London, or by any other
name whatsoever, by reason or force of any Letters Patents, Charters or
Confirmations of any of our Progenitors Kings of England, which in any time or
times they had reasonably used or exercised, and them all and singular to the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, of the said City of London, and their
Successors do ratify and confirm. To have and hold, enjoy and exercise all and
singular the premises to the same Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, of the
said City of London, and their Successors for ever, so fully, clearly, and
entirely, and in as ample manner and form, as if they were or had been
severally, particularly, and by name in these presents expressed and declared.
And further we will, and of our special grace for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
do grant that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors, be restored to all and singular their Authorities, Jurisdictions,
Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Acquittances, Immunities, and free
Customs, and we do restore the same to them and their Successors by these
presents, as fully, freely, and entirely, A grant and restitution of all
liberties, as fully as their Ancestors enjoyed them.
as they or their Predecessors in any time of our Progenitors, or Predecessors
Kings of England used or enjoyed, or ought to have use and enjoy the same. And
we will also and by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, of our
special grace, do Although they have not used or abused their customs, etc.
yet they may use them for time to come.
grant. That although the same Mayor, and Commonalty of the Citizens of the
City aforesaid, in some case happening, have not hitherto used or peradventure,
have abused the same or any Authorities, Jurisdictions, Liberties, Privileges,
Franchises, Immunities, Quittances, and free Customs, in the Letters, Patents,
and Charters aforesaid, or any of them contained and other their customs. They
notwithstanding the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, of the the said City, and
their Successors from henceforth, fully may enjoy and use the same Authorities,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Immunities, Quittances, and free Customs
whatsoever, totally not used or abused, and every of them without let or
hindrance of Us, our Heirs, or Successors, the Justices, Sherriffs, Coroners,
Escheators, or any other Bailiffs, or Ministers of Us, our Heirs, or Successors
whasoever, any cause matter or thing whatsoever in times past to the contrary
thereof, notwithstanding. To hold all and singular the premiss^s of Us, our
Heirs, and Successors, by the same and such like To hold by the same services,
as accu stomed.
services, Fee-Farm, Rents, sums of money, and demands whatsoever by which, and
as the same of Us, and our Progenitors or Predecessors before this time were
holden. And whereas within the said City of London, the Liberties and Suburbs,
and Port of the same, we are informed the search and surveying of Oil, Hops,
Soap, Salt, Butter, Cheese, and such other like things coming or brought to the
Port of the same City, to the intent to be sold or exposed to sale by way of
merchandise, and also the measuring of all Corn whatsoever, of any kind,
Onyons, Salt, Sea-coals, and Fruit of all kinds, Fish called Shel-fish,
measurable and used to be measured, which are coming or brought to the said
City of London to the intent to be sold by way of merchandise hitherto have
pertained to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and
their Predecessors, to be exercised and executed by the Mayor of the same City
for the time being, according to the Laws, Ordinances and Statutes made
concerning the same, and the Custom of the same City. We of our certain
knowledge and mere motion, for us and our Successors do ratify the same
search, surveying, and measuring above said in and by all things as the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, or their Successors
lawfully had or enjoyed before this time, and to the said now Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors
confirm by these presents. And further We will, and by these presents, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, do ordain Extent of the liberties of London.
and grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of
London, and their Successors, that the said City of London, and the Circuit,
bounds, liberties, franchises, and jurisdictions of the same do extend and
stretch forth, and may and can extend and stretch forth, as well in and through
all and singular the several Circuits, bounds, limits, franchises and
jurisdictions of the late dissolved Priory of the Church of Trinity, near
Aldgate, London, commonly called Creed-Church Dukes-place.
Street; or the Dukes Place. And the late dissolved Priory of S. Bartholomew
London, near Smithfield; and the S. Bartholomew^ Great and Less.
late dissolved Hospital of S. Bartholomew in Smithfield without Newgate
London, commonly called Great S. Bartholomews, and Little S. Bartholomews. And
also the late dissolved house or Priory of Preaching Friars Blackfriars.
within Ludgate London, commonly called Black Friars. And also the late
dissolved house or Priory of Friars of the Order of White-Fryers.
the Bl^ssed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, called White-Fryers. And also the
Inn or Liberty of Cold Herbege, otherwise Cold Harburgh, and Cooled Harbourgh
Lane within Cold Harbourgh.
in the Liberty of London aforesaid, so as from henceforth for ever all and
singular the Circuits and Franchises aforesaid of the late dissolved Priory
Church of S. Trinity, and the said dissolved Priory or house of S. Bartholomew,
and the said late dissolved Hospital of S. Bartholomew, and also the late
dissolved house or Priory of Preaching Friars and also the said late dissolved
house or Priory of Friars of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and also the said Inn
and Liberty of Cold Harbor be, and every of them is, and for all times to come
shall be, and remain within the Circuits, Precincts, Liberties, Franchises and
Jurisdictions of the same our City of London. And that all and singular the
Inhabitants and Dwellers within the same, or any of them, shall be, The
Inhabitants thereof to be within the Precincts of London.
and every of them is, and for all time to come shall be, and remain under the
rule, government, jurisdiction, oversight, search, correction, punishment,
precepts and arrests of the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of our
City of London aforesaid, and their Successors, and the Sheriffs of our City of
London for the time being, and their Officers and Ministers for ever, any
Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Exemption or Authority whatsoever to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding: Provided Proviso.
nevertheless, and we will and ordain, that all persons now Inhabitants, or The
Inhabitants of Black and White-Fryers exempt from such taxes and fifteenths,
etc.
who shall inhabit in time to come within the Liberties and Franchises
aforesaid of the said late dissolved Priory called the Blackfriars, and the
late dissolved Priory called the White-Fryers, and the whole Precinct, Circuit,
and compass of them, and all buildings therein built, and to be built from
henceforth for ever, shall be quit and exonerated of and from all taxes,
fifteenths, and other burdens of Scot, and of Watch and Ward through or within
the City of London, to be paid, made, sustained or contributed, except the
charges and expenses due and reasonable for setting out of Soldiers, and for
the defense of our Realm, and such like special services, concerning Us, our
Heirs and Successors, and except the charges for pavements and cleansing the
Lanes, Ditches, Ways, Watercourse, and Sewers within the Circuits, Precincts,
Liberties, and Jurisdictions, of the same late houses or Priories called Black
Friars and White Friars aforesaid, respectively to be paid. And that the
inhabitants shall be quit and exonerated of and from the Office of Constable,
The Inhabitants, to be ^^it of the Office of Constable, etc. within the City.
Scavenger, and such Offices of charge within the City aforesaid, without the
circuits and limits, of the said late house or Priory, called the Black Friars,
and the White Friars, respectively to be executed and exercised. Nevertheless,
we will that all Freemen of the City aforesaid, for the time being, inhabiting
or who shall inhabit within the said liberties and Franchises, of the said late
house or Priory of Black Friars, and White Friars, shall be chargeable and
eligible unto all Offices, and charges, as well Mayor, as Sheriffs, and
Aldermen, of the said City, as of the Company within the said City of London,
of which they are or shall be free as other Freemen of the said City are. And
furthermore, for the better and common profit of our City of London, and for
the accommodation and supportation of the charges and expenses of the said
City, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors. We will and grant to the same Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens, of the said City and to their Successors. That
from henceforth, all and singular persons, though they be not Free of the same
City, who now are, or hereafter shall be dwelling within the said City, the
Liberties or Precincts of the same (except the Inhabitants within the
liberties, and Franchises of the aforesaid several late houses or Priories of
the late Friars, called the Black Friars, and the White Friars) in whatsoever
aids, Tallages, grants, and other contributions whatsoever, to the use and
service of Us, our Heirs, and Successors, or to the use of the said City for
maintaining the state, good, or benefit of the said City, howsoever to be
assessed, shall reasonably be taxed and shall contribute. And the same Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City aforesaid, may and can levy the same
ayds, The Mayor, etc. may levy* ayds, by their own Officers.
tallages, grants, and other contributions (except before excepted) by their
own Officers and Ministers, by distress of the goods and Chattels of such
persons, who from time to time, shall be charged with the payment of such ayds,
tallages, grants, and other contributions, of any of them, and so levied they
can and may have, hold, and enjoy, to the use and behove aforesaid: Provided
always, Nevertheless, that such residents and dwellers in any houses within
the aforesaid City, who are not, nor shall be Freemen of the aforesaid City,
shall be taxed such ayds, Tallages, grants, and other contributions, from time
to time only for the houses in which they shall inhabit or reside, or are
dwelling within the same City of London, liberties or Precincts of the same
according to the custom of the said City shall be assessed and taxed, and not
otherwise: Provided also, that if any one, or any of the said Inhabitants,
Residents, or Dwellers, who are not or shall not be a Free man, or Freemen of
the said City, shall think himself by reason of the said aids, tallages,
grants, or contributions, unjustly grieved, that then and in such case, the
Chancellor of England, of Us our Heirs, and Successors, for the time being,
upon the complaint of any person or persons, so grieved, shall moderate and
qualify such aids tallages, grants and contributions, as to him in that behalf
shall be thought fit, which moderation shall stand and be of force. And
furthermore We will, and by these presents, for Us our Heirs and Successors, do
grant to the aforesaid Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors. That the Mayor and Recorder of the said City, which now are, and
every Mayor and Recorder of the same City, who hereafter for the time being
shall be, as well those Aldermen of the said City, as those Aldermen, who shall
for the time to come bear the charge of Mayoralty of the same City, after that
they have ceased, or be moved from the Office of Mayoralty of the same City,
and so long as they shall continue Aldermen of our City of London aforesaid,
for ever be and shall be our Justices, and of our Heirs and Successors, and
every one of them be and shall be Justices and Keepers of Us, our Heirs and
Successors, to keep and make to be kept the peace of Us, our Heirs and
Successors, in Justices of London to hold jurisdiction in Black friars,
White-friers, Dukes-place, etc
and through all and singular Circuits, Precincts, liberties, franchises, and
places aforesaid, commonly called the Blackfriars, the White-friers, the
Dukes-Place, otherwise Creed-Church-street, Great St. Bartholomews, Little St.
Bartholomews, and Cold Harborough aforesaid, and every of them, and to keep or
cause to be kept and executed all Ordinances and Statutes of this our Realm,
made for the good of our peace, and the quiet Rule and Government of our
People, in all their Articles according to the force form and effect of the
same, and to chastise and p^nish those, who contrary to the form and effect of
those Ordinances or Statutes or any of them within the limits, franchises and
places aforesaid are found to offend, as ought to be done according to the form
of the said Ordinances and Statutes, and to make to come Power to take Security
for the Peace, and commit the refusers to prison.
before them all those who threaten any of the people of Us, our Heirs or
Successors concerning their Bodies, or burning their houses, to find sufficient
Security of the peace or good behavior toward Us, our Heirs or Successors,
and if they refuse to find such Security, them to cause to be safely kept in
prison until they shall find such Security. And further We will and grant, for
Us our Heirs and Successors to the same Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens,
and their Successors, that the Mayor of the said City for the time being, and
the Recorder of the same now being, and who for the time to come shall be, and
every Alderman as aforesaid, who has been or hereafter Mayor, Recorder, and
such Justices as are customarily in the City, to be Justices of O yer and
Terminer.
shall be Mayor of the said City, after they shall cease or be amoved from the
office of Mayoralty of the said City, and so long as the Aldermen of the said
City shall continue, or any four or more of the same, Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen (whereof the Mayor and Recorder of the same City for the time being we
will to be two) from henceforth for ever, may be Justices of Us, our Heirs and
Successors; to enquire of all The Mayor and Recorder to be of the Quorum.
and all manner of Felonies, Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Sorceries, Magic Art,
Trespasses, Forestallers, Regraters, Ingrossors and Extortions whatsoever, and
of all and singular other misdeeds and offenses, of which our Justices of the
Peace may and ought lawfully to enquire, howsoever and wheresoever done or
committed, or which hereafter shall be done or attempted in the Liberties,
Franchises, and places aforesaid; and also of all other who within the same
Franchises, Liberties and places go or ride in Assemblies, or with armed force
against our peace, and to the disturbance of our people; and also of those who
lie in wait to kill our people, or hereafter shall presume to lie in wait; and
also of Hostlers, and all and singular other persons who have offended or
attempted, or hereafter shall presume to offend or attempt in abuse of Weights
and Measures, and in selling Victuals against the form of the Ordinances and
Statutes, or any of them made for the common profit of our Kingdom and people,
and also to hear and determine all and singular the same felonies and misdeeds,
according to the Laws and Statutes of our Realm of England: And also to hear
and determine, do and execute all and singular other thing or things, which
pertain, have pertained, or in time to come may pertain to Justices of the
Peace within the said City of London: So always that the said Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, may have and hold all and
singular their ancient privileges free, whole and unhurt: And that no other
Keeper of the peace, or Justice, or other No other Justices to intermeddle.
Officers or Ministers of Us, our Heirs or Successors whatsoever, shall
intermeddle in the same, or any of them. We will also, and by these presents
for Us, our Sheriffs to be attendant on the said Justices.
Heirs and Successors, charge and command the Sheriffs of the said City of
London for the time being, that from time to time they be assisting, aiding,
attending, and devising, as it behooves to the said Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen, and every or any of them, in execution of the premises, and according
to our true meaning herein expressed. And further, We do hereby give and grant
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors, that the said Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors for the time being, may have
and enjoy to their own proper use, without any account thereof to be rendered
to Us, out Heirs or Successors, all Treasure found or to be found in the said
Franchises and places called Blackfriars, White-Fryers, Dukes Place, Great S.
Bartholomews, Little S. Bartholomews, Treasure found within the Precincts
aforesaid granted to the City.
and Cold Harbor abovesaid, and waved goods and Chattels, and Estrays, goods
and Chattels of Felons and Fugitives for whatsoever Felony done, or to be done
by them, within any the said Franchises or places adjudged or to be adjudged
before Us, our Heirs or Successors, or any the Justices aforesaid: And that it
shall be lawful for the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors, by their Deputy or Minister, Deputies or Ministers of the said
City, Liberties or Suburbs of the same, to put themselves in seizen and
possession of, and in all manner of treasure found, goods and Chattels waved
and estrayed, goods and chattels of Felons and Fugitives, from time when they
shall happen, by virtue of these our Letters Patents, without any further
Warrant whatsoever. We will also, and by these presents grant to the said Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, To have these presents
under seal without Fine in the Hamper.
that they shall have these our Letters Patents under our Great Seal of
England, in due manner made and sealed without fine or fee, great or little to
be rendered, paid or made to Us in our Hamper, or otherwise to us in any wise
for the same, for that express mention is made of the time, yearly value or
certainty of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other gifts or grants made
by Us or by our Progenitors or Predecessors to the said Mayor, and Commonalty,
and Citizens of London before their time, or any Statute, Ordinance, Provision,
Proclamation, or Restriction to the contrary thereof heretofore made or
ordained, set forth or provided, or any other thing cause or matter whatsoever.
Whereof these our Letters we have caused to be made Patents. Witness our self
at our Honor of Hampton Court the 20 day of September in the year of our Reign
of England, France and Ireland the sixth, and of Scotland the two and fortieth.

We have have moreover seen certain other Jac. Char. ^
Letters, Patents of our said most dear Father of blessed memory, Lord James,
late King of England, etc. made in these words. James by the grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. To all
to whom these our present Letters shall come greeting, So great is the force of
our love toward our City of London, our Royal Chamber, as whatsoever is in us,
that we shall see necessary or profitable to the Mayor, and London the Kings
Royal Chamber.
Commonalty, and Citizens, of the same our City, that we have been ready,
freely to give from our soul to the said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, of
our said City, and it pleases Us well that all grants made by our Predecessors
in times past to our City of London, be not only confirmed, but also enlarged.
Therefore whereas amongst other things it appears, that amongst other things
the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of London from all time whereof
the memory of Man is not to the contrary, have had and lawfully exercised the
Office of The City to have the measuring of all Coals brought to London upon
the Thames.
measuring all Coals of what kind or sort soever, in any Port of the same City,
coming, brought or carried upon the Water of Thames in any ship, boat, barge,
or other vessel whatsoever, floating or being upon what part soever of the said
water of Thames, or on what Bank, Shore, or Wharfe soever of the same Water of
Thames from the Bridge in the Town of Stains in the County of Middlesex, and to
the Bridge of London, and from thence to a certain place called Yendal, or
Yenland, or Yenleet toward the Sea, and East, and also in Medway in the Port of
the City of London. Nevertheless a Question is risen, whether the weighing of
Coals, brought within the limits aforesaid, together with the measuring of
Coals does belong to the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City.
We therefore to take away all controversies in this part, as well for the
present as for the time to come, and to remove all doubt, and to the intent the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City may use, have and
enjoy as well the weighing as measuring, and each as the Wages, Rewards, Fees,
and Profits used for the same, of our special Grace have given granted and
confirmed, and by these presents for Us and our Heirs and Successors, do give,
grant, and confirm to our beloved the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of
our said City The City weigh all coals.
of London, and to their Successors the weighing of all Coals called
Stone-coals, Pit-coals, Earth-coals, and all other Coals weighable, of what
kind or sort soever, in or at the said Port of London, coming or brought up the
said Water of Thames in any ship, boat, or barge, or other vessel whatsoever,
floating or being in any port of the same water of Thames, and upon whatsoever
bank, shore, or wharfe of the same Water of Thames, from the said Bridge of
Stayns to the said Bridge of London and from thence to the said place called
Yendal toward the Sea. And also in Medway, and in the Port of London
aforesaid, to be sold or put to sale, and also all Fees, Wages, Rewards,
Profits and advantages used, or to that time belonging or any wise
appertaining. To be exercised by the Mayor of the said City for the time being,
and by the Deputies, Officers, and Ministers of the said Mayor. And further, To
be executed by the Mayor and Deputies.
we do hereby, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, give, grant, and confirm to
the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and their
Successors, that they for ever have and enjoy the Office of weighing all Coals,
called Stone Coals, Pitcoals, Earth-coals, and all other Coals weighable of
what kind or sort soever at the Port of the said City of London coming or
brought upon the said water of Thames in any Ships, Boat, Barge, or other
Vessel whatsoever floating, or being in any part of the said water of Thames,
or upon any Bank, Shore, or Wharf of the same, from the said Bridge of Staynes,
to the said Bridge of London, from thence to the said place called Yendall
toward the Sea And also in Medway, and in the Port of London aforesaid to be
sold or set to sale; and also all fees, wages, profits, rewards and advantages
whatsoever used, or to the same Office belonging, or any way appertaining, to
be exercised by the Mayor of the same City for the time being, and by the
Deputies, Officers and Ministers of the same Mayor. And we have also
constituted, and by these presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do
constitute, ordain, create, and make the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors, by the Mayor of the
same City for the time being, during the time of his Mayoralty; or by his
Deputies, Officers or Ministers; to be weigher of all and singular Coals called
Stone-Coals, Pit-Coals, Earth-Coals, and all other Coals weighable, of what
kind soever, in or at the Port of the said City of London, coming, carried, or
brought upon the same water of Thames in any Ship, Boat or Barge, or other
vessel whatsoever floating, or being in any part of the same water of Thames,
and upon any Bank, Shore, or Wharf of the same water of Thames, which shall
happen to stay, be delivered, or laid down from the said Bridge of Staynes to
the aforesaid place called Yendall toward the Sea, and also in Medway, and in
the Port of London aforesaid, to be sold or put to sale. And whereas there is a
question risen of the quantity of the Fee demanded and received by the Mayor of
the said City for the time being, and by their Fees for weighing coals
uncertain.
Deputies, Ministers and Officers, for the weighing of every Tun-weight of
Coals, containing five score and twelve pounds weight to every Tun-weight
brought within the limits aforesaid: We wholly to take away every the said
question, and the like question, do declare, establish, and for Us, our Heirs
and Successors, do grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the
said City, and their Successors, Fees settled.
that it shall be lawful for the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the
said City for the time being, by the Mayor of the same City, and by the Deputy
Minister and Officers of such Mayor for the time being, Eight pence a Tun to
the use of the City.
to ask, demand, take and receive a fee of 8 d. of lawful Money of England, to
the use of the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and
their Successors, for the weighing of every such like Tun of Coals aforesaid,
and all other Coals weighable of what kind soever; and so, according to the
same rate, for a smaller or greater quantity, of the person bringing such like
Coals; for and in respect of the charge and costs of them, the said Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors, in
the Beam and Weights, and for and in respect of their attendance, labor, and
necessary costs and expenses to be had and expended in and about the premises;
which fee of 8 d. aforesaid, the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of
the said City had and received formerly. And also we command, and by these
presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, firmly enjoin and charge all
Merchants, and other persons whatsoever, who shall bring Coals called
Sea-coals, Pit-coals, The Merchant not to unlade his coals till the Mayor has
notice.
of what kind or sort soever the same shall be within the limits aforesaid,
upon the water of Thames aforesaid, in any Ship, Boat or Vessel whatsoever:
That none of them henceforth shall unlade, deliver, or lay down, nor cause or
permit such like Coals to be unladen, delivered or laid down out of such Ships,
Boats, or other Vessels, being within the limits and bounds aforesaid, upon any
Wharf, Bank or Shore, upon either part of the same water of Thames, or to be
discharged or laid down before the Mayor of our said City for the time being,
shall take certain notice of the quantity of such Coals, and shall give
direction for the unlading of the same, and for the weighing of measuring of
such Coals, to the intent that the same Mayor of the said City for the The
intent why the Mayor should have notice of the quanti ty of coals
time being may be able to render a better and more ready reason and account to
Us, our Heirs and Successors, what quantity of Coals of what sort soever from
time to time have been brought within the Port of our said City and limits
aforesaid, and how the said City, and the parts and places next adjoining are
from time provided, and when we, our Heirs or Successors shall require the same
from the Mayor of our said City for the time being; and also to the intent
that-the sums and other profits due to Us, our Heirs and Successors for such
Coals so to be brought within the limits aforesaid (if there shall be any due)
may be better answered and paid unto the Officers and Ministers of Us, our
Heirs and Successors, to the use of Us, our Heirs and Successors, under pain of
contempt of our Royal Mandate, and incurring all such pains and punishments
which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England may be inflicted upon
such neglecters and contemners. And whereas it is notoriously known, that the
River of Thames is so necessary commodious and profitable to the said City of
London, and without the said River our said City would not long subsist,
flourish and continue: And for that by forestalling, engrossing, Forestalling
and regrating of coals.
and regrating of Coals in and at the Port of the said City brought from the
water of Thames aforesaid, such Coals are made more ^ear, to the great loss and
prejudice as well of Us, as of our Subjects. And whereas diverse ill disposed
persons, more affecting their own private gain and profit, than the general and
pub^ick good and benefit of our said City, little weighing the conservation of
the said River of ^ate, and at the present do daily and usually sell Coals, and
other things by Retail, in less quantity in Boats, commonly called Lighters,
and other vessels floating and being on the water of Thames aforesaid, after
such Coals have been unladen from the Ships and other vessels Selling coals by
Retail in Lighters.
which first brought them within the limits aforesaid, which persons make the
same Boats or Lighters as their common Shops and Warehouses, and in them do
daily hold upon the said water of Thames a common Market for selling of such
Coals, and other things, having one, two, three, and sometimes more Boats or
Lighters lying together, and fastened one to the other in the River of Thames
aforesaid, by which Market on the Thames for selling coals.
forestalling, engrossing, and regrating aforesaid, to the great cosinage,
damage and oppression, as well of the poor as the rich, daily increases and
augments, and the price of Coals and other things is made dearer. And for that
by the frequent importation, unlading and measuring of such Coals, and such
like things, in and from the said Boats or Lighters, very many of the same
Coals and other dirt often fall, and are cast into the River of Thames, to the
great harm and choking up the stream of the same River, and the said Boats so
placed do greatly hinder the stream of the said River, and the passage of
Passengers upon the water of the same River; We therefore thinking it fit that
No Markets to be in Lighters.
such an Evil ought not to be permitted to continue, we ^ommand, and for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, prohibit all persons whatsoever, that they, nor any
of them, from henceforth sell or presume to sell any Coals, of what kind soever
upon the water of Thames, in any Boat, Lighter, or other vessel whatsoever,
excep^ only in such Ships or other vessels which at first brought the same
Coals within the Port of the said City, and the limits abovesaid, unless upon
some Port, Key or Wharf near the said River, upon pain of contempt of our Royal
Mandate, and incurring such pains and punishments which may be inflicted by the
Laws and Statutes of this our Kingdom upon such contemners and neglecters. And
because it is our intent, that the same Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of
the City aforesaid, and their Successors, shall fully enjoy the Premises, we
therefore by these presents declare and signify, and for us, our heirs and
successors, do grant and covenant to and with the said Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, That they may safely,
freely and quietly have, use and enjoy all and singular the Premises for ever,
without the hindrance of Us, our heirs or successors, or any Officers or
Ministers, of Us, our heirs or successors. And if any doubt in time to come
shall be found in these presents, or any default, scruple or question
concerning the Premises shall happen to arise, we, our heirs and successors If
any defects be in these presents; others more effectual to be granted:
shall vouchsafe to make and, grant other Letters Patents under the Great Seal
of England, of our Heirs or Successors, to the same Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, for the better giving,
granting and confirming, and for the safer enjoying of the Premises, when it
shall be desired by the same Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said
City, and their Successors, for that the express mention of the true yearly
value, or of the certainty of the Premises, or of other gifts and grants by us,
or by any of our Ancestors made in times past to the said Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City, is not made, or being in these presents, or any
other Statute. Act, Ordinance, Proclamation or Restriction to the contrary
heretofore made, ordained or published, or any other matter or thing whatsoever
in any wise notwithstanding; In witness whereof we have caused these ou^
Letters to be made Patents; Witness my self at Westminster the 15th. of
September, in the 12th. year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland; and
of Scotland 48th.

Know ye now, that we deeply considering K. Charles. Char. 1.
and calling to memory the good and laudable services performed by our beloved
and faithful Subjects, the said Mayor Good service of the City remembered and
accepted.
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, which we graciously
accept, And from our soul affecting the good and happy estate of our said City,
To increase and enlarge with the greatest favor and grace we can, and to
establish, with all care and diligence we can, the Rule and Government of our
said City, of our especial grace, and from our certain knowledge, and mere
motion, and for diverse other good causes and considerations, especially moving
us at present, we do accept and approve of for us and our heirs and Successors,
as much as in us lies, all and singular the Letters Patents, Charters and
Confirmai^ons Confirmation of all the Letters Patents, except as hereafter is
excepted.
aforesaid, and all and singular Gifts, Grants, Confirmations, Restitutions,
Customs, Ordinances, Explanations, Articles, and all other things whatsoever in
the same Letters Patents, or Charters (except as are herein after excepted) and
all and singular Lands, Tenements, Offices, Jurisdictions, Authorities,
Privileges, Liberties, Franchises, Quittals, Immunities, Free Customs and
Hereditaments whatsoever, which he said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens The
names of the Corporations of London.
of the City of London, or their Predecessors, by the name of Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, or by the name of Mayor and
Aldermen, Citizens or Commonalty of London, or by the name of Mayor or Citizens
of the City of London, or by the name of Mayor and Commonalty of the City of
London, or by the name of Citizens of the City of London, or by the name of
Barons of London, or by any other name whatsoever by reason and force of the
said Letters Patents, Charters or Confirmations, or by use or Prescription, or
any other lawful means at any time or times heretofore they have had, ratified
and bestowed, and all those we ratify and confirm by these presents to the
said Mayor and Commonalty, Restitution of all their Liberties, except as herein
is excepted.
and Citizens of the said City of London, and their Successors. We will also,
and for the considerations aforesaid, for us, our heirs and successors, do
grant that the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors,
be fully and wholly restored to all and singular their Authorities,
Jurisdictions, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Quittals, and Free Customs
whatsoever abovesaid (except such as are herein after excepted) and all and
singular the same to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors: We, for us, our heirs and successors, do restore by these presents,
as fully, freely and wholly, and in as ample manner and form as they, or their
Predecessors had used, or enjoy the same in any times of our Progenitors or
Predecessors once Kings and Queens of England: We will also, and by these
presents, for us, our heirs and successors, grant, That it shall be lawful for
the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid,
any Authority, Office, Jurisdiction, Liberty, Privilege, Franchise, Immunity,
Quittals, Free Customs mentioned in the Letters Patents, or Charters aforesaid
or any of them or other their Customs which hitherto they have used or perhaps
have abused or not claimed when they ought to have claimed, That they
nevertheless the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London and
their Successors may henceforth for ever fully have, enjoy and use any matter,
cause, or thing, whatsoever in times past had, made or provided to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding; without hindrance or Impediment of Us, our Heirs or
Successors, our Justices, Sheriffs, Coroners, Escheators, or any other Bailiff
or Minister of Us, our Heirs or Successors whatsoever, the same Authorities,
Offices, Jurisdictions Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Immunities,
Quittals, and free Customs whatsoever in likewise not used or abused, or not
claimed or any of them. And to the intent the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City and their Successors in time to come, may the more
safely, freely, and quietly hold and enjoy to them and their Successors for
ever all and singular the premises in the said Letters Patents, or Charters
before mentioned or intended to be given or granted by the same; And for the
intent that no ambiguity, controversy, doubtful construction or question of, or
about the premises, may henceforth arise, but be altogether taken away; We for
the considerations aforesaid and of our special grace for Us, our Heirs and
Successors do give and grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of
the City of London and their Successors for ever, all and singular the manors,
Lands, Tenements, Offices, Fees. Rewards, Liberties, Privileges,
Jurisdictions, Immunities, Ordinances, Quittals, Hereditaments, and all and
singular other things whatsoever in the said Letters Patents, or Charters
afore-recited or any of them contained or mentioned to have been given or
granted, with all and singular the appurtenances (except such as in the same
Charters or Letters Patents, or in these prgsents are excepted) as fully,
plainly, freely and wholly, to all intents and purposes as if they had been
expressed, named, mentioned, declared and manifested severally, and namely, and
word for word in these presents, To hold all and singular the premises by these
presents mentioned to be granted or confirmed with all Appurtenances of Us, our
Heirs and Successors, by such the same or the like Services, Fees, Fee-farm,
Rent, Sums of Money, and demands whatsoever by which or what, and as all and
singular the same premises were formerly held of Us, or our predecessors, or
were intended to be held by the same Letters Patents, Charter or otherwise: And
whereas Lord Henry the fixth Recital of the Charter of the 26th. of October. 23.
Henry 6.
late King of England our predecessor by his Letters Patents, under the Great
Seal of England bearing date at Westminster the 26th. day of October in the
23d. year of his Reign; granted unto the Citizens of the City aforesaid,
amongst other things, that the same Citizens and their Successors for ever The
Soil of the Streets and Thames granted to the City.
should have all Soils, Commons, Purprestures, and Improvements in all Wastes,
Commons, Streets, Ways and other places in the City and Suburbs aforesaid, and
in the Water of Thames within the limits of the same City, together with the
profits of the same Purprestures and Improvements, and that they may improve,
and Rent and enjoy the rents of them and their Successors for ever, and
likewise several other things as in the said Letters Patents more fully
appears. And whereas in the Parliament of the said Lord Henry the 6th. late
King of England held at Westminster in the 28th. year of his Reign it was
enacted by Authority of the same Parliament that the same King should take,
resume, seize, and retain into his hands and possession, all Honors, Castles,
Lordships, Towns, Villages, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Wastes, Rents,
Reversions, Fees, Feefarms and services with all Appurtenances in England,
Wales, and the Marches of the same, Ireland, Guiana, Calice, and the Marches of
the same, which the said Lord Henry by his Letters Patents or otherwise had
granted from the first day of his Reign, and all Honors, Castles, Lordships,
Towns, Villages, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Wastes, Rents, Reversions, Fees,
Fee-farms and services, with all their Appurtenances which were of the Duchy
of Lancaster, and by the King himself, conveyed by grant or grants of the same
King, and the said King to have, hold and retain all the same premises in the
like state he had them at the time of such like concession made by the same
King of the same: And that all Letters Patents by the All Charters of K. Henry
6.1 1 made void.
said King or any other person or persons at the request and desire of the said
King, to any person or persons made of the premises, or any of them should be
void and of no force in Law: As by the same Act of Parliament (amongst other
things) does more fully appear;

And whereas our most famous Progenitor Henry the 7th. late King of England,
etc. by his Letters Patents, under the great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the 23 of July, in the 20 year of his Reign, (reciting amongst
other things, all, and singular donations, confirmations, grants, restitutions,
innovations, ordinances, and all other Articles, and things in the said Letters
Patents contained, he did accept, and approved, and ratified, and confirmed,
all and and singular the said things to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, of the said City, and their Heirs, and Successors, by the same
Letters Patents, and did grant, confirm, by his said Letters Patents, all and
singular those things as fully, plainly, and wholly, as if they had been
severally, and word for word, expressed, declared, and manifested in the said
Letters Patents of the same Lord Henry the 7th. to the same Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, as by the said Letters Patents
amongst other things more plainly appears. And whereas there are diverse
questions lately risen concerning the validity, as well of Doubts concerning
the validity of the Charter of the 20th. of Henry 7.
the said Letters Patents of the said Lord Henry the 6th. as of the said Lord
Henry the 7th. thereupon made by reason or pretense of the same Act of
Parliament, concerning resumption aforesaid; We willing that all questions
thereof should be from henceforth taken away, and to the intent the Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, may the
better, more safely, and quietly, have, hold, and enjoy some things in the said
Letters Patents of the said late King Henry the 6th. herein after expressed;
Nevertheless with some Provisoes, Exceptions, Restrictions, and Explanations,
in these presents mentioned: It is our good pleasure by Grant of diverse things
following.
these our present Letters to grant, and confirm to the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, the same particular things, and
others hereafter specified in such manner and form as is afterward metioned:
Know ye therefore, that we for diverse good causes, and considerations,
especially moving us thereunto, of our special grace, and from our certain
knowledge, and mere motion, have given, and granted, and by these presents for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give, and grant to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, that the
Mayor, and Recorder of the said City, who now are, and for the time shall be,
as well those Aldermen, who formerly have been Mayors of the City, as those
Aldermen who, for the time to come, shall sustain and bear the burden, and
office of the Mayoralty of the said City, although they shall cease from their
Mayoralty or are dismissed from it, so long as nevertheless they stand
Aldermen, and the three senior Aldermen of the said City for the time being who
have stood longest in the Office of Aldermen, and before that time have not yet
born the burden, and the Office of Mayoralty of that City, for ever Keepers,
and each of them a Keeper of the peace of Us, our Heirs and Successors within
the City of London aforesaid, and the liberties of the same, to be conserved
and kept. And we do constitute make, and ordain by these presents for Us our
Heirs and Successors, the same Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen aforesaid The
Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen to be Justices.
our Keepers, and Justices, and each of them the Keeper and Justice of us, our
Heirs and Successors within the City of London aforesaid, and the liberties of
the same; To keep, and cause to be kept, all and singular the Statutes, and
Ordinances, made, or to be made, for the good of the peace of Us, our Heirs or
Successors, for the conservation of the same, and for the quiet rule and
government of the people of Us, our Heirs and Successors, in all their Articles
as well within the said City as the liberty thereof, according to the force,
form, and effect of them; And to correct and punish all those whom they shall
find offending against the form, and effect of the said Ordinances and
Statutes, and any of them in the City aforesaid and the liberties thereof, as
should be done according to the form of those Ordinances and Statutes; And to
cause all such who shall threaten all or any of the people of Us, our Heirs or
Successors, concerning their bodies, or burning their houses, to find
sufficient security for his peace, and good behavior toward Us, our Heirs and
Successors, and if they shall refuse to find such security then to cause them
to be safely kept in our goal of Newgate, or in any other prison of Us, or our
Heirs and Successors in the said City of London, until they shall find
security; and to do, and execute all To find Sureties for the Peace.
such things which the Justices and Keepof the peace of Us, our Heirs and
Successors within any County of our Kingdom of England, are enabled, may, or
ought by virtue of any Statutes, or Ordinances of this our kingdom of England,
or by virtue of any Commission of Us, our Heirs or Successors to execute, or do
for the keeping of the peace in any the like Counties. We will also and by
these presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors do grant to the said Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors, That the
Mayor, and Recorder of the said City for the time being and such like Aldermen
as is aforesaid for the time being, who have formerly born, and exercised the
Office or place of Mayoralty of that City, and thereof such like (as aforesaid)
senior Aldermen for the time being, who have not yet born the place of
Mayoralty aforesaid: Or Four of the same, Mayor, Recorder and 4 Justices may
hold a Sessions.
Aldermen (whereof we will the said Mayor, or Recorder for the time being to be
one,) be the Justices of Us, our Heirs and Successors, for us, our Heirs and
Successors for ever: To enquire as often and when it shall seem best expedient
to them by the Oath of honest and lawful men, as well of the City aforesaid, as
the liberty of the same, by whom To enquire of several Offenses.
the truth of the thing may better be known, concerning all manner of Murders,
Felonies, Punishments, Witchcarfts, Enchantments, Sorceries, Art-magick,
Transgressions, Forestallings, Regrateings, Ingrossings, and Extortions
whatsoever, and of all and singular other Misdemeanors, and Offenses heretofore
had, or committed, or which shall henceforth happen to be done, or attempted
concerning which the Justices of the peace of Us, our Heirs and Successors,
may, or ought lawfully inquire within the City aforesaid, or the liberties
thereof: and as well of all others who have in Companies within the said City
and liberties thereof, gone, or rode, or shall from henceforth presume to go,
or ride armed against Us, our Heirs and Successors, and also of those who there
have layn in wait, or shall presume to lie in wait for the time to come, to
maim, or kill the People of Us, our Heirs and Successors, and also of all
Hostlers, and other persons who shall offend, or attempt in the said City and
the liberty of the same, in the abuse of measures, or weights, or in the
selling of victuals against Weights and Measures.
the form of the Ordinances, and Statutes or any of them made, or to be
Victuals.
made, for the common profit of our Kingdom of England, and the same people of
Us, our Heirs and Successors, and also of all Sheriffs, Constables, Goalors,
and other Officers who have behaved themselves unduly about the premises or any
of them, or shall presume hereafter to behave themselves unduly, or shall have
been remiss, or negligent, or shall so be within the City aforesaid and the
liberties of the same, and of all and singular articles, and things whatsoever
made and committed, or which henceforth shall be made, or attempted any way
concerning the premises or any of them in the City aforesaid and the liberties
of the same. And to see into whatsoever Indictments which shall be taken before
the Mayor, or Recorder of the City aforesaid for the To receive and see into
Indictments taken before them.
time being, or such like (as is aforesaid) Aldermen, or four or more of them
(whereof we will the said Mayor, or Recorder for the time being, to be one).
And to make, and continue process against all and singular so indicted, or who
after shall To make and continue process.
chance to be indicted until they be taken, render themselves, or outlawed.
And to hear, and determine all and singular Murders, Felonies, Poysonings,
Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Sorceries, Magick-arts, Transgressions, False
conspiracies, and other Misdemeanors, Fore stallings, Regrateings, Ingrossings,
Extortions, Conventicles, and Judgments aforesaid, and all and singular the
premises according to the Laws, and Statutes of our Kingdom of England, as used
and ought to be done in such like Case. And to chastise, and punish the same
offend ers for their faults by Fines, Redemptions, Amerciaments, Forfeitures,
and otherwise as has been used, and ought to be according to the Law, and
Custom of our Kingdom To punish Offenders.
of England, and the form of the Ordinances, and Statutes of the same. And to
do, exercise, hear, determine, and execute all and singular things within the
said City and liberties thereof, which Justices of the peace by the Laws, and
Statutes of our Kingdom, may, and are enabled to do, To execute the Laws as
fully as any Justices in any other County may do.
inquire, or execute, and in as ample manner, and form as any one or other
Justices of the peace in any other Counties of this our Kingdom of England,
may, and are enabled lawfully to do, inquire, punish, or execute, giving it
strictly in command by these presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, to our
Sheriffs of our said City for the time being, and their Successors, Sheriffs of
the said City, and to whatsoever Citizens of the said City, who now are, and in
time to come shall be, that they be attending, counselling, answering, and
aiding to the said keepers of the peace the aforesaid Mayor, and Recorder for
the time Sheriffs to attend the Justices when desired.
being and such Aldermen as are aforesaid in all and singular things which do
or may belong to the Office of the Keeper of the peace and such like Justices
within the said City and liberties of the same, according to the said form as
often and when they shall be duly required by them, or some, or one of them in
the behalf of Us, our Heirs or Successors.

Know ye also, that we for the consideration aforesaid have given and granted,
And by these presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors A grant of forfeiture of
Recognizauces.
do give and grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said
City and their Successors, all Recognizances taken or to be taken, acknowledged
or to be acknowledged, forfeited or to be forfeited, for appearance at any
Session or Sessions of the peace holden or to be holden before the Mayor,
Recorder, and Aldermen of the said City as is aforesaid; or any other Justices
of Us, our Heirs or Successors, assigned or to be assigned for, or concerning
the peace in the City of London, and the liberties thereof: And also all and
all manner of Recognizances taken or to be taken, acknowledged or to be
acknowledged, forfeited or to be forfeited before the Justices of Us, our Heirs
and Successors for, and concerning the peace in the same City and liberties of
the same, assigned or to be assigned, or by one, or any of them for and
concerning the keeping and maintaining of Bastard-Children, and the keeping
harmless the Parishes of the said City touching such like children, or of
Inmates dividing of houses in or for several habitations, or of suppressing of
Alchouses Inmates dividing houses. Alehouses.
within the said City and liberties thereof: And for the observation of such
like orders, which from time to time by the same Justices of peace or any of
them have been made, touching any of the late mentioned premises, and also all
manner of Recognizances Recognizances for appearance at the Sessions of
Jail-deliver. Fines and Issues of Jurors.
taken or to be taken, acknowledged or to ^e acknowledged, forfeited or to be
forfei^ed, for appearance at any Sessio nor Sessions of Jail-delivery, of and
for prisoners in the ^ame for the time being, held or to be held (...), and for
the said City and the liberties there ^f: And also Fines and Issues of Jurors,
and all other Issues, Fines and Amerciaments forfeited and to be forfeited, of
and for all and singular, the matters, causes, and occasions aforesaid, and of
and for whatsoever transgressions, Riots, Offenses, Misprisions, Extortions,
Usurpations, Contempts of Laws, Violations, and other Misdemeanors done or to
be committed in the said City or the Liberties of the same, before the Mayor,
Recorder, and Aldermen of the said City for the time being, or any of them, or
any of the Justices of Us, our Heirs and Successors concerning the peace in the
said City or before the Justices of Us, our Heirs and Successors assigned or to
be assigned, to hear and determine Felonies, Transgressions and Misdemeanors in
the said City and Liberties thereof, or before any Justices of Us, our Heirs or
Successors or any of them in the City aforesaid, judged or to be adjudged,
forfeited or to be forfeited, together with the Assessments and Levies of the
same, as often and when there shall be need: Saving and always reserving to Us,
our Heirs and Successors, Except Royal Issues.
all and all manner of Issues and Amerciaments, commonly called Fines or Issues
Royal, hereafter from time to time to be imposed upon these the Mayor and
Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and for the time or any of them
respectively, or by them to be forfeited and paid. And further we by these
Grant of forfeited Recognizances.
presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant to the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, all, and all manner
of Recognizances taken or to be taken, acknoweged or to be acknowledged, broken
or to be broken, not observed or not to be observed, before the said Justices
of the peace in the said City, and the liberties of the same or any of them for
the peace and security of the peace and good behavior; and also all manner of
Recognizances, taken or to be taken, acknowledged or to be acknowledged, before
the Mayor of the said City for the time being, in his Court or in the
Conservancy of the River of Thames within the limits of the same River, or in
our said Letters Patents of our said Father, as aforesaid, is recited and
mentioned for due Fishing and observing of good order, in taking of Fish, or
otherwise, for the preservation of small Fish in the said River of Thames, as
for the conservation of the same Water, or Shores, or Banks, of the same River,
made or to be made, broken Fines and Amerciaments imposed by the Mayor.
or to be broken; and also all Fines, and Amerciaments, Pains, and Penalties
whatsoever assessed, imposed, or adjudged, or to be assessed, or adjudged, by
or before the Mayor of the said City for the time being in his Courts, as
Conservator of the said River of the Thames, without any account, or other
thing to be rendered or made to Us, or our Heirs, or Successors. And further for
the consideration aforesaid, We have given and granted, and by these presents,
for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, do give and grant to the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, All and all Fine simposed by
Commissioners of Sewers.
manner of Fines, and Amerciaments, and forfeitures, which by reason or force
of any Commission or Commissions of Sewers of Us, our Heirs or Successors
issued, or to be issued forth within the City of London, and the liberties of
the same, under the great Seal of England of us, our Heirs, or successors,
taxed, imposed, assessed, or adjudged, or from time to time to be taxed,
imposed, assessed, or adjudged upon any person or persons, without any account
or any other thing to be rendered, paid or made to Us, our Heirs or successors.
And further, for the consideration Without Account.
aforesaid, we by these presents, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, do give,
grant and confirm to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said
City, and their successors, All messuages, Houses, Edifices, Cottages,
Buildings, Courts, Yards, Gardens, Conduits, and Cisterns, Shops, Sheds,
Porches, Benches, Cellars, Doors of Cellars, Staples, Stalls, Stays, Pales,
Posts, Justies and Penthouses, Sign-Posts, Props of Signs, and the ground and
foundation of them, Shores, Watercourse, Gutters, and Easments with their
appurtenances which now are or at any time hereafter have been erected, built,
taken, enclosed, obtained, increased, possessed or enjoyed by the said Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their successors, or any person or persons
whatsoever of, in, upon, or under all or any void grounds, Wastes, Commons,
Streets, Ways, and other Common places within the said City, and the liberties
of the same, and in the River or Water of Thames, or Ports, Banks, Creeks, or
shores of the same, within the liberties of the said City, We will also and by
these presents for Us, our heirs and successors, declare and grant, that the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their successors, for ever may
have, hold and enjoy all those Fields called or known by the name of the Inward
Moor, and Outward Moor, in the Morefields inward and outward.
Parish of Saint Giles without Cripplegate, London; Saint Stephen in
Coleman-street, London; and Saint Botolph without Bishopsgate, London; or in
some or any of them: and also all that Field called West-Smithfield ^ the
parish of Saint Sepulchers, Saint Bartholomew West Smithfield.
the great, Saint Bartholomew the ^ss, in the Suburbs of London, or in some ^
them; To the uses, intents and purpo^s after expressed. And that the same
layor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, ^d their successors, may be able to hold
in ^e said Field, called Smithfield, Fairs, and Fair there.
^arkets there to be, and used to be held, ^d to take, receive and have
pickage, ^llage, tolls and profits, appertaining, happening, belonging, or
arising out of the Fairs and Markets there, to such uses as the same Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens, or their predecessors had held or enjoyed, and now
have, hold and enjoy, or ought to have, hold or enjoy the said premises last
mentioned, and to no other uses, intents or purposes whatsoever. And that we
our Heirs or Successors, will not erect, or cause to be erected, nor will
permit, or give leave to any person or persons to erect or build a new one, or
any Messuages, Houses, Structures, Edifices, in or upon the said Field, called
Inner Moor or the Field called Outward Moor, or the said Field called
West-Smithfield; but that the said separate Fields and places be reserved,
disposed and continued to such like common and public uses, as the same Fields
heretofore and now are used, disposed or converted to (saving nevertheless and
always Excepting Streets, wastegrounds, and common soil of the City.
reserving to Us, our Heirs and Successors, all Streets, Lanes, and Alleys, and
now waste and void ground and places, as they now are within the City and
liberties of the same) To hold and enjoy the said Messuages, Houses, Edifices,
Court yards and all and singular the premises granted or confirmed, or
mentioned to be granted and confirmed, with all their appurtenances To hold in
free Burgage, and not in Capite.
(except before excepted) to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, o^
the said City, and their Successors for ever To hold in free and common
Burgage, an^ not in Capite, or by Knights service. And further by these
presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, we pardon, remit and release to the
said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, and Pardon of
Issues.
their successors, all and singular Issues, profits and rents of all and
singular the same Messuages, Edifices, Houses, Structures, Penthouses, and
other the premises last mentioned (except before excepted) any way due or
incurred before the date of these presents, to us, or our predecessors, and the
arrearages of the same, without any account, molestation, suit or impediment of
Us, our Heirs or Successors, or Without Writ of ad quod damnum.
any Justices, Officers or Ministers of Us, our Heirs or Successors, and this
without any writ of Ad quod damnum, or any other Writ or Inquisition to be
procured, issued or prosecuted in that behalf. And that it shall be lawful to
the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and their
Successors, to put themselves by them or their Deputies in full and peaceable
possession and Seizin of all and singular the premises, as often, and when it
shall seem good and expedient, and thereof to have good allowance in any Court
whatsoever, of Us, our Heirs and Successors, from time to time, without
hindrance, impediment or perturbation of Us, our Heirs or successors, our
Justices, Treasurers of England, Barons of the Exchequer, or other Officers or
Ministers whatsoever, of Us, our Heirs or Successors. And further for the
consideration aforesaid, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, we do Pardon of all
Intrusions.
pardon, remit, release and exonerate to the Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, All and all manner of Entries,
Intrusions, and Ingresses whatsoever at any time heretofore had or made of in
and upon the premises aforesaid, or any part of them, without any right or
legal title of the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City,
and their predecessors or their tenants, farmers or assigns, or any other
person or persons. We will nevertheless, and for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
do ordain and declare by these presents, that these our Letters Patents, or any
thing contained in them, shall not be interpreted or construed to the taking or
adminishing the force or effect of any Proclamations published hereafter, of or
concerning buildings and edifices in the said City, and the liberties of the
same, and in the places adjoining, for any contempts or offenses whatsoever
committed, or to be committed; nor to remit or to release any offenses or
contempts heretofore committed, or hereafter to be committed against the tenor
of the same, or any of them; but that the same Proclamations may be and remain
in Building on Churchw^lls ex^^^ted.
their full force, any thing in those presents to the contrary notwithstanding.
And we will and declare by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
that such like Edifices, Structures, Encroachments, and purprestures, which
before this time have been made, or had upon any Churches or Walls of Churches
within the said City, and liberties thereof, be and shall be subject to such
reformation as shall be appointed by Us, our Heirs and successors, or our Privy
Council, for the time being, in that behalf, any thing in these presents to the
contrary notwithstanding. And moreover We for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do
give, grant and confirm by these presents to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, The Office of Garbling
granted to the Mayor and Citizens.
the Office or exercise of Garbling, of whatsoever Merchandises and other
things which ought to be Garbled at any time arriving or coming to the City of
London, by what names or appellations soever that they are at present called or
known, or, shall happen hereafter to be called or known; and although the same
Spices and Merchandises now or heretofore have not want to be imported into the
Kingdom of England, or City aforesaid, but shall happen in time to come to be
imported. And we have made, constituted and ordained, and by these presents for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, those the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens,
and their Successors, Garblers of all and singular the said Spices,
Merchandises and things, which, as aforesaid, The Mayor, etc. constituted
Garblers.
ought to be Garbled; To have, hold and enjoy, and exercise the Office and
occupation aforesaid and the disposing, ordering, surveying, and correcting of
the same, Together with all and singular fees, profits and emoluments, lawfully
belonging and due to the same Office of Garbling, to the aforesaid Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and their Successors to be occupied
and exercised by them, Without Account.
their deputy and deputies, Officer and Officers, Minister and Ministers,
without rendering or making any account or other thing to Us, our Heirs or
Successors. And further we will, and for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do grant
to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and their
Successors, and their Deputies, Officers and Ministers, to ask, demand, take
and receive to the use of the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the
City aforesaid, and their Successors, for Garbling of the said Spices, things
and Merchandises, for which no fee or reward heretofore has been had or taken,
which how great or of what shall be appointed and allowed for Garbling by the
Lord Chancellor or Treasurer of England, or President of the Council of Us, our
Heirs and Successors, the Lord keeper of the Privy Seal, Lord Steward of the
house of us, our Heirs or Successors, and the two chief Justices of the
Kingsbench, and Common-bench for the time being, or by any four of them at
least, and by them subscribed without any account, or any thing to be rendered
to Us, our Heirs o^ Successors; excepting nevertheless, and out of these
presents reserving all such like Except Garbling Tobacco.
grants of or for Garbling of Tobacco, which has heretofore been made by us or
some of our progenitors or predecessors. And further, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors do give, grant, and confirm, by these presents to the said Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, the Office,
Occupation and Exercise of Gawging of whatsoever Wines, Oils, and other
Merchandises and things The Office of Gawger granted to the Mayor.
gawgable within the said City at any time arising or coming to the said City,
by what names or appellations soever they are at present called or known, or
hereafter shall be called or known; and although the same Wines, Oils, things
or Merchandises now or heretofore have not wonted to be imported.

And we do make, constitute and ordain by these presents for us, our heirs and
successors, the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors,
Gawgers of all and singular the said Wines, Oils, things and Merchandises which
ought to be gawged; To have and to hold, and to enjoy and exercise the Office,
Exercise and Occupation aforesaid, and disposing, ordering, surveying and
correcting of the same; together with With all Fees.
all and singular Fees, Profits and Emoluments lawfully belonging or
appertaining to the same Office; To the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens
of the said City, and their successors for ever, to be exercised and occupied
by them, their Deputy and Deputies, Officer and Officers, Minister and
Ministers, without Account, or any other thing thence to be made or rendered
unto us, our heirs or successors. And further, we will, and for us, our heirs
and successors, do grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the
said City, that it shall and may be lawful to the same Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, and their Deputies,
Officers and Ministers, to ask, demand, take and receive to the use of them,
the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, for the
gawging of the said Wines, Oils, and other things and Merchandises, which ought
to be gawged, the fees, wages and rewards belonging to the said Office, and
such so great, and such like wages, fees and rewards for gawging such Wines,
Oils, things and Merchandises, for which no fee or reward was heretofore
lawfully had or received, which how great, and what like shall from henceforth
be appointed and allowed for Gawging by the Lords, Chancellor, and Treasurer of
England, and President of the Council of us, our Heirs and Successors, and the
two Chief Justices of the King's Bench, and common Bench for the time being, or
by any four of them at least, and by them subscribed without any account, or
other thing to be rendered or made thereof to us, our heirs and successors. And
further, for the consideration abovesaid, we do by these presents for us, our
heirs and successors, give, grant and confirm to the said Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, the Office of keeping
the The Office of keeping the great Beam, etc. granted to the City.
great Standard and common Balance ordained to weigh between Merchant and
Merchant, and also the Office of Keeper of the Great Balance or Weight within
the said City of London, for weighing of all Merchandises of Avoir du pois; and
also all weights whatsoever within the same City, of all sorts of Wares,
Merchandises, and things to be weighed, by what names or appellations soever at
present they be called or known, or hereafter shall happen to be called or
known; and although the same sort of wares, Merchandises, and things
heretofore, were not accustomed to be weighed, but in time to come shall happen
to be weighed or bought, and sold by weight. And we do for us, our heirs and
successors, by these presents, ordain, make and constitute the same Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, Keepers
of the great Standard, Balance and Weight, and all Weights whatsoever; and
also Weigher of all sorts of wares, commodities, Merchandises, and things to be
weighed, and which have been accustomed and used to be bought and sold by
weight within our said City, To have and exercise the said Office and
Occupation aforesaid by them, their Deputies, Officers or Ministers, together
with the fees, profits, wages, rewards With the Fees and Profits.
and emoluments of right belonging or appertaining to the same Office, without
any account, or any other thing to be made, rendered or paid, for any of the
last mentioned premises in this behalf to us, our Heirs or Successors. And also
of our more ample grace, and mere motion, we will, and by these presents, for
us, our heirs and successors, do grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens, that it may and shall be lawful to the same Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, and their Deputies, Officers
and Ministers, to ask, demand, take and receive to the use of the same Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens, for the weighing of all Merchandises of Avoir du pois
aforesaid, and all sort of commodities, wares, and things to be weighed, the
fees and rewards of weighing the same sort of commodities, Merchandises, and
things to be weighed, for which no fee or reward was heretofore lawfully had or
received, which how great, and what like they shall be for weighing, from
henceforth shall be appointed and allowed by the Lords, Chancellors and
Treasurers of England, President of the Council of us, our heirs and
successors, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, Lord Steward of the house of us, our
heirs and successors, the two Chief Justices of the King's Bench, and Common
Bench for the time being, or by four of them at least, and by them subscribed,
without account, or other thing to be rendered, or made to us, our heirs and
successors. And also we will, for us, our heirs and successors, do erect and
create in and through the said City and Liberties thereof, and in and through
our Borough or Town of Southwark in our County of Surrey, a certain Office
called Outroper, or Common Crier, to and for the selling of Household Stuff,
Apparel, The Office of Outroper or Common Crier granted to the Mayor, etc.
Leases of Houses, Jewels, Goods, Chattels, and other things of all persons who
shall be willing that the said Officers shall make sale of the same things by
public and open claim commonly called Outcry, and sale in some common and open
place or places, in the said City and the Liberties of the same, and for the
Borough and Town of Southwark aforesaid: And the same Office for the
consideration aforesaid, we, for us, our heirs and successors, do give and
grant to the said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, and their
Successors for ever, To have and exercise the same Office by them or their
Deputy, Officer or Minister, Officers, Deputies or Ministers, being first
allowed or admitted To be exercised by them or their Deputies chosen in common
Council.
thereto by the Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City for the
time being in Common Council of the same City assembled, or by the major part
of them: And that it shall, and may be lawful to the said Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, and their Deputy or
Deputies, Officers or Ministers, to demand, take and keep for the use of the
said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens aforesaid, the Wares and Fees expressed
in a certain Schedule To take the Fees expressed in a Schedule annexed.
hereunto annexed. And we will, and for us, our heirs and successors, do
strictly appoint, command and charge all other persons, that neither they, nor
any of them presume to sell any goods, chattels, household stuff, apparel,
jewels, and other things Others not sell by outcry.
in public claim called Outcry, in the City aforesaid, or the Liberties of the
same, or in the Borough and Town of Southwark, under pain of our Royal
displeasure.

And also for the consideration aforesaid, We for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
do grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and
their Successors, And by these presents do declare, ^^eemens Widows to use
Husbands Trades.
that the Relicts and Widows of Freemen of the said City, using manual Arts and
Occupations so long as they shall continue Widows, and remain in the same City
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, may and be licensed to use and
execute, and exercise the same Arts and manual Occupations in the said City,
although they were not educated by the space of seven years as apprentices,
notwithstanding the statute made and published in Parliament of Lady Elizabeth,
late Queen of England, in the 5th. year of her Reign; or any other statute or
ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. And further, for the considerations
aforesaid, we by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and successors, do grant and
confirm to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London,
and their Successors; That no Market shall henceforth be granted, erected or
permitted That no Market be kept within seven miles of the City.
by Us, our Heirs or Successors, within 7 miles in Compass of the said City.
And because we understand that it has been, of an ancient Custom of the same
City, had and allowed in the Circuits of the justices of our progenitors once
Kings of England, to the Citizens aforesaid, that the Mayor, and Aldermen of
the said City for the time being, ought to record by word of mouth all their
ancient customs as often and whenever any thing in act or question touching
the said customs happens, and is moved before any Justices, We (the same being
considered) willing that the customs of the TheMa yor etc. to record their
Customs by the mouth of the Recorder.
said City be rather enlarged then diminished of our special grace have granted
for us, our Heirs and Successors, to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their Successors, that whenever and as often as there shall
happen any issues to be taken of or upon any custom of the same City between
any parties in pleading (although they themselves be parties) or if any thing
shall be moved or happen in pleading, act or question touching the customs
aforesaid, before Us, our Heirs or Successors, or Justices for holding pleas
before Us, our Justices of the Common-bench, Treasurer and Barons of the
Exchequer, or any other Justices of Us, our Heirs or Successors, which shall
exact or require inquisition, search or trial, the Mayor and Aldermen of the
same City for the time may record, testify, and declare by word of mouth by the
Recorder of the same City for the time being; those customs, and that by such
record, testimony and declaration, without taking any Jury thereupon, or making
any further process, they may speedily proceed to the caption or determination
of the plea, deed, cause or business. We have given also and granted and by
these presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant to the said
Mayor, and Commonalty and Citizens, and their Successors, Treasure found in the
same City, or the liberty of the same, and also waived and strayed Goods and
Chattels of all Felons and Fugitives for Felons Committed, or that shall be
committed by them in the said City, or the liberties of the same, judged or to
be adjudged before Us, our Heirs or Successors, Treasure found, etc. granted to
the Mayor.
or any of our Justices. We have granted also, and for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, by these presents, do grant that the Mayor of the said City and
their Successors for the time being, may name to the Chancellor of England for
the time being, two of the Aldermen of the same City of which one at the
nomination of the said Mayor, The Mayor to name two Aldermen for Justices in
Middlesex and London, Surrey.
shall be one of the keepers of the peace in the County of Middlesex, and the
other in the County of Surrey, who shall be inserted with others into all
Commissions henceforth to be made for the conservation of the peace in the
Counties aforesaid, and may henceforth do, concern and execute those things
which are to be done by the keepers of the peace in the Counties aforesaid,
according to the force and effect of the Commissions directed, or to be
directed to them and others. And whereas Freemen of London.
the freedom of the City of London, in times past was had in such price and
estimation, that many Merchants thought themselves happy to enjoy the same, and
to be reputed members of the same City: And whereas diverse persons being Sons
of certain Freemen of the said City, resident in our said City, and others who
were apprentices of Freemen of the said City, resident in our said City, in
these late times have used and daily do use and exercise, Merchandise,
negotiation and Commerce from the port of the same City, to parts beyond the
Seas, and by reason thereof, have and do gain and acquire great prfiots and
advantages to themselves refusing, or at least delaying to become freemen of
the said City, and to be admitted into the liberty of the same, City, although
they be capable of the same, and so they have privileges, and yet are loose
and free from public Offices, Places, Charges, and Burdens of the said City
for our service and honor and for the upholding of the state and profit of
that City, that the weakening of the Government of the said City and
impoverishing the Freemen, and disparaging of the liberty thereof. We
considering these things and intimately desiring, as much as in us, is to
strengthen and enlarge the liberties of the said City (our Royal Chamber) and
to conserve, support, and protect the rule and Government, and good and happy
state of that City. We will, appoint, ordain and declare for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, that all they who are or hereafter shall be Sons of Freemen to be
made free of London.
Sons of Freemen of the City, or who are or hereafter shall be apprentices or
Servants of Freemen of our said City, and now do or hereafter shall reside or
inhabit in the same City or the liberties of the same, or within ten miles
distant from any part of the same, and do or shall use Merchandise; and who do
or shall refuse or delay to become Freemen of the said City, shall not be
permitted at any time hence forth by themselves or by others, directly or
indirectly, to transport any goods, wares or Merchandises, by way of
Merchandising in any way from the Port of our City of London to parts foreign
or beyond the Seas; Willing and for Us, our Heirs and Successors we do firmly
command the Governors, Assistants and Merchant adventurers of England the
Governors and Assistants of the English Merchants traffiquing in the Baltic
Sea, the Society of English Merchants for discovery of new commerce, the
Governors and Society of Merchants of England trading into the Levant Seas, the
Governor and Society of Merchants of London trading to France and the Dominions
of the same, and to all other societies of Merchants trading or Merchandising
into foreign parts beyond the Seas, by what name or names soever the said
distinct Societies are known or reputed, That they, nor any of them admit,
license or permit any such like person or persons to Merchandise or Traffic,
or have commerce as Merchants to foreign parts, unless such persons first
become Freemen of the said City, and bring a testimonial from the Chamberlain
or Under-Chamberlain of the said City for the time being, that they are
admitted into the liberty of the said City.

And further, for us, our heirs and successors, we will and command, that no
Merchant being, or who hereafter shall be a Freeman of the said City, shall
take henceforth Merchants free of London, not to take Apprentices under seven
years.
any Apprentice to serve him in such like Merchandise within the City
aforesaid, Liberties or Suburbs of the s^s of or within ten miles of the same
City for less than seven years to be bound and enrolled according to the custom
of the said City, and not otherwise. And whereas by a certain Act of Parliament
made in the third year of the Reign of our most dear Father, Lord James late
King of England, It is enacted, that every Citizen and Freeman of the City of
London, and every other person or persons inhabiting, or which shall Court of
Conscience and Requests.
inhabit in the said City, or the Liberties of the same, being a Tradesman,
Victualler or Labourer, who then had, or from thenceforth should have any debt
or debts owing to him or them, not amounting to forty shillings, by any
Citizen, or any other person or persons being a Victualler, Tradesman or
Labourer, who does, or shall inhabit within the said City, or the Liberties of
the same, may cause such like Debtor or Debtors to be warned or summoned by
Officers of the Court of Request.
the Beadle or Officer of the Court of Requests in the Guild Hall London, for
the time being, by writing to be left at the dwelling house of such Debtor or
Debtors, or by any reasonable notice or warning to be given to the said Debtor
or Debtors to appear before the Commissioners of the said Court of Requests,
holden in the Guild Hall of the said City, as by the said Act* fully appears:
We will, and for us, ou^ heirs and successors, ordain and constitute, th^^ from
time to time, and in all future times ^here be, and shall be a certain Office
Clerk and his Fees.
of the Clerk of the Court of Reques^ aforesaid; And that there be, and shall
be from time to time, and in all future times one fit person to be named and
appointed by the Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City assembled
in Common Council of the same City, or the greater part of them, to be a Clerk
of the same Court, to make, write, enter and register Warrants, Precepts,
Process, Acts, Orders and Executions of that Court; And for labor and
Attendance to have and receive his fees and wages expressed in a Schedule
annexed to these presents: And that there be from time to time, and in all
future times shall be a certain Office of Beadle of Beadle and his Fees.
the Court of Requests aforesaid to be named and appointed by the said Mayor
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City assembled in Common Council of
the same City, or the greater part of them, To summon all such persons to
appear in the same Court to answer to such like persons as are appointed in the
said Act of Parliament, and to serve and execute Warrants, Precepts and Process
of the same Court, and to receive for his labor in the same Office the Wages
and Fees expressed in a certain Shedule hereunto annexed. And, whereas diverse
Burglaries, Felonies, Roberies, clandestine Stealings, and Thefts of Goods,
Jewels, Apparel and Household Stuff, and other things are daily committed within
our City of London and liberties of the same, to the grievous damage of some of
our Subjects inhabiting there or in the parts adjoining; We, for the better
discovery of such like offenders and of things so lost, will, and for Us, our
Heirs and Successors by these presents do ordain, grant and constitute that
from henceforth for ever within Register of Brokers of Pawns, etc.
the said City of London and the liberties of the same, there be and shall be a
certain Office of Register of all and for all sales and pawns made or to be
made to retailing Brokers within the said City and liberties of the same, and
for any Goods, Jewels, Apparel, Household Stuff and other things so to be sold
or pawned by any persons: and for Us, our Heirs and Successors, We now do give
and grant by these presents the same Office to the said Mayor, and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City and their Successors, to have and exercise the
said Office by them, or their Officer, Deputy or Minister, or Officers,
Deputies or Ministers, first to be allowed and admitted thereto by the Mayor
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, assembled in Common Council of
the same City for the time being, or the greater part of them: And that it may
and shall be lawful for the said Mayor and Citizens of the said City, and their
Successors, and their Deputy or Deputies, Officer or Officers, to demand, take,
or have and rerain in their power, to the use of them, the Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, the Wages and Fees expressed in a
certain Schedule annexed to these presents; without any account, or any thing
else to be rendered or made to us, our heirs or successors. And further, we do
give and grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City,
and their Successors, that it may and shall be lawful to the Citizens of the
same City, and any of them, for the time being, to expose and hang in and over
the Citizens may hang out Signs.
Streets, and Ways, and Alleys of the said City and Suburbs of the same, Signs
and posts of Signs affixed to their Houses and Shops, for the better finding
out such Citizens Dwellings, Shops, Arts or Occupations without impediment,
molestation or interruption of us, our heirs or successors, or any Officers or
Ministers whatsoever of us, our heirs or successors. And whereas Lord Henry the
eighth, late King of England, etc. by his Letters Patents, bearing date at
Westminster the 13th. day of January, in the 28th. year of his Reign, amongst
other things, for him and his successors did give and grant to the said Bethlem
and its Charter.
Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City and their Successors, the
keeping, ordering and governing of the House and Hospital of him the late King
called Bethlem, situate without, and near Bishopsgate, of the said City of
London, and all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Revenues and
Hereditaments whatsoever, and wheresoever lying and being, belonging and
appertaining unto the same Hospital, or House called Bethlem; and made and
constituted by the same his Letters Patents, these, the Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, Masters, Keepers and
Governors of the said House and Hospital called Bethlem, and of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other Premises belonging to the same House or
Hospital, To have, hold and enjoy the said Custody, Order and Government of the
said House or Hospital, called Bethlem; And the said manner, Lands, Tenements,
Possessions, Revenues and Hereditaments belonging to the same House and
Hospital called Bethlem, To the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
said City and their Successors for ever, to the uses and intents which are in
and upon the Foundation ordered and provided by the said late King his Heirs or
Successors. And that the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the said
City of London, and their Successors might be better able to support the but
then and expenses of the poor, in sustaining the House House of the Poor in
West-Smithfield.
called the House of the Poor in West-Smithfield, and other burdens assigned
and appointed to the same Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the said City
and their Successors, by Indenture mentioned to be made between the said late
King and those the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City in the
said letters Patents; As by the same his Letters Patents amongst other things
more fully appears: Know ye, that we from our Soul affecting, and intimatley
desiring to support and establish the said works for us, our Heirs and
Successors, do grant and confirm to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens
of the said City, and their Successors the said Custody, Ordering and
Government of the said House and Hospital called Bethlem, and all Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Possessions and Revenues whatsoever and wheresoever lying and
being, belonging and appertaining to the same House and Hospital called
Bethlem. And do make, ordain and constitute by these presents, Mayor, etc.
Governors of Bethlem.
those the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the said City and their
Successors, Masters, Keepers and Governors of the said House and Hospital
called Bethlem, and of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other the
premises belonging to the same House and Hospital called Bethlem, To have, hold
and enjoy the said Custody, Ordering and Government of the same House and
Hospital called Bethlem, and of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Possessions, Revenues and Hereditaments belonging to the same House and
Hospital called Bethlem, To the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the
said City and their Successors for ever; to the same uses, intents and
purposes, as in the said Letters Patents of Lord Henry the eighth are before
mentioned, ordained and appointed: Willing moreover, and for us, our heirs and
Successors, we do declare and ordain, That the said House or Hospital of
Bethlem, or the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Revenues and
Hereditaments belonging and appertaining to the same That the Lands be not
employed to other uses.
House, or any part thereof be not delivered, converted or disposed to any
other use than to the charitable works now -- and applied in the same Hospital.

And further, for Us, our Heirs and Successors We will, and by these presents
do declare our good pleasure, and do charge and command the same Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City and their Successors, that they do
not deliver That no Leases of Hospital-Lands be Let for above 21 years.
or grant the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Revenues, belonging
to the same house or Hospital or any part of them, for any term or terms of
years exceeding the number of one and twenty years; to commence from the time
of the making of such like grant or Lease in possession and not in Reversion,
reserving half of the yearly value at the least of such Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments so leased, and granted yearly to be paid during the
said term to the said Mayor, and Commonalty and their Successors to the uses,
intents and purposes above mentioned. And moreover for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, we grant and give special license to the said Mayor, and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors, that it shall and may
be lawful to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of London and their
Successors, to purchase and receive and hold, to them and their Successors, of
any person or persons whatsoever, five Acres of Land situate, lying and being
in the Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields in our County of Middlesex, and now
or late in the tenure or occupation of Margaret Pennell, or License to purchase
five Acres of Land in St. Giles in the Fields.
her Assigns; although the same five Acres, or any part of them be held of us
in Capite by Knights service; To have to the same Mayor and Commonalty, and the
Citizens of the said City, and their Successors for ever. And also we give
License and Power by these presents, to all and singular persons whatsoever,
that they, or any of them may be able to give and grant the said five Acres of
Land, and every parcel thereof, with its appurrenances, to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, although the same five Acres of
Land, or any parcel thereof be held of us in Capite by Knights Service; The
Statute of -- putting of Lands and Tenements in Mortmain notwithstanding; or
any other Statute, Act, Ordinance, Orders, Restitution made, published,
ordained or provided to the contrary, or any other thing, cause or matter
whatsoever in any thing notwithstanding: And this without any Inquisition by
pretense of any Writ or Mandate to be made, presented or taken, and to be
returned into the Chancery of us, our heirs and successors, or elsewhere:
Willing that the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and
their Successors, by reason or occasion of the premises, shall not be
oppressed, molested, disquieted or grieved in any thing by Us, our Heirs and
Successors or by the Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, or other Bailiffs,
Officers or Ministers of Us, our Heirs or Successors; The Statute of not
putting Land into Mo^tmain or any other Statute, Act, or provision to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. We nevertheless declare it to be our
Royal pleasure by these presents for Us our Heirs and Successors, that the said
Mayor, and Commonalty, and That the Mayor, etc. may build on the said five
Acres without License.
Citizens or their Successors, or any other person or persons, by the assent
and consent of the same Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, shall build and
erect without the Royal License of Us, our Heirs or Successors, in that behalf
first had and obtained, any Houses, Edifices or structures upon the premises,
or any parcel thereof. And as we or our predecessors, by distinct Letters
Patents made to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City
of London and their predecessors, have given and granted (as in the said
Letters Patents mentioned to be given and granted) to them License and power of
purchasing, having and receiving to them and their Successors, diverse
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to diverse distinct yearly values
or sums expressed in the same Letters Patents more fully appears; the Statute
of not putting Lands in Mo^tmain notwithstanding. We will now and declare and
do to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, grant for
Us, our Heirs and Successors by these presents, that these our Letters Patents,
or any grant, thing or matter contained in the same, shall not be reputed or
judged to bepart or par cel of such yearly value or sum to which, as aforesaid,
they have been made capeable and able to purchase: And further, we will, and by
these presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors do grant unto the said Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors, that
these our These Letters Patents and the Inrollment to be good without
confirmation.
Letters Patents and the inrollment of the same shall be in and through all
things firm, valid, good, sufficient and effectual in Law, toward and against
Us, our Heirs and Successors as well in all our Courts as elsewhere within our
Kingdom of England, without any confirmations, Licenses or tolerations to be
procured or obtained of Us, our Heirs or Successors by the said Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors:
Notwithstanding that any writ or writs ad quod damnum has not issued or is not
returned before the making of these our Letters Parents; and notwithstanding
the misnaming or not rightly or certainly naming, or ill reciting, or not
reciting the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Offices, Liberties, Authorities,
Privileges, Immunities, Quittances, Jurisdictions, and all and singular other
the premises above hereby granted or confirmed, or mentioned to be granted or
confirmed, or any part or parcel of them; and notwithstanding the not finding,
or ill or not right or certain finding of Office or Offices, Inquisition or
Inquisitions of the premises above hereby granted or confirmed, or mentioned to
be granted or confirmed, or any part or parcel of it by which our title in and
to the said premises ought to be found before the making of these our Letters
Patents; And notwithstanding any defect in not reciting or ill reciting of any
Lease or Leases, Grant or Grants heretofore made for term of life or lives, or
years, or otherwise, of the premises or of any part or parcel of them being
upon Record or not upon Record, or otherwise however; And notwithstanding the
ill naming or not right or certain naming any Village or Hamlet, Parish, Ward,
Place, Precinct, or Country in which the premises or any part of them is or
are; And notwithstanding any defect in not mentioning, or not fully, rightly,
or certainly mentioning the name or names, of all or any Tenements, These
Letters Parents to be sealed without paying any Fine in the Hamper.
Forms, Possessions or Occupations aforesaid, and all and singular other the
premises, or any parcel thereof, or of the Annual rent reserved in and upon the
premises or any part thereof; And notwithstanding any defect, uncertainty or
Computation or declaration or omission of the true value of the premises, or
any part of them in these present Letters Patents expressed; And
notwithstanding any defect in not mentioning our true right, state or title of
or to the same premises or any part or parcel of them; And notwithstanding the
statute of Lord Henry the 6th. late King of England our Ancestor, made and
published in the -- year of his Reign, and notwithstanding the statute of Lord
Henry the 4th. late King of England our Ancestor, made and published in the
first year of his Reign; And notwithstanding the statute aforesaid of not
putting Lands and Tenements in Mortmain; And notwithstanding the statute made
in the Parliament of Edward the first in the third year of his Reign; And the
statute made in the Parliament of Edward the third, in the twenty eight year of
his Reign concerning choosing of the Coroners; And notwithstanding any other
statute or statutes of this our Kingdom of England, or any other defects
whatsoever; and notwithstanding the not mentioning the natures, kinds, species,
quantities of the premises or any of them, or any part or parcel of them. We
will also, and by these presents grant to the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City of London, that they shall and may have these our
Letters Patents made and sealed under the great Seal of England without
^endring, paying or making Fine or Fee, great or little, to us in our hamper or
otherwise to our use any way, for that express mention is not made of the true
yearly value or of the certainty of the premises, or any of them, or of other
gifts or grants heretofore made by Us, or by any of our Progenitors or
Ancestors to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of of the City of
London; or any other statute, Act Ordinance, Proclamation, Provision or
Restriction made, Published, Ordained or provided to the contrary, or any other
cause or matter whatsoever in any thing notwithstanding: In Witness whereof we
have made these our Letters Patents; Witness my self at Westminster the 18th.
day of October in the 14th. year of our Reign.

Fees taken by the Common Outroper.
FOr selling of all Goods in ever Shilling. For writing and keeping the Books 1
Penny per l. To the Crier for crying the Goods 1 s.
Fees taken by the Register for Broakers.
FOr the Bond to be entered into by every Broaker, Brogger and Huckster to the
Chamber 8 d. For every Bargain, Contract, Pawn for or upon which there shall be
lent or given 1 s. or above, and under 5 s. For every the like, for which shall
be lent 5 s. or more, and under 20 s. For every the like, on which shall be
lent 20 s. or more, and under 40 s. 1 d. For every the like, on which shall be
lent 40 s. or more 2 d.
Court of Conscience in London, Clerks Fees.
FOr every Plaint 2 d. For every Appearance 2 d. For every Order 4 d. For every
Remittance to the Common Law 4 d. For every Precept or VVarrant to Committo
Prison 6 d. For every Search 2 d. For every Satisfaction acknowledged on an
Order 6 d. For Warning every Person within the Liberties 4 d. For Warning
every Person without the Liberties 6 d. For serving every Precept or VVarrant 4
d.
WE have also seen a certain other Charter of our said most dear Father,
Charles the First, late King of England, of Blessed Memory, made in these words:

CHARLES by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these present Letters shall come, greeting:
WHEREAS Out Well-beloved the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London, and their Predecessors, within the Port of London, within the Liberties
and Franchices of our City of London and Suburbs thereof, have had, exercised,
and enjoyed, or claimed to have, exercise, and enjoy, the Paccage of Cloths,
etc.
Office of Paccage of all Cloths, Woolls, Woollfells, Calves skins, Goat Skins,
Bales of Tin, and of all other Merchandises whatsoever, to be packed, casked,
piped, barrelled, or otherwise vesselled, out of the said Port, to be
transported to any the parts beyond the Seas, of the Goods and Merchandises as
well of Aliens and Persons born under any Foreign Allegiance, in any parts
beyond the Seas, wheresoever they should be Customed; and also the Office as
well for Surveying or Scavage of all Goods or Wares of any Merchant either
Alien or Denizen, whose Father was or should be an Alien born without our
Allegiance, and from the parts beyond the Seas to be brought to the said Port
by way of Merchandise, as also for the surveying, delivering, or balliage of
Balliage of Goods.
all Goods and Wares of any such Merchants aforesaid, to be exported from the
said Port into the parts beyond the Seas, or otherwise, on the account of
Merchandises upon and through the River Thames, within the said Port, in any
Ship, Boat, Barge, or Vessel whatsoever, floating, laden, remaining, or being
off of any Shore of the said River of Thames, and upon any Wharffe or Shore of
the same River, which should happen there to remain, and be delivered or
unladen, as well by Water as by Land, within the Port aforesaid, within the
Franchices and Liberties of the said City and Suburbs thereof; all which they
have enjoyed time out of mind, and by virtue of several Charters or Letters
Patents of Edward the Fourth, late King of England, in the First and Eighteenth
years of his Reign, to them granted; and also by virtue of a certain other
Charter or Letters Patents of Henry the Eighth, late King of England, to the
said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens aforesaid, granted in the Third year of
his Reign, ^y whatsoever Name or Names the same are called in the said Letters
Patents by Authority of Parliament confirmed, or by color of the same Letters
Patents, or any of them, or by the Prescription aforesaid, with diverse Fees and
Rewards to the said Offices belonging and appertaining. AND WHEREAS diverse
Questions and Differences have of late arisen about and concerning the Offices
aforesaid, and the Execution thereof within the Port aforesaid, within the
Liberties and Franchises of the City aforesaid, and Suburbs thereof, whereby
the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid,
have been hindered and disturbed in the Offices aforesaid, and in the Exercise
of them. KNOW YE, That We, for the removing and utter taking away all Doubts
and Questions about the said Offices, and likewise for the corroborating,
amplifying, increasing, declaring and establishing the Liberties and
Privileges of the said City, of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere
motion, and also for and in consideration of Four Thousand and two The
Consideration of the Grant, 4200 li.
hundred pounds of lawful Money of England, to the Hands of Our Ancient and
Faithful Servant George Kirge Gentleman of our Robes, and one of the Grooms of
our Bedchamber, by a Warrant under our Privy Seal, heretofore paid or assigned
to be paid, whereof we do acknowledge Our Self to be fully satisfied and paid,
and them the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London
aforesaid, and their Successors, to be thereof acquitted and discharged for
ever by these presents; and for diverse other good causes and considerations, us
hereunto especially moving, Have for us, our Heirs, and Successors, created,
ordained, and constituted, and by these presents do create, ordain and
constitute, That from henceforth, for ever hereafter, there shall be within the
said Port of London, and the limits and bounds thereof, within the Liberties
and Franchices of the said City and Suburbs thereof, an Office and Offices,
Employment and Employments of Paccage of all Woollen Cloths, Woollfells, Office
of Paccage created.
Calves-skins, Goat Skins, Bales of Tin, and of all other Merchandises
whatsoever, to be packed, casked, piped, barrelled or any ways vesselled, with
a survey of the Measure, Number, and Weight of the said Merchandises, and also
the survey of all Customable Merchandises, to the said Port, within the
Liberties and Franchises of the said City and Suburbs thereof coming, and out
of the same Port going, as well by Land as by Water, within the Liberties and
Franchises of the City aforesaid, and Suburbs thereof, as well of the Goods of
any Denizens, whose Father is or shall be an Alien, as of the Goods of Aliens
wheresoever the same shall be Customed: As also an Office or Employment of
Carriage Office of Portage or Balliage created
and Portage of all Woolls, Woollfells, Bales of Tin, and of all other
Merchandises whatsoever, as well of any Denizen, whose Father is or shall be an
Alien, born without the Allegiance of us, our Heirs or Successors, as of Aliens
born without the Allegiance of us, our Heirs, Successors, and under any
Foreign Allegiance in any the parts beyond the Seas, which shall be carried
into London, from the River of Thames to the House or Warehouse of such Alien,
and from thence to the said River: Together with the Fees, Sums of Money
Profits, and Emoluments of the said Office or Employments, and other the
Premises, in two Tables or Schedules hereunto annexed, mentioned, and
repectively limited and appointed. All and singular which Fees, Sums of Money,
Profits and Emoluments in the said Tables or Schedules, expressed as due and
lawful Fees to the said several Offices or Paccage and Portage annexed and
belonging; and in the Execution of the same Offices, and either of them,
respectively, to be had and taken, we do for us our Heirs and Successors,
ratify, establish, and confirm, by these presents, and the same Fees, Sums of
Money, Profits and Emoluments in the said Tables or Schedules before mentioned,
We do for us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said Mayor, Commonalty
and Citizens of the City aforesaid, and their Successors, for ever by these
presents. AND FURTHER MORE, of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere
motion, for the consideration aforesaid, We do for us, Heirs, and Successors,
give and grant to the said Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City
aforesaid, and their Successors, the said Office or Employment of Paccage
Paccage granted to the City.
of all and all manner of Woollen-Cloths, Wooll-fells, Calves-skins, Goatskins,
Bales of Tin, and all other Merchandises whatsoever, to be packed, casked,
piped, barrelled, or any ways vesselled; with the survey of the Measure,
Number, and Weight of the said Merchandises, together with the Fees, Sums of
Money, Profits and Emoluments, aforesaid; and also the Office or Employment of
Carriage and Portage of all Woolls, Wooll-fells, Bales of Tin, and all other
Merchandises whatsoever, as well of any Denizens, whose Father is or shall be
an Alien born, without the Allegiance of us, our Predecessors, Heirs, or
Successors, as of any Alien born without the Allegiance, of us, our
Predecessors, Heirs, or Successors, and under any Foreign Allegiance, in parts
beyond the Seas, which shall be carried in to London from the River of Thames,
to the House of such Alien, and from thence to the said River, together with
the Fees, Sums of Money, Profits and Emoluments, aforesaid, To hold and
exercise the Offices and Employments aforesaid, and either of them, with their
Appurtenances, and the Dispositions, Orderings, Surveyings, and Corrections
thereof and of either of them: Together with all Fees, Sums of Money, Profits
and Emoluments whatsoever, to the said Offices or Employments, or either of
them, in the said two Tables or Schedules to these Presents annexed, mentioned,
and respectively appointed, to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of
the said City; and their Successors, for ever: And also to exercise and occupy
the said Offices or Employments, and every and either of them, by themselves,
or by their sufficient Minister or Ministers, Deputy or Deputies, without any
Account or other thing, to be therefore rendered or made to us, our Heirs or
Successors (besides the Rent hereafter in these Presents mentioned to be
reserved and paid to us, our Heirs and Successors) and without incurring any
Penalty or Forfeiture of the Offices aforesaid, or either of them, or of any
parcel thereof, although they, or their Deputies, Officers, or Servants, do not
pack the said Goods or Merchandises, when they are ready, and upon reasoable
request and notice thereof given for the performing the said Services. And that
no other Porter, or Carrier, or any other person or persons whatsoever, shall
presume to intermit or intrude him or themselves, to carry or lade any of the
said Goods or Merchandises from any Wharf or Shore within the Limits aforesaid,
into any Ship or Vessel, or to unlade any Goods or Merchandises from any Ship
or Vessel, upon any Wharf, Shore, or Lane, within the Limits aforesaid; without
the special Appointment or License of the said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens
of the City aforesaid, or of their Officers or Deputies for that purpose, first
had or obtained. And that the Porter or Carrier appointed, and from time to
time to be appointed, by the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors; or by their sufficient Officers or Deputies for the time being,
shall have, take or receive of or from the said Merchants, as well Aliens born
without the Allegiance of Us, Our Predecessors, Heirs, or Successors, and under
any Foreign Allegiance, in Parts beyond the Seas, as of the said Denizens
born, or to be born within the Power or Allegiance of Us, Our Predecessors,
Heirs, or Successors, whose Father is, or shall be an Alien born without the
Allegiance of Us, Our Predecessors, Heirs, or Successors, for the Carriage or
Portage of the said Goods and Merchandises, such Sums of Money for their labor
aforesaid, as in a certain Schedule to these presents annexed, are mentioned
and appointed; without any account or other thing to be therefore rendered or
made to Us, Our Heirs or Successors (besides the Rents hereafter in these
Presents mentioned, to be paid to Us, Our Heirs or Successors:) AND FURTHER, of
our more abundant grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, and for the
consideration aforesaid, We do for us, our Heirs and Successors, give and grant
to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City aforesaid, and their
Successors, the Office or Employment of the Scavage and Surveying, Scavage
granted to the City.
and also the Scavage of all the Goods and Wares customable whatsoever, of any
Merchants as well Aliens as Denizens, whose Father is or shall be an Alien born
or to be born without the Allegiance of us, our Predecessors, Heirs, or
Successors, and to be brought from any parts beyond the Seas, within the
Liberties and Franchices of the said City and Suburbs thereof, on account of
Merchandising; and also the surveying, delivering, or Balliage of all the Goods
and Wares of any of the said Merchants, within the Liberties and Franchices of
the said City, which shall be carried out into parts beyond the Seas, by way of
Merchandise, through and upon the River Thames, within the limits aforesaid, in
any Ship, Boat, Barge, or Vessel whatsoever, floating, laden, remaining, or
being off of any Shore of the said River of Thames, and which upon any Bank,
Wharf or Shore of the said River, shall happen to remain and be delivered or
unladen within the Liberties and Franchices of the said City and Suburbs
thereof; together with the Fees, Sums of Money, Profits, and Emoluments, in a
certain Table or Schedule to these presents annexed, mentioned, and
respectively limited and appointed, according to the form of the Statute made
and published in the 22th year of Henry the Eighth late King of England. All
and singular which said Fees, Sums of Money, Profits and Emoluments, in the
said Table or Schedule last mentioned and expressed, as due and lawful Fees to
the said several Offices of Scavage and Balliage aforesaid annexed and
belonging, and in the Execution of the same Offices, and either of them
respectively, hereafter to be had and taken: We do for us, our Heirs and
Successors, ratify establish, and confirm, by these presents; and the same
Fees, Sums of Money, Profits and Emoluments in the said last mentioned Table or
Schedule, we do for us, our Heirs and Successors, grant to the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City aforesaid, and their Successors, for ever,
by these presents. TO HAVE and exercise the said Offices and Employments, last
mentioned, and either of them, with the Appurtenances, and the disputings,
orderings, supervisings and corrections of the same and either of them;
together with all the Fees, Sums of Money, Profits, and Emoluments, to the said
Offices or Employments, and either of them in the said Table or Schedule, to
these presents annexed, mentioned, and respectively appointed, unto the said
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the said City and their Successors, for
ever; and also to exercise and occupy the said Offices or Employments, by
themselves or by their sufficient Minister or Ministers, Deputy or Deputies,
without any Account or other Matter to be rendered or made to us, our Heirs, or
Successors for the same (besides the Rents hereafter in these presents
mentioned, to be reserved and paid to us, our Heirs and Successors) and without
incurring any Penalty of the said Offices or Employments, or either of them, or
any Parcel thereof, although they, or their Deputies, Officers, or Servants,
shall not survey or deliver the Goods and Merchandises aforesaid, when they
shall be ready, upon reasonable Request, or Notice thereof given, for the
performing the said Works or Services. WILLING, and by these Presents, for us,
our Heirs and Successors, enjoining and commanding all and singular such Aliens
and Denizens aforesaid, that they from time to time, do make and deliver, or
cause to be made and delivered, unto the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens, and their Successors, or their Servants, Deputies, or Collectors of
the Scavage aforesaid, for the time being, true and perfect Bills of Entry, of
all and every their Goods, Merchandises and Wares, which shall be from time to
time, brought within the Liberties and Franchises of the said City and Suburbs
thereof, under pain of our Royal Indignation, and of being farther punished for
their Contempt of our Command in this behalf. YIELDING therefore yearly to Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, into the Receipt of Our Exchequer at Westminster
Three Founds Six Shillings and Eight Pence, of lawful Money of England, at the
Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, by equal portions every year to be paid. AND WHEREAS We are informed,
that, with intent to defraud and deceive the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the City aforesaid, of the Fees and Profits, to the said several
Offices belonging and appertaining, several Goods and Merchandises have been
fraudulently laden and unladen, by diverse Persons at certain Wharfs or places,
commonly called St. Katherines, Tower-Wharf, Southwark, Bick-Shoar, Wappin,
Redrith, Deptford, Greenwich and Blackwall, and other places between Blackwall
and London Bridge, on both sides of the River Thames aforesaid, supposing the
same Places to be without the Port of London aforesaid, and the Liberties,
Franchises, and Suburbs thereof. WE WILL, and by these Presents, for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, do Ordain and Declare, that for ever hereafter, all and
singular Merchant-strangers, born without our Allegiance, in Parts beyond the
Seas, and under Foreign Obedience, and also the Sons of such
Merchant-strangers, who henceforth shall lade or unlade any Goods or
Merchandises, Customable in the Port of the City of London aforesaid, or in any
of the said Places or Wharfs abovementioned, shall from time to time, render
and pay, or make and cause to be rendered and paid, unto the said Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City aforesaid, and their Successors, or their
Officers, Deputies and Servants, such Wages and Fees, as are in the said Tables
or Schedules mentioned and expressed. AND FURTHER, because We are given to
understand that diverse Goods and Merchandises of Merchants, as well Aliens born
without our Allegiance, under Foreign Obedience, in Parts beyond the Seas, as
also such Denizens, whose Father is or shall be an Alien, and born under
Foreign Allegiance, in Parts beyond the Seas, which are carried out of the
Port of the said City, and brought into the said Port from Foreign Parts, and
beyond the Seas, are very often subtly concealed and colored under the Names
of other Persons, to defraud Us of Our Customs, and other things to Us
belonging, for such Goods and Merchandises, to the Prejudice and Loss of Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, and also of the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City, of the Fees and Sums of Money, so as aforesaid
respectively limited, appointed and ordained, by reason of the Exercise of the
Offices aforesaid, or any of them; We therefore being willing to look after Our
Indemnity in this behalf, and also to the intent that the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens, may the better detect the Frauds, Covins, and Deceipts
of all Persons, so concealing and withdrawing the said Goods and Merchandises,
and the Fees aforesaid, We do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, give, and by
these presents grant, to the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their
Successors, that the Mayor of the City aforesaid, for the time being, and the
sufficient Deputies, Servants, or Officers of the said Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens of the City aforesaid, in that Power to the Mayor, etc. to Administer
the Oath to discover concealed Goods.
behalf; from time to time duly Assigned, shall and may havefull Power and
Authority, to give and administer the Oath upon the Holy Evangelists, fromtime
to time, to all such Persons suspected or to be suspected, of the said
With-drawings, Concealments, Colorings, Frauds, Covins. And that it shall and
may be lawful to the said Mayor, his Minister and Deputy, or Officer for the
time being, by all lawful ways and means to compel all such persons suspected,
or to be suspected, as shall refuse or deny to take the said Oath, to take the
same Oath. Although express mention of the true yearly Value, or of the
certainty of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants by
Us, or by any of our Progenitors or Predecessors, to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City aforesaid, or any of them heretofore made,
is not made in these Presents; or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision,
Proclamation, or Restraint to the contrary, thereof, heretofore had, made,
published, ordained, or provided, or any other Thing, Cause or Matter
whatsoever, in any wise notwithstanding.

IN WITNESS whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents:
WITNESS Our Self at Westminster the 5th Day of September, in the 16th Year of
our Reign.
THE SCAVAGE TABLE OF RATES INWARDS.
A
Alum the Weight qt. 112 l. ijd Amotto the C. qt. Five Score iiijd Apples and
Pears the little Barrel q Aquavitae the Hogshead vjd Argil White or Red the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. id ob
B
BAbbies Heads the Dozen ob Bacon the C. Weight qt. 112 l. iijd Bandstrings the
Dozen Knots q Balks Great the C. qt. Six Score xviijd Middle the C. qt. Six
Score ixd Small the C. qt. Six Score iiijd
Barlings the C. qt. Six Score iiij d Barley the Quarter qt. Eight Bushels ob
Barilla or Saffora the Barrel qt. C. Weight iiij d Basket Rods the Dozen
Bundles iiij d Bast Ropes the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ob Battery Basherows or
Kettles the C. weight qt. 112 l. vj d Beef the Barrel i d Bell-Mettal the C.
weight qt. 112 l. ii d Beans the Quarter ob Blacking, or Lamb-Black, the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. iij d Bottles of all sorts the Dozen ob Boards Barrel Boards
the Thousand iiij d Clapboards the C. qt. Six Score i d Pipe-Boards the C. qt.
Six Score i d Borattos or Bombasins Narrow the single Piece, not above xv Yards
ij d Broad the single Piece, not above xv Yards iij d Books unbound the Basket
or Maund viij d Bowe-staves the C qt. Six Score ij d Brass Andirons,
Lavercocks, Chafing-Dishes, and all other Brass or Latten Wrought the C. qt.
Five Score iij d Brimstone the C. Weight 112 l. ob Bristles the Dozen Pound ob
Buckromes Of Germany the Dozen Pieces iij d Of France the Dozen Pieces ij d
Buffins Liles and Mocadoes Narrow the single Piece, not above xv Yards i d
Broad the single Piece, not above xv Yards ij d
Bull-rushes the Load i d Burrs for Millstones the C. qt. Five Score iij d
Butter the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
C
CAble-ropes for Cordage the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Cabinets Great the Piece
ij d Small the Piece i d
Caddas or Cruel Ribbons the Dozen Pieces, qt. each piece xxxvj Yards i d
Candle Week the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Candles of Tallow the Dozen Pound q
Capers the C. Pound qt. Five Score ij d Capravens the C. qt. six score iij d
Cards Playing Cards the Small Groce, qt. 12 Dozen Pair ij d Wooll-Cards the
Dozen Pair ob
Carpets Turkey, Persia, East India, and Venice, Long, the Piece vj d Of the
same, or like sorts, Short the Piece iiij d Carpets of all other sorts the
Piece ob
Cases For Looking Glasses gilt from No. 3 to No. 10 the Dozen i d ob For
Looking-Glasses ungilt, the Dozen ob
Chamlets Moyhair, and Turkey Grograms, each xv Yards i d ob Cheese the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. i d Cheese the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Cloth French
Woollen each Twenty Yards viij d Scarlet the Yard i d
Cochenele Silvester, or Campecha the Pound ob Of all other sorts the Pound id
Combs of Box or Light Wood the Groce qt. xij Dozen q Copper Bricks or Plates,
Round or Square the C. Weight iiij d Copperas the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
Corral Rough or Polisht the Mast qt. xxij l. ij d Cork the C. Weight qt. 112 l.
i d Cork the Dozen Pieces, for Shoe-makers q
D
DEal Boards of all sorts the C. qt. Six Score xij d Dogs of Earth the small
Groce qt. xij Doz. i d ob Durance of Duretty With Thread, each xv Yards i d ob
With Silk, each xv Yards ij d
Drugs Ambergris the Ounce i d ob Allosicatrina the Pound ob Barley Hull'd
the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Carway and Comin-seed the C. Weight id ob
China-roots the C. Weight qt. Five Score xviij d Civet the Ounce i d Gum
Ammoniac the C. l. qt. Score vj l Musk The Ounce i d Cods the Dozen i d
Saunders White or Red the C. qt. Five Score vj d
Treacle Common the C. qt. Five Score ij d Turpentine Com. the C. Weight qt.
112 l. i d

F
FEathers for Beds the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d Fish Cod-fish the C. qt. Six
Score iiij d Cole-fish the C qt. Six Score i d Eeles the Barrel i d Eeles Quick
the Ship Lading xs
Fish Herrings White or Red the Last vj d Lings the C. qt Six Score vj d
Lub-fish the C. qt. Six Score ij d Croplings the C. qt. Six Score i d Titlings
the C. qt. Six Score ob Sturgeon The Firkin i d The Keg ob
Salmon the Barrel i d ob
Flax C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d Flax Undrest the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob
Dressed or Wrought the C. Weight qt. 122 l. iij d
Frankincense the C. qt. 112 l. i d ob Fustians Barmillions the Piece, or two
half Pieces, qt. xv Yards each half Piece ii d Naple Fustians, Tripe, or
Velver, the Piece, qt. xv Yards ij d
Furrs Bever-Skins the Piece ob Bever-Bellies or Wombes the Dozen iiij d Budge
tawed or untawed the C. qt. V Score ij d Fox-Skins the C. qt. Five Score iiij d
Foines without Tails the Dozen i d ob

G
GAlley-Dishes each 12 Dozen i d Gauls the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d Glass for
Windows the Chest or Case iij d Glass, called Venice Drinking-Glasses the Dozen
ob Glasses Looging. Glasses Halfpenny Ware the Groce qt. 12 Doz. q Penny Ware
the Groce qt. 12 Dozen ob Of Steel small the Dozen ob Of Steel large the Dozn i
d Of Crystal small the Doz. under No. 6 i d Of Crystal middle the Doz. No. 6
ij d Of Crystal the Doz Numb. 7, 8, 9, 10. iiij d Of Crystal the Dozen No.
11, 12. xviij d Glass-Stone-plates for Spectacles rough the Doz. ob
Glass-Plates, or Sights for Looking-Glasses unsolid Of Crystal small under No.
6. the dz. ob Of Crystal No. 6. the Dozen i d Of Crystal No. 7, 8. 9, 10. the
Doz ii d Of Crystal No. 11, 12 the Doz. xij d
Gloves of Spanish Leather the Dozen Pair ob Grain for Dyers Of Scarlet Powder
the Ponnd ob Of Sevil in Berries and Grain of Portugal, or Rotta the pound q
Grocery Almonds the C. Weight qt. 112 l. iij d Anniseeds the C Weight qt. 112
l. ij d Cloves the C. Weight qt. Five Score xviij d Currants the C. Weight qt.
112 l. ij d Dates the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ii j d Figgs the C. Weight qt. 112
l. i d Fusses of Cloves the C. qt. Five Score viij d Ginger the C. qt. Five
Score xij d Liquorish the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Mace the C. l. qt. Five
Score ij s Nutmegs the C. l qt. Five Score xviij d Pepper the C. qt. Five Score
v j d Prunes the C. Weight qt 112 l. i d Raisins of the Sun the C. Weight qt.
112 l. ij. d Raisins great, or Malaga, the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Cinnamon the
C. Weight qt. Five Score xij d
Sugar Refined the C. Weight qt. 112 l. x d Candv Brown or White the C. Weight
viij d Muscavadoes and White the C. Weight iiij d St. Thome and Pennellis the
C. Weight ij d

Goats-Hair the C. l. qt. Five Score vj d Gunpowder the Barrel qt. 112 l. iij
d Gum Arabeck the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d
H
HAwks of all sorts, the Hawke, ij d Hatts Beast or Straw-Hatts the Dozn q
Beast or Straw-Hatts Plain the Groce qt. 12 Dozen i d ob Wooll-fells the Dozen
i d ob Demy-casters the Piece ob Beaver Hatts the Piece ij d
Headlings for Pipes, Hogsheads, or Barrels, the Thousand ij d Heath for
Brushes the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Hemp Undrest the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
Dressed the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d
Hides Buff-Hides the Piece ob Cow-Hides or Horse-Hides the Dozen iij d
Honey the Barrel i d ob Horses and Mares, each Horse or Mare vj d Hops the
Hundred Weight qt. 112 l. ij d
I
INdico the C. Pound qt. Five Score ij s Indico Dust the C. Pound qt. Five
Score viij d Incle Wrought the Dozen ^ound i d ob Roles the Dozen Pieces of 36
Yards each Piece i d Unwrought the C. l. qt. Five Score iiij d
Iron Wrought the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Iron Unwrought the Ton v j d Iron
Pots the Dozen i d ob
L
LAttin Vocat Shaven Lattin the C. Weight qt. 112 l. v j d Black Lattin the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. iij d
Lace Bone-lace of Thread the Dozen Yards ob Silk-Bone-lacce the Pound qt. xvj.
Ounces ijd Silk-lace of all other sorts the l. qt. ib. Ounces i d Leamonds The
Thousand i d Juice of Leamondn the Pipe vj d Pickled Leamonds the Pipe iij d
Linseed the Quarter i d Leaves of Gold the C. Leaves qt. Five Score q Lewres
for Hawks the Dozen ob
Leather Bazel Leather the Doz. Skins ob Hangings Gilt the Piece iij d Leather
for Masks the Dozen Pound ij d
Lutes the Dozen iiij d Lutestrings Catling the great Groce qt. xij small Groce
of Knots i d Minikins the Groce qt. 12 Doz. of Knots ob
Linnens British Cloth the C. Else qt. Five Score ij d Brabant Cloth, Emden
Cloth, Flemish Cloth, Freeze Cloth, Gentish Cloth, Holland Cloth, Issingham
Cloth, Overisily Cloth, Rowse Cloth, Cow-field Cloth, or Platts, each xxx Else
ij d Callicoes or Dutties the Piece ob Cambricks the whole Piece qt. xiij Else
ij d Damask for Tabling Of Holland making the Dozen Yards iiij d Of Slecia
making the Dozen Yards ij d

Linnens Damask for Towelling and Napkenning Of Holland making the Dozen Yards
i d Of Slecia making the Dozen Yards ij d
Diaper for Tabling Of Holland making the Dozen Yards i d Of Slecia making the
Dozen Yards Yards ob
Diap. for Towelling and Napkenning. Of Holland making the Dozen Yards i d Of
Slecia making the Dozen Yards ob
French Canvas and Line, Ell and half quarter broad or upwards, the C. Else qt.
Six Score iij d French or Normandy Canvas and Line, Narrow Vandales, or Vittry
Canvas, Dutch Barras and Hessens Canvas the C. Else qt. Six Score ij d Gutting
and Spruce Canvas Drillinges Pack, Duck Hinderlands, Middle good Headlock,
Muscovia Linen Narrow, Hambrough Cloth Narrow, and Irish Cloth the C. Else qt.
Six Score i d Hambrough and Slecia Cloth Broad the C. Else qt. Six Score iij d
Poldavis the Bolt i d Lawns The whole Piece qt. xiij Else ij d Callicoe Lawns
the Piece ob French Lawns the Piece ob
Lockrams the Piece of all sorts qt. 106 Else i d ob Southwick the C Else qt.
Six Score i d ob Strasbrow Linen each xxx Else i d
Linnens Striped or Tusted, Canvas, with Thread the Piece qt. xv Yards I d
Striped, Tusted, or Quilted Canvas with Silk the Piece qt. xv Yards i d
Littimus the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d

M
Malt the Quarter ob Magnus C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Masks of Velver or Satin
the Dozen i d Masts Great the Mast ij d Middle the Mast i d Small the Mast ob
Mapps Priuted the Ream id Madder Crop Madder, and all other Bale Madder the C
Weight qt. 112 l. ij d Fatt Madder the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Mull Madder
the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ob
Meal the Last qt. xij Barrels iiij d Mo^^^o Ends the dozen Pounds i d ob
O
OArs the C. qt. Six Score ij d Oars the Quarter ob Oil Civil Oil, Majorca Oil,
Minorca Oil, Province Oil, Portugal Oil, and Sallet Oil the Ton ij s vj d Rape
Oil and Linseed Oyl-the Ton ij s vj d Train Oil of Greenland or New Foundland
the Ton xvj d
Olives the Hogshead iiij d Onyons The hundred Bunches i d Seed the C. Weight
qt. 112 1. iij d
Oranges the 1000 i d Orchal the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob
P
PAck-thread the C. qt. Five Score i d ob Pans Vocat
Dripping or Frying-pans the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Warming-pans the
Dozen i d ob
Paper Brown the C. Bundles v j d Of all other sorts each Five Score Reams xx d
Pease the Quarter ob Pitch and Tar the Last iij d Plates Single, White, or
Black the C. Plates i d Double, White or Black, the C. Plates ij d
Pomegranates the thousand ij d Pork the Barrel i d ob Pots Of Earth or Stone
covered, the C. qt. Five Score i d Of Earth or Stone uncovered, the C. Cast qt.
a Gallon to every Cast, whether in one Plot or more ij d

Q
Quales the Dozen q Qick-silver the C. Pound qt. Five Score x d Quinces the C.
qt. Five Score ob
R
RApe-seed the Quarter i d Rozen the Ton viij d Rice the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i
d Rye the Quarter ob Rims for Sieves the Groce qt. 12 Doz, ob
S
SAffron the Pound ob Safflore the C. Pound qt. Five Score iiij d Salt the
Weigh ij d Saltpeter the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Says Double Says, or
Flanders Serges, the Piece iij d Hounscot Says, and Middle Says the Piece ij d
Shumack the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Silk Vocat Bridges Silk, Grenades,
Naples, Organsine, Pole and Spanish, Satin Silk, S^ear Silk, Fine and Throne
Silk, the Pound qt. xv Ounces, i d Raw China Silk the Pound qt. xxiiij Oun. i d
Ferret or Floret Silk, Fillozel, Sleave Silk course the Pound qt. xvj Ounces ob
Raw Long Silk the Pound qt. xiij Ounces ob Raw Short Silk, and Raw Morea Silk
the Pound qt. xxiiij Ounces q
Silk-Stockins the Pair ob Silk Boradoes of Silk, Catalopha, China, Damask
Silk, Chamlet, China Grogram, Tabby Grogram, Phillosellas Narrow, Tabbies of
Silk Towers, Taffaty, the Dozen Yards ij d Silk Grogram Narrow, Silk say
Calunaucocs and Phillosellas Broad, the Dozen Yards iij d Silk Grograms Broad,
Caff or Damask the Dozen Yards iiij d
Silk Wrought Sattins Bolonia, Lukes, Jean, and other of like making, the Doz.
Yards vj d Bridges Satin, China and Turkey Satin the Dozen Yards i d ob

Silk Wrought Sarcenetts Of Bolonia or Florence the Dozen Else i d ob Of China
the Dozen Else i d
Cypres Of Silk Broad the Doz. Yards ob Of Silk Narrow, each xxiiij Yards ob
Taffaties Ell Broad each Doz. Yards ij d China and Levant, each Dozen Yards ob
Velvets China Velvet, each Doz. Yards i d All other Velvets or Plushes each
Dozen Yards vj d

Skins Cordovant Skins the Dozen ij d Goat Skins in the Hair the Dozen i d Kid
Skins of all sorts the C. qt. Five score iij d
Smalts the C. Pound qt. Five Score iiij d Spars Bonnispars the C. qt. Five
Score iij d Cantspars the C. qt. Six score ij d Small Spars the C. qt. Six
score i d
Stones Dog-stones the Last vj d Marble-stones the Ton viij d Millstones the
Piece vj d Quern-stones the Last ijd
Sword-blades the Dozen id Staves Pipe or Hogshead Staves the Thousand vj d
Barrel Staves the Thousand iij d Firkin Staves the Thousand i d ob
Steell Long Steell, Wisp Steell, and such like, the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d
Gad Steel the half Barrel iiij d
Succads Wet or Dry the C. qt. Five Score x d Syder the Ton iiij d
T
TAllow the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Tapistry With Hair the C. Flemish Else qt.
5 score iiij d With Wool the C. Flemish Else qt. 5 score vj d With Caddas the
C. Flem. Else qt. v score xij d With Silk the Dozen Flemish Else ij d
Tarras the Barrel q Tazells the Thousand q Tykes of all sorts the Tyke i d ob
Thread Bridges Thread the Dozen l. i d Outnal Thread the Dozen l. i d
Whited-brown, or Piecing Thread, the Dozen l. i d ob Sisters Thread the l. ob
Lions or Paris Thread the Bale qt. C. Polts viij d
Tobacco Spanish Verins, Brazil Tobacco the C. qt. five score ij s St.
Christophers Tobacco, or the like, the C. qt. five score ij d
Tow the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ob Tyles vocat Pan-tyles, or Flanders Tyles the
Thousand ij d
W
WAx the C. Weight qt. 112 l. iv d Wainscot the C. qt. five score v j d
Whale-sins the Dozen Fins i d Wheat the Quarter Eight Bushels i d Woad Island
Woad the Ton xij d Tholose Woad the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
Wood Box-wood the Thousand Pieces ij d Brazill or Fernando Buck-wood the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. iij d Brazeletto or Jemaica Wood the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
Fustick the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ob Red or Guinny Wood the C. Weight qt. 112 l.
ij d Sipeet-wood of East India the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
Wool Beaver Wool the Pound i d Cotton Wool the C. qt. five score ii j d
Irish Combed the C. qt. five score iiij d Uncombed the C. qt. 112 l. ij d
Estridge Wool the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i j d Polonia Wool the C. Weight qt.
112 l. iij d French Wool the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ij d Lambs Wool the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. iij d Spanish Wool the C. Weight qt. 112 l. iiij d Red Wool
the Pound q Wire, Vocat Lattin VVyer, and all other VVyer, the C. Weight iiij
d Wine Eager the Ton vj d VVines Gascoyne and French VVines, and all other
Wines of the Growth of the French Kings Dominion, the Ton ij s Rhenish Wine
the Awm vj d Muskadell, and all other VVines of the Growth of the Levant, the
Butt xij d Sack, Canaries, Malagaes, Maderaes, Romneys, Bastards, Tents and
Allicants, the or Pipe xij d

Y
YArn Cable Yarn the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Camel Grogram, or Moyhair Yarn
the C. qt. Five score l. xviij d Cotton Yarn the C. l. qt. Five Score iiij d
Irish Yarn the Pack qt. Four C. Weight at Six Score l. to the C. i j d Raw
Linen Yarn Dutch or French, the C. 1. qt. Five score iiij d Spruce or Muscovia
Yarn, the C. Weight at 112 l. ij d

All other Goods not mentioned in this TABLE, shall pay for Scavage Duties
Inward, after the Rate of One Penny in the Pound, according as they are
Expressed or Valued in His Majesty's late Book of RATES. And all other not
Expressed therein shall pay the same Rates, according to the true Value.

THE BALLIAGE DUTIES OUTWARD.
BEer the Ton iiij d Canvas the Hundred Else at six score ij d Coals the
Chaldron i d Drapery Broad Cloth the Piece i d ob Kersies of all sorts the
Piece ob Perpetuannoes the Piece ob Stuffs Woollen or Worsted the single Piece
ob Stuffs Woollen or Worsted the double Piece i d
Dying Commodities Cochinele the C. qt. five score vij d Indico the C. qt. five
score iiij d Wood of all sorts for Dyers the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d
Fustians English making, each fifteen yards ob Grocery Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs,
or Cinnamon the C. qt. five score vj d Pepper or Ginger the C. qt. five score ij
d Raisins the Piece of Frail ob Raisins of the Sun the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d
Iron The Ton unwrought v j d Wrought the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d
Lamprones the Thousand ob Lead the Fodder vj d Saffron the Pound ob Salt the
Wey ij d Saltpeter the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d Silk Raw or Throne the Pound
qt. sixteen Ounces q Skins and Furrs Skins and Furrs Bever-skins the C. qt.
five score xviij d Badger-skins the C. qt. five score vj d Coney-skins Black
the C. qt. five score ij d Cat-skins the C. qt. five score ij d Fox-skins the
C. qt. five score vj d Fitches the Timber i d Morkins the C. qt. six score ij d
Otter-skins the C. qt. five score vj d Sheep or Lamb-skins the C. qt. six score
ij d Squerril-skins the thousand i d
Tyn or Pewter the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Wax the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d
Wool of all sorts the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d
Other Merchandise, Liquid and Dry, that are not particularly rated in this
Table, shall pay Balliage Duties Outward by their Bulk as follows:
A Great Pack, Truss or Fardel, containing betwixt fifteen or twenty Clothes,
or other Goods to that proportion xviij d An ordinary Pack, Truss or Fardel,
containing in bigness about ten or twelve Clothes, or twelve or fourteen Bays,
or to the like proportion, in Freezes, Cottons, or other Goods xij d A Bale
containing three or four Cloths, or four or five Bays, or the like proportion,
in other Goods vj d For a great Maund or great Basket viij d For a small Maund
or Basket, Poize three hundred weight or under viij d For a Hamper or Coffer,
Poize two hundred weight or under iij d For a Butt or Pipe viij d For a
Hogshead or Puncheon iiij d For a Barrel j d For a Firkin ii d For a Dry Fatt
viij d For a Drum Fatt iiij d For a Bale vj d For a great Chest or great Case
viij d For a small Chest or Case, Poize three hundred weight or under iiij d
For a small Box ij d For a great Trunk vj d For a small Trunk, Poize not above
two hundred weight iij d For a Bag or Sack iiij d For a Seron iij d
THE PACKAGE TABLE OF RATES.
A
ARnetto the C. qt. five score iij d Aquavitae the Hogshead iiij d Argal White
or Red the C. weight qt 112 l. i d ob Ashes Ashes, Potashes the Barrel, qt.
two hundred weight ij d Soap Ashes the Last xij d
Aule Blades for Shoe-makers the thousand ob
B
BArrilla or Saffora the Barrel, qt. two hundred weight iiij d Beer the Ton vj
d Birding Shot-lead the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Books the Maund xij d Bottles
of Glass covered with Leather, the dozen i d Birmstone the C. weight qt. 112 l.
i d Brushes the dozen ob Broken Glass the Barrel q Buttons Vocat Brass, Steel,
Copper, or Lattin Buttons the great Groce qt. xij small Groce i d Hair Buttons
the great Groce i d Silk Buttons the great Groce ob Thread Buttons the great
Groce q
Buckweed the Quarter i d Buckromes of all sorts the dozen Pieces ij d
C
CAps for Sailors, Monmouth and others the doz. i d Canary Seed the Bushel ob
Cloaks Old the Piece ob Copperas the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Cochenele
Silvester or Campecha the Pound ob Of all other sorts the Pound i d
Cobweb Lawns each fifteen yards i d
D
DRugs vocat Assafetida, Gum Armoniack, Gumlack, Olibanum, and Sassafras Wood,
the C. qt. five score vj d Cassia Fistula the C. qt. five score viij d Cassia
Lignea the C. l. qt. five score viij d Cubebs the C. qt. five score vj d Rubarb
the Pound i d Scamony the Pound i d

E
ELephant Teeth the C. qt. five score iiij d Estridge Feathers the pound
undrest ob
F
FIleings of Iron, called Swarfe, the Batrel ij d Flasks of Horn the dozen i d
Flax dressed the C. weight qt. 112 l. iiij d Flax undrest the C. weight qt. 112
l. ij d Frankincense the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Fish Herrings full or
shotten the Last vj d Stock Fish of all sorts the Last vj d
Fustians English Million the Piece, qt. two half Pieces of fifteen yards the
Piece i d Venetian English make, each fifteen yards i d

G
Gauls the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Glue the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d Glovers
Clipping the Maund or Basket i d ob Grains Scarlet Powder, and of Sevil in
Berries, and Grain of Portugal or Rotta the C. 1. ij s vj d Grain French or
Guinny the C. l. iiij d
Garble Of Cloves the C. qt. five score iiij d Of Almonds the C. weight qt. 112
l. i d Of Ginger the C. l. qt. five score i d Of Mace the C. qt. five score ix
d Of Pepper the C. qt. five score iij d
Gloves Buck Leather the dozen pair i d Gloves with Silk Fringe and faced with
Taffaty the dozen pair i d Gloves lined with Coney or Lamb skins, or plain, the
dozen pair ob
Grocery Vocat Almonds the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Anniseeds the C. weight
qt. 112 l. ij d Cloves the C. weight qt. five sco^e xij d Currants the C.
weight qt. 112 l. iij d Dates the C. weight qt. 112 l. iiij d Figgs the C.
weight qt. 112 l. ob Ginger the C. weight qt. five score ix d Licorish the C.
weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Mace the C. pound qt. five score xviij d Nutmegs the
C. l. qt. five score xiij d Prunes the C. weight qt. 112 l. ob Raisins great
and Maligo the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d Raisins of the Sun the C. weight qt.
112 l. ij d Sugar Candy the C. weight qt. 112 l. viij d Sugar of St. Thome and
Pannellis the C. weight qt. 112 l. iij d Sugar of all sorts the C. weight qt.
112 l. vj d Cinnamon the C. l. qt. five score xij d

H
HEmp the C. weight qt. 112 l i d ob Hatts Bever Hatts the Piece ij d
Demi-casters the Piece i d Felt Hatts Plain the dozen i d ob Felt Hatts lined
or faced the dozen ij d
Hair Coney Hair the C. qt. five score iiij d Hair of Goats or Kids the C.
weight qt. five score iiij d Ox or Cow-tail Hair the C. weight qt. 112 l. ob
Horns Ink-horns the small Groce qt. 12 dozen ob Horns of Lanthorn the thousand
Leaves ij d Tipps of Horns the thousand i d
Hops the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d
D
INdico of all sorts the C. l. qt. five score xij d Indico Dust the l. qt. five
score vj d India Hides the C. qt. five score xviij d Irish Rugs the Piece i d
Iron the Ton un wrought vj d Iron wrought the C. weight i d Iron Spurs the
dozen pair i d Ivory Combs the dozen pound ij d
K
LOndon Knives ordinary the small Groce iij d Sheffield Knives the small Groce
i d ob Shoemakers Pareing Knives the small Groce ob
L
LAce Bone-lace of Thread the dozen yards ob Silk-lace the pound qt. sixteen
Ounces i d ob
Lamparnes the thousand i d ob Lead the Fodder viij d Leamonds pickled the Pipe
iij d Leamonds Juice the Pipe vj d Linseed the Quarter ob Linen Callicoe the
Piece ob Cambricks two half Pieces xiij Else i d ob Damask for Tabling of all
sorts, the dozen yards ij d Damask for Towelling and Napkenning, of all other
sorts the dozen yards i d Diaper of all sorts for Tabling, the dozen yards i d
Diaper for Towelling and Napkenning of all other sorts, the dozen yards ob
Lawns the Piece qt. xiij Else i d ob Linen Cloth, called Brabant, Emden,
Flemish Freeze, Gentish Holland, Isingham, Overifilis and Rows Cloth, each 30
Else ij d French or Normandy Canvas the C. Else qt. six score iij d Dutch
Barras, Hessens and Vittry Canvas the C. Else qt. six score iij d Canvas
tusted, stripped or quilted with Copper, Silk or Thread, or such like, the Piece
qt. fifteen yards i d
Linen Shreds the Maund ij d
M
MAdder, all but Mull Madder, the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Mellasses the
Hogshead iiij d Mustard Seed the C. weight qt. 112 l. ob
N
NAils Chair Nails, Brass or Copper the 1000 ob Copper Nails, Rose Nails and
Saddle Nails, the sum qt. 10000 ob

O
Oker Red or Yellow the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d Onion-seed the C. weight qt.
112 l. iiij d Orchal the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d Oxe-Bones the thousand i d
Oxe-Guts the Barrel ij d Oil Civil Oil, Majorca Oil, Minorca Oil, Province Oil,
Portugal Oil, Linseed Oil, or Rape Oil the Ton xvj d Train or Whale Oil the Ton
viij d

P
PAper printed, or Copy Paper, the C. Reams qt. five score xviij d Pewter the
C. weight qt. 112 l. iiij d
R
RApeseed the Quarter i d Rape Cakes the thousand ob Red Lead the C. weight qt.
112 l. i d Red Earth the C. weight qt. 112 l. ob Rice the C. weight qt. 112 l.
i d Rozen the Ton vj d
S
SAffron the pound i d Salt the weigh ij d Saltpeter the C. weight qt. 112 l.
ij d Seamorse Teeth the C. weight qt. five score x d Sea Coals the Chaldron
iiij d Stockings Children Stockins the dozen pair ob Kerksey or Leather
Stockings the dozen pair i d Silk Stockings the pair ob Worsted Stockings the
dozen pair ij d Woollen knit Stockings the doz. pair i d ob
Shumack the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Skins and Furrs Badger-skins the C. qt.
five score vj d Bever-skins the C. qt. five score ij s vj d Cat-skins the C.
qt. five score iiij d Calve-skins the C. qt. five score viij d Coney-skins
gray, tawed, seasoned, or stag the C. qt. six score ij d Coney-skins Black the
C. qt. six score ij d ob Elk-skins the piece ob Fitches the Timber i d
Skins and Furrs Fox-skins the C. qt. five score viij d Jennet-skins Black,
seasoned or raw ob Kid-skins the C. qt. five score ij d Lamb-skins tawed or in
Oil the C. qt. six score vj d Morkins tawed or raw the C. qt. six score iiij d
Otter-skins the C. qt. five score viij d Rabbet-skins the C. qt. five score i d
Sheepskins the C. qt. six score vj d Sheep-pelts the C. qt. five score iij d
Squerril-skins the thousand iij d
Silk of all sorts raw the l. of xv j Ounces i d Silk Nubs, or Husks of Silk
the C. l. qt. xxj Ounces to a pound iiij d Silk English Throne the l. qt. xvj
Ounces i d Silver Vocat Quicksilver, the hundred qt. five score viij d Slip
the Barrel i d Stuffs vocat Buffins the Piece Broad qt. 14 yards ij d Buffins
the Piece Narrow qt. 14 yards i d Bridgewaters the Piece ij d Carral the Piece
i d Cametians the Piece qt. 25 yards ij d Chamblets or Grograms the Piece, qt.
about 14 or 15 yards ij d Damafellours, or Damasins the Piece ij d Durance the
Piece i d Dimaty, each 30 yards i d Floramedas the Piece i d Fugaratoes the
Piece ij d Hangings of Bristow, or stripped Stuff, the Piece iiij d
Lindsey-woollsey the Piece i d ob
Stuffs vocat Liles the Piece, Broad or Narrow, not above 15 yards ij d
Mockadoes double the Piece qt. 28 yards ij d Mockadoes single or tufted the
Piece qt. 14 yards i d Mohair the Piece qt. about 15 yards i d ob Messellawny
the Picce qt. 30 yards i d Perpetuanoes the Piece Ell Broad ij d ob Paragon or
Paropas the Piece ij d Piramides or Maramuffe the Piece Narrow id Piramides or
Maramuffe the Broad Piece ij d Rashes of all sorts the Piece, about 24 yards
iiij d Says, called Hounscot or Mild the Piece iij d Says of all other sorts,
the Piece ij d ob Serges double the Piece yard Broad qt. 24 yards iij d
Soap Hard Castle the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d The Barrel iij d
Spectacles without Cases the Groce 12 dozen ob Succads wet or dry the C. l.
qt. five score viij d
T
TAllow the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d Tapistry With Hair the C. Flemish Else qt.
5 score iiij d With Wool the C. Flemish Else qt. 5 score vj d With Caddas the
C. Flem. Else qt. 5 score xij d With Silk the Dozen Flemish Else ij d
Taffaty Taffaty Ell Broad the dozen yards ij d Silk Taffaty Broad the dozen
yards iiij d Silk Taffaty Narrow the dozen yards ij d
Thread White or Brown, or Colored, the doz. yards i d Thread Points the great
Groce ob Tiffany each dozen yards i d Tobacco Spanish Tobacco the C. qt. five
score ij s Of all other sorts the C. qt. five score vj d
Tyn Tyn unwrought the C. weight qt. 112 l. iij d ob Tyn wrought the C. weight
qt. 112 l. iiij d

V
VElures English the single Piece ij d English the double Piece ij d
Vinegar of Wine the Ton ij d ob
W
WAx English Wax the C. weight qt. 112 l. iiij d English Hard Wax the C. weight
qt. five score viij d
Woollen Bays single the Piece ij d Bays double the Piece iiij d Bays, called
Minikin Bays, the Piece vj d Broad Cloth the short Piece qt. 24 yards vj d
Broad Cloth the long Piece qt. 32 yards viij d Cotton of all sorts the C. Goads
vj d Devonshire Dozens the Piece i d Fizadoes the Piece iij d
Drapery vocat Kersies of all sorts the Piece ij d Lifts of Cloth the thousand
yards vj d Northern Dozens the single Piece iij d Northern Dozens the double
Piece vj d Penny-stones the Piece ij d Spanish Cloth English making, each 20
yards vj d
Wastcoats Of Kersey or Flannel the Dozen ij d Of Woollen Knit the Dozen iiij d
Of Worsted Knit the Piece ob Wrought with Cruel the Piece q Wrought with Silk
the Piece i d
Wool Cotton Wool the C. qt. five score iij d Estridge Wool the C. weight
qt. 112 l. ij d French Wool the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Spanish Wool the C.
weight qt. 112 l. iiij d
Worm-seed the C. pound qt. five score vj d Wood Box-wood the C. weight qt. 112
l. ob Brazel-wood the C. weight qt. 112 l. iij d Ebony-wood the C. weight qt.
112 l. i d ob Fustick-wood the C. weight qt. 112 l. ob Red-wood the C. weight
qt. 112 l. i d ob
Wines French Wines of all sorts the Ton viij d Muskadels and Wines of the
Levant the Butt vj d Sacks, Canaries, Maderoes, Romneys, and Hullucks, the Butt
or Pipe vj d
Cotton Yarn the C. qt. five score iiij d Grogram or Moyhair Yarn the C. qt.
five score xviij d Raw Linen Yarn of all sorts the C. weight qt. five score
iiij d
All other Goods not mentioned in this Table, shall pay for Paccage Duties
after the rate of One Penny in the Pound, according as they are expressed or
valued in His Majesty's late Book of Rates; and all other not expressed therein
shall pay the same rate, according to their value.

For every Entry in the Packers Book, for writing Bills to each Entry Outward,
as usually they have done xijd

The Strangers shall pay the Laboring Porters for making up of their Goods, at
their own charge, as always they have done.

The Strangers shall pay the Waterside Porter, belonging to the Paccage Office,
such Fees and Duties, for Landing and Shipping their Goods, as they have
usually paid within these ten years last past.

THE PACKERS Waterside-PORTERS TABLE OF DUTIES For Landing Strangers GOODS, and
the like DUTIES or RATES to be paid unto them for Shipping out their GOODS.
IMPRIMIS for a Butt of Currants xvj d For a Carratel of Currants viij d For a
Quarter Roll of Currants iiij d For a Bag of Currants iiij d For Pieces of
Raisins the Ton xx d For a Barrel of Raisins iiij d For all sorts of Puncheons
vj d For a Barrel of Figs ij d For Tapnets and Frails of Figs per Ton xx d For
Brazil or other Wood for Dying, per Ton xx d For Iron the Ton xiiij d For
Copperas the Ton xiiij d For Oil, Wine, or Vinegar per Ton xiiij d For Hemp and
Flax the Last xx d For loose Flax and Tow C. weight ij d For a great Bag of Tow
viij d For a small Bag of Tow iiij d For a great Bag of Hopps viij d For a
Packet or little Bag of Hopps iiij d For Packs, Trusses, Fiats, or Maunds per
Piece viij d For a great Chest viij d For a small Chest iiij d For all Cases,
Barrels, or Bales per Piece iiij d For a Bale of Madder viij d For a Bale of
Ginger, Shumack, qt. 400 weight viij d For a Faggot of Steel i d For any
Serrions the Piece iiij d For a Fat of Potashes viij d For a Last of
Sope-ashes xij d For a Last of Pitch or Tar xij d For a Last of Fish xij d For
Wainscots the C. qt. six score v s For Clapboards the C. qt. six score vj d For
Deal Boards the Hundred qt. six score xvj d For a great Mast v s For a middle
Mast ij s vj d For a small Mast xv d For great Balks the C. qt. six score v s
For middle Balks the C qt. six score ij s vj d For small Balks the C. qt. six
score xv d For a Millstone v s For a Dog-stone ij s vj d For a Woolf-stone ij
s For a Yard-stone iij d For a Grindle-stone xij d For a Step-stone or
Gravestone viij d For Quern-stones the Last xij d For Emry-stones the Ton
xiiij d For x C. weight of Holland Cheese xij d For Rozen the Ton xiiij d For
Woad the Ton xiiij d For a Chest of Sugar vj d For half Wainscots the C. qt.
six score ij s vj d For raw Hides the C. qt. five score v s For Bonnispars the
C. qt. six score vj d For small Spars the C. qt. six score iiij d For Ends of
Bonnispars the C. qt. six score ix d For a Horse, Gelding, or Mare ij s vj d
For Allom the Ton xx d For Health for Brushes the C. weight qt. 112 l. i d For
Iron Pots the dozen iij d For Rings of Wire loose the Ring ob For Pipe staves
the thousand ij s vj d For Rhenish Wine the Awm vj d For Bur-stones the C. qt.
five score ijs vj d For half Packs of Tazels the Piece iiij d For Wicker
Bottles the dozen ob For Stone the C. qt. five score i d For loose Fish the C.
Landing iij d For a Barrel of Salmon ij d For a Barrel of Stubb Eeles ij d For
a Bundle of Basket-Rods ob For a Ton of Cork xx d For a thousand of Oxe-bones
xi j d For a thousand Tips of Horns vj d For a thousand of Shank-bones xij d
For Brimstone the Ton loose xv d For a Fodder of Lead xiiij d For Rimes for
Sieves the Load xij d For a Load of Fans xij d For a Load of Bulrushes viij d
For a hundred Ream of Paper loose xij d For a Barrel of Tarras ij d For a
Barrel of Ling ij d For a Keg of Sturgeon ob For Iron Backs of Chimneys the
Piece i d For a C. weight of Elephants-teeth i d For Copper and Iron Plates per
Piece ob For a hundred small Barrels of Blacking xij d For a dozen of Scales i
d For a C. of Oars ij s vj d For every xx Sugar Flags iiij d For a Barrel of
Shot iiij d For a Bundle of Canes i d For a Cage of Quails iiij d For a Cage of
P^esants iiij d For a Winch of Cable Yarn iiij d For a Firkin of Shot ij d
All other Goods not mentioned in this Table, shall pay Portage Duties as other
Goods do of like Bulk or Condition herein expressed.

Note, this Character qt. signifies containing: ob stands for a Halfpenny (
and not Six Pence) q stands for a Farthing, i d a Penny, and v j for Six Pence,
and xviij d for Eighteen Pence, throughout these Tables.

NOW KNOW YE, That We, at the humble Petition of the Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of Our City of London aforesaid, of Our special Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion; and for diverse good Causes and Considerations, Us,
hereunto, e-specially moving, all and singular the Letters Patents, Charters
and Confirmations aforesaid; and all and singular the Gifts, Grants,
Confirmations, Restitutions, Customs, Ordinances, Explanations, Articles; and
all other things whatsoever in the said Letters Patents, Charters, Grants and
Confirmations, or any of them, contained, recited, specified, confirmed,
explained or mentioned; and all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Offices,
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Liberties, Franchises, Freedoms,
Immunities, Liberties, Customs, and Hereditaments whatsoever, which the said
Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, of Our City of London, or their
Predecessors, by the Name of the Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City
of London; or by the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens, and Commonalty of
London; or by the Name of the Mayor and Citizens of London; or by the Name of
the Mayor and Commonalty of the City of London, or by the Name of the Citizens
of the City of London, or by the Name of the Barons of London, or by the Name
of the Barons of the City of London; or by any other Name whatsoever, by reason
or force of the said Letters Patents, Charters or Confirmations before
mentioned; or of any Use or Uses, Prescription or Prescriptions, or any other
lawful means whatsoever, at any time or times heretofore, have had, or
reasonably used or exercised (except, as above is excepted) ratifying, and
gratefully for Us, Our Heirs and Successors (as much as in Us lies) accepting
and approving, do them, and every of them, to the said Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of Our City of London aforesaid, and their Successors, ratify
and confirm by these presents, TO HAVE hold, enjoy, and exercise, all and
singular the Premises aforesaid (except before excepted) to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of Our City of London aforesaid, and their Successors
for ever, as fully, freely, and entirely, and in as ample manner and form, as
the same are abovementioned, to be given or granted, or as the same otherwise
by Use, Prescription, or any Legal Way or Right whatsoever, have been
heretofore respectively had, obtained, or enjoyed, as if the same were
seperately, singly, and nominally in and by these presents expressed, named,
decl^red, granted, and manifested. AND FURTHER, We will, and by these presents
We do, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors; Grant to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, and their Successors,
that these Our Letters Patents, shall be in and by all things, according to the
true intent thereof, good, firm, valid, and effectual in the Law,
NOTWITHSTANDING any mis-naming, or any ill or false naming, or recital in the
same contained; or any Statute, Ordinances, Provision, Proclamation, or
Restriction heretofore in any wise had or made. WE will also, etc. without any
Fine in Our Hanaper, etc. Although express mention, etc. WITNESS Our Self at
Westminster the 24th Day of June, in the 15th Year of Our Reign.

FINIS.

