Imago pulcra Est. picta sculptoris manu*
At pulcriorem dat libris Author suis*
Hic Corpus* Illis ipsa Men's depingitur
Imo Vniuersi Men's and Ipsius simul
C. B.


THE IMMORTALITY OF THE HUMAN SOUL, Demonstrated by the Light of NATURE.

In Two DIALOGUES.

(...), etc. Arist. 2* de Generat. Animal. LONDON, Printed by William Wilson
for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the
Anchor in the Lower-walke, in the New-Exchange. 1659.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lord Marquess of DORCHESTER, EARL of KINGSTON,
VICOUNT NEW ARK, LORD I'IERPOINT, and Manvers, etc.
My most Honored Lord,
AS in the Firmament, or Ethereal region of the Great World, the Creator has
placed two great Lights, the one to rule the Day, the other to rule the Night:
So, (to constitute a perfect Analogy or correspondence) in the Firmament or
Celestial part of the Lesser World, Man, has He placed two great Truths (the
proper Lights of the Soul) the one to rule the Day, or Life of Man; the other
to dispel the horrid darkness of his Night, Death. And these are those twin-like
proleptical Notions of the Being of the Deity, and of the Immortality of the
Human Soul. I call them Twin-like Proleptical Notions, because, as the Sun and
Moon were made together, so were these implanted at once in the Mind of the
First Man, and have as constantly shined in the region of every man's Soul
since, as those have done in the Heavens, however the opacity of terrene
Objects and Corporeal Affections may seem sometimes to eclipse them: and
because, as the Sun does communicate its light to the Moon, so does the Former
of these super-excellent Notions, illuminate the Latter; the knowledge of the
Immortality of the Soul, receiving illustration, if not absolute dependence,
from the knowledge of the Existence of God.

The Consideration hereof (may it please your Lordship) as it engaged me, some
years since, to endeavor the Demonstration of the Existence of God; so has it
now of late importuned and prevailed upon me, to attempt the Demonstration of
the Immortality of Men's Souls, by pure and sincere Reason: To the end, that
such as doubt of either, may be convinced of the extreme folly and absurdity of
their unbelief; and such as firmly believe both, may be corroborated in their
true persuasions, observing the Testimony of the Light of Nature to make a
perfect Symphonie and concordance with thatof Authority Divine. A Design,
certainly, neither inconsistent with the genuine zeal of a Christian, nor
unworthy the most serious speculation of a Philosopher: And were I as well
assured, that I have not fallen much short of what might be expected from me,
in the capacity of the Latter, as I am, that I have not in the least
transgressed the sacred bounds of the Former; I should with more reason hope
your Lordships Approbation of my performance therein, than the sense of my own
insufficiency will permit me now to entertain. And, therefore, though perhaps
my Reasonings have not attained to that perfection and exquisite Rigor, as to
satisfy those immoderately Curious Wits of our Age, who think it much beneath
them, to acquiesce in any other Evidence but that of Demonstrations Geometrical
(of which notwithstanding, the Argument of these my Discourses is absolutely
incapable; as I have therein manifested, by clear and undeniable reason); Yet I
may comfort my self with this, that my present Undertaking will be Acceptable
to as many, as reflect upon the Piety and Good Intention of it; and my Proofs
sufficiently Persuasive for all such, who come not to examine the force of them
with invincible Prejudice, and resolution not to be convinced.

But, lest I should seem to anticipate your Lordships Judgment, which being
most profound, cannot but be also most Equitable; it becomes me rather to
excuse this my exceeding Presumption, in daring to invoke the Patronage of so
Illustrious a Person as your Lordship, to so ill-composed a work* as this is;
which (with all conceivable Humility and Devotion of Spirit) I here lay at your
feet. Truly, My Lord, I have so many Reasons to allege, in defense of this my
Ambition, that, should I insist upon but the one half of them, this sheet would
swell into a Volume greater than the Book it self, which it now ushers to your
View. Let it suffice, therefore, I most humbly beseech you, that, had I had no
inclinations in my self to this way of testifying my Reverence and Admiration
of your Lordships Eminency, both in the Quality of your Person, and Perfections
of your Mind; yet the very rules of common Prudence, and Law of Decency would
not have permitted me to make this Address to any other, but your self* For,

When I reflect upon Greatness of Condition; instantly my thoughts fix upon
your Lordship as one, whom your high Birth, and higher Merits (assisted by the
favor of Heaven) have elevated to a sublime sphere of Honor, wherein, among
the Nobility of the First Magnitude, you shine with dazzling luster, such as
strikes the eyes of all below with solemn Veneration, and excites a noble
Emulation in those Few that move in the same orb of Dignity with you.

If I consider greatness of Virtue; I need look no further then upon your
Lordship, in whom all Heroical Virtues are so transcendently conspicuous, that
they seem to be Essentially concentred in your very Nature, and as if they were
therein met together, on purpose to show the world, How glorious a thing may
result from such a Conflux of Great and Good.

If I respect Greatness of Judgment; whither, even in this Age of Light, should
I go but to your Lordship? Who, having with continued industry cultivated that
fertile and capacious field of your Mind, and planted it with all the most
useful Notions in Theology, Metaphysics, Physics, Medicine, Law Civil and
Common, the Mathematics, and other Arts and Sciences; have at length reaped so
rich a Harvest of General Knowledge, as might alone plentifully maintain the
whole Commonwealth of Letters. Insomuch as all men are ready to confess, that
if there be an Universal Oracle in the World, for the solving all Difficulties
in Learning, You are it: Nor does any thing restrain them from accusing you of
Engrossing all Science to your self, but your rare Affability, and promptness
to impart it to others.

Should I look forth for the Chiefest Patron of Learned Men; the Common People
themselves, daily observing so great a Confluence of men of the Long Roab, to
the place of your residence, and those too the most eminent in their several
Faculties, would soon direct me to your Lordship: And your Favor of Scholars
is become so notorious, that I have heard it urged as a chief Cause, why
Learning has of late found such admirable Advancement in our Nation,
notwithstanding the check of our unhappy Civil Wars.

In fine, should I consult my own particular Obligations; Gratitude it self
would rise up and enjoin me to make this Oblation only to your Lordship; since
from you alone I have received more both of Encouragement and Assistance in my
studies, than from the whole World beside; so that, indeed, your Right to this
Homage I now make to your Lordship, does wholly take away the Freedom of it.

What I have said, My Lord, though (I fear me) scarce agreeable to your severe
Modesty; is yet fully agreeable with Truth, and as well known as your Name; and
therefore, without offending the Law of Decency (as I said before) I ought not
to have permitted this Treatise to venture abroad into the common Aer, without
that Advantage and Protection, which your, and only your Patronage can give it*
Nor would Policy have advised me otherwise: for, albeit among my Readers, many
may chance to dislike the Book it self; yet, sure I am, most will like it much
the better, for carrying so illustrious a Name in the Epistle; and the severest
Critics cannot but commend my judgment in the Dedication.

Notwithstanding all these Inducements alleageable in favor of my Boldness, I
think it safer to cast my self entirely upon your Lordships Charity, for a
Forgiveness of it, than to trust in their importance, how grea soever it may
seem. And therefore, without being further rude, in disturbing your thoughts
from things of more weight and concernment; I most humbly beg your Lordships
gracious Acceptance of this public acknowledgment, I here make, of that
infinite Observance and Thankfulness, which is due to you from,

My most Honored LORD your Lordships most humble, most obedient, and most
faithful Servant W: CHARLETON:

The Errors of the Press, that have escaped the Eye of the Corrector, though
but few and venial, are yet not so soon excused, as mended, by reading
Affectation for affection, in the 10. line of the 10. page.

And, for ane, in 22. l. of the 25. page.

Coppices, for Coppies, in the 2. l. of the 30. page.

Silence, for silense, in the 1. l. of the 62. page.

Contrast, for Contract, in the 9. l. of the 71. page.

Demonstrateth it self, for demonstrate thits self in the 19. l. of the 72.
page.

Immaterial, for immortal, in the 1. l. of the 85. page.

Nightly, for mightly, in the 14. l. of the 127. page.

No other encouragment, for no other other, and in the 1. l. of the 138. page.

Obelisckes, for obeliks, in the 1. l. of the 139. page.

Contrast, for Contract, in the 18. l. of the 153. page.

Make, for moke, in the 22. l. of the 165 page*

An Advertisement to the READER.
AMong the Ancient Philosophers (as you may remember) nothing was more
frequent, than to deliver their opinions and documents, as well Physical as
Moral, in the plain and familiar way of Dialogue; and the Reasons, that induced
them thereunto, are not unworthy consideration. For, besides the opportunity
both of commemorating their worthy Friends, and of introducing several
occasional and digressive speculations, that might be, perhaps, nor less
grateful, nor less useful, than the principal Argument proposed; they thereby
gave themselves the advantage of freely alleging the various and different
Conceptions and Persuasions of Men, concerning the subject, which they had
designed to discuss: Which in the stricter method of Positive and Apodictical
Teaching, they could not with equal convenience do; And how much better we may
judge of the truth of any Theorem, when we have heard as well the principal
Reasons that impugn, as those that assert it, is obvious to common
observation. Hereunto may be added, that a Discourse digested into the form of
a familiar Conference, does by its variety delight, and by its natural freedom
and familiarity more gently insinuate it self into the Mind; as is assured by
Experience. New, when you have reflected upon these Considerations, you clearly
understand what were the main Motives, which induced the Author of this
Treatise, to dispose his Collections and solitary Meditations, on this
excellent subject, the Immortality of Men's Souls, into a Dialogue consisting of
Three Persons, the one Propugning, another Impugning that most comfortable
Tenent, and the third impartially Determining their Differences. But yet (as I
have heard) He had one inducement more to this manner of writing; and that was,
that being not long since in France, and invited to discourse of the same
Argument, He delivered the substance of all that is here spoken by one of the
Interlocutors (viz. Athanasius) in a free Colloquy, betwixt Himself and two of
his honored Friends, as they were recreating and reposing themselves in
Luxenburg Garden in Paris. So that in the Circumstances of this Confabulation,
there is nothing of Fiction, besides that of Names proper to each of the
Speakers. And, as for those; the Parts they bear in the Discourse, sufficiently
discover their Derivations.

Henry Herringman.

The Contents in Scheme.
The Immortality of the Human Soul is Demonstrated by Reasons.
1 Physical, desumed from her 1 Operations, viz 1. Volition or Willing 1 Her
proper and most agreeable Object, which is Bonum Honestum, repugnant (for the
most part) to Bonum Delectabile and Sensibile. 2 Freely, and upon deliberation.
2 Intellection 1 Pure, or distinct from Imagination 2 Reflex, in which she
understands her self to be Intellectual, and her own Intelligence. 3 Of
Universals, abstracted* from Singularity* Matter.


2 Objects which are all things Corporeal. Incorporcal, and those most properly*

2 Moral, desumed from the 1 Univerall Consent of all Men, of all Ages,
Nations* Religions. 2 Appetite of Immortality naturally inherent in all men. 3
Necessity of Justice Divine.

Haec ipsa Philosophorum Meditatio est, Animum a corpore solvere* atque
segregare. Plato in Phaedo.

THE IMMORTALITY, OF THE HUMAN SOUL, Demonstrated by the Light of Nature.
DIALOGVE THE FIRST.
The Interlocutors. LUCRETIVS, ATHANASIVS, ISODICASTES.

Lucretius. WEll met, my dear and honored Athanasius; Thus to encounter you, I
am sure, is more then a good omen: It is a happiness in present.


Athanasius. I wish it may be so, Lucretius; but, when I reflect upon my own
unworthiness, and want of power to be serviceable so my Friends, in any
proportion to my respects, or the honor I receive in their commands; I cannot
easily be so vain, as to conceive, I can be an occasion of Happiness to you,
in any kind. However, let me assure you, both of my joy to see you, and my
readiness to serve you.


Lucretius. Ah! Athanasius, I am already convinced of both. I am not so
unacquainted with the exterior Characters of the Passions, as not plainly to
perceive the evidences of joy in your countenance. The serenity of your aspect,
the pleasant smoothness of your forhead, the vivacity and luster of your eyes,
and the unusual sanguine tincture of your cheeks, are perfect demonstrations
of that Passion within you, which with a sudden yet grateful violence causes
an effusion of blood and spirits toward the habit of the body; as if the Soul,
impatient of delay and distance, dispatched those her Emissaries to meet and
bring in her beloved object. And, as for your singular Humanity, and generous
inclination to oblige, by doing good offices; the happy experience I have had
of that, has long since confirmed me, that, if there be any such thing as a
perfect Friend left in the World, certainly you are that thing, where once you
are pleased to profess a Dearness. But, why do I injure my self, in
deferring that content, this fair opportunity offers me, in your conversation;
while I endeavor to prevent your further profession of that sincerity and
truth, I long ago knew to be inherent and essential to your very Souls Pray
therefore, let me borrow you, for an hour or two, from your meditations or
other serious employments, that we may not only solace our selves, with
recalling to mind our ancient Caresses, in the days of youth, innocence and
peace, and mutually congratulate each others health and safety, after so many
troubles, dangers, and changes of Fortune, as the late Civil Wars in England
has driven us upon: but also revive that quondam custom of ours, when we were
Fellow-Collegiates in Oxford, of discoursing freely and calmely of some
Argument or other in Philosophy. For, though I have not been so good a husband
of my time, as I might have been, nor improved the several opportunities of
augmenting my small stock of learning, that some years travel toward the
South, and frequent hearing the most eminent professors of all Arts and
Sciences, in foreign Universities offered me; yet, let me tell you, I have
not been altogether a stranger to study, nor utterly lost my familiarity with
the Muses. Nay more, since the day I first ventured abroad into the World, I
have had no Mistress that held any confiderable room in my thoughts, but One,
and that the very same I have many times observed you to court, with the
strongest desires and strictest devotion imaginable.


Athanasius. Who I? pray Sir, who was that? I do not remember I ever took
Cupid for any other than an imaginary Deity, or that I resigned up the rains of
my will and Affections into the unsteady hands of a Woman. Sometimes perhaps, I
have so far complied with the incitements of my youth and blood, as to seek to
please my self in the company and favor of a handsome Woman, for
divertisement* But I was always too well aware of their Tyranny, ever to put
my self seriously and durably under their government.


Lucretius. Alas Sir, you mistake me. I do not mean a Woman; but Her, upon
whom women usually transfer the blame of all their imperfections, Nature.


Athanasius. Her, indeed, I have courted long and zealously, and intend to die
her Admirer. For, though it be a great while since I became conscious of the
vast distance betwixt us, and of my incapacity to satisfy my desires in the
knowledge of so much as the least part of Her; yet my desires are still the
same, and I discover such an infinite variety of fresh beauties and
excellencies in her every day, that but to gaze upon them at distance, and view
Her in the weak and pale reflections made in the glass of my own Reason, I
find the most pleasant and ravishing employment, my mind is capable of, and
which me thinks sufficiently compensates all the Labors and Difficulties I
meet with in my pursuit of her. And if this be that Mistress, you have so
long affected, I esteem you singularly happy in your Choice, and my self
happy in having such a Rival, as may promote my Addresses, and yet at the
same time further his own.


Lucretius. And I believe I shall likewise die, as I have lived, Her humble
Admirer too. For, I have more reason then you, considering the vast advantage
you have over me, in Wit, perspicacity, and judgment; and that your profession
daily furnishes you with variety of fresh observations and useful experiments
(for, the Art of Medicine is the best, if not the only Practical Philosophy we
have, and who so enquires into the operations of Nature, by no other light than
that of Books and solitary speculations, shall in the end find his head full of
specious Terms, but empty of true and solid Science.) I say, considering this,
I have more reason than you to despair of ever attaining to the least degree
of Familiarity and privacy with so divine a Model, as she is. And I confess
ingenuously to you, that after all my studious applications to Her, for so many
years together, and all my best endeavors to insinuate my self into her
nearer acquaintance, I can get no further then to discover, that she is like
the Sun, the more we fix our eyes upon her, still the less we discern of her;
that she is an immense Ocean, too deep for the sounding line of Man's reason
ever to reach Her bottom: and (in a word) that betwixt Us, who call our selves
Philosophers, Secretaries of Nature, etc. and the Illiterate, who calmely
acquiesce in the simple information of their senses, thereis no other
difference, but what consists wholly in Opinion: We flatter our selves with a
belief, that we know more than really we do; and they remain free from the
disquiet of that curiosity, which occasions our delusion; they neither know nor
believe they know; we only believe we know. And yet, for all this
discouragement, I am still constant in my affections to Her, and my Soul as
eager and hot in the pursuit, as if it expected to carry Her clearly in the
end. So that I cannot but stay here a little, and wonder at the strange temper
of my Mind, which is still possessed with a strong desire of what I see no
possibility ever to enjoy; especially when I reflect upon what I have been
taught, by such as were well skilled in the nature of Passions, that Love is
always accompanied with Probability of Fruition, which is the reason we much
oftener observe persons of high rank to become enamored on their inferiors,
than the contrary. This I am sure of, that this uncessant desire of knowledge
must be Natural, and coessential to the Soul of Man; or else it must be a
Production of Opinion, as sundry other Appetites are. And, if it be ingrafted
into our minds, by Natures own hand, methinks it should be more capable of
satisfaction; for, Nature does never institute any thing in vain, but commonly
provides means for the expletion of each Appetite she creates. But, if it be
not Natural, and the effect only of Presumption; how comes it to be so
Universal? there being no man, though nere so rude and savage, who does not
perceive his Mind to be under the sovereignty of this Affection, more or less:
nay, as I remember, I have read a discourse of yours, wherein you have proved
that all the Actions of our lives are in some sort or other the effects of this
Tendency to Science. And thus you see, Athanasius into what a labyrinth I have
unexpectedly brought my thoughts; nor can I hope to extricate my self, unless
you shall please to lend me the Clue of your stonger and more decisive reason.


Athanasius. Lend you the clue of my Reason, say you? Alack, alack, Lucretius,
I well perceive, your long conversation which the French, has infected you
with the humor of saying a great deal more then you think, and tempting your
Friends modesty with attributes of more value* than you know belongs to them,
as if I could be so arrogant as to undertake the solution of a Ridle, which
Lucretius really finds too hard for him. No, Lucretius, no, I am too conscious
of my own dullness and ignorance, ever to entertain a conceit so extremely
vain. But, come, I perceive your drift. I know you to be one of Epicurus's
Disciples, and indeed the most eminent amongst them; and having long since
digested and heightened all your Masters Arguments, for the Mortality of the
Human Soul; knowing me to be irreconcilable to that uncomfortable and
dangerous Opinion, you would now take the opportunity of experimenting the
force of them upon so weak an Adversary as my self. Not that I think a person
of your wit and acuteness can be so insensible of the admirable and almost
divine operations of that noble Essence, even while she is lodged in Walls of
clay, as to be seriously of his persuasion, That she is only a certain
Contexture or disposition of thinnest and sublilest Atoms, and so upon the
change of that disposition by death, is immediately dissolved, and those Atoms
again dispersed in the infinite Inanity or Space; but, that you would
willingly hear what I am able to allege to the contrary.


Lucretius. Will you believe me, Athanasius? I had no such design upon you:
Nor can I easily conceive, how you could from that doubt I proposed to you,
draw any such suspicion.


Athanasius. No? Whither then could that discourse of yours tend? Is it not
plain that the Soul's insatiate and unlimited desire of knowledge, is a good
Argument of her being Immaterial, and consequently indissoluble?


Lucretius. O, now I apprehend you. I remember indeed I have heard that urged,
and as a mighty Argument in the Schools, but at present I had no reflection
thereupon. However, I thank you for giving me the hint, and humbly beg your
pursuit of it. It Is a Theme worthy so strong a brain as yours, and (pardon my
freedom) I think you are obliged to satisfy the expectation of the World, by
divulging your Conceptions concerning that Subject. For, as I remember, in the
Conclusion of your Physiology (which I had the good fortune not long since to
see and peruse, in the Jesuits Library here in Paris, and with more content and
benefit to my mind, than your modesty will permit me to express to you) you
promise a second part thereof, in way of discovery of the Nature and
Immortality of the Reasonable Soul of man.


Athanasius. Truth is, I there said somewhat of my Hopes and willingness to
finish that structure (how slight and confused soever it were) by addition of
what seemed requisite to make it entire, which is the Consideration of the
nature of Souls; as well those of Unreasonable, as those of Reasonable
Creatures: And this some, and you among the rest, have been pleased to
interpret for a promise. But, grant it be so; Yet, sure I am, it was only
Conditional, and in case I should receive the friendly Approbation of such
judicious persons as had surveyed the first Story of that building, for my
encouragement, and obtain Leisure and Quiet, for my better effecting the rest.
And how far I have been from receiving that, or obtaining these, I suppose you
cannot be ignorant.


Lucretius. Yes really I am.


Athanasius. That Is somewhat strange. Why then give me leave to tell you, that,
instead of that Candor in the forgiveness of my lapses, and that approbation
of my toil and industry, which I looked for from my Readers; I have reaped no
other fruit of all my labors in that long and difficult Work, but most severe,
inhumane, uncharitable, unjust Censures. Some condemning me of too much
youthful Height and Affection in the style; others accusing me of usurping
other men's Notions, Maxims, and Experiments for my own, without so much as
naming the Authors, to whose bounteous Wit and Industry I was beholding for
their discovery and communication; a third sort reproaching me with
inconsideration, in assuming a task of weight so vastly disproportionate to
the slender nerves of my judgment; and a fourth scandaling me with negligence
in the duties of my Profession, and invading the certainty of all its Rules and
Maxims, while I wholly addicted my self to the Innovation of its
Fundamentalls. Now if you can allow this for encouragement, I shall the less
wonder at your expectation of my proceeding to the accomplishment of that
work, which (I call Heaven to witness out of pure devotion to knowledge; and
commendable ambition to be serviceable to the Commonwealth of Learning in
proportion to my talent) I had proposed to my self to enterprise: Otherwise, I
hope, you will not envy me, the Peace I aim at, in being henceforth silent, and
employing all my Collections, Observations, and Speculations Philosophical,
only to the furnishing the little Cabinet of my own brain. I have now at length
learned, that Sapere domi, to endeavor the acquisition of Science in private,
ought to be the principal scope of a Wise man: Nor shall I easily suffer my
self to be diverted from the resolution I have taken, constantly to put that
excellent Lesson in practice.

And as for Leisure and Quiet (without both which, you well know, no man can
compile a work of any solidity and accuratenesse, in any part of Learning
whatsoever) I have been so far from enjoying either of them, that on the
contrary, from the time I first published that Physiology you mentioned, even
to this very day, I have been embroiled in as many troubles and distractions,
as malice, persecution, and sharp adversity could accumulate upon me. I have
been driven from my Country, House, Family, Books, Friends, and Acquaintance;
and wholly deprived of all the chief endearments of life; insomuch that I am a
perfect stranger to any such thing as comfort, but what I sometimes form to my
self out of the assurance of my Innocence, and the hope of that compensation
that is ordained for Patience in unjust sufferings. In a word, Lucretius, (for
as it sharpneth the sense of my afflictions in my self, for me to recount them;
so I know it cannot be, but very unpleasant to you, to hear the miserable
adventures of your Friend) for almost these two last years, I have been
continually tossed up and down by a Tempest of Calamity, which is yet so
violent, that the dangers, which threaten me, seem to despise the prevention of
that small skill I have in the use of my Compass: My Anchors are lost, my
Vessel leaks, the Winds hurry it from land, and I hourly exspect to sink
downright. Nor can I see how it is possible for me to avoid it, unless relief
suddenly come from that Divine Power; by whose permission (for my chastisement)
it is, that the cruelty and rage of my Enemies have raised this storm against
me. Consider, then, whether this be a Condition fit to study in, or whether you
could forbear to have an indignation against this folly; who, being in such a
case, should hope to write any thing worthy so judicious and curious an eye, as
yours is? If not, pray cease to reproach me, with having been wanting as well
to my self as to the World, in not making good the Promise you urge; And
rather give me your advice how to deport my self as becomes a Philosopher, with
Constancy and tranquillity of mind, than strive to aggravate my disquiet, by
engaging me to write on so abstruse and difficult a Subject.


Lucretius. You have told me enough to change my Curiosity into Sadness and
Commiseration. I shall not be so rude to exasperate the smart of your wounds,
by pressing you further to disclose them to me, nor am I so good a Physician
for the Mind, as to prescribe you any more sovereign remedies against
Discontent, than what I am sure you well know already. But since you require my
advice, I shall bid you look into that Magazine of choice Moral Precepts,
which you have been long collecting, and treasuring up in your own breast: For,
there, I am sure, you will find such Cordialls, and virtuous Antidotes, as will
secure your Soul from being discomposed at the worst that evil Fortune can do
against you, and heighten your thoughts and Resolutions to a generous defiance
of temporal crosses, and a perfect Contempt of the World. And among the rest,
as you meet with it, be sure to dwell longest upon this rule, Never suffer your
Spirit to sink; still remembering, that Virtue is like precious Odours, most
fragrant, when incensed or crushed; and that the extremities of worthy Persons
are usually annihilated in the consideration of their own deservings, but
always overcome in the end, by their bravery and magnanimity showed in the
entertainment of them. Which I the rather point at, because I know you to be
of a Melancholy disposition, and such commonly suffer adverse accidents to make
too deep impressions upon their mind, which is thereupon apt to dejection,
which some have defined to be the first step to final Despair; And how
difficult a thing it is to raise him up, who helps to depress himself; I need
not tell you. It will not be amiss also for you, often to have recourse to
gentle and Philosophical Divertisements, and to admit conferences with your
Friends, touching some Argument or other, that you are able to discourse of
familiarly, and without torturing the brain, and putting your Imagination upon
the rack: For, by this means, you shall insensibly wear out the Characters your
misfortunes and distresses have stamped in your Soul, and find a pleasure in
taking occasional reviews of the several useful Notions filed up in the
rolls of your Memory, and at the same time, both benefit and endear your
company.


Athanasius, Sir, your Counsel is excellent, and I shall make it my chief care
to let you see how much I prize it, by my endeavors to follow it precisely.
But, know withal, Lucretius, that the foresight, I tell you, I have of my
approaching ruin, as to all that Fortune lays claim to as hers, does not
imply either my Fear of it, or want of resolution to sustein that, and even
Death it self, in what shape soever it shall present it self, without stooping
one hair's breadth below that pitch of spirit, that belongs to an honest Mind
to conserve in all encounters. It Is one thing to previse a danger, and another
to be startled and grow pale at the stroke of it: I well understand the value
of the goods of the Mind above those of Fortune: And if I can be so much in
favor with Heaven, as to be endowed but with the least portion of the Former,
I shall easily part with the Latter, and account my self rich enough in the
exchange. Be confident therefore, that so long as I can conserve my integrity,
and the peace of my Conscience entire, I shall also keep my Spirit from
dejection, nor will it be in the power of my Adversaries ever to depresse it,
with all the weights of adversity they can heap upon me.

As for that way of Divertisement, by free and unbiassed Philosophical
Conferences you speak of; I approve it as very available both to the gentle
weaning of the Mind from sad apprehensions, and the exercise of its more
agreeable Habits. But, I fear me, you do as that Physician, who prescribed his
Patient a dose of the grand Elixir, in the yolk of a Phoenix egg; You refer me
to a Medicine I cannot possibly obtain. For, though among the French there be
many excellent Wits, and men eminent for their abilities in all kinds of
Learning; Yet I observe them generally to be of a temper more fit for hot and
testy Disputes, then calm and peaceable Debates, in way of Disquisition: and
commonly, they are so fierce and ardent in defense of their own preconceived
opinions, that they account it a piece of disrespect and incivility in any man
that seems to doubt, or call the verity of them in question. So that a Noble
person of our Nation, who has lived long in this City, and is able to give a
true Character of the French Genius, as to this particular, was pleased to tell
me within these few days, that their humor of prejudice to all that is not
their own, though really much better then their own, extends also to their
Tenants in Arts and Sciences; And that it would be hard for me to find a
Scholar among them, who would not rather lose the opportunity of investigating
a truth, by an equitable and patient comparing of the strength of other men's
reasons with his own, then not appear to have clearly understood the full
nature of the thing, before it was proposed. Now, how highly disagreable this
would be to my Genius, which is so averse to all contests and passionate
Altercations, and which always brings me to Philosophical Discourses only as
to Enquiries, not final Determinations, and with perfect indifferency to either
side, not caring at all whether my Allegations, or my Opponent's, give the
greater light to certainty, so I attain to any degree of certainty in the end:
I say, how disagreeable this Overweening of the French, would be to me in
Conversation, you may easily conjecture. Besides I am yet but beginning to
speak their Language, and so am incapable of the benefit and pleasure of their
Colloquies. And though many of them are very great Masters of the Latin, and
write very elegantly therein; Yet when they come to speak it, you may perceive
such a tedious redundancy of words flowing from their tongues, as will
sufficiently convince you, that they cannot suddenly translate the conceptions
of their minds into another Language, without retaining the verbosity of their
own. Which I find exceedingly troublesome to me, in respect of the narrowness
of my capacity, that causes me many times to lose the notion and sense, in the
long and strict attention to the expressions; Just as when we meet some person
in brave and gaudy clothes, the waving of his Feather and Ribons, and the
Luster of his Lace, so distract and take off our sight, that we see the less
of his Face; and when he is past by us, we remember more of his dress, than
his stature, complexion and aspect. And thus you see how unlikely it is for me
to meet with the Physic you prescribe me, here among the French.

And as for the English that now reside here; I am not acquainted with any one
(except your self) who makes it his business to pursue the favor of those
severe and reserved Muses, that you and I so much adore. Some doubtless there
are of the same contemplative inclination; But (as I tell you) I have not
encountered so much felicity as to know any one of them; and if I did, without
good experience of his candor, and some degree of intimacy, I should think it
an unpardonable Soloecisme in good manners, to molest him with the importunity
of my Conversation, which savours of nothing so much as of sowrnesse and
melancholy. So that unless you please to be the remedy you advise, I see no
probability of my obtaining it, till I return into England.


Lucretius. What you have now remarked of the French's being generally great
Opinionators, my observation also confesses to be altogether true. Nor are
there among our Countrymen, in this place, many of those we call Votaries of
Nature; Yet I can introduce you to the knowledge of a Person, noble by Birth,
and of high condition, but infinitely more noble by the Heroic endowments of
his better part, and the large measure of Knowledge he has acquired in all
things of most use, to the well government of our selves, in all the various
occurrences of life. He is a prudent Estimator of men's actions and opinions,
but no rigid Censor of either. A valiant Assertor of truth, yet far from
Tyranny; where he finds an error, as always reflecting on human frailty, and
the obscurity of things in themselves. He well knows how to overcome, but not
at all to triumph; And when he has overcome, you can hardly perceive he ever
contended. For, he does not seem so much to refute, as to teach, rather gently
insinuating verity, then struggling in the detection of falsehood. Curious in the
collection of Books, diligent in reading them, accurate in examining what they
deliver, and always more favorable to Reason, then to Authority, unless in
matters of Faith. A great Lover of Experiments in Physic and Chemistry; Yet no
ways infected with the vanities of the one, or frauds of the other. A friend
to all learned and judicious men of your Profession, he meets with; and a
Patron to the Art it self. Witness the vast pains and cost he has lately
bestowed upon his Garden, wherein are now growing more then two thousand six
hundred Plants, of different sorts; Each of them being, according to admirable
method, disposed into a particular Classis, containing all the species
referrible to their proper Genus or Tribe: So that considering the great
variety, and orderly ranging of the Plants, I cannot think it much inferior to
the famous Seminary of Vegetables at Bloys, belonging to the Duke of Orleans.
Witness likewise the spacious Elaboratory, he has caused to be erected in his
house, and furnished with Furnaces, Vessels, and Instruments of all sorts;
Which he imployes rather for his recreation, and the extraction of the most
virtual and purest parts of Herbs, and other medicinal Simples, and the
distillation of choice Cordial Waters and Spirits, for the conservation of
health, than in practicing the impostures of Pseudo*chymists, that pretend to
the mysterious Art of Transmutation of Metalls, and making the Philosophers
stone, as they call it. And yet I have known when he has permitted one of
those Bastards of Hermes, therein to run through a whole Progress, or course
of Spagirical operations, in order to the production of the Seminal tincture of
Gold: But, it was only, that the man himself might be the better convinced, and
the World satisfied of the folly and knavery of such attempts, by the constant
unsuccessefullness of them. In a word, Athanasius; he is a perfect Virtuoso,
one infinitely above the best Character I can give him: Nor do I herein aim at
praising him, but assuring you, that in him you may meet with the most pleasing
and satisfactory Conversation in the World.


Athanasius. Even now you mentioned the Philosophers stone, Lucretius, and sure
this excellent Person you describe, is it: For if the Elixir be only Virtue in
a Parable, as I know some wise men have affirmed, why may not I think him so?
But who is it, I pray?


Lucretius. I am sure you have often heard his name, and perhaps seen him too:
It Is IS ODIC ASTES.


Athanasius. I know him both by sight and fame. He was with us in Oxford, in
time of the late Wars, and in great favor and trust with the King his
Master. And now I am confirmed of the truth of all you have said of him, having
heard as much from sundry others of worth and Credit. But will you adventure
the reputation of your Judgment so far as to commend me to his notice? I fear,
you dare not.


Lucretius. Yes I do, and doubt not to receive his thanks for my Labor, for I
know you to be singularly able in your Profession, and as free in the
communication of any thing you have found conducible to the advancement of it,
or any other part of Learning: And either of those two qualities (if you had no
other that were commendable) is sufficient to endear you to him in a short time.


Athanasius. When will you permit me to wait upon you to him?


Lucretius. Even when you please: What say you of going thither this present
evening? For his house is not far off this place, and about this hour of the
day he is usually at leisure, and disposed to admit visits. We shall find him,
I suppose, viewing his Nursery of Plants, and keeping a Diary of their short
lives; recording in the margin of his Catalogue, which of them are now in
their youth or immaturity, which in their full vigor and growth, and which
beginning to decline; And noting also which is in the blossom, which in the
Flower, which in the Seed, which fit to be cropped, that so he may be exact in
knowing the true season when each kind attains to its pride and perfection of
Virtue. For, at this time of the year, and till the latter end of August, this
commonly is his recreation every evening, in case the weather be favorable. So
that if you think fit, I will conduct you thither instantly.


Athanasius. With all my heart; I am not for deferring happiness one moment.


Lucretius. Content; But let me advertise you of one thing before we go: Though
you are a stranger to him in person; yet he is acquainted with your Genius, by
your Writings. You know the saying, Oration indicat virum. And it is not many
days since I heard him commend your Physiology, and wish you would proceed to
publish the remainder of it, concerning the Immortality of the Reasonable Soul.
So that assure your self, he will soon find occasion to draw you on to
discourse of that subject: Nor can you with civility decline it. Therefore,
provide your self for the ambush, by turning over the records of your memory,
and rallying your scattered notions, in as good order as you can, upon so short
warning.


Athanasius. Hear you, Lucretius; does this consist with the counsel you gave
me, even now, to divert my self from the sense of my misfortunes, by
entertaining frank and familiar conferences with ingenious company, without
torturing my brain, and racking my imagination? You are like a Physician, who
forbids his patient Wine, and yet can be content to see him drunk, so it be in
his company. Do you think I can discourse any whit tolerably of so difficult an
Argument, and in such a presence, without great labor of the Mind?


Lucretius. Why not? having profoundly considered, and frequently revolved the
matter in your Mind, before hand, as I am confident you have, or otherwise you
would not have given us hopes of your writing a particular Treatise thereupon.
Pray, deal ingenuously with me, have you no Adversaria, no First-Draught of
that piece you intended, among your Papers?


Athanasius. Some few sheets I have, in which I hastily scribled over my
Collections, and First Thoughts, as they chanced to occurr: But disjoynted,
without Form, and wanting the decency of connection and language. But what of
that? Would you have an Architect acquaint you with his design, only by showing
you his Materials lying confusedly congested together in a heap?


Lucretius. From a view of the Materials, I can guess at the strength and
firmness of the building intended, though not at the Model or Platform.
Therefore, without any further excuses or evasions, be pleased to comply with
the desires and expectation of your Friends, either by affording us the liberty
of perusing those memorials of your thoughts; or by abstracting the substance
or marrow of them your self, and infusing it into our ears in a brief discourse.


Athanasius. I perceive, Lucretius, you well understand the unlimited power you
have over me; otherwise you would not thus have put me upon such a
Demonstration of it, as requires me, at the same time, to lay aside my Reason,
and resign up my discretion wholly to the conduct of your importune Curiosity.
But, that you may see I am all obedience and complacency, where I have once
entered into a league of amity; I will no longer consider the hazard of my
reputation, in exposing to your Examination (which I am sure, will be strict
enough) a Summary of those Reasons, which I conceive sufficiently strong and
evident to evince the Immortality of the Human Soul, while they yet want due
Connection, and such illustration of Art and Language, as they deserve, and as
perhaps I could have bestowed upon them, at my better leisure, and vacancy from
solicitude of mind: I say, I will no longer keep my reputation in the balance
against your Commands, but freely deliver you an Abbreviate of my Notes,
touching the subject mentioned. Nor will I defer your satisfaction longer than
until to morrow, about this time; When, if you please to meet me here in this
cool Cypress Walk, in Luxemburgh Garden, you shall hear what I am able to say,
concerning that particular. In the mean time, I will go home and look over my
papers, and digest the contents of them into the most natural method I can,
upon so short premeditation. If they answer not your expectation, be just in
imputing it to your own unreasonable haste; Which would not allow me convenient
time, to cast them in a more uniform mould: If they do, be not so much a
Courtier, as to ascribe it to any thing, besides the Goodness of the Cause, in
defense whereof they are alleged.


Lucretius. My dear Athanasius, my heart is too narrow to contein the joy you
have infused into me; Nor can I express the smallest part of that content,
which redounds to me from this your most affectionate condescension. And yet I
would urge your kindness to a further grant.


Athanasius. Of what?


Lucretius. Of something, that will conduce to your own advantage, in the end.


Athanasius. I shall have but little regard to that, if what you require may
but be really grateful to your self. Pray, therefore, cease henceforth to
estimate my readiness to serve my Friend, by the proportion his requests hold
to my own utility an emolument: And freely speak your desire.


Lucretius. It is no more, but that you would permit me to interrupt you, now
and then, in your discourses, to morrow, when we meet, in case I see occasion
of Doubting, or Objecting any thing that seems material. For (as you know) I
am somewhat strict in examining the force of all Arguments proposed to me,
especially of such as pretend Evidence and Certitude requisite to full
Conviction. I would not willingly admit any Position into my belief, but what
has past the severest trial of my Reason, I can put it to.


Athanasius. Nor shall you, Lucretius, be circumvented or ensnared into an
error, by any sophistry of mine. If what I shall urge, in favor of the Soul's
Eternal subsistence after death, shall appear to you to be less clear or
solid, than I apprehend; pray, detect the invalidity thereof and spare not.
Where I am once assured of Candor, I love to be opposed. But since you intend
to raise Scruples and Objections out of what I shall deliver, and that it is
easily possible for you and me to dissent about the pre-eminence of each others
reasonings: me thinks, it were but just, we had some Third person present,
whose judgment and equity may qualify him to play the Arbiter betwixt us, and
unto whose decisive Verdict we ought equally to submit our Differences.


Lucretius. You have prevented me: Isodicastes, I am confident, will do us the
honor to be the Man. I know none so fit, in respect either of the admirable
perspicacity of his understanding, or the sincerity and uprightness of his
judgment: As no Fallacy can escape his remark, so the whole world cannot bribe
him to a partial suffrage. And if you approve the choice, I will undertake to
prevail upon him to be present at our conference, and do us that noble office.


Athanasius. Pray, let him know withal how far I was from seeking this
occasion of his trouble, and that I am not so vainly conceipted of the worth of
my notions, as to promise to my self they shall compensate his patience, by
adding one mite to that large magazine of knowledge, He is already master of.
All I hope for at his hands, is a charitable forgiveness of my Audacity, in
daring to enter the list against so potent an Opponent, concerning so difficult
and sublime an Argument, and before so discerning a Judge; and that with such
blunt weapons, as your unexpected and sudden compulsion of me to the
encounter, enforces me to make use of.


Lucretius. Fear not my justice, either in owning the violence I have used, to
draw you to comply with my desires, or saving your modesty the labor of
prepossessing him with the extreme diffidence you have of your own Abilities.
And now we are agreed upon the manner and circumstances of our Duel, pray, let
us a little solace our selves with a turn or two in this cool and fragrant
walk, into which the neighboring Orange trees so plentifully transmit the
grateful odor of their flowers. How like you this so much admired Garden?
Does it not clearly demonstrate to you, how great the additions are, that the
beauties of Nature are capable of receiving, from the hand of Art?


Athanasius. I think it worthy as great a share in the spectators wonder, as
the vast and magnificent Fabric to which it is adjoined. And if it be lawful
for us to guess at the Greatness of Princes Minds, as well as at that of
their wealth, by the amplitude and sumptuousness of the structures they have
reared; I may conjecture, that the Foundresse of this prodigious Palace, had a
Soul in all things equal to the height of her Dignity, and the largeness of
Empire, she once enjoyed; For, otherwise her subtle Favorite whom she had
raised to that immoderate sublimity of power, as made him fit to be her
Competitor for Sovereignty in dominion; would not have conceived himself
unstable in his unlimited sway, till he had clipped the wings of her aspiring
Soul, and left her embroyld in the jealousy of the King, her Son: who being
persuaded, that the luster of his Diadem was eclipsed by her shining in the
same Sphere; readily embraced their counsel, who suggested that the greatness
of her policy and aims, was never to be obscured, but by removing her into
another climate, by a kind of gentle Banishment. Had she been of as soft and
flexible a spirit as the King was, whose power he employed to her suppression;
doubtless, Monsier the Cardinal had never thought her worthy the honor of
his Fears. Great envy is always a certain sign of great Merit. But to leave
my unseasonable reflection on the Queen, who raised this stupendous Building,
and answer your demand of my opinion of the Garden; I tell you, in a word, it
is the most Princely I ever saw, for the largeness of the ground or Contents,
for the uniformity it holds to the design of the House, for the freedom of
Prospect from all the principal rooms thereof, and for the variety of
entertainments it affords, according to the several seasons of the year. Here
are Grotta's, Groves, and places of shade, for Estivation; and artificial
Fountains perpetually spouting up streams of water, to attemper the fervor
of the air, in heat of Summer: Spacious and open walks to take in the more
temperate and refreshing breath of the Spring: and arched Piazza's that afford
equal shelter from Sun, cold or rain. Here is a peculiar Garden for each
month in the year, in which things of beauty and sweetness are then in
season. Here is variety well sorted, Magnificence and Curiosity gracefully
united; and yet a Natural wildenesse so well imitated in all, that the
loveliness and perfection of the whole, seems to consist in the neat disguise
of the symmetry of the parts: so that Art is almost lost in the excellency of
it self, and visible only in dissembling a confusion. Here Palats and Noses of
all sorts are exactly accommodated and strangers usually dispute, whether the
sight or Taste, or Smell be the better provided for: nor is it easy to decide
the controversy, where each sense is feasted even to satiety. Here are little
Coppies of Orange trees, environed with hedges of Jasmine; as if the Planter
had respect to the mixture of odours in the aer, and intended --


Lucretius. Hold, Athanasius, if the distance does not deceive me, yonder comes
ISODICASTES, the wise and good -- Yes it is He, I am sure. I can distinguish
him thus far off, by the gravity of his Habit, and the sober evennesse of his
pace, with a natural decorum and comeliness, expressing the majesty and
serenity of that noble Principle, which gives motion to his body from within.


Athanasius. Pray put me not out of countenance, by telling him before my face,
how inconsiderate I have been, in accepting your challenge against to morrow.
Do not insult over the facility and good nature of your friend, by boasting
the force of your influence upon him.


Lucretius. I do consider your excess of modesty, and, therefore, will not
touch upon our appointment, while you are present. But, now he draws near, let
us not be rude in seeming insensible of the singular respect due to his quality
and worth: but mend our pace, and, by our speed to meet him civilly, confess
our transport of joy to have the happy opportunity -- Noblest and worthiest
Isodicastes, your most humble servant.


Isodicastes. Witty Lucretius, I am yours, and glad to encounter you thus
unexpectedly.


Lucretius. I ask your leave Sir to present to your knowledge, this friend of
mine here, a Person of more than common merit, which is more than I need tell
you, when you have heard me name him.


Isodicastes. I remember, I have seen this Gentleman's face often, or one
extremely like him, at least: But cannot, on the sudden recall to mind, or
where, or when.


Lucretius. In Oxford, Sir, in time of the Wars, doubtless, if at all. For,
He was scarcely arrived at the twentieth year of his age, when the flames of
our intestine commotions first brake forth into open hostility: And since they
were extinguish't in the ruins of the Royal party, you have been constantly
resident here in France, whither he is but lately come. But, not to hold you
longer in suspense, This is Athanasius, of whom I have heard you speak, upon
occasion of some new opinions and experiments, in the Physiology he not long
since published.


Isodicastes. Worthy Athanasius, fortune could not have brought me to the
knowledge of any Person, who had aforehand a greater share in my esteem then
your self. I am an honourer of your Art, and so cannot but have a singular
value and respect for any, that endeavors by his studies and writings to
contribute toward the advancement of it, as I am satisfied you have done.


Athanasius. Most honored Sir, I am not conscious to my self of any thing in
me, worthy the honor of your slightest notice, but barely my Good Will to
Learning, and the sincere Devotion and reverence I bear toward your noble self,
who are both so great an Ornament, and Patron of it. And if you shall vouchsafe
to admit me to the lowest degree in your good Grace and favorable regard, upon
so small an account as that: You will demonstrate the vast extent of your
Charity, in obliging a poor and inconsiderable thing, and one that has nothing
but the simplicity of his Zeal, to qualify him for your service.


Isodicastes. You are unreasonably modest, thus to diminish yourself,
Athanasius: And as immoderate in your overvaluation of my Capacity to express
my affection to Learning and Learned Men, otherwise than only by the content I
take in their conversation. But, let us leave this formality of Complements to
young Courtiers, as savouring of less plainness and freedom, than ought to be
amongst the Votaries of Truth and Science, when they meet together: And give me
leave to enquire of you (for, it seems you came but lately thence) somewhat
concerning the state of Learning now in England. I have been told of great
Discoveries made, by men of your Faculty there, in Anatomy, Diseases, and their
ways of Cure; Far different from the Principles and Doctrine of the Ancients.
I have heard also, that the Mathematics are in high reputation among you, and
have received much, if not of improvement, yet of illustration, from the happy
industry of some, in our Universities. Pray, therefore, let it not be
troublesome to you, to give us some hints of the particulars, wherein the Wits
of our Nation have of late been so highly beneficial to the Commonweal of
Philosophy.


Athanasius. Sir, you have laid a command upon me, which is impossible for me
to obey, without shamefully betraying my own ignorance, and (by a
disadvantageous representation of them) much disparaging the noble successes of
those Heroical Wits among our Countrymen, who have addicted themselves to the
Reformation and Augmentation of Arts and Sciences, and made a greater Progress
in that glorious design, than many ages before them could aspire to,
notwithstanding all their large hopes, specious promises, and manifold
attempts. Nevertheless, being your command, I shall strive to yield obedience
to it, so far forth at least, as to recount to you in brief, what upon the
sudden I can call to mind, of the most considerable Novelties in Natural
Philosophy, Medicine, the Optiques, Astronomy and Geometry, found out by the
ingeny and labors of men now living in England, and as yet in the prime of
their strength and years.

In the College of Physicians in London, (which without offense to any thing,
but their own Modesty, I may pronounce to be the most eminent Society of men,
for Learning, Judgment and Industry, that is now, or at any time has been, in
the whole World) you may behold Solomon's House in reality. Some there are, who
constantly employ themselves in dissecting Animals of all kinds, as well living
as dead; and faithfully recording all singularities that occur to their
observation, both in the several species, and individualls: That so they may
come to know, what is perfectly natural, what preternatural, what rare and
monstrous among the parts of them; And also what resemblance there is betwixt
the Conformation of the parts in the body of Man, and those in the bodies of
other Animals, ordained by Nature to the same, or like and equivalent uses. So
that it will be hard for any man to bring thither any Fish, Bird, or Insect,
whose Emtrails these genuine Sons of Democritus are not already intimately
acquainted with; or, at least, which they will not with admirable dexterity and
skill anatomize without confusion of the smallest Organ, and instantly explore
the proper office of each Organical part, by remarking the Figure, Substance,
Vessels, and situation of it. And, I have some reason to put you in hope, that
ere long you may see a Collection of most of the Anatomical Experiments that
these Men have made, in the bodies of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Insects of
various sorts; together with the Figure of each, and all its principle Organs,
expressed to the life in Copper-Cuts; and an exact account as well of the
Analogy, as Dissimilitude that is betwixt them and others of consimilar uses in
Man, the grand Rule or Prototype to all inferior Creatures. Which is a Method,
certainly, of inestimable use toward the complement of Natural History, and
the only way to perfect that Comparative Anatomy, whose defect the Lord St.
Alban so much complained of, in our Art.

Others there are, who daily investigate arguments to confirm and advance that
incomparable invention of Doctor Harvey, the Circulation of the Blood; And have
already brought the Doctrine thereof to so high a degree of perfection, that it
is not only admitted and admired by all the Schools in Europe, but the
advancers of it also are able to solve most of the difficult phenomenon in
Pathology, only by that Hypothesis; And frequently effect such Cures, by having
respect thereunto in their intentions and prescripts, as well in Cronique, as
Acute Diseases, as could not be hoped from any other groundwork, or
supposition formerly laid; At least not with equal correspondence to the true
method of Healing, which ought to be deduced from Principles of the greatest
evidence and certainty in Nature, among which certainly this of the Circulation
is the chiefest. And though I deny not, but the like Cures may have been
performed by Physicians, who never dreamed of any such thing, as the continual
motion of the blood from the heart, by the Arteries to the outward parts of the
body, and thence back again, by the veins?, into the heart; but rested in the
Antique opinion of a difference betwixt Arterial and Venal blood, both as to
substance and uses: Yet I may safely affirm, that the Remedies used by them,
wrought the effects aimed at, by ways altogether accidental, and beside the
direct scope of those, who gave them; And to do a cure only by Accident, you
well know, is much below the ambition of a Rational Physician, who ought to
have a firm and well-grounded Theory of the Faculties and Virtues proper to
each particular Instrument he is to make use of, in rectifying the disordered
Economy of nature in man's body. For my own part (I speak ingenuously) I am so
well satisfied of the Verity of this Harvean Circulation, and have so seriously
considered the great advantages that may be made of it, in order to the
ennobling the Art of Medicine, by reducing the maxims of it from obscure and
conjectural, to evident and demonstrative; And by accommodating the same to the
explanation of most of the Apparences in Pathology: That I have had some
thoughts of undertaking to justify all the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, which
concern the Nature and Sanation of Diseases, by reasons and considerations
deduced merely from this one Fountain, the Hypothesis of the Circulation of the
blood; And if my troubles had not deprived me of leisure, I had ere this made
some progress in that enterprise. But, I have digressed, and ask your pardon
for it.

There are, moreover, among the members of this venerable Society, who pursuing
the hint, some few years since, given them by Iacobus Mullerus, a German, in an
Academical exercise, of the nature of Animal and Voluntary Motion; have gone
far toward the explication of the reasons and manner of the Motions of the
Muscles, by the principles of Mechanics: An enterprise of great difficulty,
and long desiderated, as leading us to understand the Geometry observed by the
Creator in the fabric of the Microcosme, and the verification of Anatomical
assertions by demonstrations Mathematical. The same persons likewise have
demonstrated, that we go, because we fall, i. e. that each step we advance, is
but a shifting the body to a fresh Center of Gravity; And our Rest but a
remaining or fixing of it upon the same: As also that in progression, the Head
of a man is moved through more of space, than his feet, by almost one part of
four, in respect of its greater distance from the Center of the Earth; which
indeed was touched, and only touched upon, by that prodigy of Mathematical
subtleties, Galileo, in his Second Dialogue de Mundo.

There are also of these Miners of Nature, who have found out more probable and
commodious Uses for the Glandules, or fatty Kernells situate in diverse parts
of man's body, than were assigned unto them by all antecedent Anatomists. For,
whereas Those generally conceived them to have been intended by Nature to no
nobler an end, than either for the Imbibition or dreining of superfluous
humors inundating the parts adjacent to them; Or for the susteining of Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves in their progress from part to part; These have
discovered, that some Glandules serve for the preparation of the Succus
Nutritious, or juice that nourishes the whole body; That others are official to
the sequestration of some less profitable and disagreeable parts of the same
nutritive juice, or Vital Nectar; And that a third sort of them are ordained
for reduction of those same less profitable parts, after their separation or
streining, back again into the mass of blood, by the small veins that are
contiguous to them. And among these likewise there is one (A person of singular
note, for his Universal Learning, and indefatigable industry in Disquisition)
who aiming to promote the certainty of these New Tenants: (1.) That, according
to the Anatomical observations of Ioh. Pecquet, a young Physician of Diepp in
Normandy, the Chylus is conveyed from the stomach, by the Venae Lacteae, or
Milky Veins, into a certain Receptacle, or common promptuary situate at the
bottom of the Mesentery; and thence transmitted upwards, by a conduit running
all along on the inside of the Spine of the back, to the subclavian veins, and
so delivered into the right Ventricle of the heart, there to be turned into
blood: (2.) That the Liver is not the immediate instrument of Sanguification,
but inservient only to the sequestration of the Choleric parts of the blood,
and the conveying the same into the Gall, to be thence excluded into the Duts:
(3.) That there is no Anastomosis, or mutual Inosculation betwixt the small
branches of the Vena Portae, and those of the Vena Cava, in the substance of
the Liver; as was generally believed from the infancy of Physic, till of late
years, when this Gentleman was so happy as to evince the contrary, by ocular
demonstration: (4.) That there are certain thin, slender and transparent
Vessels, for the most part accompaning the veins, and especially in the liver,
(named Vasa Lymphatica, by Thomas Bartholinus, who seems first to have
discovered them, and Lymphe-ducts, by others since) containing a clear liquor,
like water, which they exonerate into the common Receptacle of the Chyle, newly
mentioned; to the end, that being again infused together with so much of the
Chyle as enters the veins, into the blood, it may both prevent the Coagulation
of it, and also (in respect of its predisposition to Volatility) associating it
self to the Vital spirits in the Heart and Arteries, promote the Mication, or
boiling motion of the blood: And (5.) That the solid parts of the body are not,
in the general, nourished by the blood (which He conceives to be only the fuel
of the Vital Flame, or Heat; and in regard of its great Volatility, and harsh
and grating nature, more likely to prey upon and consume, than feed and repair
the substance of the solid parts) but by the sweeter and more unctuous part of
the Chylus, drawn up by the mediation of the Nerves (especially those of the
sixth Conjugation, called the Recurrent Nerves) into the brain, and there
elaborated, and afterward transmitted by the Nerves, to all parts of the body:
This worthy Person, I say, aiming to promote the certainty of these recent
Opinions, has collected, illustrated and disposed them into one Systeme;
Hoping thereby to declare their mutual Consistence, as well each with other, as
with the demonstrative doctrine of the Circulation of the blood; And at the
same time put an end to all disputes, concerning the Milky veins, the use of
the Spleen, of the Capsulae Atrabilariae, or Renes succenturiati, Deputy
Kidneys (as Casserius Placentinus called them) and sundry other Difficulties in
Anatomy. But, whether or no he has attained to the full pitch of his hopes, in
that design; you will be best able to judge, when you have read and examined
the weight of his experiments and discourses, delivered in his excellent Book,
de Anatomia Hepatis: In the mean time, give me leave to advertise you, that his
modesty is so great, as that he expressly professes his own want of full
satisfaction concerning the truth of sundry particulars therein contained; And
therefore presents them to the World, as positions, not of apodictical
evidence, but great probability, and worthy to be embraced, only till time
shall have brought more credible ones to light.

Furthermore, among these Merchants for light, we have some so excellently well
skilled in all sorts of Medical Simples, that they know, not only the names,
but the faces also and virtues of most of the Plants in Europe; And can,
besides that, give you a better account of the American druggs, than Piso
Margravius, and others, notwithstanding the large volumes they have compiled
concerning that subject. They likewise so well understand all Fossilia, and the
several kinds of Minerals, precious Stones, Salts, concreted juices, and other
subterranean productions; That even Lapidaries and Miners come to learn of
them. We have others, who enquire into the mysteries of Refiners, Belfounders,
and all others that deal in Metals. Others, who search out the frauds and
sophistications of Wine-Coopers and Vintners, in the brewing, feeding,
stumming, and adulterating of Wines. Others, who can inform you exactly of the
several hurtful Arts of Brewers, Bakers, Butchers, Poulterers, and Cooks: All
which are of very great detriment to the health of men, though the danger be
commonly undiscerned; And, were the civil Magistrate but half so careful to
reform, as these Doctors have been in detecting those public abuses, the City
of London would soon find, by happy experience, that Physicians are both as
willing and able to preserve health, as to restore it. In a word, there is
nothing escapes their examination, which may any way concern the safety of man's
life; or the knowledge whereof can conduce to make themselves every way
accomplished in their Profession.

And as for Chemistry (which I had almost forgotten) in the whole world there
are none who know better how to distinguish betwixt the impostures and truths
of it, than these Men do: or how to make use of all the secrets thereof,
toward the preparation of noble and generous Medicaments. Witness that plenty
of choice Chymicall remedies, daily confected in the Elaboratory belonging to
the College, by the directions and prescripts of the Fellows; and the care
they constantly take, to diffuse those safe and excellent preparations among
all their Apothecaries, that so the lives of their Patients be not endangered
by the false and poisonous wares of Pseudo-chymists. A course, certainly, that
occasions great readiness and security in their Practice; and satisfies the
World both of their singular Judgment, and constant Integrity in discharge of
their trust. And thus, most honored Sir, I have hastily, and slightly run over
a few of those particulars, wherein Natural Philosophy, and the Art of Medicine
have, of late, received such notable advancement, by the Inventions and
Disquisitions of this Venerable Society; which for the Knowledge of Nature,
well deserves to be esteemed the Great Luminary of the World, from whence there
constantly stream rays of light, for the dispelling the thick and long
congested clouds of ignorance. But, before I pass to the remainder of your
demand, permit me to observe to you; that though the Fellows of this College
apply themselves severally to this or that particular Province, each one
according to the inclination and delight of his own private Genius; Yet, when
they meet together in Consultations, they are so candid and liberal in the
communication of their single observations and discoveries, that no one of them
can long be ignorant of the notions of all the rest: And the noble Emulation
that has equally enflamed their ingenious breasts, makes them unanimous in
cooperating toward the Common design, the erecting an entire and durable
Fabric of solid Science; such as posterity may not only admire, but set up
their rest in.

And now Sir, if you please to go along with me to Oxford, you shall there
also find as great Benefactors to Learning, as those were, who founded and
endowed their Colleges; and some, who for the excellency of their Inventions,
will have their Memories fresh and verdant, when Time has made those stately
buildings confess their brittleness, and reduced them into Quarries again. I
could bring you to One there, who has excogitated a Method, whereby the
Astronomy of the primary Planets may be Geometrically explained: and that as
well according to the Elliptical, as to the Circularway. A thing of stupendous
difficulty, requiring universal knowledge in the Mathematiques; and of
inestimable benefit toward the Certification of Celestial Science: and which,
being judiciously perpended, seems to be of equal weight with the merits of
even the Great Hipparchus, who (you know) made the first Catalogue of the Fixed
Stars, observed their several Magnitudes, and marked out their particular
Stations, both according to longitude and latitude; without which there could
be no certain observation of the motions of the Erratick ones. So that if
Hipparchus may be deservedly named Atlas the Second, for relieving the wearied
shoulders of that Great Grandfather of Astronomy; and if the glorious Tycho
Brahe may be called Hercules the Second, for relieving Hipparchus, long
languishing and ready to sink under so prodigious a burden, as the whole
mystery of the Heavens: I see no reason, why the Author of this admirable
Invention, which seems to assure the truth of all the rest, may not be called
Tycho the Second. For my part really, were I worthy to have this Gentleman's
Picture in my study, I should desire to have it drawn in this manner. I would
have Hipparchus, Ptolemy, and Tycho, standing in a triangle, and supporting the
whole Celestial Machine on their heads; on one side, Copernicus turning all
the Orbs about with his right hand; and this Heroes on the other side, with a
Table in his left hand containing the Figures in Euclids Elements, and with the
Forefinger of his right, pointing to the Planetary Spheres, as demonstrating
the theory of their Motions, by the maxims of Geometry. And sure I am, He
deserves to have his name assigned to some honorable place, among the worthy
Advancers of Astronomy, in the Selenographicall map of Ricciolus. I could bring
you to Another, who has likewise discovered a Method, whereby the Parabola,
Circle, Ellipsis, and Hyperbola really are (and most, if not all other regular
Curve-lined Figures, may be) squared: A Problem that has long perplex't the
thoughts of the greatest Geometricians, and of late very near turned the
brains of even the great Leviathan himself, who arrogating the solution of it
to himself, thought thereby not a little to justify his pretenses to the
Monarchy of Knowledge, and Reformation of not only the Arts and Sciences, but
also of the Universities that teach them.

Here are some, who perceiving the great advantage arising to Students from the
use of Symbols (whereby the understanding is exempted from the encombrance of
words, and brought, as it were, with one glance to behold the long continued
series of complex and intricate ratiocination, which would otherwise oppress
the memory, and confound the strongest imagination to sustain it) invented by
Vieta, and brought to perfection by Mr. Oughtred and Des Carts, for the more
compendious tradition of the Mathematics; and considering that the same way
was capable of being accommodated to the Facilitation of discourses in
Philosophy, Physic, and other parts of Learning; have made a very considerable
progress toward the invention of Symbols, or Signs, for every thing and
notion: insomuch that one of these Wits has found the variety of many millions
of Signs, in a square of a quarter of an inch, as himself professes, in a
most ingenious discourse of his, entitled Vindiciae Academiarum. Which perhaps
you have read; and if you have, I need not tell you how little he wants of
finishing that so long talked-of and desired design of an Universal Character
and Language.

And as for the Optiques, show me the men in the whole World, who have more
illustrated the nature, affections, and motions of that most subtle and
glorious Creature, Light; Or given clearer demonstrations of their Knowledge of
all sorts of Radiations, and the manner and reasons of Vision, than some
Mathematical Wits, now flourishing in this University, have done. It is their
usual recreation, to practice all Delusions of the sight, in the Figures,
Magnitudes, Motions, Colors, Distances, and Multiplications of Objects: And,
were you there, you might be entertained with such admirable Curiosities, both
Dioptrical and Catoptrical, as former ages would have been startled at, and
believed to have been Magical. They will represent to you, the Images of Things
and Persons entire, and to the life, from Tables whereon the naked eye cannot
discern so much as one part of them, unless in fractures and seemingly
confused divisions; and this by collected reflections from mirrours Conical,
Cylindrical, Concave, Unequal, Multangular, etc. They will imitate Nature to the
height of perfect resemblance, in counterfeiting Rainbows, Halo's, and Circles
of various Colors about Lights, by artificial Refractions of their beams. They
have all the several ways of Multiplying and Corroborating Light, and
transmitting it in concourse to very great distance; And this, as well by
conveying the dispersed rays through Diaphanous bodies, of convenient figures,
and reuniting them in a cone or point, after their various refractions, for the
increase of their force; Or by repercussion from Concave (Elliptical,
Parabolical, Circular) superficies of polite Indiaphanous ones. Insomuch, that
if Niceron, Kircher, and other great Masters in the Art of Light and Shadows,
would see the errors of their Optical Theory amended; and all the secrets of
Catoptrical Magic, familiarly reduced into practice: hither and only hither
they must come. And, were Friar Bacon alive again, he would with amazement
confess, that he was canonized a Conjurer, for effecting far less, than these
men frequently exhibit to their friends, in sport. They have, moreover, Optic
Tubes, or Telescopes, in such perfection, that they magnify more, and take in
more of the rays proceeding from illuminate Objects, than any other of the
same length, that ever were made before: And have brought them also to as great
a length, as can well be managed. These they use for observations of Eclipses
of Sun and Moon, of the several Phases or Apparences of the Moon, of Saturn,
and other Planets, both primary and secundary, of the Galaxy, the magnitudes
and figures of the fixed stars, and other Celestial Speculations. They have
likewise Microscopes, that magnify the dimensions of minute and otherwise
undiscernable bodies, even to an incredible rate, and bring the sight to a
familiar acquaintance with the shapes of not only whole small Flies and other
Insects, but also of the smallest part of them. Insomuch as there is hope, if
this Invention go on toward perfection as fast as it has begun, within this
last four or five years; that the eye ere long may be enabled to distinguish
even the Seminal Figures of things, which seem to regulate them in their
productions and growth; and to behold the originary Schematisms of Nature,
drawn on the smallest Moleculae, or first collections of Atoms concurring to
determinate the Figures of Concretions.

And thus, Noblest Isodicastes, have I essayd to yield you some satisfaction,
concerning the state of Learning, now in England; And the chief Particulars,
wherein it has received Advancement, by the prosperous endeavors of our
Countrymen, since your retirement here in France. I need not intimate to you,
how imperfect and rambling an account I have given you of these Novell
Inventions; and am sufficiently conscious, that I rather ought to excuse my
self, by the frailty of my Memory, and want of judgment, how to represent such
excellent and useful Discoveries, in descriptions correspondent to their
Natures: And ask your pardon for thus abusing your patience, and lessning the
merits of those worthy Authors, who have thus enriched the Commonwealth of
Philosophy.


Isodicastes. Good Athanasius, how well you have deserved both of those Authors
and my self, in this your learned Harangue; I must forbear to speak, till you
are absent. In the mean time, give me leave, a little to wonder, how it comes
about, that Apollo, who seldom plants his Laurel in a Land yet wet and reaking
with blood, and delights to reside only where Peace and Plenty have long had
their habitations; should thus take up his mansion in a Nation so lately
oppressed by the Tyranny of Mars, and scarce yet free from the distractions of a
horrid Civil War. Pallas and Bellona I know to be one and the same Goddess:
Yet I do not remember, I ever saw her pictured (like Caesar) with a Spear in
one hand, and a Book in the other. When I veiw the train of sad and heavy
Calamities, that commonly attend the Sword; I should rather have expected the
incroachment of Ignorance and Barbarism upon our Island, than the increase of
Letters and growth of Knowledge there.


Athanasius. You have reason for your wonder, Sir, I must confess; Yet when
you have considered, that every Age has its peculiar Genius, which inclines
men's Minds to some one study or other, and gives it a dominion over their
affections proportionate to its secret influence; and that the vicissitudes of
things ordained by Providence, require a general predisposition in men's hearts,
to cooperate with Fate, toward the Changes appointed to succeed in the
fullness of their time: You will think it less strange, that Britain, which
was but yesterday the Theater of War and desolation, should to day be the
School of Arts, and Court of all the Muses. Omnia secula suum habent Genium,
qui mortalium animos in certa studia solet inflectere. Quaedam aetates
praecipue armis exercitae; mox omnia in quietem composita; tum Regnorum, tum
Rerum publicarum in populis amor; nunc veluti in barbariem homines nasci,
deinde facilioribus animis mansuescere; and post secula aliquot ad stipatum
prima caligine ingenium redire: was the observation of a Modern Writer, and
has been frequently verified. Besides, our late Wars and Schisms, having
almost wholly discouraged men from the study of Theology; and brought the
Civil Law into contempt: The major part of young Scholars in our Universities
addict themselves to Physic; and how much that conduces to real and solid
Knowledge, and what singular advantages it has above other studies, in making
men true Philosophers; I need not intimate to you, who have so long tasted of
that benefit.


Lucretius. I guess the Author of that observation you allege; and that put's
me in mind of another remark of his, perhaps not altogether unseasonable. In
his Character of the English Genius, he has this saying: In Philosophia autem
and Mathesi, terrarumque and astrorum scientiis, nulla iam prodigiosa est
Sententia, quae non ex hac regione Authors invenerit, vel turbam amatorum,
vividam quidem, sed modum subtilitati per innumeras disputationes effusae non
invenientem. Now, if this be true, why may we not refer these Innovations in
Philosophy, Physic, and the Mathematics, you have here recounted, rather to
the English Humor of affecting new Opinions, than to any real defects or
errors in the Doctrine of the Ancients?


Athanasius. How now, Lucretius; you an Epicurean, and yet against liberty of
judgment among Philosophers? It seems you have forgotten your Masters Rule;
Quoties aliqua sunt in natura, quae pessunt multis peragi modis (uti eclipses
syderum, uti eorundem ortus, occasus, sublimiaque caetera) tunc unum aliquem
modum it a probare, ut improbentur caeteri, ridiculum profecto est. Pray, do
but proceed to the words immediately subsequent to that passage in Barclay,
concerning the pronesse of the English Genius to Novelties; and you will soon
find, that he reflected chiefly on the Copernican Systeme, which in his days
began to grow into high repute, and obtained many Sectators among the learned
of our Nation. So that confirming that Reproach, he endeavored to fix upon our
ingenious Spirits, by no better an instance, than that of our admission and
promotion of the Pythagorean Hypothesis, of the Motion of the Earth, revived
and adorned by Copernicus (which all Astronomers now allow to be the most
intelligible and most convenient, that ever was invented) it easily appears,
with how much more justice himself may be accused of gross ignorance in
matters Astronomical, which yet he would pretend to judge of; than we can be of
Levity and affected Innovation, for embracing and cultivating an opinion, of
whose singular probability and excellency we are fully convinced. And as we
have not submitted to that change in Astronomy, but upon grounds of as much
certainty and clearness, as the sublime and remote nature of the subject seems
capable of: So neither have we introduced any Alterations in Natural
Philosophy, Physic, and other parts of Human Learning, but what carry their
utility with them, and are justifiable by right reason, by autoptical or
sensible demonstration, and by multiplied experience. So that every intelligent
man may easily perceive, that it has been the Reformation, that drew on the
Change; not the desire of Change, which pretends the Reformation. Did you,
Lucretius, but know the Gravity, Solidity, and Circumspection of these worthy
Reformers of the state of Learning now in England; you would not suspect them
of incogitancy, or too much indulgence toward the Minerva's of their own brain:
but confess that they have precisely followed that counsel of the Scripture,
which injoynes us, to make a stand upon the Ancient way, and then look about
us, and discover, what is the straight and right way, and so to walk in it.


Isodicastes. For my part, truly, I conceive it fitting, that all Scholars
should have a reverend esteem of Antiquity, as a good guide of our younger
Reason into the ways of Nature; Yet I think it scarce safe for any man to
follow it implicitly, and without examination, as if it were impossible for him
to err the whiles, or as if the light of his own understanding were given him
to no other use, but to be set in the drak-lanthorn of Authority. The Ancients
indeed, (thanks be to their bounteous industry) have left us large and noble
Foundations; but few complete Buildings: and who so intends to have his
understanding seated commodiously, and in a pleasant Mansion of Science, must
advance superstructures of his own; otherwise he will lie open to the weather of
Doubts, and Whirlewinds of various Difficulties, nor will he be ever able to
entertain his friends with decency and satisfaction. It was gravely and wittily
said of the Lord Bacon, that those who too much reverence Old times, often
become a scorn to the New. But, Gentlemen, I perceive the evening hastens upon
us, and I have already detained you longer, then suits with the civility of an
accidental encounter; Pray, therefore, let me beg the favor of your company
to a light Collation of a Sallade and a bottle of good Wine, at my House: Or,
if your occasions have otherwise preingaged you, let me resign you to the
pursuit of them, with thanks for the content your learned conversation has
given me, and hopes of enjoying the like again, as often as your vacancy from
serious affairs will permit.


Athanasius. Noblest Sir, I most humbly thank you for the honor of your
invitation; and would attend you home, with all joy and gratitude imaginable,
would the urgency of a business I have appointed to dispatch, this evening,
dispense with me.


Lucretius. I can assure you Sir, Athanasius is preingaged, and upon a matter
of some moment; but for my self, I am at liberty to meet the happiness you are
pleased to offer me.


Isodicastes. I love not to hinder business; nor to importune a friend to his
disadvantage. And so adieu, worthy Athanasius. Come Lucretius, I will bring you
the shortest way; I have a key will let us forth at yonder Privy door, that
opens into the fields, that lie within the prospect of my house.


Athanasius. Honored Isodicastes, farewell.


DIALOGUE THE SECOND
LUCRETIUS. I See you are very precise in keeping your time prefix't,
Athanasius; And I hope, I have not made you stay, many minutes, for me. If I
have, you must impute it to the disagreement of our Watches, not to any
tardiness in my self; For, I assure you, I was here before you, in my desires.


Athanasius. I love always to be punctual in my appointments, and rather to
prevent my Friends, than put them to expect me. But, have you acquainted this
Noble person Isodicastes, with the occasion of our present meeting?


Isodicastes. Yes, Athanasius, he has; and I acknowledge my self singularly
obliged to him for importuning you to a divertisement, than which none could be
more agreeable to me, as well in respect of the Argument you have promised to
discuss, as of your self, whose Writings and yesterdaie's Conference have
created in me a desire of conversing with you, oftener than (I fear me) your
studies and affairs will permit. And now we are convened, let us lose no time,
but repose our selves upon this shady Seat, and omitting all Complements and
Prologues; address immediately to the Subject intended. For my part, I promise
you all attention of Mind possible, and as much Equity in judgment, as my
slender stock of reason can attain to.


Athanasius. Among Us, who are so happy, as to be Sacramentally engaged to
fight under the Standard of the Crucified God, I observe, in the general, two
different persuasions concerning the nature of Faith. Some there are, who seem
to have so active and long-winged a power of belief, as that they can mount up
to an easy and quick apprehension of all the Mysteries of the Christian
Doctrine; and are ready to complain, that they want Difficulties enough to
exercise the strength of their Belief. Others there are, who though their Faith
be lively and strong enough to embrace even the most sublime Article of the
Creed; and estimate the Verity of each Religious Principle only by its
dependence on Authority Divine: are nevertheless so sensible of the frailties
of Human Nature, as that they think it necessary to have often recourse to that
Pathetical Ejaculation of the man in the Gospel, Lord I believe, Lord help my
unbelief. The First, wholly refuse the assistance of their Reason, even where
it offers it self and the subject is capable of illustration by the discourses
it might raise thereupon; as judging any Fundamental of Religion much debased,
and in a manner profaned, if once it be brought to the Test of the Light of
Nature, though merely for Confirmation and more familiar admittance. The
Others, humbly resign up their Assent to all Positions contained in Sacred
Writ; and yet are glad, when they can bring up the Forces of their Reason to
assist them in the conquest of their fleshly oppositions: And conceive they
then make the best use of the talent of their Understanding, when they employ
it toward the ratification of Divine Traditions.

Now, albeit I admire, and could most willingly emulate the perfection of the
Former sort; Yet, I confess, I am not ashamed to rank my self among the
Latter. For, although (thanks be to the Mercy of God) I do not find my self
subject to diffidence in any point of the Christian belief, taught me by that
Oracle of Sacred wisdom, the Word of God: Yet me thinks I perceive my faith
somewhat Corroborated and Encouraged, when to the evidence thereof I can superadd
also the concurrent testimony of my Reason. Nor do I fear the frowns of
Theology, if I adventure to affirm, that that Soul must have a clearer
preception of the Excellency of Objects Supernatural, who can attain to
speculate them both by the light of Grace and that of Nature together. I am
very far short of their Audacity, who are so conceipted of the subtility of
their Wit, as to permit it to fly at all that a Christian is bound to believe;
insomuch as even the Arcana Deitatis, the Mysteries of the Trinity, of the
Hypostatick Union, and other the like Divine Abstrusities (which poor Mortality
is unqualified to contemplate; and, indeed, which Cherubins themselves cannot
look into, without raptures of holy wonder) have hardly escaped their
profanation. No, far be it from me, to entertain a thought of so wild and
dangerous a presumption. All I durst ever aspire unto, is only with pious
humility to apply my Reason to such of the Articles in my Creed, as seem to be
placed within the Sphere of its comprehension: Of which sort I conceive the
First and Last Article to be, viz. the Being of God, as Father Almighty, and
Maker of Heaven and Earth; and the Immortality of Man's Soul, or Life
everlasting. Nor, indeed, need I seek further for my Confirmation in the belief
of all the rest, when once I have advanced my Understanding to that due height,
as clearly to behold the Verity of these two Positions, that are the Pillars
and supporters of all the others. Nay, I have sometimes thought the Single
position of the Immortality of the Human Soul, to be the grand Base of
Religion, and like the Key, or middle stone in an Arch, which bears the weight
of all others in the building. For, if the Soul be mortal, and subject to utter
dissolution with the body; to what purpose does all Piety and Religion serve?
What issue can we expect of all our Prayers, of all our Adorations, of all our
Self-denying acts of obedience, of all our unjust Sufferings? Why should we
worship God at all? Nay, more, why should we consider whether there be a God or
no? For, the assurance of his Being could not much conduce to increase our
happiness in this transitory life; since that would then consist only in the
full fruition of Sensual pleasures: And as for future expectations after death,
there could be none at all; For, absolute Dissolution imports absolute
Insensibility; and what is not, cannot be capable of Reward or Punishment, of
Felicity or Misery.

What has not an Existence, can never know
The want of Bliss; Nothing can feel no Woe.
And from this Consideration was it, that I began first to apply my self to
search for other Reasons, for the eviction of the Souls Eternal subsistence
after death, besides those delivered in Holy Scripture; that conjoyning the
evidence and certainty of those desumed from the Light of Nature, to that of my
former belief arising from the Light of Grace: I might be the better able to
withstand the Convulsions of my own frailties, and convince others, who are so
refractory, as to submit their assent to no inducement of persuasion, but what
is drawn merely from Natural Reasons.

Now, for my encouragement and Justification in this design, I need not go far;
it being well known, that many Doctors of the Church, and those of the best
note both for Learning and Piety, have exercised their wits and pens in the
same subject: and have unanimously concluded, that though in the Christian
Creed there be sundry Articles, concerning the Condition of Man's Soul, after
its separation from the body, which by infinite excesses transcend the capacity
of his reason; Yet that general one of the perpetual existence of it after
death, may be satisfactorily evinced by the same reason. To mention all the
excellent Discourses written by these Churchmen and others, upon this
Argument; would be both tedious and unnecessary: Especially to you, who I
presume have perused the greatest part, if not all of them. It may suffice,
that I have them for my Precedents, both for the warrantablenesse, and
probability, of this my undertaking. However, if you require farther
justification of me; I refer you to the undeniable Authority of the Lateran
Council, held under Pope Leo the tenth. Which having decreed the
Anathematization of all Atheists, who durst question the Being of God, or the
Immortality of the Human Soul; in the close of the Canon not only exhorts,
but expressly commands all Christian Philosophers to endeavor the
demonstration of those sacred Truths, by solid and Physical Arguments. And,
certainly, so pious and prudent an Assembly would never have prescribed that
task, in case they had not conceived it both commendable and possible to be
effected.


Lucretius As for the Goodness and Piety of your Undertaking, truly I think
few understanding men will question it; and, on the other side, I fear me, you
will meet with as few, that will acknowledge the Possibility of your
accomplishing it. For, if I am not much mistaken, the greatest number of those
eminent Doctors of the Church, and chiefest of the Schoolmen, whom you
intimated to have been your examples, in this particular, do, after all their
labors and subtle disputes, ingenuously confess, that the best of their
Arguments are not rigorously Convincing, or such as constrain assent as
inevitably as Mathematical Demonstrations. And, if so, though I expect to
receive as high satisfaction from you, as from any, who ever gave me the same
hopes: Yet I humbly beg your excuse, if I suspend my belief of your ability to
prove the Immortality of man's Soul, by Reasons of evidence and force requisite
to the Conviction of a mere Natural man (such as I, for this time at least,
suppose my self to be, and such as indeed all men would, when they come to
examine the strength of Discourses of this nature) until you shall have given
me more pregnant testimonies thereof, than any Author; whose writings I have
read, has hitherto done, touching this subject. In a word, I believe the Soul
to be Immortal, as firmly, as you, or any person living can; Yet I should
account it no small felicity, to see a perfect Demonstration of it; such as
might for ever silense all Doubts and Contradictions, and make a Convert of my
old Master Epicurus, in case he were now among the living: And any thing less
than that, would hold no proportion to my expectation.


Athanasius. I will not deny, Lucretius, but some of those Schoolmen, who have
alleged congruous and sinewy Reasons, in favor of the Souls Immortality, did
afterward themselves confess, they were not completely Apodicticall: But, you
may be pleased to remember also, that some others of them stiffly maintained
the contrary; and all of them unanimously concur in this, that howbeit those
Reasons do not ascertain equally with Geometrical Demonstrations; yet they are
such as import either a Physical or Moral evidence, sufficient to persuade a
mind well affected toward truth, and free from the obstruction of prejudice.
Nor should I fear to obtain the Cause, however the Arguments I shall bring, to
assert the Immortality of the Soul, arise not to the height of absolute
Demonstrations: Provided they be found of greater certainty, clearness, and
consequence, than those that have ever yet been urged by those of the contrary
persuasion; and such as being superadded to the Authority of Holy Writ, become
ineluctable. And more than this, ( Lucretius) considering the singular
obscurity and abstruse condition of the subject, you have no reason to expect
at my hands. Pray, do but reflect a little on the modesty of that great man,
Aristotle, declared in sundry places of his Writings, but more especially in
the beginning of his Ethics, where he says, Hominis probe instituti est,
tantam in unoquoque genere subtilitatem desiderare, quantam rei ipsius natura
recipit. A man of Erudition, and a sound Judgment; ought to require only so
much subtility and exactness in any kind of Argument, as the nature of the
thing treated of, will admit, and no more. And, having observed the same
unreasonable humor of curiosity in others of those times, that now possesses
you, and too many of the sublime Wits of the present age, who look for nothing
below Demonstrations, though in the Metaphysics, and other Sciences that are
really incapable of them; he adds this positive rule, Mathematica certitudo
non est in omnibus quaerenda; Mathematical Certitude is not to be required in
all things. To convince you the more clearly of the Unreasonablenesse of what
you would exact from me in this case; let me a while divert you to the
consideration of the nature of a Demonstration. The Method of Demonstration,
you know, is twofold; the one by Analysis, the other by Synthesis.

The Analytical teaches the true way, by which the truth of a thing may be
found out Methodically, and as a priori; so that if the Reader or Hearer shall
strictly follow the same, and attentively heed all the Antecedents and
Consequents therein propounded, he shall come at length to understand the thing
demonstrated as perfectly, and make it as much his own, as if himself had first
found it out. But yet it contains nothing, whereby either the heedless, or
dissenting reader may be compelled to assent; For if any one of the least
Propositions therein delivered, be not exactly and fully noted, the necessity
of its Conclusions does not sufficiently appear.

The Synthetical, by a way opposite to the former, and as it were sought a
posteriori (though the Probation it self be oftentimes more a priori, than in
the former) does clearly demonstrate, what is concluded, and uses a long
series of Definitions, Postula es, Axioms, Theorems, and Problems, that if any
thing be denied of the Consequents, it speedily shows the same to be
comprehended in the Antecedents, and so extorts belief from the Reader, though
formerly repugnant and pertinacious. Nevertheless, this does not satisfy, nor
fill the mind of him who comes to learn, so amply as the other: Because it
teaches not the way or manner, how the thing proved was first found out. And
this Latter is that, which the Ancient Geometricians generally made use of in
their Writings; not that they were ignorant of the other: But (as I conceive)
because they valued it so highly, as that they desired to reserve it to
themselves, as a great Secret, and too noble to be profaned by vulgar
communication. Now, this is that strict and vigorous Method, upon which I
suppose you reflect, when you say; you would gladly meet with a perfect
Demonstration of the Immortality of Man's Soul: And I must therefore advertise
you of the Incompetency thereof to Metaphysical subjects. And the reason does
consist in this Difference; that the First Notions, which are presupposed, in
order to the demonstration of things Geometrical, agreeing with the use of the
Senses, are most easily and promptly admitted by all men; and so there is no
difficulty, but only in deducing right Consequences from them, which may be
done only by remembering the Antecedents: And the minute distinction of
propositions is therefore made, that each of them may, upon occasion, be
quickly recited, and so recalled to the memory of even the most heedlesse
Reader: But on the contrary, in things Metaphysical, all the difficulty lies in
clearly and distinctly perceiving the First Notions; For, though of their own
nature they be not less known, or, even more known, than those considered by
Geometricians: Yet, because many prejudgements of the Senses, to which from our
infancy we have been accustomed, seem repugnant to them; therefore cannot they
be perfectly known, but by such as are very attentive to them, and withal
abstract their Minds from the Images of Corporeal things, as much as is
possible; and being proposed alone by themselves, they might easily be denied,
by such as delight in contradiction. But, as for the Analytical method; I would
not have you despair of seeing it in some measure accommodated to the subject,
of which we now discourse. Provided you shall first tune your Mind to a fit
key, to bear a part in the harmony of truth, when it resounds from the strings
of all the Antecedents and Consequents propounded. Which you must do, both by
abstracting your thoughts many times from the gross representations of
Corporeal things, that hold no commerce of proportion or similitude with the
Incorporeal Nature of the thing enquired into: and by wholly devesting your
self of all prejudice, and inclination to impugn truth, when it presents it
self clad in sufficient evidence. For, whosoever comes to the examination of an
intricate truth, with the cloud of inveterate aversion, and mask of affected
contradiction, before his eyes; does thereby make himself the less fit to
perceive it: because he diverts his mind, from the due consideration of those
reasons that might convince him, to the hunting after such as may dissuade him.


Lucretius. You do well, Athanasius, thus to prepare my belief beforehand, by
telling me, how necessary it is, that I should abstract my Mind, as well from
the Images of Material Objects, as from prejudice; when it remains on your
part, first to show me the way of that Abstraction, and then to divest me of
prejudice. For, for my own part, I confess ingenuously, I can speculate
nothing, without the help of my Imagination; so that whatever I can think upon,
comes to my mind in the dress of Magnitude, Figure, Color, and other the like
conditions of Matter. Truth is, I have often heard, among your soaring and
longwinged Wits, of Abstracted and Unbodied Notions; and have sometimes
perplexed my mind, and almost cracked the membranes of my brain, in striving how
to comprehend them: And yet I always found my Phansy so inseparably conjoined
to my Intellect, as if they were both one and the same Faculty. Nor am I yet
able to distinguish betwixt my Imagination and Intellection: And when once you
shall have satisfied me of a real Difference betwixt them; I shall soon
confess, you have gone very near the Demonstration of the Souls Immortality.
Because, if the operations of the Intellect be clearly distinct from those of
the Phansy, which is a Corporeal Faculty, and therefore limited to the
perception and representation of only Corporeal Natures: It will almost follow,
that the Intellect, which is capable of knowing Incorporeals, is a substance
clearly distinct from the body, and so Immaterial; since different effects must
have different Causes. And, as for your other Postulate, viz. the exemption of
my mind from contrary prejudice; This also is what I should expect from the
efficacy of your intended Arguments. For, (as I told you before) I believe the
Immortality of the Soul; but cannot persuade my self of the possibility of its
Demonstration, by any other but Divine reasons: And it must be your work, to
convince me of the error of that persuasion. Nevertheless, I will assure you
of my best Attention, and that I come not with a resolution not to be satisfied.


Athanasius. Dear Sir, have patience a while, and you shall soon perceive both
the Necessity and Equity of what I require: And in the mean time, do not take
occasion to anticipate my Notions, but leave me to deliver them in their due
places and order.


Lucretius. I shall punctually observe your commands; and therefore, if you
think fit, immediately address your self to your Demonstration.


Athanasius. First, it will be convenient, in order to the prevention of all
Equivocation and Logomachy, that may arise from the various use of the word,
Soul; that we insist a little on the examination of that vulgar Opinion, which
admits a real distinction betwixt Animus and Anima, the Mind and the Soul:
In regard it seems to be the very same, according to which many Doctors of the
Church have conceived the Soul to have Two Parts, a Superior and Inferior; the
one being the Mind, Intellect, or Reason; the other comprehending the Sense and
Appetite Natural and Brutish.

There are (you know) many eminent men, as well Theologues, as Philosophers,
who, as they hold Man to be composed of two parts, a Soul and a Body; so do
they conceive, that his soul is likewise composed of a twofold substance, the
one Incorporeal or Immaterial, immediately created by God, and infused into the
body, at the instant of its Empsychosis or first Animation, in the Mothers
Womb: The other Corporeal or Material, originally contained in the Parents
Seed, and derived ex traduce, from the Seminalities of Male and Female commixed
in coition; which is as it were the Medium or Disposition, by the intermediate
nature whereof the Diviner part is conjoined and united to the Elementary, or
Body. And this Opinion they ground chieflly upon that speech of the Apostle,
(...): I perceive a Law in my members warring against the Law of my Mind, etc.
For (say they), since it is impossible, that one Simple Essence or thing should
war against, or have contrariety to it self; from this Repugnancy betwixt the
Sense, and the Mind or Reason, it seems necessarily consequent, that the
Sensitive and Rational Soul are things essentially different each from other.
Whereunto they superadd also, that unless this Distinction be admitted, we can
never well understand, how Man, as a living Creature, can be said to be, in one
part, little lower than the Angels: and in another, to be like the Horse or
Mule, that have no understanding. How, in respect of one part, he is made after
the Image of God: and in respect of another, he is compared to the Beasts that
perish. How, in one respect, he acknowledges God to be his Author and
Principle: and in another, he owns his production upon his Parents. How, in one
relation, he is said to be Immortal: and in another, subject to death equally
with the smallest worm.

Notwithstanding, it is not either the Authority, or Arguments of these Men,
that seem prevalent enough to bring me to be of their persuasion. For as to
their Authority; I could thereunto oppose that of some Fathers, yea and
Councils, who not only reprehend, but condemn all such, as make a duality of
Souls in man: were not the thing already well known to you. However, suffer me
to put you in mind, that the pious and learned Conimbricenses (who certainly,
have most profoundly and judiciously, of all others, handled this Question)
though they proceed not so far, as to censure this conceit to be Heretical
(as some others before them had don) yet they expressy declare their Dissent
from it. And as for their Reasons alleged; I think them likewise
insufficient. For all that Psychomachy, or intestine Conflicts which these men
imagine to be betwixt the inferior part of the soul which is called the
sensitive, and the superior called the Rational, or betwixt the Natural
Appetites and the Will; do arise only from the repugnancy or contrariety
which is between those motions of the spirits, which are on one side caused by
the senses affected by external objects; and those motions of the spirits
which on the other side are caused by the will, after the soul has deliberated
upon their convenience and utility. And, in truth, each individual man has
one and only one soul; in which is no variety of parts: that which is the
Sensitive is also the Rational, and all her Appetites are absolute Volitions.
The cause of these men's error seems to be this, that they could not well
distinguish the Functions proper to the soul, from the Functions proper to the
body; to which alone we ought in right to ascribe whatever we observe in our
selves to be repugnant to our Reason. So that in Man, there is no other
Contract or Contrariety of Affections, but what consists in the contrary
motions caused by the spirits and purer part of the blood, in that part of the
body, in which as in its principal and more immediate organ, the soul is
enthroned and exercises her faculties; whether that be the Plexus Choroides in
the brain, as most Physicians conceive; or the Heart, as the Scripture seems to
intimate; or the Glandula pinealis, in the center of the brain, as Des Carts
affirms; or any other part whatsoever: one of these motions arising from the
determination of the spirits by the will one way; and the other, from the
determination of them by the corporeal Appetite, another way. And hence it
comes often to pass, that these impulses being contrary each to other; the
stronger does impede and countermand the effect of the weaker. Nor is it
difficult to distinguish these two kinds of impulses or motions, made by the
mediation of the spirits upon the principal sensory, or chief seat of the soul.
Forasmuch as some of them represent to the soul, the Images of objects either
at that time moving the senses, or the impressions formerly made and remaining
in the brain; but offer no force or violence to it, so far as to engage the
will toward their prosecution: and others prove so effectual, as to dispose the
will accordingly; as may be observed in all those, which produce passions, or
such motions in the body, as usually accompany passions. As for the former,
though they often impede the actions of the soul, and are again as often
impeded and suppressed by them; yet, because they are not directly opposite
each to other, we can observe no conflict or wrestling betwixt them; as we may,
betwixt the latter sort of Motions, and acts of the will or Volitions that
oppose them, as (for example) betwixt that impulse, by which the principal
organ of the soul is disposed to affect her with the cupidity or desire of any
one particular object; and that, by which the will counterdisposeth her to an
aversation from, or avoydance of, the same. And this Conflict chiefly
demonstrate thits self hereby, that the will being not able to excite passions
directly, and immediately, is constrained to cast about and use a kind of art,
in order thereunto; and to apply it self to the consideration of several
things successively, or one after another; whereupon it comes to pass, that if
any one of those things occurring, chance to be prevalent enough to change the
course or current of the spirits, at that instant; yet another that follows
next after it, be not powerful enough to second the former in that change, the
spirits then immediately again resume their first course or motion (the
precedent disposition in the nerves, heart, and blood, being not yet altered)
and thereupon the soul perceives her self to be impelled to pursue and avoid
the same object, almost in one and the same moment. And this alone was that,
which gave occasion to men, to imagine Two Distinct and mutually repugnant
Powers or Faculties in the soul. Nevertheless, we may conceive another sort of
Conflict consisting in this; that many times the same cause, which exciteth a
passion in the soul, does, even in the same moment, excite also in the body,
certain motions, to which the soul does not at all conduce, and which she
suppresseth or at least endeavors to suppress, so soon as she observes them to
be begun. For instance, whatsoever causes Fear, does at the same instant
cause also the spirits to flow into those muscles, which serve to move the
thighs and legs to flight or avoidance of the terrible object; but if the
Will suddenly rise up, and determine to exercise the virtue of Fortitude, and
oppose the danger threatened, the soul then gives check to that motion of the
spirits, and converts them to the heart and arms the better to make resistance.

And here I ask leave to make a short Digression, while (with the excellent Des
Carts) I observe to you; that it is from the Event of these inward Conflicts,
by which a man may come to understand the strength or weakness of his own soul.
For such persons, who have their wills sufficiently strong to subdue passions,
and countermand those sudden motions in the body which accompany the passions;
are without doubt, endowed with Noble and Generous Souls: And those who have
their wills subject to the impetuosity of passions, and cannot check the
motions of the spirits resulting from them, must be men of abject, effeminate
and pusillanimous ones. Not that every man can make this Experiment of
himself, as to Weakness or Fortitude; because many and indeed most men come
to these Duells, armed, not with the true and proper weapons of the mind, but
with false ones borrowed from some contrary Affection: so that the conflict may
seem to be rather betwixt two opposite Passions, than betwixt the Will and
either of them; and the Will may be said to follow the fortune of the
conquering passion, rather than to be it self the conqueror. By the true and
proper weapons of the Mind, I mean certain right and firm judgments
concerning the knowledge of Good and evil; according to which it has decreed
to regulate it self in all the actions and occurrences of life. And, certainly,
of all Souls, those are the most weak and feminine, which have not their wills
thus determined to follow certain settled Judgments, but suffer them to be
drawn aside by present Affections; which being many times contrary one to
another, and equally prevalent, counter-incline the Will alternately, and so
keep it on the rack of suspense. Thus, when Fear represents Death, as the
worst of evils, and which cannot be otherwise avoided, but by flight; if on the
other side, Ambition step in, and represent the infamy of flight, as an Evil
worse then Death: these two contrary Affections variously agitate and distract
the Will, and by putting it to a long conflict and irresolution, render the
soul most servile and miserable.

Now from this consideration it is manifest, that there is no such necessity,
as has been imagined, of allowing a distinction of the soul into Animum and
Animam, or making the Reasonable soul and the Sensitive two distinct beings, in
order to the explanation of that Psychomachy, or Contest betwixt Reason and
Sense, or the Superior and Inferior Faculties, of which the Apostle complained,
and indeed which every man feels within himself: all that repugnancy
consisting in a Contrariety, not of the soul to it self (which in a Simple
Essence is impossible) but only of the Motions of the spirits; caused by the
Senses, on one side, and those caused by the Will, on the other, as has been
declared. And, as for the other Reasons that remain; what I have now said, may
be easily extended to the solution of them also: for, that Man is composed of a
Reasonable Soul, and a Body; is sufficient to our understanding him to be, in
one respect, little lower than the Angels, made after the Image of God, and
Immortal; and in another, like the Horse and Mule, that have no understanding,
and subject to death equally with the beasts that perish.


Isodicastes. By your favor, good Athanasius. You were saying even now, that
there were some Fathers and Councils, who condemned all such as maintained a
Duality of Souls in Man: But, if I am not mistaken, that condemnation does
chiefly concern the Maniches, who held two distinct Souls in every man; the one
derived from an evil Principle, and so contaminated with the tincture of
Vices; the other immaculate, pure, and having its origin immediately from God,
yea being a certain Particle of the Divine Essence it self; And, perhaps, it
may be extended also to the Platonist and Averrhoist, who affirm the Ratitional
Soul not to be the Forma informans, and so make two forms in every individual
person; both which opinions, are erroneous and heretical. But, that it does
include also those, who distinguish the Soul into a Superior and Inferior part;
the one comprehending the Mind Intellect or Reason only; the other the
Sensitive Faculties and Appetites: I am yet to learn. Which I advertise you of,
not that I am unsatisfied with the reason you have given of those Conflicts we
daily have within us; For, in truth, it seems conveniently to explain the
mystery of that Repugnancy betwixt our Rational and Corporeal Appetites: but,
to intimate to you, that I see no reason, why the Human Soul may not be
admitted: to consist of two parts, the one Immaterial and Intellectual, called
the Mind, or Understanding, and (by way of excellency) the Human Soul; the
other Material, and only Sensitive, by the mediation whereof that Divine part
is united to the body during life. And, without admitting this Distinction, I
do not understand the meaning of that Sentence of Plato, Mentem recipi in
Anima; Animam, in corpore: nor of that of Trismegistus (or whoever was the
Author of Poemander) Mentem in Animam, Animam in Spiritu, Spiritum in corpore
vehi: Both which not obscurely intimate a certain Third Nature in Man,
intermediate between that Divine essence, his reasonable Soul, and that
Material or Elementary one, his body; which can be no other, but what we call
the Sensitive part of the Soul.


Athanasius. Whether that condemnatory Sentence mentioned, does extend to such,
as hold the Reason to be one part of the Soul, and the Sensitive power to be
another, in this moderate sense you are pleased to state it; I will not much
contend, it being the proper business of Divines to determine that doubt: But,
thus much I am certain of, that it expressly touches all, who assert a Duality
of Souls Coexistent in man; and that is enough, I presume, to justify my
quotation of it, against them. As for those remarkable texts of Plato, and the
great Hermes, which you allege; I answer, that it is very probable, that those
Philosophers, who held the Soul to be Composed of two different Natures, as
these seem to have done; had for their principal argument that intestine
Repugnancy, we have explained, and that nothing can be contrary to it self.
Now, their ground or Supposition that this Repugnancy is in the Soul it self,
or betwixt the Reasonable part and the Sensitive, and not betwixt the Soul and
Body only (as I have clearly proved it to be) being manifestly erroneous:
Assuredly, their Inference cannot be longer considerable. Nevertheless, if
what I have already urged, be not sufficiently clear and valid; rather than
show my self so vain an Opiniator, as to put my judgment into the balance
against so solid a one as yours, I am content, you should continue the
possession of your present persuasion, till you shall please to afford me some
other opportunity of demonstrating the Unity and Simplicity of the Soul: My
present undertaking being only to evince the Immortality of it; and this more
out of compliance to Lucretius importunity, than any confidence of singular
ability in my self, to manage so noble and weighty an Argument. If therefore I
have not already discouraged your patience; permit me now to apply my self
wholly to that Province.

The Considerations which I have designed to allege, at this time, in favor
of the Souls Immortality, are either Physical, or Moral; And the Physical, or
such as arise from the Nature of the Soul it self, seem all to refer themselves
to this one Capital Argument.

The Reasonable Soul of Man is Immaterial; and therefore Immortal.

Here, notwithstanding the main Difficulty be concerning the Antecedent, yet
convenience of Method requires me first to manifest the Force or Necessity of
the Consequence. The Reason therefore, why what is Immaterial, must also be
Immortal, is deduceable from hence; that what wants Matter, wants likewise
parts, into which it might be distracted and dissolved: and what is incapable
of being dissolved, must of perfect necessity always continue to be what it
is. For, whatever is of a nature free from the conditions of Matter or Body;
does neither carry the principles of dissolution in it self, nor fear them
from External Agents: and by pure consequence, cannot but perpetually last, or
(which is the very same) be Immortal. And this Reason seems to me, both most
evident and ineluctable.


Lucretius. I perceive no such unavoidable Necessity. For, though an
Immateriall thing cannot perish by the Exsolution of parts, which is the only
way, by which all Corporeal natures are destroyed: yet it is not impossible,
but the same may be destroyed some other way proper to Incorporealls, and
unknown to us. Forasmuch as what ever is Principiate, or once produced, must
have some cause of its production; and then why may it not be again destroyed
by the self same Cause, or by an action of that Cause, contrary to that action
by which it was at first produced?


Athanasius. There are but two ways, comprehensible by the Understanding, how
any thing, that has existence in nature, can perish: the one is (as I have
already expressed) by the Exsolution and Dissipation of its parts, of which it
was composed; the other by absolute Adnihilation of its Entity, as the
Schoolmen phrase it. Now, though I confess, that as the former way of
destruction is peculiar to Corporeal natures; so I know nothing to the
contrary, but the Latter may be competent to Incorporeals, which are produced
ex nihilo; for, every dependent, or what has not its Being from its self, but
deriveth it from another, is liable at the pleasure of that, on which it does
depend, to be deposed from that essence or state of Being, in which it was, by
the same, created: yet, that there is any such thing as Adnihilation though
consistent with the Omnipotence of God, is hardly conceiveable, without
derogation from his wisdom, which pronounced all to be good that he had made,
and the formal reason of the Creatures goodness does consist only in this,
that it seemed good to the Divine will so to make them; and to argue a posse ad
esse, that God does or will adnihilate any thing, because it is in his power to
adnihilate, is much below so good a Logician, as Lucretius is. Nor are we to
suppose any Innovation in the general state of things; but that the course of
the Universe or Nature, does constantly and invariably proceed in the same
manner or tenor of method, which was at first instituted by the wisdom of
the Creator. There is, you know, a twofold Immortality, the one Absolute, the
other only Derivative. That the First is competent only to God, cannot be
denied; since it is impossible that that essence, which is Non-principiate, or
never had beginning, nor any Cause of its production, should be determined, or
ever cease to be, or meet with any cause of its destruction. And that the
latter may be competent to the whole Genus of Immaterial Essences,
notwithstanding the power of God, which can reduce them to Nothing, as well as
it has educed them from nothing; is likewise undeniable: for, supposing (as we
ought) that God does nothing contrary to the established Laws and decreed
order of Nature, and that this General state of things does continue still the
same, which his Wisdom at first instituted; it does evidently follow, that
what He has once made Incorporeal, shall persever to be the same to all
eternity. I remember a passage in Scaliger ( Exercit. 307. sect. 20.) that most
fitly expresses the sum of this consideration, and therefore shall recite it
to you. Solus Deus est vere immortalis and incorruptibilis, quia solus exse
suum esse habet, atque a nullo dependet; Dei vero respectu omnia creata
mortalia and corruptibilia sunt, quae a Creatoris nutu deponi possunt ab
essentia illa, in qua constituta sunt. Non corumpuntur tamen quaedam, ut Angeli
and Anima Rationalis, quia Creator non vult ea corrumpi, and nihil contrarii
ipsis, a quo corrumpantur, condidit, nec eas ita materiae immersit, ut extra
eam nec subsistere, nec operari possint. And this I conceive sufficient to
manifest the necessity of Immortality from Incorporiety.


Lucretius. But I am not satisfied of any necessity, why you should have
recourse to Immateriality, for the proof of Immortality; seeing that even among
the Father* there are some who maintain Immortality to be consistent with
Corporality: and amongst the best Philosophers, some assert the Celestial
Bodies to be Incorruptible, and deduce that their incorruptibility from the
nature of their Form, which nevertheless they account not incorporeal.


Athanasius. Those Fathers held some Corporeal natures to be Immortal, not ex
ratione essentiae, but ex Divina Gratia, only from the decree of the Divine
beneplacet; otherwise than I affirm of Incorporeals, and particularly the Soul
of man. And as for that opinion of some Philosophers, it is enough that it does
not oppose our Consequence i. e. that granting some bodies to be Incorruptible,
it follows not, that therefore Incorporeals are the less, but rather the more
inccorruptible. Whatever becomes of that Opinion, I say, that because there is
no Body, which is not in process of time, exsoluble into such parts, of which
it does consist: in as much as whether their principles be Atoms, which by
their natural agility and contrary impulsions always cause intestine
commotions, and a constant civil war in the very entrals. of Concretions, or
whether they be Elementary Qualities, active and reciprocally repugnant, which
cannot be idle, but unnecessantly act one upon another; they carry the
possibility of Dissolution in their own Composition: I say, considering this,
it is clearly necessary, that all bodies, according to the Fundamental Laws of
Nature, be subject to Dissolution, their parts being at length exturbed from
their primary site, or Position and Union, and a total resolution succeding
thereupon. Besides, you well know, that that Tenent of Aristotle, of the
Incorruptibility of Celestial Bodies, has been exploded long since: And that
what his Interpreters have so magnificently talked, of the Nature of the
Caelestial Form, is a mere dream, a chimera of immoderate subtility, and worthy
only to be laughed at; especially after those many observations of changes in
them, made by the Modern Astronomers, evincing the contrary.


Lucretius. But, do not you incur an Absurdity, in supposing that there is any
substance Immaterial, or produced-Nature Incorporeal; when as the Fathers many
of them have judged, that what is not a Body, is Nothing; and that my Tutor,
Epicurus has expressly taught, that in Nature, nothing is Incorporeal beside
Space or Inanity?


Athanasius. I know no Father, but only Tertullian (whom St. Augustine does
smartly reprehend for asserting it) of that unsound opinion; and to him we may
oppose the Authority of all, at least of most the others, who solidly justified
the contrary. And to Epicurus, I oppose Plato, Aristotle, and sundry others,
who would not admit any such thing as Emptiness in the Universe; but expressly
affirmed, that there were [(...)] Substances separate, incorporeal, and
destitute of parts. What if there were a few, who could not elevate their minds
so high, as to conceive any thing Incorporeal, besides Inanity; does it
therefore follow, that those many, and great men, who did conceive the contrary
were fools, and that I, who likewise affirm the existence of Incorporeal
Natures, do run my self upon an Absurdity? I hope, Lucretius, you will be more
favorable to your self, than to own the impertinence of any such Sequel.


Lucretius. To deal freely with you, I find the Notion of Immaterial Substance,
to be somewhat too sublime for the comprehension of so humble and shortsighted a
reason as mine is. But, perhaps, you may assist it with the Telescope of yours,
upon occasion of somewhat or other in the process of your discourse: And,
therefore, go on directly to the conviction of your Antecedent, viz. that the
Rational Soul is Immortal; for, upon that hang's all the weight of the
business.


Athanasius. The Antecedent, viz. that the Reasonable Soul is Immaterial, is
evident from the Nature and Manner of its Operations. For, since it is a
certain rule, that every Agent is known by its Effects, and that all Forms
reveal themselves by their peculiar and distinct energies, and ways of
Operation; and as certain, that the Actions of man, as a Cogitating and
Intellectual Essence, are of so noble and divine a strain, as that it is
impossible they should be performed by a mere Material Agent, or Corporeal
substance, however disposed, qualified, or modified: What truth can be more
perspicuous, more strong, than this, that the Soul of man, by which alone he is
empowered to think and understand, is an Immaterial Substance?

Now, all the Actions of the Human Soul, are referrible to two General Heads or
Fountains; whereof the one is Perception, or the single Operation of the
Intellect; the other, Volition, or the single Operation of the Will: For, to be
sensible, to Imagine, and purely to understand, are only diverse manners of
Perceiving; and to desire, to hate, to affirm, to deny, to embrace, to refuse,
are only diverse manners of Willing.

To examine these Actions, therefore, more particularly; let us in the first
place, turn our eye, for a glance or two, upon the Will, which though but a
branch of the Soul, and as it were a secundary Faculty, in respect of the
Intellect, does clearly show the Immateriality of the Soul, whose Faculty it
is. For, insomuch as the Will does by Natural and Congenial tendency, prosecute
Bonum Honestum, which is for the most part repugnant to Bonum Delectabile, or
such Good, as is only Sensual and Corporeal: It is a good Consequence, that the
Will is an Incorporeal Faculty; it being impossible for a Corporeal Faculty to
apprehend an Incorporeal Object, such as Good abstracted from all relations of
the Sense.

Again, forasmuch as the Will is absolutely Free, to elect, or refuse what
Objects she pleases; and such a Freedom cannot consist with an Appetite
immersed in Matter and obliged thereunto inseparably (because all Dispositions
of Matter are determinate and necessary, and the effects resulting from those
certain dispositions, are likewise determinate and necessary:) therefore is the
Will Superior to all Conditions and Obligations of Matter. And, that the Will
has this arbitrary Liberty of Election or Refusal, is demonstrable from hence;
that it is in the power of every man living to suspend or withold his assent to
any proposition whatever, until he is able to make a certain judgment of the
Verity or Falsity, convenience or inconvenience thereof: Which reason is so
manifest, out of our own experience, that Des Carts (and He, you will
confess, was a man of admirable circumspection and strictness in examining
Fundamental and Proleptical Notions) does securely account it among the First
and most common Notions, that are Congenial and Innate in the Mind of every
man. But, because the Will is only the Branch, and the Understanding the Root,
upon which it grows, and by which it is to be regulated; and that what I shall
say of the Intellect, may be easily accommodated to the Will, with equal
competency: I shall no longer insist upon the consideration of the Will, but
fix my discourses wholly upon the Intellect, as the Principal and Primary
Faculty, for proof of the Souls Immateriality; drawing my Arguments first from
the Actions of the Understanding, and then from its proper Objects.

The Operations of the Intellect, which give evidence of the Souls
Immateriality, may be reduced to Three distinct Orders or Classes: The First
consisting of such, by which it may be evinced, that Intellection and
Imagination are Acts perfectly distinct each from other: The Second of such, as
are called Reflex Acts, by which the Intellect does understand it self, and its
own proper functions, and perceives that it does understand: The Third of
those, by which we do not only form Universals, or Universal Notions of things;
but also understand the very reason of Universality it self. And of each of
these, I intend to speak plainly and succinctly, according to this method.

I begin with Acts of the First Classis; not that they are of any singular
dignity or excellency above the rest, but that I may seasonably remove that
obstacle of common prejudice, which men generally have (and you, Lucretius,
among the rest, as your self professed even now) that the Intellect is not a
Faculty distinct from the Fancy or Imagination; as if, what we call
Imagination in Beasts, were really the very same with that, which we call
Understanding in Men, and only different from it, secundum magis and minus,
according to the degrees of more and less, strength and acuteness.

In Man we cannot but observe a certain sort of Intellection, by which the soul
exercising her Faculty of Ratiocination, does advance her self to the assured
and distinct knowledge or understanding of some things, which is impossible for
the Imagination ever to have any apprehension of, in regard there can be no
Images or representations of them in the Phansy, though we should with never so
much intention or earnestness employ our mind to frame such resemblances. For
example, when considering the Magnitude of the Sun, we follow the conduct of
our Reason, and deduce inferences from sound premises (which is Discourse) we
soon come to know most certainly, that the magnitude of the Sun is at least an
hundred and sixty times greater than that of the Earth: Yet, do what we can, we
can never bring our Imagination to apprehend any such vastness, but shall find
it to consist only in such a small representation of the Solar Globe, as the
Sense has delivered into the brain. Nay, if we set our selves to meditate well
and seriously upon the matter, we shall soon be satisfied, that we cannot
imagine the Globe of the Earth (which is yet vastly short of that of the Sun)
to be near so great, as Demonstrations Geometrical convince it to be; forasmuch
as the Imagination (which does no more but copy out the pictures drawn on the
tables of the Senses, and that as well in dimensions, as figure, color, etc.)
conceives the Vault or Arch of the Heavens to insist upon the limits of the
visible Horizon, on every side, and that the Clouds, Sun, Moon, Stars, and
whatever else we behold within that Arch or Semicircle, are not more distant
from us, than the Horizon is. So that you see plainly, how little the
Imagination does apprehend the Heavens, and the whole World to be; and how
vastly short we come of imagining the Sun (a small part only of the Heavens,
and of the Universe) to be so great, as really it is; while we cannot imagine
the whole World to be as great, as the Earth really is: But, if we appeal to
our Understanding; that does instantly assure us, by irresistible
demonstrations, that the World, Heavens, Sun, and Earth are of certain
magnitudes incomparably greater, than those to which the Phansy can possibly
extend its power of comprehension. Which I think, Lucretius, does not obscurely
import, that there is more than an imaginary difference between the
Understanding and the Phansy.


Lucretius. I do not think so, Athanasius. For, though perhaps I cannot so
extend my Imagination, as to bring it to fathom or grasp so great a magnitude,
as that of the Sun, all at once: Yet I can imagine a greater and greater
magnitude by degrees, till at last I come to equal the whole real magnitude
thereof. Nor is it necessary, that I should have in my Phansy an Image of
greatness equal thereunto, while that small one exhibited to me by my sight, is
sufficient to make me conceive, that the real magnitude is greater than the
apparent: which I can do, only by comparing the several apparent magnitudes of
one and the same Object, at several distances from the eye.


Athanasius. Hear you, Sir. That Addition you make of one degree of magnitude
to another successively, till you attain to an apprehension of the real
magnitude of the Sun; is not an act of your Imagination, but purely of your
Reason, which finding the Image of the Suns greatness in your Phansy to be
incomparably too small, to answer to that immense distance that you understand
to be betwixt the Sun and your eye, does, by its own proper Faculty, supply
that disproportion, not by enlargement of the Image, but by inferring, from
Geometrical Maxims, that a visible Object at that supposed distance, though it
seem to be no bigger than a Coach-wheel, must yet in reality be by vast
excesses greater. For, if you had no other Conception of the Suns Magnitude,
but what is deduced from the sight; how could it ever enter into your mind,
that the Sun is really so much larger than it appears to be? Manifest,
therefore, it is, that that enlargement of your conception of the Suns
Magnitude, beyond that of its appearance, is an act of your Intellect, wholly
above the power of your Imagination. So likewise is your Comparing the several
apparent magnitudes of one and the same Object, at several degrees of distance.
Where give me leave to observe to you, that the Imagination or common sense can
have no Idea of Distance, beyond one or two hundred feet: as is evident from
hence, that the Sun and Moon, which are amongst Objects of the greatest
remoteness from the eye, and whose Diameters are to their Circumference, as
one to an hundred, or thereabouts, seem to us to be at most two feet over;
though Reason does assure us, that they are very great and very far distant.
And nothing is more certain, than that we estimate the magnitude of a thing,
from the cognition, or opinion at least, which we have in our mind of the
Distance of it comparatively to the magnitude of the image of it drawn in the
bottom of the Eye, and not absolutely by the magnitude of that image; as I have
amply and demonstratively declared in my discourse of the Manner of Vision, and
as Des Carts also has demonstrated, in the sixth Chapter of his Dioptricks:
Both which I am sure you have perused. However, because it conduces somewhat to
our present argument, permit me to give you this evident reason thereof; that
though the Image of an Object may be an hundred times greater, when the Object
is very near, than when the same is removed to a distance ten times greater:
yet the Object it self does not therefore appear to us an hundred times
greater, but almost equal. So that the Comparation of Magnitude and Distance,
is an act of the Understanding, not of the Imagination, as you presume.


Lucretius. If all our Cognition does proceed originally from our Senses, as
all men concede, and Aristotle affirms in that Maxim, Nihil est in intellectu,
quod non prius fuit in sensu; and that Intellection is made by Analogy, by
Composition, Division, Ampliation, Extenuation, and the like ways of managing
the Species or Images of things immitted into the Common Sense, by the External
Senses: Then certainly can we have no knowledge of any thing, whereof we have
no Image; and consequently without Imagination there is no Intellection, so
that in fine to Imagine and to Understand a thing will be all one.


Athanasius. Your Inference is not justifiable. For, the Common Notions, that
are as it were engraven on our Minds, and that are not derived originally from
the Observations of things by our selves, or the Tradition of them by others,
do undeniably attest the contrary. Nor can any thing be more absurd, than to
say, that all those Proleptical and Common Notions, which we have in our Mind,
do arise only from impressions made upon the Organs of our Senses, by the
incurse of External Objects; and that they cannot consist without them:
Insomuch as all sensible Impressions are singular, but those Notions Universal,
having no affinity with, no relation unto, Corporeal motions or impressions.
And, if you think the contrary, pray oblige me so far, as to teach me, what
kind of Corporeal impression that may be, which forms this one Common Notion
in our Mind, Quae sunt eadem uni tertio, sunt eadem interse. Not that I am
afraid, to question the truth of even your Supposition, notwithstanding the
general allowance of that Maxim of the Philosopher. For, whoever dothwel
observe, how far our Senses extend themselves, and what that is, which can
arise from them, in order to our Faculty of Cogitating; will easily be brought
to confess, that they exhibit to us no such Idea's of things, as we form of
them in our thoughts, and that in those Idea's we form, there is nothing, which
is not Innate and Congenial to our Mind or Faculty of Cogitating, except only
those Circumstances, which relate to experience, or whereby we judge, that
those Idea's, wehave now present to our Cogitation, may be conveniently
referred to those external Objects, which we speculate. Not that those Objects
have immitted those very Idea's into our Mind, by the Organs of the Senses; but
because they have immited somewhat, which has given occasion to the Mind to
form such Idea's, by its own Innate and proper Faculty, at this time rather
than at any other. For, nothing comes to the Mind, from External Objects, by
the mediation of the Senses, besides certain Corporeal Impressions; and yet
neither those Impressions, nor the Figures resulting from them, are such as we
conceive in the Mind; as Des Carts has amply proved in his Dioptricks: Whence
it follows, that the Idea's of Motions and Figures are innate to the Mind; that
is, that the Mind has an essential power to form them: for, when I say that
such an Idea is in the Mind, I intend that it is not always actually there,
but Potentially, and the word Faculty will justify that manner of speaking. I
add moreover, that no Corporeal Image or Species, is ever received into the
Mind; and that pure Intellection, as well of a Corporeal, as an Incorporeal
thing, is made without any Material Species or Image at all; but, as for
Imagination, to that, indeed, is required the presence of some Corporeal Image,
to which the Mind may apply it self; because there can be no Imagination but of
Corporeal things; and yet nevertheless that Corporeal Image does not enter
into the Mind. For instance, the Intellect or Mind has no material Species of
that Magnitude, which it understands the Sun to be of: but comprehends the same
to be in the Sun, by its own proper Virtue or Faculty, i. e. by Ratiocination.
Whence we may securely conclude, that the Intellect, understanding a thing
without a Material Image, must it self be immaterial: as on the contrary, the
Imagination confesses it self to be Material, because it is obliged to the use
of Material Images. Truth is, the Intellect also makes use of Images conceived
by the Phansy (and therefore they are called Phantasms) yet only as certain
Means, or Degrees, that progressing through them, it may at length attain the
knowledge of some things, which it afterward perceives as sequestered, and in a
manner sublimed from those Phantasms: But this is that, which does sufficiently
argue its being Immaterial, because it carries it self beyond all Images
material, and comes to the Science of some things, of which it has no
Phantasms.

And thus you may perceive, that we do not owe all our Cognition to our Senses:
And consequently, that to Understand and to Imagine is not (as you would infer)
all one thing.


Lucretius. I know not, what singular Faculty you may have, of abstracting your
Understanding from all commerce with the Senses, in its negotiation for
knowledge; but sure I am, that the most learned and most subtle among the
Peripateticks have unanimously held, that all our Cognition is made by the
working of our Phansy; and that the Soul does not understand, but by the
Speculation of Phantasms. Nay, Pomponatius and Sir K. Digby (both which flew up
to an admirable sublimity in their Contemplations, concerning the nature and
operations of the Soul) openly profess the Verity of that Axiom, from their
own experience. So that unless you can give me some more pregnant testimony,
of the Intellects knowing, without the immediate help of Images, pre-admitted
by the Senses, than yet you have done: you must pardon me, if I believe, that
in this point you affect to be paradoxical.


Athanasius. The Sum of what I have said, of this Argument, is this; that
though the Intellect does come to understand Corporeal Natures, by the
mediation of Phantasms: Yet the Notions, which it frames it to self of them,
are Different from those Phantasms; and that it has the Knowledge of some
things, whereof the Phansy can have no Images. And for Confirmation hereof,
since you seem to desire it, I shall offer you this one Argument more.

All the particular Knowledges, that man has, or can have, concerning finite
and complete Entities (except only the Notion of Being) are only certain
Comparisons or Respects between particular things: But of Respect, there can be
no Image or representation at all, in the Phansy: and therefore our Knowledge
is without Images.

The truth of the Major proposition is evident from hence; that of all the
particular Notions we have (except that of Being) there is no one, which does
belong to some one of the Ten Praedicaments; all which are so manifestly
Respective, that no man doubts them to be so. In particular, Substance has a
respect to Being; Quantity does consist in a respect unto Parts; Quality has a
respect unto that Subject, which is denominated from it; Action and Passion
result from the Union of Quality and Substance; Relation denotes the respect
betwixt the Relatum and Correlatum; Ubi and Quando, or Where and When, arise
from substance considered with the circumstances of Place and Time; Situation
is from the respect of Parts, to the Whole; Habit is a respect to the Substance
wherein it is, as being the propriety, by which it is well or ill, conveniently
or inconveniently affected, in regard of its own Nature. Forasmuch, therefore,
as all the Ten Predica-; ments do consist only in diversity of Respects, and
that each one of all the particular Notions which man is capable of, in this
life, does naturally fall under the comprehension of some one of those
Predicaments: What Consequence can be more genuine, more manifest, than this,
that all our Cognition is drawn from Comparisons or Respects.

For the Minor; if you question the verity thereof, pray, exercise your mind in
seriously reviewing all things that have been derived from the Senses, and see
if you can find among them any such thing as what we call a Respect. It has
neither Figure, nor Color, nor Sound, nor Odor, nor Taste: and so cannot
possibly be represented to the Sense, nor Imagination. And, if you cannot
either meet with any Image of Respect, or frame one in your Imagination; nor
deny that all the Negotiation of the Intellect is in and by Respects: I hope,
you will have little cause left for your suspicion, that I affect to be
Paradoxical, in that I affirm, that the Notions of things in the understanding,
are extremely different from whatsoever is immitted into the Mind by the
mediation of the Senses; and so, that the Intellect has a knowledge of some
things, whereof the Imagination can have no Phantasms.


Lucretius. But, all this while, you give me no Criterion, or certain Rule, by
which I may be able to discern betwixt mere Imagination, and pure Intellection,
within my self; so as to know when I apprehend a thing by my Common Sense or
Imaginative Faculty alone, and when by my Intellect alone, and without the
immediate concurrence of my Imagination. Pray, therefore, assist your alleged
argument, by prescribing me some such infallible Note of Distinction: And then
perhaps, I shall submit to your opinion.


Athanasius. In simple Imagination, the Mind does always apply it self to the
Image of the thing speculated; and in pure Intellection, it quitteth the Image,
and converteth it self upon it Self: The former act being still accompanied
with some labor, and contention of the Mind; the latter free, easy, and
instantaneous. As in this Example. When I think upon a Triangle, I do not only
instantly conceive it to be a Figure comprehended in three lines, but I also
behold those three lines, with the eye of my Mind, as if they were really
present; and this is that I call Imagination. But, when I think of a Chiliogon,
or Figure with a thousand Angles; albeit I as well understand, that the same is
a Figure consisting a thousand sides, as I do a Triangle to be one of only
three sides: Yet I cannot as well imagine all those thousand sides, or behold
them distinctly and at once, with the eye of my Mind, as if they were really
present; for, though then, because of my custom of always imagining something,
I have some certain Figure confusedly represented to me; yet that that is not
the representation of a Chiliogon, is manifest from hence, that it is no whit
different from that, which I should represent to my self, in case I thought
upon a Myriogon, or any other Figure with more sides: nor does it help me at
all to the knowing of those proprieties, by which a Chiliogon differs from
other Polygon Figures. And, if the question be of only a Pentagon, I can
understand the nature of that Figure (as of a Chiliogon) without the help of my
Imagination; and I can also imagine the same, by applying the acies of my Mind,
to the five sides thereof, and to the Area contained in them: But, here, I
plainly perceive, that to imagine thus, there is required a certain peculiar
strife, or Contention of my Mind, such as I use not in the mere understanding
of that Figure, or any other Polygon; which new Contention and Labor of my
Mind does clearly show the Difference betwixt Imagination and pure
Intellection: And this is the best Note or Character of Distinction, I can in
the present think upon to give you. But, it requires strict and profound
Meditation to observe it; and therefore let me desire you to consider what I
have said of this Difference betwixt Imagining and Understanding, to morrow
morning, in your bed, when your Spirits are clear and active, your Faculties
vigorous, and your Mind quiet and serene.


Isodicastes. You say very well, Sir* For, notwithstanding you have argued with
singular subtility, in defense of this Distinction; yet, until a man shall
find his own Experience give light and Confirmation to your Reasons, the thing
will remain involved in much obscurity. And, therefore, since frequent and calm
Meditation is so necessary, to the habituating our Mind to speculate
abstractedly, without material Phantasms, and to know when it does so:
Lucretius and I, will take some time, to meditate as seriously and profoundly,
as we can, upon this Nicety, before we decalre our final determination
thereupon; and in the mean time leave it tanquam Problema utrinque disputatum,
as a Problem well disputed on both sides, but not fully decided by either. And
so, if you please, you are at liberty to proceed to some new Argument of the
Souls Immateriality.


Athanasius. The Second Branch of the Method I proposed, arises (as you may
remember) from that kind of Operation in the Soul, whereby the Intellect,
Reflecting upon it self, does become its own Object, and so understand it self,
and its own Functions, and know it self to be an Intellect, or thinking and
discerning Nature. If therefore we well consider these Reflex Acts of the
Understanding; we can no longer doubt its being Immaterial. That the Intellect
does thus reflect upon its self, and discern its own knowledge, needs no other
testimony but that of a man's own Experience; it being impossible for any person
living not to know, that he knows what he knows, as is implied in that common
Proverb, I very well know what I know. And, that this Operation is far above
the power of whatsoever is Material, deriveth its evidence from hence; that
every Material thing or Agent is so strictly obliged to some certain place,
either permanently or successively, as that it cannot move toward it self, but
if moved at all, is moved toward some thing diverse from it self. Which truly is
the Reason of that Canon Law in Nature, that Nothing can act upon it self. For,
however one and the same thing may sometimes seem to act upon it self; yet
really it is only one part of that thing act's upon another part of the same
thing: As when one of a man's hands strikes against the other, or the end of
one finger against the palm of the hand, but the end of the same finger cannot
strike upon it self. And hence comes it, that the Sight cannot see it self, nor
the Hearing hear it self, nor the Imagination perceive that it does imagine,
nor any Corporeal Faculty whatever perceive its own Functions. We know, indeed,
when and what we see, or hear, or imagine, etc. but that Knowledge is the sole
and proper effect of that Power or Faculty within us, which being Superior to
all Sense and Imagination, and so comprehending all their activity in its own,
does perceive them, their Objects and Operations, judge of them, and reflect
upon both those judgments, and it self that frames them. And the Reason, why
the Imagination cannot perceive it self, or its own actions, is because the Act
of the Phansy tends only to the Image of the thing imagined, not to the
perception of that Image; for, of a Perception there can be no Image. It being
then most certain, that the Intellect does familiarly reflect upon it self, and
understand its own Intelligence; and as certain, that such a power does
transcend the capacity of any thing inseparably immersed in Matter, and
confined to the conditions of Matter: I cannot see how it is possible for you
to avoid or decline the necessity of the Consequence, viz, That the Intellect
is a Faculty Immaterial. And here I dare you, Lucretius, or the subtilest
Epicurean in the World, to try the strength of your Philosophy, upon this
Argument; for to me, I profess, it seems not much inferior to a Demonstration.


Lucretius. Why Sir, do you conceive, that what you affirm of the impossibility
of internal Reflection, in any but an Immaterial Agent, is of Universal truth?


Athanasius. Seriously I do, and upon the Authority of that Reason, I now
alleged, I think it justifiable to persevere in that persuasion, until your
self, or some other person shall offer me an Instance, wherein that General
position does admit of an Exception.


Lucretius. What think you, then, of sundry admirable actions of some Brute
Animals, which seem to implie Dubitation, Resolution, Invention, and the like
effects of a discoursive and self-knowing Principle within them? For example,
when you observe a Dog in hunting to cast about, try the ground, stand still,
run sometimes forward, sometimes turn aside, and then on a sudden change his
course and return back; will you not allow this to arise from a kind of
Examination of the actions of his Sense? And does not that Examination import a
Reflection of the discerning Faculty both upon it self, and its action of
discerning?


Athanasius. Alas, Lucretius, this is so light an Objection, that I cannot but
wonder, that it should retard your assent to a position of so much weight, as
that, that no Material thing can act upon it self; especially since you have
read the excellent discourses of Monsieur Des Carts, and Sir K. Digby; wherein
they have so clearly solved all the most seemingly rational actions of Beasts,
by sensible motions and corporeal principles. However, that you may no longer
be deluded, in conceiving, that the sudden stopping, turning aside, returning,
etc. of a Dog, does argue this eminent Reflection of a Faculty upon it self,
which I attribute to a Man, as the propriety of his Intellect; be pleased to
know, that the most it does import, is only Reminiscence in the Dog, by reason
of some new Species in his Phansy, accidentally intercurrent, and diverting him
from the pursuit of that other, which immediately before possessing, and as it
were beating upon his Phansy, had engaged him to a different course: For, as
often as the Species that move and affect his Sense, and so his Imagination,
are changed, so often does he change his course and vary his pursuit. And
certainly nothing comes nearer to a manifest absurdity, than to suppose, that a
Dog can, as it were, say within himself, I imagine that I do imagine; or I
perceive that I am a perceiving essence, and the like; which is an action of
such singular eminence above all what we observe to proceed from Dogs, or any
the most docible and cunning Beasts in nature, that it ought not to be imputed
to any thing below an Immaterial and self-Cognoscent Being, such as the
Reasonable Soul of Man is.

And it was upon this essential prerogative of the Human Soul, that Des Carts
seems to have reflected, when under the term Cogitation, he understood all
things that are done in us, cum Conscientia, with knowledge that we do them; so
as that not only to understand, to will, to imagine; but also to have the sense
of a thing, is the same as to Cogitate, or Think. For (says he) if I argue
thus with my self, I see, or I walk; therefore I am; and understand this only
of that Vision, or walking, which is performed by the help of my body, then the
Conclusion is not absolutely certain, because it often happens that in my
sleep, I dream that I see, and walk, when in truth I do neither: But, if I
understand it of my Perception, or Conscience of my seeing or walking, with
reference only to my Mind, which alone does perceive or think, that it does see
or walk; then the Conclusion is most certain, because it is of the nature of my
Mind to be Conscious of its own actions. Which Description of Thinking, I the
rather commemorate, because I have observed many to quarrel at it, as
incompetent and somewhat extravagant; not comprehending the Authors principal
Ground, the constant Reflection of the Mind upon its own Operations.


Lucretius. So that I perceive, you wholly exclude all Animals (except Man)
from being conscious of their own actions: But with how much reason; I shall
beseech Isodicastes here to judge, who cannot but frequently have remarked the
contrary, nothing being more common, then to see a setting Dog to come creeping
and trembling with fear and shame to his Master, when either through too much
speed in hunting, or the averseness of the wind carrying away the scent from
him, he has chanced to spring the Partridges, which he ought to have set: And
on the other side, when he has made a fair Set, and the game is taken, you
shall have him leap and exsult for joy, and run confidently to his Master for
his reward. And what can his fear and shame be referred unto, but his being
conscious that he has committed a fault, and so deserves to be beaten for it?
or his exultation in his own cunning, but to his being conscious that he has
done well, and so ought to be encouraged and recompensed with some share of the
Prey?


Athanasius. I thought I had prevented your recourse to all Objections taken
from the actions of Brute Animals, that carry a semblance of Reason in them; by
remitting you to your remembrance of what you have read in the satisfactory
Discourses of Des Carts, and Sir K. Digby concerning them: but seeing you will
not acquiesce in that reference, let me tell you briefly, that what you now
urge of a Dogs owning his faults, and exultation in his own skill and cunning,
is not sufficient to entitle him to that transcendent capacity of acting with
Knowledge, and Reflection, which I affirm to be the propriety of Man's informing
Principle within him. For, the Dog having been used to be beaten, as often as
he springs the game; no sooner see's the Birds upon their wings, but instantly
the image of the smart he has formerly suffered from his Master, upon the like
occasion, recurrs to his Phansy, and affects him with fear: As on the other
side, the sight of the birds in the Net, brings afresh into his memory the
Image of that pleasure, wherewith his Sense was affected, in eating the heads
of the Partridge, and strongly possessing his Imagination, causes that passion
of joy in him, which betrayeth it self by his leaping and skipping. For, in the
Phansy of Beasts there is always a conjunction of the Image of that particular
good or harm they have formerly received from such or such things, with the
Images of the things themselves: which is, indeed, the cause of all those so
much admired effects, called Sympathies and Antipathies, amongst Animals of
different kinds, as I have more particularly declared in my Physiology, where I
treated of the Manifestation of Occult Qualities. And this reason may serve to
solve what you object, concerning Beasts being Conscious when they have
pleased, or displeased their Masters; without entrenchment upon the Prerogative
of Man, whereby he is capable of acting with knowledge, and reflecting upon
that knowledge, as part and the principal part of his Essence. But, since you
have appealed to the judgment of Isodicastes, I humbly expect his Verdict.


Isodicastes. That many Brute Animals, especially such as are made tame and
domestic, and frequently conversant with men, are conscious of their faults;
daily experience does testify: But, that they are therefore animated with a
Soul capable of knowing it self, and its actions, by reflecting upon it self:
seems to me to be altogether inconsequent; because, as Athanasius has
explained the reason and manner of that particular action in them, it does
import no more than what belongs to a mere Sensitive Soul. So that, Lucretius,
unless you can impugn his Argument now alleged, for proof of the
Immateriality of the Human intellect by some more important Objection; I should
be unjust not to allow it to be strongly persuasive.


Athanasius. Being free, then, from any impediment of further Contradiction to
this Argument of the Intellect's being an Immaterial Faculty, from its Reflex
acts; I come now to the Third sort of its Operations, which testify the same,
viz. those whereby we do not only form to our selves Universals, or Universal
Notions, but also understand the reason of Universality it self.

In Universal Notions we are to observe Two considerables; (1.) their
Abstraction; (2.) their Universality: And either of these Conditions is alone
sufficient to enforce a persuasion of the Immateriality of that Faculty, the
Intellect, which does so apprehend them.

For, as to the First; it being evidently impossible, that any Corporeal thing
should be exempted from all Material conditions, and differences of
singularity, as Magnitude, Figure, Color, Time, Place, etc. and undeniably
certain, that the Understanding has a power to divest them of all and every
one of those conditions, and circumstances, and to speculate them in that
abstracted state, devoid of all particularities; it follows of pure
necessity, that the Understanding, which has this power so to abstract them,
must it self be exempt from all matter, and of a Condition more eminent, than
to be confined to material Conditions.

And, as to the Other, viz. their Universality; this adds to their
abstraction one admirable particularity more, which is, that they abstract in
such sort, as to express at the same time the very thing, they abstract from.
Which is not a little wonderful; since it is not easy to conceive, that the
same thing should be, and not be, in one and the same Notion. And yet if we
seriously reflect upon what we mean, when we say thus, Every man has two
hands; we shall soon perceive, that we therein express nothing, whereby one
individual man is distinguished from another: though that very word Every, does
import that every single person is distinct from another; so that here is (as
Sir K. Digby most wittily says) Particularity it self expressed in Common.
Now, this being impossible to be done, in any Corporeal representation
whatsoever, it is a necessary consequence, that the Intellect, which has this
singular propriety of thus comprehending and expressing Universals, is it self
Incorporeal.

Now, if you should require of me to declare, how the Understanding does frame
to it self Universals, when there are no such things in Nature; I shall explain
the Manner of that transcendent Operation to be thus. When we Cogitate or think
upon Individuals, that have resemblance each to other; we accommodate one and
the same Idea to all particulars comprehended under that one General notion:
and so using to impose one and the same name upon all the things represented by
that Common Idea, that name becomes Universal. Thus, when we see two stones,
and apply our Mind to consider, not their Nature, but only that they are Two;
we form to our selves an Idea of that Number, which we call a Binary, or Two:
And afterward, when we see two Birds, or two Trees, and consider not their
Nature, but only that they are two; we repeat the same Idea we had before,
which comes thereby to be Universal, and we call this number by the same
Universal name. After the same manner, when we behold a Figure comprehended in
Three lines, we form in our Mind a certain Idea thereof, which we call the Idea
of a Triangle; and we afterward always use the same Idea, as an Universal one,
to represent to us all other Figures consisting of three lines. Again, when we
perceive, that among Triangles there are some, which have one right angle, and
others which have not; we form in our selves the Universal Idea of a rectangle
Triangle, which in relation to the former Idea, as more General, we call a
Species: And that rectitude of the Angle, is the Universal Difference, by which
all rectangle Triangles are distinguished from others. Further, that in all
such Triangles, the Basis is in power equal to the powers of the sides; this is
a Propriety competent to all such, and only to such Triangles. And lastly, if
we suppose that some of these Triangles are moved, and others not; this will be
in them an Universal Accident. And after this Manner does the Understanding
frame those Five Universals, Genus, Species, Difference, Propriety, and
Accident: which really are but so many several Modes, or Manners of our
Cogitating, or Thinking; and having no existence in Nature, but only in Man's
Understanding, do bear pregnant testimony of its being Immaterial.


Lucretius. Here you say, it is undeniably certain, that the Understanding has
a power to abstract things from all conditions of Matter, and all
Particularities; when for my part, I profess, I can find no such power in my
self. For, after many the most serious essays I could make, I could never yet
conceive an Universal, but there does always occur to my Mind somewhat of
Particularity, and that under some certain Magnitude, Figure, Color, and the
like adjuncts of Body. So that it seems, either I have not an Understanding as
Active and Comprehensive, as other men have: or else those Unbodied and
Universal Notions; of which you and other Philosophers talk so solemnly, are
mere Chimera's, invented by curious and wanton Wits, to amuse such vulgar
heads, as mine is.


Athanasius. You cannot be ignorant of that power in your self, as you pretend,
Lucretius. For, though your Mind is not capable of devesting Objects of their
particular Magnitude, Figure, Color, and the other concomitants of Matter,
altogether, and at once: yet it can easily do it successively, or one after
another; and that is sufficient to attest and manifest, that the Intellect has
this power of Abstracting, and forming Universals; as I have explained.


Lucretius. I have read a certain book, written by one Hieronymus Rorarius, a
learned Prelate, containing a collection of all Arguments commonly urged to
prove, that many Brute Animals have the use of Reason not only as well as, but
in a greater proportion than Man himself has: and among the rest He affirms,
that they also frame Universals, as in particular the species of Man, according
to which as often as they see a two-legged and erect Animal, they take it to be
a Man, and not a Lion, or Horse, or the like: And if so, what becomes of this
Prerogative of the Human Intellect, you so much depend upon, for testimony of
its Incorporiety?


Athanasius. If this were true, yet doubtless Brutes can have no knowledge of
the Universality of that Species, or universal Nature of Man, viz. Humanity, as
abstracted from every degree of singularity. But, we have no reason to grant
the Supposition; for, as Brutes do not apprehend things abstracted, but
concrete, as not Color, but a body colored, not a sapour, but a body sapid,
etc: so ought we to conceive, that there is nothing else in a Dog (for
instance) but only the Memory of singulars, or of those single men, whom he
has seen, and taken notice of; and when he meets a man, whom he has not seen
before, his phansy instantly presents him the image of some one he has seen
before, and so he takes him to be a man. Nor can you recurr to that vulgar
subterfuge, that we are not so well acquainted with the nature of Beasts, as to
understand what is done in the secret cells of their brains, and after what
manner they apprehend objects: seeing it is not difficult for us, to infer as
much, from their operations or external actings. For, in case they could aspire
to so much perfection, as to frame Universal Notions of things, as we do, and
reason upon them, as we do; it were not to be doubted, but it would come into
their minds, to enquire into the acts of their progenitors, what they knew
before them; how they might signify to others at distance, what themselves have
thought and done; and how they might devolve memorials to their posterity. They
would likewise attempt to frame Arts useful in their lives, and do many noble
actions; of which it is impossible they should have the least hint or notice.
For as much, therefore, as no age can give us an Example of any such action
done by any Beast whatever; we may safely conclude, that they have no notion of
Universals, as Rorarius and you from him seem to suppose. So that this
prerogative of Man's Understanding in framing Universals, remains entire and
untoucht: and while it does so, I need not fear the stability of what I have
founded thereupon, viz that the. Human Intellect is Incorporeall. And
therefore, if you have no more to object against this my reason; I doubt not
but Isodicastes will give his vote on my side.


Idosicastes. I should, be grossly partial, Athanasius, if I did not confess,
that you have foiled your adversary at this weapon: yet I am sure Lucretius is
so candid an Antagonist, as to account it no dishonor to be overcome by Truth;
and I presume He does contend, only to make your conquest the more absolute.


Athanasius. To these few Reasons of the Immateriality of the Human Soul,
desumed from the excellency of her operations, I might here add a multitude of
others, of the same extraction and equivalent force, as in particular, that of
the existence of Corporeal natures in the Soul, by the power of apprehension;
that of her drawing from multitude to unity, her apprehension of Negations and
Privations; her containing of Contraries without opposition; her capacity to
move, without being moved herself; the incompossibility of opposite
propositions in the understanding; and sundry others: the least whereof is of
evidence and vigor sufficient to carry the cause against all those Enemies to
her Immortality, who would degrade her from the divine dignity of her nature,
to an equality with the souls of Beasts, that are but certain dispositions of
Matter, and so obnoxious to dissolution upon change of the same by contrary
agents. But, considering that the certainty of truth ought to be estimated
rather by the weight than number of testimonies; and that the discourses I have
already framed concerning some of the Soul's proper operations, are clear
enough to give light to any judicious and well disposed person, how to infer
the like conclusion from those other of her operations, which I have not
insisted upon: I shall now withdraw my own and your thoughts from her
operations, and convert them, for only a few minutes upon her Objects, that so
we may examine whether they be such, as that it is possible for them to fall
under the apprehension of any, but a faculty superior to Materiality.

Concerning the Objects, therefore, of the Understanding, they are all things
in the Universe, and so not only Corporeal and sensible natures, but
Incorporeals also, and such as are many spheres above the utmost capacity of
the Sense. That Corporeals belong to the Cognizance of the Intellect, I think
no man will dispute: and that this knowledge does prove it to be incorporeal,
is manifest from hence, that it knows the formal reason of Body, or Corporiety
it self, and that it does consist in extensibility: which it could no more do,
unless it self were above Corporiety, than a man could see the amplitude of the
sea if he were immersed into the bottom of it. Nay I might hence deduce it to
be Inorganical; insomuch as it knows not only corporeal organs, but
comprehends also the very reason and form of an Organ. For, since an Organ is
always somewhat intermediate betwixt the Faculty and the Object, or thing for
the perception of which it was made; and therefore cannot act upon it self, or
be that thing on which the Faculty works by an Organ: The Intellect could no
more be exercised in knowing an Organ, or the reason of it, if it self were an
Organ, or Faculty Organical, than one Instrument, or tool of an Artist can
employ it self upon another Instrument, or serve to that end, for which it was
framed, without the help of the Artist.


Lucretius. You say here, Athanasius, that no man doubts of the knowledge of
Corporeal Natures, by the Understanding; when you cannot but remember that
Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus have many Disciples in the World, who renounce all
Knowledge whatesover, unless it be that of their own invincible ignorance: And
for my own part, though I shall not go so high, as to say, we know nothing at
all; yet sure, I am, we do not know the intimate Nature of so much as the
smallest Plant that grows upon the ground. And if so, I cannot see how you will
avoid the blame of begging the Question.


Athanasius. How dangerous a Doctrine that of the Scepticks is, as to the
regulation of our Minds, in all the Actions and Occurences of our lives, by
certain settled Judgments in the Understanding, drawn from Philosophical
Maxims, and confirmed by experience; I have professedly declaclared else where,
and therefore shall not now repeat. But, as to your Objection, that we do not
know the intimate Natures of even Corporeal things; I answer, that though there
be nothing in the World, to which the capacity of man's Understanding is not
extensible, yet there are sundry things, which by reason of many impediments,
it does not actually know. But is this, think you, to be charged upon a defect
in the Understanding; or upon the obscurity of the things themselves? Do you
but find a Cause, that may reveal these things, and as it were draw them out of
that obscurity, wherein they are so deeply involved; and the Intellect, I will
undertake, shall soon discern and know them to the full. The Eye does not
perceive what is at the Center of the Earth; will you therefore conclude an
absolute incapacity therein, of perceiving what is there concealed, in case
there were some Cause found out, which should unlock the bowels of the Earth,
and lay open whatever is therein contained? I believe you will be more advised;
considering that the drawing of a Curtain betwixt a visible Object and the
sight, does not diminish the power of the sight, but only render the Object
inconspicuous. However, therefore, our Reason be not so perspicacious, as to
transfix the Essences of things, and discern what is the intimate Nature of
Objects; yet by ratiocination we advance so far toward it, as to know, that
besides all those qualities, and accidents, which are obvious to the Sense, and
to the imagination, there is yet somewhat more remaining, which is not obvious
to either the Sense, or Imagination. And to understand thus much, is enough to
exalt the Understanding many degrees above all Sense and Imagination; and
consequently above all Corporeal Conditions. Whereunto I shall add, that there
is no Corporeal Faculty, but is confined to the perception of only some one
certain Genus of things; as in particular, the Sight to Visibles, the Hearing
to Sounds, etc. and though the Imagination seems to be extended to very many
kinds; yet all those are contained under the Classis of Sensibles; and thence
it comes, that all Animals, which are endowed only with Phantasy, are addicted
to only Sensibles, no one affecting the Knowledge of any thing which falls
not under the Sense. But the Intellect alone is that, which has for its
Object, omne verum, and (as the Schools speak) Ens ut Ens, every Being in the
Universe; and therefore has no mixture of matter, but is wholly free from it,
and Incorporeal. A truth so clearly revealed by the Light of Nature, that
Anaxagoras said, and Aristotle subscribed, Esse Intellectum necessario (...),
Immistum, (...), quoniam intelligit universa.

And as for Incorporeals, that they likewise are within the Orb of the
Intellects activity; and do not escape the apprehension of this unbounded and
Universal Capacity; needs no other proof, besides that of our own sublime
speculations concerning the Nature of God, of Intelligences, of Angels, of the
Human Soul, and whatever else belongs to the Science of Metaphysics* which
teaches us to abstract from all Matter and Quantity. Nor does the
Understanding rest in the investigation of all substances immaterial, but
flies out of Trismegistus's Circle, and breaks through the battlements of the
World into the Extra-mundan Spaces, and there finds the notion of a certain
Being, which belongs not to the Categorie either of Substances, or Accidents,
but is independent even upon God himself: and that is Space, and to this it
gives Imaginary Dimensions. Nay, I presume it will not be accounted paradoxical
in me to affirm, that Immaterial Objects are most genuine and natural to the
Understanding; especially since Des Carts has irrefutably demonstrated, that
the Knowledge we have of the existence of the Supreme Being, and of our own
Souls, is not only Proleptical and Innate in the Mind of man, but also more
certain, clear, and distinct, than the Knowledge of any Corporeal Nature
whatever: according to that Canon of Thom. Aquinas and most of the Schoolmen,
Nullares, qualiscunque est, intelligi potest, nisi Deus intelligatur prius.
However, this is most indubitable, that the principal and most congenial
Motives or incitements of the Soul, are abstracted Considerations; as hope of
what is to come, of Eternity, Memory of what is past, Virtue, Honor, and the
like, which arise not from material principles, and have no commerce with
Elementary compositions. Now, if the Understanding were not it self purely
Immaterial, it would be absolutely impossible for it ever so much as to
suspect, much less to know assuredly, that there were any such things as
Incorporeals in the Universe: The Reason being obvious from that rule of
Aristotle, juxtim apparens prohibet alienum. For, as the eye when discolored
with a yellow humor in the jaundice, can see no Object, but it appears tincted
with the same color: So could not the Intellect perceive any other but
Corporeal Natures, if it self were not only perfused with, but wholly and
entirely immersed into, Corporiety; so that of necessity it must be Incorporeal.


Lucretius. Me thinks now, you might with equal reason infer the quite
Contrary, viz. that the Intellect could not have any perception of Corporeal
Natures, if* it self were not likewise Corporeal; there being required some
kind of proportion and compossibility betwixt the Faculty percipient, and the
Object perceptible, as is exemplified in each of the Senses: which is the sole
reason of their opinion, who contend, that the Sensitive part of the Soul is
Material.


Athanasius. I positively deny that, Lucretius. For, since the Order or Degree
of Incorporeal is superior to that of Corporeal; thence it follows, that by
virtue of that its superiority or excellency, it possesses all the perfections
of the inferior, and that in a more eminent manner. So that as the degree
Animal, being nobler than the degree merely Vegetable, does in a more excellent
proportion and manner, comprehend Vegetation, or Nutrition, Accretion, and
Generation, which are the functions of the Vegetable: In like manner, does the
degree Spiritual or Incorporeal, being more noble and perfect than the mere
Animal, and Corporeal, comprehend cognition Corporeal, or Sensation and
Imagination, which are the functions proper to the degree Animal. And thus you
see, that my inference of the Intellect's capacity to know Incorporeal
essences, from its own being a Spiritual Faculty, is genuine and orderly: but
yours, of its being Corporeal from its capacity to know Corporeals, is false
and preposterous.


Lucretius. But may not I lawfully object, that we do not conceive God, or
Angels, or Intelligences, as Immaterial Substances; when we find in our
selves, that the mind does always speculate the Divine Essence it self under
some Species of a Body, and though not of a Human Body (which yet is most
usual) yet of an aereal, or ethereal one, or somewhat more fine and subtle, if
any such there be?


Athanasius. You may make this Objection, there is no doubt; but it will not be
sufficient to prevail against what I have urged, concerning the Intellect's
extensibility even to God and other Intellectual essences. For the
understanding, though it make use of those Phantasms, that are proper to the
Imagination, as the means or degrees, by which it mounteth it self up to a
sublimity above all Corporeal species; does yet, by ratiocination, at length
attain to that height, as to be ascertained; that, beside all body of
whatsoever thinness purity and subtility, there is moreover a certain
supereminent substance, which has nothing of Corporiety in it. The Intellect,
I confess, does not positively or intuitively (as they say) know this
Substance: but, since this is its condition, while immersed in a body, which
does as it were infect it with corporeal representations or Phantasms, and
eclipse its power of Intuition; it is abundantly sufficient to our Conclusion,
that even in this mortal body it does retein and conserve its incorporeal
nature, that it does understand that substance Negatively or Abstractively.
For, this investigation or search after God, and our concluding him (out of the
force of contradiction, or by way of Negation) to be Eternal, Infinite,
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Immutable, with all other perfections imaginable
essential to his nature; does clearly demonstrate, that though the Intellect be
obliged to make use of Corporeal images, in order to its knowledge; yet it is
not obliged to acquiesce in them, so as to enquire no further, but has such a
liberty and energy, as tht it does ratiocinate beyond them, and conclude, that
there is somewhat else in being, which cannot be represented by any Corporeal
Image or species; and which though it cannot understand what it is in the
fullness of its nature, yet is it certain that such a nature there is; and more
than that, is not required to justify my Assertion. You may remember, how
Aristotle and other great Philosophers asserted the existence of Caelestial
Intelligences, Abstracted Movers, and Immaterial Substances; not that they
could see them, with the eye of the body, or frame any Idea's of them in their
Imagination: but that by profound reasoning, from the magnitude, form,
situation, motion and duration of the Celestial bodies, they came to
understand, that in nature there could not but be such Abstracted and
Immaterial Movers, which governed and continually regulated those vast and
glorious Orbs, in their Admirable and well ordered Motions.


Lucretius. If what you say, were true; it would follow, that in diseases of
the brain, and such as cause a depravation of the Phansy; the Intellect, as
being more at liberty to exercise its faculty of pure and abstracted
intellection, would arise to the cognition of Immaterial things with more
facility and promptness, than at any other time. But we daily see, that men of
disturbed Phansies, and alienated minds (as the vulgar phrase is) are so far
from understanding more clearly and distinctly, than before, that they cannot
reason at all; and it was not without cause, that some Philosophers have held,
that a man deprived of any one of his senses, can not rightly discourse of that
sense, or the objects belonging to it.


Athanasius. You have no reason to urge this upon me; for I formerly rejected
that error of the Averrhoist, that the Soul is a Form merely Assistent, and in
its functions altogether independent upon the body; and what I averr is this,
that the soul of Man does truly and entirely inform the body, and to that
purpose nature has added senses and Imagination, as handmaids to attend it in
its operations, and to give it opportunities of reasoning from what they bring
in. So that it ought not to seem strange, that upon the loss of a sense, or
perturbation of the Phansy, men cannot reason so exactly as before: and it
suffices, that when the whole economy of man's nature is in tune and order,
his understanding is capable of reasoning so as to advance itself above the
body, as far as is permitted to its nature, and at length to conclude, that
there is somewhat Incorporeal. And now I have recited all the Arguments, which
I thought most material toward the proof of the Soul's Immortality, drawn from
considerations Physical, and in particular from the souls Operations and
Objects: I referr my self to the Noble Isodicastes here, who is pleased to
assume upon himself the trouble of acting the part of an Arbiter betwixt us in
this dispute, whether you have been able to dissolve them.


Isodicastes. How unfit I am, to have the casting and decisive voice, in a
matter of this high and abstruse nature, I am sufficiently conscious. But,
since you are both pleased to create me judge of this your Debate, I shall
adventure to give you my sentiments briefly and clearly upon this last Argument
of the Soul's being Immaterial, drawn from the unboundedness of the Intellect,
as to its Object (for, of the rest, I delivered my opinion freely, as they were
alleged). Truly, I judge it to be as highly convincing, as any of which the
subject is capable. And, for my own part, I derive to my self from thence, a
full confirmation of my belief; that there is nothing in the world too vast for
the comprehension of man's understanding, nothing too small for its discernment:
and whether such a divine Capacity be competent to any but an Immaterial
Essence, is not hard to determine. Now, the Intellect being thus found to be
above all conditions of Matter, I doubt not but Lucretius will readily allow,
what you have so learnedly concluded upon, viz, that the Human soul, whose
Faculty it is, is above all possibility of Dissolution, at least from Natural
Agents. And therefore, Athanasius, if you are not already weary with
discoursing so long and strictly, be pleased to proceed to those Moral
Considerations importing the souls Immortality, which I remember you promised,
in the beginning.


Athanasius. The Moral Considerations usually brought in defense of the Souls
Incorruptibility, are Principally Three: (1) The Universal Consent of Man kind.
(2) Man's Innate and Inseparable Appetite of Immortality. (3) The Justice of
God, in rewarding Good men, and punishing evil, after death.

Concerning the First; howbeit there ever have been, and still are among men,
some differences about the state of the Soul, after death; about the place of
its posthume Mansion; and other circumstances: Yet there ever has been and
still is an Universal concurrence among them in this Tenent, that it does
survive the body, and continue the same for ever. Now, as Cicero judiciously
observes, Omni in re Consensio omnium gentium, Lex Naturae putanda est, in
every thing the general consent of all Nations is to be accounted the Law of
Nature: And consequently the Notion of the* Soul's Immortality must be
implanted, by Nature's own hand, in the Mind of every man; and who so dares to
deny it, does impugn the very principles of Nature.


Lucretius. Your Assumption here, that all Nations conspire in the belief of
the Souls Eternal subsistence after death; is contradicted by many good
Authors, who writing of certain salvage and barbarous Nations discovered in the
New World, say of them, that their rudeness and ignorance approaches so
nearly to that of Beasts, that they have not the least thought or conceit of
any such thing as the Souls being a distinct substance from the Body, or that
it is indissoluble. And, as I remember, Pliny affirms the same of the Calaici,
a wild and Atheistical people of Old Spain.


Athanasius. Granting these relations to be true, yet if we profoundly examine,
whereupon their idolatrous devotion (and there never was any Nation without some
kind of Religion and Veneration of a Deity) is grounded, and what dark belief
lies blended under their ridiculous worship, we shall soon find, that those
Indians have some implicit belief of the Eternity of their Souls, as may
appear from hence, that they assign the Soul some certain place of residence
after its separation from the body, and that either beyond the Sea, or beyond
great Mountains, or the like. Again, being observed, to stand in awe of Devils,
to be terrified with mightly Spectr's and apparitions, and to be astonished at
Magical impostures: it is evident, that if we dissect all their persuasion to
the bottom, we shall detect it to contain an opinion of the Souls Immortality.
But, though it may be true, that there are now, or formerly have been any such
Salvage people, as were wholly destitute of any the least thought or hint of
the Souls superviving the funerals of the body; yet we may return the same
Answer, concerning them, that is due to those, who should object, that there
always have been, and now are some particular Persons of all Nations, with
whom the belief of the Souls Immortality can find no entertainment or credit:
which is, that therefore it does not follow, that the persuasion of its
Immortality ought not to be reputed General; and that the dissent of a few
persons does not make a General Consent not to be Natural. For, as, though some
men are born only with one foot, and some lay violent hands upon themselves; it
is not lawful for us thence to argue, that it is not natural to men to have two
feet, or that the desire of life is not natural to all men: So, though some are
so unsound and monstrous in their judgment, as to persuade themselves, that
their Souls are Mortal; yet is not the contrary persuasion of all other men,
therefore to be esteemed Nonnatural.


Lucretius. You cannot be ignorant, that there have been not only rude and
vulgar heads, but even Philosophers, and those of sound judgment too, who have
positively denied, and strongly impugned the Immortality of the Soul; and among
therest, my Master, Epicurus, who has the reputation of one of the most
piercing and sublime Wits among all the Ancients: and therefore this position
of the Soul's Incorruptibility* seems not to be so Universal, as you presume.


Athanasius. But, pray, consider; these Philosophers were but Men, and so might
err, in their solitary conceits and opinions, as well as the most rude and
illiterate among the vulgar; as is evident from hence, that the same persons
held many other opinions of things more obvious and familiar, which yet are
highly absurd and manifestly ridiculous. And what though Epicurus and some few
other of the Grecian Scholiarchs asserted the Mortality of the Soul; are there
not ten times as many others, as high in esteem for Solidity and Wit, who have
with excellent arguments defended the Immortality of it?


Lucretius. Let us leave your Assumption, and reflect upon the validity of your
Inference. Though all men living should be persuaded of the truth of this
opinion, That the Soul is Superior to death and corruption; yet would it not
follow, that therefore that persuasion is Natural and Congenial to our very
Essence, as you conclude. For, it is not impossible that an Universal
persuasion may be erroneous, every man living being, by the imperfection of his
Nature, obnoxious to Error; and Cicero (deriding the vanity of Auspices, which
in his time were in great esteem among all Kings, People, and Nations) says,
quasi quicquam sit tam valde, quam nihil sapere, vulgar; Is any thing so
perfectly common among men, as to have foolish opinions?


Athanasius. Most evident it is, that there is no better Criterion, or truer
and safer rule, whereby to examine and confirm the truth of any thing belonging
to Men in the General, than the General Consent of Mankind concerning it. For,
as when it is enquired, what belongs to jus Animale (vulgarly called jus
Natural) we perpend the matter by the observation of such things, as are
common to all Animals: Even so, when we enquire, what is jus Humanum, or what
by special right does belong to Men, as Men, we must direct our judgment, by
what is allowed of by all Men. And doubtless this is to be accounted Lex
Naturae, the Law of Nature, or vox Naturae, the voice of Nature; or else there
is none at all. And, as to Cicero's smart saying; I confess, nothing is more
common with the multitude, than to be deluded with false opinions: But that is
only in things Arbitrary, and such whereof Nature has implanted no settled
Sense and Notion in their Minds. And, in such things, erroneous conceits many
times spread themselves abroad, and diffuse by what subtle contagion I know
not; especially when they have been first taken up upon presumption of
Authority, Antiquity, Utility and the like inducements to belief: but it is
observable, that such fallacies, as they had no ground in Nature, so by
degrees, in process of i am, they decay insensibly, and at length come ttobe
totally obliterated and forgotten. Of which sort, was that of the usefulness
of Auspices, and other ways of Divination, against which the Orator pleaded;
all which are long since laid aside, and laughed at by every one. But, as for
such things, of which Nature her self has implanted a certain Knowledge in our
Minds; it is not vulgar for men to be mistaken in them: unless you will affirm
that this natural Maxim, That every Father ought to take care of his Children;
or this, That every man is bound to endeavor his own preservation, and the
like coessential Notions, are vulgar mistakes. And of this sort, certainly, is
the opinion of the Soul's Immortality, as may be deduced from hence, that it
seems to have been connate to the first man; and confirmed from the great
antiquity of the opinion of Hell; and from hence, that it is so far from
decaying, by length of time, that on the contrary it grows every day more
strong and lively.


Lucretius. This Tenent of the Soul's Immortality which you averr to be as
ancient as Humanity itself, and implanted by Naturein the Mind of every man,
may have been, for ought we know, the politic invention of the First
Lawmakers: who, observing that the punishments denounced upon capital
Delinquents in this life were not sufficient to deter them from committing
enormities destructive to the common right and safety of Societies; prudently
persuaded men that their Souls were not obnoxious to dissolution together with
their bodies, but Immortal, and so capable of torment, after death, for their
evil deeds; and of Felicity, by way of reward for their good. Than which, there
could be no more powerful consideration to coerce men, who were not sensible
of the present benefits of Virtue: it being in all times true, that such
audacious Malefactors, as are not moved by the whole arm of the Civil
Magistrate, will yet tremble at the finger of Divinity. And this opinion could
not but take so much the deeper root in men's breasts, by how much the more
agreeable it is to that desire and love of life, which is natural to us all:
so that being the most grateful and correspondent to our nature, the promise
of Eternal existence in our better part, found a general belief; and, by common
tradition, came at length to be in a manner naturalized. But, how it is
otherwise Natural, I profess, I do not yet comprehend.


Athanasius. That this persuasion of the Soul's Eternity, was the invention of
the primitive Legislators, the better to keep men in obedience to their Laws;
has, I confess, been often said, but never proved: and what the first
supposers thereof have told us, of the manner of men's being convened into
common societies, after they had long lived abroad in the fields, and upon
mutual spoils, rapine and slaughter, after the manner of wild Beasts; is
altogether fabulous and unreasonable. Whereas, on the contrary, we are able to
prove, by those memorials that remain to us, of the First Lawmakers we read of
in History; that they found this Tenent of the Soul's Immortality settled and
radicated in the hearts of the people, from the very beginning of Mankind. I
conceive it probable enough, that the wisdom of these Lawmakers might teach
them to make use of this persuasion, in order to their more facile governing
and restraining the vulgar, otherwise more prone to all kind of exorbitancy and
violence; and it was a piece of eminent prudence in them so to do: but I have
no reason, to allow, that therefore it is a mere politic Fiction; unless you
think it lawful to conclude, that because an Husbandman does turn the streams
of a river upon his grounds, to make them the more fruitful, therefore the
river is only a Fiction. Again, though I concede, that the belief of
Immortality is very conformable and grateful to our Nature, which by instinct
inclines us to abhor Dissolution: yet this conformity and gratefullness does
not arise to us from hence, that Immortality is offered to us as undue by
Nature (as Poets report of Chiron the great Surgeon, who refused
Immortality, when proffered him by the Gods: and of Prometheus, who exclamed
against Jupiter, for exempting him from death) but, on the contrary, because it
is Natural, and that we have the assurance of it engraven on our very essence;
and therefore it can be no Fiction, as you would seem to imagine.


Lucretius. It is possible (and experience says, frequent) that an Opinion may
be General, and possess the minds of all men, for many ages together without
dispute; which yet at length may be discovered to be false and absurd, and the
quite contrary succeed into the room thereof: as may be exemplified in that of
the Antipodes, and the Circumvolution of the Earth; both which till of late
years were held wholly unreasonable and Fantastical. And perhaps this of the
Soul's Eternity may have the same fate.


Athanasius. If there be any Opinions, which all men at some time maintain; we
are to judge of the Verity or Falsity of them, by this general rule. If they be
confirmed by the judgment of all ages; and that the Mind find it self carried
and inclined to them, by secret assent and complacency, as to things generally
concerning every man alike: Then, without doubt, those Opinions are sound,
natural and congenial to man. But, if otherwise there be a tacit Reluctance in
the Mind against the admission of them; and that their importance or
concernment is not equally diffusive to all men: they are false, arbitrary, and
such as may be embraced, or rejected indifferently; for of themselves, they
neither promove, nor impede Man's felicity (unless only by accident, or as
their speculation may be pleasant, for the time) and it little relates to man's
happiness, whether there be Antipodes or not, for we in our Hemisphere can
live without commerce with them; or whether the Earth, or Sun be moved since
all the Apparences are the same, either way. But, as for the Opinion of the
Soul's surviving the body; it is not indifferent, wheit be true or not: Nor is
Man destitute of a Natural propension to believe it, when it relates to his
Supreme and everlasting Felicity.


Isodicastes. From the Antiquity, Universality, and Perpetuity of any Opinion,
I think we may safely conclude upon the Verity of it. From the Antiquity of it;
because, according to that Rule, Idem esse verum, quodcunque primum; id
adulterinum, quodcunque posterius, that which is the most ancient, is likely to
be the most true, in respect of the purity and sincerity of men's Minds in the
Primitive Age of the World, their Understandings being then more clear and
perspicacious, and their judgments less perverted by irregular Affections and
temporal Interest. From the Universality, because it seems inconsistent with
the Goodness of God, to have made us of a Nature so subject to error, as that
All Mankind should be deluded. From the Perpetuity, because, as Cicero worthily
notes, Opinionum commenta delet dies, Naturae judicia confirmat, Time
destroys all those fancies, which have no other ground, but only human
opinion; but it strengthens all those judgments, which are founded upon Truth
and pure natural Reason. And therefore, this Notion of the Souls Immortality,
being so Ancient, as that it seems to have entered into the World together with
the First Man, and what Plutarch (out of Sophocles) says of the Antiquity of
Religious principles,

Non nunc enim, neque heri sunt ista prodita,
Semper valuere, nec, quando inierint, liquet;
may be most aptly accommodated thereunto: and so Universal, as that the
apprehension of a Deity (without which no man ever lived, for, as Tully
remarketh, Multi quidem de Diis prava sentiunt, omnes tamen esse vim and
Naturam Divinam arbitrantur) seems not to have been more Common: And lastly so
Perpetual, as that Time does rather confirm, that decay it; I must judge it, to
be a sound and proleptical truth, especially when I reflect also upon that
other Character Athanasius has given of the verity and naturalnesse of a
General Tenent, viz. that the concernment of it, is equally diffusive to all
men. And did I not know, Lucretius, that your present business is
Contradiction; I should a little wonder, how you could allege that so
in-considerable an Objection, of the opinion of the Soul's Immortality being a
Fiction of the First Lawmakers. For, you well understand from what incredible
Authority that impious Whimsy was derived, even from Euripides the Poet; who
suborning the Person of Sisyphus, in his Tragedy, to speak such Atheistical
conceits, as otherwise he durst not vent, introduces him telling this formal
tale. That the life of men in old time, was salvage and barbarous, like that of
Wild Beasts; the stronger, by violence oppressing the weaker, until at last,
men were necessitated to devise certain severe Laws, for the suppressing of
mutual slaughter, and other acts of injustice. But, when they found (after long
experience) that all those Laws were ineffectual to the coercing men from
enormities and outrages; because they could take hold of only open and public
offenses, and reached not to close and secret ones: There arose up among them a
certain subtle and politic Governor, who invented a mean to provide against
that mischief also, and to prevent clandestine and secret violations of common
Right and Justice, as well as manifest and notorious. And that was, by
insinuating into the peoples heads,

Quod sit perenni vita vigens aliquis Deus,
Qui cernat ista, and audiat, atque intelligat, etc.
that there was an Immortal Power, or Deity above them, who took notice of all
their most secret actions, and designs, and would most severely punish all
injustice, in another life, which was to succeed this, and to continue
eternally. The like to which is very solemnly told by Cicero, in the person of
Cotta, in his first Book de Natura Deorum; and also by Seneca, in his second
Book of Natural Questions: But, how contrary to Reason, as well as to the
authentical Monuments (both Divine and Human) of Ancient times, and the first
foundation of Republics, or Societies; is too well known, even to your self,
Lucretius, to need my further insisting thereupon. However, this praise is due
to you, that you have omitted nothing, that might impugn Athanasius his
Argument of the Soul's Eternity, desumed from the Universal belief of it by men
of all Nations, and in all Ages.


Athanasius. Having received not only your Approbation* Noble Isodicastes, but
your Assistance also, in this my First Moral Argument; I need no other other
encouragement to proceed to the Second; which arises from Man's inbred, or
rather innate, and inseparable Appetite of Immortality.

For, there is no man who does not desire to subsist Eternally; nay, not those
very persons, who seem to impugn and disavow that desire, by a contrary
opinion (as Epicurus and all his Sectators) could ever* suppress or extinguish
it from glowing perpetually in their breast, notwithstanding all their
pretenses of being free from any such expectation: as may be inferred from
hence that they endeavored to perpetuate their names and memories to all
posterity, by their Books and opinions. And, therefore, it is not needful for
us to confirm this Assertion, by the Example of Cleombrotus, and the Disciples
of Hegesias, who were so far transported with the force of Plato's and His
discourses of the Souls eternal state after death, that they could not forbear
to lay violent hands upon themselves, that so they might set their impatient
souls at liberty from the wearisom prison of Flesh, and emancipate them into
that their more proper and delightful mansion. All we shall urge, is only
this, that There is no man, who thinks himself unconcerned in Futurity. Witness
that general ambition all men have, to perpetuate their names in the records of
immortal Fame; some, by the founding and institution of Commonwealths, Sects,
Societies, and the prescription of Laws for the continuation of them; others,
by valiant acts in war, even to the loss of health, limbs, and life itself;
others, by erecting pyramids, obeliks, Tombs, statues, and other monuments of
their greatness and heroical atcheivements; others, by writing learned and
useful Books, and even such as import the contempt of posthume Glory and fame;
others, by begetting of children, adoption of heirs, public legacies of piety,
and the like: all which are strong and lively testimonies, that this Appetite
of surviving their funerals, is implanted in their Minds, by Nature's own
hand, and so impossible ever to be totally eradicated. Now, forasmuch as Nature
does institute nothing in vain; and that it is unreasonable to conceive, that
she would infuse into us a continual desire of, and providence for, such
things in the future, whereof we shall then have no sense: it is more than
probable, that our souls shall after death be invested in that state of
Immortality, which we so uncessantly aspire unto, and to which we are carried
by a secret and insuppressable tendency. To this purpose Cicero, in the first
of his Tusculans, has a remarkable saying, which I shall therefore rehearse,
Nescio quomodo inhaereat in mentibus quasi seculorum quoddam augurium, idque in
maximis ingeniis altissimisque animis existit maxim, and apparet facillime:
quo quidem dempto, quis tam esset amens, qui semper in laboribus and periculis
viveret. etc.


Lucretius. This Affectation of Immortality, I confess, is very frequent, and
almost General; yet does it not appear to be so Essential or Natural, as that
it may not be vain, and so Nature no ways obliged to provide for its
satisfaction. For, we have other Appetites, that seem as Universal, and
consequently as Natural as this; which yet import no necessity of satisfaction,
but rather an impossibility thereof. For example, who does not desire and wish
perpetuity of youth, strength, and health; and to be exempted from the stroke
of that common enemy, Death? and yet it is well known to themselves, that these
desires are vain, and such as Nature has ordained an absolute impossibility of
their satisfaction. Wherefore, you cannot argue a necessity, nay not a
probability of the Soul's being Immortal, from her affectation of Immortality.


Athanasius. But, pray, observe the Disparity; and let the institution of
Nature itself be your rule, in discerning, what Appetite is vain, and what
capable of satisfaction. Some Appetites there are, and those almost General
too, which yet are not inserted into us originally by Nature, but arise from
the presumption of some profit, or pleasure: such is the desire of being able
to fly in the air like Birds, which every man has; for, who would not carry
himself with all possible expedition to the place whither he intends to go?
yet, because Nature has not furnished man with wings to that purpose, it is
manifest, she did not implant that desire in our Minds, and so is not bound to
satisfy the same. Other Appetites there are, which no prejudicate opinion, or
presumed cogitation, but Nature herself has created together with us; and at
the same time ordained means for our attaining to the fruition of them: such is
our Appetite of constant Health and Indolency, which as Nature has implanted,
so does she endeavor to satisfy, and would really satisfy, if it were not for
our own Intemperance and other Accidents, that frustrate those her endeavors.
Now of the Former sort, are those Appetites of wealth, power, eternal youth,
exemption from death, and the like: of the Latter sort, is that of the immortal
state of the Soul. For, there being a twofold Immortality, at which we aim,
the one of the Species or Kind, the other of the Individual; and we being
certain that Nature has provided for the satisfaction of the First, by the
Faculty of Generation: why should we not conclude, that she has likewise
provided for the satisfaction of the other, by giving our* Minds, by which we
are what we are, an inexsoluble or incorporeal substance?


Lucretius. But, do we not all abhor Death?


Athanasius. Yes, generally we do.


Lucretius. Is that Abhorrence Natural, or not?


Athanasius. Suppose it to be Natural; what would you infer?


Lucretius. Why then, certainly, Nature has instituted two Affections in us,
the one point blank repugnant to the other; For how can it consist with our
desire and hope of Immortality, that we should so much fear and abhor Death,
which must put us in possession of it?


Athanasius. The fear of Death, Lucretius, and the desire of Immortality, seem
to be rather one and the same natural Affection, than two contrary ones; for,
to desire Eternal subsistence, is to covet Immortality. But, our fear of Death
arises only from our being more concerned in, or moved by things present, than
by things to come. Which, indeed, is the main reason, why men generally offend
not only in the inordinate love of this life, but in most other things
appertaining to the same. Thus, meeting with occasions of intemperance, or
incontinence; we weigh not the loss of our health, abbreviation of life, and
other evils consequent thereupon, because our thoughts are wholly intent upon
the present pleasure that offers it self to our sense: So that, as this our
pursuit of sensual and hurtful pleasures, does not hinder the desire of health
and long life from being Natural to us; so does not our desire of perpetuity in
this life, hinder our desire of a better life after this, from being likewise
natural.


Lucretius. The Induction you have here made, seems to prove no more than this,
that men generally affect posthume Fame, or Glory; which may indeed be
accounted a kind of life in death, according to that of Ovid,

Ore legar populi, perque omnia secula fama,
Si quid habent very vatum presagia, vivam.
But, this is far from amounting to a real Immortality.


Athanasius. It is enough, if my Induction declare, in the General, that in
this life, we have a presension of some certain future state after death, in
which we shall have some sense of what we have been in this life, and that
accompanied with pleasure or pain. For, as Hunger is an Appetite, not of this
or that particular dish of meat, but only of meat in the General; so though our
opinion determine that general appetite to some one particular dish before all
others, which yet may be in it self less grateful and wholesome; yet that is
evidence enough that we have an appetite to meat in the general, and that our
affecting a deceiptful dish, does not exclude our capacity of affecting a
wholesome and more nutritive dish. In like manner, it is apparent, we have an
Appetite of Immortality in the General, or without determination to this or
that particular state or condition therein. And though the mind perchance may
pitch upon Immortal Fame, as the most grateful means to satisfy that appetite,
which in it self is a mere vanity and deceiptful: yet that is sufficient to
testify, that we have radicated in our Mind an Appetite of Immortality in the
General, and such a one as is true and germane. Whence, that you may not urge
the examples of Epicurus and others, who believing the Souls of men to be
Mortal, did yet long labor in composing Books, that might commend them to
posterity after their death; I say, that these men did indirectly, and upon
consequence give testimony of the true Immortality, in regard they were carried
on, by the secret impulse of nature, to affect that vain and false one of Glory
or Renown. For, Nature has not implanted in us any desire of things vain; but
it is our own folly and indiscretion, which permitting our mind to be too
deeply infected with things of this life; averteth our studies and endeavors
from the true and genuine scope of nature, to erroneous hopes, and delusive
expectations. And now, I hope, you have not much left to say against this
Argument of the Souls Immortality, from our Appetite thereof.


Isodicastes. Whether Lucretius be convinced of the force of this Reason, or
not; it appears by his silence, that he intends no longer to oppose it, but is
willing you should think you have made him your proselyte, and so proceed to
your last Moral consideration that remains.


Athanasius. That may be desumed from the Necessity of Divine Justice; for, as
certain as God is, so certain is it, that He is just: and since it does
evidently consist with the method of Gods justice, that it should be well with
Good men, and ill with evil men; and we do not observe Good and Evil to be
accordingly distributed in this life, but rather the contrary; Good men
generally being even overwhelmed with afflictions, and wicked men as generally
swimming in pleasures: It follows, that there must be another life, wherein
Virtue is to receive its reward, and Vice its punishment. And, if it were
otherwise, the gates of Piety would be shut up, and those of Impiety opened;
all Religion be subverted, all honesty destroyed, and all Human Society
dissolved.


Lucretius. If this Reason be conclusive, as to Men, methinks, it should be no
less conclusive concerning Beasts also. For, why should the harmless and
patient sheep be worried by the noxious and bloody Wolf? Or the innocent Dove
become a prey to the greedy Falcon? and no state remain after death, for the
reward of the sufferings of the one, and punishment of the cruelty of the
other? How can this consist, I pray, with the method of Divine Justice: All
Animals being the Creatures of God, as well as Men; and (for ought we know) as
much the subjects of his Providence and Justice.


Athanasius. Forasmuch as of all Animals, Men only are capable of knowing,
revering, worshipping and serving God; it is manifest, that They are as the
principal care of his Providence, so the only Object of his Justice. And though
this be sufficient, yet I shall add two other Reasons of weight and evidence
enough to exclude the pretense of Brutes to a concernment in justice divine.
The one is, that among men in Societies, there is a mutual Communion, such as
cannot be instituted among Beasts, in regard they want reason to understand the
benefit of such Communion: And, that by this common compact, men are obliged to
do good and not harm each to other, living in that communion; but Beasts are
not reciprocally obliged by any compact, and so are incapable of doing or
suffering injury (rightly so called) one from another. And, therefore, the
actions of Men one toward another, belong to the cognizance of Gods special
Providence; but not the actions of Beasts. The other is, that it is Natures own
institution, that some Brute Animals should be Carnivorous, some feed upon
Herbs, some upon fruits, etc. and so such as are Carnivorous must destroy other
weaker Animals, or else they cannot subsist. To these, if you please, you may
add also a third consideration, which is, that Man has sentiments of a state
after death, and desires to be happy in that state, and seems convulst at the
fear of the contrary: But, Beasts have no such thoughts, no such desires, no
such fear; so that it is no wonder, that the provident Justice of God does
distribute Rewards and punishments to Men, and to no other of his Creatures.


Lucretius. As to this last Consideration; is it not possible, that Men,
casting about for various devices and imaginations to palliate and sweeten the
sowrenesse of their Miseries, in this life, may have both invented this
comfortable opinion of a state of future Immortality; and introduced the
supposition of this provident justice of God, relating only to men's actions, on
purpose to support it: when other Animals, being destitute of the like use of
reason, could have no such conceit?


Athanasius. Impossible; because the opinion of Immortality was before any
sense of Misery, and elder than all Memory; and as it came into men's minds, at
first, upon more weighty considerations, than any temporal concernment: so must
it have been, as soon as there were men to entertain it. Wherefore, as it is
true, that men who live in misery, do more frequently fix their thoughts upon
Immortality, than those who live in happiness: So is it equally true, that not
only miserable, but many of the most prosperous and flourishing persons in the
World, do nevertheless contemn the delights and pleasures of this transitory
and umbratil life, and account it the only satisfactory and comfortable
entertainment of their thoughts, to be constantly meditating upon that state of
Immortality, which shall receive them, when all the pageant pleasures of the
present life shall be* vanished away and come to not-hing.


Lucretius. But, is not Virtue, on one side, a sufficient recompense to it
self? and Vice, on the other, a sufficient punishment to it self? and such,
than which no Executioner can inflict a more grievous and horrid? What need,
therefore, of any such state to come, until which the reward of Virtue, and
punishment of Vice, is imagined to be deferred?


Athanasius. That virtue is not a sufficient recompense to itself, may be
naturally collected from hence; that all virtuous persons have an eye of
Affection constantly levelled at somewhat beyond it. For, though the Stoics
affected this high-straind expression of the exceeding amiableness of virtue;
yet could they never persuade themselves, or others, but that Glory and Honor,
at least, were looked upon, as the Consequents of Virtue: nor can it be
affirmed, that Glory does always seek out and court virtue, of its own
accord; forasmuch as really those persons were ever the most covetuous of
Glory, who have pretended the most to decline and avoid it. Yea, the most
Heroical among the Ancients seem to have proposed Glory, and not barely Virtue
itself, as the guerdon of their most difficult enterprises and atcheivements;
which Cicero fully expresses ( pro Milone) in these elegant words: Ex omnibus
praemiis virtutis, amplissimum est praemium Gloria, quae vitae brevitatem
posteritatis memoria consolatur; and ( pro Arch.) nullam virtus aliam mercedem
laborum, periculorumque desiderat, praeter hanc Laudis and Gloriae; qua
detracta, quid est in hoc tam exiguo vitae curriculo, and tam brevi, quod
tantis nos in laboribus exerceamus? I add, that according to this dry and
uncomfortable lesson of the Stoics, a Prince would be unjust to expect honor
from his subjects, for his prudent and happy government; a soldier
unreasonable, in hoping for any recompense for his valor and wounds; an Artist
worthy of blame in demanding a valuable price for an excellent piece of work; a
Physician unconscionable, in receiving a fee for a Cure, and the like: For if
virtue, or the doing of a good action be a competent reward to its self; it
must be (as I say) manifest injustice to require or receive any other. The same
likewise may be said of Vice. For, no man, that does an ill action, fears only
least that ill should torment him: but fears something beyond it, and consequent
upon it, as infamy, imprisonment, torture and death. And these, truly, are more
congruous punishments for vice, than vice itself; otherwise all Laws would be
unjust, that inflict them. We may conclude, therefore, that since virtue does
frequently want its due reward, in this life; and vice as frequently go
without its due punishment: it follows, that after death, there is to succeed
a certain immortal state, in which both shall receive their due.


Lucretius. Granting all this to be necessary, in respect of Justice Divine;
yet I can see no necessity, why the Rewards of the Virtuous, and Punishment of
the Vicious, should be Eternal. For, no Human action, though highly good and
commendable, can yet be so meritorious, as to deserve an Eternal recompense
from God: as, on the other side, no action, though superlatively criminal and
detestable, can yet be so bad, as to require an everlasting punishment; because
neither the one, nor the other is any thing but natural, transitory, and
definite, and so can hold no proportion to what is infinite.


Athanasius. Though a Good action, and so Virtue and Honesty, considered
Physically, be but a slender thing; yet, because the worth or Merit of it is to
be estimated according to the rule of Morality, it comes to be of such
excellency, as that the Doer thereof, freely and upon election endeavoring to
compose and regulate himself, by the best rules prescribed, and so ennobling
his actions with divine perfection, as much as the frailty of his nature will
permit; may in justice hope for a reward proportionable i. e. an Eminent, and
Divine one, such to which the Soul, by its inherent appetite and tendency, does
continually aspire. And this reward cannot be other but Everlasting; because,
if it were only Temporal and Finite, it could not deserve the name of a reward,
insomuch as the Fear of being once deprived of it again, though after many
myriads of years, would destroy the pleasure of enjoying it. And the like may
be said of the perpetuity of Punishments due to vicious persons so that there
is no such disproportion as you surmise.

And here, if you please, let us set bounds to our Debate concerning the
Immortality of that noble Essence, the Human Soul. For having run over the
principal Physical Arguments, that arise from the Operations of the Soul,
as well in Volition, as Intellection, and also from the Nature and Universality
of her Objects; and added thereunto other Moral Considerations, of high
importance, in order to the Conviction of this most comfortable and sacred
Truth, whose Assertion, in obedience to your yesterdayes commands, I assumed
upon myself: I find the clue of all my Notions and Collections concerning this
sublime subject, now wholly unravelled. Nor, after my solution of all your
Scruples and Objections, does any thing remain for me longer to exercise your
patience withal, but only that I beg of you both your forgiveness, in that I
have thus long abused it already; and that I render my thanks to you Lucretius,
for the advantage you were pleased to give me, by your most ingenious and
learned Opposition, as you saw occasion, in the process of my Discourses; and
to you, Isodicastes, for your most impartial and judicious turning the scales
on the side of truth, as often as Lucretius thought, or seemed to think them*
equilibrated betwixt his reasons and mine.


Isodicastes. If I have been so happy, Athanasius, as to judge according to
truth; I assure you, it was the clearness of your Reasonings alone, that gave
me light so to do: and therefore, instead of that Forgiveness of your exercise
of my patience, (as you call it) which your modesty makes you require of me; I
must return you infinite thanks, for your so fully compensating my patience and
attention with such satisfaction, as greater ought not to be expected,
concerning an argument of so much abstrusity and difficulty, as this whereupon
you have discoursed. And for Lucretius, I think it now time for him, to lay
aside his disguise of a Contrary opinion which he put on only to experiment the
strength of your Allegations; for I must declare, that in my judgment (which
yet I do not take to be definitive) he has been too weak for you, in all the
passages of this contest; yet rather from the weakness of the Cause he
undertook, than from any want of skill in himself to manage it to the utmost of
its merit.


Lucretius. We have yet an hour good, before supper time; and you were both
pleased to devote this whole Evening to this particular Divertisement: And
therefore, if Athanasius be not tired with speaking, nor you, Isodicastes, with
hearing; let me beseech you to continue your places a little longer, while I
propose some certain Objections, long since made by Epicurus and some of my
Fellow-Disciples, against the Immortality of Man's Soul. For, until Athanasius
has perfectly refuted them also; if he thinks to Triumph, it will be before he
has completed his Victory.


Athanasius. You are a politic Enemy, Lucretius, it seems: like experienced
Generals, you place your chiefest strength in a Reserve. But, come, draw up the
remainder of your forces; I doubt not of as good success in the second charge,
as I have had in the first.


Isodicastes. But, pray, Gentlemen, let me conjure you both, not to extend your
Contract, beyond eight a clock; for, at that hour, I have appointed my Cook to
furnish us with a short repast; and my Watch says, it is almost seven already.


Lucretius. Less than an hour will conclude our quarrel, I promise you,
Isodicastes: but lest we lose time in preparatory circumstances, I immediately
address to the proposal of my intended Objections, which have always hitherto
been accounted of of moment.

The First is this, that the Soul is generated, grows up to maturity, then
again declines, grows old, and at length wholly decaies, together with the
body: So that, if that Axiom be true, quitquid natum est, possit interire, the
Soul being produced, must be subject to dissolution.


Athanasius. This Argument has two parts; the one supposing, that the Soul is
Generated: The other, that it grows old and languid, and decaies, as the body
does; and therefore I shall divide my Answer accordingly. To the First part I
reply, that that Axiom, quicquid natum est, possit interire, is true indeed
concerning all things Corporeal and Compound; but not concerning things
Incorporeal and Simple, such as I have already demonstrated the Soul to be: so
that the Production of the Soul does not necessitate her Dissolubility. That
Incorporeal Natures are incapable of destruction, I have formerly deduced from
their want of parts into which they might be dissolved: all exsolubility
consisting wholly in Partibility. And, that Simple Natures are likewise
incorruptible, is manifest even from hence, that the General and First Matter,
though Corporeal and produced from nothing by God at first, does persevere the
very same for ever. So that Dissolubility belonging neither to Incorporiety,
nor Simplicity; it is purely consequent, that the Soul, which is an essence
Incorporeal and Simple, cannot be obnoxious to Dissolution. And as to the
Production of it, though it be not easy for us (especially at the first
thought) to conceive how an Incorporeal can be produced, without perfect
creation, from which we have good cause to believe that God long since
desisted; yet that the Soul is produced, we have the persuasion of sundry good
reasons: As if it were improduct, or eternal a part ante, it would and must be
so, either as Coherent by it self, and a substance sejoyned or severed from all
other things; or as a part adhaerent to another, and deduced from that other,
when it is induced into the body. But, that it is not a substance cohaerent per
se and ab aeterno, may be inferred from hence, that there is remaining in us no
memory of any such eternal state; that the University of things would want
beginning, and so could have neither Author, nor Governor, which is monstrous
and absurd, as I have demonstrated in my Book against Atheism; that if Men had
been from all Eternity, they must have been Infinite, and so either there must
have been an infinite multitude of Souls, before all excogitable time, or the
same numerical Souls must have, by transmigration, been inservient to, or
informed successively, not only many, but infinite persons; when yet it is
repugnant, that there should be an infinite number (lest therein should be
admitted as many Binaries, Denaries, Millenaries, etc. as Unities: and so
something be allowed more infinite than an infinite, which is absurd) And that
our Souls were formerly in other men, who lived before us, we have no monument,
no record, but those Fables of Pythagoras, Empedocles, and the like. And, that
it is not a Particle desumed from another incorporeal, is demonstrable from
hence, that an Incorporeal is incapable of division into parts: Which reason is
so plain and obvious, that I cannot but wonder that Plato, having asserted God
to be a Mind Divine and Incorporeal, should nevertheless contradict himself in
affirming, that Man's Soul was a Particle taken from the substance of God
himself; or how he could imagine the Soul to be Inexsoluble, which he thought a
part of an exsoluble nature. Wherefore, seeing the Soul cannot possibly be
Improduct, either of these two ways (and certainly there can be no other) it
must of necessity be Product, whatsoever the Manner of its Production be. And
here I might (as I suppose you expect I should) take occasion to engulph my
self in that bottomless Sea of Difficulties, concerning the Original and
Extraduction of Man's Soul; but being digressive from my present Theme, and such
whereof I am not yet able to give any other account, than what you have met
with, in Sennertus, Harvey, and other modern Physicians, who have more expressly
addicted themselves to enquire into the mysteries of Generation; I think it
prudence to wave the opportunity. Only thus much I may adventure to say, and it
is pertinent to my business in hand, that the Production of the Soul cannot be
from Matter, because she is her self Immaterial; nor from an Incorporeal, by
way of desumption or partition, because Incorporiety and Divisibility are
incompatible: So that they are not altogether destitute of reason, who conceive
that it is produced ex Nihilo, and by such a Cause, whose power is immense, and
superior to all the Energy of of Nature, which must be God, the Author of
Nature. But, however it is plain, that though it has its beginning and origin
together with the body; yet being Incorporeal, it is not capable of perishing
together with it, as you would conclude. And thus much for the First part of
your Argument.

As for the Remainder of it; to that Aristotle has long since provided an
Answer to my hand, in the fourth Chapter of his first Book de Anima, which is a
Text very apposite, and memorable (however it either import a Contradiction in
the Author himself, or seem capable of their interpretation, who allege him as
a defendant of the Mortality of the Soul) and therefore I shall recite it.
Innasci autem Intellectus videtur, and substantia quaedam esse, nec corrumpi;
nam si corrumperetur quidem, id maxim fieret ab hebetatione illa, quae in
senectute contingit: nunc autem res perinde fit, ac in ipsismet sensuum
instrumentis. Si enim Senex oculum juvenilem reciperet, non secus ac ipse
juvenis videret. Unde and senectus non ex eo est, quod quidquam passa Anima
sit; sed quod simile aliquid, ac in ebrietate morbisque eveniat: ipsaque
intelligendi and contemplandi functio propter aliquid aliud interius corruptum
marcescit, cum ipsum interim, cujus est, passionis expers maneat. Which words
considered, we have good reason to afffirm, that all that change, which the
Epicurean would have to be in the Rational Soul, or Mind, during the growth of
the body in youth, and decay of it in old age; does not proceed from any
mutation in the Soul it self, but in some other interior thing distinct from
it, as the Imagination, or Organ of the Common Sense, the Brain, which being
well or ill affected, the Soul it self suffers no whit at all, but only the
Functions of it flourish or decay accordingly. For, since the Intellect is
enshrined in the body, for only this end, that it might collect the Knowledge
of things, by the intercession of the Phansy, into which the images of things
are conveyed through the Senses; and that in order to its reasoning concerning
them, it might receive hints from those images, which residing in the Phansy,
are therefore (as we have said) called Phantasms: hence is it, that the Soul,
in the beginning of its age, or during Childhood, does reason but little,
because it has then but few images or phantasms in store, from which it might
take occasion of composing discourses: but, in process of time, it comes to
ratiocinate more copiously and perfectly, as having then both more, and more
clear and ordinate Phantasms; and lastly in decrepite old age, it again falls
to reason but little and brokenly, because, by reason of the dryness of the
brain, the Phantasms are then either wholly, or for the most part obliterated,
and those few that remain, are represented both obscurely and perturbedly. So
that (as Aristotle says) if it were possible to give an old man a young Eye,
and a young Imagination; his Soul would soon declare, by exquisite vision, and
quick reasoning, that it was not she, that had grown old, but her Organs; and
that she is capable of no more change from the impairment of the body by old
age, than is usually observed to arise ( pro tempore) from a fit of
drunkenness, or some disease of the brain. For, as when the malignity of the
Spirits of Wine is overcome by sleep, and dispelled by sweat; or the violence
of a disease possessing the brain, or seat of reason, is abated; a man does no
longer suffer a delirium, but returns to the clear use of his reasoning
Faculty, as before his head was disordered: So, if the Brain and Phansy were
youthfully affected in an old man, the Soul would no longer seem to dote, but
reason as perfectly as ever before in the vigor and flourishing state of
youth. From whence it is evident, that whatever of change men have thought to
be in the Soul, by reason of that great decay generally attending old age; is
not really in the Soul, but only in the Imagination, and the Organ thereof,
which is not so well disposed, as in the vigor of life. And this might be
conveniently explained by the similitude of a Scribe, who cannot write so
smooth and fine a hand, with an old and blunted pen, as with a new and sharp
one: But the thing is of it self too clear, to need the illustration of
Comparisons. And this may suffice to dissolve your mighty Argument objected.


Lucretius. My SECOND Argument is desumed from hence, that the Soul is not only
distempered and misaffected with diseases of her own, but infected and touched
also by those of the body: and what is capable of disease or misaffection,
either protopathically, or sympathically, is doubtless capable of dissolution.
This you may remember, was long since urged by Panaetius of Epicurus sect; for,
Cicero (primo Tuscul.) speaking of him, says; alteram autem rationem affert,
nihil esse quod dole at, quin id aegrum esse quoque possit: quod autem in
morbum cadat, id etiam interiturum; dolere autem Animos, ergo etiam interire.


Athanasius. As for such Diseases of the body, which you suppose extend to the
discomposure of the Soul, by way of sympathy; as particulary the Phrensy,
Madness, Hypochondriacall Melancholy, the Lethargy, Hydrophobia, and others
which work upon the brain, and perturb the Animal Faculties: the same Answer
will serve to exempt the Soul from suffering any detriment from them, which I
just now alleged against her decay in old age. For, though in truth the Mind
cannot exercise its proper functions duly and rightly, in fits of Delirium,
the Phrensy, and the like; nor at all in Lethargies, and Apoplexies: yet this
ought not to be ascribed to any depravation or change in the substance of the
Mind itself, but only to an indisposition in the Phansy and Animal Organs.

And, as for Passions of Grief, Fear, Remorse etc. which are reputed the proper
Diseases of the Mind; in the first place, we may derive our Answer concerning
them, from the place of Aristotle newly cited. For, he there subjoyns, Amores,
odium, and alia, passiones esse non intellectus, sed corporis ipsum habentis;
esse enim forte Intellectum aliquid divinum and passionis expers. By which, his
meaning is, that the proper Function of the Intellect, is to understand and
reason (though he was pleased to reckon Cogitation among the Passions) and that
all Passions belong to the Appetite either Concupiscible or Irascible, which is
a Corporeal Faculty. For, though Passion be posterior to Cognition, and
dependent thereupon; so that it may seem to be received in the subject, to
which Cognition does belong, that is to the Mind: nevertheless, because the
Mind, while resident in the body, does make use of corporeal Images
pre-admitted into the Imagination; and in the mean while the Phansy, in
imagining what things are, does cooperate together with the Mind, and the
motion of the Corporeal or Sensitive Faculty follows after the perception of
objects by the Phansy; thence it comes, that the whole Commotion, or Passion
does belong to the Appetite and Body, the Mind all that while remain free and
unmoved, after the same manner, as a Master and servant traveling together,
the servant carries the burden, and the Master goes light and free, and
unconcerned in the weight and trouble thereof. But, forasmuch as we must admit
a certain Appetite properly competent to the Soul itself, viz. the Rational
Appetite (from the name of its action, usually denominated the Will) by which
we find ourselves secretly inclined and carried toward things Honest and
Divine, and which ought to remain in the Soul even after death, since it must
then be sensible either of pleasure in the state of felicity, or of pain in the
state of misery: therefore, I confess, we cannot deny but there are some
certain Motions in the Soul itself, which in respect of the analogy they seem
to hold to those of the sensual or Corporeal Appetite, and that we cannot
otherwise express them, may well enough be called Passions, yet these are not
to be conceived to arise from any dilatation, compression, solution of
continuity, and the like violent motions, that might adferr any harm or
detriment to the substance of the Soul. Nor, indeed, ought this to seem strange
or difficult, in a thing that is Incorporeal; since even among Corporeals, we
observe some, that have a substance unalterable, and so inconsumable, by the
most violent motions in Nature, as Gold, Amianthus, and the like; and that
Aristotle makes the substance of Heavenly bodies, such as that it cannot be
altered, heated, or dissolved by the heat of the Sun, as all sublunary bodies
are.


Lucretius. What think you then, Athanasius, of Drunkeness, wherein both the
Rational Faculty is highly perturbed, and the Motive as much enfeebled: neither
of which could be, if the Soul did not suffer from the violence of the wine;
and what is capable of suffering such damage from external causes, cannot be
incapable of total dissolution from the same, in case their force and activity
become more intense. Therefore the soul is Mortal.


Athanasius. Why, truly, I think this Argument as light and trivial as your
former, and that the same solution will serve to both. For, it is not the Mind,
which is overwhelmed with the deluge of Wine, but the brain and seat or
instrument of the Phansy, whose images being beclouded and confused by the
fumes or spirits of the wine, brought thither by the arteries; it is impossible
the Mind should make use of them with that clearness and distinction, as when
they were pure and in order. And, as for that general weakness, which remains
for a while after the drunken fit is over, in all the members of the body; this
is not to be referred to the Mind neither, but to the Motive-Faculty, whose
instruments, and principally the Nerves, are then misaffected, and in a manner
relaxed, so as they become indisposed to the regiment of the Mind.

The best Lutenist in the world, you know, cannot play a tune upon a Lute,
whose strings are relaxed by moisture, or otherwise altered from their
requisite temper: and yet his skill in music never a whit the less: why then
should you conceive, that the soul should be able to conserve the harmony of
voluntary motions in the sinews, muscles, and members of the body, when the
requisite tenor of those her instruments is depraved, by the stupefactive and
relaxing force of the Wine, drank in excess? The Members of the body are fit
instruments* to execute the motions by the Soul impressed upon them; but when
they are surrounded with the malignant and Narcotical vapors of Wine, and
thereby relaxed or oppressed; they become incapable of the Souls mandates and
government, till those vapors being again discussed, they have recovered their
natural temper, and due disposition: and yet the Soul it self all that while
remain vigorous and strong, as in Sobriety; contrary to what this your
Objection supposes.


Lucretius. Since you so easily expede your self from the Objections drawn from
Diseases, and Ebriety; I shall urge you with one, that seems more tough and
knotty, and that is this. As the Body, so also the Soul or Mind is capable of
being cured or rectified by the Art of Medicine; and if so, there must be
either an addition to, or a detraction of somewhat from the Soul; Physic being
a Detraction of what is superfluous, and an addition of what is deficient in
man's Nature: And therefore the Soul, being capable of addition and detraction,
is capable likewise of destruction.


Athanasius. Alas, Lucretius, this is still a branch of the same stock; and to
it I may easily accommodate an Answer, out of what I even now replied to your
supposed sympathy of the Soul with the body, in some Diseases. For, albeit, it
be most true, that by Hellebor and other Antimelancholical remedies, we
Physicians usually cure Madness, called Insania, and Amentia, Unsoundness or
Distraction of the Mind: Yet is it as true, that this Cure is wrought only upon
the brain, or seat of the Imagination, which being purged of that adust and
blackish humor, which oppressed it, and altered from the distemper therein
caused by the noxious and intoxicating qualities of that humor; the Mind does
soon return to perform all its proper Functions as regularly and exactly, as at
any time before the patient was invaded with that distemper of his brain, and
depravation of his Phansy. So that, as when a man go's haulting, because one of
his shoes is higher than the other, we may well enough say, that man does
hault, though all the cause of his haulting be only the inequality of his
shoes; and to make him go right again, there needs no more, but to moke his
shoes equally high: So, when a man haults, as it were, in his Reason, or fails
in the evennesse and decorum of his Discourse; we may say, that man is Unsound
or lame in his Mind, though that unsoundnesse consist only in his Brain or
Imagination, and to restore him to the right and becoming manage of his
reason, there needs no more, but to rectify his Phansy or Brain, in whose
preternatural distemper alone his madness does consist.

Again, forasmuch as there are (as it were some certain diseases peculiar only
to the Mind; at lest in that Metaphorical sense, I have already explained: And
that these depravities, commonly called Diseases of the Mind, are capable of
cure by, that which is truly the Physic of the Mind, viz. Moral Philosophy:
Therefore ought we to conceive, that as the Mind is subject to those its
Affections, without any the least detriment or alteration of its substance; so
also may it be cured of them again, without any alteration, addition, or
detraction substantial. For, since the Diseases of the Mind are nothing else
but certain Evil or vicious Habits, contracted by custom; and those Habits are
nothing else but certain Modes or Manners of its standing affected to such or
such objects: Thence comes it, that those Vicious Habits may be sensibly
expelled by the induction of contrary Habits, that is of Virtuous ones; like as
a Crooked staff may be made straight, only by bowing it the contrary way. And
though no similitude be exactly congruous in this case, because the Affections
of Corporeal Natures hold no correspondence with those of Incorporeals: Yet I
choose to make use of this, of the rectification of a crooked staff, because
the Crookedness of the staff does in some sort represent the Curvity of a Mind
misaffected by vicious Habits; and the Rectitude of a staff, equally represent
that Rightnesse of the Mind, which is acknowledged in the Sovereignty and Habit
of Virtue. And thus you see, that the Curability of the Mind by the prescripts
of Morality, does not import its dissolubility, as you infer, but rather the
Contrary; for no Moral precept can be applied to, or work upon a Corporeal or
Dissoluble essence.


Lucretius. From Diseases and Remedies both of Body and Mind, let us have
recourse to Death, and see if from the manner of its Tyranny we can raise an
Objection or two against your opinion of the Souls being naturally exempted
from the same. It is observed, that Men generally die Membratim, limb after
limb, death advancing by sensible degrees from the extreme parts to the Central
and more noble: as if the Soul were not a substance entirely collected into it
self, or resident in any one particular place of the body (as you seem to
conceive) but diffused and scattered in several pieces, and so subject to
dissipation part after part.


Athanasius. The Solution of this is far from being difficult. For, conceiving
the soul, as Incorporeal, to be diffused through the whole body, not by
Extension of bulk, but by Replication, or (as the Schools speak) by position of
the same Entity in each part of the body; it is easy to understand, that the
soul, when the members grow cold and mortified, does then, indeed, instantly
cease to be in them: yet is not cut off piecemeal, or diminished, and so
sensibly or gradually dissipated, as you suppose; but the whole of it remains
in so much of the body, as yet continues warm, and perfused by the vital Heat,
until ceasing longer to animate the principal seat or throne of its residence
(whether the Brain, or Heart) it at length bid adieu to the whole, and withdraw
itself entire and perfect. What I here say, of the Constitution of the whole
Soul in the whole body, and the whole Soul in every part of the body, by way of
Replication, or Position of the same Entity in diverse places at the same time;
is, I confess, some what obscure, and the imperfection of our knowledge in the
affections of Immateriall natures, will hardly permit us to illustrate it: yet,
lest you should think it merely imaginary and sophistical, I may assert the
possibility and reasonableness of it, by a similitude of an intentional
species, or visible Image; Which all men allow so to be diffused through the
whole medium or space, as that it is at the same time whole in every part of
that space: because in what part soever of the space the eye of the spectatour
be posited, the whole Image is still visible therein. Now, if this manner of
total diffusion, without fraction or division, be competent to the visible
species, which is Corporeal, as I have amply proved in my Physiology, where I
treated expressly of the nature of Vision: certainly it must, with more reason,
be competent to the Soul, which is Incorporeal. And as for what you observe, of
the gradual encroachment of Death, and the sensible mortification of one limb
after another, beginning at the feet and other extremities of the body, and
creeping along to the heart; the reason thereof is only this, that the Vital
Heat or Flame, being almost either suffocated by putrefaction of the blood (the
only fuel by which it is maintained) in Diseases, or exhausted by old age,
goes out, like a Lamp, by degrees; ceasing first to enliven or irradiate the
parts that are most remote from the Focus, or Heart, and then failing in its
conserving influence more and more, until at length suffering a total
extinction in the very Heart (as it were in the socket) it leave that also cold
and livelesse. So that Death is an extinction only of the Vital Flame, not of
the Soul, which as Solomon calls it, is the brightness of the Everlasting
Light, the unspoited mirror of the power of God, and the Image of his
Goodness; and being but one, she can do all things, and remaining in her self,
she makes all things new.


Lucretius. There is another Argument of the Soul's Mortality drawn from hence;
that the Soul is as well a part of the Body, as the Eye, Ear, or the other
Sensitive Organs: But these are no sooner separated from the whole, than they
become incapable of all Sense; And therefore the Soul, when once separate from
the Body, must likewise become destitute of Sense.


Athanasius. The Mind or Soul cannot, without great impropriety, be said to be
a part of the Body, as the Eyes and Ears, and other Organs of Sense are;
insomuch as these belong to the Integrality of the Body, and the Soul belongs
to the Integrality of the Totum Compositum, and is the Essence or Form of Man:
And the Soul, indeed, is in them all, and in all the rest of the Body, but none
of them is in the Soul. So that for this reason alone, you ought not to
conceive a parity betwixt the Soul and the Instruments of sense, as to their
incapacity of Sensation, after their division from the body: being the Soul is
the very Principle of Sense, and the Organs can have no Sensation without Her.
But, not to insist upon this, I deny the Soul to be a part, as the instruments
of sense are; because, otherwise than those all are, she is Incorporeal, and is
to her self, and has, both in her self, and from her self, the principle of
all her actions and energy, which none of those can pretend to. For, she does
not borrow or derive from any other principle her power of Understanding or
Reasoning, as the eye does its Faculty of seeing, and the Ear its faculty of
Hearing: but has it immediately and solely from her self; and therefore it is
no wonder, if the Eye or Ear, once disjoined from the body, can see, nor hear
no longer, etc. but the Soul, when separated from the body, can understand and
Reason of and within her self.


Lucretius. But, pray Sir, reflect a little upon this; that the Soul and Body
are mutually connected and as it were United by so near a relation or
Necessitude, as that look how the body, being once destitute of the soul, can
no longer perform any vital Action: so neither can the soul, when once
departed from the body, and mixed with the Aer, perform any action vital, or
Animal; unless you please to give yourself the liberty of imagining, that she
does then animate that part of Aer, in which she does take up her new lodging,
and of that form herself instruments fit for the execution of her faculties.


Athanasius. However the Conjunction of the Soul and body be very intimate; and
the most part of vital and Animal actions belong to the Totum Compositum, or
whole Composition: yet from thence it does not follow, that though the body be
incapable of any of those actions, without the Soul; therefore the in capacity
is reciprocal, and the soul can do no actions, without the body; because the
soul is the Principle of life and activity to the body, but not the contrary.
When we behold a soldier fighting with a sword or other weapon, we cannot
justly say, that when he is deprived of those weapons, he can no longer strike
a blow: because, though his weapons be gone, he has still his arms and hands,
wherewith he can strike, when and as often as he pleases. So, when the Soul is
every way provided of Members and Organs, as it were with a Panoplie or
complete armor, and therewith performs several actions, vital, and Animal; we
cannot say, that if once it divest itself of that armor, and become naked, it
can no longer exercise its proper functions of Intellection and Ratiocination;
because, though the instruments, by the mediation whereof she does commonly
understand and reason in the body, be taken away, yet still she retains her
Faculties. Nor will it be therefore necessary, that when the soul is departed
from the body, and breathed forth into the Aer (as you, with the vulgar, seem
to conceive) that aer should be thereby Animated: because it is essential to
it, then to act, i. e. to understand and reason, without the mediation of any
organs at all; and neither in the aer, nor any other body whatever can the soul
either meet with, or create those dispositions, that are requisite to vital
information. This Comparison, I have here made betwixt the Soul and a Soldier,
is I confess incongruous, as to the point of Information; yet it holds with
convenience enough, as to the point of Operation (and your question does
chiefly concern that): the weapons of the soldier are as much dead and
useless instruments, without the hands, that are to manage them, as the members
of the body are without the Soul; and as these are Animated by the soul, so are
those in a manner, Animated by the hands of the Soldier. And this may be
extended also to the solution of that so famous an Objection of Aristotle (1.
de Anim. 8.) where he says; Esse quidem Animam separabilem, si aliquam
functionem habeat, quam sine corpore exerceat, v. c. Intellectionem, quae est
ipsius maxim propria, si modo ea quaepiam Imaginatio non sit, aut sine
Imaginatione fiat: necesse autem est, eum, qui speculatur, speculari simul
aliquod phantasma; Ergo etc. The soul is to be accounted separable, if it has
any function, which it can exercise without the body, namely Intellection,
provided that be not a certain kind of Imagination, or can be performed without
Imagination: but experience testifies, that no man can speculate, or
understand, without Phantasms; and therefore it is not likely, that the soul is
a distinct substance and separable from the body. For, the ground hereof is
false, viz that there is no Intellection, but what is either direct
Imagination, or done by Imagination; as we have formerly proved; and that with
no sparing hand, so that we need not here repeat it. Nor had I here remembered
this Argument of Aristotle, but that this you now urge is very near of kin
thereunto, as to its force and importance, and so put me in mind of it afresh.


Lucretius. An Eighth Objection may be made from hence; that the Soul being
once expired, the body soon corrupts, stinks, and resolves to dust: I say,
expired, or like a vapor exhaled through the conduits and pores of the body;
and therefore so divided into small portions or particles, as that in that very
Egression or Expiration, it must be wholly comparated to Dispersion; and what
is capable of such dispersion, is capable of total dissolution.


Athanasius. You might well, Lucretius, have spared yourself and me the trouble
of this impertinent objection, had you thought my Answer to your Fifth, worthy
your memory. For, since you could not then deny, that the soul, as Incorporeal,
is diffused through the whole body; and therefore may issue out of it entire
and unimpaired, as possessing no place, and in that respect, as capable of
passing through the solid and compacted parts, as through the conduits and
pores: why should you now resume that gross conception, of the Souls expiring
from the body, like a vapor, or exhalation? And, as for the Putrefaction of
the Body, after the Soul has withdrawn itself from it (though it nothing at
all concern the buisiness in hand) I say, the Cause thereof is the defect of
that vital Agitation of the Heart, Blood, and spirits, by which the Humors
most prone to putrefaction, were partly kept from subsiding and fermenting, and
partly so extenuated, as to be discussed and expelled.


Lucretius. A Ninth from hence; that in Lipothymies or swooning fits, the
vigor of the Soul is so much abated and brought low, as that it would be
totally dissolved and extinguished, in case the Causes of those its Failings or
Dejections, were yet more violent, as frequently they are, and then they cause
sudden death.


Athanasius. Here you recur to the Symptoms of bodily Diseases again; but I
wish I could as easily remove them from the body, as you from defending the
Mortality of the Soul, by any considerations drawn from them, and their most
fatal effects. For, as to Lipothymies, which according to the Etymology of the
word, you call Failings of the Soul; they are in truth only Failings of the
Heart, or vital influence; arising from the preclusion or stopping of those
passages, ordained for the continual transmission of vital Spirits; which as
servants, the Soul makes use of to Life, Sense, and Motion. And, therefore,
reflecting upon what I have already said, it is obvious to conceive, that the
whole Soul being diffused through the whole body; all the failing in Swooning
fits does fall, not upon her Self, but upon the Vital Organs, which at that
time are rendered unfit for the uses and actions, to which they were framed and
accommodated. And, if the Causes of such Failings should chance to be so
violent, as to induce sudden death; then the Soul, indeed, would and must
wholly depart: yet not by reason of any dissolution of its substance, or
exceeding imbecility in it self; but only for want of those Dispositions in the
Organs of life, by which she was enabled to enliven the body. And here I could
mind you of a certain sort of Lypothymies, that happen in Ecstasies of some
Holy men, when the Soul being transported with the superlative beauty and
excellency of Divine Objects, in abstracted contemplations, does so much
neglect her inferior functions, as that the body all that while seems
senseless and livelesse: And yet this an argument rather of the strength of
the Soul, than of any Failing or Defection in it self. I could also insist upon
this, that in sleep there is a kind of Defection of the influence of the Soul
upon her corporeal Organs, especially those inservient to Sense and Motion* and
yet the Soul is then most her self, as Cyrus long since observed, in one of
Xenophons Orations, in these most elegant words; Dormientium Animi maxim
declarant Divinitatem suam; multa enim, eum remissi ac liberi sunt, futura
prospiciunt: ex quo intelligitur, quales futuri sint, cum se plane corporis
vinculis relaxaverint. But the Objection, being otherwise refuted, does require
neither.


Lucretius. Experience teaches, that no man, when dying, finds his Soul to
depart out of his body whole and at once; but rather to fail by degrees within
his breast, just as he does his Sense, in each proper Organ: Which he would not
do, in case his Soul took her flight whole and entire, out of his breast, as a
bird out of a Cage; and therefore it is probable that the Soul, being dissolved
at the instant of death, is breathed out in dispersed Atoms together with the
Aer expired from the Lungs.


Athanasius. You must needs be straightened for Objections, Lucretius, when you
fly to uncertain Experiments, and incompetent conceptions of vulgar heads; and
therefore I hope, you cannot much longer hold out against truth. I say, to
uncertain experiments; because, since it is impossible that any man, in the
extreme moment of life, wherein his Soul cease to be either in his breast, or
any other part of his body, should say to the standers by, Now I am sensible of
the egresse or flight of my Soul, and I perceive how it departs; because while
he is able to speak, or be sensible of any thing, the Soul is still in the
body, and at the instant of its departure, the Speech and all Sense fail for
ever: The experience you allege is uncertain and so no experience at all. To
incompetent Conceptions of vulgar heads; because the common people, not being
able to understand the nature of an Incorporeal; and how possessing no place,
no body can hinder its passage or trajection; have a certain gross
apprehension, that the Soul must issue out of the breast, the same way that the
breath does out of the lungs. And as for its Dispersion into Atoms; you do ill
to suppose it to be Corporeal, when you have been so often beaten from that
starting hole. These Impertinences are much below so great a wit, as yours,
Lucretius; and I should very much wonder how you could fall upon them, but that
I ascribe it to your present humor of Contradiction, which does many times
transport even wise men themselves to gross extravagancies.


Lucretius. If the Soul were Immortal, and conscious of its Immortality, as you
have affirmed; certainly it would not grieve to leave the body, which is rather
its prison, than delightful Mansion; but rather rejoice to be set at liberty,
and exult, as a snake does to cast her slough, or a stagg his old horns.


Athanasius. To this I prepared a Solution, when I proved the Appetite of
Immortality to be Natural to the Soul, however this present life cause in us a
love of it self, above that we ought to have of our future state; just as the
Appetite or love of Health does not cease to be Natural, however the
blandishments of Sense, and flattering baits of some present pleasure, that
impugnes health, may create in us a stronger desire, for the time: and
therefore you might have well omitted here to argue the Mortality of the Soul,
from its reluctance against death, and unwillingnesse to leave its old
companion, the body. However, without insisting upon this, that many men even
in this life, long used to a mean and turbulent state or condition, become so
depraved and abject in their judgment and affection, as to refuse to change it
for a better, if they might: To what I have said formerly of the Universal
desire of Immortality, I shall annex this one both pertinent and memorable
consideration, out of Cicero (in Catone majore) Quid, quod sapientissimus
quisque aequissimo animo moritur, stultissimus iniquissimo? Nonne nobis videtur
Animus is, qui plus cernat, and longius, videre se ad meliora proficisci: ille
autem, cujus obtusior sit acies, non videre? Equidem efferor studio patres
vestros quos colui, and dilexi, videndi. Neque vero eos solum convenire aveo,
sed illos etiam, de quibus audivi and legi, and ipse conscripsi. Quo quidem me
proficisceutem, haud scio quis facile retraxerit, and tanquam Peliam recoxerit.
Quod si quis Deus mihi largiatur, ut ex hac aetate repuerascam, and in cunis
vagiam, valde recusem; nec vero velim, quasi decurso spatio a calce ad carceres
revocari. Does not every wise man die with extreme content and serenity of
mind; and only Fools with disquiet, impatience, and reluctance? Is not that
mind to be accounted the most clear sighted, which sees things afar off, and
discerns that it is to be translated into a better state: and that dim and
weak, which does not look beyond things present, and discern nothing of its
future condition? For my part, truly, I am even transported with vehement
longing to behold again the faces of those brave men, your Fathers, whom, in
their lives, I so much loved and honored. And not only them, but some other
worthy persons also, whose fame I have heard and read of, and celebrated in my
own writings. And, if I were so happy once, as to be on my journey toward those
Heroes; I know none, that should easily draw me back again, or retard my speed,
by restoring my youth, like Pelias. If any of the Gods should think to do me a
favor, in making me young again, now after I have attained to this my
declining age: I profess, I would refuse the proffer; nor would I, having run
over the stage of life, be brought back again to the post, from which I first
set forth. Hereunto I might add also that patheticall Exclamation of that
Emperor of wisdom, Marcus Antoninus; Ecquando futura es, O Anima, bona
simplex, una, nuda, corpore te ambiente dilucidior? Ecquando dispositionem
dilectioni et affectui genuino deditam degustabis? Ecquando futura es plena,
rei nullius indiga, nihil desiderans ulterius, nihil expetens etc. As if He
were angry, and passionately expostulating with his soul, that she staid so
long in the indigent and vexatious condition of this life, and had omitted
opportunities of translating herself into a better, in which she would be
entirely Herself, and enjoy those pleasures, that are more genuine and
agreeable to her immortal nature. But, so clear a truth, as this of the Souls
desire of an Immortal state, after death, notwithstanding the unwillingness of
some abject minds (laden with earthy and base affections) to submit to the
stroke of Death, which alone can transport them into that state: does need no
further testimonies, or illustration.


Lucretius. If the Soul survive the body, and be Cognoscent or Knowing, after
death; doubtless it must be furnished with senses, that so she may see, hear,
etc. in order to her knowledge: but, when once divorced from her Copartner, the
body, she neither has, nor can have Organs for any such uses at all; and
therefore she can have no knowledge.


Athanasius. Here again you touch upon that so often rejected confusion of
Knowledge and Sensation, as if they were one and the same thing; when from
sundry passages in my precedent discourses, you might have easily collected,
that the sense ascribed to the Soul, is neither Hearing, nor seeing, nor etc.
but the very power of Understanding, or Intellection itself: which is indeed
called many times [(...)] Sense, in a general acceptance of the word; because
Cognition is a Perception, and because it comprehends, in way of Eminency, all
the subordinate senses, or Faculties of sensation, i. e. by itself it knows
Colors, as the Eye; sounds, as the Ear; and so of the rest. And this is the
proper prerogative of superior Faculties, that besides their own higher and
nobler Functions, they comprehend likewise all the Functions of Inferiors, and
that in a transcendent and more excellent manner, as I have already explained.
But, as for the particular manner of the Souls Knowledge, after death; I remit
you to Sr. Kenelme Digbies sublime Speculations concerning the condition of a
separate Soul; in which, though perhaps you may not meet with such
satisfaction, as you expect: yet you will meet with more than I can now give
you, without repeating his notions.


Lucretius. Well, Athanasius, you would not have referred me to another, but
that you are almost exhausted and wearied with speaking thus long yourself; and
therefore it becomes me in civility to consider the weakness of your lungs, and
slowness of your tongue (of both which I remember, you have many years since
often complained) and to ease you of this penance my curiosity put upon you, as
soon as I have proposed one Objection more, which wiser men than myself have
thought not a little difficult to be solved; and that, in short, is this.
Considering the vast disparity and (in truth) absolute incompossibility betwixt
the affections of a Corporeal and Incorporeal Nature; it seems unreasonable to
conceive, that they can be conjoined in one Composition, such as Man is, if (as
you affirm) his soul be an Immortal substance, and his Body a Mortal. Pray,
therefore, make good the possibility of such a Conjunction: and, if you can,
explain what is the common caement or Glue, that unites and holds them
together; and then I have done opposing you.


Athanasius. You very well understand Epicurus doctrine of an Eternal and
Incorporeal Inanity, or space diffused through the world, and commixed with all
Bodies or Concretions, which are yet dissoluble: and do you pretend after
this, that you cannot conceive it reasonable, that an Incorporeal should be
conjoined to a Corporeal? But, suppose you really cannot conceive it
reasonable; must it therefore be unreasonable, when so many and so eminent
Philosophers have understood, and allowed the reasonableness of this
Conjunction? What think you, in the first place, of Plato, Aristotle, and all
their sectators, who unanimously held the Anima Mundi, or Universal Soul, and
that being diffused through all parts of the Universe, it associateth and
mixeth itself with all things, and totam intus agitat molem? And then what
think you of those words of the great Hermes, quoted by Lactantius; when
discoursing of the Nature of Man, and how he was Created by God, he says: Ac
idem ex utraque natura, immortali puta, ac mortali, unam hominis naturam
texebat, ipsum quadamtenus immortalem, quadamtenus mortalem faciens; ac eundem
accipiens, in medio quasi interstitio, heinc divinae, immortalisque; illeinc
mortalis obnoxiaeque mutationi naturae constituit, ut in omnia intuens, omnia
miraretur. And thus Trismegistus; from whence it came, that Man was esteemed as
it were the Horizon of the Universe, in whom Supreme natures are joined to the
most Low, and the Heavenly to the Earthy: and this with admirable
correspondency, and as beseems the perfection of the Universe; because, since
there are some Natures purely Incorporeal and Immortal, and others purely
Corporeal and Mortal; that these Extremes might not be without a Mean, nothing
seems more congruous, than that there should be a certain sort of third
Natures, so mixed and compound of both the others, as to be Incorporeal and
Immortal, on one part, and Corporeal and Mortal, on the other. Again, whereas
you imagine it absurd, that natures so extremely different should concur to
constitute one Composition; I beseech you, Lucretius, are not Heat, and Cold,
white and black, as different each from other, as Immortal and Mortal? and yet
you see, they are often conjoined together, so as that a Middle or Third nature
does result from their union, as in particular, warm, from Heat and Cold, and
Gray or brown, from white and black. Nay, there seems so much the less
repugnancy betwixt Immortal and Mortal, Incorporeal and Corporeal natures; by
how much they are the less Different and Incompossible because they are only as
it were Disparate among themselves, and capable of conserving a whole nature:
but Heat and Cold, Whiteness and Blackness, are absolute Contraries, and cannot
consist together, without reciprocal destruction, or maintain a durable Union.
And thus much for the First part of your Demand, viz, the Possibility of a
Conjunction betwixt an Incorporeal and a Corporeal Nature.

As for the remainder, viz, what is the Common Medium, Cement or Glue, by which
two such different natures are married and united into one Compositum; I
Answer, that I conceive it to be the Blood, especially the spiritual and most
elaborate or refined part thereof: according to that ancient opinion of
Critias, Sentire, maxim proprium esse Animae; atqe hoc inesse propter
sanguinis naturam; commemorated by Aristotle (though with dissent) in the 2 Chapter
of his 1. Book de Anima; and with the testimony of sundry admirable
Experiments, both revived and asserted by our perspicacious Contryman, Dr.
Harvey, in his Exercitations concerning the Generation of Animals. For, since
the visible observations of the Manner and process of Nature, in the production
of the Chicken in and from the Egg, do assure that the Blood is the part of
the body, which is first generated, nourished, and moved; and that the Soul is
Excited and as it were Enkindled first from the blood: doubtless, the blood is
that, in which the operations vegetative and sensitive do first manifest
themselves; that, in which the vital Heat, (the primary and immediate
instrument of the Soul, especially as to Animation) is innate and congenial;
that, which is the Common Vinculum, or Caement of the Soul and body; and that,
by the mediation whereof, as a vehicle, the Soul does transmit her conserving
and invigorating influence into all parts of the body. Nay, considering that
the Blood, by perpetual Circulation, does flow (like a river of Living water)
round the body, penetrating into and irrigating the substance of all the parts,
and at the same time communicating to them both Heat and Life; and that the
Heart is framed for no other end, but that by perpetual pulsation (together
with the concurrence of the veins and arteries) it may receive this blood, and
again propell it into all the body: I say, these things duly considered, it
can be but a Paradox at most, to affirm, that the Soul having its first, and
perhaps principal residence in the Blood, may very well be conceived to be, in
respect thereof, Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part. And, lastly,
concerning the Manner of this Conjunction of the Soul and body, by the
Mediation of this vital Nectat, the Blood; it is not necessary, with the
Vulgar, to imagine, that they should mutually touch, and by hooks take
reciprocal hold each of other, in order to Cohaesion and constant Union; for,
that is competent only to Corporeals; but that Incorporeals should be conjoined
either one: to another, or to Corporeals, no more is required but an Intimate
Praesence, which is yet a kind of Contact, and so may serve in stead of mutual
Apprehension and Continency. So that this special Manner of Praesence is that
and only that, by which an Incorporeal Entity may be united to a Corporeal. And
now I have explained those difficulties concerning the Conjunction of the Soul
and Body, the one an Incorporeal and Immortal Being, the other Corporeal and
Mortal* which you seemed to think in-explicable. I expect you should be as good
as your promise, no longer to oppose me, but hereafter concur with me in
opinion, that The Soul is an Immortal substance: and that its Immortality is
not only credible by Faith, or upon Authority Divine; but also Demonstrable by
Reason, or the Light of Nature.


Lucretius. You may remember, Sr: I told you in the beginning, that though I am
an Epicurean, in many things concerning Bodies; yet, as a Christian, I detest
and utterly renounce the doctrine of that Sect, concerning Men's Souls: and that
I asked your permission to interrupt you sometimes in your discourses, by
intermixing such Doubts, and Objections, as seemed to render the Demonstration
of the Souls Immortality, by meet* Reason, exceeding difficult, if not
altogether impossible; to this end only, that I might the more fully experiment
the strength of your Arguments to the Contrary. So that notwithstanding all my
Contradiction, you ought to believe me still as strongly persuaded of the truth
of what you have asserted, as if I had acted your part, and undertaken the
assertion of the same myself: my diffidence being not of the Souls
Incorruptibility, but of the possibility of its Demonstration, by you or any
man else. And now, though you have brought, I confess, most excellent Arguments
to prove it, and both satisfied all my Doubts, and solved all my Objections:
yet whether you have so Demonstrated it, as to exclude all Dubiosity, and
compel assent (which is the propriety of perfect Demonstration) in a pure
Natural Philosopher, who refuses to admit any other conviction, but from the
Light of Nature; I must leave to the judgment of our Arbiter, the noble
Isodicastes, who will not, I am well assured, deliver any but an equitable
Censure in the Cause.


Athanasius. And you may remember too, Lucretius, how in the beginning I
advertised you of the Unreasonableness of such overcurious Wits, as expect
Mathematical Demonstrations in Metaphysicall Subjects, which are really
incapable of them; and gave you an undeniable Reason thereof. So that
considering my timely prevention of your expectation in that kind; and your
own confession that I have satisfied all your Scruples, and solved all your
Objections: I cannot but wonder at your obstinacy in your old opinion, that it
is not possible to convince a mere Natural man, of the Souls Immortality, by
the testimony of pure Reason. Nevertheless, I freely join with you, in your
Appeal to the verdict of Isodicastes, than whom certainly no man can be more
judicious, no man more just.


Isodicastes. The matter now at last in dispute betwixt you, seems to be this;
whether in a Thesis, or Proposition, which is not capable of being evinced by a
Geometrical Demonstration (as this of the Souls Immortality seems not to be)
there can yet be expected such substantial and satisfactory Reasons, Physical
or Moral, or both, as may suffice to the full establishment of it is Truth, in
the mind of a reasonable man? And therefore (that I may give you my opinion, in
a word) I say; that though in things belonging to the eognizance of a pure
Philosopher, every one ought to seek for the best assurance, of which the
nature of that thing, into which he enquireth, will possibly admit; and that
the way of Demonstration, More Geometrico, is of all others the most convincing
and scientificall: yet, since many things not only in Metaphysics, but even in
Physics, are of so retired and abstruse a nature, as not to be brought under
the strict laws and rules of Geometry, of which notwithstanding we may acquire
a competent certitude, by well examining their Effects and constant Operations;
as on one side, we ought not to require absolute Demonstrations, where the
Condition of the subject does exclude them; so on the other, we ought not to
deny the force of all other testimonies, that right Reason offers in evidence
of its verity asserted, especially when all that can be said against it, shall
be found vain and light, in comparison of what is alleged in defense of it.
This considered, though Athanasius has not precisely (according to the
rigorous acceptance of the word) Demonstrated the Immortality of Man's Soul;
yet forasmuch as He has proved it by good and important Reasons, as well
Physical as Moral, such as are not much inferior to absolute Demonstrations,
and such as by vast excesses transcend the weight of all your opposite
Allegations, Lucretius: truly, I think you ought to rest satisfied, that He
has discharged himself of his Undertaking to the Full; especially since it
would be a very hard task for you to maintain, that all the beams of the Light
of Nature do concentre only in Mathematical Demonstrations, and that we can
know nothing, which is not Demonstrable. And now Gentlemen, if you please, let
us be going toward my house, where I am sure we were expected at least an hour
ago, and where I shall have leisure to thank you more solemnly for the
infinite content I have received from your Conversation.


Athanasius. We are ready to attend you, Noblest Isodicastes; and shall ever be
as ready to acknowledge the singular Honor you have done us, in losing this
Evening upon persons so unable to merit your attention, as we have now shown
ourselves.


FINIS.

