C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Requiring all Seamen and Mariners to Render themselves to His
MAJESTY'S Service.
CHARLES R.

WHereas diverse Seamen and Mariners have lately left their Usual and Ordinary
places of Abode, and have removed themselves into some private and obscure
Places in the Inland Countries, endeavoring thereby to avoid the Search that
is now made for men of that Calling and Condition, and to escape the Press that
is gone out for His Majesty's present Service. His Majesty therefore by the
Advice of His Council has thought fit to Publish this His Royal Proclamation,
and does hereby straightly Charge and Command all Seamen and Mariners aforesaid,
now remaining in any County of England or Wales, and not already listed in His
Majesty's Service, that they forthwith Render themselves unto the Principal
Officers and Commissioners of the Navy in London, in order to their being
received into Pay, and sent on board such of His Majesty's Ships as shall be
found most expedient for His Majesty's Service; And if any of them shall
hereafter be found out or discovered who have neglected to Obey this His
Majesty's Royal Command, they shall be proceeded against with all Severity. And
His Majesty does hereby require all Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, Constables, and other Officers to whom it does or may appertain, that
they cause diligent Search to be made within all and every of their Precincts
for the said Seamen and Mariners, and to seize and secure the Persons of such
of them as shall there be found; and to cause them to be sent to the Principal
Officers and Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy in London, in order to their
farther employment: And hereof they are not to fail, as they will answer the
contrary at their Peril.

Given at the Court at Whitehall this 29th. day of March 1672. in the 24th.
year of His Majesty's Reign.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty 1672.


