C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We have fully resolved to use Our utmost Endeavors for the
Preservation of the True Religion Established in this Kingdom, to which We have
always adhered against all Temptations whatsoever; And in order to this great
end, have thought fit to Command all Popish Priests and Jesuits, being Our
Natural born Subjects, to depart out of, and not to return or come into this
Our Kingdom, under such Penalties, and in such manner as is herein after
expressed; We do therefore by this Our Royal Proclamation, strictly Charge and
Command all Jesuits and Priests whatsoever, being Our Natural born Subjects,
who have taken Orders from the Sea of Rome, or by the Authority, or pretended
Authority thereof, and not being under restraint by Imprisonment, (except Mr.
John Huddleston, who did eminently Serve Us in Our Escape from Worcester) That
they do before the Twenty fifth day of March next ensuing, depart out of this
Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; and
that they or any of them, or any other such Priests or Jesuits, do not after
the said Twenty fifth day of March, presume to come or return into Our said
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, upon pain of having
the Penalties of the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm inflicted upon them:
And for their better means to depart accordingly, We do hereby Declare and
Publish Our further Will and Pleasure, That if at any time before the said
Twenty fifth day of March, they or any of them shall resort to the Town or Port
of Berwick, or to any Port-Town of Our said Kingdom of England, or Dominion of
Wales, and there declare himself to the Magistrate of the Town, or the Officers
of any Port, that he is a Priest, and that he is there to take Shipping for his
passage, they shall suffer him or them quietly to depart, and shall see them
Shipped and sent away for Foreign Ports, and give them their furtherance for
their departure. And to the end this Our Proclamation may be the better
observed and obeyed, We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners, Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, That
they be circumspect and vigilant each of them in their several Charges, from
and after the said Twenty fifth day of March next, in searching for, and
discovering all such Jesuits and Priests as aforesaid, as shall presume to
remain or come into Our said Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick, contrary to Our Royal Pleasure and Command herein declared, that so
the Laws may be put in due Execution against them.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Fifth day of February, 1674/5. in the
Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674/5.


