BY THE KING
CHARLES By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To all and sundry his Lieges and Subjects, greeting.
Whereas the Lord has been pleased in his gracious goodness and tender
mercy, to discover unto his Majesty the great evil of the ways wherein he
has been formerly led by wicked Counsel, and has so far blessed the
endeavors of this Kirk and Kingdom, as his Majesty has now sworn and
subscribed the Solemn League and Covenant, and given satisfaction to their
desires: And whereas his Majesty is most willing and desirous to grant the
Propositions of both Kingdoms presented to his Royal Father at New Castle, and
Hampton Court, with such alterations and additions as shall be thought
necessary for the good of King and King(...) give such farther satisfaction to
his people of England, as shall be desired by his two Houses of Parliament of
England, sitting in Freedom. And for as much as an Army from he Sectarian party
in England, under the Command of L.G. Cromwell, after all the evil and
wickedness com(...) in England, in murdering his Majesty's Royal Father,
using force against the two Houses of Parliament, and oppressing their fellow
Subjects in England and Ireland, has now also invaded this Kingdom, contrary
to the solemn League and Covenant, and the Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms,
wherein his Majesty is persuaded, tha^ many of the Officers and Soldiers of
the sai^ Army have been misled through the craft and subtilty of others, who
have contrived and (...)ed the subversion of all Government, Civil and
Ecclesiastical in all the three Kingdom (...) subject all persons to their
Tyrannical usurpation and domination. Therefore his Maie^^^^ (...) the pious
and tender care he has to reclaim his Subjects from such unlawful and
re(...) courses, does hereby offer a free Pardon and Indemnity to all Officers
and Soldiers of (...) English Army now within this Kingdom, for any thing
done, or acted by them against his (...) and his Royal Father, during these
^^oubles, who shall immediately upon sight of this his Man gracious offer leave
that Army, and come over to the Scottish Army, where they shall be (...)ously
used and entertained; Provided always that this his Majesty's offer shall not
be und(...) (...) to comprehend any person or persons, who after the said force
used against the Houses of ^^^^^^ment, having sitten in the pretended House of
Commons, or in any other Court, pretend^^^ power from them, did vote the taking
away of his Majesty's Royal fathers life;

Given at (...) Castle of Sterling, the 27. of July, And of our Reign, the
Second year, 1650.

