C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Prohibiting the keeping of St. James Fair at the City and
County of Bristol.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Evcellent Majesty, out of His Princely and Christian care of
His loving Subjects, that no good means may be neglected to stay the further
spreading of the present Infection and Contagion, does find it convenient to
prevent all occasions of public concourse: And therefore being informed that
there is at hand a Fair of special note, usually kept on the Five and twentieth
day of July, called St. James's Fair, at the City and County of Bristol, unto
which there is a very great resort out of many parts of His Majesty's Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the holding whereof may be the
occasion of Danger and Infection to many parts and places which (by Gods
blessing) are now free, has (with the Advice of His Privy Council) thought
good by this His Royal Proclamation, not only to admonish and require all His
loving Subjects to forbear to resort for this time to the said Fair; but also
to enjoin and require all such as are interested therein, to forbear holding
the said Fair for this present year, upon pain of punishment, as for a Contempt
so much concerning the safety of the People, they shall be adjudged to deserve;
which they must expect to be inflicted with all severity. And His Majesty does
hereby straightly Charge and Command the Mayor and Magistrates of His said City
of Bristol, to see this His Will and Pleasure duly observed, and by all good
means to restrain and keep out of the said City, all such Persons and Goods as
shall come, or be brought from any Infected place, as they tender the safety
and preservation of the said City, and will answer the contrary at their
perils. And His Majesty does hereby further declare, That all such as are
interested in the Royalty or Profits of the said Fair, shall not by this
Temporary restraint receive any prejudice in the Right of the said Fair, or
Liberties thereunto belonging; Any thing herein before contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the Three and twentieth day of June, 1665. in
the Seventeenth year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1665.


