Words in Season: From that late Worthy Sufferer, and Servant of the Lord
Jesus, an able Minister of the New Testament, according to that Character, 2
Cor. 6.4, 5, etc. Mr. Abraham Cheer. VIZ.

I. Faith's Conquest, over the Tortures and Tenders of an Hour of Temptation,
on Heb. 11.35.

II. The Embalming of a Dead Cause, on Mark 14.8.

III. Remarkable Discourses on his Dying-Bed, with Copies and Extracts of
Letters, on several occasions.

Useful for those, whose Hearts are engaged to serve the Will of God, in this
Generation.

London, Printed for Nathan Brooks, in Bartholomew-Close, 1668.

The Publisher to the READER.
I Doubt not but the following Discourses carry so much evidence of Truth and
Holiness, as will sufficiently commend them to the Hearts and Consciences of
the upright, as proceeding from one, who believed, and therefore spoke;
delivered what he received, as a Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven,
the Fear of the Lord being evidently his treasure, wherein he walked all the
day long, and by which he was enabled to bear those hard things, which a
constant Spirit, in keeping the Commandments of God and Faith of Jesus, holding
fast the Word and Works of God, drew upon him* bringing him into fellowship
with trials and sufferings, upon the Ways, Truths, Interest, and People of the
Lord in this Generation.

It may highly concern the living, to lay to heart the removal of Prophets and
holy Ones, true mourners, that sought to stand in the Gap, to turn away wrath,
that it might not come to the utmost.

I am sure it has a sad aspect, when even a Professing (but too much
complying) People, stand as on the other side, or at a distance from those who
earnestly contend for the Faith, holding fast what they have received, and are
far from right laying to heart, That through the hatred of the world, righteous
men perish, and merciful men are taken away.

I doubt not, but there remains a remnant, whose minds by such providence are
deeply impressed, well-nigh to overwhelming, further than help is given, and
the hand stretched forth, to lead to the Rock that is higher than we, when in
all parts and corners the beauty and glory is cutting off as a fading-flower;
and how hard is it to speak and do as becomes, under such astonishing strokes,
and with him, Ezekiel. 24.18. to hold on, doing as the Lord Commands, I am
persuaded that sigh often goes up, Ezekiel. 11.13. with Amos 7.5. O Lord, cease I
beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small. The reviving and
desired issues of that work falling under great distrusts, even with those that
are the Friends thereof, when (if I may allude to it, Luke 24.19, etc) those,
who are as Prophets, mighty in deed and word before God and all the People,
Instruments polished to carry it on to an expected end, are cut off and laying
aside daily, so hard is it for us to understand that thus it ought to be, that
so the excellency of the power, may be acknowledged to be of God and not of
men, that all may see his Work is perfect, his Word is tried, with whom is no
restraint, for he sends by whom he will, the residue of the Spirit being with
him, who will in due time raise up and furnish Instruments for every service;
and if at this time men think that by cutting off, and wearing out Saints and
faithful Ones, their nest is set on high, they shall be delivered from the
power of evil, none remaining to cry out of their violence and spoil, to detect
the unrighteousness of their ways and doings, the very stone shall cry out of
the Wall, and the beam out of the Timber shall witness against them.

I humbly pray, and wish that the cast-out, scattered, peeled people, in whose
heart is the Fear of the Lord, under all amusing dispensations, may yet
increase in the Faith that stands in the Power of God, and is of the operation
of his Spirit, in the exercise thereof, which judges not after appearances,
they may understand all these deaths, passing over persons and things, but
needful and preparatory for the Glory that is to follow, when their filth and
defilements by the Spirit of Judgment, and by the Spirit of Burning shall be
put away; the slow progress of which work, with the discovery made of so great
a defection from professed Light and Principles, ought greatly to be laid to
heart, how many by reason thereof, turn from the Truth, and are confirmed in
Athiesm, even by the deceitful working of those, who in the failure of outward
advantages, and exposal to necessities, bonds, and death, set themselves at
such a distance from the works of God, our eyes have seen (the beginning of
fulfilling Prophesies, Threatenings, and Promises to the last days) as if
either there was no Holiness or Righteousness in them, or that they were
unacquainted with the inward Life and Spirit of them, so deeply has corruption
and the spirit of the world mingled it self, with those, who not long since, in
greatest seeming Light and Zeal, professed, to seek after a better state of
things, Even looking for, and hastening to the new Heavens, and new Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness; but the Works of God being forgotten, no wonder
his Word is so little believed, or his counsel waited for.

It was a worthy Expostulation, but a few years since, (before some then in the
exercise of Authority) of one, who I fear has outlived the force of it, which
though large, hoping it may be of use, I take leave here to transcribe; If you
will be able to steer your Course a-right, if you would take one straight step,
have in a readiness an acquaintance with the work of God, what it is that he
aims at, by which you may be guided in all your undertakings. Suppose now a man
or men should come and ask of you, What God has done in these Nations? What he
has wrought and effected? What is brought forth? Have you an answer in
readiness? Certainly God has done so much, as that he expects you should be
able to give an account of it; take heed that every one of you be not ready to
speak the disquietments of your own Spirits, and so cast contempt on the Work
of God; something else is required of you, I have sometimes in darkness and
under temptations my self, begun to think, that what has been, is the thing
that is, and there is no new thing under the Sun; as it has been among the
Heathen of old, so it has been amongst us; or as it was with Israel, 1 King.
16.21, 22. Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts, half of the
people followed Tibni, the son of Ginath, to make him King; and half followed
Omri: but the people that followed Omri, prevailed against the people that
followed Tibni, the son of Ginath; so Tibni died, and Omri reigned. That a
common thing and frequent in the World, had befaln us, wherein God had no hand,
but that of common Providence, in dashing one sort of men against another; so
foolish have I been, and as a Beast, so ready to condemn the Generation of the
Righteous; so unbelieving, and ready to cast away the Faith and Prayer of ten
thousand Saints, one of whose sighs shall not be lost; but such fearful effects
sometimes, trouble, disquietment, disappointment, and carnal fear will produce.
But certain it is, none of the many cries of the people of God shall be lost,
nor their Faith disappointed; God has a peculiar design in hand, and we are to
find it out, that we may be able to answer them that make enquiries. If you lay
not this foundation of your procedures, I shall not wonder, if you err in your
ways; it is your Pole Star, and will be so, by which your whole course is to
be steered; your Shield, which whilst it is safe, though you die, ye^ your
Glory abides. And the same Author further discussing what this Work and Design
of the Lord was, results it mainly in this, That Godliness and the love of the
Lord Jesus be preserved, protected, and secured from a return of the hand of
violence upon it.

What then may we now expect, but after a little further fluctuating upon the
deep, to suffer shipwreck upon some Shelves or Rocks, seeing we have ceased our
steerage by this Pole Star? what may we expect, but slaughter and extirpation,
since that Mighty Shield is vilely cast away, as though it had not been
anointed with Oil? considering also, that if the hand of violence be returned,
its confederated with, under the sacred ties of Oaths and Covenants, even
whilst it manifestly opposes Godliness, and bends the edge of all its power
against such as love the Lord Jesus in sincerity; I am sure it calls for deep
lamentation, that a People, who had the Name of the Lord upon them, are left to
that wonderful and horrible thing; (Jer. 5. last.) Prophets prophesying
falsely, and Princes bearing rule by their means, and both Prophets and People
(through a little present fleshly ease and prosperity, waxing fat and shining)
love to have it so; the holy Spirit, then assures, the end will be bitter, and
that enquiry, What will ye do, in the end thereof? though slightly passed over
now, will have its resolve, by their cry to the Mountains and Rocks, to fall
on, and hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, when in the
faileur of justice on Earth, he will cause judgment to be heard from Heaven,
When he arises, as certainly he will, to judge the Cause of the Fatherless and
Needy, and to save all the meek of the Earth.

But I may not further thus proceed, lest I exceed bounds, nor is it needful
that more be said of the Author, only I am persuaded it greatly furthered him
in the search after, and knowledge of divine mysteries, that he never was
entangled, and disadvantaged by Academical Education, which has been
over-fruitful, in furnishing persons (as worthy Mr. Rutherford on another
occasion in his Letters expresses it) with ill washen and foul distinctions to
shift Christ, this age has over-plentiful testimony thereof; this Servant of
the Lord, as by the account left of himself, in the last two Pages of this
Book, was by his believing Parents, otherwise nurtured, who waiting at the foot
of Christ, keeping his precepts diligently, became wiser than his Teachers,
giving occasion to many to renew that saying, Whence has this man letters? for
he was eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures; adding much to such as conversed
with him, whether by word or Epistle.

If what is here presented, prove of use to strengthen weak hands, or to uphold
them that are ready to fall, by keeping in view the Resurrection and
Blessedness prepared for those whom God guides by his Counsel, they will know
where to give the glory.

I earnestly wish and pray, That those to whom in a peculiar manner he was
sent, amongst whom more especially he labored, who must give an account of so
great a Talent and Price, long trusted with them, may do it with joy,
discovering by an obedience of Faith, to the Lord Jesus under all trials, that
he labored not in vain; and I hope, however it may be to others, what is here
presented, may be useful to them, keeping in remembrance how holily, justly,
and unblameably he behaved himself amongst them, that following his Faith, they
may be saved from this Generation, and be found amongst those, who receive the
End of their Faith, the Salvation of their Soul, Amen.

To the MEMORY of Mr. Abraham Cheer. Anagram. Ramah Baca here.
WAs there a voice in Ramah heard! Jer. 31.15.

Was bitter weeping there?
'Cause Rachels children were not spared, Mat. 2.18.

Why should there not be Here?
Was Baca in time past a Well? Psalm. 84.6.

Although a place of drought,
Was it made so by Israel?
When journ'ing in the South.
Did the one for Children thus lament?
The other for their Water,
Oh! how should Sion it resent, Lam. 2.1, to 12. Psalm. 46.4. Amos 1.2. Lam*
2.1. Mala. 3.17. Jonah 3.8. Ps. 119.126 Mat. 9.38. Zech. 11.4, 7

When God her Sons does slaughter?
When he cuts off her pleasant streams,
Her beauteous Branches wither;
When he shuts up her brightest Beams,
Does home his Jewels gather.
Yea, how should this increase her cry,
When in a time of need;
That Shepherds, they should multiply,
The slaughtered Flocks to feed;
That even then, God should not spare,
To take hence in great numbers; Isa. 57.1. Ezekiel. 3.26. Job 37.23.

The most laborious in their Sphere:
Place this among his Wonders.
Psalm. 36*6. Job 11.7. 1 Cor. 2.9. Psalm. 32.8. Psalm. 73 24. Job 36.9, 10
They ways, O God, are in the deep,
To search them to perfection;
It Is not for Mortals pace to keep
With thee, give thou direction.
Let Us ponder well thy ways, O Lord,
Give us thy hearing Ear;
Some teachings to us do afford,
Deuteronomy. 13.11 Ezekiel. 12.3. Mal. 3.17. Ezekiel. 14.16 Mala. 3.1. Jer. 12.1. Ezra
9.13. Lam* 3.29. 2 Samuel 24.17 Joel 2.17. Ezekiel. 9.4. Psalm. 85.10. Jer. 14.7. Job
19.21. Genesis 19.19. Jonah 3.10. Psalm. 11.17. Zech. 13.7. Lam. 1.15. Isa. 40.11.
1 Samuel 1.8. 2 Cor. 12.9.
By what we see; let us fear,
What this portends, thou make such haste,
To treasure up each Jewel;
Art minded, Lord, our Land to waste,
Must we for wrath, be fuel!
If so 't should be, thou would be just,
'Twere but Sin's recompense:
We must our mouths put in the dust,
We have given great offense.
Yet spare, O Lord, spare thou our Land,
At least in it thy Mourners;
Thy Mercy will with Justice stand,
In pard'ning great offenders.
Make us the objects of thy pity,
Thy Mercy magnify;
Spare as of old, an Heathen City,
Spare, O spare, let us not die.
But if more Shepherds thou will smite,
And Mighty men must fall;
Feed Sheep thy self, thy Battles fight,
Be thou in stead of all.
Amen. Amen.
Another. To the Memory of Mr. ABRAHAM CHEER. Anagram. Ah me! Rear Bacha.
WHo can but Mourn, when men do scorn!
To Note the Righteous Death; Isa. 57.1. Psalm. 84.6.

Who can but Rear a Bacha here,
When such drop off the Earth?
When Circumstance, shall Evidence,
In Judgment it may be:
Slight it who can, make me the man,
O Lord, may cry, Ah me!
Amen.
To the Memory of Mr. ABRAHAM CHEER. An Acrostick.
Art gone Dear Soul! Art fled? Have left the Earth?
Below thee 'twas: it answered not thy Birth.
Rare was thy Life; choice was thy latter end,
At last for God, and Truth, thou did contend.
Have Overcome? Have got the Victory?
Ah! then, let others say, Why may not I?
Mercy Begat him, Led him, Fed him, Kept,
Cheered him, did all, until the time he slept.
Has now enthroned him, entered him in Rest,
Each Soul that walks with God, shall thus be blessed.
Awake, then, Rouse faint hearts, shake off distrust,
Rampant be Faith, greatest of men are dust;
E'relasting's God, and Worship him we must.
ANAGRAM. Abraham Cheer. Ah Arm a Breach.
TO Saints and Sinners, God this day does call,
To hear, consider, and to lay to heart,
What he has done, is doing, and yet shall
Be done amongst us, ere this Cup depart.
Blessed are they, whom Chast'ning he does teach,
To hear and fear, when he makes such a Breach.
O hasten Saints, how is the Sun now setting,
The Light which on you sometimes brightly shone,
Away from you apace seems to be getting;
As if God's work amongst you now were done.
By treble strokes God heretofore did Preach,
To you, not hearing, comes this fearful Breach.
And is there not a Cause? Consider, try;
What mean those bleatings everywhere so rise?
A worldly Spirit, Pride, Formality,
Bent to backsliding, as if 'twere your life.
First-Love, first-Works, alas, you do not reach,
No wonder then the Lord makes such a Breach.
Says to his chiefest Children, Come away,
Remove the Candle, and put out the Light:
These People eat and drink, rise up to play,
Are not the Children of the Day, but Night;
They hear indeed, but do not what I Teach,
Wherefore in fury, I will make a Breach.
Poor Church in Plymouth, whom methinks I spy,
As men astonished stand, and thus they speak,
The Lord has dealt with us most bitterly,
Dear Cheare's gone from us, O behold a Breach!
It Is so indeed, a breach full sore and wide,
That is upon the choicest Mercies made;
And each of you, are like now to be tried,
Whether Religion be your chiefest Trade
That you are driving Heaven for to reach,
Or fixed on Earth, if so, a sorer Breach
Will yet attend you, fully to discover
Upon what ground you stand, what ends you have
Before this overflowing Scourge pass over;
Look well about you, Cheare's gone to his Grave.
The Shepherd's smitten, he no more must Preach,
Watch, Warn, nor Water; Oh! this is a Breach.
Ah! Plymouth, thou thy Shepherds that have turned
Out of thy Gates, the men who sought thy good;
Against them cruelly thy wrath has burned,
Thou suckst in poison, loathest wholesome food.
Hughs, Martin, Cheer, and all thy hand could reach,
Thou castest out, wherefore behold a Breach.
And you poor Sinners, living in that place,
Where God set up, this burning shining Light,
And did display the Glory of his Grace,
Thereby your Souls to Christ for to invite;
Your Day is gone, your Night its shadows reach,
Instead of Building, now behold a Breach.
A sound of Gospel Grace, you may not hear
Again till God have made your Souls to say,
Blessed are those feet, on Mountains that appear,
Bringing glad tidings of the joyful day;
Who coming in the Name of Christ, shall Preach,
And thereby shall repair this woeful Breach.
Poor outward, inward Prisoners, and Exiles,
Have lost a worthy sympathizing Friend;
So has whole Sion, within many miles,
She has not any, so able to extend.
Help every way: Compassions he did reach,
And labored, till he died, in Sion's Breach.
The day before he di'd, when speech seemed failing
His Soul did travel, groan, and cry to God
Most bitterly, lamenting and bewayling;
Causes in Sion calling for the Rod:
The deep Ap^stasies his Soul did reach,
And while h^^v'd, made on him many a Breach.
But, Ah! the day is great among Jacob's Seed,
Horsemen and Chariots swiftly flee away;
And none are raised to stand up in their stead,
When each choice piece, goes to its House of Clay.
By whom shall Jacob rise? Lord, thou us teach,
And send Supplies sufficient to the Breach.
Which cannot be, but by thy holy Spirit,
Given forth amongst the Remnant that remain;
Who, till then, Places desolate inherit,
As men to be made free among the slain:
Without this, who can Suffer, Do, or Preach,
Or stand this day in such a widened Breach.
Look up then, Sion's Friends, from things below,
To Jesus, who was dead, and is alive;
And has in heart and hand for to bestow,
All that we need, to make poor Sion thrive.
Though men of Might be gone, He Is all to each,
Yea, more than all, to repair such a Breach.
He shall not be discouraged, nor fail,
Till all in purpose, purchase, Promise true;
Be brought to pass, also both head and tail,
Of Beast and Whore, receive their final due.
And Kings and Kingdoms out their hands shall reach
Submissively to Him that heals the Breach.
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 24. for manifect, r. manifest. p. 20. l. 4. for or, r. of, p. 37.
l. 18. for promises, r. prem^ses. p. 59. l. 29. for salutations r. salvations,
p. 73. l. 27. for and, r. as. p. 82. l. 31. for came, r. come. p. 93. l. 1. for
promises, r. premises. p. 112. l. 26. for promises, r. prophesies. p. 114. l.
1. r. largeness. p. 120. l. 1. for affait, r. affair. p. 125 l. 1. for do
engage, r. to. p. 203. l. 32 for Admo. r. Admi. p. 228. l. 13. f. you r. your,
p. 245. l. 33. r. lifegiving. p. 279. l. 30. f. to, r. too.

There are also several mis-pointings, which the Judicious Reader will of
himself amend.

FAITHS CONQUEST OVER THE TORTURES and TENDERS OF An Hour of Temptation.
Heb. 11.35. latter part. By Faith --

-- And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain
a better resurrection.


THis Chapter, in the main scope of it, is designed, to set forth the
Incomparable Excellency of Faith, commending it self in the Example and
Instance of many Worthies, as answering to that description the Lord himself
gives of it, Mark 9.23. All things are possible to him that believes; the
which Catalogue and Register of their Acts and Monuments is not intended merely
to preserve the memory of such men (though their remembrance is blessed, Prove.
10.7. Psalm. 112.6.) but mainly to recommend to the Saints and Ages to come, the
mighty Power of that Principle, by virtue of which they believed things
incredible, attempted things impossible, sustained things insufferable in the
eye of sense and reason; nothing therefore low or mean is attributed in this
place, nor should our aims or expectation be flat and indifferent in the
contemplation thereof.

It Is most true, this History of the famous acts of Believers, is drawn out of
the Old Testament, and calculated (as I may so express it) to that meridian,
These all died in faith, obtaining a good report, but received not the Promise,
verse. 13. and 39. yet serves not only indifferently for the Gospel-dayes
wherein we are, but indeed commends it self the more transcendently to us, by
how much God has provided some better things for us; having opened more fully
the object of believing the Lord Jesus in the Gospel, and poured out more
plentifully the holy Spirit of Promise, than it was ordinarily in those days:
which Consideration may serve to afford both mighty Aid and Argument to
Believers now, to encourage Christians to trust upon the Lord, to do for them
more than they can ask or think, according to the power which works in them,
in their faithful following him.

Not to stand upon the opening particularly of these words, nor on the exact
time when they were fulfilled; very likely this, and some other here about had
reference to the cruel sufferings in the times of the Maccabees, which the
Hebrews, to whom this Epistle was written, had reason to have a particular
knowledge of, although the History to us be Apocrypha; it may suffice us, that
the Spirit of the Lord has here infallibly determined, such things were done,
and that the Conquest was truly attributable to this believing, as it dealt
with, and drew virtue from the power of God. So that without more a-do, in the
words are Four things observeable;

1. Here is the Noble and Glorious Principle in which all these rare exploits
are wrought; on the commendation of which, the whole Chapter insisteth. By
Faith they did it; whether in all the subject mentioned, it was a Faith that
was saving, will not be here disputed; this is plain, it was such Faith at
least, as falls within the Word of God, and builds upon the Authority thereof,
in the business they were concerned in; upon which foundation they went
through, and under-went what was before them, in following God in their
generations.

2. We have here the subject, or seat of action, upon which this great
Experiment is tried; and that is a tortured, butchered, massacred, harmless,
weak Believer; Others were Tortured, a particular Inventory whereof made and
taken in the verses following, 36, 37, 38. such cruel usages as were beneath
humanity to inflict, and above humanity to sustain, were exercised on, and
invincibly endured by these poor souls, under the aid and influence of that
Faith of theirs.

3. Here is the magnanimity and excellency of spirit described, unto which
their faith raised them, putting its self in the noble denial and repulse given
to the tender of deliverance, upon any unworthy terms; They Accepted not
Deliverance, though their Persecuters came with torments in one hand, and
tenders in the other, in as much as both were manifest Artifices and Engines to
accomplish the same design: as they slighted the threatenings of the one, so
they scorned the allurements of the other. Deliverance in it self, and as it
may be considered, is a mercy; and the acceptance of it is a duty; and
consequently the refusal of it would have been their evil. But if Deliverance
cannot be had but upon terms dishonorable to the Lord; if deliverance be a
snare, then to accept of such deliverance is a sin, at least a great blemish to
believing; of which more hereafter.

4. We have the powerful Motive, and blessed Prospect that Faith took in view,
from whence strength was gathered to bear the tortures, and forbear the
deliverance, and that was, The obtaining a better Resurrection; they had their
eye and heart set upon a way of deliverance, for which they would be beholding
to the Lord only, and this is called, A better Resurrection; that is, not only
better than their tortures, but better also than any deliverance that could be
offered to them: this fixed expectation of their Faith carried them above any
base or unworthy cringings to the sons of violence.

If you consider the words in their Connection and dependancy on the former part
of the verse, you have this observable; Women received their dead (Children)
returned to life again; this was verified, 1 King. 17.23. 2 King. 4.36. Others
( viz. other Women) were tortured (i. e) had their living children tortured,
not accepting deliverance for them; this is storied 2 Maccab. 6. If we consider
Women as the subjects of this strong Faith, who are styled, 1 Pet. 3.7. the
weaker vessels; Widows (perhaps) and desolate, yet trusting in God, hardly any
faith out-went theirs: Oh Woman, Great is thy Faith: we might by the way gather
this Observation:

That the weaker vessels may be capable of exercising the strongest Faith.

Out of weakness they were made strong: when I am weak, then I am strong; this
treasure (as well as the discoveries of the Gospel) is put into
earthen-vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us;
that as the strength of Flesh may not glory in his presence, so neither may the
weakness of a poor Saint occasion him to sink or dispond, but he that glories
may glory only in the Lord. -- But I shall not stand here, but proceed to draw
forth, and make a brief improvement of some of the Observations that lie most
plain in the words themselves: one of which is plainly thus;

Doct. 1. That the most cruel tortures that have been invented by the vilest
sons of men, have (by divine permission) been vented upon the choicest sons of
God. They of whom, in Gods account, the world was not worthy, the best of earth
was not good enough for them, verse. 38. in man's account, the worst of earth was
not bad enough: As they are made the filth of the world, and offscouring of
all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. so no instruments of cruelty can be enough vile or
forcible in their thoughts to rid and deliver it of them. The lust and rage in
all generations has been fruitful in inventions of this kind, they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, etc. the innumerable variety of particulars are
reducible to this general, They where Tortured. I shall only attempt to pursue
this Point to an issue, by speaking briefly to these two enquiries, 1. What is
meant by these Tortures. 2. Whence has it sprung that they (such an harmless
People as they) have had this for theit lot, or why have they been tortured
thus?

As for the former thus, The word here rendered torture, is observed no where
else to be used in the New Testament, and in strictness of speech signifies,
to be used and dealt withal, as men do with a Drum, viz. (...) a nomine (...):
which figurative expression directs us for its meaning, either to the manner or
end of men's cruel dealing with them. If the former be looked on as intended,
then the resemblance is taken from the manner of their torments, answering
either to the violent stretching out, or distending the head of the Drum, which
(you know) by cords and other means is braced at times to the utmost extremity.
Thus have the precious limbs and members, not only of our Lord himself, but of
his dearest children, been violently distorted, till part has been plucked
from part on Racks or other Engines, and that complaint literally verified,
Psalm. 22.14. I am poured out like water, all my bones are out of joint. -- Or
else it answers to the beating of a drum, which is performed with both hands,
with multiplicity of strokes not to be numbered; and then it refers to those
cruel beatings, stripes, and blows that have been beyond measure laid upon
their backs, such as of which the Apostle speaks, Some had trial of cruel
mockings and scourgings. Paul records the number and measure of his beatings by
the Jews, 2 Cor. 11.24. as though they would keep stroke as on a Drum: such
pretended order is sometimes spoken of by such Revolters as are profound to
make slaughter, Hos. 5.2. but at other times they were stripes without measure,
verse. 23, 25. beating with rods, beating with stones; hence he was in deaths
often, in this path must we expect to follow our Lord, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5. in stripes
in imprisonment, etc. This sets forth the liberal and unlimitted cruelty in
point of act that wicked men have still abounded in.

Or otherwise, the metaphor directs us to the consideration of the end and
design of the Persecutors in the extention of their cruelty, and this also
under this similitude, may refer one of these two ways: First, to set out the
design of the Tormentors (as is the Soldiers in beating their Drum) thereby to
animate, encourage, and hearten those that are engaged with themselves; that
look as that warlike-sound is intended to quicken, chear-up, and delight the
spirits of such Warriors; so are the extorted groans and cries of the Lords
poor sufferers, levelled to the heightning the pride, scorn, and derision of a
bloody generation. So ^hey did by the green-tree (our Lord himself) see Matt.
27.39. to 49. where you have the People, Priest, Thieves, making pastime of his
groans under the torments of men without, and the bruisings of his God within,
Isa. 53.10. this was prophetically declared of him, and verified in his
members* Psalm. 69.10, 11, 12. Nevertheless, the overruling hand of the Lord is
in this frequently to be seen and magnified, in turning the devices of the
wicked herein upon their own head, and rather working conviction and
astonishment on many, who perhaps have come with intentions to scorn at the
misery of the poor Lambs of Christ, yet in beholding the inhumane cruelty of
the one, and the divine Power displayed in upholding the other, have gone away
convinced, God is with them of a truth; as its manifest in the seq^el of that
derision on our Lord above mentioned, Luke 23.47, 48. The Centurion seeing the
issue of it, glorified God, justified Christ, and all the people smote their
breasts and returned; so shall he make their own tongues to fall upon
themselves, all that see them shall flee away, and all men shall fear, and
shall declare the work of God, when they shall wisely consider of his doings,
Psalm. 64.8, 9. (2) Another end and design of men by such torments, is to strike
^ greater terror in the hearts of their opposits, to break the spirits of such
as are related to and interested in the cause of those tortured ones, being
Companions of them that are so used, and thereby to drive them from their
station and profession, smiting the shepherd, in expectation that then the
sheep must be scattered; but herein (as in the former) infinite Wisdom shines
forth, in bringing meat out of the Eater, and sweetness out of the Strong,
bringing to naught the devices of the wicked, it frequently coming to pass, as
in the case of Paul, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. The things (the cruel things) which
happened to him, fell out rather for the furtherance of the Gospel, so that his
bonds for Christ were manifect in all Cesars Court, and all other places, and
many Brethren in the Lord waxing confident by his bonds, grew much more bold to
speak the Word without fear. O Lord, behold their Threatenings, and grant to thy
Servants Boldness, was the Prayer of their Faith, Acts 4.29. The more
shamefully the Apostles were entreated, they were the more bold in their God,
to Preach the Gospel of their God with much contention, 1 These. 2.2. Men think
it for evil, but God has wonderfully brought it about for good.

These Tortures upon the harmless Lambs of Christ, have been exercised in
several Ages of the world with much variety, according to the fruitful womb of
lust of the sons of violence, who from generation to generation derive and suck
the spirit of Persecution from him that was of the wicked-one, and slew his
Brother; and has more or less, exerted its self according to the opportunities
they have had for so doing, which have been frequently either more relaxed, or
restrained, as has seemed best to infinite Wisdom to bring about his ends and
designs of Glory in the earth. But though these great and sore trials are the
common lot of Saints in all ages, yet there are some eminent and peculiar
Periods, some remarkable points of time, which the Scripture does refer unto,
that may be called in an especial manner the times of such torment, with which
we have need be well acquainted, and our concernment respecting them.

The First time that I note such tortures were in date and fashion (as I may
express it) is that (as I understand) the Text points at, namely, toward the
latter end of the Grecian Monarchy; not but that diverse fair Sons and Daughters
of God, had their share deeply in Sufferings before, sundry times. But now it
grew to be the common expectation of all those that would hold up any
Profession of the true God, a time was come over them, which carried this in
the very front of it; it was a torturing time, especially under Antiochus
Epiphanes, of whom we have such an exact description, under the notion of a
little Horn, the very point and venom of which, is levelled against the people
of the Saints of the most High; read him pourtrayed, Dan. 8, verse. 9.10, 11,
12. compared with, and opened v. 21, 23, 24, 25. This dreadful opposition and
persecution was made to the Name of God against such as retained the Profession
of it, according to the Laws and Ordinances given by the hand of Moses.

There is a Second Period, or special point of time wherein the tortures of the
Lords people are remarked, and that is under the reign and rage of the Dragon,
exercising his power in the Roman Monarchy considered as Pagan; this is
described by that fourth Beast, Dan. 7.7, 8. dreadful and terrible, and verse.
19, 20. exceeding dreadful; this principally respects those incredible tortures
that were inflicted throughout the whole Roman Territories (which were wide and
large) upon any who professed the Name of Christ, especially in the Reigns of
those Ten bloody Emperors, known commonly by the name of the Ten Persecutions:
As the former was against profession of the Name of God under the
Old Testament; so this was against the profession of the Name of Christ under
the New.

A Third time to which, by way of eminency, the Tortures of the Lords people is
appropriated, is the time of the Reign, and especially toward the Ruin of
Antichrist, described in Rev. 13. in its distinct Powers under the first and
second Beast, beginning short upon the Empires professing the Name of Christ,
and carrying threatenings and slaughters against the true Witnesses of the
Spirit and Life of Christ, though pretending to the Name of him; and this not
only during the 1260 days or years assigned him, but principally at the end
thereof, when for a short space Power must be given him to slay those Witnesses
with such a slaughter, as carries its manifest distinction from the Sufferings
to which they are liable, during their prophesying in Sackcloth and his bloody
Reign, not far from which, finishing Rage (which is but a short time) the
general Consent of most that search into the times, and what Israel ought to
do, agrees that we are by the wise hand of our Father cast, the Word and
Works, Prophecies and Providence of God, helping much to make up such a
Judgment, though in several particulars about it, there is variety in the
understandings of the most serious enquirers. My apprehension and expectation
hereupon, is, that we are near upon the borders of (if we have not already made
some entrance on) an hour of sore temptation, which will try all them that
(professing an interest in heaven) do dwell upon earth; in which it will be
found of great moment that we stand girt about with the whole Armor of
Righteousness upon the right hand, and on the left, especially holding fast
this shield of Faith, whereby, though in the Ages past some were tortured, yet
they were more then Conquerors, they overcome by the blood of the Lamb, etc.
Our Second Enquiry in opening the Observation, was, Whence comes it to pass,
that such a people as the Lords people are (at least wise ought to be) are
nevertheless exposed to such torments, they who are the blessing to the whole
Creation, simple concerning evil, willing to live honestly, following peace
with all men, as much as it is possible, sent forth as sheep in the midst of
wolves, blameless and harmless as the sons of God without rebuke, professing
and striving to answer this principle, yet are hated, cast out, persecuted as
the filth of the World, the troublers of Israel, them that turn the world
up-side down; whence comes this to pass, That no torture can be heavy enough,
no death hard enough for them.

1. That which gives life and fierceness to all these Enmities and Tortures
which spring from them, is the beastly Nature and Lust of poor fallen man, that
bears the Image of the Devil herein, having this Character, Hateful, and hating
one another, living in malice and envy, Tit. 3.3. serving diverse lusts and
pleasures. Hence wicked men, and they that have no Faith, are called
unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. [(...)] men that cannot be reduced to any
proper place; Beasts after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15.32. Bruits hurried with
humor or sense contrary to reason; as natural wild Beasts, made to be taken
and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. How frequently are they likened by the Spirit to
Lions, Psalm. 57.4. Wolves of the evening, Zeph. 3.3. and other Beasts of prey;
signifying the miserable plight sin has cast poor man into. If Jacobs own
sons, having partook of his education, deserved this Character, Cursed be their
Wroth for it was fierce, and their Rage for it was cruel; How much less is to
be expected from others, that have no bridle on them, if their lust be crossed,
if their wickedness be witnessed against, as it is by the holy Conversation of
testifying Saints? Who can stand before envy! the Ambition of one Haman will
run down a whole Nation; the fear and anger of one Herod will devour all the
Children in Bethelem.

2. There is a set and stated Enmity put, and placed between these two Seeds,
the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. upon which a War
is founded in a way that can admit of no reconciliation: for what agreement can
there be betwixt Light and Darkness? 1 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Hence the Lord takes
notice, that the bottom of that perpetual discord, by which the Philistines
dealt with Israel by revenge, and took vengeance with a dispightful heart to
destroy it, was the old hatred, Ezekiel. 23.15. an hatred that was as old as the
old Serpent the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginuing. Hence 1 John
3.12. Cain is said to slay his Brother, he was of that wicked-one; and the
occasion of the quarrel was, his own Works were evil, and the others righteous:
This Root Christ reduces that wrath unto, that was exercised against him, John
8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the works of your Father ye will do;
he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. And as it was
in Abraham's Family, He that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit. So it was in Paul's days, Gal. 4.29. So it is now, and
so it will be till the God of Peace tread Satan under our feet, which will be
shortly, Romans 16.20. till that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, be
bound and cast into the bottomless pit, Rev. 20. beginning.

3. There is an exasperation and aggravation added to this old hatred,
frequently, when there is added a blind Superstitious Devotion and Zeal; When
this old hatred can get the covert and pretext of a Zeal for God, it grows
hereby exceeding fierce; when Paul was acted on a principle of
self-righteousness, out of zeal he persecuted the Church, Phil. 3.7. and you
see to what height it grew, he thought he ought to do any thing contrary to the
Name of Christ, shut them up in prison, voted their death, punished them,
compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceeding mad against them, persecuted
them even to strange Cities, Acts 26.9, 10, 11. breathed out threatenings and
slaughters against them, chap. 9.1. Of this time Christ foretells and forwarns
his Disciples, The time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he
does God service, Joh. 16.2. They who think it promotes divine service to
persecute Saints, being zealous of a traditional Worship of their Fathers, will
be very cruel in their undertakings; Hence is the Spirit so express, that in
the latter days perilous (or fierce) times shall come, for men shall have
(among other ingredients to their maglignity) a form of Godliness, but denying
the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.1. to 4. This, when it comes to be the guise of
Persecutors, will make of it fierce times; When Simeon and Levi had a Religious
Pretext for their cruel act, Genesis 34.31. Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel, Genesis 49.7.

4. Another occasion of their wrath boiling up to torment, arises from the
constant, bold, and courageous Spirit that is sometimes found in the Lord's
people, that will neither be debauched with their terms, nor broken by their
threats; this exasperats exceedingly. So it is with the three Worthies, Dan.
3.16, 18, 19. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter; be it known to
thee, O King, we will not serve thy Gods, nor Worship thy golden Image which
thou have set up. Then was the King full of fury, and the form of his visage
changed against them, and commanded the Furnace to be heated seven times more
tha^ it was wont, etc. See also verse. 22.

When Steven stood in the boldness of his Testimony, Acts 7.54, 57. It cut them
to the heart, they gnashed on him with their teeth, cried out, stopped their
ears, ran upon him with one accord, cast him out of the City, and stoned him.
If Mordecai will not bow, Haman is on a rack, all his comforts do not comfort
him, till he show himself profound for slaughter; not an ordinary gallows will
serve the turn. A Consideration which ought not to be improved, as many do,
that because they are apt to be thus enraged, therefore we are to slack our
Testimony, thereby to abate their fury, but rather to wait on the Lord with the
more earnestness to double and multiply his Spirit, and the strengths and
consolations of it with us, as they Acts 4.29. Though the Heathen rage, etc.
Now, Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant to thy Servants that with all
boldness they may speak thy Word. They do not beg Prudence, Policy, Skill to
evade and escape, but more anointing, to testify boldly for the Lord: which
was granted fully.

5. When unto all this there is super-added the opportunity of wicked men's
having the power of Magistracy in their hands, Prove. 28.15, 16. I mind, when
they have a providential admittance to the capacity of making Laws, and putting
them in execution against the people of God, having their own lusts
uncontrollable, and an advantage of covering their cruelty under pretext of
Law, and to asperse the faithfulness of Saints to the Laws of Jesus Christ,
with the odious charges of being against Magistracy, and not being subject to
the higher Powers, etc. the old accusation, Neh. 2.19. chapter 6.6. Hest. 3.8. Acts
17.6, 7. They now rush upon the poor Lambs of Christ with all their lusts (as
so many sayls) bearing, nay, in these capacities there is occasion to draw
forth those monstrous cruelties which (perhaps) they hardly thought were hid in
their hearts; as you see in that remarkable instance of Hazael, who when he was
told, He would slay the young men of Israel with the sword, dash the Children,
and rip up the Women with child? replied, But what is thy servant a Dog, that
he should do this great thing? He thought (its likely) that unless he did
degenerate from humanity, and became a beast, he could not perform such strange
things: but what is the answer of the Prophet; The Lord has showed me, thou
shall be King over Syria, 2 King. 8.18. Intimating, that whatever fierce and
dogged disposition lay hid in his heart against the Lords interest, under what
plausible pretext soever it might be covered for a time from others, nay,
whatever better persuasions he might have of himself about it, yet his
King-ship would give opportunity and provocation enough to draw them forth, to
grow up into his conceit, Joh. 19.10. Know thou not that I have power to
crucify thee, and power to release thee? will give strong temptation to a
wicked man to condemn and kill the Just though he does not resist, especially
when an intrest of worldly honor seems to lie that way, ver. 12.
notwithstanding convictions and reluctancies of Conscience to the contrary,
Dan. 6.14, 15, 16. Mat. 14.7, 9.

These may serve as some of the Reasons, giving light why and whence it is,
that it has been the lot of Saints some have been tortured thus. I shall only
touch a little Practical Improvement, by drawing these Inferences,

Use 1. If it be so that the Lord's people have their times by the permission,
nay the appointment of God, wherein they have been, and may be tortured, put to
the most violent shameful way of dying; or the most slavish, miserable, and
disgraceful way of living, though the most choice of all his Children, It then
may serve to caution such as are lookers on, how they proceed to make a
positive judgment of men, and things, according to the severe dispensations
they are carried through, a mistake, upon which very great inconveniences have
often followed, and yet very incident in our Censuring-day to diverse who deal
with the Lord's Interest in their conclusions; as the Barbarians with that
providence of the Viper on Paul's hand, pass a judgment, Without doubt this man
is a murderer, whom though he escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers not to
live. But such rash conclusions frequently revert as much into the quite
contrary extreme (as it did with them, Acts 28.4, 5, 6.) It becomes us
therefore to lay our conclusions of this kind upon other principles than these,
which are not appointed directly to signify what we are apt often to infer
from them singly considered, Eccles. 9.1. if the best of men have endured the
worst of torments, if from the beginning it has been so? such fiery trials
should be no strange things to us, nor should we draw any strange deductions
from it, either to the censure of the persons, or dislike of the cause
testified to thereby.

Use 2. If the rage of man, having all the aggravations and advantages
abovenamed, be such a fierce thing, and has been so fruitful in torments on
the Saints; and if we have such caution to expect more in the latter days,
wherein iniquity must be expected to abound, then let it teach us to admire the
wonderful grace of God to poor England, and to the poor Saints of God in it,
that have lived in such times wherein men that hate them have such Laws in
hand, and at hand, to destroy them; nay, having it in the power of their hand
to put them in execution, having also received such exasperation in the years
that are past to remember and revenge many old grudges, and yet so few to this
day (compared with the body of professing people in this Nation) have suffered
these things in their extremity: that we should be helped to cleave to the
Lord, and every one of us alive before him, That there is no more blood mingled
with our sacrifices: the Bush burn in the fire and yet not be consumed; it is
the Lord's doings, and mavelous in our eyes, and should be owned and improved
as an argument to strengthen our faith against the many faintings we are liable
unto, in further trials.

Use 3. If from the Spirit that is in poor fallen man, there be such ill fruits
as those mentioned against the image, people, and heritage of the Lord, let us
not only prize that grace which has delivered us from that power, principle, and
interest to which all the former fierce Characters do naturally and necessarily
agree: But on the other hand, be very conversant with the Lord, for subduing in
us the remains of that spirit that lusts unto envy even in us; and that
toward them that persecute us, there may be showed forth our Dove-like
innocence, in pressing toward that Gospel-qualification of praying for them,
Mat. 5.44, 45. Romans 12.17. to the end, 1 Pet. 3.9. and doing them good for all
the evil they do to us, that we may show our selves to be the Children of
another Father, living in another principle, and referring our selves in all
the injuries done unto us, to another judgment; and if the Lord will bless it
to that end, we may hereby leave a powerful conviction, that they hate and
persecute us (as they did our Lord before us) without a cause.

I proceed to take some other Observations from the words, Others were
tortured; Some were tried otherwise, others this way; some were tortured, not
all; all are exercised some way or other, every man's work must be tried.
Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3.12. He chasteneth every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. Whomsoever he
loves, he rebukes and chasteneth, Rev. 3.19. But though every man must be
tried, it is not appointed that they must all be this way tried; tried by fire
and water, tried by tortures. Some were tortured; where I note.

Doct. 2. That though the Lord has provided trials for all his Children, yet
he has designed tortures but to some of them. Thus Christ expresses himself
to his Disciples, Some of you they shall put to death, Luke 21.16. The Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, Rev. 2.10. All Saints are some way tried,
they be but some Saints are always tried; All men are born to sorrows, Job
5.7. yet but of some it is properly said, they are men of sorrows, Isa. 53.3.
Lam. 3.1. Psalm. 88.15. This is a plain case and obvious to frequent experience.
Yet because it may be seasonable and useful, we may consider it by inquiring
into these Two Things.

1. Why some are Tortured. 2. Why but some are Tortured.
For the former: We now respect tortures as they are more immediately under the
disposal and ordering of the Lord, appointing more or less in point or measure,
to more or fewer subjects as it pleases him; they being such bitter things as
before is described, it is enquired, Why the Father appoints it to any of his
Children? To this is answered,

1. Negatively, not from any love God has to the Torments, or from any lack or
abatement of love to his Children, he does not take pleasure to see his
precious believing People lie scattered up and down (as they are described
Psalm. 141.7. and 79.2, 3. Lam. 4.1, 2.) as so many marks and monuments of the
cruelty and butchery of the sons of men: no, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; he esteems them
precious in their lives, and puts a value on them in their death. It goes (as
we may speak with reverence) near the heart of the Lord to see his Jewels thus
dealt withal; In all their Afflictions he is afflicted, and the Angel of his
Presence is with them, Isa. 63.9. He that touches them, touches the apple of
his eye, Zech. 2.8. He does not afflict willingly, or grieve the children of
men, Lam. 3.33. much less the Children of God, but rather like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him; for he knows
our frame, and considers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103.13, 14. nay, he has
testified the greatest displeasure against such as have bin executioners of his
rebukes, when they have not performed them with pity, Zech. 1.15. Isa. 47.6.
Psalm. 69.26, 27. His Anointed Ones must be very tenderly handled, and have no
harm done against them, ( Psalm. 105.14, 15.) wheresoever they wander. Moab has
a charge to do so, Isa. 16.3, 4. and in defect thereof his controversy is
dreadful with the Nations, Ezekiel. 25 throughout, so chap. 26.2, 3. etc.

2. But positively and in general thus. Though the Lord does not assign these
Tortures, these fiery Trials to his Children, for want of love to his, or from
any delight he has in such Tortures considered in themselves; Yet many times
the Lord has higher and better ends to promote then their deliverance; ends
that have more of good in them than these Tortures can possibly have of evil;
and when it is so, these dispensations are not only excusable, but are to be
justified, Good is the Word of the Lord. As namely,

1. Sometimes in giving his darlings thus to the power of the Dog, he designs
to bring to light the worth and excellency of some Truths of his, which
otherwise would be much obscured, if not quite excluded from among the
children of men; namely, such Truths, in the vindication of which his children
are called and brought forth thus to suffer, being wrought to a contentedness,
rather to endure torments than to let them go. When a soul or people having
obtained help from God, continue witnessing to such Truths whatever it costs
them; There is reflected this honor upon Truth, as was said of it of old,
Great is Truth, and it shall prevail; whereas if it should be as it is with the
generality of Professors at this day, when a Truth comes to be spoken for,
there is such a shrinking, twisting, shifting to evade the dint of the Trial,
how would the World have too just cause to say, What is there in your beloved
Truth, more than in our beloved Error? What is your Profession more than ours?
your Religion more than ours? If there were any excellent thing in it, you
would do and suffer somewhat excellent and extraordinary for it, to take off
this stumbling block and occasion therefore from them who seek or desire
occasion; the Lord is pleased to steel a people to this height, We can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. And then to show a
proof of Truth in them, and the power and goodness thereof, he puts them on a
trial proportioned to this design; he has some truth of the Gospel to show in
Paul, and then must he be troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 10. chap. 6.4,
10, 11. chap. 11.23. to 29. If the truth of Christ be in him, no man shall stop
him of his boasting, none of these things move him, or separate him from the
love of God. Truth shall be tried in those vessels of earth, though it be by
fire seven times, and the furnace seven times hotter than aforetime.

2. Sometimes the Lord does, by these Tortures, assert and clear up the
sincerity and inward value and excellency of those Virtues or Graces of Christ
which are his own, and his admirable workmanship in their Souls. These pass up
and down among men as mere delusions from the Devil, and hypocrisy in the
professors of them. And now it is the interest of the Lord's honor, and the
vindication of the operation of the Spirit, that these be put upon some trial
that may search their very root and bottom, discover their foundation to the
neck: When God speaks of his Workmanship and Image in Job, Satan undertakes, if
he could h^ve the stripping him of all his outward accommodations, touch all he
has, and he would curse him to his face: That attempt failing, he is
confident, that if he might have the torturing of him, the touching and tearing
his bones and his flesh, he would curse him to his face: and if he durst assert
his confidence of his success in such an enterprise to the face of God, may we
think much of his confident imposing his suggestions on the projects and
conclusions of his children? He did attempt the green Tree, and its no marvel
if he do the Dry. Now while he would bear God (if possible) and does bear the
World in hand so confidently, that he has instruments of Cruelty, that would
whip and kick the new creature in any man to nothing, and herein make God a
Liar (as in the former) and an Imposture (as in this) the Lord delivers the
dearly beloved of his Soul into the enemies hand (though with sufficient
restrictions) Take him Torturer, try him to the bottom, and when all comes to
all, when he is tried, he shall come forth as Gold; Job 23.10. And though till
his word of deliverance came to his Joseph's, the word of the Lord tryes them,
while their feet are hurt with fetters, and they be laid in irons, Psalm.
105.18, 19. They pass through fire and water, yet he brings them into a wealthy
place, Psalm. 66.10, 11, 12. Men and Devils shall know that the Faith, Love,
Zeal, Patience, Courage, Holiness, etc. wherewith he has endowed them, have
that of Truth, Virtue, and Worth in them, as does undeniably constitute them
more excellent than their neighbors, and that an excellent Spirit is found in
them, so as none of these tortures numbered up, Romans 8.35. to the end, is able
to separate betwixt them and their love to God, and uprightness with and before
him.

3. Sometimes the Lord does by these Tortures take occasion to heighten the
honor of his own Power, Arm, and Influence, which are day by day administered
to bear up his children, when it is manifest they have no external props to
stay them up, but are out of weakness, made strong. This brings out a more
evident acknowledgement, That the power of Christ rests upon them, 2 Cor. 12.9.
God is in them of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. Its true, as long as times and
providence hold to keep off pains from the body, chains from the legs, stripes
from the back, famine from the belly, other props and principles may be
presumed to bear one up: but when there is no fruit in the Vine, no flock in
the Field, no herd in the Stall, none shut up nor left, yet then to rejoice in
the Lord, to glory in tribulation, to account it all joy to fall into diverse of
them, and they great ones; this is convincing, that such are kept, and kept up
by the mighty Power of God; underneath such must needs be everlasting arms.
What convictions came upon the two great Monarchs, by the great support the
three Worthies and Daniel (chapter 3. and chapter 6.) had from the Lord, to yield their
bodies to torment! The former, because they would not join with false worship;
the other, because he would not cease practicing the true: they gave glory to
the God of heaven, and upon all occasions confess, that an excellent Spirit was
found in them.

4. Sometimes the Lord brings about this end by it; he hereby brings forth a
more plain and naked discovery of the wickedness that is in the world through
lust. Many times men come in upon Dominions, and the exercise of Power and
Authority with most plausible insinuations, protestations and declarations of
their design and temper, as if no other than the disposition of Lambs were in
them, whereon they raise a name and repute of benefactors, Luke 22.25. or
merciful Lords, and reckon it no small part of their interest and business to
raise and maintain in the spirits of people, the supposition of some indelible
marks of the nature and majesty of a Deity is stamped upon them, and sutably,
to get a reverence of them as most sacred; when many times to open and
undeceive the minds of poor souls held in such blind devotion, the Lord lets
them alone, and exposes the bodies of his dearest ones to their cruelty, that
no man may glory in men above what is written, but that coming to a plain
discovery of men and things in their own evidence, as Psalm. 36.2. the sons of
men, as well as the children of God, may breath after the Lords arising to rule
the earth, and become the Governor among the Nations.

Thus we see for high ends, and unto glorious advantage some are tortured.

The Second Enquiry put, is, Why but some? men would be gratified, and if God
be so honored, why not all tortured? A few Reasons may be considered here also.

1. There are but some tortured, because God is pleased to account but some
worthy to bear and wear the glory of being thus used for his Namesake. There
are some of whom the Lord says, They shall walk with me in white, for they are
worthy. Who are counted worthy to walk in white? Why, they who are come out of
great tribulations, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the lamb, Rev. 7.14. Though there be some points of honor, of which
it may be said, this honor have all the Saints, Psalm. 149.9. yet it holds not
true in this that we speak of, they who had the first stripes for the Name of
Christ, rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name,
Acts 5.41. They have marks of distinguishing favor, who bear in their body the
marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. Always carrying about in their body the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the Life of Jesus may so much the more be
magnified and manifested in their mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.10, 11.

2. All are not tortured, because the Lord sees all of his Servants have not
power to bear such trials; as all men have not faith, so all good men have not
the like strong faith, though they may have the like precious Faith. Their
Faith may carry them to Heaven, who yet may not have that degree and strength
of Faith to carry them through Tortures to heaven; not that they who have most,
have any thing to boast of above others, as being better than they, the
differance is only in bestowing mercies, which are distributed variously even
as the Spirit will, 1 Cor. 12.11. yet still a proportion of trial is measured
out suitable to their strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. for he knows our frames, and in
measure does debate with us, and as the day is, so our strength shall be, Deuteronomy.
33.25. and even as there are children, young men, and Fathers in Christ, 1 John
2.13. so have these their trials as they can, and that they may be able to bear
them.

3. All are not tortured, because all are not called to be tortured; the Lord
has other employments for some that shall as sufficiently prove their
faithfulness, and improve their strength, as if they had been tortured. Some of
the Saints may as really honor God in a Meeting, as others of them may on a
Gibbet, every member has not the same office ( Romans 12.4. 1 Cor. 12.
throughout) not the same employment, shall not by the same manner of doing, or
dying, glorify God, John 21.19. God seeks for a man to stand in the gap, and
make up the hedge, Ezekiel. 22.30. Every man is not looked for in that place of
danger: it is good to be where God looks for a man.

4. All are not tortured, because the Lord will be magnified in distributing
the trials of the body of Christ otherwise than he did the trials of their
Head: its true, the tortures that were laid on him were to meet on him alone,
he was to tread the Wine Press alone, and of all the people there was none to
help him; they that thought they could drink the Cup he was to drink, or be
baptized with his Baptism, did not understand themselves: He looked and there
was none to help, and he wondered there was none to uphold, therefore his own
Arm brought him help, etc. But now in the fellowship and similitude of Christ's
sufferings assigned to the body, although there be a compleatness of suffering
appointed to the whole, of which the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.24. and though
there be a common spirit of fellowship and simpathy of bearing one another
burdens, through which they are all baptized into one body; yet is there
distribution made of them, into the various parts, each member having that
assigned him, which infinite wisdom sees proper for him, so that none may boast
against others, as if he had no need of them; though Paul had labored and
suffered more than all, yet he had not suffered all, and could not say to the
weakest, I have no need of thee.

5. Lastly, All are not tortured, because the Lord will roll away the reproach,
and remove the usual stumbling block which Satan raises up to the turning the
weak out of the way of the Lord; namely, That the enquiring after and
profession of Jesus Christ, does indispensibly necessitate and bind over unto
all manner of hardships; such can never be in reasonable expectation of good
day more, but must bid adieu to all creature comforts, and espouse the quite
contrary extremities: its true, A dying to, a denying, nay, a hating of all our
lower comforts is required to be learned in the beginning of their way who will
be his Disciples; But whether they shall be actually put upon that trial, and
really deprived of them, is left to be disposed of in the breast and good
pleasure of him, who knows what part of the wrath of men, and suffering of
Saints, will praise him; and the remainder he will restrain, the absolute
conclusion therefore of stumbling Sinners, and discouraging Saints, as if their
bread would fail, and, as a Lion, he would break all their bones, are hence to
be expelled, as having no just ground to be insisted on, as real obstructions
to our following the Lord. Tempted Souls are apt to get their spirit quite worn
out with a fearful expectation of the most fiery trials, when as it may be the
Lord has appointed no such thing at all for them, and in their following on in
this way, they have met with little or nothing of what they feared. A few
Practical Inferences here shall close up the Point.

Use 1. Is it so, that God has appointed but some to be Tortured, not all; it
then yields some stay against those surprising amazements that are apt,
especially in such days as these, to seize upon the spirits of people, who are
looking toward Zion with their faces thither-ward; most good people are looking
upon Penal Laws and Statutes made and making against them; if they hold on in
such a profession as they have made hitherto of Christ Jesus, all must be
banished, all must be sold as slaves, all must be impoverished, imprisoned, or
the like; Why then, says a poor creature, what shall I do? I can never lie in a
nasty prison, being used to a soft bed, fresh air, good diet: Says another, I
shall never endure another clymate, to have lash and labor, that have been
bred up in a Land and State of fullness: I can never live if I am forced to such
hunger and poverty as the Laws do threaten me. Why, Soul, do not reason thus;
thou know not what supplies of strength the Lord may furnish thee withal if
he call thee to such a condition, Out of weakness, many have been made strong;
But besides, thou should not fret thy self with such an expectation, thou
know not that any part of this shall be thy portion: Yes, yes, (will such
object) I am sure if any man in the town or country, it will be me; such and
such have particular enmities to me, etc. Why, yet thou know not but the
Lord may preserve thee in his way from such rage of men and strife of tongues;
thou may be of them whom God reserves. Baruch cried out, Woe is me now, for
the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, etc. Jer. 45.3. perhaps of the heavy
and dangerous service he was called upon to go where Jeremiah could not, chapter
36.5, 6. he feared ruin and tortures inevitably, yet God had ways to hide
him, v. 26. and to give and secure him his life for a prey, chapter 45.5. Moses had
many dreadful objections and discouragements against going upon that thankless
difficult, hazardous message God sent him on, Exodus 3.10. What am I, verse. 11.
they will say what is his Name, verse. 13. They will not believe me, nor hearken
to my voice, chapter 4.1. I am not eloquent, of a slow speech, and of a slow
tongue, verse. 10. Send by whom thou should send, v. 13. All springing from
fear of the issues of the undertaking, and of the miscarriage in it, which when
it came to be put in practice, there was not one of the feared things occurred
in his path, though some other trials did: Unbelieving fear of these dreadful
consequences of following God, is very fruitful, in forming Lions in the way,
as if there were no avoiding of them, or no restraint designed by that Arm
which sets bounds to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further; there
shall thy proud waves be stayed. He brings the counsel of the Heathen to
naught, and makes the devices of the people of none effect, Psalm. 33.10, 11.
Its not unusual that they fall into their own net, whilst we escape, Psalm.
141.10.

Use 2. If it be but some that are Tortured, and they stand distinguished by
the absolute sovereignty and gracious disposal of the Lord, who appoints their
call, anointing, and season, as it pleases him; on whose will also the
with-drawment of influences hereunto does depend: Then it may caution you and
me to take care how we judge of men that are assisted, or not assisted in point
of enduring tortures. Its not the smallest infirmity of this day, there is a
present over-valuing and under-valuing men and parties, according as there
appears or dis-appears an ability to endure the tortures, that attend the trial
of their profession: The persons of some are had in admiration because of
advantage above what is written; and the persons of others so despised, as if
God were not able to make them stand; that is a needful counsel in a case not
very different, Romans 11.18. Boast not against the branches, for if thou
boastest, thou bear not the root, but the root thee; and the teaching
therein, has been oftentimes enforced on me by that determination of our Lord,
which is admitted frequently to take place at this day, Many that were last
shall be first, and the first last: And it falls frequently under observation,
That men, as well as things, do very speedily and often, countermarch and shift
places: Many tall Cedars, who did run well, suffer many things, gave great
ground of persuasion that they would have gone thorough, have notwithstanding
at one point or other faultred, deserted their station, and (as Sampson) grown
weak as another man, when perhaps on the same ground a poor weak believer,
over-looked and despised by most, has obtained grace and strength from on
high, to make good that post, and to walk from strength to strength in the Name
of the Lord his God. So that all glorying or being puffed up for one against
another, is excluded here. Let not him boast that puts on his Armor.

Use 3. Must some be tortured, must all be tried; is not the day of the
expectation of greater things than these yet over? Then let us learn to prepare
our Faith and Patience, get on our Armor and gird it on; take heed how you be
drawn into a sleep of security from the present interval of Calm and Rest,
which the Lord is pleased hitherto to continue to you, in a very wonderful
manner. Some are (if not tortured yet) sorely tried and tempted, while you have
your mercies and opportunities so peaceable about you; you should be reckoning
this is a space allowed you to gather courage, not to contract rust by rest;
but laying up a store against the evil day, that question should be still with
us in a way of endeavoring its resolution, Seeing we look for these things,
what manner of People should we be? standing on our guard expecting to be drawn
forth, and ready to comply with that Call, Who will rise up for me against the
evildoers? who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? Psalm.
49.16. in a faithful, humble, Lamb-like readiness to follow Jesus Christ, and
witness for him, though it be in tortures, temptations, or wherever he goes.

But to proceed to some farther Observations in the words, Others were
tortured, etc. It is employed to make up the sense at every sentence, by Faith
they were so, although it be not so expressly named. By Faith they were
tortured, by Faith they accepted not deliverance; by Faith they looked for a
better Resurrection, all the famous doings, and fearful undoings recorded in
this Chapter, are to the honor of Faith. This expression therefore that comes
first to hand, By Faith some were tortured; may be considered two ways.

1. It has a great truth in it, if we thus understand it by Faith (that is by
means of their Faith, upon this occasion and for this reason) they were
tortured, even their Faith; This was the quarrel the Devil and World had with
them, viz. They were men of Faith. Or else,

2. The expression may be thus understood. By Faith they were tortured, that
is, they were supported in and carried through their Tortures living or dying,
by their Faith; This was the victory that overcame the world in all these
tortures, even their Faith. I take this latter to be most immediately aimed at
in this place, and sutably is my eye to prosecute it. Though I take the former
not to be excluded, or at least we may draw some useful considerations from
that sense. By Faith, that is, upon occasion of their Faith, they were
quarrelled with, singled out, and tortured by Satan and his instruments: Great
Faith exposed them to great sufferings: And so it is now, and may afford us
this Observation.

Doct. 3. That a lively Faith possessed and professed, is that which will
enrage and engage the worlds highest violence and cruelty on him that has it.

I intend a very brief dispatch of this (not being so immediately perhaps
intended in the words) and that by considering Faith, as contracting and
incurring this rage, in a twofold sense or respect.

1. Consider we this Faith unfeigned as it is possessed, or respecting its
inward root and principle, as it dwells in the hidden-man of the heart in
that which is incorruptible; against this, and as such, does the Prince of
Darkness mainly bend his batteries. Its true, he brings his torments to bear
upon the limbs and members of the Body, the sensitive part; but nothing is more
evident than that his design lies farther, as appears by this, That if by the
frights or feeling of these tortures he can but get in pollution and defilement
upon the soul of a poor Saint; if he can but corrupt that from the simplicity,
or debauch that of the virginity it has with Christ; then is the offense of
the Cross ceased, the torments are all called off, the work is done. He is mad
to see any soul delivered from his dominion, and translated into the Kingdom of
the dear Son of God, and there lives by this Faith on comforts, that he cannot
intermedle withal; derives strength and influence, which he cannot obstruct; is
acted in a life, and on principles, and reasonings, which have a fixed and
unalterable antipathy to his former courses; nay, have virtue and success to
make resistance to Satan, oftentimes to put him to flight, 1 Pet. 5.9. Jam.
4.7. And this is the Victory that so frequently overcomes, not only the World,
1 John 5.4. but the Prince of the World, 1 John 4.4. Now there is little reason
that we should wonder to see Satan rage, and in a rage to bring his instruments
of greatest cruelty to bear upon a soul that lives by Faith above him, and in
such an advantageous way of conquest over him, as the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail to do him real harm, to bring him down from his excellency. But he
still stands on ground, and fights with instruments that are invisible and
invincible; such Births the Red Dragon watches to devour, casts his floods
after, raises war against, upon this foot of account, They keep the
Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus. Upon this foundation also he
exasperates all his crew, acted by the spirit of this world, who are enforced
to gnaw their tongues for pain, that in all their on-sets from generation to
generation, they could never come at, nor quell that spring and root of action
and suffering, whereby they have been so perpetually baffled, and all their
costly and promising attempts been brought to naught. Hence all their
consultations and endeavors resolve themselves into this issue, To rid the
world of them who by a constant steady testimony of their drawing virtue, as
Olive Trees, from the God of the whole earth, being here in torments to them
that dwell upon the earth.

2. We may consider Faith in its Profession, or the Profession of our Faith;
that is to say, not only as it inwardly unites a soul to Christ, whereby he
draws forth consolations and aids to do so wonderfully on Gods behalf; But also
as it engages a believer to stand forth in the face of the World to testify
against it that its deeds are evil; bearing witness to the Holiness and
Faithfulness of God, in opposition to the stream of the lusts of men. Thus it
contracts rage to the utmost, Joh. 7.7. Me it hates, because I testify of it
that the works thereof are evil. When the whole demeanor of a Christian, both
in point of Worship and Conversation, is kept on, so as not to be tempted to
fall down before the Idolatry on one hand, or fall in with the debauchery on
the other, which is proposed under Countenance, or imposed by Law. The world
cannot bear the words of such a people, Amos 7.10, etc. Can the abomination of
a people be offered up before their eyes, and will not that Nation stone them?
Exodus 8.26. In this matter the Disciple is not privileged above his Lord, Joh.
15.18, 19. The world will hate such a people, as it hated him, for witnessing
against their ignorance and superstition. Ye worship ye know not what! we know
what we worship, Joh. 4.22. Ye are too superstitious: whom ye ignorantly
worship, him we declare to you, Acts 17.22, 23. This is enough to get the world
in an uproar. This is said above, Rev. 11.10. to torment them that dwell on the
earth; these two Prophets that have no other weapons but the Blood of the Lamb,
and the Word of their Testimony, the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of
Prophecy; and in this Message, and under this Anointing, witnessing, though in
sackcloth, against the evils that are in the world through lust, lighting
them, as Gods Candlesticks, the way to heaven; this torments men of earth. No
wonder then that they torment you; why, your conversations, testimony,
profession of your Faith, torments them. Christ came not to send peace in the
earth, but a sword, Mat. 10.34. but a fire, and what if it be already kindled?
Luke 12.49. Is Christ delighted with such contention? nothing less. But these
are the consequences of the lusts of men, irritated occasionally by the
faithful rebukes of the Gospel of Christ, and a practical profession of the
Faith thereof in such as embrace and obey it.

A word or two of Practical Improvement, and I shall leave this Point.

Use. 1. If Faith both in the Possession and Profession of it, be apt to draw
the rage of the world in the extremity of it upon you; this speaks the
reasonableness of this Exhortation, that you give diligence to it, that the
Faith any of you profess, be Faith unfeigned, 2 Timothy 1.5. Since, I say, Oh ye
professed Believers, your Faith in God, and faithfulness to God, is that which
you must expect will enrage the world against you; I beseech you satisfy not
your selves with any Faith short of such as will carry all the world in a way
of victory before it. I have thought that at this day there is no man so
miserable, as a professor of Faith which is not right and real; he will
contract the worlds rage, anger, and displeasure, because he professes some
Faith; and he incurrs the Lords anger and displeasure, because he but
professes, because he has not true Faith, Faith unfeigned. Interest in former
days, led some to profess at an high rate, and their credit engages them now
not to fetch their turns too short upon it; but the worlds rage charge them
so hot in the rear, that they cannot hold it, but are forced in, by open
Apostasy, to dash themselves against the thick Bosses of his Buckler.

Use 2. As it concerns you that your Faith be unfeigned, so the like reason and
necessity arises from the Promises, that your Faith be unmixed, in your
present contest with the world: that is, that they may have nothing to charge
you with, but your single Faith, and such things as are the proper offspring
of it, and of faithfulness to God upon it. It was the admirable advantage
Daniel had against the greatest Council that day in the world, Dan. 6.4, 5.
They could find no occasion against him forasmuch as he was faithful, unless
they could find it against him in the Law of his God. The like had David
against the envious and evil eye of Saul, that God was with him, and helped him
in all his affairs wisely and faithfully, 1 Samuel 18.12, 14, 15, 28, 29, 30.
There was no occasion administered to them that sought occasion. The contrary
whereunto is very detrimental to you, when they that pursue you have ground for
that charge. Jer. 50.7. We offend not, because they have sinned against the
Lord the habitation of Justice, even God the hope of their Fathers. See the
Spirits strict caution against this, 1 Pet. 2.20. What Glory is it, if when ye
are buffeted for your faults, you take it patiently? see chapter 4.15. Oh it will
be your blessedness, that they who pursue you, though they will not do it
perhaps without a color, yet they may do it without a cause, may have naught
to charge you with than that which (when their vizor of Rhetorical eloquence
and invective malice is stripped from it) resolves its self in a sober gracious
eye into this, it is for their being true to Jesus Christ, their Faith in him,
their subjection to him, their adhering to his Cause, Name, Works,
Institutions. Such a bottom will render you at length more than a Conqueror.

Use 3. Take heed how you admit a Parley with those Reasonings, which tend to
prejudice you against believing, to make you think hardly, at least to think
slightly of Faith, in that it involveth you in so many dangers and
perplexities. Satan lies at a Bay to possess you with offense, especially in
such days as this: Christ tells you, These things have I spoken that you might
not be offended; Blessed is he that is not offended in me: But, Oh! how strong
are temptations to reason thus? why, this way of Professing, of Meeting, of
Exercising, is the high way to make me poor, a beggar, to undo me at last, and
what shall I do then? Such Reasonings have need be rejected with utmost
abhorrency.

Use 4. These Considerations should sweeten Heaven and Glory to us: If while we
live by Faith, we draw the World, and such a world of miseries on us, it should
quicken the edge of our longings (not in a way of impatience neither) to be
dissolved and be with Christ, who is far better; Where sorrow and sighing shall
flee away, where shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain: for former things are past away, Rev. 21.4.

But to go forward to another Point. By Faith some were, etc. Understanding it
thus, that, by Faith, as the principle that bare them up and carried them
through as conquerors, they were tortured. This sense of it is most agreeable
with the drift and design of the whole Chapter. The nobility of their Spirits
commends the excellency of their Faith; To be tortured, and bear it patiently,
is well; but so may many do from other Principles and Causes, they cannot tell
possibly how to escape; but now to choose affliction with the people of God, to
become companions of them that are so used, to improve what God does in it, and
think this is best of all; a Spirit thus managed, and demeaning its self
through the sharps of it, commends the Fatih by which he does it. By Faith they
were tortured: the tortures on one hand, and temptings on the other, made no
impression, no alteration on them, they were the same as formerly, or rather
much better. By Faith they were so --. The Note is this.

Doct. That the Faith of Gods Elect is of invincible power to make them
Conquerors in all their tortures.

What I have to say to the clearing up this Point, I shall offer, by
endeavoring to show these two ways wherein Faith contributes to the
performing this high service.

1. Faith does contribute to bear up under tortures themselves (and much more
under less trials, as imprisonment, banishment, etc.) by way of evidencing
things to the Soul, which otherwise are not so clear and substantial, as its
the office of Faith to make them, Heb. 11.1.

2. Faith contributes hereunto, by way of ministering influence and assistance
to the soul, strengthening and heartning it to endure that which otherwise
would seem insufferable, break and sink the Spirit.

As for the former of these, Faiths proper tendency to give light and evidence
to the soul, and by evidence to beget a conquering magnanimity, commends it
self to us as its conversant about a threefold object or employment.

1. Faiths main evidencing work, is concerned about the grand Interest and
Propriety that the Soul has in God, and God in him; to get this case once
cleared up beyond controversy, and to maintain the soul in a satisfactory veiw
of an interest in Christ. Where this is uncertain or clouded up, the soul sets
upon such hazards with much trembling, and good reason it should do so, all
things considered. But where this Mystery of Union and Relation to Christ is
cleared, to and by believing, the soul becomes impregnable; as might be
abundantly made out by that triumph of Faith, recorded exactly and accurately,
Romans 8.33. to the end. Can any of the instruments of torture or cruelty there
ennumerated, separate such a one from the love of God, who stands resolved and
undoubted upon Gospel-grounds? nay, He is more than a Conqueror; Tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, though all the day long
we be killed and counted as sheep for the slaughter; yet can none of these,
managed either by men or Angels, do any thing of importance to the shaking of
such a one. When he arrives to that pitch of triumph, Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is
my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my
life; of whom shall I be afraid? You may guess how far he is hereby removed out
of the way of danger: inroads may be made upon him, but he cannot be easily
moved.

2. Faith has another matter to clear up in a way of evidence, and by doing it
effectually, it contributes exceeding encouragement to a Believer to endure
torments; namely, it evidenceth the Truth, and Goodness, and the special
Relation that God has to the Cause that it suffers in, from all the clouds,
aspersions, and calumnies that men would cast upon it. I do not say that Faith
can make a bad cause good, but it can make an obscure cause clear. It is not
enough that a Christian have the clearness of a personal interest in the Lord,
when he comes to endure torment; but it is needful that he have the clearness
of a good Cause, and a good Call, that he suffers on, or else he may suffer as
an evil-doer, and what thank will that be? the truth and goodness of his Cause
needs then to be cleared; and Faith is of singular essicacy this way, when
perhaps the wisdom and devilish policy of men have been at work with
opprobrious reproaches to vilisie it, or some timeserving Apostates, with their
sophistical arguings, and scholastical distinctions, as Jannes and Jambres, to
invalidate and resist the Truth; to which service Scriptures and Arguments are
not wanting to be wrested, for the perverting the plain ways of God, when the
case is so, and a poor Christian is frequently so assailed and baited with
them, that he knows not how to give a distinct, satisfactory, convincing answer
to all these sophisms; nay, perhaps cannot demonstrably extricate himself from
all the subtle entanglements that of this kind may be drawn about him. Now is
it the office of Faith to clear up the innate goodness and truth of the
principles it suffers on, that at least to its own satisfaction the soul is
abundantly cleared and convinced therein, and united thereunto: And this has
helped the Martyrs of Christ to bear so bold a testimony to diverse Truths, of
which they were not able to make a scholastical defense by way of disputation,
yet could set to their seal by dying, or sustaining any tortures. -- When this
point is once satisfactorily evidenced, that the Cause is Gods, that Jesus
Christ is interested and embarked in it, it gives strong consolation. What an
encouragement was that, 2 Chronicles. 20.15. Be not dismayed at this great
multitude; for the battle is not yours, but Gods. So was it to David with the
Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.47. The battle is the Lords. When a soul can see God not
only interested with it, but really more deeply interested and concerned than
its self is, it yields full assurance of good success at last. I know the Lord
will maintain the Cause of the Afflicted, and the Right of the Poor, Psalm.
140.12. because it can in title God to it, Psalm. 74.22. Arise, O God, plead thy
own Cause. This also will beget a dread on the soul, how it gives way to any
temptation to betray it. This Truth, this Profession, however men call it
little, however it may ^eem I may be saved without it, its no point of
Salvation; yet it being Christ's more than mine, though committed to my trust,
to deny it, is to deny Christ; and to betray it, is to betray Christ: and
though (as the common cry is) none ever suf^ered upon such a point, none in the
past generation ran the adventure of tortures on such an assertion; yet the
soul, by believing, being brought to see Christ's interest in it, and relation
to it, and that perhaps this is the day designed to bring forth a proof to the
goodness and worth of it, a soul becomes not only engaged, but inseperably
united, and impregnably set for the defense of it.

3. Faith has a further work to do in point of evidence, and thereby
administers abundance of strength to a weak Christian to endure any tortures
for the Lords sake, and that is, gives evidence of the real nothingness that
there is in whatsoever the adversary is able to do in point of torment, if the
matter be indeed laid upon a right balance, and held with an impartial and
steady hand; and that in these Three respects:

1. Faith is called into Counsel, (in the exclusion of the reasonings of flesh
and blood) it manifests abundance of wind and emptiness in all the threatenings
of the sons of men; what they say of this kind, are but great swelling words of
vanity, an empty sound, of little affrighting signification, Know thou not
(says Pilate) that I have power to crucify thee, and power to release thee?
He would willingly have had his majesty and threatenings very terrible; but what
is Christ's answer? Thou could have no power except it were given thee from
above. The power the Devil himself has, though he be the Prince of the Air,
cannot get over an hedge without special Commission, Thou has^ (says he
concerning Job) made an hedge about him. Hence it is, that when their
threatenings and preparations have been to heat the Furnace seven times hotter;
they feared not the wrath of the King, as seeing him that is invisible, Our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us, able to divert that fiery threatening; and
if he will not do so, yet able to bring us out again. These threatenings,
increase the cry for boldness.

2. Faith helps the soul to see that all their profers and tenders of
deliverance, of honor, of preferment, or whatever else such poor worms can
mention, is as mere a vapor as the other: When Satan made the tender to
Christ, All this will I give thee; all this power, says he, will I give thee,
and the glory of them, for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will
give it; if therefore thou will fall down before me, all shall be thine, Luke
4.6, 7. Our reason would have accepted it. Christ has the promise of the
World, only Satan has the possession of it, and must be expulsed by main
force; now at this juncture, one bow will do it; and were it not better vail
once, than from generation to generation be in a continual contest for it, and
his seed exposed to such tortures to obtain and maintain the ground that is
thus gradually gotten? No, Jesus will not value all the supremacy the Devil
could surrender in the World, worth one bow to obtain it; Get thee behind ^e
Satan, verse. 8.

3. Faith in like manner makes evident that all ^he terms, articles, and
proposals of adversaries, that seem very little and innocent, upon which their
tortures are to be escaped, and their favors ^btained, are very dangerous
things; a bow or cringe ^t a distance may seem a small matter, for the
^btaining such advantage, but Christ sees it too great to give to Satan, for
the gaining the glory of earth or heaven either. A bow to the golden Image from
the three Worthies, seems a small thing to reason, but its too hard to the
reasoning of Faith. A bow to Haman from Mordecai in the gate, is a small matter
in an eye of wisdom and prudence, but to Faith it may not be yielded. Daniels
retirement to mental devotions, seems but rational; but if that be the only
terms of deliverance, in the omission of positive instituted Worship, Faith
says the articles are too hard to be accepted of. -- But of this more
hereafter.

2. But as Faith yields succor, by such a way of evidencing to the
understanding and judgment things that are obscure, the clearing up of which
have such a direct tendency to beget courage; So, in the Second place, does
Faith greatly aid, by ministering Influence, and thereby bringing power and
virtue with it, in furthering diverse blessed properties and qualities in the
soul, wherewith it receives ability to do, and to bear wonderful and
insupportable things, when the Lord calls thereunto; As for instance in a few
Particulars.

1. Faith contributes toward this support by way of influence, in that Faith
brings with it, as its first born fruit, Peace passing all understanding, Romans
5.1. It draws all the tumultuating thoughts of a poor creature into such a calm
and composure, tha^ though the outward man decay, yet the inner man is renewed
day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Though the bones be broken, pain and tortures come on,
yet the inner man retains its sweetness, quietness, serenity and
undisturbedness; and when thus the mind is quiet, the man is invincible. Of the
office of Faith, as it works Peace, I do not now intend to treat, the Scripture
is full of it, Romans 5.1. Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose
mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in thee. Through this
mind-surpassing peace, the heart and thoughts are kept in Christ Jesus. Where
this glorious work is done, it is not the extending the external parts of a
poor man that can intermedle with his joy. This joy of the Lord is his
strength, he can glorify the Lord in the fires, exercise all patience and
long-suffering with joyfulness, giving thanks to the Father. There is indeed in
the world, sometimes to be seen among carnal men, a certain greatness of
spirit, whereby they do pass through tortures, to the shame of many who profess
better principles; but alas! this is little better than a mere stupifaction of
their senses; it besots them; is as the vinegar and gall they were wont to give
to men on the Cross, to deaden their senses to their pain: The spirit of this
world does so wrap up their thoughts, that they are as if they had took that
sleeping drink, mentioned, Prove. 31.7. Drink and forget their poverty, and
remember their misery no more. This is rather an imprisoning, than a calming of
their spirits; they have nor their senses exercised to discern betwixt good and
^vil, but rather benumbed. Whereas this Peace of which I am treating (as Christ
says) in patience ^ossesseth the soul: A man is said to possess his soul when
he has the command and disposal of all his ^houghts and faculties according to
the best reason. This, in the case in hand, is only the offspring of ^xed
Faith, and admirably advantageous in sustain^ng torments.

2. Faith contributes influentially, not only as it begets peace, but also as
it brings the soul up to a certain resignedness unto God, to a willingness to
be ^t Gods dispose; here am I, let him do with me what seems good in his
sight: That which makes torments to be tortures indeed, is when the members
draw one way, and the mind another; but when the soul comes to be fully yielded
up to divine pleasure, this makes tortures become no tortures, or at least to
become less tortures. You see this eminently set forth in the Captain of our
Salvation himself, while he was crucifying in weakness, and tempted as are we,
while the humane nature would have made choice of that request, Father save me
from this hour, Joh. 12.27. then was his Soul troubled, all was dark and
intolerable; But when he fixes in that resignedness, For this cause came I to
this hour, Father glorify thy Name; then are there not only Oracles of
approbation, giving aid from the most excellent Glory, but the Baptism he has
before him, how is he pained ere it be accomplished. And so in the very
offering its self, we see how his resignation expedited his tortures, he was
dead sooner than the rest: for when the Soldiers came to break the bones of
the thieves, they brake not his bones; why? because he was dead already. How
so? Why he said, It was finished, bowed his head, gave up the Ghost, and said,
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23.46. Whereas the others
abode in a contest till the last gasp 'twixt spirit and members, loath to part,
much work left undone, had no certainty (one at least) of rest for his soul.
This makes sore conflicts in times of torment; whereas on the contrary, how
sweet is that yielding up all to God, mentioned Isa. 50.5, 6. I was not
rebellious, neither turned away back; but gave my back to the smiters, etc. So
chap. 53.7. He opened not his mouth, but is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter,
etc. This subduedness to the will of God, by the dominion of Faith, then is of
exceeding moment to strengthen us to the enduring these torments.

3. Faith does influence the soul to bear torments notably, by bringing and
increasing a certain greatness and nobility, a largness and publickness of
spirit on it more than formerly. Shall such a man as I flee? Neh. 6.11. It
begets a largeness of heart, in some degree answering that of Solomon, 1 Kings
4.24. unto which a base shrinking is exceeding contrary and loathsome,
especially considering by, and for whom, and to the interest of whose Name it
is engaged. Its marvelous to consider what many have endured to gratify the
lust of a great man, 2 Samuel 2.14, 15, 16. to provide for their families, to
assert the liberties of their Country, and the like; and is not the will,
pleasure, honor of Jesus Christ of far greater moment to be witnessed unto to
the highest? It was a gallant spirit in Joab, which encouraged the people, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, let us play the men for our people, and for the
Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good: The like
reasonings will Faith suggest to beget resolutions. I have now an opportunity,
which I may never have again, to play the man, the Christian, the Believer, for
my God, my Christ, for his Gospel, his Institutions, his Cause and Interest.
What can be too hot or heavy to be done or suffered upon this account?

4. Faith influenceth notably in this matter, by giving the soul a prospect
into, and a fore-taste of that better Resurrection, realizing and rendering
substantial the promised Glory thereof unto it. It Is remarked of our Lord, that
for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, Heb. 12.2. Moses, when he was threatened, endured, as seeing him that is
invisible, and having his eye to the recompense of reward, chap. 11.26, 27.
They took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, who know in themselves they
have in Heaven a better and more enduring substance, chap. 10.34. Stephen
looking steadfastly into Heaven, was not dismayed at the frowns, threats,
tortures of his fierce adversaries, Acts 7.55, 56.

I shall only draw this into an Applicatory Improvement briefly, and pass along
upon the whole of what has been said to this Head.

Use. You are with a very loud voice, men and Brethren, exhorted and beseeched,
to give all diligence to the Concernments of your Faith. Above all your
gettings, covet a true, lively, Gospel-faith; above all your keepings, strive
to hold fast, and contend earnestly for this Faith. If ever there were days
that called loud for the Life of the Faith of the Son of God, these days call
for it. I had fainted (says the Psalmist) unless I bad believed: And truly you
will be apt to faint in the day of adversity, as if your strength were small
where your Faith is not good. Take heed therefore of all things that may either
adulterate it from its simplicity, or stop and obstruct it from its growth. God
has begun to exercise your souls, and to prove your profession in a way of
trials; its true, you have not yet resisted unto blood, unto tortures, as
others have, and you (at least some of you) may. The grand Question your souls
should pursue to a full and satisfactory resolution, is, What stock have you,
proportionable to such an expectation? Here I shall propound these Two
Exhortations.

1. Prove your Faith. 2. Improve your Faith.
1. Prove your Faith, or take it in the Exhortation, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves, whether you are in the Faith; prove your own selves: Do not take up
principles upon trust, persuasions of a good condition upon trust, in a day
when you are at the point of being put upon fiery trials; Every man's work must
be tried; the time is come that judgument must begin at the House of God. Every
one must bear his own burden. Here you would be directed particularly to see,
(1) That your Faith be true. (2) That your Faith be strong. (1) That it be
true; feigned Faith will beget but fading Comforts; nay, as was said, It will
do greater mischief in such a day, than no Faith at all. Here Evidences would
be needful for discovery, and Arguments with Directions, for exhortation, that
souls who upon the trial find themselves short, would not strike off through
discouragements; but rather strike up with so much the more diligence to make
their Calling and Election sure, for helps, in order whereunto they must at
present be referred to what has been offered in other exercises: The like
might be offered to press you to look after strength of faith.

2. Be exhorted, such of you as find that good work of Faith with any power in
your souls, that you do not let it lie by you, as a Talent in a Napkin, or as
the Sword behind the Ephod, since there is none to it, to make you valiant to
do exploits: Oh! be much in this work of drawing it forth upon constant, quick,
and lively exercise; as namely,

1. Improve your Faith against your Fears. It has a sovereign and excellent
virtue that way, in the experiences of all the Saints. As perfect Love casts
out Fear, so does perfect Faith; indeed it is Faith working by Love only does
it: What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. In the Lord I have put my
trust, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Have Faith upon its
principallity of exercise, when the sloods of ungodly men are apt to make
afraid.

2. Improve your Faith against all your offenses and murmurings that you meet
withal in your souls, occasioned and multiplied by the stumbling blocks of the
day. Proper Doctrines cannot be preached, proper Duties cannot be practiced,
proper Truths cannot be professed, but Satan raiserh up multitudes of
Objections against them, of which this usually bears the mastery, Spare thy
self; they resolve themselves into this usually as their bearing reason, The
fear of man. In such a time, how needful is that Character to be found, Great
peace have they that love thy Law, and Nothing shall offend them, Psa. 119.165.
When tribulation and persecution for the Word comes, how by and by men are
offended, Mat. 13.21. It was one great part of Christ's care at parting with
his Disciples, that they should not be offended, at men's putting them out of
the Synagogues, and thinking they do God good service in killing them, John
16.1, 2. When John was in prison, it is not easy to answer the questions, nor
to remove the offenses that arise upon it, Whether Christ be the Christ or no?
But blessed is he (says Christ) that is not offended in me, Mat. 11.6. Oh!
improve your Faith against these stumbling offenses.

3. Improve your Faith unto a full conquest of the World, and the things that
are therein, respecting all the afrightments and allurements of it, as it
presents and presses you with its objects of love and fear. Oh! in such
staggering times, the dirt that clogs the feet of a Believer, the thick clay,
that either in act or desire he is busied to load himself withal, is extremely
detrimental to taking straight steps to your feet: How easily did the present
evil World draw Demas, Judas, and diverse others, to a betraying, denying,
deserting their high profession? The victory that overcomes this (you have
heard) is your Faith.

4. Improve your Faith against all the filthiness of the flesh and of the
spirit; let such as name the Name of the Lord Jesus depart from iniquity; a
little sin will destroy a great deal of valor, whereas holiness carried on
toward its perfection in the fear of God, will yield increases of strength and
security against the worst that man can do unto you, for who is he can harm
you, if you be followers of that which is good? Holiness will secure you from
harm: They who torture you, if they cannot defile you, cannot destroy you; they
may kill you, but cannot hurt you; you shall not be hurt of the second death.
And in as much as you are frequently showed what power Faith improved has to
promote holiness, the Lord make you faithful herein.

Thus far has been spoken to set forth the excellent and admirable nature of
believing, considered in its encounters with, and conquest over torments. It
remains, that we now take into view its virtue and excellency, as it conflicts
with, and gets success against another adversary, no less difficult to be
attempted than tortures be, no less apt to overcome, and that is, the tempting
tenders of Deliverance. And herein is the greatness of the atchievment, that
the Faith which enabled them to bear tortures without grudging, enabled them to
refuse the tenders of deliverance without complying. (...). Redemptionem notat,
addita praeposito insinuare videtur perfectam redemptionem. Leigh. Cr. Sac^.
[They accepted not Deliverance.] The word we read Deliverance, denotes in the
proper signification of it full Deliverance, Deliverance very complete; and is
here applied to signify such a deliverance as did not only consist in a mere
relaxation of the torment, as supposing them to be upon the Rack, in such a
case when the sinews begin to snap, and the joints to sever one from another;
if nothing more were offered in the deliverance but merely to let down the rack
and take off the creature from the extremity of torment, though that may for a
time seem to gain upon a mere man, yet such may the case be, that such
deliverance may be worse than death its self: You read in Rev. 9.5, 6. of a
torment, in which men shall seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire
to die, and it shall flee from them. Implying, that such may be the torment on
a poor creature, as that to be killed outright, is better than to be spared;
Knock me in the head rather than let me live thus in Torture. But the
deliverance here is full deliverance, a being reduced to a state of ease, rest,
and quiet; together with any other accommodations that can be desired to
complete it; All this will I give thee, Credit, Trade, Preferment, Applause,
and what not?

[They accepted it not.] They did not give it friendly entertainment, such as
one would show to a stranger when he has been long absent. They were at such a
pitch of raisedness, that they would give such deliverance, deliverance on such
terms, not any friendly welcome, or entertainment, that other men, perhaps,
would gladly do, they could not salute it, bid it, God speed, could be in no
fellowship with it.

[That they might obtain] The word does not signify any expectation, that they
had, or could have of dealing with the hope of the Resurrection upon the terms
of strict merit. As if there were any equality or proportion betwixt their
enduring tortures; and their receiving the Resurrection; nay, when they have
done all, left all, suffered all, they are unprofitable servants; but only
thus, in thus standing under torments, thus withstanding deliverance upon
unworthy terms, they were in the Lord's path of expecting the comfortable
foretastes now, and assurances of a further glory.

[A better Resurrection] Paul pressed hard to obtain the Resurrection from the
dead, Phil. 3.11. which is not only a Resurrection of the dead, both of the
just and unjust, but that which is called, the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6.
for, the dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 These. 4.16. They which are Christ's
at his coming, 1 Cor. 15.23. For them that sleep in Christ, shall God bring
with him. This is called the Better Resurrection; not only better than their
torments, but better than their proffered Deliverance.

The main Point that I shall propound to be handled from the words, is this;

Doct. 5. That it is no less the excellency of Faith to reject the tempting
Tenders, than to sustain the cruel Tortures of a trying Day.

The supposition is of a person put upon this Dilemma, he is brought into a
condition of torturing, be it actually so to his feeling, or only vertually in
the threats or Laws that represent them at hand, or to his fears. In this
condition he has two offers, two tenders made to him: First, the tender of the
Torturer, and he offers Deliverance, full and complete deliverance. Secondly,
the tender of the Comforter, and he offers the Resurrection. And now the man is
put to it, Will you comply with the design of the Torturer, and you shall have
Deliverance? Or, will you adhere to the design of the Comforter, and you shall
have (perhaps not any ease, mitigation, but rather an increase of pain; But) at
length, a lot in the end of the days, in the Resurrection? Look to your
choice, let your choice be the offspring of a well-deliberated and digested
judgment upon the case. Now here lies the excellency of believing, in fixing
the soul upon principles of the highest reason; to cleave to this (the
Resurrection) is better. When sense comes in with its judgment, life is sweet,
Skin for skin, and all a man has he will give for his life. The body is more
worth than food, and the life than raiment. Death is a King of terrors.
Banishment is terrible, tortures intolerable, hunger insufferable; Spare thy
self, this evil shall not overtake thee. What says Friends, Wife, Children,
Oh! do not disgrace your self, do not destroy us; men will praise thee when
thou do well for thy self. But what says Faith? [Ah, will a carnal heart
say, I hate him, for he never speaks good to me, but evil.] Well, but what will
it say? Why, there is a glorious Resurrection that will repair all tortured
bodies, tottered limbs, massacred members, will all be done up better in the
Resurrection? And in mean time, these light afflictions are but for a moment,
and not worthy to be compared with that glory which is ready to be revealed in
us. Scorn the torturer, slight the tender; reject the offer at man's hand, it
is and has a lie in the right hand: fall into the hands of the Lord, commit
the keeping of thy soul to him in well-doing, as into the hands of a faithful
Creator: be assured he is able to keep that which is committed to him against
that day. This is an hard saying, flesh cannot bear it, but faith can and does.

Now, that we may not miscarry or offend on the right hand nor on the left in
this narrow point, I suppose it may be requisite to draw the matter thus into
Consideration; Deliverance from tortures, and consequently from any other, or
lesser trials, may be considered Three ways.

1. In a simple and abstract Notion in its self, unclothed of other
circumstances and dependencies, and then we shall see what acceptance Faith
will give to it when tendered.

2. We are to consider Deliverance as in the torturers hand and design, as an
Engine or Instrument to carry on the same end, which he attempted to extort by
torments; namely, to bereave the man of his Testimony.

3. We may consider Deliverance, as it stands compared with, and opposed to the
better Resurrection; these Two standing in competition in their tender. --

Now in each of these respects, there are several considerable Truths to be
taken notice of, especially in such times of attempts, to debauch all manner of
ways.

1. For first of all, If we consider Deliverance apart from the projects and
designs of men, who are tempting and attempting by it, to bring about their
ends, upon a poor tortured Child of God; I say, take it in a single and
abstract notion, apart from such entanglements, and the matter admits of a very
vast difference in the judgment, and to the acceptance of Faith. For if the
case can be clearly and truly so stated, Faith can and must accept deliverance
with all thankfulness, with honor to God, and with great advantage to the soul
concerned in it. -- And therefore as we pass along, I would willingly speak a
little distinctly to this case, that some stop and prevention may be put to the
prejudice, that may otherwise arise upon a rigid insisting on this Doctrine; as
if the tendency of Faith in times of trial, were inevitably to run all upon the
Rocks, without any respect had to the preserving our selves, or any thing
concerning us, or committed to us of our external mercies. Being therefore the
contrary is to be supposed, and is employed all along under the main Truth
asserted in the Text; I will fairly lay down this Supposition:

That Deliverance (as Deliverance may be considered) is a Mercy not to be
refused, but accepted by Believers.

Deliverance from tortures, from trials, if you would think of it very
abstractly, and in its mere simple nature; Deliverance from harm and evil may
be reckoned among a Christians middle things, I mean such things as in their
own nature are neither good nor evil, but do receive the impression and
denomination of good or evil, suitable to their relation, improvement, or design
to which they are bent and levelled, accordingly as they are either used or
abused. And therefore it is that the Spirit of the Lord ( Eccles. 9. beginning)
declares that there is neither love nor hatred by all that of this kind is
under the Sun. But in this sense it falls not immediately under our present
discourse. A little farther therefore. -- Deliverance to a Christian represents
it self so, as he can clearly and comfortably eye it in God's hand, and as
something conveyed to him by the goodness of a good God. And when deliverance
can be thus beheld, not only as coming in a common effective providence, but by
the approbation, allowance, and good will of the Father, then such deliverance
is entertained with the best acceptance of Faith, he compasses God about with
songs of deliverance. To this Point a little may be spoken. There are several
respects in which no man is so capable to accept Deliverance, such Deliverance,
as a Believer.

1. None, as he, can tell what to make of Deliverance.

2. None, as he, knows how to improve Deliverance.

3. None, as he, can account with God for it at the last Day.

1. First of all; When Deliverance comes in, in such a way as he may accept of
it, none is able to make so much of it, put such a value upon it as he; every
thing on this side Hell is Mercy. It Is of the Lord's mercies we are not
consumed. Faith advances the value of every received good, according to the
love that sent it, the price it cost, the grace that brings it; it says as
Jacob, I am less than the least of all thy mercies, Genesis 32.10. What am I, that
thou have brought me hitherto? says David, 2 Samuel 7.18. It traceth out, and
owneth the footsteps of divine good will in every little thing, and much more
when it sees such salutations: Life is a mercy, Liberty a mercy, exemption from
Tortures a great mercy, Deliverance out of them a greater mercy. Hence the Soul
is compassed, and compasses his God about with songs of Deliverance.

2. None knows how to improve a Deliverance, how to use it when he has it, as
a Believer: If he have Life on this side Death, Liberty on this side Bonds,
Ease on this side Torment, he is taught to acknowledge and reckon he is not his
own in it, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. but must use it to the glorifying God in soul and
body, which are his. None is under such obligations, none has such objects and
opportunities to make an high improvement of them as he has who by believing
looks into them, others bestow them on their lusts.

3. None, as he, knows what account he must give to God for such Deliverances:
as he must reckon for every idle word, and all the deeds done in the body, so
he must yield an account of all his receipts whatever they be, and therefore
must so receive and improve as one that must be judged by the Law of Liberty;
and hence durst not say of any Mercy as they, Our tongues are our own, who is
Lord over them? Psa. 12.4. On these accounts, and others that might be
mentioned, the Believer has reason to know deliverance, the worth that is in
it, and his duty about it, more than any other. Now as none can deal with
deliverance as they, so is it a very high duty incumbent on such to receive
deliverance at the hand of God; then to accept deliverance is his duty, and to
give it such acceptance and entertainment in Truth, as he expressed in
Complement, and in a strain of Oratory and Rhetoric, Acts 24.2, 3. the terms
only changed: the Believer may thus express himself to the Lord; Seeing I enjoy
great quietness, (great deliverance, great preservation) and that very worthy
deeds are done to such a worm as I, by thy Providence, I accept it always, and
in all places (my dear Father) with all thankfulness. None do and can give it
such acceptable entertainment as the Believer of whom we treat. The matter
therefore thus stated and considered, he does not, he durst not refuse such
deliverance: For if he should not thus receive it,

1. He were, in this refusal, a mere destroyer of himself; a thing abhorrent to
godliness: he were, I say, accessory of the violence done upon himself. Saul is
as guilty of his own death, if his Armor-bearer thrust him through, as when he
falls upon his own Sword. If Life, Liberty, or any Mercy may be had in God's
way, the refusal of it is the destroying our selves so far as that Mercy
extends. Though we are required to hate Father and Mother, and our own Lives,
in a sense, yet it is far from the intendment of the Spirit we should carelessly
run them upon hazard: no, such know their bodies are the Temples of the Holy
Spirit, and they ought to use them well for his sake who dwells in them: He
that abuses the Temple of God, him will God destroy.

2. Such a refusal of Deliverance, when it may be had in the Lord's way, is a
manifestation and an act of the highest ingratitude and unthankfulness to the
Lord that can be thought on. To scorn or set at naught his favors, is very
much beneath the ingenuity of a Believer; who ought to embrace all occasions to
show forth the high praises of the Lord, which are due unto his Name. Blessed
are such as dwell in the Lord's House, they have frequent such occasion to be
praising him, and it is comely for the upright.

3. Should he not accept Deliverance, when it may be had in the Lord's way, it
would be found an act of high violence and injustice toward others, who may be
involved and concerned equally with themselves. Some have Wives, and Children,
or other Relations, in the flesh; now, as if he provide not for his own, and
especially for them of his own household, he were worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy
5.8. So if he draw them into sufferings, from whence he might have deliverence
in a way honorable and acceptable to the Lord, he is accessory of their
misery, their wrong will be upon him. -- More of this kind might be spoken, but
I fear too much of it is ready to be alleged on the common principle, which is
fruitful in such kind of reasonings: Save thy self, spare thy self; this harm
shall not come unto thee, as Mat. 17.22. I shall only draw this Consideration
into suitable Improvement, in a few Inferences.

1. If this be so, then may we take up this Instruction, That Godliness, and
the profession of it, does not inevitably run and necessitate a Christian upon
the hazard and loss of every thing he has, or induce him to cast away all:
Though it does indeed require him to prepare his stuff for removing, to stand
crucified in his affections unto them, and ready to make surrender of them
whenever the Lord needs them (as was said of the Colt) or is pleased to call
for them; yet it also directs to an excellent way of receiving, enjoying, and
using them; buying as if he bought not, having, and using all these as not
abusing them, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Do not therefore take up hard thoughts of
Godliness, because of the Doctrine of Self-denial, the Cross at entrance, or
the Trials and Tribulations that are appointed to attend the Professors of it.

2. Hence it will also follow, That false and wrong Principles are not to be
accounted good, because persons do, upon them, run all they have upon ruin. As
there is a kind of respect and pity kindled in tender and ingenious hearts
toward a people who suffer under the profession of principles that have an
appearance of Holiness in them: So does a kind of stedfastness to those
principles, and resolution to run all things to ruin on them, very much tend
to raise admiration and applause to such a people and their profession: whereas
on the contrary, I desire you to take this as a standing Rule;

That the goodness of a Principle is not to be tried and determined by the
resolution of the Sufferer, but the resolution of the Sufferer by the goodness
of his Principle.

Good-men may be very weak under good Principles, and Bad-men may be very heady
and resolute under bad principles; and this well considered, would lead off our
eyes from gazing on, and having men's persons in admiration upon one hand when
we see them stand, or being apt to judge them and their cause if we see them
insident in hours of temptation to shake and totter.

I confess its very beautiful and desirable to see stedfastness of Soul, as
the offspring of Truth, fixed there in Gospel-evidence; and the contrary
hereunto, has given not a little advantage and occasion to weak ones, to
question almost every thing, whether there be any thing of Truth in it, seeing
the generality of all Professors have been in the entrance on this Trial, so
hardly fixed to any thing that endangereth the loss of their external
accommodations. If it be enquired, Why so many shrink, and totter, who profess
the Truth? I answer: It does not argue that their Principle was naught, and so
the cause of their tottering; but their standing upon that principle was not
sound, they were not joined to the things they professed, they were not mixed
with Faith, Heb. 4.2. There are many principles on which many have adventured
their All, and endured great Tortures, and yet no truth or soundness in them.
See 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
were nothing. Which implies a possibility, on hollow and unsound bottoms, to
proceed thus far, and yet find no acceptance with God at all in it. We may
consider a few Principles that will carry men to endure torments, and yet not
such as we may justify.

1. First, there is Self-Righteousness; a design to establish a man's own
Righteousness in opposition to the Righteousness of Christ in the Gospel: its
wonderful to consider what tortures it will wade through in compassing its
design. You know that Observation the Apostle makes of it, Col. 2.23. where
speaking of the attempts made to deceive and spoil Christians of the simplicity
of the Gospel, partly by the Heathenish Philosophy, and partly by Jewish
Superstition, they meet in this, A show of wisdom they have in Will Worship,
and humility, neglecting the Body, not in any honor to the satisfying the
flesh. Flesh will be satisfied, and a design of flesh carried on vigorously, to
promote its righteousness, though it be in a neglecting, dishonouring, offering
violence to the body. Men have, and do admit great hardships on their body, to
promote the righteousness of the flesh.

Again; Another principle that will carry men through sufferings wonderfully,
is, the lust of the flesh: when there is some untamed lust that seems to be
crossed by sufferings, and especially if it can be hid under the cloak of some
profession. As for instance; the Pride and Ambition of a man, where it rages
and is unmortified, it will rush and make a noise a great while through
sufferings. Such a man will scorn to be said to bow, to be called a Turn-coat,
to yield to such a subdued unworthy generation. So likewise headiness,
frowardness, where it takes head and heart, it will rush as the Horse into the
battle: The Counsel of the froward is carried headlong, Job 5.13. Its
masterpiece is blind madness.

3. Moreover, Strong affections to the persons of men, and admiration of them,
because of advantage. The Disciples would go and die with Lazarus, Joh. 11.16.
They would follow Jesus into Prison, and into Death, Luke 22.33. Affections led
Peter upon the Waves for Christ's company, but could not keep him from sinking.
Many would go to the ends of the Earth, for the love they bear to such a
Ministry, to such a People, etc. But if this be the height and strength of it,
it will abate and decay upon sharp trial.

4. Lastly, When a man's case becomes desperate, as Saul: Men will fall upon
their Sword; Judas hang himself; Men will desire to die, and it flees from them.

Upon the whole this Conclusion issues forth; The goodness of a man's Bottom,
Spirit, Cause, or Principle, is not to be concluded from the resoluteness of
his standing; and on the contrary, other ways must be sought to determine and
censure the badness of a Principle, besides the Apostasy of Professors from it.
All they that were in Asia forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 1.15. At his first Answer, no
man stood by him, chapter 4.16. All scattered to their own from Christ, Joh. 16.32.
Sought their own things, and not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil.
2.21. And yet Truth's professed by them never the worse for all this. Let Us
then be less rash in judging them and their standing, taking heed rather lest
we fall; God is able to graft them in, and make them stand again: Deliverance
when God may be seen bringing it, and enjoyed in it, ought to be accepted, and
Faith fittest to give the best acceptance to it.

2dly. But to pass this by, my aim in the next place principally, is to
consider Deliverance as it is in the tempters hand, as an offer of his, and as
in design to carry on the same projects, that he had in the Torment, and that
is, To ensnare and debauch the person, when the Tortures have made such a
breach upon the members, as the Tormenter thinks he has caused some impression
by way of despondency on the mind, that he supposes former reasonings are
someway weakened, and former resolutions abated; now is Deliverance tendered as
a bait, to draw the soul off from its stedfastness. Now Faith is of power to
interpose, to relieve the poor, tortured, tempted soul, settling it upon the
power of God, and by gathering up his spirits to help him to make that gallant
repulse, that honorable refusal to it in all its painted and alluring beauty;
I scorn your Deliverance, Got behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me. You
have the excellency of Faith described in other subjects ( verse. 37.) They were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, They were tempted, were slain with the sword:
Among other conquests of believing, this was not the least, that in the midest
of other cruel Tortures, they were tempted, and yet were conquerors. How
tempted? Why, as is said above, ( v. 15.) they had opportunities to have
returned, to have escaped; and this was the nobility of their spirits, they
slighted such opportunities, when temptation lay in opportunities. We are
therefore here to observe this further Supposition, to be employed in the former
assertion; That the fairest offers of Deliverance in a Torturers hand, may
carry the foulest designs of Temptation in them; and then is Faith eminently
concerned to take heed of them, and resist them. Indeed, if persons will be by
no means persuaded to look otherwise than on the outside of the offer, it is
not strange if they take, if such swallow them down, as the unwary Fish does
Hook and all; but if they belong to God, they must vomit them up again, God
shall cast them out of their belly. When God has a soul under the Rod, upon
the Rack, in measure, when it breaks forth he will debate with it, he seeks
to make impressions by frequent solicitations, to get entrence by some means or
other for his designs of grace and holiness; which he does gradually chafe in
this way, Job 33.14, 15, 16, 19, etc. chapter 36.8, 9, 10. In like manner, though,
with a differing design, when Satan can but have the winnowing, ( Luke 22.31.)
and hampering of a child of God, ( Job 1.11, 12. chapter 2.5, 6.) his whole design
is to make impressions of pollution, Curse God and die, let go thy integrity;
and the remembrance and experience he has how many strong men have fallen this
way, encourages and emboldens him to deal frequently this way. As we see those
instruments of his did with Jeremiah, chapter 20.10. All my familiers watch for my
halting; peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him,
and take our revenge on him. Sampson had a great spirit, and by plain force
could not be subdued, but a Dalilah is prevalent to ensnare him. David shall
have Michal given him to Wife, but in design that she may be a snare to him, 1 Samuel 18.21. There being no Enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against
Israel. Balaam the Son of Beor, gives counsel, to take Israel in a way that had
more of Efficacy to divide betwixt them and their God, than could be expected
from Balacks fighting them, or Balaams cursing them, Micah 6.5. Numb. 25.1, 2,
3. Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed,
etc. James 1.14, 15. By these ways is a poor soul overcome, and brought into
bondage frequently, when open violence will do but little harm on him. Now the
attempts of the enemy in such a season, when the poor man is in the fear or
feeling of Torture, are carried on one of these Two ways:

1. Sometimes so gross is the Design, so apparent is the Project to debase, and
debauch, as every eye may see it, and he that runs may read it: and
consequently so, as the common reason of men, not only may detect it, but offer
relief against it; when Violence springs up into a Rod of wickedness, it is
usually thus, and then the escape and conquest is more easily obtained: the
very principles of humanity guiding a man in his choice and refusal. In vain
(says Solomon, Prove. 1.17.) is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird. When
the Project lies so open, as Reason and Morality dictate and assist against it,
its not then so properly attributed to Faith to do it. -- But,

2. Satan's Project is many times carried on very covertly, and lies hid and
concealed under many very specious shows and pretenses; the danger of standing
out, the reasonableness of yielding and complying, are ready to be disputed
with much demonstration. Now when really the case is thus, and the snares of
Satan are thus couched and latent, the soul is only preserved by the mere grace
of God, and Faith comes to be magnified in the glory of its operation: for
short of that, and while Faith is not upon its quick exercise, the soul is
liable, ere ever it is aware, to be taken and carried away, his reason liable
to captivity; and the abundance of these Cavils may divide the man within
himself, against himself. To be in a capacity of resolving all these Doubts and
answering, or at least stilling and silencing all these Objections, on the side
of Truth. This speaks the victory of Faith, and proclaims the man a Believer
indeed. Of this there is a very pregnant Instance in this Chapter, in the case
of Moses, verse. 24, 25, 26. The deliberations of his mind are expressed in acts
of Choosing, Refusing, Esteeming; all which were employed in weighing a case
very like this, of which the Text treats. He refused Deliverance and
Preferment, with all the Accommodations imaginable; and embraced Afflictions,
Reproaches, Sufferings; not as out of direct necessity, but as of choice, upon
terms that must necessarily expose him to the common Censure of Observers.

We may weigh and accommodate to our use some Circumstances in that affair. He
refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter. Its supposed, and most
probable, Pharaohs Daughter was Heiress to the Crown of Egypt, and having no
Children, would have adopted Moses as her Son, to entitle him to the Succession
of the Crown of Egypt, or at least to advance him to an high capacity of Honor
and Dominion in that Court. Now all this he refuses; not only dis-esteems, but
denies to touch with it; and this not on a fit, or in a heat, as a youthful
frollick; for the Spirit notes it to be when he was come to years; And Acts
7.22, 23. He was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, mighty in words
and in deeds: and when he was full 40 years, it came into his heart, etc. All
which shows him to have been, both as to his Age, and the ripeness of his
Understanding, every way capable of putting forth acts of mature and deliberate
Consideration, especially in a matter of such moment to him. Well, thus
capacitated, he Refuses that, and it, not merely to exchange for a retired
contemplative way of living, wherein he might more desireably accommodate his
noble genius, by being sequested from the noise and sensualities of the Court;
But, He chooses to suffer Afflictions with the people of God: their state at
this time was very terrible in the Iron furnace, where he could expect at best
nothing but lash and labor: both which must needs be the more irksome, for
that he had not been bred, or accustomed to them: but he stands fixed in his
choice, as upon an estimate of things on all hands, in which he concludes he
had the better bargain, Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater treasure than
the riches of Egypt, etc.

It might be easy to represent to our selves, what abundant Reason, according
to flesh and blood, would stand up against this choice of his. Would not Sense
have said, Never make this Choice, you will never be able to endure the
Brick-kilne, the cruel Taskmasters, the hard fare of Onions and Garlic, who
have been bred so delicately, fed so deliciously, clad so honorably? Would not
Policy have said, Never make this Choice, it will savor of a design, That you
intend to grow popular among an heady mutinous Nation; you purpose to take your
advantage to rebel against the King, to shake off the yoke of Servitude; you
are known at Court, and will be eyed, and incur the wroth of the King above any
man in Egypt, Keep your station, meddle not with Changes, now the eyes and
expectation of all begin to be fixed on you? Would not Parents, and Friends,
have said, Make not this Choice, you will utterly overthrow our fortunes, to
which you may now be probably in a capacity to raise us; in this your act you
will involve us under the same cloud, and common hardship and suffering with
your self; and to be made miserable by the hand that we expect advancement by,
is a double misery? Would not Israel, the best and wisest of them say, Oh!
whatever you do, make not that Choice; Now you are in a fair probability to do
us good in a public capacity: You may be Pharaoh! and then may let Israel go:
at least, you may be another Joseph, a Second in the Kingdom; and in that
capacity may obtain, if not a rescinding, yet a relaxing of the rigor of the
Laws that bind our burdens so insufferably upon us, that cut off our Males, and
use us with so many inhumanities as are unsufferable, unexpressible; Whereas if
you come among us, you may make our yoke the heavier, and burdens the greater,
may beget jealousies concerning us, and so render us the more miserable? --
These, and others, may be thought to have had weight in them. But herein now
breaks forth the excellency of believing; By Faith he turns the deaf ear to all
these clamours, is satisfied in his Choice on the other hand; and that not in
an headstrong, resolute frollick, but as having the best and most convincing
demonstration on his side; he chose for the better, for greater riches in hand,
for a greater recompense of reward in hope. The other tender which he refused,
he saw had more of an Hook than of an Help in it, was a snare rather than any
advantage; and therefore he utterly rejects it. At this Point is a notable
trial of the Truth, strength, and excellency of a Believers Faith, when he is
helped to ponder a Deliverance, an Accommodation, at the very brink of trial
and torture, and if he finds it too dear (as a man may buy Gold too dear) he
there and then rejects it, and rather chooses the suffering than the sinning
side. This leads us now, to the main Practical Question in this day.

Quest. How shall a Christian know when his Deliverance may be bought too dear,
when he must embrace any Tortures, rather than touch with it, though it be
tendered?

Unto this I shall endeavor to Answer in Five or Six Particulars.

1. When the greatest Deliverance is tendered on the one hand, and the greatest
Tortures threatened on the other. If I cannot come at the good of that
Deliverance, but I must commit some sin in coming at it, I may not in that case
touch with, but must refuse that Deliverance. The Reason of this is manifest,
There is more of evil in the least sin, than there can possibly be of good in
the greatest deliverance. You have the case cleared in the Instance last given
of Moses, there was but one little word that turned the scale of his
determination so powerfully, and that was, they were the pleasures of Sin for a
season. He could not accept of, and improve the accommodation of the Court any
longer without sin; he saw how sin had intermixed and incorporated its self
into them, and so they could be no longer urged but as temptations to, and
costly coverings of sin; and on this single bottom he rejects them, and reckons
the worst reproaches and sufferings, where Christ may be had, and incomparably
far better. One Sinner (and so one sin) destroys much good; as a few dead
Flies will much sweet Ointment, Eccles. 9.18. and 10.1. It will not serve the
turn to say as Lot did, Is it not a little one, and my soul shall live? The
extenuating, lessening, and excusing sin in such cases, is very frequent, but
exceeding dangerous; and then is Job's charge easily incurred, Chap. 36.21.
Take heed, regard not Iniquity, for this have thou chosen rather than
Affliction. When great Affliction and (that which we call) a little Sin, come
in competition in our choice, its usual to choose Sin rather than Affliction.

Object. But it is usually objected, Why is it not safe, of two evils to choose
the least?

Sol. I Answer, This is very dangerous to be reduced to practice, and utterly
contrary to the mind of God, when the evil in the Question is about any Sin;
for a man is not to commit the least sin, to avoid the greatest suffering; no
nor to commit one sin to avoid another. For whereas many shelter themselves
under this refuge, which is not a rest, because it is defiled, they would do
well to consider, That there is no dispensation of God that necessitates any
son of men alive to commit any sin whatsoever. God does not need any sin of
ours to promote any end of his, nor any proper end of ours.

Object. But if the Question arises, Did not many good men sin, when they were
driven to such extremities, to avoid sufferings breaking in upon them? Did not
Abraham, Jacob, David, and others, do so?

Sol. I Answer, All this is most true: but mark it, when ever you find any of
these recorded in the Word of God, they are there set as so many Sea-marks: As
you see a Bouy upon the top of a Rock, to signify that Death and danger are
there, if you come near that place; they are not as Landmarks which you are
directed to approach unto, but as Dungeon-lights, from which you must keep the
farthest distance, in dark and stormy nights. Moreover you may observe, That
usually wherever you find a Believer has avoided a danger, or grasped at a
privilege in a way of sin, usually God has made that a bitter privilege to
them by that time he has done with them. As in the case of David, seeking his
Satisfaction and Comforts in Bathsheba, which he attempts to come at in a way
of Adultery and Blood; for beside the breaking his communion with God, and the
breaking his bones, the Sword never departs from his house. Jacob he lies and
uses indirect courses to come at the Birthright of Esau, and the Blessing of
Isaac: but observe him, all his days he walks in a very troublesome
pilgrimage, the rest of the few and evil days he had to live; his gray hairs
were brought with sorrow to the Grave.

Object. But it is sometimes objected, The person had in his eye and intention,
the bringing about some good by it, some privilege to serve God the quieter,
and some liberty of enjoying what he has, the better to do good to them that
are necessitated, and may not that excuse and plead for a little latitude,
which some acts of his have?

Sol. I Answer, as Job did his Friends, chap. 13.6, 7. Hear my reasoning, and
hearken to the pleadings of my lips. Will thou speak wickedly for God? and talk
deceitfully for him? This very way of reasoning you have stated and refuted by
the Apostle, Romans 3.7, 8. If the Truth of God has abounded by my lie to his
Glory, why yet am I judged as a sinner? As though he had said, If the Glory of
God was brought about, or the Truth of God brought forth to evidence the more
by a lie, or fault of mine, Does not that acquit me from being a sinner, and
blameworthy in so doing? His answer, is with the greatest vehemence rejecting
it, as a slanderous report, and that which was falsely fastened either upon his
Doctrine or Practice, that a man may do evil that good may come thereby; God
does not require or accept any sin of ours, to perform any service, or promote
any ends of his.

2dly. A second case in which the question is resolved, when I may not accept
Deliverance, is this, When I cannot come at the good of Deliverance, but I must
give a stab, stretch, or wound to a good Conscience. I ought not upon such
terms to touch with Deliverance; for thus to do, were but to exchange and avoid
the torture of my body, and admit in the room of it a torture upon my soul and
spirit. They who will adventure to rush upon, and run down the counsel,
comfort, and judgment that Conscience sets up, and would keep up in them, they
little think what an hazard they run. Paul could steadfastly behold the Council,
and tell the High Priest (that was President of it) that God would smite him as
a whited-wall, when he had this defense to make, I have lived in all good
Conscience to this day, Acts 23.1, 2, 3. This makes Councils that persecute,
slight and despicable; torments, sweet and easy. Though without there be
fightings, yet inwardly there will be peace; whereas if our hearts condemn us,
God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. To have God and our own
Consciences against us at once, will not be countervailed by the friendship of
this world, that any obtain by stretching a good Conscience, making shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience. I have been sometimes awakned with the dread of
that word, Jer. 4.11, 12. when a threatening is exhibited from the Wilderness,
and then to have God give sentence also against a People, that is dreadful; to
have God against us, our selves against us, and many to one, but we draw men
against us too in such cases, this is the worst of torments; whereas all is
rendered easy when we can say, Psalm. 17.2. Let my sentence come forth from thy
presence. If God be for us, Conscience for us, who then can be against us? who
can harm us? We may read in Cain, Judas, Spira, and many others, how fearful
it has been to undergo a wound in them: A man may sustain his infirmities of
other kinds, but a wounded Conscience who can bear?

Object. Its true, I cannot quiet the clamours of Conscience as I would do, but
I find I am very ignorant, and men tell me, This I may do, and that I may do
very safely, and I am bound to think of them better than my self, and not to
prefer before their judgment the dictates of my weak Conscience.

Answ. It is a very dangerous thing to do any thing against the dictates of an
erring Conscience, provided thou know not at present that it is in this
thing erring. It is a question among many, Whether the dictates of an erring
Conscience do bind? but sure I am, that violence offered to an erring
Conscience, has a direct tendency to terrify him that does any thing with a
doubting Conscience; He that doubts is damned if he eat: for whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14.23. Blessed is the man that condemns not himself
in the things that he allows. Though thy Conscience may be erroneous, yet
while thou know it not to be so, it is the best friend thou have under
Heaven. Take heed therefore by the force of others, or the fear and treachery
that is in thy self, thou admit any violence done to it, lest once stretching
it beyond its staple, it never do the offices of a good Conscience more to
thee, to counsel, excuse, witness toward thy peace more.

Object. But I have seen other men accept of, comply with, and yield to, that
which my Conscience makes such a noise about, and they good men too, and yet
they profess they have peace in it; and why may not I adventure?

Answ. For my part, I durst not judge another man's Servant; to his own Master
he stands or falls: Yet I have sometimes observed men who have adventured in
this kind, and though they have carried it with an high forehead, and put a
bold countenance on it; yet there are times when one may discern them to have
pale faces, which may give intimation, all is not well within: such are under
great temptation to keep up their credit till the Lord arrest them with a new
Conviction, as he did David, with a Thou art the man! and then they may, as he,
be forced to cry out (how long soever he had carried it stoutly) All my bones
are out of joint; Restore to me the joys of thy Salvation, and take not away
thy Holy Spirit from me. But suppose their Consciences do not smite them, they
may have a kind of peace that is but from security, not the peace of God, not
the peace of the answer of a good Conscience by the blood of sprinkling. The
Apostle tells us of a Conscience seared with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. Some sorts
of violence done to Conscience are left by the Lord to the Devils curing, who
heals the smart of diverse wounds by searing them; but the cure is never the
more desirable for all that. Its with Conscience as it is with Cloth, which
sometimes the Fuller strains so much upon the Tenters, till he break the very
staple of it, and then its neither fire nor water will shrink it (whereas being
strained but in an ordinary way, it would) but though it shrink not, you may be
sure it will have no strength for service. Take heed you offer not such force
to Conscience, lest you find it short of serving you as it should in time of
need.

3. If I cannot come at the good of Deliverance, but I must betray or balk some
Truth of God, entrusted with me as a part of my Testimony, I may not upon any
terms touch with that Deliverance. Every Truth of Christ, committed to the care
and custody of a Christian is of more worth and value than all his Comforts and
Accommodations under the Sun. And he that yields or betrays any Truth thus
deposited, as a pledge to his trust and care, for the procuring any liberty to
himself, has too hard a bargain of it. You have an express direction, Prove.
23.23. Buy the Truth and sell it not. We are to buy it whatever it cost, but
not to barter it whatever it will yield. That was a choice Spirit described, 2
Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. The Glory of
God may be so deeply engaged and imbarqued in one Truth, as all my external
comforts may not be named in one day with it. It has been an expression very
taking with me, Isa. 43.9, 10. God has his times wherein most eminently he is
put upon it to vindicate his Truth; the question is brought upon the stage and
trial of the world, who must either yield and say, It is truth; or else must
endure the test of God's Evidences, who are his Saints: Ye are my Witnesses
says the Lord, or his Son, called his Servant whom he has chosen; who in the
grand contest with all the powers of darkness has, by witnessing his good
confession, merited that name, Rev. 3.14. The Amen, the Faithful and true
Witness; a resemblance and proportion to him, is every Christian required to
keep, in his being called forth to a witness-bearing to him. As God values
every Truth of his at an high rate, especially in the day that it is to be
spoken for, so should we. There are diverse Truths that in most Ages are not
controverted; these are not so properly the Truths under present consideration,
but such as the design of the Adversary is manifest to root out from being
professed under heaven, such are the Word of Patience, which must be kept, Rev.
3.10. the present Truth, which must be had in remembrance and establishment, 2
Pet. 1.12.

Object. Why, is not every truth, a truth now, a present truth?

Answ. Though that which is truth at any time, abides truth at all times; yet,
as has been said, those truths in a most eminent manner are called present
truths, which concern at present the vindication of the Glory of God, and draw
on the present trials of the day upon the Assertors of it. I note this the
rather, because in this shifting-day many that would be thought to be the
Lord's Witnesses, please themselves with this, Blessed be God we hold to
Fundamentals! What Fundamental Truths have we yielded, or denied? and think
themselves no way concerned to keep up a testimony for those truths which they
call Circumstantial, such as are not matters of Salvation, whether it be held
or practiced this way, or the other way. Alas! by such distinctions and
evasions as these, men have let go almost their whole testimony about the Royal
right of Christ, to set up Institutions of Worship that are to be maintained in
his Authority only. And I fear that such who can so easily relinquish their
testimony to present Truths under this pretention, They are not Fundamental
Truths, it will be found that when those Truths which they now call
Fundamental, shall be brought (as they may speedily be brought) to their trial,
and so become present Truths, there will other distinctions be found out, to
avoid the offense of the Cross concerning them also. For an unconceiveable
weakness in sticking close to every Truth is unavoidably contracted, by
yielding to the betraying of any Truth. Hence Paul would not give place by
subjection, no not for an hour (when there was great contention) that the Truth
of the Gospel might be continued, Gal. 2.5. so verse. 14. you see how eagerly he
contended with Peter, which might have endangered the Peace of the Churches,
merely, because he walked not uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel.
That Point which that Epistle handles being the present Truth, which was most
assaulted and endangered to be lost in that day, occasions him to be so jealous
of it, that he would and did run all manner of hazards, rather than betray it.
Our case is the same now: many glorious Truths has the Lord brought forth,
asserted, cleared, and committed to his Saints and Churches to keep
unrebukeable till the appearing of Christ, especially those of his Dominion
over his Saints, and others, these now being put upon a public test upon the
stage of the World, and we as Witnesses Subpoena to give in Evidence to the
truth and goodness of them, We durst not accept of any overtures of
Deliverance, or otherwise, whereby our Testimony to them should be balked.

4. When I cannot come at the good of Deliverance, but I must bind up my hands
from being capable of doing God that service in my generation, which he
requires of me freely for the time to come; when these are the terms,
Deliverance is too dear form, and may not be accepted. -- We are called unto
Liberty, and withal required to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, and not to be entangled with any yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1. Not
to be the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. For, if we seek to please them, we
cannot be the servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10. Now that thing which would bind up
my hands from being serviceable to Jesus Christ when he calls for my service,
my yielding thereunto, whatever it be, is a betraying of my Christian Liberty,
which Christ has purchased for me with his blood. We are debtors unto Grace,
and may not violate that obligation, or yield to any thing that incapacitates
us to discharge it, by any means, or on any terms. You read frequently at what
an high rate in several contests Paul stands upon his Roman Privileges, he
would not when in Prison came out to the detriment or disparagement of those
his humane liberties, Acts 16.37. And shall Paul think earthly privileges to
be such as he would endure longer imprisonment, rather than basely betray them;
and shall we who are called to Gospel-liberties, bought at so dear a rate
beyond his, ( Acts 22.28. 1 Pet. 1.18.) sell them for a song, God forbid. You
know when Moses was upon the Treaty with Pharaoh, about the enlargement of
Israel out of Egypt, diverse overtures Pharaoh makes, according as the hand of
the Lord pressed on him. They should sacrifice in the Land, Exodus 8.26. or,
they should go out, so none but the Men might go, leaving the Women and
Children, chap. 10.9, 10, 11. or, They should all go, but they should leave the
Flocks and Herds, chap. 10.24. But what is the resolution of Moses? There shall
not an hoof be left behind, for thereof must we take to serve the Lord our God:
and we know not with what we must serve the Lord until we come thither, v. 26.
Shall Moses and Israel stand on their Points to endure Bondage rather than
leave an Hoof behind? And shall we make such terms to have Locks and Fetters
upon our Hands and Feet from serving Christ for time to come, seeing we little
know what he may require of us to serve him withal? God forbid. Can true
Israelites endure to have Deliverance upon such terms, as the thrusting out
their right eyes, and laying it for a reproach on all Israel? Would not all the
Lords people lift up their voices and weep if it should be so? 1 Samuel 11.2, 4.

Object. What would you have me do? I am now (perhaps) a Prisoner. They will
give me liberty so I will engage to Preach no more, to Meet no more, etc. If
they keep me a Prisoner, I cannot Meet, or Preach, etc. And if I promise I will
not, I shall be but in the same capacity I am in now, and am likely to be still
in?

Answ. This way of reasoning is very ensnaring; for, (first) if thou art in
bonds, thy great interest lies in this, in giving diligence that the Word of
God is not bound, 2 Timothy 2.9. but rather as Paul says, Phil. 1.12. That the
things that fall out of this kind, fall out rather to the furtherance of the
Gospel. Such therefore as seek and get freedom on terms that leave the Word
obstructed in that free passage wherein it should run and be glorified, 2 These.
3.1. they do but get the fetters off from their own feet, and set them upon the
Word of God, which is but Deliverance with a mischief. (2) Thy liberty obtained
in such a way, and on such reasonings, is but a liberty and freedom to serve
thy self, feed and satisfy thy self and lusts as a man, not to serve Christ,
or do any thing for thy God as a Christian man. (3) If thou art violently
restrained by them, the sin of any omission of Duty and Service, lies at their
door; and to their peril be it when the King shall demand the reason of thy
want of service: but when thou acceptest of those terms, thou becamest
accessory with them, art in conjunction with them, its thy sin as much, if not
more than theirs; they think they do God good service. (4) If thou art only
bound by the hands of Violence, the Lord looks on thee, and reckons thee as his
free man, free in Spirit, thou reservest the dominion of that for God. Thou
live not, dyest not as a Fool dies, but as a man falls before wicked men,
2 Samuel 3.33, 34.

Object. Now there is little opportunity to do the Lord any such service, but
if ever an opportunity present, I hope to be as ready as another: may not such
obligations be enervated, repented of, and a soul disobliged from them?

Answ. It has been, and is still the crying sin of this day, and of the years
past, That persons have thought it a very small matter, to make and break these
kind of Engagements, according as interest presents them with an opportunity;
the iniquity and provocation whereof I shall only attempt to open in one
Scripture, Ezekiel. 17.12, 13, to verse. 20. where God expostulates the case with
the rebellious House of Judah. They and the King of Babylon make a Covenant,
and there is for ratification of it the Oath of God added: The King of Babylons
design was to make the Kingdom base, that it might not lift up its self; and in
this exigency they make a Covenant. The question is put, Whether their taking
an opportunity to shake off this yoke and break this Covenant, might not be
succeeded with prosperity? This consequence the Lord disclaims with the highest
indignation, and that, because of the Oath of God, the quarrel and controversy
of that Oath and Covenant should be required severely at the hands of such a
treacherous people. -- If thy hand have been lifted up in Truth, Righteousness,
and Judgment already, then take care how thou retract that, and to whom thou
lift it up the second time, lest it prove a double provocation.

5. If I cannot come at the good of Deliverance, but I must entrench upon the
Name, Honor, and Glory of God, which he has lifted up in the World, I may not
touch with that Deliverance. There are some ways and works of God wherein he
has more immediately and eminently in some generations, concerned his Name
than in others, or than ever it was before. God went to make him a Name of
Greatness and Terribleness, by Redeeming Israel out of Egypt, and driving the
Nations out of Canaan, 1 Chronicles. 17.21. Isa. 63.12, 14. S^ by bringing Judah out
of Babylon; and will do, by bringing his Sion from under Antichrist. Toward the
later whereof, he has made very glorious advances in our days, and we have
sung his praise in them, so as it may be said of his Holy People at this day,
as of Israel of old, Deuteronomy. 4.32, 33, 34. And all this he has done to get
himself a glorious Name: Our zeal for which, and love to which, is now brought
to trial, whether we will yea or nay, deny his Name? A faithful adhering to
which, though by a people that have but little strength, is very acceptable to
the Lord, Rev. 3.8, 9, 10. And he will do great things for such in times and
hours of temptation. If therefore God be at this day so tender of his Name, as
he is, that he will not give his glory to another, we ought to be upon his side
in this design; and especially when this Name of his comes to be spoken about,
all our Deliverances ought to be brought to this test, if they may be had with
a saving to this Name they are welcome, otherwise they may not be accepted.

Object. But whatsoever we can say was done in our days of that kind, the Lord
now appears plucking it down again, leads that strength into captivity, and
gives that glory into the enemies hand, bestows the marks of favor upon the
other party, who thrive and prosper; and being advanced to the capacity we see
them, we do but follow Providence in joining there?

Answ. 1. The best of thy plea is, God is angry with his People, and has a
great Controversy with them, which he pleads with deep and bitter strokes, and
thou will be on his side, angry with them too, and plead against them. In so
doing thou may be right and safe; but I must tell thee thou have very much
reason to take heed both of thy standing, and frame of spirit, lest his
indignation take place on thee for being out of thy place; the Lord is very
jealous against such as offer their service to be the executioners of his
rebukes upon his heritage, Zech. 1.15. Psalm. 69.26. Isa. 47.6. that was a sore
word, Obadiah verse. 11. For thy violence against thy Brother, shame shall cover
thee, in the day that thou stoodest on the Other side -- thou should not
have looked on the day of thy Brother, etc. The Lord takes special notice on
what side men stand, when he is dealing with his own Children for their folly.
(2) Moreover the Lord's rebuke is not against his People for their Principle
and testimony, but for their unsutableness to that Testimony and Principle of
theirs which they professed. And now he is come in the way of this trial to see
whether we will cleave to him with our whole heart, and with our whole soul;
what remnant they be who will cleave to him in principles of Righteousness, of
Holiness, of Purity, of Godliness, of Gospel Worship, of an Heavenly
Conversation, and underneath the feet of these subject their interest of Ease,
Rest, Liberty, Estates, Limbs, Lives; his Voice is therefore now, in this
respect, who is upon the Lord's side? Psalm. 94.16. Here its an exceeding mercy
indeed to have obtained mercy to be faithful; not to deny his Name whatever it
costs.

6. Deliverance is then to be dreaded, not accepted, when I cannot come at the
good of Deliverance, without giving just occasion of stumbling to many to fall,
and of grief and affliction to the bonds of many that stand. Precious in the
sight of the Lord are the lives and souls of the poorest Saints, and ought to
be tender to us, that we do nothing whereby they be stumbled, offended, or made
weak, much less destroyed for whom Christ died. Asaphs first conviction of his
extravagancy, Psalm. 73.15. was, if he should speak thus, he should offend
against the generation of Gods Children. As he was tender, so the Lord is very
jealous of this, Ezekiel. 13.22. how the heart of the Righteous be made sad, whom
God has not made sad, and the hands of the wicked strengthened, that they
should not return from their wicked way, etc. I confess there is a great
latitude of Liberty wherein a Christian may walk in lawful things, among which
the obtaining Deliverance is a branch of privilege; but if it be attempted, as
by many it is, to the offending, wounding, destroying of many of Christ's little
ones; a Millstone hung about the neck, etc. is more tolerable than the
consequence of such seize.

Object. But say some, The different tempers and distempers of people and of
professors is become such, that there is no walking by this rule, in this case;
for there are diverse Saints will come and tell me, if I do such or such a
thing, I shall sin and wound them, encourage others to follow me to their hurt,
Others (no way inferior to the former in Wisdom, Parts, Piety) tell me, If I
do not such a thing, I ruin my family, am worse than an Infidel, run them as
well as my self upon danger, and temptations, so that in my omission and
refusal, I shall grieve and offend them, and what may I do in this case, when I
am likely to offend Saints either way?

Answ. When this is really so, it is a strait case, though I think somewhat
rare in all the straitning circumstances in the Objection: but put the case it
be so; this is a ruled case with me, If I can bring the matter into this plain
evidence, that in my doing it, I shall really endanger the one party to sin;
and in my not doing it, I shall but endanger the other party to suffer: being
necessitated to a choice, I am to take that course whereby I may prevent the
ones sinning, though I cannot prevent but really endanger the others suffering.
For as I may not commit any sin my self to prevent my own suffering, so I may
not run any one upon sin, to prevent another from suffering; for betwixt sin
and suffering there is no comparison. Indeed I may not choose any sin or
suffering in my self, or another, if it may righteously be avoided; but when I
am driven to this Dilemma, though it be an hard yet it is a clear case what I
am to do, and cast the care of the issue upon the Lord. We have a very high
instance of this in the case of Haman and Mordecai, Esth. 3. throughout. You
have Haman advanced by the King to exceeding dignity, and a Royal Commandment,
that all should bow and do him reverence; a small matter, just, and requisite
(one would think) for Mordecai, to have done as well as others, rather than
break the Kings Commandment, incur Hamans burning rage, and revenge, and
endanger the destruction of the whole people of Israel; which yet he adventures
to do, and to stand in, and cannot be by fair means or foul, removed from it.
What would have been said of him now (think you) to have run so many thousands,
both Estates and Lives, upon immediate hazard, rather than to yield a Civil
token of subjection to such a Magistrate? What can be conceived to justify
him? Why, his Justification lies in the due consideration of the two
denominations these two men have, in the first and fourth verses. What was
Mordecai? why he was a Jew; and he told them that enquired about the reasons of
his contempt, That he was a Jew. verse. 4. a Person of no mean Quality,
Pedigree, and Account; see Esth. 2.5. Ezra. 2.2. Neh. 7.7. And what was Haman?
Why ( verse. 1.) he was the Son of Amadatha the Agagite. What was Agag (whence
Haman descended) He was the King of Amalek, the relict of that destruction
about which God had not only expressly determined, Exodus 17.14, 16. Numb. 24.20.
Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18, 19. but given a very strict charge to Saul to make utter
riddance of him from under Heaven, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3. Now as this indispensible
Commandment lay for the destruction of Amalek in general, and such indignation
was provoked for sparing Agag in particular in that Chapter: So had the Lord
expressly determined, Numb. 24.7. His King should be higher than Agag, and his
Kingdom should be advanced. This Controversy was to stand unreconcileable from
generation to generation ( Exodus 17.16.) nay, when Israel was at the lowest,
and the branch of David as a root out of a dry ground, as it was in that day
(they being in Captivity) yet was there preserved a Root against Amalek,
according to Judge. 5.14. This wicked Haman was the Jews enemy, Esth. 3.10. and
7.6. the wretched root of enmity abode in him, that he derived from the stock
of Amalek. Unto him in this character, spirit, and capacity, faithful Mordecai
cannot bow, he remembers the Lords Controversy, Prophecy, Providence formerly
against Amalek, and hence he cannot bow or yield in the least, whatever it
cost; the issue, as well as the interest of this Controversy, was not unknown
to his Wisemen and Wife, before the final decision of it, Chap. 6.13. If
Mordecai be of the Seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou
shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him. Mark, here is
an Interest against which God had a stated Controversy, yet in one of the
Branches of its Royal-line in a Rising way, the not bowing and yielding to
which, is the highway to endanger presently the Lives and Estates of all the
Israel of God: yet, being Mordecai has that foundation to stand upon, and is
as the Lord's Root against Amalek, its safer (he judges) to adventure the
losing all that could be lost, in a way of suffering, both his own and others,
than betray the Lord's Interest; close up thus the Lord's Controversy, step
aside from the Lord's Precepts, and make invalid the Lord's Promises; and by
his public example, encourage and involve others in the like iniquities. The
Consequences of this faithful abiding with God, is well known: The
accommodating it, is left to serious consideration. This Point in hand stands
clearly witnessed to in it: When the sufferings only of Saints lie endangered
if I take one way, and their sinning be endangered if I take the other; I am to
resist to blood, striving against sin, much more to bonds, or any other
tortures or sufferings. I do not deny but the case above, had many
extraordinary circumstances clothing it, but yet many excellent noble lessons
may be safely deduced.

I shall, from the whole of what has been delivered under this head of
Doctrine, draw a few Inferences, and proceed.

1. If in so many cases Saints are not to accept Deliverance, but its the
interest and excellency of their Faith rather to endure tortures: Then I
beseech you to be very tender how you judge others, for that upon trials they
do not accept of Deliverance, on such terms as may seem very plain and easy
unto you. Its the ordinary censure of some, This is but their humor, and
self-willedness, because they would seem to be something, etc. I say, though
you cannot make a judgment upon what bottom such a Christian stands in not
accepting Deliverance, yet do not presently conclude against him; it may be he
has more reason to refuse Deliverance than it is safe for him to express unto
others, in an age when men are made offenders and destroyed for a word; leave
him to the Lord, and charitably suppose he has a Conscience to Godward in what
he does; and though it be misguided in this matter, yet its the best he has,
and he is bound to make much of it; Do not judge another man's Servant, to his
own Master he stands or falls.

2. I would upon the Promises further beseech you, That since there are so many
cases in which its dangerous (however it may seem pleasant) to accept
Deliverance, you would give diligence that when these soul-shaking trials are
ready to beset you, and set upon you, you may not be taken in a way of
surprise: the greatest mischief Satan does to souls in this kind is, when he
frights them into Deliverance, and escape, ere ever their spirits are recovered
to a just capacity to weigh and make a solid judgment what is best to be done
in the case, all things considered. They are ready to be taken with that way of
reasoning that Esau was, Genesis 25.32. Behold, I am at the point to die; and what
profit shall this Birthright do to me? So they: Behold! I am at the point to
be imprisoned, to be banished, to be tortured: and what good then can this
Profession do to me? And so being surprised with the fright, sell their
Birthright for a little meat, or something like it which perishes with the
using of it. In order to the preventing which mischief, I beseech you Consider:

1. First, That this Trial whereupon the Lord brings you, perhaps is the
principal, if not the only opportunity in which you may ever have the advantage
to speak a word on Gods behalf, and bear thus witness for him as long as you
live; What shall we do for our Sister in the day that she is spoken for? was a
seasonable question, Cant. 8.8. There is a day when God is to be spoken for,
Christ to be spoken for, Truth to be spoken for, which being elapsed, the
things of this our peace may be hid from our eyes. Oh! therefore, while you
have this opportunity, omit not to do good, to improve it to the utmost.

2dly. Consider, A little ground lost, at such a Season, and in such a
Testimony, is hardly recovered again; where you find one Christian soundly
recovers it, you may observe abundance decline and grow weak in making any
future resistance to temptations. We are called to follow the Lord as Virgins:
now where the enemy has prevailed once to violate the chastity of such, to
bruise the teats of their virginity, they afterward grow weak to make
opposition to attempts of the like nature, Ezekiel. 16.30. How weak is thy heart,
seeing thou do all these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman? A
backsliding Professor is like a whorish woman, who having lost her chastity,
though she gets an imperious forehead, yet has a weak heart; though she is
bold to assert her chastity, yet she is weak to preserve it.

3dly. Consider, How easy and frequent it is with the Lord to make that
deliverance which you buy so dear, become a real burden to you. How many ways
has he to make your liberty a burden, by fresh vexations such meet withal,
your Trade (for the sake of which you adventure such strange attempts) a real
burden, by Losses, Deadness, Crosses in it? Your very Lives a burden, by
sickness, and diverse other vanities and vexations of spirit? And who would buy
that too dear, that is liable to so many causualties? Take heed that Satan does
not at such surprizals make a market upon you; for you are not ignorant of his
enterprises.

3. But leaving this Point, let us proceed to the Third Head, or manner of our
considering Deliverance, and that is, as Deliverance stands compared with, and
undervalued by the preference of a better Resurrection, when the Torturers
tender of Deliverence, and the Comforters tender of a better Resurrection come
in competition: though both are good in themselves, yet Faith helps to make the
choice of the Resurrection, as being the better incomparably, notwithstanding
any inconveniences on this side it.

Hence the Third Supposition in the general Doctrine is, That a Believing
Prospect into the Resurrection, is of mighty force to carry a Christian through
any Tortures, and to reject any unworthy tenders of Deliverance.

Faith transmitting the eye upon Eternity, and fixing the expectation thereupon
the consequences of the blessed coming of the King, sets all at rights, turns
the Scales toward the advantage of the Glory and Interest of God, as worthy to
be adhered to: in comparison of which Resurrection, Torments are but a
flea-biting, and Tenders of Deliverance as a painted feather. The Emphasis lies
in the term [Better.] Faith satisfies, that the soul in this has chosen the
better part, not only better than Suffering, for so may Deliverance seem to be:
But Better upon all accounts whatsoever, than the best and fairest offer, that
can possibly be made to defloure, and entice from following after God. Earth
may be good, Deliverance unto it, and the Accommodations in it, may be good;
but when they are at the best, Christ is better, Heaven is better: to have
Christ with us in Sufferings, with Peace, Joy and Satisfaction here; and to be
ever with Christ in the Resurrection of the Just, this is transcendently best
of all. The clearing this Point would be attempted (did not time prevent) in
considering particularly, these Three things:

1. Deliverance at the best, with its power to allure us unto the choice of it
[for its not it, when we are under offense at it, but Deliverance with its full
allowance, that is brought undervalue in this choice.]

2. The Resurrection considered at the worst, and as it lay obvious to
Objections (especially to them in that day) yet forcible and effectual to
persuade.

3. The actings and excellency of Faith, in singling out, and fixing the souls
choice herein, notwithstanding the absence of any other Reasonings or Arguments
to turn the Scale, other than these drawn singly from the Concerns of this
Resurrection.

These can be but briefly touched at present, as for the former, thus; --

First, Deliverance here offered (as was showed before) is Deliverance with all
its Accomplishments and Accommodations, that we can imagine to set it off
admirable, and apt to take with a tortured, tempted, poor Creature; (I mean in
an humane dress) all that the Adversary is capable of adding to it, to give it
a gloss, that may effectually answer his ends. Now there are Two things which
do tend much this way, and are apt to be very taking to a sensual or watchless
eye. (1) The Pleasantness. (2) The Presentness of Deliverance, as I may express
it.

(1) Its one main part of the Tempters business to set off, as he can, the
taking Pleasantness of Deliverance; he baited his Hook to Christ with all the
Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them, and that in a moment of time, with
this offer, All this Power will I give thee, and the Glory of them, Luke 4.5,
6. To Asaph, with a condition of men that have no bands in death, their
strength firm, are not in trouble as other men, nor plagued as other men; eyes
standing out with fatness, they have more than heart could wish. -- Therefore
God's People often turn in hither, Psalm. 73. beginning. The first temptation
was by a Tree good for food, pleasant to the eye, and to be desired to make one
wise, Genesis 3.6. He never wants high and fair profers to make up a temptation
effectual to allure: You shall buy and sell, be free of the great City, that
made rich all her Merchants ( Rev. 18.10, to 19.) so you will receive the mark
in the forehead, or right hand; you may admit it secretly, if you will not
openly, chap. 13.16, 17.

(2) The Tempter also insists much, and gains much advantage by representing
and imposing the Presentness of Deliverance; you shall have this presently. The
Resurrection you speak of, is a great way off, a long time to come; and will
you tarry till the Heavens be no more for such a thing, and in mean time
overlook that Deliverance which is in hand? A Bird in Hand is worth two in the
Wood. Better is the sight of the eyes, than the wandering of the desire, Eccles.
6.9. This offer of things that are seen, has great prevalency with a soul who
lives more by Sense than by Faith; this was the snare of Demas, he forsook that
way of the Lord, having loved the present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. To be delivered
from the present world, (Gal. 1.4.) is an extraordinary salvation, it being so
apt to take with us when we begin to grow weary, and can wait on the Lord no
longer; and reckon (as was noted of Esau) I am at the point of Death, and what
good can this Birthright (this hope of a Resurrection, and another World to
come) do to me? Give me Deliverance, will such a one say, or I die. Thus the
Captive Exile hastes, lest he die in the Pit, and his bread should fail. --

Secondly, But consider we the Resurrection; and here if we will improve the
thoughts of it to advantage, we should admit to our thoughts about it those
Objections that may make it seem less taking; there are Three of them that we
may easily conjecture might rationally arise in the spirits of these poor
tempted tortured ones, against their adhering to the Resurrection in the
neglect of present Deliverance.

1. About the very truth of this Notion of the Resurrection, there is the
appearance of a very great impossibility, Flesh and Blood, Sense and Reason
object, How can these things be? If a man die can he live again? Of all living
there is hope; a living Dog is better than a dead Lion; the living know that
they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all, Eccles. 9.4, 5.

These are the Reasonings of a rational mind that admits only of humane
demonstration. When Paul was making his Defense before Agrippa, one who was
expert in all Customs and Questions among the Jews, yet reasons on this
Supposition, That it was thought a thing incredible with them that God should
raise the dead, Acts 26.8. with verse. 3. If the question be put, Can these dry
bones live? Sense, Reason, Learning, has no better than this astonished
answer, Lord, thou know, Ezekiel. 37.3. This now is a great disadvantage unto a
rational choice, as our case is. But here steps in Faith, which acts upon dead
things, a dead Womb in Sarah, dead Loins in Abraham, a Sacrificed Isaac, a
Crucified Christ, the slaughtered Witnesses, a betrayed Cause, are subjects
proper to a living Faith to exercise its self upon, when it has a word of
Promise; Faith thinks it not incredible that God should raise the dead; it
lives upon that great Power that raised Jesus from the dead: So that though the
bones be scattered about the Graves mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaves
Wood, Psalm. 141.7. though the bodies of the Saints are given to be meat to the
Fowls of the Heaven, and their flesh to the Beasts of the Earth, their Blood
shed like water, and there be none to bury them, Psalm. 79.2, 3. though Limb be
torn from Limb, and Quarter set at the greatest distance from Quarter; though
the fire devours the Bowels, and the Dogs lick the Blood, yet Faith is not
hereby lost in a certainty of Conclusion; This is Dust in Covenant with the God
of Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob; and though it be dead to us, yet all live to
him, Luke 20.37, 38.

2. If there should be a yielding to the possibility of it, yet it might be
objected, The demonstration of the Point, and its determination in
Scripture-evidence, was not apparent and manifest in that day; Life and
Immortality being reserved to be brought to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy
1.10. and the way into the Holiest of all, being not yet made manifest, while
as the first Tabernacle was yet standing, Heb. 9.8. Not but that there was a
sufficient Testimony in the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets to this Truth,
to guide Believers in the Hope of Glory; but so far was there a Vail on this,
as well as other Truths, that the Sadduces, a Sect of no mean Repute and
Authority in the Jewish Church, not only questioned, but utterly denied any
such thing to be founded in the Old Testament at all, Mat. 22.23. Acts 23.8.
Nay, under the clear manifectations of this Truth in the Testimony of Christ
and the Apostles in the New Testament, you see a generation who affirmed, That
the Resurrection is past already, and overthrew the Faith of some; against whom
the Apostle disputes at large, 1 Cor. 15. Nay, notwithstanding all this, we see
in all Ages there have been some, who by weakening the Authority of the
Scriptures in geneeal, or by a lawless, wanton allegorizing the Scriptures that
refer to this and other precious Truths in particular, do satisfy their reason
in rejecting the truth of the Lord's Testimony herein. If it may be supposed
that these souls, of whom the Text makes report, should be assaulted with any
part of this temptation, about the obscurity of the revelation of this Doctrine
in the Scriptures, it must needs magnify the excellency of their Faith, that
conquered this disadvantage, and through this cloud also conclude, the
preferency of the Resurrection to their tendered Deliverance.

3. But supposing the possibility and probability of this Doctrine be
acknowledged to have been undoubted to them, yet this might remain a very
considerable remora in their way; it was a thing a great while to come; many
thousand years have passed since the assertion of it, and yet no appearance of
it; and many thousand years may yet be ere it take place; as was their
reasoning, Ezekiel. 12.27. and as the Scoffers of the last days object, 2 Pet.
3.4 Now (as was said) when against this is objected, the Presentness of the
Worlds offer, you shall have Deliverance presently, Liberty presently, Ease
presently; and will you tarry till Doomsday for a Resurrection? The conquest of
this objection must needs bespeak the great power of Faith in the present
choice.

Thirdly, Now consider we the actings of Faith, in its interposition to turn
the scale upon the single proffer of the Resurrection, and for the sake of it
to slight the terror; nay, to embrace the sentence of a Gibbet, a Stake, a
Rack, an Ax, an Halter, a Transportation into Exile; surely we may conclude a
man has need deal upon notable principles that is thus furnished. Now Faith
helps by being the evidence of things that are not seen, as,

1. By annihilating, and rendering very empty and vain all those things that can
be offered in competition with the Resurrection.

2. By realizing, and rendering very substantial and precious, all those things
that are promised in, and accompany the Resurrection. Briefly thus; --

First, A discovery is made by believing, of the invalidity to an Heavenly
mind, and its divine reasonings of all that can possibly be offered by the
Tempter, or his Torturers to debauch: Consider them either (1) in their single
nature as they all are subjected through the fall to vanity. How many have this
Deliverance, and are cursed with it, crossed with it, blasted in it, unable to
keep it, o^ comfort themselves under it? Take Deliverance alone, and what is
it? A Crust for a Dog (says Luther of the Turkish Empire) a feast too empty to
satisfy an immortal soul. Will thou set thy eyes on that which is not? The
whole Book of Ecclesiastes practically opened, is the effect of believing in a
gracious heart, Vanity of Vanities (says the Preacher, and so says the
Believer) Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity. (2) Consider we them in
conjunction with the sin that buys them, by means whereof they receive the
denomination of the pleasures of sin. And then whereas in the former respect
they were at best but vanity, in this they are vexation of spirit, an evil
sickness; wherein many thrust themselves through with many sorrows, drown
themselves in ruin and perdition; and in this sense to be avoided and fled
from as from a Serpent. (3) Consider we them in their competition with Jesus
Christ, and as frequently they stand in opposition to him, and then they are
very pernicious, must be hated, Luke 14.26. else we cannot be his Disciples.

Secondly, Faith makes a discovery of the Resurruction, and gives satisfactory
evidence about it, as that which has weight to bear down all contrary
objections; the way it takes is not to fill the imagination with speculatory
Notions, but to put it out of doubt, and quiet it in receiving the Testimony
God has given by his Son therein: And particularly (1) it gives evidence of a
very full and satisfactory repairation of all those breaches that all these
tortures and sufferings could make upon their concerns therein. They, mentioned
Heb. 13.34. took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, knowing in themselves
they have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. Whatever Losses they
sustained in Stock or otherwise, it interrupted not their joy, they took it
joyfully, the Resurrection will pay for all. The like is true of the marks of
the Lord Jesus they now bear about in their bodies; now indeed they are the
badges of loss and infamy, but he accounts it is better to enter into Life
blind and maimed, than to adventure Hell by saving them. At the Resurrection of
the Just, our vile bodies shall be made like unto the glorious body of our
Lord. In point of the perfection of them, we know not what we shall be; only
this we know, That when he appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him
as he is. (2) As it evidenceth a repair of losses thus sustained; so it
ascertaineth a most abundant recompense, not of Debt but of Grace, when they
that suffer with him shall receive the Crown of Life; for shame they shall
receive double, and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion. When
this shall be remembered, Ye are they who have continued with me in my
Temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto
me, Luke 22.28, 29. When for whatever has been lost or forsaken of his kind,
there shall not only be made good the lundred-fold-promised, Mat. 19.29. in
Peace, ^oy, and Consolation in Tribulation, but in that World to come Life
everlasting.

I shall draw the whole to a Conclusion in these Two or Three Inferences of
Duty.

1. If all this (and a great deal more that might be said) hold true, touching
the worth as well as the truth of the Resurrection; Then would I beseech you,
that you do not sell the Doctrine of it for a Song; do not be so easily baffled
as many be out of the Faith and expectation of it, by a few Allegorical
Notions, and plausible evasions of those Scripture-Testimonies that give
evidence to this Truth, in which is wrapped up so much of your standing
Consolation when ever you are called by any manner of death to put off your
Tabernacle, that your flesh also shall rest in Hope, and your vile body be
changed into the likeness of Christ's glorious body: Whatever natural
corruption, weakness, dishonor it be sown in, yet it shall be raised
spiritual, in incorruption, power, glory, and be ever with the Lord.

2. Be entreated to give your selves more unto a search and study of that
blessed truth that concerns your Resurrection, and the glory that shall follow;
and be not ye easily startled and offended at it by reason of the miscarriages
of some who have been Assertours of it, and been too forward to vent their rash
Conceptions touching diverse things about it. You know the blessedness
pronounced on them who read and hear the things contained in that Book, which
most professedly opens the Mysteries thereof, and yielded in the Vision and and
Revelation of it, such standing Consolation unto John, to whom it was made
known; and is a Doctrine of unspeakable strength and encouragement to the
Lord's suffering, banished, tortured ones, as many in this day have found it.

3. Draw forth the Improvement of your acknowledged conceptions and
expectations of that day, in a way of Consolation, rejoicing in Hope, and
pressing after the Light, Faith, Spirit, and Power of it, making sure of your
right to, and proper qualifications for that day. Blessed and Holy are they
that have a part in this first Resurrection; especially improve it (as I said)
to Consolation in all the losses you have sustained, or are like to. This may
seem one (amongst others) to you, that a poor worm that speaks, is to part (at
present) with you, and it may be may see your face in the flesh no more; does
this seem any way grievous? why, let us carry the case in our thoughts beyond
the Grave, in a path of faithfulness; the Resurrection will bring us together
again, and make amends for all the loss herein sustained: Then we shall be ever
with the Lord in that triumph, of which the stranger cannot intermeddle with
the Joy. Comfort one another with these words, and the God of all Consolation
be with you. Amen.

FINIS.
THE EMBALMING OF A Dead Cause: OR, Christ's kind acceptance of sincere (though
weak) attempts, to preserve a sweet savor upon his Concerns in the World,
under those many deaths he is pleased to draw on them, until their promised
Resurrection.

Heb. 12.22. But ye are come to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the Living
God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels.

Genesis 50.26. So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a Coffin in Egypt.

Isa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the dead.

Job 14.14. If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my change come.

Printed in the Year. 1668.

THE EMBALMING OF A DEAD CAUSE.
Mark. 14.8. She has done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my
Body to the burying.
THese words are part of Christ's own Vindication of, and Apology for a very
acceptable work of an Holy Woman, which nevertheless, through their great
mistake, came under a very severe censure at the hands of the very Disciples of
Christ themselves, Mat. 26.6. who taking knowledge only of so much therein, as
occured to their sense and carnal reason; admitted thereby not a little
disquiet on their own spirits ( they had indignation, verse. 4. they murmured,
verse. 5.) and reflected much trouble upon hers, verse. 6. Even such high-raised
and Heavenly actions of Saints, as have the most choicest esteem and acceptance
with the Lord, may yet meet with very undue representations, and procure very
strange reflections from the hands of others truly dear to Christ. It should
therefore be no greater strange thing to us to be judged by man's judgment, its
well we stand or fall to another Master.

But so well was the integrity of her spirit, and the noble principles, and
springs of this action known to Christ, and approved by him, that himself
undertakes her defense (when perhaps her trouble at their hard measure, might
stop her own mouth) and appears to plead her cause not only so far as to give a
present check to their rash conclusion, and a testimony to the goodness and
acceptableness of her work: but withal takes order by an unalterable
appointment for perpetuating the praise thereof, verse. 9. That where ever the
Gospel of Grace should be Preached throughout the world, this that she had done
should be declared for a Memorial of her. Christians under cloudy censures lose
nothing at last by leaving their censured selves and actings, to be vindicated
by the Lord, to whom their integrity is known, and their cause committed, Micah
7.9, 10.

Where ever the Doctrine of the Grace of Christ should be proclaimed, this
should be produced as a lively instance, pattern, and example, to illustrate
and confirm the power and prevalency thereof, in that it is of power to beget
on so contemptible a weak vessel as this poor Woman was, such exceeding
largeness, nobility, and ingenuity of spirit, as was beyond what the gallantest
principles or endeavors of mere Man could arrive unto; and yet when the
memorial hereof was to be mentioned, when the Gospel should be Preached either
to Nations abroad, or Generations to come, the principal intendment was not
merely to affix a mark of honor upon this individual person, or this single
act (for her very name is hid both here, verse. 3 and in Mat. 26.6, 7.) but to
commend and advance the value of the principles and motives she went upon, to
the encouragement and admonition of us, and others, upon whom the ends of the
World are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. Romans 15.4. I purpose not to mention, or stay upon
the profitable deductions and inferences that would commend themselves from the
coherence of the words, or matter round about them, intending but a present
brief Comment on them.

In the words first read, we have a double Character of her noble spirit set
forth.

First, In the extent of her act, She has done what she could.

Secondly, In the intent of it, She is come aforehand to anoint my body, etc.

She has done what she could] The word does not merely signify that she had
stretched her self to the utmost bounds of her estate and ability that way, to
purchase so costly a confection as this was: for the greatness of the cost
manifested it self to their offense, and it could no way mitigate their
disquiet, to tell them how much she had expended in that respect; but hereby I
understand Christ would have them know that a certain raisedness and greatness
of spirit had acted her to the utmost, beyond the ordinary sphere of Believers,
to devise and practice liberal notable things, so that she was not capable of
being restrained and circumscribed within a narrow compass, she did what she
could, for she could not but do what she did.

She is come aforehand to anoint.] By what impulse, or instinct of spirit, or
with what distinct and evidence her understanding was assisted to receive the
Doctrine of, and to make provision for the Funeral of her Lord, is not expressly
mentioned. This is evident, that the Disciples generally were very dark, nay
averse to notions of this kind, their expectations being very earthly and
carnal, of being advanced with him, to some external Pomp and Glory, which his
Death and Burial (so suddenly) was inconsistent with, by reason of their
weakness and readiness to be offended, wherein the Lord was very tender of
propounding the Doctrine, and distilling the Notions of his Death among them,
whilst he was with them, John. 16.4. And what he delivered of this kind was
hardly regarded or remembered till afterward, John 2.22. and 12.16. Luke 24.8.
But this good Woman had early impressions made upon her heart of this blessed
Truth, She ^as aforehand, not only with the dispensation it self, but also
with the most forward of the Disciples themselves, expecting it, and preparing
for it.

To anoint my Body to the burying.] This was the manner of the Jews to bury,
John 19.40. especially where a reverend and honorable estimation, or singular
affection were to be expressed. What might be extraordinary in her eye will
hereafter be spoken to; only, toward the drawing this act of hers into a way
of improvement for common use, it may not be amiss to consider the body of
Christ, not only literally, as was immediately intended in her act, but in a
figurative acceptance, as other Scriptures may help, and warrant to consider
it, and our concerns about it. Thus, sometimes by the Body of Christ is
intended his Church and People, considered in their capacity of conflicting
with many deaths and dangers, wherein they need, and depend upon him for aid
and influence as their Head, 1 Cor. 12.27. Colos. 1.18, 24. Ephesians. 1.23. The Body
of Christ may also be applied to signify sometimes the whole Economy, or
administrations of the concerns of Christ in the World, for the peculiar good
of his Church, especially with respect to the Institutions of the Gospel,
according as the Legal Institutions, Ordinances, and Administrations of Moses
are called the body of Moses, Jude verse. 9. compared with Zech. 3.2. (where the
contest was about the restitution of the Ordinances of the Lord, according to
the Mosaical Institution after the captivity) I say as the administrations of
the Law, are called the body of Moses, about which Satan had a contest then, so
may (by just analogy) the Institutions of the Gospel, be called the body of
Christ, against which Satan has not only many conflicts with them that are
anointed, and honored to be a Royal Priesthood, but in the infinite Wisdom of
God, and for the bringing about, and perfecting of his designs with greater
glory, he has designed manifest deaths and burials thereunto, that his
Resurrection-Power may be the more fully manifested, Hos. 6.12. Isa. 26.19.
Rev. 11 9, 10 11. Unto this his Body mystically and figuratively considered,
there being such promises of a Resurrection, there is also a spiritual
embalming to be performed to it, complete to the capacities of the Lords dear
Children, all essays and offers hereunto in such ^argeness of heart, and
preventing forwardness as was found in this Handmaid, have a very singular
resentment and acceptance with the Lord, as shall hereafter be showed, the
which I hope may be treated of, and applied to our case, without stretching the
Metaphor beyond the bounds of Scripture allowance, or digressing from the
Spirits intendment concerning us in this place.

The words thus opened, afford us this Observation;

Doct. That the Lord highly prizeth all vigorous attempts of his weakest
Children, to preserve a sweet savor on the concerns of Jesus Christ, when they
are exposed to death and burial.

All Nations where the Gospel comes, must expressly take notice (for a pattern
to all that shall believe) what a value and estemation Christ had of, and an
apology for a censured act of a glorious soul, laid out early and nobly upon
what concerned him, when under a sentence of death and burial, by the wise
appointment of God (though to be executed by the hands of wicked men) so that
if it might not be preserved from rage and scorn, yet should from stench and an
evil savor, as much as lay in her, till its hoped-for Resurrection should set
it above either what she could do for it, or the enemies against it; may we
therefore in our capacities learn that lesson, Go and do likewise, Luke 10.37.
In handling this Point I shall not confine my self to any other method, than
will offer it self in considering this lively instance and pattern to Believers
in the Text; what was the peculiar excellency of her act indiscernable to good
men that were standers by, and wherein the acceptableness lay, and thence by
way of proportion where the cogent reason and influence of it lies, respecting
us at this day.

First, Then we may consider the inward springs and motives of her action that
lay hid from ordinary observation, upon which her spirit was raised, and her
endeavors extended to this degree mentioned in the Text.

Secondly, We may consider the effect of these lively and ennobling principles,
manifesting its self in the dimentions of her activity, or how it was said of
her, She did what she could.

Thirdly, The business or affair it self, about which she was conversant; a
very thankless office in the thoughts of those that were lookers on, though
they were the Disciples of Christ, and men honorable in many other respects
above her.

Fourthly, The estimation and acceptance that it finds with Christ,
notwithstanding the hard measure, and severe censures at the hands of men.

I shall only speak of all these in her, so, as is immediately applicable to
our own case as we go along.

First, As for the first of these; namely, The hidden principles and springs of
motion that were open to the Eyes of Christ with whom she had to do, though
mistaken and miss-judged by those spectators. Not to enlarge in that variety as
the matter will bear, there are these two that offer themselves by Christ's
discovery to our view and learning, as being needful indeed to all generous and
noble actions that are wrought.

1. There lay at the bottom of her act, a lively faith, strong and operative in
this very matter; not only in receiving the discoveries of the death and burial
of her Lord, whereunto the Disciples were so generally unacquainted, but also
the assurance of his speedy Resurrection, not only in the hints that himself
had given of it, but also from the testimony that the Spirit had long since
born, Psa. 16.10. that he should not see corruption in the grave, his early
witness whereunto we have, John. 2.19. speaking of the Temple of his body,
verse. 20. he says, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up
again: Till he was risen from the dead, this was not understood, or at least
not regarded and remembered ( verse. 22.) by the Disciples; only such and so
great, apprehensive and active, was the Faith of this good Woman, that she
receives the Doctrine of the Death and Burial, and quick Resurrection from the
Grave, of her dear Lord, and accordingly put her self to this great Cost, to
signify her compliance with the Promise, that he should be buried, but not
subjected to that corruption and putrefaction that attends that state and
condition of all others. We read of the same Mary, Joh. 11.2. in conjunction
with her Sister Martha, that when they were concerned in the burial of their
Brother Lazarus, though there was no want but rather a superabundance of love
to him, living and dying: Christ loved him, Joh. 11.35, 36. The Disciples loved
him, for they could be content to go and die with him, verse. 16. His Sisters
loved him to some excess, verse. 31. and yet because they had no expectation of
his Resurrection till the general Resurrection, verse. 24. they yielded him up
to corruption, Joh. 17.13, 14. so that when he had been dead four days, they
concluded by this time he stinketh, verse. 39. plainly showing, that having not
any faith, or foresight of his return to life again so speedily, they were at
no cost to embalm or perfume him against the stench of the Grave: but touching
him whom God would raise up from the Grave not to see corruption, (wherein he
transcended David who wrote that Psalm, who having served his generation, by
the Will of God fell asleep, was laid to his Fathers, and saw corruption) Acts
13.34, to the 37. Acts 2.24. to the 32. So true and strong was her Faith
herein, that she deals not with him as with Lazarus, but aforehand anoints
him; and after he was in the Grave, again prepares another Confection of choice
Embalm to perfect what might be lacking in the former, Luke 23.56. Mark 16.1.
by which we may perceive that Faith (and such as was not found in Israel
ordinarily) lay at the bottom, and contributed aid and influence to all these
great acts, and to this particularly wherein she did what she could for Christ.
In just proportion hereunto, and on the same reason, is there need of Faith
unfeigned, even Faith of the operation of God, to engage souls to show the like
respect to the dying Cause, Interest, and Concernments of Jesus Christ. Other
men (and they also good men in the main) generally give it over, when such
distress and dying pangs come on it, till Christ come in the clouds of Glory,
especially where the grounds of their carnal and creaturely expectations of its
revival do perish and fail; none have such engagements on them to lay out
themselves in preparing proper imbalm for it, (of which mention is made
hereafter) but they who have upon Gospel, and unmixed principles, an insight
into, and a foresight of the design of God to give it an effectual reviving
and Resurrection. The Faith then of this Resurrection is the needful principle
to enlarge souls in such a case to do what they can for Christ's sake.

2dly. There was also in the bottom of this famous censured act of hers,
fervent love in its lively operation; which is a large and defusive principle
actuating souls upon very noble and unparalled exploits: its power and
tendency to do so, commends its self in that ample character and description
the Apostle gives of it, 1 Cor. 13. throughout. We have a very particular
account of this principle brought forth to evidence by our Lord himself in an
act of like cost and signification in the beginning of her way of following
Jesus Christ, Luke 7.47. she there v. 37. brings an Alabaster box of Ointment,
and with it anoints his feet (having as the chap. shows) washed them with her
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. This perfume, though it filled
the house with its odor, yet was little understood, in its spring and
principle, by them that sat by; but Jesus discovers it, verse. 47. Much was
forgiven her, therefore she loved much; there was much love in her soul on
work, and hence she lays out her self much upon her Lord; the love of Christ
constrains her, and this, though it was to work so early, yet was not soon
expended, but rather increased more and more; neither was it clouded, or abated
by the expectation of an approaching death and funeral, but herein also puts
out its self, does what it could toward his burial. Love makes her follow
Christ not only in life but in death also, at his death to see the utmost of
him, and do the utmost for him; compare Luke 23.27, 28, 55, 56. chap. 24.1. and
Joh. 19.25. chap. 20.1. and Mark 15.40, 41, 47. you may perceive how Love led
them from place to place, where Hazard might seem to way-lay them, and how
unsatisfied they were with what others did tending this way: It was not the
fine linen Joseph of Arimathea bought; it was not the newness of the Sepulcher
hewed out of a Rock, in which never man lay, but fitted (it seems) for himself,
Mat. 27.59, 60. nay, it was not the costly bed of Spices that Nicodemas laid
him in, John 19.29, 40. could satisfy them, but there must be more Spices
bought to this end, Mat. 16.1. Love is strong as Death, all the substance of a
man's house will be contemned in the pursuit of it, Cant. 8.6, 7. In like manner
will it be where a soul or people have, from the love of Christ shed abroad in
their hearts, a suitable reflection on the things of Christ, they being so
apprehensive of, and enamoured with the unalterable beauty of them, as these
deaths and burials they meet withal do not alter the complexion of them, or
abate of that dear love and streaming affection to them; where it dies they
will die, and there will they be buried, nothing but death, nay death it self
will not be able to separate 'twixt it and them, Ruth 1.16, 17. their own lives
will not be dear to them for its sake, Phil. 2.30. Acts 15.26. chap. 20.24.
Rev. 12.11.

Secondly, But let us proceed to consider the Effect of these noble and
innobling Principles of Faith and Love in this affait in the Text; and also in
the like on the Children of God at this day, where the work of Faith and Love
with Power are produced; this commends it self in the extent of such acts as
are performed, she did what she could; the commendable latitude of her spirit
and endeavor, is a qualification well worthy a little enquiry, When may a soul
be said to have done what he could? This and the like expressions, when they
are applied to set forth the Lords acceptance of a souls enlarged endeavors
after, or for himself, do not signify such a perfection of intention, or act
as denotes perfection, which is not capable of increase or addition. The
choicest Saints in their highest services and seize this way, have found
cause to cry out when they have done all that they could (at the best rate) yet
they are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.20. here is no place for Pride;
boasting is excluded by the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27.

The expression it self, however applied here to the commendation of this good
Woman, yet implies some degrees of imperfection, and supposes the act in some
respects to be short of absolute compleatness; As for Instance,

1. First, Though she did, and a Christian in his highest endeavors may have
done what he could, yet may it be very short of having done what he should;
there lies a very vast disproportion most times betwixt the perfection of the
Law, and the utmost seize of our act, such as may hide pride from us. The
Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. The Law is holy, and the Commandment
holy, just, and good, Rom, 7, 12. The Law is spiritual, verse. 14. Indeed the
Holy God, who is perfection it self, can require nothing less than perfection
for suitable converse with himself, Mat. 5.48. Now between this perfect rule,
and our imperfect act, what proportion can there be? I am carnal, sold under
sin, our unspeakable mercy lies in the new and living way of Gods own
appointing, to present our selves and services without spot, and without
blemish to himself; not through the works of Righteousness that we have
wrought, but according to his own mercy and grace, whereby he makes us accepted
in the Beloved.

2. Secondly, Though she did, and a Christian may be said to do what he could;
yet may there be, and many times there is a great shortness of doing what he
would; as there is a disproportion betwixt the Act and Law of which a poor
Saint often complains; So is there betwixt his heart and hand, or (as Christ
tenderly excuses it in his Disciples) betwixt a Spirit that is willing, and
the Flesh that is weak, Mat. 26.41. This is that the Apostle in the person of a
poor Child of God complains, Gal. 5.17. We cannot do the things we would. And
Romans 7.15. to the 21. he finds a Law, that when he would do good, evil is
present. Here now is a Christians case, and the comfort concerning his act,
when in all his apprehended shortness he finds a true gracious principle that
delights in the Law of God, and presses after a perfect union with, and a
similitude to it, groaning under, and conflicting to his utmost, with the
contradictions of his infirm self: where this is indeed and in truth obvious to
the searching eye of Christ, he puts that blessed construction on it, as to his
Disciples, the Spirit indeed is willing, etc. and the Spirit testifies, 2 Cor.
8.12. That if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a
man has, and not according to what he has not. We serve not an hard Master
that requires impossibilities, or expects beyond what he has enabled for. He
was judged a wicked and slothful Servant who had formed up that dreadful
apprehension of a severe and cruel Master, that reaped where he did not sow,
and gathered where he did not straw, Mat. 25.24, 26. We have a very choice
character of the disposition of the Lord toward the offspring of a willing
mind, Mark 12.42. to the end; a Widow cast into the treasury two mites, that
make a farthing; a very small and inconsiderable thing for the bulk of it, but
being the product of a noble mind, and being extended to all that ever she had,
she had done all what she could, and this has more acceptable entertainment
and high commendation, than the many rich, who cast in much of their abundance;
they might have (comparatively to her) narrow spirits, though they had larger
Pursses. Hence was the commendation of the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.2,
3. The deep poverty was matched with abounding riches of liberality, and then
to their power, and beyond their power, they were willing of their own selevs,
and that was on this principle, verse. 5. First they gave their own selves to
the Lord, and to us by the will of God. Souls yielded up to the Lord are the
only generous spirits. The greatness of David's joy, 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 17, 18. was
not so much for the greatness of the gift, but the willingness and uprightness
of the heart (his own and others) that drew them out to do what they could for
the House of God. But a little more particularly to attempt the resolution of
this enquiry, When a soul may be said to do what he can for Christ?

1. First, We only then do what we can, when our spirits are bending and
pressing toward an abundance and increase of act, according as we find the
concernments of Christ about which we are conversant, requires or needs it,
when as we see the distress of it increase, there grows upon us daily the care
of these concerns, as we see the days are evil, wicked men worse and worse,
and good men faint and weary, we then lay about us: What excellent thing do we,
can we do, what do we more than others? Its the guise of many Professors, when
they see Christ's things go to the Wall (as we say) then to study Prudence and
Wisdom, things good in themselves and in their place, but what do they signify
here but a mere politic contrivance how to preserve themselves by an abatement
of their zeal, a temperament and qualification of the height and strickness of
their Profession, the disposition of such tends this way, they will do as
little as they can for Christ; They hope they may be saved if they meet not so
often, nor so public, nor so many as formerly, until at length their prudence
will be to leave Christ alone, and repair to, and care for their own things.
Nay it will be well if it turn not them aside to their crooked ways, where God
has threatened to lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. Oh! where are
those stirrings of spirit, when we see a City, a Nation wholly given to
Idolatry, ingageing the more public, frequent, and fervent appearing on Gods
behalf, Acts 17.16. That would have entered into the Theater had he been
suffered, Acts 19.13, 31. That when the Decree is signed, of death without
mercy, yet will keep on, not only Moral but Instituted Worship, to the utmost
as aforetime, Dan. 6.10. Rashness is not here pleaded for, but a zeal of God
according to knowledge, and an holy fervency of spirit, serving the Lord,
rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation, continuing instant in Prayer, not
forsaking the assembling our selves, though the manner of some be so; but
exhort one another daily while it is day, provoking to Love and good Works, and
that so much the more as we see the days be evil, and that day approaches.

2. Secondly, We then do what we can when we make it our care and business to
get our spirits and frames in all we do, raised on more noble principles than
formerly; Gospel-principles are not revealed to us, or improved by us to their
height at first; The Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans
1.17. Who walk by it from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. And are changed
from glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. They that rest in, and trust to former
Seize and Experiences, will find them short of furnishing for new
services of Sufferings: We have need, in these thorny and rocky paths, to have
our shoos of iron and brass, and as the day is, so should our strength be,
Deuteronomy. 33.25. We have need not only to prefer that request, Lord help our
unbelief; but also, Lord increase our Faith.

3. Thirdly, We do what we can then, when we improve our utmost interest in
others; Saints and Sinners do engage them to do what they can for Christ, when
the distress is public and extended to others generally; it should not
satisfy our spirits, to narrow up our care and endeavor within the compass of
our own things. It was a sad complaint, All seek their own, Phil. 2.21. Ye
shall be scattered every one to his own, Joh. 16.32. This good Woman in the
Text does not satisfy her self, to make preparation for the embalming her dear
Lord, but she is still found accompanying and engaging others with her, Luke
23.55, 56. and chap. 24.10. Our forwardness and zeal, as was theirs of
Macedonia, which provoked very many, 2 Cor. 9.2. Alas! we are debtors to
others, both Saints and Sinners, Romans 1.14, 15. And we should do as much as
lies in us, to get them engaged to Christ as debtors to him, chap. 8.12. Oh!
did the worth and need of souls press more upon us, we should not be so private
spirited as we seem to be, in respect of the dispersing the knowledge of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, but should be more ready and less afraid to suffer all
things for the Elects sake, that they (be they converted, or unconverted) may
also obtain the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal Glory, 2 Timothy
2.10. Oh! strive and study to do then what you can for Christ.

But here it may be requisite (ere we go further) to remove out of the way some
of these deceits of Satan, whereby it is usual with him, to wrap many poor
souls in their self-pleasing, but indeed to their detriment and undoing. How
frequently does it occur to our observation, That it is the pretention of many
Professors who seek their ease in Sion, as well as of profane persons, that
though they do but little in the great and momentous matters of Eternity, yet
they do what they can, they say; and if God accept the will for the deed, what
need so much clamor to press them further? God is merciful, and why should we
be so over-strict? will we have men do more than they can do? To free the
Scripture from such corrupt glosses, and forewarn and deliver our selves from
such insnaring temptations to ease and slumber, let us consider, That there are
diverse lusts of a very narrowing debasing tendency, within the Circles of which
Satan attempts to bring poor souls in such days as these, and then shrinks and
shrivels them upon all quarters, that they can do no excellent thing for
Christ: Its a pitiful, its a dreadful thing to think to excuse our want of
activity for God, upon the account of the straits that such temptations and
iniquities lead us into; this is to cover with a covering that is not of the
Spirit, that they may add sin to sin, which has a woe pronounced on it, Isa.
30.1. chap. 28.20.

1. First, Satan does endeavor what he can, to debase Souls, by filling them
with carnal and unbelieving discouragements; this exceedingly disableth them
from attempting any thing that is excellent. Its but little such a one can do;
and its a pitiful account he can give of having done what he could; besides the
common discouragement that arises from the persecution at the hands of wicked
and ungodly men, the nature and tendency of which discouragement is frequently
spoken unto (and I shall here pass by.) There are sundry that are apt to arise
from good men themselves, in those censures, and miss-judgings that forward
souls meet frequently in the way; and indeed they wound very deep: Had it been
an enemy I could have born it, but it was thou, a man, my friend, and my
familiar, etc. this cut deep. To apply only to what is in the Text, it was in
the opening of the Context noted, that this grand work of hers that had such an
eminent commendation from Christ himself, as springing from more Faith and Love
than ordinary, fell yet under such severe judging of the Disciples themselves,
that it put the soul of this good woman into no small trouble, Mark 14.6. Let
her alone, why trouble you her? If we note a few of the offenses they had at
her, and objected against her; and by comparing them, we shall find that they
have an exact similitude to the Cavils at this day, started against the zealous
Saints; under which it may quiet us to consider that they are no new, and
therefore should be no strange thing to us.

Cavil 1. There was no prudence used in this act, this seems to lie at the
bottom of their sense: wise men would not have done like this foolish Woman
thought they, and at this they had indignation within themselves, verse. 4. and
murmured against her; they were in a very pettish and impatient fit, as if they
had said, these unpresidential actings will make a great noise to little
profit, and at length spoil all our prudential reasonings. But now when they
are improved, without due regard to the great interest of Christ, which ought
to be laid and cared for in the first place; they prove great offenses, not
only to hinder such contrivers themselves, but to obstruct others who were
following Christ, and would be induced to follow him, in more faithfulness,
courage, and simplicity.

2dly. A breach of the law of Charity was pretended, the saving what she had
for her self, the providing for the Poor, the supplying the Bag that Christ and
his Disciples lived upon, are supposed to be damnified and neglected hereby;
Mercy should have been preferred before zealous Sacrifice, etc. This is a usual
Objection, but there is more of Judas in it, than many that are offended by it
are aware of, John 12.6. Charity to bodies is pretended and advanced hereby
frequently, above Love to Christ, and Charity to poor souls; they may starve
and die for want of a word of Life rather than such losses must be suffered,
such hazzards run, such cost expended.

3dly. The thing was let run at waste, was another Objection: Christ had no
need of it, he was sweet without it, and it was early enough for his funeral;
her love was known without such costly characters. Is not this a common way of
reasoning? Cannot the Gospel be preached, the Cause of Christ secured, the
Profession of Christ upheld, unless you, such poor weak ones as you, must make
a noise, and run your selves and others upon ruin? you will be brought to
beggary, your families ruined, then who must maintain you? Christ is in Glory,
the everlasting Gospel will be preached in due time, in the midst of Heaven the
Elect will be called, and we that are Christ's shall go to Glory, though you
never make such a-do. This is usual, and apt to discourage; yet ought indeed to
signify little with gracious souls, who know that God does set them for the
defense of the Gospel, as a pillar and ground of Truth, being his witnesses
against an adulterous generation, before whom should they be ashamed to profess
him; the stones will cry out, and Christ would be ashamed of them before his
Father, and the holy Angels; but in this their faithful testimony, though
friends scorn them, Job 16.20. yet by Prayer and Supplication, committing
themselves, and the pleading their cause to God, he will in due time plead
their cause, and take up the controversy as he did this poor Woman's, when they
that have judged them shall be ashamed: This then is the first caution, Take
heed that your hearts be not disquieted by such weakening discouragements from
without, or within, lest you be weary and faint in your minds, and thereby
become disabled from doing excellent things; think not that God will own and
accept the result of such wind-shaken-minds, and put this mark of favor on it,
She did what she could.

2. Secondly, Another sinful Circle, within which Satan endeavors to conjure
the spirits of many Professors, and therein narroweth and straitneth them from
any capacity to do what they might for Christ, is because, the business, and
spirit of the world, busieth them with Martha's lot in many things, and then
they think they have as good excuse for their neglects as had she, that doing
as much as nothing, it must pass, because they do what they could. This is very
lamentable, though frequently spoken to; it remains the guise of many
Professors, You know my business, what a deal of work I have, says one: What a
deal of care and destraction I have, says another: Just as they that were
bidden to the Wedding-Supper; one had bought a Farm, and he must go and see it;
another had bought a yoke of Oxen, and he must go and try them; another had
married a Wife, and therefore he cannot come; all desire, Pray have me excused;
all begin to make excuse with one consent, Luke 14.18. You may read one word,
and see how badly such excuses will stand in the day of Christ, when not one of
those that were bidden, shall taste of the Supper, v. 24. Oh! when men's hands
are so full of business, and that most times greedily and unnecessarily sought
after and pursued, that they cannot come; or at least their hearts so
overcharged with the cares and pleasures of it, that they cannot come to any
purpose; what does this portend, but some swift stroke at hand on such a
foolish people, to make up that lamentation? Jer. 9.

3. Thirdly, A third advantage Satan gets on many, by which he incloseth them
within their spiritual benumedness, That they can do very little for God, and
yet please themselves, is the old usual complaint (and that not without cause,
though most times without sense) of a bad dead cold heart; when this seems to
be the Religion of people, and that, from whence they get, or would get, not
only excuse for their shortness, but a supposition that they are very humble,
tender, ingenious, watchful, experimental, because they are so able and apt to
tell of, and mourn over bad hearts; but hardly have I ever observed a people so
inclinable to the deepest hypocrisy, and palpable neglect of any spiritual
means to make them better; but as the door turns upon the hinges, so do they
upon such complaints, till what they artificially complain of at first, spring
up at length as a Leprosy in their foreheads, to be seen and read of all men.

4. Fourthly, Another sinful boundary wherein Satan wraps many, and disableth
them from doing any thing excellent for Christ (and then they think it well
enough, if they do what they can within their compass) is, The offense of
Spirit that is apt to grow either at the ways or people of Christ, because of
the imperfection, they epsy or suppose to be found in them: But, blessed is he
that is not offended in Christ, Mat. 11.6. Such distemper is dangerous,
especially in such a dark state of things, wherein that word seems verified,
Mat. 26.31. This night shall ye be offended because of me: When Professors are
apt on all hands to stagger and fall into sin, providence frown, opportunities
of serving God cannot be come at without apparent hazard; spirits of people
grow froward, apt to catch at advantages, glad to find excuses, for departure
from Relation to one another, hard to be reconciled; this is a bad season for
souls apt to stumble at the stumbling-stone: It begins with this, I am not free
to meet, pray with, hear, join with such a one (although all acts of Christian
duty for removing offense are neglected) and at length it appears, that of whom
one is overcome, of him he is brought into bondage. Oh! study to preserve the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; Great peace have such as love the Law
of Christ, and nothing shall offend them.

5. Fifthly, To name no more at present, Satan gets hold on many, by pleasing
them under a slothful, sinful abuse of this notion, We can do nothing, without
we have help from the Lord: The which way of reckoning, as it is most commonly
abused, has this signification, All the idle neglects of Professors shall be
as much (as they durst for modesty express themselves) fathered upon God. As
the first way of Satan to cover the man's iniquity, was, The Woman that thou
gave to be with me, she gave me, etc. as if he had said, Had thou not given
me a Woman, I had not sinned: the evil lies at least between us; but from all
such excuses, God will be clear when he is judged.

This may serve as a taste, That its not every I can do no more, will serve the
turn to excuse us, much less obtain for us this blessed Testimony Christ gave
of this Woman, She has done what she could, she has come aforehand to anoint
my Body to the burial. You may do more than you do all of you; nay, all things
considered, must do more than this perfuming-work, of which I shall speak a
little more particularly to show its special nature, when I have first offered
a few Considerations, showing what engagements do lie on us, to do what we can
for Christ, especially in this business of begetting a good savor on his
things, in this day, when they are exposed, as much as may be, to stinking.

1. First, We are concerned to do what we can for Christ in this respect,
because Christ has done what he can to put a sweet savor upon us, when we
stank to purpose; and does not ingenuity require that we put the question the
Prophet did, 2 Kings 4.13. Thou have been careful for us with all this care;
what is to be done for thee? Or, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I
render to the Lord for all his benefits? especially when he looks for nothing
but our returning on his Name, the reflection of the sweet savor that he has
bestowed on us; let us but consider, what great things (of this kind) he has
done for us, 1 Samuel 12.24. What were we when he cast a look of Love upon us?
Our navel was not cut, nor washed in water at all, not salted at all, nor
swadled at all; cast out in the open field in our blood, to the loathing of our
person, trodden under in blood, etc. Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6. The stench of a soul in
such a plight, may be read Psalm. 38.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Well, to take away this evil
savor, What has Christ done in his Oblation? Ephesians. 5.2. Gave himself an
offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. What does he by
constant Intercession? Rev. 8.2, 3. stands with much Incense to offer up the
persons and services of Saints, with acceptance, as a cloud of perfume
ascending up before God out of his hand. All the offerings under the Law, both
on the Brazen Altar for Sacrifice, and on the Golden Altar of Incense, are only
figurative of what Christ does this way; of all which its so frequently
signified, Its an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor before the Lord.
What does he by bestowing his Spirit in the work of regeneration, but anoint
with precious ointment, Ezekiel. 16.9, 10, etc. Or, as was the manner of Kings to
prepare for their intimate Communion, Esth. 2.12. What is the displaying his
Name, but an ointment poured out, Cant. 1.3. What are his Appearances, smelling
of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm. 45.8. and all to make us glad? Are not the
kisses of his lips for that end perfumed, to that end, to convey to us a savor
of them, Cant. 5.13. What, I say, does all this speak, and signify, if not an
obligation that we should be a sweet savor to him, and leave a savor of him
in every place, in such especially, as wherein his Name is or may be defamed, 2
Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. Oh! let our garments be always white, let our head and
heart want no ointment, to pour out as there is occasion, liberally and
bountifully, when in any sense (as was said of the Colt, Mark 11.3.) the Lord
has need of it.

2dly. Its but reasonable we should do what we can to bring up a sweet savor
upon the things of Christ, if we call to remembrance, What cost and pains we
have been at, (to represent that savoury, which is pollution, and rottenness it
self, I mean) to beautify and accommodate any stinking lust; unto which we
were bound, though in so doing, we labored in the very fire, and wearied our
selves for very vanity, Habak. 2.13. For who can bring up a clean sweet savor
on that which is so unclean? Shall we bestow such endeavor to perfume a
dunghill lust? and shall not we much more lay out our selves now upon things
that are of an excellent nature, on whom God has determined to bestow such
weights of Glory? see the disposition and drudgery of a poor sinner in seeking
to keep up a part at a distance from God, Isa. 59.9, 10. Thou wentest to the
King with ointment, and did increase thy perfumes, and did send thy
messengers far off, and did debase thy self, even to Hell; thou art wearied
in the greatness of thy way, yet said thou not, There is no hope, etc. What
Ointments, what Perfumes, what Cost, what Trouble was there expended by this
poor wretch, to bring about his interest in a way agreeable to his own lust,
and wretched heart of apostasy, debasing its self, even to Hell? and shall we
be so loath to lay our selves out to the utmost in such ointments and perfumes,
as are on so blessed an object, and to so advantageous an end as is now
proposed? Shall the whorish Woman, Prove. 7.17, 18. perfume her Bed with Myrrh,
Aloes, and Cynamon, to satisfy and fill her self and her lust with greater
content; and are we so loath to prepare such a bed for our Lord's concerns till
the day break and the shadows fly away. Oh! lets learn, that as we have
yielded our members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity; even so now let us
yield our selves servants to Righteousness and to Holiness: Romans 6.9. What
fruits had we in these things, whereof we are now ashamed?

3dly. We should do all we can to raise a sweet savor, for that the
adversaries of Christ do all they can to beget a stench upon the things of
which we speak; they do what they can to make them as the filth of the world,
and offscouring of all things to this day; the Dung-carts of the world, into
which every one throws the dirt and excrement that they cast out of their
doors, 1 Cor. 4.13. If the Witnesses of Christ be slain, their dead bodies are
not suffered to be put into graves, but lie in the streets of the great City,
Rev. 11.8, 9. Psalm. 79.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 141.7. Ezekiel. 24.7. And why thus left
above ground; but that (as Isa. 34.3) their slain being cast out, their stink
may come out of their carcasses. Shall the enemies of Truth do what they can
against the Truth, as Pilate gave a charge, Ye have a Watch, make it as sure as
you can, Mat. 27.65. Were they at such charge to debauch Judas, to debauch the
Soldiers that watched the Sepulcher? and all to make the interest of a dead
Christ abhorred among men; and shall we not do what we can to cover, if not
recover it? Should the men of Jabesh adventure so desperately to rescue the
dead bodies of Saul, and of his sons, from the reproach of the Philistines, and
be at such cost to prepare a royal burning and burying for them? 1 Samuel 31.12,
13. compared with 2 Chronicles. 16.14. Shall the dead body of such an enemy of the
Lord's interest (as he was against David) be so honorably rescued from the
reproach of the Heathen? Shall not we do what we can for such an intetest as
Christ's is, when it is thus reproached, and exposed to scorn and contempt?

4thly. God has furnished us (the weakest and poorest amongst us that are his)
to do much that shall be very effectual and acceptable, this way, and to this
end; discouragements then should not hinder us from doing what we can to
preserve a a sweet Name and savor to Christ. Many cry out, Alas! what can I
do? what have I to bring, poor creature! were I as able as gifted, as well
qualified and furnished to Preach, Pray, Discourse, Dispute as others, I might
attempt something. This reason is not right; its not Gifts but Graces (as I
shall show you hereafter) that send forth the most precious savor: and there
may be an abounding of the latter of these in souls, to whom the former is
denied. Nor does the virtue of the embalm indeed lie so much in the abundance
of act, as of acceptance; she that cast in what she had, and therein did what
she could, though it were in value but two mites, yet it was accounted in
virtue more than two millions: The love of such a poor soul to Christ is seen
in a little token, and then the estimation of it you may read, Cant. 4.10. How
fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is thy love than wine!
and the smell of thine ointments, than all spices! If true love be in the
composition, the smell of such an ointment, it is unparalled in Christ's
account. Goats-hair had its acceptance on and value from this consideration,
Exodus 25.2, 4. and Women spinning it, whose spirits stirred them, Exodus 35.26.

5thly. We should do as much as we can for Christ, because its a time and hour
of temptation, wherein many Professors (if not most) do as little as they can
for shame, through the fear of what the after reckoning may cost them more than
the spices; Many are willing to be at much cost to feast Christ when his
interest is rising, who have nothing to bestow at his funeral; nay, its well if
such as cleave to Christ now, can pass without the sharpest censure from their
very hands from whom better things might be expected. Such a one is a sinner,
Luke 7.29. Such a one is a waster, Mark 14.3. are the ordinary thanks we must
look to meet with from them that have been great pretenders to Christ. There is
few Joseph's, few Nicodemases, that were but secret Disciples, when all was
well, who yet boldly witness against the condemning of Christ, Luke 23.51.
boldly own and desire him, when condemned, Mark 15.43. richly embalm and
intombe him, Joh. 19.38, 39, 40, 41. Since it is so rare to find secret
Professors in prosperous times, grow bold asserters of him in adverse times;
but on the conarary, most are offended at such night-seasons; forsake him and
flee every one to his own and leave him alone, Mat. 26.31. Joh. 16.32. It so
much the more concerns us, if the love of Christ constrain us to appear the
more streniously for him, and lay out our selves upon him.

6thly. We should do all we can for Christ, because God expects much from us
this way, as the very end for which he has raised us up, and brought us
hither; he gives us this denomination, Ye are the Salt of the Earth, Mat. 5.13.
Salt is good; its nature, use, and tendancy, is to preserve from putrefaction
and stench, things otherwise liable thereunto: if we lose our saltness, our
aptitude to preserve a sweet savor in our selves, and that whereabout we are
eminently concerned, we are good for nothing, not good for the Earth, not good
for the Dunghill, but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men. Professors
that are unsavory, nay, that are not savoury, and engaged to savor others in
stinking times, they are, or are like to become the worst of men. Our Interest
is to press up to that character, 2 Cor. 2.14. A people by whom God makes
manifest the savor of his knowledge in every place, being unto God a sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish. He that
savoured of the things of men, more than things of God, 'twas an offense to
Christ, Mat. 16.23. Its good to be as well what, as where God looks for a man
to be, especially in perilous times.

This might serve to have been spoken to the Second general Head, proposed to
consideration, in opening the Doctrine, how it might be said, She did what she
could.

Thirdly, We proceed then to the Third thing, represented to our consideration
in this instance, namely, The business or affair it self, about which she was
employed; The which spiritually imitated and followed by us, is so much our
concernment; She came aforehand to anoint his Body to the burying. Of her act
in the strict acceptance of it, and its application to the body of Christ's
flesh, that was then expressly anointed by her, I shall not now speak; the
rather, because (as such) it is exalted at the Fathers right hand, not only far
above the Grave (Death has no more dominion over him) but also above any
possibility of being reached by any offers or attempts of ours, to add to the
glory or savor of it. But he has a Body always with us, as I hinted in the
explication of the terms, adequated, and exposed to such endeavors of ours, as
is my principal design to promote. This seems not obscurely hinted at, and
intended in the verse before the Text, at least we may allude to it for
illustration, You have the Poor with you always, and whenever you will, you
may do them good; but me ye have not always. Thus, though the Heavens do and
must contain the Body of Christ up in Glory, yet he has mystically and
figuratively a Body of poor Saints always with us upon the Earth; he has a
poor Cause and Interest, wherein he does for glorious ends imba^que them; This
is exposed to the compassion and bounty of those who would be thought his
Friends, especially under these many deaths and burials, wherein an ill savor
is frequently attending it; its a good work wrought on it, and such as Christ
takes exceeding kindly as done unto himself, Mat. 25.40. When any proper
attempts are made to preserve this, from the bad savor that is incident to
such a state of things, and usually attends it.

Toward the better understanding therefore what properly concerns us in this
case, as far as we may transfer it to our selves in this figure (not to speak
at large of the Body, Interest, or Concerns of Christ, exposed to those deaths,
and proposed to those embalmings of ours, of which, and of this crucified state
of it, we have had when occasion to treat) it shall suffice that we distinctly
consider these Two things.

1. First, What kind of ill savor is it, which this Body, Cause, and Interest
of Christ is incident unto, and liable to contract under the deaths and burials
that must by the will of God attend it.

2. Secondly, What is the nature and composition of that Anointing or
Embalming, which is proper to resist a stench and putrefaction of such a state
of things, in contributing whereunto Christ expects from us, that we should do
what we can?

1. As to the first of these, thus; We may consider the things of Christ which
fall under our present disquisition, either in an abstract notion as they are
purely his things, and stand in a true and inseparable union with him, and
relating to him by virtue of the everlasting Covenant, and the promises
thereof, wherein they are given and ascertained to him, beyond any possi^ility
of failure or miscarriage; or else we may consider them more comprehensively,
as they are clothed and circumstantiated with diverse additaments that are of a
lower nature and allay, yet so involved and complicated by the wise disposal of
divine providence, as tends in a direct observance, to accomplish and bring
about the designs thereof: in this respect many things which seem to stand
related in a way of present serviceableness to Christ's interest, may, and will
suffer such consumption as their own nature is liable unto; but in the former
sense, the things of Jesus Christ that are proposed to the care and seeking of
the Saints, Phil. 2.21. are by the power and virtue of the said covenant,
secured from any detriment tending to annihilation; but though deaths do often
attend them, yet so strong and effectual is their relation to Jesus Christ,
that because he lives, they shall live also; nay, though they die, they shall
live again, Joh. 11.25. Exceeding consolatory is that word, Isa. 26.19. Thy
dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. The poor
Saints were crying out before under the manifest disappointments, and
miscarriage of all their strong cries and travel, verse. 14. They are dead, they
shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise, etc. But God would have
his faithful ones know, that such is the virtue of their relation to Christ as
his dead body, that such a Resurrection is ascertained to them, as shall not
only deliver them from the power of the grave, Psalm. 49.15. but manifest that
their very death was gain and advantage to them, Phil. 1.21. Their grave, a
chamber of retirement, and bed of rest, Isa. 57.2. till some blast of
indignation be overpast, Dan. 12.13. It was indeed the distinguishing honor of
the Captain of our Salvation, that in his contest with death and the grave, he
saw no corruption, Acts 2.25. to the 31. chap. 13.34. to the 37. In all things
he has the pre-eminence of David, to whom this Word of God came, Psalm. 16.11.
(who doubtless sucked much consolation from it) it is signified he saw
corruption in this sense, that what of him is corruptible is subjected to that
way of refining; Its sown in corruption, but shall be raised in incorruption:
His better and noble part being preserved in an excellent way of living to God,
Luke 20.37, 38. his flesh also rests in Hope. The corruption then, or any ill
savor that may arise upon the interest of Christ thus considered, is not such
as tends to annihilation or utter dissolution, the everlasting purposes,
covenant, and faithfulness of God with Christ, secures it in a state of Hope;
neither does this only and singly refer to the final Resurrection of the whole
in a way of complete glory at the last day (which was Martha's narrowing
mistake about Lazarus, Joh. 11.24.) but shall be manifestly verified in such
eminent appearances of God, to get himself a glorious Name antecedently to that
consummating Glory, as shall answer and accomplish a system of blessed
Promises, and promises of the Glory of the latter days, that shall be raised
in the ruin of Babylon, and Resurrection of the Witnesses of Christ, tending
to prepare his people, for his glorious appearing, as a Bride adorned to meet
the Bridegroom.

Its not such a rottenness, or stinking, as Martha concluded Lazarus to be,
which would consume and eat him out, not be prevented, resisted, and cured till
the Heavens be no more, Job 14.12. There is hope in its end, Jer. 31.17. 1
These. 4.13. Though the Lord show us great and sore troubles, he will quicken us
again, and bring us up again from the depths of the Earth, Psalm. 71.20. Though
we walk in the midst of troubles, yet he will revive us, Psalm. 138.7. The mouth
of the Lord has spoken it, those precious Promises are of mighty efficacy to
embalm it. Nevertheless there is an ill savor on several accounts, that is apt
to be brought upon this body, or interest of Christ, at such times, under such
deaths as we speak of, against which the embalm we treat of, is to be prepared;
As namely,

1. There is a stink apt to betide it, the occasion of which is merely from
without, arising from the rotten and corrupt disposition of such as are
instrumental in bringing such deaths upon it, who usually account it their
interest to expose it to all the ignominy and contempt imaginable, that in the
abomination thereof, a foundation may be laid for the excusing and commending
themselves, in delivering the world from such a loathsome burden. Thus they
did with the green Tree, and no marvel if they do so with the dry. When they
had in design to put the Lord of Glory to an open shame; what artifices had
they to load him with all manner of ignominy both before and at his death,
foretold by a spirit of prophecy, Psalm. 22.6, 7, 8. exactly fulfilled, Mat.
27. He was scourged, verse. 26. Stripped, verse. 28. Mocked, verse. 29. Spit upon;
his head smitten, verse. 30. Scoffed, and led to be Crucified, verse. 31.
Scornfully inscribed, verse. 37. Reviled by them that passed by, wagging their
heads, verse. 39. Mocked by the Chief Priests, Elders, and Scribes, verse. 41.
Had the same cast in the teeth by by the thieves, verse. 44. Reproached with his
God, his Trust, his King-ship, his Doctrine, his Prayers, as with a sword in
his bones thus they assailed him: Oh! how irksome was the stench, that the
spitting and disgorging of a filthy generation upon him drew him under in this
dying dispensation! And as they have done to him in his own person (who hid not
his face from shame and spitting) so do they to those that go forth to him
without the Camp, bearing his reproach; They are made a spectacle to the World,
to Angels, and to Men; Fools, weak, despised, hunger, thirst, naked, buffetted,
pilgrims, reviled, persecuted, defamed, made the filth of the world, and
offscouring of all things to this day, 1 Cor. 4.9. to 13. The word notes the
Mr. Buroughs Moses Choice.
filth scraped off shoes; or from the pavement, or the dung-cart that goes
through the City, into which every one brings his filth and casts in. Every one
had some filth to cast upon Paul, and the rest of the Apostles. So it was Jer.
15.10. This stench had need to be provided against by such as would have his
Name be as a precious Ointment. Diverse mistake the right way of performing
this, supposing that the best way of resisting this, is by repelling and
retorting it with the same measure into their faces who lay it on. Christ's
method of imbalming is quite otherwise, namely, by bearing it with all
patience, meekness, and holy resignedness of the judgment to God, who knows how
to make their own tongues to fall upon themselves, and their violent dealing
upon their own pates. We have the high Instance and Example of Christ himself,
1 Pet. 2, 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, Isa. 5.6.
Mat. 26.67. Isa. 53.7. So did they who followed his steps, 1 Cor. 4.12. Praying
for the worst of our Enemies, Mat. 5.44. Acts 7.60. and over-comming evil with
good, Romans 12.19, 20, 21. tender, bearing in our bosom these rereproaches,
Psalm. 89.50, 51. to be affected deeply with them, and melt under them, Psalm.
69.7, 9, 19, 20. Psalm. 120.3, 4. Zeph. 3.18. and quietly to wait on God, till
he role it away, is what concerns us in this matter; and happy are we if herein
we lay out our selves to do what we can for Christ.

2dly. There is an ill savor frequently contracted, upon occasion of the
corrupt flesh that adheres to many Professors of it, and pretended friends;
their unsteady walking, and manifest backsliding do procure a stinking savor
to the whole, especially in such a season as we are speaking of; The Name of
God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, by means of such, Romans 2.24. Tit. 2.5.
great occasion is given to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14.
It was not a small matter of ill report that doubtless was raised at this dark
time whereof the Text speaks. If you suppose the enemies to scorn at this rate,

What is become of your King?

Why, he is hanged for a Traitor and Blasphemer. And,

What is become of the Deacon of that new-gathered Church, that was entrusted
with the treasure?

Why, he sold himself to the Devil for thirty pieces of silver, betrayed his
Master, and then hanged himself, falling headlong, and then all his bowels
gushed out; and this is known to all the dwellers at Jerusalem, Acts 1.19.

What became of Peter, the most forward, zealous, Ringleader of the Company?

Why he, after he had drawn his Sword and shed blood, forsook his Master, and
by and by denied him, once and again, and the third time; nay, cursed and swore
that he never knew him.

What became of the rest of his Disciples in that trial?

Why, after that they had promised, That though they should die with him, they
would never deny him, Mat. 26.39. No sooner was he beset, but they all forsook
and fled, and scattered every one to his own, and left him alone, John 16.32.
These sore provocations of scorn and blasphemy, falling in together with the
dark administration it self of Christ's Death, might well occasion this outcry
(as Jacob said to his Sons, Genesis 34.30.) You have troubled me, and made me to
stink amongst the Inhabitants of the Land, amongst the Canaanites and
Perizzites; O^, as the Israelites to Moses (though by them ill applied, Exodus
5.21.) You have made our savor to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in
the eyes of his Servants, to put a Sword into their hands to slay us. Such
falls of Professors, as they, draw on themselves wounds, that stink and are
corrupted, Psa. 38.3, 5, 7. So do they cause the whole way of truth to be evil
spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. this is a lamentation. Now against this putrefaction, it
much concerns the Saints to lay out themselves to do what they can, showing all
good fidelity for the adorning and perfuming the Gospel of God in all things,
Titus 2.10. Having a conversation (transcendantly) honest among the Gentiles;
that whereas they speak evil of them as evildoers, they may by their good
works which they shall behold, glorify God, etc. 1 Pet. 2.12. Phil. 2.15, 16,
Mat. 5.15, 16. Titus 2.8. Romans 14.16.

3dly. There is an uncouth savor apt to arise from the very dispensation it
self, though we should consider it unclothed, and freed from the former nasty
circumstances. Mortality in any respect is unpleasant; dissolution is not
desirable: The Saints that desire to depart, do not desire to be unclothed (as
such) Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.4. Every such death is a sowing in some dishonor,
weakness, the corruption also, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. This is a startling to Nature,
Sense, and Reason. In the Concerns of Christ, whereof we speak, there is no
such death besides it, but some thing suffers loss, its unclothed of some
seeming beauty, although in the issue it be to make for a more real and
substantial glory; every sentence of death has some resemblance to the King of
Terrors, Job 18.14. This contracts paleness upon the faces of Friends
themselves, Jer. 30.6, 7. swooning, fainting fits are apt to seize them, who
(with Joseph) weep over and kiss such corpse, Genesis 50.1, 2. Imbalmings are
needful to resist such sadnings; so Prove. 27.9. Ointment and Perfume rejoice
the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's Friend by hearty counsel. Christ's
Sepulcher was a Grave, though hewn out of a Rock; and imbalming was requisite,
though never man lay there before, Joh. 14.39, etc. especially seeing weeping
Visiters desired access, not only unto, but into the Sepulcher, Mark 16.5. Joh.
20.6, 8. The Grave or Cave of Lazarus fetched groans and tears from Christ
himself, because he loved him, though he was come to raise him, Joh. 11.33, 35,
38. The aptness of the choicest Saints to faint, swoon, and quail at the Grave
of that Interest (whose Resurrection yet they frequently expect) calls for
cordial confections, liberally prepared for such funerals.

Secondly, Proceed we to the Second branch under this general Head, and that
is, To take knowledge what is the Nature of this composition of Imbalm, that is
proper to withstand the said ill-savour in the several respects of it, about
which also consider we, -- 1. First, Some general Properties or Qualities that
are principally to be heeded in this Preparation. 2. Secondly, The special
Ingredients that must concur to make up the Composition of it.


The former of these I shall propound under the Observation and Improvement of
two or three words, in her case in the text, which may direct our care in this
business.

1. That which we bring to the Lord on the present intendment, must bear
proportion to hers in this quality. Hers was (and so must ours be) very Pure
Ointment. The word Spiknard, the margent reads Pure-nard; some think it should
be translated, Upright and Perfect Nard: They taking the word (...) to be
derived from (...), and so signify faithful, proper, pure, and unmixed Nard,
it being liable to be adulterated, vitiated, and corrupted. By due proportion
whereunto, all endeavors of ours, must have this principally heeded, that
simplicity, integrity, and true sincerity do truly qualify whatever of this
kind be attempted, which directs us as well that all the ingredients be unfeigned
and answerable to the pure standard without hypocrisy; as also that there be
nothing admitted, which is of a foreign allay, which will prove of a
corrupting nature to all the rest. We read that in the Levitical
administration, there was both an holy Ointment, and an holy Perfume, for the
special use of the Tabernacle, to be compounded by special direction, according
to the Art of the Apothecary, Exodus 30.23, 24, 25, 34, 35, 36. The Spices,
Dose, Confection, and Application of it must be strictly ordered by the
standard of the Sanctuary, under penalty of death on the least corruption or
deviation: The which pointing unto Gospel-things, I might show particularly,
requires all manner of care, that what we bring before the Lord for a sweet
savor, do fully answer the pattern for simplicity and godly sincerity; a
little evil else, will spoil much good; Dead Flies (says the Wiseman, Eccles.
10.1.) cause the Ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor; so
does a little Folly him that is in repute for Wisdom and Honor. They have need
of clean hands, and a pure heart, that does approach with such intendments.
What manner of persons ought they to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness?
If they lose their savor, wherewith shall they be sweetened?

2dly. What we bring on this design, must bear proportion to hers in this, Her
Spicknard was very precious. Which expression signifies as well the inward
virtue and excellency of it, as the rich price, cost and value of it. It might
(said the Disciples) have been sold (and such things seldom yield what they
cost) for three hundred pence; which likely was the Roman penny, by computation
about seven pence halfpenny of ours, that amounts to about 9 l. -- 7 s. -- 6
d. sterlin. So great a value to be expended at one dash on Christ, by a Woman;
that seems to have been not one of the richest neither; being so highly
commended, and propounded as an exemplary instance to us, shows that what we
bring of this kind, must be in the sight of God of great price (as a gracious
frame of Spirit in his children is said to be) even that hidden man of the
heart, in that which is not corruptible, 1 Pet. 3.4. In this also it is
significant, that the external cost and detriment, that such vigorous attempts
may bring upon us, ought not to be drawn into the reckoning, as worthy to be
named or counted dear to our selves, so we may bring him Honor, bear up his
Name, serve our Generation, finish our Testimony, and hereby raise him a sweet
savor in the midst of an adulterous age, where we are brought forth. The
debate and resolution between two generous spirits ( David and Araunah) about
offering up a sweet savor to the Lord, is very teaching, 2 Samuel 24.24. I will
surely buy it of thee for a price; neither will I offer burnt offerings unto
the Lord my God of that which does cost me nothing. Such as profess a
persuasion of the necessity toward this confection, of a rich access of the
precious things of Heaven, such as precious Blood (1 Pet. 1.19.) of a precious
Christ (1 Pet. 2.7.) apprehended by precious Faith (2 Pet. 1.1.) through
precious Promises ( verse. 4.) in a precious Word (1 Samuel 3.1.) answering to
those precious things of Heaven, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.13. to 16. Such I say as
acknowledge a necessity of these, are much overseen, to stick at, and stand
upon things of a lower value, such as, Father, Mother, Wife, Children,
Brethren, Sisters, own Life, Luke 14.26, to 33. Mat. 10.37, 38, 39. Mark 10.28,
29, 30. as though they were too costly or precious to be laid down upon this
honorable account, if the Lord have need of them.

3dly. The Ointment she brought, is in this respect teaching to us, That the
Application of it was very Manifest, Liberal, and Diffusive; She did not only
open, pierce, and give some vent to it sparingly and gradually, but brake the
Box, pouring it out upon his head. It bespeaks the business performed with such
good will, so thoroughly and effectually, as intended neither secrecy nor
reservation, as his head and all his other parts were filled with the Ointment
(answering that Scripture, Psalm. 133.2.) so was the whole house intentionally
filled with odor of it, John 12.3. -- Christ is principally honored with our
affairs of this kind, when we appear most openly and communicatively in sending
forth the savor, and showing forth the virtues of him that has called us out
of darkness into his mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 2.9. The excellency of this
composition is best discerned, in its contest with, and conquest over
opposition, then smelling most, when censured, crushed, bruised most; holding
forth the Word of Life as Lights in the World, Phil. 2.15, 16. to make all men
see what is the fellowship of the Mystery, Ephesians. 3.9. We only then answer the
ends and expectation of Christ, now pressed after, when (though in censuring
perilous days) we do in our several places and capacities, do what we can, by
a public Testimony, bear witness to every Truth and Virtue of his, and such
especially as are most eminently striven against, by the wickedness of the
days and places we live in.

We come now to speak to the special Ingredients of the Confection which is
only competent to preserve a sweet savor to Christ's dying Interest, about
which, for the encouragement and direction of the meanest Saint, to do what
they can, this must be considered, That all of them that are a sweet savor
unto God, they are the Spices and Powders of the Merchants, Cant. 6.1. Mark.
16.1. brought from far, and to be bought at Gospel-prices, Rev. 3.18. I counsel
thee to buy of me, etc. That which is of our own growth, Phil. 3.8, 9. begged
or borrowed, Mat. 25.9. will not serve the turn. This, though very precious,
yet they that have a mind to trade in it, may have great penyworths, Isa. 55.1,
2, 3. Nor is it the less acceptable to the Lord, or thankworthy, that they
bring it with this acknowledgement, 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 15, 16. What am I, and what
is this people, that we should be able to offer so willingly? For all things
come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee; all this store that we have
prepared comes of thy hand, and all is thine own. -- Moreover, this should be
an encouragement to the poorest, weakest Believer, That though spiritual gifts
of deep knowledge and utterance, may do much toward the raising, and repute,
to a dying cause; Yet have the graces of the Spirit, shining in the hearts and
conversation of a poor Believer, an estimation of a greater price in the sight
of God, and a real and direct tendency to glorify the Name of God in a
standing way, when the high and renowned gifts of Prophecy may fail, and
Tongues cease, and Knowledge vanish away, 1 Cor. 13. to the end. The truth of
which we have verified in our days, and may yet further, That the great,
learned, famed men, who would be thought the only Bulwarks and Champions for
the Truth and Cause, have shrunk from it, and their Names rot and stunk,
whilst a few poor despised Saints that own themselves nothing, and have no
might, have yet been preserved, to abide with Christ in his temptations; and
having obtained a little strength, do not deny his Name. Thus has it been in
all Ages, Not many Wise, etc. But God has chosen the foolish things, etc. And
I thank thee Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth (says Christ) that thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; even
so Father, etc. But more particularly;

1. In all such Confections, there is indespensibly necessary, A lively Faith
of the operation of God, without which it is impossible to please him, Heb.
11.6. Romans 14.23. This contributes strength, savor, and duration to all other
ingredients (as they say Ambergreese does to all Perfumes) is in the front of
all others, 2 Pet. 1.5. And though it be precious ( v. 1.) yet must have virtue
still diligently added to it. By Faith Joseph when he died made mention of the
departure of the Children of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his bones,
Heb. 11.22. Many are the excellent exploits recorded by Moses, performed by
Joseph's Faith; yet the Spirit singles this one out doubtless for its exemplary
eminency) to abide upon this Gospel-File, that his Faith at dying (though the
Light of Israel were for the time seemingly put out with him) had such a
singular regard to the assurance of the Promise of deliverance, that on the
single evidence thereof he gave commandment touching his bones. What
Commandment? namely, the same he had given touching his Fathers bones, Genesis
50.2. That they should be embalmed, the better to comport and be in fellowship
with the design of the Promise, in the truth of which he had so much
confidence, as he was contented his bones should be kept (though imbalmed)
above ground, and not reposed to their proper rest, till his people also should
be brought to rest in the Land of Promise; his Faith preferred a Cave in
Canaan, before a Pyramid in Egypt; and would be preserved by an embalming,
wherein Faith had the principal hand, Genesis 50.24, 25, 26. Jacobs bones must
also be embalmed upon the credit of that precious Promise, Genesis 46.4. I will go
down with thee into Egypt, and I will surely bring thee up again. Jacobs bones
must be brought sweet to Canaan, to show the precious compliances of Faith with
Promises, seemingly dead and broken to Sense and Reason.

2. There is necessary in such embalming, Love and the fruits of it. Of these
two, something was spoken above, as being principal agents in doing what we
can. This constrains the soul to do excellent things, 2 Cor. 5.14. bears,
indureth, acts, lays out unspeakably, 1 Cor. 13.7, 8. Cant. 8.6, 7. Work of
Faith, and labor of Love are joined together, 1 These. 1.3. thinks it can never
do enough for Christ, and for poor souls ( chap. 28.) this causeeth an odor of
a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to God, Phil. 4.8.

3. A Third Ingredient that admirably accompanies the other (as one of the
three principal Spices, Exodus 30.23.) is the patience of Hope, 1 These. 1.3. 1
Cor. 13.13. This is choicely fitted for such a Grave, till such a Resurrection,
Acts 26.6, 7. Job 14.7, 14. It Is of an exceeding sweetness (1 John 3.3.) and
comforting tendancy, Romans 12.12. It sweetens a stinking prison, Zech. 9.11, 12.
Acts 28.20. a stinking grave, Psalm. 16.9. it makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5.
because of the precious love of Christ shed abroad, etc.

4. Without Holiness there can be no such sweetness as is pressed after, Thou will not suffer thy holy One to see corruption. Saintship both in its truth,
and manifestation, is indispensibly required hereunto; A cleansing our selves
by the power of Promises from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in fear of God. To speak properly, Holiness is a
composition of all the Graces of a Saint in a joint concurrence; and is the
very complexion of the new creature, as Holiness is the Nature of God, and
respects all his glorious attributes, and perfections. In proposing this
therefore, I speak the whole of a Christians Concerns in this business, Be ye
clean who bear the vessels of the Lord. Under this then is intended all the
fruits of the Spirit innumerated, Gal. 5.22, 23. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. and
elsewhere plentifully described, and exhorted to. --

5. I shall therefore only add, That a spirit of nobility, and Zeal for God,
not liable to be prostituted to the love or fear of creatures, is most
eminently requisite to complete a sweet savor to the scorned things of Christ.
A shrinking private low spirit, very much dishonours so great a Leader and
Commander, as Christ has been unto us; A most lively example is in the case
before us, -- These poor Women were so far carried above their fears, that in
the face of danger in a time of fears, though in the morning while it was yet
dark, they made their approaches to the Sepulcher to perfume it, though it
might be judged both unseasonable, uncivil, and unsafe for Women to come so
near an armed Guard (especially if Soldiers were then as they are now) set on
purpose, to prevent the consequences of such twylight approaches, Mat. 27.63,
64, 65, 66. And let loose to all manner of incivilities without control, chap.
27.27. to 31. Such a Spirit becomes us; not ashamed, not afraid of the
Testimony of our Lord, nor of his Prisoners, but ready to be offered up, as
partakers of the Afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God: For
we have not received the spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a sound
mind, 2 Timothy 1.7, 8.

These virtues of Jesus Christ in their conjunction, fixation, and exercise, in
the spirit and walkings of Saints, are the Ointments and Ornaments in the sight
of God and Men of great price; neither should the weakest Saint be discouraged,
to bring forth what they have of this kind, to the common design; and treasury
Christ puts a value on it, and then we should not hold back more than is meet.
Which leads me to the Fourth general Consideration propounded for opening the
main Doctrine, namely, --

Fourthly, How are we to conceive of Christ's Acceptance of what is done of
this kind by us?

We see the Text speaks it, directly, and fully in the case of this censured,
hard-thought-of poor Woman; and if we can find the disposition and temper of
his heart to be the same in our case, it may prove a great encouragement and
engagement to do what we can for Christ, whether men be pleased or displeased
at it: All I shall do here, is to show (1) That Christ accepts kindly and well
pleasedly, such offers to raise a sweet savor. And then (2) How he signifies
this his Acceptance.

Of the former, take but one testimony, Cant. 4.12, to 16. Thy Plants (says
Christ to his Church) are an Orchard of Pomegranates with pleasant fruits,
Camphire with Spikenard, and Saffron, Calamus, and Cinamom, with all trees of
Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief Spices, etc. Awake, O North
Wind, and blow O South, that the Spices thereof may flow out. That by those
several sweet smelling Spices, are intended the Graces of the Spirit, I think
is ordinarily concluded. The scope of this Scripture, is to draw forth the
smell of these upon the consideration of the value that Christ puts upon them,
and the acceptance he has of them, even then when poor souls are under some
straitning Providence, too much enclosed, shut up and sealed; To prevent which
privateness of spirit, and to draw forth this fragrant perfume to more
advantage, the North Wind, and South Wind, are called to meet, in their
opposition, upon the Garden; signifying, perhaps, that commotion and disquiet
state of things, where such contrary blasts have their violent contests, Dan.
7.2. by means whereof, though the Garden may seem to suffe^ some spoil and
loss, yet it is to the heart of Christ, that his Spicknard, and other Plants,
through these bruisings and shakings, should send forth the smell thereof:
However this seems evident, That whatever private, low, and undervaluing
thoughts the poor Saints have of their own seize, because they are but
Plants yet, not tall Trees, as the Cedars of Labanon that God has planted; yet
Christ has his eye upon their spiritual Nature and Original, they are all
Slips of that Branch of Renown, are sweeter and more acceptable in his account,
than (through their humility) they seem to be in theirs; we yet know not the
high value he puts upon the riches of the glory of the inheritance in the
Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. and to have them in exercise, especially on so solemn
occasion as this is; why it is the joy and rejoicing of his heart. The heart of
Christ in point of this acceptance may be read in David's on an occasion, which
has some resemblance, at least might be used to illustrate this, and that is,
in his expressing himself thankfully to the men of Jabesh-Gilead, for the
Funeral-love they had showed to one, who had been the Lords Anointed, 2 Samuel
2.5, 6. Blessed be ye of the Lord, that you have showed this kindness to your
Lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him; and now the Lord show kindness and
truth unto you; and I also will requite your kindness because ye have done this
thing.

The blessing he gives them, shows his acceptance to the uttermost, the
occasion thus; There was a day when the men of Jabesh-Gilead, were in
unspeakable distress by means of the hard terms offered them by Nahash the
Ammonite, 1 Samuel 11. 1, 2. they could have their peace upon no other terms than
by espousing an irreparable mark of reproach and infamy on themselves, and all
Israel; and in this nick of extremity, Saul puts his life in his hand, and
rescues them seasonably, and wrought a very great deliverance. This kindness of
Saul to them, they were never in a capacity to requite, till the day that the
body of their Lord, and instrumental Savior, was hanged on the Wall of a
Garrison of the Philistines, as a mark of like reproach and ignominy on the
whole Interest of God. In such a day of death and danger, when the body of
their Lord, and his dear Children, is hung a stinking in the face of the Sun;
now is a time to prove and improve the kindness, and ingenuity of their spirits
toward their Lord and Israel, by putting their lives in their hands, and doing
what they could to fetch him off from, and give a check to that reproach of the
enemies of the Lord on his Name and Interest. They attempt it, they succeed,
and bring off these dead bodies, and (mark it) they came to Jabesh and burnt
them there, and took their bones and buried them, and fasted seven days, 1 Samuel 31.11, 12, 13. They not only buried, but burnt them there, which was the
manner of Royal Funerals: compare it with 2 Chronicles. 16.14. They laid Asa in a
bed which was filled with sweet odours, and diverse kind of spices, prepared by
the Apothecaries art, and they made a very great burning for him: See Jer.
34.5. With the burnings of thy Fathers, the former Kings which were before
thee, so shall they burn odours for thee. This perfumed Royal Funeral you see
has acceptance and recompense with David. And shall Jesus Christ, who laid
down his life to take away the curse and reproach from us, and has set us free
from wrath to come (which we can never requite) now call for a proof of our
kindness, and thankfulness, by doing what we can to rescue the honor of his
Name and Interest that is now exposed to contempt, and to bestow a more
perfuming funeral on it, and lamentation over it, than without danger we durst
do; and shall we stand upon the hazard and cost of it, and in so doing shall
not we lose the blessing of David, The Lord show kindness and truth unto you.

Nay, shall not the men of Jabesh-Gilead rise up in judgment, who did what
they could to cover the shame, and recover the honor of a wicked Prince, who
fell for his iniquity, as if he had never been anointed; and shall we refuse,
or come short of perfuming this service to the King of Glory, who is put to an
open shame in his Name and People; God forbid. -- This honorable act will find
acceptable resentment and recompense from Christ as that did from David, and as
kindness to the dead has always done on ingenious spirits: Ruth 1.8. and
2.20. Blessed be he of the Lord, who has not left off his kindness to the
living and the dead. But let us see how Christ does manifest this his
acceptance of such attempts.

1. Christ is ready to show forth his acceptance of this kindness, by his being
so willingly engaged to plead the cause, and vindicate the innocence and
integrity of such a People as do what they can for him; many are the ill
instructions at home, and the ignominies abroad that will be raised upon such
an account; But of this we may have assurance, he stands engaged to make good
that word, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. As Christ stood not upon his own
vindication, when his Father's honor was in his eye; but he committed his
cause to him, who effectually has brought it about; So should not we stand
upon our own vindication, when the Name of Christ lies at the stake. See Psalm.
35.5, 6. Commit thy way to the Lord, etc. And he shall bring forth thy
Righteousness as the light, and thy Judgment as the noonday. We see how
effectual he does it in the Text, concerning this poor Woman in all her
ignominies, and hard speeches that she met withal; and no less will he show it
at this day, to be the high title of his honor, Thus says thy Lord, the Lord,
and thy God, who pleads the cause of his people, Isa. 51.22. He will thoroughly
plead their cause, Jer. 50.34. and execute Judgment for them, bring them forth
to the light, and their eyes shall behold thy Righteousness, Micah 7.9.
Mavelous have been the Lord's ways and methods of asserting the integrity of
his people, from the midst of the clouds of ignominy.

2. Christ shows his acceptance by ordering the issues of all the provision
that a people makes for his Name and Glory, that it proves the directest
provision they can possible make for themselves and their best interest, The
liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand, Isa.
32.8. That course which the generality of people conclude according to rules of
Providence is the way to ruin them, proves the most effectual means to
establish them: of this Psalm. 112. gives a full testimony. The good man, is
there brought in gracious, full of compassion, showing favor, and lending,
dispersing, giving to the Poor; and yet in all respects, making the fullest
provision for his own best blessedness in so doing. That of Christ is the
Paradox to prudent Professors in perilous times, which they can by no means
resolve, He that will save his life shall lose it, and he that will lose his
life shall save it. How evidently is this made good in the good Name of
persons? Men have generally reasoned, that to cleave to such a Profession, or
Testimony, or People, has been the highway to be disgraced for ever; whereas
the Lord has manifestly built up the Houses of such (as its said of the
Midwives Houses in Egypt.) We read in the first and last verses save one of
Heb. 11. concerning the Worthies, That by Faith they obtained a good report,
though they received not the Promise. It was matter of reproach to them, that
they should embrace and cleave to certain Promises from generation to
generation, owning them as their Interest, which yet brought not forth in their
day, the great things they testified of, and professed that as Pilgrims and
Strangers they waited for; they made this their business, to raise a good
report, and preserve a sweet savor upon the Promises, which yet brought not
forth as they expected they should; but yet this they got by it, the Promises
left a good report on them, Their Names (by means thereof) were as precious
Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. for that their conversation were as precious Ointment to
the Name of God. --

Christ shows his acceptance of such, by making known to such the most early
discoveries of his further breaking forth of Glory beyond any other. So it was
in the case of the Text, they that were at this early costly provision of
Imbalm, had the first Knowledge, Evidence, and Joy of the Resurrection of Christ
from the dead; and must be the first messengers of the blessed Tidings thereof,
John 20.1, 14. to 18. Luke 24.10. Mark 16.9, 10. They had not the first
manifestation of it who were men of the greatest parts, employment, or esteem.
Nothing is more obvious to frequent experience, then the preventing Grace of
Christ, at least in keeping the spirits of such sweet, quick, lively; and if
any fore-tastes of approaching Glory be going, such overcommers shall have the
morning star, Rev. 2.28.

Christ's acceptance is frequently signified this way; They who do what they
can to raise a sweet savor on the concerns of Christ, shall be rendered the
most useful, blessed, and a blessing of any others in their generations; The
blessings of the souls and bodies of them that were ready to perish shall come
upon such, Job. 29.13. They shall be as dew frow the Lord, and as the showers
upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the sons of men,
Micah. 5.7. Their love to Christ, laying out its self for him thus, is likened
to the Ointment on the head of Aaron, and the dew of Hermon and Sion; for there
the Lord commanded the blessing, Psalm. 133. The Families, Neighbors,
Fellow Members of such shall rise and call such blessed, Prove. 31.28. Ezekiel.
34.26. The distinguishing mark of acceptance is reserved by Christ, till the
day of recompense, which hastneth greatly, in the which not the value of a cup of
cold water has been given on this sweetning design, but shall have its eminent
reward. Upon that enquiry of the poor Disciples, Mat. 19.27. Behold, we have
forsaken [All] and have followed thee, what shall we have therefore? It was a
great [All] a few Fishing-Nets and Boats, and the like poor things; Yea, but it
was their [All] they had done, and were undone, as far as they could for
Christ; and what remains to them? Truly they having followed Christ in the
Regeneration (or as Luke 22.28.) continued with him in his Temptations, he
appoints to them a Kingdom as the Father appointed him, They must eat and drink
with him in his Kingdom, sitting on Thrones and judging the Tribes of Israel;
and every one that has forsaken Brothers, or Houses, or Fathers, etc. shall
receive an hundred fold, etc.

From the words, a few things more tending to a closer Application of the
whole, shall serve for a close.

Use 1. This might be improved by way of Information thus; If Christ do put
such a real high value upon all attempts that are levelled toward this design,
to preserve a sweet savor on his concerns, when they are by the world exposed
to stinking. Then

1. May we gather how the heart of Christ stands aspecting such as do what they
can to render him and the things of his Name and Glory odious, by laying
contempt and reproach upon it what in them lies; surely it will be a bad day
for such when he shall plead with them, and vindicate the quarrel of his abused
Name and Interest: If they that honor him shall be thus honored, then they
who despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.20. It Is worth
consideration, what requitals in kind Chtist has in store for such indignities
done to him, what funerals he has reserved for such enemies; See Isa. 14.9,
11, 18, 19, 20. Hell from beneath is moved at thy coming. -- Thy pomp is
brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols; the worm is spread under
thee, and the worms cover thee. -- They that see thee shall narrowly look upon
thee, etc. All the Kings of the Nations, all of them lie in glory, every one in
their own house, but thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch,
as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword. -- As a
carcass trodden under foot, thou shall not be joined with them in burial,
because thou have destroyed thy Land, and slain thy people: the seed of
evildoers shall never be renowned. -- An Instance like unto this of the Lord's
severity to such as have provoked him, and abused his Glory, we have, Jer.
16.4. They shall die of a grievous death, they shall not be lamented, neither
shall they be buried, but they shall be as dung upon the face of the Earth.
These are some of the Lord's ways, that he can take, and many times does with
such as are not tender of his Glory: Consi^er this ye that forget God, etc. The
funerals of Jez^bel, that dreadful enemy to the Lord's Prophets and People, may
be a warning to such Persecuters.

2dly. It also lets us understand with what little savor he does and will
regard those who have been pretenders to him in the days of Prosperity; but in
Adversity, and under the passions and reproaches that ^ttend the Gospel, they
hide their faces as it were from him; nay, are ready to deal with him, as the
Pharis^es are condemned for doing, Mat. 23.29, to the end. Who built the Tombs
of the Prophets, and garnisht the Sepulchers of the Righteous, and yet espouse
and walk in the very spirit of those that slew them; see their doom, and downfall
in the same place.

3dly. It also shows how little thank-worthy they will be in the day of Christ,
and how much it is to their loss of their comfort now, and will be of their
reward then, who think every thing too much, that they either actually lay out,
or put in hazard for the Namesake of Christ. If a good wish indeed will do it,
or the blessing mentioned, James 2.15, 16. would be accepted, that (possibly)
might be spared; but as for any thing that is costly, or dangerous, that cannot
be adventured, It Is an hard saying, who can bear it? Of such will not Christ
say, They that are ashamed of me and my Word, before this evil and adulterous
generation, of them shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he appears in his
Glory, and in the Glory of his Father and of all his Holy Angels?

Use 2. But I rather proceed to offer a few things, that may tend to direct and
engage in this matter. And here (first) some Cautions to prevent mistakes and
miscarriages, in the Preparation and Application of this Imbalm; and (then) a
few Directions, and I shall conclude.

Caution 1. Take heed that you continue not in such a state, and carry such
corruption about you, as will render you utterly incapable of doing any other
than raising a stench on the things of Christ. Whatever you have to do about
them, the purity of this Confection is such as the least evil owned and
allowed, will diffuse its malignity through it to the vitiating the whole, and
rendering it of none effect: A little such leaven will sour the whole lump;
Dead Flies cause the Ointment of the Apothecary to stink, so does a little
folly, etc. This is notably illustrated in the case put, Hagg. 2.11, 14. where
is showed that there is much more force and malignity in a little evil to
corrupt much good, then there is in much Religious Service of such a People, to
leave an impression of goodness on things otherwise void of it. Look to it that
you be very clean who bear the vessels of the Lord in this Service, lest you
defile this undertaking for the Lord: clean hands and a pure heart are
indispensibly requisites in this affair.

Caution 2. Take heed according to what Rules, Instructions, or Dispensatory
you compound this Imbalm. I hinted before how exactly careful God was in the
Composition both of the Oil and Powder that were to perfume his Tabernacle,
Exodus 30.23, etc. No less is he jealous of the present things under
consideration, Take we heed therefore of false Rules, and Principles, as namely;

1. Take heed how you admit of humane Wisdom and Prudence, the consultings of
flesh and blood, to dictate and give rules in these matters. It is very
fruitful in multiplying inventions, evasions, expedients, distinctions, which
indeed have a show of Wisdom, but its frequent that the Serpents subtilty is
foisted in, in the place of the simplicity of Christ; to call any man Master in
this matter, is very dangerous.

2. Take heed you mistake not by seeking the Cheapest instead of the Chiefest
way of this Perfuming. It Is indeed our wisdom and understanding to set down
aforehand and cast the cost, Luke 14.28, 31, etc. lest having begun, you be
not able to finish; but then it must be brought to this issue, verse. 33.
Whosoever he be that forsakes not all that ever he has, he cannot be my
Disciple. Nothing less than all one has, even his whole Living, every thing on
this side Heaven must be made up in the account (if the Lord has need of it)
to be laid out on it.

Caution 3. Admit not Custom, common Fame, nor common Fear to be your
Counselors: These and the like Cautions must be persued.

But I had rather Conclude with a few Counsels:

1. If you do any thing excellent for Christ, do it early: So did this good
Woman, both in the Text and at the Sepulcher. Many stay their hands from works
of this kind, till they see what others, who are accounted more eminent, will
do; they think it imprudent, and to savor of rashness and singularity to be
presidential and exemplary: but this will one day be found the excellency of
Christian activity in works of this nature, That they tarry not for men, nor
wait for the sons of men, Micha 5.7. We may in this case allude to that
passage, 2 Samuel 19.12. Ye are my Brethren, ye are my Bone and my Flesh,
wherefore are ye then the last to bring back the King? Many are so late and
lingering in works that concern Christ's Glory of this kind, putting it off from
one time to another, till their spirits sink to the work, and the things
themselves (as was said of Lazarus) stink in their nostrils.

2dly. Consider the Royal Extract, Descent, and Original of this Cause and
Interest, the Imbalming of which with these sweet Odours you are exhorted to.
It Is the offspring of a King, of a great King. The Wise men were liberal in
presenting him with Frankincense and Myrrh whom they understood to be King of
the Jews, though laid in a manger, Mat. 2.11. -- And Jehu had so much
generosity, when he had done the judgments of God upon Jezebel; as to give
order, 2 Kings 9.34. Go, see now this cursed Woman, and bury her; for she is a
Kings Daughter. Shall a cursed Woman have a becoming burial, because she is a
Kings Daughter, and shall not the blessed Cause of the King of Kings be better
respected? though it be thrown to dogs, and be meat for them, it deserves
better for his sake to whom it stands related in Royal Progeny. He that (as was
said) was judged by the Wise men of the East worthy of a present of
Frankincense, Gold, and Myrrh at his birth, being born King of the Jews, and
of a costly bed of Spices by honorable counsel at his funeral, being Crucified
as King of the Jews, deserves upon the same account an honorable treatment,
when any of his things come under clouds and suspicion by the men of the times.
Some Kings indeed were so evil, as debarred them from Royal Funerals, Jer.
22.18, 19. 2 Chronicles. 21.19, 20. But Christ deserves better usuage. If you would
have your hearts engaged to this honorable work, lay to heart the merit of it
at your hands. It Is both nearly related to you, and has done unspeakable
worthy things for you, while it was in its flourishing capacity and condition.
It Is very near and natural to you that are Saints; as David said, Ye are my
Brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: It is the very Womb wherein we were
warmed, and brough^ forth in that state of Saint-ship under the profession
whereof we stand. Of Sion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her:
Reciprocations of love to such Relations, and of endeavors if it were possible
to requite them, 1 Timothy 5.4. would engage to do our utmost at their Funeral, as
Joseph imbalmed his Father, who tendered him dearly, and lamented his supposed
death exceedingly, Genesis 37.34, 35. So would a Mothers Grave (because a Mothers)
be extraordinarily bewailed, Psalm. 35.14. Many that bury an only Child, or
firstborn, will spare no cost about it: This (say they) is all the Portion I
have to pay it. What was said of the men of Jabesh, might here be repeated;
they thought they could do no less to the remembrance of a Father in Israel,
who had done so well for them; or the Exhortations to the Daughters of Israel,
to weep over him who clothed them in Scarlet, with other delights; who put on
Ornaments of Gold upon their Apparel, 1 Samuel 1.24. much more in a ^piri^ual
sense has this Interest of Christ deserved at your hands. Oh! be not
ungrateful at su^^ an opportunity as this, you may never have the like ^o
express your ingenuity, if you elapse this.

4thly. Press after larger participations of a Royal Spirit, if you would do
any excellent thing at this Funeral. Where there are any sparks of true
Nobility, they will vent themselves this way, whereas spirits of a base and
sordid complexion will shrink in such a time of cost and hazard as this. It was
a brave spirit in Araunah, when there was a ^ebate betwixt David and him about
the price of ^he Sacrifice, that was to be offered up for a sweet ^avour in an
infectious nasty season, As a King, gave he to the King, 2 Samuel 24.23. 'Twas
hard to discern by their spirits (if external badges had not ^een there to
distinguish them) which of them had most of the spirit of a King in him. Such
large^ess of heart is exceeding proper and honorable ^n the case before us. A
little laid out in the power of this Principle will be highly enhansed in the
value of it. It was a notable Instance, and evidence that Rispah (though but
the Concubine of Saul) retained some tincture of a Royal mind, that when the
seven men of the offspring of Saul, were executed at the instance of the
Gibeonites, with that reproachful and cursed death; yet she from her noble
disposition, and generous respect to that Royal offspring, does what she could
to keep them from those corrupting casualties that are apt to attend carcasses,
exposed as they were in the open air, to be a prey to the Birds by day, and the
Beasts by night; her sackcloth was accepted as a noble pavillion, and spoken
well of at Court, till a more noble Funeral was provided for them, 2 Samuel 21.9,
to 14. Christians, if you are (as you profess) made Kings and Priests to God, a
Royal Priesthood, then you have another, a nobler spirit than have others; it
concerns and becomes you to stir up and improve on things that are most
excellent. It Is not for Kings (Oh Believers!) It Is not for Kings and Princes to
do less than the noblest things. To open their mouth for the dumb in the Cause
of all such (as on this account) are appointed to destruction; Open thy mouth,
judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy.

5thly. Know for your encouragement, That though Christ expects you should do
what you can to imbalm his Interest, yet the sovereign virtue of that, which
indeed does and must preserve it from rotting and stinking, depends upon the
Lord's own provision and preparation: Though your good will be accepted, and
your work shall be rewarded, yet it is freedom from corruption flows from the
absolute dominion he has over the Grave where he lies, and the purpose and
engagement that he has made known in the New Covenant to give it a
Resurrection. It Is no small encouragement therefore to know, and be insured
that we are workers together with Christ in this design, which must needs be
succeeded with a good issue and therefore it is good adventuring thereupon.

6thly. Lastly, Resolve upon this, That if you live not long enough to see its
Resurrection, yet you will be laid in the same Grave with it; where it dies
you will die, and there you will be buried; The Spices then prepared and laid
in to imbalm it, will also perfume you. The last Testimony of Friendliness the
old Prophet could show to the young Prophet (1 Kings 13.28, 29, 30, 31.) was to
take up his dead ca^kass, though a Lion had slain him and stood by, lay him in
his own Sepulcher, and give this charge, When I am dead, then bury me in the
Sepulcher wherein the man of God is buried, lay my bones besides his bones.
Joseph lays the body of Christ in his own new Tomb, Mat. 27.60. Abraham and
Sarah, Isaac and Rebeka, Jacob and Leah, and Joseph also covet to be laid
together, Genesis 49. 29, 31. A Cave in Canaan, where they must be laid in the
Faith of Promises, which is more desirable than the chiefest Royal Sepulchers
in Canaan, Genesis 23.6. chap. 49.29. chap. 50.25, 26. It was nobly resolved in
Ittai the Gittite, 2 Samuel 15.21. Surely in what place my Lord the King shall
be, whether in death or life, there also will thy Servant be. Such blessed
Resolutions raised on true Principles, Rev. 12.11. Acts 15.26. chap. 20.24.
chap. 21.13. have their acceptance now, and shall not miss of an early
Resurrection in due time, 2 Kings 13.21. Dan. 11.13. Isa. 26.19.

FINIS.
The gracious Author of the foregoing Treatises, after full Three years
Suffering under very hard circumstances, enduring many inhumanities from
merciless Goalers in Excester-Goal, was continued Prisoner under Military
Guards in the Isle of Plymouth, where a violent Sickness in a few days seized
upon him; in which a Friend admitted to a constant Converse, judged these
following Passages worthy his Observation, which may fitly be here inserted, as
a Discovery of the Grace granted in his various Changes, and Abiding with him,
until by the Will of God, having finished his Work, he fell asleep.
A Friend giving him some Emulsion to drink, he drank and said, All passages
are clear, between Stomach and Belly, Head and Heart, and that and Heaven,
blessed be God.

A Friend then asking him if he had any thing to say to them in the Family with
him, in case the Lord should call him from them? He replied, I desire the
blessing of the God of Heaven may be upon you, and a full Reward from him be
ministered to you for all the labor of Love you have showed to me for the Lords
sake; and I beseech you continue steadfast in the Faith and Testimony to Christ
and his Concerns, who is as worthy as ever, notwithstanding all the reproach
cast on him and them; and I desire earnestly you will take heed of being
offended at Him, his Word, Works, or Ways, but be careful to be found in his
paths, as ever you hope to have help, to stand before him with peace and
comfort at his appearing.

He further said, Christ had a poor Remnant yet left, that he was persuaded
should be helped to stand, and no more to be afraid of the worst that men can
do, than he, through Grace, was now afraid of what Death could do to him. And
said, Though I may be rolled into my dust, yet there is a promised approaching
Glory, that God will most certainly bring forth out of all these great deeps,
with which we are now encompast, though (says he) it may be you also may not
live to see it, but to die in the Faith of it will be enough; and the Lord
grant you may not stagger, and that no cloud may be upon your Testimony to God,
nor (unless clouds be good for you) upon your Interest in him.

And as to the Church at Plymouth, he said, He had often, since his Sickness, on
his bed, begged of God, that the Lord the God of the spirits of all flesh,
would set a man over that Church, a man whom he should choose, to go in and out
before them, to feed them, that so the Lords poor flock be not utterly
scattered by those that carry or keep them Captive. Numb. 27. he referred to.

And further said to a Friend then present, I desire you, if God by his
Providence or otherwise, shall hereafter speak any such thing to you, though
but in a whisper, you would not despise or neglect it, but look on it as the
Call of God to you, and obey it accordingly.

To which that Friend replied, My weakness is sufficiently known to you, my
self, and others, for such a weighty service, making me dread the thoughts of
such an undertaking as at present furnished; yet I hope I shall carefully mind,
what the Lord may speak to me in future, as also what hint you have now given
about it, to do therein as God shall direct.

After this discourse ended, he further said, He had been a poor staggering
vain creature, and since the time he came to this place, and the Lord gave a
little recovery, he had not so improved it as became him; he earnestly wished he
could write a little, that he might leave a witness against it. Saying also,
Ah! I have many things in Shorthand, that none can read but my self, by which
means they will be lost.

Then added, I have a poor Sister, an honest affectionate soul, who I desire
you will do what you can to comfort, support and strengthen, according to that
counsel, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Now we exhort you Brethren, warn them that are unruly,
comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. And
desired we would sometimes speak a word in season to her. And further said, as
to the Church in Plymouth, wherein he had labored, he designed to serve the
Lord in it, and to gather souls to Christ; and had now the witness of a good
Conscience in that matter, that he had not wilfully omitted, or dealt
negligently in that Work in the main of it, as opportunity presented; and blessed
the Lord, that since his Imprisonment, he had heard of six or seven of that
Church, that had gone triumphing to Heaven before him.

Then speaking of Christians Sufferings, he minded that word, 1 Pet. 4.16. Yet
if any man suffer as a Christian, etc. He minded what a blessed thing it was to
suffer as a Christian, viz. To begin, hold on, hold out, and at last come off
as a Christian; It was a great Word and Work, and speaking of his pains he had
on his outward-man, yet blessed God, There was no sorrow added, nor no sting in
them, that was stuck in the sides of Christ, blessed be his Name.

A Friend asking how he did? Never better in my life (said he) blessed be God.

One asked him whether he would have any Cordial? He said, Yes, may it be an
instrument on Gods behalf to recover a little strength before I go hence, and
be seen no more, to speak yet a word for God, else tell me of no more Cordials,
for I drink full draughts. One giving him a little, he drank and said, I am
made to drink of the best spiced Wine, the Wine of the Pomegranate; his Love is
better than Wine; I am drinking of a Vineyard, not a drop of red Wine blessed
be God: the Day I think is come, I shall be led to the Fountain of Living
Water, and shall hunger nor thirst no more; And added, The Wine that is red
might have been my Portion, even fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest,
might have been the portion of my Cup.

Oh! if Jacob's heart revived to see the Chariots to carry him to Joseph in
Egypt, How should my Soul revive in me to see my God's Chariots of Salvation to
carry me to see him, not in Egypt, nor Earthly but Heavenly Canaan; Then he
fetched a sigh, saying, I sigh, but am not sad.

Then applying himself to speak to Friends about him, he said, And to you that
are troubled, rest with me there is prepared for you shortly.

One telling him, he spent himself; he said, He would gladly spend and be spent
for Christ, yet would not make undue haste to Heaven till his Beloved pleased,
yet I would bid my Friends Farewell, remembering Elijah threw his Mantle on
Elisha at parting; and though I cannot yet say whether it be finally farewell:
Paul bid the Romans farewell often, but I can bid you heartily farewell,
blessedly farewell. Then added, I have one word for Sion, I have been often
refresht in thoughts of old Jacob, as I mentioned but now, how he revived, and
said, Joseph is yet alive, I will go down and see him before I die: But yet
before he comes out of Canaan he is at a stand, and God must be sought to know
his mind, Genesis 46.4. God assures him, he would go with him into Egypt, and
would surely bring him up thence, and yet Jacob must die there; I have thought
how can this word be true? and have been answered, it was true to Jacob
collectively, though not personally considered, his seed, and with them him
also, dead or alive, must be brought up with them in the time appointed; and
though Jacob's life indeed is took off in somewhat an unexpected time and way,
yet his Faith is kept up so as he gives charge in that matter, ere he dies,
that his bones should be carried up with them, and so gives testimony to the
Truth of God in that case, and the like does Joseph.

Oh Friend! God has brought us down unto Egypt, it may be where we would not
have gone; he has indeed let us go in the beginning of our way where we would,
and we then went under full gales like to them, Exodus 15.14. to 18. saying, We
shall come up out of Egypt, it may be pitching it too personally as to us, for
whether we in our persons shall be brought from Bashan and the depths of the
Sea, may yet be a question; but if we be indeed the seed of Jacob, that seek
him and his face, we shall then most certainly be brought up dead, or alive,
out of Egypt: let us endeavor to keep up Faith in that.

There is a Cause God has stretched out his hand to own amongst us, though men
may be divided about it what it is; some say it consists in Stating and
Asserting our Rights against Oppressors; but I take it to be such a Testimony
to Christ's Kingdom, that few will espouse but such as love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity. Though as to outworks, they must be owned as works of wonder, but
the inward-part is the main thing, even to bring forth Judgment and Truth into
Power and Practice, so as all the upright in heart shall follow it; this, even
this shall be so brought out and lifted up over the heads of all oppositions
and oppressors; but God has much of this kind yet to bring forth in the hearts
of his own Children: But, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

One asked him, Will you have some refreshing? I have refreshing (says he) the
world knows not of, and Strangers cannot intermeddle with.

His Sister desired, he would take rest, He answered, Christ's Disciples said
of Lazarus, Joh. 11. If he sleep, he shall do well, speaking it of natural
sleep; but to sleep in Jesus, as those that God will bring again with him, is
much better. Adding, It was a sweet resolve of Hezekiah's broken words, Isa.
38. when he had spoken hard words of God, not becoming a man of his
acquaintance with divine dispensations, when he says, What shall I say? he
has spoken, and himself has done it; I shall go softly all my years in the
bitterness of my soul, verse. 15. Yet recollects himself, verse. 16. O Lord, by
these things men live; and in all these things is the life of my spirit, so
will thou recover me, and make me to live. So I have a word or hint sometimes
as if the Lord would say, Eat a little, and drink a little; as if he might have
some little further work for me; but then old pains, and not old clearness
again at other seasons, making me see and say, Oh! how hard a thing is it to
keep an even hand with God, in his various dispensations. So foolish was I and
ignorant, as that good man once said, Psalm. 37. Sometimes as a man, then as a
Beast, etc. but it is good for me to draw near unto God, and to say though he
kill me, yet I will trust in him.

But it pleased the Lord though by very undiscernable degrees, after keeping
his Chamber three quarters of a year, to give him a Recovery for some season;
after which being seized with Sickness, which continued to the finishing of his
days; the following, being but few of many worthy occasional sayings of his,
were by the same Friend carefully treasured up. Being asked by a Friend, Is all
well within? He answered, All Is well there, blessed be God my God, the high
rock of my salvation; my soul has trusted in him, and shall not be ashamed.

His Sister discovering something of impatience at the stroke upon him,
threatening his dissolution; he earnestly reproved her, saying, Oh! be more a
Woman, be more a Christian; Is this what you told me yesterday?

Being then asked by a Friend, Have you ought to say to us, before you leave
us? He replied, O love the Lord all ye his Saints! when and wheresoever he
calls to follow, go after him; yea, though he kill you, yet love him still,
trust him still. One saying to him, Yea, worthy is the Lamb to receive Glory,
Honor, Obedience, and Service from all his Saints: He replied, He is worthy
indeed, for he has redeemed me by his blood, blessed be God he is my God, he
is my God; And then said, The Lord has strangely raised me, and called me to
put on a very high Profession, and carried me more strangely through it to this
hour; though it may seem to be but a poor thing in its self considered, yet the
Lord has had a care of such a poor worm, and has not left me shamefully to
forsake him nor has hitherto forsaken me; and blessed be my God that has
brought me into bonds for his Names sake in this day; this honor have not all
his Saints, though they be a People near unto him; but Oh! the crowning Mercy
is this, that I can behold my Father's face with joy; and can say in some
measure, I have finished the work thou gave me to do, and now, holy Father, I
come to thee.

I have heretofore given some account of my self to you, and as you may
remember as to those remarkable Passages of my Life, both as a Christian, a
Minister, a Sufferer; This last I am now come to put a Seal to as they have
been Sufferings for Christ's Cause an^ Kingdom, as God has given him to be
Head over al things to the Church, which is his Body, and indeed (...) he has
appointed me, sufferings for his Names sake, so I must say, to his praise, he
has so far restraine^ men's wrath, as he has made Enemies to be at peac^ with
me, and friendly to me; this I would comment to you my dear Friends, as an
Argument for ever to trust in God.

There is also, some thing I have been under from his own hand, that has been
with great pain upon me, as you have been Witnesses; and my sorrows here have
been oft-times greater than my groanings, and this last has been well nigh
oversetting at some seasons, insomuch as I thought it was impossible to have
born the torments laid on my poor flesh; but now I see nothing is too hard for
God, sometimes to lay on his own Children, or for his Power to bear them up
under.

His Sister tells him, You spend your self in speaking: He answers, Let me
speak that I may be refreshed. It is refreshing to me to speak of what God has
made sweet to me. Then he calls for a little Julip to drink; a Friend says to
him, It will be hut a little while, and you will thirst no more. He replies, Ah
blessed are they that eat Bread in the Kingdom of our Lord, and drink Wines
there, he will lead them by Rivers and Fountains of Living waters, where they
shall thirst no more, and he will wipe away all tears from their eyes.

His Sister desired to know how he was satisfied as to his coming hither, she
having been the occasion as she judged of his coming from Exon to Plymouth, and
consequently of his coming hither; He answered, Very well satisfied, all have
been steps of divine ordering; I would not have come from Exon, might I have
had my own will; I would not have stayed in Plymouth, after I had Preached
once, but God would have me stay; I would not have come to this place, after my
time of suffering was out in the Town Hall at Plymouth, if I might have had my
own will; but God would bring me hither, and blessed be the Lord that let me
not have my own will, blessed be God that brought me here, and blessed me here,
with desirable Company and Mercies, concerning which we have had occasions and
seasons to speak well of God together; yea, since I have been brought here, and
sick here, yet the steps of God have been in great wisdom with me, and the
bottom of them all paved with Love, in the main of his goings in these dark and
heavy strokes; I say, in the main of them they have been attended with peace
to my soul; I have had Old Wine, or New, afforded still; sometimes he has said
the Old is better, and has made ancient experiences of his Love, sweet to me,
yet not always alike clear; sometimes he has seen good to cut short within
and without, and this last trial, to deal plainly, came on in somewhat a cloud,
at its entrance I was somewhat stupid, thinking no more in it than ordinary;
but I was at last awakened by the Lord to think that this might be a long and
close trial, and though he let me see the Anchor dropped within the Vail, yet had
I not that freshness of Evidence, till within a few days last past, when he
called up my Spirit to a close search, in a Night or two, though I said but
little of it, but he graciously issued that matter in a token for good, that
whether I live or die, I hope I shall wear to his praise, while I have my
being; so that thus it is with me now, Christ is lovely to me in all the
afflictions I have met with, in all I have seen and suffered: wherefore rejoice
with me, O my Friends, let us rejoice and bless the Name of the Lord together
that has dealt well with me; and do not I beseech you disgrace the throne of
his Glory, because of me or this fleshly state that must be taken from you.
Murmur not I pray ye, that yet you see not Saviors come up upon Mount Zion.
The reserve of Spirit is with him, and the Lord has many Children to bring in,
besides those that are brought, that shall be brought in by virtue of fresh
Anointing, so as they shall be known to be Children of his that he has blessed:
And as I desire you would not weep for me, so not inordinately for your selves
neither; adhere to Christ, and fear none of those things ye shall suffer. I
have no deep insight into deep Mysteries; but this I Believe God is a-rising to
do some great thing in the World for Sion's sake, and though it be hard for us
to lose our Chariots and Horsemen, some by Apostasy, some by Death, some by
Scattering, yet when the Gathering time shall be, it will be no grief, nor
sorrow of heart to behold the way of Gods working in all these things, when we
shall say he has done all things well.

There are many signs upon us, that prognostic great things near at the doors,
though I dare not say I know much distinctly as to Times, Means, and Methods,
only be assured not one jot or title of all God has spoke shall fail, though
our interpretations of them may fail.

If any ask how it stood with me, as to these things at this season, tell them,
If I die, I die in as full Assurance that God will give reviving to his poor
despised Cause and Interest, as I do believe the Resurrection of this Body, and
that I know both the one and the other are founded on such a Word as shall
stand as Mountains of Brass. And advise them also, to take heed how they wait
on men's Indulgence, so much talked of, but let their Faith stand in the Wisdom,
Power, and Faithfulness of God, and their Prayers be directed more that way,
endeavoring to make Religion their business; yet if any shall lean to such a
deceitful Bow, be not you dismayed or discouraged at it, but hold on your way,
that shall be strength to you.

And now, Oh now, could I send Epistles to all the Churches; in these things I
would, but that work I think is over; be ye therefore as the Epistle of that,
to them. And now my dear Brother and Sisters, I desire to bless God for you,
and for your great tenderness to me; but herein, as to particulars, my mouth is
stopped. I hope you will continue love to my poor Sister, you see what a poor
Creature she is, yet I hope one that will find Mercy in the day of Christ. And
dear Sister A. L. remember me to all Saints in Plymouth, and tell them, I have
no greater joy than to hear that they are of those Children that are walking in
the Truth, as to hear of any of them walking loose to Christ, and loose to the
Profession of him, is my Souls grief. Oh! tell them, that as ever they hope to
see my face with joy at the great Day, that what they have seen and heard from
me a poor worm that has been according to the mind of the Lord, they would do,
and the God of Peace shall be with them. And now Friends, as a Sir H.V.
good man once said, so I say (as to what you may have further to say to me or
ask of me) While the Oil runs bring your Vessels. His Sister asked what he had
to say to her Family? He answers, They had been a kind poor Family, the Lord
make them his Family; and, dear Sister, look over a weak Husband and Family,
and difficulties that may occur as to them and you. You and I have been
Witnesses to the Faithfulness of Christ, how he has provided for us in former
days; and I challenge you, if you can, to say to the contrary, he has not
failed us thus far. Then he said, I am weak and faint. A Friend by, said to
him, The Lord the Creator to the ends of the Earth faints not, but gives
power to the faint, and to those that have no might, renews strength. He
answers, Yes, he does so, and will also roll away the reproach of his People in
due time, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; Oh this part, this part of
the reproaches of Christ, this now almost eight years reproach, What Glory is
there in it, to those that are helped to bear up under it.

Then speaking to his Sister A. said, Dear Sister, Bear up, bear up, blessed be
God for strength to you thus far, bear up still I beseech you, accept all in
good part, and pass by all weaknesses; you and your Husband had Relations each
of you, dear to you both; and also I trust to Christ, I desire not
complementally, but really to be remembered to them all, and desire they may be
all gathered up to Christ to meet him at his appearing.

And I desire for you all that you may be strengthened to all the pleasure of
God, that is yet to come to pass concerning you, and that you may come out of
these great Tribulations as Sheep from the washing; and though you may see me
possibly go away from you, in the fiery trial, yet it may be you may be
admitted to that Mercy of being bid come out and show your selves; yet that is
but little, considering the snares that may yet attend such a state: But Oh!
how much clearer is my way to come out thus, than by men.

Then speaking to the Maid, he said, I desire God may have the praise of what
he has wrought in, and for you, and wherever you are cast, I desire you may
walk as a chaste Virgin.

And to the Nurse he said, I know not how you may think your self concerned in
such discourse as this, since these may seem strange things to you, yet give me
leave to say, they are some of the true sayings of God, how strange soever they
may seem; yea, they are also needful things for you to be acquainted with; Oh
press after them with all earnestness.

Then a Friend present, speaking after this manner, Ah! Brother, What is the
meaning of these Dispensations of the Lord, in snatching away his choicest
Saints from amongst us, and leaving the poorest and weakest to be Concerned for
him in such a day, making them ready in sorrow and sadness of heart to say, By
whom shall Jacob arise, since he is so small? To which he replied, How small
soever Jacob was, yet Jacob's God was not small; He is a great King, and a God
above all Godds; and as was minded but now, he gives Power to the faint, and
our strength is in the Name of the Lord that made Heaven and Earth, who does
and will do much by Babes; wherefore say not, I am a Babe, a Child, etc. but
rather say, Here am I, send me, that God who was Jacob's God, who fed and led
him all his life long, he has been and is the God of the Seed of Jacob to this
day, that has led us thus far also, through a vast howling Wilderness, and
sustained us, and not suffered us to deny his Name: Oh this God is our God, let
him be our guide even unto death. The Fathers that were before us, alas, what
were they, and the Prophets, do they live for ever? no they were weak as we,
and died as must we; but when the Lord had work for them to do, he gave
Anointing for it, and then they could say they were full of Might and Power by
the Spirit of the Lord to show Israel their transgression, and the House of
Jacob their sin. So we, through Christ, can do all things, he strengthening us.
Look then to the Lord that gave the former rain, and will give the latter also
in its season, according to his Power. And my dear Brother, Be not discouraged,
your work seems cutting short also day by day by many things, though what you
may live to see or suffer; I know not, neither do I know how meet it may be to
mind you of a motion I made to you about two years since on the like occasion
about remembering the poor Flock I have traveled and labored amongst, if God
cast your lot in these parts; but hoping you will mind what may be your Duty in
this matter, I shall say no more, but the Will of the Lord be done; be of good
courage, and God shall strengthen your hearts.

His Sister was troubled seeing him so weak, which occasioned him to say, Oh!
be ashamed, Sister, of such a demeanor, cannot you let a poor Believer go to
Heaven? Oh! did you but stand on the threshold and see what preparations God
has made for such a poor worm as I am, you would never be afraid of Death
more. Oh! honor Christ much, I think he is coming near to honor me, though I
know not yet that my Sentence is come out from him; yet I speak not as if I had
hankering thoughts to stay. Oh! when shall I see the day? We shall sing at
parting, and not mourn as now; blessed be God for ever, that he has not let
the Righteous to be ashamed, nor Wicked men to triumph over them for my sake.
Ah! did they know what God has pardoned in me, they might be apt to triumph
more than now they can.

If there seems any importunity from any Friends for any thing to be mentioned
of me, when I am gone, speak moderately of me I beseech you; but if any thing
has been seen in me worth learning, let it be offered with much humility; or
rather I think let my Works praise me in the Gate, but I limit not.

His Sister asked, Will you drink? Yea Sister (says he) Have you any of the
best spiced Wine? He then grew faint, and could speak no more at that time.

Afterward, being asked how he did? He said, All his bones were as it were out
of joint. And added, God has reserved this Proof of my Ministry (viz.) in much
painfulness until these few years last past, having been little acquainted with
Sickness before. He then asked If it were day? A Friend answered, The night was
far spent, the day was at hand, even a morning without clouds, to which you
seem hastening. To which he replied, Yes, as a very clear shining after rain.
Being asked a while after, How he did? He (with his eyes lifted up) answered,
Nevertheless I am still with him, he holds my soul in life, will guide me by
his Counsel, and afterward receive me up to Glory.

A Friend that dwelt upon the place, coming to him, and speaking Religiously,
He replied, There was much talk of Religion in the World, but few had attained
to acquaintance with the powerful inward part of it; and then minded that much
of the power of Religion indeed was comprehended in that word, Phil. 1.21. For
me to live is Christ; not only to live on, or to Christ, but to live Christ, in
all we speak or act is a high work: Lord, let my soul (says he) into the sight
and joy of it, yet more and more. The same person enquiring of him, How it was
with him in this hour? He said, Blessed be God, he has washed away my sins,
and spoke peace to my soul, and thereby obliged me to follow him while I live,
and much more to go to him when I die. Then said, O Father, shall I not now go
hence, but return into a world of so many snares and dangers again. And further
tells the Person aforesaid, That he was very sensible of great respects
received from her and her Relation; And said, For a full recompense to you all,
I desire when ever you come to such an hour as I am now approaching to, you may
meet with the same Comforts that through Grace I now find.

A Brother coming from far, a day or two after, to visit him; being brought in
suddenly upon him, seemed a little displeased, saying, His Spirit was not now
able to bear any sudden thing without oversetting.

That Brother asking him how he did? He answered, Never better in my life. But
adds, Think it not to be passion or words of distraction, for though I am very
weak in body, yet God is very near to me.

He also then said to a Friend sitting by, on the occasion of turning in his
bed by reason of weariness, Ah! this is not our rest, it is polluted; but there
remains a rest to the People of the Lord, and his rest shall be glorious.

After this he had a day or two that seemed to be hopeful to his Recovery, in
which season little was said to him, or by him; being desirous to let his
spirits rest from exercise in order thereunto, if so were the Will of the Lord.

But his Pains returning, and a Friend asking how he did? He answered, It had
been a night of exercise to him, inward and outward. To which it was answered,
That exercises were appointed by the Lord both for body and spirit; but how are
you sustained under them: To which he answered, I am graciously born up still,
and kept in peace under all.

Being asked if he had yet any hint how the Lord might do with him, as to this
dispensation he was now under, as to life or death? He replied, He had nothing
in that matter he could call divine teaching, but by laying all circumstances
within his view, in the present case together, he thought he must go hence, at
which poor flesh was ready to shrink and murmur. It was answered, That must and
would do so, while in its present being, it naturally seeking
self-preservation, and avoiding and shrinking at that which threatens its
destruction, and it must needs be irksom to it, to be following God in ways it
knows not, whence they come, or whither they lead, but yet notwithstanding it
must be brought down; for a corn of Wheat cast into the ground, is not quickened
except it die; and so in this case precedent to the quickening that is to be
brought out, on the proper subjects of it: Death in one respect or other, must
be brought on upon all fleshly glory and excellency, even in its perfection.
Whereunto he replied, Yes, it must so, for unless it die, it remains alone, and
cannot be brought out in its glorious state, of the manifestation of the sons
of God, but by cracking the shell of this earthly tabernacle, and so coming out
to it.

A Friend coming to have felt his Pulse; He said, I have not asked your
observations in my case, it may be thought possibly it might add some
impressions of hopes or fears, if I should know what it is. The Friend replied,
His Observations in such cases vere not very material to acquaint him with; but
says the Friend, What are your own Observations in the case? He answered, His
Hope was on high, yet Flesh he found hankering in his Musings at some seasons,
suggesting there was much desirable work to do, some of one sort, some of
another; at this and the other place making him ready to desire to stay, and
loath to be gone: but when looking up and considering the state of things, then
he is made to say to his soul, Oh! haste away to thy Mountain. And, Oh! that I
had wings as a Dove, then would I flee away and be at rest; I would not live
always, and am ready to say sometimes as he, Take me away, for thou know my
days that they are vanity. But Oh! I am much more cumbred on the other hand
with crying, How long, Lord! And sometimes am ready to wish an end, which way
ever it be, by recovery or death.

To which it was told him, That argued him a man. Yes, (said he) a poor man.

It was told him again, All our Poverty, Weakness, and Unworthiness, in the day
approaching, shall but make matter for a song the more, to the praise of rich
Grace, and Mercy, in the Lord's remembering us in our low estate, because his
Mercy endures for ever.

On the same day, in the afternoon, a Friend asking him how he did? He
answered, Coveting to overcome: referring to a word, had been spoken that day
in the Family, from Rev. 2.26. of which one had given him some account. It was
replied to him, That was a good work, and good in it, to be eying him that had
overcome, by whom only we can be helped to overcome. He replied, Yes, to be able
to say, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the Faith, is a great word and
work.

And further said, He had had his reflections, and he thought some injections
also, that day of his neglects of service for the Lord, that he might better
have improved in times past, though in the main, the Testimony I have born to
Christ, in my day, is a quieting, comforting Consideration, through the blood
of Christ, though not the bottoming Consideration, on which my peace is built,
yet it is of great use, in a secondary sort, at such a season; and I mention it
to you, that you may do much, suffer much, shrink not, nor neglect no work for
God; it will be no grief of heart to any that have spent, and been spent, for
God, his Name and Interest for days to come.

Being ver^ ill, and, in the apprehensions of those about him, like to leave
them, he was asked, Had he any further word to them, or any of the Lord's
People, before he left them. To which he answered, I have spoken to you and
them already the whole Counsel of God, according to what I have received, and
was under no temptation, to keep back any thing through fraud; I cannot now
speak much, and if I could, unless the great Remembrancer set home with Power
and Efficacy, what is spoken upon our minds and spirits, it will signify but
little; and to add many words, would be but a vanity: but for you, and them,
and all Saints, I pray that you may abide with God, and never be ashamed or
tempted with fear or cowardice, or unbecoming complyances with base Earthly
Worldly Interests to let go your holdfast on any Truth you have professed, as
Truth is in Jesus.

I have delivered to that poor Church I appertain unto, the Doctrine of a Free
Gospel of Grace, wherein a foundation is laid in the blood of Jesus, of Peace
with God through him, and they also, have wit^ hands lift up to the most High,
professedly accepted (...) that Grace tendered to them; and I being, I think,
about to leave Earth, and to go to my Father, and give (...) account of my
Stewardship therein; I do go in f^^ assurance that it is the true Grace of God
wherein they stand; and I do lay it before them, with the utmost ability such a
poor worm as I can do, that they be not by Doctrine, Word, nor Spirit, soon
shaken from their stedfastness, hither or thither, for life or salvation, but
as they have been taught.

He farther said, I also have been engaged in a witness to the Royal
Sovereignty of Christ in his Institutions, against the Inventions of men
opposed thereunto; which Testimony has been born up against blindness and
ignorance, in a poor dark world that lies in ignorance and wickedness; and
their Testimony in fellowship with this of mine, has flourisht in former
days, under those more promising propitious Prospects we were then encompest
and encouraged with, it had then by them and others, Hosanna's ascribed to it;
but since God has seen good to try this Testimony, and Spirits of such as
profess it with a day of adversity, that many looked not for and they have
hereby been tempted basely and unworthily to throw away the Shield, as if it
never had been anointed; the thoughts whereof has many times almost broken my
heart in pieces: But let all such know, I go away in this firm persuasion, as
to the things we have together professed as aforesaid, that they are the true
sayings of God, and that such as in this hour of temptation have deserted their
Profession of them, God will meet with all such if he love them, to ^waken and
recover them from such paths and postures ^f backsliding, or else to make them
know, to their ^hame, and confusion of face, that they have dealt dis^onourably
with Christ and his Concerns, and danger^usly with their own souls; which I
desire they may and Mercy to repent unfeignedly of, before it be too ^ate.

I have been also concerned in a Testimony with diverse Churches, as to a work
God has had on the wheel among us in our days, very mysterious in many parts
of it; there have also many trials been upon it, and to try it, and to make up
such a trial, as all things considered, has not been known in many
generations. It has also a Dark-side and a Vail that God keeps upon it, by
reason of which many are offended at it; but if I have not been left to mistake
God and Gospel, it has also a Beautiful-side that this world is not worthy of,
and a time also appointed when its beauty shall be brought forth as the Light,
and shine as the Sun at noonday; though it seems yet to me, that times may
pass over it, that may make some of those few stagger also; but this remains
sure upon the whole, that though it be the day of Jacob's trouble, and it is
very great, so that none is like it, yet he shall be delivered out of it:
wherefore let not your hearts, nor any other upright ones, be dismayed at what
remains; for though I cannot tell what comes next, nor have attained to that
distinctness of knowledge (as were to be wished and waited for) as to times and
seasons, which God the Father has very signally yet hid in his own hand; Yet I
am very much persuaded, this Generation shall not pass away till the Lord
appear to give signal Evidence of the Great Work he has had, and yet has upon
the wheel, and also of his care of all that are concerned in it. Oh! Love the
Lord all ye his Saints, the Lord preserves the Faithful, and plentifully
rewards the proud doers.

At another time, being asked, Would he have any thing to Plymouth? He said,
No: for saving the Interest of the Lord in Plymouth, the Town was now as little
to him, as this little Island where he was.

Being asked how he did? He said, I am a poor sick weak creature still; Adding,
That the Tempter had been very busy this Night with him, suggesting that it is
much to him that he should be a Creeple; but the Lord (he said) had put the
Tempter to shame, and given him to know, that though he was at present weak,
yet in the Lord Jehovah he had still everlasting strength.

At another season, a Friend asking, What, does your hard work continue still?
He said, Yes, I am laboring as it were in the fire, which were not to be
endured, but in hopes of the Crown.

At another time, being asked how he did? He said, Still in the Warfare, but on
the Conquerors side. To which his Friend replied, Blessed be the Lord, that
has chosen you to be a Soldier, and helped you thus far as a good Soldier of
his, to endure hardships. He replied, Yea, we account them happy which endure

One comes to him, and says, Poor Neighbor! What of the Night? He said, The
Lord had made it a Night of sore affliction to him; And said, He was now poor
and needy indeed; yet (says he) my God thinks on me.

To which his Friend replied, Yea, he has also greatly magnified Mercy to you
in this your sickness, by strengthening your Faith, and lengthning out your
Patience, under such long sore visitations as these have been; and I trust is
signally teaching you Obedience by the things you suffer. At which he sighed,
And said, Ah! that word, learning Obedience by the things we suffer, is a great
word, and has much in it, when God rightly opens it, and he does teach
Obedience, much indeed by such things beyond what we think of, our thoughts and
ways being far short of his in such things.

Another Friend that had been with him about the beginning of his Sickness,
coming now to see him again; He said to him, I remember I told you formerly, I
had no cloud on my peace, and joy in the Lord, since this Sickness; but have
seen cause since to change my voice in that matter, the Lord having, since
that, brought me under trials and cloudings sometimes, though blessed be God,
they have been day, not night-clouds, through which God has shined; and I
cannot so much desire for my self or others, that we might always be without
clouds, as that our Holiness might might be promoted, and carried on by them,
then all will be well.

A Friend asking how he did? He said, I have been this Night full of disorders.
It was answered, The whole Earth was so, and we, while dwelling on it, are like
to participate in somewhat of the same kind, in one sense or other; all these
disorders are but making way for that blessed orderly state of things, by which
he will manifest himself indeed, to be the God of Order, and not of Confusion,
not only in the Assemblies of the Saints, but throughout the whole Earth.

The same day, being asked by one, How does this valiant Soldier of Christ? He
shook his head at it, and said, A pitiful Soldier. It was replied, One great
part of a Soldier was to endure hardships, and this part God had helped him to
do, at a blessed becoming rate, thus far; which was matter of thanksgiving to
the Lord on his behalf, and gave ground also to hope he would in like manner be
helped to the end.

Then those about him, looking at one of his hands (now bereaved of strength)
He said, Come, What see you? What tidings? Does it rot? Let it do so, it must
do so, yet shall mortallity he swallowed up of life, and this now poor
perishing Carcass shall be brought up again, into a more glorious state, by the
mighty power of God, by which he is able to subdue all things to himself. It
was then told him, We have no tidings more than ordinary, only had little hopes
as to men, and means, as concerning his case, whatever the Lord might please to
do.

It was then asked him, What tidings he had in himself, as to his case? He
said, Nothing at any certainty; But said, He heard Friends in the Room
whispering often, as if they saw or discerned some great change that were not fit
for him to know. But I bless the Lord (said he) I begin to be more mortified to
all this state of things here below, though Flesh and Blood has sometimes its
hopes and fears in exercise about them, but when God knocks off their Wheels, I
see and then can say, by these things men live. Yea, said a Friend, they live
indeed at a rate they could not live, were it not for such dyings daily to all
other kinds of living, and thereby bringing out to that way of Life, as to
which way of Life, it is said, it cannot be brought out but by dying, it else
remains alone. To which he said, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, nor Corruption Incorruption; yet Flesh is unwilling to hear of this.

To which it was told him, No marvel that Flesh and Blood did boggle in such
cases, when it is called to go in a way it knows not, and a knife at the throat,
ready to kill all the way; it is therefore reckoned a great lesson to be learnt
by all Christians, not to trust in themselves, but the Living God; and is
taught best by sentences of death past upon all they are apt to trust in, of a
fleshly carnal kind, 2 Cor. 1.9.

Again, that day, a Friend asking how he did? He replied, Heavy, heavy. It was
told him, Earth would be so. Yea, says he, and the Sand weighty, but the New
Heavens, and New Earth will not be so; their make will be of a more
transcendent nature, by reason of the Spirit of Holiness and Righteousness that
shall dwell in them.

It was answered, Yes, In those days the Righteous shall flourish. Whereunto
he quickly replied, That the Righteous had their day, a day that might be
properly called theirs, in which they should in some sort flourish; But (said
he) it is said, in his day, entitling it to Christ principally, the Righteous
shall flourish, Christ shall have a day for it in the world.

Being asked, What think you, shall you be returned to us again, or not? He
said, Truly he knew not what to think in that matter; and when all thoughts
about it were made, it was hardly worth a serious consideration, in regard of
their uncertainty, and the little of Christian concernment in such kind of
knowledge; for though sometimes it were very grateful to Flesh and Blood, to be
able to say, hereby shall it be known I am a man of God, by my coming to such a
place, or doing such a thing, at such a season; yet when Paul went bound in
Spirit to Jerusalem, under fullest gales that ever he went, he must not know
what must betide him there, Acts 20.22. nor whether God would be glorified in
him by life or death.

A Clyster being ministered that day, which wrought not; it was asked, How he
did? He said, Hastening home now apace. What makes you think so, says the
Friend? Why (says he) the Lord has usually made it his way with me, when he
works me up to settled persuasions of things, they have usually come to pass
accordingly; now having had Clysters, and such means administered, that have
wrought with my poor body, long, even to admiration; but now it ceases to do
so, and all passages seem stopped for evacuation of the humors lodged in my body;
I conclude, he intends to take me away. It was told him, It was but one Clyster
had so miscarried with him, another might operate; and that such a conclusion
could not well be drawn from no better premises than that. Then he added, God
has been many ways bringing me to an acquiescence in his Will as to such an
issue; he seems to be putting, and has likewise been for this week or more,
taking you off from glorying in the flesh, of such a poor creature any longer,
by bringing this poor body under such straightning circumstances, as may make
you all willing to part with me, rather than to be continued under such sore
pains to me, as well as trouble to you, that so you might let me go; and he
having dealt thus with me, and also spoke, and continues to speak peace to my
soul, I am upon the whole persuaded, I shall leave you; and am helped to say in
that matter, The Will of the Lord be done.

The same day, a Friend asking him, How he did? He said, I am laboring, that
whether present or absent, I may be accepted of the Lord. His Friend answered,
It became him to be so, laboring, eying him, whose Soul has traveled and
labored, that such poor ones as we, might be accepted, and through whom God
has graciously witnessed his acceptance of you, and also of your
witness-bearing unto him, in this your present suffering state (not only from
men, but his own hand likewise) as I am fully persuaded. Then he groaned, and
said, Alas, this poor, weak, weary body.

To which his Friend replied, It was made poor, in order to enriching; and
seemed to be uncloathed, in order to be clothed upon with his house from
Heaven. There he fetched a deep sigh, and said, Ah! if in this life only I had
hope in Christ, I were of all men most miserable. To which it was answered,
Blessed be God, for that well-grounded hope in Christ for a better life, even
that hope that is as an Anchor, sure and steadfast, cast within the Vail, where
our Forerunner is for us entered. Yea, (said he) that better hope, by which we
draw nigh unto God. And bid him be of good cheer; Rest would be more sweet to
him, when he entered into it, by all the toil he met with in the way.

Then he groaned, and said, He was groaning after Liberty. Yea, says his
Friend, a Liberty that tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the sons of men. No,
(says he) it is as a dew from the Lord, it is a glorious liberty.

On the same day, attempting to repose, A Friend seeing him very ill, said, Oh!
my dear Brother, Must we part? He said, Yes, he thought so, though it may be
but for a little time, to meet again with more advantage.

But said the Friend, Alas, how dark are the Providence still, taking away the
best, and leaving the poorest and neediest, for the day and duties of it. To
whom he answered, Lay not much stress upon that, the work is not yours but
Gods, he will provide, only will vary his methods as pleases him; look
therefore to him, and those that are with you, Heb. 12.22.

He then asked a Friends advice, about some Physical administrations, whereto
was replied, Oh! my dear Brother, you know my weakness to advise in any case,
and much more in these I so little understand; that should you practice any
thing as my advice, in competition with others, and miscarry in ^t, I should
not be able to stand under it, though I have this witness with me, that the
best advice I have, I would gladly give; and were it better, I would more
readily give it in any case; but my weakness every way is not unknown to you.
He replied, It might not be meet for us to speak of each other, what might
otherwise be said, having both our fears each way, lest we should speak more
than is meet; but he hoped we had both our witness in that matter, since our
coming together, and that we have carried it to each other in uprightness of
Spirit and truth of Affection, for which we had both occasion to bless the Lord
for favor therein afforded; and for advice desired in the case propounded, he
should not further put any such burden upon him.

To another Friend about him, He said, Alas, what care is there generally and
particularly among persons to conform to the fashions of the world; But, Oh!
let our eyes be upon Jesus in opposition thereunto, and in that path of the
Lord, the God of Love and Peace shall be with us. Then breaking out into holy
Admonitions on that word, 1 Cor. 2.9. of the great^ess which Eye had not seen,
Ear heard, nor had en^ered into the Heart of man to conceive. And said, Oh! as
you love your souls, press, press on, and after it with all your might, and
keep close to the Lord and his paths in pursuit of it, though these ways be
every where spoken against.

Upon a First Day of the Week, in the morning, he began to speak to all in the
Family with him, one after another, as follows.

Ah! Sister A. the Lord gave you a heart to own, and profess him, his Name, and
Ways early, when they were ways every where spoken against, and since you
have held up and out the Profession thereof, in a flourishing day, and now are
concerned, in, and with the same, in this hour of temptation, which I beseech
you be not affrighted, nor offended at: You know how it fared with our Lord and
Master, whom the Religiou^ as well as the Profane world persecuted, and
expelled their Coasts; the Servant is not above his Master It is true, you have
had the Name of a Gentlewoman, and of being descended of great Parantage, and
raised to great things in a worldly account; but keep these al^ under-foot, as
you ought, and let that be the song still, Worthy is the Lamb to receive Power
and Riches, Wisdom and Strength, Honor and Glory, and Blessing. Oh! give up
all to him, as Auranah of old, as a King to a King, so let the Offering be
given up cheerfully, and resignedly entirely to him.

I bless God, I have learned something of this in conversing with you, of your
readiness and freeness heretofore, and now to lay out for the Lord; and though
(...) now go the way of all flesh, yet you know in all your hearts, and in all
your souls, that we have none of u^ cause to be sorry, or repent for what we
have laid ou^ for the Lord. And you for your part have heretofore entertained
Saints, yea, it may be Angels unawars the Lord reward you for it; and the God,
under whose wings you are come to trust, be your great reward; but Oh! take
heed, your Good be not evil spoken of, and that your Table become not a trap,
nor what was provided for good, turn to your hurt. I desire the Lord Jesus may
teach you to look carefully about you, that you lose not the things you have
wrought, but receive a full reward. I remember it is said of Abel, who though
dead, he yet speaks; and have thought that word in a bad sense, looking at
me, and many others, who, while living, have been but dead Speakers; but I am
now hastening to another kind of death, where after Worms have consumed this
flesh and bones, yet I may be brought forth as a living speaking Witness in
these words of mine, against such as slight the instruction of them. Then said,
I bless the Lord for ever, that he has kept me from Hell and horror, to hope
of Salvation, eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ, and that I shall be helped, in
my poor measure, to show forth his praise in this Generation, as well as to
every one that is to come.

Oh Friends! you are like yet to have opportunities amongst living Saints that
speak livingly and audibly. Oh! take heed, take heed this present dispensation,
that you yet are, and I have been trusted with; be not as the Lord's Trumpet,
sounding an Alarm against you, on the behalf of the Lord of Hosts, whose words
have not been received by you.

Then speaks of England, and says, Oh! poor England, sinful England, who
stonest the Prophets, and choice men that are sent unto thee, but would not
hear in this thy day, the things that appertain unto thy peace; but now they
are hid from thine eyes. Thou have had an Iron Sinew and brow of Brass, and
would not be gathered to the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls. Ah England!
England! What would many Kings, and Princes, and Righteous men have given to
have enjoyed, one of those blessed days of the Son of God, which thou have
sinned away, and rendered thy self unworthy of? Oh! how art thou become a place
of Persecution, treading and trampling down, God, his Name, and Concerns, as
much as in thee lies!

But, Oh! there is yet a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, whom the
Lord has yet seen good to winnow till he has driven each grain of Corn from
other; yet be of good cheer, you that are wholly a right Seed, abide with God,
and know assuredly you are more precious in his sight than Gold of Ophir; and
lay this Cordial by it, that the World is not worthy of you, yet judges you
unworthy of it; but there is a day coming, even the day of Jezerel, the seed of
God shall have a day for it, in which the Righteous shall flourish, and
abundance of Peace, as long as the Moon endures. That word has been sweet to
me many times, Psalm. 72.19. And let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory,
Amen, and Amen. The Prayers of David, the Son of Jesse, are ended. Oh! methinks
here is an ending of Prayer indeed, Comprising the whole Glory of the great
David in this short request, that is the complete end of all Prayer, calling
worthily for Amen, and Amen, to close it up.

Then speaks to all in the Room, saying, I charge you all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and as you will ever answer it at that great day, that you make
Religion your business, and that you make not Godliness a slight thing, nor
walking with God a small matter, as ever you hope to stand with boldness before
God in the judgment.

Then he said, God indeed has took strength from these Arms of mine. I speak
it not as if I murmured at it, or by way of discouragement, as if he could not,
if it please him, raise dead bones, and of stones make Children to Abraham,
desires that they would lift up his arms, which they did, and then he lays
this solemn Charge upon them, and desires, they would by lifting and holding
up his hands, be witness to it, as his Charge to all of them, That they make it
their great business, the remaining part of their days to walk, to the praise
and glory of the Lord Jesus, in all the paths of his pleasure.

His Sister being troubled to see how he spent himself in speaking; He said to
her, Come Sister, is this becoming to cry over a dead Dog, when by dying he may
glorify God the more. And added, I am here yet among the Living, though with
many marks of death upon me; yet nothing with infallible certainty with me,
that I shall die at this time; but, Oh! look up from me to the Lord, that so,
that whether I live or die, your Interest may be sure in the Lord Jesus; and
now the Lord watch between me and every one of you, when we shall be apart one
from the other.

Then speaking to his Brother A. said, My dear Brother, the God of Jacob, the
restorer of the dry scattered bones of Israel, shine forth from between the
Cherubims of Glory on thy dear soul, dispersing and dispelling all Clouds,
Foggs, and Fears, under which thou have been long serving God, with many tears
and temptations many a day, of which I have been Eye and Ear witness; and the
God that has hitherto kept us alive to this day, cause all those clouds to
flee away, and bring out your soul yet more fully, not only to find pity from
him to escape the snares that others are caught in, to their hurt; but grant
also, that you may come forth as one of those Palm-bearers, clothed in white,
Rev. 7.9. as having gotten the victory over all Enemies, and made to sing with
grace in your heart, as they, verse. 10. Salvation to our God which sits upon
the Throne, and to the Lamb. And the love extended by you to me unworthy, and
in me to my Lord and Captain of my Salvation: Oh! that streams of Salvation may
come forth, if it be his blessed will, from him to you; so also make you a
blessed pattern of Piety, Purity, and Stability for him, whom I desire to serve
in the Gospel.

His Sister asked, Will you have some Cordial? He said, Oh! when shall I drink
of that good new Wine in my Father's Kingdom?

In a morning, his Friend asked him, What of the Night? He said, It has been a
long Night. But says his Friend, The Morning comes; Yea (said he) as a snare
on it, comes stealing upon the world; but the Children of the Day, and of the
Light, that have on the Armor of Light, shall have no cause to fear.

He Exhorted a good Woman, that watched with him, with all earnestness, to
close walking with the Lord.

His Sister said to him, I hope Brother, as your Tribulations abound, your
Consolations abound He said, It was a hard question, Consolations being very
inward deep things.

She then asked how he felt his Heart? He replied, I feel the fleshly parts
declining apace, but I trust the spiritual renewing.

But saying further to his Sister, Come, are you wiling to part with me yet?
She answered, Yes, in some measure, she hoped she was, considering his pains on
the one hand, and the glory that should follow. Then said he, Be careful, I
charge you, to walk close with God in your generation; and take heed of
departing from his ways, but walk as becomes a Christian, that would be found
to his praise.

After this, through extremity of pains, the exercise of his Understanding was
at seasons interrupted; but very sensible and spiritual in his Intervals.

One asked him, How it was with him? He said, Under great rebukes from the
Land, by reason of sin; Saying, I have been a wretched sinner, have perverted
my way, and my walks with God have been short, and formal; But, Oh! that it may
go well with Israel in the latter days, though I be as reprobate silver,
because the Lord has rejected me.

It was told him, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ, the Righteous, who is the Propitiation for our sins: Yea, says he,
through Faith in his Blood; he is so, and thither does my soul flee.

He was also cautioned, to take heed of casting away any his Confidence, that
has great recompense of reward, and of making a judgment of things, in an
hour of temptation and tribulation, contrary to another judgment made and
confirmed by the Lord again and again to him heretofore, minding him, how the
Tempter waited such seasons to disturb him, and drive him from the strength he
had laid up for him in Grace, that is in Christ Jesus, when Grace in us may be
but at a low ebb. Yea, (replied he) I would leave this Exhortation with you,
that when God bruises, breaks, treads down a poor soul, and it lies before him
as ashamed and confounded, and not able to open its mouth; Oh! then to look up
to the Lord, for then will the Tempter be busy at such seasons; for we are not
ignorant of his devises; but if God give another day, and more strength, I hope
to speak more convincingly of these things.

The next day being asked, How it was with him? Whether all were clear within?
He said, It was very tempestuous round about; but yet the Lord is instructing
and answering such a poor worm from the secret place of thunder; And afterward
says, It will be better, and there is hope in the end for all this. And then
broke out with admiration, saying, He is ever mindful of his Covenant, Holy and
Reverent is his Name, he is a God near to those that fear him in the needful
season.

Sometimes after, one saying to him, I hope you can yet say God is good, and a
strong hold in the day of trouble, and knows them that trust in him: Yes, I can
say so, blessed be my God; but not alike at all times can I say so; but I
remember the counsel and advise yesterday, to wait on the Lord, and keep his
way, and my place, appointed me by God, which I desire to do all the days of
my appointed time, till my change come, though flesh and blood suggest, this is
hard work, and would make haste out of it.

In the morning following, being asked, How is it now? He said, God had been at
work closely with his Spirit, in the three days past before this, though this
was left him for support, That the foundation of God remains sure to all his
sealed ones; but (says he) I have been ready to say, Why should I speak of
sealed ones, being such a one, as might for mine iniquities be sealed up to a
day of Wrath, and be kept in chains of Darkness to the great day. I have been
so foolish, to think my seize were such, as if I were got to the top, and
needed little more: but the Lord has laid Judgment to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet, and has not only thrown down the high raised
Structure, but razed the very foundations of all fleshly glory and excellency;
and the Lord has delivered his glory into Captivity, and his strength into the
Enemies hand, yet has not left me without hope, I trust, good hope in mercy,
that all notwithstanding shall issue well in the end.

But, Oh! the reproach that I have brought on the Name of God! might that be
done away by all I feel and suffer inward and outward, I shall rejoice.

In the Afternoon, the same day, it was said to him, I have observed by some
hints from you, That you have in these few days past, had some exercises on
your Spirit, I would be glad to know whence and what they were, and the way of
God with you in them. He replied, He had indeed some such exercise, occasioned
by close searches made in his soul, about the clear and certain right and title
it had to a substantial well-founded Interest in Christ, which though (says
he) I have mentioned heretofore to you, and others, what it was, and how it
was, the Lord had begot and carried on in me; and thought it had been above
questions, yet had I some doubts and fears renewed of a very ancient date,
about, if not above thirty years ago, with many miscarriages since to promote
the same matter; and this coming in a time of such weakness, and when by the
working of my Spleen, which sent up dark and disturbing vapors, clouding my
imagination, and made sore work within; but the Lord made me see much of my own
fleshly gloryings, as also others in me, and in my flesh, which God would take
down in this day of trial, when every ones work must he tried of what sort it
is, even by fire; and truly I was made to see to my shame, much hypocrisy and
formality in my converse with the Lord in one respect or other, and that the
Practical part of Religion I had yet arrived to little acquaintance with, to
what I had in days past; but this brought me in the issue, to see, that I was,
what I was, that was good, only by grace, and no room for flesh to glory, but
was brought through grace to experience this Truth, that when I am weak, then
am I strong; and that however it be, yet the Lord forgets not his poor, nor
despises not his prisoners; this is a brief account of the Way God led me in,
in this matter, and has so issued it, that I trust through grace, I shall yet
come to lay down my weary head and heart in the peace of Gods speaking, that
will keep and carry me to the end.

His Friend told him here, somewhat of the danger of attempting such great
works, under such disadvantages as these seasons and circumstances he had in
these days past been under, for such works as these, minding to him, That
every season was not a fit season, for judgment especially, to be calling in
question, things so long and often under more clear light, and leadings,
confirmed formerly; and however that be a great Truth, that every day will yet
more demonstrate, that we are but yet Children in Christianity, far short of
that manly state of things to which the present dispensation of God, both
public and personal, have a proper and true tendency, toward which more
excellent way, it is our duty to be pressing, yet so to be pressing toward it,
as to remember both how we have heard, and received, and hold fast the
beginning of our confidences, firm unto the end, that so the Tempter get not
advantage against us, as he does, or may do against persons ignorant of his
devices: But he, being still weak, either to speak or hear, more was not said,
but that he, his Friend, was glad to see the Lord had issued the matter so
well, to the Preventing the Tempters design, and giving his poor Servants to
see, how great that mercy is of all the Saints and their concerns, being in
Gods hand; when the strength of our own hands, heads, and hearts fails so
frequently as they do, yet he remains the same for ever, and in such seasons,
secretly succors, and supports, and at last brings out into a wealthy place,
to his own praise, and encouragement of the poor and needy, to trust in him at
all times.

In the morning, supposing him drawing near his end, a Friend was called to
him, who finding him discomposed again in his head, and convulsive motions
renewed, with shortness of breath; yet soon after, asking how he did? He said,
He was a wonder unto many by reason of the rebukes of God upon him, but the
Lord was, and he hoped would be his strong refuge to the end.

His Friend told him, He had made know himself to him as a strong hold in this
day of trouble hitherto, else he had sunk under his afflictions; but to ^e kept
up and carried on under such great long ex^rcises, justifying God still, and
blessing him, in gi^ing as well as taking, spoke much of divine support ^iven
in. Yea (says he) I would not only justify, but (...) have great reason to
glorify God, as the God of my ^alvation.

It was answered, His present posture of submission and subjection to him as
the Father of Spirits, was a notable way of glorifying God in the fire, and
giving praise to him in the Isle of the Sea. And after a little pause, He
added, He had now but a few steps more to go, which he desired the Lord would
also so order, as he might not be left to sin against him; and blessed the
Lord, that he had given him, and yet maintained such good hope, through Grace
in him, that he was not, and hoped he should not fear to follow him, through
the valley of the shadow of death, to which he now seemed hastening.

A Friend coming to him, and asking him, How does this honest Watchman? Honest
Watchman (says he) has much in it, to be a Watchman indeed, looking out for
the morn, as the Watchman of Ephraim, that was with his God, when other
watchmen are as the Prophet is said to be, Hosea 9.8. A snare of a Fowler in
all their ways, and hatred in the house of their God, as is too evident of the
Watchmen of our day, by reason of deep defilements found amongst them;
wherefore the day of the Watchman comes, yea makes haste, now shall be their
perplexity, and the days of their visitations are come, the days of
recompenses are come, Israel shall know it; for the Lord dispensations are now
very swift.

Being asked, How he had done to Night? H^ said, I laid me down to sleep, and
waked again; (...) the Lord sustained me, and has not made this night night of
terror, by affrightning dreams and imag^ nations, as sometimes; but I seem to
be going on as weary traveller his way.

Sometimes after, being asked, How he did? H^ said, A poor weak creature. It
was answered, But trust in the Lord you have strength. Yea (said he) blessed be
God, everlasting strength, and they that indeed trust in him shall be as Mount
Zion that cannot be moved, but abides for ever; for as the Mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his People for ever.

A Friend telling him, There was an acquaintance of his come to see him, who
was going to Preach amongst the poor Saints abroad; He wished him prosperity in
that good work; saying, He never found cause to repent of any of his working
days for Christ, in his lifetime.

At the same time, one coming from far to visit him, and telling him, He had
dear Remembrances from many Friends of his, who in a way of supplication, with
humble submission, were looking to the Lord, the God of all Consolation,
concerning him, and his case. He replied, He is indeed the God of all
Consolation, of strong Consolations, which were sealed up to his soul.

And then added, I am very much affected with this surprising visit of yours:
And soon after said to ^he same Friend, He had in the two Nights past, been
graciously led, and let into the understanding of that Word, Psalm. 37.37. Mark
the perfect man, and behold ^he upright, the end of that man is peace; So as he
^as never let into it in like manner before.

A Friend saying, How does my Brother? He ^eplyed, I cannot say of you, as he
of old, You took our Brother by the heel in the womb, but hope we shall ^^ke
one another by the hand in Heaven, and that both (...) you (intending the
Friend that came to visit him) ^ill live and love as Brethren, or words to this
purpose, (...) near as could be gathered; for now speech failed.

Then speaking of the pressures that were upon him, he was advised, to look to
the Lord, who in depths of Wisdom administered them, managing all Circumstances
about them, as also to eye Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, who endured
sore travel, yea, bruising from his Father also, as knowing he ought to suffer
such things, and so to enter into glory; and the Spirit spoke of the Sufferings
of Christ, and the Glory that should follow. He replied, Oh! that Glory, that
Glory on the other side.

Calling for drink, and the Maid bringing it him, he desired a Friend present
might give it, who coming to him, said, You appear now, as one that is shortly
to drink new Wine in the Kingdom of the Father. He answered, Though many have
greater marks of Faith than I have, yet I am assured I shall be received into
fellowship with the Father, Son, Spirit, and all Saints. And looking earnestly
on the Friend, said, If it please God to renew strength, he should give good
evidence, that he loved that Friend dearly, and all Saints.

A little after, the same Friend acquainted him of two dear Friends of his in
London, that desired particularly to be remembered to him; and were much
exercised in fellowship with his present trial. He being very weak, replied, I
can say little; but I pray God they may be strengthened with all might and power
in the inward man, to hold out to the end, according to his glorious power.

Being asked by another, How he did? He said, My heart begins to fail, I now
feel. But after said, Blessed be God for Christ's Grace and eternal Glory.

Soon after he broke out into fervent earnest Prayer, 1st. Deeply lamenting
Israel's dealing falsely with Go^ in his Covenant. 2dly. Speaks forth with
great clearness his faith, that God would make the decision between real and
pretended Saints; and that God would abide with those that abode with him,
greatly encouraging such as found grace to stand in this hour of temptation;
Concluded, committing himself, Soul and Body, to the Lord for keeping and
carrying to the end.

At another time, in like manner, in great zeal and fervency, implored the Lord
to make the decision between the true Seed of Israel, and pretenders, who had
dealt falsely with the Lord, under show of much love.

Then beggs, If God had any thing for him to speak, he would communicate and
enable to it; and that if Abraham's work were done, that he would say to him,
with that clearness and evidence, as he might understand it, Thou have fought a
good fight, have kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for thee a Crown which
God the Judge of all shall give thee.

A while after, and but three hours before his dissolution, a Friend perceiving
him under great pressures, spoke softly to him, They looked unto the Lord and
were lightened. A right look will bring down relief under all difficulties. Yea,
replied he, with strength and earnestness, And their faces were not ashamed.
Thence forward he spoke not; but in a few hours after (it being the 5th day of
the first Month, 1668.) yielded up his Spirit, falling asleep without pang, or
considerable groan.

FINIS.
Copies and Extracts OF LETTERS Written on several occasions BY That Deceased
Servant of CHRIST, The Author of the foregoing Discourses.

Printed in the Year, 1668.

A Book that he approved (being the work of an other) containing Instructions
for Children, he sent several of them to some of his Acquaintance, accompanied
with this Letter to their Parents.
Unto my dearly beloved Brethren, Sisters, and Friends, whom the Lord has
entrusted with the oversight of Families, Children, and Servants; abundance of
the Spirit of Glory, and of God is desired. -- Endeared in the Lord!
UNder the strong obligations of bounden duty, which my Father has been
pleased to lay upon me of serving the Interest of your Souls, and theirs whom
God has given you, to my uttermost; it has been not the least part of my
study in this School of Instruction, unto which he has sent me, how I might at
this distance most effectually attend, and be found therein, as one that must
give an account, not only of the Law of my Relations, but also of these fruits
thereof on your hands, which have extended and abounded to me-ward in
un-interrupted tender love* and sympathy, as well in this my chain, ^s in the
many years of my weak ende^vours to serve Christ among you in liberty; in
requital whereunto, as I can do little at most, so am I often inwardly checked
and rebuked for my sinful shortness toward you, both in general and particular,
from soul to soul; and very lately it has been with more than ordinary weight
on me to exercise pity and compassionate thoughtfulness on those Families of
yours, both Children and Servants, many of which the Lord has multiplied like
a Flock, whose particular affections (as far as they have been capable to
express them) I have been at a loss how to recompense or improve to their
advantage; but having been advising with some of my Companions here, as well as
laying the matter before him, who is able to give seed to the sower, and
multiply with blessing the seed sown; I have herewithal attempted to make an
Essay for entrance with them, in presenting to them this upright plain
Address, prepared to my hand by some one of the Lord's Prisoners, full of
bowels toward such young subjects, consisting of such proper matter, and
brought forth in such a condescending Spirit and Language, as I trust by the
blessing of the Lord will find good acceptance and success among such souls. --
My present Writing therefore with it, is not so much to crave its acceptance in
good part by them, for of that I have much assurance; bu^ to lay hold of this
opportunity, to desire your faithful following the design of it, by stirring up
your selves, and zealously and unweariedly doing your endeavor with all your
wisdom, interest and might, behaving your selves among them as Men and Women of
knowledge, that your account of their souls (as mine account of yours) may be
given up with joy and not with grief: Here am I, and the Children and Servants
which thou have graciously given me; unto which faithfulness of yours, (besides
many other weighty Arguments that might be urged) the very remembrance of the
days being so very evil, may afford you (as it has me) many forcible motives.

1. These are days wherein you know not how suddenly you may be hurried,
plucked, and separated from them, not only by death, which climbeth up at the
windows in most Families this sickly season; but by the violenee of the Sons of
Men, through the wise ordering of God, who are permitted to make and execute
Laws which have direct threatenings, and a present tendency that way, toward
such as you, who stand in a profession of Christ's, which testifies that their
works are evil. This rage has already invaded and uncovered some Families
among you, and multitudes in other places; and all such as will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must expect the like, not as if some strange thing happened to
them, and therefore should be in daily preparation to make and leave their own;
such as are instructed and have learned to trust in God, and to own and improve
a Relation for themselves in him, according to their capacity, which may make
an abundant supply to this lack or loss of your company and society, which will
turn to their great blessing, and help to your confident and comfortable
surrendering them up to the Lord in a way of fol^owing him, whithersoever he
goes, and may call ^r dispose of you.

2. These are times in which a more than ordinary disadvantage and danger is
designed to spoil and destroy both Infants and Youth; not only in respect of
their Schooling, which must be carried on by such Tutors, and under such Rules,
as tend to tempt and subject them to suck-in the Principles of that Apostasy
and misery that the former years have been delivered from; or else can hardly
make any procedure in Learning requisite to accomplish them. But principally
are they exceeding liable to danger and destruction (if the Lord wonderfully
prevent not) by means of their unavoidable company and converse with other
youths of their growth and degree, the which generally is become everywhere so
wanton, wicked, debauched, through the looseness of the times, and the
countenance that all filthiness finds, where it ought to be punished and
restrained, that unless your Children and Servants be, through a blessing on
your Prayers and Endeavors, in-laid with good Principles in awakened
Conscience, followed with constant Instruction, and an exemplary Conversation,
with a wise, moderated, steady discipline, it will be a mavelous thing if
they be not utterly spoiled, become a scourge and torment to you, and at length
repent that ever they saw you, and perish in the gain-sayings of this wicked
and adulterous generation.

3. The days that have passed over you, have been days of the Lord's
wonderful Salvations, and the stretching forth of his Arm in these Nations to
d^ mavelous things toward the getting himself a glorious Name. The putting
away the remembrance o^ which from under Heaven, and razing out of all the
marks and monuments thereof, is the manifest design of the wicked men of this
generation. -- The memory whereof, as it always ought to be dear to you, who
have been blessed in those Salvations, and have sung his praise; So should it
be your great care to preserve the same, by teaching and instructing those
committed to your charge therein, and that not only in the History and Letter
of them (the very memory whereof will be famous in the ages to come) but
especially in the inward Principles, Springs, and Spirit of them, as well as
the issues whereunto they were by the Lord intended, that yours may be able to
tell the generations to come, and the people uncreated may praise the Lord.
Which things your offspring will only be capable to understand, and sutably to
comply with the Lords motions and designs therein, when they shall be
spiritually instructed in, and experimentally acquainted with the way and
operations of the Lord on the Spirits of his People, to which your utmost
diligence is indispensibly required, as ever you would glorify God in your
generation.

4. Moreover, you generally profess your selves to be such as expect glorious
days to succeed the deep trials that are (or are coming on) upon the heritage
of the Lord; and do you not wish so well to your own, as to do what in you
lies, that they should have a share in that Salvation which your selves have
professed, longed, prayed, labored, suffered for? And how think you, will they
be capable of bearing that glory (or suppose there be yet a reserve of trials
for them that are to usher it in) which will be very full of power, and purity,
unless they be indeed brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
instructed in Christ, as the Truth is in him; and from a fellowship in his
Spirit, brought within the compass of the rich and glorious Promises, which
shall manifest and convey the blessed things unto the Ages to come, that
instead of the Fathers may be the Children.

5. Add hereunto, that the force and violence of this evil time is such as does
drive you frequently, and may yet be expected to drive you more from your
stated seasons on the first days of the Week, and other times, of following
the Lord in those solemn public Appointments and Institutions of the Gospel,
unto your Family retirements, at least a great part of your time in those
days, the which affords you more enlarged opportunities than you had formerly,
to teach and instruct your own houshoulds, great and small, according to their
capacity, in the things of the Kingdom; to the which you are concerned to give
all heed, diligence, and endeavor; not in any neglect of opportunities in the
Assemblies of the Saints, while they do continue, or may be had; but when there
is an interval, the solemn exercises in the Church being ended, or when through
force and fury they shall (if the Lord shall permit them to) be so utterly
broken, as you should be reduced again to that ancient way of the Saints, being
governed as in Abraham's and the Patriarchs time in Family Worship. You are, I
say, so much the more concerned to set your selves vigorously to this work of
endeavoring, that your houses may become as so many Churches of Christ in
respect of that Instruction, reading the Scriptures, Praying, gracious
Conference, Discipline, exemplary Walking in all holy Conversation and
Godliness, which ought to be professed and maintained in beauty, set in majesty
among them, and in this sense to be setting your houses in order, for you know
not how soon these very staves of beauty and bands may be violently invaded,
disturbed, and broken by the same spirit of hatred, which now offers force to
your more solemn Assemblings: While therefore you have this price in your hand,
this undisturbed opportunity, you should be doing this good.

I hope I need not largely follow these with other Arguments, which might be
drawn out at length from the inestimable value of their immortal souls, the
redemption whereof is precious, which now are committed to your care and
oversight, and will be strictly required at your hands, in the day of Accounts
that draws nigh; and that the rather, for that now is their making or marring
time, which effects you may expect will, and frequently do follow, according as
you either are found in the due and diligent discharge of your duty among them,
or are negligent and remiss therein. Little it is considered and laid to heart,
how much of the interest of your present peace, and the comfort of your lives
is laid up in your wise, constant, gracious endeavor of this kind, and the
Lord's blessing thereupon. Whereas, on the contrary, it were well if the common
reproach upon the Name of the Lord were altogether groundless; and that it were
not too evidently to be seen in many Families of Professors, that their
Children and Servants are as rude, untaught, incorrigible, wanton, wicked,
unruly as any others, as if the only care upon those entrusted with the
Headship of Families, were (and that hardly performed as it ought to be) to
have them brought forth, and brought up to Adam (or to Earth rather) to learn
their Books, Complements, Manners, and Trades; but to understand themselves, to
learn Christ, to know the Lord God of their Fathers, to be instructed in the
Holy Scriptures from their youth up, to know themselves miserable without a
Savior, and to be led as by the hand unto him. Oh! how rare are these
seize, and that because endeavors are so slack in order thereunto; I
pray you examine your selves, your prayers, your practices, your conversations,
where are the bowels of Christ toward your own! Do you travel in birth again
for them till he be formed in them? Should it not be much more your care to see
them Saints, than to see them men and women? Alas! if you Families (who would
bear the World in hand, that there is some excellent thing among you more than
others) be not taught the fear of the Lord, where do you think a Seed should be
reared up to serve him, that in the stead of the Fathers should be the Children
accounted with God for a generation? Among worldly men it may not be expected,
whose Children are ordinarily the offspring of their lust, the painted Idols
of the rich and pinching burdens of the Poor, and their Servants the mere
drudges to promote the Interest of their ease, gain and covetousness, few
enquiring or caring what becomes of their immortal precious souls; The manifest
ruins upon whom (unless the Lord work extraordinarily upon them) should
provoke us to pity them and be the more jealous over our own concernments
herein, in order hereunto suffer this further word of Exhortation.

Make it (I beseech you) your main business to set before them the pattern of a
standing, even, serious, holy conversation. F^milies do usually receive faster
and deeper the impression of the similitude of their dispositions and
behavior, who have the oversight, and government of them, than of their mere
precepts and exhortations. The Majesty and Authority which God has entrusted
and invested you with among them, is only held up in its enamouring beauty and
convincing power, while you improve it much in the fear of God, neither
debasing it on the one hand by a vain, fond, frothy lightness in your spirits
and carriage toward or before them, or exercising it by a proud, furious,
imperious, domineering over them on the other hand. Much spiritual wisdom lies
in your tempering and mixing a sweet affable behavior without vanity, with a
grave reproving demeanor without fierceness, and this not in an affected
appearance, but in truth; nor only at uncertain fits and flashes, but in a
constant fixed frame, within doors, and without. Consider also you have in
their sight taken up an high and holy Profession of the Cause and Institutions
of Christ, and those about you are likely to be someway interested in the
sufferings you are threatened to sustain, for your adhering faithfully
thereunto, in respect whereof it will be their happiness, that you hold fast
(in their eye and as their example) these truths in a pure Conscience, to which
you have begun to witness, not only for the Truths sake themselves, which
deserve that you should deliver them to the next generation, unmixed and
unbetrayed by you; but for your own dear Relations sake also, before whom it
would be sad, should you lay such a stumbling block in the beginning of their
way, as does bespeak (so loud as you can proclaim it) that there is no such
thing as Truth, worth your adhering to in a day of trial, and consequently
worth their enquiring after, embracing or engaging themselves in, in times of
such persecution. I hope better things of you, and such as accompany Salvation,
though thus I write, trusting that you either do, or will do the things which I
desire (or rather the Lord requires) of you; to whom I leave you, and rest,

Yours, many ways obliged, to love and serve you for Christ's sake.

To a Friend in a time of Great uncertainties, as to public Transactions A
spiritual understanding of the times, and what Israel ought to do, be granted
largely to you. --
Holy and Beloved!
I Think yours of the 9th and 16th instant, are both of date later than my last
to you; by which you may easily perceive my aptness to tire in prosecuting
divine advantages: At present I was willing to have followed you closer, but
that my frequent little Journeys have of late prevented me. How faithful is
that Word! and verified to a thousand generations, Whosoever is wise, and shall
observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord. -- And that -- none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand. If ever there was a time to have the eye of Saints kept very intent
upon the Lord to trace out his footsteps, it seems, now to be such a time, when
his Pavilion is darkness and fire enfolding it self, to be then divinely
enabled to read not any particular loving kindness sealed up to the observer in
special, but to see the Salvation of Israel carried on in a strait path, and
that he that builds Sion works still by line and plummet, is a grace
bestowed not in common in the House of God; but is methinks one of the special
love tokens by which he will show among all his Disciples, who is the Beloved
One that leans on his bosom, and that have the favor to ride in the Chariot,
the midst whereof is paved with Love for the Daughters of Jerusalem. -- I may
take up a just mournful Lamentation of my own short-sightedness, and incapacity
(I had almost said impossibility) to discern with any distinction of
apprehension, the Temple of God open in Heaven, and in it the Ark of the
Testament, while there proceeds out of the Throne, and by means of the Censor
cast into the Earth, such lightnings, and thundrings, and voices, and
earthquakes, and great hail. Only I durst not say short of this, the Lord
gives me now and than a glimps of the King in his Glory, and the Land that is
very far off. And, ah then! how good is a Pisgah-sight of Canaan? It Is even as
the Chariots that Joseph sent, that revived fainting Jacob; what life and
signification it manifests to lie hid in such a word as this, -- Yet God is
good to Israel. -- Yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear
God, that fear before him? With what a different power is a soul acted then in
such a request, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done, from what it is when only
in an usual formal way it breaths it out? Such transfigurations may well
constrain an outcry, It Is good to be here, though many times one knows not
what he says, -- But alas! why speak I, think I, long I so much for such
sights and tastes which indeed, though precious, yet are transient? mean while
not valuing as I should that substantial feeding and living upon Sions lasting
foundations, such as remain unshaken, though he bring us into the place of
Dragons, and cover us with the shadow of death, though there be no fruit in the
Vine, and the labor of the Olive cease, yet then to live above hope under
hope, etc. have the Lord's joy remain in us, and our joy be full.

Methinks all the Lord's footsteps point to us, that, as our proper lesson, To
be securing all that which concerns us upon such Foundations as cannot be
shaken, when Heaven and Earth is moved, Foundations are destroyed, the Earth
and all its Inhabitants dissolved, before the Lord, when he comes; for he
comes to judge the Earth with Righteousness, and his People with Equity.

Yours, in special Relation, and Affection.

To two of his Acquaintance Imprisoned. Direct leadings to living Fountains of
Water, and wiping all tears from your eyes, is desired.
Much Beloved!
I Salute you both in the same bowels, and with the same respect; although I
have not much that I know of to communicate, that can add any thing to either
of you, trusting (and in a measure tasting) that you are as on Eagles wings,
carried beyond what my poor, dark, confused heart or hand can contribute to you
in the force and fellowship of that blessed Word, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. And, as I
trust you in a good measure, are, and so I am, by Grace, helped with many
others in every Prayer of ours, to desire you further may be advantaged with
those walks with God in the perfect liberty of Grace and Peace, that may make
up abundantly your blessedness, not only in equality with, but in a way of
surpassing and transcendency to their present privilege, that have as yet
opportunity allowed them to walk up and down about their Father's business. It
is not a little or low ground of Consolation for you; and I pray that the power
of it may still remain with you, which one was mentioning, that you are as
really in the Cause and Business of the King, though you can do nothing but
make Prayers for him, and bewail the dishonor done to his Majesty, as if you
were in Field or Council for him. It is to one of you a state not unusual, I
hope its to neither of you strange or unexpected; it cannot be but a little
while at the longest run ere that Word will be made good on you in a most
blessed sense, Eccles. 4.14. and ere that be, I am by Grace persuaded, that (as
you share in many more Prayers and direct personal remembrances than formerly,
so also) that experience of Paul's will redound to your real Consolation, Phil.
1.12, 13, 14. as verified, and is in part upon you. The dreadful and unexpected
issue to which all things in appearance are reverting, beyond what we were
willing to suppose the former Apostasy should, or indeed could extend unto,
nay, beyond the hop^s of those poor worms that are everywhere wallowing in the
vomit of their own dru^^^nness, and belch out blasphemy; I trust will have with
many, as I hope the consideration of it has begun to have with me its effects,
to lead the Lord's people into a deeper search after, and greater sense of the
Idols of Jealousy that have provoked to this exceeding Jealousy, in which the
Lord seems not pleased to spare the giving his own Name, together with the
memorial of all his Wonderful Works to be reproached, and as a byword to the
vilest of men, and no one left that can say, Restore. Surely, though the
personal iniquities be great and manifold that have been found in the skirts of
the Lord's People, under their Profession that they are Saints; yet do I
believe there lies more combined, united, provoking guilt upon them unpurged,
unrepented of, vindicated and pleaded for, considered as they are Sionists, and
in their public Relations. Ah! these other man's sins are such eating evils to
such as are in a sort related to them, and yet in a seeming tolerable and
excusable sense free from them, as for which, I am persuaded not only the Land
mourns, but even Sion languisheth, and her Children faint in the streets, and
yet few consider where is the malignity of the disease, or declare the causes
of banishment. True it is, some that I think honorably of, have professed the
discovery, and a means for recovery of it; but truly I think with such an hard
and uneven hand have been the application, that I fear, though their good will
may be accepted of the Lord, yet in the issue they will prove Physicians not of
that value, as may be expected from their Profession in that respect. I am also
in some hopes that the Lord is more effectually weaning his little Children
from every Idol; to which, one after another, they are so apt to apply
themselves, though guilt and unholiness be in the bottom of it, how many a
pitiful piece has the Lord made manifest to be as Coniah, Jer. 22.28. a
despised broken Idol, a vessel wherein is no pleasure; and yet such has been
the carnality of many, that they have been concluding, as they of this Coniah,
Lam. 4.20. -- When I have remembered all along that holy escape that the Lord
helped you unto, when many other good men were entangled, and came not off,
till their bones were broken; I have been made to rejoice in that love and
favor to you, that has preserved, and I hope reserved you in a waiting
Spirit, till he should bring you forth among the sons that shall comfort
Jerusalem, when she sees their ways and doings concerning all the evil that
has been brought upon her, Ezekiel. 14.22, 23. a passage that I read this
morning, which it may be I understood not, that desired Prayers might be made
to the Lord in that behalf, increased with holy jealousy my cry, lest any
influence of that Word, Isa. 51.14. (which God forbid) should light upon any of
the dear Children of God, that are this day in bonds. I trust the grace of
Jesus Christ will keep, guide, bless, and sanctify you both, and all that are
as you, and when ever he lifts up your heads, it will be to see his reserve of
Wonders, that shall glorify his Holy Name. -- I am cut short of enlargeing,
unless my opportunity of Conveyance were a little better known to me, for a
most plentious supply of this defect, I shall return again to my travel in your
behalf, that the Shepherd and Stone of Israel may undertake for you to keep you
in perfect peace. Now to him, that after you have suffered a while, is of all
power to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the
presence of his Glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be
Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever. Amen.

7th 3d month, 60.
Upon the death of some whom he honored, to two of his Acquaintance then
Fellow Prisoners. The Lord send you help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen you
out of Sion.
Greatly Beloved!
I Salute you both, as is meet in the Lord. These two last Posts I have not
written any Letter to you, partly for that I have been out of Town some little
journies, but principally having been much under the surprise that those were,
Job 2. ult. The voice indeed is loud, and as if seven Thunders had at once
uttered their voices; the terribleness of it makes many shrink as Eliah into
his den. When! Oh when shall we hear the still soft Voice, and as men of
understanding see his Name! We may well cry out, he has shown us hard things,
and given us to drink the Wine of astonishment; which falls the heavier, in
that such who have obtained favor, to lay nearest to heart the concernments of
Sion, and to be therein aided with greatest boldness and sweetest intimacy near
to the heart of Christ, and have had their Affections enflamed most with what
they have sought, and seemed to themselves, and others, to have been of those
bosom intimates that know all that their Friend does, and have hereupon spoken
openly and without clouds, or reservations, their confidence of things, that
have appeared in the issue to be mistakes; how some of them bear it, I do not
well know; but sure I am, the hand is very sorely turned upon the little ones
that believe in Christ, great is their astonishment, like that, Isa. 51.17. to
the end. I have often thought of them, Acts 21.4. Who said to Paul, by the
Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. How like the language of our
spirits (heightened by fervent affection, and attended with providential
bringing to remembrance of suitable Scriptures; and all this on a soul enjoying
clear access to the Lord) is, to the voice of the spirit in truth as he fulfils
that Promise, He shall take of mine and show it unto you, and shall show you
things to come. And if it may please the Father, after he has graciously
allayed the storminess of these perplexing waves, that at present doubtless
discompose for any thing, to lead his holy ones into a more perfect discerning
of things which in this kind do differ, and in mean time instruct to think more
soberly of themselves, and judge more tenderly of others; I shall yet hope this
sharp dispensation may bring out meat and sweetness that we thought not of. --
As for the poor Martyrs themselves, when I review what was of late said of
their particular persuasions, and how (when their departure was hid from them)
they enjoyed such un-interrupted joyful communion with the Lord, I cannot but
admire the wisdom and goodness of the Father, that took that course with them,
to anoint them for their burial (but alas! they had no burial!) But much more
grace to admiration appears to me in it, that when their persuasions and
expectations from the Lord in that point, gave way to his determinations, yet
that at that very time the Tempter should be bound up, who doubtless desired to
have them, that he might have winnowed them as Wheat, and would have made a
great market of the least discouragement upon them over the whole Antichristian
World. Oh! how unsearchable are his ways, and his works past finding out! The
deadly Treacle that you speak of, will doubtless swiftly become a Cup of
trembling to this wretched generation, and entayl the guilt of all down along
from Abel, etc. A very strange efficacy that it has to cry and to prevail at
length, though it tarry long first. That Abels was not answered and expiated in
the Flood that destroyed the World of the ungodly; nor that of Zacharias (if it
was his who said, The Lord look upon it, and require it, 2 Chronicles. 24.22.) But
they both must cry against that generation that put to death the Lord of Life,
and neither of these cries expire at the ruins of them and their devastation
to this day, but shall be found as fresh in outcry against that great City
where also our Lord is crucified, Rev. 18.24.

And though it is hard to discern, yet great is the pravalency of those cries of
Saints that night and day follow the Lord herein, though he not only tarry
long, but even seem to be angry with the Prayers of his People; that word has
sweetly stayed me in this hour of temptation, Thou tellest my wanderings, put my
tears in thy bottle, are they not written in a Book by thee! If their
wanderings, staggerings, be tenderly numbered, and their tears bottled, and
their grouns booked, and all this by thee! a Book of remembrance before the
Lord! We need not be so sollicitous what becomes of them, though they are above
out of our sight, doubtless, when it comes to much Incense in the Angels hand,
the Censor will be cast into the Earth, Rev. 8.3, 4, 5.

Rests, Yours in tears.
24. 8. month, 60.
Unto one who had acquainted him with the departing of some from their holy
Professions. The early visits of the bright and morning Star, be a light in
your dark place, till the day dawn, and the shadows flee away.
Beloved in and of the Lord!
SInce my last, I have received yours, wherein you were pleased to remember,
and send such a rich Token to your poor Friend, whom you are pleased to
describe by that merry title of your Father; who blesses God for grace and
support ministered, by tracking the footsteps of the Father of Spirits in those
paths of peace and pleasantness, wherein he pleases to lead you, and others of
his suffering ones, so contrary to the methods and expectation of men, whose
breath are in their nostrils, Job. 22.29. Psalm. 41.8, 12, 13. unto which I
account it no diversion that he is pleased (as your last intimates) to keep you
in an humble sense of the shortness of self-sufficiency, for bearing you up
against the hour of temptation; the very fear whereof has already cast down so
many stars from their excellency, on whom this inscription is manifestly
engraven, as a caution to us, though a byword to scorners, Lo this is the man
that made not God his confidence. Over whom as I have little ground to glory, 1
Cor. 10.12. Romans 11.18, 20. so neither is there just occasion to be greatly
offended, Isa. 2.22. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18. Joh. 6.66, 67. chap. 16.13, 32.
Although I find it somewhat difficult to draw the memorial of their slips into
a gracious perpetual remembrance, without some mixtures either of wrath or
doubting. I confess it makes me many times tremble to think of the relation
wherein the Lord has placed me in his House, wherein you and others look on
me, and expect much from me (as yours intimates) who am so unsuitable to a
doorkeeper there, lest while much weight depends on such a worm, that Word be
fully and justly verified, Isa. 22.25. and so of being reared up a Monument for
a living end, as was his Pillar, 2 Samuel 18.18. I prove but an heap of Infamy,
verse. 17. But over against these faintings, when they have ran in as a flood, I
have hitherto found the Spirit of the Lord lifting up a Standard, and
displaying a Banner in his Fear, by which a seasonable rescue has been offered
in a time of need. And that by keeping me upon, and now and than succeeding me
in some measure in this Threefold work, which I doubt not but you have arrived
to a good degree and great boldness in the Faith of;

First, That I do not satisfy my self in any ordinary and slight Evidences of
an Interest in eternal Love, but press toward that full Assurance of Faith
founded on the New Covenant, and universally influential on the New Creature. I
speak not as if I had attained much, but this is with me by the Grace of
Christ, my soul is so much the more engaged to press after the riches of full
assurance of understanding a fellowship in the mystery of God the Father, and
of Christ, as I see the days are evil, the glimmerings whereof in that degree
the Father sees good to entrust me withal, have been an unspeakable stay to me
against the fears of what man can do unto me; and through your Prayers, and the
help of the Spirit of Jesus, I hope will continue so to be unto the end; the
powers whereof both to peace against the fears of this day (Romans 8.31. to the
end) and to purging against the filth of it, (2 Timothy 2.19. 1 John 3.3.) I need
not insist to show you, who your selves are taught it of God, Job. 36.22. --

2dly. Another main work which I find of great necessity and advantage, is, the
setting up in my soul the dominion of the Cross of Christ, in a daily
mortification (through spiritual aid and arguments) of the affections and lusts
of the Flesh, to every thing that may, or must suffer loss in the expected
fiery trial, whether it be either corruptible things, as Silver and Gold (any
under-Christ enjoyments) or corrupted, corrupting things, as is all the
filthiness both of the Flesh and of the Spirit. The entanglements of one or
other of these is the snare which so easily besets most of those who in this
day are contriving how much Truth they may possibly sell, or at least expel for
peace, who seldom treat upon these terms, but Satan makes his market on them,
we are not ignorant of his devices; To be therefore mortified by time to th^se
things, is a very great part of our best Interest, not only that (in this
sense) our sins go aforehand to judgment, that we may not be judged in them,
and for them with the World, when the Lord comes out of his place, to punish
the inhabitants of the Earth, and arises terribly to shake it; but also that
our pleasant pictures, costly coverings, and all our detectable things may be
so crucified to us, and we to them in the love of them, that it may be no hard
thing when the Lord calls for them to glorify him, to say to them, Get ye
hence, What profit is there in my Blood? If the Lord (his Name, Cause,
Testimony) has need of it, what is that between us and him?

3dly. I also am brought into an experimental observation how much of moment is
the spirit of a sound mind, to have real, substantial, and digested principles,
and to be in union with them concerning that Cause, for which we are at the
point to be thoroughly tried, Whether that part of it that concerns Worship,
or otherwise, to have our Faith in such a day as this to be only founded in the
wisdom of man (our own or others) short of the power of God, to build another
man's foundation, or boast in another man's line, of things made ready to our
hand, at a time when every man's work must be tried, and every man must bear
his own burden, and give such an account as this is of himself to God; though
the structure seem never so stately, and to be founded on the highest
resolution, yet will that doom and outcry sooner or latter attend it, as did
his Ax, 2 Kings 6. And indeed (as you observe) backslidings at this time of day
are very rarely and hardly repaired (though I trust some will) ere the door be
shut, Mat. 25.8, 9, 10. -- To have therefore our rejoycings in our selves, and
not in another, Prove. 5.17. Gal. 6.4. is our great Interest; That it may be
your sweet portion, is the prayer of him (who being unexpectedly interrupted)
having nothing of moment to impart as tidings,

Rests, Yours, as ever.

To a Friend, long kept close Prisoner, under hard Circumstances, and greater
threatenings. Everlasting joy upon your head, while sorrow and sighing flee away.
Beloved, and honored by and for the Lord!
THis morning, having obtained that mercy from the Lord, of reading a Character
of your heart drawn by your own hand, wherewithal I and others were not a
little refreshed, and a safe hand presenting for the conveyance of this to you,
which I hope may reach you, I thought my self providentially called and
concerned to give you a testimony of my joy in the Grace of Christ, which is
engaged hitherto to uphold you with everlasting arms, that neither the strength
nor length of your Suffering is such to you, as is accounted otherwise by you
than ^ight, and but for a moment, being laid on the balance with the Glory
that is ready to be revealed in us. In this way of reckoning, while our eye is
kept on invisible and eternal weights of Glory, realizing and impropriating
them, Crowns of thorns are more easy and less dishonorable than at a distance
they seem to be, or than we sense and apprehend them, while we are reasoning
after the flesh. -- Weights indeed they have and are, and such as make the
oppressed many times to groan earnestly, none for the present being joyous but
grievous, and are tenderly thought upon by him, who in all their afflictions is
afflicted, the Angel of whose presence also is with them; but we know the End
of the Lord, and his Rest shall be glorious, when his indignation cease in
their destruction; but he rests in his Love, and there also shall make the
weary to rest. -- I judge my self some-way rebuked from above, and untaught
what and how to pray as I ought, if in any prayer of mine I forget the Sons of
your noble Order, and especially in seeking what you desire; namely, that you
through the greatness of Faith may enter into rest, and at this time of day,
while he has taken business out of your hand, he may the more abundantly
acquaint and refresh you with that dismission to rest, as may secure you until
the indignation be over-past. You know his privilege, who ( Jer. 36.5.) though
he was shut up, that he could not walk abroad about his Lord's business, was
nevertheless hid there by the Lord; when the Courtiers did purpose to take him,
( verse. 26.) But if in the Father's Counsel it appear best, that out of these
Storehouses he bring more of his precious boxes of Ointment to be poured out
upon the present Funerals of the Cause he is concerned in, I make no question
but the savor thereof will commend it self to all the Virgins in this and
other generations, and they shall have Robes and Rest, till they stand again in
their lot at the end of days; and who believing and loving Jesus Christ in
Truth, would not put off his filthy garments, in expectation of such change of
raiment?

As for my part, my Father graciously indulgeth me, and the Lambs here, giving
us an undeserved Covert (of which no reason can be given) even where Satan's
seat is, while other flocks are dispersed and scattered. Near about us, by my
last I acquainted, that some from our neighboring parts, are sent to that
place of ancient experience, where they have a stock of prayers and presence to
begin upon: they begin on straw, as learning to endure hardness as good
Soldiers; the Lord make that word good to them, which often has been in that
place sweet to me, Exodus 23.25. and at length, Eccles. 4.14. I expect daily the
same lot, in the Lord's withholding his hand from which, I fear nothing more
than a Spirit apt to do as Agag, 1 Samuel 15.32. putting off the evil day, the
least Sunshine brought forth a manifestation, that notwithstanding the ruin
of his Nation, and danger of himself, he was not mortified to the delicacy of
his life; nor had escaped (though he thought he had waved) the bitterness of
his death.

I need your Prayers and precious Exhortations, tending to prevent slumber,
that I be not taken at unawares. The Lord keep fresh and manifest before your
eyes and mine, the Captain of our Salvation, not only as a leading pattern, but
as a life-giving Principle, on which having our minds stayed, we may still be
trusting in him, as kept in peace upon peace there, with true respects to all
your Family,

Rests, Yours, in the love of Jesus.
26th 4th month, 62.
His judgment about continuing, or, forbearing Assemblies to Worship the Lord.
Strength and Beauty, as is in the Sanctuary.
Beloved in the Lord!
I Thought it best, while it is yet day, and opportunity offers, that we
attempt to make improvement so, as may mutually tend to the strengthening each
others Faith and Love in Christ Jesus, with such intimations of occurrences as
may direct to suitable sympathy and supplication, as the Interest of the Lord
may require in its present circumstances, at their hands, who have learned to
approve themselves as true Sionists. This place affords little, save the
continued series of divine goodness holding our souls in life, and not
suffering our feet to be moved, where he withholds not the tokens of his
Fatherly care and provision to supply all our wants both outwardly and within,
to show that he is good, our Rock* and no unrighteousness is with him.

We had rumors of being this week brought before the Deputy Lieutenant, but
that came to nothing: Fear and fury fills many men's hands with work of their
own occasioning; so does he make their own tongue to fall upon themselves, the
Righteous shall see it and flee away; and all men shall see and consider the
work of God, for they shall wisely consider his doing.

They at our Island I hear are well and cheerful, but free access to them is
denied, nothing else can be expected as times and jealousies are; yet Heaven is
open still. David could form a song in the Cave when his Faith reached to this
assurance, He shall send from Heaven and save me. Earth was blocked up, but
Heaven was open still. And as long as Heaven holds, he had no ground to
mistrust a want of the Promises accomplishment to the uttermost. Many thoughts
of heart have exercised us as well in groans at the throne, as in other sad
conferences among our selves at the reasonings and resolves of your strong men,
who by drawing away the shoulder from the yoke, and their hand from the Plough,
wherein they seemed so well skilled and blessed formerly, have given way to the
ceasing of their work in a time when their Faith and Love to Christ is brought
to its trial; and that any poor souls should interpose with their lives in
their hands, to bear up the Name of Christ, and to preserve a nail in his
House; in their absence it serves to signify, that there is something of
reality in that Promise, The last shall be first, and the first last. And
touching your Question, What ground a Church has, in times of Persecution, to
appear publicly? If by publicly be meant only so far knownly as wherein (with
the best prudence and caution used as their case stands) they may most
effectually answer the ends of mutual edification, and hold up the Glory of
Christ in the practice of his Institutions; It Is so far from being a Question,
What grounds they have to meet, as we know not what grounds can well be held up
to the contrary, by any who pretend to so much profession, as that any part of
the Instituted Will of God is worth the suffering for, or that Christ is worth
the following in Gospel-Precepts, when the Obedience of Saints therein is to be
tried as by fire. If you be pleased to single out any Reasons that can pretend
to satisfi^ Conscience, guided by the mind of God in Scripture, they may have
an examination.

Rests, Yours, many ways obliged.
20th 7th month, 62*
To the same Friend, and something further on the same Subject.
My very Dear!
THe Sea Monsters they draw forth their breast, and give suck to their young
ones, Ah! what shall the Lord's People who have received anointing to Preach
the blessed Gospel, become cruel as the Ostriches of the Wilderness, that the
young Children (yea, and old Disciples too) ask Bread and none gives it unto
them; nay, are willing to seek their Bread with the peril of their lives,
because of the Sword of the Wilderness; And shall such men as we who have known
the Terrors of the Lord, and felt the Love of Christ constraining us, that
pretend to know the worth of an immortal soul, the joy for one sinner that
repents, that have had a dispensation of the Gospel committed to us, and yet
no necessity lying upon such, no woe to such if they Preach not the Gospel, no
compassion at least, no more compassion to the multitudes that are scattered as
sheep that have no shepherd: Alas! where is the fellowship of that Spirit which
of old enabled the publishers of this Gospel, after they were shamefully
entreated, to wax bold in their God, to Preach the Gospel of their God with
much contention, 1 These. 2.2. approving themselves the Ministers of Christ in
Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Stripes, in Necessities, in Distresses. Where is
the Lord God of Eliah! Where is he that put his Spirit upon them who first
trusted in Christ? I have been often refreshed with a saying of holy Buroughs,
in his Epistle to the Reader of his Heart-Divisions; alleging a saying of
Luthers; I desire to be a faithful Minister of Christ and his Church, if I
cannot be a Prudent one, the standing in the gap is more dangerous and
troublesome than getting behind the hedge, there you may be more secure, and
under the wind; but it is best to be there where God looks for a man, etc. thus
he. -- Indeed in this day, if ever the Lord looks who they be that will stand
in the gap, that will answer that Character, My life is continually in my hand,
yet do I not forget thy Precepts: They who rescued the Field of Lentiles, and
the Field of Barley (which were part of the Lord's Land, how inconsiderable
soever it might seem in its self) when the generalty of Israel deserted them,
were at last reckoned among the first rank of David's Worthies, 2 Samuel 23.11. 1 Chronicles. 11.13. though perhaps while it was in doing they might be reckoned rash,
heady, hair-brained men; they who cannot pass as well through evil as through
good report in the Gospel of God, can surely go but a little way in it; he that
left at Pamphilia, and would go no further in the work (because perhaps 'twas
too hot and heavy) was not thought by Paul fit for the same employment another
time, whatever his Kinsman Barnabas might think of him. I could wish some of
these things might be by the Lord let in, and set home upon the spirits of
such, who not only Retire themselves, but sound a Retreat also to others, who
might otherwise be sweetly and advantagiously engaged to fight this good fight
of Faith; War this good Warfare, endure this hardness as good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ. I am called off from pursuing this matter. All here are well; not
else at present,

Rests, Yours, many ways.
18th 8th month, 62.
To a Friend released out of Prison. Wisdom and understanding exceeding much,
and largeness of heart like the Sand of the Sea.
Precious and Beloved!
I Have my longings to know how it fares with your Soul, now you are under the
advantage of gathering up at liberty the diffused Light and Anointing that is
dropped with such variety in the Body of Christ, especially in your City,
whither, I observe it is the aim of most of the choice Persons up and down, who
either are driven, or disengaged from necessary attendance in their Country
stations, to make haste, promising themselves greater liberty and enjoyment
there, than ordinarily here can be expected. In respect whereof I have been
sometimes conceiting that it is a place, and puts into a capacity for Believers
to make the most rare Extracts, and pick out the choicest Notions and
Assistances of any where in the World; which thoughts are easily attended with
such temptations, Oh! that I had the wings of a Dove, I would flee far away
from this stormy wind and tempest, I would see that goodly Mountain and
Libanon. But then I am as often checked with this reproof, He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow; these creaturely engagements may render a man the
more prudent and rational; it is many to one if they make him more serious,
spiritual, evangelical. It may be easy to get the mind fraughted with noise,
news, notions; but to get the heart established with grace, drawn into a more
substantial and experimental communion with Jesus Christ, according to the
tenor of the New Covenant, and in the Grace and Truth thereof; this is not so
easy to be found and maintained, without extraordinary watch and diligence.
These words of Wisdom, may be more heard in quiet, and to better purpose and
improvement, than in the outcry of him that rules among Fools.
Soul-searching, Heart-preparing, Sin-mortifying work, may have more advantage
from the retirement of a nasty Prison, then (unless abundance of Grace be
ministered) from being left to walk in a large place, especially if with a large
principle of Liberty to touch withal, but being laid in Gospel-bonds under the
Instituted charge of none. In these respects (my much valued in the Lord!) I
have not only had some trials of my own soul, while I have been representing
things to my self in such a figure; and also seen the woeful issues thereof on
some others who have fallen under my short-sighted observation; but have withal
had many a thought of you, since you have been (in an outward respect) as a
Hind let loose; I will not say I have had hints of any tamperings with you,
but only, that it is mavelous if you have not, which does and will so much
the more magnify Grace in your being preserved in Christ Jesus, steadfast in
the Faith, fervent in the Spirit, lively and active in the ways of God,
growing up more into Christ which is our Head, and being more publicly
diffused by a largeness of Spirit in all the members. This, all this I hope,
pray, and shall to my utmost endeavor, may be found remaining and increasing
in you, according to the form of sound words, the pattern of them who first
trusted in Christ, worthy of all the Grace you have received, and Testimony you
have born hitherto in doing and suffering, and worthy of the blessed hope, of
the Resurrection of the Lord's Cause, and the approaching of his promised
Glory. In a fellowship in this earnest expectation and endeavor, you have the
prayers of all our little Family, but especially and particularly of,

26th 6th month, 63. Your wonted, and constant Soul-Friend.

Unto an ancient Acquaintance taken at a Meeting, and cast into Prison.
Entrance and abiding with joy, and rejoicing into the King's Palace.
My never dearer than now Friend!
I Salute you in this new state, into which you are cast by the wise hand of my
good Father, in fellowship with my self and other dear Companions, and as you
have obtained this Grace, that you suffer not an evil-doer, (though as an
evil-doer) unto bonds, that the Word of God may not be bound, nor
Gospel-gatherings unto Christ, confined within, and accommodated to state
models, answerable to the lusts of wicked men. So, I pray you may not miss of
those full free uninterrupted streams of Strength, Satisfaction, and
Consolation, which have been the promised and experienced portion of the
highest Saints that have appeared for God. My soul has had fellowship in that
thanksgiving touching you, Dan. 3.28. Blessed be that God who has sent his
Angel, and has kept his Servants that has trusted in him, that they have
changed the King's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve
nor worship any God except their own God. And I pray that you may never want
the experiment of those constant supports and sweetnings that I know a poor
worm has enjoyed in this condition; yet it is not your bonds I desire, but your
blessedness exalted over the heads of them; especially I desire on your behalf,
that your soul may be furnished with that satisfactory clearness in the Cause,
and jealousy of the terms of Deliverance that invite you forth; that in
patience you may possess your soul, with constancy enjoy the sweetness of it,
from its fitness for converse with God, and with courage and resolution refel
those Hen-pickings which I presume is your portion by some prudent Cowards,
wherewith your City abounds, and your large acquaintance has made you known
unto. I trust the great things, of the Name, Interest, Glory, and Gospel Truths
of Jesus Christ, owned by your act, and sealed to in their excellency by your
bonds, will outweigh the self-saving arguments of air, health, trade, liberty,
which are things (and greater things than these) that must be hated upon this
competition. That prudent Proposal of, Master, save thy self; had more of the
Devil in it than (I think) Peter was aware, when it was brought in to retard
Christ's opportunity of glorifying his Father, and saving his People in a way
of suffering. You well know the excellent proof of the Faith of those
Travelers of old, was, they conquered the opportunity they had of returning to
their Comforts and Relations, their Kindred and Country from whence they came.
Truly, there is before you, and in your hand an opportunity of glorifying God
in a way of suffering, and it puts me in mind of a passage of a good man,
treating of the gale of opportunity, thus expresses himself to the case in
hand; A man may have an opportunity to suffer for Christ, which if he neglect,
he may never have the like again: To suffer for Christ is honorable; God will
not put this honor upon every one, he puts this honor upon his Vessels of
honor, he gives Grace to a man, and casts him into a vessel of Silver or Gold,
and then throws them into the fire to melt, and suffer for his Name. The Metal
of that Christian must be Silver or Gold that can suffer for Christ: a vessel
of Wood, throw it into the fire, its Hoops will fly off, it will break asunder
and never hold out. The three Children that were cast into the fiery furnace,
what glorious mould and metal were they made of? Had they not taken that
opportunity to suffer for God, they might never meet with such a one again. (1)
What a spreading Fame and Glory of God did their sufferings scatter over all
the World, Dan. 3.28, 29. God's Glory shines out of their sufferings; enemies
acknowledge none like Israel's God. (2) They honor themselves; 1. They no
sooner in the fire, but they meet with Jesus there, verse. 24, 25. according to
Isa. 43.2. 2. It was an honor to them that God should work such a noble
miracle for them, as to stop the mouth of the fire, that it could not burn
them. (3) Their Suffering was the Churches honor and advantage; it won great
respect and honor to the Jewish Church and Religion (4) Did not their
Suffering, and God's owning them, strengthen the weak Faith of their distressed
Brethren, the poor Jews? -- Your Sufferings may be the Conversion of others:
How willing would you be to Preach a Sermon, if you were sure it would be the
Conversion of some soul? thy Suffering for Christ may be the best Sermon that
ever thou preachedst in thy life, and may win more upon souls; as we say, The
best Living, is the best Preaching; so I say, To suffer well is the best
preaching, etc. (5) It will increase your future glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

I had other things on my thoughts, but am interrupted by the unavoidable
access of strangers, and noise; I may next say a little more, I am troubled to
break off thus, but you know the heart, the opportunity, the interruption of a
Prisoner, especially where there there is a full and rude Prison. The Lord help
you, that by a patient continuing in well-doing, you may commit your soul,
body, estate, liberty, into the hands of God, as of a faithful Creator, knowing
whom you have believed, and that he is able to keep that which you have
committed to him against that day; only the good thing (that blessed Testimony
to Truth as it is in Jesus) committed by him unto you, keep through the holy
Spirit that dwells in you. Sell not for a supposed opportunity (to buy and
sell and get gain) your real opportunity to exalt Jesus Christ in suffering for
his Names sake; most who make haste this way out of bonds, do usually reckon,
they will be more prudent next, than to suffer for a circumstance; and commonly
God shows himself more jealous of his Glory, than to employ them again in so
honorable a work. Unless, as one of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's time, who
recanted his Profession, because (said he) I cannot burn for Christ: but
shortly after his House was burnt (as I remember) and he must burn without
Christ. Tho Lord strengthen you with might in your soul. Amen.

Yours, etc.
30th of the 5th mon. 64.
Upon a Letter sent to him for Conveyance, from a Church of Christ in London,
to one of their Fellowship, in Prison, near him. That you may stand perfect and
complete in all the Will of God, desired.
My inward Friend!
THe receipt of yours to me, exposing to my view for advantage, as well as
committing to my hand for Conveyance, that lively instance of the care of a
whole Congregation toward one of their Members, was not more welcome to me,
than the matter offered therein to observation was rebuking and convincing of
my sinful shortness toward diverse, unto whom I stand deeply engaged, as well
as dearly related, in Gospel-bonds. I hope it has had, and will farther be
succeeded with this issue, to awaken me to a farther observation and
apprehension of that great debt that I owe on Christ's behalf to diverse souls,
whose faces for a long time I have not seen in the flesh, from which my
distance, in respect of place, does not discharge me in point of duty, and be
of directive usefulness to guide my way, and inform how I ought to behave my
self among the scattered members of the Church of the Living God, which is
(where it is as it should be) the Pillar and Ground of Truth; on which, as on a
Pillar, that should go out no more, should stand engraven, to be seen and read
of all men, the public Edicts of our King, with all his Statutes and
Judgments, especially in a time when they are spoken against, and would be
razed out; nay, razed to the very foundation thereof, by the sons of Edom, that
border of wickedness, the people against whom God has indignation for ever.
The consideration whereof does not only require that they be living stones, who
are competent for such ends, having living tables in their hearts, for the
inscriptions of the Spirit of the Living God, and that the beauty of this
Ornament be set in Majesty, but does frequently commend to me that observation
which your last ere this (some time since) was hinting to me of the need we
have, who design such services, to wait for power by the Spirit from on high,
to be his Witnesses, and to expect according to his Promise, That showers of
the latter rain shall come down to furnish a people to bear his glory in the
administrations of his House, answering the Institutions of the New Testament;
although I am no way taken with that dilatory inference, wherein some seem to
stick, as if upon the observation that Briars and Thorns are come upon God's
Houses in the joyous City, and are likely to abide there till the Spirit be
poured out from on high; therefore it were best, and our Interest, till the
manifest taking place of that promised dispensation, not to put our hands to
such Acts and Ordinances, the beauteous Majesty of which must needs be
acknowledged to be very much wrapped up and concerned in the hoped issues of such
a Glory stepping in. There being blessed ends to be by us promoted in our
present state, by our dutiful obedience to every Institution of our King; and
through infinite Grace and Mercy, are there such Gifts and Graces of the Spirit
to be found on some, as may yield help to sober, humble enquirers, to get over
such stumbling blocks, and contribute toward their preparing in Body and
Spirit, as an adorned Bride to meet the Bridegroom, who loves to find his
keeping all his Commandments unrebukable, and without spot to his appearing.
In which attire, I earnestly desire your whole man, Body, and Soul, and Spirit,
may be found ministering a practical convincing Argument, by your standing
completely perfect in the whole Will of God, that there is (as there indeed is)
a hidden excellency in fellowship with Jesus Christ in those ways and
appointments of his upon their souls, who in Faith and Faithfulness are yielded
up to him therein, which has admirable Virtue in it, though at present not
attended with those mighty Signs and Wonders by Gifts of the Holy Spirit, the
which were rather for the sakes of them who believed not, than for such as
through Faith are directed to judge of, and close with such things answerable
to their tendency by good pleasure to lead into the Mystery of God, and of the
Father, and of Christ. The Reason and Efficacy whereof lies not in any just
proportion betwixt the thing commanded and the Mystery proposed to enjoyment,
no more than there did between washing in Jordan, and Naamans clensing, (the
cause of the scornful storming of his proud spirit) but in the mere sovereignty
of divine good pleasure, who gives us a word of Faith to guide and prove our
obedience, and engage our humble expectation of his own presence, who is Lord
of Influences, to conduct the Heirs of Promise into those secrets of his
Pavilion by doors, at the threshold of which the Children of this Worlds wisdom
stumble, either by sensual Formality, sticking in the letter of things; or by
aerie Speculations, rejecting the weakness and foolishness of Christ in his
Institutions; but Wisdom is justified of her Children. All here are well, love,
honor and salute you.

Yours, in Soul-service.

To a Friend, who, after some Retirement, was returning to pursue his Calling
in Affairs of this World. The Lord be your shade, on your Right Hand.
My very dear Brother!
I Perceive you are applying your self to something men call, Business in the
World; and I have comfortable hopes, that you have studied ere this hour that
lesson, Finally Brethren, the time is short, it remains, etc. -- For the
fashion of this World passes away. Oh my dear Brother! my soul is afflicted to
observe the over-greedy Engagement of many (whom I love and honor for their
former eminency) plunging themselves into business, and there even drowning
themselves in ruin and perdition; losing the savor of their spirits, the
intimacy of their Communion with Christ in the Spirit, and so grow dry,
careless, prudent, fearful, omissive, what not? till there is hardly left so
much as the uniform appearance of a soul, that has been the seat of such
glorious discoveries and enjoyments as men have readily spoke of formerly. It
may well be asked of many now, as the Apostle, Where is the Blessedness ye
spoke of? -- Men discourse of their primitive applications of Truth, and to it
speak much and frequently of blessedness in the things of the Gospel; it was
blessed Praying, and blessed Hearing, and blessed Meeting, and blessed
Meditating; because in all these they sought after, and partook of blessedness!
But where is that now? There is somewhat of Praying, and Preaching, etc. but
where is the blessedness of all these? Is it not very much departed, and what
may be the cause? is it not much from hence? Men are gone deep into the spirit
of the World, and are grown carnal, of the Earth earthy, and savouring of the
Earth, and thereby losing their Love, Zeal, Faithfulness, Insensibly, but very
dangerously. I hope better things of you, and that you both do and will watch
your own Spirit, and stir up others to take great heed to their spirits, that
they deal not treacherously.

Yours*
7th 3d month, 64.
To an ancient Friend, giving his Apprehensions concerning the multitude of
Professors; with some of his Experiences both in Bonds and Sickness.
Kind and very much respected!
THe posture of the Lord's own People, even of such, who in days past, with
greatest intimacy, and endearment, went to the House of God in company, has of
late years under these stupendous dispensations presented it self to me much
after the similitude of a great Fleet of Ships outward-bound, who set out of
their Port beautifully equipped, laden, trimmed, in consortship, and under a
very prosperous promising gale, all spreading their very Top-gallant, sayls to
show their celerity and make the best of their way: A very beautiful and
pleasant prospect to an eye delighted in such expeditions. But having stood but
a little way in this course out of sight of the Country from whence they set
forth, a dark night and dismal storm overtaking them, they are dispersed all
Sea-over; a great number being mindful of the Port whence they came, think they
have a fair opportunity, and plausible excuse to return again, and draw up with
design to adventure such storms no more. Others, and they not a few, being
confident and conceited of their own understanding, do shape their course to
and fro as the wind shifteth, are cast upon Rocks and Shoals, to the making
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience. Many others fearing that course,
think yet by casting their Wheat and Tackling into the Sea, they shall somewhat
lighten their Ship, and be the better able to weather it out, and so dropping
Anchors at the wrong end, wish for day. Few, very few prefering the Interest of
the great Owner and Fraughter beyond their own Lives, determine to stem the
storm, and press toward the Port unto which they are bound, in the face of all
difficulties; and of these few, Alas, How rare is it, that two keep in company
with intents to strengthen and help each other as they can! I need not make the
Application particularly to spiritual things, the day we live in gives sad
evidence of the Truth of all these Instances; and now the case being thus, how
desirable should it be to such, who in disposition, desire, and endeavor, are
pressing forward to meet with good Neighbors, who may keep company, and yield
(if need be) advice, supply, or assistance, till we all come to drop Anchor
within the Vale, whither the Forerunner is for us entered. If in this
providential coming-up with one another, it might be of any encouragement or
advantage to you, I could at large acquaint you, That by the Grace of God, I am
what I am; who have great occasion to exalt wonderful loving kindness, that
has helped hitherto so, as after five year imprisonment, in more than five
Prisons; and in this last year above nine months sickness, with diverse trials
of Faith and Patience, I have never yet seen the least reason (and I praise
Christ my Lord) never been under an hours temptation, to relinquish, or repent
of my Testimony in Word or Deed to any one persecuted Truth of Christ, for
which I suffer; and though my present lot be in a place where the salt sharp
Air is manifestly ruinous to my health, exposing me (more than ever I was in my
life) to daily distempers, and under a Sentence of Primunire, and in a
readiness* on all occasions, for threatened Transportation, besides other
threatening and straitning circumstances; yet under all, is Christ as precious
to my soul as ever, and so is his Cause, Work, and Institutions, and faithful
Children, and every way as worthy of my All, as I professed him to be in the
greatest fullness or plenty of all things; neither durst I for my life balk the
least Truth of Jesus, which is to be witnessed unto, for the obtaining any
health, liberty, or other accommodations whatever; nor can I express the
constant satisfaction, and sometimes consolation that my soul is made to enjoy
in following God, especially when in my greatest sickness, about this time
twelve month, and at other seasons, when I have been ready to step into
Eternity; Thoughts and Pen cannot set forth the Peace passing understanding,
wherewith my soul was possessed, in respect of the present Truths of Jesus
Christ, and his heart love to me therein, which do to this day abide in their
excellency, and obligation, engaging my soul to love and praise the Lord for
his unspeakable gifts of Grace to me herein, who have as fearful, cowardly,
unbelieving, slothful, self-saving, a poor heart, as I think any poor Christian
alive is pestred withal. In the mention therefore of this, or any part of it, I
would not be understood to intend the proposing my self to any high Thoughts
that should be had of me, as if I were better than others, or had attained to
any praiseworthy, or exemplary degree of stedfastnest herein; for I have much
more to say in way of self-judging, humbling, and loathing before the Lord; but
my design in this liberty of speech, is to engage you to a like freedom, and to
give you in part a Character how you may represent me to your self in your
addresses before the Lord; but principally, that hereupon I may take occasion
as from experience, the more confidently and earnestly to beg you, That you
would be much in the searching and trying your heart and ways, examining to
the bottom (if that work have layen neglected, as in too many it does) how it
stands between the Lord and you in point of union, and relation toward each
other. The dispensations that are over us, are come to lay the Ax to the root
of every Tree; if the root be found to be rottenness, the blossoms (of an
external Profession) will go up like the dust. Nothing short of true Interest
in Jesus Christ, laid in real Regeneration, and the renewing of the holy
Spirit, will hold out to the end of this trial to any purpose; forms of
Godliness will expose to man's wrath, and where there wants the Power of it, it
will expose to Gods wrath, whose fire is in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.
Nor will it suffice that Interest in it self, in Christ, be safe, barely
considered, unless also Influences from him be obtained, and Communion with him
be improved, unto a daily resignation to him, and walking in the beauties of
Holiness before him. Any sinful shortness, neglect, abatements, losses, of this
kind are very perilous in such a time as this, it is one to a thousand, that is
under decays of this kind, and proceeds in a path of it without early sense
and repentance; but that word is verified, Men gather them, they easily sink
down into an earthly, carnal, sour, discontented, fearful, heartless posture
of spirit, and then are unable to make resistance to any temptation, whether to
sin, or sinking. They therefore have of all others the advantage, who by the
constraints of Faith, and Love, abide close, serious, spiritual, faithful,
conscientious with, and toward the Lord, not slothful in business, fervent in
Spirit, serving the Lord, rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing
instant in Prayer. That you may be found in this attire, waiting for the coming
of our King, is the sincere desire for you of him, who would be glad to hear
from you, and to serve your soul in any thing within the compass of,

Yours, in true respects, A. C.

To a Friend, advising to look well to his steps, in some quick turns of
Providence. An Hiding Place in the Cleft of the Rock, till the Indignation be
over-past. -- Desired for you.
Honored and Beloved!
WHat a blessing, beyond compare, is it to be as those living things,
mentioned, Rev. 4.8. Full of Eyes within, and before, and behind, (v. 6.)
Indeed so short are the turns that the Lord takes, so mysterious are his works,
his way in the clouds, and paths in the de^p waters, that we must needs say as
he, Job 26.14. Lo these are part of his ways, but how little a Portion is
heard of him? the Thunder of his Power who can understand? When I either look
back and see what has the Lord wrought! Or forward, and think what great
things seem to hover over us in Promises. The former things are come to pass,
and new things he does declare; truly, I have many tremblings in my self, Alas!
Who shall live when God does this? On what a single foot have I need stand,
both in point of Hope and Holiness, that I may preserve a station undefiled,
and not be ashamed before him, at his coming. I was never more fearing my self,
and others, than in this half-work, that seems to be in a capacity of being
done before us: the bottom is such, as neither Saints nor Sinners methinks
durst adventure much upon; yet many go on in the simplicity of their hearts, to
try if perhaps they may do the least service to help the desired work forward
to its just issues. I am apt to think you see enough of Lamentation in the
divisions of Reuben, that make such searchings of heart; the same Cloud (as I
was saying last) extends hither, and the Effects are the same I suppose here
and there. They that have gone hand in hand in their mourning hitherto, seem
necessitated to part, and yet neither sing nor weep mutually at parting, but a
spirit seems to sunder them that is not likely to carry them far without
miscarriage. But it is no wonder to see a sinful Nation, a People laden with
iniquity, fuller of passions than of compassions, divided and lose one another
in a season, when it seems neither day nor night; and about a work, that is so
fitted to set out the manifold wisdom of God, as if the Maker of Heaven and
Earth had reserved his work, his strange work; his act, his strange act, till
last; and left this inscription on every footstep he takes, Yet he will show
him greater works than these, that ye may marvel, Joh. 5.20. They of all, have
the crowning mercy, who are thought worthy to have that Righteous man's
portion, to be called to the foot of God, Isa. 41.2. Deuteronomy. 33.3. A very holy
Evangelical large Spirit, is only fitted to comply with what our God is doing.
Blessed are all they that wait on him. --

These Parts afford no Intelligence, only Evil-men and Seducers wax worse and
worse; men's hearts are failing for fear, and for looking for the things that
are coming on upon the Earth, while the Powers of Heaven, and the Pillars of
the Earth are shaking. I find few seriously enquiring in any other than a
superficial Spirit. What must the Righteous do? Our very Character seems to be,
a People void of counsel. I am,

Yours, in spiritual affection knit to you, waiting to obtain relation to you
in all the will of our King. A. C.

To a Friend, with Arguments for Patient waiting. The Lord be your shade upon
your Right Hand.
My Dear!
I Have sometimes had Instruction, and conceived engagement from that word, 2
Kings 3.16, 17 to dig pits till the rain fill the pools; Ye shall not se^ wind,
neither shall ye see rain, yet the valley shall b^ filled with water, that ye
may drink, etc. The latte^ days work has Promises prepared, and proportioned
to a design of magnifying the Naked Arm o^ God, in the spoiling the Glory,
sealing up the hand and hiding pride of every man. And this advantag^ have we
beyond our Predecessors, that the Lord has made eminent, evident advances upon
this Work i^ our view and remembrance; having given us, as in a little Map, a
lively description and testimony of what he both can and will do for his Names
sake, and he having been at work in a way of Wonders, nay, proceeding to do
very terrible things; still he expects we should be following him, in a Faith
and expectation of great things, Joel 2.21. That was a very good advice, Job
5.8, etc. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause; which
does great things, and unsearchable, mavelous things without number, who
gives rain upon the Earth, and sends waters upon the Fields, to set up on
high those that be low, that those which mourn may ^e exalted to safety. --
(verse. 16.) So that the poor has Hope, and Iniquity stops her mouth. This
is a day wherein the Lord's great Contests, seem to be drawing toward a
determination and period, all Interests and Preparations seem hastening their
march ^oward the Valley of Decision. Thither bring down ^hy Mighty ones, O God!
Ah! how should we be wakening up our selves, and others, to look about us, that
we be not found naked, unclothed, unwarn^d, unarmed, and the day over-take us,
as it may and will do others, at unawares! How may we see ^n every quarter,
Idolatrous and Profane persons, ^trengthning and stretching one another to the
utmost ^xtent of Abomimation; and should not this yield ^n enforcing Argument
to quicken us up for Christ, ^o look and lay about us, to engage as many as is
^ossible to be on the Lord's side, lively, valiant, vi^ilant, with the Arm and
Armor of God on the ^ight hand and on the left; as those who are in an
^xpectation of following the Lamb on the Mount ^ion, under those Virgin
qualifications, as bespeaks them Called, Chosen, and Faithful: And that to this
end, we admit not impressions to be made on our Spirits to the abatements
either of our Light or Life in following on to know the Lord, from either our
fear at the swellings of Jordan without, or offense, vexation; or inordinate
grief and dispondency at the discords and inconsistencies of the Saints within:
I must confess this Prison has produced a fresh trial of Spirit to me, of
late, beyond what hitherto I have ordinarily observed, and experienced it, to
see the abounding increasing filthiness of this profane Family, the Governors
and Governed in it, being set upon the impudence of Abomination, not only
slighting and hating Reproof, but daring us and Heaven with their Oaths,
Curses, Singing, Roaring, Rageing, etc. insomuch as were not the goodness of
God, and of his Cause, a relieving support, the place would become a Prison
indeed; but this I take to be bu^ as a little Scheme of a great World of
Wickedness* How great is that Grace, that gives ground to say* We know we are
of God, while the poor World lie^ thus in wickedness! Ah poor England! Oh tha^
my head were waters! --

Yours, etc.

To a Friend, encouraging to stedfastness. Light arising out of obscurity and
darkness.
My honored Friend!
THe principal intendment of this, is to let you know, that through Grace I am
preserved alive, in the midst of many cooling and killing dispensations of
Providence, yet has not the length nor strength of the pressures been hitherto
admitted to draw my Soul into any dislike of the hand that lays them on, or of
the Cause for which (at men's hand) I endure this hard usage; but the more I am
led either to behold the true principles of this Cause, or the gracious
engagements and endearments of the heart of Christ in and to it, and to those
who in a spirit of Faith and faithfulness adhere to it, and are the Confessors
of it, or to call over the gracious experiences that my self and
fellow sufferers in other places have had and testified, the dearer has it,
and every part and point of it been, made unto me, and the more confidently am
I satisfied, that the Lord will appear to the shame of those, Profane, or
Professors, who are either the open enemies, or secret betrayers of it, and
weakners of the Friends and Favorites thereof: And truly, I wish your soul may
stand at due distance from any defilements and mixtures of this kind, which are
apt to steal in insensibly upon spirits, influenced either with the Fear or
Love of Creatures, in this staggering and backsliding hour of temptation,
wherein men's politic and prudential contrivances to preserve themselves from
danger, has abundantly weakened and wasted the Courage, if not the Conscience
of Testifying Duty. It Is of no small advantage (I find by blessed experience)
to be giving daily diligence, in observation, how nearly and firmly the great
Concerns of the Lord's Glory in his Works and Ways, are related to the Lord
Jesus, in his raised and exalted capacity, and how directly the weight of them
all, rests upon his shoulders who is mighty to bear; and with what infinite
wisdom, and according to what an exact platform of eternal counsel, all these
seeming Meanders and Laborynths of exterior transactions, are managed,
according to the integrity of his heart, and the skilfulness of his hand, who
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. In the Faith and Hope of
this, the Soul of a Believer has gracious invitations and engagement to return
to its rest, knowing that in quietness and confidence is its strength, and are
as the secrets of a Presence Chamber for it, till these calamities be
over-past; and though it look on, but cannot interpret signs in Heaven, and on
the Earth perplexity, distress of Nations, the Sea and Waves roaring, through
approaching woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth and of the Sea; yet it can
acquiesce in the infallible knowledge of that Interpreter, one among a
thousand, who is concerned in all these things engaged by Covenant, and
resolved in absolute Will, to bring about, in the best time and way, the Ends
of his Glory, and its blessedness, in a most sweet harmony and conjunction.

This saying to the righteous, It shall go well with them; and commanding their
fluctuating tempestuous souls into a calm, is yet very far from inducing them
to that carnal security and idleness, wherein tired Professors are apt to wrap
and bless themselves, concluding, we must leave public things to Providence,
and retire into a closset-converse with our selves and the Lord, things good in
themselves, but usually abused into the generating of a private, selvish,
narrow frame of Spirit, unfit to serve God in our generation, by Converting
Sinners, Edifying Saints, or saving themselves from an untoward and adulterous
generation, by a faithful testimony. That the contrary hereunto may be your
blessed lot, namely, largness of Heart like the Sand on the Seashore,
accompanied with cleanness of hand, and a Spirit cleansed by the Blood, and set
free by the Spirit of the Gospel, is the earnest desire for you, of him, who is

Yours, assuredly.
These Parts yield little, only fresh gazing on a new Blazing-Star in the East;
and diverse talks of the beautiful Star in the West; few think of the Star of
Jacob, that bright Morning Star: they who overcome shall have him as a certain
forerunner and prognostic of a Morning without Clouds; they must be up early,
who look to be visited with the comfortable beams of it. Even so, Amen.

1st. of the 2d. month, 65.


Another to the like effect. Supplies of every good thing from the Shepherd and
Stone of Israel.
Dear Heart!
IT is in my desire for you, that you may obtain the favor of a marked
Mourner, securing you from approaching Plagues, and reserving you for expected
Salvation among the Palm-bearing throng, who only are competent to learn the
new song, as one of the One hundred forty four thousand, that are redeemed from
the Earth. And though you are fed with the Bread of Affliction, and Waters of
Adversity (and that also by measure and stealth) yet you may not want the
satisfactory sight and hearing of a Teacher, that may guide you into all Truth,
as it is in Jesus, keeping you upright in this staggering day, when so many
reel to the right hand, and to the left. I confess, sometimes I have hopeful
expectations of seeing some such effect as this o^ all these slidings, some of
them of understanding s^all fall to try them, and to purge and make them white,
even to the time of the end; but yet, It is a fearful thing thus to fall into
the hands of the Living God. My lie that promotes his Glory, makes me no whit
less a sinner; or my doing evil, that good may come thereby. I think I was
hinting to you last time, the Caution the Lord has ministered to me, by Prove.
25.26. A righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring, detrimental and infectious to all that have any
thing to do with him. The account that you give of the Wall of the Daughter of
Sion, much-like his, Neh. 2.13. which was once such an inviting prospect, Psalm.
48.12, 13. would engage to that Outcry, Lam. 2.18, 19. but that there is hope
in her end, That her Children shall return, though now they are not; her dead
men shall live together, this dead body shall arise. A review therefore of her
from the munition of Rocks, suitable to that Landschip, Isa. 33.20, etc. is
becoming the Children of the King; but especially has it been of use to me, to
feed upon that discovery, made of the temper of his heart, who is principally
interested and concerned in all these mutations, He shall not fail, nor be
discouraged, till he have set Judgment in the Earth, Isa. 42.4. The youths
shall faint and grow weary, and young men utterly fail; they who stand upon
their youthful vigor and greenness, may and shall give way; but he who has
such engagements with him, and for him, as verse. 5, 6. he waits without
weariness, and expects without impatience, till his enemies be made his
footstool. A fellowship through faith in in his Spirit, will furnish to a
similitude in his patience, to a being armed with the same mind that was in him.

Rests, Yours, dearly.

To a Friend upon the death of a Zealous, Faithful, and therefore Persecuted
Servant of the Lord. Where is the Lord God of Elijah?
My true Friend!
IT comes to my lot, to take you now by the hand, though you may justly and
earnestly challenge and expect it from a righter and more instructed heart and
hand, who being under deep pressures, and considering there is a time to be
silent (especially when put to shame) as well as a time to speak, is not easily
drawn forth to any thing of this nature, till he can recover a little strength,
waited for, to comfort others with the same comforts wherewith himself has
been (when he has been) comforted himself of the Lord; dreading especially
under such a dispensation to utter any thing rashly; knows that to speak his
troubles, will add little to the allaying of yours; and that, as Vinegar upon
Nitre, will be the singing songs to an heavy heart, his own or others; wishes
therefore his present silence may have no worse interpretation, than the seven
days silence of Job's Friends, who answered him not a word when they saw his
anguish was exceeding great, and their own was not very small. The Interest of
words (merely such) can be of little signification, while the things themselves
spoken of, are manifestly absent. Perhaps we have spoken enough, if not too
much for our part, now God is come to speak his part, which requires much quiet
attention, the rather for that though it be very loud, yet very mysterious, and
deep, as are many of the Oracles of God; those especially wherein he designs to
manifest himself to his, and not to the World. I could for my own part also lay
hold on the like exemption, and silent retirement, as most befitting my present
state and frame, altogether entangled and perplexed, and presuming that you
have at hand to help not only the presence of the great promised Comforter, who
can supply all your wants, but also the secondary supplement of many worthy
Ones, who have received the Anointing, and thereby the Tongue of the Learned,
to speak words in season: From you we have hitherto received the accounts given
of the gradual st^ps of him, who works all things according to the counsel of
his own Will; in the several gradations wherein we have not been wanting, as
enabled, to pour out our hearts before him who was able to help, and are now
enquiring why he has appeared as being angry with the Prayers of his People,
covering himself with a Cloud that they could not get through. If any distinct
answer be given, you may expect to hear of it. In mean time that, Isa. 57.1. is
before us, as verified, not only in the loose generation of Professors, who
seem greatly hardened and estranged from the Interest of their chiefest
mercies; but to true, even among those who seem to be most tenderly touched
with affectionate sense of present privations, and pressures of all kinds;
right laying to heart, and due considerations of such stupendous works of God,
both in their present weight and future warning, is very rare, and require
extraordinary teaching and conduct, that neither on one hand we despise, or on
the other faint, when thus chastised by him. Your cry for help hence, must be
returned with the same importunity, ye also helping by Prayer to God for us,
who though at some personal distance, are yet in some sort of Sympathy pressed
(if not above measure, and beyond strength) yet to the utmost degrees of what
is hitherto received; yet wisdom and strength are with him with whom we have to
do, who has graciously put himself under promise, that as the day is, the
strength shall be. The Lord prepare us for learning, harping, singing the new
song, which is the peculiar melody of them redeemed from the Earth, which
admits of no interruption from Thundrings, Earthquakes, Tempests, Voices;
though they proceed out of the Throne, and are subservient to the Ends of it.

Yours, heartily*
4th of the 4th mon. 67.
Another on the same occasion. Garments of Gladness, for the Spirit of
Heaviness.
My dear Sister!
WHile there is a Spirit in Heaven, influencing spiritual Believers upon Earth
in their frail capacities, that Word will have its verity among them, though
absent from one another in the body (how great soever their distance, and how
dark soever their circumstances may be) yet are they present in the Spirit,
joining not only in rejoicing, while order and stedfastness in the Faith are
manifest, but also in affliction and mourning where knowledge is imparted (or
though but supposed) of the hand of the Lord touching and bruising, especially
in the most tender part, and on spiritual occasions, such has been the
fellowship of the Spirit (through Grace I trust) in my soul with you under the
very heavy rebuke of the Almighty, wherewith you have been exercised,
especially of late days, on diverse accounts, both personal, domestic, in the
Church of Christ, where you walk in the whole Sion of God; and as in the Nation
it self, having a right and relation to its welfare, or desolations, as I also
am fully satisfied you have had with me, in diverse proofs that have been put
upon my Faith and Patience as far as they have come to your cognizance; and I
hope the same Grace will not only teach us to be tender, but mutually helpful
each to other toward the understanding and compliance more fully with our
Father's mind in these stupendous dispensations, so as his ends upon us may be
actually furthered in the promotion of the power and beauties of Holiness. Unto
which issues, though godly sorrow working Repentance never to be repented of,
has a very direct tendency, and humbling our selves greatly under the mighty
hand of God, is the straitest step toward the best exaltation in due time: Yet
when I read the present temper (and its tendency) of my own heart, and also
observe in yours, and others late lines upon this heartbreaking occasion, to
what excess of sadness, fear, discouragement, and even dispondency, we are apt
to yield the Tempter advantage to triumph over us, and hardly recover our
selves to a jealous thought, that there is any considerable danger in the
excess on that hand, but that it is a kind of virtue to refuse to be comforted;
I say, in such observations my heart has bin smitten with reproof, and
somewhat awakned to stand upon its watch against incursions on that quarter,
lest Satan should get an advantage on us, who should not be ignorant of his
enterprises. It Is true, we have lost a Prince and great man in Israel this day,
But who was his Father? 1 Samuel 10.12. was it not the Father of Spirits, with
whom the residue of the Spirit is, and who can at his pleasure set a man over
the Congregation; Know we not where is the Lord God of Elijah, is he not in
Heaven, and can do whatever he pleases? Is not his Spirit in Promise? Are not
all the Promises of Christ Yea and Amen? Does not the time of the Promise draw
nigh of that grand effusion of the Spirit of Elijah, that shall raise the
Witnesses, revive the Works, lift up the Standard, break the Yoke? have not
some sprinklings of the Spirit been found up and down in our days, and should
it not be owned as a token for good, and turned to us for a Testimony, that the
Harvest is not far off? Are not these discouraging complainings of ours, much
of the same kind, and go upon the same mistakes, and may righteously issue in
the same dismissions to us from further service, as it was with Elijah in his
fainting fit, after he had acted in so full a gale of the Spirit just before,
that now he complains, They have killed the Prophets, etc. and I, even I am
left alone, and my life is sought also; What am I better than my Fathers? We
know the Answer of God to him, which I trust is true at this day, There is yet
a remnant according to the Election of Grace, and Seed that shall serve him,
and shall be accounted with him for a Generation. The Fathers, where are they?
and do the Prophets, the Worthies live for ever? Why cry we out of loss? God
has not lost them, God took them, they all live to God, they are ever with the
Lord. We have not lost them, unless they that sleep in Christ are perished; we
shall go to them shortly, though they shall not return to us; We shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; they have not lost themselves, they are found
in Christ: to die is gain; to be with Christ is far better; Death is theirs,
because they are Christ's. The work of God has not lost them, if we take it in
its most capacious comprehensive acceptance. God has a Will to be done not in
Earth, but also in Heaven; they are not dismissed from the King's business, who
are called from the Camp to the Court, advanced from being Soldiers, to be
Privy Counselors. God has a great Family in Heaven, and Earth, and many
Vessels; some above in honor, some below in dishonor. If God have fully
purged any, who can grudge them to be translated as Vessels unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Master's immediate use, etc. Besides, look on the
Work as it is below, it must be granted, That if it must always proceed
according to one measure or manner, by a line that we have made ready to our
Lord's hand; then will the Work be deficient, and suffer loss, when those that
we lay stress upon are taken away, and others cannot be found presently to clap
into their places; but if the Work be the Lord's, and receives various
appearances and representations, according to the counsel of his own Will, and
yet in all go strait forward; then humbling acts passing on it, changing its
beautiful appearance, laying it sometimes low, in a low place, making the
fatness of its flesh lean and thin, are not to be accounted loss, or at a dead
stand, by such poor worms as we, that can judge of such things only by
appearance.

The wheel of divine Actings went always straight forward, Ezekiel. 1.9, 12. and
returned not when they went; whither the Spirit was to go they went; and yet
that work that goes always streigh^ forward, has not always liftings up
above the Earth, nay, many times stands still, verse. 21. Yet God is not slack
concerning his Promises, nor Retrograde concerning his Work. Gideon may have
too many, but God had never too few to do his work by; there is no restraint to
the Lord to save by many, or by no might. Well, when Moses my Servant is dead,
Josh. 1.2. and that at the straits of proud swelling Jordan, what shall poor
Joshua (a Servant, a slighted inferior) do? Why, he must be strong and of a
good courage, verse. 6. Only be strong, and very courageous, verse. 7. have not I
commanded thee to be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed,
verse. 18. So Deuteronomy. 31.6, 7, 8. such sweeping dispensations that fall upon the
choicest men of Israel, are apt to invade the courage of the Remnant that is
left, against which as Grace makes special provision to lay in matters for
support, it concerns us faithfully to draw it out: Be of good courage, and God
shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that trust in the Lord.

Rests, Yours, affectionately, for Christ's sake.

To a Friend, upon the Release of some, who had been diverse years Imprisoned.
Dear Friend!
I Am glad if those Friends come safe on shore; if there be nothing of a
Witness to be looked at in such a lot, it is good to get to Land with all speed:
but if there be any thing of our being set, for the defense (or Apology) of the
Gospel, Phil. 1.17. though but in the smallest point of it, it may be very
hazardous shifting places, Acts 27.31. 1 Samuel 22.23. 1 Cor. 9.15, 16. If God
look for a man in the gap, though but to defend a piece of Barley, 1 Chronicles.
11.13, 14. or though but of Lentiles, 2 Samuel 23.11, 12. If it be any part of
the Heritage of Israel; it will not be easy answering that question, when
found in a way of escaping, What do thou here Eliah? It needs great care and
caution to come out of Egypt well leavened, when the most are making haste,
that they may not die in the pit. When will that Roman greatness be out-shone
by Christian Nobility of Spirit? Acts 16.37.

Yours.
30th of the 9th mon. 67.
Upon occasion of a Token of small value in Provisions, sent to him, and his
fellow Prisoners. Unto our Brethren and Friends in the bonds and bowels of the
Gospel, whose hearts have made them willing, under the bounteous Influences of
the God of Israel, to comfort the hearts of the unworthy Prisoners of the Lord
in Plymouth Island, by a Costly Present, and to every one that has contributed
or helped therein, to a tender groan, or the value of a cup of cold water, be a
large recompense of Reward given in Grace, and ascertained in Glory, by him who
is not unfaithful to forget such labor of Love showed to his Name.
Beloved and esteemed, as is meet in the Lord!
ALthough we are hitherto detained from the personal and particular knowledge
of you by Name, wh^^^ counsels and care have been concerned in this liberal
expression of your Sympathy, with a few poor undeserving creatures; in which
matter we could be glad to receive distinct information, as far as such a
desire might be thought modest in us to ask, and be expedient for you to grant,
to the end that our Supplications for you, and Applications to you, might be
more direct and particular. Yet ere that come to hand, and lest Matthew. 6.3. may
have influenced, (though we think the reason of it binds not in this case) We
thought it lay on us, not to forbear the present acknowledgment, such as it is,
(at least as a forerunner to what we should be willing to offer more
particularly) that hereby you might be informed, that through the Lords
Providence, the whole of it came safe to hand, and by his Grace, we hope the
heavenly voice in it has (and through your Prayers) will yet have a more
effectual access to our hearts, to lay us under those obligations, to a
faithful, cheerful, unwearied trusting in him, and waiting on him at all times,
which we are satisfactorily persuaded was the design of your devising those
liberal things for us. Under which engagements we reckon our selves bound at
least to give you some account of our selves in the present respect, That if it
may be our rejoicing each in other, may be rendered more reciprocal, we
comforted together with you by the mutual Faith and Love both of you and us.
And first of all, we wish you knew that under the varieties and vicisitudes of
exercises wherewith our Heavenly Father has seen good to prove and try us for
some years together, leading us in some paths, and under some disappointments
in our Creature-concerns and accommodations, that we thought not of, and had
not trod with our feet in days past; Yet hitherto has his bountiful Provision
and tender Care over us exalted it self in a distinguishing manner, and many
times to our admiration, so as hitherto our Bread has not failed, but has
been given to us in due season, and our Waters have been sure; so that knowing
how little we are yet fitted to bear, as a Father pittieth his Children in
their low estate, he has not proved us with hunger or with straights, nor
called us up to approve our selves his Witnesses in necessities, in distresses,
etc. but our lot has rather been to partake of the fat, and sweet, and soft,
insomuch as if he put that Question to us, to be resolved according to that
express literal sense of it; When I sent you forth on the Services and
Sufferings that attend your Testimony, and you knew not whither you went;
Lacked you anything? We must answer, Nothing, Lord, but in that respect have in
hand, or we trust in some degree of sweet satisfaction, we have all, and
abound, and are full, by the favor of him who gives us all things richly to
enjoy, and is (we would humbly hope) teaching us in whatsoever state we are,
therewith to be content. So that at many of the strange preventions of
loving kindness* even in things of this sort, we are often made with admiration
to cry out, What is this to us, Lord! Is this after the manner of men, O God!
Is this a Prison! If we should have sought a Prison in a Prison these six or
seven years, Have we yet found it! Whatever others in the same fellowship of
bonds with us have found, we must say, for our parts, That as we have escaped
the Sword, and we hope the Polutions of the Adversary, so we have found great
Grace in the Wilderness for his People, his Chosen. -- The which we mention,
not only that we may praise the Lord together, while ye observe that we receive
not, nor accept not so thankfully your Present in respect of need, through that
unspeakable gift and care of his who has hitherto continued the Bread of the
day in its day; but that herewithal we might take hold of an apt occasion to
take you by the hand, and lead you with a little the more encouragement up and
down in those ways of the Lord, wherein we must sing, Great has been the
goodness of our God, even in the experiences that we have passed practically
through, in the Doctrine and Profession whereof we had been trained up, in our
years of plenty and prosperity; so that we must say, The Land that we have been
sent to spy out, even in the straitest passages of it, as far as our Father
assigned us to follow him in, is a very good Land; and if we rebel not against
the Lord, but abide with him, those very circumstances that at a distance seem
like sons of Anak, and walls reaching up to Heaven, apt to eat up the
Inhabitants, are well able to be overcome, and will be found Bread for us,
while we stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the majesty of the
Name of the Lord our God; so that these Serpents at a distance, from which we
are apt to flee, are found to believing, but a rod (and that a rod of God too)
when taken in the hand. And could we come forth to you in Truth and Evidence,
as wise and right improvers of the sensible experiments we have actually found,
tasted, seen, and handled hitherto of this sort; and that the savor of these
excellent things had not been diminished in these souls of ours, through too
much an in observent, careless, earthly disposition* bringing us down from our
advantages of excellency; we might speak more loudly to you than now we can*
Oh! taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed are they that put their trust
in him! The Lions (among whom we dwell) do want and suffer hunger; but they
that fear the Lord, lack nothing that is good. In the midst of their
sufficiency they are in straits, while in the straits (designed to wear out the
people of the Saints of the most high) there is a provision made of
sufficiency; be ye therefore strong, and very strong, and very courageous, and
God shall strengthen your hearts.

And now for a thankful acknowledgement, though it may not be interpreted as
any requital of your holy liberality, What shall we farther say? than that we
do (as we are able) bring the matter in our requests and thanksgivings unto
him, who is able to make all Grace abound toward you, All Sufficiency in all
things may abound to every good work, being enriched in every thing to all
bountifulness, which causes in us thanksgivings unto God. And this we beg on
your behalf, not as if we desired a gift, or that it should be so again done to
us, knowing that there are many watery faces everywhere requiring Bread to be
cast upon them, as under far greater necessity than our selves: But as h^ving
persuasion (and some small experience) what a great recompense it is in such
case to have the mouth and hand opened, from the hearts being enlarged with
those expatiating Graces and Virtues of the Spirit of the New Testament, that
constitute a true largeness of heart like the Sand on the Seashore, and to
increase that greatness, that is proportionate to the large discoveries of
believing, doing, suffering-Grace, and Preparations for expected Glory. In
order to it, we desire for you all, and entreat you to press and pursue after,
(1) Greater advances toward newness of heart; the old heart will be as old
bottles, and an old garment, that will not comport with the new Wine which is
yet in the Cluster, and a blessing in it, though men attempt to destroy it. And
this is not only a newness of state, but a newness also of frame, by means
whereof the inner-man may pass under experimental renewings day by day, even
the renewings in the Spirit of your minds, by which the Truths, Ways, and
Works of the Lord, the King, may have an intimate access and abundant entrance
into your own souls, and you into them, in their virtue, dominion, and power.
(2) Greater approaches in a way of heavenliness and nearness to the Lord, at
distance from the spirit of this evil World; where the World is set in the
heart, the God of this World will be quickly filling it, narrowing and
enclosing it for earthly service; and this not only in men of Earth, who have
their portion in this life, but also in those that are by the Blood of Christ
delivered from the gross pollutions of this pr^sent evil World, through lust;
but yet much concerned in the business, cares, and intricating-affairs of its
many things, which though lawful in themselves to be diligently prosecuted, yet
as lying under the influence and advantages of the Prince of it, having a
notable tendency to bring souls down from their excellency, and to eat out
insensibly the liveliness and sweetness of our spirits, longer and further than
the Victory that overcomes it, in the virtue of the Cross of Christ, by which
we are crucified to it, and it to us, be kept up on fresh exercise. (3) Right
waitings for, and waitings on the Spirit of Promise, who is of power to quicken
dry bones, raise dead Witnesses, and do great things in and for us, which shall
not be resisted, nor need not be assisted with might and power; though for a
time the work about it may be made to cease with force* and power. We shall say
no more at present, but with the representation of our obliged respects to
every one of you, as if known by Name, leaving you in the blessed arms of our
Beloved, we remain

22th of the 9th mon. 67. Your Brethren, waiting for the Consolation of Israel.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF any inquire, what might occasion so much severity, as to detain the Author
so many years, and until death, a Prisoner? It may suffice to insert here for
the Readers satisfaction, That in the state of his case, left under his hand,
setting forth the illegality and unrighteousness of proceedings against him, He
concludes it thus;

If it should be suggested, Perhaps he is a Ringleader; This true Character of
the Person, may alleviate jealousies of that kind.

He was born at Plymouth, of mean yet honest Parentage, is not by Kindred or
any Alliance related to any Person or Family of any Note at all, was not bred
up to Learning at any University, or sent any where to Travel for Education, or
Experience; but contrariwise, brought up and kept diligently by his Parents to
Work, in the poor yet honest Trade of a FVLLER; never lived out of that Town a
Month together all his life, except in a Journey some Weeks on occasion, about
sixteen years since, to London; besides what he under-went by constraint in
Prison. Never in the former Wars was enlisted in any Troop or Company under
Pay, and in the Trained-Bands of the Town where he served, never was accounted
worthy of Promotion to so much as a Corporal, nor in the Corporation, whereof
he was a Member, ever advanced so high as a Constable, never bettered his
Estate one farthing, by all the propitious advantages, that might have given
him opportunity for so doing; nor is conscious to himself of the least desire
of adding to what he has, by any present or future advantages that any
favorable overtures of the times may tempt him with; never was advanced to, or
improved in any Place or Office of Trust or Profit, Civil, Military, or
Ecclesiastical; save only for some few weeks, unknown to him, and against his
will, he was Mustered a Chaplain to the Fort, but quickly got himself
discharged of that again. Never was concerned in, nor truly charged with any
Plot, Mutiny, or Tumult, giving the least disturbance or occasion of Fear, or
Jealousy.

This one thing then only can remain to give color to such proceedings, That
about eighteen years since, he being convinced of his Duty to the Lord, by
evidence of Scriptural Light, joined himself in an holy Covenant, to walk in
all the Ordinances of the Lord blameless, to the best of his Light and Power,
in fellowship with a poor and despised People.

FINIS.

