THE COMMINATION Prescribed in the LITURGY OF THE Church of England,
VINDICATED; AND Recommended to the Consideration of all Pious Christians. IN A
SERMON, Preached to a Country Audience on the First Sunday in Lent, 1679/80.

By Benjamin Camfeild, Rector of Aylston near Leicester.

Cursed is he that makes the Blind to wander out of the way: And all the
people shall fay Amen. Deuteronomy. 27.18. LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Gun,
and R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER,
HOw this honest Discourse may relish with thee, I know not: Yet if it prove
Medicinal, the season I am sure, is good and proper enough for it, and, it
matters not much, though it should be less palatable. Two desperately-malignant
humors it has to encounter and work upon, Faction and Profaneness, both of
them now almost grown Epidemical. God Almighty send it a Success answerable to
the sincere intentions of him that tenders it. But, if thou art Friend to an
Orderly Piety and Christian Life, He may promise himself, moreover, thy
acceptance and Prayers: And that is all, which I have to desire of Thee on his
behalf: Unless it be this point of common Justice, that thou Read it over
without prejudice, and consider of it, before thou pass censure: But This too I
should rather commend unto thee for thy own Benefit, because Spiritual Physic
Operates not like to Bodily, whether we think on it, or no.

Farewell.
A Lent Sermon.
Deuteron. XXVII. XV. -- And all the people shall answer, and say Amen.


IT is a most excellent Devotional Service, Cum primis salutaris est ceremonia:
sed non video our debeat exhiberi solum nno die, and non saepius. Bucer. for so
in the Liturgy of Edward 6. it was determined to Ashwednesday, but after
enlarged to diverse time of the year, with an ^^^alty only to the First day of
Lent. See Mr. Ham. L'Estrange's. Alliance of Divine Offices. chapter 11. p. 318.
which our Church has charitably provided for the Beginning of Lent in the
Commination prescribed to be used on Ashwedensday (and at other times * of
Solemn Humiliation, when the Ordinary shall appoint) as one of the most proper
Helps and Expedients she could furnish Penitents with, in that loose and
degenerate Age, wherein our Lot is fallen, which is impatient of a severer
Discipline; namely, That, according to the Pattern set us, in this Chapter
principally, the General Sentences of Gods Curses against impenitent sinners be
distinctly pronounced in the presence of all the People, and that every one
that hears them should answer as distinctly unto each Sentence, Amen.

But such is the Licentiousness and Profaneness of our Generation, that,
instead of desiring and promoting the Restoration of Primitive Discipline, we
will not vouchsafe to come up so much as Thus far. We make light of sin, and
slight the Calls of God and his Church unto Repentance; and live, as if we
thought that the happiness and Salvation of the World to come, were worthy but
of very little Care and Labor and Pains in our striving to secure it here. We
have found out new and easy ways and methods to Heaven, which the Primitive
Christians, the Church of Christ from the Beginning were never acquainted with;
ways to Heaven without Repentance, without confessing and forsaking our sins,
and bringing forth Fruits meet for Repentance. We are not for going so far
about, but a nearer Cut, a directer Passage of our own devising, a Leap as it
were from Hell to Heaven, or hugging our sins all the days of our Life, at
Death and the Grave to part and shake hands with them. We have time enough to
spare for Worldly pleasures and divertisements; but when Religion challenges
our attendance, we have no leisure at all for it. We can spend hours and days
freely enough in Visits, in Sports, in Drinking, and it is well sometimes if not
in worse employments: But, Oh! how Scrupulous do we seem in Conscience of
taking any part from our six working days and Devoting it unto God!

Pardon me, Beloved, if upon this occasion, I speak somewhat plainly and freely
to you. A Pan-Cake Bell, as we call it, upon Shrove-Tuesday, though no
Authority enjoin it, will easily draw men from the works of their Callings, and
every one is free and forward enough in harkening to the Summons of it. What a
General Rendesvouz and Crowd of People is there every where usually upon it!
But the Bells may Call loud enough and Chime long enough upon the Ash-Wedensday
after it (and that by Authority too both of Church and State) yet few or none
will take the warning given them, to lay aside their Worldly business for a
while, to resort to the Congregation, there to Confess their Sins, and give
proof of their Repentance, and Humble themselves together before Almighty God,
in order to the procuring of his Forgiveness and Blessing.

Nor is this all. I would it were. Too many there are, that are gone a degree
farther in their Impiety. They content not themselves with abstaining from the
Churches Service, but they sit down also in the Chair of the Scorner. They
Scoff at, and Deride, Revile, and Blaspheme that most excellent Service which
we then perform, as a Superstitious, Foolish or Wicked thing, an uncharitable
Cursing of our selves and others, etc. Of whom I must say, as St. Jude in
another Case, These speak evil of those things, which they know not, Psalm. 10.
but what they know Naturally, as Brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt
themselves.

Alas! None of those Persons consider, what a provocation it is unto God
Almighty, in the days and seasons of his Grace to harden their Hearts against
him: How dear it cost his People of old in the Wilderness, unto whom therefore
he swear in his wrath, Psalm. 99.
that they should not enter into his Rest: How dismal a Requital he has
threatened unto such, Prove. 1. chapter Because I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I also will Laugh at your Calamity, and
Mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as Desolation, and your
destruction comes as a Whirlewind, when distress and anguish comes upon you:
Then shall they call upon me, says He, but I will not answer, they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me; for that they hated Knowledge, and did
not choose the fear of the Lord; they would none of my Counsel, they despised
all my reproof: Therefore shall they eat of the Fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own devices. -- These Persons think not, how implacable God
has declared himself upon such a like miscarriage, as this of theirs is. You
have a full and lively Picture of it drawn for your view, Jsa. 22.12. etc. In
that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping and mourning, and to baldness
and to girding with Sackcloth; and behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen and
killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine, (saying with the Epicurean
Drolls of all Ages) Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die. And it was
revealed in my ears by the Lord of Hosts, (says the Prophet) surely this
Iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts.
-- Nor do I aggravate the matter here by this Comparison beyond what is Just
and Right: For whenever our Governors, both in Church and State, do by their
Laws and Orders call us to Mourning and Fasting and Humiliation, we are to look
upon it and interpret it, as if God himself called us by them thereunto; See 2
Cor. 5.20. 1 These. 4.8. etc.
and he expects we should take the warning, which they as his Deputies, give
us, and construes our despising of them, as a contempt to himself, by whose
Authority they Act; And so also of old he gave the warning to his People,
according to that of the Prophet Joel, chapter 2. Blow the Trumpet, Sanctify a
Fast, Call a Solemn Assembly; Gather the People; Sanctify the Congregation;
Assemble the Elders; gather the Children and those that suck the Breasts; Let
the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; Let
the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar,
and let them say, spare thy People, O Lord! -- This you see, is the Truth of
the Case, we are all herein Transgressors; though it may be aggravated in some
by their Contumacy, and mitigated in others by their Seduction and Inadvertency.

Beseech we God of his infinite mercy therefore, that he lay not this great
Iniquity to the Charge of this sinful Kingdom! Pray we, as Moses did for the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 9.27.
Look not O Lord, unto the stubbornness of this People, nor to their
wickedness, nor to their sin! Or, as we have it our Letany. -- From hardness of
heart and contempt of thy Word and Commandment, Good Lord deliver us!

However, upon all these Considerations laid together, I have purposely
diverted unto the Text even now Read; that I might meet with those who will not
so much as afford their presence at such a Solemnity, and give them that
account of this part of our Service, which may, by Gods Grace, engage them
hereafter to a conscionable frequenting of it.

And, that I may do this with the better success, I will First set before you
the Law and Practice, as it stood among the Israelites; what was the Divine
institution and Ordinance among them in this matter; and then Secondly, show
you, how far we are still concerned in it, or what this observance among them
suggests to invite and justify or vindicate our imitation.

First, It is good to consider the Order, which the Lord kept with his People
in times pasts, T. 6. L. 1. p. 196.
as the Nonconformists themselves have sometimes worded it upon other Occasions.

The First provision about this we Read of Deuter. 11.26. etc. -- Behold, says
Moses, Augmentatio Boni; Diminutio Boni Aben-Ezra.
I set before you this day a Blessing and a Curse (that is, Good and Evil,
Happyness and Misery) A Blessing, if ye obey the Commandment of the Lord your
God, which I Command you this day, and a Curse if ye will not obey. -- And it
shall come to pass, says he, when the Lord thy God has brought thee into the
Land, whither thou go to Possess it, that thou shall put the Blessing upon
Mount Gerizim, and the Curse upon Mount Ebel; Are they not on the other side
Jordan, etc? Ainsworth in Loc.
-- Thou shall put, or give, the Blessing Upon, or Toward, Mount Gerizim (for
so the Hebrew Preposition Gnal sometimes signifies) that is, cause it to be
pronounced there; and so the Curse in like manner Upon, or Toward, Mount Ebel.
Thou shall see or take care that the Blessing and Curse be given forth by the
Priests, Dandam curabis, opera scil. Levitarum. Vatablus.
the Levites, toward these Mountains respectively; by the Levites, I say,
whose Office it was to teach Jacob Gods Judgments, Deuteronomy. 33.10.
and Israel his Law; by whom God had before ordered the Solemn Blessing, chapter
10. and the Curses too, as afterward we find it.

But of this same matter he speaks more particularly and distinctly in This
27th Chapter. Psalm. 12. etc. These shall stand on Mount Gerizim, to bless the
People, when ye are come over Jordan, Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and
Issachar, and Joseph, (under which, Ephraim and Manasseh) and Benjamin. These
shall stand on Mount Gerizim to Bless the People, Vatablus.
ad audiendam benedictionem, to hear the Blessing pronounced on the People for
Obedience. And these shall stand upon Mount Ebel to Curse, Reuben, Gad, and
Asher, and Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali. These on Mount Ebel to Curse, or for the
Cursing, that is, in like manner, to hear the Curse denounced for Disobedience.
For the People were not on either Mountain to pronounce the Blessing or the
Curse, but to hear and witness unto both proclaimed by the Levites, as it
follows. -- And the Levites shall speak and say unto all the men of Israel with
a loud voice, Cursed be (or, is) the man that makes any Graven, or Molten
Image, an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of the Craftsman, and
puts it in a secret place: And all the People shall answer, and say, Amen.
Cursed is he that sets light by his Father or his Mother; And all the People
shall say Amen. -- etc. Munster is mistaken, who reckoned but 11.
in Twelve particulars, in the end of each of which it is prescribed still in
words at length, And all the People shall say Amen.

And as this Office was twice prescribed by Moses in the name of God unto them,
as we have seen, so afterward we find it put in practice under Joshua, when he
had Conducted them over Jordan to this place. Josh. 8.33. etc. And all Israel
and their Elders, and Officers, and their Judges stood on this side the Ark,
and on that side, before the Priests, the Levites, which bare the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger (that is, the Proselite) as he that
was born among them. Half of them over against Mount Gerizim, and half of them
over against Mount Ebel; as Moses the Servant of the Lord had Commanded before,
that they should Bless the People of Israel. And afterward he Read all the
words of the Law, the Blessings and Cursings, according to all that is written
in the Book of the Law; there was not a word of all that Moses Commanded, which
Joshua read not before all the Congregation of Israel with the Women and the
little ones and the Strangers, that were Conversant among them.

An august and full assembly, we see, here, of the Rulers and all the People,
Women and Children too, and Strangers (who had embraced their Religion) not
excepted. -- And when Joshua is said to have read all the Blessings and
Cursings according to all that was written in the Law, and as Moses had
Commanded, we must understand that he issued out his Warrant, gave forth his
Edict to the Priests the Levites herein to do their proper Office, and what
they did at his Command is ascribed to him, as if he had done it. -- And so
again, though there be no particular mention here of the Acclamations of all
the People answering and saying Amen, yet there can be no question at all, but
that so we are to conceive of it, because All is said to be done by him
according to all that was written by Moses in the Book of the Law about it,
where he had his Pattern as well as Commission given him, and in which it was
so often repeated, "All the People shall say Amen.

Concerning the place where these two Mountains stood, Vide Matium. in Josh. 8.
Non procul a Sicimis. Antiq. L. 4. c. ult.
some difference there is among Cosmographers, which I shall not trouble you
with. Josephus describes them near to Sichem, and that is the most common
Opinion, it being reported by Travelers into those parts, that near the Gate
of that City was Jacobs Fountain, and somewhat above that, a Mount arising with
two Tops, as it were, one against the other, which the Inhabitants thereabouts
take for Gerizim and Ebel, the one upon the Right hand, the other on the Left,
supposing the Face turned to the East or Sunrising; Mount Gerizim Southward,
which was accounted Dextrum mundi latus the Right side of the World, and Mount
Ebel Northward, which has been ever looked upon as Male-ominata plaga, an
ill-bodeing Coast.

Now in the Valley, between these two Mountains, as the story tells us, was
placed the Holy Ark, and next to that the Priests the Levites which bore it,
and all Israel, Officers and People, in their several Tribes, on this side and
on that, Half of them over against Mount Gerizim, and Half of them over against
Mount Ebel. That is, as we are told more particularly, Toward Mount Gerizim
were the six heads of the Free Tribes, with their respective Tribes, Liberarum
filij ex justis Matribus familias.
Simeon and Levi, and Judah and Issachar and Joseph and Benjamin, all Children
of the Free-Women, Rachel and Lea. And Blessedness, the Apostle tells us,
belongs to the Children of the Freewoman. Gal. 4.22.31. -- Upon this Mount,
afterward the Samaritans are said to have Built their Temple, taking occasion,
it seems, Ainsworth in Deuteron.
from what was now done there for a Superstitious conceit of the place it self,
calling themselves, Those that belong to the Blessed Mount. Servarum filij.
-- And then for Mount Ebel there were six others, the Sons of the Bond-Women,
Four of them Born of the two handmaids, viz. Gad and Asher, the Sons of
Zilpah, Lea's handmaid, Dan and Naphtali of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid. But
then, to make up the number even with those on the other side, two are added,
that were Born indeed of the Free, Reuben, the Eldest by Leah, but one that had
forfeited his dignity by defiling his Fathers Bed; and Zebulun the last of the
Sons by Leah also, and so the least in Dignity. Thus the People are divided
into two equal Choires, as it were, the one on the Right Hand, and the other on
the Left, with all their Faces toward the Ark; Ora omnium obversa ad Arcam.
Matius ut supra.
the Blessings to be pronounced by the Levites, toward those on Mount Gerizim,
and the Curses toward those on Mount Ebel, over against them, not unfitly
declaring (as one of the Rabbi's observes) Quantum esset inter benedictionem
maledictionemque dissidium; how great a Distance there is between Obedience and
Disobedience, the Blessing and the Curse. A vast Gulf, as it were, between
them, like to that we read of in the Gospel, between Abraham's Bosom and the
place of Torment. They move toward two opposite points, and are not possibly
to be reconciled so as to meet together in one.

Well, the Congregation thus set, we are to suppose that some one or more of
the Levites did lift up his voice like a Trumpet, and, Tanquam fecialis: Mat
ius ibid.
as God Almighty's Herald propound the Articles of his Law and Covenant,
turning first to the Right, that is, toward Mount Gerizim, to utter the
Benedictions and Blessings. -- But, what these Blessings were, Moses does not
specify; and this silence of his in the Case is looked upon by some, Ainsworth
in Loc.
as instructive about a Mystery (in like manner as the Apostle to the Hebrews
interprets his silence concerning the Genealogy of Melchisedec) leading the
Sagacious Reader to look for them by another, which is Christ, by whom comes
Grace and Truth, and whom God has sent to Bless us. -- But, waving this
conjecture though these Blessings are not specified, it is not to be
questioned, but they were rehearsed to the People as well as the Curses; nay,
it is observable, where we have the History of the practice, in the time of
Joshua, that the chief, if not only, mention is made of Benediction, as Moses
the Servant of the Lord had Commanded before, that they should Bless the People
of Israel. Masius in Loc.
Sola Benedictio agebatur: It was their Blessing all along that was designed
and aimed at; the other was but (...), a thing as it were, by the by,
Subservient and in order to this Benediction, as a likely means to remove the
impediments and hindrances of it. Those therefore that are versed in the Jewish
Antiquities, tell us, that the Blessings are particularly to be Collected out
of the Curses here mentioned, answering to each of them. A pause being made by
the Levite at the end of every Sentence or Period, both of Blessing and Curse,
that the People, on both sides, might attest their approbation distinctly to
every Article, as he went along, by their joint Acclamations of Amen; only with
this difference, Those on Mount Gerizim beginning the Amen to the Blessings,
and their Brethren on the other side against them on Mount Ebel resounding or
ecchoing the like after them; Those on Mount Ebel again beginning the Amen to
the Curses, P. Fagius in Denter.
and their Brethren on Gerizim repeating the same after them. -- And it is not
improbable but that the twelve Benedictions, on the one side, and the twelve
Maledictions, on the other were pronounced alternatim, by turn, or Exchange,
Antiq. L. 4. C. ult.
in the way of Antiphone or Responsal, succinentes sibi invicem, as Josephus
has it, The Levites suppose, first beginning toward the Right with the
Blessings thus, Blessed is he that worshippeth the true Jehova only, and no
other Gods besides or with him, whereunto All the People answer and say Amen,
Those on Mount Gerizim beginning the shout, and those on Mount Ebel following
them therein. And then, turning to the Left, (or another Levite it may be
appointed for the Left) Cursed is the man that makes any Graven or Molten
Image, etc. whereto All the People again answer and say Amen, Those on Mount
Ebel beginning the shout, and those on Mount Gerizim following them in the
same. And then proceeding to the Second, Blessed is he that honors his
Father and Mother; whereunto all the People in like manner answer and say Amen.
And on the otherside, Cursed is he that sets light by his Father, or Mother:
And all the People say Amen. -- And so in Order throughout all the rest. 1.
Inter Deum and hominem. 2. inter filium and patrem. Munster in Loc.
The First plainly relates to the leading Duty of man to God, which begins the
First Table of the Law. The Second to that of Children to their Parents, which
is also the First of the second Table. And then we may observe that the Last is
general and comprehensive of all together. On the one side, suppose, Blessed is
he that confirms all the words of this Law to do them. -- and on the other,
-- Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. And
all the People say Amen.

Which interlocutory service finished between Priest and People, the Minister,
as it is probable, proceeded to repeat all that follows in the 28th Chapter as
an agreeable Comment or Illustration upon this Blessing and this Curse, which
God had caused to be pronounced among them, and they by their Amen had
consented to the truth and equity of; that they might the better understand and
consider, how much was Comprised under either of them, what good things under
the Blessing, and what evil things under the Curse. And it is not unlikely, but
these Blessings and Curses, so distinctly proclaimed by Gods Messenger, and
attested to by the People, were the Summary, Epitome, or Abstract of that Law
which was at this time also engraven upon 12 great Stones very plainly, Deuter.
27.8.
[in perpetuam rei memoriam] for a perpetual Remembrance to them all; The chief
of those Commands, which they were obliged unto, thus recommended to their
careful observance, both by the hope of Reward, and the fear of punishment.

But, passing by all other observations, we have here, you see, a Form of
worship prescribed by Moses to all the People, a Form of worship, wherein both
Priest and People were interchangeably to bear a part, and a Form of worship to
be observed orderly and uniformly among them. And all the People shall answer
and say Amen.

It is well, that there was none of the Spirit, or Leaven, of the Dissentors of
our time then among them. For they would have said, To what purpose is all this
Do about external and bodily worship? about the uttering of an Amen? about the
observing of such Order and Ceremony in it? Nay, they would have gainsaid and
quarell'd at it, if upon no other ground, yet merely because commanded, as an
intolerable imposition upon their liberty and freedom, a yoke of bondage. Alas!
It is no engageing now, as it was then, it seems, for all the People, that they
shall observe any thing prescribed them about the service of God; so morose and
untractable they are. Set them to the Right hand, they will take the Left: Bid
them Kneel, or Stand up, they will Sit and Loll: Bid them Answer to any thing,
They will be Mutes. Bid them say Amen; they will rather declare, by some or
other sign or gesture, a dislike of the disaffection to the worship they are
present at. They are not at all for being bound up to any thing, for obliging
themselves, or paying their homage and devotion to God [concepta verborum
formula] in any premeditate Form of words drawn up to their hands. -- But that
by the way.

All I will now further enquire into about the Text shall be concerning the
importance and meaning of this word, Amen, which the People, we may presume,
here uttered with a great deal of Solemnity and reverence as well as
understanding and affection. As we Read at another time, when Ezra Blessed the
Lord, the Great God; All the People answered Amen, Amen, Ezra 8.6.
with lifting up their hands and bowing their heads, and worshipping the Lord
with their Faces to the Ground. And there was a command for that Amen too, as
well as for this, the Amen at the end of their Doxologies, See 1 Chronicles. 16.34.
etc. Psalm. 89. ult. 106.48. etc. 1 Cor. 14.16. Revel. 7.12.
and praises and prayers, which therefore has been transcribed into the
Churches practice ever since.

Well, but what is the proper meaning and interpretation of Amen? That is, the
most needful enquiry for our information.

In answer to this therefore you must know, that it is Originally an Hebrew
word, though since admitted by use and custom into all Languages, made a free
denizon as it were in all Countries, retained in all Tongues and among all
People. Now in the Hebrew it has relation unto Truth, and so it is used
sometimes as a Noun, for Truth it self, but more usually as an Adverb, for
Truly, in confirmation of Truth.

(1.) It is used as a Noun, for Truth, Verity, Faithfulness; So God himself is
called The Amen, we English it the God of Truth. Isa. 65.16. In Deo Amen, i. e.
in Deo vero. Grot. in Loc.
That he who Blesses himself in the Earth, shall Bless himself in the God of
Truth; and he, that Swears in the Earth, shall Swear by the God of Truth. It
is in the Hebrew, in and by God the Amen. He alone is Truth, the Very and True
God, in whose Name we are to Bless, and by whose Name we are to Swear. And
thus, in the New Testament, Christ, being also the True God, is in like manner
called The Amen. Rev. 3.14. These things says the Amen, the Faithful and True
witness; where the Later words explain the Former, the Greek pertinently
glossing upon the Hebrew (as chap. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the Ending) The Amen, that is, " The Faithful and True witness, or as he
elsewhere styles himself " The Truth. St. John 14.6. And so the word is used
too by St. Paul, applied to the Promises of God through him. 2 Cor. 1.20. All
the promises of God are in him, yea and in him Amen. i. e. Truth and Truth;
most certain, perfect and infallible Truth.

But then (2ly.) it is most frequently used Adverbially, and then, as I said,
the importance of it is Truly or Verily, as we often render it. And this is the
primary, signification and use of it, as a word of Vehement asseveration or
earnest affirming. Thus in St. Matthew chapter 24, 47. " Amen I say unto you. So it
is in the Original. We English it " Verily. But then in St. Luke. chapter 12.44.
where the same thing is repeated, the Greek Varies, (...), that is, Truly, in
Truth, or, as we there English it, Of a Truth I say unto you. -- In another
place we find it rendered by (...), which is, in Greek, the Adverb of Affirming,
answerable to the Latins, Etiam, and our Yea, (as where Christ injoyns, let
your Communication be yea yea, (...)
etc. St. Matthew. 5) Thus in St. Matthew chapter 23.36. " Amen I say unto you, we
read it, " Verily. But it is in St. Luke chapter 11.51. (...), " Yea I say unto
you, though in our. Translation we have no notice of it. -- Sometimes we find
both the Greek and Hebrew put together. So in the place before quoted, All the
promises in him yea, and in him Amen. (...); for the Noun: and so for the
Adverb too. Revel. 1.7. Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see
him, etc. (...), " Yea, Amen. We read it, Even so Amen. And this was usually
ingeminated by our Blessed Savior, when he was most earnest in his
asseverations. Amen, Amen: or Verily, Verily I say unto you. St. John 3.3. and
5.14.12.16.23, etc.

From all this now we gather, that Amen is most properly a note of Affirmation.
And, when it comes at the end of a Sentence, we are to construe it according to
the matter going before it. If it be any thing possitively declared from God;
then Amen, is the Subscription or Seal as it were of our Faith added to it.
Thus we have it at the end of our Creed, Amen, that is our Creed over again in
one word. "So I believe, (...), as Aquila and Symmachus sometimes render it. "
Assuredly, so it is. -- "The Creator, says St. Paul, Romans 1.26.
who is Blessed for evermore, Amen, yea, that he is. -- If it be matter of
Desire or Prayer, Then it is all the Prayer repeated again in one word, which
the Greek turns by, (...), Rev. 22.20.
the Latins by, Fiat, we in English, so be it, I come quickly, says Christ:
Amen, says the Apostle, come Lord Jesus, that is, I both believe and desire
it. So the Prophet Jeremiah. God having said, obey my voice, Jerem. 11.5.
that I may perform the Oath, which I have Sworn to your Fathers, etc. -- Then
answered I (says he) and said, Amen; O Lord. We read it, " So be it, O Lord.
It is an expression both of Faith in Gods promises, and Desire to enjoy them.
But in another place of that Prophet it denotes desire alone and by it self
without any belief or persuasion of the Truth of what went before. Thus, when
Hananiah had Prophesied falsely the return of the Vessels and of Jechoniah;
Jeremiah, Chapter 28.6.
to express his good wishes only, though he knew and foretold the Contrary,
says upon it; Amen, The Lord do so. The Lord perform the words which thou have
promised. -- q. d. This would please me very well; and This is matter of my
hearty wishes too, if so it pleased God.

Amen, Originally and primarily is, Affirmantis, a word of Faith and
persuasion, affirming or assenting to the truth of what is said. But sometimes
it is moreover according to what goes before it, Optantis, a word of wishing
and desiring, or Concedentis and ratum habentis, a note of consent and
ratification, And that is the chief notion under which we are to look upon it
throughout the Churches Service. As a Subscription of him that uses it to that
which went before; as a Testimony of his assent and consent thereunto; and
accordingly sometimes not only his Faith and persuasion, but his wishes and
desires. Amen all the end of our prayers and praises is, So be it. At the end
of our Creeds, So it is. And in like manner, whenever an affirmation goes
before it, as in these Sentences -- "Cursed is the man, who does so and so.
Amen is, So we believe. Hereby therefore the people Saying Amen to these
Curses, as before to the Blessings, did openly testify their firm belief of
what had been pronounced in the name of God; set to their Seal, that God was
true, and as his promises of Blessing to be embraced, so his threatenings of
Curse to be feared. They did hereby declare publicly their assent to the truth
and Equity of them all; that it was but just and fitting that, whosoever among
them did so and so transgress, should so and so be punished; The disobedient
accursed, as the obedient Blessed; and upon the whole they gave up their full
consent to the Law of God, established and ratified with these Blessings in it
to the Obedient, and Curses to the Disobedient, as all Laws are with the People
sanctions of due Rewards and Punishments.

They did not therefore, as some vainly surmise, herein unnaturally Curse
themselves, or wish these Curses absolutely to light upon themselves; No more
than he that consents to any Law, that has a penalty annexed to it. He only
says in effect, I consent to the Law thus promulged; I yield to the justice
and equity of this punishment upon the breach of it; and think those worthy of
the punishment who shall presume to break it. But, all the while, the scope,
design and intention of the Law is Obedience and a Blessing upon that
Obedience; and the punishment annexed only to deter from the violation of it.
But then indeed, upon a supposition of such a wicked violation, we declare
further, that the penalty is but just and righteous; nay, and we do voluntarily
expose our selves to the Infliction of it, by consenting to the Law so
established.

And that now was the chief design of what was here prescribed -- And all the
People shall answer and say, Amen. viz. openly to testify their Consent, as
has been said, to the Law of God that had this penalty or Curse by him annexed
to the breach of it; and so to enter themselves solemnly into Covenant with
God, in hopes of his Blessing, and in dread of his Curse, both which were set
before them; thus to vow and swear fealty to Gods Laws, and bind their Souls
with a Bond unto him; as the Psalmist says of himself, I have Sworn to keep
thy righteous Judgments. Psalm. 119.
-- And every vow and Oath made unto God does necessarily end in a Curse upon
our selves, if we break it, as Plutarch well notes; (...). Romans Quaest.
a Curse which by our perjurie we pull down upon our selves, and may in a sort
too, namely, upon that supposition, be said beforehand to imprecate. So when
Nehemiah took an Oath of the Priests to do according to their promise of
Restitution. chapter 5. He shook his Lap and said, so God shake out every man from
his house, and from his Labor, that performs not this promise, even thus be
he shaken out and emptyed! And all the people said Amen, and praised the Lord
and did According to this promise. 11.13. Yet here they did not properly Curse
themselves, neither, but testified their belief, that God would so Curse the
Disobedient, and that it was just and Righteous that so he should, whoever they
were, and hereupon were moved to Obedience. Or, it may be, there was thus much
more in it; they did Oblige themselves under a Curse to this Obedience, as
every one that appeals to God Almighty as witness and Judge in a Case does;
saying in a manner, God do thus and thus to me, if I perform not. And yet, all
the while, this is not any uncharitable Cursing of our selves, but a most
charitable obliging our selves in the highest manner we can to our bounden
duty, by the Belief and dread of that Curse, which otherwise we look for: As we
find it expressed in that solemn Covenant with God, which Nehemiah Caused the
Jews to Seal unto, They entered into a Curse and into an Oath to walk in Gods
Law. chapter 10.29.

And thus now I have given you an account of the Pattern before us, the Divine
institution and appointment among the Jews, and their practice according to it.
It remains only, that I show you next, as briefly as I can, how far we also may
be still concerned in it.

And First, See Dr. Comber on this Office. Compan. to Temple. part. 4. p. 551.
etc.
in the General, should we grant it to have been wholly and purely Ceremonial,
a possitive and peculiar Ordinance of God for his People the Jews only, yet
thus certainly it becomes us all, both to think and speak with all Modesty and
Reverence of it, as such; God himself having Commanded that the Curses of his
Law should be thus orderly and distinctly denounced by the Levites; and that
all the People, at the hearing of them, should as distinctly and audibly answer
and say, Amen. We must not therefore presume to Condemn this, either for a
foolish or a wicked appointment. We must take heed, how we Blaspheme and
affront God Almighty by the little Cavils and Exceptions of our prejudiced and
forestalled apprehensions. To this height of impiety does the zealous hatred of
some against the Liturgy bring them. What otherwise they pretend to Reverence
in their Bibles, they most ignorantly reproach and dispute against in the
Common Prayer Book.

But then, Secondly, though there were confessedly some particular
Circumstances in this Case that belonged to the Jews only (such as the division
of their Tribes after that manner upon the two opposite Mountains and the like)
yet the Substance of the thing it self is manifestly such as carries a great
deal of natural Equity and useful morality in it; and is the rather to be
imitated by us, because God has gone before in prescribing of it to this very
purpose of engaging and promoting Obedience among his ancient People; Obedience
being unto us, as well as unto them, the way to Blessing, and Disobedience to
us, as well as unto them, the way to a Curse.

As for the Laws of eternal Equity and Righteousness, our Blessed Savior came
not to destroy or put an end to them, but (...), more fully to Preach and more
effectually to press them upon the World. And as to matters of Order and
decency among the People, though of particular and positive institution, we
may observe a frequent imitation in the Christian Church under the New
Testament, without any challenge for so doing. We Rehearse their Deealogue as
the Rule of our Lives. The very Petitions of the Lords Prayer had been used in
their devotions. The materials of both Sacraments, the water of Baptism, the
Loaf and Cup in the Lords Supper took their rise from them. Bishops, Priests
and Deacons in the Government of the Church, are by the Fathers resembled to
their Highpriests, Priests, and Levites. Vt sciamus traditiones Apostolicas
sumptas de veteri Testamento, Quod Aaron and su^j ejus atque Levitae in Templo
fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri and Diaconi vendicant in Ecclesia. St.
Hiron ad Evagr.
And the very manner and order of worshipping God in their Synagogues, for
Reading the Holy Scriptures, and Prayers, as the Learned Totum Regimen
Ecclesiarum Christi conformatum fuit ad synagogarum exemplar. Grot. in Act. 11
know, has been readily Copied out in the Churches of Christ. -- No wonder
therefore, that our Reformed Church was easily induced to an imitation of this
most useful Discipline likewise, which has Gods Honor and our Good (the great
ends of all our Lives) stamped, as it were, in Legible Characters upon the
forehead of it.

It tends apparently to the Honor of God and his Laws, thus to have the Equity
Truth and Righteousness of them made known, proclaimed, and acknowledged: And
it tends as apparently to promote Righteousness and Virtue in us, thus
distinctly to own and profess our firm belief, that all the Laws of God are
Righteous and Good, and that the Sanctions of them are all just and equal; and
we left inexcusable upon the Transgression of them. It is therefore a very
fitting means and help, you see, both to Glorify God and to promote our own
good and happiness; to bring us to Repentance, for what is past, and to keep us
in Obedience, for the time to come.

Nor has this Transaction any thing in it that is repugnant or unsuitable to
the Times of the Gospel, more than of the Law; to the Christian worship, any
more than to the Jewish.

Christ, it is true, has taken away the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
being made a Curse for us, as the Apostle has it. There is no dispute of
that. And so it was then too, in Type and figure, shadowed forth and adumbrated
in their Sacrifices: Revel. 13.8.
He being the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and the substance of
all those shadows. But this is only still with respect unto True Penitents;
that is, those who sincerely Repent of their former Disobedience, and as
sincerely resolve and endeavor to reform and amend for the future. As to all
others, who bid God defiance, and sin, elata mann, with an hand lift up against
Heaven, as it were daring the Almighty to punish them, the Curse of the Law
holds still in force; and all the Acts of wilful sin and Disobedience are, no
less now than before, under the Sentence of Gods Curse. And we ought every one
to believe and Confess this, till by the sight of our Cursed wretched and
miserable Estate, by reason of Sin, we are brought unto Repentance and
Reformation, and so qualified for the Pardon and Blessing of the Gospel of
Grace through Jesus Christ. Then we are assured, that there shall be no
Condemnation to us, Romans 8.1.
who walk "not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; but we shall most
certainly be delivered from the Execution of all those Threatenings, not because
there is no truth and certainty in them, but in regard that our Redeemer, by
his merit and satisfaction has purchased for us a Release and immunity from
them. We are yet to declare a steadfast belief of the Truth and certainty of
these Curses; thereby to own what our sins deserve at Gods hands, and most
justly expose us to; and admire the patience and forbearance of God toward us;
and they are to be as a Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ for deliverance
from them, and as a Tutor and Monitor of the great obligation we have to him
our Redeemer; They are also to bring us to a true and serious Humiliation for
all our Transgressions, and to warn us against them for the time to come. For,
notwithstanding the Blessing of the Gospel, we are yet, if we take not heed, If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Let him be Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor. 16.22.
liable to a Curse also, if we are wilfully Disobedient to it; nay and a
greater and sadder Curse and Condemnation, than the Law ever pronounced,
because the Blessing to us is by many degrees greater, than what was set before
them. As we have better promises, so we have also a sorer Judgment held forth
unto us, as the Apostle to the Hebrews, more than once, intimates. How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? chapter 2. And of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Blood of the Son of God, etc? chapter 10. The Gospel is not made up altogether
of comforts and promises, as some mistake it, but has its Threats and Terrors
also. knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord we persuade men 2 Cor. 5.11.

Both the Baptist, Christ's forerunner, and our Blessed Savior himself too,
call upon us to Repent, that we may fly from wrath; and tell us, that the Axe
is now laid to the root of the Trees, so that every Tree which brings not
forth good Fruit is to be hewn down, and cast into the Fire; and that unless
we Repent we shall all perish. -- In that famous Sermon of our Lords upon the
Mount, we have him not only, as it were upon Mount Gerizim uttering the
Beatitudes or Blessings to his Disciples. St. Matt. 5. Blessed are the poor in
Spirit. Blessed are they that mourn. Blessed are the meek. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness. Blessed are the merciful. Blessed
are the pure in heart. Blessed are the Peacemakers. Blessed are they that are
persecuted for Righteousness-sake. But, if we compare St. Luke chapter 6. We find
him also as it were upon Mount Ebal, to denounce unto others a contrary Woe and
Curse. But Woe unto you that are Rich. Woe unto you that are full. Woe unto you
that Laugh now. Woe unto you when all men speak well of you. -- As elsewhere we
find him uttering many Woes against the Hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, St.
Matthew. 23. St. Luke 11. St. Matthew. 11. St. Luke 10.
and those that Repented not at the sight of his mighty works among them. And,
when he vouchsafes to give us an account of the Judgment of the Last day he
lets us understand, how all men then shall be divided and separated, as the
Children of Israel now were, the Righteous, that is the Sons of the Freewoman,
the Faithful Disciples of Christ, as it were on Gerizim, at the Right hand to
receive a Blessing, but the unrighteous, that is the Bondslaves of Sin and
Satan, as it were on Ebal, at the Left hand to receive the Curse. St. Matthew.
25. Then shall the King say unto them on his Right hand, Come ye Blessed of my
Father. ver. 34. Then shall he say also unto them on the Left Hand, Depart from
me ye Cursed. -- ver. 41. So that, you see, the Gospel it self has its
Sentences both of Blessing and Cursing; And there is an Amen too, St. Mat.
28.20. St. Mark 16.20. St. Luke 24.53. St. John. 21.25
you may observe, at the end of all the Four Evangelists, which relates to all
things Contained in them, Woes and Curses, as well as Blessings, to testify
the Certainty of both, and the Belief of both in the Church of Christ. Amen,
that is, This is the Gospel of Truth. We say commonly, as True as Gospel. And
both of them shall be made good to the full at the Day of the Revelation of the
Righteous Judgment of God; when all Nations shall be gathered before the Great
Judge, and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his
Sheep from the Goats, and set the Sheep on his Right hand, (that is, as has
been said, on Gerizim) and the Goats on the Left, (that is, on Ebal.) When our
Lord shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire
taking Vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; but to be glorified in his Saints and admired in all them that
believe. 2 These. 1.

This Institution therefore among the Jews, which gives us a Remembrance and
Representation of these things is not any more unsuitable to the times of the
Gospel, than to those of the Law; For we are all (...), under the Law to
Christ. 1 Cor. 9.21. Gal. 6.2. St. Jam. 2.12.
It is as fit now as then, that we should attend to the whole will of God, his
Curses no less than Blessings. It Is as fit now as then, that we should set the
Amen of our Faith to each of them; answering unto every Sentence in the Holy
word of God, Amen, and so confessing with our mouths, that we believe it
unfeignedly in our hearts. To the intent, as it follows in our Church Service,
that, being admonished of the great indignation of God against sinners, we may
the rather be moved unto earnest and true Repentance; and may walk more warily
in these dangerous days; fleeing from such vices, for which we affirm with our
own mouths the Curse of God to be due.

Mark here, I beseech you, the plain Resolution of our Amen to Gods several
Curses. It is not uncharitably to Curse our selves or others; No, all is in
order to a Blessing, that we may every one carry a share of the Blessing home
with us. It is only to affirm with our mouths, the Truth of the Divine Curses;
That the Curse is due to such and such Transgressors by Gods appointment. That
it is most certain all such Sinners are really accursed by God, under his
Curse, while they continue such; and have no possibility of removing that
Curse, but by a speedy Repentance and Return to God for pardon and forgiveness
through Jesus Christ, that by and in him they may be Blessed; for ever Blessed
by being first saved from their Sins, and turned from their iniquities. -- God
of old declared his great Indignation against those, who hearing the words of
his Curses, should yet bless themselves in their hearts, saying I shall have
peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart to add drunkenness to
thirst: The Lord, says Moses, will not spare such a man, but all the Curses in
this book shall lie upon him. Deuter. 29.18.19. The Prophet Isaiah proclaims
it, once and again. There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked. chapter
48.22. and chapter 57.21. Let no man deceive you with vain words, says the
Apostle, for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children
of Disobedience. Ephesians. 5.6. And when they shall say peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as Travel upon a Woman with Child, and
they shall not escape. 1 These. 5.3. It is of great concernment to us therefore,
in time to see and understand and believe and be sensible of the Cursed State
which our sins necessarily and unavoidably involve us in, and to judge and
condemn our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
that we may anticipate the judgment of the Lord, that we may not be then
condemned by him; and that we may be moved effectually to humble our selves in
this day of grace, and season lent us for Repentance, to deprecate all his
displeasure against us, and obtain acceptance and favor with him through his
Beloved.

It is not we, alas! that make Obedience a Blessed thing, or Disobedience a
Cursed thing. It Is all one for that, whether we Believe it, or not: Whether we
say and own it, or not. The Blessing and Curse are, both of them, already
pronounced from God. They are the Sentences of his Curse contained in the Holy
Scriptures, the Infallible word of him, that cannot lie; and gathered out
thence only for our caution and warning. Our Amen added to them is but a
fitting declaration, that those whom God has Blessed are certainly Blessed;
and those whom he has Cursed are as certainly Cursed; saying with our Lips
that we believe this in our hearts, which we are Damned infidels if we believe
not.

And this way of owning and confessing it, is a very probable and likely means
to prevent the danger by showing of it to us; to bring us, as has been said,
to an hearty Repentance for all that is past and a through amendment for the
time to come, that so we may avoid the Curse and inherit the Blessing; that
taking this leisurely admonition of Gods fierce displeasure against such and
such Sinners, viz. (Idolaters, Disobedient to Parents and Governors, Unjust,
Cruel, Malicious, Unclean, Uncharitable, Covetous, and suchlike, who do err
and go astray from the Commands of God, the paths of piety, Righteousness and
Sobriety, and walk in the High-Road to destruction) we may the rather be moved
to an earnest and true Repentance in all these particulars for the gross
miscarriages we have been guilty of; and for the future awakened and stirred up
to take greater heed unto our selves, and walk circumspectly, especially in
these dangerous days, wherein there are so many bad examples, in the midst of
a crooked and perverse Generation; fleeing from those several Vices, Ex ore tuo.
for which we have affirmed with our own mouths, (and therefore affirmed with
our mouths, because we believe in our hearts) the Curse of God is due, as it is
clearly and plainly legible in his Holy word.

There can be nothing of impiety, or folly, nothing of antiquated Judaism, or
innovating Popery, and Superstition certainly in all this. Nay, I must
pronounce upon the whole, that there is nothing, which keeps persons from an
hearty Compliance with so wholesome a Service, but either: First, the not
understanding of it aright. Or, Secondly, some secret love reserved to their
own Sins, which makes them backward and unwilling thus to enter into a sacred
vow and covenant with God under a Curse against them. For otherwise the Benefit
of this Devotion is most Conspicuous. What more prevailing motive can there
possibly be both to Repentance and Reformation, than this Remembrance of the
dreadful Judgment of God hanging over our heads, whilst we continue in Sin, and
always ready to fall upon us, prompting of us therefore, as the only remedy
and way to escape, forthwith to return unto God, with all contrition and
meekness of heart, bewailing and lamenting our wicked life, acknowledging and
confessing our aggravated offenses to him, and seeking to bring forth Fruits
becoming penitents.

And, Thus if we do, as the excellent Homily of the Church assures us in the
Close, Christ will deliver us from the Curse of the Law, and from the extreme
malediction, which will light upon them that shall be set on the Left hand; and
he will set us at his Right hand, and give us the gracious benediction of his
Father, commanding us to take possession of his most glorious Kingdom.

Unto which he vouchsafe to bring us all for his Infinite mercy! Amen.

FINIS.

