THE TRVE SVBIECT TO THE REBEL.

OR THE HVRT OF SEDITION, HOW GREIVOVS IT IS to a Commonwealth.

Written By Sr JOHN CHEEK Knight ( Tutor and Privy-Councellour to King EDWARD
the sixth) 1549.

Whereunto is newly added by way of Preface a brief discourse of those times,
as they may relate to the present, with the AUTHORS life.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. Anno Dom.
1641.

THE PREFACE.
THis Discourse of the Hurt of Sedition, was not intended by the Author as a
Prophecy for any future times, but merely occasioned by the sad story of those
present distractions, wherein he had no part but as a Spectator. If it be now
thought any way liable to an application, that must be imputed to the common
fate of humane affairs, quibus inest quidam velut orbis: and quemadmodum
temporum vices, ita morum vertuntur. For upon this common Stage of the world,
though the Actors change daily, and have their last Exits after which they
return no more; yet there is a continual recurrence of the same Pageants,
parts and humors to be represented by other persons, Vitia erunt donec
homines. Covetousness and ambition, and such active vices are seldom off the
Theater, though they do as seldom appear there in their own faces, but with
the borrowed masks of public good, the honor or peace of the State, the
propagation or reformation of Religion. Privatae causae pietatis aguntur
obtentu, and cupiditatum quisque suarum religionem veluti pedissequam habet.
The meanest capacities are not unskilled in these ordinary artifices: consult
the story of those times under EDWARD the VI. and you shall meet with insolent
demands from some rebellious subjects against the form of religion then
established by Act of Parliament: others you shall find sitting under their
Oak of Reformation upon the life and death of all civility and learning.
Against both which our Author directs his reasons. This contagion was so
spreading, that I find twelve several Shieres infected with it, and almost
forty thousand persons, a great number, but yet no army. They had all the
advantages which they could desire except a good cause, and an able Leader.
They met with a young Prince, in the beginning of his reign; with a late and
great alteration in religion, which was never observed to go alone; with a
many secret jealousies and envyings in the Nobilitle, which after burst out
into open defiance; with a general aptness to mutiny in the vulgar, who had
been formerly Tenants to religious houses, and complained now as well of new
Lords as now Laws; with an universal stupor and lethargy in most men of the
long Robe, which were lately frighted out of a great part of their wits as well
as their means: many of them so unable to instruct others, that it seems they
had scarce ordinary discretion to govern themselves. The very Universities,
which had been the glory, were now become the scorn or pity of the Kingdom;
their Libraries robbed and spoiled either by pretended authority, or
connivence; their liberties and privileges invaded and borne down by the
prevailing parties, the Townes-men of Oxford and Cambridge. Much of their
present maintenance, and the maine hopes of their future preferment taken from
them: at least in their opinion, when they saw most or all the revenues of
their Colleges given to the King; some Bishoprics actually dissolved, and the
whole jurisdiction enclining to a ruin. This did strike them with such a
Panick fear as did justly deter parents from bestowing upon their children
that ingenuous education which was attended with so great charges and so small
hopes. And such as were already entered upon that way, were forced to quit their
professions and betake themselves to another kind of life. Insomuch that I
find one house of learning in Cambridge pitifully complaining, that the great
dearth of things, and the little charity of men had driven away more good wits
from that one College then were left in the whole University. The words are
part of a Letter from St John's College to the Duke of Somerset Lord Protector.
In which there are so many other things considerable, that I cannot forbear to
trespass so far upon the Readers patience, as to exhibit some what more to
the same purpose. Having represented to his honor two other domestique
calamities peculiar to that House, they descend to a third, of which they say,
Diu nos pressit, in miram angustiam compegit, and in extremam conditionem non
nos solum sed reliquos omnes studiosos detrusit. Quae illa est? Durissima
caritas omnium rerum vendibilium. Augetur pretium omnium, pecunia nostra non
augetur. Quomodo olim duodecim denarris, nunc non licet vivere viginti. Qui
authors sunt tantae miseriae? Dicemus, and domino monente ac demonstrante
dicemus. Suntilli qui domum ad domum conjungunt, qui rapinas pauperum
congerunt, qui fructum eorum rarissime comedunt. Haec dicit Dominus per Esaiam
Prophetam, nos apertius loquemur. Sunt illi, qui hodie passim in Anglia praedia
Monasteriorum gravissimis annuis reditibus auxerunt. Hinc omnium rerum exauctum
pretium: hi homines expilant totam Rempublicam. Villici and coloni universi
laborant, parcunt, corradunt, ut istis satisfaciant: hinc singuli coguntur
singulis imponere, and universa Respub. gravissime premitur. Hinc tot Familiae
dissipatae, tot Domus collapsae, tot communes mensae aut jam nullae aut in
angulos and latebras conclusae. Hinc (quod omnium miserrimum est) nobile illud
decus and robur Angliae, nomen inquam Yomannorum Anglorum fractum and collisum
est. Et haec etiam miseria maxim redundat in authors ejusdem. Quotusquisque
enim est Mercatorum Londinensium, (hi homines hanc miseriam mirifice
concitarunt) qui non angustius, tenuius, and pressius his temporibus vivit,
quam cum passi sunt alios homines vivere? In nullam partem Reipub: majori
impetu invasit hoc malum quam in rem literariam: reliqui homines ita liberi
sunt ut possint quaerere sibi vitam; studiosi non quaerunt, sed quaesitam
recipient: quae si augetur, hoc fit non opera illorum, sed bonitate aliorum.
Postremo, debet pecunia nostra, aut major esle, quod cupimus; aut caritas reru^
minor esle, quod per Te fore speramus; aut fructus studiorum minimus erit, quod
maxim omnium metuimus. Haec tanta caritas rerum and haec nulla Charitas
hominum intra hos paucos annos expulit ex hoc uno Collegio plura optima
ingenia, quam nunc sunt perfect docti viri in tota Academia: nec solum
expellit praesentes, sed aufert una etiam universam absentium spem. This and
much more to this purpose, from that learned College. And the whole Vniverfity
in their many public letters to most of the Nobility then in Parliament do
run much upon this strain. I shall give a taste of one or two. First to the
Lord Marquess of Northampton, whom they desire to be a means that learning may
berestored to her ancient honor, and good wits allured to it by some new
hopes. And proceed thus, In hoc Parliame^to (nisi valde fallimur) veram
Religionem restituetis. Divinum profecto consilium, and nosuna Deum rogamus
omnes, ut ne vestigium quidem Papisticae faecis in ulla part Religionis,
quaecunque illa fuerit, amplius resideat. Sed ignorantia quid? tolletur ex omni
populo. Quorum industria? doctorum. At ubi sunt? in Academiis. At quot
requiruntur ad ignorantiam ex Anglia relegandam polliceri quidem nos non
audemus. At plures quotidie illuc confluent. Qua spe? honor artium? nullus
fere est. Expectatione praemiorum? sed illa and rara sunt and exigua sunt.
Nomine and honestate literarum? Quo loco nunc jacent literae vel ignari omnium
literarum facile animadvertunt. Et qui posthac docti erunt? pauperes? At hic
non diu manent propter inopiam. Sed divitum filij? at hi minus, vel propter
alterius vitae expectationem, vel literarum his temporibus obscuram
conditionem. Sed parents ut filij sui instituantur literis semper curabunt.
Ast hi spe lucri magis, quae jam sublata est, quam doctrinae cupiditate, quae
in illis nulla est, hoc fecerant. Ast boni viri inopiam studiosoru^ levabunt.
Hoc olim factum est. Sed nunc prioris seculi felicitatem potius admirari, quam
hac spe studiosorum vitam alere and sustentare possumus. Quorsum tot Scholae in
Anglia, siad Academias paucisese conferunt? I mo aut paucae sunt, aut relictae
and contemptae sunt: and parents hodie cuivis rei potius quam literis liberos
suos addicunt. Sed Respub: huic rei remedium adferet. Digna certerea in qua
totum occupetur Parliamentum: nisi enim haec semina doctrinae teneris animis
tempestive sparsa fuerint, quaenam in Repub: vel exoriatur spes, vel a dolescat
virtus, vel efflorescat pura Religio and vera felicitas, prudentia Tua
intelligit. Multa ad hunc modum verissime dici possint de labenti jam and
admodum proclivi ad occasum literarum dignitate (Nobiliss. Marchio:) quae res
quantum in se very habet tantum adjume^ti a Te requirit ad maturum illi
adferendum remedium. Hoc dabis Religioni and Reipublicae: hoc dabis multorum
parentum sollicitae spei, multorum ingeniorum praeclarae indoli: dabis hoc
etiam saluti posterorum temporum, in quibus nullus doctrinae fructus exoriri
potest, cujus sementis superioribus temporibus facta non fuerit. Dabis his
omnibus quantum vis, vis certe tantum quantum literis, hoc est, summis and
verae Religionis praesidiis, and florentis Reipublicae ornamentis dari debere
prudentia Tua judicabit. In another of their letters to St Anthony Denny, one
of the privy Council, where they plead the same cause with as much eloquence
as earnestness, they desire him to consider that it is not their own
particular, but the common cause of all posterity, and the whole State; and
that he and all others in authority, would be careful to distinguish betwixt
some obuoxious persons, and the whole Commonwealth of learning, ne ea ratio
quae ignorantiam malorum Sacerdotum justissime puniat, optimorum etiam
ingeniorum spem a studiis literarum una auferat. Hoc remedium non malos ad
sanitatem adduceret, sed bonos ad desperationem adigeret. Thus much for the
miseries or fears of the University of Cambridge in those times. Nor was that
of Oxford in any better condition. I find an ample commission granted to the
Earl of Warwick, and eight more, any seven, six, five, four, three, two, or
one of them, to visit in capite and membris the whole Diocese, but especially
the Vniverfity of Oxford. What other effects that Visitation had, does not well
appear, but (it is said) Richard Coxe, who was one of them, did so clearly
purge the Vniversitie-Librarie of all Monuments of superstition, that he left
not one book in it of all those goodly Manuscripts, of which by the
munificence of several Benefactors, that place was very amply furnished:
Especially by Richard Aungervyle Bishop of Durham, Thomas Cobham Bishop of
Worcester, Humphrey the good Duke of Gloucester, John Whethamsted Abbot of S.
Albans, John Tipetoft Earl of Worcester, and diverse others. Such errors or
rather impieties were committed by some in this kind, that John Bale, a man
sufficiently averse from the least shadow of Popery, and one that hated all
Monkery with a perfect hatred, yet could not but complain to King EDWARD the
sixth, and dolorously lament so great an oversight in the most lawful overthrow
of Abbeys and Frieries. Covetousness was at that time so busy about private
commodity that public wealth in that most necessary and godly respect was not
any where regarded. A great number of them which purchased those superstitious
mansions, reserved of those Library books, some to serve their jakes, some to
scour their Candlesticks, and some to rub their Boots, some they sold to the
Grociers and Sope-sellers: and some they sent over Sea to the Book-binders, not
in small number, but at times whole Ships full. Yea the Universities of this
Realm are not all clear in this detestable fact. But cursed is that belly
which seeks to be fed with such ungodly gains, and so deeply shameth his
natural country. I know a merchant man (which shall at this time be
namelesse) that bought the Contents of two noble Libraries for forty shillings
price, a shame it is to be spoken. This stuff has he occupied in steed of
gray paper by the space of more then these ten years: and yet he has store
enough for as many years to come. A prodigious example is this, and to be
abhorred of all men which love their nation as they should do. Yea, what may
bring our Realm to more shame and rebuke, then to have it noysed abroad that
we are despisers of Learning? I judge this to be true, and utter it with
heaviness, that neither the Britains under the Romans and Saxons, not yet
the English people under the Danes and Normans had ever such damage of their
learned Monuments as we have seen in our time. Our posterity may well curse
this wicked fact of our age, this unreasonable spoil of Englands most noble
antiquities. The Anabaptists in our time, an unquietous kind of men, arrogant
without measure, captious and unlearned, do leave none old works unbrent,
that they may easily come by; as appeared by the Libraries at Munster in the
land of Westphalia, whom they most furiously destroyed. An able witness of
this their wicked custom, is Petrus Plateanus, among many others, in his
Treatise against their dogged doings. Libros omnes exurunt (inquit) indignantes
se ab alio quam ab ipso suo spiritu doctos videri. Miserum est cernere
Bibliothecas non ignobiles ab execranda Secta hoc modo aboleri. They think
scorn of any other Spirit to seem learned, then of their own fanaticall
brains. Antonius Corvinus says also in his book against them, Anabaptistarum
furor optimos quosque authors, ac vetustissima venerandae antiquitatis
exemplaria absumpserunt in Bibliotheca Osnaburgensi. I could bring out a great
number of like testimonies from Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bullinger, Calvin,
and Philip Melancthon, with other of the most notable writers of our age,
concerning this ungracious violence of these chimney Preachers, and
bench-Bablers: but let these two rehearsed at this time suffice. Thus far John
Bale ( in his declarations upon Lelands iournall) to King EDWARD the VI. 1549.

But to return. I conceive the very sight of these barbarous insolences
committed upon those Treasuries of good Letters, Books and Libraries, could not
but impresse in serious apprehensions a deep contemplation of the approaching
funerals of most kinds of Learning, and make them take their long leaves of
the Universitie. And so they did: insomuch that at Oxford their public
Schools were converted into a private gardenpiot; their public Treasury
robbed; their moneys and muniments embesel'd and wasted, as does more largely
appear by the preface to a royal Grant of and MARY'S to that University in
the first of her Reign. Regina omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint
salutem. Gravissimorum hominum testimoniis ad aures nostras perlatum est, ac
certissimis quibusdam rationibus nobis quasi ob oculos positum, nostram illam
Academiam quae Oxonii sita est, alterum totius regni lumen, olim bonarum
literarum omnium celeberrimum emporium, sic and temporum injuria afflictam
esse, ut pene inculta jaceat, and inopia harum retum quibus dignitas omnis
sustinetur adeo oppressam esse, ut extincta jam pene and quodam quasi squallore
contabuisse videatur. Publicas enim illius Scholas, in quibus olim fiebat
statis quibusdam and solennibus diebus frequens discentium concursio, vastatas
and in privaros hortos conversas: Publicum the saurum direptum: ornamenta
publica ablata, and publica vectigalia it a tenuia, imo it a fere nulla esse
accepimus, ut neque publicis usibus aliqua exparta sufficiant, neque publicarum
causarum defensioni and injuriis propulsand is respondeant. Nos igitur
Academiam illam, qua contempta and deserta nec orthodoxa fides defendi, nec in
rebus controversis veritas erui, nec certe in Repub: justitia administrari
potest, pene oppressam and jacentem erigere atque excitare, illiusque
squallorem depellere, and inopiam nostra munificentia sublevare ad regium munus
nostrum perrinere existimantes, ut posthac habeat quo and suas Scholas erigat,
erectas teneat perpetuis ut speramus futuris tem poribus, and se suaque
privilegia adversus quarumcunque injuriarum procellas defendat, etc. And though
this might persuade with some that to be a Scholar was none of the greatest
curses; yet I do not see that the people were hearty friends with learning all
Q. MARY'S days, nor in the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH. What a learned
ministry shall we think Q Eliz. Iniunction 43.
they had under Queen MARY, when many were made Priests being children, and
otherwise utterly unlearned, so they could read to say Mattens and Mass? And
how can we expect it should be much bettur in the first of Q. ELIZABETH, when
some Ministers (because they were but mean Readers) are enjoined to peruse
over before once or twice Ibid. Iniunction 3.
the Chapters and Homilies, to the intent they might read to the better
understanding of the people? And what estimate shall we make of their
discretion, when it was thought Ibid. Iniunction 9.
very necessary that no priest or Deacon should take to his wife any manner of
woman without the advice and allowance first had, upon good examination, by the
Bishop of the Diocese, and two Justices of the Peace? What rare Preachers
shall we imagine they had in the University at that time, when M^ Tavernour of
Water-Eaton high Sheriff of Oxfordshiere, came in pure charity, not
ostentation, and gave the Scholars a Sermon in St Maryes, with his gold chain
about his neck, and his sword by his side; beginning with these words, Arriving
at the Mount of Saint Mary's, in the stony Stage where I now stand, I have
brought you some fine Biskets, baked in the oven of Charity, and carefully
conserved for the Chickens of the Church, the Sparrowes of the Spirit, and the
sweet Swallows of Salvation. By this we may guess what a dearth of learning
there was till it pleased God and good Queen ELIZABETH to redeem it from
poverty and contempt by granting new and ample Charters to the University of
Cambridge, and passing several Statutes in Parliament, That of Provision and
others, very beneficial for the maintenance of Scholars, and reducing the
Clergy of this Kingdom to that luster which they had in the days of her
royal Father, when that high and Honorable Court of Parliament gave them this
testimony, that the body Spiritual, now being usually 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12.
called the English Church, always has been reputed and also found of that
sort, that both for knowledge, integrity and sufficiency of number, it has
been always thought, and is also at this hour, sufficient and meet of it
self, without the intermedling of any exterior person or persons, to declare
and determine all causes of the Law Divine, or of spiritual learning; and to
administer all such offices and duties as to their rooms Spiritual does
appertain. For the due administration whereof, and to keep them from
corruption, and sinister affection, the Kings most noble Progenitors, and the
Ancestors of the Nobles of this Realm, have sufficiently endowed the said
Church both with Honor and Possessions. Indeed nothing more certain, then
that this one Kingdom of England has in all ages produced as many, nay more
learned men in all Professions, then any other Nation in the world besides:
witness the several Catalogues of our ancient apud Boston: Bariensem.
Lehandum. (...) Baseum, Vossium. etc.
Authors, and their works. No better reason for it then the liberal
maintenance of Scholars in the Universities, and the fair preferments in the
Church. Take away these, and what can be expected but the whole Nation will be
quickly overrun with beggary and barbarism? Then, that definition of a
Scholar will prove too Catholic, a silly fellow in black. So true has that
of the Historian ever been, nihil a quoquam expeti nisi cujus fructus ante
providerit. And sublatis studiorum pretiis etiam studia peritura ut minus
decora. By all the Laws of God may not a man as freely dispose of his estate
io the endowment of a Church or College, as to any lay person or Corporation?
The donations of Kings and other pious Founders and Benefactors made to them,
are they not as good and strong by the Laws of this Land as any other private
conveyance? Have not the Clergy as true a propriety in their freeholds as the
rest of his Majesty's Subjects? Are they not the first words of those
fundamental Laws of England comprised in the Great Charter; We have granted
to God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed for us and our heirs
for evermore, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her
whole rights and liberties inviolable? Does not every King at his Coronation
take a solemn Oath for the preservation of them? Are there not many hideous
and direful imprecations of their Founders laid upon all such as dare to
violate their intentions? And has not common experience taught us that
Church-chapmen, though they had the cheapest penyworths, had not ever the best
bar gains? Not but that the Means as well as the Ministers of the Church, as
they are liable to abuses, so must they submit to a Reformation. And the
Government it self so far as it shall appear to the wisdom of the State to
be notoriously inconvenient, no good man but will desire to see it altered. But
for those which know least, to take upon them most; not only to instruct and
direct the Lawgivers, but even to judge and condemn the Laws themselves; to
cry out against them as tyrannical, and made in times of Popery; to reject the
Common Prayer Book as a piece of Jdolatry, and brand that for superstition
which is yet legal conformity, to call the very Office of Episcopacy
Antichristian and Diabolical, which all Antiquity counted sacred, and our
public Acts of Parliament acknowledge to be one of the greatest States of 8
Eliz c. 8.
this Realm; to give out that if all arguments fail, they will dispute it
with the sword, what are these but rudiments of Sedition scattered among the
common people too much distempered with those two vulgar diseases, Ignorance,
and desire of Innovation? whence it is, they can only say they would not have
this Government, but cannot say what they would have. Yea may it not be feared
that an Anabaptisticall parity as well in State as Church sounds too plausibly
in the ears of the multitude? Consult our Chronicles, see what were the aims
and ends of those rude companies under Jack Straw and Wat Tyler in RICHARD the
seconds days. Look upon Kets demands, and Ombles Prophecy under EDWARD VI. Do
not they all amount to this Sum, they would have no Noble men, no Gentlemen,
no Lawyers, no Justices, as well as no Bishops? This you will find to be the
occasion why this worthy Author Sr John Cheek first writ this Discourse. Which
indeed was printed again by order of Queen ELIZABETH 1569. and then too not
without cause, for there was at that time a Rebellion in the North, and those
that were parties to it, pretending a restoration of Religion, tore and
trampled under foot the Common-prayer-Bookes which they found in the Churches
of Durham. To prevent all such disorders in the giddie multitude of these
succeeding times, in quibus magis alii homines quam alii mores, I have thought
it might in part conduee to the public peace and good of this Kingdom, if
they were once more presented with this short, but considerable Tract, Of the
Hurt of Sedition, which may with more ease be kept out of a Commonwealth then
expelled: sooner suppressed then moderated. The Author himself lived as
peaceably as he writes: whiles he was in his College he was a president of
love and amity: and after his departure an earnest mediator to compose the
Society a little distracted by domestique factions. He that desires to know
more of him, let him peruse the succeeding imperfect story of his life,
collected for the most part out of such as were contemporary with him, and
somewheres spelled and put together out of the several letters of himself and
others.

THE LIFE OF Sr JOHN CHEEK.
THIS learned and worthy man fell immediately from the womb of his mother into
the lap of the Muses; being both borne and bred within the liberties of that
famous nursery of good letters, Cambridge. Where I quickly find him at a full
height, but cannot tell you how low he took his rise: the diversity of
expression in several Anthors, cannot but in this point distract the Reader;
some making him of a noble, some of a base extraction. We may imagine the mean
to be of a nearer alliance to truth then either extreme. I have read his Mother
saluted by the name of Mrs cheek, and two of his Sisters fairly matched, one
to Doctor Blithe, the Kings professor of Physic; and Mary, another of them, to
William Cecill, afterward Lord Burghley, a most able minister of State in
those days, and the Father of diverse noble Families in these. Upon which
probabilities I would conclude M Cheek for his parentage to be somewhat more
then the son of his own deserts. And yet these were so far above vulgar
and ordinary, that they quickly purchased him a Fellowship in St John's
College; and it may be disputable whether in point of learning he ought more
to the place, or the place to him. His eminency was so generally taken notice
of by the whole Vniverlity, that they pitched upon him for the sole manage of
two weighty, but honorary employments, of their public Orator and Greek
Reader. In the discharge of this latter he went over Sophocles twice, all
Homer, all Euripides, and part of Herodotus, to his Auditors benefit, and his
own credit, which was all the Salary he then had. Till King HENRY the VIII of
his Royal bounty, endowed that and the other Chaires with the liberal
allowance of forty pounds per annum. Then the place was thought worthy the
seeking for, and I find three powerful competitors all suiting for it in Mr
Cheeks absence: yet it seems the prudent King upon the sole commendatories of
his former deservings reserved that honor for him, to be the first Regius
Professor of the Greek tongue in Cambridge. as Sr Thomas Smith was of Law. Whom
I mention for that great intimacy which he had with our Author. They were both
Fellows of the same College, both Professors in the same University, both
Officers of State in the same Court: they two especially by their advice and
example brought the Study of Tongues and other politer learning first into
request in that University. But while they were in their full cariere they had
the hap to meet with some rubbs. Upon hopes of facilitating the understanding
of the Greek tongue they attempted to reduce it to the ancient, but obsolete
manner of pronunciation; a thing very repugnant to the genius of those times
and other places. This innovation was quickly observed by Stephen Gardener
Bishop of Winchester then Chancellor of that University, who took a course to
repress it by a strict injunction sent to be published there Maij XXI 1542.
Yet so as he was content upon equal terms to reason the matter with Mr
Cheek, and so he did fairly and friendly in his first letters: The Professor
was not willing to desert the cause and quitt the field having so Honorable an
adversary: he answers the Chancellor once and again, freely (I confess) and
(as the BP thought) boldly. Long was the cause bandyed betwixt them, the one
pleading ancient right, the other present possession. But at last Mr Cheek was
content to submit to that one unanswerable argument of the Chancellours,
Authority. Yet his rules and practice had taken such deep root in his Auditors
that by them it was propagated through this whole Kingdom: and that we
Englishmen now speak Greek and are able to understand one another when no body
else can, this we must acknowledge to be a special effect of Mr Cheeks rare
ingeny. Which could not long be contained within the narrow precincts of the
University; that famous King, HENRY the VIII, thought it fit to call this great
light of learning out of the shadow, and so he did Iulij X. 1544. and to his
custody he then committed the most precious jewel of the Kingdom, the young
Prince EDWARD, being at that time not full seven years of age. Here was such a
happy concurrence of sweetness and ingenuity that it was no very hard matter
for the Master to imbue the tender years of his Scholar with so deep a
tincture of Piety, and good letters as rendered him the glory of his own
times, and the miracle of ours. What unspeakable progress he made under this
Directour of his Studies, he that makes a doubt of Cardans testimony may be
confirmed from those many noble relics of his industry and sufficiency, both
in Greek and Latin, written with his own hand, which are still preserved in
his Majesty's Library at S. James. And what a fit and happy choice the King
made in such a Tutor, for such a Scholar I cannot better express then in the
words of that learned Antiquary John Leland, who dedicated one of his books to
Mr Cheek with this L'envoy.

Ad libellum, ut Ioanni Checo Grantano placere studeat Si vis Thespiadum Choro
probari
Fac ut consilio, libelle, nostro
Facundo studeas placere Checo:
Quem Pandioniae colunt Athenae.
Et quem Roma colit diserta multum
Quem Rex Maximus, omnium supremusque,
HENRICUS reputans virum probatum
Spectatumque satis, reconditeque
Censorem solidum eruditionis,
EDVARDVM been filium, suumque
Haeredem, puerum, illi, ad alta natum,
Sic concredidit utriusque lingua
Flores ut legeret venustiores;
Exercens facili manum labor,
Ut CHRISTI imbiberet suave nectar.
Felicem arbitror hunc diem fuisse
Tanto Discipulo dedit Magistrum
Qui talem etc.


I suppose it may be truly said that under God M. Cheek was a special
instrument of the propagation of the Gospel, and that Religion which we now
profess in this Kingdom. For he not only sowed the seeds of that Doctrine in
the heart of Prince EDWARD, which afterward grew up into a general
Reformation when he came to be King, but by his means the same saveing truth
was gently instilled into the Lady ELIZABETH, by those who by his procurement
were admitted to be the Guides of her younger Studies: Such were first William
Grindall, a hopeful young Scholar ofS. John's in Cambridge, whom being
destitute of other means of subsistence, M. Cheek took into his service Anno
1544. and soon after preferred him to the Lady ELIZABETH: with whom he
continued as long as he lived in good favor and likeing: and the loss of him
was, by Mr Cheeks means, presently supplied in Roger Ascham, who had formerly
been his Scholar in the College, and Successor in the Orators place in the
University: A man dear unto him for similitude of studies, but more for his
zeal to the true Religion. Which was so precious with our Author, that no man
was great in his books, but such as were well affected to Gods. Even in HENRY
the VIII time his friends and familiars were most of those worthy men which
proved Reformers in King EDWARDS days, and either Martyrs or Exiles in Queen
MARY'S. His foreign acquaintance were Sleidan, Melancthon, Sturmius, Bucer,
Camerarius, Coelius, Peter Martyr and others, great Scholars and good
Protestants. And the Crown was no sooner on King EDWARDS head, January XX
VIII. 1547. and the Gospel set at liberty, but many of these men came, and
others were sent for to help forwards that great work of the Reformation in
England. when the young King was well settled in his Throne, and began to be
skilled in the art of reigning, he thought fit to make choice of such men for
the nearest attendance upon his person, as he knew to be best affected to it;
and therefore amongst others admitted M. Cheek to be one of his Privy Chamber.
This accrue of honor to her son made his learned mother the University a
suitor to him for protection in those stormy times: who in her letters to him
gives him such an elogie, as I cannot omit without guilt of concealment. This
it is, Ex universo illo numero Clarissimorum virorum (Clarissime Chece) qui ex
hac Academia in Rempublicam unquam prodierunt, Tu unus es quem semper Academia
prae universis alijs and praesentem complexa est, and absentem admirata est:
quam Tu vicissim plusquam Vniversi alij and praesens ornaveras, and absens
juvas. About this time he took so much leisure as either to pen or publish
several learned, and useful Tracts both for Church and State. And as his
merits, so his Princes favor were ever in progression. In the year 1551,
after the treaty about the Match with France, when his Majesty was pleased to
make a doale of honors amongst his deserving Subjects, M. Cheek was not
forgotten; he with his Brother in Law Secretary Cecill, and others were then
Knighted. This was but a foundation upon which the grateful Prince had a
purpose to erect higher preferments had not the hand of Providence so soon
snatched him a way into another Kingdom, to invest his temples with a more
glorious Crown. This was done July VI. 1553. Not long after he had called Sr
John Cheek to sit at the helm of State, the Council Board. In this common
loss of so good a King He, good man, had more then a common share. The tide of
the times must now turn, and he must either row with it, or be in danger to
perish in it. And so he was; for his zeal to Religion transporting him a little
beyond his loyalty to his lawful Sovereign, he was one of those among the
Council who could have been content the Lady IANE'S title to the Crown should
have been thought better then the Lady MARIE'S. And for this He amongst others
was clapped up in Prison July XXVII. Here he was stripped of the greatest part of
his honors, and all his fortunes: but his person was set at liberty September
III. And not long after I meet with him in Germany, either a forced or a
voluntary Exile. From thence he passed into Italy, and by the way left those
adversary Epistles of Winchester and himself with his friend Coelius, who put
them in Print without the Authors privity. At his return to Germany he was
kindly entertained at Strasbourg, where he took up his old trade; and set up
shop again, being chosen public Professor of the Greek tongue in that place.
This was a treasure which maintained him in his exile: this he had not
confiscate to the Queen: this escaped the diligence of all the Searchers when
he conveyed it out of the Kingdom. Here he lived about two years in good
repute, till I know not what unluckie stars put him upon a journey into the
Low Countries. Nor is it well agreed what his business was there. Some have
said it was to marry a wife: but what need of that, when he was already matched
to a young Lady, who lived to see many happyer days after his decease, and
dyed well nigh threescore years after him, Anno 1616? Others report the
occasion of this his voyage to be no more but a friendly interview, and visit
of the English Ambassadors then at Bruxelles, and among them his ancient friend
the Lord Pagett, who engaged the faith of King PHILIP for his safe conduct. But
for the maine motive of this his voyage, I subscribe to the relation of
Sleidan, as most ancient and likely to be most true. He tells us how Sr John
Cheek went into Low Germany ut vxorem educeret, to fetch his wife from thence,
who belike was lately come over out of England, and meant to settle with him at
Strasbourg. Those words of Sleidan were (as I conceive) by an easy mistake
corrupted into vxorem duceret; and this was the first plantation of that
opinion touching his marriage, which sprung up afterward into a popular
error. But whatever was the occasion, the event of that journey did not
correspond to the undertakers hopes. For in his return from Bruxelles to
Antwerp, May XV. 1556, both Sr John Cheek and Sr Peter Carew were waylay'd by
the Provost Marshall for King PHILIP, beaten from their horses, tied hand and
foot to the bottom of a Cart, and so conveyed hoodwinckt to the next Haven,
where they were Shipped under hatches, and their first landing place was the
Tower of London, where they were committed to close Prison. It is said there be
some Writers that have made both these men Martyrs two years before; and
assigned them a place in the Calendar June XIII. 1554, the day upon which they
were supposed to be burned both at the same Stake, and for the same Cause. But
the truth is otherwise: Sr Peter Carew outlived all his troubles, and underwent
many honorable services under Queen ELIZABETH, and dyed in Ireland above
twenty years after this supposed Martyrdom, Anno 1575. Sr John Check's lot
was somewhat harder: he was put to this miserable choice, either to forgo his
life, or what is far more precious his liberty of conscience. No mean;
neither his great learning, his known integrity, the intercession of his
friends, and among them Abbot Fekenhans, (a man which could do somewhat with
Queen MARY) could compound for his pardon at any lower rate then the
recantatiof his Religion. This he was loath to accept till his hard usage in
prison, joined with thereats of worse upon his perseverance, and fair promises
to his submission, with what other insinuating means humane policy could
invent to work upon flesh and blood, drew from his mouth an abrenuntiation of
that truth which he had so long professed, and still believec. Upon this he was
sooner restored to his liberty, but never to his content. The sense and sorrow
for his fall in himself, and the daily sight of that cruel butchery which was
exercised upon others for the constant profession of the truth, made such deep
impressions in his broken soul, as brought him to a speedy, but comfortable
end of a miserable life. He died at London in the house of Peter Osberne
Esquier, in September 1557. His body lies buried in St Albans, Woodstreet: with
this Epitaph upon his tomb. Doctrinae CHECUS linguaeque utriusque Magister
Aurea naturae fabrica morte jacet.
Non erat multis unus, sed praestitit unus
Omnibus, and patriae flos erat ille suae.
Gemma Britanna fuit: tam magnum nulla tulerunt
Tempora the saurum; tempora nulla ferent.
I do not find any issue that he left of his body, save one son which bare
his own name, a comely young man and a stout; slain in his Princes service at
the siege of Fort del Or in Jreland 1580. the only man of ours that was lost
in that days service. But for the issue of his brain, that is more numerous;
and for their sakes which are delighted in such pedigrees, I have set down
this succeeding Catalogue of Sr JOHN CHEEKS Works. Scripsit CL. V. Ioannes
Checus
Introductionem Grammatices. Lib. 1. De Ludimagistrorum officio, Lib. 1. De
pronunciatione linguae Graecae. Correctiones Herodoti, Thycididis, Platonis,
Demosthenis, and Xenophontis. lib. plurimis. Epitaphia. Lib. 1. Panegyricum in
nativitatem EDVARDI Principis. Elegiam de aegrotatione and obitu EDVARDI VI. In
obitum Antonii Dennei. Lib. 1. De obitu Buceri. Commentarios in Psalmum CXXXIX
and alios. An liceat nubere post Divortium. Lib. 1. De fide iustificante. Lib.
1. De aqua lustrali, cineribus, and palmis, ad Wintoniensem. L. 1. De
Eucharistiae Sacramento. Lib. 1. Collegit in Parliamento argumenta and rations
exutraque part super negotio Eucharistiae. Edidit ( quem hic recusum damus) de
damno ex seditione Libellum.
Transtulit E Graeco in Latinum.
Euripidis and Sophocils quaedam ad literam. Aristotelem de anima. Demosthenis
Olynthiacas, Philippicas, and contra Leptinem. AEschinis and Demosthenis
Orationes adversarias. Plutarchum de superstitione. Leonem Imperatorem De
apparatu bellico. Iosephum De antiquitatibus Iudaicis. Chrysostomi Homilias
quasdam. viz Contra Observatores Novilunii 1. De dormientibus in Christo. 1. De
provi dentia Dei. 3. De fato. 3. Maximi Monachi asceticum.
Ex Anglico in Latinum.
Thomae Cranmeri librum de Sacramentis. Officium de Communione.


THE TRVE SVBIECT To THE REBEL.
AMONG so many and notable benefits, wherewith GOD has already liberally and
Plentifully endued us, there is nothing more beneficial, then that we have by
his grace kept us quiet from rebellion at this time. For we see such miseries
hang over the whole state of common wealth, through the great misorder of your
sedition, that it makes us much to rejoice, that we have been neither partners
of your doings, nor conspirers of your counsels. For even as the Lacedaemonians
for the avoiding of Drunkenness, did cause their sons to behold their
servants when they were drunk, that by beholding their beastliness, they might
avoid the like vice: even so has God like a merciful father staid us from
your wickedness, that by beholding the filth of your fault, we might justly
for offense abhor you like Rebels, whom else by nature we love like
Englishmen. And so for our selves we have great cause to thank God, by whose
religion and holy word daily taught us, we learn not only to fear him truly,
but also to obey our King faithfully, and to serve in our own vocation like
subjects honestly. And as for you, we have surely just cause to lament you as
brethren, and yet juster cause to rise against you as enemies, and most just
cause to overthrowe you as Rebels. For what hurt could be done either to us
privately, or to the whole commonwealth generally, that is now with mischief so
brought in by you, that even as we see now the flame of your rage, so shall we
necessarily be consumed hereafter with the misery of the same. Wherefore
consider your selves with some light of understanding, and mark this grievous
and horrible fault, which ye have thus vildly committed, how hay nous it must
needs appear to you, if ye will reasonably consider that, which for my duties
sake, and my whole Countries cause, I will at this present declare unto you.

Ye which be bound by Gods word not to obey for fear, like men pleasers, but
for conscience sake, like Christians, have contrary to Gods holy will, whose
offense is everlasting death; and contrary to the godly order of quietness,
set out to us in the Kings Majesty's laws, the breach whereof is not unknown to
you, taken in hand uncalled of God, unsent by men, unfit by reason, to cast
away your bounden duties of obedience, and to put on you against the
Magistrates, Gods office committed to the Magistrates, for the reformation of
your pretensed injuries.

In the which doing, ye have first faulted grievously against God, next
offended unnaturally our Sovereign Lord, thirdly troubled miserably the whole
commonwealth, undone cruelly many an honest man, and brought in an utter
misery both to us the Kings subjects, and to your selves being false Rebels:
and yet ye pretend that partly for Gods cause, and partly for the
commonwealths sake, ye do rise, when as your selves cannot deny, but ye
that seek in word Gods cause, do break indeed Gods commandment; and ye that
seek the commonwealth, have destroyed the commonwealth: and so ye mar that
ye would make, and break that ye would amend, because ye nether seek any
thing rightly, nor would amend any thing orderly.

He that faulteth, faulteth against Gods ordinance, who has forbidden all
faults, and therefore ought again to be punished by Gods ordinance, who is the
reformer of faults. For he says, leave the punishment to me, and I will
revenge them. But the Magistrate is the ordinance of God, appointed by him with
the sword of punishment, to look straightly to all evil doers. And therefore
that that is done by the Magistrate, is done by the ordinance of God, who^ the
Scripture oftentimes does call God, because he has the execution of Gods
office. How then do you take in hand to reform? Be ye Kings? By what
authority? or by what succession? Be ye the Kings officers? By what
commission? Be ye called of God? By what tokens declare ye that? Gods word
teaches us, that no man should take in hand any office, but he that is called
of God like Aaron. What Moses I pray you called you? What Gods minister bade
you rise?

Ye rise for religion. What religion taught you that? If ye were offered
persecution for religion, ye ought to fly: so Christ teaches you, and yet
you intend to fight. If ye would stand in the truth, ye ought to suffer like
Martyrs: and you would slay like Tyrants. Thus for religion ye keep no
religion, and neither will follow the counsel of Christ, nor the constancy of
Martyrs. Why rise ye for religion? Have ye any thing contrary to Gods book?
Yea, have ye not all things agreeable to Gods word? But the new is different
from the old, and therefore ye will have the old. If ye measure the old by
truth, ye have the oldest: if ye measure the old by fancy, then it is hard,
because men's fancies change, to give that is old. Ye will have the old still:
Will ye have any older then that which Christ left, and his Apostles taught,
and the first Church after Christ did use? Ye will have that the Canons do
establish. Why, that is a great deal younger then that ye have of later time,
and newlier invented. Yet that is it that ye desire. Why, then ye desire not
the oldest. And do you prefer the Bishops of Rome before Christ? men's
inventio^ before Gods law? the newer sort of worship before the older? Ye seek
no religion, ye be deceived, ye seek traditions. They that teach you, blind
you; that so instruct you, deceive you. If ye seek what the old Doctors say,
yet look what Christ the oldest of all says. For he says, before Abraham was
made, I am. If ye seek the truest way, he is the very truth: if ye seek the
readiest way, he is the very way: if ye seek everlasting life, he is the very
life. What religion would you have other now, then his religion?

You would have the Bibles in again. It is no marvel, your blind guides would
lead you blind still. Why, be ye Howlets and Bats, that ye cannot look on
the light? Christ says to every one, search ye the Scriptures, for they bear
witness of Christ. You say, pull in the Scriptures, for we will have no
knowledge of Christ. The Apostles of Christ will us to be so ready, that we may
be able to give every man an account of our faith. Ye will us not once to read
the Scriptures, for fear of knowing of our faith. Saint Paul prays that
every man may increase in knowledge, ye desire that our knowledge might decay
again A true religion ye ieek belike, and worthy to be fought for. For
without the sword indeed, nothing can help it, neither Christ, nor truth, nor
age can maintain it. But why should ye not like that which Gods word
establishes, the primitive Church has authorized, the greatest learned men of
this Realm have drawn, the whole consent of the Parliament has confirmed,
the Kings Majesty has set forth? Is it not truly set out? Can ye devise any
truer, then Christ's Apostles used? Ye think it is not learnedly done. Dare ye
Commons take upon you more learning, then the chosen Bishops and Clearks of
this Realm have? Think ye folly in it? Ye were wont to judge your Parliament
wisest, and now will ye suddenly excel them in wisdom? Or can you think it
lacks authority, which the King, the Parliament, the learned, the wise, have
justly approved? Learn, learn, to know this one point of Religion, that God
will be worshipped as he has prescribed, and not as we have devised: and that
his will is wholly in his Scriptures, which be full of Gods spirit, and
profitable to teach the truth, to reprove lies, to amend faults, to bring one
up in righteousness, that he that is a Gods man may be perfect and ready to
all good works. What can be more required to serve God withal? And thus much
for religion-Rebels.

The other rabble of Norfolk Rebels, ye pretend a commonwealth. How amend ye
it, by killing of Gentlemen, by spoiling of Gentlemen, by imprisoning of
Gentlemen? A marveilous tanned commonwealth. Why should ye thus hate them? for
their riches, or for their rule? Rule they never took so much in hand, as ye
do now. They never resisted the King, never withstood his Council; be
faithful at this day, when ye be faithless, not only to the King, whose
subjects ye be, but also to your Lords, whose tenants ye be. Is this your
true duty, in some of homage, in most of fealty, in all of allegiance, to
leave your duties, go back from your promises, fall from your faith, and
contrary to law and truth to make unlawful assemblies, ungodly companies,
wicked and detestable camps, to disobey your betters, and to obey your Tanners,
to change your obedience from a King to a Ket, to submit your selves to
Traitors, and break your faith to your true King and Lords? They rule but by
law: if otherwise, the Law, the Council, the King, takes away their rule. Ye
have orderly sought no redress, but ye have in time found it. In countries
some must rule, some must obey, every man may not bear like stroke, for every
man is not like wise. And they that have seen most, and be best able to bear
it, and of just dealing befide, be most fit to rule. It is another matter to
understand a man's own grief, and to know the commonwealths sore: and
therefore not they that know their own case, as every man does, but they that
understand the commonwealths state, ought to have in countries the preferment
of ruling. If ye felt the pain that is joined with governance, as ye see and
like the honor, ye would not hurt others to rule them, but rather take great
pain to be ruled of them. If ye had rule of the Kings Majesty committed unto
you, it were well done ye had ruled the Gentlemen: but now ye have it not,
and cannnot bear their rule, it is to think the kings Majesty foolish and
unjust, that has given certain rule to them. And seeing by the Scripture,
that ye ought not to speak evil of any Magistrate of the people, why do ye
not only speak evil of them, whom the Kings Majesty has put in office, but
also judge evil of the King himself, and thus seditiously in field stand with
your swords drawn against him?

If riches offend you, because ye would have the like, then think that to be
no commonwealth, but envy to the commonwealth. Envy it is to appaire another
man's estate, without the amendment of your own. And to have no Gentlemen,
because ye be none your selves, is to bring down an estate, and to mend none.
Would ye have all alike rich? That is the overthrowe of labor, and utter
decay of work in this Realm. For who will labor more, if when he has gotten
more, the idle shall by lust without right, take what him lust from him, under
pretense of equality with him. This is the bringing in of idleness, which
destroys the commonwealth, and not the amendment of labor, that maintains
the commonwealth If there should be such equality, then ye take all hope away
from yours, to come to any better estate than you now leave them. And as many
mean men's children come honestly up, and are great succor to all their stock,
so should none be hereafter helped by you: but because ye seek equality,
whereby all cannot be rich, ye would that belike, whereby every man should be
poor. And think beside that riches and inheritance be Gods providence, and
given to whom of his wisdom he thinks good. To the honest for the increase
of their godliness, to the wicked for the heaping up of their damnation, to
the simple for a recompense of other lacks, to the wise for the greater setting
out of Gods goodness. Why will your wisdom now stop Gods wisdom, and provide
by your laws, that God shall not enrich them, whom he has by providence
appointed as him likes? God has made the poor, and has made them to be
poor, that he might show his might, and set them aloft when he lists, for
such cause as to him seems; and pluck down the rich to this state of
poverty, to show his power, as he disposes to order them. Why do not we the^
being poor bear it wisely, rather then by lust seek riches unjustly; and show
our selves contented with Gods ordinance, which we must either willingly obey,
and then we be wise; or else we must unprofitably strive withal, and then we
be mad. But what mean ye by this equality in the commonwealth? If one be
wiser then another, will ye banish him because ye intend an equality of all
things? If one be stronger then another, will ye slay him because ye seek an
equality of all things? If one be well favourder then another, will ye punish
him because ye look for an equality of all things? If one have better
utterance then another, will ye pull out his tongue to save your equality?
And if one be richer then another, will ye spoil him to maintain an
equality? If one beelder then another, will ye kill him for his equalities
sake? How injurious are ye to God himself, who intends to bestow his gifts
as he himself lists, and ye seek by wicked insurrections to make him give
them commonly alike to all men, as your vain fancy likes. Why would ye have
an equality in riches, and in other gifts of God there is no mean sought?
Either by ambition ye seek Lordlinesse, much unfit for you; or by
covetousness ye be unsatiable, a thing likely enough in you; or else by folly
ye be not content with your estate, a fancy to be plucked out of you. But and
we being weary of poverty would seek to enrich our selves, we should go a
far other way to work then this, and so should we rightly come to our desire.
Does not Saint Peter teach us before God a right way to honor, to riches, to
all necessary and profitable things for us? He says, humble your selves, that
God might exalt you: and cast all your care on him, for he cares for you. He
teaches the way to all good things at Gods hand, is to be humble, and you
exalt your selves. Ye seek things after such a sort, as if the servant should
anger his master, when he seeks to have a good turn on him. Ye would have
riches I think, at Gods hand who gives all riches, and yet ye take the way
clean contrary to riches. Know ye not that he that exalts himself, God
will throw him down? How can ye get it then, by thus setting out your
selves: Ye should submit you by humility one to another, and ye set up your
selves by arrogance above the Magistrates. See herein how much ye offend God.
Remember ye not, that if ye come nigh to God, he will come nigh unto you? If
then ye go from God, he will go from you. Does not the Psalm say, he is
holy with the holy, and with the wicked man he is froward? Even as he is
orderd of men, he will order them again. If ye would follow his will, and
obey his commandments, ye should eat the fruits of the earth, says the
Prophet: if not, the sword shall devour you. Ye might have eaten the fruits
of this seasonable year, if ye had not by disobedience rebelled against God.
Now not only ye cannot eat that which your selves did first sow by labor,
and now destroy by sedition, but also if the Kings Majesty's sword came not
against you, as just policy requires, yet the just vengeance of God would
light among you, as his word promises, and your cruel wickedness deserves.

For whatsoever the causes be, that have moved your wild affections herein, as
they be unjust causes, and increase your faults much, the thing it self, the
rifing I mean, must needs be wicked and horrible before God, and the usurping
of authority, and taking in hand of rule, which is the sitting in Gods seat of
justice, and a proud clyming up into Gods high throne, must needs be not only
cursed newly by him, but also has been oftne punished before of him. And that
which is done to Gods officer, God accounts it done to him. For they despise
not the minister, as he says himself, but they despise him: and that
presumption of challenging Gods seat, does show you to have been Lucifers, and
shows us that God will punish you like Lucifers. Wherefore rightly look, as
ye duly have deserved, either for great vengeance for your abominable
transgression, or else earnestly repent with unfeigned minds, your wicked
doings: and either with example of death be content to dehort others, or else
by faithfulness of obedience declare how great a service it is to God, to obey
your Magistrates faithfully, and to serve in subjection truly.

Well, if ye had not thus grievously offended God, whom ye ought to worship,
what can ye reasonably think it, to be no fault against the King. whom ye
ought to reverence? Ye be bound by Gods word to obey your King, and is it no
break of duty to withstand your King? If the servant be bound to obey his
master in the family, is not the subject bound to serve the King in his
Realme^. The child is bound to the private father, and be we not all bound to
the commonwealths father? If we ought to be subject to the King for Gods
sake, ought we not then, I pray you, to be faithfully subject to the King? If
we ought dutifully to show all obedience to heathen Kings, shall we not
willingly and truly be subject to Christian Kings? If one ought to submit
himself by humility to another, ought we not all by duty to be subject to
our King? If the members of our natural body all follow the head, shall not
the members of the political body all obey the King? If good manners be
content to give place, the lower to the higher, shall not religion teach us
always to give place to the highest? If true subjects will dye gladly in the
Kings service, should not all subjects think it duty to obey the King with
just service? But you have not only disobeyed, like ill subjects; but also
taken stoutly rule upon you, like wicked Magistrates. Ye have been called to
obedience, by counsel of private men, by the advice of the Kings Majesty's
Council, by the Kings Majesty's free pardon, but what counsel takes place
where sturdinesse is law, and churlish answers be counted wisdom? Who can
persuade where treason is above reason, and might rules right, and it is had
for lawful whatsoever is lustful, and commotioners are better then
commissioners, and common woe is named commonwealth? Have ye not broken his
laws, disobeyed his Council, rebelled against him? And what is the
commonwealth worth, when the law which is indifferent for all men, shall be
wilfully and spightfully broken of headstrong men, that seek against laws to
order laws; that those may take place, not what the consent of wise men has
appointed, but what the lust of Rebels has determined. What unthriftinesse is
in ill servants, wickedness in unnatural children, sturdinesse in unruly
subjects, cruelty in fierce enemies, wildness in beastly minds, pride in
disdainful hearts, that flows now in you: which have fled from housed
conspiracies to encamped robberies; and are better contented to suffer famine,
cold, travel, to glut your lusts, then to live in quietness, to save the
Commonwealth: and think more liberty in wilfulness, then wisdom in
dutifulness: and so run headlong not to the mischief of other, but to the
destruction of your selves, and undo by folly that ye intend by mischief,
neither seeing how to remedy that ye judge faulty, nor willing to save your
selves from misery, which stiffe-neckednesse cannot do, but honesty of
obedience must frame.

If authority would serve, under a King the Council have greatest authority;
if wisdom and gravity might take place, they be of most experience; if
knowledge of the Commonwealth could help, they must by daily conference of
matters understand it best: yet neither the authority that the Kings Majesty
has given them, nor the gravity which you know to be in them, nor the
knowledge which with great travel they have gotten, can move ye either to
keep you in the duty ye ought to do, or to avoid the great disorder wherein
ye be. For where disobedience is thought stoutnesse, and fullennesse is
counted manhood, and stomaking is courage, and prating is judged wisdom, and
the elvishest is most meet to rule, how can other just authority be obeyed, or
sad counsel be followed, or good knowledge of matters be heard, or
commandments of Councillors be considered? And how is the King obeyed, whose
wisest be withsta^ded, the disobedie^test obeyed, the high in authority not
weighed, the unskilfullest made chief Captains, to the Noblest most hurt
intended, the braggingest brawler to be most safe. And even as the viler parts
of the body would contend in knowledge and government with the five wits, so
do the lower parts of the Commonwealth enterprise as high a matter, to strive
against their duty of obedience to the Council.

But what talk I of disobedience so quietly? have not such mad rages run in
your heads, that forsaking and bursting the quietness of the common peace, ye
have hainously and Traitorously encamped your self in field, and there like a
byle in a body, nay like a sink in a town, have gathered together all the
nasty vagabonds, and idle loiterers, to bear armor against him, with whom all
godly and good subjects will live and dye withal? If it be a fault, when two
fight together, and the Kings peace broken, and punishment to be sought
therefore, can it be but an outrageous and a detestable mischief, when so many
Rebels in number, malicious in mind, mischievous in enterprise, fight, not
among themselves, but against all the Kings true and obedient subjects, and
seek to prove whether rebellion may beat down lionesty, and wickedness may
overcome truth or no? If it be treason to speak hainously of the Kings
Majesty, who is not hurt thereby, and the infamy returns to the speaker
again, what kind of outrageous and horrible treason is it to assemble in
campean army against him, and so not only intend an overthrowe to him, and
also to his Commonwealth, but also to cast him into an infamy through all
outward and strange nations, and persuade them that he is hated of his people,
whom he cannot rule, and that they be no better then villains, which will not
with good orders be ruled. What death can be devised cruel enough for those
Rebels, who with trouble seek death, and cannot quench the thirst of their
rebellion, but with the blood of true subjects, and hate the Kings merciful
pardon, when they miserably have transgressed, and in such an outrage of
mischief will not by stubbornness acknowledge themselves to have faulted, but
intend to broyle the Commonwealth with the flame of their treason, and as much
as lies in them, not only to annoy themselves, but to destroy all other. He
that is miscontented with things that happen, and because he cannot bear the
misery of them, renteth his hair, and teareth his skin, and mangleth his
face, which eases not his sorrow, but increases his misery, may he not be
justly called mad and fantastical, aad worthy whose wisdom should be
suspected? And what shall we say of them, who being in the Commonwealth,
feeling a soar grievous unto them, and easy to have been amended, sought not
the remedy, but have increased the grief, and like frantic beasts, raging
against their head, do tear and deface as much as lies in them, his whole
authority in government, and violently take to themselves that rule on them,
which he by policy has granted unto other. And who waighing well the
heaviness of the fault, may not justly say and hold them to be worse herein
then any kind of brute beasts. For we see that the sheep will obey the
Shepherd, and the Nete be ruled by the Nete-heard, and the Horse will know his
keeper, and the Dog will be in awe of his Master, and every one of them feed
there, and of that, as his keeper and ruler does appoint him; and goes from
thence, and that, as he is forbidden by his ruler. And yet we have not heard
of, that any Heard or company of these have risen against their Herdmen or
governor, but be always contented not only to obey them, but also to suffer
them to take profit of them. And we see furthermore, that all Herds, and all
sorts, be more eager in fierceness against all kind of strangers, then they
be against their own rulers, and will easier offend him who has not hurt
them, than touch their ruler who seeks profit on them. But ye that ought to
be governed by your Magistrates, as the Herds by the Herdman, and ought to be
like sheep to your King, who ought to be like a Shepherd unto you, even in the
time when your profit was sought, and better redress was intended then your
upstirres and unquietness could obtain, have beyong the cruelty of all
beasts, foully risen against your ruler, and showed your selves worthy to be
orderd like beasts, who in kind of obedience will fall from the state of men.
A Dog stoupeth when he is beaten of his Master: not for lack of stomach, but
for natural obedience: you being not stricken of your head, but favored; not
kept down, but succored, and remedied by law, have violently against law, not
only barked like beasts, but also bitten like hell hounds. What, is the
mischief of sedition, either not known unto you, or not feared? Have not
examples aforetimes, both told the end of Rebels, and the wickedness of
rebellion it self? But as for old examples, let them pass for a while, as
things well to be considered, but at this present one thing more to be waighed.
Look upon your selves, after ye have wickedly stepped into this horrible kind
of treason, do ye not see how many bottomless whirlepooles of mischief ye
be gulpht withal, and what loathsome kinds of rebellion ye be feign to wade
through?

Ye have sent out in the Kings name, against the Kings will, precepts of all
kinds, and without commandment commanded his subjects, and unrulily have
ruled, where ye listed to command, thinking your own fancies the Kings
commandments, and rebels lusts in things to be right government of things, not
looking what should follow by reason, but what your selves follow by affection.
And is it not a dangerous and a cruel kind of treason, so to give out
precepts to the Kings people? There can be no just execution of laws,
reformation of faults, giving out of commandments, but from the King. For in
the King only is the right hereof, and the authority of him derived by his
appointment to his Ministers. Ye having no authority of the King, but taking
it of your selves, what think ye your selves to be? Ministers ye be none,
except ye be the Devils Ministers, for he is the author of sedition. The Kings
Majesty intends to maintain peace, and to oppress war, ye stir up
uproares of people, hurly burlies of vagabonds, routs of robbers, is this any
part of the Kings ministry? If a vagabond would do what him lust, and call
himself your servant, and execute such offices of trust, whether ye would or
no, as ye have committed to another man's credit, what would every one of you
say or do herein? Would ye suffer it? Ye wander out of houses, ye make
every day new matters as it pleases you, ye take in hand the execution of
those things, God by his word forbidding the same, which God has put the
Magistrates in trust withal. What can ye say to this? Is it sufferable think
ye? If ye told a private message in another man's name, can it be but a false
lie I pray ye? And to tell a fained message to the Commonwealth, and that from
the King, can it be honest think ye? To command is more then to speak, what
is it then to command so traitorous a lie? This then which is in word a
deceitful lie, and in deed a traitorous fact, noisome to the Commonwealth,
unhonourable to the King, mischievous in you, how can you otherwise judge of
it, but to be an unheard of and notable disobedience to the King, and therefore
by notable example to be punished, and not with gentleness of pardon to be
forgiven.

Ye have robbed every honest house, and spoiled them unjustly, and pitifully
wronged poor men being no offenders, to their utter undoing, and yet ye think
ye have not broken the Kings laws. The Kings Majesty's law and his
commandment is, that every man should safely keep his own, and use it
reasonably to an honest gain of his living: Ye violently take and carry away
from men without cause, all things whereby they should maintain, not only
themselves, but also their family, and leave them so naked, that they shall
feel the smart of your cursed enterprise, longer then your own unnatural and
ungodly stomachs would well vouchsafe. By justice ye should neither hurt nor
wrong man; and your pretensed cause of this monstrous stir, is to increase
men's wealth: and yet how many, and say truth, have ye decayed and undone, by
spoiling and taking away their goods? How should honest men live quietly in the
Commonwealth at any time, if their goods either gotten by their own labor, or
left to them by their friends, shall unlawfully and unorderly, to the feeding
of a sort of Rebels, be spoiled and wasted, and utterly scattered abroad? The
thing ye take, is not your right, it is another man's own. The manner of
taking against his will, is unlawful, and against the order of every good
Commonwealth. The cause why ye take it, is mischievous and horrible, to fat up
your sedition. Ye that take it, be wicked ttaitours, and common enimes of all
good order. If he that desires another man's goods or cattle, do fault, what
does he, think you, whose desire taking follows, and is led to and fro by
Just, as his wicked fancy void of reason does guide him? He that uses not his
own well and charitably, has much to answer for, and shall they be thought not
unjust, who not only take away other men's, but also misuse and waste the same
ungodly? They that take things privily away, and steal secretly and covertly
other men's goods, be by law judged worthy death: and shall they, that without
shame spoil things openly, and be not afraid by impudence to profess their
spoil, be thought either honest creatures to God, or faithful subjects to
their King, or natural men to their Country? If nothing had moved you but the
example of mischief, and the foul practice of other moved by the same, ye
should yet have abstained from so licentious and so villainous a show of
robbery, considering how many honester there be that being loath their
wickedness should be blazed abroad, yet be found out by providence, and hanged
for desert. What shall we then think or say of you? shall we call you pickers,
or hid thieves? nay more then thieves, day thieves, Herd stealers, Sheire
spoilers, and utter destroyers of all kind of families, both among the poor,
and also among the rich. Let us yet farther see, is there no more things
wherein ye have broken the Kings laws, and so uildly disobeyed him, contrary
to your bounden duty?

Ye have not only spoiled the Kings true subjects of their goods, but also ye
have imprisoned their bodies, which should be at liberty under the King; and
restrained them of their service, which by duty they owe the King; and
appaired both strength and health, wherewith they live and serve the King. Is
there any honest thing more desired then liberty? ye have shamefully spoiled
them thereof. Is there any thing more dutiful then to serve their Lord and
Master? But as that was deserved of the one part, so was it hindered and
stopped on your part. For neither can the King be served, nor families kept,
nor the Commonwealth looked unto, where freedom of liberty is stopped, and
diligence of service is hindered, and the help of strength and health abated.
Men's bodies ought to be free from all men's bondage and cruelty, and only in
this Realm be subject in public punishment to our public Governor, and
neither be touched of headless Captains, nor holden of brainlesse Rebels. For
the government of so precious a thing, ought to belong unto the most noble
ruler, and not justly to be in every man's power, which is justly every living
man's treasure. For what goods be so dear to every man as his own body is,
which is the true vessel of the mind to be measurably kept of every man for
all exercises and services of the mind. If ye may not of your own authority
meddle with men's goods, much less you may of your own authority take order
with men's bodies. For what be goods in comparison of health, liberty, and
strength, which be all settled and fastened in the body. They that strike other,
do greatly offend and be justly punishable. And shall they that cruelly and
wrongfully torment men's bodies with yrons, and imprisonments, be thought not of
other, but of themselves honest, and plain, and true dealing men? What shall
we say by them, who in a private business will let a man to go his journey in
the Kings high way? Do they not, think ye, plain wrong? Then in a common
cause, not only to hinder them, but also to deal cruelly with them, and shut
them from doing their service to the King, and their duty to the Commonwealth,
is it not both disobedience, cruelty, and mischief think ye? What an
hinderance is it, to have a good garment hurt, any jewel appaired, or any
esteemed thing to be decayed? And seeing no earthly thing a man has more
precious then his body, to cause it to be cruelly tormented with yrons, feebled
with cold, weakened with ordering, can it be thought any other thing but wrong
to the sufferer, cruelty in the doer, and great disobedience and transgression
to the King: How then be ye able to defend it? But seeing ye so unpittifully
vex men, cast them in prison, lade the^ with yrons, pine them with famine,
contrary to the rule of nature, contrary to the Kings Majesty's laws, contrary
to Gods holy ordinances, having no matter, but pretensed and fained gloses, ye
be not only disobedient to the King like Rebels, but withstanding the law of
nature like beasts, and so worthy to dye like dogs, except the Kings Majesty,
without respect of your deserving, do mercifully grant you of his goodness,
that which you cannot escape by justice.

Yet ye being not content with this, as small things enterprise great matters,
and as though ye could not satisfy your self, if ye should leave any
mischief undone, have sought blood with cruelty, and have slain of the Kings
true subjects many, thinking their murder to be your defense, when as ye have
increased the fault of your vile rebellion, with the horror of bloodshed, and
so have burdened mischief with mischief, while it come to an importable
weight of mischief. What could we do more in the horriblest kind of faults,
to the greatest transgressors and offenders of God and men, then to look
straightly on them by death, and so to rid them out of the Commonwealth by
severe punishment, whom ye thought unworthie to live among men for their
doings. And those who have not offended the King, but defended his Realm, and
by obedience of service sought to punish the disobedient, and for safeguard of
every man put themselves under duty of law, those have ye miserably and
cruelly slain, and bathed you in their blood, whose doings ye should have
followed: and so have appaired the Commonwealth, both by destruction of good
men, and also by increase of Rebels. And how can that Commonwealth by any
means endure, wherein every man without authority, may unpunished slay whom
he list, and that in such case, as those who be slain show themselves most
noble of courage, and most ready to serve the King and the Commonwealth, and
those as do slay be most villainous and traitorous Rebels that any Commonwealth
did ever sustain. For a City and a Province be not the fair houses and the
strong walls, nor the defense of any engine, but the living bodies of men,
being able in number and strength to maintain themselves by good order of
justice, and to serve for all necessary and behoueable uses in the
Commonwealth. And when as man's body being a part of the whole Commonwealth, is
wrongfully touched any way, and specially by death, then suffers the
Commonwealth great injury, and that always so much the more, how honester and
nobler he is who is injuriously murdered. How was the Lord Sheffeld handled
among you, a noble Gentleman, and of good service, both fit for counsel in
peace, and for conduct in war, considering either the gravitie of his
wisdom, or the authority of his person, or his service to the Commonwealth,
or the hope that all men had in him, or the need that England had of such, or
among many notably good, his singular excellency, or the favor all men bare
toward him, being loved of every man, and hated of no man. Considered ye, who
should by duty be the Kings Subjects, either how ye should not have offended
the King, or after offense, have required the Kings pardon, or not to have
refused his goodness offered, or at length to have yielded to his mercy, or
not to have slain those who came for his service, or to have spared those who
in danger offered ransom. But all these things for gotten by rage of
rebellion, because one madness cannot be without infinite vices, ye slew him
cruelly, who offered himself manfully; nor would not spare for ransom, who
was worthy for nobleness to have had honor; and hewed him bare, whom ye
could not hurt armed; and by slavery slew nobility; indeed miserably, in
fashion cruelly, in cause divellishly. Oh with what cruel spite was violently
sundred, so noble a body from so godly a mind? Whose death must rather be
revenged then lamented, whose death was no lack to himself, but to his
country; whose death might every way been better borne, then at a Rebels hand.
Violence is in all things hurtful, but in life horrible. What should I speak
of others in the same case, diverse and notable, whose death for manhood and
service, can want no worthy praise, so long as these ugly stirs of rebellion
can be had in mind. God has himself joined man's body and his soul
together, not to be parted asunder, before he either dissever them himself, or
cause them to be dissevered by his minister. And shall Rebels and headless
camps, being armed against God, and in field against their King, think it no
fault to shed blood of true subjects, having neither office of God, nor
appointment of ministers, nor just cause of rebellion; He that steals any
part of a man's substance, is worthy to loose his life. What shall we think of
them, who spoil men of their lives, for the maintenance whereof, not only
substance and riches be sought for, but also all common wealths be devised.
Now then, your own consciences should be made your judges, and none other set
to give sentence against ye: seeing ye have been such bloudsheders; so
heinous man-quellers, so horrible murderers; could you do any other then
plainly confess, your foul and wicked rebellion to be grievous against God,
and traitorous to the King, and hurtful to the Commonwealth? So many grievous
faults meeting together in one sink, might not only have discouraged, but
also driven to desperation, any other honest or indifferent mind. But what
feel they, whose hearts so deep mischief has hardened, and by vehemency of
affection be made unshamefast, and stop all discourse of reason, to let at
large the full scope of their unmeasurable madness.

Private men's goods seem little to your unsatiable desires, ye have waxed
greedy now upon Cities, and have attempted mighty spoils, to glut up, if you
could, your wasting hunger. Oh how much have they need of, that will never be
contented? and what riches can suffice any that will attempt high enterprises
above their estate? Ye could not maintain your camps with your private goods,
with your neighbors portion, but ye must also attempt Cities, because ye
sought great spoils, with other men's losses, and had forgotten how ye lived
at home honestly with your own, and thought them worthy death that would
disquiet ye in your house, and pluck away that which ye by right of law
thought to be your own. Herein see what ye would have done, spoiled the Kings
Majesty's subjects, weakened the Kings strength, overthrown his towns, taken
away his munition, drawn his subjects to like rebellion, yea and as it is
among foreign enemies in sacking of Cities, no doubt thereof, ye would have
fallen to slaughter of men, ravishing of wives, deflouring of Maidens, chopping
of children, firing of houses, beating down of streets, overthrowing of all
together. For what measure have men in the increase of madness, when they
cannot at the beginning stay themselves from falling into it. And if the
besetting of one house to rob it, be justly deemed worthy death, what shall
we think of them that besiege whole Cities for desire of spoil? We live under
a King to serve him at all times, when he shall need our strength, and shall
ye then not only withdraw your selves, which ought as much to be obedient as
we be, but also violently pluck other away too, from the duty unto the which
by Gods commandment all subjects be straightly bound, and by all laws every
nation is naturally led? The towns be not only the ornament of the Realm, but
also the seat of Merchants, the place of Handycrafts, that men scattered in
Villages, and needing diverse things, may in little room know where to find
their lack. To overthrowe them then, is nothing else but to waste your own
commodities, so that when ye would buy a necessary thing for money, ye could
not tell where to find it. Munition serves the King, not only for the defense
of his own, but also for the invasion of his enemy. And if ye will then so
straightly deal with him, that ye will not let him so much as defend his own,
ye offer him double injury, both that ye let him from doing any notable fact
abroad, and also that ye suffer not him quietly to enjoy his own at home. But
herein has notably appeared, what Cities have faithfully served and suffered
extreme danger, not only of goods, but also of famine and dearth, rather then
to suffer the Kings enemies to enter: and what white-liverd Cities have not
only not withstood them, but also with shame favored them, and with mischief
aided them. And I would I might praise herein all Cities alike, which I would
do, if all were like worthy. For then I might show more faith in subjects,
then strength in Rebels, and testify to men to come, what a general faith
every City bare to the Kings Majesty, whose age although it were not fit to
rule, yet his subjects hearts were willing to obey: thinking not only of his
hope, which all men conceive hereafter to be in him, but also of the just kind
of government, which in his minority his Council does use among them. And
here, how much, and how worthily may Exeter be commended? which being in the
midst of Rebels, unvictualled, unfurnished, unprepared for so long a siege, did
nobly hold out the continual and dangerous assault of the Rebel. For they
sustained the violence of the Rebel, not only when they had plenty enough of
victual, but also eleven or twelve days after the extreme famine came on
them, and living without bread, were in courage so manfull, and in duty so
constant, that they thought it yet much better to die the extreme death of
hunger, showing truth to their King, and love to their Country, than to give
any place to the Rebel, and favor him with aid, although they might have
done it with their less danger. Whose example, if Norwich had followed, and
had not rather given place to traitor Ket, than to keep their duty; and had
not sought more safeguard then honesty, and private hope more then common
quietness, they had ended their rebellion sooner, and escaped themselves
better, and saved the loss of the worthy Lord Sheffeld, in whom was more true
service for his life, then in them for their goods. And although this cannot be
spoken against certain honest that were amongst them, whose praise was the
greater, because they were so few: yet the greater number was such, that they
not only obeyed the Rebel for fear, but also followed him for love, and did
so traitorously order the Kings band under my Lord Marquess, that they
suffered more damage out of their houses by the Townsmen, than they did
abroad by the Rebels. Whose fault, as the Kings Majesty may pardon, so I would
either the example might be forgotten, that no City might hereafter follow the
like, or the deed be so abhorred, that other hereafter would avoid the like
shame, and learn to be noble by Exeter, whose truth does not only deserve long
praises, but also great reward.

Who then that would willingly defend ye, can say any thing for ye, which
have so diversely faulted, so traitorously offended, not only against private
men severally, but also generally against whole Towns: and that after such a
sort, as outward enemies, full of deadly feud, could not more cruelly invade
them. And thus the Kings Majesty dishonored, his Council disobeyed, the
goods of the poor spoiled, the houses of the wealthy sacked, honest men's
bodies imprisoned, worthy men's personages slain, Cities besieged and
threatened, and all kind of things disordered: can ye without tears and
repentance hear spoken of, which without honesty and godliness ye practiced,
and not find in your hearts now to return to duty, which by witchcraft of
sedition, were drowned in disorder? Have ye not in disorder first grievously
offended God, next traitorously risen against your King, and so neither worthy
everlasting life, as long as ye so remain, nor yet civil life, being in such
a breach of common quietness. If every one of these cannot by themselves pluck
you back from these your lewd and outrageous enterprises, yet let altogether
stir ye, or at least be a fearful example to other, to beware by your
unmeasurable folly, how they do so far provoke God, or offend man, and find by
your mistemper to be themselves better ordered, and learn still to obey,
because they would not repent, and so to live with honesty, that they would
neither willingly offend Gods law, nor disobey man's.

But and ye were so much blered, that you did think impossible things; and
your reason gave ye against all reason, that ye neither displeased God
herein, nor offended the King: yet be ye so blind, that ye understand not
your own case, nor your neighbors misery, nor the ruin of the whole
commonwealth, which does evidently follow your so foul and detestable
sedition? Do ye not see, how for the maintenance of these ungodly rablements,
not only Cities and Villages, but also Shieres and Countries be utterly
distroyed? Is not their corn wasted, their cattle fetched away, their houses
rifled, their goods spoiled, and all to feed your up-rising without reason, and
to maintain this tumult of Rebellion, invented of the Devil, continued by
you, and to be overthrown by the power of Gods mighty hand? And why should not
so hurtful wasting and herrying of Countries, be justly punished with great
severitie, seeing robbing of houses, and taking of purses, do by law deserve
the extremity of death? How many suffer injury, when one hundred of a Shiere
is spoiled? and what injury, think ye, is done, when not only whole Shieres be
destroyed, but also every quarter of the Realm touched? Have ye not brought
upon us all poverty, weakness, and hatred within the Realm? and discourage,
shame, and damage, without the Realm? If ye miserably intended, not only to
undo other, but also to destroy your selves, and to overthrow the whole
Realm, could ye have taken a readier way to your own ruin, then this is?

And first, if ye be any thing reasonable, lift up your reason, and weigh by
wisdom, if not all things, yet your own cases: and learn in the beginning of
matters, to foresee the end; and so judge advisedly, ere ye enter into any
thing hastily. See ye not this year the loss of Harvest? And think ye, ye
can grow to wealth that year, when ye lose your thrist and profit? Barnes be
poor men's storehouses, wherein lies a great part of every man's own living,
his wives and his childrens living, wherewith men maintain their families, pay
their rents, and therefore be always thought most rich when they have best
crops. And now when there is neither plenty of hay, nor sufficient of straw,
nor corn enough, and that through the great disorder of your wicked rebellion,
can ye think ye to do well, when ye undo your selves; and judge it a
Commonwealth, when the Commons are destroyed; and seek your hap by
unhappiness; and esteem your own loss, to be your own forwardness, and by
this judgment show your selves, how little you understand other men's matters,
when ye can scarcely consider the waightiest f your own? Has not the hay this
year, as it rose from the ground, so rotted to the ground again? and where it
was wont by men's seasonable labor, to be taken in due time, and then serve for
the maintenance of horse and cattle, wherewith we live, now by your disordered
mischief has been by men's idleness and undutifulnesse, let alone untouched:
and so neither serves the poor to make money of, nor any cattle to live with.
The corn was sown with labor, and the ground tilled for it with labor, and
looked to be brought home again with labor, and for lack of honest laborers,
is lost on the ground: the owners being loyterers, and seeking other men's, have
lost their own, and hoping for mountains, lacked their present thrift, neither
obtaining that they sought, nor seeking that they ought. And how shall men live
when the maintenance of their provision is lacking? For laboring and their old
store is wasted by wildness of sedition, and so neither spare the old nor save
the new. How can men be fed then, or beasts live, when as such wastfull
negligence is miserably used, and mispending the time of their profit, in
shameful disorder of inobedience, they care not greatly what becomes of their
own, because they intend to live by other men's? Hay is gone, corn is wasted,
straw is spoiled: what reckoning of harvest can ye make, either for the aid
of others, or for the relief of your selves? And thus have ye brought in one
kind of misery, which if ye saw before, as ye be like to feel after,
although ye had hated the Commonwealth, yet for love of your selves, ye would
have avoided the great enormitie thereof, into the which ye wilfully now have
cast in your selves.

Another no less is, that such plenty of victual, as was abundantly in every
quarter, for the relief of us all, is now all wastfully and unthriftfully
spent, in maintaining you unlawful Rebels, and so with disorder all is
consumed, which with good husbandry might long have endured. For so much as
would have served a whole year at home, with diligent and skillful heed of
husbandry, that is wilfully wasted in a month in the Camp, through the
ravening spoil of villainy. For what is unordered plenty, but a wastfull spoil?
whereof the inconvenience is so great, as ye be worthy to feel, and brings
in more hardness of living, greater dearth of all things, and occasioneth many
causes of diseases. The price of things must needs increase much, when the
number of things waxes less, and by scarcity be inhansed, and compels men
to abate their liberality in house, both to their own, and also to strangers.
And where the rich wants, what can the poor find? who in a common
scarcity, lives most scarcely, and feels quickliest the sharpness of
starving, when every man for lack is hungerbitten: which if ye had well
remembered before, as ye now may after perceive, ye would not I think so
stiffneckedly have resisted, and endangered your self in the storm of famine,
whereof ye most likely must have the greatest part, which most stubbornly
resisted, to your own shame and confusion.

Experience teaches us, that after a great dearth, comes a great death, for
that when men in great want of meat eat much ill meat, they fill their bodies
with ill humors, and cast them from their state of health, into a subjection
of sickness, because the good blood in the body is not able to keep his temper
for the multitude of the ill humors that corrupts the same. And so grow
great and deadly plagues, and destroy great numbers of all sorts, sparing no
kind that they light on, neither respecting the poor with mercy, nor the rich
with favor. Can ye therefore think herein, when ye see decay of victuals,
the rich pinch, the poor famish, the following of diseases, the greatness of
death, the mourning of widows, the pittifulnesse of the fatherless, and all
this misery to come through your unnatural misbehaviour, that ye have not
dangerously hurt the Commons of your country, with a doleful and an uncurable
wound? These things being once felt in the Commonwealth, as they must needs be,
every man sees by and by what follows, a great diminishment of the strength
of the Realm, when the due number that the Realm does maintain is made less,
and thereby we be made rather a prey for our enemies, then a safety for our
selves.

And how can there be but a great decay of people at the length, when some be
overthrown in war, some suffer for punishment, some pine for famine, some die
with the camps diet, some be consumed with sickness. For although you think
your selves able to match with a few unprepared Gentlemen, and put them from
their houses, that ye might gain the spoil, do ye judge therefore your
selves strong enough, not only to withstand a Kings power, but also to
overthrow it? Is it possible that ye should have so mad a frenzy in your
head, that ye should think the number ye see so strong, that all ye see not,
should not be able to prevail to the contrary? With what reason could ye
think, that if ye bode the hot brunt of battle, but ye must needs feel the
smart, specially the Kings power coming against you, which if ye fear not,
belike ye know not the force thereof? And so much the greater number is lost
in the Realm, that both the overcommer, and the overcommed be parties,
although unlike, of one Realm: and what loss is, not only of either side,
but of both, that does plainly redown to the whole. Then where so great and so
horrible a fault is committed, as worse cannot be mentioned of, from the
beginning, and brings in withal such penury, such weakness, such disorder
in the Commonwealth, as no mischief beside could do the like: can any man
think with just reason that all shall escape unpunished, that shall escape the
sword; and not many for terror and example sake, should be looked unto, who
have been either great doers in such a disordered villainy, or great
Counselors to such an outgrown mischief, seeing the only remedy of
redressing wilful faults, is a just and a severe punishment of such, whose
naughty deeds good men ought to abhor for duties sake, and ill men may dread
for like punishments sake: and a free license to do mischief unpunished, is
so dangerous, that the sufferance of one, is the occasion of the fall of a
great number; and womanish pity to one, is a deceitful cruelty to the
whole, enticing them to their own destruction by sufferance, which would have
avoided the danger by fore-punishment.

And in such a barrenness of victual, as must needs come after so ravening a
spoil, it must needs be, that some, though few, shall be so nipt with
eagerness of famine, that they shall not recover again themselves out of so
fretting a danger. So in a general weakness, where all shall be feebled, some
must needs die, and so diminish the number, and abate such strength, as the
Realm defended it self withal before. Which occasion of never so few, coming
of so great a cause, if ye should make just amends for, not of recompense,
which ye could not; but of punishment, which ye ought, how many, how diverse,
and how cruel deaths, ought every one of ye often suffer? How many came to
the Camps from long labor to sudden ease, and from mean fare to stroying of
victual, and so fell in a manner unawares, to such a contrary change, that
nature her self abiding never great and sudden changes, cannot bear it
without some grounds entered of diseases to come, which uncircumspect men shall
sooner feel then think of, and then will scarcely judge the cause, when they
shall be vexed with the effect. It is little marvel that idleness, and meat of
another man's charge, will soon feed up and fat likely men: but it is great
marvel if idleness and other men's meat do not abate the same by sickness
again, and specially coming from the one, and going to the other, contrary in
those who violently seek to turn in a moment, the whole Realm to the contrary.
For while their mind changes from obedience to unrulinesse, and turns it
self from honesty to wildness, and their bodies go from labor to idleness,
from small fare to spoil of victual, and from beds in the night to cabins,
and from sweet houses to stinking camps, it must needs be by changing of
affections which alter the body, and by using of rest that fills the body,
and glutting of meats which weakneth the body, and with cold in the nights
which acrazeth the body, and with corrupt air which infecteth the body, that
there follow some grievous tempest, not only of contagious sickness, but also
of present death to the body.

The greatest pluck of all, is that vehemence of plague, which naturally
follows the dint of hunger, which when it enters once among men, what darts
of pangues, what throws of pains, what shouts of death does it cast out, how
many fall, not astonished with the sickness, but fretted with the pain, how
beats it down, not only small towns, but also great countries?

This when ye see light first on your beasts, which lack fodder, and after
fall on men, whose bodies gape for it, and see the scarceness of men to be by
this your foul enterprise, and not only other men touched with plagues, but
also your own house stung with death, and the plague also raised of your
rising, to fire your selves, can ye think to be any other, but manquellers of
other, and murderers of your selves, and the principalls of the overthrow of so
great a number, as shall either by sword or punishment, famine, or some plague,
or pestilence be consumed, and wasted out of the Commonwealth? And seeing he
that decays the number of Cottages, or Plowes in a Town, seems to be an
enemy to the Commonwealth, shall we not count him, not only an enemy, but
also a murderer of his country, who by hare-brained unrulinesse, causes the
utter ruin, and pestilent destruction of so many thousand men? Grant this
folly then and oversight to be such as worthily ye may count it, and I shall
go further in declaring of other great inconveniences, which your dangerous
and furious misbehaviour has hurtfully brought in, seeing diverse honest and
true dealing men, whose living is by their own provision, has come so
aforehand by time, that they have been able well, to live honestly in their
houses, and pay besides their rents of their farms truly, and now have by your
cruelty and abhorred insurrections lost their goods, their cattle, their
harvest, which they had gotten before, and wherewith they intended to live
hereafter, and now be brought to this extremity, that they be neither able to
live, as they were wont at home before, nor to pay their accustomable rent at
their due time. Whereby they be brought into trouble and unquietness, not
only musing what they have lost by you, but also cursing you by whom they have
lost it, and also in danger of losing their holds at their Lords hands, except
by pity they show more mercy then the right of the law will grant by justice.
And what a grief is it to an honest man, to labor truly in youth, and to
gain painfully by labor, wherewith to live honestly in age, and to have this,
gotten in long time, to be suddenly raught away by the violence os sedition?
which name he ought to abhor by it self, although no misery of loss
followed to him thereby. But what greater grief ought seditious Rebels to have
themselves, who if they be not stricken with punishment, yet ought to pine in
conscience, and melt away with the grief of their own faults, when they see
innocents and men of true service, hindered and burdened with the hurt of their
rebellion, and who in a good Commonwealth, should for honesties sake prosper,
they by these Rebels only means, be cast so behind the hand, as they cannot
recover easily again by their own truth, that which they have lost by those
traitors mischief. And if unjust men ought not so to be handled at any man's
hands, but only stand to the order of a law, how much more should true and
faithful subjects, who deserve praise, feel no unquietness, nor be vexed
with sedition, who be obediently in subjection, but rather seek just amends at
false Rebels hands, and by law obtain that they lost by disorder, and so
constrain you to the uttermost, to pay the recompense of wrongful losses,
because ye were the authors of these wrongful spoils. Then would ye soon
perceive the Commo^wealths hurt, not when others felt it who deserved it not,
but when you smarted who caused it, and stood not and looked upon other men's
losses, which ye might pity, but tormented with your own, which ye would
lament.

Now I am past this mischief, which ye will not hereafter deny, when ye
shall praise other men's foresight, rather then your wicked doings, in bewailing
the end of your fury in whose beginning ye now rejoice. What say ye to the
number of vagabonds and loytring beggars, which after the overthrow of your
camp and scattering of this seditious number, will swarm in every corner of
the Realm, and not only ly loitring under hedges, but also stand sturdily in
Cities, and beg boldly at every door, leaving labor which they like not, and
following idleness which they should not. For every man is easily and
naturally brought from labor to ease, from the better to the worse, from
diligence to sloathfulnesse, and after wars it is commonly seen, that a great
number of those which went out honest, return home again like roisters, and
as though they were burnt to the wars bottom, they have alltheir life after
an unsavory smack thereof, and smell still toward day-sleepers, pursse-pickers,
high-way-robbers, quarrel-makers, yea and bloud-sheders too. Do we not see
commonly in the end of wars more robbing, more begging, more murdering then
before, and those to stand in the high way to ask their alms, whom ye be
afraid to say nay unto honestly, least they take it away from you violently,
and have more cause to suspect their strength, then pity their need. Is it not
then daily heard, how men be not only pursued, but utterly spoiled, and few may
ride safe by the Kings way, except they ride strong, not so much for fear of
their goods, which men esteem less, but also for danger of their life, which
every man loves. Work is undone at home, and loiterers linger in streets,
lurk in Alehouses, range in highways, valiant beggars play in towns, and
yet complain of need, whose staff if it be once hot in their hand, or
sluggishnesse bred in their bosoms, they will never be allured to labor
again, contenting the themselves better with idle beggary, then with honest
and profitable labor. And what more noisome beasts to be in a Commonwealth?
Drones in Hives suck out the honey, a small matter, but yet to be looked on by
good husbands. Caterpillars destroy the fruit, an hurtful thing and well
shifted for, by a diligent overseer. Diverse vermin destroy corn, kill Pullein,
engines and snares be made for them. But what is a loyterer? A sucker of Honey,
a spoiler of corn, a destroyer of fruit, nay a waster of money, a spoiler of
victual, a sucker of blood, a breaker of orders, a seeker of breaks, a
queller of life, a Basiliske of the Commonwealth, which by company and sight,
does poison the whole Country, and staineth honest minds, with the infection
of his venom, and so draws the Commonwealth to death and destruction. Such
is the fruit of your labor, and travel for your pretensed Commonwealth, which
justice would no man should taste of but your selves, that ye might truly
judge of your own mischief, and fray other by example from presuming the like.
When we see a great number of flies in a year, we naturally judge it like to
be a great plague, and having so great a swarming of loytering vagabonds, ready
to beg and brawle at every man's door, which declare a greater infection, can
we not look for a grievouser and perillouser danger then the plague is? Who can
therefore otherwise deem; but this one deadly hurt, where with the
Commonwealth of our nation is wounded, beside all other is so pestilent, that
there can be no more hurtful thing in a well governed state, nor more thrown
into all kind of vice and unrulinesse, and therefore this your sedition is not
only most odious, but also most horrible, that has spotted the whole Country
with such a stain of idleness.

There can be no end of faults, if a man rehearse all faults that do necessary
follow this unruly sturdinesse. For not only vagabonds wandering and scattering
themselves for mischief, shall run in a man's eyes, but also disorder of every
degree, shall enter in into a man's mind, and shall behold hereby the
Commonwealth miserably defaced by you, who should as much as other, have kept
your selves in order in it. Neither be the Magistrates duly obeyed, nor the
laws justly feared, nor degrees of men considered, nor Masters well served,
nor Parents truly reverenced, nor Lords remembered of their tenants, nor yet
other natural, or civil Law much regarded. And it is plainly unpossible that
that Country shall well stand in government, and the people grow to wealth,
where order in every state, is not fitly observed, and that body cannot be
without much grief of inflammation, where any least part is out of joint, or
not duly set in his own natural place. Wherefore order must be kept in the
Commonwealth like health in the body, and all the drift of policy looks to
this end, how this temper may be safely maintained, without any excess of
unmeasurablenesse, either of the one side or of the other. And easy enough it
is to keep the same, when it is once brought into the mean, and to hold it in
the stay it is found in, but when it bursteth out once with a vehemence, and
has gotten into an unruly disorder, it spreads so fast, and overfloweth all
honest men's resisting so violently, that it will be hard to recover the breach
of long time again, except with great and wise counsel, which no doubt shall
be in season used, there be wonderful remedies sought therefore. And even as a
man falling, is easier holden up by stay, than when he is fallen down, he is
able to rise again, so is the Commonwealth slipping, by the foresight of
wisdom, better kept from ruin, then when it is once fallen into any kind of
misery, the same may be called again to the old and former state. Do we not
evidently know, that a man may, better keep his arm or his leg from breaking or
falling out of joint, before hurt come to it, then after the hurt, it may safely
and quietly be healed, and restored to the former strength and health again?
And now through your seditious means, things that were before quiet and in good
order, laws feared and obeyed, subjects ruled and kept in duty, be all now in
a great disorder, and like if it be not helped, to grow to wildness, and a
beastliness, seeing that neither common duty can be kept, which nature
prescribes, nor common law can be regarded, which policy requires. How can
ye keep your own if ye keep no order, your wife and children, how can they be
defended from other men's violence, if ye will in other things break all order,
by what reason would ye be obeyed of yours as servants, if ye will not obey
the King as subjects, how would ye have others deal orderly with you, if ye
will use disorder against all others? Seeing then there is such a confusion now
of things, such a turmoile of men, such a disorder of fzashions, who can look
to live quietly a great while, who can think but that ye have miserably tossed
the Commonwealth, and so vexed all men with disorder, that the inconvenience
hereof, cannot only nip others, but also touch you.

But now see how that not only these unlooked for mischiefs, have heavily
grown on ye, but also those commodities which ye thought to have helped your
selves and others by, be not only hindered but also hurt thereby. The Kings
Majesty by the advice etc. intended a just reformation, of all such things as
poor men could truly show themselves oppressed with, thinking equality of
justice, to be the Diadem of his Kingdom, and the safeguard of his commons.
Which was not only intended by wisdom, but also set on with speed, and so
entered into a due considering of all states, that none should have just cause
to grudge against the other, when as every thing rightfully had, nothing could
be but unrightfully grudged at. And this would have been done, not only with
your glad and willing assent, but also been done by this day almost throughout
the whole Realm, so that quietly it had been obtained without inconvenience,
and speedily without delay. And whatsoever had been done by the Kings Majesty's
authority, that would by right have remained for ever, and so taken in law,
that the contrary party, neither could by justice, neither would by boldness,
have enterprised the break thereof. But least wicked men should be wealthy, and
they whose hearts be not truly bent to obedience, should obtain at the Kings
hand, that they deserved not in a Commonwealth, ye have marvellously and
worthily hurt your selves, and graciously provided except the Kings goodness
be more unto you then your own deserts can claim, that ye be not so much
worthy as to be benefitted in any kind, as ye be worthy to lose that ye
have on every side. Ye have thought good to be your own reformers belike, not
only unnaturally mistrusting the Kings justice, but also cruelly and uncivilly
dealing with your own neighbors. Wherein I would as ye have hurt the whole
Realm, so ye had not enterprised a thing most dangerously to your selves, and
most contrary to the thing ye intended. If ye had let things alone, thought
good by your selves to be redressed, and dutifully looked for the performance
of that the Kings Majesty promised reformation, they should not have been
undone at this time, as in a great sort of honest places they be, nor those
countries who for their quietness be most worthy to be looked on, should have
been unprovided for at this day. But this commodity has happened by the way,
that it is evidently known by your mischief, that others duty, who be most
true to the King, and most worthy to be done for, and who be most pernicious
and traitorous Rebels. And it is not to be doubted, but they shall be
considered with thanks, and find just redress without deserved misery, and
you punished like Rebels, who might have had both praise and profit like
subjects. For that as ye have valiantly done of your selves, think ye it will
stand any longer, then men fear your rage, which cannot endure long, and that
ye shall not then bide the rigor of the law, for your private injuries, as ye
used the fury of your brains in other men's oppressions? Will men suffer wrong
at your hands when law can redress, and the right of the Commonwealth will
maintain it, and good order in Countries will bear it? Ye amend faults as
ill Chyrurgions heal sores, which when they seem to be whole above, they
rankle at the bottom, and so be feign continually to be sore, or else be mended
by new breaking of the skin. Your redress seems to you perfect and good, ye
have pulled down such things as ye would, ye think now all is well, ye
consider no farther, ye seek not the bottom, ye see not the sore, that ye
have done it by no law, ye have redressed it by no order, what then? If it be
none otherwise searched then by you, it will not tarry long so, either it will
be after continually, as it was before your coming, or else it must be when all
is done, amended by the King.

Thus have ye both lacked in the time, and mist in the doing, and yet besides
that ye have done, which is by your doing to no purpose, ye have done the
things with such inconveniences, as has been both before rehearsed, and shall
be after declared, that better it had been for you, never to have enjoyed the
commodity, if there be any, then to suffer the griefs that will ensue, which
be very many. In every quarter some men whom ye set by will be lost, which
every one of you if ye have love in ye, would rather have lacked the profit
of your enclosures, then cause such destruction of them, as is like by reason
and judgment necessarily to follow. What Commonwealth is it then, to do such
abominable enterprises after so vile a sort, that ye hinder that good ye
would do, and bring in that hurt ye would not, and so find that ye seek
not, and follow that ye lose, and destroy your selves by folly, rather then
ye would be ordered by reason, and so have not so much amended your old sores,
as brought in new plagues, which ye your selves that deserve them will lament,
and we which have not deserved them may curse you for. For although the Kings
Majesty etc. intended for your profits a reformation in his Commonwealth, yet
his pleasure was not, nor no reason gave it, that every subject should busily
entermedle with it of their own head, but only those whom his Council thought
most meet men for such an honest purpose. The Kings Majesty etc. has godly
reformed an unclean part of religion, and has brought it to the true form of
the first Church that followed Christ, thinking that to be the truest, not what
latter men's fancies have of themselves devised, but what the Apostles and their
fellows had at Christ's hand received, and wills the same to be known and
set abroad to all his people. Shall every man now that lists and fancieth the
same, take in hand uncalled, to be a Minister, and to set forth the same,
having no authority? Nay, though the thing were very godly that were done, yet
the person must needs do ill that enterpriseth it, because he does a good
thing after an ill sort, and looks but on a little part of duty, considering
the thing, and leaves a great part unadvised, not considering the person, when
as in a well and justly done matter, not only these two things ought well to
be weighed, but also good occasion of time, and reasonable cause of the doing,
ought also much to be set before every doers eyes. Now in this your deed, the
manner is ungodly, the thing unsufferable, the cause wicked, the person
seditious, the time traitorous, and can ye possibly by any honest defense of
reason, or any good conscience religiously grounded, deny that this malicious
and horrible fault, so wickedly set on, is not only sinful before God, and
traitorous to the King, but also deadly and pestilent to the whole Commonwealth
of our Country, and so not only overfloweth us with the misery, but also
overwhelmeth you with the rage thereof?

Yet further see, and ye be not weary, with the multitude of miseries, which
ye have marvellously moved, what a yoke ye wilfully do bring on your selves,
in stirring up this detestable sedition, and so bring your selves into a
further slavery, if you use your selves often thusinobediently. When common
order of the law can take no place in unrusy and disobedient subjects, and all
men will of wilfulness resist with rage, and think their own violence to be
the best justice, then be wise Magistrates compelled by necessity, to seek an
extreme remedy, where mean salves help not, and bring in the Martial law,
where none other law serves. Then must ye be contented to bide punishment
without process, condemnation without witness, suspicion is then taken for
judgment, and displeasure may be just cause of your execution, and so without
favor ye find straitness, which without rule seek violence. Ye think it a
hard law and unsufferable. It is so indeed, but yet good for a medicine.
Desperate sickness in physic must have desperate remedies, for mean medicines
will never help great griefs. So if ye cast your selves into such sharp
diseases, ye must needs look for sharp medicines again at your Physicians
hands. And worthy ye be to suffer the extremity in a Commonwealth, which
seek to do the extremity, and by reason must receive the like ye offer, and
so be contented to bide the end willingly, which set on the beginning wilfully.
For no greater shame can come to the Commonwealth, then that those subjects
which should be obedient even without a law, cannot be contented to be ordered
by the law, and by no means kept within their duty, which should every way
offend rather then in their duty. It is a token that the subjects lack reason,
when they forsake law, and think either by their multitude to find pardon,
which cannot justly stretch to all, or else by strength to bear the stroke,
which cannot prosper against a king. They must needs little consider themselves,
who bring in this necessity, rather to stand to the pleasure of a man's will,
then to abide the reason of the law, and to be endangered more when another man
lists, than when himself offends. And this must necessarily follow if your
rebellion thus continue, and while ye seek to throw down the yoke which ye
fancy your selves burdened withal, ye bring your selves in a greater
bondage, leaving safety and following danger, and putting your selves under
the justice of them, whose favor ye might easily have kept, if ye would
willingly and dutifully have served. Now the Gentlemen be more in trust,
because the Commons be untrusty, and they got by service, which ye lose by
stubbornness, and therefore must needs, if ye thus continue, have more
authority from the King, because ye would be in less subjection to the King,
and that as ye will not do of your selves, ye must be compelled to do by
others, and that ye refuse to do willingly, think ye must be drawn to do
the same constrainedly. Which when it comes to pass, as wisdom sees in
your faults that it must needs, what gain ye then, or what profit can arise
to you by rising, which might have found ease in sitting still, and what shally
ye be at length the better for this turmoile, which beside diverse other
incommodities rehearsed, shall be thus clogged with the unsufferable burden of
the Martial law.

Yet is there one thing behind, which me thinks your selves should not
forget, seeing that ye have given the cause, ye should duly look for the
effect. Ye have spoiled, imprisoned, and threatened Gentlemen to death, and
that with such hatred of mind, as may not well be borne: the cause thereof I
speak not on, which tried will happily be not so great; but see the thing: set
murder aside, it is the hainousest fault to a private man. What could more
spightfully have been done against them, than ye have used with cruelty? Can
this do any other but breed in their stomachs great grudge of displeasure
toward you, and engender such an hatred, as the weaker and the sufferer must
needs bear the smart thereof. The Kings best kind of government is so to rule
his subjects, as a father orders his children, and best life of obedient
subjects is one to behave himself to another as though they were brethren
under the King their father. For love is not the knot only of the
Commonwealth, whereby diverse parts be perfectly joined together in one
politic body, but also the strength and might of the same, gathering
together into a small room with order, which scattered would else breed
confusion and debate. Dissension we see in small houses, and thereby may take
example to great commonwealths, how it not only decays them from wealth, but
also abateth them from strength. Think small examples to take place in great
matters, and the like though not so great to follow in them both, and thereby
learn to judge of great things unknown, by small things perceived. When
brethren agree not in a house, goes not the weakest to the walls? and with
whom the father takes part withal, is not he the likest to prevail? Is it
not wisdom for a younger brother, after the good will of the parents, to seek
his eldest brothers favor, who under them is most able to do for him? To
seek them both with honesty is wisdom, to loose them both by sullenness is
madness. Has there not been daily benefits from the gentlemen to you, in
some, more, and in some less, but in none considered; which they have more
friendly offered, then you have gently requited. This must ye lose, when ye
will not be thankful, and learn to gain new good will by desert, when ye
forsake the old friendship unprovoked. And ye must think that living in a
commonwealth together, one kind has need of an other, and yet a great sort of
you more need of one gentleman, then one gentleman of a great sort of you: and
though all be parts of one commonwealth, yet all be not like worthy parts, but
all being under obedience, some kind in more subjection one way, and some kind
in more service another way. And seeing ye be less able by money and
liberality, to deserve good will then other be, and your only kind of desert is
to show good will, which honest men do well accept as much worth as money,
have ye not much hindered and hurt your self herein, loosing that one kind of
humanity which ye have only left, and turning it into cruelty which ye ought
most to abhor, not only because it is wicked of it self, but also most noy
some to you. I can therefore for my part think no less herein, but ye must
find some inconvenience he rein, if you follow your stiffness still, and must
needs judge that ye have wilfully brought on your selves such plagues, as the
like could not have fallen on you, but by your selves. Seeing then thus many
ways ye have hurt the commonwealth of this whole Country within, by
destruction of Shieres, loosing of harvest, wasting of victual, decaying of
manrode, undoing of Farmers, increasing of Vagabonds, maintaining of disorder,
hindering of redresses, bringing in of Martial law, and breeding continual
hatred amongst diverse states, what think ye I pray you, judge ye not that ye
have committed an odious and detestable crime against the whole commonwealth,
whose furtherance ye ought to have tendered by duty, and not to have sought the
hurt thereof with your own damage.

Besides all these in war dgriefs, which every one severally must needs feel
with misery, there happens so many outward mischances, among strangers to us
with disdain, that if there were nothing ill within the Realm which we should
feel, yet the shame which does touch us from other countries should not only
move, but also compel you heartily to forethink this your rebellious sedition.
For what shall strangers think, when they shall hear of the great misorder,
which is in this Realm, with such a confusion, that no order of law can keep
you under, but must be feign to be beaten down with a Kings power? Shall they
not first think the Kings majesty, in whose mind God has powered so much hope
for a child, as we may look for gifts in a man, either for his age to be little
set by, or for lack of qualities not to be regarded, or for default of love to
be resisted, and no notable grace of God in him considered, nor the worthiness
of his office looked upon, nor natural obedience due to him remembered. Shall
they not next suppose, small estimation to be given to the rulers, to whom
under the King we owe due obedience, that cannot in just and lawful matters be
heard, nor men to have that right judgment of their wisedome', as their justice
in rule, and foresight in counsel requires, but rather prefer their own
fancies before others experience, and deem their own reason to be
commonwealth, and other men's wisdom to be but dreaming? Shall they not
truly say the Subjects to be more unfaithful in disobedience, then other
Subjects worse ordered be, and license of liberty to make wild heads without
order, and that they neither have reason, that understand not the mischief of
sedition, nor duty which follow their beastlynesse, nor love in them which so
little remember the common wealth, nor natural affection which will daily
seek their own destruction? Thus the whole Country lacking the good opinion
of other nations, is cast into great shame by your unruliness, and the
proceedings of the Country, be they never so godly, shall be ill spoken of, as
unfit to be brought into use, and good things hereby that deserves praise,
shall bide the rebuke of them that list to speak ill, and ill things untouched
shall be boldlyer maintained. Nothing may with praise be redressed, where
things be measured by chanceable disorder, rather then by necessary use; and
that is thought most politic, that men will be best contented to do, and not
that which men should be brought unto by duty. And with what duty or virtue in
ye can ye quench out of men's memories this foul enterprise, or gather a good
report again to this Realm, who have so vilely with reproach slaundered the
same, and diversely discredited it among others, and abated the good opinion
which was had of the just government and ruled order, used heretofore in this
noble Realm, which is now most grievous, because it is now most without cause.

If this outward opinion, without further inconvenience were all, yet it might
well be borne and would with ease, decay that it grew, but it has not only
hurt us with voice, but endangered us in deed, and cast us a great deal
behind the hand, where else we might have had a jolly foredeale. For that
opportunity of time, which seldom chances, and is always to be taken, has
been by your froward means lost this year, and so vainly spent at home for
bringing down of you, which should else profitably have been otherwise
bestowed, that it has been almost as great a loss to us abroad, to lack that
which we might have obtained, as it was combrance at home, to go about the
overthrowe of you, whose sedition is to be abhorred. And we might both
conveniently have invaded some, if they would not reasonably have grown to
some kind of friendship, and also defended other, which would beside promise,
for times sake, unjustly set upon us: and easily have made this stormy time a
fair year unto us, if our men had been so happy at home, as our likelihood
abroad was fortunate. But what is it, I pray you, either to let slip such an
occasion by negligence, or to stop it by stubbornness, which once past away,
can be by no means recovered, no not though with diligence ye go about to
re-enforce the same again.

If ye would with wickedness have forsaken your faith to your natural
Country, 'and have sought crafty means to have utterly betrayed it to our
common enemies, could ye have had any other speedier way then this is, both to
make our strength weak, and their weakness strong? If ye would have sought to
have spighted your country, and to have pleased your enemy, and follow their
counsel for our hinderance, could ye have had devised of them any thing more
shameful for us, and joyful to them? If they which lie like Spyals, and
harken after likelihoods of things to come, because they declare opportunity
of times to the enemy, are to be judged common enemies of the Country, what
shall we reasonably think of you, who do not secretly bewray the counsels of
others, but openly betray the Commonwealth with your own deeds, and have as
much as lies in you, sought the overthrowe of it at home, which if ye had
obtained at Gods hand, as he never allows so horrible an enterprise, how
could ye have defended it from the overthrow of other abroad? For is your
understanding of things so small, that although you see your selves not unfit
to get the upperhand of a few Gentlemen, that ye be able to beat down before
you the Kings power? yea and by chance ye were able to do that, would ye
judge your selves by strength mighty enough to resist the power of outward
nations, that for praise sake would invade ye? Nay, think truly with your
selves, that if ye do overcome, ye be unsure both by strength abroad, and
displeasure of honest men at home, and by the punishment of the God above. And
now ye have not yet gotten indeed, that your vain hope looks for by fancy,
think how certainly ye have wounded the Commonwealth with a fore stroke, in
procuring our enemies by our weakness to seek victory, and by our outward
misery to seek outward glory, with inward dishonor, which howsoever they get,
think it to be long of you, who have offered them victory, before they began
war, because ye would declare to men hereafter belike, how dangerous it is
to make stirs at home, when they do not only make our selves weak, but
also our enemies strong.

Besides these there is another sort of men, desirous of advantage, and
disdainful of our wealth, whose grief is most our greatest hap, and be
offended with religion, because they be drowned in superstition, men zealed
toward God, but not fit to judge, meaning better without knowledge, then they
judge by their meaning, worthier whose ignorance should be taken away, then
their will should be followed, whom we should more rebuke for their
stubbornness, then despise for their ignorance. These seeing superstition
beaten down, and religion set up, Gods word taking place, traditions kept in
their kind, difference made between Gods Commandments and man's learning, the
truth of things sought out according to Christ's institution, examples taken of
the Primitive Churches use, not at the Bishop of Romes ordinance, and true
worship taught, and will worship refused, do by blindness rebuke that which by
truth they should follow, and by affection follow that which by knowledge they
should abhor, thinking usage to be truth, and Scripture to be error, not
waying by the word, but misconstruing by custom. And now things be changed to
the better, and Religion trulier appointed, they see matters go awry, which
hurts the whose Realm, and they rejoice in this mischief, as a thing
worthily happened, mistaking the cause, and slandering Religion, as though
there were no cause, why God might have punished, if their used profession
might still have taken place. They see not that where Gods glory is truliest
set forth, there the Devil is most busy for his part, and labors to
corrupt by lewdnes, that which is gotten out by the truth, thinking that if it
were not blemished at the first, the residue of his falsehood should after
less prevail. So he troubles by by-waies, that he cannot plainly withstand;
and uses subtlety of Sophistry, where plain reason fails; and persuadeth
simple men, that to be a cause, which indeed cannot be tried and taken for a
cause. So he causes religion, which teaches obedience, to be judged the cause
of sedition; and the doctrine of love, the seed of dissension; mistaking the
thing, but persuading men's minds, and abusing the plain meaning of the honest,
to a wicked end of religions overthrowe. the husbandman had not so soon
thrown seed in his ground, but steppeth up the enemy, and he sows cockle
too: and makes men doubt, whether the good husband had done well or no, and
whether he had sown there good seed or bad. The fancifull Jews in Egypt
would not believe Jeremy, but thought their plague and their misery to come by
his means; and leaving off Idolatry to be the cause of penury: wherefore by
wilful advice they intended to forsake the Prophets counsel, and thought to
serve God most truly by their rooted and accustomed Idolatry. When the
Christian men were persecuted in the Primitive Church, and daily suffered
Martyrdom for Christ's profession, such fair season of weather was for three
or four year together, that the Heathen judged thereupon, God to be delighted
with their cruelty, and so were persuaded that with the blood of the Martyrs,
they pleased God highly. Such fancies lighted now in Papists, and irreligious
men's heads, and join things by chance happening together, and conclude the one
to be the cause of the other, and then delight in true worshippers hurt,
because they judge cursedly the good to be bad, and therefore rejoice in the
punishment of the goldy. For they being fleshly, judge by outward things, and
perceive not the inward, for that they lack the spirit: and so judge amiss,
not understanding God, what diversity he suffers to blind still the
wilful, and how through all dangers he saves his fore-chosen. Thus have ye
given a large occasion to stubborn Papists, both to judge amiss, and also to
rejoycein this wicked chance, contented with our mischief, not liking our
religion, and thinking God does punish for this better change, and have thereby
an ill opinion of Gods holy truth, confirmed in the^ by no sure scripture, but
by following of mischance, which they ought to think to come for the pride and
stubbornness of the people, who does not accept Gods glory in good part, nor
give no due praise to their Lord and maker.

What should I say more? Ye hurt every way, the dangers be so great, and the
perils so many, which do daily follow your divellish enterprise, that the more
I seek in the matter, the more I continually see to say. And what words can
worthlly declare this miserable beastliness of yours, which have intended to
divide the Realm, and arm the one part for the killing of the other? For even
as concord is not only the health, but also the strength of the Realm, so is
sedition not only the weakness, but also the aposteme of the Realm, which
when it breaks inwardly, puts the state in great danger of recoverie, and
corrupts the whole Commonwealth with the rotten fury, that it has long
putrified with. For it is not in sedition as in other faults, which being
mischievous of themselves, have some notable hurt always fast adjoined to
them, but in this one is there a whole hell of faults, not severally scattered,
but clustred on a lump together, and coming on so thick, that it is unpossible
for a Region armed with all kind of wisdom and strength thereto, to avoid the
dangers that issue out thereof. When sedition once breaks out, see ye not
the laws overthrown, the Magistrates despised, spoiling of houses, murdering
of men, wasting of countries, increase of disorder, diminishing of the Realms
strength, swarming of vagabonds, scarcity of laborers, and those mischiefs
all plenteously brought in, which God is wont to scourge severely with all war,
dearth, and pestilence? And seeing ye have theft and murder, plague and
famine, confusion and idleness linked together, can ye look for any more
mischief in one shameful enterprise, then ye evidently see to grow herein?
As for war, although it be miserable, yet the one part gets somewhat, and
rejoices in the spoil, and so goes lustier a way, and either increases his
Country with riches, or enhaunceth himself with glory: but in sedition both
the parts loses; the overcommed cannot fly, the overcommer cannot spoil; the
more the winner wins, the more he loses; the more that escape, the more
infamous men live; all that is gained, is scarcely saved; the winning is loss,
the loss is destruction; both wast themselves, and the whole most wasted; the
stren gthning of themselves, the decay of the country; the striving for the
victory, is a prey to the enemy: and shortly to say, the hellish turmoile of
sedition, so far passes the common misery of war, as to slay himself is more
heinous then to be slain of another. O noble peace! what wealth bring thou
in! how does all things flourish in field and in town! what forwardnes of
religion, what increase of learning, what gravity in counsel, what devise of
wit, what order of manners, what obedience of laws, what reverence of states,
what safeguard of houses, what quietness of life, what honor of Countries,
what friendship of minds, what honesty of pleasure have thou always
maintained! whose happiness we knew not, while now we feel the lack, and
shall learn by misery to understand plenty, and so to avoid mischief, by the
hurt that it brings, and learn to serve better, where rebellion is once
known, and so to live truly, and keep the Kings peace. What good state were
ye in before ye began? not pricked with poverty, but stirred with mischief,
to seek your destruction: having ways to redress all that was amiss,
Magistrates most ready to tender all justice, and pitiful in hearing the poor
men's causes, which sought to amend matters more then you can devise, and were
ready to red resle them better then ye could imagine: and yet for a headiness
ye could not be contented, but in despite of God, who commands obedience, and
in contempt of the King, whose laws seek your wealth, and to overthrowe the
Country, which naturally we should love, ye would proudly rise, and do ye
wot not what, and amend things by rebellion to your utter undoing. What state
leave ye us in now? besieged with enemies, divided at home, made poor with
spoil and loss of our Harvest, unordered and cast down with slaughter and
hatred, hindered from amendme^ts by your own divellish have, endangered with
sicknesses by reason of misorder, laid open to men's pleasures for breaking of
the laws, and feebled to such faintness, that scarcely it will be recovered.

Wherefore, for Gods sake, have pity on your selves: consider how miserably
ye have spoiled, destroyed, and wasted us all: and if for desperateness ye
care not for your selves, yet remember your wives, your children, your country,
and forsake this rebellion, with humble submission acknowledge your faults, and
tarry not the extremity of the Kings sword, leave off with repentance, and
turn to your duties, ask God forgivenes, submit ye to your King, be
contented for a Commonwealth one or two to die, and ye Captains for the
residue sacrisice your selves. ye shall so best attain the Kings gracious
pardon, save the assembly, and help the Commonwealth, and declare your doings
to proceed of no stubbornness, but all this mischief to grow out of ignorance,
which seeing the misery, would redress the fault, and so recover best the blot
of your disorder, and stay the great miseries which be like to follow. Thus if
ye do not, think truly with your selves, that God is angry with you for your
rebellion, the Kings sword drawn to defend his country, the cry of the poor to
God against ye, the readiness of the honest in armor to vanquish ye, your
death to be at hand; which ye cannot escape, having God against ye, as he
promises in his word; the Kings power to overthrow ye gathered in the field,
the Commo^wealth to beat ye down with stripes and with curses, the shame of
your mischief to blemish ye for ever.

FINIS.

