PROPOSALS for Printing a Book entitled, The History and Antiquities of
Hertfordshire.
Written by Sir HENRY CHAUNCY, Knight, Sergeant at Law. Containing,
I. THE Original of the several Divisions in the Counties of England, into
Corporations, Buroughs, Parishes, Hundreds, Wapentakes, Manorvils and Hamlets;
also the Jurisdiction of all manner of Courts, heretofore held in the County of
Hertford, the Quality of the Judges, and the Laws and Customs used there. The
Royalties and Privileges granted to Buroughs, Hundreds, Liberties and Manors,
of great use to the Lords thereof. The Original of Fairs, Markets, Tolls, and
such Royalties. The Succession of the Lords of Hundreds and Manors; and Remarks
on those whose Courage, Valor and Virtues have been a Glory to their Name and
Posterity. To which is added the Pedigree and Descent of the Families of that
County, which may enable Heirs to prove their Titles to Estates of their
Ancestors, upon the Expiration of any long Terms. II. The Original of Abbeys,
Priories, Monasteries, Parish-Churches, Advowsons, Tithes, Rectories,
Impropriations, Vicaraes, etc. To which is added the Lives of the Abbots of St.
Albans. III. An account of the Rivers, Navigations, Medicinal Waters. Also the
Ancient Seats of Kings, Parliamentary Councils, or Terms held in that County.
The ancient Castles, Seats and Parks of the Nobility and Gentry, and the
Quality of those that resided there in the time of the Conquest, and to what
Persons the Conqueror disposed of all the Manors in that County. IV. Catalogues
of all the Earls, Sheriffs, Knights of the Shire, Burgesses of the Buroughs,
and other Officers there, that have been to this time: with the ancient Methods
of their Elections and Form of their Government. V. An exact Description of
every Parish, etc. by it self, and the Antiquities thereof; with whatever else
is remarkable, and worth transmitting to Posterity.
Collected from Doomsday Book, the Rolls, and Records in Chancery, in the
Exchequer, in the Duchy and Augmentation Office; as also from ancient History,
useful not only for the Gentlemen of this County but others, to discover the
Original and Grants of their own Royalties, Liberties and Privileges.

Proposals and Specimens are delivered, and Subscriptions taken by the
Undertakers Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, London,
and John Bu^^rd; as also by the Booksellers in London, Oxford, Cambridge,
Hertford, St. Albans, and all the other Towns in England.

PROPOSALS.
I. That the Book shall be printed on the same Letter and Paper with the
Specimen of the County-Town annexed, only some few on a much larger Paper, for
Gentlemen that are Curious. II. That the Book will contain above 120 Sheets in
Folio, besides about forty large Copper Plates of the Breadth of a Sheet; which
is proposed at 16 s in Sheets, viz. Eight Shillings in hand, and eight
Shillings at the delivery of the Book. The large Paper at 24 s in Sheets, viz.
Twelve Shillings in hand, and Twelve Shillings at the delivery of the Book.
III. That those Gentlemen who subscribe for six Books shall have a seventh
gratis, which brings the Price of each Book to about 13 s 6 d. IV. That if
Encouragement is given by 300 Subscriptions, being paid in by the first day of
Michaelmas Term, the Book shall be delivered about Easter next; about Thirty of
the Plates being already engraved. V. That the Price of each Book shall be 28 s
in Sheets to those who shall not take the Benefit of Subscribing; of which they
may be the better assured, by reason there will be but 500 small, and 50 large
Paper Printed.
The Names of those Gentlemen, etc. who have already thought fit to have some
Towns and their Seats Engraved.
The Seats of
Sir Nicolas Miller, Knight. at Sandon, called Hide-Hall. Edward Chester, Esquire
called Cockenhatch in Barkway. Tho. Newland, Esquire called Newsels in Barkway.
James Goulston, Esquire called Witial. Ralph Freeman, Esquire called Aspeden-Hall.
Bernard Turner, Esquire called Littlecourt. Mdm Barnes, called Moorhouse in Great
Hadham. The Hon. Sir Rob. Josselyn, Bar. called Hide-Hall in Sabridgworth. With
two Monuments in two distinct Plates.

The Hon. the Lady Wiseman Baronettess, at Bishop-Bury. With three Monuments in
three several Plates.

The Monument of Sir John Leventhorp, Knight. Sir Humphry Gore, Knight. called
New-place. With two Monuments in two Plates.

Edw. Sawyer, Esquire called Berkhamstead-place. The Lady Field, called
Stansted-bury. Matthew Bluck, Esquire called Hunsdon-House. Sir Tho. Brograve, Bar.
called Hammels. Coll. Harrison called Bawles. Esquire Bacon, called
Harlingford-bury. Tho. Atkins, Esquire called Bedwel-Park. Edm. Presley, Esquire called
Wild-Hill. Sir William Lytton, Knight. called Knebworth-place. Sir John Spencer,
Bar. called Ofley-place. Esquire Helder called Little Ofley. Sir John Austen, Bar.
called Stagenhod. Sir Jonath. Keate, Bar. called the Hoo. The Hon. Sir Rich.
Anderson, Bar. at Ponley. The Hon. Hen. Guy, Esquire at Tring. A New and Correct
Map of the County. Hertford Town. The Town of St. Albans. Hitching Town. --
Church.
Herudford, Heortford, now Hertford.
THIS was a Town of some remark in the time of the ancient Britains; who, in
those days, Phil. Briet. Parall.
called it Durocobriva, which signifies, in their Language, Rubrum Vadum:
Briva, which is an Adjection to many Names of Places, signified, among the old
Britains and Gauls, a Bridge or a Passage, and Durocobriva a Water-passage: and
if Mr. Cambden's Rule hold true, Came. Brit. tit. Hertf. fol. 413, 414.
That the best Conjectures of ancient Places may be made from the Analogy and
Similitude of their Names, from their Situation near Rivers and Lakes, and from
their Distances of Places, tho they may not justly answer the exact account of
Miles between Place and Place, for that the Numbers are often mistaken by the
Clerks, and the Ways may since be much altered: certainly this Town, not
Redburne (as he supposes), was the Town that Antonine the Emperor calls
Durobriae; for Durobrivae or Durocobrivae was a Town of the Trinobantes,
situated between Durolipontem (which is Huntingdon) thirty five Miles, Du
Fresne Glos. Med. and Infim. Lat.
and Lindun (which is Lincoln) fifty six Miles, upon the River Lea in the
County of Herudford, fifteen Miles North of London; and this Town of Hertford
was situated on the River Lea, and the Trinobantes did possess the same; whenas
Redburne was situated upon the Verlume, in the Country of the Cattieuchlani,
and does not so near answer the Distances from London, Huntingdon and Lincoln,
as Hertford does. And the Britains might call this Town Durocobriva, from the
Ford and the Red Gravel; and for the same reason the Saxons might afterward
call this Town Herudford from Durobriva, Beda.
which, in their Language, signifies the same thing and answers the Color of
the Gravel at the Ford: and in continuance of time they called it Heortford,
Ibid.
and at length, by contraction of the Word, Hertford. All which seems more
probable than the Conceit of Mr. Norden, who reprimands the learned Cambden for
calling this Town Hertford, Norden's Survey of Hertfordshire, p. 17.
when he had the venerable Bede for his Author, who lived about that Time; but
would have every one believe that the Saxons denominated this Town Hartford,
from a Ford of Hearts, which he fancies was both consonant to the Sound of the
Name, and to the Nature and Situation of the Place, but cites not any Record,
History or Authority that proves his Opinion, or that there was any Forest or
Chase in this County: but doubtless it is merely called Hartford for Hertford,
by reason of the broad Dialect and ill speaking of the vulgar sort of People,
which oftentimes, through long usage, changes the true Names of diverse Places;
and in allusion to this new Name, some Herald has lately given to this
Corporation a Coat of Arms, wherein they bear a Heart Gules fording through a
River.

In the beginning of the Heptarchy, Heylin's Geograph. p 313. Pryns Col. of
Parl. p. 6. Matthew. Westminster. Ann. 673. p. 236. edit. 1570. Flo. Wig. 673.
this Town was accounted one of the principal Cities in the Kingdom of the East
Saxons, where the Kings of that Province often kept their Court: and in Anno
Christi 673, a Parliamentary Council or National Synod was held on the 24th day
of September; in which Assembly, Nisin and Kentin two Kings of the Heptarchy,
Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, Putta Bishop of Rochester, Elutherius
Bishop of the West Saxons, Winfrid Bishop of the Mercians, and all the Nobles
appeared in Person, but Bisi Bishop of the East Angles and Wilfrid Bishop of
the Northumbers, appeared by their Deputies Aecci and Baldwin, they being sick
at that time; and the Archbishop, who presided in this Council, produced a
Book, wherein he had noted ten Articles taken out of the Book of Canons,
requiring that the same might be received.

1. That the Feast of Easter should be kept on the Sunday following the
fourteenth day of the first Month. Spel. Con.
2. That no Bishop should intermeddle in another Diocese, but be content with
the Care of his own Flock. 3. That no Bishop should, in any thing, disquiet any
Monastery consecrated to God, nor take by Violence, any Goods that belonged to
the same. 4. That Bishops, being Monks, should not go from Monastery to
Monastery, except by sufferance or permission of their Abbots, and should
continue in the same Obedience wherein they stood before. 5. That none of the
Clergy should depart from his Bishop to run into any other Diocese; nor coming
from any other Place should be admitted, unless he brought testimonial Letters
with him; but if any such Person should be received, and should be sent for
home, and refuse to return; both he and his Receiver should be excommunicated.
6. That Bishops, and others of the Clergy, being Strangers, should be content
with the Benefit of Hospitality, and should not take in hand any Priest's
Office, without License of the Bishop in whose Diocese he should remain. 7.
That twice in the Year a Synod should be kept; but because of diverse
impediments herein they did think good, that in the Calends of August a Synod
should be kept once in the Year at a certain place called Cloveshook. 8. That
no Bishop should, by his Ambition, seek to be preferred before another, but
that every one should know the time and order of his Consecration. 9. That as
the Number of the Christians increased, so there should be more Bishops
ordained. 10. That none should contract Matrimony with any Person, but with
such as should be lawful by the Orders of the Church. None should make an
incestuous Marriage. None should forsake his Wife except for Fornication; but
if any Man did put away his Wife which he had lawfully married, if he would be
accounted a true Christian, he may not be coupled with another, but so remain,
or be reconciled to his own Wife.
These Articles were confirmed with the Subscription of all their Hands; so
that all those who should go against the same should be degraded from their
Priesthood, and separated from the Company of all of them.

But from the time of holding this Parliamentary Synod, I cannot find any
Record or History, that gives any further account of this Town till the time of
King Alfred; for in the time of the Saxon Heptarchy those Petty Kings
endeavored much to enlarge their Dominions, and did often invade each others
Country, whereby great Waste and Spoil was committed by reason of those
continual Wars, so that no Memorials could be preserved during those
troublesome times.

When these Petty Kings had weakened themselves, and wearied out the People
with Sword and Rapine at home, King Egbert subdued his neighboring Princes,
and made himself the first English Monarch; and he divided this Land into
Provinces, that he might, with the greater Ease, distribute Justice to his
People, and keep his Subjects in Peace and Quiet; and he denominated this
Province from this Town, and made it the Shire or County-Town, for at that time
this was the most remarkable Place and the greatest Town in this Province, and
the most convenient place for the Governor to manage the Affairs of the
County: and when this King died, which was An. Christi 836, the Possession of
this Town came to his Son Ethelwolph.

But the Danes and other barbarous People in those Pagan Countries, Chron.
Ethel. 478. number. 40. W. Malms. 19. n. 40. Hov. 236. number. 70. Chro. Sax. 544,
545. Asser Min. H. Hunt. Hist. l. 5. p. 201. n. 10. Hol. Vol. 1. Histor. Engl.
147. Hollingsh. Desc. Brit. 51.
discovering the Poverty and miserable Condition which the late Wars had
brought upon the Inhabitants of this Island, took that opportunity to invade
this Kingdom, and did destroy the People, and wasted this Land many years
together, sparing neither Age nor Sex, and in An. Christi 894, and 23 of King
Alfred, they, riding with their Navy in the River of Thames, sailed up the
River Lea with light Pinnaces and Ships, and built a Fort on the Bank of the
River, about the place where the Town of Ware now stands, and fortified it with
a great Wear, which they raised about it by a great Bank or Damm which penned
up the Water about the Fort, from whence the Danes made their Excursions, and
assailed this Town of Heorutford, spoiled the Inhabitants, and burned their
Houses to the ground; which caused King Alfred, the same Year, to levy an Army,
who built a Castle at this Town, being about twenty Miles distant from London,
whither a great part of the Citizens of London, and other People repaired, and
modelling themselves into an Army, did attempt to destroy the Danish Fort at
Ware; but in that Action four of the King's Officers were slain, and his Army
put to flight.

When the Summer approached, the King encamped with his Army on both sides the
River, and viewed the Fort which the Danes had fortified; and when he had
discovered the Strength of their Walls, and the Order of their Ships fenced
about with Stakes, and knew that they would command all the Corn in the Field
for their Garrison, which was near the City or within the compass of their
Army, and what they should not need they would burn or destroy, the King
observed the Course of the River Lea, as he was drawn with a Horse upon the
Banks, and discerning that in some places the Chanel of the River might be
drawn so shallow, and the Stream straitened with Stakes, that all the Skill of
the Danes could not tow their Ships back again; he caused two Currents to be
made, one on either side the River, and after the Work was begun, the Water
sunk at the Danish Fort, so that the Pagans could not tow back their Ships;
then they immediately conveyed their Wives to the East Angles, where they
secured them, and made their Composition with the English, that they might
march to Quatbridge, near the Severne, where they built another Fort; but the
Army hastened and followed them to the West, whilst the Citizens of London did
seize their Ships, and those they could not bring up they broke in pieces; but
those which were worth the taking, they drew up to the City of London; and
since that time the Tides have been kept back by a large Sasse made at
Blackwall, from whence that place was denominated; and by straitning the
Passage of the Tides in the several Channels with high Banks on either side
those Cuts, which keep back the Tides from drowning the Level so that they
cannot now flow to this Town as they formerly did, when they brought up large
Vessels hither, from whence a Hill near Warepark is now called Shipman's Hill,
and another Hill near this Town is now called Porthill; and some Anchors have
been found in this Vale: But where the passage of the Thames is open and wide,
and no Mills to obstruct the Current, the Tides still flow a great way, as to
Kingston. When King Alfred had in this manner dreined the whole level, and
recovered it from the Sea, it became his Land, whence several of these Meads
are now called King's Meads, and become common to the adjacent Villages; and in
Anno Christi 900 this King died, and this Town came to King Edward, who was his
Son and Successor.

Which King, Chro. Sax. 549.
Anno Christi 914, 14. Regni sui, about the Feast of St. Martin, being the 12th
of November, commanded a Borough should be built on the North side of
Herotford, between the Rivers called the Mimeram, the Benefitian, and the
Ligean, which are the Parishes of St. Andrew, St. Nicolas, and St. Mary the
Great, for they are situated upon the North part of the Ligean, which is the
Luy or the Lea, and the Mimeram or the Marran, and the South part of the Bean
or the Benefitian; Ib. p. 550. number. 913.
but in the Summer following, between the Ambarvals (which is Rogation Week)
and the Solstice, he caused a good part of his Army to build the other part of
this Borough on the South side of the Ligean or the Lea, which are the
Parishes of All Saints and St. Mary the Less, since that time called St. Mary
the Monk, and now St. John's; and this Town was then made parcel of the King's
Revenue, for that it was built at his proper Costs and Charges, and it was
called a Borough for that it was a Fortification made to protect and defend
the People from the Violence of the Danish Infidels, Verst. Ant. p. 212.
for the Name of Borough did properly signify a Place of Defense, for these
Places at first were fenced about with Walls of Turf, and Clods of Earth for
Men to be shrouded in, as in Forts or Castles; and from this name of Borough
the Houses in this Town were anciently called Burgages.

And when these Houses were first inhabited, the Possessors of them were called
Tenants in Burgage from their Houses; for every Tenant paid to the King for his
Burgage or Tenement a certain yearly Rent, in lieu of his Protection and
Safety, which was then called Haganel, Ing. 5. Ed. Ill. Spel. Glos. tit. verb.
Haga.
from the word Haga, which signifies a Fence or a Rampire; and this King did
constitute a Bailiff to let his Houses, and to receive his Rents; and did also
incorporate this Borough by the Name of Bailiff and Tenants, which Bailiff was
the King's Officer, which he empowered to hold Courts for the Government of the
Tenants and People within the Borough, where Laws were made, Offenders
punished, and all Officers requisite to support the Peace and Government of a
Corporation were chosen, and this Constitution perpetuated to Succession, which
made it a Corporation or Borough Incorporate; Skinner's Lexic. tit. verb.
Corporation.
for a Corporation is a Company of Tradesmen, or a City, or Town, endowed with
Privileges, Magistracy, and Power of making Laws within themselves; and this
was the Original of all Corporations. But this Corporation was known by a
particular Name of Bailiff and Tenants, and continued to Succession; and when
these Tenants gained the Name of Burgesses, from the Contraction of the Word
Burgages, the Name of this Corporation was changed, for then it seems this
Borough was incorporated by the Name of Bailiff and Burgesses, and that the
Names of this Corporation have been such, is manifest by several Charters of
this Borough.

In the Survey taken in the time of William the Conqueror, it is there
recorded, That, Doomsd. 132.


Burgum de Hertford pro december hidis se defendebat tempore Regis Edwardi and
modo non facit. Ibi erant 146 Burgenses in soca Regis Edwardi.

De his habet modo Comes Alanus tres domos quae tunc and modo reddat
consuetudinem.

Eudo Dapifer habet duos domos, quae fuerunt Algari Cochenac; and tunc and modo
reddentes consuetudinem, and tertiam Domum habet iste Eudo, quae fuit Ulmari
Eton, non reddat consuetudinem.

Goisfridus de Bech tres domos consuetudinem reddent.

Humfridus de Anslevile tenet sub Eudone duos domos cum uno horto, harum una
accomodata fuit cuidam prefecto Regis, and altera cum horto fuit cuidam
Burgensis, and modo reclamant ipsi Burgenses sibi injuste ablatos.

Alios 18. Burgenses habet Rex Willielmus, qui fuerunt homines Comitis Heraldi
and Comitis Lenuini omnes consuetudines reddent.

Petrus de Valongies habet duas Ecclesias, cum una domo, quas emit de Ulwin de
Hatfield, reddat omnes consuetudines. Ipse Ulwin and dare eas and vendere
poterat.

Goisfridus de Magnavile habet occupatum quoddam qui fuit Elgari Stalci, and
septem domos, quae nullam consuetudinem reddiderunt nisi geldum Regis quando
colligebatur.

Radolfus Baniard habet duos domos, and tunc and modo consuetudinem reddat.

Harduinus de Scalers habet 14 domos, quas habuit Acho tempore Regis Edwardi,
nullam consuetudinem dabant nisi geldum Regis, de quibus advocat Harduinus
Regem ad protectorem. Adhuc unam domum habet Harduinus de dono Regis, quae fuit
cuidam Burgensis, reddebat omnem consuetudinem.

Hoc suburbium reddit 20 lib. arsas and pensatas and tres molini reddebant 10
lib. ad numerum.

Quando Petrus Vicecomes recepisset 15 lib. ad numerum reddebat tempore Regis
Edwardi 7 lib. and 10 sol. ad numerum.

The Borough of Hertford was rated at ten Hides in the time of King Edward,
The Confessor.
now (that is, in the time of K. William) it made not so much: there were one
hundred forty six Burgesses in the Soke (or Jurisdiction) of King Edward, of
these Earl Alan has now (that is, in the time of the Conqueror) three Houses;
which then (that is, in the time of King Edward,) and now (that is, in the time
of King William) paid Rent.

Eudo Dapifer had two Houses, which were Algar Cochenac's, and then (that is,
in the time of King Edward) and now (that is, in the time of King William) paid
Rent. And the same Eudo has a third House, which was Ulmar Eton's paid no Rent.


