Eben-ezer.

A Thankful Memorial OF GOD'S MERCY In preserving ENGLAND from the
GUNPOWDER-TREASON, 1605.

Being a SERMON on 1 Samuel 7. 12. Prepared for November. 5th, to be Preached at the
Cathedral; but Preached for the most part of it at the Parish Church of Temple,
in the City of Bristol, on the 6th of November. being the Lords Day.

By John Chetwynd, M. A. Prebend of the Cathedral, and Vicar of Temple, in the
City of Bristol.

Psalm. 118. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and
be glad in it.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Tho. Wall, Bookseller at Bristol. 1682.

To the Worshipful and his ever Honored Friend and Kinsman, John Harington,
of Kelston, Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of
Somerset.
SIR,
I Have made bold to direct these Papers to you, as a Testimony of my respect,
and as being assured, that you are a true Protestant of the Church of England
established by Law.

As for such as falsely, and with a contradiction, so term, and call themselves
Roman Catholics, I expect no such Readers.

As for Protestants in Masquerade, whose worldly designs make them sit loose to
all Religions, they may see what may reform them, if not convince them.

But as for your self, and such as are Protestants out of conscience, you and
they, who are peaceable Sons of the most Apostolical Church of England, may
read what may confirm them in their true faith and Worship, and what may
comfort and support them under any fears, dangers, hardships, that may attend
them in and for their so being and doing: God being still the same yesterday,
to day and for ever. He that has delivered, does deliver, will deliver.

To his blessing I commend these Papers. To his protection and guidance your
self and second-self, with all your Family. And subscribe my self,

Bristol, November. 16. 1681. Your most Resepctful Kinsman, and humble Servant,
John Chetwynd.

A Memorial of God's most gracious preservations of England from the Spanish
Invasion and Gunpower Treason. Of an unknown Author. Found by me among my
Father's Papers, thus directed: To my Posterity.
GOD's ancient Church Two solemn Feasts did keep,
On Two set days, by his own word directed:
When Pharoah's Host was drowned in the deep;
And when proud Haman's Treason was detected.
Two works of equal grace, but greater wonder.
The Lord has done sor us past all men's Reason,
When Papist did attempt to bring us under
By Spanish Armado and by Piercy's Treason.
I and my house these great things will remember.
And in remembrance sanctify two days,
In Augustone, 3.
the other in November. 5.

Both made by God for us to give him praise.
Dear children, charge the children after you,
Still to observe these Feasts, as I do now.
Eben-ezer.
A Thankful Memorial of God's preserving England from the Gunpowder Treason,
1605.
1 Samuel VII. 12. Then Samuel took a stone, and set it up between Mizpeh and
Shen, and called the name of it Eben-ezer, saying, Hitherto has God helped us.
TO regulate my discourse, I have made choice of this Scripture, as being in
many particulars parallel to the occasion of the day, and suitable to this
great and solemn Assembly, whose outward luster and grandeur, and other
circumstances and expressions of rejoicing, testify our apprehensions of this
day to be, as it deserves to be with us, a High Day, a Holy day, even a day
which the Lord our God has made mavelous in our eyes; a Day to be had in
everlasting remembrance, never-tobe Ps. 118 23, 24.
forgotten; a Day of Gods making. Some days may be said to be made by Gods
flat, Let it be made, as all creatures besides man were. But other days, in
which notable and memorable occurrences fall out, may be said to be made with
Gods faciamus, Let us make, as man was. And such was this, which God by saving,
preserving and delivering our King, Church and State, made mavelous in our
eyes, and calls for our rejoicing in it. Such was the Jewish Passover; such the
day of our Savior's Exodus 12.
Resurrection, to which this Scripture is applied; and such is this day: The
Memorial of the mercies, on which exhibited, we now celebrate.

Foelix and fausta dies, lux flava quinta Novembris. And may it be for ever
celebrated by us and our Posterity, as long as the Sun and Moon endures? For
this was the Lords doing; and let it still be mavelous in our eyes: So it was
in David's day. Thus it was in ours. In David's, a deliverance from great
dangers; all by Gods might, all by Gods mercy, and that not in small things (as
yet in them God is to be seen), but usque Ps. 118, 12, 15.
ad miracula: and that not only mavelous in it self (for so all Zech. 9. 11.
Gods works are, which seem small, because usual), but wonderful in our eyes,
because rare. In which we cannot but say, Digitus Dei est hic.

And such was this our day. In a most eminent manner Gods day, both for the
exceeding greatness of our danger, and Gods gracious and wonderful deliverance,
when the Devils, and the Jesuits, and their bigoted Proselytes, had laid their
heads together, to destroy our King, and Church, and State, our Religion,
Liberty, Lives; when the Balak of Spain and the Balaam of Rome Thus far was the
Preface to my Sermon prepared for the Cathedral on the 5th. but our Reverend
Diocesan preaching, upon my desire, in my turn, I thought fit to preach it at
Temple on the 6th, being the Lords day in the afternoon: omitting the foregoing
Preface.
had conspired together our utter destruction.

We read Esther 9. 20, 21. that Mordecai and Esther sent Letters with all
Authority to all the Jews nigh and far, that they should keep the 14th and 15th
of the month Adar, yearly, as the days wherein the Jews rested from their
enemies, and the month which was turned from sorrow to joy, and from mourning
to a good day; that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of
sending Portions one to another, and of gifts to the poor; because the Plot of
Haman, the enemy of all the Jews, which he had devised against them, was b^
Queen Esther's mediation to the King, turned upon his own head; and the Jews
had ruled over them that hated them; and Haman and his Ten sons were hanged:
Therefore the Jews ordained and took it upon themselves, and upon their seed,
and upon all such as joined to them; so as it should not fail (as it does not
to this day among them, wherever dispersed, though it be two thousand years
since), that they would keep these two days, according to their writing and
according to their apppointed time every year. And that these days should be
remembered and kept through every Generation, every Family, every Province, Est.
9. 27, 28.
and every City, and that these days should not fail from among the Jews, nor
the memorial of them perish from their seed -- Thus it was with the Jews.

And have not we as much cause to remember with thankful rejoicing the great
deliverance vouchsafed our Fathers, and in them of us? Certainly we have; and
therefore God having by a Miracle of Mercy, prevented the barbarous and
inhumane Design of the Papists, the implacable enemy of all Protestants,
especially of English Protestants; it was then looked upon as a principal part
of their thankful resentment, by King James of famous memory, and the then
sitting-Parliament, To enact the observation of one day, viz. the fifth of
November, yearly to be observed as a thankful memorial of that wonderful Mercy.

Now God having by his Providence so ordered, that this present year, his day,
the Lords day, the day which he has made for the Remembrance of Christ's
Resurrection, and all the Blessings that accrue by him (and all we enjoy,
whether spiritual, or external, temporal or eternal, are all from him;
deliverance from Hell, Death and Damnation of soul and body; deliverance from
slavery and bondage, and all external pressures, are all from him) and it being
the principal work of this day, Gods Holy Rev: 1,
day, the Lords Holy Day, to celebrate the thankful memorial of his Mercies.

And this day of Gods appointing, immediately succeeding the day of the Kings
appointment, I have not thought it unfit, nor any way inproper to lay before
you what was prepared for yesterdays Solemnity, in another place. That so
(though the outward Pomp (a necessary circumstance in that day) may be left;
Yet the reality of our thankfulness might be expressed in this more private
Assembly; and we all put in mind, and be stirred up, as the Jews by the two
days of Purim, so we of England, and we now present, by the Solemnity
yesterday, according to the Law of Man; and by what shall be now spoken on this
day, the day of our Rest and Rejoicing, according to the Law of God, may be
stirred up to rejoyceful thankfulness for Gods goodness vouchsafed to us.

And indeed the remembering, declaring and rejoicing in Gods wonderful works of
Creation and providence, as well as of Redemption, are to have a principal part
in the due Sanctification of our Christian Sabbath.

For the helping you wherein, I shall lay before you what the Text first read,
presents us with: Having first shown you,

That we of England have as much reason, and as great cause to celebrate two
days yearly in the memorial of our deliverance from the Powder Treason, as the
Jews have for their deliverance from Haman.

The design of Haman, and prosecution of it against the Jews, was not so
dangerous and mischievous as this Conspiracy of the Papists was against the
English- and Protestant Religion, as will appear by many particulars, parallel
Circumstances in their Purim, and our Powder Treason. And indeed ours may be
called Purim from the Greek word (...), which signifies fire, as that from the
Hebrew word Pur that signifies a Lot.

1. Theirs by the sword, from whence some might have escaped. Ours by a blast
of fire that would have spared none.

2 Theirs would have destroyed Queen Esther and her people; ours King James,
Queen, Prince, Lords, Commons, the whole Flower of the English Nation met in
Parliament.

3. They had a set day which all knew; ours uncertain, secret, known to none
but themselves.

4. Theirs was but an ordinary day; ours a most magnificent day, when the Kings
Majesty, and all the great States would have been in their Robes, and greatest
Glory.

5. They poor captive Jews scattered and dispersed without power or policy,
living in subjection.

We a most flourishing Kingdom, for wealthl, power and policy, under a most
magnificent King, Illustrious Nobles, Reverend Prelates, Honorable, and
worshipful, and wealthy Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, even the Cream and
Flower of the whole Nation.

6. Consider the parties by whom; their enemy was but one Haman, a stranger by
Nation; a stranger in Religion, an heathen Idolater; ours no strangers by
Nation; all English men, no strangers in Religion, professing the same
Christianity; not Turks, nor Pagans, Infidels, Moors, or Indians (though indeed
much worse) but Christians, and such as would be thought true Catholics; yea
the only Catholic Christians; yea, some of them (which is among them more than
Christians) Jesuits.

Haman was wicked, that is his title; but these exceeded him in wickedness.
Haman was a declared enemy; but these secret Vipers that eat through the bowels
of their own Mother.

The malice of all men, calling to it all the malice of the Devil, did never
invent the like in all ill Circumstances.

A degenerate Christian is the worst of men, and the worst of men is the worst
of Creatures; and it is grown into a Proverb amongst other Nations; and these
cruel treacherous Powder-Traytors gave too much ground for it, An Englishman
Italianate, is a Devil incarnate --

7. Consider we the color and the cause of both Designs. As all evil things
usually have one thing for their color, and other for their cause.

In Haman, the cause was Mordicai his not bowing. The color was, they were of
a different Law: Heretics. They were not for the Kings profit.


In ours, the Cause is not bowing to one, viz. The Old Gentleman at Rome; one
prouder than Haman, who have had Emperors to hold their Stirrups, Kings to lead
their Horses, and kiss their feet.

The Color pretended, is zeal for Religion; we were and still are in their
accounts Heretics; and therefore must be killed blown up, destroyed; and they
think they have St. Paul's Warrant for it, for so it has been urged.

Hereticum devita, which we make but one word, and that a Verb, which we
rightly translate avoid, and they two words, viz. a Noun and Preposition; and
so would have it signify to kill. De vita, to take from life. They consulted
their Oracle the Provincial, who answered them as Ahasuerus did Haman, De
populo fac quod libet, Do with them, as it seems good unto thee. Esth. 3. 11.


8. Consider we the event: The Jews delivered, Haman hanged, we preserved, the
Traitors suffered: God was otherwise minded than Haman; he would have destroyed
a Nation, but God preserved it; Haman put the Lot into the lap, but God drew it
out.

And in this event consider, 1. Means. 2. Manner. 3. Time. 4. Issue.


1. Means: They, to God by fasting and prayer; to man, by Queen Esthers
Mediation to the King.

We used none, nor could use any; neither fasted or prayed, suspected no evil;
and so could use no means to prevent it.

2. Manner: Though no means to God, yet we had from God, and so had they too;
but ours better, both from and by a King.

Theirs from a King, but from him came the Danger, his Proclamation under hand
and seal, without which Haman could have done nothing. Ours from a King, but no
danger from him. He was as deep in the danger as we were.

Theirs by a King set right by Esthers Information in a regular and common way.
Ours by no information, but inspiration; by a Casual rather than a Grammatical
interpretation of the dangers being past as soon as the Letter was burnt.

3. Time: The night before Haman intended to have begged Mordecai's life, the
King could not sleep; calls for the Chronicles, reads therein what faithful and
eminent service Mordecai had done for him; and enquiring and understanding that
he had received no recompense, he resolves to honor him; Haman pronounces how
Mordecai should be honored, who was commanded to do what he proposed himself,
and as he thought for himself; and according to the great grief of him, he did
perform the Kings Command, and his own designed honor toward him. Haman
himself was by the King, upon the Queens Complaint, judged to be hanged; which
was done on the same day, place, gallows, that he had designed for Mordecai.

4. Issue: Deliverance to both; the net broke, the Fowl escaped, yea, the
Fowler himself taken, Israel delivered, Pharaoh drowned, Psalm. 124.
Haman hanged.

So was it with us and the Powder-Traytors; they hoped that their designed puff
and net should have divided and scattered our Noble Senators, and ancient and
glorious Structures; and they themselves were deservedly hanged and quartered,
and their heads and limbs set up on the tops of that house they designed to
throw down.

So that what we read concerning the Jews, may as fitly be applied unto us; in
the day that the enemies of the Jews, of us Protestants, Esth. 9. 1.
hoped to have power over them, over us, it was turned to the contrary, that
the Jews, that our King, had rule over them that hated them.

And oh! let it still be mavelous in our eyes! Let us be glad Ps. 118. 24.
and rejoice in it.

And indeed Gods deliverances of England have been acts of Wonder.

Not to insist on the unexpected discovery of the present Popish Plot; and let
us pray for the full defeating of it; the truth whereof I hope no good Subject,
or true conscientious Protestant, dot\h any thing question, being attested by
such undeniable Evidences; viz. his most Gracious Majesty (whom God still
preserve from it) the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the whole House of
Commons; and which we have still cause to fear, though several Artifices are
used to smother and stifle it; but let us remember, that many times the less
noise, the more danger.

But to pass this, as not so pertinent at present. Our work is what the
Psalmist was, to consider the days of old, and the years Psalm 77, 5, 11, 12.
of ancient times; to remember the works of the Lord, even his wonders; to
meditate of all his works, and to tell of all his doing.

Now these ancient mercies, God has made them that they Psalm. 111. 4.
should be had in remembrance; that we should declare them to our Children.

Moses spends the four first Chapters of Deuteronomy in recording of them; and
God himself made a Statute Law to Israel, which they observed; for so we find
them speaking, I will utter dark Psalm. 78. 2, 3, 4, 6.
sayings of old, which we have heard and known: and our Fathers have told us.
We will not hide them from our children, showing to the Generations to come the
praises of the Lord, and his strength, and the wonderful works that he has
done. That the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which
should be born: who should arise and declare them to their Children.

Now to mention no more: There are two great deliverances; ancient deliverances
which God has given to his Church and people in England from their inveterate
and implacable enemies the Papiss:

From the Spanish Invasion in 88 From the Gunpowder Treason in 1605. Two such
deliverances that our eyes have not seen, nor our ears have heard, nor could
our Fathers tell us of the like. One by Strand, the other by Land. One from a
Fleet, and as they called it an invincible Armado, sent forth by the King of
Spain's great and vast Charge, long Preparation, the Popes blessing, furnished
with his best and most zealous Soldiers, all manner of Instruments of Cruelty,
Whips and Knives engraven in Spanish, with words which in English are, To cut
the Throats of the English Heretics. The other from a Vault under ground,
charged with many Barrels of Gunpowder, Billets and Faggots, etc. A Monks
Invention that would, had not God prevented, with one blast destroyed both King
and Kingdom; the most sudden, cruel and unmerciful instrument of Death.

Both of these gracious deliverances from the hands of our most implacable
enemies, the sworn Vassal of the Papal Throne, that sought not only (and they
are still of the same humor) our Land and Estates, and Livelihoods; but our
Lives, our Souls, our Consciences, even our utter Destruction, to have brought
us under the Tyranny of a Foreign Prince, and the unutterable and unconceivable
Cruelty of the Papal Usurpation and Inquisition.

Not from roaring Enemies, but such as were Vipers, that sting to Death without
any hissing at all.

Such was this deliverance, the thankful memorial whereof we now celebrate.

From Hamans Plot, to some.

From Babylons power and dominion, to the rest.

To those who would not comply with them, and embrace their superstitious,
idolatrous Principles and Practices, to them from Death.

To those that were Protestants in Masquerade, or Atheistical, indifferent to
all Religions; notwithstanding fancy to the contrary, that deliverance was from
servitude, slavery and bondage; Englishmens Land and Goods, let the Owners be
what they will, will be always judged by Jesuited Foreiners, heretical, when
they are victorious over us, which God forbid. Have we then not great reason
that are, and have been the redeemed of the Lord, whom he has delivered from
the Egyptian darkness of Popery, from the worse than Babylonish Cruelty and
barbarous oppression of Popish enemies, from the Devilish Treachery and
Conspiracy of others by the Discovery of the late Plot: Have we not great
reason, I say, to sing aloud with the Psalmist, and say,

We will praise the Lord with our whole heart: in the Assembly of Psalm. 111. 1.
the upright, and in the Congregation.

The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have 2.
pleasure therein.

His work is honorable and glorious, and his righteousness endures 3.
for ever.

He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is 4.
gracious and full of Compassion.

He has sent Redemption unto his people, etc. 9.


In furtherance of this common piety, and to refresh our Memories, and quicken
our Devotion, I have made choice of the Scripture first read as pertinent to
the occasion: Text Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpeh and Shen,
and called the name of it Eben-Ezer, saying, hitherto has God helped us --

In which we have considerable,

1. Something supposed. 2. Something expressed. 1. Supposed. 1. Their danger from
their enemies, who were the Philistines. 2. The cause of it: Their profession
and practice of the true Religion, Reformation; putting away their Idols,
Baalim and Ashteroth v. 4. Worshipping at Mizpeh, fasting and praying. v. 6.
2.Expressed. In which, 1.Gods grace and favor toward them: Hitherto has God
helped us. 2. Their sense of it, Thankfulness for it, and care to continue the
memorial of it.




Thus large is this little portion of Scripture, containing, like Gold, much
value in a little compass. To handle each particular as they ought, would be
too great a trespass to your patience; and therefore I shall direct my
discourse, not to consider the many Doctrinal truths that they would present us
with, but apply my self to show you how suitable they are to the occasion of
this Solemnity; and that according to the Method proposed: and first,

1. What Is supposed
1. The danger. 2. The cause.


I shall join both together. Their danger was from the Philistines, because of
their Reformation, v. 3. and sincere profession, and exercising of Religion and
religious Worship at Mizpeh. v 6. where they met to humble themseves before
God, and to consult of their affairs. Then the Lords of the Philistines went up
against Israel, v. 7. and drew near to battle against them, v. 9. and they were
afraid of the Philistines, v. 7. and entreated Samuel to cry unto the Lord for
them, that he would save them out of the hand of the Philistines, v. 8.

The Philistines were their neighbor Inhabitants, whom the Israelites ought to
have expelled; but did not, nor could not; so that they continued amongst them
as thorns in their sides; many times in subjection, always in opposition to
Israel; and sometimes having the upper hand, as after the death of old Eli;
when they took the Ark of God, kept it seven months, sent it from City to City,
but grew weary of it, and at last return it home; and it was settled at
Kirjath-jearim, where it continued twenty years; during which time the
Israelites lamented their Condition under the Philistines power, but took care
to set up the Ark in the house of Aminidab, whose Son Eleazer was consecrated
to attend upon it.

Then Samuel, whom God had raised up in Eli's place to rule and govern, called
them to Repentance; and they obeyed that call, and reformed themselves, put
away Baalim and Ashteroth, their He-Gods and She-Gods, and there solemnly
humbled themselves by fasting and prayer, and sacrificing a Lamb, that
signified their faith in Christ, and obedience to God, v. 9. Then the
Philistines drew near to battle against them, at which they being unarmed, were
afraid; and knowing their own guilt, desired Samuel to pray for them, which he
did, and God delivered them in a miraculous way, thundering a great thunder on
the Philistines, and discomfiting of them. v. 10.

This was their Case -- And is not ours the parallel to it?

Their enemies were the Philistines, that always maligned Gods Israel.

Ours the Papist, that always hate Gods true Catholic and Apostolic
Protestant Church of England.

They had the Ark, Gods true Religion and Worship. Their Faith once famous
throughout the World, their Religion pure, their Faith Orthodos, Their manners
holy, and their Bishops holy Martyrs.

But this Ark they would not keep, they became corrupt and unsound in their
Principles, and kept not the Faith once delivered to them; but changed the
glorious truths of God to a lie, as the heathen Romans did; cast away what they
pleased of Gods commands, quite left out of their Catechisms the second; and to
make Rom 1,
up the number, divided the tenth into two. A sorry shift to support their
idolatrous Worship; taught for Doctrines their own unwarrantable Traditions;
closed up the Scriptures in an unknown tongue, made it piacular to have or
read; and when to make some show of owning them, they make use of them; they
most ridiculously applied them: as to instance,

God made a greater light, and a lesser light; therefore the Pope is as much
greater than the Emperor, as is the Sun than the Moon; Christ said to Peter,
Kill and eat; therefore the Pope may excommunicate and kill Kings. Peter said,
Behold two Swords; therefore the Pope has both Spiritual and Temporal
Jurisdiction. God said to Jeremy, He should plant and transplant; therefore the
Pope may dispose and transpose Kingdoms at his pleasure. Domini sunc Cardines
terrarum, therefore the Cardinals are Lords of the earth Speed Hist. p. 213.

But generally they suppress the Scriptures, and instead thereof, allow their
lying Legend to be read in Churches. Added twelve new Articles to the Christian
Faith, impose Contradictions to be believed, a that most monstrous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that contradicts not only Scripture, that does assure us
that Christ's natural Body is in Heaven* but all that speaks us men, our ^enses,
sight, smell, taste, touch; our Reason and Understanding, that cannot
comprehend how one body may be in a thousand places at one time; and that all
the dimensions of a man of full-grown stature can be hid under, made and
contracted into the proportion of a small Wafer; have conjoined new, soul
body-state destroying principles, as that Dominion is founded in Grace.

That Religion should be promoted by the Sword. A Turkish Tenet. And that which
is the Lerna Malorum that makes way (if believed and entertained) unto the
establishing of all manner of Villainies in practice, and falsehood in opinion;
viz. That the Pope is infallible.

Thus for matters of Faith: and as for their Morals, how impure have been their
practices? not only allowing of public Stews, so that in Rome there were no
less than twenty five thousand Common Women in the year 1565. under the Popes
protection, who received Bp. Jewel.
a Tribute from them; but those houses of enforced, and usually but pretended
Charity, have proved no other than unclean Brothel-houses, and murderous
habitations, witness those 6000 Heads of Children taken out of a Pond near a
Nunnery, by the Command of Gregory the then Pope.

And as for Papal Vestals that were at greater liberty, we read that Boniface
an Englishman in the year 616 complained in a Letter rent to Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, That the English Nuns wandering in pilgrimage under
show of Devotion, lived in pleasure and wanton Fornication through all the
Cities of France and Lumbardy. Speeds Hist. p 360.

How holy and chaste the Roman Court was, we have the Testimony of Cardinal Hugo
who told them of Lions in his farewel-Sermon, when the Pope had for some time
so journed amongst them, That of the many benefits that the Popes abode had
brought them, this was a principal, that, when at his coming thither there were
three or four houses of Common-Women in Lions, now at their departure they lest
but one, but that indeed reached from the Eastgate to the West -- facta est
urbs tota lupana.

And of what temper of manners they were generally of, even their devoted and
religious persons, in the days of King Richard the first of England, we may
find by that answer which he made to one Fulco a French Priest, who had told
him that he had three very had Daughters, which he wished him to bestow in
marriage, or else Gods wrath would attend him. When the King had replied, he
had not any Daughter; yes, quoth the Priest, Thou have the^^ Daughters, Pride,
Couetousness and Letchery. The King replied, My Pride bequeath to the haughty
Templers and Hospitallers; Speed. Hist. p. 480.
my Covetousness to the white Monks of the C^st^ary Order, and my Letchery to
the Priests and Prelates; for therein they took their greatest felicities. How
profitable Guests they are, and have been to those persons and states that
(...) and submit to them, I suppose their proslyted bego^^^ the Laity, find to
their great cost. And we are informed by Authentic History, that the Popes
Authority has been very chargeable and burdensome to the Kingdom of England;
not only by terrifying or alluring dving persons to give their Estates from
their own Children and lawful Heirs, under a pretense of Devotion to the
Church, and Charity to Souls, to free them from Purgatory (a place of the Popes
own mai^ing) but by the owned and public exactions many ways emptying and
impoverishing the Realm; which King Henry the third was very sensible of, who
when the Pope in person (and that was a less mischief than the entertaining of
his power) desired to come into England, he denied him, it being then said (and
it is, and would prove as true still) That the Pope is as a Mouse in a Sachel,
or a Snake in ones bosom, that did ill repay the Hosts for their
entertainment. Speed Hist. p. 538.

And their Exactions were so great in the days of that King, that a Cardinal
truly told the Pope, That England was to the Pope as Baalams Ass, which had
been so often wronged, spur galled and cudgelled, it was no marvel that now at
last she opened her mouth to complain; and for themselves and the Roman Court,
they were like Ishmael, every man's hand against them, and theirs against every
one.

How gentle and courteous, kind and innocent they have been, where they have
had power, all Histories record. The destruction of the innocent Waldenses, the
treacherous Massacre at Paris, the villainous and barbarous Murders of the
Protestants in Ireland, Piedmont, and wherever they got power. And though they
may seem as mild, innocent and harmless, as Gregory the first, when they have
no strength (they then do but hide their claws, which are still sharp) but when
they have got power, as fierce as Gregory the seventh, (that Brand of Hell,
Hildebrand) who by poisoning seven of his Predecessors, made way to the Papal
Throne; and when sat down in it, managed it to the Ruin and Destruction of the
German Emperor and Empire.

And what safety or security can any Prince have from them, who not only teach
it as lawful to kill or remove Kings, but also as meritorious? and have brought
their accursed Doctrine into wicked practice, in the murdering of two Kings of
France successively, one of them always of the Religion, and the other turned
to them, viz Henry the third and fourth of France; for the first of which,
stabbed by a treacherous Monk, there was great rejoicing at Rome, and a
Panigerical Oration belched out of the Popes own mouth in the Conclave; so that
they not only think they may, but applaud it as meritorious; as appears by the
writing of Mariana and others.

But this is not the Divinity of the old primitive Christians, but of the new
Jesuits, who more properly may be called Jehusites, driving furiously as he did
to the Ruin and destruction of Kings, by force and power of Arms, if they can;
but if that fail, if they want Vires, they will try Virus; when Sword and Gun
cannot, Poison shall. How often was that excellent Princess Queen Elizabeth,
never to be mentioned without Honor, so assaulted? (and God preserve his most
excellent Majesty that now is, from it) And if that fail, they will try what
Powder will do; a Monks invention found out by the help of the Devil, to the
ruin and destruction of Mankind; And had their wicked Plot took effect, would
have been the ruin of the whole Nation.

But blessed be God, the snare was broken, and we in our Progenitors were
delivered, and have a just occasion of rejoicing in this day which the Lord
has made. Psalm. 118. 1.


And thus you see the parallel of the

Persons
Philistines. Papists.


2. The cause of their Danger: The receiving of the Ark, the setting of it up,
reforming from Idolatry, putting away Baalim and Ashteroth, worshipping of God,
praying, fasting, meeting at Mizpeh; Then the Lords of the Philistines set the
battle in array against them, v. 10.

Was not our case parallel? what makes the Pope and his Accomplices so
maliciously set against the King and Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland? was
it not the bringing the Ark of true Religion, which they despised and rejected,
and setting of it up, and sanctifying those that should minister in it.

First begun by that Magnanimous and Heroic Prince King Henry the Eighth, who
like David, being a man of Blood, began Gods Temple, but did not finish it, but
left it unto that most excellent and virtuous Prince Edward the Sixth, the
Josiah of his age, that justly deserved the style of Titus, Delicium humani
Generis; who carried it forward notwithstanding the great opposition he met
with from the Scottish Papists, who at Muscleborough Field, were worsted by a
small handful of Englist Protestants, notwithstanding their mighty Army which
brought into the field with it their breaden-God-Altars, Crucifixes, and other
Popish Trinkets, had 24000. slain in the Encounter; and of the English not
above 100. And the same fate attended the Devonshire and Cornish Rebels that
rose upon the same occasion.

And though it met with a sharp opposition and persecution by fire and faggot,
by the malice of those wretched Apostates from it, Gardner and Bonner, and the
misguided zeal of Queen Mary; yet then the tree of Religion, though it withered
in the leaf, yet grew in the root, being watered with the blood of many eminent
Christians of all sorts, learned and godly Divines and Bishops, who in the
former Kings reigns had helped to introduce it; and in hers, confirmed the truth
of it with their Deaths for it; so that it quickly again flourished by the
means of that most excellent Princess Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, whom
none except such as that foul-mouth Liar, and fugitive Jesuit Sanders, will
mention without Reverence, much less speak ill of her. By her means, I say, God
established his Ark in our Israel; his truth, his Worship amongst us; removed
Baalim and Ashteroth, the He-Saints and She-Saints that were set up, and
worshipped in Gods place. Notwithstanding,

1. All open opposition by force. In Ireland by Stukely and Sanders; in the
North, by No folk North^^^ela^d and Westmoreland. From Spains invasion in 1508.
which had it in any measure succeeded prosperous, would have been seconded by a
it one bred Rebelion; of which Sir Walter Raleigh says, That it only d^need a
Morice on our English Seas. And as another (...) not one bullet into the shore;
lost many thousand m^n, and near 20^. ships; whereas we lost but one in all
Vessel, and not an hundred men.

2. All secret machinations, treacherous Contrivances by poison, pistol,
dagger, powder, by Campion a French, Lopez a Jew, Creighton a Scot, some vile
Bygotted Gentleman, and many others.

Thus that most excellent Princess, notwithstanding all opposition by force and
fraud that was made against her, maintained Gods Ark, not only twenty years as
at Kirjath-jearim, but twice twenty and five years; and died in peace and
serenity of mind in her bed in a good old age; even the age of man in Moses's
time, seventy years; and does well deserve, notwithstanding all the barkings of
lying Papists, and the belchings of impure Mouths against her, that part of her
Epitaph, She is, she was, what can there more be said,
In earth the first, in Heaven the second Maid.
Which Ark so settled her Successor King James of blessed Memory, the most
learned and most peaceful Monarch of Great Britain and Ireland, maintained,
continued and established, which exceedinly provoked the malice of the Popish
Philistines against him. Hence they contrived, Watson and Clark, Cobham and
Raleigh's Conspiracy against him in 1603. and that failing, this most Hellish
Powder Treason no doubt, devised by the Devil, but acted by his Instuments,
Piercy, Katesby, Digby, and others, who intended to blow up the King, Queen,
Prince and the great States, and Commons of the Land, then met in the
Upper-House of Parliament; and then to lay that horrid fact to the Puritans
(Sham Plots, you see, are none of their new devices) and so to have taken up
thence a pretense by the help of Foreigners, whom they had tampered with, to
root out Protestants and their Religion, and establish Popery; which (no
question) is, and will be their perpetual design and endeavor.

But blessed be God, for ever blessed be his Holy Name, God intervened, and
overruled, (and O let him do so still) and turned Esth. 9. 1.
it into the contrary.

God made that day, which had they had their wits, should have been for Villainy
and cruelty, the most unfortunate day, such as Nov. 5.
eye has not seen, nor ear heard of, unto us most joyful, and most glorious;
when by Gods infinite Goodness, and his then most excellent Majesty's most
fortunate Interpretation of a passage of one of their own Letters, which
passage was, The Danger will be over as soon as the Letter was burnt; which
was, as a learned Prelate speaks, more casual than rational; not by Grammatical
Learning, but by divine Revelation and Inspiration; and by his Bp. Andrews,
faithful Councils, diligent and discreet Inquisition and search, discovered
and prevented, though those Monsters of men, and the Vassals of the Pope had
taken the Sacrament of secrecy, and the time was near for the execution of it.

Thus was our great danger by our gracious God prevented, and their own
deserved ruin by themselves procured.

The remembrance whereof we ought in all solemn manner to celebrate every fifth
of November, as we do, and long may we and our posterity do it. And as we are
directed in a Prayer and Thanksgiving in the Office appointed for that day,
joyfully to bless God, and earnestly to entreat him to root out that Babylonish
and Antichristian Sect, whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction,
whose practice is murdering of souls and bodies; from whose Treachery, Cruelty,
Rage, Malice, good Lord deliver us. Amen.

Text. Then Samuel took a stone, etc. saying, hitherto has the Lord helped us.

Having in the former dispatched the first thing proposed, viz. What was in the
Text supposed, their danger, and the Cause of it, and their enemies. I now come
to the second thing, viz. What is expressed.

Time will not allow particular insisting on those many things which the Text
in its parts would present us with.

I shall sum up all in these two things,

1. Gods helping them. 2. Their sense of, and thankfulness for that help.
1 Gods helping them: which though last in words, yet being first in nature, I
shall first speak to; and as I proceed, compare Gods helping them with his
helping us.

Now what their deliverance was, the Text shows us.

After the Ark was taken by the Philistines, at the news whereof, and of his
two Sons death, old Eli died, and Ickabod was born ^ the glory was departed,
and they for twenty years were in an afflicted, and therefore lamenting
Condition, v. 1. being fallen into the sin of Idolatry, v. 3.

Under the bondage of the Philistines who disarmed them, left not a Smith, etc.
Samuel having been always a Prophet and Instructor of them, never ceasing to
pray for them, Cap. 12. 1. He having reproved them for, exhorted and prevailed
with them to put away Baalim and Ashteroth, their He-Gods, and She-Gods, and to
serve the Lord; now as a Judge, in which Office he seems now to be inaugurated,
he summons them to Mizpeh in order to their further Reformation, to fast and
pray, and confess their sins; which the Philistines hearing of, they gathered
themselves together with an hostile intention.

No new thing for Satan to employ his Instuments in the obstructing of good
actions.

At the hearing of whose gathering together, the Israelites were afraid, being
unarmed and unprepared to encounter with them, v. 7 and therefore despairing of
their own, apply themselves to Samuel to pray for Gods help, that he would save
them, v. 8. They were sensible of their own sinfulness, being Idolaters, and
knew that God would not hear sinners.

They were assured of Samuels Holiness and Innocence, and therefore of Gods
favor toward him. Hence they desired him to pray for them when they were
apprehensive of their own unfitness and indisposition to pray for themselves;
where by the way observe:

Though graceless sinners in their prosperity scorn and abuse Gods faithful
Ministers, yet have they then a Conviction in their own Consciences of their
Innocence: and in time of their distress, will seek to such to pray for them;
as Pharaoh to Moses, the people to Samuel; they sent not to their
fellow-Idolate's, nor Pharaoh to the Magicians; then Moses, then Samuel must be
desired to pray for them.

Thus it is, and will be with intelligent, though graceless people, in
reference to scandalous and careless Ministers, who do delightfully associate
them in their sinful and unwarrantable practices of drin^ing, swearing, dicing,
etc. even those persons who seem to applaud flatter, and admire them; yet in
their sober moods have so much conviction, that in their thoughts they condemn
them as the blemishes of their Function; and in the'r extremiti^s little regard
their Prayers for them; then an Innocent Moses, though many times rejected;
then an holy and blameless Samuel shall be sought to; then, pray for us; then,
honor me before the people.

The only way for Ministers to keep up their Reputation with men, is to be
careful of a blameless Conversation, a faithful discharge of their Ministerial
Function, a constant Conversing in their studies with God by Meditation and
Prayer, and with the best Companions, the holy Scriptures, and the Books of
learned and holy Writers; (no such Companions in Taverns or Coffeehouses) and
the keeping their Consciencies void of offense toward God and man; which shall
they do, they will find love, as Samuel from a David, and Reverenee and
Respect, even from a Saul and Herod, as Samuel and John Baptist did.

This by the by: and I assure you, spoke with no ill intent; and I hope and
pray it may be to some good effect.

To return: 1. Samuel answers their desire, makes testimony of his faith in the
promised Messiah by his sacrifice, and earnestly cries to God for them, v 9.

Faith and Prayer, the pious man's best defense: Preces and Lacrymae arma
Ecclesiae, Prayers and Tears the Churches weapon. Non vires, non virus, nec
pulvis Sulphureus; not Power, nor Poison, nor Powder: they are not the arms of
Christ's Followers, but of the Jesuits and Romish Synagogue.

The success was, God heard his Prayers, thundered upon, and discomfited the
Philistines, gave the Israelites a great victory, whereby they regained the
Cities they had lost; so that afterward they flourished in peace, Justice and
Religion all the days of Samuel.

And what manner of people these were, whom God thus helped, we may learn from
the Context, and so we find them, 1. A sinful people, Idolaters. 2. An
assaulted people by the Philistines lording over them, coming in arms against
them. 3. A penitent people, as is evident, 1. By their Obedience to Samuels
summons, coming to Mizpeh; they were no Dissenters from the Magistrates-lawful
Command. 2. By their Reforming, Putters away of Baalim and Ashteroth. 3.By
their Humiliation before God. 1. Confessing their sins. 2. Fasting. 3. Praying
to God. 4. Praying to Samuel to pray for them.

4. Using their own endeavors, as well as depending on Gods Power. They went
forth.


Thus it was with the Israellites; and has it not been so with us in many
particulars, which time will not admit my speaking to? Only in general.

Their enemies were Philistines, Idolaters, that worshipped Dagon, and other
Heathen Deities; the first Inhabiters, in whose room the Israelites succeeded,
but such whom God had justly for their sins when come to ripeness, appointed to
be rooted out; and left Command to do it as the Land would bear, left the wild
Beasts should increase upon them; and gave the Land unto the Israelites, which
did not, or could not expel them; so that they still continued amongst them,
sometimes in subjection, many times in power over them; but always because of a
different Religion, at an implacable enmity against them; and still watching,
and taking all opportunities to destroy them.

And as for the Israelites, though they had been Idolatrous Worshippers of
Baalim and Ashteroth, yet were now truly penitent; had reformed themselves, put
away Baalim and Ashteroth, and became sincere in their Worship of the true God;
and were now in the actual worshipping of him by Samuels Command, which they
obeyed, congregated at Mizpeh, unarmed and unprepared, and not expecting of an
enemy: Mutato nomine. Put we but Jesuited Papists in the room of Philistines,
and true English Protestants instead of Israelites, and our excellent and
learned Prince, King James of happy Memory, instead of Samuel, Westminster
instead of Mizpeh, and the most solemn Assembly of Parliament brought thither by
the Kings summons, to establish and confirm true Religion, and whence to come
immediately from the actual performance of Religious Worship in the ancient
structure of St. Peter's; And you have the true Case of the occasion of this
times solemnity; and therefore I shall not, and I need not add any more, only
in general observe,

That quarrels that are grounded on matters of Religion, are not durable; most
implacable, most mischievous -- Philistines against Israelites, Papists against
Protestants.

For though it be true, that many Atheistical Matchiavils that are of
themselves of no Religion, do make use of the name of it, as a politic engine
to work their own purposes, and are otherwise indifferent to all. And many
crafty-pated, or such who have small dealings, do profess this or that
persuasion upon a Design of gaining a Trade to advance their worldly Interest,
turn Dissenters of every sort, to gain a Trade amongst those they turn to; and
are indeed crafty shavers that are of no Religion out of Conscience, yet
pretend to some out of their Covetousness.

Yet we know our Fathers have told us in their recorded Histories, and we our
selves have seen, and known many zealous Bygots in all persuasions, who have
good intentions, but weak Judgments; that are indeed conscientious, though
erroneously so; and will not by flattery or force be persuaded or prevailed
with, to forsake that persuasion or opinion they have espoused; yea, though
their leaders who did seduce them into those seditious, schismatical and
fantastical Principles and Practices, turn from them themselves, and many
times earnestly oppose them.

Thus it was with Brown, the Father and Cognominator of our first Separatists,
who had seduced many to a Separation from our Church, as Antichristian in her
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, yet himself returned and became Minister of
a Church, a place so named; but his followers (the source, spring, fountain and
root of those many Hydra-headed Divisions in Religion, which have abounded
amongst us ever since) still continued obstinate.

Now in those whose Consciences, though erroneous, and not their worldly
Interest sway them, in such the quarrel for Religion, and upon that occasion,
becomes settled, durable, implacable and mischievous.

And such is, and has been, and will be of the Bygoted Papists (the old and
greatest Fanatics) against the Protestant Church of England, who ever since it
has had an established being, they have and will oppose, and set themselves
against, as the Philistines did against Israel.

Erroneous Consciences (though in good men) are apt to mistake their carnal
passions for commendable zeal, under which (when their Interest lurks) it
drives on unto furious motions. Thus the Disciples, James and John, being
ignorant of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, dreamed of an earthly Kingdom. And this
soon made them ambitious (as appears by their Mothers motion, no question, set
on by themselves) That the one might sit on the right hand, and the other at
the left, in Christ's Kingdom.

This Ambition makes them furiously zealous to call for fire from Heaven on the
Samaritans that would not entertain their Master.

But herein they were not like their Master, nor liked by him.

Christ's Passions were free from Concupiscence, wherewith ours are defiled. Our
Passions are like water that has a muddy residence, which when it is stirred,
every part grows foul with it; but our Savious Passions of grief, and anger,
and sorrow, were like clean water in a pure vessel, which is never the fouler
for the motion; so were not the two Disciples, who thought their carnal
Passion, zeal for their Master; and the Destruction of the Samaritans,
well-pleasing Justice. Christ tells them, You know not what Spirit you are of,
and that he himself was of another temper; who came to save men's lives, and not
destroy.

Oh! how like in this particular unto these two mistaking Disciples of Christ,
are those that call themselves the Followers of Jesus, (but so called per
Antiphrasin, as Lucus a non lucendo) who are not the Followers of the meek and
holy Jesus, but the Imitators of those furious Soldiers, Jehu, and Ignatius
their founder of accursed Memory.

John and James, Christ's Disciples, in a passionate zeal for their Master,
would needs have Samaria destroyed with fire from Heaven.

Our Jesuits would, and did endeavor to destroy our King, Queen, Prince, Lords
spiritual and temporal, Commons, our stately ancient Structures; yea, Friends
as well as Foes, with fire from Hell.

But as Christ rebuked his Disciples rashness, so God disappointed the Jesuits
and their bygoted Proselytes cruel malice.

And the Evangelist in recording the Story, has given a Resolution to that
question, Whether Jews may destroy Samaritans for not being of their Religion
or Persuasion. Dissent in Religion was the cause of their quarrel.

Samaritans would not entertain Jews going to Jerusalem, but starve them.

The Jews would by fire destroy the Samaritans; if they be Heretics, burn
them, let them not live. The Woman of Samaria tells our Savior, That the Jews
have no dealings with the Samaritans: John 4. 9.
Non contuntur; yea, they abused each other, forgetting Humanity and Piety on
either part, and so always continued till their own implacable divisions made
way for, and brought Destruction upon them both in the days of Claudius.

All the Disciples were not of the same Spirit with these two Zealots. The
other ten, though they liked not the Samaritans unkindness to their Master, yet
called not for fire from Heaven; neither were the Samaritans all so uncivil;
for we read how he turned into another Town.

And to comfort such as be thus minded as the Ten Disciples were, we may take
notice, that our blessed Savior was none of the Zealots, or showed himself on
their side, but inclined to Humanity, Peace, Familiarity, Friendship and
Goodness toward all.

He still would converse with the Samaritans; ask water, sent his Disciples to
Samaria to buy meat; to this Town to take up lodging. In this journey he healed
a Samaritan. Leper; yea, so favorable toward them, and so ready to be used by
them, that he was called a Samaritan for his labor. John 8. 48.


Christ was in the right, and its safe being of Christ's Temper, yea, its our
duty to be so; Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. Phil. 2.
7.


But what are the Jesuits and the Jesuited Papists? God forbid we should think
so of all Roman Catholics. All the Samaritans did not refuse Christ, some
entertained him. All Papists are not of that mischievous temper; but those that
are Jesuits and Jesuited, they are indeed like these two misguided Disciples,
not in their goodness otherwise, but in their furious Zeal, who were moved by
the barbarous indignity of denying harbor for a night to their Master (whom in
his Transfiguration they had so lately seen in Glory; and this denial by a sort
of paltry Heretics; and only because his was as if he went to Jerusalem, he
was well affected in Religion) to call for fire from Heaven utterly to destroy
them.

This made these two that were of the chiefest of Christ's Disciples, one of
them a Pillar in the Church, the other Christ's beloved Darling, to make that
motion of fire from Heaven. Gal. 2.


And was not that motion good? considering they had the example of Elijah's so
doing, whom they had so lately seen in Glory? John 21. 7.
Thus far the two Disciples of Christ, and Ignatius Loyala's Luke 9. 54.
society, go together.

But now they break Company; Christ's Disciples would have fire from Heaven;
this cursed spawn of Ignatius would have it from under ground.

Christ's Disciples asked their Masters leave; these consult not with Christ at
all, but with their Father the Devil, who was a Murderer.

Christ's Disciples would have it done by a Miracle, wherein Gods finger might
be seen; they by a base and treacherous Invention of the Devils contriving.

They would do it like Disciples in Gods Name, by their Masters License, call
it down, not conjure it up; from Heaven its own Sphere, not from below. The
Disciples, like Eagles, fly to the Clouds; the Jesuits like Moldwarps, creep
into a Vault.

Now though the Disciples Circumstances were right, yet the motion was wrong,
which sprang from the ignorance of their own and Christ's Spirit; for which he
rebukes them, You know not what Spirit you are of; and from ignorance can
spring no good.

You know not what you ask; you worship you know not what. Matthew. 20. 23.


These are Christ's own returns to these two Disciples; and to John 4. 22.
the Woman of Samaria, wherein we may find rebuked by our Saviors own mouth,

Ignorant Zeal, implicit Faith, and blind Devotion; the Popes three great
Engines of State to maintain his power.

Zeal must be according to knowledge, or else it will precipitate even Christ's
own well-meaning Disciples into cruel and bloody acts; how much more such loose
principled persons as generally Jesuits and Jesuited Papists, into treacherous
and mischievous Plots and Contrivances, murdering of Kings, massacring of
thousands of Innocents, blowing up King and Kingdom in an Instant! And all this
the fruit of ignorant zeal!

But the example of Elias will not bear them out in it, for Elias's Spirit was
suitable to Elias's time, and the legal Administration, which was of Death; but
Christ had altered the Administration, and brought in by the Gospel, Peace and
Life.

Elias had a particular Commission, they had none.

Elias only destroyed the culpable; these Disciples had no more regard to the
Innocent in that place, than Jonah had to those in Nineveh.

They were Christ's Disciples, and not Elia's; and therefore might not have the
Spirit of Elias, but of their Master, who came to save life, and not destroy;
and such is, and should, be the Spirit of Christ's Disciples, whose Office is
not what Bellarmine says, St. Peter's is, Pascere and occidere, to feed and
slay; but to seek and save. The second Office Bellarmine attributes to St.
Peter, viz. Occidere to slay, came from him who was a Murderer from the
beginning, and not from the holy and meek Jesus, who was, as his Name imports,
a Savior, and not a Slayer.

Such then that are Christ's Disciples, must learn of him who was meek and
lowly, not proud and cruel. Thus far of Gods helping them.

Text. Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called
it Eben-Ezer.

In which words we have three things considerable,

1. The sense of their deliverance, Then 2. Their present thankfulness, saying,
Hitherto. -- 3. Their care for the continuance of the memorial of it, Then
Samuel took a stone --


Of each of these in their order, and first of the

1. Their sense of their Deliverance implied in the word Then; When God had
thundered on the Philistines and discomfited them, v. 10. When the men of Israel
went out from Mizpeh and pursued them, and smote them until they came to Beth
car. v. 11.

My present business is to parallel their Case with ours. The Israelites Case
was whilst they were unarmed, fasting and praying, and Confessing their sins,
and in all likelihood met at Mizpeh for the consulting about their Concerns; so
then Samuel judged Israel, v. 6. as likewise we read of Isreal's meeting there
before that time, Judge. 10. 17. not thinking or being suspicious, or afraid of
any danger near them, but in profound Peace, as to men, and by humbling
themselves before God, making their Peace with him. Then the Lords of the
Philistines went up against Israel, and drew near to battle, v. 10. with which
sudden and unexpected danger, they were very much terrified, and in that fear
did not sink under, and cowardly run away (as the Emperor Ferdinands Popish
Army invading the Hussites for their Religion, twice did, being stricken by God
with a panick fear, never striking one stroke) but they bethought themselves,
and betook themselves to the best course they could for their own preservation;
they befought Samuel not to cease to pray for them; they remembered (most
likely) that it was Moses's hand lift up, that gave their forefathers victory;
and they themselves went out of Mizpeh and pursued them, and God himself
thundered upon them so, that the Philistines were discomfited and smitten before
Israel, until they came to Beth-car, v. 11.

Lo this their deliverance, and their sense of it appears by Samuels setting a
stone, erecting a Monumental Trophy of Gods mercy shown them in that place.

Now should we parallel our Deliverance from the Powder Treason and Traitors,
and theirs from the Philistines, we shall find many remarkable Circumstances
that heightened the greatness of our danger, and so the value of our
deliverance, above theirs.

Which I may but touch.

1. Their danger was from open enemies, from whom they had deserved, and could
expect no other.

Ours was from pretended Friends, who lived, yea, flourished with Wealth and
Honor under the Protection of that King and Laws that they endeavored the
Destruction of; were secret enemies that lived as Friends in the midst of us.

2. The Israelites danger was known to them, and could not be hid from them;
the Lords of the Philistines went up against them in battle in an hostile
manner as declared Enemies.

Ours was altogether hidden from us, no sign, token or suspicion of any
mischief toward, all things calm; and those that call themselves Romau
Catholics (a Contradiction in the terms, as a Particular Universal) had a very
great share in the Kings favor, and pretended greatest satisfaction with it.

Then the Lords of our Philistines, the enemies of our Peace and Religion, did
not go up with an Army at their heels, though they had Provision to have
suddenly raised one; but they went down into the Vaults and Cellars with the
Devil at their elbows.

Their under-ground-Contrivances prevented discovery, till our great and
gracious God (whose name be ever magnified) who is Pan Ophthaelmus, and saw
those hidden works of darkness, made one of themselves an Instrument of
revealing of them and their most mischievous design.

And hence may all Gods saithful Servants comfort themselves, That though the
Devils claws be in all our enemies Plots, and our danger, yet still God sees
them, though they do not; and has, and will have a hand in their Discovery,
and in his Servants Deliverance, as he had in Isreal's Deliverance from the
Philistines, and in our forefathers, and in them our Deliverance from the
Powder Treason.

3. The Israelites Danger was what they knew, provided against, and that by all
the ways that could be imagined likely to deliver them, as,

1. Humiliation, fasting, weeping. 2. Their own Reformation, they put away
Baalim and Ashteroth. 3. Their importunate desires of Samuels praying for them.
4. Samuels answering their desire, not only, 1. Earnestly praying; He cried. 2.
But likewise sacrificing a Lamb. v. 9.



Samuel set Faith and Prayer on work; first he sacrificed, exercised and acted
his Faith on Jesus Christ the true Lamb of God, that was by the Levitical Lambs
typified, as being slain from the beginning of the World; and then he earnestly
and fervently, not only prays, but cries to the Lord for them.

And having thus taken the right course to make God their friend, for this is
the course of his own prescribing, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people which are
called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn
from their wicked ways: then will I hear, etc. Having taken this course, they
then

5. Set themselves forth courageously and valiantly to fight against them; and
God fought with them, and for them, and made them victorious over their
enemies; insomuch, that they drove them clean out of the field into their
strong-hold of Beth-car; the consequence of which Victory was the recovering of
their own City, and Peace with the Amorites.

Having thus considered theirs, let us now see what our Danger, and so
Deliverance was.

1. Our Danger was not from open enemies, but pretended and supposed friends,
who had been many ways obliged to gratitude and good Offices by the favor of
their Prince, and the courtesy and kindness of their Fellow Subjects.

Oh horrid and unnatural Ingratitude, and almost incredible, were it not that
we have seen and known by woeful experience, that the blind zeal of
Jesuit-ridden Papists carries them against all the ties and obligations that
flow from gratitude, kindred, friendship, Relation; and in the service of the
Devil and the Pope, makes them like Levi, to know neither Father nor Mother,
Kin nor Relation, Friendship nor Gratitude, but tramples down all that is
sacred, that stands in the way of their promoting of the Interest of the Roman
Church; and if that be the case, then Tros Tyrius nullo discrimen agetur. Let
them be Friend or Foe, Relation or Stranger, their fellow-Catholicks, yea,
fellow Plotters too, it is all one; if they are conceived to be blocks in their
way, they must be removed, if their strength, teachers, and the seasonableness
of so doing, prompt to it. And our Progenitors found that observation before
mentioned very true in those English Powder-Traytors, viz. That an English man
Italionated, is a Devil incarnate --

2. Our Danger was hid from us; no suspicion, nor fear, nor apprehension of it;
all secure, Halcyon days of peace, without any disturbance. The fear of danger
that possessed the Nation in reference to the death of Queen Elizabeth, was over.
Sol occubuit nox nulla secuta est. Peace and Religion settled and maintained in
the same Condition, Traffic and Trading, Merchandising and Manufacturage
encouraged, and by a settled peace with Spain, which before was always dubious,
now enlarged to the exceeding Advantage of the English Nation.

The old enmity, and fear of enmity from Scotland, now quite removed by the
uniting of the two Diadems in one Person, who was what his Motto (chosen by
himself) speaks him, Vere Pacificus.

Learning encouraged under a most learned King; then indeed were Musae
regnantes; and all things in a most flourishing and most prosperous estate.

Favor was equally, according to Demerits, extended unto the Catholic
Nobility and Gentry.

Books written by Catholics to persuade the Papists to a quiet submission unto
their Princes peaceable Government; when all things carried a fair prospect to
a glorious and happy Estate; even then -- Latet anguis in herba.

Then the implacable enmity of Satan against all that is good and lovely; then
the infatuated zeal of Priest-ridden Bygots, set them on work, to contrive that
work of Darkness, that has no parallel, as to all its Circumstances, in any
History; which was invented by the Prince of Darkness, carried on by Children
of Darkness, and laid in a place of Darkness; which when if had taken light by
Faux's Match, would have proved the blackness of darkness; and it is to be
feared (considering the general security and impenitency of prosperous Mankind)
would have sent many a shattered body to the darkness of Death; and many a poor
unprepared soul unto utter Darkness; and would have been suitable to an Italian
Revenge, the Destruction of soul and body. Tantum Religio poterat fundere
malorum.

3. Our danger could have no preparation against it; for as Ignoti nulla Cupido
-- so nullus Timor. The Israelites knew, and provided all possible means
against their danger, by Humiliation, Reformation, Fasting, Prayers, praying to
Samuel to pray for

them, and their own valor; but alas! none of these could, or were put in use,
or were thought upon in our case.

The Preparations for the Grandeur of the first days Session of Parliament, had
put away the thoughts of Humiliation; Feasting excluded Fasting, and
Complements and Courtship of Salutations, Prayer.

And, for any endeavors of our own, the nature of our danger prevented all; so
that we must say, That our Deliverance was digitus Dei alone; no Samuel to pray
for us, no Army to go forth against our enemies, whom we knew not, nor where to
find; and as for the way of their malice by Gunpowder, no possible escaping;
so that we must still say, Non nobis Domine, Not unto us, etc. And, If the Lord
had not been on our side, they had swallowed us up quick. Ps. 115.


And let this be our encouragement still, That God is, and 124.
will be on the side of his faithful, penitent and praying people, to defend
and preserve them (even when care is not, or cannot be taken) from all the
Contrivances, and mischievous Plots of the implacable enemies of our Religion,
Laws, Lives, Liberties, Consciences; for it is certain, That howsoever God be
not in the beginnings of evil enterprises to set them forward, yet at the end
he must be, or no end will be; for Domini sunt Prove. 21. v. 16.
exitus.

The Horse may be prepared for the battle, the Lot cast into the Lap, the
Counsel of Ashitophel may be taken, Haman may obtain the Kings Letters to
destroy the Jews, the great Fleet at Ezion Geber may be prepared, Sennacheribs
mighty Army may be listed, the Lords of the Philistines may be upon their
march, the Powder, and Billets, and Match may be all laid, and a wicked Faux
ready with his dark-Lanthorn to put fire to it; and how near was our late
Popish Plot ripe for execution, when it was discovered!

Yet God defeats them all; for Counsel may be in the heart of man, and words at
his Tongues end, and Acts at his fingers end, the Match laid to the Powder, yet
nothing shall be said, or done or take effect, except God will have it so; he
gives and denies success as hepleaseth.

And as for Samuels Prayers, or our own endeavor, our Case and Danger was such
as could not admit either in particular.

But the daily Devotions of righteous persons (that would have kept fire from
Heaven from falling on Sodom) and Gods infinite free Mercy prevented their fire
from Hell from doing execution; so that for the greatness of our deliverance
manifested in the greatness of our Danger, we must still say, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us: but unto thy Name give Glory, Ps. 115. 1.
for thy mercy and thy truths sake.

For had it not been the Lord, who was on our side, they had swallowed us up
quick (had their Fire been kindled, it would Ps. 11^. 1.
have made but one mouthful of King and Kingdom).

But blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to 6.
their teeth.

Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler: 7.
the snare is broken, or loosed, and we are escaped.

Now (as St. Austin observes) a thing is loosed two ways; either after we are
snared, or before; so a Captivity may be said to be turned two ways, by an
after-deliverance, or a forehand prevention.

The Grecians express by Prometheus and Epimetheus; the Latins by anteverta and
postverta; the Schoolmen by praeveniendo, subveniendo. The first is best.

A good buckler to keep off the blow, is better than a good Plaster to heal
the hurt.

And such was our deliverance, a prevention, concerning which we may say, That
the Destruction intended was the Devils doing, and it is monstrous in our eyes;
the deliverance was Gods doing, and let it still be mavelous in our eyes,
that we may be thankful at present; and in the eyes of our Posterity; the
memorial of it perpetuated from Generation to Generation; which thankfulness
was Samuels practice at the present, and care for the Children of Isreal's
future remembrance of it, and comes in the last place to be spoken to.

2. Samuels present thankfulness expressed in these words, saying, Hiterto has
God helped us.

He acknowledges that God had helped them, and had always helped them. And
herein indeed consists the proper form and essence (if I may so speak) of our
Thanksgiving, viz. -- To recount to his Honor what he has been to us, and
what he has done for us --

Instances whereof we have in many of David's Psalms. The 136. throughout, and
145. which I shall only point to.

In the two first verses he tells us, That he will extol God his King, and
bless his Name for and ever; every day he would bless God, and praise his name
for ever and ever. -- And how he did, we may see it in the following verses, by
declaring of Gods

1. Greatness. v. 3, 4, 5, 6. 2. Goodness. v. 9. 3. His Works and Saints, v 10,
11, 12.


And having reckoned up from the fourteeenth to the twentyfirst, many
particular Instances of his Acts of grace, and goodness, and greatness, he
concludes with declaring what was his own, and what he desires should be of
others. -- My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord. And let all flesh bless
his holy name for ever and ever, v. 21.

Lo this is the Tenor of our blessing God, and declaring our thankfulness to
him, when we recount to his Glory and Honor what he has done for us.

Now this is a wide and comprehensive duty: shall we pass over the imperate,
and only consider the elicite Acts of it; such as flow from, and constitute the
very being of it? All which we may find in this of Samuels expression of his,
and the Israelites (for he was but their mouth) thankfulness unto God; Hitherto
has God helped us.

Now the elicite Acts of thankfulness are five,

1. Observation. 2. Remembrance. 3. Confession. 4. Valuation. 5. Retribution.


1. Observation: For how can we be thankful for that we take no notice of?

This was Isreal's sin charged upon them, that made them (...). 1. 1, 2.
worse than Ox or Ass. The Kindness, and the Circumstances of it, must be
observed by us. Thus David, Thou have brought me hitherto: what am I? Thus
Samuel, Hitherto has God helped

2. Confession with the tongue: Thus Samuel, he did not set a stone and say
nothing, but he called it Eben-Ezer; saying, hitherto has God helped.

We must not stifle, nor imprison the Apprehensions we have of Gods Goodness in
our hearts, but declare them to others.

Hence David: Come my Children, hearken unto me, and I will tell you what God
has done for my soul. And it is a Ps. 92. 2. 3.
good thing to sing praises unto thy name, to show forth thy loving kindness in
the Morning, and thy faithfulness every night.

Hence he calls his tongue his Glory: How is the man's tongue his Glory, but as
it is an instrument employed in the glorifying Ps. 16 9.
of God, wherein stands man's highest praise. Acts 2, 26.


Mere speech, is the glory of a man above brute Creatures; Eloquent speech is
the Glory of the learned above the untaught. Gracious speech Language of Prayer
and Praises, is the Glory of a David, a man after Gods own Heart.

3. Remembrance: Hence the Psalmist, when he presses his soul to praise God,
calls upon it not to forget any of his Ps. 103 2.
benefits.

Reflect we must on the mercies we enjoy, or we shall never be thankful.

Hence God himself instituted Trophies, Stones, and Days, and other Monuments
to continue the memorial of them; and we read it as a commendable and praise
worthy deed of the City of Zurich, who engraved the year of their deli^^rance
from the Romish Antichrist, upon Pillars in Letters of Gold.

4. Valuation: A d^e estimate of the mercies we enjoy at Gods hands If once we
think meanly of them, we shall quickly be unthankful for them; if we say as
Hiran or the Cities which Solomon gave him, What Cities are th^se? we shall
soon forget the kindness, and brand with disgrace; call them Cabul. 1 King, 9.
13.


If once say with the Israelites, Nothing but this Manna; we should soon prove
Murmurers against, and not Praisers of God. When Korah thought his being a
Levite a small thing, then he murmured. Numb. 16. 9.


If Gods Consolation seems small, our thanksgivings will be Job 15. 13.
very slender.

5. Retribution: an essential part of thanksgiving; hence the Psalmist, quid
retribuam, what shall I render?

As Ahasucrosh asked, What done for Mordecai? so we should ask, what done for
God, on his Command, to his Glory? Certainly all we are, have, can do, suffer,
are less than the least of Gods mercies.

Yet an Obligation lies upon us, render we must, give up our selves, souls,
bodies, all we are, have; yet all will fall short of what we owe to Gods Glory;
and we can give him but his own, (...). Romans 12. 1.


Let us then own God in all we have, and honor him by all we can do or suffer
for him.

Own him in all our Mercies, all our Deliverances, this Deliverance, our
preservation. And thus express our thankfulness as Samuel did, by a due
Observation, Remembrance, Acknowledgment, Valuation and Retribution; and by
taking care as he did, to transmit the memorial of it to Posterity, which is
the last that comes now to be considered.

3. Samuels care for the continuance of the memorial, in these words, Then
Samuel took a stone, etc.

A practice that God himself had directed, to continue the memorial of his
great Acts; and was practiced by Jacob: and Josh. 4. 5, 6.
here by Samuel, which he named Eben-ezer, the Stone of Genesis 28. 18.
Help. 31. 15. 35. 14.


But because, though stones be very durable and lasting Monuments, yet time,
that is edax rerum, may consume them, or otherwise they may be removed:
therefore God was pleased to fix a memorial of his gracious Acts in time it
self, that so the renewing of that, might perpetuate the Memorial of them. To
this end he had set apart fixed days, as the Passover, and the days of Purim

The Trophies and Momuments of Stone or Brass, though the materials may be and
continue, yet the Cause, Author and Reason of their erecting, may be utterly
worn out. As the Pyramids in Egypt, and Stonehinge in Wiltshire, no certainty
why or by whom placed. But when it is fixed on days in time itself, nothing can
wear it out, till time be swallowed in eternity.

There are three great National Deliverances mentioned in Scripture, each of
which had its memorial-day appointed.

1. The Passover by Gods command. Exodus 12.
2. Purim by Esther and Mordecai. Esth. 9.
3. Dedication of the Temple, which Christ himself observed.


All these set apart as monuments of thankfulness for Isreal's Deliverance from
Pharaoh's Bondage, Hamans Plot, and Babylons Captivity.

And should we parallel Englands old and late Deliverances with theirs, we
should find that they come short in nothing, but are in some Circumstances more
eminent and miraculous.

And therefore the Institution of the fifth of November for an high and holy
day, is a most justifiable Act; and the observation of it a most necessary Duty
on all true Englishmen, good Subjects, and sincere Protestants; wherein we call
to remembrance, confer of, and declare to others, and stir up our own hearts to
a thankful admiration of Gods wonderful works in our deliverance. Let us say as
Samuel. Hitherto has God helped us: and with David, O how great is thy
goodness! how terrible are thy works! and consider with our selves what manner
Ps. 31. 15. 66. 3.
of persons we ought to be in all holy and godly Conversation; And with the
Psalmist, What shall we render! And 2 Pet. 3. 11.
what is more fitting? Then since this is the Deliverance that God Ps. 116.
has wrought, let us do, opus Dei in die suo, Rejoice and be glad in it.

O let us joyfully, thankfully and affectionately remember the Mercy of this
deliverance vouchsased to us in our Forefathers; reflect upon the greatness of
our Danger, and Gods wonderful goodness in our escape from it.

Our Case was that of the Church, Men rose up against, had Ps. 124.
swallowed us quick; and their mischievous device, like proud and overflowing
waters, against which there can be no defense, had gone over our soul; so that
had not Gods mercy intervened, we had been a prey to their teeth; but blessed
be God, our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler. The Net
was broken, and we were delivered, and all by the help of the Name of the Lord,
who made Heaven and Earth.

In which case of theirs, as in ours, were joined Cruelty, Malice, Violence,
Policy, Subtlety, and an irresistible Force, such as is the overpowring of Fire
and Water, that burns and destroys without Remedy.

And herein see and consider the greatness of Gods Mercy in this Deliverance.
It was a great State-Mercy, but a greater Soul-Mercy; for hereby the glorious
Gospel of lesus Christ is continued to us. O say not of this, as Let of Zear,
It is a little one. Genesis 19. 20.


Let this Mercy then be writ in the Records of our hearts, as well as Statutes,
that as what Mordecai had done was read by Ahasuerus, so this may be by us; not
only that we may know it and mind it, but that we may as Ahasuerus did for
Mirdecai, and say, What has been done for God? What shall we do for him?

Let us therefore (I beseech you) answer God's expectation, because of this and
all other his former and latter Deliverances, for therefore are we put in mind
of them. And know we, that if we do not, we may expect that God will
expostulate with us as he did with Israel.

8. I brought you out from Egypt, and brought you forth out of Judge. 10. 8, 9,
10.
the house of bondage.

9. And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand
of all that oppressed you, and drove them out from before you, and gave you to
^^^d.

10. And I said unto you, (...) the Lord your God; sear not the gods of the
Amorites, in whose land you dwell; but you have not obeyed my voice.

Yea, we justly may fear that he will answer us in our Entreaties and Dangers
when we cry unto him, as he did them:

11. Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorties, from the
children of A^^^^, and from the Philistines? Judge. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14.


12. The Sidonians also and the Amalekites, and the Meabites did oppress you,
and you cried unto me, and I delivered you out of their hands.

13. Yet you have forsaken me, and served other gods, wherefore I will deliver
you no more.

14. Go and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the
time of your tribulation. Change we the names, and the things agree.

Let us then answer God's expectation, since God by this great Deliverance has
continued his Gospel, (and, O Lord, continue it to us and our Posterities.) O
let us

1. Prize it: As that which exalts a Nation, lifts it up, as it did Capernaum,
unto Heaven. He has shown his word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel. He has not done Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
so with any Nation, and as for his judgments, they have not knewn them.

2. Improve it. Otherwise it will prove a Judgment to us; yea, the Judgment;
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness. The neglect of the Gospel Joh. 3. 19.
casts down to Hell, and makes our escape impossible. Mat. 13 50.


3. Walk worthy of it, answerable unto it, and to God's expectation Heb. 2 3.
from us, because of it. Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel. Walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith we Phil. 1. 27.
Ephesians. 4. 1.
are called. And thereby adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in Tit. 2. 10.
all things.

To these ends Joshua minds Israel of what God had done for them; and amongst
other things, How Balak, Son of Zippor Josh. 24. 9. 10.
King of Moab, arose and warred against them, and called Balaam the Son of Beor
to curse them: But he would not hearken unto Balaam, but he blessed them still,
and delivered them out of Balak's hand.

And after many other signal Mercies showed to them, he concludes with God's
expectation from them. Now therefore 14.
fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth, and put away the gods
which your Fathers served on the other side the flood, and in Egypt; and serve
ye the Lord.

And as it was then, so it is still; God's expectation from us upon our
Deliverancs is, That we should serve hem without fear, Luke 1. 74. 75.
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. Not that we
might exclaim against the foulness of the Fact, or inveigh against the Monsters
that were the Actors of it, or bless our selves for so fair an Escape, or keep
a day in the Memorial of it; much less were we liberate, that we should become
Libertines: To sit down to Eat, and to Drink Healths after new and unseeming
Modes, and to rise up to Play; But that we might serve God in Holiness and
Righteousness all the days of our life.

Serve we ought, though we should not be delivered; as the holy Martyrs did:
The three Princes in Daniel, and Job resolved he would, though God should kill
him. How much Job 11. 15.
more ought we, when we are delivered, (and that aforehand, by way of
prevention) to render unto God Evangelical and acceptable Service and Sacrifice
of Thankfulness and Love!

Serve Him we must then, in Holiness and Righteousness, and that not only in
the sight of men, but before him; and that not for a spirt or fit, but all the
days of our Life. Let not our Holiness be as the Pharisees, in our Fringes and
Phylacteries, in outward expressions, in hearing the Lectures of the Law, no
matter how we live. Let not our Holiness be like the Sadducees, live
indifferently well; but believe neither Spirit, nor look for any Resurrection:
Not like Agrippa's, who was half persuaded. Not in Holiness only, not in
Righteousness only, but in both, and that for ever.

And as for our present deportment,

Let us rejoice in the day which the Lord has made.

When God calls to fasting, it is a sin to feast; and when to rejoicing, it is a
sin to mourn. Isa. 20. 13.


Had this Plot taken effect to the desire and expectation of the Neh 8. 9, 10.
Projectors, there would have been a Jubilee in Askalon.

Shall we not then rejoice, and be glad outwardly in body, inwardly in Spirit?
let our joy be such as may be seen and perceived by face, voice, countenance,
habit and gesture; bind the sacrifice with cords unto the horns of the Altar.
Let our hearts Psalm. 118. 27.
be glad, and our Glory, our tongue rejoice. Bless the Lord Psalm. 16. 9.
in the Congregation. Let the Singers go before, and the Players Psalm. 68. 25.
26.
on the Instruments follow after.

Let us say with the Psalmist, My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto
thee: and my soul which thou have redeemed.

My Tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are
confounded, they are brought unto shame that seek my hurt.

But let us be sure that our joy and rejoicing may be in the Lord; such as God
may be pleased with.

Not in the day of our Kings deliverance, make our selves or others sick with
bottles of Wine; not sit down to eat, and Hos. 7. 5.
drink healths, and rise up to play; for with such mirth God is Exodus 32. 6.
not well pleased, but does threaten to spread the dung of such 1 Cor. 10. 5.
feasts upon their faces, and curse their Blessings. Mal. 2. 3.


Now that our rejoicing may please God, we must begin with Halelujah, and end
with Hosannah.

David gives us a pattern; Open to me the gates of Righteousness Psalm. 118. 19.
25.
I will go into them, and I will praise the Lord. Save now, O Lord, I beseech
thee: I beseech thee send now prosperity.

Thus should we be joyful in Gods house of prayer; but still Isal. 56. 7.
remember to rejoice in trembling, because we know not what a Psalm. 2. 11.
day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1.

Join we then praise and prayer; thanksgiving for the mercies we have received,
and prayers for the mercies we still stand in need of.

All the Psalms are reducible to two words, Halelujah and Hosanna, not to be
severed. Neither of these, if alone, will prosper, nor are acceptable when not
united.

O then! let us now do both; praise God for our former and latter Deliverances
from the many attempts of our Popish Adversaries, the Spanish Invasion,
Gunpowder Treason, many preservations of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, and
our own deliverance from their truly real Plot, and intended Mischief (which
God preserve us from).

Pray unto him for the continuance of his gracions providence over us, and
protection of us. For, suppose that all were dead that sought our lives: Say
they are: but is the Devil dead too? If he be not, it steds not much if they
were.

His Powder Mill will still be going, he will be as busy as ever in turning
over all his devices, in turning himself into as many shapes as Proteus; and
all to turn us to mischief. And therefore we have, and shall have always cause
to follow our Halelujah's with our Hosanna's, pray, as well as praise, in
reference to our Popish Adversaries; That God would abate their pride, assuage
their malice, and confound their devices; That the Life of our most Gracious
King may be preserved; the Protestant Religion, our Lives and Liberties secured
from all the devilish attempts of our implacable enemies the Jesuits and their
Proselytes.

Oh let all that are now in the House of the Lord, especially those amongst us
that are of the House of the Lord, earnestly and affectionately pray for our
most Gracious King, as in duty we are bound, because God commands it; and out
of respect to 1 Timothy 2. 2.
our own tranquillity that is wrapped up in his safety, that God would continue
forth his goodness toward him, and bless him with length of days, with
strength of health, with the increase of all Honor and happiness, with Terror
in the eyes of his Enemies, with Grace in the eyes of his Subjects, with
whatsoever David or Solomon, or any other King that was happy, was blessed
with, a long continuance of the Peace and Glory of his Kingdoms on earth, and
with the eternal Kingdom of Glory and Peace in the highest Heaven. To which God
bring us all for his infinite mercy, through Jesus our blessed Savior. Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.

