THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. A View of the Fanatic Faction of England; As also the Ends and
Reasons of publishing these Papers in these Times. Page 1. CHAP. II. A Brief of
the diverse Ends in desiring to have this Parliament called Of the true Cause of
the Contempt and Hatred of the Clergy among the People, and what makes the
Churches differences irreconcilable. p. 3. CHAP. III. What use the Fanatics
have made of Parliaments, and the ways whereby that Faction in this Parliament
and Kingdom have endeavored to make the Clergy contemptible and odious to the
people. p. 8. CHAP. IV. The Fanatics Arts of framing Accusations to the
Parliament against the Clergy, and their manner of proving their Charges. p.
12. CHAP. V. A View of the New Judges of the thus accused Clergy; Their
condition, and their judging of Doctrines in their Committees for Religion, De
facto and de jure. p. 17. CHAP. VI. The Censures of these Judges against the
Clergy, and the true Reason thereof. p. 21. CHAP. VII. Of Parliamentary changes
in Religion. Of the Policy and ways for the destruction of Religion by this
Parliament, wrought by the long conspiracy and combination of the Fanatics of
England, here laid open. p. 26. CHAP. VIII. A concluding Parallel between the
Popish Persecution in Q. Mary's time, and this Fanatical Persecution. p. 35.


PERSECVTIO VNDECIMA: Or, The CHURCHES Eleventh Persecution.

Being a Brief of the Fanatic Persecution OF THE PROTESTANT CLERGY OF THE
Church of England: More particularly within the City of LONDON.

Begun in Parliament, Anno Dom. 1641. And Printed in the Year, 1648.

But they mocked the messengers of God, and misused his Prophets, till the
wrath of God arose against his people, and there was no remedy. II. Chron.
chap. 36. verse. 16. Reprinted in the Year, 1681.

And are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner near Paternoster Row.

CHAP. I. A View of the Fanatic Faction of England; As also the End and
Reasons of publishing these Papers in these Times.
WHat miseries the Fanatic Faction (so long lying like the Canaanites, as
Thorns in the sides of our Israel) would bring upon this Nation, England wanted
not Ezechiels Watchmen to foretell? and the Story of these Times has proved
their Prophesies wanted no Truth; but, Quos perdere vult Jupiter, eos dementat
prius: Otherwise it were strange to think, that of two Factions, viz. Papists
and Fanatics, mortally hating each other, distinctly incorporated from the
Church of England, and both of them destructive to it; the one like cunning
Pick-pockets, should set the Eyes of the people so busily to look after the
Religion of the other, and in the mean time rob them of their own; and by the
same Principles (like Firebrands in the Tails of Sampsons Foxes, looking diverse
ways) alike endanger the Established Religion. The one Faction was made most
odious to the people, the other seemed most Religious; and the due execution of
Penal Laws against Popish Recusants has been accounted Zeal and Justice: but
any legal Penalties inflicted on Fanatic Recusants, was cried down for Cruelty
and Tyranny, and made the Judges reproach; nor would the people endure to hear
the name of Fanatic Dissenters mentioned in a Pulpit; which now to drown,
together with their own folly in countenancing or non-conceiving the Fanatics
designs, the more Loyal Party have invented the new name of Roundhead) the
Nobility, Gentry, and generally all sorts of people accounting the Fanatic
Faction a simple inconsiderate Party, well meaning People, tender Conscienced
Christians, such as deserved pity rather than punishment; little remembering our
Saviors Caveat against Wolves in Sheeps clothing: which in Demosthenes Fable,
laying all the breach of public Peace between them and the Sheep, upon the
Dogs which were set to watch the Sheep-folds; till the seduced Sheep (for
quietness sake) delivering up their Keepers for a Sacrifice to the Wolves, too
late found their own Folds exposed to such danger as Wisdom might have easilier
prevented, than it could afterward remedy.

What else have the causeless clamours of the Fanatics meant for this many
years against the Bishops and the Clergy of England? who in our Saviors phrase
of Pasce oves, watched over the Flock of Christ; but to smite the Shepherd,
that so the Sheep might be scattered: Like that of Tully, Civium perditorum
scelere pulsus a Delubris is qui illa servarat, Religionum Jura polluta, and in
Larium sedibus edificatum est Templum licentiae. De Legib. lib. 2
And what havoc has been made among the Sheep, since the
City-Fanatick-Tumults cried out, No Bishops, and armed Fury has forced
thousands of the Clergy from their Flocks; the almost Ruins of the Church, and
of three Kingdoms sufficiently witnesses; a just Judgment of God upon a People
long contending with their Priests, and mocking, and mis-using the Prophets and
Messengers of God, till like the Jews, Hosea 4. 4. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
the wrath of God fell upon them, and there was no remedy: and all this
vengeance executed by a generation of Vipers, eating out the Bowels of their
Mother Church and Country, wherein they have long lurked; stiling themselves
(for above twenty years last past, I can witness) the only people of God, the
Meek of the Earth, Christ's little Flock, Weak Brethren; crying out against
Bloodthirsty Papists for taking up Arms against Kings and Princes; and who but
those Fanatics, the devout observers of the Fifth of November (their only
Holyday) in hatred of the Gunpowder Treason? (though that Gunpowder was never
carried in Bandaliers, and fired in the Face of the King, for the safety of his
Person) and their daily Sermons were against Persecution; yet now themselves
(weak Christians till so well Armed) are become the only and most bloody
Persecutors, having slain more thousands of Protestants in England, under
color for fighting for the Protestant Religion, than Queen Mary condemned
Scores within the like compass of years. The truth is, the Fanatics of England
have long conceited themselves to be the only people of God, like the Jews,
(and a man might swear by their Actions they are Jews indeed, and not
Christians) and all other men not of their Tribe, to be the wicked of the
World, and Gods Enemies, Egyptians and Amalekites: That so whatever favor was
done to any of their Faction, they thought themselves nothing beholden to any
man for it; but they would say God Decreed them to do it, so that they could do
no otherwise; and what ever Justice was done to any of their Tribe, was
accounted cruelty and persecution of Gods people.

But whatever Injustice or Cruelty they acted upon their Neighbors, (better
Christians in good sooth than themselves) they called it Justice and Zeal for
Gods Glory, fulfilling Gods Decree; and can in their Canting Language (the
Language of Canaan, as they styled their abusing of Scripture phrase) flatter
themselves, that they must wash their Feet in the Blood of the ungodly, and
binding Kings in Chains and their Nobles with Links of Iron, sit smiting their
fellow Servants and fellow Subjects against the Law, while they pretended to
Judge according to the Law: (this being the Old Character of A Fanatic, a
Strangers Angel, a Neighbors Plague, a Saint Abroad, a Devil at Home) but his
Children ye are (says our Savior) whose works ye do: The Devil was a Liar
from the beginning, and the Accuser of the Brethren; and who have done the
works of such a Father you may here know, by a taste of the First Fruits (Sower
Grapes of their long promised Canaan, a glimpse of their Clergy-hating, the
Foundation of Fanatick-Babel-Reformation: and what an Harvest of misery to this
Nation has followed such beginnings (when Judgment begins at Gods House) may
be gathered into Volumes by better Pens. It Is enough from a private Hand (in
such Times as these) if any short Copy can be set forth for others to follow;
and to show the Fanatics that all men do not sleep, but some stand watching
still to give the World warning of such Hypocrites; especially considering that
is no Records of the particulars of the Tyranny of these Times has been extant
to the World, though all honest Protestants have much desired it; Time indeed
not bearing Truth from a Protestant hand. As also considering the multitude of
Scandalous Pamphlets, Parliament Speeches, Centuries, Declarations published
all and faced with Authority of Parliament, the Supreme Court of Justice in
England; Title enough to charm the World, especially Posterity, into a belief
of such Authentic Records; should no particular Counter-work of Truth be left
to oppose such slanders. For as yet there is none; and probably if either an
Act of Oblivion should happen, or time waste away the present Clergy (who by
reason of the fury of this Age, dare not write their own Sufferings, nor by
reason of their being so scattered can bring them to a general Collection)
never any may come forth: whereby the Fanatic lies, and shameful slanders of
the Clergy of this Generation would pass for current Truths; when as the
Faction themselves know, and cannot but acknowledge (as I have heard some of
them say) that they could never have taken a worse time against the Bishops of
England, whose personal honest Lives, Learning, and Piety was so eminent, that
indeed it made clamours against them the more violent (like that against our
Savior, Away with him, away with him, when the Question was asked, what evil
has he done?) that so they might remove them by Tumults, against whom they
could not work their Designs by Law. And for the persecuted Clergy of the
Church of England, I am confident it is their hearty desire, and I dare in
their Names make this solemn Appeal to Posterity, (if ever God send times for
Justice in England) that (after so cruel and barbarous sufferings by
banishments, and manifold imprisonments, some in noisome and foreign Jayles
among Thieves and Mr. Stone of Saint Clements Eastcheap sent Prisoner to
Plymouth by Shipping. Mr. Chislen of St. Mathews Friday-street sent Prisoner to
Colchester Castle. Doctor Griffith committed to Newgate: and diverse others.
Felons: Some in Ships under Decks near Dr. Martin and Dr. Stern, Masters of
Colleges in Cambridge. Doctor Fairfax of St. Peter's Cornhil.
smothered: Some starved and dead in Diverse starved to Death in
Winchester-House.
Prison; others murdered in Dr. Raughleigh Dean of Wells, murdered by his
Jailer. Dr. Antil wounded, and died of his wounds in Taunton Castle. The sury
of these Times have forced the concealing of some Persons and Circumstances,
for theirs, and the Authors security.
Prison. All of them sequestered, spoiled of their Goods, and Estates, and
Houses, to the ruin of their Wives and Children also) that they might obtain a
legal Trial, to know what evil they have done; that it may appear whether
scandalous Accusers, and scandalous Judges have not made a scandalous Clergy,
and not found them such. This being left them their only comfort in their
Miseries, that they suffer as Christians, not as Evil Doers, but for
Righteousness sake, as God and their own Consciences bear them Witness, and
these ensuing Lines (though rude, yet true) may not a little prove to any
impartial Reader, to the satisfying also of that newly started Objection by the
House of Commons against a Personal Treaty with the King, viz. the bringing in
again of Scandalous Ministers.

CHAP. II. A Brief of the diverse Ends in desiring to have this Parliament
called. Of the true Cause of the Contempt and Hatred of the Clergy among the
People, and what makes the Church differences irreconcilable.
PRivate Interests and Advantages are ever the grounds of usurped Power, and
why Laymen in this Parliament have presumed to intermeddle with matters of
Religion, and to monopolize all executive and judiciary Power in Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church (which God knows they never understood) under
pretense of Reformation of Religion, Mr. Hampden (one of the prime Grandees of
the Fanatic Faction) has satisfied the World, in his Answer to a Private
Friend, asking him why they so much pretended Religion, when indeed Liberty and
Property, and Temporal Matters were by them chiefly intended? Should we not
(said he) use the pretense of Religion, the people would not be drawn to assist
us. And truly it were pity that Posterity should be left without some memento
of the private Interests and Designs of all sorts of people in this Kingdom, in
themselves different, yet all concentring in this one word Reformation, to
build the Babel of this Generation: Not much unlike the hatching of the Belglek
Troubles, Nobilitas cum Plebe conspirant, and rem suam curant, dum publicam
curare videntur. Strada de Bello Belg. Hist. of the Council of Trent.
Such desires in calling the Council of Trent have been translated into an
English madness and superstition in longing for this Parliament, which all men
fansied such a (...) medicamentum to each private Malady, that not any Humor
in the Body Politic, or itch in the Breech of the Kingdom, but was kept clawed
by Mr. Speakers Thanks, and large Promises of Redress of their Grievances: Even
the London Porters Petition received much Thanks from the Parliament, and
proffers of easing them of their Burdens. A fair opportunity had the Great Ones
to work their ends over other men's Shoulders.

1. The Court emulation (for even the Kings House and his Council were poisoned
with Fanaticism) thought by a Parliament to remove the Favorites, that so upon
their Ruins, themselves (next in place) might be advanced. What also was the
sin of the Archbishop and the Earl of Strafford? (against whom this Parliament
was set on fire with heat of Envy) but they being greatly loved of their King
for their faithful Service to his Majesty, the Church and their Country.

2. The Country Nobility long discontented with their Court-Banishment, (as it
were) hoped by a Parliament to new model the Court, and exchange places. To
this end the Propositions continually clamor, that all the Privy Council, and
all Officers of State may be in the disposal of Parliament, that is, of Lord
Say and his Faction.

3. The Gentry of England by a Parliament (into which the Gentry used to be
called, till of late) besides their private Preferment and Revenge, thought (as
did the Freeholders and all sorts of people) to be eased of Monopolies and
Taxes (never remembering that they paid no Subsidies) and especially of an
intended Tyranny, which the Fanatic Faction, with continual Alarums, so
drummed into the Peoples Ears, even to a Frenzy of ridiculous Fears and
Jealousies.

4. The Lecturing House-creeping-Ministers, prayed zealously for a Parliament;
thereby hoping to set up their newfangled Doctrines and Disciples: Indeed, to
divide the Church Lands amongst their Tribe (as the pretense was of taking away
the Bishops Lands, to maintain preaching Ministers) and to invade other Men's
Livings, and to have the sole Government of the Church in their Hands, (this is
that which they call setting up of Jesus Christ in his Throne) the World now
see what their aim was at first in calling this the Parliament of their Prayers.

5. All sorts of Sectaries in England, were earnest for this Parliament,
because they had conspired to pack it for their Designs against the King and
the Church* as hereafter will be shown.

6. The Common Lawyers pleaded for a Parliament, that themselves might snatch
an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction into their Courts, to advance their Law above
the Gospel (as they have done) crying up their Idol-Law to be above the King (a
Creature above his Creator:) then what are the Lawyers, who have the Law in
their own Hands, the Breast of the Judge, or the Breast of the Court (as they
phrase it) is the supreme Power? And truly for these many years last past, have
the Lawyers enslaved both King and People by the Charm of Law, Law.

7. The Country People generally fancied, that a Parliament would free them
from paying of Tithes, which produced several Petitions to that purpose, from
several Counties.

8. All sorts of Trades and Companies in London, hoped for Iome increase of
their Trading, if a Parliament were called, and yet who more crying out against
Monopolies and Patents, than these Citizens? Who are the greatest
Monopolilizers in this Kingdom, and scarce any Incorporation in London, but had
some Petition ready for this Parliament, with confidence that nothing must be
denied for the advance of Trade.

And all sorts of People dreamed of an Vtopia, and Infinite Liberty, especially
in Matters of Religion; nay, scarce any man but had some Design of Private
Interest, excep the Ancient, Orthodox Clergy, who foresaw what a Misery the
height of a Faction would bring on the Church, by a Parliament.

And yet after 5 years Sitting in this so Idolized Parliament, no sorts of men
but have missed their Ends; their Ministers especially verifying that Prophecy
of Dr. Bancroft: Survey chapter 20.
For all the Outcries that Church Livings might be employed to the Maintenance
of Eldership, well may they procure in some other Age, the further
impoverishing of the Church; but they shall be sure to be little the better for
it: And generally instead of being eased of their Grievances, they have been
plagued by this Parliament, as by the Flagellum Dei, a Rod of their own making,
to scourge this Land for their murmuring against Moses and Aaron, their
Contempt of the King and the Priest; into which Crying Sin, an Hypocritical
Faction has been long drawing this People, Archbishop Laud's Speech In the
Star Chamber.
by wounding the King through the sides of the Church, as knowing well, that if
they could destroy Monarchy in the Church (Episcopal Government in England,
being indeed the King's Spiritual Militia, and that most powerful, as
commanding the Consciences of Subjects) by planting in Rebellion for Religion,
they should soon weaken the Power of the King's Temporal Militia, as woeful
Experience has taught us; this made the Masters of the Faction always set up
the Church as the Butt, and the Bishops Sleeves as the White, chiefly aimed at
by all sorts of People, to shoot their Bolts against, that to have the Bovv
ready bent, and the Quiver full of sharp Arrovvs, even bitter words against
the Church, grevv to be the only Wisdom and Religion in fashion: O ye
scandalous Clergy, and O ye bringers in of Popery! was the belching of every
open mouth, when the greater sort had deeply swallowed other manner of Gall,
for which they took up the common cry against the Clergy, only to color their
deadly Spleen, bred upon Temporal Distempers, which the world takes no public
notice of as yet; but were the true causes of the Contempt and hatred of the
Clergy among this Generation, whereby the Fanatic Faction very inconsiderable
for Number, drew multitudes (who hated their by-ways in Religion) to their
assistance. The first and main Engine buzzed into the people long before this
Parliament was, That the Bishops and the Clergy were the Instruments for the
Kings intended Tyranny, the common saying in Terminis was, that the Clergy are
all for the King, that is, the Clergy seeing your Fanatic Spirit of Darkness,
working in the Children of Disobedience, would by their Preaching to fear God
and the King, according to the Scriptures, have prevented the ruins, which
they foresaw this Faction would, and now have brought upon this Kingdom; to
this purpose what a fiery pair of multiplying Spectacles, did the Faction put
on the Noses of the people, furiously looking on Dr. Manwarings Sermon, till
the Face of the Body Politic began to fire, in a former Parliament, not
quenched even to the beginning of this, but continually kindled against him,
and some others (not above three more Divines) who preached the Kings
Prerogative like Divines, if Scripture (which they so cry up, for their own
ends) in 1 Samuel 8. or the practice of the Kings of Judah may be Judge, more
than the Supremacy of the Lawyers would brook, or the jealous Worshippers of
Meum and Tuum in England, could endure should be true. This was the kindle-coal
that the Faction bellowsed to that flame, that must consume not only those
particular men, but even the whole Clergy, Root and Branch; as in Scotland, the
Feud of some discontented Lords, against some particular Bishops, vowed revenge
on the whole Church: this fire of malice, was the Bishop Ross's Scottish
Declaration, 1648.
fire from Heaven, which confirmed their Covenant, and made it the pattern in
the Mount, for Englishmen to follow. This added to the name Baals Priests, and
such other reproaches of the Clergy among the Fanatics, the new Scoff of
Cesans Friends. This made the popular Earl of Essex say in this Parliament,
that he never knew but one Bishop in Parliament, stand up for the good of the
Commonwealth, the old phrase of Rebellion; and when Unparalled Reasons by
Not. Fiens.
Not. Fiennes made Speeches in Parliament, and printed them, with the Title of
unparalled Reasons, to show that Episcopacy was an Enemy to Monarchy, the
Lord Say his Father, (and Godfather to the Fanatic Faction) printed a Speech,
Lord Says second Speech.
That the Bishops were too much for the King, and therefore were to be thrown
out of the Parliament; the most applauded Speech amongst the Commonwealth
party, whose sense it spoke out to the full, and was the Core of the Canker
bred in them against the Church; and unto this score do the Clergy owe their
eight years persecution, and their continued Banishment from their Livings, for
fear they should preach the people (now undeceived) into obedience to their
King.

A second Cause was the sacrilegious thirsting after the Church Lands, by some
in this Land, whose Grandfathers having svvallovved long Leases, or perhaps
some forged Deeds of Church Lands; the Wax sticks still on the Childrens
Stomachs, that no vvonder if they cannot be well, till like the Vine-dressers
in the Gospel, they hate and mis-use the Lords Servants; nay desire to kill the
Heir, that the Inheritance may be theirs, whose blasted Posterity has no
little hopes of recruiting their scattered Estates out of the old Reserve of
the Church. Public hatred being the ready way to make the Church Lands their
private prey: For this purpose have the Lay-brethren continued the practice of
their Faction in Q. Elizabeth's days, Survey of Discipline. cap. 11.
in clapping silenced Ministers, and Non-conformists, and Lecturers on the back,
and follovving their Sermons, setting them at the upper end of the Tables, and
seeking by all means, to prvcure them Credit and Favor with the People; not
that they cared for them, or for Religion, or for Christ himself; but hoping,
that by the violent Course which they savv these men run into, the Bishops,
and the rest of the Clergy would grow so odious, that it would in time be a
small matter to dispossess them of all their Livings, whereof some portion
might come to their shares: Which public hatred of the Clergy was not a little
increased upon a Jealousy, occasioned by the Activeness of some Bishops, and
others of the Clergy, in seeking by Law to recover some Church-revenue out of
the Usurpers clutches, (otherwise mentioned in this Book) that they began to
argue, if the Clergy should advance in the Favor of the King, and the People
their preaching against Sacrilege, may prevail to the touching of their
Copyholds; and it is the unhappiness of the Clergy, that most of their Lands are
occupied by Men, grown too great by their Leases, to be accounted Farmers, and
as much regreating the name of Tenants to such Landlords, whom they think they
may command: And this bred the like hatred in London, and other Incorporations,
and Nests of the Faction against the City-Clergy, upon their suit for increase
of Tithes in City-Livings (which are generally of very small value, and depend
upon peoples Benevolence, a thing of dangerous consequence in a Kingdom) upon
the Statute of Hen. 8. allowing two shilling nine pence per pound of the Rent
of houses (which Statute to evade, the Lawyers and Scriveners have invented a
plain Cheat, by a Lease and a Lease, that Houses of 50 l. Rent per Annum, shall
scarce pay 5 or 10 s. Tithe per Annum) which so netled the Purse-proud
Londoners, accounting Tithes but as Gift, or Alms, that they would rather spend
at Law, or give a Lecturer of their own choice twice as much as their full
Tithe came to, than pay their Dues to the Parson (a Word made their Scoff) that
Two shillings nine pence was an usual Nick name for any Divine, as he walked
through the Streets, though the Clergy in their moderate Rates demanded not
above twelve pence per pound, and this seeking by Law to recover their due, was
called (by the covetous World) T^^ covetousness of the Clergy.

3. There was another sin of the Clergy as much talked of, that was, forsooth,
The Pride of the Clergy, what was that? Why! Time having spent the old Stock of
Sir John's, planted into Churches in the hurly-burly days of Queen Elizabeth,
Bishop Jewel in his Sermon to the Queen.
Illiterate Mechanics, and such who could but Write and Read, and gather in
Tithes for the Patron's use, with Curchees for some Wages for their
Journeywork, hereby Bancrofts Survey of Discipline.
villifying the Sacred Function, as in these our Times, and men of Worth and
Learning sprung into their places; Peace of the Church bringing Religion into
request and Credit, so that some Noblemen, Gentlemen, and men of Estates, began
to spend on their Children as much as would make them rich in another Calling,
only to fit them for the Priesthood (besides Lands of Inheritance, or money
left as their Portions.) These were not like to betray the honor of the
Church, and of the Sacred Function, to become the continual servants of men,
who (especially in London) thought Stipends of 40 l. per annum, enough for any
Clergyman, though he had Wife and Children. Sir N. R. a Rich Alderman being
desired to increase his contribution to a Minister, because he was a man of
much Merit; answered, if the Minister were an Angel from Heaven, he should have
of him but ten shillings per Quarter. And that any of the Clergy should be made
Justice of the Peace, or Officer of State (as indeed, who so fit to keep Love
and Peace among Neighbors? And I have heard the Officers, and Retainers to the
Treasury confess, that they were never so well used, as when a Bishop was Lard
Treasurer) was made such an Eyesore in the Peoples Sight, by the Faction,
especially the swarm of Lawyers, not taken notice of, though put into
Commissions; men of a mere Mercinary profession, raising great Fortunes upon
the Sins and Ruins of their Country, unlike to prove Justices of Peace, who
live by ^^aking Contention and Strife among Neighbors; and from that small
(happy) number of Lawyers in England, Anno Domini 1555. which John Stow
mentioned, but two men of Law at the Kings Bench Bar, and at the Common Pleas
but one Sergeant; yet had they nothing to do all that Michaelmas Term, and yet
no tempus belli, have increased into an Incorporation of many thousands of rich
and potent Leading men in all Corners of the Kingdom; many advanced in the
esteem of the People, by their opposing the King's Prerogative, under pretense
of Law, That not the King, but their Law kept every man in his Right, though
since the King has been eclipsed these seven years, whom has their Law kept
in their Right? Therefore when Judge Cook told King James, that the Law kept
the Crown upon his Head, the King well replied, Thou lie Traitor, it is I
that maintain the Law. And as malicious Enemies have too many Lawyers been to
the Church, knowing well, that if the Clergy should grow into esteem and power,
to be Justices of the Peace, they would plant in Charity, and so spoil the
Trade of Lawyers, whose private gain has been styled the flourishing of the
Law; that not a Lawyer in a Parish, but commonly was the Parson's busy Enemy;
and it is still in the Lawyers hearts and mouths, that the Archbishop would
have hindered their Law: Did not such Interests facilitate belief, he that had
seen the habit of the Clergy in our days, would wonder wherein lay the pride of
the Clergy; for who wore plainest Garments were most maligned; but I forget the
pride of the Wives of the Clergy in their Apparel: Those that were guilty I
excuse not, yet I must profess, I knew very few thus justly taxed; but such was
the pride of English Women (especially the Gentry) that with much scorn and
envy, they would look at a Clergy-man's Wife, if clothed as well as
themselves, though their Birth and Portions, and their Husband's temporal
Estate were known able to maintain it, sometimes better than the other; and in
London, every Woman, whose Husband perhaps paid but twelve pence Tyth per
Quarter, thought the Minister's Wife proud, if clad better than her self; and
as for habit, so for place and precedence, every Gossip could prattle, that a
Ministers Wife had no place, though the Law is, that all Wives shall take place
according to their Husbands. These Petticoat Quarrels bred much envy to the
Clergy, but majorcum superbia with far greater pride: And besides that, Laici
Clericis oppido sunt infesti.

4. So generally peevish and fanaticiz'd were the people, that not any
particular discontent, or personal Quarrel with any private Clergyman, but
these Bishops-! these Parsons-! (the whole Coat) began their furious threats of
Revenge; and for these many years, has the opposing the Bishops, or regular
Clergy, been made the sign of a Babe of Grace, and a professor of pure
Religion, and (since this Parliament) been the ready way to preferment, as the
sure Character of a fast Friend to the Parliament, that diverse have not only
been afraid to show their wonted Neighborhood to their Parsons, but have grown
active against them, only to secure themselves from suspicion of Malignancy, by
being known to converse with a Malignant, or sequestered Minister.

These, and such like matters have thickened the mists of scandalous Clergy^
and bringing in Popery, cast before the Peoples eyes, to widen the Breach into
an impossibility of Reconciliation: These seven years sad experience persuading
me, that the great Controversies of Christendom (as of latter days) so in
elder Ages about the Arrian Heresy under Constantius, Synod against Synod, to
revoke the Nicene Decrees, Socr. schol. lib. 2.
and that other Division about the Celebration of Easter under Commodus, were
but some State Stalking-horses, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21.
or at least maintained with such Vehemence, for politic ends, whereof Church
History has taken no Cognizance; like the two Golden Calves of Presbytery and
Independency, set up in our days, to cover Jeroboams policy for a new
Government; Presbytery being thought at first a Cloak large enough to serve all
turns, till new designs started up Independency, both equally destructive to
the old way, which though woeful experience has proved the best way, and most
men at the bottom desire; yet because it consists not with their rash
temporal Engagements they furiously oppose: could we else think, that
Christians and Countrymen should engage in a Bloody Civil War, to demolish a
Cross, or put down an innocent Ceremony, to deshoy a Bishop of a Diocese, and
set a Pope in every Parish? A mere Book-man of this Generation can find little
difference above-board, all sides professing they fight for the same things,
which surely made Dury and Dr. Mosely, and Dr. Gibbons take so much pains and
travel, to seek Reconcilement in Religion; but alas! G. Cassander, H. Grotius,
may write Votum pro pace Ecclesiastica: Romish Priests may hazard their lives
to reconcile Protestants, and Protestants hope to convert Papists; Church men
may fast, and pray, and write, and preach for Peace, but all to no purpose: Can
they reconcile the King and the Pope's Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical? Can
they secure a Rebel against a King in Power? Can they make Agreement between
Publick-Faith Debts, and Bishops Lands, and Delinquents Estates? Take away
Temporal Differences, and Church Controversies among Christians might soon be
ended; for what have the engaged men of this Generation long whispered, and now
speak out to the Citizens desirous of a Treaty for Peace, while the pretense is
Religion, should the King be restored to his Throne; what security can they
(Traitors) have for their Necks and Estates? What shall become of their
Ordinance-Law? Should Bishops come in again, what shall become of our Moneys
for the purchase of their Land? The City Publick-Faith-Mongers tremble to think
that their Debts will be desperate; Soldiers say, if peace come, their
Triumphs will be spoiled; should the Kingdom be settled, and every man enjoy his
own, the Fanatic Ministers cry out, what shall they do, who have intruded into
other men's Livings? These thoughts fright the Presbyterian Lecturers, and the
Assembly of Divines (who these Twelve Months have been preaching against this
Army) into a zealous Union with this Independent Army, yea, with Turks or Jews,
or any Religion in the World (consisting with their usurped possessions) would
they join, rather than suffer the old Religion to be restored. These, these are
the true Reasons that continue the differences of our Church to such a
difficulty, if not impossibility of reconcilement, and when for such ends men
have employed Conscience, no wonder in presecution thereof, what cruelty,
injustice and Tyranny is used as mediums, for obtaining such wicked purposes,
whereof you have a small view in this following Discourse.

CHAP. III. What use the Fanatics have made of Parliaments, and the ways
whereby that Faction in this Parliament and Kingdom have endeavored to make
the Clergy contemptible and odious to the people.
HOW old the Fanatic grudge is against the Church of England, the Discourse of
the Troubles of Frankford can tell the World; and truly since Sacrilege has
been cried up for Reformation, has that same Spirit of Darkness been tampering
in Parliaments, to make them their Engine for the work of destroying the
Church, under color of Reformation, that Archbishop Whitgift (that holy meek
man) in Queen Elizabeth's days, lying very sick, and being told of a Parliament
called, (out of his pious care for the Church) prayed God, that he might not
live to see that Parliament, as near as it was, and God heard his Prayer; and
although (as Lord Verulam confesses) the Parliament of England owes some
satisfaction for the many injuries, and unjust oppressions formerly done by
them to the Church; yet since the first breach (so thirsty were the Members
after the remnant of the Church Lands) few Parliaments, but have rather sought
to increase that debt, till the Church be quite undone; to this purpose, how
have the Fanatics (who for these many years have had the vogue of the people,
opening their mouths wide after any Game, to which one of their Beagles should
lead the trace) superstitiously longed for Parliaments, because their Plots and
hopes were to pack them for their design against the King and Church, as now
they have done, which made the Presbyterian Sectaries, and all other sorts of
Fanatics, so idolize this Parliament, calling it Mr. Calamy. Dr. Temple.
the Perliament of their Prayers, and a frequent Pulpit Title for the House of
Commons was, the House of Gods, and the House of mortal Gods, and truly they
were an House of Gods, like the Heathenish Roman (...), an House of Gods of all
Countries, the Images of English Sectaries; for they do but represent, and it is
but fitting that new Gods should have new Priests, ^ Tim: 4. 3.
heaping up to themselves Teachers after their own hearts lusts; no marvel then
if the Ministers of Christ grow out of request, and all the malice, and
slanders, and cruelty of these new Gods be racked on those, who would teach the
people to serve the true God, rather than men: But God forbid, but that the
world should know, what arts of lying, and slandering, and false accusing,
to make the King and the faithful Clergy of England odious to the people, has
been raised as the Scaffolds to build this second Babel, which though no
longer looked upon, than while in present use, yet (if faithfully recorded)
will be as precious Monuments in the Eyes of wise men, when they shall see
(if God has not given up this Nation to make Lies their Religion) Truth
triumphing in the ruins of such ill founded Structures: how this Fanatic
Faction blasphemed their King, I leave to better Pens, though they used the
same means therein, as their experience had found serviceable for their wicked
ends against the Church, which devices I have collected out of their Printed
Papers, or mine own Observations at Committees, and elsewhere.

The Foundation of the Fanatic Babel being laid, by packing their Agents into
this their forced Parliament (as shall be hereafter declared) and their long
preparing of the people for their Work, by setting the People a madding after
this Parliament, the whole Kingdom's Ruin, as I heard a London Divine, in
June, 1642. accused at a full Committee, to have prophesied (as since it has
appeared) That the Counties had chosen a Company of Hotheaded Men into the
House of Commons, who would prove the Ruin of this Kingdom: The Foundation
being thus laid, the first Scaffold to the Building was made by railing
Speeches, within the Houses (by Privilege of Liberty of Speech to abuse any
persons, their King have not they spared) by some particular Members, stuffed
full of malicious and bloody Eloquence (Let the Sword reach from the North to
the South, quoth Sir Edward Deering) rather than his fantastical new
Church Government should be hindered, reviling the established Form of God's
Service, under which they were bred and born, blasting the sacred Function of
the Ministry of Christ, by which they were made Christians, and publishing
those Speeches in Print, on purpose to infect the People, and fire their minds,
ready enough to catch any such Sparks; and this railing against the Clergy, was
the only way to be made a Chairman of a Committee, or to be designed for some
great Preferment, and to be the worshipful Golden Calves of the People, the
only Ambition of those popular Speech-makers, who little dreaming of the
Fanatic Plots (as wise Statesmen as they pretended to be) to which themselves
opened the Gap, kindled the fire which others of meaner condition (but of
different intentions) blew up to such Flames, as since has burned the
Kindler's own Nests. The Lord Digby proclaimed Traitor, banished, and made the
public hatred of the Fanatics: The Lord Faulkland killed at Newberry Fight:
Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes condemned to die by Martial Law, for the good service he
had done the Parliament his Masters: Sir Edward Deering, who made this motion
in the House of Commons with great applause, to burn the late Canons, (made in
the Convocation, and stamped with the King's Authority) by the Canon-makers own
Hands; not long after had those same his Speeches burned by the public
Hangman, himself expelled the House, and forced to fly the Fury of the People
under a Priest's Coat, and read Prayers in a Church for a disguise, and became
an earnest Suitor for a Deanery, viz. of Canterbury, when he had so railed
against Deans and Chapters, upon no other ground but report (as himself
confessed:) but missing this Preferment, turned Apostate from the King (to whom
he had fled) to those whom himself had called Rebels and Traitors; yet
rejected by them also for his labor; and soon ended his days with grief and
scorn. Mr. Pym, and John White, the Libelling Centurist, who died distracted,
crying out, how many Clergymen, their Wives, and Children he had undone; and
others have been cut off in the midst of their rage against God's Ministers:
Fair warnings to other such like Rabshekahs, who yet have time to repent. But
these Speeches so applauded, and other men imitating them, made a fair way for
a second Story of the same Scaffolding for this new Building, by Remonstrances
and Declarations published in the name of the House of Commons, which usually
ranked the Papists and the Clergy together, as Enemies to the Kingdom, and in
that midnight Remonstrance, in the name of the House of Commons Assembled in
Parliament, was it in terminis laid down, That none of the Clergy were
preferred, but those who preached wickedness and profaneness; yet was no
particular person named, nor truly could be named guilty of so heavy a charge;
but Audacter Calumniari, haerebit aliquid was their Plot, and all the miseries
and Grivances of the Kingdom were laid on the Bishops and the Prelatical Party
(as the new phrase was) when the Authors of that Black Remonstrance knew that
the Clergy of the Church of England had not, nor could have any Vote or hand in
those matters, they being such of which the Clergy did equally complain; which
(besides the House of Commons voting the Clergy in Convocation) guilty of a
Praemunire, accusing also twelve Bishops of High Treason, committed to the
Tower, on purpose only to stop their Mouths from claiming their Privileges,
which as part of the Parliament belong unto them) was enough to have raised
hatred to a second (...), considering the Religious Faith the people then had
of the Reports of their new Gods, as Pulpits called the House of Commons, which
so far possessed a Gentlewoman used to their Lectures, that she durst In
Lyme-street, in London.
not in Conscience take Phystek-without an Order of Parliament from the House
of Commons; such a Brother we read of in Dodona's Grove, who would not believe
his Creed, because there was no Act of Parliament for it: And at the beginning
of this blessed Parliament, did the Fanatic Faction in the House of Commons,
Print and publish a foisted Order, (carefully dispersing the Copies throughout
the Kingdom) in the Name of the House of Commons assembled in Parliament, to
stir up, indeed to invite all active men, (as they phrased the men of their
Tribe) to accuse Ministers, making this one crime and scandal to be complained
of, That a Clergyman had two Livings, though according to the Laws of the Land:
Which Order (though disclaimed within the Walls of the House of Commons, yet
not countermanded by any public Act of the House, so willing were all sorts of
men in the House to see the Clergy abused, notwithstanding that high affront
and dishonor of their House) so wrought abroad in all parts of the Kingdom,
that not any Knave or Fool in a Parish whom reproof for sins had made the
Ministers Enemy, but now thought himself commanded (yes, and bound in
Conscience to obey) to fly in the Face of Gods Minister, and his Spiritual
Father, that within a short space above two thousand Petitions were brought in
against the Clergy (so readily had they packed their business) two or three of
the Fanatic avowed Instruments in a Parish presenting Petitions constantly,
styled The Petition of the whole Parish, though the major part of the Parish;
yea, (I have known it) three parts of four in a Parish have never seen any such
Petition, but disclaimed it under their hands: And the basest Mechanics hand
to a Petition, how false soever, so it were against a Clergyman, was received
with favor, and with Mr. Speakers Thanks for their love to the Parliament, and
could bring upon any Minister of Christ more chargeable and vexatious Summons
and attendance on the Parliament or Committees, and oftentimes longer
Imprisonment, than the Report or Testimonials of all the other better
Parishioners could free him from; nor were there any honest Orthodox Clergy
(for all else were accounted the Parliaments Friends) who groaned not under the
Insolency of this proud domineering Faction, daily threatening them with
Petitioning against them in Parliament, which was then thought a most dreadful
business, though the people had never so long known their Parsons Learning and
Honesty; but as Sir H. S.
Mr. Seldom (a Member of the House) then told a Person of Honor, Learning and
Honesty were sins enough in a Clergyman in these days.

3. Having thus sent into Countries for ugly shapes and skins of Beasts to dress
the Clergy in for the peoples sight, no marvel if (as the Heathens served the
Christians) they now set Dogs to bait them, countenancing all those who opposed
the established Worship of God, and suspending the due Administration of the
same, by an imperious Order of the House of Commons only, in defiance to the
Kings Proclamation then set forth for the due celebration thereof, and also of
an Order of the House of Peers for the same purpose; and in many Churches have
some Members of their private Authority forbid the Priests to read Divine
Service, St. Michael Cornhil.
others in contempt thereof, put on their Hats during the Reading of Prayers,
St. Giles Cripplegate.
which gave such encouragement to the Rabble-Rout of that Faction in the City,
that in diverse Churches unheard of Violences were offered to Ministers
officiating in full Congregations by a few Sectaries, yet scarce durst any man
either rescue the Minister, or defend their own Religion; and it is too well
known how a few (called Zealous) young Fellows with their Wenches rushing into
any Church in London could have set up a Psalm, and thereby sing a whole Parish
out of their Relegion, Vide vitam Jacobi Andre^.
(a Trick they had from the Dutch Rebels and Anabaptists) into such a
lukewarmness were most men grown toward Gods Service; but as this was made
the Shiboleth to try the Fanatic Friends, so was the contemning of the
Established Religion a ready way to make all the constant Professors of that
Religion contemnned also, and who should be constant in Religion if not the
Clergy.

4. A Fourth way to make the Clergy odious to tht People, was their abetting
all Outrages and Affronts done to the Persons and Functions of the Clergy,
insomuch, that upon their sending for Burton, and Pryn, and Bastwick, (Three
Champions, or Fanatic Beautifews) and the audacious Riots and Tumults,
attendin their return to London without control, the Faction took such
Encouragement (having found their Strength in the House of Commons) in their
contempt of the Priest, that a Divine in his Habit, could not walk the Streets
of London, without being reproached in every corner, by the name of Baal's
Priest, Popish Priest, Caesar's Friend, and the like Scoffings; nor durst
Parishoners show their wonted love toward their Spiritual Father; nay, scarce
durst they come to hear him preach, without hazard of being accounted a
Malignant, if he were so conscientious as not to change his Religion (as these
Sectaries would have him,) and now New England so vomited up her Factious
Spirits, that Merchants in London began to complain, that all Commodities in
New England were fallen to half their former price, and each Damm and Sink of
Religion pumped into our wholesome Streams, those who (as Witches do their
Baptism) had renounced their former sacred calling to the Priesthood, yet now
returned the only admired Churchmen, and were by Orders of the House of
Commons, either forced into other Men's Churches, as Lecturers, or thrust into
sequestered Parsonages (their Fellow Subjects Freehold) which before themselves
had cried down for Antichristian.

5. A fair Introduction to the reproachful Usage of the Clergy at Committees,
in the face of their own Parishioners; for having found the forwardness of the
people (by their first foisted Order aforesaid) to serve them in their Designs,
the Faction in the House procured a large Committee for Religion (as they
called it) the Fanatics main Engine against the Church, dividing it into many
Sub-Committees, as Mr. White's Committee, Mr. Corbet's Committee, Sir Robert
Harlows Committee, Sir Edward Deering's Committee, and diverse others, upon
pretense of hearing the multitudes of Petitions daily brought in against
scandalous Ministers (as the term was) which Committees were made as several
Stages for continual Clergy-baitings; mine Ears still tingle at the loud
Clamors and Shoutings there made (especially at the Committee which sat at the
Court of Wards) in derision of grave and reverend Divines, by that rabble of
Sectaries which daily flocked thither, to see this new pastime, where the
Committee-members, out of their vast Privilege to abuse any man (though their
Betters, some Members of the Convocation, whose privileges are, and by Law,
ought to be as large as those of the House of Commons) without control, have
been pleased to call the Ministers of Christ brought before them, (by Jaylors
and Pursevants, and placed like heinous Malefactors, without their Bar
(bare-headed forsooth) sausie Jacks, base Fellows, brazen faced Fellows, and in
great scorn, has the Cap of a known Orthodox Dr. Halsy.
Doctor been called to be pulled off, to see if he were not a shaven Popish
Priest; and upon a Parson's Evidence for one of his Parishoners, That he was no
Papist, (whose Evidence in such cases, is, and ought to be Authentical) it was
replied by a Committee, Have you no Witness but a base Priest? And to some
Eminent Doctors in Divinity of the City of London, viz. Dr. Baker, Dr. Brough,
Dr. Walton, giving Testimony in a cause then before them, it was said by a
Citizen, Member of that Committee, Isaac Pennington, what shall we believe
these Doctors for? And Sir Robert Harlow going to his Committee-Chair (the
Chair of the Scorner) bragged to his Friend Dr. Fell.
How he would bait the Dean of Christ-Church; and after such like Usage, with
chargeable and long Attendance, de die in diem, on these Committees, as many
Clergymen as were brought to the Stake to be voted (right or wrong) were sure
to be outed of their Livings, else their good and godly People were not
pleased; that the Souls of many honest and faithful Ministers of Christ, were
so filled with the scorn of the proud, who thus had them in Derision, that they
died for very grief, as did Dr. Halsy, and Dr. Clarke, and diverse others.

CHAP. IV. The Fanatics Arts of framing Accusations to the Parliament against
the Clergy, and their manner of proving their Charges.
THe Reports of these new Spanish-English Inquisitions being spread abroad in
City and Country, so fleshed these Hounds in their Parson-hunting (as their own
phrase was) and so terrified the rest of the Clergy, that by this success, the
Masters of the Game began to heighten on their Designs of planting in a new
Ministry, not only as foisted Lecturers, but as endowed Churchmen, the more
strongly to make them Servants for their work, especially in London, (whose
Clergy bore the heat of the day in this persecution; for not six Parsons or
Vicars in all that City, but abhorred these ungodly courses) that two or three
Reformers in a Parish, usually demanded no smaller matter of their Parson, than
that he should resign up his whole Livelihood at once, viz. his Living,
otherwise they would threaten to fetch him up to the Parliament; which Threats
so far prevailed with many of blameless Lives and Conversation, that to avoid
the trouble and charges, and the infinite Scorn and Vexation at Committees, and
the Shame (as then it was accounted) of being ranked among scandalous
Ministers, gave up their Churches, viz. Mr. Mason, Dr. Howel, Mr. Ward, Dr.
Pierce, Dr. Hill, Mr. Paggit, Mr. Hanslow, etc. And all others sought to change
their Livings for some more quiet place: And I have heard some of these
malicious Londoners, not ashamed openly in the face of a Committee, to profess,
(and without control) That they would never give over vexing their Parson,
till they had worried him out of his Living. And so much have these Factions
prevailed, that scarce any Parsons or Vicars in that City are left
unsequestred; what Justice can any expect from such Committees, who have taken
upon them to be Judges of the Clergy, against whom they have so openly declared
themselves Parties and Adversaries: For scarce any of the persecuted Clergy,
but can name some particular Members of this Faction in the House of Commons,
and so by consequence of these Committees also, who have been active, not only
as Representatives, but as chief Promoters and Authors of their Troubles, some
by giving Instructions, what to lay in Petitions against them, others have
drawn up Articles and Petitions, Miles Corbet Chairman against Mr. Brooks.
and have sent them to Parishes to be subscribed, and to seek out Witnesses (if
they could) to prove them; nor scarce durst any Parishoner deny his hand,
though he knew nothing of the Charge, for fear of being accounted a Malignant;
and to some Parishoners refusing to subscribe, because they could prove nothing
of the Accusations, it has been replied, Sir Henry Mildway, and Mr. Ash,
against Dr. Walton.
Set you your Hands, leave us to prove the Charge; till two or three Presidents
in this kind, from these new Legislative hands, had made a Case for some
Lawyers Table Book, that the known way of petitioning against a Clergyman, was
to go to such a Lawyer, or such a Solicitor, who for his Fee could furnish any
Clyent with Accusations against any Clergyman whatsoever; but perhaps some
will say, those Articles were not true against their Minister, they could not
prove them.

That is no matter, the Lawyers can warrant those Clyents harmless; for, say
they, the Parliament, (that is the House of Commons) put not men to their
Oaths, not allow any Costs or Damages upon default of Proof, though their
Accusation or Charge against their Minister be never so foul, never so false,
and the Ministers Charges never so great: to name but one instance in this
kind, Dr. Cousins Dr. John Cousins.
the Reverend Dean of Peterborough, and Master of Peter House in Cambridge,
upon a motion made in the House of Commons by the Lord Fairfax, that the Doctor
had enticed a young Scholar to Popery, was committed to the Sergeant at Arms
to attend daily till the House should call him to a hearing; after Fifty Days
Imprisonment, and Charges of Twenty shillings per diem, (besides being exposed
to the scorn and houtings of the City Sectaries, who daily flocked to the
Doors of the Parliament, to show their readiness to serve them) upon hearing,
the said Doctor made it appear (some Members also bearing him vvitness) that
the Doctor being then Vice Chancellor of the University, had most severely
punished the Mr. Nicols.
Party (whom upon Examination he had found guilty) by Recantation, and by
expelling him the University, yet no Cost or Damage by way of Reparation was
allowed to the Doctor by the House of Commons. This is the Justice of the
Supreme Court of Judicature in England; and a great show of Justice had these
Accusations, if (like a Chancery Bill) any one particular laid were proved,
though it were but malignancy against the Parliament; a Crime never heard of
till the Fanatic Faction in Parliament voted, That to obey the King was High
Treason: this new Privilege of Parliament so agreeable to Gods Law, (Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor) advised some Parishioners
to put in some odious Crimes against their Parson amongst the smaller matters
they had laid; otherwise (said he) Mr. Edwards against Dr. W. before the
Fanatics had driven out the more moderate Party from the House of Commons.
the House will not regard your Petition, no matter whether ye can prove them
or not, and when some of the honester party (not then crowded from the House
of Commons) upon often experience of such slanders uncontrolled, moved that
according to Reason and Common Justice, whosoever brought a false Accusation
against any man should Lege talionis, be punished as the Accused should have
been, if guilty; the Faction in the House rejected that just Motion, pretending
that such an Order would discourage Petitioners: and a Chairman being told by
Dr. Stern, Master of Jesus College in Cambridge upon the like occasion, that
the Committee were bound by Gods Law not to countenance a false Witness
according to the Ninth Commandment, replied to the Doctor, that he should not
teach them whot to do: yet every week as soon as some wicked Design ripeneth,
for a color do these men Vote and Ordain mightily for keeping the Sabbath Day,
when lying and false witnessing will no longer advance their Cause, they will
Vote it may be as much for this Commandment also; nay, in stead of reproving
false witness, the Faction in Committees have found out shifts to help out a
Reforming Liar, or else to salve up the business with further proof to be
produced hereafter, or making consequences and inferences upon a false or
doubtful Testimony, lest their good people (as they called their Agents) should
be discouraged; but for sureness sake Orders were often pasted on the Doors of
the Committee, forbidding entrance to any but those of their own Faction,
witness the Committee in the Exchequer Chamber about the Smectymnuan Libel, or
the Grand Petition against Episcopacy, where all other Divines were turned out
for Spies, as their phrase was; but some stayed long enough to hear heavy
Charges weakly proved, viz. That Episcopacy was an Enemy to Parliaments, and to
the Laws of the Land: How proved think you? Why a single Witness is produced,
saying, that he heard a Doctor in Divinity Dr. D.
of Sussex speak some words against the Parliament, Ergo, and the latter part
was proved, because a Bishop said that he would hinder Mr. Burton's
Prohibition, (but did not hinder it, as Burton there confessed) these were the
only Proofs of such high Charges there alleged to make Episcopacy and the
Bishops odious; and as if all these ways were not ^now to make the Clergy of
England stink in the Nostrils of a seduced people; let the world consider what
scandalous Libels have been written by the Fanatics against the Clergy, and
those Authorized by the Parliament: among multitudes to name but one though in
that hundred, I mean the first Century, written by Mr. John White a Lawyer, and
a great Chairman for Religion, with an Epistle In the Margin of that Epistle,
Quorum esse and videre est esse and bibere.
canting in Scripture phrase, applying the words of the Holy Ghost to the
proper works of the Devil, who is called the envious man, and the accuser of
the Brethren: hear this John White generally charging the Clergy of England to
be dumb Dogs, men swallowed up with Wine and strong Drink, whose Tables are
full of Vomit, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Buggerers, that change the natural use
into that which is against Nature, Priests of Ball, Bacchus, Priapus, etc. Jer.
5. Romans 26. Isaiah 28. 7.
Horrid Crimes, or horrid Slanders! Did ever any Popish Jesuit so revile the
Clergy of England? I need not pray the Lord rebuke him, for God has long since
cut him off in the midst of his rage against the Church, such ungodly practices
raving rnd condemning himself at his dying hour, for his undoing so many
guiltless Ministers: and let any man judge if that first and only Example of
Buggery prove not John White and his Abettors, the true Sons of the Father of
Lies, who was a Liar from the beginning; for either the party was found not
guilty, why then sequestered? Or guilty, why then not punished by death
according to Law.

It is not to be imagined that the Fanatics would conceal the shame of any
Clergyman, when they so raked each Dunghill and corner to discover it; but
that such an instance (if proved) should have been triumphantly stretched, to
further their glorious Reformation; and whether the party so accused, was not
some years before this Parliament, cleared by the Justices of the Peace for
Sussex, who sifted out that Fanatic Plot against him (as one of those Justices
told me) I refer the Reader to the then Justices of that County; but for a
general Answer to that scandalous Libel, this Truth without question may be
said, That not any one person in that Century, has had any legal Trial at all;
but condemnati quoniam accusati; and the Justice of these times is, satis est
accusare, otherwise what man in his Wits could believe, that Adulteries,
Fornications, and such deeds of Darkness could be proved (as this John White
affirms in the Margin of his Epistle) by seldom less than six or seven
Witnesses? unless so many saw what this worthy Member did with his Neighbors
Wife in White Friars, which made his own Wife so jealous of this Mr. White her
Husband: But why suspicion of incontinency only from looks, as in that Century
Example 49. or from leading women into dark places, as Example 18. by one
whose house stands in a dark Alley in London, or why to be seen in company
with Papists (which the Law requires of Clergymen) as in Example 75. and 88.
should be such Charges and Crimes as to ruin a man and his whole Family, or
used as an Argument to make the whole Clergy odious, let any Christian judge. I
have been present, when a grave and learned Divine has been accused at a
Committee for an Adulterer and a Drunkard, the proof of the former was only
kissing a Woman in the presence of Company, and the other, was the drinking of
only one half Pint of Wine; and so unchristian a scrutiny has been made for
accusations, and pretended proofs of Crimes against the persons of the Clergy,
that (besides Accusers, and those known Schismatics, and Adversaries allowed
to be both Parties, and Judges, and Witnesses also.) Agents in Parishes have
baen employed in going from house to house with Parliament Warrants, summoning
and terrifying all Men and Women, nay Servants, (I have known it) whom they
could hear were acquainted with such Ministers; and at Committees the
Neighbors and familiar Friends so summoned, have been urged ex officio, to
speak not only to Articles laid in Petitions, but also have had their
Consciences sifted, to make them confess some Crime or Report, or suspicion of
a Crime. If the Parish afforded no Evidence, nor their old Acquaintance, down
they sent (in some men's Causes) to the University to hunt out some Scandal, in
the time of their Ministers abode there: nor have some Clergy men's Lives and
Conversation from their Cradle been left unsearched (I could name particulars)
to get something, whereof to accuse a Clergyman at the Parliament: So that
any Report of a Crime committed twenty years before this Parliament, (as in
that Century Example 58.) or before taking of Holy Orders, or being possessed
of a Church, or any Crime which Justice had long since taken cognizance of, and
censured, as Example 72. or any rash words never so privately spoken, have
been now reaped up to make a Ministers scandal, and the whole Ministry
scandalous. Another trick of false Accusing accounted a just way of charging
Clergymen, was a fallacious wresting of Words, quite contrary to the sense of
the Preacher: A Reverend Doctor (whom I could name) was accused in Parliament,
that he had Preached about fourteen years before this Parliament, that the
Bishops when they took away the Mass, took away all Religion; upon hearing, the
Doctor produced the Sermon, and made it appear, that he Preached at that time,
(it being the public Assizes at York) that men must not think that the
Bishops, when they took away the Mass took away all Religion. Another Divine
was accused of Popery, viz. that he had Preached, that the intention of the
Priest, was of the Essence of the Sacrament; when he Preached it only
Historice, and confuted the Opinion at the same time.

But if no proofs could be found of Crimes and Vicious Conversation in a Clergy
man, then came in the politic Counsel of the Heathenish Presidents against
Daniel, Daniel 6. 5.
We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against
him concerning the Law of his God, under the (made odious) crimes of
Innovations, Superstition, Popery, a Sin (not (...)) without transgression of
any Law, Statute, Act of Parliament, Order, or Ordinance of both, or either
Houses; nor would the Faction publish any Rule, to measure what should be
accounted Innovations, Superstition or Popery, and what not; but with these
false Traces, they cunningly kept up the loud Cries of their People against the
Clergy, making thereby so large a Snare, that not the most zealous Protestant
Divines, who had been all their Life times preaching against Popery and
Superstition, could possibly escape, if but accused: Good God! can Posterity
(if they may be suffered to be Christian) have so much Faith as to believe,
that in the face of a Christian Nation (nay, nay a pure Reforming Religious
Christian Parliament) the Ministers of Jesus Christ should be doomed to ruin,
for saying in effect, Christianus suum: See here a Catalogue of Crimes charged
upon the Clergy, collected out of the first Century, authorized to be Published
in Print by the Parliament.

Bowing at the name of Jesus, Examples, 33. 43. Setting up the name Jesus in
the Church, Ex. 72. 83. Preaching against Sacrilege, Ex. 22. Bowing the Body
in Gods House, Ex. 7. Assisting the King, and exhorting Subjects so to do, Ex.
33. 43. Reading the Kings Proclamation in Churches, according to the Kings
Command, Ex. -- 28. 34. 52. Appointing the 43. Psalm to be sung, Ex. 29.
Preaching against not coming to their own Parish Church, Ex. 21. 35. 38.
Reading, and having Popish Books, Ex. 88. 55. Seen in Company with Papists, Ex.
88.
It were endless to reckon particulars in this kind of Accusations, as wearing
the Surplice, using Ceremonies, praying for Bishops, all now cried down for
Superstition and Popery: But in every Petiton, Malignancy against the
Parliament, was the Burden of the Song (this indeed made any Doctrines to be
censured Superstition and Popery) a Crime would puzzle all the Divines and
Lawyers in Christendom to expound, were they Strangers to the Proceedings of
this Faction; this Malignancy being nothing else but for Subjects to be
suspected of being constant in Religion toward God, and Loyalty toward their
King, this is the unquestionable definition of Malignancy against the
Parliament and what Christian (much more a Clergyman) would plead not guilty
to these objected Crimes, or be ashamed of these condemned Popish Doctrines?
And when by these tricks, they had cruelly committed many of the Clergy into
noisome Prisons, forcing others to fly the like cruelty, by forsaking their
Habitations and Estates, their Wives and Children, they sequestered them for non
Residence, first force them to fly, and then to punish them for flying: It Is
pity to omit their pretty fashion of sequesting Mr. Freeman of London; It is
this day ordered by the Committee for plundered Ministers, that all the Profit
of James Garlick-hithe, be sequstred into the Hands of, etc. from Mr. Freeman,
the present Incumbent, till cause be shown to the contrary. O the excellent
Justiceof the new Saints! of the Reforming People of God! executed by Club-law,
and by the Sword of War, which these weak Christians, by the help of a
mis-guided Commonwealth-Party, have raised to empower themselves to force the
Consciences of all men (now themselves are grown so strong) to a new Covenant,
the Fanatics last Engine to ruin the Church, and to destroy the Clergy, Root
and Branch: A Solemn League and Covenant, the Fanatic, Antichristian Idol, set
up in the Temple of God, hung up in all the Churches of London; a Covenant,
like that in Isaiah, with Death, and an Agreement with Hell: A Covenant made by
the Fanatics of two Nations, in defiance to God and the King, to the
Destruction of the Religion of their own Mother Church, and of all Loyalty to
their King, the Father of their Country: A scandalous Covenant, maliciously
studied, and laid for a mere Snare, and Rock of Offense to the Estates and
Consciences of the Clergy, and People of God, that Scandal in the Abstract,
Scandalum datum, praebens proximo occasionem ruinae, the proper work of the
Devil, insomuch, that at a general Summons of the Gentry, and remnant of the
Clergy of the County of Surrey, for the taking this Covenant, some chief Actors
of the Faction, when they saw, that with several Salvo's, and Liberty to take
it in any sense, with mental Reservations, and considerations, that it was but
a forced Oath (and such like mincings) many men (and some of the Clergy, loving
this present World, took the same) said, they were sorry to see some take it,
whose Estates they hoped to have caught by this Hook: And although the Authors
of the Covenant, knew the Clergies greater Obligations than other men, by Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy to the King, and by Oaths of Canonical Obedience,
and by several Subscriptions upon Record to the present Church, and by their
stricter Tie of Conscience, and greater knowledge of the Function of Episcopacy
(from whence themselves received their own Holy Order) which from our Saviors,
and the Apostles days, was without Interruption for 1500 years, and still is
continued in all Christian Churches, where Rebellion started not the Scruple,
and the Sword ever since maintains the Heresy; yet none were so much pressed,
and urged to take this Covenant, in Terminis, to destroy Bishops, as were the
Clergy, and the refusal thereof was ipso facto, loss of any Clergy-man's
Livings and Livelihood; nay, so barbarous were this Faction, that their
Committee for Composition at Goldsmiths Hall, would not admit the Lord Bishop
of Winchester, lately deceased, to compound for his sequestered Temporal Estate
(for no compounding for Spirituals is allowed: but Sequestration is indeed
Deprivation with these men) unless he would take the Covenant, and swear to
destroy himself, and his own sacred Function; yet these were the men, who have
so cried out against Oaths ex officio, and against forcing the Consciences of
men, and give this reason, why the Liturgy must be taken away, because it gave
Offense to some men's Consciences; and these are the men who cried down the
Clergy for Innovations, and now punish them because they will not move; Preface
to the Directory.
but as these Fanatics have rigidly practiced all those things, which
themselves so much abhorred, teaching the World a new Art, how to commit any
villainy securely, by first railing against that Sin which they intend to
commit; so may they be a warning to all Christian Princes, how they suffer the
Church or State-Goverment to be spoken against, be the pretense never so pious,
or seemingly Religious.

CHAP. V. A view of the New Judges of the thus accused Clergy; their condition
and their judging of Doctrines in their Committees for Religion, de facto and
de jure.
HAving given the world a short view (by which the rest may be guessed) of the
Fanatics arts and tricks of making the Clergy their adversaries, and inventing
accusations against them, whom as heinous Malefactors, they have taken upon
them to judge (as they pretend) by Law, and by the Justice and Wisdom of the
High Court of Parliament, for Reformation of Religion; it is not unseasonable to
show the world a true Character of these great Judges in their personal
Relations, as well as their political capacity of judging de facto, and de
jure. And surely men (who were strangers to the designs of this Faction) would
think (by the high strains of public Acts pretending Reformation of Religion)
there were some Ecumenical Counsel now sitting, or at least some great
Convocation of Grave and Learned Bishops and Clergy of England (who were wont
to have the judiciary power in Church Matters, long before any Parliaments were
in England) famous for their honest Lives, and by their great knowledge able to
judge, not vote Religion up or down: but O Tempora! O Mores! the Grave Bishops
of the Church are by tumults driven from the Parliament; the Convocation by
subtelty of a pretended praemunire, and by fury are cried down; hereby all the
Clergy of England are silenced at one; not any one Churchman admitted to
consult, or act in matters Ecclesiastical; the Keys are snatched by violence
from the Apostles hands (to whom Christ gave them) and are hung at the girdles
of mere Laymen; most of them illiterate men assembled in Parliament, a mixed
multitude of all professions, wherein as Sir Robert Naunton has observed in
King James's Reign, since the Fanatics began their Plot, were 40, who never
saw Twenty years of age, and many such were chosen into the House of Commons;
yet upon any one of these Votes (as Votes go now adays) the peace and Religion
of a Nation may depend. But to give a just account, casting out the most of the
Nobility, and about two hundred of the House of Commons (men of greatest
Estates, therefore more like to seek the welfare of their Country, than their
own private interests, which were driven from the House, where they sat but as
Ciphers) and counting the multitudes of Tradesmen, and Merchants of London and
other Incorporations packed into this Parliament to carry a Vote; besides the
many Lawyers, Mercenary men, and most of them Recorders, and so servants to
Incorporations (making Laws for themselves to get Money by) together with a few
engaged Knights and Gentlemen, famous for hauking and for hunting after
Lectures and Whorehouses, (many of them having sold off their Houses in the
Country, and took others at London, to follow the Fanatical Plot more
diligently) and the sum of these make up the Fanatical Faction in the
Parliament, stiling themselves the Parliament of England. And now the Soldiers
by a counterfeit Seal have recruited the House with no small number of Colonels
and Officers; when indeed they have turned the Parliament out of doors, and
turned themselves Apostates in Religion, and have shared the Lands of the
Church to make themselves a fortune; not to mention their vicious Lives, which
might make up truer Centuries; nor their Hypocrisy, Lies, and breaking of
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; yet these are the men usurping all power
both of Church and State; who are become the supreme Heads of the Church, and
of all Church Matters, which none of them ever understood, yet these (also
parties) have made themselves Judges of the Religion, Doctrine, Function, and
Estates of all the Clergy of England. Miles Corbet the Recorder of Yarmouth,
who Indicted a man for a Conjurer, and was urgent upon the Jury to condemn the
party upon no proof but a Book of Circles found in his Study, which Miles said
was a Book of Conjuring, had not a Learned Clergyman told the Jury, that the
Book was but an old Almanac. I have been present at a Committee for Religion,
consisting of five or six Tradesmen and Merchants of London, and an ignorant
Lawyer in the Chair; yet these have judged Doctrines by whole sale, executing
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in an high act, viz. Absolving Ecclesiastical
persons (suspended by their Diocesan Bishop) as it were in a parenthesis, with
an O yes! Ye that will have these three Ministers of Wales (I confess I have
forgot their names) to have Liberty and License to preach, say I! Ye that will
not, say no! Which being thrice repeated, and answered I! I! these three
suspended Ministers were by this Vote perfectly absolved no doubt! In the mean
time, at this worshipful, (nay honorable) Bar, was a heavy complaint against a
Grave Mr. Brooks of Yarmouth.
Divine of Blasphemy, which he had preached, viz. That the Virgin Mary was the
Mother of God; and at a day appointed for Voting, had not a Divine whispered
some of these Committee Men, had this Doctrine been Voted Blasphemy; so easily
might the sacred Ephesine Counsel have been condemned by this learned Committee
for (...), and condemning Nestorius for Heresy; and Elizabeth in the first of
St. Luke, should have been as guilty of Blasphemy, for calling the Blessed
Virgin the Mother of her Lord. And when a Reverend Doctor, and Dr. Stern.
Master of Jesus College in Cambridge, who was charged with Blasphemy at Sir
Robert Harlows Committee, for writing Honor God with thy substance, on the
Basin for Alms; made answer, by asking whether it was not rather Blasphemy in
them to call a sentence of Scripture Blasphemy? it was replied by a boy-Member
of that Committee, Will ye suffer him (meaning the Doctor) to answer by
questions? At another time I heard one of these Committees cry out, what a
miserable condition these people were in, who lived under such a Minister, who
(as the Article was) had preached, that Original sin was washed away in
Baptism? which was there derided at as Popery. In brief, to never so true
Doctrines, the Mr. Rous.
Chairman says, they sit not there to dispute. Up started Captain Ven, (a
Tradesman of London) and asked a Mr. Cheslen of St. Matthew Fridaystreet.
Divine (justifying at their Bar his Doctrine to be true and Orthodox) did you
preach these Doctrines? answer I or no! whether they be true or false, leave
that to us to judge. So the case stands with the Divines of England; let any
ignorant hearer (suppose an Apprentice Boy, I have known it) accuse any
Clergyman (the gravest Doctor in Divinity) of preaching Doctrines which the
Boy thinks are false, or Popish Doctrines, to the House of Commons, or
Committees, shall the Divine be sent for, perhaps by a Pursivant: justify his
Doctrine he must not, though never so true, the House supposes it to be false,
erroneous, Popish, or scandalous, because complained of; answer he must, did he
preach it, I, or no? Whether it be true or false, they will not dispute, hit or
miss, they will vote, and that is enough to make any Doctrine true or false,
Popish or scandalous, and thereby to imprison the person of Christ's Minister,
and to seize on his Estate, to out him of all his Freehold and Livelihood, and
to spoil him of his goods: Cicero delegibus, lib. 1.
O si tanta potestas sit stultorum sententiis, ac jussis, ut eorum suffragiis
rerum natura vertatur, cur non sanciunt, ut quae mala sunt pro bonis habeantur?
yea so senslesly conceited have this Lay -Parliament (Parliamentum indoctorum)
been of themselves, that some of them have said, since they had read the
Scriptures (in English) why should they not be able to judge of Divinity, as
well as the best Doctors? And to have desired, that Doctrines complained of in
Petitions to these Lay-Committees, might be referred to the Judgment of Learned
Divines about London, would have been taken for an high contempt of their
Committee for Religion, and of the power of Parliament; (as a Mr. Vaughan.
Member of that Committee told one, who made the Motion in private to him)
where such are become Judges of Divinity. When Lawyers perk into a Chair for
Religion, and Cobblers preach (both alike lawful) no marvail if Religion be
voted illegal, and the Priests be thought to go so awry; and in these times, to
the Lawyer must the Divine go, if he will preach without fear of being made a
scandalous Minister, or imprisoned for every Sermon. I have known some twenty
shillings Fees given to a Lawyer to plead at the Committee for Religion, in the
behalf of some Doctrines preached in a Sermon, for which the Preacher never got
twenty pence, no defense being left for the Priests Doctrine, or officiating in
sacris, unless allowed by an Act of Parliament, or some common Law-trick;
insomuch, that a Learned Doctor of Divinity being accused of Popery, for
calling the Communion Table an Altar, alleging the Scripture in the Dr. Cousin.
Hebrews, Habemus Altar, we have an Altar, of which they may not eat, meant of
the Christian Eucharist, could not hereby be acquitted of the Popery; but
producing the words of an Act of Parliament of Edward the Sixth, yet
unrepealed, calling the Eucharist the Sacrament of the Altar, the Committee for
Religion were fully answered. And several Actions at common Law of Assault and
Battery were brought against a Mr. Adams.
Divine in Essex, who out of zeal to Gods house, (as the Priests did with
Vzziah) thrust some people out of his Church, who sending for Cakes and Ale
from an Alehouse, were profanely carousing on the Lords Table in the Church;
yet could not this Crime be admitted a lawful plea in the Common Law, to save
the Minister harmless from being overthrown in the Action; but consulting with
a Lawyer, he was advised to plead his institution and induction into the said
Church, where the fact was done, and so by a Rule in the Law, that any man may
thrust another out of his House, if he behave himself uncivilly therein, the
Minister was secured from the Actions of Assault and Battery; so that would our
Savior now beat out the buyers and sellers from the Temple, the Lawyers would
afford an Action against him of Assault and Battery. And not long before this
Parliament, did the Lawyers find out ways of Indicting Clergymen at the
public Assizes, for standing up at the Creed; In Durham.
or for denying to give the Sacrament to people obstinately refusing to kneel
at the receiving thereof, and to come up to the Rails about the Holy Table;
that I have known some Sectaries in London, command their servants to go to the
Sacrament, and to sit in the lower places of the Church, to try whether the
Minister would bring the Sacrament to them in their seats, that so they might
have an Action of Law against the Minister, or else complain against him to the
Parliament: nor will it be too long a digression to remember a former vent of
the Fanatics malice in a Parliament at the beginning of King Charles his
Reign; urging strongly, a motion of making Adultery death in a Clergyman, but
not in any other person, purposely to throw scorn on that profession; and how
safe any Clergy man's life should have been, may the conspiracy of the Lady
Laurence witness against a grave Divine, which the justice of the Star Chamber
found out, and censured: righteous judgment no doubt is to be expected, when
such a malicious Faction shall get power to make themselves Judges of the
Clergy, as now they have done.

Good God! have our Preachers been these Eighty years confuting the
superstition of the Papists, to be made the stalking horses to a Sacrilegious,
Superstitious, and Rebellious Faction? by whom themselves are at last crowed
down for Papists, under the same pretense of Reformation, having been taught to
hate Popery without discretion; no marvail if such people now question their
Teachers, and think they have forfeited their power and knowledge to them, whom
they have taught no better; and what use these men have made of this pretended
power, let their own actions testify. But that they may seem to be no usurpers
of any power, at first they derided at Episcopacy (or Monarchy, but that is not
the subject of this discourse) to be Jure Divino, though never so plain, in the
10. of St. Luke, by Christ's Election of 12 Apostles, and 72 Disciples of an
inferior order, out of which Mathias was in the first of the Acts preferred to
be numbered with the 11 in the room of Judas; and were there any scruple, who
more fitting to resolve the doubt, than those who lived in the Apostles time?
as did Ignatius, whose works, as also the continued succession of Bishops in
all Christian Churches for 1500 years together, were argument enough to those
who have not denied their Faith, forgetting their Creed, I believe the holy
Catholic Church: And against such men a Christian ought not to dispute: But
now began new principles of Divinity to be broached, by the new
State-Chaplains, vid. That the Law of nature bade the Parliament (that is, the
House of Commons, the peoples Representatives) to reassume all power into their
hands, it being so universally complained of, that the King and the Bishops had
abused their trust, intending to ruin the Kingdom, and destroy Religion (the
two great bugbears wherewith the Fanatical Faction (who felt the pulses of the
people beating strongly after property, or Religion) kept the people
continually affrighted; and it being as generally believed, (for qua volumus
facile credimus) that all power in Church and Commonwealth was derived from
the people, and their Representatives, and not from God immediately: The
Observator.
Aristotle's Politics is made Scripture for this new Divinity; and surely an
excellent Religion will nature teach Christians, to justify what they have, or
shall do so manifestly against the Law of God and man. If this argument be not
strong enough, their Lecturers, who were wont in former Parliaments also to
attend the House of Commons door, making Legs to the Members in transitu,
praying their Worships to remember the Gospel, by which they meant their
Presbytery: these preach to them, that their power to Reform Religion, is Jure
Divino, why? forsooth because the people called them thereunto; and vox Populi
est vox Dei, was their beloved unquestionable Oracle; indeed vox populi cried
up Rebellious Absalom against his King and Father! Vox populi cried against our
Savior, Crucify him, Crucify him! Vox populi called for the Golden Calf!
from whence to the silver-Smiths of Diana, Scripture may teach us that
Argumentum pessimi turba, and that in Religion vox populi is rather vox Diaboli
than Dei. Seneca de vita beat.
Yet this vox populi must choose our Religion, and Religion-makers: but who
gave the people power to choose? the Kings writ for Elections; then all power
is not in the people, nor can any Electors invest their Elected with the jus
Tertii, for nemo potest plus juris transfer in alium, quam ipse habet; the
power of the Kings, and of the Church, being not in the peoples power to commit
to their Trustees; Laws having made the distinction between the Kings
Prerogative, and the Subjects propriety, between Church and Commonwealth; as
well as between meum and tuum, among Fellow Subjects: and were the Kingdom
Elective (as England was never) yet well might that Roman Emperors Speech be
applied, Vestrum quidem erat eligere, post autem meum est imperare, vestrum est
obedire: But that all power of the Church in Doctrine and Discipline should be
originally in the people (that is, the rude multitude) is a new opinion framed
by affection, and made Religion by politic engagements, only to serve the
present designs; for now the Fanatical Lecturers (having obtained their ends
against the Bishops by vox populi, their own Doctrine) dispute the power with
their Lay-masters in Parliament; who by their help getting the Sword, (and by
that the strongest power) are not like to forego the same upon Vox populi: But
did not violence so crowd up this Lay-Parliament, and Committee for Religion,
that in their Chairs no room is left for Gods word to take place, they might
know that the 2. Malachi 7.
Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and not the peoples lips, and that by
tying up the lips of the Priests. Gods Law says, Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. That man which shall do presumptiously, and not hearken to the
Priest, shall dye: Nor did the people teach the Apostles, but surely the
Apostles taught the people, and Ruled over the people in Word and Doctrine;
since to them Christ gave the Keys, Christus dedit, non populus: Otherways St.
Paul's Rod was a mere brag, and so was his jurisdiction, 1 Cor. 11.
the rest will I set in order when I come; which also he commended to Timothy
and Titus, and the other Bishops and Deacons for governing the Church, whereof
the first Synod at Jerusalem consisted; and to prevent the mistake of
Lay Elders in that Synod, it is said afterward of Judas and Silas, that Acts 15.
they also were Prophets; and of the Clergy were all general Counsels of
Christendom made up, to whom Constantine said, judiciary power (especially in
Doctrines) did belong: and this was the established Law of the Christian world;
the benefit whereof St. Ambrose pleaded against Auxentius: and it is known, upon
such grounds Luther refused the judgment of the Emperors Court, appealing to a
Counsel concerning his Doctrine. The word Presbyter almost Englishing itself
Priest, as was the Ecclesiastical sense of the word, both in the New Testament,
and Ancient Writers, both Christian and Heathen, which Amianus Marcellinus, a
mere Historian, describes Christiani ritus Presbyter, never Englished in the
Grammatical sense, till design translated it so in our English Testament; and
by those Translators never intended to be wrested to Lay Elders, as the
non-Doctors of this Generation will have it to signify. But I forget my self,
that I dispute against a Sword, and such Adversaries who told their King, they
sat not to be ruled by Presidents, but to make Presidents to the world; and
truly they have been as good as their word: But I hope they will regard the
judgment of a Protestant Martyr in this case, (for the shedding of whose Blood
the Parliament made an Ordinance for repentance:) when the Papists in Queen
Mary's Reign urged Mr. John Rogers, that the Parliament had established the
Romish Religion; of what force (said this godly Martyr) may Fox 3. page 127.
old Edition. Lord Says Laws.
we think these Parliaments are, which establish contrary Laws, to condemn that
for evil, which before they had decreed for good? it is better to obey God,
rather than man; making Religion, which like Tullies Lex Naturae, nec tolli,
nec abrogari potest, become Leges Seiae, and Apuleiae, quae unico Senatus
versiculo puncto temporis sublatae sint. And should the House of Commons assume
this power in Religion, Religion, like Englishmens clothes, would ever be
cutting into some new fashion, as any Faction arises in the Kingdom; but that
this Faction in Parliament may blind the eyes of the world, (indeed to
strengthen and support themselves, till they should become absolute Masters of
England) when they had been long tampering with Religion, at last they found
(policy necessitating them) some need of using Clergymen; yet in such a
monstrous way, as the Christian world never heard the like, by a new thing
called an Assembly of Divines, not summoned by the Kings Writ and Authority,
(expressly against the Statute of Hen. 1.) nor chosen by the Clergy, but plucked
out of each Members pocket, and by virtue of Hocus pocus, jugled into a
Conventicle-Synod, on purpose (for all forced Synods have ever more of private
interest, than the public good of the Church) to help out with some new
Religion, as their Masters (which hired them with 4 s. per diem) shall appoint:
Yet lest these Divines (such as they be, New-Englanders, Amsterdamians,
Pedants, and Trencher Chaplains; (to whom were some ten learned Clergy-mens
names joined as Seals, who never came there in person) should take any
authority to themselves, the Faction in Parliament have jusled in Thirty of
their Lay-Members (another Vote can make them thirty more) as Members of this
Linsy-woolsie Synod, to help up a side; but to make all sure, their Parliament
Masters have ordered, that this Assembly (yoaked like an Ox and an Ass to till
the Holy Land) must meddle only with what shall be propounded to them from the
Houses of Parliament; and when all is done, their conclusions shall not bind,
till the Parliament give leave and consent; and says the Ordinance (not Law)
whereby this Learned Synod is created and bridled, these Divines must tell them
what is most agreeable to Gods word; and when the Parliament is thus certified
what Gods Law is, the House of Commons will vote whether it shall be obeyed or
no: Such an Omnipotency over Gods Law, over the Church and the King, has this
Faction usurped since this Parliament, to plant in Christ's Kingdom, and the
power of Religion and Reformation as their specious pretenses at first were,
turning the Spanish cloak of Religion into the English Proverb, of playing the
Devil for Gods sake.

CHAP. VI. The Censures of these Judges against the Clergy, and the true reason
thereof.
THese are the Grapes of this long-promised Fanatical Canaan, gathered from
such pretended holy-Thistles; at whose growth while some laborers in Gods
harvest (too late repenting) connived, doubting that they were some weak and
tender Vine-branches, and others of more discerning spirits seeking to weed
them out, pricked their own fingers; they grew like Jothams bramble; Judges 9.
such Kings over the Trees, that they have banished the Vine, and the Olive,
peace and plenty; and to plant in the stinking Elder, have burned up the goodly
Cedars of the Church, root and branch; and the field of Christ's wheat choked
with the tares which the envious man has been long sowing in this Land, now
grown to their harvest, to whose sheaf (like Joseph's dream) must every sheaf
make obeisance, else the upstart bramble-King sends fire to devour them, as it
has already torn the whole coat of the Clergy, as many thousands of them can
witness; the sad conclusion of the woeful premises of this Book: yet this
Tyranny and persecution of the Clergy is styled the justice of Parliament, and
the power of Reformation of Religion; whereof the Reader may here see a
pattern, in the cruel sufferings of the Clergy of London, presented in a
general Bill of Mortality, to which these papers may serve for a short
Commentary, till God send better days of enlarging the story by a more full
Collection; the very naming of the persons in that Bill (being generally men of
known honest Lives, and constant painful preaching (that the Earl of
Northumberland discoursing with Mr. Calamy (for so have the engaged Nobility
prostituted their honor to the Courting of each Fanatical Lecturer and Pedant,
of whom indeed they stand in awe) about the supplying of above fifty Churches
in London void of Ministers, told Mr. Calamy, that they must restore some of
the Sequestered Clergy of London; to which Mr. Calamy replying, God forbid; the
Earl said, unless they did so, the Parliament could not find men of abilities
to preach in London:) The naming (I say) of those men were enough to shame the
Father of Lies, and his Fanatical Sons (were not both past shame) and to
vindicate the rest of the abused Clergy of England, (as well sure as the
Personal faults of some few (and those very few) be made the scandal of the
whole Function) and yet who so cruelly persecuted as these London-Divines? will
ye know the reason thereof? The Fanatical design growing high, pitched upon
three main engines to complete their work, vid. the setting up the Militia, the
seizing of the Navy, and the planting in of Lecturers, and it is hard to say
which of these three have done their new Masters best service; this last being
the ready way to obtain the two former; whereunto much conduced the feigned
fears and jealousies raised by the Faction in the City; as also by several
Votes and Declarations of Parliament of Foreign invasions from abroad, and
secret dangers at home, no sooner bruited abroad than believed, by a people
deceiving and willing to be deceived; whereby the Faction in Parliament
desiring a Guard, refused the Trained Bands of Middlesex (profer'd by the King
to satisfy their fears) confiding rather in the Citizens of London, purposely
to engage that City to maintain them in whatsoever wickedness they should act;
their chiefest care being to make sure of London, (the head and fountain of
this proud and cruel blood-thirsty Faction:) therefore to keep and increase
this power in the City, they knew Jeroboams Calf-policy in altering Religion,
and the Priesthood, would be necessary for their plot of a new Government: to
which purpose they at first invented these tricks and formalities of Justice
against the Clergy, till having got the power, their Sword should make good the
Sequestring and Removal of those (especially in London) who were not like to
Apostatize from Religion and Loyalty, in ceasing to preach to the people to
fear God and the King, according to the Scriptures; hereby making way to plant
in their own Creatures, and Ministers to deifie the Calves of their own setting
up; this made the Faction in the House of Commons never to transmit any Bills
against any particular accused Clergyman to the House of Peers (where indeed
lay judiciary power) to a Legal hearing; but knowing well such foggy charges
would soon vanish at the face of Justice, these evil spirits kept on their
course of casting mists before the peoples eyes, to make them think that the
lights of the Church burned so dim, that it was necessary to snuff them, or
quite put them out: This is the true reason of their cruelty toward the
London-Clergy, and indeed to the whole Clergy of England; and this wicked
policy drew on this sad story following.

A General Bill of the Mortality of the Clergy of London: or, a Brief
Martyrology and Catalogue of the Learned, Grave, Religious, and Painful
Ministers of the City of London, who have been Imprisoned, Plundered,
barbarously used, and deprived of all Livelihood for themselves and their
Families in these last years, for their constancy in the Protestant Religion
established in this Kingdom, and their Loyalty to their Sovereign.
THe Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's, the Dean, Residentiaries, and other
Members of that Church, sequestered, plundered, and turned out. Alhallows
Woodstreet, Dr. Wats, sequestered, plundered; his Wife and Children turned out of
doors, himself forced to fly. Alhallows Barkin, Dr. Lafield pursuivanted,
imprisoned in Ely-house, and the ships, sequestered, and plundered, afterward
forced to fly. Alhallows Breadstreet. Alhallows Great. Alhallows Hony-lane.
Alhallows Less. Alhallows Lumbardstreet, Mr. Weston sequestered. Alhallows
Staining. Alhallows the Wall. Alphage, Dr. Halsie shamefully abused, his Cap
pulled off, to see if he were not a shaven Priest; voted out, and dead with
grief. Andrew Hubbard, Dr. Chambers sequestered. Andrew Undershaft; 1. Mr.
Mason through vexation forced to resign. 2. Mr. Prichard after that
sequestered. Andrew Wardrobe, Dr. Isaacson sequestered. Anne Aldersgate, Dr.
Clewet sequestered. Anne Black-friars. Antholins Parish. Austins Parish, Mr.
Udal sequestered, his Bedrid Wife turned out of doors and left in the streets.
Bartholmew Exchange, Dr. Grant sequestered. Bennet Fynck, Mr. Warfield
sequestered. Bennet Grace-Church, Mr. Quelch sequestered. Bennet Pauls-wharfe,
Mr. Adams sequestered. Bennet Sheerhog, Mr. Morgan dead with grief. Botolph
Billingsgate, Mr. King sequestered and forced to fly. Christ-Church, Mr. (...)
turned out, and dead. Christophers, Mr. Hanslowe forced to resign. Clement
East-cheap, Mr. Stone shamefully abused, sequestered, sent Prisoner to Plymouth,
and plundered. Dionys Back-Church, Mr. Humes sequestered, and abused. Dunstans
East, Dr. Childerley reviled, abused, and dead. Edmonds Lumberstreet, Mr. Paget
molested, silenced, and dead. Ethelborough, Mr. Clark sequestered, imprisoned.
Faiths, Dr. Brown sequestered, and dead. Fosters, Mr. Batty sequestered,
plundered, forced to fly, and dead. Gabriel Fench-Church, Mr. Cook
sequestered. Geo. Botolf-l. Dr. Styles forct to resign. Greg. by St. P. Dr.
Styles forct to resign. Hellens, Mr. Miller turned out, and dead. James Dukes
place, Mr. (...) sequestered. James Garlick-hythe, 1. Mr. Freeman plundered,
and sequestered. 2. Mr. Anthony his Curate turned out. John Baptist, Mr.
Weemsly sequestered. John Evangelist. John Zachary, Mr. Edlyn sequestered,
forced to fly, and plundered. Katherine Coleman. 1. Dr. Hill forced to resign.
2. Mr. Kibbuts sequestered. Katherine Cree-church, Mr. Rush turned out.
Laurence Jury, Mr. Crane sequestered. Laurence Pountney. Leonard Eastcheap, Mr.
Calfe forced to give up to Mr. Roborow, Scribe to the Assembly. Leonard
Foster-lane, Mr. Ward forced to fly, plundered, sequestered, and dead for want
of necessaries. Margaret Lothbury, Mr. Tabor plundered, imprisoned in the
King's Bench; his Wife and Children turned out of doors at midnight, and he
sequestered. Margaret Moses. Margaret New Fishstreet, Mr. Pory forced to fly,
plundered, and sequestered. Margaret Pattons, Mr. Meggs plundered, imprisoned
in Ely-house, and sequestered. Mary Abchurch, Mr. Stone plundered, sent
Prisoner by sea to Plymouth, and sequestered. Mary Aldermanbury. Mary
Aldermary, Mr. Brown forced to forsake it. Mary le Bow, Mr. Leech sequestered,
and dead with grief. Mary Bothaw, Mr. Proctour forced to fly, and sequestered.
Mary Cole-church. Mary-Hill, 1. Dr. Baker sequestered, pursuivanted, and
imprisoned. 2. Mr. Woodcock turned out, and forced to fly. Mary Mounthaw, Mr.
Thrall sequestered, and shamefully abused. Mary Somerset, Mr. Cook
sequestered. Mary Stainings. Mary Woolchurch, Mr. Tireman forct to forsake it.
Mary Woolnoth, Mr. Shute molested, and vexed to death, and denied a
Funeral-sermon to be preached by Dr. Holdsworth, as he desired. Martins
Ironmonger-lane, Mr. Spark sequestered and plundered. Martins Ludgate, Dr.
Jermin sequestered. Martins Orgars, Dr. Walton assaulted, sequestered,
plundered, forced to fly. Mr. Moss, his Curate, turned out. Martins Outwitch,
Dr. Pierce sequestered, and dead. Martins Vintry, Dr. Rives, sequestered,
plundered, and forced to fly. Matthew Friday-street, Mr. Chestlin violently
assaulted in his house; imprisoned in the Compter, thence sent to Col chester
-Goal in Essex, sequestered and plundered. Maudlins Milkstreet, Mr. Jones
sequestered. Maudlins Old-fishstreet, Dr. Griffith sequestered, plundered,
imprisoned in Newgate; when being let out, he was forced to fly; and since
imprisoned again in Peter-house. Michael Bassishaw, Dr. Gifford sequestered.
Michael Cornhil, 1. Dr. Brough sequestered, plundered, Wife and Children turned
out of doors, his Wife dead with grief. 2. Mr. Weld his Curate assaulted,
beaten in the Church, and turned out. Michael Crooked-lane. Michael Queenhithe,
Mr. Hill sequestered. Michael Querne, Mr. Lance sequestered. Michael Royal,
Mr. Proctour sequestered, and forced to fly. Michael Woodstreet. Mildred
Breadstreet, Mr. Bradshaw sequestered. Mildred Poultry, Mr. Maden sequestered,
and gone beyond sea. Nicholas Acons, Mr. Bennet sequestered. Nicholas
Cole-abby, Mr. Chibbald sequestered. Nicholas Olaves, Dr. Cheshire molested,
and forced to resign. Olaves Hart-street, Mr. Haines sequestered. Olaves
Jewry, Mr. Tuke sequestered, plundered, and imprisoned. Olaves Silverstreet,
Dr. Boosie abused, and dead with grief. Pancras Soper-lane, Mr. Eccop
sequestered, plundered, forced to fly; Wife and Children turned out of doors.
Peter's Cheap, Mr. Vochier sequestered, and dead with grief. Peter's Cornhil, Dr.
Fairfax sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Ely-House and the Ships; his Wife
and Children turned out of doors. Peter's Pauls-wharf, Mr. Marbury sequestered.
Peter's Poor, Dr. Holdsworth sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Ely-House,
then in the Tower. Stephens Colemanstreet. Stephens Walbrook, Dr. Howel through
vexation forced to forsake it, sequestered of all, and fled. Diverse since
turned out.
Swithings, Mr. Owen sequestered. Thomas Apostle, Mr. Cooper sequestered,
plundered, sent prisoner to Leeds -Castle in Kent, dead with grief. Trinity
Parish, Mr. Harrison.

In the 97 Parishes within the Walls, besides St. Paul's, Outed 85. Dead 16.

Parishes without the Walls.
ANdrew Holborn, Dr. Hacket sequestered. Bartholmews Great, Dr. Westfield abused
in the Streets, sequestered, forced to fly, and dead. Bartholomew Less. Brides
Parish, Mr. Palmer sequestered. Bridwel Precinct, Mr. Brown turned out. Botolph
Aldersgate, Mr. Booth sequestered and plundered. Botolph Algate, Dr. Swadlin
sequestered, plundered, imprisoned at Gresham-Colledge, and Newgate; his Wife and
Children turned out of doors. Botolph Bishops-gate, Mr. Rogers sequestered.
Dunstans West, Dr. Marsh sequestered, and dead in remote parts. George
Southwark, Mr. Rogers sequestered. Giles Cripplegate, 1. Dr. Fuller sequestered,
plundered, imprisoned at Ely-house. 2. Mr. Hutton his Curate assaulted in the
Church, and imprisoned. Olaves Southwark, Dr. Turner sequestered, plundered,
fetched up Prisoner with a Troop of Soldiers, and after forced to fly. Saviors
Southwark. Sepulchers Parish, Mr. Pigot the Lecturer turned out. Thomas
Southwark, Mr. Spencer sequestered, and imprisoned. Trinity Minories.
In the 16 Parishes without the Walls, Outed 14. Dead 1.

In the 10 Out-Parishes.
CLement Danes, Dr. Dukeson sequestered, plundered, and forced to fly. Covent
Garden, Mr. Hall sequestered, and forced to fly. Giles in the Fields, Dr.
Heywood sequestered, imprisoned in the Compter, Elyhouse, and the Ships, forced
to fly, his Wife and Children turned out of doors. James Clarkenwel. Katherine
Tower. Leonard Shoreditch, Mr. Squire sequestered, imprisoned in
Gresham-Colledge, Newgate, and the King-bench, his Wife and Children plundered,
and turned out of doors. Martins in the Fields, Dr. Bray sequestered,
imprisoned, plundered, forced to fly, and dead in remote parts. Mary
Whitechappel, Dr. Johnson sequestered. Magdalen Bermondsey, D. Paske sequestered.
Savoy, 1. Dr. Balcanquel sequestered, plundered, forced to fly, and dead in
remote parts. 2. Mr. Fuller forced to fly.
In the 10 Out-parishes, Outed 9. Dead 2.

In the Adjacent Towns.
THe Dean, and all the Prebends of the Abbey-church Westminster, (but only Mr.
Lambert Osbaston) sequestered. Margarets Westminster, Dr. Wimberly sequestered.
Lambeth, Dr. Featly sequestered, plundered, imprisoned, and dead a Prisoner.
Newington, Mr. Heath sequestered. Hackney, Mr. Moore sequestered. Reddriffe.
Islington, diverse Ministers turned out. Stepney, Dr. Stamp sequestered,
plundered, and forced to fly. In the adjacent Towns, besides those of the
Abbey-Church, and Islington, Outed 7. dead 1. The Total of the Ministers of
London within the Bills of Mortality, (besides Paul's and Westminster) turned
out of their Livings by Sequestration, and otherwise. 115. Whereof Doctors in
Divinity, above -- 40. And the most of them plundered of their Goods, and their
Wives and Children turned out of doors. Imprisoned in London, and in the Sips,
and in the several Goals and Castles in the Country. 20. Fled to prevent
Imprisonment, -- 25. Dead in remote parts, and in Prisons, and with grief, --
22. About 40 Churches vold, having no constant Minister in them.
Vsque quo, Domine? Rev. 6. 10.

CHAP. VII. Of Parliamentary changes in Religion. Of the Policy and ways for
the destruction of Religion by this Parliament, wrought by the long conspiracy
and combination of the Puritans of England, here laid open.
BUt what safety can be to England, when Lay-Parliaments shall presume to
meddle in Religion; hanging Reformation of Religion as a Curtain to the
Parliament-windows, making it the Stalking-horse to their temporal ends and by
respects, the ruins of Three Kingdoms in our days, can sufficiently witness;
changes of Religion being ever the Laities punishment, as well as the Clergies
affliction; as might be proved by the English story, ever since Parliaments
have been but instrumental or active thereunto. Henry the 8th begat the policy,
to whose Lust and Tyranny how soon did the Parliament turn Pander? covering
many a foul fact under the fair face of Reformation; burning Papist and
Protestant both at one Stake, by Bill in Parliament without any Trial. Edward
the 6th (of Nine years old) his Parliaments twice altered Religion, according
to the two Grandees Sommerset and Dudley. R. Barns. T. Gerrard. S. Jeronimus.
In the first of Queen Mary the Parliament punished the same Religion by Fire,
which themselves had so lately established. Upon coming in of Queen Elizabeth
the Parliament changed Religion again; and, within few years, made it death for
a Priest to reconcile any man to that Religion; which Parliaments had so
zealously restored, that in the space of twelve years, four changes of Religion
were made by Parliaments in England, more than ever were made by any Christians
throughout the world in 1500 years before. But what policy in the Laity drew on
those contrary changes, and what miseries this Nation felt thereby, may afford
more truth, than these times can bear, and therefore is omitted. Yet in all
these Parliaments was the stamp of just, that is, Royal Authority, (though how
justly executed I say not) and therefore ought to be obeyed active or passive;
nor in any of these Parliaments (or ever since, till this Parliament) were the
Clergy (one of the three Estates of the Realm, the best conservators of
Religion) quite excluded with convocations of the Clergy, though legally chosen
by the Kings Writ, (not forced up out of a Renegado house-creeping Ministry by
Lay-votes) who had the judiciary cognizance of matters of Doctrines, as one
has observed in a discourse to answer the Popish Slander cast upon our
Religion, that it is a mere Parliamentary Religion: Though it cannot be denied
but that fury against the present Clergy, because they would not comply with
the prevailing party, to extol the present Change, and in later Parliaments,
the Puritan-policy having influence even upon Court-counsels, have too much
bound up the power of the Keys, and left the Clergy little liberty, but to
grant Subsidies: But never did the Laity in Parliaments grasp at the power of
the Keys, till the Puritans getting strength in the House of the Commons,
nibled at the Church Power, under the name of a Lay-Committee for Religion,
which King James connived at, little thinking whereto that ill example would
grow in his Son's days, hanging St. Peter's Keys at Laymens girdles, thereby
(as we now see) locking up the Priests lips, and shutting up Church-doors to
the sequestring of Almighty God from his holy Habitations; and by an Army of
Subjects in rebellion against their King, taking away the daily Sacrifice out
of the Temple, for the Reformation of Religion, the old pretense to color
politic designs, thereby to take away the shame of whatever cruelty shall be
acted to advance the same; never remembering that of St. Paul, We must not do
evil that good may come of it. What fit Judges of Religion Parliaments have
been, and are like to be, let us hear again Mr. Rogers, that famous Protestant
Martyr, when it was objected to him that he ought to be a Catholic, because
the Parliament had established the Popish Religion: Of what force (says he)
are Parliaments, which establish contrary Decrees, condemning that for evil,
which before they had established as good? and the Parliaments of later times
have been ruled by the fancy of a few. Henry the 8th established what he
pleased by Parliaments. In Edward the 6th, the Dukes of Somerset and
Northumberland bore all the stroke, and did not all things sincerely. And for
the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, what by her politic moulding of the
Parliament, and her infinite popularity, and her Armies, who durst Vote against
her pleasure? Besides (as one observes) her Parliaments consisting of grave
men did do the Queens work, and in that, the Kingdoms business; no thoughts of
opposing Prerogative under pretense of Property, or distinguishing between the
service of the Crown, and of the Commonwealth, as two diverse (yea contrary)
things, till the Fanatics began to make Parliaments as Cock-pits, and pitched
fields for fighting against the King and the Church, under the notion of
standing up for the Subjects Liberty; which made King James say that he could
never find any joy in his Parliaments, calling them in scorn and anger, Five
hundred Kings: And the wise Earl of Arundel (lately deceased) then prophesied,
that Posterity would have cause to curse those Fanatics in former Parliaments,
who upon such undutifulness caused their breach;of which, as also of the
Parliaments of King Charles, Sir Robert Naunton has observed, That half a
dozen of popular discontented persons, such as (with the fellow that burned the
Temple of Diana) would be talked of, have swayed all the Parliaments, as Lord
Say, Mr. Pym, Hambden, Stroud, and other Parliament-drivers, as the Army
Declarations styled the XI. Presbyterian Impeached Members, who have lived to
sit in this Parliament, to see the flames of their own kindling almost consume
the Church, and these three Kingdoms, by their reviving Nadab and Abihu's
strange Fire, by their presumption in meddling with matters of the Church, to
the subversion of Religion, under pretense of Reformation; which how politickly
wrought by the long combination of an hypocritical Faction, we come now to
speak of, more particularly.

The former Examples of alteration of Religion, and of compassing secular ends
and designs, by pretense of Reforming Religion, having beaten out a ready way
for any change; no sooner began the Fanatical Faction to appear, and by their
furious pretense of Loyalty, and hatred of Popery, under Queen Elizabeth's
policy, (to balance the Popish party, then not weakened enough in the Kingdom
for her security) Martin Mar-prelate.
suffered to take head, but presently they began to Libel the Bishops and the
Church of England, and to poison the people in most corners of the Land, but
chiefly in London, with Geneva Doctrines, and Pamphlets. Admonition to
Parliament, answered by Dr. Whitgift. Vorax written by Stub: a Lawyer,
Brother-in-law to T. Cartwright.
Supplications are made to the Queen, and to the Privy Council, but especially
to the Parliament; Petions pretended to be subscribed by 100000 hands put up
against Bishops. Remonstrances and Admonitions are directed to the Parliament
to advance the Presbytery, as the holy Discipline; but finding little
countenance to such a frenzy, they fell into such Libelling and Menacing the
Queen, the Council, and the Parliament, that in their heat the fire of Sedition
began to appear; so that to quench it in the spark, the Queen made severe Laws
against them, and by hanging Penry, condemned with Vdall and Barow, (who were
pardoned) brake the neck of their Plots, and turned their brags into preaching
of preces and lachrymae, as the only arms for Christian Subjects, and into
Doctrines of humble obedience and patience, till indeed they could pack an
House of Commons for their purpose, as some Dr. Chap. to Field. 1587. Everights
horse, whom they had borrowed for Faux.
Pamphlets of those days advised the Brethren; their party in Parliament being
then inconsiderable, or at least not able to carry on their work by their own
strength: and probably those Laws had for ever purged this Kingdom of this new
plague, had not an old sore unexpectedly broke out in the Gunpowder Treason, so
apparently plotted by Papists, (though the Actors intended to have laid the
Saddle on the Fanatical Horse; but little sooner than they deserved, as we now
see) that to permit the other, was counted the best way to cure this; and as it
sever happens, the common hatred of any Faction, gives great advantage to its
contrary: So now the Fanatics, full glad of such an occasion, began busily to
revive their suspended hopes of their Reformation, strengthened also by their
united brethren of Scotland, as that in all Parliaments since, through King
James's too much love of peace, and Archbishop Abbots affected popularity, upon
some Court-disfavour, and by other Courtiers emulation, by the subtelty and
hypocrisy of the Faction; they have gained ground, till they have driven the
Church and the King out of Three Kingdoms, by the Engine and name of
Parliament, to cover their Fanatical Combination and Conspiracy, which they
have been so long contriving, to raise to its height by these means following:
By incorporating themselves into a Church as distinct from the Church of
England, as the Papists have been; they have set up an upstart Ministry of
Lecturers; they made public collections of Moneys for their silenced
Ministers, under pretense of poor Ministers; they have had their Feoffees
entrusted with great sums of Moneys, raised among themselves for furtherance of
their designs; witness the plot of buying out of Impropriations, to plant in
men of their own Tribe; to whom St. Antholins in London was the Nursery: they
had their mutual intelligence throughout the whole Kingdom, and engrossed
almost all the inland Trade to men of their Faction; they took up a canting
language to themselves, which they called the Language of Canaan, abusing
phrase of Scripture, thereby to understand one another, to color their
seditious practices; they had their Emissaries (whereof simple Robin the
Bible-Carrier was one) or Scouts to give notice where men of their Tribe
preached; so that not any one of their Ministers could come to London from the
farthest parts of England, but found entertainment in the City; for whose
Randevouz a Widow (whom Alderman Pennington Married) kept an Ordinary in
White-Friars, where many of them lodged in Doctor Prestons days; and when any
of these preached in any place in London, or thereabouts, they wanted not a
crowd of followers. And as these were busy in the Church, so their close
Committe-Masters in those days were not idle in the State; much correspondency
held with the Brethren of Scotland; and before any Wars began in either Nation,
Mr. Hamden went yearly into Scotland, as I have heard some of his Neighbors in
Buckinghamshire say; they had their Counsel Tables, sitting in several parts of
the Kingdom, [Knightly's House in Northamptonshire, Lord Says House, wherein
was a room and passage, which his servants were prohibited to come near, where
great noises and talkings have been heard, to the admiration of some who lived
in the House, yet could never discern their Lords Companions] that in King
James's days a great Mistress of the Faction (who afterward changed her House
to come to Black-Fryars to live under the Gospel, as they called their
Lecturing Parishes, whose House was much frequented by Lord Say, and the Earl
of Warwick, Mr. Pym, etc.) could say, That their party was then strong enough
to pull the Kings Crown from his head, but the Gospel would not suffer them;
but not long after the Gospel was put into a posture of War, when so many
Military yards in London, Westminster, and Southwarke, and other places, about
sixteen years since grew into much request, [whither Lord Brook much resorted,
whom I have seen entertained there with whole Vollies of Muskets, that
Fanatical Goliath armed cap a pe, yet shot in the eye, which himself bragged
should see the Millenary fools Paradise begin in his life-time] and all
Sectaries in London on a sudden entered themselves, and drew on others to be
listed in those Artillery-Gardens, to exercise feats of Arms (for pastime, as
some were drawn in) against a time of need, was the Reason given by some
Brethren of those days, which it should seem only themselves foresaw better
than other men; and as their designs ripened, Captain Forster, a Vintner
behind the Exchange, was employed by the City-Faction, to send over sea for
Skippon, a confiding Brother to the Cause, to be Captain of the London
Artillery Garden (who was since this Parliament made Major General of the City
Rebels) flamming the rest of the Londoners, that a Stranger was sent for, to
prevent emulation among the City-Captains, upon an election; a fair preparatory
for the invasion of the Scots, to force the King to call a Parliament, which
all men were made so much to long for, because the Faction had plotted to pack
it for their designs. This made the Earl of Warwick write from York, to his
Friends in Essex, about the Election of Knights and Burgesses for this
Parliament, alleging, That the Game was well begun; Mr. Pym rode a Circuit
into diverse Counties, to promote Elections of men of the Faction; and Sectaries
went from place to place, to cry down the nomination of any who belonged to the
Kings Service, and to give Votes for men of the new Religion, and notorious
opposers of the King, or the Clergy; whose names the Faction had privately
before listed, whereby diverse Citizers and Lawyers were chosen for Burgesses in
Parliament, by those Incorporations which they never had any relation to, nor
knowledge of, but by some rebellious opposing Moses and Aaaron, the King or the
Priest; witness Mr. Bagshaw, and Mr. White, two Lawyers chosen for Southwarke,
the one a Feoffeeman, censured in the Star Chamber; the other, a Seditious
Law-Reader against Bishops not long before; like the four Burgesses of London,
chosen upon four such grounds, Alderman Soame for his imprisonment in denying
of Ship Money; Vassal for his obstinacy against Customs; Craddock for the
Cause of New England; Alderman Pennington for his known zeal by his keeping a
fasting Sabbath throughout his Shrivalty. Lecturers also came thrusting into
Elections of the Clergy (wherein they had nothing to do, as having not whence
to pay Subsidies) for men into the Convocation, with whom came some Citizens to
Christ-Church in London, to hear how the Plot took in the Election; but having
no hopes to pack up a Convocation, they made a Rendevouz of many Scandalous and
Schismatical Lecturers, and such as Doctor Burgess, whom guilt made
Parliament-Converts and Vassals, at Mr. Calamies House in Aldermanbury, (till
strengthened into a new Assembly at Westminster) as a Counter Convocation, or
Conventicle, from whence the Faction in Parliament received informations
concerning Religion, and hereby did they communicate their intelligence and
designs, with directions how these their Ministers might by degrees prepare the
people for their work; that I have heard their Auditors say, that by the
Sundays Sermon, or a Lecture, they could learn, not only what was done the
week before, but also what was to be done in Parliament the week following;
besides the information which their Pulpits gave the people; for coming in
tumults to the House for Justice, from a Juncto of these Ministers came that
insolent order of directions, thrown into Churchwardens houses by unknown
hands, how to take the first Protestation; from one of these Clubs came the
S^nectymnuan Libels, which got the Authors round sums of Money to make their
Religion shine in the world, er tull. adversus Marcion. lib. 4.
ut ipse MarcionT Evangelico aliquando credidit, cum pecuniam in primo calore
fidei contulit: Reformers in Luthers time did not so, if Scoperus the Emperors
Secretary said true at a Diet at Ausburgh. History of the Counsel of Trent.
Nor may we forget how the Faction in London packed up a new Common Counsel,
removing ancient grave men, to foist in young and mean fellows, but zealous for
the Cause; not an Office in the City, though chargeable and troublesome; yet
how ambitious were the Faction of those places, even to a Constableship? And
for a Old Jury.
Churchwardenship I have known motions made at the Kings-Bench-Bar, for a
prohibition of a legal and usual choice, when the Faction found themselves not
strong enough in Votes in their Parish: and above a year before any face of War
appeared, or any Vote to raise Arms was heard of, it is well known scarce a
Sectary in London but had stored himself with Arms, to furnish each Boy in his
house; and many Porters loaded with Muskets, have been seen carried in the
Evenings, into the Houses of men notoriously disaffected in Religion, who
conveyed Arms and Traitorous Libels, and Observations, printed at a public
charge, to their Country Chapmen; nor durst the Lord Mayor make inquisition,
for fear of being accounted an Enemy to the peace of the Kingdom, then full of
fears of Papists trained under ground, and other (God knows what) Enemies;
and before the bloody Votes to kill and slay, they sent Scouts into all parts
of the Kingdom, to sound the people how they stood affected to begin a War; one
Brumidge a Brasier in Gracious-street in London, and a Cook his Neighbor, were
sent into Gloucestershire and Worcestershire, to muster their Forces,
discovering how each Village stood affected or disaffected; Members also of the
Faction came to the Elders of the Dutch Church in London, to know of the State
and Government of their Church, telling them that they would follow their
pattern, though some of those Elders counseled them, not to pull down their
House, till they knew where else to lie dry; adding also, that the English
people were not like the Dutch, nor would ever endure their Government.

These, and many other practices in the like kind, may show the world, what a
free Parliament this was from the beginning, and how God had infatuated this
Nation, that they would not see this juggling, nor believe the Clergy, who
foretold the miseries this Faction would bring to this Church and State; but to
suffer a small number (the little flock of Christ, they were wont to call
themselves) to ride the whole Kingdom to destruction: for notwithstanding all
this shuffling and packing, when this Parliament first met, the Fanaricks for
number made not above the third part of the House of Commons; and I am
confident, that in the City their Faction was not a fifth part, and those of
the younger and meaner sort, but infinitely busy at an Election of a
Common-Councel-man in Langborne-Ward, wherein are above three hundred
Householders (and from such meetings none of the Faction would be absent) yet
could they not make up sixty in all that Ward: Some years after, above 14000
Housekeepers in London, were listed in the design of Tompkins and Challoner,
though they wanted ways to communicate their strength one to another. And
therefore to gain the Vote of Parliament to themselves, they tried the Fox skin
to cover for a while their Lions claw, seeking pretenses plausible to the
Patriotical party also, to purge the House of Commons (as the phrase was) of
all undue Elections upon Court-Letters, or of men engaged in the late
Monopolies; whereby they wormed out of the House those whom they suspected of
Loyalty, but kept in old Sir Henry Vane, and Sir Henry Mildmay, and others
(greater Monopolists) whom they knew to be of their Faction; and to supply
those vacancies, Mr. Pyms, or Mr. Speakers underhand Letters, were enough to
make Mr. Pyms Son, scarce out of his Nonage, be chosen for a Parliament Man:
Kings Declaration, 12 Aug.
but if it chanced that such private Letters miscarried in their desires, the
new elected Members have been sounded how they stood affected to Bishops, and
so accordingly never admitted, or presently received. But this trick made the
Faction not yet absolute Masters of the Vote in the House of Commons; which put
their Members to wonderful pains and trouble, by continual attendance, sitting
in the House till midnight to watch to carry a Vote, when other Members wearied
out, were departed the House, that so they might compass by diligence, what
they could not obtain by their numbers of their persons: [The first
Remonstrance of the House of Commons against the King, voted in the House at
midnight,] this made diverse of them let out their Houses in their Countries,
(which upon the Act of continuance they afterward sold) and take (sequestered)
houses in London and Westminster, that they might be near their work, having
their Emissaries constantly attending the door of the House of Commons, to call
in Members of this Faction to vote what they pleased, to advance their design,
upon notice of a small appearance in the House; but if any appointed business
caused a fuller House, their daily sitting had made them expert in discerning
the face of the House, to know their own strength, how the Vote would be at
that time; the Faction having made Mr. Speaker (a Lawyer) sure their own [by a
Fee of 6000 l. voted to him, and made Master of the Rolls] would either by some
pretended Foreign Letters, made by themselves in London, or by some new
discovery of a Plot against the Parliament, or else by long Speech-makings,
defer the business of the day, till the absence of the rest of the Members;
some following their pleasures, others their private necessary affairs, little
dreaming of making a Trade by sitting in Parliaments, as in their Shops or
Counting-houses (whereas Parliaments like Physic purge, if seldom used, but
destroy, when continued as food) should make way for this vigilant Faction to
carry the Vote, by the Major part present; having embodied themselves in the
Parliament and Kingdom for their work, and especially in London, by daily
Tavern-clubs in each Ward, communicating intelligence to and from their
Table-Juncto's, or Sub-Committees sitting in diverse private houses in
London,[Brownes house a Grocer near Cheapside cross; also a Drapers house in
Watling-street; as now the Saracens head in Friday-street, etc.] to prepare
Results of each days passages in the City, to report to Mr. Pym and his close
Committee; when they came from the Parliament to be feasted at night in
confiding Citizens houses; amongst whom Mr. Pym was so idolized, that mine eyes
saw a Gentleman violently assaulted in the streets, and dragged to the
Poultry-Compter, as a Sanctuary against the Tumults, only for speaking a
neglectful word of this Mr. Pym; a forerunner of that furious rising in Arms of
the whole City to defend Mr. Pym and the five Members from a legal. Trial for
High Treason, of which the King had impeached them. By these and many other
advantages, it is easy to conceive how a combined Faction may overcome a far
greater number, when single and hood-winked from perceiving plots of destroying
Religion and the King, by those who by Votes, and Declarations, and
Protestations, pretended to make the King a glorious King; and counted it a
great scandal to them, that it should be reported they intended to take away
the Liturgy, which they desired only in some things should be reformed,
employing some Bishops and others of the Clergy, to consider of what things
might be altered for satisfying tender Consciences, that many of the Clergy
also, as well as other Subjects well-willers to the King, were so possessed,
that though they saw Arms raised against the King, and all his Forts, Ships,
and Revenues seized on in defiance of his Majesty, yet would they not believe
that the Parliament intended the King any hurt or evil at all; yea, diverse were
not dispossessed of this fond credulity, till the Votes of imprisoning and of
no further addressing to the King were published: And now when they can neither
help themselves, nor their King, cry out upon Hypocrites, and say, they will
never believe Parliaments any more; though it is not safe for them to say so, or
whatere more they think, such is now the liberty of the Subject; and indeed so
willing were the major part of the House of Commons to be lulled asleep into a
pleasing dream of Reformation, by clipping the wings of Prerogative, and paring
the Bishops nails, and taking down the pride of the Clergy (as the Fanatic
buzzed pretenses were) to which all parties were marvelously ready (like the
Horse in the Fable, yielding his back to the Saddle to be rid of the Deer, that
he might have all the pasture) and by extolling the honor and authority of
that House, whereof themselves were also Members, till the Faction by planting
in their Instruments for Chair-men of Committees, and into all places of
action, so rid the more moderate party of the House beyond their own stay; who
now grown weary, and feeling the Spur in their own sides, began too late to
take heed, and to think to shake off their hot-Spur-riders; but indeed threw
themselves out of their so-longed-for Parliament: for upon any Speech or Motion
contrary to the sense of the Faction, the parties moving were called presently
to the Bar, or committed to the Tower, or expelled the House; and others were
terrified hereby, or by the Tumults out of the City, led up by Dr. Burges and
Capt. Ven to the Parliament-doors, to see that the Godly Party (for so their
Faction was called) in the House might not be out-voted. [Dr. Burges said at
the Parliament-doors, of the Multitudes and Tumults of the City-Rabble, These
are my Band-dogs; I can set them on, and I can take them off again. Oh brave
Cornelius!] That by these means above two hundred shortly after were forced out
of the House, to leave the Faction absolute Masters of the Vote in the House of
Commons, and House of Peers also; little thinking that the Clergies persecution
(which themselves sat so long winking at) would prove their own just
punishment, by suffering a Faction to grow so powerful, without so much as
protesting against their injustice and oppression.

But rather assisting the Faction, to imprison in the Tower twelve Bishops upon
a false charge of High Treason, only because they did their duty, to their
eternal honor, like Christian Bishops, and lovers of their Countries welfare,
in solemnly protesting (as pares Regni) against such violence and wickedness,
though with apparent hazard of their persons and Estates. Nay, when these
driven Members of Lords and Commons again assembled at Oxford by the Kings
Proclamation (upon the second Invasion of the Scots) for number in both Houses
exceeding those who were left at Westminster (almost 200 Commons before they
had sitten five weeks) besides the Royal presence of the King, very probably
might have recovered this Kingdom by calling themselves a Parliament, as the
eyes of the Kingdom upon them did expect, (which drew over some Members from
Westminster, and more would have followed to have joined with them in
Parliament) and as in all reason they might have, as well as they did demand
and take upon them all privileges of Parliament. But the Fanatic spirit
(brought thither in Mr. Bagshawes Lawyers pouch, or maintained there before at
the Brethrens charge) was busy there also in fomenting fears and jealousies,
that they must not set the King a precedent to break Laws, vid. the forced Act
of continuance of this Parliament in it self void, for fear they should make
the King too great: and such courses they took in imitation of the Faction at
Westminster, that they complained to the King of a Divine who in a Sermon
historice related the Story of Charles Martel his inventing Rebellion,
Sacrilege, and Parliaments; and Secretary Windebank, lately come from France
to the King, was forced suddenly to return into France, to prevent the odium
which might have fallen on the King by protecting him whom they also intended
to have questioned; that well might his Majesty call them his Oxford
Mungrel-Parliament
Mungrel-Parliament, whose negligence and wilful blindness has twice undone
the Kingdom. But to return to the Members at Westminster, whom we left
Conquerors of the Vote in the House of Commons, whose Agents were set on work
throughout the Kingdom (especially in London) to muster up their Forces,
without which they could neither long keep the Vote so gotten, nor could make
their Votes of any power or authority (the House of Commons being of it self no
Court of Judicature, having no power to give an Oath, nor to imprison any of
the Kings Subjects, except their own Members; but to consult and transmit their
Proposals to the House of Peers, to whose joint Results the Kings Royal
Signature puts life and makes it Law, or an Act of Parliament.) The next work
therefore (to which success heightened them) was to try their strength in the
House of Peers, for concurrence to their designs; to which Lord Say had long
tutored his Pulpit-Lords, and other discontented popular Lords, were hoped
easily to be drawn, seeing the people so extol the proceedings of this Faction
in the House of Commons, though they intended to go on with their work without
the Lords concurrence, if they could not have brought them to their Bow, as
indeed they have made no other use of the House of Peers, than to cover and
countenance the Fanatical practices with the Name and Title of both Houses of
Parliament, and of Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, setting the Lords
in the first place, like Ciphers in Arithmetic, to advance the following
numbers: for what meant the new phrase in Pulpits and Pamphlets, of the House
of Gods, and of the Worthies of the Land, but only the House of Commons? and
what more frequently buzzed into peoples heads, than that the Lords sat but
for themselves; the Commons sat for the good of all the people, and were
therefore more to be regarded and maintained? But for a formality and show of
Legal proceedings in a Parliamentary way, Mr. Pym is sent into the City to make
Speeches against Obstructions in the Body politic, that Reformation could not
go on till they were removed; which soon raised the City-Tumults to petition
the Parliament, that the Bishops and Popish Lords might be thrown out of the
House of Peers, as the only hinderers of Reformation of Religion, thereby
indeed to lessen the numbers of Votes likeliest to oppose the Fanatic Faction.
These Tumults daily increasing (upon the countenance they found from the
Parliament, where they were bid to come like men, that is, with Swords) by the
Rabble of Porters and Apprentises daily sent by their Masters, but chiefly by
their Mistresses, with Clubs and Swords, to cry for Reformation at the
Parliament-doors: Jan. 1641.
The Faction in London having also combined to shut up their Shops for many
days together, and persuaded others to do the like, upon some pretended fears;
but the truth was, to make the poor people in and about the City a pretense to
mutiny for want of work, so heightened the Faction in the House of Commons, that
they sent up Mr. Hollis to the House of Peers to demand the Names of the
dissenting Lords, that so they might expose them to the peoples fury (as they
posted the dissenting Members of the House of Commons in the case of the Earl
of Strafford.) The Ringleaders still to the Rout, were Dr. Burges, the only
scandal to his profession in all London, (as his Parishioners of Watford can
tell, and the Spiritual Courts of London-Diocess also;) Capt. Ven, who sent
Tickets by Porters and Emissaries to raise these Myrmidons; and Sir Richard
Wiseman, who with this confused Army assaulting the Bishop of Lincoln's house
in Westminster, had his brains dashed out with a stone from the wall, and was
buried at the collected charges among the Apprentises. The House of Peers thus
daily assaulted without, and wanting no false Brethren within, was not like to
hold out any long Siege, the very doors, and Lobby, and entries, being so
crowded with the Tumults, that none can pass in or out, without a kind of leave
from the Assailants; who upon the word given of the approach of any popish or
disaffected Lord (as the phrase was) would in derision cry out Rome! Rome! but
when any whom they accounted well-affected was to pass by, they would cry, Make
way! Make way! (a free Parliament all this while) insomuch, that some Lords had
their Cloaks torn from their backs at the Parliament-doors: Nor could the
Bishops (one of the three Estates in Parliament) or Popish Lords, as they
called them, come to the House without apparent hazard of their persons: which
made the Bishops (as Pares Regni) solemnly to protest against all Acts done in
their absence, till the Parliament should be restored to liberty (as Mr.
Speaker has lately done; and the Members who lately fled to the Army, upon
their return have nullified all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, made since their
forced absence, by like City-Tumults in the year 1647.)

Hereupon the faction in the House of Commons furiously impeach the protesting
Bishops of High Treason, and twelve Bishops were at once committed to the
Tower, to gag their Mouths that they might be easilier robbed of their Votes
and Purses, as afterward they were, the Treason not yet proved. The Bishops
and Popish Lords thus thrown out of the Parliament, and the rest of the Royal
Nobility terrified, were forced to withdraw themselves from the Parliament,
leaving the Vote of the House of Peers to the Faction galloping in its fury:
yet for all those affronts done by the City-Tumults at the Parliament-doors (to
show how truly it has been ever said of the Fanatic, That he will not Swear,
but he will Lie) as also the assaulting of that Loyal Lord-Mayor's house, by
the same Tumults in the midst of the City; Sir Rich. Gurny.
and notwithstanding their furious marching through the City, in return from
the Parliament House (whose Guard they called themselves, and bragged how they
were thanked by the Members for their love to the Parliament) with Links and
loud Clamours, timely alarming the Goldsmiths of Cheapside to shut up their
Shops; and notwithstanding the nightly Tumults about pulling down
Cheapside-Cross, and the Trained-Bands marching day and night about the City to
keep the peace, [A Coopers Apprentice on Breadstreet-hill, pulling off the Legs
of our Savior's Picture on the East End of the Cross, in the act fell on the
Iron-bars; but told his Master that some of the Watchmen hurt him with an
Halbert, concealing the truth, till after ten days torture, seeing no hope of
life, with horror he confessed his fact, lamenting Gods judgment upon him, and
died of the wound; whose death so terrified the Tumults from that action, that
they never attempted the Cross any more, upon my own knowledge. And in the
first of King Charles, when the same Cross was beautified, a Fanatic, who
broke the Neck of the Babe in the lap of the blessed Virgin, within three
nights after had his Neck broke, and left dead in the streets near the Cross,
no man knowing how it came to pass. At Tukesbury in Gloucestershire, I have
seen the Grave of a reforming Zealot, who demolished the Cross, and made the
Crossstone (wherein was our Savior's Picture) an Hog-trough: All the Piggs and
the Sow which drank therein, died the first night, and the man drowned himself
in a Well, over an Hog-trough, which stood by the Well, as the Spiritual Court
of Gloucester can witness, and many yet living in Tukesbury can justify this
story.] Yet did the Faction in Parliament tell the King (and the world in
print) in answer to the Kings complaining of those Tumults, That they saw no
Tumults, but that the concourse in Westminster Hall used to be as great in
Term-time. By these means the Fanatical Faction in the Parliament having
conquered the Vote of both Houses, and forced the King to fly, began soon to
declare their Legislative power, in publishing their imperative Vote, That the
Subjects of England were bound to obey the Ordinances of both Houses of
Parliament as a Law, in case the King should deny his Royal Assent. But knowing
such Votes were not like to find universal obedience, as their designs
required, the next and last thing they entered upon, was power to execute those
Votes, which their success (by the late Tumults ready for a War) heightened them
to demand, under pretense of putting the Militia of the Kingdom into such hands
as the Parliament, that is, the Fanatical Faction, should think fit; which to
obtain, one would think it might spend the faith of a Christian to believe,
what ridiculous fears and jealousies of Invasions from abroad, and secret
dangers at home, were suddenly bruited by the Faction up and down the Kingdom;
[Fears of Invasions by the Danes, by the French, by the Irish; fears of Papists
in London, when the Faction knew they had scarce left one in the City but in
Prisons: Mr. Pym's Plague-plaister; the discovering of a Plot by a Tailor in a
Ditch; fears of blowing up the Thames with Gunpowder to drown the City and
Parliament; the House of Commons fired by Papists; an Army of Papists at
Black Heath in Kent; an Army of Papists in Lancashire; Horses trained under
ground at Ragland; the Midnight Alarm in London, and parts adjacent, that the
King was coming against the City with an Army of Horse, when his Majesty was
lately forced to fly for the safety of his person: The Votes of Lord Digby
raising an Army at Kingston upon Thames, when he had only his Coach and six
Horses: The Votes that the King had raised an Army at York, when some chief
Actors said in my hearing, at that time the Houses of Parliament knew that the
King was not able to raise one hundred men: The Earl of Warwick and Sir Thomas
Barrington sent into Essex to raise the Country, told the people in public
meetings, that the Queen was landed with an Army of 13000 Papists. It were
endless to reckon up the multitudes of such Lies and ridiculous Fears] As also
to think how ready people were to frame themselves to a belief thereof, as
given up to believe lies even with greediness, when indeed the design only
was for this Faction, hereby to raise an Army, to execute whatsoever themselves
should conceive would advance their Plots of subverting Religion and Government
of this Church and State, under the specious color of Reformation of all
grievances whatsoever, whereby they drew in to their assistance the Patriotical
party also, who were the far greater number throughout the Kingdom; whose pulse
beating wholly after Property (desiring destruction neither of King, nor
Bishop, but only reformation of conceived excess of power) was kept
continually affrighted by alarms from the Faction, that the King would make his
Subjects all Slaves; which to prevent, they thought themselves necessitated to
uphold this Parliament in any thing which they should act, though never so
abominable and unjust, for fear if this Parliament should be dissolved, they
should never have any more Parliaments; and these men once unhappily engaged,
especially the Londoners, by vast sums of money, which the Parliament had
politickly drawn them to lend, were bound to follow the Fanatics madness,
only to secure themselves and their publick-Faith debts; insomuch, that upon
the burning down the Excise-house in Smithfield in the year 1647, by the rude
Multitudes in the City, about the time of the King's coming to Holdenby, it is
strange to think, how these moderate men (formerly desirous to have the King
come to London) were suddenly so affrighted with fears, that if the King came
nearer London, surely the people would pay no Excise nor Taxes, then how should
their Public Faith-debts be paid? and gave advantage to the Faction, in the
name of the City, to petition the Parliament, that his Majesty might not come
nearer London, upon some pretenses laid in that Petition; but Money was the
bottom of the business; hoping by delay to make some surer bargain with their
King: but now too late they see their folly.

Thus by Hypocrisy, Fraud, and Violence, misguiding the Patriotical party, the
Fanatics of England grew so powerful, raising an Army, which of themselves
they could never have done, now commanded by most confiding Sectaries, which
the Citizens at first thought so inconsiderable; supposing, though they let
them run on to do the work, (which they also desired, in reforming
State-distempers) they could quell them at pleasure; persuaded also that the
War should last but one Month, (as Mr. Hamden told some Citizens) but now they
have lived to see the Banners six years displayed, to plant in what Religion
soever the strongest party of Sectaries with their Sword shall make good, (upon
hopes of gain, or fear of loss, not likely by Citizens to be opposed) and all
other men in prosecution of their own (different) ends, are forced to serve for
Stales and Blindes for the Fanatical Masters to destroy the King and the
Church, by the loss of the liberty and property of the Subject, on which all
parties so doted: and no sooner had the Faction their desires of an Army raised
for their service, but presently they began to execute their long dormient
Votes of scquestring the Clergy from their Livings; and by an insolent thing,
called an Ordinance of Parliament, (repealing five Acts of Parliament, made in
several Kings Raigns) utterly abolished the sacred Liturgy, the whole service
of God out of the Church, planting in room of it, a new nothing, a senseless
Rubrical Directory, that will serve all sorts of Religion, but the true
Religion, which to destroy this new Engine was purposely invented; merely upon
this wicked policy (though other frivolous pretenses are alleged in the
Preface to that newfangled Directory.) The policy in abolishing Liturgy.
First, because in the Liturgy were more Prayers for the King than would
consist with their Traitorous ends. Secondly, the abolishing of the Liturgy
took away the daily service of God in Cathedrals, and made them of no use; a
fair way to take away the Land of Deans and Chapters. Thirdly, the Scots called
in for their assistance in time of need, as also to engage all sorts of
Sectaries to their aid against the King. Fourthly, their new-erected Ministry,
and Assembly of Divines and non-Divines at Westminster, by abolishing the
Liturgy thought to extol their own fame and estimation, to the leading captive
the people into ignorance, the mother of blind obedience to, whatsoever burden
they should lay upon them, from Jesus Christ's Throne of their Divine Presbytery.

Thus (as the State Affairs) in the Church came this change, or rather
destruction of Christian Religion in England; like the great Beast in Daniel,
to whom an Army was given, by reason of transgression, whereby it took away the
daily Sacrifice, and threw the truth to the ground, and it practiced and
prospered; but what miseries have followed such policy, not only the
persecution of the Clergy, but the ruin of the Laity of our times can
sufficiently witness, groaning under all sorts of calamities, that War and
Rapine, and Tyranny can bring upon a Nation, when like the Israelites, there
was no King in England, but a mysterious gunpowder-clouded King and Parliament,
viz. the Fanatical Faction and Conspirators fighting against God and the King,
under color of King and Parliament, the Riddle of this Generation; three times
altering (they call it purging) the House of Commons of Monopolists,
Malignants, and Presbyterians, to obtain the Vote, and by a post-vote
justifying three notorious Symptoms of a wicked Faction, viz. the publishing
an Order of inviting accusations against the Clergy, in the name of the House
of Commons, which the House had not cognizance of; the keeping the King out of
Hull by Sir John Hotham, which the House knew not of; and the imprisoning the
King in the Isle of Wight by Hammond, for which he had no public korder, but
the sense of this Faction, or some private directions from the Army.

CHAP. VIII. A concluding Parallel between the Popish Persecution in Queen
Mary's time, and this Fanatical persecution.
THus has this Faction filled up the measure of their iniquity, fulfilling the
Prophesies and Predictions of wise wen, who gave England warning of the
mischiefs which they foresaw the Fanatics would in time bring upon this
Nation; to name but two particulars: Dr. Bancroft wrote in the days of Queen
Survey of Discipl. cap. 21.
Elizabeth; Certain hypocritical brethren of the Laity, have clapped the
Presbyterian or Puritan Ministers on the back, followed their Sermons, set them
at the upper end of their Tables, and sought by all means to procure them
credit and favor with the people, not that they cared for them, or for
Religion, or for Christ himself, but hoping that by the violent course which
they saw these men run into, the Bishops and the Clergy would grow so odious,
that it would be in time a small matter to dispossess them of all their
Livings, whereof some portion might come to their shares.

Another as true I find written, Anno Dom. 1603.

N. D. or 3 conversions of England. 3 part. page 149.
All wise men (even among Protestants) see that no Sect in the world can be
more prejudicial and pernicious to another than the Puritan Sect is, and would
be to the Protestant, if they could get the upper hand: Yet these are the men
who so fiercely have cried out against persecution, and against the cruelty of
Papists, making an Ordinance for Repentance, for the Blood spilt in the days of
Queen Mary (never remembering the persecution of the Church in the Reign of
Henry the Eighth, which how this Generation have made their own sin, I say not)
intitling their Faction only to those Martyrs merits, as their undoubted
Heirs; indeed cunningly to color their pretense of fighting for the Protestant
Religion, and to enrage the people to a revenge on the Kings Party, whom they
labored to make the world believe, were the guilty offspring of those Popish
Persecutors; whereas like the Jews, while they build the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, they show themselves to be the Sons of those who persecuted the
Prophets: And were those Martyrs now alive, they would be the greatest
Malignants and Delinquents of our days, fit to be Plundered, Sequestered,
Banished, Imprisoned, or Slain by bloody Votes, because they would not obey the
Parliament in changing Religion; as is plain in the story of Mr. John Rogers;
and crime enough it is in these days to be constant to the Book of
Common Prayer, which those Martyrs in Queen Mary's time sealed with their
Blood, and has ever since been continued in the Church of England, till wholly
abolished by an Fox Acts and Non.
Ordinance of this Parliament; whose cruelty as it has slain more thousands of
English Subjects, than Queen Mary condemned scores, so has it far less show of
Justice, or Legal proceedings, all being now done coram non judice, by upstart
Committees, and new-erected Judicatories, never heard of in England before; as
also sine Lege, by mere Arbitrary Votes, and fancies of malicious Adversaries,
and Judges in their own cause: nor were any in Queen Mary's Reign condemned but
by known Laws of the Land, and legal Trial, with disputations and persuasions
used to reclaim them from their supposed Errors; but the Fauatick persecution
is to hunt after matters of accusation, not to reform Errors, but to torment
the persons of men, and condemnati quoniam accusati is their Justice. And when
the Faction had thus plundered and sequestered the Clergy of all their Estates
for some years, another fit of persecution was raised against diverse of them
from Goldsmiths-hall and Habberdashers-hall, upon composition of their Temporal
Estate, where the Clergy were ever most spitefully used by those cruel
Committees; the Laity compounding for two years value, but the Clergy seldom
came off without four or five years: purchase of their own Lands and Estate.
And because I intend not to swell into too big a Volume, I Will give you but one
instance of the proceedings of Habberdashers-hall-Committee toward To Dr.
Martin they sent a Ticket in Prison at Ely-house, who desired them to take the
twentieth part, so that they would promise to send him the remaining nineteen
parts of that Estate which they supposed him to have.
a Clergyman, to whom a Ticket was sent for 240 l. as the twentieth part of
his Estate; he coming within the ten days limited in their Tickets to the
Committee for Mitigation, proffering his Oath that all his Estate real and
personal was not worth 200 l. could not be admitted to his protestation, but
was referred to the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of Moneys;
whither applying himself, the Doorkeeper told him, that he must not enter in
till he was called. Thus attending de die in diem, the ten days were expired,
without his being called, or his obtaining leave to pass the first or second
doors, which were duly locked by their Officers: Hereupon, according to the
great Justice of Committee-Orders, and Parliament-Ordinances, he fell by course
into their Messengers hands as their prisoner (though at large) for not making
an end within the ten days. After some weeks dancing attendance, and feeing a
Lawyer, his Petition was read; to which was annexed an Affidavit, that his
whole Estate was not worth 100 l. The Answer of the Committee was, That until
he should bring in the one moity of his Assessment, viz. 120 l. according to
the custom of that Committee, he should not be heard; which he not able to
perform, was sent for by their Pursuyvants, and upon his Petition was ordered
to bring in 50 l. and then to be further heard. After some delay, he moved
again, and was ordered to give present security to bring in 20 l. the next
Committeeday, or else to prison he must go presently; which to prevent, he was
forced to borrow 20 l. and accordingly deposited it, petitioning to be admitted
to his protestation: But the Committee told him, they must observe Rules, and
ordered him to give security for the other 30 l. to be brought the next
sitting, or else he must go to prison, telling him, that if he were not worth
so much, when he came to hearing the money should be returned to him again:
whereupon he was again forced to borrow 30 l. more, which he brought in
accordingly; but upon hearing was told, that though the Ordinance did admit all
men, yet the custom of that Committee did not admit of Malignants to their
protestation: and so took all the borrowed 50 l. as the twentieth part of his
Estate, which he by Affidavit gave in to them, was not worth 100 l. having been
long sequestered, and plundered of his Goods, and by imprisonments and Egyptian
years of Famine, forced to spend his long-provided Store. And just such a Cheat
does the Committee for plundered Ministers put upon the afflicted Wives and
Children of the sequestered Clergy, in their suing for the fifth part of their
Husbands Living, which an Ordinance of Parliament pretended to allow them: If
their Husband or Father has two Livings, their first trick is to tell them,
that they will allow them the fifth part of but one of them: The next is, that
though the Ordinance run generally without any limitation, yet they have secret
instructions whereby they grant Orders for a fifth part, with this proviso,
That if the sequestrator (or Cutpurse) show not good cause to the contrary. The
Wife of Dr. P. has been 3 years, to the expense of almost 100 l. to obtain her
fifth part, but could not prevail
This draws on much travel, and charges on Lawyers, and Sollicitors, and
Committee-Officers; and the Parliament-Minister upon hearing, pretending that
the Living is of value little enough to maintain him, or any frivolous Plea,
breeds a demur; and although they grant Order after Order, yet all is to no
purpose: for, say the Committee, we must not displease our Friends; they mean
their Masters, who under pretense of long prayers, can devour whole houses, and
starve other men's Wives and Children, by invading their possessions kept from
the right Owners by Club-law. And truly their Ordinance for the fifth part
does generally prove but a mere mockery to the Wives and Children of the Clergy
in the midst of their heavy Persecution, and a Snare to draw them into expense
of their last groat, in hopes to get their so-fairly-promised morsel; that as I
have known very few obtain it effectually, so have many of them after some
years of chargeable and vexatious attendance been wearied out, buying at too
dear a rate their Repentance of believing of hoping for any Justice or mercy
from the Fanatical Faction: From whom may all Gods people pray, Good Lord
deliver us.

FINIS.

