THE PROGENY OF GEFFREY CHAUCER
The true portraiture of GEFFREY CHAUCEER the famous English poet as by THOMAS
OCCLEUE is described who lived in his time and was his Scholar.



THE WORKS OF OUR Ancient, Learned, and Excellent ENGLISH POET, JEFFREY
CHAUCER: As they have lately been Compared with the best Manuscripts; and
several things added, never before in Print.

To which is adjoined, The STORY of the SIEGE of THEBES, By John Lidgate, Monk
of Bury.

TOGETHER WITH The Life of Chaucer, SHOWING His Country, Parentage, Education,
Marriage, Children, Revenues, Service, Reward, Friends, Books, Death.

Also a TABLE, wherein the Old and Obscure Words in Chaucer are explained, and
such Words (which are many) that either are, by Nature or Derivation, Arabic,
Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Dutch, or Saxon, marked with particular Notes
for the better understanding their Original.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CECIL, Knt. PRINCIPAL SECRETARY To the
QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesty, Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, one
of her Highness's most Honorable Privy Council, and Right Worthy Chancellor of
the University of CAMBRIDGE.
Right Honorable,
AT the last Impression of this Work, in way of humble Duty and Thankfulness, I
presented to Your Honor certain Collections and Observations upon Chaucer; as
namely, His Life, Picture, and Pedigree: the Arguments of every Book and Tale:
the Explanation of old Words, with Declaration of Authors by him cited: and
also two Treatises, the Death of Blanch, called his Dream: and the Flower and
the Leaf, never before printed. But as these things then through want of time
were not fully perfected, so were there some other things omitted, at the next
Impression to be performed.

Now therefore, that both by old written Copies, and by Mr. William Thynn's
praiseworthy Labors, I have reformed the whole Work, whereby Chaucer, for the
most part, is restored to his own Antiquity; and noted withal most of his
Sentences and Proverbs; having also, with some Additions, reduced into due
place those former Notes and Collections; as likewise proved the Significations
of most of the old and obscure Words, by the Tongues and Dialects from whence
they are derived; translated also into English, all the Latin and French by him
used; and lastly, added to his Works some Things of his own doing, as the
Treatise of Jack Upland against Friars, and his A. B. C. commonly called La
Priere de nostre Dame: I am bold to present the whole to your Honorable Favor
and Patronage, always mindful of my bounden Duty to Your Honor's House, which
with hearty Prayer I commend to the Grace of the Almighty.

Your Honor's in all Duty at Commandment, THO. SPEGHT.

To the Readers.
AFter this Book was last Printed, I understood that Mr. Francis Thynn had a
purpose, as indeed he has when time shall serve, to set out Chaucer with a
Comment in our Tongue, as the Italians have Petrark and others in their
Language. Whereupon, I purposed not to meddle any farther in this Work, although
some promise made to the contrary, but to referr all to him; being a Gentleman
for that purpose inferior to none, both in regard of his own Skill, as also of
those helps left to him by his Father. Yet notwithstanding, Chaucer now being
Printed again, I was willing, not only to help some Imperfections, but also to
add some things; whereunto he did not only persuade me, but most kindly lent me
his Help and Direction. By this means most of his old Words are restored;
Proverbs and Sentences marked; such Notes as were collected, drawn into better
order; and the Text by old Copies corrected.

But of some things I must advertise the Readers; as first, that in Chaucer
they shall find the Proper Names oftentimes much differing from the Latin and
Greek, from whence they are drawn; which they must not condemn in him as a
fault: for both he, and other Poets, in Translating such Words from one
Language into another, do use, as the Latins and Greeks do, the sundry Species
of Metaplasmus: as Campaneus for Capaneus; Atheon for Acteon; Adriane for
Ariadne. Which Chaucer does in other Words also; as gone for begone; leve for
beleve; peraunter for peradventure; loveden for did love; woneden for did won,
etc.

It is his manner likewise, imitating the Greeks, by two Negatives to cause a
greater Negation; as, I ne said none ill.

Also many times to understand his Verb; as, I not what men him call, for I
know not, etc.

And, for the Author, to name some part of his Work; as, Argonauticon for
Apollonius Rhodius. And that sometime in the Genitive Case, a former
Substantive being understood: as, read Aeneidos: Metamorphoseos: for the
Authors of those Works.

And for his Verses, although in diverse places they may seem to us to stand of
unequal Measures; yet a skilful Reader, that can scan them in their nature,
shall find it otherwise. And if a Verse here and there fall out a Syllable
shorter or longer than another, I rather aret it to the negligence and rape of
Adam Scrivener, that I may speak as Chaucer does, than to any unconning or
oversight in the Author: for how fearful he was to have his Works miswritten,
or his Verse mismeasured, may appear in the End of his Fifth Book of Troylus
and Creseide, where he writes thus: And for there is so great diversity
In English, and in writing of our tongue,
So pray I God, that none miswrite thee,
Ne thee mismetre for defaut of tongue, etc.


Moreover, whereas in the explanation of the old Words, sundry of their
Significations by me given, may to some seem conjectural; yet such as
understand the Dialects of our Tongue, especially in the North, and have
knowledge in some other Languages, will judge otherwise: and for the satisfying
of others, which want such skill, I have by these Characters a. g. l. i. f. d.
b. notified to them from what Tongue or Dialect such Words are derived.

It were a Labor worth commendation, if some Scholar, that has Skill and
Leisure, would conferr Chaucer with those learned Authors, both in Greek and
Latin, from whom he has drawn many excellent things; and at large report such
Histories, as in his Works are very frequent, and many of them hard to be
found: which would so grace this Ancient Poet, that whereas diverse have thought
him unlearned, and his Writings mere Trifles, it should appear, That besides
the knowledge of sundry Tongues, he was a Man of great Reading and deep
Judgment. This course I began in the former Impression, but here of purpose
have left it off; as also the Description of Persons and Places, except some
few of more worthy note; as a labor rather for a Commentor, for that it
concerns Matter, than for him that intends only the explaining of Words.
And thus to conclude, I commit to your wonted Favor, this our Poet, and what
here is done for the Poet's sake.

TO HIS Very Loving and assured Good Friend, Mr. THOMAS SPEGHT.
I Am sorry, that neither the worthiness of Chaucer's own Praise, nor the
importunate Prayers of diverse your loving Friends, can yet move you to put into
print those good Observations of him, and Collections that you have gathered.
For, as for the Objections against him, that in our private Talk you are wont
to say are commonly alleged, as first, That many of his Words are become (as
it were) vinewed and hoary with overlong lying; and next, that some of his
Speeches are somewhat too broad and plain; and that the Work therefore should
be the less gracious: these are either no Causes, or no causes sufficient, to
withold from Chaucer such desert of Glory as you may bestow upon him at your
Pleasure.

It is well known to wise and learned Men, that all Languages be either such as
are contained in Learning, or such as be used in daily practice: and for
learned Tongues, they having Testamentario jure, their Legacies set down by
them that be dead, Words must be retained and continued in them in such sort as
they were left, without alteration of the Testators Wills in any thing,
although in his choice it be that is to use them, when to use, or where to
refuse them, at his own discretion. But in usual Languages of common Practice,
which in choice of Words are, and ever will be subject unto change, never
standing at one stay, but sometimes casting away old Words, sometimes renewing
of them, and always framing of new, no man can so write, as that all his Words
may remain current many Years. Which thing, Horace, in his Book De art
Poetica, precisely notes in these Verses: Vt silvae foliis pronos mutantur in
annos:
Prima cadunt: ita verborum vetus interit aetas:
Et juvenum ritu florent modo nata, vigentque.
Debemur morti nos, nostraque, etc.


Whereby he declares, that Words in common Tongues, like unto Leaves, must of
necessity have their Buddings, their Blossomings, their Ripenings, and their
Fallings: and Chaucer most excellently also himself in true foresight hereof in
these Verses of his: I know that in form of speech is change
Within a hundredth year, and words tho
That hadden price, now wonder nice and strange
Think we them, and yet they spoke them so,
And sped as well in love, as men now do.


And therefore impossible it was, that either Chaucer could, or any man living
can, keep Words of unlearned Tongues from falling after so long a time. And
this has happened amongst the Latin Writers themselves, when theirs was a
spoken Tongue, as ours now is, who, though they first made their own Words, and
gave them their Allowance, yet diverse of Cecilius, Statius, Ennius and Plautus,
were by latter Latinists rejected; and now again many of them, by the last
Writers of all (though before, as it were by Proclamation, put down for
baseness) are upon a new touch warranted for good, and pass abroad as Sterling.
But so pure were Chaucer's Words in his days, as Lidgate, that learned Man,
calls him, The Loadstar of the English Language; and so good they are in our
days, as Mr. Spencer (following the Counsel of Tully in his Third Book De
Oratore, for reviving of ancient Words) has adorned his Style with that Beauty
and Gravity, that Tully there speaks of: and his much frequenting of Chaucer's
ancient Words, with his excellent imitation of diverse Places in him, is not the
least help that has made him reach so high, as many learned men do think, that
no Poet, either French or Italian, deserves a second place under him. And
furthermore, by your Interpretation of the unusual Words, that ancient Hardness
and Difficulty is made most clear and easy: and in the Pains and Diligence you
have used in collecting his Life, methinks you have bestowed upon him as
favorable Graces as Medea did upon Aeson; for you have restored us Chaucer,
both alive again, and young again; and delivered many from the erroneous
Conjectures they conceived of him. And therefore, though every thing be not
perfect to your own mind, (for Desires be endless; and nothing can be at one
time both begun and perfected) yet since you have opened the way to others, and
attempted that which was unattempted before you, your Endeavors herein cannot
but be well accepted, unless of such as have better Will, without just cause,
to reprove others, than either Wit or Skill to do well themselves.

Touching the Incivility Chaucer is charged withal; what Roman Poet has less
offended this way than he? Virgil in his Priapus is worse by a thousand
Degrees, and Ovid in his Book De Art Amandi, and Horace in many Places as deep
as the rest; but Catullus and Tibullus, in unclean Wantonness, beyond measure
pass them all. Neither is Plautus nor Terence free in this behalf: But these
two last are excused above the rest, for their due Observation of Decorum, in
giving to their Comical Persons such manner of Speeches as did best fit their
Dispositions. And may not the same be said for Chaucer? How much had he swarved
from Decorum, if he had made his Merchant, his Miller, his Cook, his Carpenter,
tell such honest and civil Tales, as were told of his Knight, his Squire, his
Lawyer and his Scholar? But showing the disposition of the baser sort of
People, he declares in their Prologues and Tales, That their chief Delight was
in undecent Speeches of their own, and in their false Defamations of others, as
in these Verses appears: Let be thy lewd dronken Harlotry,
It is a sin and eke a great folly
To apairen any man, or him defame,
And eke to bring wives in such blame.


And in excuse of himself for uttering those broad Speeches of theirs, he uses
these Words: But first I pray you of your courtesy
That ye ne arette it not my folly,
Though that I plainly speak in this mattere
To tellen you her words, and eke her chere,
Ne though I speak her words properly:
For this ye known, as well as I,
Who shall tellen a tale after a man,
He mote rehearse, as nigh as ever he can,
Everich word, if it been in his charge,
All speak he never so rudely ne large,
Or else he mote tellen his tale untrue,
Or feine things, or find words new.


And in another place: Deemeth not for Gods love, that I say
Of evil intent, but that I mote rehearce
Her tales all, been they better or werce,
Or else falsen some of my matere.
The wise Plato says, as ye mow read,
The word must needs acord with the deed:
It men should tell properly a thing,
The word must cousin be to the working.


For no man can imagine in his so large compass, purposing to describe all
English-mens Humors living in those days, how it had been possible for him to
have left untouched their filthy Delights; or in discovering their desires, how
to have expressed them without some of their Words.

And now to compare him with other Poets: His Canterbury Tales contain in them
almost the same Argument that is handled in Comedies: His Style therein for the
most part is low and open, and like unto theirs: but herein they differ; The
Comedy-Writers do all follow and borrow one from another, as Terence from
Plautus and Menander: Plautus from Menander and Demophilus: Statius and
Caecilius from Diphilus, Apollodorus, and Philemon; and almost all the last
Comedians from that, which was called Antiqua Comaedia. The Ring they beat is
this, and out of the same Track they go not; To show the Looseness of many
Young Men; the Lewdness of some Young-women; the crafty School Points of old
Bawds; the little regard of honest disposed Serving-men; the miserable
Wretchedness of diverse old Fathers, and their Folly in countenancing and
committing their Sons to the Charge and Government of most impudent and
flattering Parasites; such as in Terence is prating Davus and Geta, and bold
bawdy Phormio. Chaucer's Device of his Canterbury Pilgrimage is merely his own:
His Drift is to touch all sorts of men, and to discover all Vices of that Age;
which he does so feelingly, and with so true an Aim, as he never fails to hit
whatsoever mark he levels at.

In his five Books of Troylus and Creseid, in the Romaunt of the Rose, in his
Black Knight, in the Merciless Lady, in some few also of his Tales, in his
Dream, and in that of Blanch, (which is in your hands, and was never yet
imprinted) and in other his Discourses he soareth much higher; and is in his
Troilus so sententious, as there be few Staves in those Books which include not
some principal Sentence; most excellently imitating Homer and Virgil, and
borrowing often of them, and of Horace also, and other the rarest both Orators
and Poets that have written. Of whom, for the sweetness of his Poetry, may be
said, that which is reported of Stesichorus: and as Marcus Cethegus was termed
by Ennius, Suadae medulla; so may Chaucer rightly be called, The Pith and
Sinews of Eloquence, and very Life it self of all Mirth and pleasant Writing:
besides, one Gift he has above other Authors, and that is, By excellency of
his Descriptions, to possess his Readers with a more forcible Imagination of
seeing that (as it were) done before their Eyes, which they read, than any
other that ever has written in any Tongue. And here I cannot forget to
remember unto you, those ancient learned Men of our time in Cambridge, whose
diligence, in reading of his Works themselves, and commending them to others of
the younger sort, did first bring you and me in love with him: and one of them
at that time, and all his Life after, was (as you know) one of the rarest men
for Learning in the whole World. The same may be said of that worthy learned
Man your good Friend in Oxford, who with many other of like excellent Judgment
have ever had Chaucer in most high Reputation.

And now, (Mr. Speght) seeing not only all Greek and Latin Poets have had their
Interpreters, and the most of them translated into our Tongue, but the French
also and Italian, as Guillaume de Salust, that most divine French Poet; Petrark
and Ariosto, those two excellent Italians, (whereof the last, instructed by Mr.
John Harington does now speak as good English as he did Italian before,) shall
only Chaucer, our Ancient Poet, nothing inferior to the best, amongst all the
Poets of the World, remain always neglected, and never be so well understood of
his own Countrymen as Strangers are? Well, content your self, and set your
heart at rest; for, seeing I was one of them which first procured you to take
in hand this Work, and since you have given me of your Copies to use privately
for mine own Pleasure; if you will not put them abroad your self, they shall
abroad 'ere long, and look into the World without your consent. Yet, lest many
Inconveniences might happen by this Attempt of mine, and diverse things be set
forth contrary unto your own liking, let me once again entreat you (as I have
done often heretofore) to yield to my just and reasonable suit: wherein you
shall not only satisfy that Conceit which I have many Years carried of your
unfeigned Love toward me; but pleasure many who daily expect your Pains
herein; and perform also unto Chaucer great part of that Honor that he most
worthily deserves. So with my thrice hearty Commendations I bid you farewell.

From Leicester the last of June, Anno 1597. Your assured and ever loving
Friend, Francis Beaumont.

THE READER TO Geffrey Chaucer.
Reader. WHere have thou dwelt, good Geffrey, all this while,
Unknown to us, save only by thy Books?

Chaucer. In Haulks and Herns, God wot, and in Exile,
Where none vouchsaft to yield Me Words or Looks;
Till one which saw me there, and knew my Friends,
Did bring me forth: such Grace sometime God sends.

Reader. But who is he that has thy Books repaired,
And added more, whereby thou art more graced?

Chaucer. The self-same Man who has no Labor spared
To help what Time and Writers had defaced:
And made old Words, which were unknown of many,
So plain, that now they may be known of any.

Reader. Well fare his heart; I love him for thy sake,
Who for thy sake has taken all this Pains.

Chaucer. Would God I knew some means amends to make,
That for his Toil he might receive some Gains.
But wot ye what? I know his Kindness such,
That for my good he thinks no Pains too much.

H. B.
Upon the Picture of Chaucer.
WHat Pallas City owes the heavenly mind
Of prudent Socrates, wise Greece's Glory;
What Fame Arpinas spreadingly does find
By Tully's Eloquence and Oratory;
What lasting Praise sharp witted Italy
By Tasso's and by Petrark's Pen obtained;
What Fame Bartas unto proud France has gained,
By seven days World Poetically strained:
What high Renown is purchased unto Spain,
Which fresh Dianaes Verses do distill;
What Praise our Neighbor Scotland does retain
By Gawine Douglas, in his Virgil Quill;
Or other Motions by sweet Poets Skill;
The same, and more, fair England challenge may,
By that rare Wit and Art thou do display
In Verse, which does Apollo's Muse bewray.
Then Chaucer live, for still thy Verse shall live
T'unborn Poets which Life and Light will give.
Fran. Thynn.

Of the Animadversions upon Chaucer.
IN reading of the learned praiseworthy Pain,
The helpful Notes explaining Chaucer's Mind,
The abstruse Skill, and artificial Vein;
By true Annalogy I rightly find
Speght is the Child of Chaucer's fruitful Brain;
Vernishing his Works with Life and Grace,
Which envious Age would otherwise deface.
Then be he loved and thanked for the same,
Since in his Love he has revived his Name.
THE LIFE Of Our Learned English Poet, Geffrey Chaucer.
So much as we can find by Heralds, Chronicles, and Records, of his Country.
Parentage. Education. Marriage. Children, With their Marriage. Lands. Service.
Reward. Issue. Death.
Revenues. Service. Reward. Friends. Books. Death.

Gulielmus Camdenus. Gaufredus Chaucer sui saeculi ornamentum extra omnem
ingenii aleam positus, and Poetastras nostros longo post se intervallo
relinquens.

-- jam monte potitus
Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam.

His Country.
THis famous and learned Poet, Geffrey Chaucer, Esquire was supposed by This Leland
had Commission from King Hen. Eighth to search all Libraries in England for
matters of Antiquity. He died in the days of Edw. Sixth.
Leland to have been an Oxfordshire or Barkshire Man born: for so reports
John Bale in his Catalogue of English Writers; Quibusdam argumentis adducebatur
Lelandus, ut crederet, etc. Some Reasons did move Leland to think, That
Oxfordshire or Barkshire was his Native Country.

But as it is evident by his own Words in the Testament of Love In the 1. Book
and 5th Sect.
, he was born About the 2d or 3d Year of Edw. Third.
in the City of London: for thus he writes there; Also in the City of London
that is to me so dear and sweet, in which I was forth grown, and more kindly
Love have I to that Place than to any other in yerth (as every kindly Creature
has full Appetite to that Place of his kindly Engendure, and to wilne Rest and
Peace in that stead to abide) thilke Peace should thus there have been broken,
which of all wise Men is commended and desired.

In the Records of the Guild Hall in London we find, that there was one Richard
Chaucer Vintner, quasi Wineturner, that is, a Merchant of the Vi^^ry, which
sold by whole sale.
Vintner of London in the twenty third Year of Edward 3d. who might well be
Geffrey Chaucer's Father.

Also there was a Nun of St. Hellens in London named Elizabeth Chaucer, in the
first Year of Rich. 2d. as it is in Record, which seems either to have been
his Sister, or of his Kindred, and by likelihood a Londoner born.

Moreover, in the eighth year of the same King, Geffrey Chaucer was Controller
of the Custom-House in London, as after out of the Records shall appear.

Other Dealings he had in the City, as we may plainly see in the Testament of
Love; all which may move us to think, That he was born in London.

His Parentage.
FOR his Parentage and Place of Birth, although Bale terms him, Galfridus
Chaucer nobili loco natus, and summae spei juvenis, yet in the Opinion of some
Heralds, (otherwise than his Virtues and Learning commended him) he descended
not of any great House; which they gather by his Arms, De argento and rubeo
color partita per longitudiuem scuti cum benda ex transverso, eisdem coloribus
sed transmutatis depicta sub hac forma.



But this is but a simple Conjecture: for, honorable Houses, and of great
Antiquity, have borne as mean Arms as Chaucer; and yet his Arms are not so
mean, either for Color, Charge, or Particion, as some would make them.

And indeed both in respect of the Name, which is French, as also by other
Conjectures, it may be gathered, That his Progenitors were Strangers.

But whereas some are of Opinion, that the first coming of the Chaucers into
England was when Qu. Isabel, This Q. Isabel being sent into France with her
young Son Edw. by the K. of England her Husband, to conferr about matters with
her Brother the French King, would by no means return, having conceived a great
Hatred against the Spensers, and also against the King, for suffering himself
to be misled by their naughty Counsel; but by all means stirred the People to
Rebellion, and in the end came over her self with almost three thousand
Strangers besides Englishmen.
Wife to Edw. 2. and her Son Prince Edw. returned out of Henault, a Province
lying between France and Flanders.
Henault into England, at which time also almost 3000 Strangers came over with
them, as by Chronicles appears; or some two Years after, when Philip,
Daughter to the Earl of Henault, came over to be married to Prince Edward: I
can by no means consent with them, but rather must think, That their Name and
Family was of far more ancient Antiquity, although by time decayed, as many
more had been of much greater Estate. For in the days of Edw. 1. there was one
John Chaucer, as appeared by the Records of the Tower; where it is said, That
the King did hear the Complaint of John Chaucer in the damage of 1000 l. There
was also in the time of Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. Elias Chaucesir; of whom the
Records in the Exchequer have thus; Edwardus Dei Gratia, etc. liberate de
Thesauro nostro Elias Chaucesir december solid. etc. with which Characters Geffrey
Chaucer is written in the Records of Edw. 3. and Rich. 2. This Name was at the
first a Name of Office or Occupation, which afterward came to be the Name of a
Family, as Smith, Baker, Skinner, and others have done. In the time of King
John likewise, there was one named le Chaucer, as appears by the Records of
the Tower. But what need I to stand upon the Antiquity or Gentry of Chaucer,
when the Roll of Battle Abbey affirms Chaucer to have come in with the
Conqueror. Moreover, it is more likely that the Parents of Geffrey Chaucer
were mere English, and himself an Englishman born; for else how could he have
come to that Perfection in our Language, as to be called, The first Illuminer
of the English Tongue, had not both he, and his Parents before him, been born
and bred among us? But what their Names were, or what Issue they had, otherwise
than by Conjecture before given, we cannot declare.

Now whether they were Merchants, as some will have it, (for that in Places
where they have dwelled, the This Conjecture is of small force: for the
Merchants of the Staple had not any Arms granted to them, as I have been
informed, before the time of Henry the Sixth, or much thereabout.
Arms of the Merchants of the Staple have been seen in the glass Windows) or
whether they were of other Calling, it is not much necessary to search; but
wealthy no doubt they were, and of good account in the Commonwealth, who
brought up their Son in such sort, that both he was thought fit for the Court
at home, and to be employed for matters of State in foreign Countries.

His Education.
HIS bringing up, as Leland says, was in the University of Oxford, as also in
Cambridge, as appears by his own Words, in his Book entitled, The Court of
Love; and in Oxford (by all likelihood) in Canterbury or in Merton College,
Canterbury College in Oxford, founded by Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury,
was suppressed in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. and joined unto Christs-Church.
with John Wickliffe, whose Opinions in Religion he much affected; where,
besides his private Study, he did with great diligence frequent the public
Schools and Disputations; Hinc acutus Dialecticus, hinc dulcis Rhetor, hinc
lepidus Poeta, hinc gravis Philosophus, ac sanctus Theologus evasit.
Mathematicus insuper ingeniosus erat a Johanne Sombo, etc. Hereupon says
Leland, he became a witty Logician, a sweet Rhetorician, a pleasant Poet, a
grave Philosopher, and a holy Divine. Moreover, he was a very skilful
Mathematician, instructed therein by John Some and Nicholas Nicholas de Lynna
studiorum praecipuas parts in Mathesi collocavit, quae quatuor disciplinarum
orbem complectitur: videlicet, Arithmeticam, Geometriam, Musicam, and
Astrologiam. Bale.
Lynne, Friars Carmelites of Lynne, and men very skilful in the Mathematics,
whom he, in his Book called The Astrolaby, does greatly commend, and calls
them, Reverend Clerks.

By his Travel also in France and Flanders, where he spent much time in his
young Years, but more in the latter end of the Reign of King Rich. 2. he
attained to great Perfection in all kind of Learning: for so do Bale and Leland
also report. Circa postremos Richardi secundi annos in Galliis floruit,
magnamque illic ex assidua in literis exercitatione gloriam sibi comparavit.
Domum reversus forum Londinense, and Collegia Leguleiorum, qui ibidem patria
jura interpretantur, frequentavit, etc. About the latter end of King Richard
the Second's Days he flourished in France, and got himself great Commendation
there by his diligent Exercise in Learning. After his Return home, he
frequented the Court at London, and the Colleges of the Lawyers, which there
interpret the Laws of the Land, and among them he had a familiar Friend called
John Gower, a Knight, as Bale writes, studied not only the common Laws of the
Land, but all other kind of good Literature. He lies buried in St. Mary
Overies in Southwark, in a stately Tomb erected in the Wall, with his Image
lying over him, in a Habit of greenish Damask down to his Feet, a Collar of
Esses Gold about his Neck, and on his Head a Chaplet of Roses, the Ornaments of
Knighthood. Under his Head he has the likeness of three Books, which he
compiled: the first, Speculum Meditantis in French; the second, Vox Clamantis
in Latin; the third, Confessio Amantis in English.
John Gower.

It seems that Chaucer was of the Inner Temple; for not many Years since,
Master Buckley did see a Record in the same House, where Geffrey Chaucer was
fined two Shillings for beating a Franciscan Friar in Fleet Street.

Thus spending much time in the Universities, France, Flanders, and Inns of
Court, he proved a singular man in all kind of Knowledge.

His Marriage.
HE matched in Marriage with a Knights Daughter of Henault, called Paon de
Ruet, King of Arms, as by this Draught appears, taken out of the Office of
the Heralds. This Gentlewoman whom he married (whose Name we cannot find) as it
may be gathered by Chaucer's own Words in his Dream, was Attendant on Blanch
the Duchess, in the Duke of Lancaster's House, as also her Sister Katharine
was; or else waited on the Duchess Maud, Sister of Blanch, who was married to
William Duke of Bavare, Earl of Henault, Zeland, and Holland. But howsoever it
was, by this Marriage he became Brother-in-Law to John Plantagenet, surnamed
Gaunt, of Gaunt in Flanders, where he was born, was the fourth Son of King
Edward the Third. He was Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Lincoln, Darby, and
Leicester, King of Castile and Lions, and Steward of England. He was also Earl
of Richmond, and Duke of Aquitain. He had three Wives, Blanch, Constance, and
Katharine. He lies buried in the Quire of Paul's.
John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, as hereafter appears.

Stemma peculiare Gaufredi Chauceri Poetae celeberrimi.
Paganus de Rouet Hannoniensis, aliter dictus Guien Rex Armorum. Catherina de
Rouet a priore marito Hugone Swinford Equite cognominata Swinford: Quae postea
renupta Johanni Gandavensi tertii Edovardi Regis filio Lancastriae Duci, illi
procreavit filios tres and unicam filiam. Gaufredus Chaucer Poeta celeber. sui
saeculi ornamentum ac decus ingens. Altera filiarum and cohaeredum Guienni
Armorum Regis, cujus Nomen non editur. Thomas Chaucer Armiger dominus Manerii
de Ewhelm in Oxoniensi Commit. William de la Pole Comes Marchio, and postea Dux
Suffolciae. Alicia unica filia, and haeres Thomae Chaucer ter nupta Johanni
Philip. equiti, deinde comiti Sarum, and postea Will. Com. Suff. Johannes de la
Pole Dux Suffolciae. Edmundus de la Pole Comes Suffolciae, ultimus ex hac
stirpe attinctus tempore Regis Hen. 7.



Johannes Burg hershe, Miles. Matildis filia William Kerdeston Militis.
Johannes Burghershe Miles. Imania filia natu maxima, and una haeredum Simonis
Hannap vel Hanning de Commit. Glouc. Matildis filia and cohaeres Johannis
Burghershe Militis. Margareta altera filiarum and haeredum Johannis Burghershe
nupta Johanni Arundel de Com. Cornubiae. Johannes Arundell. Hinc descendit
hodiernus Johannes Arundel.



His Children, with their Advancement.
IT should seem, that Geffrey Chaucer had another Son besides Thomas Chaucer
was born about the 38 or 39th Year of Edw. 3.
Thomas; for in the Preface to the Written Ann. Domini 1391. Rich. secund. 14.
Astrolabe writes to one, whom he calls his little Son Lewis: yet some hold
opinion, (but I know not upon what Grounds) that Thomas Chaucer was not the Son
of Geffrey Chaucer, but rather some Kinsman of his, whom he brought up. But
this Pedigree by the hands of Master Glover alias Somerset, that learned
Antiquary, as also the Report of Chronicles, show it to be otherwise.

Some say that in recompense of Geffrey Chaucer's Service in France, being sent
thither Ambassador, Edward the Third gave him this Maud, Daughter and Heir of
Sir This John Burghershe was of the same Line of Barrholomew Burghershe, one of
the first Knights of the Garter at the Institution thereof by Edward 3. and of
Henry Burghershe Bishop of Lincoln, and Chancellor and Treasurer of England.
John Burghershe, Knight, whom he married to Thomas Chaucer his Son, to the
great increase of his Living, and amendment in Blood.

This Thomas Chaucer, besides his own Inheritance of Ewelme olim Chauceri and
Delapolorum, nunc Regiae aedes. Dum enim Johannes Lincolniae Comes Gulielmo
Delapolo e filio Johanne nepos res novas contra Henricum septimum moliretur
proscriptus omnibus honoribus, and his possessionibus excidit: quae in
patrimonium Regium transcriptae fuerunt. G. C.
Ewelm and Dunnington Castle stands in a Park in Barkshire not far from
Newberry, where to this day stands an old Oak called Chaucer's Oak.
Dunnington Castle, (which M. Camben, England's most excellent Antiquiographer
terms, Quondam Chauceri, and postea Delapolorum Castellum exiguum) was diverse
ways preferred, as out of Records in the Tower of London here we may partly see.

Vicesimo secundo Rich. secundi viginti Marcae datae Thomae Chaucer per ann.
durante vita.

Anno primo Henrici quarti idem donum viginti Marcarum confirmatum.

Thomas Chaucer primo anno Henrici sexti capitalis Pincerna Regis Angliae.

Thomas Chaucer, Sheriff of Oxfordshire and Barkshire, and Constable of
Wallingford in Barkshire: Castrum admirandae amplitudinis and magnificentiae
duplici murorum ambitu, duplici item vallo circundatum, in medio, moli in
magnam altitudinem aeditae arx imponitur, in cujus acclivi per gradus ascensu
fons est immensae profunditatis. Incolae constructum a Danis credunt, alii a
Romany. G. Camben.
Wallingford-Castle and Knaresborow in Yorkshire. Castrum rupi asperrimae
impositum, quod Serlonem de Burgo patruum Eustacii Vescii condidisse ferunt:
nunc patrimonii Lancastrensis censetur. G. Camden.
Knaresborow Castle, and the Forest of Knaresborow, during Life.

Queen This Jane of Navarr, Widow to John of Mounford, Duke of Britain, was
married to Henry the Fourth, about the fourth Year of his Reign.
Jane, Wife to Henry the Fourth, the twelfth year of his Reign, gave to Thomas
Chaucer, for his good Service, Manerium de Woodstock, Hannebrough, Wotton, and
Stuntesfield, cum omnibus membris and Hamlet. suis durante vita.

Thomas Chaucer, the last Heir male of the Chaucers, and Owner of Ewelm and
Dunnington Castle, the Inheritance of the Chaucers, lies buried in a black
Marble Tomb, in a fair Chapel, in the Parish Church of Ewelm, in the south
side of the Quire, with this Epitaph, Hic jacet Thomas Chaucer, Armiger,
quondam dominus istius villae, and patronus istius Ecclesiae, qui obiit 18 die
Mensis November. Anno Dom. 1434. and Matildis uxor ejus, quae obiit 28 die Mensis
Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1436.

Thomas Chaucer had one only Daughter, named Alice, married thrice; first to
Sir John Phillip, Knight; then to Thomas Mountacute, Earl of Salisbury; and the
third time to The Pooles Advancement grew first by Merchandise: and Sir Richard
Poole, Knight. was Father to William de la Pool, Merchant of Hull, who, for that he
frankly and freely did lend to King Ed. 3. a great Sum of Money (at Mortaign in
France, when he was greatly distressed) was honored with the Girdle Military,
made Banneret, and endued with 1000 Marks by the Year; and his Successors after
were advanced to be Dukes of Suffolk, as in Master Stow's Annals appears.
William de la Pole, Earl, and after Duke of Suffolk; who, for love of his
Wife, and commodity of her Lands, fell much to dwell in Oxfordshire and
Barkshire, where his Wives Lands lay. Between them they had a Son called John,
as appears in the Book of the Foundation of the Hospital of Ewelm, (which is
to be seen in Mr. Stow's Library) where the Master, Minister, and the poor Men,
are enjoined to gather themselves at appointed times about the Tomb of Thomas
Chaucer and Maud his Wife, Father and Mother of the Duchess, and there to say
certain Prayers appointed; which being ended, one of them is to say openly in
the English Tongue, God save in Body and Soul our sovereign Lord the King; my
Lord William Duke of Suffolk; my Lady Alice, Duchess of Suffolk his Wife, our
Foundress; my Lord John their Son, and all Christian People; the Brethren
answering, Amen. This is added, because some have held, that she never had
Child, but that the Duke had this Son by another Wife: although indeed the
descending of the Chaucers Lands to the Poles, and after to the King, might
sufficiently confute them. But what is it wherein some will not cavil?

This William and his Wife increased the Manor Place of Ewelm, William de la
Pole was first secretly married to the Countess of Henault, by whom he had a
Daughter: and after being divorced from her, was publicly married to T.
Chaucer's Daughter, Countess of Salisbury, who proved this Daughter, being
married to one Barentine, a Bastard. The which Barentine afterward, for a Rior
made against the Countess, was condemned, and lost an hundred Pounds by the
Year. J. Stow.
and builded there a Parish Church, and an Hospital called Gods-house, for two
Priests and thirteen poor men, to be sustained for ever. One of the Priests to
be Master of the Almshouse and Alms people, them to instruct; the other
Priest, a Schoolmaster, freely to teach the Children of the Tenants of the
said Lordship their Grammar; and either of them to have ten Pounds by the Year.
Also one of the poor men to be called Minister, to present the Faults of the
other to the Master, and to ring their common Bell to Service, and to have
sixteen Pence the Week, and the rest fourteen Pence. To the which House they
gave the Manors of Ramridge in Hampshire, Conock in Wiltshire, and Mersh in
Buckinghamshire. They also founded an Hospital at Donnington Castle J. St.

This Alice, In the 28. of K. Hen. 6. 1450. this William de la Pole was
banished the Realm for five Years, to pacify the hard opinion which the
Commons had conceived against him. In his Journey to his Banishment he was
taken and beheaded, and his Body cast up at Dover Sands, and buried in the
Charter House at Hull. J. St.
Wife of Duke William, surviving her Husband, was after buried in the Parish
Church of Ewelm, on the South Side of the high Altar, in a rich Tomb of
Alabaster, with an Image in the Habit of a Vowess, and Duchess crowned, lying
on the same Tomb: and another Image under the Tomb, so near as may be, like
unto her at the time of her Death, with this Epitaph, Orate pro anima
serenissimae principissae Aliciae Suffolchiae, hujus Ecclesiae Patronae, and
primae fundatricis hujus Eleemosinariae, quae obiit 20 die mensis Maii, Anno
Dom. 1475. Litera Dominicali, A.

Among many things that greatly renowned Geffrey Chaucer, this was one says
Bale, That he had a Kinswoman, Quae Gulielmo Sudovolgiorum Duci nupsit, ac
magno in splendore Aquelmi vitam egit: that is, which being married to William
Duke of Suffolk, lived in great Honor at Ewelm.

His Revenues.
BUT now to return to Geffrey Chaucer: although he had Lands and Revenues in
diverse Places, and that to the yearly value, as some say, almost of a thousand
Pounds, yet the Place of his most Abode was at Woodstock, in a fair House of
Stone next to the King's Place, called to this day Chaucer's House, and by that
Name passed by the Queen to the Tenant which there now dwells. Chaucer took
great Pleasure to lie there, in regard of the Park, in sundry of his Writings
much by him commended; as also to be near the Court, where his best Friends
were, and they who were able to do him most Pleasure: by whose means he had
sundry Rewards bestowed upon him, and that worthily, for his good Service,
which often he performed, and whereof in Chronicles and Records we may read.

His Service.
IN the last Year of King Edward the Third, This Sir Rich. Dangle, a Knt. of
Poictu, came over with the Duke of Lancaster, who, for his Valiancy and tried
Truth to the King of England, was made Knight of the Garter.
he with Sir Richard Dangle, and Sir Richard Stan, was sent to Montrevil to
move a Marriage to be had between Richard Prince of Wales, and the Lady Mary,
Daughter to the French King. Some write, that he, with Petrark, was present at
the Marriage of Lionel Duke of Clarence with Violant Daughter of Galeasius Duke
of Millain; yet Paulus Jovius names not Chaucer, but Petrark, he says, was
there. And yet it may well be; for it is in Record, that twice or thrice he was
employed in foreign Countries: which if it be true, well might the man be at
such Charges and Expenses as he might stand in need of King Richard the
Second's Protection (as after shall appear) till he had better recovered
himself. But for his Service he was not unrewarded.

His Rewards.
CHaucer is called Armiger Regis: for in the Patent Rolls of Part 1. of 50 Ed.
3. M. 5. the King makes a Grant, Armigero nostro Galfrido Chaucer. This
Armiger Regis was of good Worship and Reputation about the Prince, being also
the same that Scutifer Regis was, to bear the King's Shield and other Armor of
his, both out and in the Wars. By which Name of Scutifer Regis, the King
granted to him the Lands and Body of Sir Edmund Staplegat, for the Manor of
Bilsington in Kent, to whom he paid 104 Pounds for the same; as appears in
Patent Part 2. de anno 49 Edw. 3. Again, the King before that, in 45 Edw. 3: as
appears in pellis Exitus of the Exchequer, had granted unto him twenty Marks
by Year, by the Name of Galfride Chaucer Valectus Hospitii; which is, Groom of
the Palace, a place of good Worship. By which Name of Valectus* also King Edw.
3. long before did entite Laurence Hastings, Lord of Aburganey, calling him
Valectum nostrum, being the King's Groom, Page, or Servant. For unto this day,
certain Servitors of the Queens are called Pages and Grooms, being of Worship
and Reputation, as are the Grooms of the Privy Chamber. By which may be
gathered in what Credit G. Chaucer was with King Edw. 3.

Anno 8 Richardi 2. Galfridus Chaucer Contrarotulator Customariorum and
Subsidiorum in portu Civitatis nostrae London.

Anno 17 Richardi 2. Viginti librae datae Galfrido Chaucero per annum durante
vita:

Vigessimo secundo anno Richardi secundi concessum Galfrido Chaucer unum dolium
vini per annum durante vita, in portu civitatis London. per manus capitalis
Pincernae nostri.

Anno primo Henrici quarti Galfrido Chaucero Armigero literae patentes
confirmatae pro viginti libris nummorum per annum durante vita and uno dolio
vini.

Eodem etiam anno concessae adhuc and datae eidem Galfrido Chaucero Quadraginta
marcae per annum durante vita.

His Friends.
FRiends he had in the Court, of the best sort: for besides that he always held
in with the Princes, in whose days he lived, he had of the best of the
Nobility, both Lords and Ladies, which favored him greatly. But chiefly John
of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, at whose commandment he made the Treatise Some say
he did but translate it; and that it was made by Sir Otes de Grantsome, Knight,
in French: of my Lady of York, Daughter to the King of Spain, representing
Venus; and my Lord of Huntingdon, sometime Duke of Excester. This Lady was
younger Sister to Constance, John of Gaunt's second Wife. This Lord of
Huntingdon was called John Holland, half Brother to Richard the Second: He
married Elizabeth the Daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.
Of the Alliance betwixt Mars and Venus: and also the Book of the Duchess.
Likewise the Lady Isabel, Daughter to King Edward the Third, and Wife to
Ingeram de Guynes, Lord De Coucy: also the Lady Margaret, Daughter to the same
King, married to John Hastings Earl of Penbrook, did greatly love and favor
Geffrey Chaucer; and he again did as much honor them, but especially the Lady
Margaret, as it may appear in diverse Treatises by him written: as in the
Prologue of the Legend of good Women under the Name of the Daisy; and likewise
in a Ballad, beginning, In the season of Feuerier. Others there were of great
account, whereof some, for some causes, took liking of him, and other for his
rare Gifts and Learning did admire him. And thus he lived in honor many Years
both at home and abroad.

Yet it seems that he was in some trouble in the days of King Richard the
Second, as it may appear in the Testament of Love; where he does greatly
complain of his own rashness in following the multitude, and of their hatred
against him for bewraying their purpose. And in that complaint which he makes
to his empty Purse, I do find a written Copy, which I had of Mr. Stow (whose
Library helped me in many things) wherein ten times more is adjoined than is in
Print. Where he makes great Lamentation for his wrongful Imprisonment, wishing
death to end his days: which in my Judgment does greatly accord with that in
the Testament of Love. Moreover, we find it thus in Record:

In the second Year of Richard the Second, Out of the Records in the Tower.
The King took Geffrey Chaucer and his Lands into his Protection: the occasion
whereof, no doubt, was some danger and trouble wherein he was fallen by
favoring some rash attempt of the common People. For living in such
troublesome times, wherein few knew what part to take, no marvel if he came
into some danger, nay great marvel that he fell not into greater danger. But as
he was learned, so was he wise, and kept himself much out of the way in
Holland, Zeland, and France, where he wrote most of his Books.

His Books.
CHaucer had always an earnest desire to enrich and beautify our English
Tongue, which in those days was very rude and barren; and this he did,
following the Example of Dantes and Petrarch, who had done the same for the
Italian Tongue, Alanus for the French, and Johannes Mena for the Spanish;
neither was Chaucer inferior to any of them in the performance hereof: and
England in this respect is much beholden to him, as Leland well notes; Anglia
Chaucerum veneratur nostra poetam,
Cui veneres debet patria lingua suas:
Our England honors Chaucer Poet, as principal
To whom her Country Tongue does owe her Beauties all.


Besides those Books of his which we have in print, he wrote diverse others; as,
De Vulcani veru. De Leone and eius dignitate. Comoedias and Tragoedias.
Facetias and Jocos. Jack Vpland against Friars. Now Printed. And His A. B. C.
Now Printed.


Others I have seen without any Authors Name, in the hands of Mr. Stow, that
painful Antiquary; which for the Invention I would verily judge to be
Chaucer's, were it not that Words and Phrases carry not every where Chaucer's
Antiquity. Mr. William Thynn, in his first printed Book of Chaucer's Works,
with one Column on a side, had a Tale called the Pilgrims Tale, which was more
odious to the Clergy than the Speech of the Plowman. The Tale began thus; In
Lincolneshire fast by a fenne, Stands a religious house who does it kenne.
The Argument of which Tale, as also the occasion thereof, and the cause why it
was left out of Chaucer's Works, shall hereafter be showed, if God permit, in
Mr. Francis Thynn's Comment upon Chaucer; and the Tale it self published if
possibly it can be found.

Now, concerning those Books which we have in print; The Canterbury Tales for
the most part were of his own Invention; yet some of them translated, and
penned in King Richard the Second's Days, and after the Insurrection of Jack
Straw, which was in the fourth Year of the same King; for in the Tale of the
Nuns Priest, he makes mention thereof.

The Romaunt of the Rose was translated out of French.

Troilus and Creseid, called Trophe in the Lumbard Tongue, was translated out
of Latin, as in the Preface to the second Book of Troilus and Creseid he
confesses in these Words: To every Lover I me excuse,
That of no sentement I this endite,
But out of Latin in my Tongue it write.


Mary Magdalen, translated out of St. Origin.

The Ballad, Fly from the Prease, made by Chaucer on his Deathbed:

The Letter of Cupid is none of Chaucer's doing, but was compiled by Thomas
Occleve, vel Ockelese, vir tam bonis literis, quam generis prosapia clarus
exquisua quadam Anglici sermonis eloquentia post Chaucerum, cujus suerat
discipulus, patriam ornavit linguam. Johannis Wiclevi, and ipsius Berengarii in
religione doctrinam sequebatur. Tractatus hos fecit: Planctum proprium.
Dialogum and amicum. De quadam Imperatrice. De art moriendi. De coelesti
Jerusalem. De quodam Jonatha. De Regimine Principis.
Thomas Occleve, of the Office of the privy Seal, sometime Chaucer's Scholar.
The which Occleve, for the Love he bare to his Master, caused his Picture to be
truly drawn in his Book De Regimine Principis, dedicated to Henry the Fifth;
the which I have seen, and according to which this in the beginning of this
Book was done by Mr. Speed, who has annexed thereto all such Coats of Arms, as
any way concern the Chaucers, as he found them (traveling for that Purpose) at
Ewelm and at Wickham.

Occleve, in that Book where he sets down Chaucer's Picture, adds these
Verses: Although his life be queint, the resemblaunce
Of him that has in me so fresh livelines,
That to put other men in remembrance
Of his person, I have here the likeness
Do make, to the end in soothfastnes,
That they that of him have lost thought and mind,
By this peinture may again him find.


His Death.
GEffrey Chaucer departed out of this World the 25th of October, in the Year of
our Lord 1400, after he had lived about 72 Years. Thus writes Bale out of
Leland; Chaucerus ad canos devenit, sensitque senectutem morbum esse; and dum
causas suas Londini curaret, etc. Chaucer lived till he was an old Man, and
found old Age to be grievous: and whilst he followed his Causes at London, he
died, and was buried at Westminster.

The old Verses which were written on his Grave at the first, were these:
Galfridus Chaucer vates and fama poesis,
Maternae hac sacra sum tumulatus humo.


But since Mr. Nicholas Brigham did at his own Cost and Charges erect a fair
marble Monument for him, with his Picture, resembling that done by Occleve; and
these Verses: Qui fuit Anglorum vates ter maximus olint
Gaufredus Chaucer conditur hoc tumulo:
Annum si quaeras domini, si tempora vitae
Ecce notae subsunt, quae tibi cuncta notant.
Anno Domini 1400, die mensis October. 25.


About the Ledge of which Tomb were these Verses; now clean worn out: Si
rogites quis eram, forsan te fama docebit:
Quod si fama negat, mundi quia gloria transit,
Haec monumenta lege.


Now it shall not be amiss to these Epitaphs, to add the Judgments and Reports
of some learned men, of this worthy and famous Poet. And first of all, Thomas
Occleve, who lived in his Days, writes thus of him in his Book De Regimine
Principis: But welaway so is mine heart woe
That the honor of English Tongue is deed,
Of which I wont was counsel have and reed.
O Master dear and Fadre reverent,
My Master Chaucer, flower of Eloquence,
Mirror of fructuous entendement,
O universal Fadre of Science:
Alas that thou thine excellent prudence
In thy bed mortal might not bequeath.
What eyld Death? Alas why would she thee sle.
O Death that did not harm singler in slaughter of him
But all the land it smerteth.
But nathelesse yet have thou no power his Name sle,
His hie virtue afterteth
Vnslain fro thee, which ay us lifely herteth,
With Books of his ornat enditing,
That is to all this land enlumining.


The same Author again in the same Book: My dear Master, God his soul quite,
And Fader Chaucer feign would have me taught,
But I was young, and leered lite or naught,
Alas my worthy Master honorable,
This Lands very treasure and richesse,
Death by thy death has harm irreparable
Unto us done: her vengeable duresse
Dispoiled has this land of the sweetness
Of Rhetorige: for unto Tullius
Was never man so like among us:
Also who was heir in Philosophy
To Aristotle, in our Tongue, but thou?
The steps of Virgil in Poese
Thou suedest eken, men know well enough.
That combre World that thee my Master slough
Would I slain were: Death was too hastife
To run on thee, and reve thee thy life,
She might have tarried her vengeance a while,
To that some man had egal to thee be.
Nay let be that: she knew well that this I Will
May never man forth bring like unto thee:
And her Office needs do must she,
God had her so, I trust all for the best,
O Master, Master, God thy Soul rest.
Dan John Lidgate Monk of Bury, an excellent Poet: He traveled France and
Italy, to learn the Languages and Sciences.
John Lidgate likewise, in his Prologue of Bocchas of the Fall of Princes, by
him translated, says thus in his Commendation.

My Master Chaucer with his fresh Comedies,
Is dead alas, chief Poet of Britain,
That whilome made full pitous Tragedies,
The faule also of Princes he did complain,
As he that was of making sovereign,
Whom all this land should of right prefer,
Since of our Language he was the Loadsterre.
Afterward in the same place do follow fourscore and three Verses in the
Commendation of Chaucer, and the Books that he made particularly named.

In a Book of Master Stow's (but I know not who was the Author) I find these
Verses; O fathers and founders of enornat eloquence,
That elumined have our great Britain,
To soon we have lost our lauriat Science,
O lusty licour of that fulsome Fountain,
O cursed Death, why have thou those Poets slain,
I mean Gower, Chaucer, and That is Geffrey Vinesause: of whom read in the
Recital of Authors.
Gaufride,
Alas the time that ever they fro us did.


John Lidgate again, in a Book which he writes of the Birth of the Virgin
Mary, has these Verses; And eke Master Chaucer now is in grave,
The notable Rhetore, Poet of Britain,
That worthy was the laurel to have
Of poetry, and the palm attain,
That made first to distill and rain
The gold dew drops of speech and eloquence
Into our Tongue through his excellence.
And found the flowers first of Rhetoric,
Our rude Speech only to enlumine,
That in our Tongue was never none him like:
For as the sun does in heaven shine,
In midday spear down to us by line,
In whose presence no sterre may appear,
Right so his ditties withouten any pear
Every making with his light dislaine,
In soothfastnesse, who so takes heed:
Wherefore no wonder though my heart plain
Upon his death, and for sorrow bleed
For want of him now in my great need,
That should (alas) convay and eke direct,
And with his support amend and correct
The wrong traces of my rude Pen,
There as I err, and go not line right.
But that for he ne may me not kenne,
I can no more but with all my might,
With all mine heart, and mine inward sight,
Prays for him that now lies in chest,
To God above to give his Soul good rest.


The excellent and learned Scottish Poet Gawyne Douglas, Bishop of Dunkeld, in
the Preface of Virgil's Eneados, turned into Scottish Verse, does thus speak of
Chaucer: Venerable Chaucer, principal Poet without pere,
Heavenly Trumpet, Orloge, and Regulere,
In eloquence, baulme conduct, and Dyal,
Milky fountein, clear strand, and rose ryal
Of fresh endite through Alvione Island brayed,
In his Legend of notable ladies said, etc.


About William Caxton's Time, This William Caxton of London, Mercer, brought
Printing out of Germany into England about the latter end of the Reign of Henry
the Sixth, and practiced the same in the Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster. It
was first found in Germany at Mogunce, by one John Cuthembergus, a Knight; and
brought to Rome by Conradus an Almaigne, as some Authors say.
Stephanus Surigonius, Poet Laureat of Millain, did write this Epitaph upon
Geffrey Chaucer, in Latin.

Epitaphium Galfridi Chaucer, per Poetam laureatum Stephanum Surigonum
Mediolanensem in decretis licentiatum.
PYerides musae, si possint numina fletus
Fundere, divinas atque rigare genas:
Galfridi vatis Chaucer crudelia fata
Plangite: sit lachrimis abstinuisse nephas.
Vos coluit vivens: at vos celebrate sepultum,
Reddatur merito gratia digna viro.
Grande decus vobis est docti musa Maronis,
Qua didicit melius lingua latina loqui.
Grande, novumque decus Chaucer, famamque paravit:
Heu quantum fuerat prisca Britanna rudis.
Reddidit insignem maternis versibus, ut jam
Aurea splendescat, ferrea facta prius.
Hunc latuisse virum nil, si tot opuscula vertes,
Dixeris, egregiis quae decorata modis,
Socratis ingenium, vel fontes Philosophiae,
Quicquid and arcani dogmata sacra ferunt.
Et quascumque velis, tenuit dignissimus arts:
Hic vates parvo conditus hoc tumulo.
Ah laudis quantum, praeclara Britannia, perdis,
Dum rapuit tantum mors odiosa virum.
Crudeles Parcae, crudelia filia sororum:
Non tamen, extincto corpore, fama perit:
Vivet in aeternum, vivent dum scripta poetae:
Vivent aeterno tot monumenta die.
Si qua bonos tangit pietas, si carmine dignus,
Carmina, qui cecinit, tot cumulata modis,
Haec sibi Marmoreo scribantur verba sepulchro,
Haec maneat landis sarcina summa suae.
Galfridus Chaucer vates, and fama poesis
Maternae haec sacra sum timulatus humo.
Post obitum Caxton voluit te vivere cura
Guillelnii, Chaucer clare poeta, tui.
Nam tua non solum compressit opuscula formis,
Has quoque sed lands jussit hic esse tuas.
And as for men of later time, Mr. William Thynn, that learned Gentleman, and
painful Collector of Chaucer's Works, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the King's
Majesty, has duly set forth the commendable Qualities of this Poet; whose
Judgment we are the rather to approve, for that he had farther insight into him
than many others: of whom, John Bale, in his Book De Scriptoribus Britan.
Centur. 12. has some 60 Years past delivered this; Guilhelmus Thynn, praeclari
generis homo, and ab ineunte aetate in literis educatus, multo labor,
sedulitate and cura usus, in perquirendis vetustis exemplaribus, Chauceri opera
restituit, atque in unum collegit volumen: quod Henrico octavo Anglorum regi
dedicavit. Since whose time, two of the purest and best Writers of our days,
the one for Prose, the other for Verse, Mr. Ascham and Mr. Spenser, have
delivered most worthy Testimonies of their approving of Chaucer. Mr. Ascham in
one Place calls him English Homer, and makes no doubt to say, that he valueth
his Authority of as high Estimation as ever he did either Sophocles or
Euripides in Greek. And in another place, where he declares his Opinion of
English versifying, he uses these Words. Chaucer and Petrark, those two worthy
Wits, deserve just Praise. And last of all, in his Discourse of Germany, he
puts him nothing behind either Thucidides or Homer for his lively
descriptions of site of Places, and nature of Persons both in outward shape of
Body, and inward disposition of Mind; adding this withal, That not the proudest
that has written in any Tongue whatsoever, in these Points, can carry away the
Praise from him.

Mr. Spenser, in his first Eglogue of his Shepherds Calendar, calls him
Tityrus, the God of Shepherds, comparing him to the Worthiness of the Roman
Tityrus Virgil. In his Fairy Queen, in his Discourse of Friendship, as thinking
himself most worthy to be Chaucer's Friend, for his like natural Disposition
that Chaucer had, the shows, that none that lived with him, nor none that
came after him, durst presume to revive Chaucer's lost Labors in that
imperfect Tale of the Squire, but only himself; which he had not done, had he
not felt (as he says) the Infusion of Chaucer's own sweet Spirit surviving
within him. And a little before, he terms him, Most renowned and Heroical
Poet; and his Writings, The Works of Heavenly Wit; concluding his Commendation
in this manner: Dan Chaucer, Well of English, undefiled,
On Fame's eternal Beadrole worthy to be filed.
I follow here the footing of thy Feet,
That with thy meaning so I may the rather meet.


And once again I must remember Mr. Camden's Authority, who as it were reaching
one hand to Mr. Ascham, and the other to Mr. Spenser, and so drawing them
together, utters of him these Words: De Homero nostro Anglico illud vere
asseram, quod de Homero eruditus ille Italus dixit: -- Hic ille est, cujus de
gurgite sacro
Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores.


And that we may conclude his Praises with the Testimony of the worthiest
Gentleman that the Court has afforded in many Years; Sir Philip Sidney, in his
Apology for Poetry, says thus of him; Chaucer undoubtedly did excellently in
his Troilus and Creiseid; of whom truly I know not whether to marvel more,
either that he in that misty time could see so clearly, or that we in this
clear Age walk so stumblingly after him. Seeing therefore that both old and new
Writers have carried this reverend Conceit of our Poet, and openly declared the
same by Writing, let us conclude with Horace, in the eighth Ode of his fourth
Book:

Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori.
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
HAving, for some Years last past, been greatly solicited by many Learned and
Worthy Gentlemen, to Re-print the Works of this Ancient Poet; I have now, not
only to answer their Desire, but I hope to their full Satisfaction, performed
the Obligation long since laid upon me, and sent Chaucer abroad into the World
again, in his old dress, and under the Protection of his own Merits, without
any new Preface or Letters Commendatory, it being the Opinion of those Learned
Persons, that his own Works are his best Encomium.

Whereas in the Life of Chaucer, mention is made of a Tale, called the Pilgrims
Tale, which is there said to have been seen in the Library of Mr. Stow, and
promised to be printed so soon as opportunity should offer; I have, for the
procuring of it, used all Diligence imaginable, not only in searching the
public Libraries of both Universities, but also all private Libraries that I
could have Access unto; but having no Success therein, I beg you will please to
accept my earnest Endeavor to have served you, and take what is here printed,
it being all that at present can be found that was Chaucer's.

J. H.

THE Works of Ieffrey Chaucer, With Additions. Also the Siege and Destruction
of the worthy City of Thebes; Compiled by John Lidgate, Monk of BVRY.

Virtue flourishes in Chaucer still, Though Death of him has wrought his will.



To the KING's HIGHNESS, My most Gracious Sovereign Lord, HENRY the Eighth, By
the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defensor of the Faith, and
Lord of Ireland, etc.
AMongs all other excellencies, most Gracious Sovereign Lord, wherewith
Almighty God has endowed mankind, above the residue of earthly creatures, as
an outward declaration of reason or reasonableness, wherein consists the
similitude of Man unto Angels, and the difference between the same and brute
beasts, I verayly suppose, that Speech or Language is not to be reputed amongs
the smallest or inferiors: for thereby is expressed the conceit of one to
another, in open and plain Sentence, which in the residue of lively creatures
lacks and is not showed amongs them, but by certain covert and derke signs,
and that in few things, having course and operation only of nature. This
Speech or Language, after the confusion of Tongues, sent by Gods punishment for
pride and arrogance of people, has been by a certain instinct and disposition
natural, devised and invented in sundry parts of the world, as fellowships or
companyings of folks one with another chanced, much to the outward expressing
of the thing in word or sound, according to that whereof it had meaning or
signification. But in process of time, by diligence or policy of people,
after diverse forms, figures, and impressions in metal, barks of trees, and
other matter used for memory and knowledge of things, then present or passed,
sundry letters or carectes were first amongs the Phenices devised and found,
with such knittings and joynings of one to another, by a mavelous subtilty
and craft, as counterveiled was and is equivalent to the same Languages. So as
the conceit of man's mind, which at the beginning was used to be declared by
mouth only, came to such point, that it was as sensibly and vively expressed in
writing. Hereupon ensued a great occasion and courage unto them that should
write, to compone and adorn the rudeness and barbariety of speech, and to
form it to an eloquent and ordinate perfection: whereunto many, and many great
Poets and Orators have highly employed their studies and courages, leaving
thereby notable Renoume of themselves, and example perpetual to their
posterity. Amongs other, the Greeks in all kinds of sciences seemed so to
prevail, and so to ornate their Tongue, as yet by other of right noble
Languages cannot be perfitely imitated or followed. The Latins by example of
the Greeks, have gotten or won to them no small glory, in the forming, order,
and uttering of that Tongue. Out of the which two, if it be well searched, that
is to say, Greek and Latin (though by corruption of speech it should seem
much otherwise) have been derived the residue of the Languages, that be written
with the letters of carectes of either of them both: But of all Speeches, those
which most approach to ye Latin, be the Italian and Spanish Tongues; of whom the
one by corruption of the Goths and Longobardes had her beginning, as Latin
spoken by strangers of a barbare understanding: the other being also Latin, was
by Vandales, Goths, Moors, Sarracenes, and other so many times blemished, as
marveile it is to see now unto what perfection these two formed out of the
Latin and Barbares speeches be reduced. Next unto them in similitude to the
Latin is the French tongue, which by diligence of people of the same, is in few
years passed so amended, as well in Pronunciation as in Writing, that an
Englishman, by a small time exercised in that Tongue, has not lacked ground to
make a Grammere, or rule ordinary thereof. Though of troth (which some shall
scarcely believe) the Germans have so formed the order of their Language, that
in the same is both as much plenty and as nere concordaunce to the phrase of
the Latin, as the French Tongue has. And veraily, like as all these and the
rest have been thus vigilant and studious to meliorate or amend their
Languages; so has there not lacked amongs us, Englishmen, which have right
well and notably endeavored and employed themselves, to the beautifying and
bettering of the English Tongue.

Amongs whom, most excellent Prince, my most redoubted and gracious sovereign
lord, I your most humble Vassale, Subject and Servaunt, William Thynn, chief
Clerk of your Kitchen, moved by a certain inclination and zeal, which I have,
to hear of any thing sounding to the laud and honor of this your noble Realm,
have taken great delectation, as the times and leisers might suffer, to read
and hear the books of that noble and famous Clerk Geffrey Chaucer, in whose
works is so manifest comprobation of his excellent learning, in all kinds of
doctrines and sciences, such fruitfulness in words, well according to the
matter and purpose, to sweet and pleasant sentences, such perfection in meter,
the composition so adapted, such freshness of invention, compendiousnesse in
narration, such sensible and open style, lacking neither majesty ne mediocrity,
covenable in disposition, and such sharpness or quickness in conclusion, that
it is much to be marvailed, how in his time, when doutless all good letters
were laid asleep throughout the world, as the thing, which either by the
disposition and influence of the bodies above, or by other ordinance of God,
seemed like (as was in danger) to have utterly perished, such an excellent Poet
in our tongue, should as it were (nature repugning) spring and arise. For tho it
had been in Demosthenes or Homerus times, when all learning and excellency of
sciences flourished amongs the Greeks, or in the season that Cicero prince of
eloquence amongs Latins lived, yet had it been a thing right rare and
strange, and worthy perpetual laud, that any Clerk by learning or wit,
could then have framed a tongue, before so rude and imperfite, to such a sweet
ornature and composition; likely, if he had lived in these days, being good
letters so restored and revived as they be, if he were not empeached by the
envy of such as may tolerate nothing, which to understond, their capacity does
not extend, to have brought it unto a full and final perfection. Wherefore,
gracious sovereign lord, taking such delight and pleasure in the works of this
noble Clerk (as is aforementioned) I have of a long season much used to read
and visit the same, and as books of diverse imprints came unto my hands, I
easily and without great study might and have deprehended in them many errors,
falsities, and depravations, which evidently appeared by the contrarieties and
alterations found by collation of the one with the other, whereby I was moved
and stirred to make diligent search where I might find or recover any true
copies or exemplaries of ye said books, whereunto in process of time, not
without cost and pain, I attained, and not only unto such as seem to be very
true copies of those works of Geffrey Chaucer, which before had been put in
print, but also to diverse other never till now imprinted, but remaining almost
unknown, and in oblivion: whereupon lamenting with my self the negligence of
the people that have been in this Realm, who doubtless were very remiss in the
setting forth or avauncement either of the Histories thereof, to the great
hinderaunce of the renoume of such noble Princes, and valiant Conquerours and
Captains, as have been in the same, or also of the works of memory of the
famous and excellent Clerks in all kinds of sciences, that have flourished
therein. Of which both sorts, it has pleased God as highly to nobilitate this
Isle, as any other Region of Christendom: I thought it in manner appertenaunt
unto my duty, and that of very honesty and love to my Country, I ought no less
to do, than to put my helping hand to the restoration and bringing again to
light of the said works, after the true Copies and Exemplaries aforesaid. And
devising with my self, who of all other were most worthy, to whom a thing so
excellent and notable should be dedicate, which to my conceit seems for the
admiration, novelty, and strangeness, yt it might be deputed to be of in the
time of ye Author, in comparison, as a pure and fine tried precious or
pollished jewel, out of a rude or indigest mass or matere, none could to my
thinking occur, that since, or in ye time of Chaucer, was or is sufficient,
but only your Majesty Royal, which by discretion and judgment, as most
absolute in wisdom, and all kinds of doctrine, could, and of his innate
clemency and goodness would, add or give any Authority hereunto.

For this cause, most excellent, and in all virtues most prestante Prince, I as
humbly prostrate before your Kingly estate, lowly supply and beseech the same,
yt it woll vouchsafe to took in good part my poor study and desirous mind, in
reducing unto light this so precious and necessary an ornament of the tongue in
this your Realm, over pitous to have been in any point lost, falsified, or
neglected: So that under the shield of your most royal Protection and Defense,
it may go forth in public, and prevail over those yt would blemish, deface,
and in many things clearly abolish the laud, renoume, and glory heretofore
compared, and meritoriously adquired by diverse Princes, and other of this said
most noble Isle, whereunto not only Strangers under pretext of high learning
and knowledge of their malicious and perverse minds, but also some of your own
subjects, blinded in folly and ignorance, do with great study contend. Most
gracious, victorious, and of God most elect and worthy Prince, my most dread
sovereign Lord, in whom of very merit, duty, and succession, is renewed the
glorious Title of Defensor of ye Christen Faith, which by your noble
Progenitour, the Great Constantine, sometime King of this Realm, and Emperor
or Rome, was next God and his Apostles, chiefly maintained, corroborate, and
defended: Almighty Jesus send to your Highness the continual and everlasting
habundance of his infinite Grace. Amen.

A TABLE of the Principal Matters Contained in this VOLUME; Which you may find
by the Folio's, as follows.
Folio THE Prologues of the Canterbury Tales 1 The Knights Tale Folio 9 The
Millers Tale Folio 26 The Reves Tale Folio 33 The Cooks Tale Folio 36 The man
of Laws Tale Folio 38 The Squires Tale Folio 47 The Merchants Tale Folio 53 The
Wife of Bathes Prologue Folio 62 The Wife of Bathes Tale Folio 69 The Freres
Tale Folio 72 The Sompnours Tale Folio 75 The Clerk of Oxenfords Tale Folio 80
The Frankeleins Tale Folio 91 The second Nonnes Prologue Folio 98 The second
Nonnes Tale Folio 99 The Prologue of the Chanons Yeoman 102, Folio 103 The
Chanons Yeomans Tale Folio 104 The Doctor of Physickes Tale Folio 110 The
Pardoners Prologue Folio 112 The Pardoners Tale Folio 113 The Shipmans Tale
Folio 117 The Prioresse Prologue Folio 121 The Prioresse Tale ibid. The Rhyme of
Sir Topas Folio 123 The Tale of Chaucer Folio 125 The Monks Prologue Folio 141
The Monks Tale Folio 142 The Tale of the Nonnes Priest Folio 149 The Manciples
Tale Folio 155 The Plowman's Tale Folio 157 The Parsons Tale Folio 169 The
Romaunt of the Rose Folio 199
Troilus and Creseide is divided into five Books.
The first Book begins Folio 258 The second Book begins Folio 268 The
third Book begins Folio 283 The fourth Book begins Folio 298 The fifth
Book begins Folio 313 The Testament of Creseide Folio 329
The Legend of good women has all these following.
The Prologue Folio 334 The Legend of Cleopatras Folio 339 The Legend of Tisbe
of Babylon Folio 340 The Legend of Queen Dido Folio 341 The Legend of
Hipsiphile and Medea Folio 345 The Legend of Lucrece of Rome Folio 347 The
Legend of Ariadne Folio 349 The Legend of Philomene Folio 351 The Legend of
Phillis Folio 353 The Legend of Hypermestra Folio 354 A goodly Ballad of
Chaucer Folio 355
Boethius de Consolatione is divided into five Books.
The first book begins Folio 356 The second book begins Folio 363 The
third book begins Folio 373 The fourth book begins Folio 387 The fifth
book begins Folio 399
All these Works following be Works by themselves.
The Dream of Chaucer called the Duchess Folio 408 The Assembly of Poules Folio
418 The Flower of Courtesy Folio 425 How Pity is dead, etc. Folio 427 La belle
dame sans mercy Folio 428 Annelida and false Arcite Folio 435 The Complaint of
Annelida to false Arcite Folio 437 The Assembly of Ladies Folio 439 The
Conclusion of the Astrolaby Folio 445 The Complaint of the black Knight Folio
460 A Praise of Women Folio 466
The House of Fame is divided into three Books.
The first book begins Folio 467 The second book begins Folio 471 The
third book begins Folio 476
The Testament of Love is divided into three Books.
The Prologue of the Testament of Love Folio 484 The first book begins
Folio 485 The second book begins Folio 500 The third book begins Folio
521
All these Works following be Works by themselves.
The Lamentation of Mary Mag. Folio 537 The Remedy of Love Folio 545 The
Complaint of Mars and Venus Folio 548 The Complaint of Mars alone Folio 550 The
Complaint of Venus alone Folio 551 The Letter of Cupid Folio 552 A Ballad of
our Lady Folio 556 A Ballad to King Henry the IV. Folio 558 Three Sayings of
Dan John Lid. Folio 562 Of the Cuckoo and the Nightingale ibid. Scogan unto the
young Lords and Gentlemen of the King's House Folio 565 Diverse other Ballads of
Chaucer, etc. Folio 567 A Ballad of good Counsel, made by John Lidgate Folio
569 A Praise or Commendation of Caucer's Eloquence Folio 570 A Ballad, ^eaching
what is Gentilness ibid. A Proverb against Covetise and Negligence ibid. A
Ballad against unconstant Women ibid. How all things in this World is variable,
save Women only ibid. The Craft of Lovers Folio 571 A pleasant Ballad of Women
Folio 573 The ten Commandments of Love ibid. The nine Ladies worthy Folio 574
Certain Ballads Folio 575 How Mercury, with three Goddesses, appeared to Paris
Folio 576 A Ballad pleasant ibid. The discriving of a fair Lady ibid. A Ballad
warning men to beware of deceitful Women ibid. Certain Verses compiled by
Chaucer Folio 578 A Ballad declaring the worthiness of Women's Chastity Folio
579 The Court of Love ibid. Chaucer's Dream Folio 592 The Flower and the Leaf
Folio 609 The A. B. C. called, la priere de nostre dame Folio 615 Jack Upland
Folio 616 Chaucer's Words to Adam his own Scrivener Folio 621 The Prologue of
the Story of Thebes Folio 622 The first Part of the Siege of Thebes Folio 623
The second Part of the Siege of Thebes Folio 630 The third Part of the Siege of
Thebes Folio 643
Eight goodly Questions, with their Answers.
SOmetime in Greece, that noble region,
There were eight clerks of full great
science,
Philosophers of notable discretion:
Of whom was asked, to prove their prudence
Eight Questions, of derke intelligence:
To which they answered after their intent,
As here does appear plain and evident.
The first question was, What earthly thing
Is best, and to God most commendable?
The first clerk answered without tarying,
A man's soul, ever ferme and stable
In right, from the troth not variable.
* But now alas, full sore may we weep:
For couetise has brought troth asleep.
The second, What thing is most odious?
A double man, said the Philosopher,
With a virgin face, and a tail venomous:
With a fair view, and a false profer:
A corrupt carien in a golden tree.
* It is a monster in natures lineage,
One man to have a double visage.
The third, What is the best dower
That may be to a wife appropriate?
A clean life, was the clerks answer,
Without sin, all chaste, and inuiolate
From all deceits, and speeches inornate,
Or countenance, which shall be to despise.
* No fire make, and then no smoke woll arise.
The fourth question, What maiden may
Be called clean in chastity?
The fourth clerk answered, which always
Every creature is ashamde on to lie:
Of whom men reporten great honesty.
* Good maidens keep your chastity forth,
And remember, y^ good name is gold worth.
Who is a poor man ever full of woe?
A covetous man, which is a nigon:
He that in his heart can never say ho:
The more good, the less distribution,
The richer, the worse of condition,
Men in this coast clepen him a niggard,
Sir Guy the bribour is his steward.
Which is a rich man, without fraud?
He that can to his good suffice:
Whatsoever he has, he yeueth God y^ laud:
And keeps him clean from all couetise:
He desires nothing in ungodly wise:
His body is here, his mind is above:
* He is a rich man, for God does him love.
Who is a fool is the seventh demand?
He that would hurt, and has no powere:
Might he mikell, much would he command:
His malice great, his might naught were:
He thretteth full fast, full little may he dear:
He thinks not how men have said be forne,
* God sends a shrewd Cow a short horn.
Who is a wise man is the eight question?
He that might noye, and does no annoiaunce:
Might punish, and leaves punission:
A man merciful, without vengeance.
A wise man puts in remembrance,
* Saying, Had I venged all mine harm,
My cloak had not be furred half so warm.
Explicit.
To the King's most noble Grace, and to the Lords and Knights of the Garter.
TO you well of honor and worthiness,
Our Christen King, ye heir and successor
Unto Justinians devout tenderness,
In the faith of Jesus our redemptour:
And to your Lords of the Garter, flower
Of cheualrie, as men you clepe and call,
The lord of virtue, and of grace author,
Grant the fruit of your lose, never appall.
O liege Lord, that have the likeness
Of Constantine, thensample and mirror
To Princes all, in humble buxomenesse,
To holy Church, o very sustainour
And pillar of our faith, and werriour,
Again of heresies the bitter Gall:
Do forth, do forth, continue your succor,
Hold up Christ's banner, let it not fall.
This Isle or this had been but heathenesse
Had be of your faith the force and vigor,
And yet this day the fiends crabbedness
Weneth fully to catch a time and hour,
To have on us your lieges a sharp shoure,
And to his servitude us knitte and thrall:
But aye we trust in you our protector,
On your constaunce we awaiten all.
Commands yt no wight have hardiness,
O worthy King, our Christen Emperor,
Of the faith to disputen more or less
Openly among people: Her error
Springs all day, and engenders rumor.
Makes such law, and for ought may befall,
Observe it well, thereto be ye doctor,
Does so, and God in glory shall you stall.
Ye Lords eke, shining in noble fame,
To which appropred is the maintenance
Of Christ's cause, in honor of his name,
Shoue on, and put his foes to vttraunce,
God would so, so would eke your legiaunce,
To tho two, aye pricketh you your duty:
Who so not keeps this double obseruaunce
Of merit and honor naked is he.
Your style says, ye be foes to shame,
Now kith of your faith the perseverance,
In which an heap of us he halt and lame:
Our christen King of England and of France,
And ye my lords, with your alliance,
And other faithful people that there be,
Trust I to God, shall quench all this noisance,
And this land set in high prosperity.
Conquest of high prowess is for to tame
The wild woodnesse of all these miscreaunce,
Right to the rote daily repe ye that same,
Slepen not this, but for Gods pleasaunce
And his mother, and in signifiaunce,
That ye been of Saint Georges liuere,
Does him service, and knightly obeisaunce,
For Christ's cause is his, well known ye.
Stiff stand in that, and ye shall grieve and grame
The foe to peace, the norice of distaunce,
That now is earnest, turn it into game,
Now kithe of your believe the constaunce,
Lord liege, and Lords have in remembrance,
Lord of all is the blisfull Trinity,
Of whose virtue, the mighty habundaunce
You heart and strength in faithful unity.
Explicit.
WHen faith fails in Priests sawes,
And lords hestes are holden for laws,
And robbery is holden purchase,
And letchery is holden sollace:
Then shall the land of Albion
Be brought to great confusion.
It falls for a gentleman
To say the best that he can
Always in man's absence,
And the sooth in his presence.
It comes by kind of gentill blood
To cast away all heaviness,
And gader together words good,
The work of wisdom bears witness.
The Argument to the Prologues.
THE Author, in these Prologues to his Canterbury Tales, does describe the
Reporters thereof for two causes: first, that the Reader, seeing the quality of
the Person, may judge of his speech accordingly: wherein Chaucer has most
excellently kept that decorum, which Horace requires in that behalf. Secondly,
to show, how that even in our Language, that may be performed for descriptions,
which the Greek and Latin Poets in their Tongues have done at large. And
surely this Poet, in the judgment of the best learned, is not inferior to any
of them in his descriptions, whether they be of Persons, Times, or Places.
Under the Pilgrims, being a certain number, and all of differing Trades, he
comprehends all the People of the Land, and the nature and disposition of
them in those days; namely, given to devotion, rather of custom than of zeal.
In the Tales is showed the state of the Church, the Court, and Country, with
such Art and cunning, that although none could deny himself to be touched, yet
none durst complain that he was wronged. For the man, being of greater Learning
than the most, and backed by the best in the Land, was rather admired and
feared, than any way disgraced. Whosoever shall read these his Works without
prejudice, shall find that he was a man of rare Conceit and of great Reading.

WHen that April with his shours sote,
The drought of March had pierced to the rote,
And bathed every vain in such lycour,
Of which virtue engendered is the flour:
When Zephyrus eke with his sote breath,
Espired has in every holt and heath,
The tender croppes, and that the young son
Has in the Ram half his course yronne,
And small fowls maken melody,
That slepen all night with open eye:
So priketh hem nature in her courage,
Then longen folk to go on pilgrimage,
And Palmers to seeken strange strondes,
To serve hallowes couth in sundry lands:
And specially fro every shyres end
Of England, to Canterbury they wend,
The holy blissful martyr for to seek,
That hem has helped when they were seek.
IT befell that season on a day,
In Southwarke at the Taberde as I lay,
Ready to wend in my pilgrimage
To Canterbury, with devout courage,
That night was come into that hostelry,
Well nine and twenty in a company,
Of sundry folk, by aventure yfall
In fellowship, and pilgrims were they all,
That toward Canterbury would ride:
The chambers and stables weren wide,
And well weren they eased at the best.
And shortly, when the sun was at rest,
So had I spoken with hem everychone,
That I was of her fellowship anon,
And made forward early for to rise,
To take our way there as I you devise.
But nathelesse, while I have time and space,
Or that I ferther in this tale pace,
Me think it accordaunt to reason,
To tell you all the condition
Of each of hem, so as it seemed me,
And which they were, and of what degree:
And eke in what array that they were in:
And at a Knight then will I first begin.
The Knight. 1.
A Knight there was, and that a worthy
man,
That fro the time that he first began
To riden out, he loved chivalry,
Troth, honor, freedom, and courtesy:
Full worthy was he in his Lords war,
And thereto had he ridden no man so far,
As well in Christendom as in Heathenesse,
And ever had honor for his worthiness.
At Alisaundre he was when it was won,
Full often time he had the bourd begone,
Aboven all nations in Pruce:
In Lettowe had he ridden and in Luce,
No Christen man so often of his degree:
In Garnade at the Siege had he be,
At Algezer, and riden in Belmary,
At Leyes was he, and also at Sataly,
When they were won, and in the great see,
At many a noble Army had he be.
At mortal Battles had he been fiftene,
And foughten for our faith at Tramissene
In listes thries, and aye slain his fo.
This ilke worthy Knight had been also
Sometime with the Lord of Palathy,
Against another Heathen in Turkey:
And evermore he had a sovereign prise,
And though he was worthy he was wise,
And of his sport as meek as is a Maid,
He never yet no villainy ne said
In all his life, unto no manner wight:
He was a very perfect gentil knight.
For to tell you of his array,
His horse were good, but he was nothing gay;
Of fustian he weared a gippon,
All besmottred with his Haubergion:
For he was late come fro his voyage,
And went for to done his pilgrimage.
The Squire. 2.
WIth him there was his son, a young squire,
A lover and a lusty Bachelere,
With his locks crull as they were laid in press,
Of twenty year of age he was as I guess:
Of his stature he was of even length,
And wonderly deliver, and of great strength.
And he had be sometime in chivauchy,
In Flaunders, in Artois, and Picardy,
And borne him well, as of so little space,
In hope to stand in his Ladies grace.
Embrouded was he, as it weren a mede,
All full of fresh flowers, both white and read,
Singing he was, or floiting all the day,
He was fresh, as is the month of May.
Short was his gown, with sleves long and wide
Well coud he sit on a horse, and fair ride:
He coud songs make, and eke well indite,
Just, and eke dance, portray and well write.
So hot he loved, that by nighter tale,
He slept no more than does the Nightingale.
Curteis he was, lowly, and servisable,
And kerfte before his Fader at the table.
The Squires Yeoman. 3.
A Yeoman had he, and servaunts no mo
All that time, for him list to ride so:
And he was clad in cote and hoode of grene,
A shefe of Peacocke arrows bright and shene,
Under his belt he bare full thriftely:
Well coud be dress his tackle yeomanly:
His arrows drouped not with feathers low,
And in his hand he bare a mighty bow.
A notte head had he, with a brown visage:
Of wood craft well couth he all the usage:
Upon his arm he bare a gay bracer,
And by his side a sword and a bokeler,
And on that other side a gay daggere,
Har^eised well, and sharp as point of spear:
A Christofer on his breast of silver shene,
An horn he bare, the baudricke was of grene:
A foster was he soothly as I guess.
The Prioresse. 4.
THere was also a Nonne, a Prioresse,
That of her smiling was simple and coy,
Her greatest oath was by Saint Loye,
And she was cleped dame Eglentine,
Full well she song tho service devine,
Entuned in her voice full semely,
And French she spoke full fetou^y,
After the school of Stratford at Bow,
For French of Paris was to her unknow.
At meat was she well ytaught withal,
She let no morsel fro her lips fall:
He wete her fingers in her sauce deep:
Well couth she carry a morsel and well keep,
That no drop ne fell upon her breast:
In courtesy was set full much her lest.
Her overlip wiped she so clean,
That in her cup was no ferthing seen
Of greece, when she droken had her draught,
Full semely after her meat she raught:
And sikerly she was of great disport,
And full pleasant and amiable of port,
And pained her to counterfete chere
Of court, and be stateliche of manner,
And to been holden digne of reverence.
But for to speak of her conscience,
She was so charitable and so pitous,
She would weep if that she saw a mous
Caught in a trappe, if it were dead or bled;
Of small hounds had she, that she fed
With roast flesh, milk, and wastel bread,
But sore wept she if any of hem were dead,
Or if men smote hem with a yard smart:
And all was conscience and tender heart.
Full seemly her wimple pinched was:
Her nose tretes, her eyes gray as glass:
Her mouth small, and thereto soft and red:
But sikerly she had a fair forehead,
It was almost a span broad I trow,
For hardely she was not undergrow.
Full fetise was her cloak, as I was ware:
Of small Coral about her arm she bare
A pair of bedes, gauded all with grene,
And thereon hong a broch of gold full shene,
On which there was first writ a crowned A,
And after (Amor vincit omnia.)
Another Nonne also with her had she,
That was her chapleine, and priests three.
The Monk. 5.
A Monk there was, fair for the maistry,
An out rider, that loved venery:
A manly man, to been an abbot able,
Full many a dainty horse had he in stable:
And when he rode, men might his bridle here
Gingeling in a whistling wind as clear,
And eke as loud as does the chapel bell:
There as this lord was keeper of the sell,
The rule of saint Maure and of saint Benet,
Because it was old and somedele streit,
This ilke Monk let old things to pass,
And held after the new world the pace:
He yave not of the text a pulled hen,
That says, that hunters be not holy men,
Ne that a Monk, when he is recheless,
Is like to a fish that is waterless:
This to say, a Monk out of Cloystre:
This ilke text yield he not worth an oystre.
And I say his opinion was good,
Whereto should he study, and make himself wood,
Upon a book always in Cloister to pore,
Or swinke with his hands, or to labor,
As Austin bid, how shull the world be served?
Let Austin have his swinke to him reserved.
Therefore he was a pricksoure aright,
Greyhounds he had as swift as foul of flight:
Of prickinge and of huntinge for the hare
Was all his lust, for no cost would he spare.
I saw his sleves purfled at the hand
With Greece, and that the finest in a land;
And for to fast his hoode under the chinne,
He had of gold wrought a curious pin.
A love knot in the greater end there was,
His head was bald, and shone as any glass.
And eke his face, as he had been anointe,
He was a lord full fat and in good point.
His eyes sleep, and rolinge in his head,
That stemed as a furneis of a lead.
His boots sowple, his horse in great estate,
Now certainly he was a fair prelate.
He was not pale as a forpined ghost,
A fat Swan loved he best of any roast.
His palfray was brown as is a berry.
The Friar. 6.
A Friar there was a wanton and a merry,
A limitour, a full solemn man:
In all the orders four is none that can
So much of daliance and fair language:
He had made full many a marriage
Of young women at his own cost,
Until his order he was a noble post.
Full well beloved, and familier was he
With frankeleins over all his country.
And with worthy women of the town,
For he had power of confessyoun,
As he said himself, more than a curate,
For of his order he was licenciate.
Full sweetly herd he confession,
And plesaunt was his absolucion.
He was an easy man to give penance,
There as he wist to have a good pitaunce.
For unto a poor order for to give,
Is a sign that a man is well ishriue;
For if he gave ought he durst make auaunt,
He wist well that a man was repentaunt.
For many a man is so hard of heart,
That he may not weep although him smerte.
Therefore instead of wepinge and prayers,
Men mote give silver to the poor freres.
His tippet was aye sassed full of knives
And pinnes, for to give fair wives.
And certainly he had a merry note,
Well could he singe and plaien on a rote.
Of yedding he bare utterly the price,
His neck was white as the flower delice,
Thereto strong he was as a champioun,
And knew the taverns well in every town,
And every hosteler and tapstere
Better than a lazer or a beggere:
For unto such a worthy man as he,
Accords naught, as by his faculte,
To have with lazers such acquaintance
It is not honest, it may not avaunce
For to dele with such porayle,
But all with rich, and sellers of vitaile.
And over all there as profit should arise,
Curteis he was, and lowly of service.
There nas no man no where so virtuous,
He was the best beggar in all his house;
And gave a certain ferme for the grant,
None of his brethren came in his haunte.
For though a widow had but a shoo,
(So plesaunt was his in principio)
Yet would he have a farthing or he went,
His purchase was better than his rent.
And rage he couth as it were a whelpe,
In love days there could he mikel help;
For there he was not like a cloisterere,
With a threde bare cope, as a poor friar;
But he was like a master or a pope,
Of double worstede was his semy cope.
So rounded was as a bell out of press,
Somewhat he lisped for his wantonness,
To make his English sweet upon his tongue,
And in harpinge, when that he song,
His eyes twinkeled in his head a right,
As done the sterres in a frosty night.
This worthy friar was called Huberde.
The Merchant. 7.
A Merchant was there with a forked berde,
In motley, and high on his Horse he sat,
Upon his head a Flaunders bever hat,
His boots clasped fair and fetously,
His reasons spoke he full solemnly,
Showing always the increase of his winning:
He would the sea were kept for any thing
Betwixe Middleborough and Orewell:
Well could he in exchange sheldes sell,
This worthy man so well his wit besette,
There wist no wight that he was in debt,
So stately was he of his governaunce,
With his bargeins, and with his cheuisaunce.
Forsooth he was a worthy man withal,
But sooth to saine, I not what men him call.
The Clerk of Oxenford. 8.
A Clerk there was of Oxenford also,
That unto Logic had long ygo:
As lean was his horse as is a rake,
And he was nothing fat I undertake,
But looked hollow, and thereto soberly:
Full thredbare was his over courtpy,
For he had yet getten him no benefice,
Ne was naught worldly to have none office:
For him was lever han at his beds head
Twenty books clad with black or red,
Of Aristotle, and of his Philosophy,
Than robes rich, or fiddle, or gay sautrie,
But all he that he was a philosopher,
Yet had he but little gold in cofer,
But all that he might of his friends hent,
On books and on learning he it spent,
And busily began for the souls pray
Of hem that helped him to scholay.
Of study took he most cure and head,
Not a word spoke he more than was need,
And that was said in form and reverence,
And short and quick, and of high sentence,
Sowning in moral virtue was his speech,
Gladly would he learn, and gladly teach.
The Sergeant at Law. 9.
A Sergeant of Law ware and wise,
That often had been at the pervise,
There was also, full rich of excellence,
Discreet he was, and of great reverence:
He seemed such, his words were so wise.
Justice he was full often in assise,
By patent, and by plain commissioun,
For his science, and his high renoun,
Of fee and robes had he many one:
So great a purchasour was no where none:
All was fee simple to him in effect,
His purchasing might not been in suspect.
No where so besie a man as he there nas,
And yet he seemed busier than he was:
In terms had he case and domes all,
That fro the time of king William was fall,
Thereto he coud endite, and maken a thing,
There coud no wight pinch at his writing:
And every statute coud he plain by rote,
He rode but homely in a medley cote,
Girt with a seint of silk, with bars small,
Of his array tell I no longer tale.
The Frankelein. 10.
A Frankelein there was in his company:
White was his berd as is the daisie,
And of his complexion he was sanguine,
Well loved he by the morrow a sop in wine:
To liven in delight was ever his won,
For he was Epicures own son,
That held opinion, that plain delight
Was very felicity perfect.
An householder, and that a great was he,
Saint Julian he was in his country:
His bread, his ale, was always after one,
A better viended man was no where none.
Without bake meat was never his house,
Of fish and flesh, and that so plenteouse,
It snewed in his house of meat and drink,
Of all deintes that men coud of think:
After the sondre seasons of the year
So changed he his meat and his suppere.
Full many a fat Partriche had he in mew,
And many a Breme, and many a Luce in stew,
Woe was his Coke, but his sauce ay were
Poynante and sharp, and ready all his gere,
His table dormaunt in his hall always,
Stood ready covered all the long day.
At cessions there was he lord and sire,
Full often time he was knight of the shire.
An anelace and gipsere all of silk,
Hing at his girdle, white as morrow milk,
A sheriff had he been, and a countour,
Was no where such a worthy vavesour.
The Haberdasher. 11.
AN Haberdasher there was, and a carpenter
A web, a dier, and a tapiser:
All were yclothed in o Lyvere,
Of a solemn and a great fraternite.
Full fresh and new her gear ypiked was,
Her knives ychaped nere not with bras,
But al with silver, wrought full clean and well:
Her girdles and her pouches every dele.
Well semde everich of hem a fair burgeis,
To sitten at a yield hal, on the hie deys:
Everich for the wisdom that he can,
Was shape liche for to ben an alderman,
For cattaile had they right enough and rent,
And eke her wives would it well assent:
And else certain they were to blame,
It is full fair to been ycleped madame,
And to gone to vigilles all before,
And have a mantell roialliche ibore.
The Coke. 12.
A Coke they had with hem for the nones,
To boil the Chikens and the mariebones.
And powder merchant, tarte, and galingale:
Well coud he know a draught of London ale,
He couthe roste, sethe, boil, and fry,
Make mortreis, and well bake a pie.
But great harm was it, as it thought me,
That on his shinne a mormall had he,
And blanke manger made he with the best.
The Shipman. 13.
A Shipman was there wonning far by West:
For aught I wot he was of Dertmouth,
He rode upon a rouncie, as he couthe
In a goune of falding to the knee:
A dagger hanging by a lace had he:
About his neck under his arm down:
The hot somer had made his hew all broune:
And certain he was a good felaw,
Full many a draught of Wine had he draw
From Burdeux ward, while the chapmen sleep,
Of nice conscience took he no keep:
If that he faught, and had the higher hand,
By water he sent him home to every land:
But of his craft to reken well his tides,
His stremes and his dangers him besides,
His herbrough, his moan, and his lode manage,
There was none soch from Hull to Cartage.
Hardy he was and wise to undertake:
With many a tempest had his berde be shake:
He knew all the havens as there were
Fro Scotland, to the Cape de Fenestre,
And every creek in Britain and in Spain:
His barge was called the Maudelain.
The Doctor of Phisike. 14.
WIth us there was a Doctor of Phisike,
In all this world ne was there none him like
To speak of Phisike, and of Surgerie:
For he was grounded in Astronomy,
He kept his patient a full great dell
In hours by his Magike naturell:
Well couthe he fortune the assendent,
Of his Image for his patient.
He knew the cause of every malady,
Were it of cold, heat, moist, or dry,
And whereof engendered was each humor,
He was a very parfite practisour,
The cause iknow, and of his harm the root,
Anon he gave to the sick man his boot:
Full ready had he his Apothecaries
To send him drugges, and his lectuaries,
For each of hem made other for to win:
Her friendship nas not new to begin,
Well knew he the old Esculapius,
And Dioscorides, and eke Ruffus,
Old Hippocrates, Halie, and eke Gallen,
Serapion, Rasis, and also Avicen,
Averrois, Damascene, and Constantin,
Bernard, Gatisden, and Gilbertin,
Of his diete, miserable was he,
For it was of no superfluitee,
But of great nourishing, and digestible:
His study was but little on the Bible.
In sangwine and in perce he clad was all
Lined with Taffata, and with Sendall.
And yet he was but easy of dispense,
He kept that he wan in time of Pestilence,
* For Gold in Phisike is a Cordial,
Wherefore he loved Gold in special.
The Wife of Bathe. 15.
A Good wife also there was beside Bathe,
But she was some deal defe, and that was scathe:
Of cloth making she had such an haunt,
She passed hem of Ipre, or of Gaunt.
In all the Parish wife ne was there none
That to the offering before her should gone,
And if there did, certain right wroth was she,
That she was all out of charitee.
Her kerchers full large were and fine of ground,
I durst swear they waiden ten pound,
That on a Sunday were upon her hedde.
Her hosen were of fine scarlet read,
Full strait istrained, and shoes full new,
Bold was her face, and read was her hew,
She was a worthy Woman all her live,
Husbands at the Church door had she five,
Withouten other company in youth:
But thereof needed not to speak as nouth:
And thrice had she been at Ierusaleme,
She had passed many a strong streme:
At Rome had she been, and at Boloine,
In Calis, at saint James, and at Coloine,
She couthe much of wandering by the way:
Gat tothed was she, sothly for to say.
Upon an Ambler easily she satte,
Iwimpled well, and on her hedde an hatte
As broad as is a bokeler or a targe:
A foot mantell about her hippes large,
And on her feet a pair of spurs sharp:
In fellowship well couth she laugh and carpe.
Of remedies of love she could perchance,
For she couth of that art the old dance.
The Parsone. 16.
A Good manne there was of religioun,
And was a poor Parsone of a town:
But rich he was of holy thought and work,
He was eke a learned man and a clerk,
That Christ's Gospels truly would preach,
His Parishens devoutly would he teach.
Benign he was, and wonder diligent,
And in adversity full pacient:
And soch one he was proved often sithes,
Full loath were him to curse for his tithes,
But rather would he yeuen out of doubt,
Unto his poor parishens all about,
Both of his offering, and of his substance,
He couthe in little thing have suffisaunce.
Wide was his parish, and houses fer asonder,
But he ne left, neither for rain ne thonder,
In sikenesse ne in mischief, for to visit
The ferdest in his parish, much or lite,
Upon his feet, and in his hand a stafe:
This noble ensample to his sheep he yafe,
That first he wrought, and afterward taught,
Out of the Gospel he the words caught,
And this figure he added eke thereto,
* That if Gold rust, what should Iron do?
For yef a Priest be foul, on whom we trust,
No wonder is a leude man to rust:
* And shame it is, if a Priest take keep,
To see a shitten shepherd, and a clean sheep:
* Well ought a Priest ensample for to give
By his clenenesse how his sheep should live.
He set not his benefice to hire,
And let his sheep acomber in the mire,
And run to London to saint Poules,
To seken him a Chauntrie for souls:
Or with a brotherhede to be withold:
But dwelt at home, and kept well his fold,
So that the Wolf made hem not miscary,
He was a shepherd, and not a mercenarie.
And though he holy were, and virtuous,
He was not to sinful men dispitous,
Ne of his speech dangerous ne digne,
But in his teaching discrete and benign,
To drawn folk to heaven with fairness,
By good ensample, this was his besinesse,
But if he were any person obstinate,
Whether he were of hie, or low estate,
Him would he snibbe sharply for the nonis,
A better Priest, I trow, no where none is.
He waited after no pomp ne reverence,
Ne maked him no spiced conscience.
But Christ's lore, and his Apostles twelve,
He taught, but first he followed it him selue.
The Plowman. 17.
WIth him there was a Plowman his brother,
That had island of dong many a fother
A true swinker, and a good was he,
Living in peace, and perfect charitee.
God loved he best with all his heart
At all times, though him gained or smart:
And then his neighbors right as himself.
He would thresh, and thereto dike, and delfe,
For Christ's sake, for every poor wight,
Withouten hire, if it lay in his might.
His tithes paid he full fair and well,
Both of his proper swinke, and his cattle.
In a tabard he rod upon a Mare.
There was also a Reave, and Millare,
A Sompnour, and a Pardoner also,
A Mansiple, and my self, there was no mo.
The Miller. 18.
THe Miller was a stout carle for the nones,
Full bigg he was of braune, and eke of bones,
That proved well, for over all there he came,
At wrestling he would have away the Ram.
He was short shuldred, a thick gnarre,
There has no door, but he would heue the bar,
Or break it with the renning of his hedde,
His beard as any Sow or Fore was read,
And thereto broad, as it were a spade,
Upon the coppe right of his nose he hade
A werte, and thereon stood a tufte of heeres,
Red as the bristles of a Sowes ears:
His nostrels black were and wide.
A swerd and buckeler bare he by his side:
His mouth as great was as a furneis,
He was a jangler, and a golierdeis,
And that was most of sin, and harletrise:
Well couth he steal Corn, and toll it thrice,
* And yet he had a thombe of gold parde.
A white coat and a blew hode weared he.
A bagpipe well couth he blow and soune,
And therewithal brought he us out of town.
The Mancile. 19.
A Manciple there was of the Temple,
Of which all Catours might taken ensemple,
For to been wise in buying of vitaile,
For whether he paid, or took by the tail,
Algate he waited so in his ashate,
That he was aye before in good estate.
Now is not that of God a full fair grace,
That soch a leude man's wit should pace
The wisdom of an heap of learned men?
Of masters had he mo than thrice ten,
That were of Law expert and curious,
Of which there was a dosen in that house,
Worthy to been stewards of rent and land,
Of any Lord that is in England,
To maken him live by his proper good,
In honor deptlesse, but if he were wood,
Or live as scarsly, as him list desre,
And able to helpen all a shire
In any case that might fallen or hap:
And yet the Manciple set all her cap.
The Reave. 20.
THe Reave was a slender cholerik Man,
His bearde was shave as nie as ever he can,
His here was by his ears round ishorne,
His top was docked like a Priest beforne,
Full long were his legs, and eke full lene,
I like a staff, there was no calfe i seen.
Well couth he keep a Garner and a Binne:
There was none Auditour coud on him win.
Well wist he by the drought, and by the rain,
The yelding of his seed, and of his grain.
His Lords Sheep, his Nete, and his Deirie,
His swine, his Horse, his store, and his pultrie,
Were holly in this Reuis governing,
And by his Covenant yaue he rekening,
Since his Lord was twenty year of age,
There could no man bring him in arerage.
There nas Bailie, Herd, nor other Hine,
That he ne knew his slight and his covine,
They were adradde of him as of the death:
His wonning was full fair upon an Heath,
With grene trees shadowed was his place,
He couth better than his Lord purchase:
Full rich he was and stored privily,
His Lord he could well please, and subtiliy
To give and lene him of his own good,
And have a thank, and yet a coat and a hood.
In youth he had learned a good mystere.
He was a whele wright, and a Carpentere.
This Reave satte upon a right god stot,
That was all pomell gray, and height Scot.
A long surcote of perce upon he hade,
And by his side he bare a rustie blade.
Of Norfolk was this Reave, of which I tell,
Biside a town, men clepen it Baldeswell.
Tucked he was, as is a Friar about,
And ever he rode hinderest of the route.
The Sompnour. 21.
A Sompnour was with us in the place,
That had a fire red Cherubins face,
For saufleme he was, with iyen narow,
All hot he was, and lecherous as a Sparow,
With scaled brows black, and pilled berde:
Of his visage Children were fore afferde.
There nas quicksilver, litarge, ne brimstone,
Borage, Ceruse, ne oil of Tartar none,
Ne Ointment that would cleanse or bite,
That him might help of his whelks white,
Ne of his knobbes sitting on his Chekes:
Well loved he Garlike, Onions, and Lekes,
And for to drink strong wine, as red as blood,
Then would he speak, and cry as he were wood.
And when he had well idronke the wine,
Then would he speak no word but Latin:
A few terms coud he, two or three,
That he had learned out of some degree:
No wonder is, he had heard it all the day,
And ye known well eke, how that a Iaie
Can clepe watte, as well as can the Pope:
But who so couth in other thing him grope,
Then had he spent all his Philosophy,
(A question quid juris) would he cry.
He was a gentill harlot and a kind,
A better fellow should a man not find:
He would suffer for a quart of Wine,
A good fellow to have his Concubine,
A twelve month, and excuse him at the full:
* Full privily eke a Finch couth he pull,
And if he found o where a good fellawe,
He would teachen him to have none awe
In soch case of the Arch Deacons course:
But if man's Soul were in his Pourse.
For in his Pourse he should ipunished be,
Pourse is the Arch Deacons Hell, said he.
But well I wot, he lies right in deed:
Of cursing ought eke sinful man dread.
For cursing woll slay as asoiling saves.
And also ware him of a Significav it.
In danger had he at his own gise,
The young Girls of the Diocise,
And knew her counsel, and was of her red,
A garlond he set upon his head,
As great as it were for an alestake:
A Buckler had he maked him of a Cake.
The Pardoner. 22.
WIth him there rode a gentle Pardonere
Of Rouncevall, his friend and his compere,
That strait was come fro the court of Rome,
Full loud song he, come hider love sone,
This Sompnour bare to him a stiff burdoun,
Was never Trompe of half so great a soun.
This Pardoner had here as yellow as wax,
But somth it hing, as does a stricke of flax:
By unces hing his locks that he had,
And therewith he his shoulders oversprad,
Full thin it lay, by culpons one and one,
But hode for iolite, ne weared he none,
For it was trussed up in his wallet,
Him thought he rode all of the new set,
Dishe vild, save his Cappe he rode all bare,
Soch glaring iyen had he as an Hare.
A Vernacle had he sowed upon his cappe,
His wallet beforne him on his lap,
Bret full of pardon come from Rome al hot,
A voice he had as small as has a Got.
No berde had he, ne never should have,
As smoth it was as it were new shave,
I trow he were a Gelding or a Mare:
But of his craft, fro Barwike unto Ware,
Ne was there soch another Pardonere,
For in his male had he a Pillowhere,
Which, as he said, was our Ladies veil:
He said, he had a gobbet of the sail
That sanct Peter had when that he went
Upon the Sea, till Jesus Christ him hent.
He had a Cross of Latin full of stones,
And in a glass he had Pigges bones:
But with these relikes; when that he fond
A poor Parsone dwelling in uplond,
Upon a day he gat him more money
That that Parsone gat in months twey.
And thus with fained flattering and japes,
He made the Parsone, and People, his apes.
But truly to tellen at the last,
He was in Church a noble Ecclesiast:
Well couth he read a lesson or a story,
But alder best he sang an offitorie:
Full well he wist, when that song was song,
He must preach, and well afile his tongue,
To win silver, as he full well coud:
Therefore he song so merrily and loud.
Now have I told you sothly in a Clause,
The state, the araie, each number, and the cause
Why that assembled was this Company
In Southwerk at this gentell hostelrie,
That hight the Tabard, fast by the Bell.
But now is time to you for to tell,
How that we baren us that like night.
When we were in that hostelrie alight.
And after woll I tell of our voyage,
And all the remnaunt of our Pilgrimage.
But first I pray you of your courtesy,
That ye ne arrete in not my folly,
Though that I plainly speak in this matter,
To tellen you her words and eke her chere:
Ne though I speak her words properly.
For this ye known as well as I,
* Who shall tellen a tale after a man,
He mote rehearse as nie as ever he can
Everich word, if it be in his charge,
All speak he never so rudely ne large:
Or else he mote tellen his tale untrue,
Or feign things, or find words new:
He may not spare, although he were his brother,
He mote as well say o word, as another.
Christ spoke himself full broad in holy writ,
And well I wotte no villainy is it.
Eke Plato says, who so can him read,
* The words mote been cousin to the deed.
Also I pray you forgive it me,
All have I not set folk in her degree,
Here in this tale as they shoulden stand,
My wit is short, ye may well understand.
GReat cheer made our host us verichone,
And to the Supper set he us anon:
And served us with vitaile of the best,
Strong was the wine, and well to drink us lest.
A seemly man our Host was with all,
For to been a Marshal in a Lords Hall.
A large man he was with iyen stepe,
A fairer Burgeis is there none in Chepe:
Bold of his speech, wise and well itaught,
And of manhood him lacked right naught.
Eke thereto he was a right merry man,
And after supper plaien he began,
And speak of n^^th among other things,
When that we had made our reckonings:
And said thus, now lordings truly
Ye been to me welcome right heartily:
For by my troth, if I should not lie,
I saw not this year so merry a Company
Atones in this her borough, as is now:
Fain would I don you mirth, and I wist how:
And of a mirth I am right now bethought,
To don you ease, and it shall cost naught.
Ye gone to Canterbury, God mote you speed,
The blissful Martyr quite you your mede,
And well I wot, as ye gone by the way,
Ye shapen you to talken and to play:
For truly comfort ne mirth is there none,
To riden by the way as dumb as a stone:
And therefore would I maken you disport,
As I said erst, and done you some comfort,
And if you likes all by one assent
For to stonden at my Judgment:
And for to worchen as I shall you say,
To morrow, when we riden on the way,
Now by my Fathers Soul that is deed,
But ye be merry, I will give you my heed:
Hold up your hands withouten more speech:
Our counsel was not long for to sech:
Us thout it was not worth to make it nice,
And granted him without more avise,
And bad him say his verdit as him lest.
Lordings (quoth. he) now herkeneth for the best,
But take it not, I pray you, in disdain,
This is the point to speak it plat and plain:
That each of you to shorten others way,
In this viage, shall tellen tales tway,
To Canterbury ward, I mean it so,
And homewards he shall tell tales other two,
Of a ventures whilom that han befall:
And which of you that hereth him best of all,
That is to sain, that tellen in this case
Tales of best sentence and most solace,
Shall have a supper at our alder cost,
Here in this place, sitting by this post.
When that we comen again from Canterbury,
And for to make you the more merry,
I will my selven goodly with you ride,
Right at mine own cost, and be your guide.
And who that woll my judgment with say,
Shall pay all that we spend by the way:
And yef ye vouchsafe that it be so,
Tell me anon without words mo,
And I woll erly shape me therefore.
This thing was granted and our oaths swore
With glad heart, and praiden him also,
That he would vouchsafe for to do so,
And that he would ben our Governor,
And of our tales judge and reportour:
And set a Supper at a certain prise,
And we woollen ben demed at his devise,
In hie and low, and thus by one assent,
We ben accorded to his judgment.
And thereupon the wine was fette anon,
We dronken and to rest went ilke one,
Withouten any longer tarying.
A morrow when the day began to spring,
Up rose our Host, and was our alder cock,
And gadird us togedirs on a flock,
And forth we riden a little more than paas,
Unto the watering of saint Thomas:
And there our Host began his Horse arest,
And said; Lords, herkeneth if you lest:
Ye wot your forward, and I it record
* If eve song and morrow song accord,
Let see now who shall tell the first tale.
As ever I mote drink wine or ale,
Who so is rebel to my Judgment,
Shall pay for all that by the way is spent:
Now draws cut or that ye farther twin,
The which that has the shortest shall begin.
Sir Knight (quoth. he) my master and my lord,
Now draws cut, for that is mine accord:
Comes nere (quoth. he) my lady Prioress,
And ye, sir Clerk, let be your shamefastness,
Ne studieth naught, lay hand to, every man,
Anon to draw every wight began,
And shortly for to tellen as it was,
Were it by aventure, chance, or caas,
The sothe is this, the cut fill to the Knight,
Of which blithe and glad was every wight,
And tell he must his tale as was reason,
By forward, and by composition,
As ye han heard, what nee death words mo?
And when this good man saw that it was so,
As he that wise was and obedient
To keepen his forward by his free assent:
He said, sithen I shall begin the game,
What welcome cut to me a Goddesname,
Now let us ride, and herkeneth what I say:
And with that word we riden forth our way,
And he began with a right merry chere,
His tale anon, right as ye shall hear.
Thus ends the Prologues of the Canterbury Tales.
The Knight's Tale.
PAlamon and Arcite, a pair of Friends and Fellow Prisoners, fight a Combat
before Duke Theseus, for the Lady Emely, Sister to the Queen Ipolita, Wife of
Theseus. A Tale fitting the Person of a Knight, for that it discourses of the
Deeds of Arms, and Love of Ladies.

WHilome, as old stories tellen us
There was a Duke that hight Theseus,
Of Athens he was lord and governor,
And in his time such a conqueror,
That greater was none under the son:
Full many a rich country had he won.
What with his wisdom and his chivalry
He conquered all the reign of Feminy,
That whilome was ycleaped Cithea,
And wedded the queen Ipolita,
And brought her home with him to his country,
With mikell glory and solemnity,
And eke her young sister Emely.
And thus with victory and melody
Let I this worthy Duke to Athens ride,
And all his host, in arms him beside.
And certes, if it nere to long to here,
I would have told fully the mannere,
How wonnen was the reign of Feminy
By Theseus, and by his Chivalry.
And of the great battle for the nones
Between Athens and Amasones,
And how besieged was Ipolita
The young hardy queen of Cithea:
And of the feast, that was at her wedding,
And of the tempest at her home coming.
But all that thing I mote as now forbear,
* I have God wot a large field to ear:
And weked ben the oxen in the plow,
The remnant of my tale is long ynow.
I will not letten eke none of this rout,
Let every fellow tell his tale about,
And let see now who shall the supper win:
And there I left, I will again begin.
This Duke, of whom I make mencioun,
When he was come almost to the town
In all his well and in his most pride,
He was ware, as he cast his eye aside,
Where that there knee led in the hight wey
A company of Ladies, twey and twey
Each after other, clad in cloths black:
But such a cry, and such a woe they make,
That in this world nis creature living
That ever heard such a waimenting;
And of this cry they nold never stenten,
Till they the reins of his bridle henten.
What folk be ye that at mine home coming
Perturben so my feast with your crying,
Quod Theseus? Have ye so great envy
Of mine honor, that thus complain and cry?
Or who has you misbode, or offended?
Now tells me, if it may be amended,
And why that ye be clothed thus in black?
The oldest lady of them all spoke,
When she had sowned with a deadly chere,
That it was ruth for to see and here;
She said, lord, to whom fortune has yeve
Victory, and as a conqueror to live,
Naught greeveth us your glory and honor:
But we beseeke you of mercy and succor,
And have mercy on our woe and distress,
Some drop of pity, through thy gentilness,
Upon us wretched women let thou fall.
For certes lord, there nis none of us all,
That she ne has be a duchess or a queen:
Now be we caitives, as it is well iseen,
Thanked be fortune, and her false wheel,
That none estate assures to be well,
Now certes lord, to abide your presence
Here in this temple of the goddess Clemence
We have be waiting all this fourtenight:
Help us lord, since it lies in thy might.
I Wretch, that weep and wailen thus
Whylome wife was to king Campaneus,
That starfe at Thebes, cursed be the day:
And all we that been in this array,
And maken all this lamentacioun,
We losten all our Husbands at that town,
While that the Siege there about is say:
And yet the old Creon (welaway)
That lord is now of Thebes city
Fulfilled of ire and iniquity,
He for despite, and for his tyranny
To done the dead bodies villainy
Of all our lords, which that been slaw,
Has all the bodies on an heap y^raw,
And will not suffer hem by none assent
Neither to be buried ne to be brent,
But makes hounds to eat hem in despite:
And with that word, without more repite
They fallen grofly, and crien pitously,
Have on us wretched Women some mercy,
And let our sorrow sink in thine heart.
This gentle duke down from his horse stert
With heart pitous, when he heard hem speak
Him thought that his heart would all to break
When he saw hem so pitous and so mate,
That whylome were of so great astate:
And in his arms he hem all up hent,
And hem comforted in full good intent,
And swore his oath, as he was true Knight,
He would done so fer forthly his might
Upon the tyrant Creon hem to wreake,
That all the people of Greece should speak
How Creon was of Theseus yserved,
As the that has his death full well deserved.
And right anon withouten more abode
His banner he displayed, and forth rode
To Thebes ward, and all his host beside:
No near Athens nold he go ne ride,
Ne take his ease fully half a day,
But onward on his way that night he lay:
And sent anon Ipolita the queen,
And Emely her young sister shene
Unto the town of Athens to dwell:
And forth he rides, there nis now more to tell.
THe red statue of Mars with spear and targe,
So shines in his white banner large,
That all the fields glyttren up and down:
And by his banner, borne is his penon
Of Gold full rich, in which there was ybete
The minotaure, that he won in Crete.
Thus rides this duke, this conqueror
And in his host of chivalry the flour,
Till that he came to Thebes, and alight
Fair in a Field, there as he thought to fight.
But shortly for to speaken of this thing,
With Creon, which was of Thebes King,
He fought, and slew him manly as a Knight
In plain battle, and put his folk to flight:
And at a saut he wan the city after,
And rent adowne wall, spar, and rafter:
And to the ladies he restord again
The bodies of her husbands that were slain,
To done obsequies, as tho was the gise.
But it were all too long for to devise
The great clamor, and the weimenting,
That the ladies made at the brenning
Of the bodies, and the great honor
That Theseus the noble conqueror
Does to the ladies, when they from him went:
But shortly to tellen is mine intent.
When that this worthy duke, this Theseus
Has Creon slain, and wan Thebes thus,
Still in the field he took all night his rest,
And did with all the country as him lest:
To ransacke in the taas of bodies deed
Hem for to strip of harneis and of weed
The pillours did her business and cure
After the battle and discomfiture:
And so befell, that in the taas they found
Though girt with many a grievous wound
Two young knights lying by and by
Both in arms fame, wrought full richely:
Of which two, Arcite hight that one,
And that other hight Palamon:
Not fully quick, ne fully dead they were,
But by her coat armours and by her gere
The Heralds knew hem best in special
As tho that weren of the blood rial
Of Thebes, and of sistren two yborn.
Out of the taas the pillours has hem torn,
And han hem carried soft into the tent
Of Theseus, and he full soon hem sent
To Athens, to dwellen there in prison
Perpetual, he nold hem not raunson.
And when this worthy Duke had thus idone,
He took his host, and home he goth anon,
With Iawrel crowned as a conqueror,
And there he lives in joy and honor,
Term of his life, what needs words mo?
And in a toure, in anguish and in woe
Dwells Palamon, and his fellow Arcite
For evermore, there may no gold hem quite.
THus passes year by year, and day by day,
Till it fell once in a morrow of May
That Emely, that fairer was to seen
Than is the lilly upon the stalk green,
And fresher than may, with flowers new,
For with the rose color strofe her hew,
I not which was the fairer of them two.
Er it was day, as was her wont to do,
She was arisen, and all ready dight,
For May woll have no slogardy a night;
The season pricketh every gentell heart,
And makes it out of their sleep to stert,
And says arise, and do May observaunce;
This makes Emely to have remembrance
To done honor to May, and for to rise,
Iclothed was she fresh for to devise;
Her yellow hair was broided in a tresse
Behind her back, a yard long I guess,
And in the gardyn at sun uprist
She walks up and down as her list:
She gathers flowers, party white and reed
To make a subtell garland for her heed,
And, as an Angel, heavenly she song:
The great toure, that was so thick and strong,
Which of the castle was the chief dungeon,
Wherein the two Knights were in prison,
Of which I told you, and tellen shall
Was even joynant to the gardyn wall;
There as this Emely had her playing,
Bright was the son, and clear the morning,
And Palamon, this woeful prisoner,
As was his wont, by leave of his gayler,
Was risen, and romed in a chamber on high,
In which he all the noble cite sigh,
And eke the gardyn, full of branches grene,
There, as this fresh Emely the shene
Was in her walk, and romed up and down;
This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon,
Goth in his chamber roming to and fro,
And to himself complaining of his woe,
That he was borne full often said alas.
And so befell, by adventure or caas,
That through a window thick of many a bar
Of iron great, and square as any spar,
He cast his eyes upon Emilia,
And therewith he blent, and cried, ha, ha,
As though he stongen were unto the heart.
And with that cry Arcite anon up stert,
And said, cousin mine, what eyleth thee,
That art so pale and deadly for to see?
Why cryest thou? who has do thee offense?
For gods love take all in patience
Our prison, for it may none other be,
Fortune has yeven us this adversite,
Some wicked aspect or disposition
Of Saturn, by some constellation,
Has yeven us this, although we had it sworn
So stood the heaven when that we were born,
We mote endure, this is short and plain.
This Palamon answered, and said again,
Cosyn, forsooth, of this opinion
Thou have a vain imaginacion,
This prison caused me not to cry,
But I was hurt right now through mine eye
Into mine heart, that woll my bane be,
The fairness of a Lady that I se
Yond in the gardyn, roming to and fro,
Is cause of all my crying and woe.
I not where she be woman or goddess,
But Venus it is, sothly as I guess,
And therewithal on knees down he fill,
And said; Venus, if it be thy will
You in this gardyn thus to transfigure
Beforne me, sorrowful wretched creature,
Out of this prison help that we may escape,
And if our destiny be so ishape
By eterne word, to dyen in prison,
Of our lineage have some compassion,
That is so low ybrought by tyranny.
And with that word Arcite began espy
Whereas the Lady romed to and fro,
And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,
That if that Palamon were wounded sore,
Arcite was hurt as much as he, or more;
And with a sigh he said pitously,
The fresh beauty sleeth me suddenly
Of her that rometh in yonder place,
And but I have her mercy and her grace
That I may seen her at the least way,
I nam but dead, there nys no more to say.
This Palamon, when he these words herd,
Dispitously he looked, and answered:
Whether say thou this in ernest or in play?
Nay, quod Arcite, in ernest by my fay,
God help me so, me list full ill to pley.
This Palamon began knit his brows twey,
It were (quod he) to thee no great honor
To be false, ne for to be a traitor
To me, that am thy cosyn and thy brother,
Isworne full deep, each of us to other,
That never for to dien in the pain,
Till that the death depart shall us twain,
Neither of us in love to hindre other,
Ne in none other case, my leve brother,
But that thou should truly further me
In every case, as I should further thee;
This was thine oath, and mine also, certain
I wot it well, thou dare it not withsain.
Thus art thou of my counsel out of dout,
And now thou would falsely ben about
To love my Lady, whom I love and serve,
And ever shall, till that mine heart sterve.
Now certes, false Arcite, thou shall not so,
I loved her first, and told thee my woe
As to my counsel, and to my brother sworn
To further me, as I have told beforne,
For which thou art thounden as a Knight
To helpen me, if it lie in thy might,
Or else art thou false, I dare well sain.
This Arcite full proudly spoke again,
Thou shall (quod he) be rather false than I,
And thou art false, I tell thee utterly.
For paramour I loved her first or thou,
What will thou sain, thou wist it not or now
Whether she be woman or goddess:
Thine is affection of holiness,
And mine is love, as to a creature:
For which I told thee mine aventure,
As to my cousin, and my brother sworn.
Suppose that thou lovedst her beforne:
* Wost thou not well the old Clerks saw?
That who shall give a lover any law?
Love is a greater law by my pan,
Then may be yeven to any earthly man:
And therefore positive law, and such decree
Is broken all day for love in each degree;
A man mote needs, love maugre his head,
He may not fleen it, tho he should be dead,
All be she maid, widow, or else wife.
And eke it is not likely all thy life
To stonden in her grace, no more shall I:
For well thou wost thy self verily,
That thou and I be damned to prison
Perpetual, us gains no raunson.
* We striven, as did the hounds for the bone,
That fought all day, and yet her part was none,
There came a cur, while that they were so wroth
And bare away the bone from hem both.
* And therefore, at Kings court, my brother,
Each man for himself, there is none other.
Love if thou list, for I love, and aye shall:
And soothly, lefe brother, this is all.
Here in this prison mote we endure,
And everich of us taken his aventure.
Great was the strife and long betwixt hem twey,
If that I had leisure for to sey:
But to theffect: it happed on a day,
(To tell it you shortly as I may)
A worthy Duke that hight Perithous,
That fellow was to Duke Theseus,
Since thilke day that they were children lite,
Was come to Athens his fellow to visit,
And for to play, as he was wont to do,
For in this world he loved no man so:
And he loved him as tenderly again.
So well they loved, as old books saine,
That when that one was dead, soothly to tell,
His fellow went and sought him down in hell:
But of that story list me not to write.
Duke Perithous loved well Arcite,
And had him know at Thebes year by year:
And finally, at the request and prayere
Of Perithous, withouten any raunson
Duke Theseus let him out of prison.
Freely to gone whether him list over all
In such a guise, as I you tellen shall.
This was the forward, plainly to endite
Betwixt Duke Theseus and him Arcite:
That if so were, that Arcite were yfound
Ever in his life, by day, night, or stound,
In any country of this Duke Theseus,
And he were caught, it was accorded thus,
That with a sword he should lose his heed,
There was no other remedy ne reed,
But takes his leave, and homeward him sped:
Let him beware, his neck lies to wed.
How great sorw suffers now Arcite?
The death he feels through his heart smite:
He weepeth, waileth, and cries pitously,
To sleen himself he waits prively:
And said, alas, the day that I was borne,
Now is my prison worse than beforne:
Now is me shap eternally to dwell
Naught in purgatory, but in Hell.
Alas, that ever I knew Perithous,
For else had I dwelt with Theseus
I fettered in his prison evermo:
Then had I be in bliss, and not in woe.
Only the sight of her, whom that I set ve,
Though that I never her grace may deserve,
Would have sufficed right enough for me.
O dear cousin Palamon (quod he)
Thine is the victory of this aventure,
Full blissul in prison may thou endure:
In prison, nay certes but in paradise,
* Well has fortune to thee turned the dice,
That have the sight of her, and I thabsence:
For possible is, since thou have her presence,
And art a knight, a worthy man and able,
That by some case since fortune is changeable
* Thou may sometime to thy desire attain.
But I that am exiled, and barraine
Of all grace, and in so great despair,
That there nis water, earth, fire, ne air,
Ne creature, that of hem maked is,
That may me heal, or done comfort in this,
Well ought I sterve in wanhope and distress.
Farewell my life, my lust, and my gladness.
Alas, why playnen men so in commune
Of purueyance of God, or of fortune
* That yeueth hem full often in many a gise
Well better than hemselfe can devise.
Some man desires to have richesse,
That cause is of her murdre or sickness,
And sour man would out of his prison feign
That in his house is of his meyne slain.
Infinite harms been in this mattere,
We wot not what thing we prayen here,
We faren as he that drunk is as a mouse,
A dronken man wot well he has an house,
But he wot not which the right way thider,
And to a dronken man the way is slider;
And certes in this world so faren we.
We seken fast after felicite,
But we go wrong full often truly,
Thus we may say all, and namely I
That wenden, and had a great opinion
That if I might escape fro prison,
Then had I been in ^oy and perfect hele,
There now I am exiled fro my well,
Since that I may not seen you Emely,
I nam but dead, there nys no remedy.
Upon that other side Palamon,
When that he wist Arcite was gone,
Such sorrow he makes, that the great tour
Resowned of his yelling and clamor,
The pure fetters on his shinnes great
Were of his bitter salt tears wete.
Alas (quoth he) Arcite cosyn mine,
Of all our strife, God wot the fruit is thine;
Thou walk now in Thebes at large,
And of my woe, thou yeuest little charge;
Thou may, since thou have wisdom and manhed,
Assemble all the folk of our kindred,
And make war so sharp in this country,
That by some adventure, or by some treat
Thou may have her to lady and to wife,
For whom I must needs lose my life.
For as by way of possibilite,
Since thou art at thy large of prison fre,
And art a lord, great is thine advantage
More than is mine, that sterve here in a cage;
For I may weep and wayle whiles that I live,
With all the woe that prison may me give,
And eke with pain, that love yeueth me also,
That doubleth all my tourment and my woe.
Therewith the fire of jelousie up stert
Within his breast, and hent him by the heart
So woodly, that he likely was to behold
The box tree, or the ashen deed and cold.
Then said he, O cruel gods, that govern
This world with your word eterne,
And written in the table of Athamant
Your parliament and eterne grant,
What is mankind more unto you yhold
Than is the sheep, that rouketh in the fold.
For slain is man, right as another be,
And dwells eke in prison, and in arrest,
And has sickness, and great adversite,
And often time giltlesse parde.
What governance is in this prescience
That giltlesse turmenteth innocence?
And increases thus all my penance,
That man is bounden to his obseruaunce
For Gods sake to leten of his will,
There as a be may all his lusts fulfill,
And when a be is dead, he has no pain,
But after his death man mote weep and plain:
Though in this world he have care and woe
Without dout it may stonden so.
The answer of his let I to divines,
But well I wot, in this world great pine is,
Alas, I see a serpent or a thief,
That many a true man has do mischief,
Gone at his large, and where him list may turn,
But I mote ben in prison through Saturn,
And eke through Juno, jalous and eke wood,
That has stroied well nigh all the blood
Of Thehes, with his wast walls wide,
And Venus sleeth me on that other side
For jealousy, and fear of him Arcite.
Now will I stint of Palamon alite,
And let him in his prison still dwell,
And of Arcite forth woll I you tell.
The summer passes, and the nights long
Increases double wise the pains strong
Both of the lover, and of the prisoner,
I not which has the wofuller mister,
For shortly to say, this Palamon
Perpetuel is damned to prison,
In chains and fetters to the deed,
And Arcite is exiled on his heed
For evermore as out of that country,
Ne neuermore shall his lady se.
You lovers ask I now this question,
Who has the worse, Arcite or Palamon?
That one may se his lady day by day,
But in prison mote he dwell asway;
That other where him list may ride or go,
But seen his lady shall he never mo.
Now deemeth as ye list, ye that can,
For I woll tell forth my tale as I began.
When that Arcite to Thebes comen was,
Full often a day he swelt and said alas,
For seen his lady shall he never mo,
And shortly to conclude all his woe
So mikell sorrow made never creature,
That is or shall be, while the world may dure,
His sleep, his meat, his drink is him byraft,
That lean he waxes, and dry as a shaft,
His eyes hollow, and grisly to behold,
His hew pale, and fallow as ashen cold,
And solitary he was, and ever alone,
And wailing all the night, making moan,
And if he heard song or instrument,
Then would he weep, he might not stent
So feeble were his spirits, and so low
And changed so, that no man coud him know
His speech ne his voice, though men it herd
As in his gyre, for all the world it ferd
Naught comely like to lovers malady
Of Eros, but rather like many
Engendered of humors melancolike
Beforne his fell fantastike
And shortly was turned all up so down
Both habit and disposicioun
Of him, this woeful lover Arcite,
What should I all day his woe endite?
When he endured had a year or two
This cruel torment, and this pain and woe
At Thebes, in his country, as I said,
Upon a night in sleep as he him laid,
Him thought how that the winged Mercury
Beforne him stood, and bad him be merry,
His slepy yerd in hand he bare upright,
An hat he weered upon his hairs bright
Irayed was this god, as he took keep
As he was when Argus took his sleep,
And said him thus: to Athens shali thou wend
There is the shapen of thy woe and end.
And with that word Arcite awoke and stert,
Now truly how sore that ever me smert
Quod he, to Athens right now wol I fare,
Ne for no dread of death shall I spare
To see my lady, that I love and serve,
In her presence recke I not to sterve.
And with that word he caught a great mirror
And saw that changed was all his color,
And saw his visage all in another kind,
And right anon it ran him in his mind,
That since his face was so disfigured
Of malady, the which he had endured,
He might well, if that he bare him low,
Live in Athens evermore unknow,
And seen his lady welnigh day by day,
And right anon he changed his array,
And clad him as a poor labourer,
And all alone, save only a squier
That knew his privitie and all his caas,
Which was disguised poorly as he was.
To Athens is he gone the next way,
And to the court he went upon a day,
And at the gate he proffered his service
To drugge and draw, what men would devise:
And shortly of this matter for to saine,
He fell in office with a chamberlain
The which was dwelling with Emelie,
For he was wise, and soon couth epsy
Of every servant, which that served here,
Well couth he hewn wood, and water bear,
For he was young and mighty for the nones,
And thereto he was strong and big of bones
To done that any wight began him devise;
A year or two he was in this service
Page of the chamber of Emelie the bright,
And Philostrate he said that he hight.
But half so well beloved man as he
Ne was there none in court of his degree,
He was so gentill of conditioun,
That through all the court was his renown,
The said it were a charity
That Theseus would enhauneen his degree,
And put him in a worshipful service
There as he might his virtue exercise:
And thus within a while his name is sprung
Both of his deeds, and of his good tongue,
That Theseus has taken him so nere
That of his chamber he made him squier,
And yaue him gold to maintain his degree,
And eke men brought him out of his country
Fro year to year full prively his rent,
But honestly and slyly he it spent,
That no man wonderd how he it had,
And three year in this wise his life he lad,
And bare him so in peace and eke in were
That there nas man that Theseus durst der;
And in this bliss let I now Arcite,
And speak I woll of Palamon alite:
In darkness horrible and strong prison
This seven year has sitten this Palamon
Forpined, what for woe and distress
Who feels double sore and heuinesse:
But Palamon, that love distraineth so,
That wood out of his wit he goes for woe,
And eke thereto he is a prisonere
Perpetuell, and not only for a year.
Who coud rhyme in English properly
His martyrdom? forsooth it am not I,
Therefore I pass as lightly as I may.
It befell that in the seventh year in May,
The third night, as old books us saine
(That all this story tellen more plain)
Were it by adventure or by destine
As when a thing is shapen, it shall be,
That soon after midnight, Palamon
By helping of a friend brake his prison,
And flees the city as fast as he may go,
For he had yeuen the gailer drink so
Of a clarrie, made of certain wine,
With Narcotise and Opie, of Thebes fine,
That all the night though men would him shake
The gailer slept, he nught not awake;
And thus he flees as fast as he may,
The night was short, and fast by the day,
That needs cost he mote himself hide,
And to a grove that was fast there beside
With dreadful foot then stalketh Palamon,
For shortly this was his opinion,
That in the grove he would him hide all day,
And in the night then would he take his way
To Thebes ward, his friends for to pry
On Theseus to help him to warrie:
And shortly, either he would lose his life
Or win Emelie unto his wife,
This is the effect, and his intent plain.
Now will I turn to Arcite again,
That little wist how nie was his care
Til that fortune had brought him in her snare,
The merry Lark, messenger of the day,
Saleweth in her song the morrow gray,
And fiery Phoebus rises up so bright,
That all the orisont laugheth of the sight,
And with his stremes, dries in the greues
The silver drops hanging in the leaves.
And Arcite, that in the court riall
With Theseus is squire principal,
Is risen, and looks on the merry day
And for to done his obseruaunces to May,
Remembering on the point of his desire
He on his courser, startling as the fire
Is riden into the fields him to pley
Out of the court, were it a mile or twey,
And to the grove of which I you told
By adventure, his way he began hold
To maken him a garlond of the greves
Were it of Woodbind or Hauthorn leves,
And loud he song against the Son shene,
May, with all thy flowers and thy grene,
Welcome be thou (said he) fair fresh May,
I hope that I some green thing get may:
And from his courser, with a lusty heart
Into the grove full hastily he stert,
And in a path he romed up and down
There, as by adventure this Palamon
Was in a bush, that no man might him se,
For sore afraied of his death was he;
Nothing ne knew he that it was Arcite,
God wot he would have trowed that full lite.
But sooth is said, gone sithen are many years
* That field has iyen, and the wood has eres,
* It is full fair a man to bear him euin
For all day men mete at unset steuin
Full little wot Arcite of this felaw
That was so nigh to hearken of his saw,
For in the bush sits he now full still.
When that Arcite had romed all his fill,
And songen all the roundell lustily,
Into a study he fell suddenly,
As done these lovers in their queint gires,
Now in the crop, and now down in the brires
Now up now down, as boket in a well,
Right as the Friday, soothly for to tell
Now it raineth, now it shines fast,
Right so began gerie Venus ouercast
The hearts of here folk, right as her day
Is gerifull, right so changes she array,
Selde is the Friday all the week ilike,
When that Arcite had song, he began to like
And set him down withouten any more:
Alas (quoth. he) the day that I was bore,
Now long Juno through thy crueltee
Will thou warren Thebes the city?
Alas ybrought is to confusion
The bloodriall of Cadmus and Amphion.
Of Cadmus, I say, which was the first man
That Thebes built, or first the town began,
And of the city first was crowned king:
Of his lineage am I, and of his spring
By very line, as of the stock riall:
And now I am so caitife and so thrall,
That he that is my mortal enemy
I might serve him as his squire poorly.
And yet does me Juno well more shame,
For I dare not be know mine own name,
But there as I was wont to hight Arcite,
Now hight I Philostrat, not worth a mite.
Alas thou fell Mars, alas thou Juno,
Thus has your ire our lineage all fordo
Save only me, and wretched Palamon,
That Theseus martireth in prison:
And over all this, to slean me utterly
Love has his fiery dart so brenningly
I sticked thorough my true careful heart,
That shapen was my death erst my shert.
Ye slean me with your eyes Emelie,
Ye been the cause wherefore that I die.
Of all the remnaunt of mine other care
Ne set I not the mountaunce of a Tare,
So that I coud do ought to your pleasaunce.
And with that word he fell down in a trance
A long time, and afterward he up stert.
This Palamon thought that through his heart
He felt a cold sword suddenly glide:
For ire he quoke, no longer would he bide.
And when that he had heard Arcites tale,
As he were wood, with face dead and pale,
He stert him up out of the bushes thick,
And said: Arcite thou false traitor wicke
Now art thou hent, that love my lady so
For whom that I have this pain and woe,
And art my blood, and to my counsel sworn
As I have full often told thee here beforn,
And have beyaped here duke Theseus,
And falsely have changed thy name thus;
I will be dedde, or else thou shall die,
Thou shall not love my lady Emelie,
But I will love her only, and no mo,
For I am Palamon thy mortal fo;
Though that I have no weapon in this place,
But out of prison am astert by grace,
I dred not, that either thou shall die
Or thou ne shall not louen Emelie,
These which thou will, or thou shall not affert.
This Arcite, with full dispitous heart
When he him knew, and had his tale heard,
As fers as a Lion, pulled out his swerd
And said: By God that sits above
Ne were that thou art sick, and wood for love,
And eke that thou no weapen have in this place
Thou should never out of this grove pace,
That thou ne should dien of mine hond,
For I defy the suertie and the bond
Which that thou say that I have made to thee,
What very fool, think well that love is free,
And I will love her maugre all thy might,
But forasmoche as thou art a Knight,
And wilnest to daren here by battle,
Have here my truth, to morrow I will not fail
Without witting of any other wight,
That here I will be founden as a knight,
And bringen harneis, right enough for thee,
And chese the best, and leave the worst for me,
And meat and drink this night will I bring
Enough for thee, and clothes for thy bedding,
And if so be that thou my lady win
And slay me in this wodde, there I am in,
Thou may well have thy lady as for me,
This Palamon answered, I grant it thee.
And thus they been departed till a morrow
When each of hem had laid his faith to borow,
O Cupide out of all charitee
Oreigne, that would have no fellow with thee
Full soth is said, that love ne lordship
Woll not his thanks have any fellowship
We find that of Arcite and Palamon,
Arcite is ridden anon into the town,
And on the morrow or it were day light
Full privily two harneis had he dight
Both sufficient and mete to darreigne
The battle in the field betwixt hem tweine
And on his horse, alone as he was borne
He carries all his harneis him beforne,
And in the grove, at time and place iset
That Arcite and this Palamon been met,
To changen began the color in her face
Right as the hunter in the reign of Trace
That stands at a gappe, with a spear
When hunted is the Lion or the Bear
And hereth him rushing in the leaves
And breaks the boughs in the greues
And thinks, here comes my mortal enemy
Without fail, he must be dedde or I
For either I mote slay him at the gap
Or he mote slay me, if me mishap
So ferden they, in changing of her hew
As far as euerich of other knew
There nas no good day, ne no saluing
But straight, without word or rehearsing
Eueriche of hem helped for to arm other
As friendly, as he were his own brother
And after that, with sharp spears strong
They foinen each at other wonder long
Thou might wenen, that this Palamon
In his fighting, were a wood Lion
And as a cruel Tigre was Arcite
As wild Bores began they fight and smite
That frothen white as some for ixe wood
Up to the ancle foughten they in her blood
And in this wise, I let hem fighting dwell
As forth I woll of Theseus you tell.
The destiny and the minister general
That executes in the world over all
The purveiance, that God has said beforne
So strong it is, that though the world had sworn
The contrary of thing by ye and nay,
Yet sometime it shall fall on a day
That fell never yet in a thousand year,
For certainly our appetites here,
Be it of war peace hate or love,
All is ruled by the sight above,
This mean I now by mighty Theseus,
That for to hunt is so desirous,
And namely at the great Heart in May,
That in his bed there daweth him day,
That he nis clad, and ready for to ride
With hunt and horn, and hounds him beside,
For in his hunting has he soch delight,
That it is all his joy and appetite
To been himself great Hearts bane,
For after Mars, he serves now Diane.
Clear was the day, as I have told or this,
And Theseus, with all joy and bliss,
With his Ipolita, the fair queen,
And Emelie iclothed all in green,
An hunting been they ridden rially,
And to the grove, that stood there fast by
In which there was an Heart as men him told,
Duke Theseus the straight way has hold,
And to the land he rides him full right,
For thither was the heart wont to have his flight,
And over a brook, and so forth his wey,
This duke woll have a course at him or twey
With hounds, soch as him list command,
And when the duke was comeninto the laund
Under the son he looked, and that anon
He was war of Arcite and Palamon
That foughten breme, as it were bulls two,
The bright swords wenten to and fro
So hidiously, that with the lest stroke
It seemed that it would have fellen an oak,
But what they weren, nothing he ne wot,
This duke with his spors his courser smote,
And at start he was betwixt hem two,
And pulled out his sword, and cried, ho
No more on pain of lesing your head
By mighty Mars, he shall anon be dead
That smites any stroke, that I may seen
But tells me what mister men ye been,
That been so hardy for to fighten here
Without judge or other officere,
As though it were in listes rially?
This Palamon answered hastily,
And said: sir, what needs words mo?
We have the death deserved both two
Two woeful wretches been we and caitiues
That been encombred of our own lives,
And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,
Ne give us neither mercy ne refuge,
But slay me first, for saint charity,
But slay my fellow as well as me,
Or slay him first, for though thou know it lite
This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,
That fro thy sand is banished on his head,
For which he has deserved to be dead,
For this is he that came unto thy yate,
And said, that he hight Philostrate,
Thus has he iaped full many a year
And thou have made him thy chief squiere,
And this is he, that loves Emelie.
For since the day is come that I shall die,
I make plainly my confession,
That I am thilke woeful Palamon,
That has thy prison broke wickedly
I am thy mortal foe, and he am I
That loves so hot Emelie the bright,
That I woll die here present in her sight.
Wherefore I ask death and my iewise,
But slay my fellow in the same wise,
For both we have deserved to be slain.
This worthy duke answered anon again
And said, this is a short conclusion,
Your own mouth, by your own confession
Has damned you, and I woll it record
It needs not to pine you with a cord,
Ye shall be dead by mighty Mars the red.
The queen anon for very womanhedde
Began for to weep, and so did Emelie,
And all the ladies in the company
Great pity was it, as thought hem all,
That ever such a chance should befall.
For gentlemen they were of great estate,
And nothing but for love was this debate,
And saw her bloody wounds wide and sore,
And all criden at once both less and more,
Have mercy lord upon us women all:
And on her bare knees adoune they fall,
And would have kissed his feet there as he stood,
Till at the last, assaked was his mood:
* For pity renneth soon in gentle heart
And though he at first for ire quoke and stert,
He has considered shortly in a clause
The trespasses of hem both, and eke the cause:
And although his ire her gilt accused,
Yet in his reason he hem both excused
* As thus: he thought well that every man
Woll help himself in love all that he can,
And eke deliue^ himself out of prison,
And eke his heart had compassion
Of women, for they weepen ever in one:
And in his gentle heart he thought anon,
And foft unto himself he said: fie
* Upon a lord that woll have no mercy,
But be a Lion both in word and deed
To hem that been in repentance and dreed
As well as to a proud dispitous man
That will maintain that he first began.
* That lord has little of discretion,
That in such case can no diffinition:
But weighs pride and humbleness after one.
And shortly, when his ire was thus agone,
He began to looken up with eyes light
And spoke in place these words all on hight.
The God of love, ah benedicite,
How mighty and how great a lord is he:
Again his might there gains no obstacles,
He may be cleaped a God for his miracles.
For he can maken at his own gise
Of everich heart, as him list devise.
Lo here this Arcite, and this Palamon,
That quietly were out of my prison gone,
And might have lived in Thebes riasly,
And known I am her mortal enemy,
And that her death is in my power also,
And yet has love, maugre her eyes two
I brought hem hither both for to die.
Now looks, is not this a great folly?
* Who may be a fool, but if he love?
Behold for Gods sake that sits above,
See how they bleed, be they not well araied?
Thus has her lord, the god of love hem paid
Her wages, and her fees for her service:
And yet they wenen to be full wise,
That serve love, for ought that may befall.
But yet is this the best game of all,
That she, (...) whom they have this iollite,
Con hem therefore as much thank as me.
She wot no more of all his hot fare
By God, than wot a Cuckoo or an Hare.
But all mote been assaied hot and cold,
A man mote been a fool other young or old,
I wot it by my self full yore agone:
For in my time a servant was I one.
And therefore since I know of loves pain,
I wot how sore it can a man distraine,
As he that often has be caught in her iaas,
I you foryeue all wholly this trespaas
At the request of the queen that kneeleth here,
And eke of Emely, my sister dear,
And ye shall both anon unto me swear,
That ye shall never more my country dear,
Ne make war upon me night ne day,
But been my friends in all that ye may:
I you foryeue this trespass every dele.
And they him swear his asking fair and well,
And him of lordship and of mercy praid,
And he hem granted grace, and thus he said.
To speak of worthy lineage and richesse,
Though that she were a queen or a princess
Ilke of you both is worthy doubtless
To wed when time is, but nethelesse
I speak, as for my sister Emelie
For whom ye have this strife and jealousy,
Ye wot your self, she may not wed two
At ones, though ye fighten euermo:
But one of you, all be him loath or lefe,
He mot go pipe in an Yuie leaf:
This is to say, she may not have both
Been ye never so jealous, ne so wroth.
And therefore I you put in this degree,
That each of you shall have his destine
As him is shape, and hearken in what wise,
Lo here your end, of that I shall devise.
My will is this, for plat conclusion
Without any replication
If that you likes, take it for the best
That euerich of you shall go where him lest
Freely without ransom or daungere
And this day fifty weeks, far ne nere
Euerich of you shall bring an C. knights
Armed for the lists upon all rights
Already to darrein here by battle
And this behote I you withouten fail
Upon my truth, as I am true knight
That whether of you both has that might
That is to say, that whether he or thou
May with his hundred, as I spoke of now,
Slay his contrary, or out of lists drive
Him shall I give Emely to wiue
To whom fortune yeueth so fair a grace.
The lists shall I do make in this place
And God so wisely on my soul rue
As I shall even judge be, and true.
Ye shall none other end with me make
That one of you shall be dedde or take
And ye thinken this is well isaid
Says your advise, and hold you well apaid
This is your end, and your conclusion.
Who looks lightly now but Palamon?
Who springs up for joy but Arcite?
Who could tell, or who could rightly endite
The great joy that is made in this place
When Theseus had done so fair a grace?
But down on knees went every manner wight
And thanked him with all her heart and might
And namely these Thebanes full many a since
And thus with good hope and heart blithe
They taken her leave, and homward began they ride
To Thebes ward, with his old walls wide.
I trow men would deem it negligence
If I foryetten to tell the dispense
Of Thebes, that goes busely
To maken up the lists rially
To such a noble Theater, as it was
I dare well say, in all this world there nas
The circuit whereof a mile was about
Walled with stone, and diched all about
Round was the shape, in manner of a compass
Full of degrees, the hight of sixty paas
That when a man was set on one degree
He let not his fellow for to see.
Eastward there stood a gate of marble white,
Westward right such another in thopposite.
And shortly to conclude, such a place
Was none in earth, as in so little space,
For in the land there nas no crafts man
That Geometry, or Arithmetike can
Ne purtreiture, ne caruer of Images
That Theseus ne gave him meat and wages
That Theater to make and devise
And for to do his Rite and Sacrifice
He Eastward has upon the yate above
In worship of Venus, the Goddess of love,
Do make an auter and an oratorie,
And on the West side, in memory
Of Mars he maked such another
That cost of gold largely a fother.
And Northward, in a turret in the wall
Of Alabaster white and red Coral
An oratorie rich for to se
In worship of Diane the Gods of chastity
Has Theseus do wrought in noble wise.
But yet had I foryetten to devise
The noble caruings and the purtreitures
The shape, the countenance and the figures
That were in the oratories three,
First in the temple of Venus thou may see
Wrought on the wall, full pitously to behold
The broken sleeps, and the sighs cold
The salt tears, and the weimenting
The fire strokes, and the desiring
That loves servants in this life enduren
The oaths, that her covenants assuren
Pleasaunce and hope, desire, foolehardinesse
Beauty and youth, braudrie and richesse
Charms and sorcerie, leasing and flattery
Dispense, business, and jealousy
That weared of yellow golds a garland
And a Cuckoo sitting on her hand.
Feasts, instruments, carols, and daunces,
Iusts and array, and all the circumstaunces
Of love, which I reken and reken shall
By order, were painted on the wall,
And mo than I can make of mention
For sothly all the mount of Citheron
Where Venus has her principal dwelling
Was showed on the wall in purtreing
With all the joy, and the lustiness
Naught was foryetten the portresse idleness
Ne Narcissus the fair of yore agon
Ne yet the folly of king Solomon
Ne yet the great strength of Hercules
Thenchauntment of Medea and Circes
Ne of Turnus, with his hardy courage
The rich Cresus caitife in seruage
* Thus may you seen, that wisdom ne richesse
Beauty ne slight, strength ne hardiness
Ne may with Venus hold champartie
For as her list the world may she gie,
Lo, all these folk so cought were in her laas
Till they for woe full often said alas
Suffices here one example or two
And though I coud reken a thousand mo.
The statue of Venus glorious to see
Was maked fleeting in the large see
And fro the navel down all covered was
With waves grene, and bright as any glass
A citriole in her right hand had she
And on her hedde, full semely for to see
A rose garland fresh and well smelling
Above her hedde Doves flittering
Before her stood her son Cupido
Upon his shoulders wings had he two
And blind he was, as it is often seen
A bow he had and arrows bright and kene
Why should I not as well tellen all
The purgatory that was thereabout over all
Within the temple of mighty Mars the read
All painted was the wall in length and bread
Like to the Estris of the grisly place,
That hight the great temple of Mars in Thrace,
In thilke cold and frostie region,
There Mars has his sovereign mancion.
First on the wall was painted a forest,
In which there wonneth another man ne beast
With knottie and knarie barrein trees old
Of stubs sharp and hidious to behold:
In which there was a romble and a swough
As though a storm should break every bough
And downward from an hill under a bent,
There stood the temple of Mars armipotent
Wrought all of burned stele, of which thentre
Was long and straight, and ghastly for to see,
And thereout came such a rage and a vise,
That it made all the gates for to rise.
The Northern light in at the doors shone,
For window on the wall was there none,
Through which men might any light discern.
The doors were all of Athamant eterne
Y^lenched overthwart and head long
With iron tough, for to maken it strong.
Every pillar, the temple to sustain
Was tonne great, of iron bright and shene.
There saw I first the dark imagining
Of fellonie, and eke the compassing:
The cruel ire, red as any glede,
The pickpurse also, and eke the pale dread,
The smiler, with the knife under the cloak,
The shepen brenning with the black smoke
The treason of the murdring in the bed,
The open war, with wounds all be bled.
Conteke with bloody knives, and sharp manace
All full of chirking was that sorry place.
The sleer of himself yet saw I there,
His heart blood has bathed all his here:
The nail ydriuen in the shode on hight,
with cold death, with mouth gaping upright.
Amids of the temple sat Mischaunce
With discomfort and sorry Countenance:
Yet saw I Woodnesse laughing in his rage
Armed complaint, theft, and fierce courage,
The carraine in the bush, with throat ycorue
A thousand slain, and not of qualme istorue.
The tirant, with the prey by force iraft,
The town destroyed, there was nothing ilaft.
Yet saw I brent the ships hoppesteres,
The hunter istrangled with the wild beres:
The Sow fretting the child in cradle,
* The Cook iscalded, for all his long ladle.
Naught was foryeten the infortune of Mart,
The carter ouerridden by his own cart,
Under the wheel, full low he lay adoun.
There were also of Marts devision,
The Harbor, the Botcher, and the Smith,
That forgeth sharp swords on the stith.
And all above depainted in a tour
Saw I Conquest, sitting in great honor
With the sharp sword right over his head
Hanging by a subtle twined thread.
Depainted was there the slaughter of Julius,
Of great Nero, and of Antonius:
All be that thilke time they were unborne,
Yet was her death depainted there beforne
By manacing of Mars, right by figure,
So was it showed on that portreiture
As is depainted in the stars above,
Who shall be dead or else slain for love.
Suffices one ensample in stories old,
I may not reken them all, though I would.
The statue of Mars upon a cart stood
Armed, and looked grim as he were wood,
And over his head there shinen two figures
Of stars, that been cleaped in scriptures,
That one (Puella) hight, that other (Rubeus)
This god of arms was araied thus:
A wolf there stood beforne him at his fete
With eyes red, and of a man he ete:
With subtle pensill was painted this story
In redouting of Mars and of his glory.
Now to the temple of Diane the chaste
As shortly as I can I woll me have,
To tell you all the discriptioun:
Depainted been the walls up and down
Of hunting and of shamefast chastity:
There saw I how woeful Calistope,
When that Diane grieved was with her,
Was turned fro a woman to a bear,
And afterward was she made the loadsterre:
Thus was it painted, I can say no far,
Her son is eke a star as men may see.
There saw I Dane turned unto a tree,
I mean not the goddess Diane,
But Venus daughter, which that hight Dane
There saw I Acteon an Heart ymaked
For vengeance that he saw Diane all naked:
I saw how that his hounds have him cought,
And freten him, for they knew him naught.
Yet painted was a little furthermore,
How Athalant hunted the wild Bore,
And Mellager, and many other mo,
For which Diane wrought him care and woe.
There saw I many another wonder story,
Which me list not to draw in memory.
This goddess full well upon an Heart sete,
With small hounds all abouten her fete,
And underneath her feet she had a Moon,
Wexing it was, and yet should wane soon.
In gaudie green her statue clothed was,
With bow in hand, and arrows in caas.
Her iyen aye she cast full low adoun
There Pluto has his dark regioun.
A woman traveling was her before,
But for her child so long was vnbore,
Full pitously Lucina began she call,
And said help, for thou may best of all.
Well coud he paint lively that it wrought,
With many a florein he the hewes bought.
Now been these lists made, and Theseus
That at his great cost has arrayed thus
The temples, and the theater eueridele,
When it was done, it him liked wonder well.
But stint I woll of Theseus alite,
And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The day approaches of her returning,
That euerich should an C. knights bring,
The battle to darreine, as I you told,
And to Athens her covenants to hold,
Has euerich of hem brought an C. knights
Well armed for the war at all rights:
And sikerly, there trowed many a man
That never since the world began,
As for to speak of knighthood of her hond,
As far as God has made sea or land,
Nas of so few, so noble a company:
For every wight that loved chiualry,
And would his thanks have a passing name
Has prayed, that he might be of that game,
And well was him, that thereto chosen was:
For if there fell to morrow such a caas,
Ye know well, that every lusty knight,
That loves paramours, and has his might
Were it in England, or were it elsewhere,
They would all full feign willen to be there.
* To fight for a lady, ah, benedicite,
It were a lusty sight for men to se.
And right so farden they with Palamon,
With him there went knights many on:
Some would been armed in an habergeon,
And in a breast plate, with a light gippion,
And some would have a pair of plates large,
And some would have a pruce sheld, some a ^arge
Some would be armed on his legs well,
And have an axe, and some a mace of stele.
There nas none new gise, that it nas old.
Armed were they, as I have you told
Euerich after his opinion.
There may thou se coming with Palamon
Ligurge himself, the great king of Trace:
Black was his berd, and manly was his face.
The sercles of his iyen in his head
They glouden betwixt yellow and red:
And like a Lion looked he about,
With kemped hairs on his brows stout.
His lims great, his brawnes hard and strong
His shoulders broad, his arms round and long.
And as the guise was in his country,
Full high upon a chair of gold stood he,
With four great white bulls in the trasys.
Instead of a coat armor over his harnays
With nails yellow, and bright as any gold
He has a bears skin, cole black for old.
His long hair was kempt behind his back,
As any ravens feather it shone for black.
A wreath of gold arm great, of huge weight
Upon his head set full of stones bright
Of fine rubies and clear diamands.
About his chair there went white allaunds
Twenty and mo, as great as any stere
To hunten at the lion or the wild bear
And followed him, with mosell fast ybound:
Collers of gold, and torrettes filed round.
An hundred lords had he in his rout
Armed full well, with hearts stern and stout.
With Arcite, in stories as men do find,
The great Emetrius the King of Inde
Upon a steed bay, trapped in steel,
Covered with a cloth of gold diapred well,
Came riding like the god of arms Marce,
His coat armure was of cloth of Trace
Well couched with perle, white, round and great:
His saddle was of brent gold new ybet.
A mantle upon his shoulders hanging
Brette full of rubies, red as fire sparkling.
His crispe hair like rings was of iron,
And that was yellow, and glittering as the son.
His nose was high, his eyes bright cytryn,
His lips ruddie, his color was sanguyn.
A few freckles, in his face yspreint
Betwixt yellow, and somdele black ymeint,
And as a Lion he his eyes kest
Of five and twenty year his age I gest:
His beard was well begun for to spring,
His voice was as a trumpet sowning.
Upon his head he weared of laurer green
A garland fresh and lusty for to seen.
Upon his hand he bare for his delight
An Eagle tame, as any lilly white.
An hundred lords had he with him there,
All armed save her heads in her gere,
And that full richely in all manner things.
For trusts well, that earls, dukes, and kings
Were gathered in this noble company
For love, and for increase of chiualry.
About this king there ran on every part
Full many a rame Lion and Libart.
And in this wise, these lords all and some
Been on the sunday to the city come
About prime, and in the town a light.
This Theseus, this duke, this worthy knight
When he had brought hem into his city,
And inned hem, euerich after his degree,
He feasted hem, and does so great labor
To easen hem, and done hem all honor,
That yet men wenen that no man's wit
Of none estate coud ne amend it.
The minstralcie, the service at the feast,
The great yefts also, to the most and least,
The rich array, throughout Theseus paleis,
Ne who sat first ne last upon the deys,
What ladies fairest been or best dancing,
Or which of hem can best dance or sing,
Ne who most feelingly speaks of love,
Ne what hawks sitten on perchen above,
Ne what hounds liggen on the flour a down
Of all this now make I no mentioun:
But of the effect, that thinks me the best,
Now comes the point, harkeneth if you list.
The sunday at night, or day began to spring,
When Palamon the lark herd to sing,
Although it were not day by hours two,
Yet song the lark, and Palamon right tho
With holy heart, and with an high courage
He rose up, to wenden on his pilgrimage
Unto the blisfull Cithera benign,
I mean Venus, honorable and digne:
And in her hour, he walks forth apaas
Unto the lists, there as the temple was:
And down he kneleth, and with humble chere
And heart full sore, he said as ye shall here.
Fairest of fair: O lady mine Venus,
Daughter of Jove, and spouse to Vulcanus,
Thou glader of the mount of Citheron,
For thilke love thou had to Adon,
Have pity of my bitter tears smart,
And take my humble prayer at thine heart.
Alas, I ne have no language to tell
The effect, ne the torment of mine hell:
Mine heart may not mine harms bewray,
I am so confuse, that I cannot say,
But mercy lady bright, that wost well
My thought, and see what harms that I feel:
Consider all this, and rue upon my sore,
As wisly as I shall for evermore
Enforce my might, thy true servant to be,
And hold war always with chastity:
That make I mine auow, so ye me help.
I keep not of arms, still for to yelpe,
Ne ask I to morrow to have victory,
Ne renounce in this case, ne vain glory
Of prise of arms, to blown up and down,
But would have full possessioun
Of Emely, and die in her service,
Find thou the manner how, and in what wise,
I retch it not, but it may better be
To have victory of hem, or they of me,
So that I have my lady in mine arms.
For though so be that Mars is god of Arms
Your Virtue is so great in heaven above,
That if you list, I shall well have my love.
Thy temple shall I worship ever mo,
And on thine altar, where I ride or go
I woll done sacrifice, and fires beat.
And if you woll not so, my lady sweet,
Then pray I you, to morrow with a spear
That Arcite do me through the heart bear:
Then reke I not when I have lost my life,
Though Arcite win her to his wife.
This is the effect and end of my prayere,
Give me my lady, thou blisfull lady dear.
When the orison was done of Palamon,
His sacrifice he did, and that anon
Full pitously, with all circumstaunces,
All tell I not as now his obseruaunces.
But at the last the statue of Venus shoke,
And made a sign, whereby that he took,
That his prayer accepted was that day,
For though the sign showed a delay,
Yet wist he well that granted was his bone,
and with glad heart he went him home full sone,
The third hour in equal that Palamon
Began to Venus temple for to gone,
Up rose the sun, and up rose Emelie,
And unto the temple of Diane began hie:
Her maidens, the which thider were lad
Full readily with hem the fire they had,
The incense, the clothes, and the remnant all,
That to the sacrifice longen shall:
The horns full of meeth, as was the gise,
There lacked naught to done her sacrifise
Smoking the temple, full of clothes fair:
This Emely with heart debonaire
Her body wisshe with water of a well:
But how she did right I dare not tell,
* But it be any thing in general,
And yet it were a game to hear it all,
To him that means well it were no charge:
* But it is good a man be at his large.
Her bright hair unkempt was, vntressed all,
A crown of a green Oak vnseriall
Upon her head was set full fair and mete,
Two fires on the altar began she beat,
And did her things, as men may behold
In Stace of Thebes, and these books old.
When kindled was the fire, with pitous chere
Unto Diane she spoke as ye may here.
O chaste goddess of the woods green,
To whom both heaven and earth and see is seen:
Queen of the reign of Pluto, dark and low,
Goddess of maidens, that my heart has know
Full many a year, and wost what I desire,
As keep me fro the vengeance of thine ire,
That Acteon abought cruelly:
Chaste goddess, well wost thou that I
Desire to been a maid all my life,
Ne never woll I be love ne wife.
I am (thou wost well) of thy company
A maid, and love hunting and venery,
And for to walken in the woods wild,
And not for to been a wife, and been with child,
Naught will I know company of man,
Now help me lady since you may and can,
For the three forms that thou have in thee.
And Palamon, that has such a love to me,
And eke Arcite, that loves me so sore,
This grace I pray thee withouten more,
As send love and peace betwixt hem two:
And fro me turn away her hearts so,
That all her hot love, and her desire,
And all her busy torment, and all her fire
Be queint, or turned in another place.
And if so be thou wolt not do me that grace
Or if any destiny be shapen so,
That I shall needs have one of hem two,
As send me him that most desires me.
Behold goddess of clean chastity
The bitter tears, that on my cheeks fall,
Since thou art a maid, and keeper of us all,
My maidenhed thou keep and well conserve,
And while I live, a maiden woll I thee serve.
The fires bren upon the altar clear,
While Emely was thus in her prayere:
But sodeinly she saw a thing queint,
For right anon one of the fires queint,
And quicked again, and after that anon
That other fire was queint, and all agon:
And as it queint, it made a whistling,
As done these wet bronds in her brenning.
And at the bronds end outran anon
As it were bloody drops many one:
For which so sore aghast was Emely,
That she was well nie mad, and began to cry,
For she ne wist what it signified,
But only for the fear thus she cried,
And wept, that it was pity for to hear.
And therewithal Diane began to appear
With how in hond, right as an hunteresse:
And said daughter, stint thine heaviness:
Among the gods high it is affirmed,
And by eterne word written and confirmed,
Thou shall been wedded to one of tho,
That have for thee so much care and woe:
But unto which of hem I may not tell.
Farewell, for I may no longer dwell:
The fires which now on mine altar bren
Shall declaren, ere that thou gone hen
This adventure of love, as in this case.
And with that word the arrows in the case
Of the goddess clatteren fast and ring,
And forth she went, and made vanishing,
For which this Emely astonished was,
And said: what amounts this, alas,
I put me under thy protection
Diane, and under thy disposition.
And home she goth anon the next way,
This is the effect, there is no more to say,
The next hour of Mars following this
Arcite unto the temple walked is
Of fierce Mars to done his sacrifise
With all the might of his paymem wise.
With pitous heart and high devotion,
Right thus to Mars he said his orison.
O strong god, that in the reigns cold
Of Trace honored art, and lord yhold,
And have in every reign and every land
Of arms, all the bridle in thine hond,
And hem fortunest as thee list devise,
Accept of me my pitous sacrifise.
If so be that my thought may deserve,
And that my might be worthy for to serve
Thy godhead, that I may been one of thine:
Then pray I thee that thou rue on my pine
For thilke sore pain, and for thilke hot fire,
In which thou brentest whylom for desire,
When thou use the fair beauty
Of fair young Venus both fresh and fre,
And had her in thine arms at thy will:
Although thou ones on a time misfull,
When Vulcanus had caught thee in his laas,
And found thee ligging by his wife alas:
For thilke sorrow that was in thine heart,
Have ruth as well on my pains smart.
I am young and uncunning, as thou wost,
And as I trow with love offended most,
That ever was any lives creature:
For she that does me all this woe endure,
Ne retcheth never, where I sink or flete.
And well I wot, or she me mercy hete,
I mote with strength with her in this place:
And well I wot, without help or grace
Of thee, ne may my strength not avail:
Then help me lord to morrow in my battle,
For thilke fire that whilome brenned thee,
As well as the fire now brenneth me.
And do, that I to morrow have the victory,
Mine be the travel and thine be the glory,
Thy sovereign temple woll I most honouren
Of any place, and always most labouren
In thy pleasaunce and in thy crafts strong.
And in thy temple I woll my banner hong,
And all the arms of my company,
And evermore, until the day I die,
Eterne fire I woll beforne thee find:
And eke to this auow I woll me bind.
My heard, my hair that hongeth low adoun
That never yet felt offencioun
Of rasour ne of shere, I woll thee yeve,
And been thy true seuaunt while I live.
Now lord have ruth upon my sorrows sore,
Yeve me the victory, I ask thee no more.
The prayer stint of Arcite the strong.
The rings on the temple door they rong,
And eke the doors yclattren full fast,
Of which Arcite somewhat him aghast.
The fires brennen upon the auter bright,
That it began all the temple for to light:
A sweet smell anon the ground up yafe.
And Arcite anon his hond up hafe,
And more insence into the fire he cast,
With other rites mo, and at the last
The statu of Mars began his hautherke ring:
And with that sound he heard a murmuring
Full low and dim, that said thus: Victory.
For which he yafe to Mars honor and glory.
And thus with joy, and hope well to fare
Arcite anon into his inn is fare,
As feign as foul is of the bright sun.
And right anon such a strife is begun
For thilke granting, in the heaven above
Betwixt Venus the goddess of love,
And Mars the stern god armipotent,
That Jupiter was busy it to stent:
Till that the pale Saturnus the cold,
That knew so many aventures old,
Found in his experience and art,
That he full soon has pleased every part.
And sooth is said, elde has great advantage,
* In elde is both wisdom and usage:
Men may the old outren, but not outread.
Saturn anon, to stinten strife and dread,
Albeit that it be again his kind,
Of all this strife he can remedy find.
My dear daughter Venus, quoth. Saturn,
My course that has so wide for to turn,
Has more power than wot any man.
Mine is the drenching in the sea so wan,
Mine is the prison in the dark coat,
Mine is the strangling and hanging by the throat,
The murmr, and the churles rebelling,
The groaning, and the privy enpoysoning.
I do vengeance and plain correction,
While I dwell in the sign of the Lion.
Mine is the ruin of the high hals,
The falling of the toures and of the walls
Upon the minor, or on the carpenters:
I slew Sampson, shaking the pillars.
And mine been also the maladies cold,
The dark treasons, and the casts old:
My looking is the father of pestilence.
Now weep no more, I shall do my diligence,
That Palamon, that is thine own knight,
Shall have his lady, as thou him behight.
Though Mars shall help his knight, natheles
Betwixt you it mot sometime be pees:
All be ye not of one complexion,
That couseth all day such division.
I am thine ayle, ready at thy will,
Weep no more, I woll thy lust fulfill.
Now woll I stenten of these gods above
Of Mars, and of Venus goddess of love,
And plainly woll tellen you as I can
The great effect, of which that I began.
Great was the feast in Athens that day,
And eke that lusty season in May
Made every wight to ben in such pleasaunce,
That all that day iusten they and dance,
And spenden it in Venus high seruise:
But because that they shoulden arise
Early, for to see the great and strange sight,
Unto her rest went they quickly at night:
And on the morrow when day began spring,
Of horse and harneis, noise and clattering
There was in the hostelries all about:
And to the palace rode there many a rout
Of lords, upon great steeds and palfreis.
There may thou see devising of harneis
So uncouth, so rich, and wrought so well
Of Goldsmithry, of braudry, and of stele,
The shields bright, testers, and trappers,
Gold hewn helms, hauberks, and coat armers,
Lords in paraments on her coursers,
Knights of retinue, and eke squiers,
Nailing the spears, and helmes bokeling.
Gigging of shields with lamers lacing
There as need is, they were nothing ydell:
The foming steeds on the golden bridell
Gnawing and fast the armurers also
With file and hammer, riding to and fro:
Yemen on foot, and communes many one
With short staves, thick as they may gone.
Pipes, trompes, nakoners, and clariouns,
That in the battle blown bloody souns.
The palace full of people up and down,
Here three, there ten, holding her questioun:
Deuining of these Theban knights two.
Some said thus, some said it should he so:
Some did hold with him with the black berd,
Some with the balled, some with the thick herd.
Some said he looked grim and would fight,
He has a sparth of twenty pound of weight.
Thus was the hall full of deuining
Long after the sun gam to spring.
The great Theseus of his sleep began wake
With minstralcie and noise that they make:
Held yet the chamber of his palace rich,
Till that the Theban knights both ylich
Honored weren, and to the place yfet.
Duke Theseus is at the window set
Arrayed right as he were a god in trone:
The people preased thyderward full sone
Him for to seen, and done him high reverence,
And eke to hear his hest and his sentence.
An herald on a scaffold made an oo,
Till all the noise of the people was ydo:
And when he saw the people of noise still,
Thus showed he forth the mighty dukes will.
The lord has of his high discretion
Considered, that it were destruction
To gentle blood, to fighten in this gise
Of mortal battle, now in this emprise:
Wherefore to shapen that they shall not die,
He woll his first purpose modifie.
No man therefore, up pain of loss of life
No manner shot, polax, ne short knife
Into the lists send, or thider bring,
Ne short sword to stick with point biting
No man ne draw, ne hear it by his side:
Ne no man shall to his fellow ride
But one course, with a sharp grounden spear:
Foin if him list on foot, the same he shall were.
And he that is at mischief, shall he take,
And not slain, but brought unto the stake,
That shall ben ordained on either side,
Thider he shall by force, and there abide.
And if so fall, that the cheefetaine be take
On either side, or else sleen his make,
No longer shall the turnament last:
God speed you, goth and lays on fast
With swords and long mases fighten your fill,
Goth now your way, this is the lords will.
The voice of the people touched heaven,
So loud cried they with merry steven:
God save such a lord that is so good,
He wills no destruction of blood.
Up goth the trompes and the melody,
And to the lists rides so the company
By ordinance, throughout the cite large,
Hanged with cloth of gold, and not with sarge.
Full like a lord this noble duke began ride
And these two Thebans on either side:
And after rode the queen and Emely,
And after that another company
Of one and other, after her degree:
And thus they pasten throughout the city,
And to the lists comen they be by time.
It nas not of the day yet fully prime,
When set was Theseus full rich and hie
Ipolita the queen, and Emelie,
And other ladies in degrees about:
Unto the seats preaseth all the rout.
And westward, through the yates under mart
Arcite, and eke and hundred of his part
With banner red, is entered right anon:
And in the selue moment entered Palamon
Is, under Venus, eastward in that place,
With banner white, and hardy cheer and face.
In all the world, to seken up and down,
So even without variatioun
There nas no where such companies twey:
For there was none so wise that coud sey,
That any had of other advantage
Of worthiness, ne of estate, ne age,
So even were they chosen for to guess:
And into the renges fair they hem dress.
When that her names red were euerichone,
That in her number, gile were there none,
Tho were the gates shut, and cried was loud,
Do now your deuoir young knights proud.
The heralds left her pricking up and down,
Now ringen trompes loud and clarioun,
There is no more to say, east and west
In goth the sharp speres sadly in the arrest:
In goth the sharp spurs into the side,
There see men who can just, and who can ride.
There shiueren shafts upon sheilds thick,
He feels through the heart spoone the prick.
Up springs the speres, twenty foot on hight,
Out goth the swords as the silver bright.
The helmes they to hew, and to shred,
Out burst the blood, with stern stremes red:
With mighty maces the bones they to break.
He through the thickest of the throng began threke.
There stumblen steeds strong, and down gone all,
He rolled under foot as does a ball.
He foineth on his feet with a tronchoun,
And he hurleth with his horse adoun.
He through the body is hurt, and since ytake
Maugre his head, and brought unto the stake,
As forward was, right there he must abide.
Another is lad on that other side.
And sometime does hem Theseus to rest,
Hem to refresh, and drink if hem lest.
Full often a day have these Thebans two
Together met, and done each other woe:
Unhorsed has each other of hem twey.
There was no tigre in the vale of Colaphey,
When her whelpe is stole, when it is lite,
So cruel on the hunt, as is Arcite
For jealous heart upon this Palamon:
Ne in Belmarie there is no fell Lion,
That hunted is, or for his hunger wood,
Ne of his prey desires so the blood,
As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite:
The jealous strokes on her helmes bite,
Out renneth the blood on both her sides reed.
Sometime an end there is of every deed:
For ere the sun unto the rest went,
The strong king Emetrius began hent
This Palamon, as he fought with this Arcite,
And made his sword deep in his flesh bite.
And by force of twenty is he take
Vnyolden, and drawn to the slake.
And in the rescous of this Palamon
The strong king Ligurge is borne adoun:
And king Emetrius for all his strength
Is borne out of his saddle a swords length,
So hurt him Palamon or he were take:
But all for naught, he was brought to the stake:
His hardy heart might him helpen naught,
He must abide, when that he was caught
By force, and eke by composition.
Who sorroweth now but woeful Palamon?
That mote no more gone again to fight.
And when that Theseus had seen that sight,
He cried ho: no more, for it is don:
Ne none shall longer to his fellow gone.
I woll be true judge, and not party,
Arcite of Thebes shall have Emely,
That by his fortune has her fair ywon.
Anon there is a noise of people begone
For joy of this, so loud and high withal,
It seemed that the listes shoulden fall.
What can now fair Venus done above?
What says she now? what does the queen of love?
But wepeth so, for wanting of her will,
Till that her tears adowne on the lists fell:
She said: I am ashamed doutles:
Saturnus said: fair daughter hold thy pees,
Mars has al his will, his knit has his boon
And by mine dead thou shait be eased soon.
The trumpes with the loud minstralcie,
The heralds, that so loud yell and cry
Been in her well, for love of Dan Arcite.
But hearkeneth me, and stinteth noise alite,
Which a miracle there befell anon.
The fierce Arcite has his helm off ydon,
And on a courser for to show his face
He pricketh endlong in the large place,
Looking upward upon Emelie,
And she again him cast a friendly eye.
* (For women, as to speak in commune,
They followen all the favor of fortune)
And was all his chere, as in his heart.
Out of the ground a fire infernal stert
From Pluto sent, at the request of Saturn,
For which his horse for fear began to turn,
And leap aside, and foundred as he lepe:
And ere that Arcite may taken keep,
He pight him off on the pomell of his head,
That in the place he lay as he were dead.
His breast to brosten with his saddle bow:
As black he lay as any coal or crow,
So was the blood yroune in his face.
Anon he was ybrought out of the place
With heart full sore, to Theseus paleis,
Tho was he coruen out of his harneis,
And in a bed ybrought full fair and bliue,
For he was yet in memory, and on live,
And always crying after Emely.
Duke Theseus, with all his company
Is comen home to Athens his cite
With all bliss and great solemnite:
Albeit that this adventure was fall,
He would not discomfort hem all.
Men said eke, that Arcite should not die,
He should ben healed of his malady.
And of another thing they were as feign,
That of hem all there was none islaine,
All were they sore hurt, and namely one,
That with a spear was thirled his breast bone.
Two other had wounds, and two broken arms,
Some of them had salues, and some had charms:
Sundry fermaces of herbs, and eke save
They dronken, for they would her lives have.
For which this noble duke, as he well can,
Comfort and honors every man,
And made great revel all the long night,
Unto the strange lords, as it was right.
Ne there nas hold no discomforting,
But as is at iusts or a turneying:
For soothly there nas no discomfiture,
For falling is hold but an adventure.
Ne to be (...) by force unto a stake
Vnyolden, and with twenty knights take:
And one person, withouten any mo
To be hearted forth by arm, foot, and too,
And eke his steed driven forth with staves,
With footmen, both yeomen and knaves,
It was arretted him no villainy:
There may no man cleape it cowardie.
For which anon, duke Theseus did cry
To stinten all rancour and envy.
They gre as well of one side as of other,
And either side is like, as others brother,
And yaue hem gyfts after her degree,
And helden a feast fully dates three:
And conveyed the knights worthily
Out of his town a days journey largely.
And home went every man the right way,
There nas no more but farewell and have good day.
Of this battle I woll no more endite,
But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
Swells the breast of Arcite, and the sore
Increases at his heart still more and more.
The clottered blood, for any lee chcraft
Corrumped, and is in his bouke last,
That neither veineblood, ne vent ousing,
Ne drink of herbs may be helping,
By virtue expulsive, or animal:
For thilke virtue cleaped natural
Ne may the venim void, ne expel:
The pipes of his lungs began to swell,
And every lacerte in his breast adoun
Is shent with venim and corruptioun.
Him gains neither, for to get his life,
Vomit upward, ne downward laxatife:
All is to brusten thilke region,
Nature has no domination..
* And certainly there as nature woll not wirch,
Farewell physic, go bear the corse to chirch.
This is all and some, that Arcire must die:
For which he sends after Emelie,
And Palamon that was his cosyn dear:
Then said he thus, as ye shall after hear.
Naught may my woeful spirit in my heart
Declare o point of all my sorrows smart,
To you my lady, that I love most,
But I bequeath the service of my ghost
To you abouen any creature,
Since that my life may no longer dure.
Alas the woe, alas my pains strong,
That I for you have suffered, and so long.
Alas the death, alas mine Emely,
Alas departing of our company:
Alas mine hearts queen, alas my lives wife,
Mine hearts lady, ender of my life.
* What is the world, what asken men to have?
Now with his love, now in his cold grave
Alone withouten any company.
Farewell my sweet foe, mine Emely,
And soft do take me in your arms twey,
For the love of God, and hearkeneth what I say:
I have here with my cousin Palamon
Had strife and rancour many a day agon
For love of you, and for my jealousy:
And Jupiter so wisely my soul gie.
To speaken of a servant properly
With circumstances all, and truly,
That is to say, troth, honor, and knighthede
Wisdom, humblesse, estate, and high kinrede,
Freedom, and all that longs to that art,
So Jupiter have of my soul any part,
As in this world, right now know I non,
So worthy to be loved as Palamon:
That serves you, and woll done all his life.
And if that you shall ever been a wife,
Foryet not Palamon, the gentleman:
And with that word his speech fail began.
For from his feet unto his breast was come
The cold death, that had him ouernome.
And yet moreover, for in his arms two
The vital strength is lost, and all ago.
Save only the intellect, without more,
That dwells in his heart sick and sore,
Began failen, where the heart felt death.
Dusked been his iyen two, and failed breath.
But on his lady yet cast he his iye,
His last word was, mercy Emelie.
His spirit changed, and out went there,
Whitherward I cannot tell, ne where:
Therefore I stint, I am no diuinistre,
Of souls find I not in this registre.
Ne me list not thilke opinion to tell
Of hem, though they written where they dwell.
Arcite is cold, there Mars his soul gie.
Now woll I speak forth of Emelie.
Shright Emelie, and houlen Palamon,
And Theseus his sister up took anon
Swouning, and bare her fro his corse away:
What helps it to tarry forth the day,
To tellen how she wept both even and morrow?
* For in such case women have much sorrow,
When that her husbands been fro hem go,
That for the more part they sorowen so,
Or else fallen in such malady,
That at the last certainly they die.
Infinite been the sorrow and the tears
Of old folk, and folk of tender years,
In all the town for death of this Theban:
For him there weepeth both child and man.
So great weeping was there not certain,
When Hector was brought, all fresh yssaine
To Troy alas, the pity that was there
Scratching of cheeks, and renting eke here.
Why would thou be dead? thus women cry,
And had gold enough, and Emelie.
No man ne may gladen Theseus,
Saving his old father Egeus,
That knew this worlds transmutatioun,
* As he had seen it, both up and down:
Joy after woe, and woe after gladness,
And showed him ensamples and likeness.
* Right as there died never man (quoth. he)
That he ne lived in earth in some degree,
Right so there lived never man (he said)
In this world, that sometime he ne deied.
* This world is but a throughfare full of woe,
And we been pilgrims, passing to and fro:
Death is an end of every worlds sore.
And over all this yet said he much more
To this effect, full wisely to exhort
The people, that they should hem recomfort.
Duke Theseus with all his busy cure
Casts now, where that the sepulture
Of good Arcite shall best ymaked be
And eke most honorable for degree.
And at the last he took conclusion,
That there as Arcite and Palamon
Had for love the battle hem between,
That in the same selue grove, sweet and green,
There as he had his amorous desires,
His complaint, and for love his hot fires,
He would make a fire, in which the offis
Funeral he mighten all accomplis.
He has anon commanded to hack and hew
The Oaks old, and lay hem all on a rue
In culpons, well araied for to brenne:
His officers with swift foot they run
Right anon at his commandment.
And after Theseus has ysent
A large bear, and it all ouersprad
With cloth of gold, the richest that he had:
And of the same suit he clothed Arcite.
Upon his hands his gloves white,
Eke on his head a croune of Laurel grene,
And in his hand a sword full bright and kene.
He laid him bare visaged on the bear,
Therewith he wept that pity was to here.
And for the people should seen him all.
When it was day he brought him to the hall,
That roreth of the crying and the soun.
Tho come this woeful Theban Palamon
With glitering beard, and ruddie shining here is
In clothes black, dropped all with teres
(And passing other of weeping Emelie)
The rufullest of all the company.
And in as much as the service should be
The more noble and rich in his degree,
Duke Theseus let forth the steeds bring,
That trapped were in steel all glittering,
And covered with the arms of Dan Arcite:
Upon these steeds great and lilly white,
There saten folk, of which one bare his shield,
Another his spear in his hand held:
The third bare with him a bow Turks,
Of brent gold was the case and the harnes:
And ridden forth apace with sorry chere
Toward the grove, as ye shall after here.
The noblest of the Greeks that there were
Upon her shoulders carried the bear
With slack pace, and eyes red and wete
Throughout the city, by the master street,
That sprad was all with black, and that wonder hie:
Right of the same is the street ywrie.
Upon the right hand went Egeus,
And on the other side duke Theseus
With vessels in her hand of gold full fine,
All full of honey, milk, blood, and wine.
Eke Palamon, with full great company:
And after that came woeful Emelie,
With fire in hand, as was that time the gise,
To done the office of funeral service.
Hie labor, and full great apparelling
Was at service, and at fire making,
That with his green top the heaven raught,
And twenty fadome of bred arms straught:
This is to saine, the boughs were so broad,
Of straw first there was laid many a load.
But how the fire was maken up on height
And eke the names, how all the trees hight,
As oak, fur, beech, aspe, elder, elm, popelere,
Willow, holme, plane, box, chesten, and laurere.
Maple, thorn, beech, ewe, hasell, whipuitre,
How they were feld, shall not be told for me:
Ne how the gods runnen up and down
Disherited of her habitatioun,
In which they wonned in rest and pees:
Nymphs, Faunies, and Amadriades.
Ne how the beasts, ne how the birds all
Fledden for fear, when the trees was fall.
Ne how the ground aghast was of the light,
That was not wont to see the sun bright.
Ne how the fire was couched first with stre,
And then with dry sticks cloven a three,
And then with green wood and spicerie,
And then with cloth of gold and perrie,
And garlands hanging with many a flour,
The mirrhe, the incense, with sweet odor.
Ne how Arcite lay among all this,
Ne what richesse about his body is,
Ne how that Emely, as was the guise
Put in the fire of funeral service,
Ne how she souned when made was the fire,
Ne what she spoke, ne what was her desire:
Ne what jewels men in the fire cast
When that the fire was great and brent fast:
Ne how some cast her shield, and some her spear,
And of her vestments, which that they were,
And cups full of wine, of milk, and blood,
Into the fire, that brent as it were wood.
Ne how the Greeks with a huge rout
Thrice did riden all the fire about
Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,
And thrice on the right, with her speres clatering:
And thrice how the ladies began all to cry.
Ne how that led was homeward Emelie:
Ne how that Arcite is brent to ashen cold,
Ne how the liche wake was yhold.
All that night long ne how the Greeks play.
The wake plays ne keep I not to say:
Who wrestled best naked, with oil anoint.
Ne who bare him best in every point.
I woll not tellen eke how they gone
Home to Athens when the play is done.
But shortly to the point then woll I wend,
And maken of my long tale an end.
By process and by length of certain years
All stinten is the mourning and the tears
Of Greeks, by one general assent.
Then seemed me there was a parliament
At Athens, upon a certain point and caas:
Among the which points yspoken was
To have with certain countries alliance,
And have of Thebanes fully obeisance.
For which this noble Theseus anon
Let send after this gentle Palamon
Vnwist of him, what was the cause and why:
But in his black clothes sorrowfully
He came at his commandment on hie,
Tho sent Theseus after Emelie.
When they were set, and hushed was the place,
And Theseus abidden has a space,
Or any word came from his wise breast
His eyes set he there as was his lest,
And with a sad visage he siked still,
And after that, right thus he said his will.
* The first mouer of the cause above
When he first made the fair chain of love,
Great was theffect, and high was his intent,
Well wist he why, and what thereof he meant,
For with that fair chain of love he bond
The fire, the air, the water, and the land
In certain bonds, that they may not flee:
The same prince and that mouer (quoth. he)
Has stablisht in this wretched world adoun
Certain of days and duracioun
To all that are engendered in this place,
Over the which day they may not pace,
All mow they yet tho days abredge:
There needs none authority to ledge.
For it is proved by experience,
But that me list declare my sentence.
Then may men by this order discern,
That thilke mouer stable is and eterne.
* Well may men know, but he be a fool,
That every part is derived from his hoole.
For nature has not taken his beginning
Of one part or cantle of a thing,
But of a thing that perfect is and stable,
Descending so, till it be corrumpable.
And therefore of his wise purueyanuce
He has so well beset his ordinance,
That spaces of things and progressions
Shullen endure by successions
And not eterne, without any lie:
This may thou understand and see at eye:
* Lo the oak, that has so long a norishing,
Fro the time that it begins first to spring,
And has so long a life, as ye may see,
Yet at the last wasted is the tree.
Considers eke, how that the hard stone
Under our feet, on which we tread and gone
Yet wastes it, as it lies in the wey.
The broad river sometime wexeth drey.
The great tounes see we do wane and wend,
Then ye see that all this thing has end.
And man and woman see shall we also,
That needs in one of the terms two,
That is to saine, in youth or else in age
He mote be dead, a king as well as a page.
Some in his bed, some in the deep see,
Some in the large field, as ye may see:
It helps not, all goes that ilke wey:
Then may you see that all thing mote dey.
What makes this but Jupiter the king?
That is prince, and cause of all thing,
Converting all to his proper will,
From which it is derived sooth to tell.
And here again, no creature on live
Of no degree avails for to strive.
* Then is it wisdom, as thinks me,
To make virtue of necessite:
And take it well, that we may not eschew.
And namly that to us all is dew.
And who so grutcheth ought, he does folly,
And rebel is to him that all may gie.
* And certainly, a man has most honor
To dien in his excellence and flour,
When he is siker of his good name:
Then has he don his friends ne him no shame.
And glader ought his friends be of his death,
When with honor iyold is up the breath,
Then when his name apaled is for age,
For all foryetten is his vassellage:
Then it is best, as for a worthy fame,
* To dien when he is best of name.
The contrary of all this, is wilfulness,
Why grutchen we? why have we heaviness,
That good Arcite (of chiualry the flour)
Departed is, with duty and with honor,
Out of this foul prison of this life?
Why grutchen here his cousin and his wife,
Of his welfare, that loves him so well:
Can he hem thank? nay God wot never adele,
That both his soul, and eke himself offend,
And yet they mow not her lusts amend?
What may I conclude of this long story,
But after sorrow I read us be merry,
And thank Jupiter of all his grace:
And ere we departen from this place,
I read we maken of sorrows two
One perfect joy, lasting euermo:
And look now where most sorrow is herein,
There woll I first amend and begin.
Sister (quoth. he) this is my full assent
With all the people of my parliament
Of gentle Palamon your own knight,
That serves you with will, heart, and might,
And ever has done, since ye first him knew,
That ye shall of your grace upon him rue,
And take him for husband and for Lord:
Lend me your hand, for this is our accord.
Let see now of your womanly pite:
He is a kings brothers son parde,
And though he were a poor batchelere,
Since he has served you so many a year,
And had for you so great aduersite,
It must ben considered, leueth me,
For gentle mercy ought to passen right.
Then said he thus to Palamon the knight:
I trow there need little sermoning
To make you assenten to this thing.
Comes nere, and take your lady by the hond,
Betwixt hem was maked anon the bond,
That hight Matrimony or marriage,
By all the counsel of the Baronage.
And thus with all bliss and melody
Has Palamon iwedded Emely.
And God that all this world has ywrought,
Send him his love, that it has so dear bought,
For now is Palamon in all well,
Living in bliss, in richesse, and in hele,
And Emely him loves so tenderly,
And he her serves so gentilly,
That never was there no word hem between
Of jealousy, or of any other tene.
Thus ends Palamon and Emely:
And God save all this fair company.
The MILLERS Tale.
NIcholas, a Scholar of Oxford, practices with Alison the Carpenters wife of
Osney, to deceive her Husband, but in the end is rewarded accordingly.

The Millers Prologue.
WHen that the Knight had thus his tale ytold,
In all the company nas there young ne old,
That he ne said it was a noble story,
And worthy to be drawn in memory:
And namely the gentiles eueriehone.
Our host lough and swear, so mote I gone,
* This goes aright, vnbokeled is the male,
Let see now who shall tell another tale:
For truly the game is well begone.
Now tells us sit Monk if you can
Somewhat, to quite with the knights tale.
The Miller for dronken was all pale,
So that vnneths upon his horse he sat,
Ne nold avail neither hood ne hat,
Ne abide no man for his courtesy,
But in Pilats voice he began to cry,
And s^^re by arms, blood, and bones,
I can a noble tale for the nones,
With which I woll now quite the knight his tale.
Our host saw that he was dronken of ale,
And said: abide Robin leave brother,
Some better man shall tell us first another:
Abide, and let us wirch thriftely.
By Gods soul (quoth. he) that woll not I,
For I woll speak, or else go my way.
Our host answered: tell on a devil way:
Thou art a fool, thy wit is overcome.
Now hearketh quoth. the Miller, all and some:
But first I make protestatioun,
That I am drunk, I know it by my soun:
And therefore if I mispeake or say,
Wite it the ale of Southwarke, I you pray:
For I woll tell a legend and a life
Both of a Carpenter and his wife,
* How that a clarke set a Wrights cap*
The Reave answered and said stint thy clap:
Let be thy leaud drunken harlottrie,
* It is a sin, and eke a great folly
To apairen any man, or him defame,
And eke to bring wives in such blame.
Thou may enough of other things feign,
This drunken Miller spoke full soon again
And said: my leave brother Oswold,
* Who has no wife, he is no cokewold.
But I say not therefore that thou art one,
There been full good wives many one.
Why art thou angry with my tale now?
I have a wife parde as well as thou,
* Yet now I for all the Oxen in my plough,
Take upon me more then is enough
To deemen of my self that I am one,
I woll believe well that I am none.
* An husband should not been inquisitife
Of Gods priuity, ne of his wife.
For so he find Gods foison there,
Of the remnant needs not to enquere.
What should I more say, but this Millere
He nold his word for no man forbere,
But told his churles tale in this mannere:
Me forthinketh I shall rehearce it here,
And therefore every gentle wight I pray,
Deemeth not for Gods love that I say
Of evil intent, but that I mote rehearse
Her tales all, been they better or werse,
Or else falsen some of my matere.
And therefore who so list it not to here,
Turn over the leaf, and choose another tale,
For ye shall find ynow great and small
Of historiall thing touching gentleness,
And eke morality, and holiness.
Blame not me, if that ye choose amiss,
The Miller is a churl, ye know well this,
So was the Reave eke, and other mo,
And harlotrie they told eke both two.
Auise you, and put me out of blame,
* And eke men should not make ernest of game.
The Millers Tale.
WHylome there was dwelling in Oxenford
A rich gnofe, that gests helden to board,
And of his craft he was a Carpenter,
With him there was dwelling a poor scholar
Had learned Art, but all his fantasy
Was turned to learn Astrology:
And coud certain of conclusions
To demen by interrogations,
If that men asken him in certain hours
When that men shoulden have drought or shours:
Or if men asked him what should befall
Of every thing, I may not reken all.
This clarke was cleped Hend Nicholas:
Of berne love he coud and of solas,
And thereto he was sly, and right priuee
And ilike to a maiden meek to see.
A chamber he had in that hostelrie
Alone, withouten any company,
Full tetously dight with herbs sote,
And he himself as sweet as is the rote
Of Licores, or of any Seduwall.
His almagiste, and books great and small.
His asterlagour, longing for his art,
His augrim stones lying fair apart
On shelues all couched at his beds head:
His press icouered with a folding red,
And all above there lay a gay Sautrie,
On which he made on nights melody,
So sweetly, that all the chamber rong:
And Angelus ad virginem he song.
And after that he song the kings note,
Full often blessed was his merry throat.
And thus the sweet clarke all his time spent
After his friends finding and his rent.
This Carpenter had wedded new a wife,
Which that he loved more then his life:
Of eighteen year I guess she was of age,
Jealous he was, and kept her strait in cage,
For she was wild and young: and he was old,
And deemed himself to been a Cokewold.
* He knew not Cato, for his wit was rude,
That bade men wed her similitude.
* Men shoulden wed after her estate,
For youth and elde is often at debate.
But since he was fallen in the snare,
He must enduren (as other folk) his care.
Fair was this young wife, and therewithal
As any Wisele her body gentle and small.
A seinte she weared, barred all with silk,
A barme cloth, as white as morrow milk
Upon her lendes, full of many a gore.
White was her smock, embrouded all before
And eke behind, on her colere about,
Of cole black silk, within and eke without.
The tapes of her white volipere
Were of the same suit of her colere.
Her fillet broad of silk, and set full hie,
And sikerly, she had a likerous eye:
Full small ypulled were her brows two
And tho were bent, and black as any s^o.
She was much more blisful for to see
Than is the new Perienet tree:
And softer than the wool is of a weather.
And by her girdle hung a purse of leather
Tassed with silk, and perled with latoun,
In all this world to seeken up and down
There nis no man so wise, that couth thence
So gay a popelote, or so gay a wench.
Full brighter was the shining of her hew,
Then in the toure the Noble forged new.
But of her song it was so loud and yerne,
As any swallow sitting on a berne:
Thereto she couth skip, and make a game,
As any Kid or Calfe following his dame.
Her mouth was sweet, as braket or the meth
Or hord of Apples, lying in hay or heth.
Winsing she was, as is a jolly colt,
Long as a mast, and upright as a bolt.
A brooch she bare on her sow collere,
As broad as the bosse of a bucklere.
Her shoes were laced on her legs hie:
She was a primrose and a piggesnie,
For any lord to liggen in his bed,
Or yet for any good yoman to wed.
Now sir, and eft sir, so befell the caas,
That on a day this Hende Nicholas
Fell with this young wife to rage and pley,
While that her husband was at Oseney:
As clerks ben full subtle and queint,
And privily he caught her by the queint
And said: I wis but I have my will,
For derne love of thee lemman I spill:
And held her full fast by the haunch bones,
And said: lemman love me well at ones,
Or I woll dien also God me save.
And she sprung as a colt in a traue:
And with her head she wrieth fast away,
And said: I woll not kiss thee by my fay*
Why let be (quoth. she) let be Nicholas,
Or I woll cry out harrow and alas.
Do away your hands for your courtesy.
This Nicholas began mercy for to cry,
And spoke so fair. and proffered him so fast,
That she her love granted him at last,
And swore her oath by S. Thomas of Rent,
That she would been at his commandment,
When that she may her leisure well epsy.
My husband is so full of jealousy,
That but ye wait well, and be prive,
I wot right well I nam but dead quoth. she.
Ye mote be full derne as in this caas.
Nay thereof care ye not quoth. Nicholas:
* A clarke had litherly beset his while,
But if he couth a Carpenter beguile.
And thus they were accorded and y^worne
To awaiten a time as I have said beforne.
And when Nicholas had don thus every dele,
And thacked her about the lends well,
He kissed her sweet, then takes his Sautrie
And plaieth fast, and makes melody.
Then fell it thus, that to the parish chirch
(Christ's own works for to wirch)
This good wife went upon a holy day:
Her forehead shone as bright as any day,
So was it wash, when she let her work.
Now was there of the chirch a parish clerk,
The which that was cleaped Absolon,
Croule was his hair, and as gold it shon,
And strouted as a fan large and broad,
Full straight and even lay his jolly shode,
His rode was red, his eyes gray as Goos,
With Poles windows coruen on his shoos.
In hosen read he went fetously,
Gird he was full small and properly,
All in a kirtle of light waget:
Full fair and thick been the points set,
And thereupon he had a gay surplise,
As white as the blossom on the rise.
A merry child he was, so God me save,
Well coud he let blood, clippe, and shave,
And make a charter of land, and a quitaunce:
In twenty manner coud he trip and dance,
After the school of Oxenford tho,
And with his legs casten to and fro:
And play songs on a small Ribible,
Thereto he song sometime a loud quinible:
And as well coud he play on a Geterne.
In all the town nas brewhouse ne Tavern,
There as any gay girl or Tapstere was,
That he ne visited with his solas,
But sooth to say he was somewhat squaimus
Of farting, and of speech dangerous.
This Absolon, that was jolly and gay,
Goes with a Censer on a Sunday,
Censing the wives of the parish fast,
And many a lovely look on hem he cast,
And namely on this Carpenters wife:
To look on her him thought a merry life.
She was so proper, and sweet as Licorous.
I dare well saine, if the had been a Mous,
And he a Cat, he would have her he^^ anon.
This parish clerk, this jolly absolon
Has in his heart such a love longing,
That of no wife he took none offering,
For courtesy he said he would have none.
The moon when it was night full bright shone,
And Absolon his Geterne has ytake,
For paramours he thought for to wake,
And forth he goes, jealous and amorous,
Till he came to the Carpenters house,
A little after the Cocks had yerow.
And dressed him by a shot window,
That was upon the Carpenters wall:
He sings in his voice gentle and small,
Now dear lady, if that thy will it be,
I pray you that ye would rue on me:
Full well according to his Geterning.
This Carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,
And spoke unto his wife and said anon,
What Alison, hears thou not Absolon,
That chaunteth thus under our boures wall?
And she answered her husband therewithal,
Yes God wot, I hear him every dele.
This passes forth, what wol ye bet then well:
Fro day to day this jolly Absolon
So woeth her, that him was woe begone.
He waketh all the night, and all the day,
He kembeth his locks broad, and made him gay
He woeth her by means and brocage,
And swore that he would been her own page.
He sings brokking as a Nighttingale:
He sent her piment, methe, and spiced ale,
And wafres piping hot out of the glede:
And for she was of roun, he proffered her mede.
For some folk woll be won for richesse,
And some for strokes, and some with gentleness.
Sometime to show his lightness and mastrie
He plaieth Heraudes on a skaffold hie.
But what avails him as in this caas?
So loves she this Hende Nicholas,
* That Absolon may blow the Buckes horn:
He ne had for his labor but a scorn,
And thus she makes Absolon her ape,
And all his request tourneth to a yape.
Forsooth this proverb it is no lie,
* Men say thus always, that the nigh sly
Still makes the far love to be loathe:
For though that Absolon be wood or wroth,
Because that he far was from her sight,
This nie Nicholas stood in his light.
But now bear thee well Hend Nicholas,
For Absolon may wail and sing alas.
And so befell it on a Saturday,
This Carpenter was gone to Osnay,
And Hende Nicholas and Alison
Accorded were to this conclusion,
That Nicholas should shapen hem a while
This silly jealous Carpenter to beguile:
And if so be the game went aright,
She should sleep in his arms all night,
For this was his desire and hers also.
And right anon, withouten words mo,
This Nicholas no longer would tarry,
But does full soft unto his chamber carry
Both meat and drink for a day or twey.
And to her husbond had her for to sey,
If that he asked after Nicholas,
She should answer she mst where he was:
Of all that day she saw him not with eye,
She trowed he was in some malady.
For no cry that she or her maid coud call
He nold answer, for naught that might befall.
Thus passes forth all the like Saturday,
That Nicholas still in his chamber lay,
And eat, drank, and slept, and did what him list
Till Sunday, that the sun goes to rest.
This silly Carpenter has great marvel
Of Nicholas, or what thing might him eile,
And said: I am adrad by saint Thomas
It stondeth not aright with Nicholas.
God shilde that he died suddenly:
This world is now full tickle sekerly.
I saw to day a corse horn to cherch,
That now on monday last I saw him werch.
Go up (quoth. he unto his knave) anon,
Cleape at his door, and knock fast with a stone:
Look how it is, and tell me boldly.
This knave goes him up full sturdely,
And at the chamber door while that he stood,
He cried and knocked as he were wood:
What how? what do ye master Nicholay?
How may ye sleepen all this long day?
But all for naught, he heard not a word.
A hole he found full low upon a board,
There as the cat was wont in to creep,
And at that hole he looked in full deep,
And at the last he had of him a sight.
This Nicholas sat ever gaping upright,
As he had keyked on the new moon.
Adowne he goes, and told his master soon,
In what array he saw this ylke man.
This carpenter to blissen him began,
And said: now help us saint Frideswide.
A man wot little what shall him betide.
This man is fallen with his Astronomy
In some woodnesse or in some agony.
I thought aye well how it shoulden be,
* Men shoulden not know of Gods priuite.
Yea blessed be always the leaud man,
* That naught but only his belief can.
Right so ferd another clarke with astronomy,
He walked into the fields for to pry
Upon the star, to wete what should befall,
Till he was in a marlepit yfall,
He saw not that: yet by saint Thomas
Me reweth sore on Hende Nicholas:
He shall be arated out of his studying,
If that I may, by Jesus heaven king.
Get me a staff, that I may underspore
While that thou Robin heauest up the door:
He shall out of his studying, as I guess.
And to the chamber door he began him dress.
His knave was a strong carle for the nones,
And by the haspe bare up the door at ones,
Into the floor the door fell anon.
This Nicholas sat as still as any stone,
And ever gaped upward into the air.
This carpenter wend he were in despair,
And hent him by the shoulders mightily,
And shoke him hard, and cried pitously,
What Nicholas, what? how look adoun:
Awake, and think on Christ's passioun.
I crouch the from elues, and from wiked wights:
Therewith the night spell he said anon rights
On four halues of the house about,
And on the dreshfold of the door without,
Jesus Christ, and saint Benedight
Bliss this house from every wicked wight:
Fro the nights mare, the wite Pater noster,
* Where wonnest thou saint Peter's sister?
And at the last this Hende Nicholas,
Began for to sike sore, and said alas:
Shall all this world be lost eftsoons now?
This carpenter answered: what say thou?
What think on God, as we men do that swink.
This Nicholas answered, fetch me drink,
And after woll I speak in priuite
Of certain things that touches thee and me:
I woll tell it none other man certain.
This carpenter goth down, and comes again,
And brought of mighty ale a large quart,
And when each of hem had dranken his part,
This Nicholas his chamber door fast shet,
And down the carpenter by him set
And said: Johan host mine lefe and dear,
Thou shall upon thy troth swear me here,
That to no wight thou shall my counsel wrey:
For it is Christ's counsel that I say,
That if thou tell it any man, thou art forlore:
For this vengeance thou shall have therefore,
That if thou wray me, thou shall be wood.
Nay Christ it forbid for his holy blood
Quoth. tho this silly man, I am no blabbe
Ne though I say it, I nam not lefe to gabbe.
Say what thou wolt, I shall it never tell
To child ne wife, by him that harrowed hell.
Now John (quoth. Nicholas) I woll not lie,
I have yfounden in mine astrology,
As I have looked in the Moon bright,
That now on monday next, at quarter night
Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and wood
That half so great was never Noes flood:
This world (he said) in less than in an hour
Shall all be orient, so hidous is the shoure:
Thus shall mankind drench, and lose her life.
This carpenter answered and said: alas my wife
And shall she drench? Alas mine Alisoun?
For sorrow of this he fell almost adoun,
And said: is there no remedy in this caas?
Yes yes full good (quoth. Hende Nicholas)
If thou wolt werchafter lore and read,
Thou may not werchen after thine own head:
For thus says Solomon that was full true,
* Work all by counsel, and thou shall not rue.
And if thou will werken by good counsel,
I undertake, without mast or sail
Yet shall I save her, and thee and me.
Have thou not heard how saved was Noe,
When that our lord had warned him beforne,
That all the world with water should be lorne?
Yes (quoth. the carpenter) full yore ago.
Have thou not heard (quoth. Nicholas) also,
The sorrow of Noe with his fellowship,
Or that he might get his wife to ship?
Him had lever I dare well undertake
At thilke time, than all his wethers blake,
That she had a ship her self alone:
And therefore wost thou what is best to done?
* This asks have, and of an hasty thing
Men may not preach ne make tarrying.
Anon go get us fast into this inn
A kneding trough or else a kemelyn,
For each of us: but look that they been large,
In which men mow swimmen as in a barge?
And have therein victuals sufficiaunt
But for a day, fie on the remnaunt:
The water shall aslake and gone away
Abouten prime upon the next day.
But Robin may not weten of this, thy knave,
Ne eke thy maid Gille I may not save:
Ask not why: for though thou ask me,
I woll not tellen Gods privite.
Suffices thee, but if thy wits be mad,
To have as great a grace as Noe had:
Thy wife shall I well save out of doubt,
Go now thy way, and speed thee hereabout.
But when thou have for her, and thee, and me,
Ygetten us these kneading tubs three,
Then shall thou hang hem in the roof full hie,
That no man of our purueyaunce epsy:
And when thou have don thus as I have said,
And have our vitaile fair in hem ylaid,
And eke an axe to smite the cord arwo
When the water comes, that we may go,
And break an hole on high upon the gable
Unto the garden ward, over the stable,
That we may freely passen forth our way,
When that the great shoure is gone away,
Then shall thou swim as merry I undertake,
As does the white ducke after her drake:
Then woll I cleape, how Alison, how John
Be merry: for the flood woll pass anon:
And thou wolt saine, hail master Nicholay,
Good morrow, for I see well that it is day:
And then we shall be lords all our life
Of all the world, as was Noe and his wife.
But of one thing I warn thee full right,
Be well auised on that ilke night,
That we benentred into the ships board,
That none of us ne speak not a word,
Ne clepe ne cry, but been in his prayere,
For so to done it is Gods own hest dear.
Thy wife and thou mote hang fer a twinne,
For that betwixt you shall be no sin,
No more in looking than there shall in deed:
This ordinance is said, go God thee speed.
To morrow at night, when men ben all asleep,
Into our kneading tubs woll we creep,
And sitten there, abiding Gods grace:
Go now thy way, I have no longer space
To make of this no longer sermoning:
* Men saine thus: send the wise and say nothing:
Thou art so wise, it needs thee not teach,
Go save our lives, and that I thee beseech.
This silly carpenter goes forth his way,
Full often he said alas, and welaway,
And to his wife he told his privite,
And she was ware, and knew it bet than he
What all this queint cast for to sey:
But natheles, she ferde as she would dey,
And said, alas, go forth thy way anon,
Help us to escape, or we be dead eachone:
I am thy true very wedded wife,
Go dear spouse, and help to save our life.
* Lo, what a great thing is affection,
Men may die of imagination,
So deep may impression be take.
This silly carpenter begins to quake:
Him thinks verily that he may see
Noes flood come waltering as the sea
To drenchen Alison, his honey dear:
He weepeth, waileth, and makes sorry chere,
He siketh, with many a sorry thought,
He goth, and geteth him a kneading trough,
And after a tub, and a kemelin,
And privily he sent hem to his in:
And hing hem in the roof full privily.
With his own hand he made him ladders three
To climben by the ronges, and by the stalks
Into the tubs honging by the balkes,
And hem vitailed, both trough and tubbe,
With bread and cheese, and good ale in a iubbe:
Sufficing right ynow as for a day.
But er that he had made all this array,
He sent his knave, and eke his weuch also
Upon his need to London for to go,
And on the monday, when it drew to night,
He shut his door, without candle light,
And dressed all thing as it should be.
And shortly they clomben up all three.
They sitten still not fully a furlong way,
Now pater noster clum, said Nicholay,
And clum quoth. Johan, and clum said Alison:
This carpenter said his devotion,
And still he sit, and bids his prayere
Awayting on the rain, if he it here.
The dead sleep, for weary business
Fell on this carpenter, right as I guess
About curfewe time, or little more:
For travail of his ghost he groneth sore,
And est he routeth, for his head mislay:
And down the ladder stalketh Nicholay,
And Alison full loft after she sped:
Withouten words mo they went to bed
There as the carpenter was wont to lie,
There was the revel, and the melody.
And thus lies Alison and Nicholas
In business of mirth and solas,
Till that the bell of lauds began to ring,
And Freres in the chaunsell gone to sing.
This parish clerk, this amorous Absolon,
That is for love always so woe bygon,
Upon the monday was at Osenay
With company, him to disport and play:
And asked upon a case a cloisterere
Full privily, after John the carpentere:
And he drew him apart out of the chirch,
And said I not: I saw him not here wirch
Since saturday, I trow that he be went
For timbre, there our Abbot has him sent.
For he is wont for timbre for to go,
And dwellen at the graunge a day or two:
Or else he is at his house certain,
Where that he be, I cannot sorthly saine.
this Absolon full jolly was and light,
And thout, now is my time to walk all night
For sikerly, I saw him not stering
About his door, since day began to spring.
So mote I thrive, I shall at cocks crow
Full privily knock at his window,
That stant full low upon his boures wall:
To Alison woll I now tellen all
My love longing: for yet I shall not miss.
That at the least way I shall her kiss.
Some manner comfort shall I have parfay,
My mouth has itched all this long day:
That is a sign of kissing at the least.
All night me met eke, that I was at a feast.
Therefore I woll go sleep an hour or twey.
And all the night than woll I walk and pley.
When that the first cock has crow anon,
Up rist this jolly lover Absolon,
And him arayeth gay, and in queint device:
But first he cheweth greins and licorice,
To smellen sote, or he had kempt his here,
Under his tongue a true love he bear,
For thereby he wend to been graciouse.
He comes to the carpenters house,
And still he stant under the shot window,
Unto his breast it raught, it was so low:
And soft he knocked with a semely soun.
What do you honycombe, sweet Alisoun?
My fair bird, and my sweet sinnamon:
Awake lemman mine, and speaks to Absolon
Full little thinken ye upon my woe,
That for your love I swelt there as I go.
No wonder is though I swelt and sweat,
I mourn as does the lamb after the teat.
I wis lemman, I have such love longing,
That like a Turtle true is my mourning.
I may not eaten no more than may a maid.
Go fro the window jack fool, she said:
As help me God and sweet saint Iame,
I love another, or else I were to blame
Well bet than thee (by Jesus) Absolon:
Go forth thy way, or I woll cast a stone,
* And let me sleep, a twenty devil way.
Alas, quoth. Absolon, and welaway,
That true love was ever so yuell besette:
Then kiss me, since it may be no bette
For Jesus love, and for the love of me.
Will thou then go thy way therewith, quoth. she?
Ye tertes lemman, quoth. this Absolon.
Then make thee ready, (quoth. she) I come anon.
And unto Nicholas she said, be still,
Now peace, and thou shall laugh thy fill.
This Absolon down set him on his knees,
And said: I am a lord at all degrees:
For after this I hope there comes more.
Lemman thy grace, and sweet bird thy nore.
The window she vndoth, and that in have,
Have do (quoth. she) come off and speed thee fast,
Least that our neighbors thee epsy.
This Absolon began wipe his mouth full dry.
Dark was the night as any pitch or cole,
And at the window she put out her ers hole,
And Absolon sped neither bet ne wers,
But with his mouth he kissed her bare ers
Full sauorly: and as he was ware of this,
Abacke he stert, and thought it was amiss,
For well he wist a woman had no berde,
He felt a thing all row, and long herd,
And said: fie, alas what have I do?
Te he (quoth. she) and clapped the window to,
And Absolon goes forth a sorry paas.
A heard, a beard, said Hende Nicholas,
By gods corpus, this goes fair and well.
This silly Absolon heard it every dele,
And on his lip he began for anger bite,
And to himselue he said, I shall thee quite.
Who rubbeth now, who froteth now his lips
With dust, with sond, with straw, and with chips
But Absolon? that says full often alas,
My soul be take I to Sathanas,
But me were lever than all this town, quoth. he,
Of this despite awreken for to be.
Alas, quoth. he, alas that I ne had bleint,
His hot love is cold, and all yqueint.
For fro the time that he had kissed her ers,
Of paramours he set not a kers,
For he was healed of his malady,
Full often paramours he began defy.
And weep as does a child that is ybete.
A soft pace he went over the street
Unto a smith, men callen dan Gerueys,
That in his forge smites plow harneis,
He sharpeth shares and culters busily.
This Absolon knocks all easily,
And said undo Gerueys, and that anon.
What who art thou? It am I Absolon.
What Absolon, what for Christ's sweet tree,
Why rise ye so rath? eye benedicite
What eileth you? some gay girl God it wot
Has brought you thus on the merytote:
By saint Neotes, ye wot well what I mean.
This Absolon ne raught not a been
Of all his play, no word again he gaffe,
* He had more towe upon his distaffe
Than Garuays knew, and said friend so dear,
The hot culter in the chimney here
As lene it me, I have therewith to done:
I woll bring it thee again full sone.
Geruays answered: certes were it gold,
Or in a poke nobles all untold,
Thou should it have, as I am true smith:
Eye Christ's foot, what wol ye don therewith?
Thereof (quoth. Absolon) be as be may
I shall well tellen thee by to morrow day.
And caught the culter by the cold stele,
Full soft out at the door began he stele,
And went unto the carpenters wall:
He coughed first, and knocked therewithal
Upon the window, right as he did ere.
This Alison answered: who is there
That knocks so? I warrant he is a thief.
Why nay (quoth. he) God wot my sweet lefe,
I am thine Absolon, thine own derling:
Of gold (quoth. he) I have thee brought a ring,
My mother yaue it me, so God me save,
Full fine it is, and thereto well ygraue:
This woll I give thee, if thou me kiss.
This Nicholas was risen for to piss,
And thought he would amenden all the iape,
He should kiss his ers ere that he escape:
And up the window did he hastily,
And out his ers he put full privily
With all his buttocke, to the haunch been:
And therewith spoke this clerk, this Absolon,
Speak sweet bird, I not where thou art.
This Nicholas anon let fleen a fart,
As great as it had been a thunder dent,
That with the stroke he was well nie yb^ent:
And he was ready with his iron hot,
And Nicholas in the arse he smote.
Off goes the skin a hondbrede about,
The hot cultor brend so his tout,
That for the smart he wend for to die,
As he were wood, he began for to cry,
Help, water, water, for Gods heart.
This carpenter out of his slumber slert,
And heard one cry water, as he were wood,
And thought, alas how comes Noes flood,
And set him up withouten words mo,
And with an axe, he smote the cord at woe:
And down goes all, he found neither to sell
Bread ne ale, but down shortly he fell
Upon the floor, and there a swowne he lay.
Up stert then Alison and Hende Nicholay
And cried out, and harrow in the street.
The neighbors about both small and great
In run, for to gauren on this man,
That in a swoune lay, all palish and wan:
For with that fall brosten has he his arm,
But stonden he must unto his own harm.
For when he spoke, he was yborne adoun
With Hende Nicholas and Alisoun,
They told every man that he was wood
He was aghast so sore of Noes flood
Through fantasy, that of his vanite,
He had getten him kneading tubs three,
And had hem honged in the roof above
And that he paried hem for Gods love
To sitten in the roof par company.
The folk began laughen at his fantasy,
And into the roof they kyken and they gape,
And turned all his earnest into a jape,
For what so this carpenter answered,
It was for naught, no man his reason herd,
With oaths great, he was ysworne adoun,
That he was holden wood in all that town.
* For euerich clerk anon held with other,
They said the man was wood, my leave brother,
And every wight began laughen at this strife.
Thus swiued was the carpenters wife,
For all his keeping, and his jealousy:
* And Absolon has kissed her nether eye,
And Nicholas is scalded in the tout,
This tale is done, and God save all the rout.
The Reues Prologue.
WHen folk had laughed at this nice caas
Of Absolon and Hende Nicholas,
Diverse folk hereof diversely they said,
But for the more part they lough and played:
Ne at this tale I saw no man him grieve,
But it were only Oswolde the Reave:
Because he was of carpenters craft,
A little ire in his heart ylaft.
He began to grutchen and blame it a lite:
Soothly (quoth. he) full well couth I thee quite
With blearing of a proud Millers eye,
If that me list to speak of ribaudrie.
But I am old, me lust not play for age,
* Grass time is done, my fodder is forage:
This white top writes mine old years,
Which sometime yelow was, now white ben min here is:
* But yet I fare as does an open ers,
That ilke fruit is ever longer the wers
Till it be rotten in molloke or in stre.
We old men, I dreaden so fare we,
Till we be rotten can we not be ripe,
* We hoppen always, while the world wol pipe:
* For in our will there stiketh ever a nail,
To have an hoar head and a green tail,
As has a leke, for though our might be gone,
Our will desires folly ever in one:
For when we may not don, than wol we speken.
* Yet in our ashen cold is fire yreken.
* Four gledes han we, which I shall devise,
Auaunting, lying, anger, and couetise,
These four sparkles longen unto elde:
Our old lims mow well been vnwelde,
But will ne shall not fail, that is sooth.
* And yet have I always a colts tooth,
As many a year as it is passed hen,
Since that my tap of life began to run.
For sikerly, when I was borne anon,
Death drew the tap of life, and let it gone:
And ever since has the tap pronne,
Till that almost all empty is the tonne.
The streme of life now droppeth on the chimb,
* The silly tongue may well ring and climb
Of wretchedness, that passed is full yore:
With old folk save dotage is no more.
When that our host had heard this sermoning,
He began to speak as lordly as a king,
And said: what amounts all this wit?
What shall we speak all day of holy writ?
* The devil I think made a Reave to preche
Or a souter, a shipman, or a leche.
Say forth thy tale, and tarry not the time:
Lo Depford, and it is half way prime:
Lo Greenwiche, that many a shrew is in,
It were time thy tale for to begin.
Now sirs then quoth. this Oswold the Reave,
I pray you all, that ye not you grieve,
* That I answer, and somedele set his houfe,
* For lefull it is with force, force off to shoufe.
This dronken Miller has ytold us here,
How that beguiled was a carpentere
Perauenture in scorn, for I am one:
And by your leave, I shall him quite anon,
Right in his churles terms woll I speak,
I pray to God his neck mote be to break,
* He can well in mine eye seen a stalk,
But in his own he cannot seen a balke.
DEnyse Simkin, the Miller of Trompington, deceives two Clarks of Scholars
Hall in Cambridge, in stealing their Corn; but they so use the matter, that
they revenge the wrong to the full. The Argument of this Tale is taken out of
Bocchace in his Novels.

The Reues Tale.
AT Trompington, not far fro Cambridge
There goth a brook, and over that a bridge,
Upon the which brook there stant a mell:
And this is very sooth, as I you tell.
A Miller was there dwelling many a day,
As any peacocke he was proud and gay:
Pipen he couth, and fishen, and nets beat,
And turn cups, and well wrestle and shete.
Aye by his belt he bare a long pauade,
And of a sword full trenchaunt was the blade.
A jolly popere bare he in his pouch,
There nas no man for peril durst him touch.
A Shefeld thwitel bare he in his hose,
Round was his face, and camised was his nose.
As pilled as an ape was his skull,
He was a market beater at the full.
There dursten no wight hond on him ledge,
But he ne swore he should sore abedge.
A thief he was forsooth, of corn and mele,
And that a sly, and vsaunt for to stele.
His name was hoten Deynous Simkyn,
A wife he had, comen of noble kin:
The parson of the town her father was,
With her he yafe full many a pan of bras.
For that Simkyn should in his blood allie,
She was yfostered in a nunnerie:
For Simkyn would no wife, as he said,
But she were well ynourished, and a maid,
To save his estate of yomanrie.
And she was proud, and pert as a pie,
A full fair sight was it to see hem two.
On holy days beforne her would he go
With his tipet wounden about his heed,
And she came after in a gite of reed,
And Simkyn had hosen of the same.
There durst no wight clepen her but dame:
Was none so hardy, that went by the way,
That with her once durst rage or play,
But if he would be slain of Simkyn
With pauade, or with knife, or bodkin.
* For jealous folks been perilous euermo
Algates they would her wives wenden so.
And eke for she was somedele smoterliche:
She was as digne as water in a diche,
And as full of hoker, and of bismare,
As though that a lady should her spare,
What for her kindred, and her norterly,
That she had learned in the nonnery.
A daughter had they betwixt hem two
Of twenty year, withouten any mo,
Saving a child was half a year of age,
In cradle it lay, and was a proper page.
This wench thick and well ygrowne was,
With camised nose and eyes gray as glass:
With buttockes broad, and breasts round and hie,
But right fair was her hair, I woll not lie.
The parson of the town, for she was fair,
In purpose was to maken her his hair
Both of his cattle, and of his mesuage,
And strange he made it of her marriage:
His purpose was to bestowen her hie
Into some worthy blood of auncetrie.
For holy churches good mote been dispended
On holy churches blood that is descended.
Therefore he would his holy blood honor,
Though that he holy church should devour.
Great soken has this Miller out of dout
With wheat and malt, of all the land about,
And namely there was a great college
Men clepen it the Scholars Hall of Cambrege,
There was her wheat and eke her malt iground.
And on a day it happed in a stound,
Sick lay the Manciple on a malady,
Men wenden wisely that he should die.
For which this miller stale both wheat and corn
An hundred time more than he did biforn.
For there before, he stale but courteously,
But he now was a thief outragiously:
For which the warden chid and made fare,
But thereof set the Miller not a tare,
He cracked, bosted, and swore it nas not so.
Then were there young poor scholars two,
That dwelten in the Hall, of which I say,
Testife they were, and lusty for to play:
And only for her mirth and reuely,
Upon the Warden busily they cry
To give hem leave but a little stound,
To gone to mill, to see her corn yground:
And hardely they durst lay her neck,
The Miller should not steal hem half a peck
Of corn by sleight, ne by force hem reave.
And at the last the warden yaue hem leave:
Johan hight that one, and Alein hight the other,
Of a town they were both, that hight Strother
Far in the North, can I not tell where.
This Alein makes already his gere,
And on a horse the sack he cast anon:
Forth goes Alein the clerk, and also John,
With good sword and buckeler by her side.
Johan knew the way, him needs no guide,
And at the mill door the sack down he layth.
Alein spoke first: all hail Simken in faith,
How fares thy fair daughter, and thy wife?
Alein welcome (quoth. Simken) by my life,
And John also: how now, what do ye here?
* By god Simond (quoth. John) need has no pere,
* Him behoues serve himself that has no swain,
Or else he is a fool, as clerks saine.
Our Manciple I hope he will be dead,
Swa works aye the wange in his head:
And therefore is I come, and eke Alein,
To grind our corn and carry it home agein:
We pray you speed us home in that ye may.
It shall be done (quoth. Simkin) by my fay:
What woll you done while it is in hand?
By God, right by the hopper woll I stand,
Quoth. John: and seen howgates the corn goth in,
Yet saw I never by my father kin,
How that the hopper waggs to and fra.
Alein answered: Johan will thou sa?
Then woll I stand beneath by my croune,
And see how the meal falls adoune
Into the troghe, that shall be my disport:
Quoth. John, in say I may been of your sort,
I is as ill a Miller as is ye.
This Miller smileth at her nicite,
And thought all his done for a wile,
They wene that no man may hem beguile,
* But by my thrift yet shall I bleare her eye,
For all the slight in her philosophy,
The more queint clerks that they themselves make,
The more woll I steal when I gin to take:
* Instead of flour yet, woll I give hem brenne,
* The greatest clerks ben not the wisest men
As why some to the wolf spoke the Mare:
Of all her art count I not a tare.
Out of the door he goes full privily,
When that he saw his time, subtly
He looked up and down, till he had yfound
The clerks horse, there as he stood ybound
Behind the Mill, under a lessell:
And to the horse he goth him fair and well,
He strippeth of the bridle right anon.
And when the horse was loose, he began to gone
Toward the fen, there as wild mares rinne,
And forth with wehe, through thick and thin.
The Miller goes again, no word he said,
But does his note, and with these clerks played,
Till that her corn was fair and well yground.
And when the meal was sacked and ybound,
This John goth out and found her horse away,
And began to cry harrow and welaway,
Our horse is lost, Alein for Gods benes,
Step on thy feet man, come forth all atenes:
Alas our Warden has his paltrey lorne,
This Alein all forgot both meal and corn:
All was out of mind his husbandry:
What, whilke way is he gone? he began to cry.
The wife came leaping inward at a run,
She said alas, he goes to the fenne
With wild Mares, as fast as he may go:
Vnthank come on his hond that bound him so,
And he that better should have knit the rein.
Alas (quoth. John) Alein for Christ's pein
Lay down thy sword, and I shall mine alswa:
I is full swift God wete as is a raa.
By Gods fale he shall not escape us bathe:
Why ne had thou put the capel in the lathe?
Ill heste Alein, by God thou is a fonne.
These ^elie clerks han full fast ironne
Toward the fenne, Alein and eke John:
And when the miller saw that they were gone,
He half a bushel of her flower both take.
And had his wife knede it in a cake.
He said, I trow the clerks were aferde.
* Yet can a Miller make a clerks berde,
For all her art, yet let hem gone her way,
* Lo where they gone, let the children play:
They get him not so litely by my croune.
These selie clerks re^nen up and down
With keep, keep, iossa, iossa warth there,
Go whistle thou, and I shall keep him here.
But shortly, till it was very night
They couth not tho they did all her might,
Her capell catch, he ran away so fast:
Till in a ditch they caught him at the last.
Werie and wet as beasts in the rain,
Comes silly John, and with him comes Alein:
Alas (quoth. John) the day that I was borne,
Now are we driven to hethen and to skorne:
Our corn is stole, men woll us fools call,
Both the Warden, and our fellows all,
And namely the Miller, wallaway.
Thus plaineth John, as he goth by the way
Toward the Mill, and bayard in his hond.
The Miller sitting by the fire he fond,
For it was nit, and ferther might they naught.
But for the love of God they him besought
Of her borough and ease, as for her penny.
The Miller said again, if there be any,
Such as it is, yet shall ye have your part:
My house is strait, but ye have learned art,
Ye can by argument make a place
A mile broad, of twenty foot of space:
Let see now if this place may suffice,
Or make it romer with speech, as is your gise.
Now Simond (said Ihon) by S. Cutherd
Aye is thou merry, and that is fair answered.
I have heard say, men should take of two things
* Swilke as he finds, or swilke as he brings.
But specially I pray thee host dear,
Get us some meat and drink, and make us chere
And we will pay truly at the full:
* With empty hond, men may no hawks tull.
Lo here our silver ready for to spend.
The Miller to the town his daughter send
For ale and bread, and roasted hem a goos,
And bound her horse he should no more go loos:
And in his own chamber he made a bed
With sheets and with chalons fair yspred,
Not from his own head ten foot or twelve:
His daughter had a head all by her selue,
Right in the same chamber fast them by:
It might he ne bette, and the cause why,
There was no roumer herbrough in that place.
They soupen, and speaken of mirth and solace,
And dronken ever strong ale at the best.
About midnight went they to rest.
Well has this Miller vernished his head,
Full pale he was for dronken, and nothing red.
He gaspeth, and he speaks through his nose,
As he were in the quacke, or in the pose.
To head he goes, and with him his wife,
As any Iay was she light and iolife,
So was her jolly whistle well ywet.
The cradle at the beds fe^t was set
To roken, and to give the child to suke.
And when that dronken was all in the cruke
To bed went the daughter right anon,
To bed goes Alein and also John.
There uas no more, hem needed no dwale,
This Miller has so wisely bibbed ale,
That as an horse he snorteth in his steep,
Ne of his tail behind he took no keep.
His wife bare to him a bordon well strong,
Men might hem hear routen a furlong.
The wench routeth eke par company.
Alein the clerk that heard this melody,
He poked on Johan, and said: sleep thou?
Heardst thou ever swilke a sang ere now?
Lo swilke a coupling is it wixt hem all,
A wild fire upon her bodies fall,
Who heard ever swilke a ferly thing,
Ye, they shall have the flower of evil ending:
All this lang night there tides me no rest:
But yet naforce, all shall be for the best.
For Ihon (said he) as ever mote I thrive?
If that I may, yon wench woll I swiue.
Some easement has law yshapen us.
For Johan, there is a law that says thus,
* That if a man in one point been agreeued,
That in another he shall be relieved.
Our corn is stolen, soothly it is no nay,
And we have had an evil fit to day.
And since I shall have none amendment
Again my loss I will have mine easement:
By Gods sale, it shall none other be.
This Johan answered: Alein, auise thee:
The Miller is a perilous man, he said,
And if that he out of his sleep abraied,
He might done us both a villainy.
Alein answered: I count him not worth a fly.
And up he rest, and by the wench he crept.
This wench say upright, and fast she slept,
Till he so nigh was, ere she might epsy,
That it had been too late for to cry:
And shortly for to say, they were at one.
Now play Alein, for I woll speak of Ihon.
This Ihon lay still a furlong way or two,
And to himself he makes routh and woe:
Alas (quoth. he) this is a wicked iape,
Now may I say, I is but an Ape:
Yet has my fellow somewhat for his harm,
He has the Millers daughter in his arm:
He auntreth him, and has his need ysped,
And I lie as a drafte sack in my bed,
And when this iape is told another dey,
I shall be hold a daffe or a cokeney:
I woll arise, and auntre me by my fay:
* Vnhardie is vnsely, thus men say.
And up he rose, and softly he went
Unto the cradle, and in his arm it hent,
And bare it softly to his beds fete.
Soon after the wife her routing let,
And began awake, and went her out to piss,
And came again, and began the cradle miss,
And groped here and there, but she found none:
Alas (quoth. she) I had almost misgone,
I had almost gone to the clerks bed:
Eye benedicite, then had I foul ysped.
And forth she goes, till she the cradle fond,
She gropeth always further with her hond,
And found the bed, and thought not but good,
Because that the cradle by it stood:
And nist where she was, for it was derke,
But fair and well she crept in by the clerk,
And lies full still, and would have caught a sleep.
Within a while this Ihon the clerk up lepe,
And on this good wife he laid full sore,
So merry a fit had she naught full yore:
And priked hard and deep, as he were mad.
This jolly life have these two clerks lad,
Till that the third cock began to sing.
Alein wax weary in the dauning,
For he had swonken all the long night,
And said, farewell Malin my sweet wight.
The day is comen, I may no longer bide,
But euermo, whereso I go or ride,
I am thine own clerk, so have I hele.
Now dear lemman (quoth. she) go, farwele:
But or thou go, one thing I woll thee tell,
When thou wendest homeward by the Mell,
Right at the enter of the door behind
Thou shall a cake of half a bushel find,
That was ymaked of thine own meal,
Which that I did help my fire to steal.
And good lemman God thee save and keep,
And with that word she began almost to weep.
Alein vprist and thought ere it daw
He would go creep in by his felaw:
And found the cradle with his hand anon,
By God thought he all wrong have I gone:
My head is tottie of my swinke to night,
That makes me that I go not aright.
I wot well by the cradle I have miss go,
Here lies the Miller and his wife also.
* And forth he goes on twenty devil way
Unto the bed there as the Miller lay.
He wend have cropen by his fellow Ihon,
And by the Miller he crept in anon,
And caught him by the neck, and soft he spoke,
And said: Ihon, thou swineshead awake,
For Christ's soul, and hear a noble game:
For by that lord that called is saint Iame,
I have thrice as in this short night
Swiued the Milers daughter bolt upright,
Whilst thou have as a coward been aghast.
Ye false harlot (quoth. the Miller) have?
A false traitor, A thou clerk (quoth. he)
Thou shall be dead by Gods dignite.
Who durst be so bold to disparage
My daughter, that is come of such lineage?
And by the throat boll he caught Alein,
And he him hent dispitously again,
And on the nose he smote him with his fest,
Down ran the blood stream upon his breast:
And in the floor, with mouth and nose ybroke
They wallowen, as does pigs in a poke.
And up they gone, and down again anon,
Till that the Miller spurned on a stone,
And down he fell backward upon his wife,
That wist nothing of this nice strife.
For she was fall asleep a little wight
With Ihon the clerk that waked had all night:
And with the fall out of her steep she braied,
Help holy cross of Bromholme she said:
In manus tuas, lord to thee I call,
Awake Simond, the fiend is on me fall.
My heart is broken, help I am but dead,
There lies one on my womb and on my head,
Help Simkin, for these false clerks do fight.
This Ihon stert up as fast as ever he might,
And graspeth by the walls to and fro
To find a staff, and she stert up also,
And knew the eftres bet than did this Ihon,
And by the wall she found a staff anon:
And saw a little shemering of a light,
For at an hole in shone the Moon bright,
And by that light she saw hem both two,
But sikerly she nist who was who,
But as she sey a white thing in her eye:
And when she began this white thing epsy
She wend the clerk had weard a voluper,
And with the staff she drow ner and ner,
And wend have hit this Alein at full,
And smote the Miller on the pilled skull,
That down he goth, and cried harrow I die:
These clerks beat him well, and let him lie,
And raieth hem, and took her horse anon,
And eke her meal, and on her way they gone:
And at the Mill door they took her cake
Of half a bushel flower, well ybake.
Thus is the proud Miller well ybete,
And has ylost the grinding of the whete,
And paid for the supper every dele
Of Alein and of Ihon, that beat him well:
His wife is swiued, and his daughter als,
Lo such it is a Miller to be falls.
And therefore this proverb is full sooth,
* Him dare not well ween that evil does:
A guilour shall himself beguiled be.
And God that sit in hie majesty
Save all this company, great and small,
Thus have I quit the Miller in his tale.
The Cooks Prologue.
THe Cook of London, while the Reave spoke,
For joy he thought, he claude him on
the back:
A ha (quoth he) for Christ's passioun.
This Miller has a sharp conclusioun,
Upon this argument of her bigage.
Well said Salamon in his language,
Ne bring not every man into thine house,
For herbouring by night is perilous,
Well ought a man auised for to be,
Whom that he brought into his priuite.
I pray to God so give me sorrow and care,
If ever sithen I hight Hodge of Ware,
Heard I a Miller bette isett awerke,
He had a iape of malice in the derke.
But God forbid that we stinten here,
And therefore if ye vouchsafe to hear
A tale of me that am a poor man,
I woll tell you as well as I can
A little yape that fell in our city.
Our host said, I grant it thee:
Now tell on Rodger, look that it be good,
* For many a pastie have thou letten blood,
And many a Jack of Douet have thou sold,
That has been twice hot and twice cold.
Of many a pilgrim have thou Christ's curse,
* For of thy persse yet fare they the worse,
That they have eaten with thy stoble Goos:
* For in thy shop is many a Fly loos.
Now tell on gentle Rodger by thy name,
But yet I pray thee be not wroth for game,
* A man may say full sooth in game and play.
Thou say full sooth (quoth. Roger) by my fay
* But soth play, quade play, as the Fleming
Says:
And therefore Henry Bailly by thy faith,
Be thou not wroth, or we departen here,
Though that my tale been of an hostelere.
But nethelesse, I woll not tellen it yet,
But ere we part, ywis thou shall be quit.
And therwithall he lough and made cheer,
And said his tale, as ye shullen after hear.
THE Description of an unthriftie Prentice, given to Dice, Women, and Wine,
wasting thereby his Masters Goods, and purchasing Newgate to himself. The most
of this Tale is lost, or else never finished by the Author.

The Cooks Tale.
A Prentise whylome dwelt in our cite,
And of the craft of Vitailers was he:
Galiard he was, as Goldfinch in the shawe,
Broune as a berrie, a proper short felawe:
With locks black, and kemt full fetously,
Dance he couth full well and jollily:
He was called Perkin Reuelour,
He was as full of love and paramour,
As is the hiue full of honey sweet,
Well was the wench with him that might meet.
At every Bridal would he sing and hop,
He loved bette the tauernes than the shop.
For when any riding was in Cheap,
Out of the shop thither would he leap,
Till that he had of all the sight isein.
And soothly, he would not come agein,
But gather him a meinie of his sort,
To hop and sing, and make such disport:
And there they set Steuin for to meet
To plaien at the dice in such a street.
For in the city nas there no Prentise
That fairer couth casten a pair of dise
Then Perkin couth, and thereto he was fre
Of his dispense, in place of priuite.
That found his master well in his chafare,
For often times he found his box full bare.
* For sikerly, a prentise reuelour.
That haunteth dise, riot, or paramour,
His master shall it in his shop abie.
All have he no part of the Ministralcie.
For theft and riot they been conuertible,
All can he play on Gettron or on Rebible,
* Revel and truth, as in low degree
They ben full wroth all day, as men may see.
This jolly prentise with his master abode,
Till he were nigh out of his prentishode,
All were he snibbed both early and late,
and sometime led with revel to Newgate.
But at the last, his master him bethought
Upon a day, when he his paper sought,
Of a proverb, that says this same word,
* Well bette is rotten apple out of hord,
Than that it should rot all the remnaunt:
So fares it by a roiotous servant.
It is much less harm to let him pass,
Then he shend all the servant in the place.
Therefore his master gave him a quittaunce,
And bad him go, with sorrow and mischaunce.
And thus this jolly prentise had his leave:
Now let him roiot all the night or leave.
And for there is no thief without a louke,
That helps him to waste or to souke
Of that he bribe can, or borrow may,
Anon he sent his bed and his array
Unto a compere of his own sort,
That loved dice, revel, and disport:
And had a wife, that held for countenance
A shop, and swiued for her sustenance.
The man of Laws Prologue.
OUr host saw well, how that the bright Sun
The arc of his artificial day had run
The fourth part, and eke half an hour more:
And though he were not deep expert in lore,
He wist well it was the eighteen day
Of April, that is the messenger to May:
And saw well that the shadow of every tree
Was in length of the same quantite
As was the body erect, that caused it:
And therefore by the shadow he took his wit,
That Phoebus, which that shone clear and bright
Degrees was forty five clomben of hight.
And for that day, as in latitude
It was ten of the clock, he began conclude,
And suddenly he plight his horse about.
Lordings (quoth. he) I warn you all the rout,
The fourth part of this day is now agon.
Now for the love of God and of saint John
Leseth no time, as ferfoorth as ye may:
Lordings the time wastes both night and day,
And steals from us, what privily sleeping,
* And what through negligence in our waking
As does the streme, that turns never again,
Descending fro the mountain into the plain.
Well can Seneke and many a Philosophre,
Bewailen time, more than gold in cofre.
* For loss of cattle may recovered be,
But loss of time shendeth us (quoth. he)
It would not come again withouten dread,
* No more than woll Malkins maidenhead,
When she has lost it in her wantonness.
Let us not mowlen thus in idleness.
Sir man of Law (quoth. he) so have I blis,
Tell us a tale anon, as forward is:
Ye been submitted, through your free assent
To stonden in this case at my judgment.
Acquiteth you now of your behest,
Then have you done your deuer at the lest.
Host (quoth. he) de pardeux ieo assent,
To break forward is not mine intent.
* Bihest is debt, and I woll hold feign
All my behest, I can no better saine.
* For such law as a man yeueth another
He should himself vsen it by right,
Thus woll our text: but nathelesse certain wight,
I can right now no thrifty tale saine.
For that Chaucer (though he can but leaudly
On Metres and in rinning craftily)
Has said hem, in such English as he can
Of old time, as knows many a man:
And if he have not said hem leave brother
In one book, he has said hem in another,
For he has told of lovers up and down,
Mo than Ouide made of mentioun
In his Epistles, that been full old.
What should I tell hem, sithen they ben told?
In youth he made of six all alone,
And sithen he has spoken of euerichone
These noble wives, and these lovers eke,
Who so that woll his large volume seek
Cleaped the saints lives of Cupide:
There may he see the large wounds wide
Of Lucresse, and of Babylon Thisoe
The swerd of Dido for the false Enee,
The tree of Phillis for her Demophoon,
The plaint of Deianire, and of Hermion,
Of Ariadna, and of Hypsiphilee,
The barraine I Will stonding in the sea
Which that dreint Liandre for Hero,
The tears of Helein, and eke the woe,
Of Briseis, and of Laodomia,
The cruelty of queen Medea.
The little children honging by the hals,
For the Jason that was of love so falls.
Of Hipermistra, Penelope, and Alcest,
Your wifehood he commends with the best,
But certainly no word ne writes he
Of thilke wicke ensample of Canace,
That loved her own brother sinfullie:
Of such cursed stories I say fie.
Or else of Tyro Appoloneus,
How that cursed king Antiochus
Biraft his daughter of her maidenhead,
That is so horrible a tale for to read,
When he her drew upon the pament,
And therefore he of full auisement
Nold never write in none of his setmons
Of such unkind abominations.
Ne I woll none rehearse, yef that I may.
But of my tale how shall I done this day?
Me were loath be likened doubtless
To Muses, that men cleaped Piriades,
Methamorphoseos wot what I mean.
But nathelesse I retche not a Been,
Though I come after him with Haubake,
I speak in prose, and let him rimes make.
And with that word, he with a sober chere
Began his tale, as ye shullen after here.
LAdy Custance the Emperors Daughter of Rome, after her marriage with the
Soudan of Surrey, through the Malice of the Soudans Mother, suffers great
trouble and misery with her young Child Mauris: but yet in the end is restored
to Comfort.

The man of Laws Tale.
O Hateful harm, condition of pouert
With thirst, with cold, with hunger
confounded,
To asken help thee shameth in thine heart,
If thou non ask, with need thou art so
wounded,
That very need vnwrappeth al thy wounds hid
* Maugrie thine head, thou must for indigence
Or stele, or beg, or borow thy dispense.
Thou blamest Christ, and say full bitterly,
He misdeparteth richesse temporal,
Thy neighbor thou witest sinfully,
And say, thou have too little, and he has all:
Parfay (say thou) sometime he reken shall
When that his tail shall to brenne in glede,
For he naught helps needful in her need.
Hearken what is the sentence of the wise,
* Better is to dien than have indigence,
* Thine own neighbor woll thee to despise,
If thou be poor, farewell thy reverence.
Yet of the wise man take this sentence,
* All the days of poor men been wicke,
Beware therefore or thou come to the prick.
If thou be poor, thy brother hates thee,
* And all thy friends fleech fro thee, alas:
O rich Merchaunts full of well be ye,
O noble prudent folk, as in this caas,
Your bags been not filled with ambes aas,
* But with cise sink, that reuneth for your chance
At Christeninass merry may ye dance.
Ye seeken land and see for your winnings,
As wise folk ye known all the state
Of reigns, ye been fathers of tidings,
And tales many, both of peace and debate:
I was right now of tales desolate,
Nere that a merchant, gone many a year,
He taught a tale, which ye shullen hear.
IN Surrey whylome dwelt a company
Of chapmen rich, and thereto sad and true,
That wide where senten her spicery,
Clothes of gold and Satin rich of hew:
Her chafare was so thriftie and so new,
That every wight has deintie to chafare
With hem, and eke to sellen hem her ware.
Now fell it, that the masters of that sort
Han shapen hem to Rome for to wend,
Were it for chapmanhood or for disport,
None other messenger would they send,
But comen hemself to Rome, this is the end:
And in such place as thought hem advantage
For her intent, they taken her herbigage.
Soiourned han these merchants in that town
Certain time, as fell to her pleasance:
But so befell that the excellent renoun
Of the emperors daughter dame Custance
Reported was, with every circumstance
Unto these Surrein merchants, in such wise
Fro day to day, as I shall you devise,
This was the comen voice of every man:
Our Emperor of Rome God him se,
A daughter has, that sithen the world began,
To reckon as well her goodness as beauty,
Nas never such another as is she:
I pray to God in honor her sustain,
And would she were of all Europe the queen.
In her is high beauty without pride,
Youth, without grenhed or folly,
To all her works virtue is her guide,
Humbles has slain in her all tyranny:
She is a mirror of all courtesy,
Her heart is very chamber of holiness,
Her hond minister of freedom and alms.
And all this voice was soth, as God is true.
But now to our purpose let us turn again:
These merchants han don fret her ships new:
And when they han this blisfull maiden sein,
Home to Surrey been they went agein,
And done her needs, as they han done yore,
And liuen in wealth, I can say no more.
Now fell it, that these merchants stood in grace
Of him that was the Soudan of Surrie:
For when that they came from any strange place
He would of his benign courtesy
Maken hem good cheer, and busily epsy
Tidings of sundry realms, for to lere
The wonders that they might seen or here.
Among other things specially
These merchants have him told of dame Custance,
So great noblesse, in earnest seriously,
That this Soudan has caut so great plesance
To han her figure in his remembrance,
And all his lust, and all his busy cure
Was for to love her, while his life may dure.
Parauenture in that like large book
Which cleaped is the heaven, ywritten was
With stars, when that he his birth took,
That he for love should han his death, alas:
* For in the stars, clearer then is the glass
Is written God wot, who so could it read,
The death of every man withouten dread.
In stars many a Winter there before
Was written the death of Hector and Achilles,
Of Pompey, and Julius, or they were bore:
The strife of Thebes, and of Hercules,
Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
The death: but that men's wits been so dust,
That no wight can well read it at the full.
This Soudan for his privy counsel sent,
And shortly of this matter for to pace,
He has to hem declared all his intent,
and said hem certain, but if he might have grace
To have Custance, within a little space
He nas but dead, and charged hem to hie
To shapen for his life some remedy.
Diverse men, diversely they saiden:
The argument they casten up and down,
Many a subtle reason forth they laiden,
They speaken of Magic, and abusioun:
But finally, as in conclusioun
They cannot seen in that none advantage
Ne in none other way, save in marriage.
Then saw they therein such difficulty
By way of reason, to speak all plain,
Because that there was such diversity
Between both her laws, that they sain,
They trow that no christen prince would fain
Wedden his child under our laws sweet,
That us was taut, by Mahound our prophet
And he answered: rather than I lose
Custance, I would be christen doubtless:
I mote been hers, I may none other chese,
I pray you hold your arguments in pees,
Saves my life, and be ye not retcheles
To getten her that has my life in cure,
For in this woe I may not long endure.
What needs greater delatation?
I say, by treaty and embassadrie,
And by the Popes mediation
And all the church, and all the chivalry,
That in destruction of Maumetrie
And in increase of Christ's law dear,
They been accorded, as ye shall hear.
How that the Soudan and his baronage,
And all his lieges should ychristened be,
And he shall han Custance in marriage
And certain gold, I not what quantite;
And her to find sufficient surete:
The same accord was sworn on either side,
Now fair Custance, almighty God thee gide.
Now woulden some men waiten as I guess
That I should tellen all the purueiance
That the Emperor of his noblesse
Has shapen for his daughter dame Custance:
Well may men know that so great ordinance
May no man tellen in a little clause,
As was araied for so high a cause.
Bishops been shapen with her for to wend,
Lords and ladies, and knights of renoun,
And other folk y^^ow this is the end,
And notified is throughout the town,
That every wight with great deuotioun
Should pray Christ, that he this marriage
Receive in gree, and speed this voyage.
The day is come of her departing,
I say the woeful day natural is come,
That there may be no longer tarrying,
But forward they hem dress all and some:
Custance, that with sorrow is all overcome
Full pale arist, and dressed her to wend,
For well she sey there is none other end.
Alas, what wonder is it though she wept?
That shall be sent to a strange nation
Fro friends, that so tenderly her kept,
And be bounden under subjection
Of one, she knows not his condition.
* Husbands been all good, and han been yore,
That know ne wives, I dare say no more.
Father (she said) thy wretched child Custance,
Thy young daughter, fostered up so loft,
And ye my mother, my sovereign pleasaunce
Over all thing (out take Christ on loft)
Custance your child her commends often
Unto your grace: for I shall to Surrie,
Ne shall I never more see you with eye.
Alas unto the Barberie nation
I must anon, sithen it is your will:
But Christ that starfe for our redemption,
So give me grace his hestes to fulfill:
I wretched woman no force though I spill,
* Women are born to thraldom and penance,
And to been under man's governance.
I trow at Troy when Thurus brake the wall
Of Ilion, ne when brent was Thebes cite,
Ne Rome for the harm of Hanniball,
That Romans has ivenqueshed times three,
Nas heard such tender weeping for pite,
As was in the chamber for her parting.
But forth she mote, wheder she weep or sing.
O first moving cruel firmament
With thy diurnal swegh, that croudest aye,
And hurriest all fro East to Occident,
That naturally would hold another way:
Thy crouding set the heaven in such array
At the beginning of this fierce Voyage,
That cruel Mars has slain this marriage.
O infortunat assendent tortuous,
Of which the lord is helpelesse fall, alas,
Out of his angle into his derkest house
O Mars, O occisier, as in this caas:
O feeble Moan, unhappy been thy paas,
Thou knittest there thou nart not received,
There thou were well, fro thence art thou waiued.
Imprudent Emperor of Rome, alas,
Was there no philosopher in thy town?
Is no time bette than other in such cas?
Of voyage, is there none electioun?
Namely to folk of high conditioun
Not when a rote is of a birth yknow?
Alas we been too leaud, or to slow.
To ship is brought this woeful fair maid
Solemnly, with every circumstance:
Now Jesus Christ be with you all (she said)
There nis no more, but farewell fair Custance.
She paineth her to make good countenance,
And forth I let her sail in this mannere,
And turn I woll again to my mattere.
Explicit prima pars: and sequitur pars secunda.
THe mother of the Soudan, well of vices,
Espied has her sons plain intent,
How he woll let his old sacrifices:
And right anon she for her counsel sent,
And they ben comen, to know what she meant,
And when assembled was this folk in fear,
She set her down, and said as ye shall hear.
Lords (quoth. she) ye known every chone,
How that my son is in point to let
The holy laws of our Alkaron
Yeuen by Gods messenger Mahomete:
But one auow to great God I hete,
The life shall rather out of my body start,
Or Mahomets law go out of my heart.
What should us tiden of this new law
But thraldom to our bodies and pennaunce
And afterward in hell to been draw,
For we reneyed Mahound our creaunce,
But lords, woll ye now make assurance,
As I shall say, assenting to my lore,
And I shall make us fafe for evermore?
They sworen, and assenten every man
To live with her and die, and by her stond:
And euerich in the best wise that he can
To strengthen her, shall all his friends fond.
And she has this emprise taken in hond,
Which ye shall hear that I shall devise,
And to hem all she spoke in this wise.
We shall us first feign, christendom to take,
Cold water shall not grieve us but alite:
And I shall such a revel and a feast make,
That as I trow I shall the Soudan quite:
For tho his wife be christened never so white,
She shall have need to wash away the read,
Though she a font full of water with her led.
O Soudonnesse, root of iniquite,
Virago, thou Symyram the secound,
O serpent under fememnete,
Like to the serpent deep in hell ibound:
O feigned woman, all that may confound
Virtue and innocence, through thy malice
Is bred in thee a neast of every vice.
O Satan envious, since thilke day
That thou were chased from our heritage,
Well knew thou to women the old way:
Thou made Eve to bring us in seruage,
Thou wolt fordoen this Christen marriage:
* This instrument, so welaway the while,
Make thou of women when thou wolt begile.
This Soudonnesse, whom I blame and werie,
Let privily her counsel gone her way:
What should I in this tale longer tarry?
She rides to the Soudon on a day,
And said him that she would reny her lay,
And christendom of priests hondes fong,
Repenting her she Heathen was so long.
Beseeching him to done her that honor,
That she might have the christen folk to fest:
To pleasen hem I woll done my labor.
The Soudon says, I woll done al your hest,
And kneeling, thanked her of that request,
So glad he was, he nist not what to say,
She kissed her son, and home she goth her way.
Arrived been these christen folk to land
In Surrey, with a great solemn rout,
And hastily this Soudon sent his sond,
First to his mother, and all the reign about,
And said, his wife was comen out of dout,
And praiden hem for to riden against the queen
The honor of his reign for to sustene.
Great was the press, and rich was the ray
Of Surreyans, and Romans ymet yfere:
The mother of the Soudon rich and gay
Receives her with all manner glad chere,
As any mother might her daughter dear:
Unto the next city there beside
A soft paas solemnly they all ride.
Naught trow I, the triumph of Julius,
Of which that Lucan makes such a bost,
Was roialler, and more curious,
Than was thassembling of his blisfull host:
But this Scorpion, this wicked ghost
The Soudonnesse, for all her flattering
Cast under all this, mortally to sting.
The Soudon comes himself soon after this
So rially, that wonder is to tell:
He welcometh her with much joy and blis,
And thus in mirth and joy I let hem dwell.
The fruit of every tale is for to tell,
When time come, men thought it for the best,
That revel stint, and men gone to rest.
The time come, this old Soudonnesse
Ordained has the feast of which I told,
And to the feast, christen folk hem dress
And that in the general, both young and old:
There may men feast and rialte behold
And dainties more than I can devise,
But all to dear they bought it or they rise.
O Soudon, woe that ever thou art successor
To worldly bliss, springed with bitterness,
* The end of joy, is worldly labor.
Woe occupies the end of our gladness,
Harken this counsel for thy sikernesse:
* Upon thy glad day ha^^^ thou in mind,
The unware woe or harm, that comes behind.
For shortly to tellen at a word,
The Soudon, and the Christen euerichone
Been all to hew, and sticken at the board,
But it were only dame Custance alone,
This old Soudonnesse, this cursed crone,
Has with her friends done this cursed deed,
For she her self would all the country led.
There was Surreien non yt was converted,
That of the counsel of the Soudon wot,
That he nas all to heawe, er he asterted:
And Custance han they taken anon fotehot,
And in a ship all sternelesse (God wot)
They han her set, and bidden her learn to sail
Out of Surrey ayenward to Itale.
A certain tresour that she thither ladde,
And sooth to said, vitaile great plente,
They han her yeuen, and clothes eke she had,
And forth she saileth in the salt se:
O my Custance, full of benignite
O Emperors young daughter so dear,
He that is lord of fortune be thy stere.
She blesses her, and with full pitious voice
Unto the cross of Christ, tho said she.
O clear, O welful auter, holy croice
Reed of the lambs blood full of pite,
That wesh the world fro the old iniquite:
Me fro the fend, and fro his clawe keep.
That day that I shall drenchen in the deep.
Victorious tree, protection of true,
That only worthy were for to bear
The king of heaven, with his wounds new,
The white lamb, that hurt was with a spear:
Flemere of feendes, out of him and here
On which thy limbs, faithfully extenden
Me keep and give me might my life to menden.
Years and days fleeteth this creature
Through the sea of Greece, unto the strait
Of Marocke, as it was her adventure:
O, many a sorry meal may she bait,
After her death full often may she wait,
Or that the wild waves would her drive
Unto the place there she should ariue.
Men mighten asken why she was not slain
Eke at the feast, who might her body save?
I answer to that demand again,
Who saved Daniel in that horrible cave?
That every wight, were he master or knave,
Was with the Lion frette or he asterte,
No wight but God, that he bare in his heart.
God list to show his wonderful miracle
In her, for she should seen his mighty works:
Christ that is to every harm triacle,
* By certain means often, as known clerks,
Does thing for certain end, yt full derke is
To man's wit, that for our ignorance
Ne can not know his prudent purueyance.
Now that she was not at the feast yslawe,
Who keeps her fro ye drenching in the sea?
Who kept Jonas in the fishes mawe,
Till he was spouted out at Niniuee?
Well may men know, it was no wight but he
That kept the people Ebrak from drenching
With dry feet, through the sea passing.
Who has the four spirits of the tempest,
That power had, both to anoy land and see?
Both north and south, and also west and east,
Anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree.
Southly the commander thereof was he
That fro the tempest aye this woman kept,
As well when she woke as when she slept.
Where might this woman meat and drink have?
Three year and more, how lasts her vitaile?
Who fed the Egyptian Mary in the cave
Or in desert (none but Christ sans fail)
Five thousand folk it was as great marvel
With loaves five and fishes two to feed,
God sent his foyson at her great need.
She drives forth into our Occian
Throughout the wide see, till at the last
Under an hold, that nempne I ne can,
Fer in Northumberlond, the wave her cast,
And in the sand her ship sticked so fast,
That thence nolne it not of all a tide,
The will of Christ was yt she should there abide.
The constable of the castle down is fare
To seen this wrecke, and all the ship he sought,
And found this weary woman full of care,
He found also ye treasure that she brought:
In her language, mercy she besought
The life out of her body for to twin,
Her to deliver of woe that she was in.
A manner latin corrupt was her speech
But algates thereby was she understand,
The constable, when him list no longer seche,
This woeful woman brought he to land:
She kneleth down, and thanketh Gods sond,
But what she was, she would no man sey
For foul ne fair, though she shoulden dey.
She said she was so mased in the sea,
That she foryate her mind by her troth:
The constable of her has so great pite
And eke his wife, yt they weepen for routh:
She was so diligent withouten sloth
To serve and please euerich in that place,
That all her louen, that looken in her face.
The constable, and dame hermegild his wife
Were painems, and that country every where,
But Hermegild loved her right as her life,
And Custance has so long soiourned there
In orisons, with many a bitter tere,
Till Jesus has converted through his grace
Dame Hermegild, constablesse of yt place.
In all that land dursten no christen rout,
All christen folk been fled from the country
Through painims, that conquered all about
The plagues of the North by land and see:
To Wales fled the christianite
Of old Bretons, dwelling in that I Will,
There was her refute for the mean while.
Yet nas there never Christen so exiled,
That there nas some in her priuite
honored Christ, and Heathen beguiled,
And nigh the castle such there dwellen three:
That one of hem was blind, and might not see
* But it were with thilke eyes of his mind,
With which men seen after they been blind.
Bright was the sun, as in summers day,
For which the constable and his wife also
And Custance, han taken the right way
Toward the sea, a furlong way or two,
To plaien, and to romen to and fro:
And in her walk, three blind men they met
Crooked and old, with eyes fast yshet.
In the name of Christ cried this blind Breton
Dame Hermegild, give me sight again:
This lady wax afraied of the soun,
Least that her husbond shortly forto sain
Would her for Jesus Christ's lore have slain,
Till Custance made her bold, and bad her werch
The will of Christ, as daughter of his cherch.
The constable woxe abashed of that sight,
And said: what amounts all this fare?
Custance answered: sir it is Christ's might,
That helps folk out of the fiends snare:
And so ferforth she began our law declare,
That she the constable ere that it was eve
Converted, and on Christ made him believe.
This constable was nothing lord of this place
Of which I speak, there he Custance fond,
But kept it strongly many a Winter space,
Under Alla, king of Northumberlond,
That was full wise, and worthy of his hond
Again the Scots, as men may well here,
But turn I woll again to my mattere.
Satan, that ever us waits to beguile,
Saw of Custance all her perfectioun,
And cast anon how he might quite her wile,
And made a young knight yt dwelt in the town
Love her so hot, of foul affectioun,
That verily him thought that he should spill,
But he of her once might have his will.
He woeth her, but it auailed naught,
She would do no manner sin by no wey:
And for despite, he compassed in his thought
To maken her on shameful death to dey:
He waits when the Constable is away,
And privily on a night he crept
Into Hermgilds chamber while she slept.
Werie forwaked in her orisons
Sleeps Custance and Hermegilde also:
This knight, through satan's temptations
All softly is to the bed ygo,
And cut the throat of Hermegilde atwo,
And laid the bloody knife by dame Custance.
and went his way, there God give him mischance.
Soon after comes the constable home again
And eke Alla, that king was of that land,
And saw his wife dispitously yslain,
For which he wept and wrong his hond,
And in the bed the bloody knife he fond
By dame Custance, alas what might she say?
For very woe her wit was all away.
To king Alla was told all this mischance,
And eke ye time, and where, and in what wise,
That in a ship was founden this Custance,
As here before ye han heard me devise:
The kings heart for pity began agrise,
When he saw so benign a creature
Fall in disease and in misaduenture.
For as the lamb toward his death is brought,
So stant this innocent beforne the king:
This false knight yt has this treson wrought
Bears her in hond yt she has don this thing:
But nathelesse there was great mourning
Among the people, and said they cannot guess
That she had done so great a wickedness.
For they han seen her ever so virtuous,
And loving Hermegild right as her life:
Of this bare witness euerich in the house,
Save he that Hermegild slow with his knife:
This gentle king has caught a great motife
Of this witness, and thought he would enquere
Deeper in this case, the troth to lere.
Alas Custance, thou have no champion,
He fight can thou not, so welaway:
But he that starft for our redemption
And bond Satan, and yet lith there he lay,
So be thy strong champion this day:
For but if Christ on thee miracle kithe,
Without gilt thou shall been slain aswithe.
She set her down on knees, and thus she said:
Immortal God, that sauedest Susanne
Fro falls blame, and thou merciful maid,
Marie I mean, daughter to saint Anne,
Beforne whose child angels sing Osanne,
If I be guiltless of this felony,
My succor be, or else shall I die.
Have ye not seen sometime a pale face
(Among a prees) of hem that has been lad
Toward his death, whereas hem get no grace,
And such a color in his face has had,
That men might know his face yt was bistad
Emongs all the faces in that rout,
So stands Custance, and looks her about.
O Queens living in prosperity,
Dutchesses, and ye ladies euerichone,
Have some routh on her adversity,
An Emperors daughter stant alone:
She has no wit to whom to make her moan,
O blood royal, that stondeth in this dread,
Fere of been thy friends at thy greatest need.
This Alla king, has such compassioun,
As gentle heart is full of pity,
That from his eyes ran the water down.
Now hastily do fette a book (quoth. he)
And if this knight wol swear, how that she
This woman slow, yet wol we us avyse
Whom that we wol shall ben our iustyse
A Breton book, written with Euangeles
Was fet, and thereon he swore anon,
She guilty was, and in the mean whiles
An hond him smote upon the neck bone,
That down he fell atones as a stone:
And both his eyes brust out of his face
In sight of every body in that place.
A voice was heard, in general audience
That said: Thou have disclandred guiltles
The daughter of holy chirch in high presence,
Thus have thou done, and yet I hold my pees.
Of this marvel aghast was all the prees,
As dismaide folk they stonden euerichone
For dread of wreche, save Custance alone.
Great was the dread and eke the repentance
Of hem that hadden wrought suspection
Upon this silly innocent Custance,
And for this miracle, in conclusion
And by Custances mediation
The king, and many another in that place
Converted was, thanked be Gods grace.
This false knight was slain for his untroth
By judgment of Alla hastily,
And yet Custance had of his death great roth,
And after this, Jesus of his mercy
Made Alla wedden full solemnly
This holy maid, that is so bright and shene,
And thus has Christ made Custance a queen.
But who was woeful (if I should not lie)
Of this wedding? but Donegild and no mo:
The kings mother, full of tyranny,
Her thought her cursed heart brast a two:
She would not that her son had do so,
Her thought a despite, that he should take
So strange a creature unto his make.
* He list not of the chafe ne of the stre,
Make so long a tale, as of the corn,
What should I tell of the realte
Of yt marriage, or which course goth beforne:
Who blows in a trumpe or in a horn,
The fruit of every tale is for to say,
They eaten and drinken, dance, and play.
They gone to bed, as it was skill and right,
For though that wives been full holy things,
They must take in patience a night
Such manner necessaries, as been pleasings
To folk that han wedded hem with rings,
And lay a little her holiness aside
As for the time, it may none other betide.
On her he gat a man child anon,
And to a bishop, and to his constable eke
He took his wife to keep, when he is gone
To Scotland ward, his fomen for to seek.
Now fair Custance yt is so humble and meke
So long is gone with child till that still
She halt her chamber, abiding Christ's will.
The time is come, a man child she bare,
Mauricius at fontstone they him call,
This constable does forth come a messenger,
And wrote to his king that cleaped was Alla,
How that this blisfull tiding is befall,
And other tidings needful for to say,
He takes the letter, and forth goth his way.
This messenger to done his advantage,
Unto the kings mother rides swithe,
And salueth her full fair in his language,
Madame (quoth. he) ye may be glad and blithe,
And thanked God an hundred thousand since,
My lady quaene has a child, withouten dout
To joy and bliss of all this reign about.
Lo here the letters sealed of this thing,
That I mote bear in all the have I may:
Give ye wol ought unto your son the king,
I am your servant both night and day.
Donegilde answered, as at this time nay,
But here I woll all night thou take thy rest,
To morrow woll I say thee what my lest.
This messenger dronk sadly both ale and wine,
And stolen were his lettets privily
Out of his box, while he slept as a swine,
And counterfeited was full subtly
Another letter, wrought full sinfully
Unto the king direct of this mattere
Fro his Constable, as ye shall after here.
The letter spoke the queen delivered was
Of so horrible a fendlishe creature,
That in the castle none so hardy was
That any while dursten therein endure:
The mother was an Elfe by adventure
I come, by charms or by sorcerie,
And every wight hates her company.
Woe was this king when he yt letter had sein,
But to no wight he told his sorrow sore,
But with his own hand he wrote again,
Welcome the sonde of Christ for evermore
To me, that am new learned in his lore:
Lord, welcome be thy lust and thy pleasance,
My lust I put all in thy ordinance.
Keeps this child, all be it foul or fair,
And eke may wife unto mine home coming:
Christ when him lest may send me an heir,
More agreeable than this to my liking:
This letter he sealed, privily weeping,
Which to the messenger was taken sone,
And forth he goth, there is no more to done.
O messenger fulfilled of dronkenesse,
Strong is thy breath, thy limbs faltren aie,
And thou be wraiest all secretnesse,
Thy mind is sorne, thou ianglist as a Iaie:
Thy face is turned in a new array,
* There drunkenness reigns in any rout,
There nis no counsel hid withouten dout.
O Donegild, I ne have non English digne
Unto thy malice, and thy tirannie:
And therefore to the fend I thee resign,
Let him enditen of thy traitrie.
Fie mannish fie: O nay by God I lie:
Fie fendishe spirit, for I dare well tell,
Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell.
This messenger came fro the king again,
And at the kings mothers house he light,
And she was of this messenger full feign,
And pleased him in all that ever she might:
He drunk, and well his girdle under pight,
He sleeps, and he snoreth in his guise
All night, till the sum began arise.
Eft were his letters stolen euerichone,
And counterfeited letters in this wise,
The king commands his constable anon
Upon pain of hanging on an high iewise,
That he ne should suffren in no wise
Custance, within his realm for to abide
Three days, and a quarter of a tide.
But in the same ship as he her fond,
Her and her young son, and all her gere
He should crouden, and put fro the land,
And charge her, that she never eft come there:
O Custance, well may thy ghost have fere,
And sleeping in thy dream been in penance,
When Donegild cast all this ordinance.
This messenger on ye morrow when he woke,
Unto the castle halt the next way:
And to the Constable he the letter took,
And when that he this pitous letter sey,
Full often he said (alas) and welaway,
Lord christ, quoth. he, how may this world endure
So full of sin is many a creature.
O mighty God, if that it be thy will,
Sin thou art rightful judge, how may it be
That thou wolt suffer innocence to spill,
And wicked folk to reign in prosperity?
O, good Custance (alas) so woe is me,
That I mote be thy turmentour, or else dey
On shames death, there nis none other wey.
Weepen both young and old in that place,
When that the king this cursed letter sent:
And Custance with a deadly pale face,
The fourth day toward the ship she went:
But nathelesse she takes in good intent
The will of Christ, and kneeling in that strond,
She said lord, aye welcome be thy sond.
He that me kept fro that false blame,
Whiles I was on the land amongs you,
He can me keep fro harm and eke fro shame
In the salt sea, although I see not how:
As strong as ever he was, he is now,
In him trust I, and in his mother dear,
That is to me my sail and eke my stere.
Her little child lay weeping in her arm,
And kneeling pitously to him she said,
Peace little son, I woll do thee none harm:
With that her kercher off her head she braid,
And over his little eyes she it laid,
And in her arm she lulleth it full fast,
And into heaven her eyes up the cast.
Mother (quoth. she) and maiden bright Marie.
Sooth it is, that through woman's eggement
Mankind was lore, and damned aye to die,
For which thy child was on cross yrent:
Thy blisfull eyes saw all his turment,
Then is there no comparison between
Thy woe, and any woe that man may sustene.
Thou see thy child yslaine before thine eien,
And yet lives my little child parfay:
Now lady bright, to whom all woeful crien,
Thou glory of womanhead, thou fair may,
Thou haven of refute, bright sterre of day,
Rue on my child of thy gentilnesse,
That rewest on every rufull in distress.
O little child (alas) what is thy guilt?
That never wroughtest sin, as yet parde,
Why woll thine hard father have thee spilt?
O mercy dear constable (quoth. she)
As let my little child dwell here with thee:
And if thou dare not sauen him fro blame,
So kiss him once in his fathers name.
Therewith she looks backward to the land,
And said: farewell husband routhlesse:
And up she rist, and walks down the strond
Toward the ship, her follows all the prees:
And aye she prays her child to hold his pees,
And takes her leave, and with an holy intent
She blesses her, and into the ship she went,
Vitailed was the ship, it is no dread
Habundantly, for her a full long space:
And other necessaries that should need
She had ynow, hereid by Gods grace:
For wind and weather, almighty God purchase,
And bring her home, I can no better say,
But in the sea she drives forth her way.
Alla the king comes home soon after this
Unto his castle, of which I told,
And asks where his wife and his child is,
The constable began about his heart wax cold,
And plainly all the manner him told
As ye han heard, I can tell it no better,
And showed the king his seal and his letter.
And said: lord as ye commanded me
On pain of death, so have I done certain:
This messenger turmented was, till he
Must be known, and tell plat and plain
Fro night to night, in what place he had lain:
And thus by witty subtle enquiring,
Imagind was by whom this harm began spring
The hand was known that the letter wrote,
And all the venim of this cursed deed:
But in what wise, certainly I not,
The effect is this, that Alla out of dread
His mother slow, that may men plainly read,
For that she traitor was to her allegeaunce:
Thus ends old Donegild with mischaunce.
The sorrow that this Alla night and day
Makes for his child and his wife also,
There is no tongue that it tellen may.
But now woll I to Custance go,
That fleeteth in the sea in pain and woe
Five year and more, as liked Christ's sonde,
Or that her ship approached unto land.
Under an heathen castle at the last,
(Of which the name in my text I not find)
Custance and eke her child the sea up cast,
Almighty God, that saves all mankind,
Have on Custance and on her child some mind,
That fallen is in heathen hond eftsoone.
In point to spill, as I shall tell you soon.
Down fro the castle comes there many a wight
To gauren on this ship, and on Custance:
But shortly fro the castle on a night,
The lords steward (God give him mischance)
A thief, that had renied our creaunce,
Came into the ship alone, and said he should
Her lemman be, whether she would or nold.
Woe was the wretched woman tho begone,
Her child and she cried full pittously:
But blisfull Mary halpe her anon,
For with her strogling well and mightily
The thief fell over the board all suddenly,
And in the sea he drenched for vengeance,
And thus has Christ unwemmed kept Custance.
* O foul lust of luxure, lo thine end,
Not only that thou faintest man's mind,
But verily, thou wolt his body shend,
The end of thy work, or of thy lusts blind
Is complaining: how many one may men find
That not for work sometime, but for thentent
To done this sin been either slain or shent.
How may this weak woman have ye strength
Her to defend against this renegate?
O Golias, unmeasurable of length
How might David make thee so mate?
So young and of armure so desolate,
How durst he look on thy dreadful face?
Well may men seen it is but Gods grace.
Who yaue Judith courage or hardiness
To slean prince Holofernes in his tent,
And to deliver out of wretchedness
The people of God? I say, for this intent
That right as God spirit and vigor sent
To hem, and saved hem out of mischance,
So sent he might and vigor to Custance.
Forth goth her ship through ye narow mouth
Of Subalter and Sept, yfleeting aie
Sometime West, and sometime North and South,
And sometime East full many a weary day:
Till Christ's mother, yblessed be she aie,
Has shapen through her endless goodness,
To make an end of all her heaviness.
Explicit secunda pars, and sequitur pars tertia.
NOW let us stint of Custance but a throw,
And speak we of the Roman Emperor,
That out of Surrey has by letters know
The slaughter of Christians, and dishonor
Done to his daughter by a false traitor,
I mean the cursed wicked Soudonnesse
That at the feast let stean both more and less.
For which this Emperor has sent anon
His senator, with royal ordinance,
And other lords God wot many one,
On Surreians to done high vengeance:
They brennen, slean, and bring hem to mischance
Full many a day: but shortly in the end
Homeward to Rome they shapen hem to wend.
This senator repaireth with victory
To Rome ward, sailing full roially,
And met the ship driving, as says the story,
In which Custance sat full pitously:
Nothing knew he what she was, ne why
She was in such array, ne she nold sey
Of her estate, though she shoulden dey.
He brings her to Rome, and to his wife
He yaue her, and her young son also:
And with the senator she lad her life.
Thus can our lady bring out of woe
Woeful Custance, and many another mo:
And long time dwelled she in that place
In holy works ever, as was her grace.
The senators wife her aunt was,
But for all that she knew her nere the more:
I woll no longer tarry in this caas,
But to king Alla, which I spoke of yore,
That for his wife weepeth and siketh sore,
I woll return, and let I woll Custance
Under the senators governance.
King Alla, which that had his mother slain,
Upon a day fell in such repentance,
That if I shortly tell all shall, and plain,
To Rome he comes to receive his penance,
And putten him in the Popes ordinance
In high and low, and Jesus Christ besought,
Foryeue his wicked werks that he wrought.
The fame anon through Rome town is born,
How Alla king shall come on pilgrimage,
By herbegers that wenten him beforn,
For which the senator, as was usage
Rode him again, and many of his lineage,
As well to shown his high magnificence,
As to done any king reverence.
Great cheer does this noble senator
To king Alla, and he to him also:
Euerich of hem does other great honor,
And so befell, that on a day or two
This senator is to king Alla go
To feast, and shortly if I shall not lie,
Custances son went in his company.
Some men would sain at ye request of Custance
This senator had lad this child to feast:
I may not tellen every circumstance,
Be as be may, there was he at the least:
But sooth it is, right at his mothers hest
Beforne Alla, during the meat space
The child stood, looking in the kings face.
This Alla king has of this child great wonder,
And to the senator he said anon,
Whose is yt fair child that stondeth yonder?
I not (quoth. he) by God and by saint John:
A mother he has, but father has he non,
That I of wot: but shortly in a stound
He told Alla how the child was yfound.
But God wot (quoth. the Senator also)
So virtuous a liver in my life
Ne saw I never, as she, ne heard of mo
Such wordly woman, maiden, ne of wife:
I dare well say she had lever a knife
Through her breast, than ben a woman wicke.
* There is no man couth bring her to ye prick.
Now was the child as like Custance
As possible is a creature for to be:
This Alla has the face in remembrance
Of dame Custance, and thereon mused he,
Give that the child's mother were aught she
That is his wife, and privily he sight,
And sped him fro the table all that he might.
Parfay he thought, yt fatome is in mine head,
I oughten deem of skillful judgment,
That in the salt sea my wife is ded:
And afterward he made his argument,
What wot I, if Christ has hither sent
My wife by sea? as well as he her sent
To my country, fro thence that she was went.
After anon, home with the Senator
Goth Alla, for to see this wonder chance:
This Senator does Alla great honor,
And hastily he sent after Custance:
But trusts well, her lust not to dance.
When that she wist wherefore was that sond,
Uneath upon her feet might she stond.
When Alla saw his wife, fair he her great,
And wept, that it was ruth for to see,
For at the first look he on her set,
He knew well verily that it was she:
And for sorrow, as dombe stant as a tree:
So was her heart shet in distress,
When she remembered his unkindness.
Twice she souned in his own sight,
He weepeth and him excuses pitously:
Now God (quoth. he) and his hallowes bright
So wisty on my soul have mercy,
That of your harm as guiitlesse am I,
As is Mauris my son, so like your face,
Else the fiend me fetch out of this place.
Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain,
Or that her woeful heart mighten cease,
Great was the pity to hear hem complain,
Through which plaints began her woe to encrese.
I pray you all my labor to release,
I may not tell her woe till to morrow,
I am so weary to speak of her sorrow.
But finally, when the sooth is wist,
That Alla guiltless was of her woe,
I trow an hundred times been they kissed,
And such a bliss is there betwixt hem two,
That save the joy that lasts euermo,
There is no like, that any creature
Has seen or shall, while the world may dure.
Tho prayed she her husbond meekely
In releasing of her pitous pain,
That he would pray her father specially,
That of his Majesty he would incline
To vouchsafe some day with him to dine:
She prayed him eke, he should by no way
To her father no word of her to say.
Some men would say, yt the child Maurice
Does this message until this Emperor:
But as I guess, Alla was not so nice,
To him that was of so sovereign honor,
As he that is of christen folk the flour,
To send a child, but it is bette to deem
He went himself, and so it may well seem.
This Emperor granted full gentilly
To come to dinner, as he him besought:
And all ready he came, and looked busily
Upon this child, and on his daughter thought:
Alla goes to his inn, and as he him ought
Arraied for this feast in every wise,
As ferforth as his cunning may suffice.
The morrow came, and Alla began him dress
And eke his wife, the Emperor to mete:
And forth they ride in joy and in gladness,
And when she saw her father in the street,
She light down and falls to his fete.
Father (quoth. she) your young child Custance
Is now full clean out of your remembrance.
I am your daughter Custance (quoth. she)
That whilome ye han sent into Surrie:
It am I father, that in the salt see
Was put alone, and damned for to die.
Now good father I you mercy cry,
Send me no more into Heathennesse,
But thanken my lord here of his kindness.
Who can the pitous joy tellen all
Betwixt hem three? since they been thus imet:
But of my tale make an end I shall
The day goes fast, I woll no longer let:
This glad folk to dinner been ylet,
In joy and bliss, at meat I let hem dwell,
A thousand fold well more than I can tell.
This child Mauris was sithen Emperor
Made by the Pope, and lived christenly,
To Christ's church he did great honor:
But I let all this story passen by,
Of Custance is my tale specially,
In old Roman jestes men may find
Mauris life, I bear it not in mind.
This king Alla, when he his time sey
With this Custance, his holy wife so sweet,
To England been they come the right wey,
Where as they live in joy and in quiet.
But little while it lasts I you hete,
* Joy of this world fer time woll not abide,
Fro day to night, it changes as the tide.
Who lived ever in such delight a day,
That he ne meued either in conscience
Or ire, or talent of some kin affray,
Envy or pride, or passion, or offense?
I ne say, but for this end and sentence,
That little while in joy or in pleasance
Lasts the bliss of Alla with Custance.
* For death, that takes of hie and low his rent,
When passed was a year, even as I guess,
Out of this world king Alla began hent,
For whom Custance has full great heaviness.
Now let us praien God his soul to bless:
And dame Custance, finally to say,
Toward the town of Rome goth her way.
To Rome is come this holy creature,
And finds her father whole and sound:
Now is she escaped all her adventure,
And when that she her father has yfound,
Down on her knees she goes to ground
Weeping for tenderness in her heart blithe,
She herieth God an hundred thousand sith.
In virtue and holy alms deed
They liuen all, and never asunder wend,
Till death departen hem, this life they led:
And fares now well, my tale is at an end.
Now Jesus Christ, that of his might may send
Joy after woe, govern us in his grace,
And keep us all that been in this place.
The Squires Prologue.
OUR host on his stirrops stood anon,
And said: good men hearkeneth euerichon,
This was a thriftie tale for the nones:
Sir parish priest (quoth. he) for Gods bones,
Tell us a tale, as was thy forward yore:
I see well that ye learned men in lore,
Can muckle good, by Gods dignite.
The Parson him answered, benedicite,
What eileth the man, so sinfully to swear?
Our host answered, O Ienkin, be ye there?
Now good men (quoth. our host) harkneth to me,
I smell a loller in the wind (quoth. he)
Abides for Gods digne passion,
For we shall have a predication:
This loller here woll preachen us somewhat.
Nay by my fathers soul, that shall he not,
Said the Squier, here shall he not preach,
Here shall he no Gospel gloss ne teach:
We leueth all in the great God (quoth. he)
He would sown some difficulte,
* Or spring some cockle in our clean corn.
And therefore host, I warn thee beforne,
My jolly body shall a tale tell,
And I shall ringen you so merry a bell,
That I shall waken all this company:
But it shall not been of Philosophy,
Ne of Physic, ne terms queint of law,
There is but little Latin in my maw.
The King of Arabie sends to Cambuscan King of Sarra, an Horse and a Sword of
rare quality: and to his daughter Canace a Glass and a Ring, by the virtue
whereof she understands the language of all Fowls. Much of this Tale is
either lost, or else never finished by Chaucer.

The Squires Tale.
AT Sarra, in the land of Tartarie,
There dwelt a king that warred on Surrie,
Through which there died many a doughtie man:
This noble king was called Cambuscan.
Which in his time was of so great renoun,
That there nas no where in no regioun
So excellent a lord in all thing:
Him lacked naught that longs to a king,
As of the sect of which he was borne.
He kept his lay to which he was sworn,
And thereto he was hardy, wise, and rich,
And pitous and just always yliche:
True of his word, benign and honorable
Of his courage, as any center stable.
Young, fresh, and strong, in arms desirous,
As any batcheler of all his house,
A fair person he was, and fortunate,
And kept always so royal astate,
That there nas no where such another man.
This noble king, this Tartre, this Cambuscan
Had two sons by Eltheta his wife,
Of which the eldest hight Algarsife,
That other was cleaped Camballo.
A daughter had this worthy king also
That youngest was, and hight Canace:
But for to tell you all her beauty,
It lithe not in my tongue, ne in my conning,
I dare not undertake so high a thing:
Mine English eke is insufficient,
It must been a Rethor excellent,
That couth his colors longing for the art.
If he should discriue here every part:
I am none such, I mote speak as I can.
And so befell, that this Cambuscan
Has twenty Winter borne his diadem,
As he was wont fro year to year I deny
He let the feast of his nativity
Done crien, throughout Sarra his city,
The last Idus of March, after the year.
Phoebus the Sun full jolly was and clear,
For he was nigh his exaltation
In Marces face, and in his mansion
In Aries, the collerike, the hot sign:
Full lusty was the weather and benign,
For which the fowls against the sun shene
What for the season and the young grene,
Full louden song her affections:
Hem seemed han getten hem protections
Again the swerd of Winter kene and cold.
This Cambuscan, of which I have you told
In royal vestements, sit on his deis
With diadem, full high in his paleis:
And held his feast so royal and so rich,
That in this world nas there none it liche.
Of which, if I shall tell all the array,
Then would it occupy a Summers day,
And eke it needs not to devise
At every course the order of service.
I wol not tellen as now of her strange sewes,
Ne of her Swans, ne of her Heronsewes.
Eke in that land, as tellen knights old
There is some meat that is full dainty hold,
That in this land men retch of it but small:
There is no man that may reporten all.
I will not tarry you, for it is prime,
And for it is no fruit, but loss of time,
Unto my first purpose I woll have recourse.
And so befell that after the third course,
While that this king sit thus in his noblay,
Hearkening his minstrals her things play,
Beforne him at his board deliciously
In at the hall door all suddenly
There came a knight on a steed of brass,
And in his hond a broad mirror of glass:
Upon his thombe he had of gold a ring,
And by his side a naked sword honging,
And up he rides to the high board.
In all the hall ne was there spoke a word,
For marvel of the knight, him to behold
Full busily they waiten young and old.
This strange knight yt come thus suddenly
All armed save his head, full roially
Salued king and queen, and lords all
By order, as they sitten in the hall,
With so high reverence and obeisaunce,
As well in speech as in countenance,
That Gawaine with his old courtesy,
Though he come again out of fairie,
Ne could him not amend of no word.
And after this, before the high board
He with a manly voice said his message,
After the form used in his language,
Without vice of syllable or of letter.
And for his tale should seem the better,
Accordant to his words was his chere,
As teaches art of speech hem that it lere.
All be that I cannot sown his style,
Ne I cannot climben so high a style:
Yet say I thus as to my comen intent,
Thus much amounts all yt ever he meant,
If it so be, that I have it in my mind.
He said: The king of Araby and of Inde
My liege lord, on this solemn day
Salueth you as he best can and may,
And sends you in honor of your feast
By me that am ready at your heest
This steed of brass, that easily and well
Can in the space of a day naturell
(That is to say, in four and twenty hours)
Where so ye list, in drought or in shoures
Beren your body into every place,
Into which your heart wills to pace,
Without weine of you, through foul or fair.
Or if ye list to fleen in the air,
As does an Eagle, when him list to sore,
This same steed shall bear you evermore
Withouten harm, till you been there you lest,
Though that ye sleepen on his back and rest,
And turn again, with writhing of a pin.
He that it wrought, could full many a gin:
He waited many a constellation,
Or he had done this operation,
And knew full many a seal and many a bond.
This mirror eke that I have in mine hond,
Has such a might, that men may in it see,
When there shall fallen any aduersitee
Unto your reign, or to your self also:
And openly see, who is your friend and fo:
And over all this, if any lady bright,
Has set her heart on any manner wight,
If he be false, she shall the treason see,
His new love, and all his subteltee
So openly, that there shall nothing hide.
Wherefore again this lusty Summer tide
This mirror and this ring, that ye may se,
He has sent to my lady Canace
Your excellent daughter that is here.
The virtue of this ring, if ye woll here
Is this, that if she list it for to were
Upon her thombe, or in her purse it bear,
There is no foul that flees under heaven,
That she ne shall understand his steven,
And know his meaning openly and plain,
And answer him in his language again:
And every grass that grows upon root
She shall well know, and whom it wol do boot,
All he his wounds never so deep and wide.
This naked swerd that hangs by my side,
Such virtue has, yt what man so ye smite,
Throughout his armure it woll kerue and bite,
Were it as thick as a braunched oak:
And what man yt is wounded with the stroke
Shall never be hole, till that you list of grace
To stricken him with ye platte in thilke place
There he is hurt, this is as much to saine,
Ye mote with the plat swerd again
Stricken him in ye wound, and it woll close:
This is very sooth withouten gloss,
It fails not, whiles it is in your hold.
And when this knit has thus his tale told,
He rides out of the hall, and down he light:
His steed, which that shone as Sun bright
Stant in the court still as any stone:
The knight is in to chamber sad anon,
He is unarmed, and to the meat ysette,
And all these presents been full rich yfette,
This is to sain, the swerd and eke the mirror
And borne anon was into the high tour,
With certain officers ordained therefore:
And to Canace the ring is bore
Solemnly, there she sat at the table.
But sikerly without any fable
The horse of brass, that may not be remeued,
It stant, as it were to the ground yglewed:
There may no man out of the place it drive
For none engine, or windlas, or poliue:
And cause why, for they cannot the craft,
And therefore in the place they han it laft,
Till yt the knight has taught hem ye manner
To voiden him, as ye shall after here.
Great was ye prees, that swarmed to and fro
To gauren on the horse that stondeth so:
For it so high was, and so broad and long,
So well proportioned for to been strong,
Right as it were a steed of Lombardie:
Therewith so horsly, and so quick of eye,
As it a gentle courser of Poile were:
For certes, fro his tale to his ere
Nature ne art coud him not amend
In no degree, as all the people wend.
But evermore her most wonder was,
How that he couth gone, and was of bras?
It was of fairie, as the people seemed:
Diverse folk diversely they demed,
* As many heads, as many wits there been:
They murmr, as does a swarm of Been,
And maden skils after her fantasies,
Rehearsing of the old Poetries,
And said it was ylike the Pegase
The horse that had wings for to flee,
Or else was the Greeks horse Sinon,
That brought Troy to destruction,
As men in these old books read.
Mine heart (quoth. one) is evermore in dread,
I trow some men of arms been therein,
That shapen hem this city for to win:
It were right good yt such things were know.
And other rowned to his felaw low,
And said he lied, for it is rather like
An appearance made by some Magike,
As Iogglours plaien at these feasts great:
Of sundry thoughts thus they iangle and treat,
* As leaud people deemeth commonly
Of things that been made more subtly,
Than they can in her lewdness comprehend:
They demen gladly to the badder end.
And some of hem wondren on the mirror,
(That born was up to the master tour)
How men mighten in it such things see.
Another answered, certes it might well be
Naturally by compositions
Of Angels and of sly reflections:
And saiden that in Rome was such on.
They speaken of Alhazen and Vitellion,
And Aristotle that writes in her lives
Of queint mirrours, and of prospecttues,
As known they that han her books heard.
And other folk han wondered on the sweard
That would so piercen through every thing:
And fell in speech of Telephus the king,
And of Achilles for his queint spear,
For he couth with it both heal and dear,
Right in such wise as men may with ye swerd,
Of which right now ye have your selue herd.
They speaken of sundry harding of metal,
And speaken of medicines eke withal,
And how, and when it should hardened be,
Which is unknow algate to me.
Tho speak they of Canaces ring,
And saiden all, that such a wonder thing
Of craft of rings heard they never non,
Save that Moses and king Salamon
Had a name of cunning of such art:
Thus sain the people, and drawn hem apart
But nathelesse, some saiden that it was
Wonder to make of fern ashen, glass,
And yet is glass not like ashen of fern,
But for that they han known it so fern,
Therefore cease her iangling and wonder.
As sore wandren some on cause of thunder,
On ebb and flood, on gossomer, and on mist,
And on all thing, till the cause is wist.
Thus ianglen they, and demen and devise,
Till that the king began fro his board arise.
Phoebus has left the angle meridionall,
And yet ascending was the beast royal
The gentle Lion with his Aldrean,
When that this Tartre king Cambuscan
Rose from his board, there as he fat full hie:
Beforne him goth the loud minstralcie,
Till he came to his chamber of paraments,
There as they sownen diverse instruments,
That is like an heaven for to here.
Now dauncen lusty Venus children dear:
For in the fish her lady sat full hie,
And looks on hem with a friendly eye.
This noble king is set upon his trone,
This strange knight is fet to him full sone,
And in the dance he goes with Canace.
Here is the revel and the iolite
That is not able a dull man to devise:
He must han know love and her seruise
And been a feestliche man, as fresh as May,
That should you devise such an array.
Who couth tellen you ye form of daunces
So uncouth, and so fresh countenaunces?
Such subtle lookings and dissimulings
For dread of jealous men's apperceiuings?
Ne man but Lancelot, and he is dead
Therefore I pass over all this lusty head,
I say no more, but in this iollinesse
I let hem, till men to supper them dress.
The steward bids spices for to hie
And eke the wine, in all this melody
The vshers and the squires been ygone,
The spices and the wine is comen anon:
They eten and dronken, and when this had an end
Unto the temple, as reason was, they wend:
The service done, they soupen all by day.
What needs it to rehearsen her array?
Each man wot well, that at a kings feast
Is plenty, to the most and to the least
And dainties mo, than been it my knowing.
And after supper goes this noble king
To seen this horse of brass, with all his rout
Of lords and of ladies him about:
Such wondering there was on this horse of bras,
That sithen the great siege of Troy was,
There as men wondered on an horse also,
Ne was there such a wondering, as was tho.
But finally, the king asks the knight
The virtue of this horse and the night,
And prayed him to tell of his governance.
The horse anon began to trip and dance.
When yt this knight laid hond on his rain,
And said, sir there is no more to saine,
But when you list to riden any where,
Ye mote trill a pin, stant in his ere:
Which I shall tell you between us two.
Ye mote nempne him to what place also,
Or to what country you list to ride.
And when ye come there you list abide,
Bid him descend, and trill another pin,
For therein lies the effect of all the gin:
And he woll down descend and done your will,
And in that place he woll abide still:
Though al ye world had the contrary sworn,
He shall not thence be ythrow ne yborne,
Or if you listen bid him thence to gone,
Trill this pin, and he woll vanish anon
Out of the sight of every manner wight,
And come again, be it day or night,
When that you list to clepen him again
In such a guise, as I shall to you saine
Betwixt you and me, and that full sone,
Ride when you list, there nis no more to done.
Enfourmed when ye king was of y^ knight,
And has conceived in his wit aright
The manner and the form of all this thing,
Full glad and full blithe, the noble king
Repaireth to his revel, as beforne:
The bridie is in the toure yborne,
And kept among his jewels lefe and dear:
The horse vanished, I not in what mannere
Out of her sight, ye get no more of me:
But thus I let in lust an iolite
This Cambuscan, and his lords feasting
Till well nigh the day began to spring.
Explicit prima pars: and sequitur pars secunda.
THe noryce of digestion, the sleep
Began on hem wink, and bad hem take keep,
* That mirth, drink, and labor woll have rest:
And with a galping mouth hem all he kest,
And said, it was time to lie adoun,
For blood was in his dominatioun:
* Cherishes blood, natures friend (quoth. he)
They thanken him galping, by two by three,
And every wight began drawn him to his rest,
As sleep hem bade, chey took it for the best.
Her dreams shul not now ben ytold for me,
Full were her heeds of fumosite,
That causes dreams, of which there is no charge,
They sleepen soundly, till it was prime large
The most part, but it were Canace:
She was full measurable, as women be.
For of her father had she take her leave
To gone to rest, soon after it was eve:
Her list not apalled for to be,
Nor on the morrow, vnfestliche for to see
And slept her first sleep, and then awoke
For such a joy she in her heart took
Both of her queynt ring, and of her mirror,
That twenty times she changed her color:
And in her sleep, right for impression
Of her mirror, she had a vision.
Wherefore, or that the sun up began glide,
She cleped her maistresses her beside
And said, that her lust for to arise.
These old women that been gladly wise
As is her maistresse, answered her anon,
And said: Madam whider woll ye gone
Thus early? for folk been all in rest.
I woll (quoth she arise) for me lest
No longer to sleep but walken about.
Her maistresse cleped women a great rout,
And up they risen, well ten or twelve:
Up rises fresh Canace her selue
As ioly and bright, as the young sun,
That in the Ram is four degrees up run,
No higher was he, when she ready was:
And forth she walked an easy paas
Arrayed after the lusty season sote,
Lightly for to playen, and walken on foot:
Naught but five or six of her meyne,
And in a trenche, fer in the park goes she.
The vapor which that fro the earth glode,
Makes the sun to seem ruddy and broad:
But nathelesse, it was so fair a sight,
That it made all her hearts for to light,
What for the season, and for the morowning,
And for the fowls that she herd to sing.
For right anon, she wiste what they meant
Right by her song, and knew al her intent.
* The knot why, that every tale is told,
If it be tarried till lust be cold
Of hem that han it hearkened after yore,
The savor passes, ever longer the more,
For fulsumnes of prolixite,
And by that same reason thinks me
I should unto the same knot condiscende,
And make of her walking sone an end.
Amidde a tree, for dry as white as chalk,
As Canace was playing in her walk,
There sat a falcon over head full hie,
That with a pitious voice began to cry,
That all the wood resouned of her cry,
And beaten had her self so pitously
With both her wings, till the reed blood
Ran endlong the tree, there as she stood:
And ever in one she cried and shright,
And with her beck, her seluen so she pight,
That there nas Tygre, ne cruel beast
That dwells in wood, neither in forest,
That nolde han wept, if that they weep coud,
For sorrow of her, she shright always so loud.
For there was never yet man on live,
If that he couthe a Falcon well discriue,
That herd of such another of fayrenes
As well of plumage, as of gentilnes,
Of shape, of all that might irekened be:
A Falcon peregryn than seemed she
Of fremd land, and evermore as she stood,
She swounded now and now for lack of blood,
Til welny is she fallen fro the tree.
This fair kings daughter, this Canace,
That on her finger bare the queint ring,
Through which she understood well every thing
That any foul may in his leden saine,
And coud answer him in his leden again,
Has understand what this falcon said
And welny for routhe almost she deyd:
And to the tree she goes full hastily
And on this Falcon began look pitously,
And held her lap abroad, for well she wist
The Falcon must fallen from the twist
When yt she swouned next, for lack of blood:
A long while to waiten there she stood,
Till at the last she spoke in this manner
Unto the hawk as ye shallen after here.
What is the cause, if it be for to tell,
That ye ben in this furiall pain of hell?
Quoth. Canace, unto this Hawk above:
* Is this for sorrow of death, or loss of love?
For as I trow, these ben causes two,
That causen most a gentil heart woe:
Of other harm it needs not to speak,
For ye your self, upon your self wreake,
Which proves well, that either ire or dread
Mote ben encheson of your cruel deed.
Syn that I se none other wight you chase,
For ye love of God, so does your self grace:
Or what may be your help? for west or east
Ne saw I never er now, no bird ne beast,
That farde with himselue so pitously:
Ye slay me with your sorrow verily,
I have of you so great compassioun:
For Gods love come fro the tree adowne.
And as I am a kings daughter true,
If that I verily the causes knew
Of your disease, if it lay in my might
I would amend it, certes or it be night,
As wisely help me the great God of kind.
And herbs also shall I right enough find,
To heal with your hurts hastily.
Tho shright this Falcon yet more pitously
Than er she did, and fell to ground anon,
And lies a swoune deed as is a stone,
Til Canace had her in her lap itake
Unto the time she began of swoune awake:
And after that she of swoune can abreyd,
Right in her Hawks leden thus she said.
* That pity renneth soon in gentle heart
(Feeling his similitude in pains smert)
Is proved all day, as men may see,
As well by work as by authorite,
For gentle heart keeps gentleness.
I see well, that ye have of my distress
Compassion, my fair Canace
Of very womanly benignite,
That nature in your principles has set,
But for none hope for to fare the bet.
But for to obey unto your heart free,
And for to make other beware by me,
As by the whelpe chastised is the Lion,
Right for that cause, and that conclusion,
While that I have a leisure and a space,
Mine harm I woll confessen or I pace:
And ever while that one her sorrow told,
That other wept, as she to water would,
Till that the Faucon bad her to be still:
And with a sike, thus she said her till.
There I was bred, alas that ilke day,
And fostred in a roche of marble gray
So tenderly, that nothing aileth me,
I ne wist what was aduersite,
Till I coud fly, full high under the sky.
There dwelt a Tercelet me fast by,
That seemed well of all gentleness,
All were he full of treason and of falsenesse.
It was so wrapped under humble chere,
And hew of troth, and in such manner
Under pleasaunce, and under busy pain,
That no wight coud have wend he coud fain:
So deep in greyne he died his colors,
Right as a serpent hides him under flours,
Till he may see his time for to bite:
Right so, this god of loves hypocrite
Does so his ceremonies and obeysaunce,
With his dissimuling and fair assemblaunce,
That souneth unto gentleness of love,
As in a tomb is all the fair above,
And under, the corse, such as ye wot,
Such was this hypocrite cold and hot,
And in this wise he served his intent,
That save the fiend, non wist what he meant:
Till he so long had weeped and complained,
And many a year his service to me fained,
Till that mine heart, too pitous and too nice,
All innocent of his cruel malice,
For ferd of his death, as thought me
Upon his oaths and his surete,
Granted him love, upon this conditioun,
That evermore mine honor and renoun
Where saved, both preuy and apert,
This is to say, that after his desert,
I yaue him all mine heart and all my thought
God wot, and in none other wise naught:
And took his heart in change of mine for aye.
* But sooth is said, gone sithen many a day,
A true wight and a thief thinks not one.
And when he saw the thing so fer igone,
That I granted him fully my love
In such a guise, as I have said above,
And yeuen him my true heart as free
As he swore he yafe his heart to me.
Anon this tigre, full of doubleness
Fell on his knees with so devout humblesse,
With high reverence, and eke by his chere
So like a gentle lover, as of manner
So ravished, as it seemed for joy,
That never Troylus, ne Paris of Troy,
Jason certes, ne none other man,
Since Lamech was, that alder first began
To louen two, as written folk beforne,
Ne never sithen Adam was borne,
Ne couth man by twenty thousand part
Counterfeit the sophimes of his art:
Ne were worthy to vnbocle his galoche,
There doubleness or faining should approach:
Ne so couth thank a wight, as he did me,
His manner was an heaven for to see
To any woman, were she never so wise:
So painteth he his chere, point devise,
As well his words, as his countenance,
And I so loved him for his obeysaunce,
And for the troth that I demed in his heart
That if so were that any thing him smert,
Were it never so lite, and I it wist,
Me thought I felt death at my heart twist,
And shortly, so ferforth this thing went,
That my will was his wills instrument.
That is to say, my will obeyed his will
In all thing, as far as reason fill,
Keeping the bounds of my worship ever:
Ne never had I thing so lefe ne so lever
As him God wot, ne never shall no mo.
This lasts longer than a year or two,
That I supposed of him nothing but good.
But finally, thus at the last it stood,
That fortune would that he must twin
Out of that place, which that I was in:
Whereof me was woe, it is no question,
I cannot make of it description.
For o thing dare I tell boldly,
I know what the pain of death is thereby,
Such harm I felt, that he ne might bleue.
So on a day of me he took his leave
So sorrowfully eke, that I wend verily,
That he had felt as much harm as I,
When that I heard him speak, and saw his hew
But natheles, I thought he was so true,
And eke that he repair should again
Within a little while sooth to saine
And reason would eke, that he must go
For his honor, as often happeth so,
* That I made virtue of necessite,
And took it well, since it must needs be:
As I best might, I hid fro him my sorrow
And took him by the hond, S. John to borow,
And said him thus: lo I am yours all,
Beth such as I have been to you and shall.
What, he answered, it needs not rehearse,
* Who can sain bet than he who can do wers:
When he has al well isaid, than has he done.
* Therefore behooves him a long spoone
That shall eaten with a fiend, thus herd I say.
So at the last he mote forth his way,
And forth he flees till he come there him lest
When it come him to purpose for to rest:
I trow he had thilke text in mind,
* That all thing repairing to his kind
Gladeth hemselue, thus sain men as I guess:
* Men louen of kind newfanglenesse
As birds done, that men in cages feed.
For though thou night and day take of hem heed,
And straw her cage fair and soft as silk,
And give hem sugre, honey, bread and milk,
Yet right anon as his door is up,
He with his feet would sporne adoun his cup,
And to the wood he would, and worms eat,
So newfangle ben they of her meat,
And louen nouelries of proper kind,
No gentleness of blood may hem bind:
So ferd this Tercelet, alas the day.
Tho he were gentle borne, fresh and gay
And goodly for to see, and humble and free,
He saw upon a time a kite flee,
And suddenly he loved this kite so,
That all his love is clean fro me go:
And has his troth falsed in this wise.
Thus has the kite my love in her service,
And I am lorne without remedy.
And with yt word this faucon began to cry,
And swouned often in Canaces barme:
Great was the sorrow for that hawks harm,
That Canace and all her women made,
They nist how they might her faucon glade.
But Canace home hears her in her lap,
And softly in plasters began her wrap,
There as she with her beck had hurt her selue.
Now cannot Canace but herbs delue
Out of the ground and make salues new
Of herbs precious and fine of hew,
To helen with the hawke: fro day to night
She does her business, and all her might.
And by her beds head she made a mew,
And covered it with veluets blew,
* In sign of troth, that is in women seen.
And all without the Mew is painted green,
In which were painted all these false fowls,
As ben these tidefes, tercelets, and owls,
Right for despite were painted hem beside
Pyes feel on hem for to cry and chide.
Thus leave I Canace her hawk keeping,
I woll no more as now speak of her ring,
Till it come eft to purpose for to sain,
How that this faucon got her love again
Repentaunt, as the story tells us,
By mediation of Camballus
The kings son, of which I have of told.
But henceforth I woll my process hold
To speaken of auentures, and of battails,
That yet was never herd of so great maruails.
First woll I tell you of Cambuscan,
That in his time many a city wan:
How that he wan Thedora to his wife,
And after woll I speak of Algarsife,
For whom full often in great peril he was,
Ne had he ben helped by the horse of bras.
And after woll I speak of Camballo,
That fought in lists with the brethren two
For Canace, ere that he might her win,
And there I left, I woll again begin.
Explicit secunda pars.
Apollo whirleth up his chare so hie,
Till that the god Mercurius house he fly.
There can be found no more of this foresaid tale, which has been sought in
diverse places.
Here follows the words of the Merchant to the Squier, and the words of the
Host to the Merchant.
IN faith Squier thou have thee well yquit
And gentely to, I praise well thy wit
Quoth. the Merchant, considering thine youth,
So feelingly thou speak, I thee alouth
As to my doom, there is none that is here
Of eloquence, that shall be thy pere
If yt thou live, God give ye right good chance
And in virtue send thee perseverance.
For of thy speaking I have great deinte,
I have a son, and by the Trinite,
I had lever than twenty poundsworth land
(Though it now were fallen in my hond)
He were a man of such discretion,
As that ye ben: fie on possession,
But if a man be virtuous withal.
I have my son snibbed, and yet shall,
For he to virtue lists not to intend,
But for to play at dise, and to spend,
And lose all that he has is his usage:
And he had lever talk with a page,
Than to commune with any gentle wight,
Where he might learn gentleness aright.
Straw for your gentleness (quoth. our host)
What Merchant, pardy full well thou wost,
That each of you mote tellen at the lest
A tale or two, or breaken your behest.
That know I well (quoth. ye Merchant) certain,
I pray you have me not in disdain,
Though I to this man speak a word or two.
Tell on thy tale withouten words mo.
Gladly sir host (quoth he) I woll obey
Unto your will, now hearkeneth what I sey:
I woll you not contrary in no wise,
As far as my wits may suffice,
I pray to God that it may pleasen you,
Then wot I well it is good ynow.
The Merchants Prologue.
WEeping and wailing, care and other
sorrow
I have ynow, both even and eke a morrow
Quoth. the Merchant, and so have other mo,
That wedded be, I trow that it be so:
For well I wot it fares so by me,
I have a wife, the worst that may be,
For though the fiend coupled to her were,
She would him ouermatch I dare well swear.
What should I rehearse in special
Her high malice? she is a shrew at all.
There is a long and a large difference
Betwixt Grisilds great patience,
And of my wife the passing cruelte:
Were I unbound, all so mote I thee,
I would never eft come in the snare:
* We wedded men live in sorrow and care,
Assay who so woll, and he shall find
That I say sooth, by saint Thomas of Inde,
As for the more part, I say not all,
God shield that it should so befall.
Ah good sir host, I have wedded be
These months two, and more not parde:
And yet I trow, he that all his life
Has wedded be, though men him rife
Into the heart, ne couth in no mannere
Tell so much sorrow, as I now here
Coud tell, of my wives cursednesse.
Now (quoth, our host) Merchant so God the bless,
Since ye ben so much know of that art,
Full heartily I pray you tell us part.
Gladly (quoth. he) but of mine own sore
For sorry heart I tell may no more.
The Merchants Tale.
Old January marries young May, and for his unequal match receives a foul
reward.

WHylome there was dwelling in
Lumbardie
A worthy knight, that born was at
Pauie,
In which he lived in great prosperity,
And sixty year a wife less man was he:
And followed aye his bodily delight
On women, there as was his appetite,
As done these fools that been seculeres.
And when that he was past sixty years,
Were it for holiness or dotage,
I cannot saine, but such a great courage
Had this knight to ben a wedded man,
That day and night he does all that he can
To epsy, where that he wedded might be:
Praying our lord to graunten him that he
Mighten once known of that blisfull life,
That is betwixt an husbond and his wife:
And for to liuen under that holy bond,
With which God first man and woman bond.
None other life (said he) is worth a bean:
* For wedlock is so easy and so clean,
That in this world it is a paradise:
Thus says this old knight that is so wise.
* And certainly, as south as God is king,
To take a wife, it is a glorious thing,
And namely when a man is old and hoar,
Then is a wife the fruit of his tresore:
Then should he take a young wife and a fair,
On which he might engendren him an heir,
And lead his life in joy and in sollace:
Whereas these batchelers singen alas,
When that they finden any aduersite
In love, which nis but child's vanite.
And truly it sit well to be so,
That batchelers han often pain and woe:
On brotell ground they bilden brotelnesse,
They find freelte, when they wenen secrenesse:
They live but as liuen birds or bestes,
In liberty, and under nice arestes,
There as a wedded man in his estate
Lives a life blisfully and ordinate,
Under the yoke of marriage ybound:
Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound.
For who can be so buxome as a wife?
Who is so true and eke so tentise
To keep him sick and hole, as is his make?
For well or woe she nill him not forsake:
She nis not weary him to love and serve,
Though that he lie bedred till he sterue.
And yet some clerks sain, that it is not so,
Of which Theophrast is one of tho:
What force though Theophrast list to lie.
Ne take no wife (quoth. he) for husbondrie,
As for to spare in household thy dispense:
* A true servant does more diligence
Thy good to keep, than does thine own wife,
For she woll claim half part all her life.
* And if that thou be sick, so God me save
Thy very own friends or a true knave
Woll keep thee better, than she yt waits aye
After thy good, and has done many a day.
And if thou take to thee a wife untrue,
Full oftentime it shall thee sore rue.
This sentence, and an hundred sithes worse
Writes this man there, God his bones curse.
But take no keep of such vanite,
Defieth Theophrast, and hearkeneth me.
A wife is Gods yeft verily,
All other manner yefts hardely,
As londs, rents, pasture, or commune,
Or mouables, all ben yefts of fortune,
That passen as a shadow on a wall:
But dread not, if plainly speak I shall,
* A wife woll last and in thine house endure,
Well longer than thee list peradventure.
* Marriage is a full great sacrament,
He which has no wife I hold him shent:
He lives helpless, and all desolate,
I speak of folk in seculer estate.
And herkneth why, I say not this for naught:
A woman is for man's help ywrought.
The high God, when he had Adam maked,
And saw him alone all belly naked,
God of his great goodness said than,
Let us maken an help to this man
Like to himself, and then he made Eve.
Here may ye see, and hereby may ye preue,
* That a wife is man's help and comfort,
His paradise terrestre and his disport:
So buxome and so virtuous is she,
They must needs liuen in unite:
One flesh they ben, and two souls as I guess,
Not but one heart in well and in distress.
A wife, ah saint Mary, benedicite,
How might a man have any aduersite
That has a wife? certes I cannot say,
The bliss that is betwixt hem twey
There may no tongue tellen or heart think.
If he be poor, she helps him to swinke,
She keeps his good, and wastes never a dell,
All that her husbond lust, her likes well.
She says not once nay, when he says ye,
Do this (says he) a ready sir (says she.)
O blisfull order of wedloke precious,
Thou art so merry, and eke so virtuous,
And so commended, and approved eke,
That every man that halt him worth a leke,
Upon his bare knees ought all his life
Thanken God, that him has sent a wife.
Or pray to God daily him for to send
A wife, to last unto his lives end.
For then his life is set in sikernesse,
He may not be deceived, as I guess,
So that he werch after his wives read:
Then may he boldly bearen up his head,
They been ever so true and also wise.
For which, if thou will werchen as the wise,
Do always so, as women woll thee read.
Lo how that Jacob, as these clerks read,
By good counsel of his mother Rebecke
Bounden the kids skin about his neck:
For which his fathers beneson he wan.
Lo Judith, as the story tell can,
By her wise counsel Gods people kept,
And slew him Holofernes while he slept.
And Abigail by counsel, how she
Saved her husbond Naball, when that he
Should have be slain. And look Hester also
By good counsel delivered out of woe
The people of God, and made him Mardochee
Of Assure enhaunsed for to be.
* There nis nothing in gree superlatife
(As says Seneck) above an humble wife.
Suffer thy wives tongue, as Caton bit,
She shall command, and thou shall suffer it,
And yet she woll obey of courtesy.
A wife is keeper of thine husbondrie:
* Well may the sick man still wail and weep,
There as there nis no wife the house to keep,
I warn thee, if wisely thou will werch,
Love thy wife, as Christ loves his cherch:
If thou love thy self, thou love thy wife.
No man hates his flesh, but in his life
He fostreth it, and therefore bid I thee
Cherish thy wife, or thou shall never ythee.
Husbond and wife, what so men yape or play
Of wordly folk hold the seker way:
They be so knit, there may none harm betide,
And namely upon the wives side.
For which January, of which I told
Considred has in his days old
The lusty life, the virtuous quiet,
That is in marriage honey sweet.
And for his friends on a day he sent
To tellen hem theffect of his intent.
With face sad, his tale has he hem told:
He said good friends, I am hoar and old,
And almost (God wot) on the pits brinke,
Upon my soul somewhat must I think.
I have my body folily dispended,
Blessed be God, it shall ben amended:
For I woll ben certain a wedded man
And that anon in all the have I can,
Unto some maid, fair and tender of age.
I pray you shapeth for my marriage
All suddenly, for I woll not abide:
And I woll fonden to epsy on my side,
To whom I may be wedded hastily.
But for as much as ye ben more than I,
Ye shullen rather such a thing espien
Than I, and there me lust best to alien.
But one thing warn I you my friends dear,
I woll none old wife have in no mannere:
She shall not pass fifteen year certain.
* Old fish and young flesh woll I have feign:
Better is (quoth. he) a Pike than a Pikereell,
And bet than old Beef is the tender Veell.
I woll no woman of thirty Winter age,
* It nis but Beanstraw and great forage,
And eke these old widows (God it wot)
* They connen so much craft in Wades bote,
So much broken harm can they when hem lest,
That with hem should I never live in rest.
* For sundry schools makes subtle clerks,
A woman of many schools half a clerk is.
But certainly, a young thing may men gie,
Right as men may warm wax with hands plie.
Wherefore I say you plainly in a clause,
I nill none old wife have for this cause.
For if so were I had such mischaunce,
That I in her couth have no pleasaunce,
Then should I lead my life in aduoutrie,
And so straight to the devil when I die.
Ne children should I none on her geten:
Yet had I lever hounds had me eaten,
Than that mine heritage should fall
In strange honds: and thus I tell you all
I dote not, I wot the cause why
Men should wedden: and furthermore wot I,
There speaks many a man of marriage,
That wot no more of this that does my page:
For which causes man should take a wife,
If he may not live chaste in his life,
Take him a wife with great devotion,
Because of lefull procreation
Of children, to the honor of God above,
And not only for paramour or for love:
And for they shoulden Letcherie eschew,
And yield his debts when that it is due:
Or for that each man should helpen other
In mischief, as a suster should the brother,
And liuen in chastity full heavenly.
But sirs (by your leave) that am not I,
For God be thanked, I dare make auaunt,
I feel my lims hole and sufficiaunt
To done all that a man belongs to:
I wot my selue best what I may do.
Though I be hoar, I fare as does a tree,
That blossometh ere that fruit ywox be,
The blossomd tree is neither dry ne dead:
I feel no where hoar but on my head.
Mine heart and my lims been as green,
As Laurel is through the year to seen.
And sithen ye han heard all mine intent,
I pray you to my will ye woll assent.
Diverse men diversely hem told
Of marriage many examples old.
Some blames it, some praises it certain,
But at the last, shortly for to saine,
(As all day falls alteration,
Betwixt friends and disputation)
There fell a strife betwixt his brethren two,
Of which that one was cleaped Placebo,
Justinius soothly called was that other.
Placebo said: O January brother,
Full little need han ye my Lord so dear,
Counsel to ask of any that is here:
But that ye been so full of sapience,
That you ne likes for your high prudence,
To waiue fro the word of Solomon:
This word says he unto euerichone,
* Work all thing by counsel, thus said he,
And then shall thou not repent thee.
But tho that Solomon speak such a word,
Mine own dear brother and my Lord,
So wisely God my soul bring to ease and rest,
I hold your own counsel for the best.
For brother mine, take of me this motife,
I have been now a court man all my life,
And God wot, though I now unworthy be,
I have stonden in full great degree
Abouten Lords in full great estate:
Yet had I never with none of hem debate,
I never hem contraried truly.
I wot well that my lord can more than I,
That he says, I hold it firm and stable,
I say the same, or else thing semblable.
* A full great fool is any counsailour,
That serves any Lord of high honor,
That dare presume, or once think it,
That his counsel should pass his lords wit,
Nay, Lords be no fools I swear by my fay.
Ye have your self spoken here to day
So high sentence, so holy, and so well,
That I consent, and confirm every dell
Your words all, and your opinioun.
By God there nis no man in all this town
Ne in Italy, coud better have said:
Christ holds him of this full well apaied.
And truly it is an high courage
Of any man that is stopen in age,
To take a young wife, by my father kin:
Your heart hongeth on a jolly pin.
Does now in this matter right as you lest.
For finally I hold it for the best.
Justinius that aye still sat and herd,
Right in this wise to Placebo answered.
Now brother mine be patient I you pray,
Since ye have said, now hearkneth what I say,
Senecke among his other words wise
* Says, that a man ought him well auise,
To whom he yeueth his land or his cattle.
And since I ought auise me right well,
To whom I give my goods away fro me,
Well much more I ought auised be,
To whom I give my body: for always
I warn you well it is child's play
To take a wife without auisement,
Men must inquire (this is mine assent)
Wheder she be sober, wise, or dronkelew,
Or proud, or any other ways a shrew,
A chider, or a waster of thy good,
Other rich or poor, or else a man is wood:
* All be it so, that no man find shall
None in this world, that trotteth hole in all,
Ne man, ne beast, such as men can devise,
But natheles, it ought enough suffice
With any wife, if so were that she had
Mo good thewes, than her vices bad:
And all this asks leisure to enquere,
For God wot I have wept many a tere
Full privily, since I had a wife.
* Praise who so woll a wedded man's life,
Certain I find in it but cost and care,
And obseruaunces of all blisses bare.
And yet God wot my neighbors about
And namely of women many a rout,
Saine that I have the most steadfast wife,
And eke the meekest one that bears life.
* But I wot best, where wringeth me my shoe.
Ye may for me, right as you list do,
Auise you, ye been a man of age,
How that ye entren into marriage,
And namely with a young wife and a fair.
By him that made water, earth, and air
The youngest man that is in all this rout,
Is busy ynow to bring it about
To have his wife alone, trusts me:
Ye shall not pleasen her years three.
This is to sain, to done her pleasaunce,
A wife asks full much obseruaunce:
I pray you that ye be not evil apaid.
Well (quoth. this January) and have thou all said?
Straw for thy Seneck, and for thy proverbs,
I count it not worth a pannier of herbs
Of school terms, wiser men than thou,
As thou have heard, assenteth it right now
To my purpose: Placebo, what say ye?
* I say it is a cursed man (quoth. he)
That lets Matrimony sekerly:
And with that word they risen suddenly,
And ben assented fully, that he should
Be wedded when he list, and where he would.
High fantasy and curiousness
Fro day to day began in the soul empress
Of January, about his marriage:
Many a fair shap, and many a fair visage
There passes through his heart night by night:
As who so took a mirror polished bright,
And set it in a common market place,
Then should he see many a figure pace
By his mirror, and in the same wise
Began January within his thought devise
Of maidens, which that dwellen beside:
He wist not where he might best abide.
For if that one had beauty in her face,
Another stont so in the peoples grace
For her sadness and her benignite,
That of the people greatest voice had she.
And some were rich and had bad name:
But nathelesse, betwixt earnest and game,
He at last appointed him on one,
And let all other from his heart gone:
And chese her of his own authoritee,
* For love is blind all day, and may not see.
And when that he was in his bed ybrought,
He puttreid in his heart and in his thought
Her fresh beauty, and her age so tender.
Her middle small, her arms long and slender,
Her wise governance, and her gentleness,
Her womanly bearing, and her sadness.
And when he was on her condiscended,
Him thout his choice might not ben amended.
For when that he himself concluded had
Him thought each other men's wit so bad:
That impossible it were to reply
Against his choice, this was his fantasy.
His friends sent he to, at his instaunce,
And prays hem to done him yt pleasaunce,
That hastily they would to him come,
He would bredgen her labor all and some:
Needs no more for him to go ne ride,
He was appointed there he would abide.
Placebo came, and eke his friends soon,
And alder first he bad hem all a boon,
That none of hem none arguments make
Against his purpose that he has ytake:
Which purpose was pleasant to God (said he)
And very ground of his prosperity.
He said there was a maiden in the town,
Which for her beauty has great renoune,
All were it so, she were of small degree,
Suffices him her youth and her beauty:
Which maid he said he would have to wife
To liuen in ease and holiness of life:
And thanked God, yt he might haven her all,
And that no wight his bliss parten shall:
And prays hem to labor in this need,
And shapeth that he fail not to speed.
For then he said, his spirit was at ease,
Then is (quoth. he) nothing may me displease,
Save o thing pricketh in my conscience,
The which I woll rehearse in your presence,
* I have (quoth. he) heard say full yore ago,
There may no man have perfect blisses two:
This is to say, in earth and eke in heaven.
For though he kept him fro the sins seven,
And eke from every branch of thilke tree,
Yet is there so perfect prosperitee
And so great ease and lust in marriage,
That ever I am aghast now in mine age,
That I shall lead now so merry a life
So delicate without woe or strife,
That I shall have mine heaven in earth here.
For sithen very heaven is bought so dear
With tribulation and great penance,
How should I then living in such pleasaunce,
As all wedded men done with there wives,
Come to yt bliss, there Christ eterne on live is.
This is my dread, and ye my brethren tweie
Assoileth me this question I you preie.
Justinius, which that hated his folly,
Answered anon right in his yaperie:
And for he would his long tale abrege,
He would non authority allege,
But said: sir, so there he non obstacle
Other than this, God of his hie miracle,
And of his mercy may so for you werch,
That er ye han your rights of holy cherch,
Ye may repent of a wedded man's life,
In which ye sain is neither woe ne strife:
* And else God forbid, but if he sent
A wedded man grace him to repent
Well after, rather than a single man.
And therefore sir, the best read that I can
Despeireth you not, but have in memory,
* Parauenture, she may be your purgatory,
She may be Gods mean and Gods whip,
Then shall your soul up to heaven skip
Swifter than does an arrow out of a bow.
I hope to God hereafter ye shall know,
That there nis none so great felicite
In marriage, ne never none shall be,
That you shall let of your salvation,
So that ye use as skill is and reason
The lusts of your wife attemperatly,
And that ye please her not too amorously:
And that ye keep you eke from other sin.
My tale is done, for my wit is thin:
Beth not aghast hereof my dear brother.
But wade we fro this matter to another.
The wife of Bathe, if ye understand
Of marriage, which ye now have in hand,
Declares full well in a little space:
Fares now well, God have you in his grace.
And with this word, Iustine and his brother
Han take her leave, and each of them of other.
For when they saw that it must needs be,
They wrought so by wise and sly treat.
That she this fair maid which May did hight
As hastily as ever that she might
Shall wedded be to this January.
I trow it were too long to you to tarry,
If I you told of every escrite and bond,
By which she was feossed in his land:
Or for to harken of her rich array.
But finally icomen is the day,
That to the cherch both tway ben they went,
For to receive the holy Sacrament,
Forth comes the priest, with stole about his neck,
And bad her be like Sara and Rebeck
In wisdom and truth of marriage:
And said his orisons, as is the usage,
And crouched hem, and bad God should hem bles.
And made all seker inow with holiness.
Thus been they wedded with solemnity:
And at feast sits both he and she
With other worthy folk upon the deies,
All full of joy and bliss is the palaies,
And full of instruments and of vittaile,
And that the most deintiest of all Itaile.
Beforne him stood instruments of such soun,
That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphion
Ne made never such a melody.
At every course came loud ministralcie,
That never Ioab tromped for to here,
Neither Theodomas yet half so clear
At Thebes, when the city was in dout,
Bacchus the wine hem skinketh all about,
And Venus laugheth on every wight,
For January was become her knight:
And would now both assain his courage
In liberte, and eke in marriage.
And with her firebrond in her hond about,
Daunceth before the bride all the rout:
And certainly, I dare well say right this,
Emenius, that God of wedding is,
Saw never so merry a wedded man.
Hold thou thy peace thou poet Marcian,
That writest us that ilke wedding merry
Of Philologie and him Mercury,
And of the songs that the Muses song:
Too small is both thy pen and eke thy tongue
For to discriuen of this marriage,
When tender youth has wedded stooping age,
There is such mirth, it may not be written,
Assaieth your self, than may ye witten
If that I lie or non in this matere.
May she sit, with so benign a chere,
That her to behold, it seemed a feire.
Queen Hester looked never with such an eye
On Assuere, so meek a look has she.
I may you not devise all her beauty,
But thus much of her beauty tell I may,
That she was like the bright morrow of May
Fulfilde of all beauty, and of plesaunce.
This January is ravished in a trance,
And at every time he looked in her face,
But in his heart he began her to manace,
That he yt night, in his arms would her strein
Harder than ever Paris did Helein.
But natheles, yet had he great pity
That thilke night offenden her must he:
And thought alas, O tender creature,
Now would God ye might well endure
All my courage, it is so sharp and kene,
I am aghast, ye shall it not sustene.
But God forbid, that I did all my might,
Now would to God that it were waxen night,
And that the night would last ever mo,
I would that all these people were ago.
And finally he does all his labor,
As he best might, saving his honor,
To have hem fro the meat in subtle wise,
The time came that reason was to rise,
And after that men dauncen, and drink fast,
And spices all about the house they cast:
And full of joy and bliss is every Man,
All but a Squire, that hight Damian,
Which carfe before the Knight many a day:
He was so ravished on his Lady May,
That for very pain he was nie wood,
Almost he swelt, and swounded there he stood:
So sore has Venus hurt him which her brand,
So fresh she was, and thereto so licand:
And to his bed he went him hastily,
No more of him at this time speak I:
But there I let him weep inow and plain,
Till the fresh May woll rewen on his pain.
O perilous fire, that in the bedsraw bredeth,
O familiar foe, that his service bedeth.
O servant traitor, false homely hew,
Like to the Adder sly in bosom untrue.
O January all drunken in pleasaunce,
God shilde us all from your iniquitaunce
Of marriage, see how this Damian,
Thine own squire and eke thy borne man
Entendeth to done thee villainy:
God grant thee thine homely foe to epsy.
* For in this world nis wers pestilence,
Than homely foe, all day in thy presence.
Parformed has the sun his arc diurne,
No longer may the body of him soiourne
On orisont, as in that latitude:
Night with his mantill, that is dark and rude,
Began for to spread the Hemisperie above:
For which departed is the lusty rout
Fro January, with thonke on every side
Home to her house lustely they ride,
There as they done her things, as hem lest,
And when they saw her time they go to rest.
Sone after this lusty January
Woll go to bed, he would no longer tarry.
He drinks Ipocras, clarrie, and vernage
Of spices hot, to increase his courage:
And many a lectuarie had he full fine,
Such as the cursed monk dan Constantine
Has written in his book of Coitu:
To eten hem al he nolde nothing eschew,
And thus to his privy friends said he:
For Gods love, as soon as it may be,
Let void all this house in curteis wise sone.
Men drinken, and the trauers drew anon,
So hasted January, it must be done:
The bride was brought to bed as still as ston
And when the bed was with the priest iblessed
Out of the chamber every wight hem dressed.
And January has fast in arms take
His fresh May, his paradise, his make:
He lulleth her, he kisseth her full often
With thick bristles of his beard vnsoft,
I like the skin of Houndfish, sharp as brere,
For he was shave all new in his manner:
He rubbeth her upon her tender face,
And said thus: Alas, I mote trespace
To you my spouse, and you greatly offend,
Or time come that I woll down descend.
But nathelesse, considreth this (quoth he)
There nis no workman, whatsoever he be,
That may both wirch well and hastily:
This woll be done at leiser perfectly,
It is no force how long that we play,
In true wedlock coupled be we tway:
And blessed be the yoke that we been in,
For in our acts we mow do no sin.
* A man may do no sin with his wife,
Ne yet hurt himself with his own knife:
For we have leave to play us by the law.
Thus labors he, till the day began daw:
And then he takes a soppe of fine clarre,
And upright in his bed then sits he
And after he sings full loud and clear,
And kissed his wife, and makes wanton chere.
He was all coltish, and full of ragerie,
And full of gergon, as is a flecked Pie.
The slack skin about his neck shakes,
While yt he sang, so chaunteth he and craketh.
But God wot what May thought in her heart,
When she him saw up sitting in his shert
In his night cap, with his neck all lean:
She prayseth not his playing worth a Bean.
Then said he thus: my rest woll I take
How day is come, I may no longer wake,
And down he laid his head and slept till prime:
And afterward, when that he saw his time
Up rises January, but the fresh May
Holds her chamber to the fourth day,
As usage is of wives for the best.
* For every labor sometime mote have rest,
Or else long may he not to endure.
This is to say, no lives creature,
Be it fish or beast or brid or man.
Now woll I speak of woeful Damian,
That langureth for love, as ye shall here.
Therefore I speak to him in this manner.
I say, O sely Damian, alas
Answer to this demand, as in this caas,
Now shall thou to thy Lady fresh May
Tell thy woe? She woll always say nay:
Eke if thou speak, she woll thy woe bewray.
God be thine help, I can no better say.
This sick Damian in Venus fire
So brenneth, that he dies for desire:
For which he put his life in adventure,
No longer might he in this wise endure,
But privily a penner began he borrow,
And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,
In manner of a complaint or a lay
Unto this fair and fresh Lady May.
And in a purse of silk, honging on his shert,
He has it put and laid it at his heart.
The Moon at moonetide that ilke day
(That January had iwedded fresh May)
Out of Taure was in the Cankre gleden,
So long has May in her chamber bidden
As custom is unto these nobles all:
A bride shall not eaten in the hall
Till days four, or three at the least
I passed been, than let her go to feast.
The fourth day complete fro noone to noone,
When that the high Mass was now idoon,
In hall sat this January and May,
As fresh as is the bright Summers day,
And so befell, how that this good man
Remembers him upon his Damian,
And said: Saint Mary, how may this he,
That Damian entendeth not to me?
Is he aie sick: or how may this betide?
His squires, which that stoden him beside,
Excused him, because of his sickness,
Which let him to done his besinesse:
None other cause might make him tarry.
That me forthinketh (quoth. this January)
He is a gentle squire by my troth,
If that he died, it were harm and routh:
He is as wise, discreet, and secree,
As any man that I wot of his degree,
And thereto manly and serviceable,
And for to be a thrifty man right able.
But after meat as soon as ever I may
I woll my self visit him, and eke May,
To done him all the comfort that I can:
And for that word, him blessed every man,
That of his bounty and his gentleness
He would so comforten in his distress
His squire, for it was a gentle deed.
Dame (quoth. this January) take good heed,
That after meat, ye and your women all
(When ye have been in chamber out of this hall)
That all ye gone to see this Damian:
Does him disport, he is a gentleman,
And tellen him that I woll him visit,
Have I nothing but rested me alite:
And speed you fast for I woll abide,
Till that you sleepen fast by my side.
And with that word he began to him call
A squire, that was Marshall of his hall,
And told him certain thing that he would,
This fresh May has straight her way ihold
With all her women, unto this Damian:
And down by his beds side sat she than
Comforting him as goodly as she may.
This Damian, when that he his time say
In secret wise his purse, and eke his bill
(In which he had written all his will)
Has put into her hand withouten more,
Save that he sighed wondrous deep and sore:
And sothly, to her right thus said he,
Mercy, and that ye discover not me:
For I am dead, if that this thing be kid.
This purse has she in her bosom hid,
And went her way, ye get no more of me,
But unto January icome is she,
And on his bed side she sit full soft,
He takes her, and kisseth her full often:
And laid him down to sleep, and that anon.
She fained her, as that she must gone
There as ye wot, that every wight had need:
And when she of this bill has taken heed,
She rent it all to clouts, and at last
Into the privy, sothly she it cast.
Who studieth now but fair fresh May:
And down by January she lay,
That slept, till the cough has him awaked:
Anon he prayed her to strip her all naked,
He would of her (he said) have some pleasance:
He said her clothes did him encombrance.
And she obeieth he she lefe or loath.
But lest yt precious folk be with me wroth,
How that he wrought, I dare not to you tell,
Or wheder she thought it paradise or hell:
But I let hem worch in her wise.
Till even song ring, that they must arise.
Were it by destenie or by adventure,
Where it by influence, or by nature,
Or constellation that in such estate
The heaven stood, that time fortunate,
(As for to put a bill of Venus works)
* For all thing has time, as saien clerks
To any woman for to get her love:
I cannot say, but the great God above
That knows, that non act is causeles,
He deem all, for I woll hold my pees.
But soth is this, how that this fresh May
Has take such impression that day
Of pity, on this sick Damian,
That fro her heart she driven ne can
The remembrance for to done him ease;
Certain (thout she) whom this thing displease
I recke not, for this I him assure,
I love him best of any creature,
Though he no more had than his shert.
* Lo pity renneth sone in gentle heart,
Here may ye see, how excellent franchise
* In women is when they hem narow auise.
Some tyrant is, as there be many a one,
That has an heart as hard as any stone,
Which would have letten sterue in the place
Well rather than have granted him her grace:
And her rejoiced in her cruel pride,
And not have recked to been an homicide.
This gentle May, fulfilled of pity,
Right so of her hond a letter made she,
In which she granted him her very grace,
There lacked naught, but only time and place,
Where that she might to his lust suffice:
For it shall be, right as he woll devise.
And when she saw her time upon a day,
To visit this Damian goth this fair May,
And subtly this letter down she thrust
Under his pillow, read it if him lust.
She takes him by the hond, and hard him twist
So secretly, that no wight of it wist,
And bad him been all whole, and forth she went
To January, when that he for her sent.
Up rises Damian the next morrow,
All passed was his sickness and his sorrow:
He kembeth him and proineth him and piketh,
And does all that his Lady lust and likes:
And eke to January he goes as low,
As ever did a dog for the bow.
He is so pleasant to every man
(For craft is all, who that it can)
That every wight is fain to speken him good,
And fully in his Ladies grace he stood.
Thus let I Damian about his need,
And in my tale, forth I woll proceed,
Some clerks holden that felicite
Stont in delight, and therefore certain he
This noble January, with all his might
In honest wise as longs to a knight,
Shope him to live full deliciously,
His housing, his array, as honestly
To his degree, was made as a kings.
Among other of his honest things
He had a garden walled all with stone,
So fair a garden was there never none.
For out of doubt, I verily suppose,
That he that wrote the Romant of the Rose,
Ne couth of it the beauty well devise:
Ne Priapus, ne might not suffice,
Though he be god of gardens, for to tell
The beauty of the garden, and of the well,
That stont under a laurer always green:
Full often time king Pluto and his queen
Proserpina, and all her fayrie
Disporten hem and maken melody
About that well, and daunced as men told.
This noble knight, this January the old
Such deinte has, in it to walk and play,
That he woll suffer no wight to bear ye kay,
Save he himself, for the small wicket
He bare always of silver a clicket,
With which when yt him list ne would vnshet
And when that he would pay his wife her det
In summer season thider would he go,
And May his wife, and no wight but they two:
And things which yt weren not done a bed,
He in the garden performed hem and sped.
And in this wise, many a merry day
Lived this January and this fresh May.
But worldly joy may not always endure
To January, ne to no living creature,
* O sudden hap, O thou fortune unstable,
Like to the Scorpion diceiuable,
That flattrest with thy head when thou wolt sting:
Thy tale is death, through thine enuenoming.
O brotell joy, O sweet poison queint,
O monster, that so suddenly can peint
Thy gifts, under the hew of steadfastness,
That thou deceiuest both more and less.
Why have thou January thus deceived,
And had him for thy friend received?
And now thou have beraft him both his eyes,
For sorrow of which desires he to dyen.
Alas, this noble January that so free,
Amidde his lust and his prosperity
Is woxen blind, and all suddenly,
His death therefore desires he utterly.
And therewithal, the fire of jelousie
(Lest that his wife should fall in some folly)
So brent his heart, that he would full feign,
That some man, both him and her had slain.
For never after his death, ne in his life
Ne would he that she were love ne wife:
But ever live a widow in clothes black,
Sole as the turtle does yt has lost her make.
But at the last, after a month or tway
His sorrow began to swage, soth to say.
For when he wist it might non other be,
He patiently took his aduersite:
Save out of doubt may he not forgone,
That he nas ielous ever more in one:
Which jelousie, it was so outrageous,
That neither in hall ne in none other house,
Ne in none other place never mo
He nolde suffer her neither ride ne go,
But if that he had hand on her always.
For which full often wepeth fresh May,
That loved Damian so benignely,
That she mote either die suddenly,
Or she mote have him all at her lest:
She waits when her heart should to breast.
Upon that other side, Damian
Become is the sorowfullest man
That ever was, for neither night ne day
Ne might he speak a word to fresh May,
As to his purpose of no such matere,
But if that January must it here,
That had an hand upon her euermo.
But natheles, by writing to and fro,
And privy signs, wist he what she meant,
And she knew all the signs of his intent.
O January, what might thee it avail?
Tho thou might see, as far as ships sail:
* For as good is a blind man disceived be,
As to be disceiued, when that he may see.
Lo Argus, which had an hundred eien,
For all that ever he couth pore and prien,
Yet was he blent, and God wot so ben mo,
That wenen wisely that it is not so:
Pass over is an ease, I say no more.
The fresh May, of which I spoke of yore
In warm wax, has printed this clicket,
That January bare of that small wicket,
By which unto his garden often he went.
And Damian that knew all her intent
The clicket counterfeited privily:
There nis no more to say, but hastily
Some wonder by this clicket shall betide,
Which ye shall heren, if ye woll abide.
O noble Ovid, sooth say thou God wot,
* What flight is it, if love be long and hot,
That he nill find it out in some manner:
By Pyramus and Thisbe may men lere,
Though they were kept full long streit over all,
They ben accorded, rowning through a wall:
There nis no wight couth find such a slight.
But now to purpose, ere the days eight,
Were passed, ere the month July befill,
That January has caught so great a will
Through egging of his wife him for to play,
In his garden, and no wight but they tway,
That in a morrow, unto this May said he,
Rise up my wife, my love, my lady free:
The turtle voice is heard my lady sweet,
The winter is gone, with all his raines wete,
Come forth now with thine eyes columbine,
Now fairer been thy breasts than is wine.
The garden is enclosed all about,
Come forth my white spouse out of all dout,
Thou have me wounded in my heart, O wife:
No spot in thee nas in all thy life.
Come forth and let us taken our disport,
I chese thee for my wife and my comfort.
Such old leaud words then used he.
Unto Damian a sign made she,
That he should go before with his clicket:
This Damian has opened this wicket,
And in he stert, and that in such manner,
That no wight might it see ne here,
And still he sat under a bush anon.
This January, as blind as is a stone
With May in his hand, and no wight mo,
Into his fresh garden is he go,
And clapped to the wicket suddenly.
Now wife (quoth. he) here nis but thou and I,
That art the creature that I best love:
For by that lord that sit us all above,
I had lever dien on a knife,
Than thee offend my dear true wife.
For Gods sake think how I thee chees,
Not for couetise, ne other good doubtless,
But only for the love I had to thee.
And though that I be old and may not see,
Be to me true, and I woll tell you why,
Certes three things shall ye win thereby.
First love of Christ, and to your self honor,
And all mine heritage, town and tour
I give it you, makes charters as ye list:
This shall be done to morrow ere sun rist
So wisely God my soul bring to bliss:
I pray you on covenant that ye me kiss.
And though that I be jelous, wite me naught,
Ye been so deep imprinted in my thought,
That when I consider your beauty,
And withal, the unlikely elde of me,
I may not certes, though I should die
Forbear to ben out of your company
For very love, this is withouten dout:
Now kiss me wife, and let us rome about.
This fresh May when she these words herd,
Benignely to January answered,
But first and forward she began to weep:
I have (quoth. she) a soul for to keep
As well as ye, and also mine honor,
And of wifehood ilke tender flour,
Which that I have ensured in your hond,
When that the priest to you my body bond.
Wherefore I woll answer in this manner
By the leave of you my lord so dear.
I pray God that never daw that day,
That I ne sterue, as foul as woman may,
If ever I do to my kin that shame,
Or else that I empaire so my name,
That I be false, and if I do that lack,
Do strip me and put me in a sack,
And in the next river do me drench:
I am a gentlewoman, and no wench.
Why speak ye thus, but men ben ever untrue,
And women have reproof of you, aye new.
Ye can none other communing, I leave,
But speak to us of untrust and repreue.
And with yt word she saw where Damian
Sat in the bush, and kneel he began:
And with her finger signs made she,
That Damian should climb upon a tree,
That charged was with fruit, and up he went:
For verily he knew all her intent,
And every sign that she couth make,
Well bet than January her own make.
For in a letter she had told him all
Of this matter, how that he werch shall.
And thus I let him sit in the pery,
And January and May roming full merry.
Bright was the day, and blew the firmament,
Phoebus of gold down has his streams sent
To gladen every flour with his warmenesse:
He was that time in Gemini, as I guess,
But little fro his declination,
The causer of Jove's exaltation.
And so befell that bright morrow tide,
That in the garden, on the further side
Pluto, that is the king of Fayrie
And many a lady in his company
Following his wife, the queen Proserpine
Each after other right as a line,
Whiles she gadred flowers in a mead:
In Claudian ye may the story read,
How in his grisely cart he her fet.
This king of Fayrie adoune him set
Upon a bench of turues fresh and green,
And right anon thus said he to his queen:
My wife (quoth. he) that may not say nay
Experience so proves every day
The treason which that women does to man,
Ten hundred thousand stories tell I can,
Notable, of your untruth and brotelnesse.
O Solomon, richest of all richesse,
Fulfild of sapience, and of worldly glory,
Full worthy ben thy words in memory
To every wight, that wit and reason can:
Thus praises he the bounty of man.
* Among a thousand men yet found I one,
But of all women found I never none:
Thus says ye king, yt knows your wickedness.
And Jesus Filius Sirach, as I guess,
Ne speaks of you but selde reverence:
A wild fire, a corrupt pestilence
So fall upon your bodies yet to night:
Ne see ye not this honorable knight?
Because (alas) that he is blind and old,
His own man shall maken him cuckold.
Lo where he sit, the letchour in the tree.
Now woll I grant of my majesty
Unto this old blind worthy knight,
That he shall have again his eye sight:
When that his wife would done him vilanie,
Then shall he know all her harlotrie,
Both in reprefe of her and other mo.
Ye shall (quoth. Proserpine) and woll ye so?
Now by my mothers soul sir I swear,
That I shall yeuen her sufficient answer.
And all women after for her sake:
That though they been in any gilt ytake
With face bold, they shullen hemselue excuse
And bear hem down that would hem accuse.
For lack of answer, non of hem shull dien,
All had he see a thing with both his eyes,
Yet should we women so visage it hardely,
And weep and swear and chide subtly,
That ye shall been as leude as are gees,
What recketh me of your authoritees?
I wot well this Jew, this Solomon,
Found of us women, fools many one:
But though he ne found no good woman,
Yet there has found many an other man
Women full true, full good, and virtuous;
Witness of hem that dwell in Christ's house,
With Martyrdom they preued her constance.
The Romain jests eke make remembrance
Of many a very true wife also.
But sir, he not wroth that it be so,
Though that he said he found no good woman
I pray you take the sentence of the man:
* He meant thus, That in soueraign bounte
His none but God, that sits in trinite.
Eye, for very God that nis but one.
What make ye so much of Solomon?
What though he made a temple, Gods house?
What though he were rich and glorious?
So made he a temple of false godis,
How might he don a thing yt more fore forbod is?
Parde as fair as ye his name emplaster,
He was a lechour, and an idolaster,
And in his elde, very God forsook.
And if that God and (as says the book)
Yspared him for his fathers sake, he should
Have lost his reign sooner than he would.
Iset not of all the villainy,
That ye of women write, a butterfly,
I am a woman, needs more I speak
Or else to swell till that mine heart break.
For sithen he said that we been iangleresses
As ever mote I hole broke my tresses,
I shall not spare for no courtesy
To speak hem harm, that would us villainy.
Dame (quoth. this Pluto) be no longer wroth,
I give it up: but since I swore mine oath,
That I would grant him his sight again,
My word shall stand, yt warn I you certain:
I am a king, it set me not to lie.
And I (quoth she) queen am of Fairie.
Her answer she shall have I undertake,
Let us no mo words hereof make:
Forsooth I will no longer you contrary.
Now let us turn again to January,
That in the garden with this fair May
Sings merier than the Popingay:
You love I best, and shall, and other non.
So long about the alleyes is he gone,
Till he was commen against thilke pery,
Where as this Damian sits full merry
On high, among these fresh leaves green.
This fresh May, that is so bright and shene
Began for to sike, and said: alas my side:
Now sir (quoth. she) for ought that may betide
I must have of these peers that here I see
Or I mote die, so sore longs me
To eten some of the small peers green:
Help for her love that is heavens queen.
I tell you well a woman in my plite,
May have to fruit so great an appetite,
That she may dyen, but she it have.
Alas (quoth. he) that I ne had here a knave,
That couth climb, alas, alas (quoth. he)
For I am blind, ye sir no force (quoth. she)
But would ye vouchsafe for Gods sake,
The pery in your arms for to take:
For well I wot that ye mistrust me,
Then would I climb well enough (quoth. she)
So I my foot might set upon your back.
Forsooth said he, in me shall be no lack,
Might I you help all with mine heart blood:
He stoupeth down, and on his back she stood,
And caught her by a twist, and up she goth.
Ladies I pray you that ye be not wroth,
I can not gloss, I am a rude man:
And suddenly anon this Damian
Began pullen up the smock, and in the throng
A great tent a thrifty and a long.
She said it was the meriest fit,
That ever in her life she was at yet:
My lords tent serves me nothing thus
It foldeth twifold by sweet Jesus,
He may not swiue not worth a leke:
And yet he is full gentill and full meke.
This is lever to me than an euensong.
And when that Pluto saw this wrong,
To January he gave again his sight,
And made him see as well as ever he might:
And when he had caught his sight again,
Ne was there never man of thing so feign:
But on his wife his thought was ever mo.
Up to the tree he cast his eyes two,
And saw how Damian his wife had dressed
In such mannere, it may not be expressed,
But if I would speak vncurtesly.
And up he yaf a roaring and a cry,
As does the mother when the child shall die:
Out help, alas, (harow) he began to cry:
For sorrow almost he began to die,
That his wife was swiued in the pery.
O strong lady whore what do thou?
And she answered: sir what ayleth you?
Have patience and reason in your mind,
I have you helped of both your eyes blind.
Up peril of my soul I shall not lien
As me was taught to help your eyes.
Was nothing bet for to make you see,
Than strogle with a man upon a tree:
God wot I did it in full good intent.
Strogle (quoth. he) ye algate in it went
As stiff and as round as any bell:
It is no wonder though thy belly swell.
Thy smock on his breast it lay so thech,
That still me thought he pointed on the brech.
God give you both on shames death to dien,
He swiued thee, I saw it with mine eyes,
Or else I be honged by the halse.
Then is (quoth. she) my medicine false,
For certainly, if that ye might see,
Ye would not say these words unto me,
Ye have some glimsing, and no perfect sight.
I see (quoth. he) as well as ever I might,
Thanked be God, with both mine eyes two,
And by my troth me thought he did so.
Ye mase ye mase, good sir (quoth she)
This thank have I for that I made you see:
Alas, quoth she, that ever I was so kind.
Now dame, quoth. he, let al pass out of mind:
Come down my sefe, and if I have missaid,
God help me so, as I am evil apaid.
But by my fathers soul, I wend have seyn,
How that this Damian had by thee lain,
And that thy smock had lain upon his breast,
Ye sir (quoth. she) ye may wene as ye lest:
* But sir, a man that waketh out of his sleep,
He may not suddenly well taken keep
Upon a thing, ne se it perfectly
Till that he be adawed verily.
* Right so a man that long has blind be,
Ne may not suddenly so well ysee
First when the sight is new comen again,
As he that has a day or two ysain.
Till that your sight istabled be awhile,
There may full many a sight you begile.
Beware I pray you, for by heaven king
* Full many a man weneth to see a thing,
And it is all another than it seems:
* He that misconceiueth often misdemeth.
And with that word she lept down fro ye tree:
This January who is glad but he?
He kisseth her, he cleppeth her full often,
And on her womb he stroketh her full often:
And to his paleis home he has her lad.
Now good men I pray you beth ye all glad.
Thus ends here my tale of January,
God bless us all, and his mother Marie.
The wife of Bathes Prologue.
Experience, though none authority
Were in this world, is right ynow for me
To speak of woe that is in marriage:
For lordings, since I twelve years was of age,
Thanked be God that is eterne on live,
Husbonds at church door have I had five
For I so often have ywedded be,
And all were worthy men in her degree.
But me was told not long ago iwis,
That sithen Christ went never but onis
To wedding, in the Cane of Galilee,
That by thilke ensample taught he me,
That I ne should wedded be but ones.
Lo here, which a sharp word for the nones,
Beside a well, Jesus God and man
Spoke in reprefe of the Samaritan:
Thou have had five husbonds (quoth he)
And that ilke man that now has thee,
Is not thyn husbond: thus said he certain,
What he meant hereby, I can not sain,
But that I ask a point, why the fifth man
Was not husbond to the Samaritan:
How many might she have in marriage?
Yet herd I never tellen in mine age
Upon this number true definitioun,
Men may divine, and glosen up and down.
But well I wot express without lie,
God bad us for to wex and multiply,
That gentle text can I well understand:
Eke well I wot (he said) mine husbond:
Should leave father and mother, and take to me,
But of number no mention made he
Of bigamie or of octogamie,
Why should men speak of it villainy?
Lo he the wise king Dan Solomon
I trow had wives many mo than on,
As would God it lefull were to me
To be refreshed half so often as he.
Which a gift of God had he, for his wyuis?
No man has such, that in this world a live is.
God wot this noble king, as to my wit
The first night had many a merry fit
With each of hem, so well was him alive.
Blessed be God, I have wedded sieve,
Welcome the sixth wheneuer he shall
Forsooth I woll not keep me chaste in all:
When mine husbond is fro the world ygon,
Some christen man shall wed me anon.
For then the Apostle says, that I am fre
To wed a godeshalfe where it likes me:
* He says, that to be wedded is no sin,
Better is to be wedded than to brinne.
What recketh me though folk say villainy
Of shreud Lamech, and of his bigamy?
I wot well Abraham was an holy man,
And Jacob eke, as fer as ever I hear can,
And each of hem had wives mo than two,
And many another holy man also.
Where can you say in any manner age
That ever God defended marriage
By express words, I pray you tell me?
Or where commanded he virginite?
I wot as well as ye, it is no dread,
The Apostle, when he spoke of maidenhead,
He said, thereof precept had he none:
Men may counsel a woman to be one,
* But counsailing is no commandment,
He put it wholly in our own judgment.
For had God commanded maidenhead,
Then had he damned wedding out of dread.
* And certes, if there were no seed ysow,
Virginity then whereof should it grow?
Poule ne durst not command at the lest
A thing, of which his master yafe none hest:
The dart is set up for virginite,
Catch who so may, who runs best let see.
But this word is not taken of every wight,
But there as God list give it of his might.
I wot well that the Apostle was a maid,
But natheles, though that he wrote and said
He would that every wight were such as he,
All nis but counsel to virginite.
And for to ben a wife he yaue me leave,
Of indulgence, so nis it to repreue
To v^ed me, if that my make die
Without exception of bigamie:
All were it good no woman for to touch,
He meant as in his bed or in his couch.
* For peril is, both fire and tow to assemble,
Ye know what this ensample may resemble.
This is all and some, he held virginite
More perfect than wedding in freelte.
Freelte clepe I, but if that he and she
Would lead her life all in chastity.
I grant it well, I have none envy,
Though maidenhead prefer bigamie,
It likes hem to be clean in body and ghost:
Of mine estate I woll make no bost.
For well ye know, a lord in his household
Has not every vessel all of gold:
Some been of tree, and don her lord service
God clepeth folk to him in sundry wise,
And euerich has of God a proper gift,
Some this, some that, as him likes shift.
Virginity is great perfection,
And continence eke with devotion:
But Christ, that of perfection is well,
Bad not every wight he should go sell
All that he had, and give it to the poor,
And in such wise follow him and his lore:
He spoke to hem that would live parfectly,
And lordings (by your leave) that am not I,
I wol bestow the flower of all mynage
In the acts and fruit of marriage.
Tell me also, to what conclusion
Were members made of generation?
And of so perfect wise a wight iwrought?
Trusts well, they were not made for nout,
Gloss who so woll, and say up and down
That they were made for purgatioun
Of urine, and other things small,
And eke to know a female from a male,
And for none other cause, what say ye no?
The experience wot well it is not so:
So that the clerks be not with me wroth,
I say that they were maked for both,
This is to saien, for office, and for ease
Of engendrure, there we not God displease.
Or why should men else in her books set,
That man should yield to his wife her det?
Now wherewith should he pay his payment
If he ne used his sely instrument?
Then were they made upon a creature
To purge urine, and eke for engendrure.
But I say not that every wight is hold,
That has such harness as I to you told,
To gone and vsen hem to engendrure,
Then should men take of chastity no cure.
Christ was a maid, and shapen as a man,
And many a saint, sithen the world began,
Yet lived they ever in perfect charity:
I nill envy no virginity.
Let hem with bread of pure wheat be fed,
And let us wives eat barley bread,
And yet with barley bread, Mark tell can,
Our lord Jesus refreshed many a man.
In such a state as God has cleped us,
I woll persevere, I nam not precious,
In wifehood woll I use mine instrument
As freely as my maker has it sent.
If I be dangerous, god give me sorrow,
Mine husbond shall it have both euin and morrow,
When that him list come forth and pay his det,
An husbond wol I have I wol not let,
Which shall be both my debtour and my thrall,
And have his tribulation withal
Upon his flesh, while that I am his wife.
I have the power during all my life
Upon his proper body, and not he,
Right thus the Apostle told to me,
And bad our husbonds for to love us well,
All this sentence me likes every dell.
Up stert the Pardoner, and that anon,
Now dame quoth. he, by God and by saint John,
Ye been a noble preacher in this caas:
I was about to wed a wife, alas
What, should I bie it on my flesh so dear?
Yet had I lever wed no wife to year.
Abide quoth. she, my tale is not begone:
Nay, thou shall drink of another ton
Er that I go, shall sauer worse than ale,
And when that I have told forth my tale
Of tribulation that is in marriage,
Of which I am expert in all mine age,
This is to say, my self has been the whip,
Then may thou chese wheder thou wolt sip
Of thilke ton, that I shall set abroch:
Beware of it, er thou to nere aproch.
For I shall tell ensamples mo than ten:
* Who so woll not beware by other Men
By him shall other men corrected be:
These same words writes Dan Ptholome,
Read in his almagest, and take it there.
Dame I woll pray you, if your will were,
Said this Pardoner, as ye began,
Tell forth your tale, spares for no Man,
And teach us young Men of your practike.
Gladly (quoth. she) if it may you like.
But that I pray to all this company,
If that I speak after my fantasy,
As takes not a grief of that I say,
For mine intent is not but to play.
Now sirs, then shall I tell forth my tale:
As ever might I drink wine or ale
I shall say sooth. Tho husbonds that I had
Three of hem were good, and two were bad:
The three good men were rich and old,
Uneaths might they the stature hold,
In which they were bounden unto me.
Ye wot well what I mean of this parde:
As God me help, I laugh when I think,
How pitiously a night I made hem swinke,
But by my fay, I told of it no store:
They had me give her land and her treasore,
Me neded no longer to do diligence
To win her love, and do hem reverence.
They loved me so well by God above,
That I ne told no deinte of her love.
* A wise woman woll besie her ever in one
To get her love there as she has none.
But sithen I had hem holly in mine hond,
And that they had give me all her land,
What, should I take keep hem for to please,
But it were for my profit and mine ease?
I set hem so a work by my fay,
That many a might they songen well away:
The bacon was not fet for hem I trow,
That some men have in Essex at Donmow.
I governed hem so well after my law,
That each of hem full blisfull was and faw
To bring me gay things home fro the fair.
They were full fain when I spoke hem fair:
For God it wot, I chid hem spitously.
Now herkeneth how I bear me properly.
Ye wise wives that can understand,
Thus shul ye speak, and bear hem on hond,
* For half so boldly there can no man
Swear and lie, as a woman can:
I say not this by wives that been wise,
But if it be when they him miss auise.
* A wise wife shall if that she can her good,
Bear hem in hond that the cow is wood,
And taken witness of her own maid
Of her assent: but herkeneth how I said.
Sir old keynard, is this thine array,
Why is my neighbors wife so gay?
She is honored over all where she goth,
I sit at home, and have no thriftie cloth.
What do thou sirrah at my neighbors house?
Is she so fair? art thou so amorous?
What rownest thou with our maid? benedicite
Sir old lechour, let thy yapes be.
And if I have a Gossip or a friend
(Without gilt) thou chidest as a fiend,
If that I walk or play unto his house:
Thou come home as drunken as Mouse,
And preachest on thy bench with evil prefe:
Thou say to me it is a great mischief
To wed a poor woman, for costage:
And if that she be rich of high parage,
Then say thou, it is a very tourmentrie
To suffer her pride and her Melancholy.
And if that she be fair, thou very knave,
Thou say that every holour woll her have.
She may no while in chastity abide,
That is assailed on every side.
Thou say some folk desiren us for richesse,
Some for our shape, and some for our fairness,
And some, for she can either sing or dance,
And some for gentleness or for daliance,
Some for her honds and her arms small:
Thus goes all to the devil by thy tale.
Thou say Men may not keep a castle wall,
It may so long assailed be over all.
And if that she be foul, thou say that she
Coueteth every Man that she may see.
For as a Spaniell, she woll on him lepe,
Til that she find some man that wol her chepe:
* Ne none so gray Gose goth there in the lake
(As say thou) yt woll been without her make.
And say, it is a hard thing for to welde
A wight, that no man woll his thonke held.
Thus say thou lorell, when thou go to bed,
That no wise Man needs for to wed,
Ne no man that entendeth unto heuin.
With wild thunder dent and fire leuin
Mote thy wicked neck be all to broke.
* Thou say, dropping houses, and eke smoke,
And chiding wives maken Men to flee
Out of her own house, ah, Benedicite,
What aileth such an old man for to chide?
Thou say, we wives woll our vices hide,
Till we be wedded, and than we wol hem show.
Well may this be a proverb of a shrew.
Thou say, that oxen, horses, asses, and hounds,
They ben assaied at diverse stounds:
Basins, lauers, or that Men hem bie,
Spones, stools, and all such husbondrie,
And so be pots, clothes, and araies,
But folk of wives maken non assaies,
Till they been wedded, old dotard shrew,
And say, how we woll than our vices show.
Thou say also, that it displeases me,
But if that thou will praise my beauty,
And but thou pore always on my face,
And clepe me fair dame in every place:
And but thou maken a feast on that ilke day
That I was borne, and make me fresh and gay:
And but thou done to my norice honor,
And to my chamber within my bour:
And to my fathers folk, and his alies,
Thus say thou old barell full of lies.
And again of our prentise Ienkin,
For his crispe here, shining as gold fine,
And for he squireth me both up and down,
Have thou caught a false suspection:
I woll him not, tho thou were ded to morrow.
But tell me this, why hidest thou with sorrow
The keys of thy chest away fro me?
It is my good as well as thine parde.
What, wenest thou make an idiot of our dame
Now by that Lord that called is saint Iame
Thou shall not both although thou were wood
Be master of my body and of my good,
That one thou shall forgon maugre thin iyen.
What helps it of me to enquere and spien?
I trow thou would lock me in thy chist?
Thou should say, Wife, go where thou list,
Take your disport, I woll leave no tales,
I know you for a true wife dame Ales.
We love no Man, yt takes keep or charge
Where that we go, we woll be at our large.
Of all Men iblessed mote he be
The wise Astrologien Dan Ptholome,
That says this proverb in his almagest,
* Of all Men his wisdom is the best,
That recketh not who has the world in hond.
By this proverb thou shall understand,
Have thou inow, what need thee recke or care
How merely that other folk do fare.
For certes, old dotarde by your leave,
Ye shallen have queint inow at eve.
* He is too great a nigard that woll werne
A man to light a candle at his Lantern:
He shall have never the less light parde.
Have thou inow, thou dare not plain thee:
Thou say also, that if we make us gaie
With clothes or with precious array,
That it is peril of our chastity:
And yet with sorrow, thou must enforcen thee,
And say these words in the Apostles name:
In habit made with chastity and shame
Ye women should appareile you (quoth. he)
And not in tressed here, and gay peer
As perle, ne with gold, ne clothes rich.
After the text, ne after thy rubriche
I nill not worche as much as a Gnat.
Thou say also, I was like a Cat:
* But who so would senge the Cats skin,
Than would the Cat dwellen in his Inn:
And if the Cats skin be stick and gay,
She nill not dwell in house half a day,
But forth she woll or any day be dawed
To show her skin, and gone a catrewawed,
Thus thou say, if I be gaie, sir shrew,
I woll ren out, my borell for to show.
Sir old fool what helps thee to spien?
Though thou play Argus with his C. eyes
To be my wardcors, as he can best,
In faith he shall not keep me but my lest:
* Yet couth I make his beard so mote I thee.
Thou say eke yt there been things three
The which greatly troublen all the earth,
And that no wight may endure the ferth:
O, lefe sir shrew, Jesus short thy life.
Yet preachest thou, and say, an hateful wife
Rekened is for one of these mischaunces:
Been there non other resemblaunces
That ye may liken your parables to
But if a sely wife be one of tho?
Thou likenest eke woman's love to hell,
To barren land, there water may not dwell:
Thou likenest it also to wild fire,
The more it brenneth, the more it has desire
To consume any thing, that brent would be.
Thou say, right as worms shenden a tree,
Right so a wife destroieth her husbond,
This known they that been to wives bond.
Lordings, right thus as ye have understand
Bare I stiffely mine old husbond on hond,
That thus they saiden in her drunkenness,
And all was false, but as I took witness
Of Ienken, and of my niece also:
O Lord the pain I did hem, and the woe,
And that full giltles by Gods sweet pine:
* For as an horse, I couth both bite and whine,
I couth plain, though I were in the gilt,
Or else oftentime I had been spilt.
* Who so first to Mill comes, first grint,
I plained first, and so was our war istint:
They were full glad to excusen hem bliue
Of thing, that they a gilt never in her life.
Of wenches would I bear hem on hond,
When yt for sick, vnneths might they stond,
Yet tickled I his heart for that he
Wend I had of him so great cheerte:
I swore that all my walking out by night,
Was for to epsy wenches that he dight:
Under that color had I much mirth,
For all such wit is given us in our birth,
* Disceipt, weeping, spinning, God have give
To women, kindly while that they live.
And thus of a thing I may auaunt me,
At the end I had the best in each degree,
By sleight or force, or by some manner thing,
As by continual murmr or grudging.
Namely a bed had they muckle mischance,
There would I chide, and don no pleasance:
I would no longer in the bed abide
(If I felt his arm over my side)
Till he had made his raunsom unto me,
Then would I suffer him do his nicete.
And therefore, every man this tale I tell,
* Wiue who so may, all been for to sell:
* With empty honds men may no hauks lure,
For winning would I all his lust endure,
And make me then a fained appetite,
And yet in Bacon had I never delight:
That maked me ever yt I would hem chide.
For though the Pope had sitten hem beside,
I would not spare hem at her own board,
For by my truth I quit him word for word,
As help me very God omnipotent,
Tho I right now should make my testament,
I ne owe hem a word, but it is quit,
I brought it so about by my wit,
That they must give it up, as for the best,
Or else had we never been in rest.
For though he looked as wood as a Lion,
Yet should he fail of his conclusion.
Then would I say (good lefe) take keep,
How meekly looks wilken our sheep:
Com near my spouse, and let me kiss your cheek.
Ye should be all patient and meek,
And have a sweet spiced conscience,
Since ye so preach of Jobs patience,
Suffers always since ye so well can preach,
And but if ye do, we shall you teach,
That it is fair to have a wife in pees,
One of us two mote obeien doubtless:
* And since a man is more reasonable
Than a woman is, ye must been sufferable.
What aileth you to grutch thus and groan?
Is it for ye would have my queint alone?
Why take it all: lo, have it every del,
Peter I shrew you but ye love it well.
For if I would sell my belchose,
I couth walk as fresh as any rose,
But I woll keep it for your own tooth:
Ye be to blame by God, I say you sooth.
Such manner words had we often on hond.
And now will I speak of my fourth husbond.
My fourth husbond was a reuellour,
This is to say, he had a Paramour,
And I was young and full of ragarie,
Stubburne and strong, and ioly as a Pie,
Well coud I dance, to an Harp small,
And sing iwis as a Nightingale,
When I had drunken a draught of sweet wine.
Mettellus, the foul churl and the swine,
That with a staff bireft his wife her life
For she drunk wine: though I had be his wife,
Ne should he not have daunted me fro drink:
And after wine, of Venus must I think.
* For all so seker, as cold engenders hail,
A licorus mouth must hane a lecherous tail.
* In women vinolent is no defense,
This know lechours by experience.
But lord Christ, when it remembers me
Upon my youth, and my iolite,
It tickleth me about the heart root,
Unto this day it does my heart boot,
That I have had my world as in my time:
But age alas, that all woll enuenime
Has me bireft my beauty and my pith:
Let go, farewell, the devil go therewith.
* The flower is gone, there nis no more to tell,
The bran (as I best can) now mote I sell.
But yet to be right merry woll I fond,
Now forth to tell of my fourth husbond.
I say I had in heart great dispite,
That he of any other had delight:
But he was quit by God and saint Ioce,
* I made him of the same wood a troce,
Not of my body in no foul manner,
But certainly, I made folk such chere,
* That in his own grease I made him fry
For anger, and for very jelousie.
By God, in earth I was his purgatory,
For which I hope his soul been in glory.
For God it wot, he sat full often and song,
When that his shoe full bitterly him wrong.
There was none, save God and he, that wist
In many wise, how sore that I him twist,
He died when I came fro Jerusalem,
And lies in grave under the Rode beem.
All nis not his tomb so curious
As was the sepulture of Darius,
Which that Appelles wrought so subtly:
It is but wast to bury him preciously.
Let him farewell, God give his soul good rest,
He is now in his grave and in his chest.
Now of my fifth husbond woll I tell,
God let never his soul come in hell.
And yet was he to me the most shrew,
That feel I on my ribs all by rue,
And ever shall, unto mine ending day.
But in our bed he was so fresh and gay,
And therewithal, he couth so well me gloss,
When that he would have my belly chose,
That though he had me beat on every bone,
He couth win again my love anon.
I trow I loved him the bet, for that he
Was of his love so dangerous to me.
We women have, if that I shall not lie
In this mattere a queint fantasy.
* Wait to thing we may not lightly have,
Thereafter woll we all day cry crave.
Forbid us thing, and that desiren we:
Prese on us fast, and then woll we flee.
With danger vttren we all our chaffare,
* Great prees at market makes dear ware.
And to great cheap is hold at to little prise,
This knows every woman that is wise.
My fifth husbonde, God his soul bless,
Which I took for love and no richesse,
He sometime was a clerk in Oxenford,
And had left schole, and went at home to board
With my Gossip dwelling in our town:
God have her soul, her name was Alisoun.
She knew my heart and eke my priuite,
Bet than our parish priest so mote I thee,
To her bewrayed I my counsel all,
For had my husbond pist again the wall,
Or done a thing that should have cost his life,
To her, and to another worthy wife,
And to my nece, which that I loved well.
I would have told his counsel every dell,
And so I did full often God it wot
That made his face full often red and hot
For very shame, and blamed himself, for he
Had told to me so great a priuite.
And so befell that ones in a Lent
So often time I to my Gossip went.
For ever yet I loved to go gaie,
And for to walk in March, April, and May
Fro house to house, to hearken sundry tales,
That Ienkin clerk, and my Gossip dame Ales,
And I my self, into the fields went:
My husbond was at London all that Lent,
I had the better leisure for to pleie,
And for to see, and eke for to be seie
Of lusty folk, what wist I where my grace
Was shapen for to been, or in what place?
Therefore made I my visitations
To Villages, and to processions,
To preachings eke, and to pilgrimages,
To plays of miracles, and to marriages,
And weared on my gaie skarlet gites:
These worms, these moughts, ne these mites
Upon my parell fret hem never a dell,
And wost thou why? for they were used well.
Now woll I tell forth what happed me:
I say, that in the fields walked we,
Till truly we had such daliance
This clerk and I, that of my purueyance
I speak to him, and said how that he,
If I were widow, should wedden me.
For certainly, I say for no boastance,
Yet was I never without purueyance
Of marriage, ne of other things eke:
I hold a Mouses wit not worth a Leke.
That has but one hole to sterten to,
And if that fail, then is all idoe.
I bare him on hand he had enchanted me:
My Dame taught me forsooth that subtlety,
And eke I said, I met of him all night,
He would a slain me, as I lay upright,
And all my bed was full of very blood,
But yet I hope truly he should do me good:
For blood betokens gold, as I was taught.
And al was falls, I dremed of hem right naut;
But as I followed aye my Dames lore,
As well of that as of other things more.
But now sir let me see, what shall I sain:
A ha, by God I have my tale again.
When that my fourth husband was on here,
I wept algate and made heavy chere,
As wives moten, for it is usage:
And with my kerchefe covered my visage.
But for that I was purueyed of a make,
I wept but small, and that I undertake.
To church was my husbond born on morrow
With neighbors yt for him maiden sorrow,
And Ienken our clerk was one of tho:
As help me God, when that I saw him go
After the bear, me thought he had a pair
Of legs and of feet, so clean and so fair,
That all my heart I yaue unto his hold,
He was I trow twenty Winter old,
And I was forty, if I shall say footh,
But yet I had always a Colts tooth:
Gaptothed I was, and that became me well,
I had the print of dame Venus seal.
As help me God, I was a lusty one,
And fair, rich, and young, and well bigone:
And truly, as mine husbond told me
I had the best queint that might be.
For certes I am all fully Venerian
In feeling, and my heart is Marcian:
Venus me yaue my lust and my licorousnesse
And Mars yaue me my sturdie hardiness.
Mine ascendent was Taure, and Mars therein:
Alas, alas, that ever love was sin.
I followed aye mine inclination
By virtue of my constellation:
That made me I couth never withdraw
My chamber of Venus from a good fellaw.
Yet have I Martes mark upon my face,
And also in another privy place.
For God so wisely be my salvation,
I loved never by no discretion,
But ever followed mine appetite,
All were he short, long, black, or white,
I took no keep, so that he liked me,
How poor he was, ne eke of what degree.
What should I say? but at ye months end
This jolly clerk Ienken, that was so hend,
Has wedded me with great solemnitee,
And to him yaue I all the land and fee,
That ever was yeuen me here before:
But afterward repented me full sore,
He nold suffer nothing of my list.
By God he smote me once with his fist,
For that I rent out of his book a lefe
That of that stroke my ears wex defe.
Stubborn I was, as is a Lioness,
And of my tongue a very iangleresse.
And walk I would, as I had done beforn
Fro house to house, although he had it sworn:
For which full oftentime would he preach,
And me of old Roman jests teach.
How he Sulpitius Gallus left his wife,
And her forsook for term of his life,
Not but for open head he her seie
Looking out at his door on a day.
Another Roman told he me by name,
That for his wife was at a Summer game
Without his weting, he forsook her eke.
And then would he upon his Bible seek
That ilke proverb of Ecclesiast,
Where he commands, and forbids fast,
A man shall not suffer his wife roile about.
Then would he say right thus out of dout:
* Who so builds his house all of sallowes,
And pricketh his blind horse over the fallowes
And suffers his wife for to seche hallowes,
Is worthy to be honged on the gallows.
But all for naught, I set not an haw
Of his proverbs, ne of his old saw:
Ne I would not of him corrected be,
I hate him that my vices tells me,
And so do mo (God it wot) than I.
This made him wood with me all utterly,
I nold not forbear him in no caas.
Now woll I say you sooth by S. Thomas,
Why that I rent out of his book a lefe,
For which he smote me, that I was defe.
He had a book, that gladly night and day
For his disport, he would read always:
He cleped it Valerie, and Theophrast,
At which book he lough always full fast.
And eke there was a clerk sometime at Rome,
A Cardinal, that hight saint Jerome,
That made a book against Iouinian,
In which book there was eke Tertullian,
Crisippus, Trotula, and Helowis,
That was Abbess not far fro Paris:
And eke the parables of Solomon,
Ouids art, and books many one,
And all these were bounden in one volume,
And every night and day was his custom
(When he had leisure and vacatioun
From other worldly occupatioun)
To readen in this book of wicked wives:
He knew of hem mo legends and lives,
Than been of good women in the Bible.
For trusts well, it is an impossible,
That any clerk would speak good of wives,
But if it been of holy saints lives,
Ne of none other woman nere the mo
* Who painteth the Lion, tell me who?
By God, if women had written stories,
As clerks han, within her oratories,
They would have writ of men more wickedness
Than all the mark of Adam may redress.
The children of Mercury and Venus
Been in her working full contrarious.
Mercury loves wisdom and science,
And Venus loves riot and dispense.
And for her diverse disposition,
Each falls in others exaltation.
And thus God wot, Mercury is desolate
In Pisces, where Venus is exaltate,
And Venus falls where Mercury is reised,
Therefore no woman of no clerk is preised.
* The clerk when he is old, and may naught do
Of Venus works, not worth his old sho,
Then sit he down, and writ in his dotage,
That women cannot keep her marriage.
But now to purpose, why I told thee,
That I was beaten for a book parde.
Upon a night Ienken, that was our sire,
Red upon his book, as he sat by the fire,
Of Eve first, that for her wickedness,
Was all mankind brought to wretchedness:
For which yt Jesus Christ himself was slain,
That bought us with his heart blood again.
Lo here express of women may ye find,
That woman was the loss of all mankind.
Tho rad he me how Sampson lost his here is
Sleping, his lemman cut hem with her sheres
Through which treason lost he both his eyes,
Tho rad he me, if that I shall not lien,
Of Hercules, and of his Deianire,
That caused him to set himself a fire.
Nothing forgot he the care and the woe
That Socrates had with his wives two:
How that Xantippe cast piss on his head,
This silly man sat still, as he were dead,
He wiped his head no more durst he saine,
But er the thunder stint there comes rain.
Of Pasiphae, that was queen of Crete,
For shreudnesse him thought y^ tale was sweet.
Fie, speak no more, it is a grisely thing,
Of her horrible lust and her liking.
Of Clitemnestra for her letcherie,
That falsely made her husbond for to die,
He rad it with well good devotion.
He told me eke, for what occasion
Amphiaraus at Thebes lost his life:
My husbond had a legend of his life.
Eriphilem, that for an ouche of gold
Has privily unto the Greeks told,
Where that her husbond hid him in a place,
For which he had at Thebes sorry grace.
Of Lima told he me, and of Lucie:
They both made her husbonds for to die,
That one for love, that other was for hate:
Lima her husbond on an euin late
Empoysoned had, for that she was his fo:
Lucia Is^erous loved her husbond so,
That for he should always upon her think,
She gave him such a love manner drink,
That he were dead ere it were morrow:
And thus algates husbonds han sorrow.
Then told he me, how one Latumeus
Complained to his fellow Arius,
That in his garden growed such a tree,
On which (he said) that his wives three
Honged hemselfe for hearts dispitous:
O lefe brother (quoth. this Arius)
Give me a plant of this blisful tree,
And in my garden planted shall it be.
Of latter date of wives has he red,
That some han slain her husbands in bed,
And let her letchour dight hem all the night,
Whiles that the corse lay in floor upright.
And some had driven nails in her brain,
Whiles they sleep, and thus they have hem slain.
Some have give hem poison in her drink:
He spoke more harm than any heart may think,
And therwithall he knew mo proverbs,
Than in this world there grows grass or herbs.
* Bet is (quoth. he) thine habitation
Be with a Lion, or a foul Dragon,
Than with a woman using for to chide.
* Bet is (quoth. he) high in the roof to abide,
Than with an angry wife down in an house,
They ben so wicked and so contrarious:
They haten, that their husbonds louen aie.
* He said, a woman cast her shame away,
When she cast off her smock: and farther mo,
A fair woman, but she be chaste also,
Is like a gold ring on a Sowes nose.
Who coud wen^, or who coud suppose
The woe that in miue heart was and pine.
And when I saw he would never fine
To reden on this cursed book all night,
All suddenly three leaves have I plight
Out of his book, right as he radde, and eke
I with my fist so took him on the cheke,
That in the fire he fell backward adoun:
And up he stert, as does a wood Lioun,
And with his fist he smote me on mine head,
That in the floor I lay as I were dead.
And when he seie how still that I lay,
He was aghast, and would have fled away,
Till at the last out of my swoun I braied:
Oh, have thou slain me false thief I said,
For my land thus have thou murdered me?
Et I be dead, yet woll I once kiss thee,
And near he came, and kneeled fair adoun,
And said: dear suster, sweet Alisoun,
As help me God I shall thee never smite:
That I have done it is thy self to wite,
Foryeue it me, and that I thee beseke.
And yet eftsoons I hit him on the cheke,
And said: thief, thus much am I bewreke,
Now woll I die, I may no longer speak.
But at the last, with mokell care and woe
We fell accorded within out selves two:
He yafe me all the bridle in mine hond
To have the governance of house and land,
And of his tongue, and of his hond also,
And I made hem bren his book anon tho.
And when I had gotten unto me
By maistrie, all the soueraignte,
And that he said: mine own true wife,
Do as thou list, the tear me of all thy life,
Keep thine honor, and eke mine estate,
After that day we had never debate.
God help me so, I was to him as kind,
As any wife fro Denmark unto Inde,
And also true, and so was he to me.
I pray to God that sit in Majesty
So bliss his soul, for his mercy dear,
Now woll I say my tale if ye woll hear.
The Friar lough when he had heard all this:
Now dame (quoth. he) so have I joy or blis,
This is a long preamble of a tale.
And when the Sompner herd the friar gale,
Lo (quoth. this Sompner) by Gods arms two,
A Friar woll entermete him euermo:
* Lo good men, a Fly and eke a Friar
Woll fall in every dish and eke matere.
What speak thou of preambulatioun?
What amble or trot? either peace or sit adoun:
Thou let our disport in this mattere.
Ye wolt thou so sit Sompner (quoth. ye Friar)
Now by my fay I shall, ere that I go,
Tell of a Sompner such a tale or two,
That all the folk shull laugh in this place.
Now do, else Friar I beshrew thy face
(Quoth. this Sompner) and I beshrew me,
But if I tell tales two or three
Of Freres, ere I come to Sitting burn,
That I shall make thine heart for to murne:
For well I wot thy patience is gone.
Our host cried peace, and that anon,
And said: let the woman tell her tale,
Ye faren as folk that dronken been of ale:
So dame, tell forth your tale, and that is best.
All ready sir (quoth. she) right as you lest,
If I have license of this worthy Friar.
Yes dame, tell forth your tale, I woll it here.
A Batcheler of King Arthurs Court is enjoined by the Queen to tell what thing
it is that Women most desire. At length he is taught it by an old Woman, who
for that cause is enforced to marry her.

The wife of Bathes Tale.
IN the old days of King Artour,
(Of which the Bretons speaken great honor)
All was this land fulfilled of Fairie,
The Elfe queen, with her jolly company
Daunced full often in many a green mead:
This was the old opinion as I read.
I speak of many an hundred year ago,
But now can no man see none elfes mo,
For now the great charity and prayeres
Of limitours and other holy Freres,
That fearchen every land and every stream,
As thick as motes in the Sun beam,
Blissing hals, chambers, kitchens, and boures,
Cities, boroughes, castles, and hie toures,
Thropes, Bernes, Shepens, and Dairies,
This makes that there been no Fairies:
* For there as wont to walk was an Elfe,
There walks now the limitour himself
In vndermeles, and in mornings,
And says his Mattins and his holy things
As he goes in his limitatioun:
Women may go safely up and down
An every bush, and under every tree,
There nis none other incubus but he,
And he ne will done hem no dishonor.
And so fell it, that this king Artour
Had in his house a lusty batcheler,
That on a day came riding fro the river:
And happed, that alone as he was borne,
He saw a maid walking him beforne,
Of which maid anon, maugre her head,
(By very force) he beraft her maidenhead:
For which oppression was such clamor,
And such pursuit unto king Artour,
That damned was this knight to be dead
By course of law, and should have lost his head.
Perauenture such was the statute tho:
But that the Queen and other ladies mo
Sa long praiden the king of his grace,
Till he his life granted in that place,
And yaue him to the queen, all at her will
To chese where yt she would him save or spill.
The queen thanketh ye king with all her might
And after this, thus spoke she to the knight,
When she sey her time on a certain day.
Thou stands yet (quoth. she) in such array,
That of thy life yet have thou no surete:
A grant thee thy life, if thou can tell me
What thing is it that women most desiren:
Beware, and keep thy neck bone from yren.
And if thou can not tell it me anon,
Yet woll I give thee leave for to gone
A tweluemonth and a day, to seek and lere
An answer sufficient in this matere.
And suertie woll I have, ere that thou pass,
Thy body for to yield in this place.
Woe was the knight, and sorrowfully likes:
But what? he may not done all as him likes.
And at last he chese him for to wend,
And come again right at the years end
With such answer, as God would him puruay:
And takes his leave, and wendeth forth his way.
He seeks every house and every place,
Where as he hops for to find grace,
To learn what thing women louen most:
But he ne couth arriuen in no coost,
Where as he might find in this matere
Two creatures according yfere.
Some said, women loved best richesse,
Some said honor, some said jollinesse,
Some said rich array, some said lust a bed,
And often time to been widow and wed.
Some said, that our heart is most yeased
When that we been flatered and ypraised.
He goes full me the sooth, I woll not lie,
* A man shall win us best with flattery,
And with attendaunce, and with business
Ben we ylimed both more and less.
And some men sain, how that we louen best
For to been free, and do right as us lest:
And that no man repreue us of our vice,
But say that we be wise, and nothing nice.
For truly there nis none of us all,
If any wight woll claw us on the gall,
That we nill like, for that he says us footh:
Assay, and he shall find it, that so does.
* For be we never so vicious within,
We woll be holden wise and clean of sin.
And some men sain, that great delight have we
For to been hold stable and eke secre,
And in o purpose steadfastly to dwell,
And not bewray thing that men us tell.
But that tale is not worth a rake stele,
* Parde we women can nothing hele,
Witness of Midas, woll ye here the tale?
Ovid, among other things small
Said, Midas had under his long hairs
Growing on his head two asses ears:
The which vice he hid, as he best might,
Full subtly from every man's sight:
That save his wife, there wist of it no mo,
He loved her most, and trusted her also,
He prayed her, that to no creature
She nold tellen of his disfigure.
She swore him, not for all the world to win,
She nold do that villainy, ne that sin,
To maken her husbond have so foul a name:
She nold not tell it for her own shame.
But natheles, her thought that she did,
That she so long should a counsel hide,
Her thought it swoll so sore about her heart,
That needely some word she must astert:
And since she durst tellen it to no man,
Down to a marris fast by she ran,
Till she came there, her heart was on a fire:
And as a bittour bumbeth in the mite,
She laid her mouth unto the water adoun.
Bewray me not thou water with thy soun
Quoth. she, to thee I tell it, and to no mo,
Mine husbond has long Asses ears two.
Now is mine heart all hole, now it is out,
I might no longer keep it out of dout.
* Here mow ye see, though we a time abide,
Yet out it mote, we can no counsel hide.
The remnaunt of the tale, if ye will here,
Reads Ovid, and there ye may it lere.
This knight, of which my tale is specially,
When that he saw he might not come thereby,
This is to say, what women louen most:
Within his heart sorrowful was his ghost.
But home he goth, he might not soiourne,
The day was come, he must home return.
And in his way, it happed him to ride
In all his care, under a forest side,
Whereas he saw upon a dance go
Of ladies four and twenty, and yet mo:
Toward the dance he drow him full yerne,
In hope that some wisdom should he learn.
But certainly, ere that he came fully there,
Vanished was the dance, he nist not where,
No creature saw he that bare life,
Save in the green sitting an old wife:
A fouler wight there may no man devise.
Again the knight the old wife began arise,
And said: sir knight, here forth lies no way,
Tell me what ye seeken by your fay,
Peradventure it may the better be:
* These old folk con much thing (quoth. she.)
My lefe mother (quoth. this knight) certain,
I nam but dead, but if that I can saine,
What thing it is that women most desire:
Coud ye me wisse, I would quite well your hire.
Plight me thy troth here in my hand (quoth. she)
The next thing that I require of thee
Thou shall it do, if it be in thy might,
And I woll tell it you or it be night.
Have here my troth (quoth. ye knight) I grant.
Then (quoth. she) I may me well auaunt,
Thy life is safe, for I woll stond thereby,
Upon my life the queen will say as I:
Let see, which is the proudest of hem all
That wears on a kerchefe or a call,
That dare say nay, of that I shall you teach,
Let us go forth without longer speech.
Tho rowned she a pistell in his ear,
And had him to be glad, and have no fear.
When they ben comen to ye court, the knight
Said, he had hold his day, as he had hight,
And ready was his answer, as he said:
Full many a noble wife, and many a maid
And many a widow, for that they be wise,
(The queen her self sitting as a justice)
Assembled ben, his answer for to hear,
And afterward this knight was bode apeare.
To every wight commanded was silence,
And that the knight should tell in audience,
What thing that worldly women loved best:
This knight ne stood not still as does a beast,
But to his question anon answered
With manly voice, that all the court it herd.
My liege lady: generally (quoth. he)
Women desiren to have soueraignte
As well over her husbonds as her love,
And for to ben in maistrie hem above.
This is your most desire, though ye me kill,
Does as you list, I am here at your will.
In all the court nas there wife ne maid
Ne widow, that contraried that he said,
But said, he was worthy han his life.
And with that word, up stert the old wife,
Which yt the knight found sitting on ye green:
Mercy (quoth. she) my sovereign lady queen,
Ere that your court depart do me right:
I taught this answer unto this knight,
For which he plight me his troth there,
The first thing I would of him requere,
He would it do, if it lay in his might:
Before the court then pray I thee sir knight,
(Quoth. she) that thou me take unto thy wife,
For well thou wost, that I have kept thy life:
If I say false, say nay upon thy fay.
This knight answered, alas and welaway:
I wot right well that such was my behest,
For Gods love chese a new request:
Take all my good, and let my body go.
Nay (quoth. she) then I shrew us both two.
For though that I be foul, old, and pore,
I nold for all the metal ne the ore,
That under yerth is grave, or lithe above,
But if I thy wife were and thy love.
My love (quoth. he) nay my damnation:
Alas that any of my nation
Should ever so foul disparaged be.
But all for naught, the end is this, that he
Constrained was, that needs must he her wed,
And takes this old wife, and goth to bed.
Now woulden some men say perauenture
That for my negligence, I do no cure
To tellen you the joy and the array,
That at the feast was that ilke day.
To the which thing answer shortly I shall:
I say there nas no joy ne feast at all,
There nas but heaviness and much sorrow:
For privily he wedded her on a morrow,
And all day after hid him as an oule.
So woe was him, his wife looked so foul.
Great was ye sorrow yt knit had in his thought
When he was with his wife a bed ybrought,
He walloweth, and turns to and fro.
His old wife lay smiling euermo,
And said: O dear husbond, O benedicite,
Fares every knight thus as do ye?
Is this the law of king Artours house?
Is every knight of his love so dangerous?
I am your own love, and eke your wife,
I am she, which that saved has your life,
And certes yet did I never you unright.
Why fare ye thus with me the first night?
Ye faren like a man that had lost his wit.
Fie, what is my gilt? for Gods love tell me it,
And it shall be amended if I may.
Amended (quoth. this knight) alas nay nay:
That woll not been amended never mo,
Thou art so loathly, and so old also,
And thereto comen of so low a kind,
That little wonder is though Iwallow and wind,
So would God (quoth. he) mine heart would breast,
Is this (quoth. she) the cause of your unrest?
Ye certainly (quoth. he) no wonder nis.
Now sir (quoth. she) I couth amend all this,
If that me list, ere it were days three,
So well ye might bear you unto me.
But for ye speak of such gentleness,
As is descended out of old richesse,
That therefore shullen ye be gentlemen:
Such errogaunce is not worth an hen.
* Lo who that is most virtuous always,
Preuy and apert, and most intends aye
To do the gentle deeds that he can,
Take him for the greatest gentleman.
Christ would we claimed of him our gentleness,
Not of our elders, for our old richesse.
* For though they give us all her heritage,
For which we claimen to ben of high parage,
Yet may they not bequeath, for nothing,
To none of us, her virtuous living,
That made hem gentlemen ycalled be,
And bad us followen hem in such degree.
Full well can the wise poet of Florence,
That hight Dantes, speak in this sentence:
Lo in such manner rhyme is Dantes tale.
* Full selde up rises by his branches small
Prowess of man, for God of his goodness
Woll that we claim of him our gentleness:
For of our elders may we nothing claim
But temporal thing, yt men may hurt and maime.
Eke every wight wot this as well as I,
If gentleness were planted naturally
Unto a certain lineage down the line,
Preuy and apert, then would they never fine
To done of gentleness the fair office,
They might done no villainy ne vice.
Take fire and bear it into the derkest house
Betwixt this and the mount Caucasus,
And let men shut the doors, and go then,
Yet woll the fire as fair lie and brenne
As twenty thousand men might it behold:
His office natural aye woll it hold
Upon peril of my life, till that it die.
* Here may ye see well, how that gentry
Is not annexed to possession,
Sithen folk do not her operation
Always as does the fire, lo in his kind:
For God it wot, men may full often find
A lords son done shame and villainy.
* And he that woll have prise of his gentry,
For he was borne of a gentle house,
And had his elders noble and virtuous,
And nill himself don no gentle deeds,
He follow his gentle auncetre, that dead is,
He nis not gentle, be he duke or earl.
* Fie villains, sinful deeds makes a cherle.
For gentleness nis but the renomie
Of thine auncetres, for her high bounty,
Which is a strong thing to thy person:
Thy gentleness comes fro God alone.
* Then comes out very gentleness of grace,
It was nothing bequeath us with our place.
Thinks how noble, as says Valerius,
Was thilke Tullius Hostilius,
That out of poverty rose to high noblesse:
Reads Seneck, and reads eke Boece,
There shall ye seen express, no dread is,
* That he is gentle that does gentle deedis.
And therefore dear husbond, I thus conclude,
All were it that mine auncetors were rude,
Yet may that high God, and so hope I,
Grant me grace to live virtuously:
* Then am I gentle, when I begin
To live virtuously, and leaven sin.
And there as ye of poverty me repreue,
The high God, on whom that we believe,
In wilful pouerte chese to lead his life:
And certes, every man, maid, and wife
May understand, Jesus heaven king
Ne would not chese a vicious living.
* Glad pouert is an honest thing certain,
This woll Seneck and other clerks saine.
* Who so would hold him paid of his pouert,
I hold him rich, all had he not a shert.
* He that coueteth is a full poor wight,
For he would han that is not in his might.
* But who yt naught has, ne coueteth to have,
Is rich, although ye hold him but a knave.
Very pouert is sin properly.
Iuuenall says of pouert merrily:
* The poor man when he goes by the way
Beforne thieves, he may sing and play.
* Pouert is hateful good: and as I guess,
A full great bringer out of business:
A great amender eke of sapience,
To him that takes it in patience.
Pouert is, although it seem elenge,
Possession that no wight woll challenge.
* Pouerte full often, when a man is low,
Makes him God and eke himself to know.
* Pouert a spectacle is, as thinks me,
Through which one may his very friends see.
And therefore, since that I you not grieve,
Of my pouert no more me repreue.
Now sir, eke of elde ye repreued me:
And certes sir, though none authorite
Were in no book, ye gentles of honor
Sain, that men should an old wight honor,
And cleape hem father for her gentleness,
And authors shall I find, as I guess.
Now there as ye sain yt I am foul and old,
Then dread you not to been a cokewold.
* For filth, elthe, and foul, all so mote I thee,
Ben great wardeins upon chastity.
But natheles, since I know your delight,
I shall fulfill your worldly appetite.
These now (quoth. she) one of these things twey,
To have me foul and old till that I dey,
And be to you a true humble wife,
And never you displease in all my life:
Or else woll you have me young and fair,
And take your adventure of the repair
That shall come to your house because of me,
Or in some other place may well be?
Now chese your selue whether yt you likes.
This knight auiseth him, and sore likes,
But at the last he said in this manner:
My lady and my love, and wife so dear,
I put me in your wise governance,
Cheseth your self which may be more pleasaunce
And most honor to you and me also,
I do no force whether of the two:
For as you likes, it suffices me.
Then have I got of you the maistry (quoth. she)
Since I may chese and govern as my lest:
Ye certes wife (quoth. he) I hold it for the best.
Kiss me (quoth. she) we be no longer wroth:
For by my truth, I woll be to you both,
This is to say, to be both fair and good.
I pray to God that I mote sterue wood,
But I to you be also good and true,
As ever was wife, sithen the world was new:
And but I be to morrow as fair to seen,
As any Lady, Empress, or Queen,
That is between East and eke the West,
Does with my life right as you lest.
Cast up the courtein, and look how it is.
And when this knight saw verily all this,
That she so fair was, and so young thereto,
For joy he hent her in his arms two:
His heart bathed in the bath of bliss,
A thousand times a row he began her kiss:
And she obeyed him in every thing,
That might done him pleasure or liking.
And thus they lived unto her lives end
In perfect joy, and Jesus Christ us send
Husbonds meek and young, and fresh abed,
And grace to ouerliue hem that we wed.
And I pray to God to short her lives,
That will not be governed by her wives.
And old and angry niggards of dispense,
God send hem soon a very pestilence.
The Friars Prologue.
THis worthy limitour, this noble Friar
He made always a manner louring chere
Upon the Sompner, but for honest
No villains word as yet to him spoke he:
But at the last he said to the wife,
Dame, God give you right good life,
Ye have touched here, all so mote I the,
In schole matter, a full great difficulte,
Ye have said much thing right well I say:
But dame, here as we riden by the way
Us needs not to speaken but of game,
And let authorities a Gods name
To preaching, and to school of clargie.
But if it like unto this company,
I woll you of a Sompner tell a game,
Parde ye may well know by the name,
That of a Sompner may no good be said.
I pray that none of you be evil apaid:
A Sompner is a renner up and down
With maundements for fornicatioun,
And is ybeat at every tounes end.
Tho spoke our host and said: sir ye should ben hend
And curteis, as a man of your estate,
In this company we woll no debate:
Tells your tale, and let the Sompner be.
Nay (quoth. the Sompner) let him say to me
What so him list: when it comes to my lote,
By God I shall him quite every grote,
I shall him tell which a great honor
It is to be a flattering limitour,
And eke of many another manner crime,
Which needs not to rehearse at this time,
And of his office I shall him tell ywis.
Our host answered: peace, no more of this,
And afterward he said unto the Friar,
Tell forth your tale mine own master dear.
The Freres Tale.
THE Sompner and the Devil meeting on the way, after conference, become sworn
brethren, and to Hell they go together. A covert invective against the Bribery
of the Spiritual Courts in those days.

WHylome there was dwelling in my country
An Archdeacon, a man of high degree,
That boldly did execution
In punishing of fornication,
Of witchcraft, and eke of baudrie,
Of defamation, and aduoutrie,
Of church reues, and of testaments,
Of contracts, and lack of sacraments,
Of usury, and of simonie also:
But certes letcherours did he much woe,
They shoulden sing, if they weren hent,
And small tythers they were foul yshent,
If any person would upon hem plain,
There might assert hem no pecunial pain
For small tithes, and small offering,
He made the people pitously to sing:
For ere the bishop caught hem with his hook
They were in the Archdeacons book,
And then had he (through his jurdiction)
Power to done on hem correction.
He had a Sompner ready to his hond,
A s^ier boy was there none in England:
For subtly he had his espiaile,
That taught him where he might avail.
He couth spare of letchours one or two,
To teachen him to four and twenty mo:
For though this sompner wood were as an hare,
To tell his harlottry I woll not spare,
For we ben out of his correction,
They have of us no juridiction,
Ne never shullen, term of all her lives.
Peter so ben women of the stews,
(Quoth. this Sompner) yput out of our cure.
Peace with mischance and with misauenture
Said our host, and let him tell his tale,
Now tells forth and let the Sompner gale,
Ne spares not mine own master dear.
This false thief, this sompner (quoth. the friar)
Had always bauds ready to his hond,
As any hawk to lure in England,
That tells him all the secre they knew,
For her acquaintance was not come anew,
They weren his approvers privily,
He took himself a great profit thereby,
His master knew not always what he wan:
Without maundement, a leaud man
He coud summon, on pain of Christ's curse,
And they were glad to fillen his purse,
And maden him great feasts at the nale.
* And right as Judas had purses small
And was a thief, right such a thief was he.
His master had but half his duty,
He was (if I shall give him his laud)
A thief, a sompner, and eke a baud.
He had eke wenches of his retinue,
That whether sir Robert or sir Hue,
Or John, or Rafe, or who so that it were
That lay by hem, they told it in his ear.
Thus were the wenches and he of one assent,
And he would fetch a fained maundement,
And summon hem to the chapter both two,
And pill the man, and let the wench go:
Then would he say, friend I shall for thy sake
Do stricken thee out of our letters blake,
Thou dare no more as in this case travail:
I am thy friend there I may thee avail.
Certain he knew of bribries mo,
Than possible is to tell in years two:
For in this world nis dog for the how,
That can an hurt dear from an whole know,
Bet than the Sompner knew a sly letchour,
Or auouter, or else any paramour:
For that was the fruit of all his rent,
Therefore on it he set all his intent.
And so befell, that once on a day
This Sompner waiting ever on his pray,
Rode to summon an old widow a ribibe,
Faining a cause, for he would have a bribe,
And happed that he saw beforne him ride
A gay yeoman under a forest side:
A bow he bare, and arrows bright and shene,
He had upon him a courtpie of green,
An hat upon his head with strings black.
Sir (quoth. this Sompner) hail and well itake.
Welcome (quoth. he) and every good fellaw,
Whider ridest thou under ye green wood shaw
Said this yeoman, wolt thou far to day?
This Sompner him answered, and said: nay,
Here fast by (quoth. he) is mine intent
To riden for to reysen up a rent
That longs unto my lords duty.
Art thou then a baylie? Yea quoth. he.
He durst not then for very filth and shame
Say that he was a Sompner for the name.
Depardieur, quoth. this yeoman lefe brother,
Thou art a bailey, and I am another,
I am unknown, as in this country,
Of thine acquaintance I woll pray thee,
And eke of brotherhead, if that thou lift,
I have gold and silver in my chist:
If that ye hap to come in our shire,
All shall be thine, right as thou wolt desire.
Grant mercy (quoth. this sompner) by my faith.
Euerich in other his truth laith,
For to be sworn brethren till they dey,
And with yt word they riden forth her wey,
This sompner with yt was as full of iangles,
As full of venom, as ben these wariangles,
And ever requiring upon every thing.
Brother quoth. he, where is your dwelling,
Another day if that I should you seech?
This yeoman him answered in soft speech:
Brother quoth. he, far in the North country,
Whereas I hope sometime I shall thee see,
Or we depart I shall thee so well wisse,
That of mine house thou shall never miss.
Now brother quoth. the sompner, I you pray
Teach me, while we riden by the way,
(Since that ye ben a bailey as am I)
Some subteltie, tell me faithfully
In mine office how I may most win,
And spare not for conscience ne for sin,
But as my brother, tell me how done ye,
Now by my troth brother dear said he,
As I shall tellen thee a faithful tale,
My wages been full strait and full small,
My lord is hard to me and dangerous,
And mine office full laborious:
And therefore by extortion I leave
Forsooth by all that men woll me give,
Algate by sleight or by violence:
From year to year I win all my dispense,
I can no better tellen faithfully.
Now certes (quoth. the Sompner) so fare I,
I spare not to taken God it wot:
* But if it be too heavy or too hot,
That I may getten in counsel privily,
No manner conscience of that have I,
Nere mine extortion, I might not liuen,
Of such yapes woll I not be shriuen:
Stomach ne conscience know I none,
I shrew all these shrift fathers euerychone,
Well be we met by God and sweet S. Iame,
But leave brother, tell me thy name
Quoth. this Sompner: in this mean while
This yeoman began a little for to smile.
Brother quoth. he, wolt thou yt I thee tell?
I am a fiend, my dwelling is in hell,
And here I ride about my purchasing,
To wete where I may get any thing:
My purchasing is theffect of all my rent,
Look how thou ridest for the same intent
To win good, thou reckest never how,
Right so fare I, for ride woll I now
Unto the worlds end for to pray.
Ah (quoth. this sompner) what do ye say,
I wend ye were a yeoman truly,
Ye have a man's shape as well as I,
Have ye a figure then determinate
In hell, there ye ben in your estate?
Nay certainly (quoth. he) there have we none,
But when us likes we can take us one,
Or else make to you seem: we ben shape
Sometime like a man, or like an ape,
Or like an Angel can I ride or go:
It is no wonder thing though it be so,
A lousie iugler can deceive thee,
And parde can I more craft than he.
Why quoth. ye Sompner, ride ye then or gone
In sundry shape, and not always in one?
For we (quoth. he) woll us such form make,
As most able is our preyes for to take.
What makes you to have al his labor?
Full many a cause lefe sir Sompnour
Said this fiend, But all thing has time,
The day is short, and it is passed prime,
And yet ne got I nothing in this day,
I woll entend to winning, if I may,
And not entend our wits to declare:
For brother mine, thy wits ben all too bare
To understand all, though I would tell thee,
But for thou ask why labouren we:
For sometime be we Gods instruments
And means to done his commaundments
What that him lust, on his creatures,
In diverse art and in diverse figures:
Withouten him we have no might certain,
If that him list to stonden there again,
And sometime at our prayer have we leave,
Only the body, and not the soul to grieve:
Witness of Job, whom we deden woe.
And sometime have we might of both two,
This is to saine, of body and soul eke,
And sometime we ben suffered for to seek
Upon a man, and done his soul unrest,
And not his body, and all is for the best
When he withstandeth our temptation,
It is a cause of his salvation,
Albeit that it was not our intent
He should be safe, but that we would him hent,
And sometime be we servant unto man,
As to the archbishop saint Dunstan
And to the Apostle eke servant was I.
Yet tell me (quoth. this Sompner) faithfully,
Make ye you new bodies thus always
Of elements? the fiend answered nay:
Sometime we feign, and sometime we arise
With dead bodies, and that in sundry wise,
And speak as renably, fair, and well,
As the Phitonesse did to Samuel:
And yet would some men say it was not he.
I do not force of your divinity,
But a thing I warn thee, I woll not yape,
Thou wolt algates wete how we be shape:
Thou shall hereafterward (my brother dear)
Come, where thee needs not of me to lere,
For thou shall by thine own experience
Conne in the chare the read of this sentence
Bet than Virgill, while he was on live,
Or Daunt also. Now let us ride bliue,
For I woll hold company with thee,
Till it be so that thou forsake me.
Nay (quoth. this Sompner) yt shall not betide,
I am a yeoman known full wide:
My troth wol I hold to thee, as in this caas
For though thou were the devil Sathanas,
My troth woll I hold to my brother
As I am sworn, and each of us to other,
For to be true brother in this caas,
And brother, we gone to our purchaas.
Take thou thy part, that men woll ye give,
And I shall mine, and thus shall we both leave.
And if that any of us have more than other,
Let him be true, and part it with his brother.
I grant (quoth. the devil) by my fay,
And with that word they riden forth her way,
And right at them ring of the tounes end
(To which ye sompner shope him for to wend)
They saw a cart that charged was with hay,
Which that a carter drove forth on his way,
Deep was the way, for which the cart stood:
This carter smote, and striued as he were wood,
Heit scot, heit brok, with spare ye for ye stones,
The fiend (quoth. he) you fetch body and bones,
As ferforth as ever ye were yfoled,
So much woe as I have for you tholed,
The devil have all, both horse, cart, and hay.
Quoth. this Sompner here shall we have a pray
And nere y^ fiend he drew, as naught ne were
Full privily, and rouned in his ear:
Hearken brother, hearken by thy faith
Hear not thou what the carter says?
Hent it anon, for he has give it thee,
Both hay and cart, and eke his caples three,
Nay (quoth. the devil) God wot never a dele,
It is not his intent trust me well,
Ask him thy self, if thou trowest not me,
Or else stint a while and thou shall see.
This carter thacked his horse on the croupe,
And they begun to draw and to stoop.
Heit now (quoth. he) yt Jesus Christ you bless,
And all his hondy work, both more and less:
That was well it wight mine own liard boy,
I pray God save thee and saint Loy,
Now is my cart out of the slow parde.
Lo brother (quoth. the fiend) what told I thee,
Here may ye seen mine own dear brother
* The carle spoke o thing but he thought another
Let us go forth about our voyage,
Here win we nothing upon carriage.
When they comen somewhat out of the town,
This Sompner to his brother began to roune:
Brother, quoth. he, here wonneth an old rebecke,
That had almost as lefe to lose her neck,
As for to give a penny of her good,
I woll have xii. d. tho that she were wood,
Or I woll sompne her to our office,
And yet God wot of her I know no vice:
But for thou can not, as in this country
Win thy cost, take here ensample of me.
This Sompner clappeth at ye widows gate,
Come out he said thou old veritrate:
I trow thou have some friar or priest withthee.
Who clappeth there said this wife, benedicite,
God save you sir, what is your sweet will?
I have (quoth. he) in summons of thee a bill,
Up pain of cursing, look that thou be
To morrow before our Archdeacons knee,
To answer to the court, of certain things.
Now lord (quoth. she) Jesus king of kings
So wisely help me, as I ne may,
I have been sick, and that full many a day.
I may not go so far (quoth. she) ne ride,
But I be dead, so pricketh it my side,
May I not ask a libell sir Sompnour,
And answer there by my proctour
To such thing as men would apposen me.
Yea quoth. this Sompner, pay anon let see
Twelve pence to me, and I will thee acquit,
I shall no profit have hereof but lite.
My master has the profit and not I,
Come of, and let me ridden hastily:
Give me xii. pence, I may no longer tarry.
Twelve pence quoth. she, lady saint Mary,
So wisely help me out of care and sin,
This wide world though I should it win,
Ne have I not xii. d. within my ho^d:
Ye know well that I am poor and old,
Kith your alms on me poor wretch,
Nay then quoth. he, the foul fiend me fetch,
If I thee excuse, though thou should be spilt.
Alas quoth. she, God wot I have no guilt,
Pay me quoth. he, or by sweet saint Anne
I woll straight bear away the new pan
For debt, which thou owe me of old,
When thou made thy husbond cokold,
I paid at home for thy correction.
Thou lie (quoth. she) by my salvation,
Ne was I never ere now, widow ne wife,
Sompned unto your court in all my life:
Ne never I nas but of body true,
Unto the devil black and rough of hew
Give I thy body and my pan also.
And when the devil heard her curse so
Upon her knees, he said in this manner:
Now Mably, mine own mother dear
Is this your will in earnest that ye sey?
The devil (quoth. she) fet him ere he dey,
And pan and all, but he woll him repent.
Nay old stotte, that is not mine intent,
Quoth. this Sompner, for to repent me
For any thing that I have had of thee,
I would I had thy smock and every cloth.
Now brother (quoth. the devil) be not wroth:
Thy body and thy pan is mine by right,
Thou shall with me to hell yet to night,
Where thou shall known of our priuitie
More than a master of divinity.
And with that word ye foul fiend him hent
Body and soul, he with the devil went,
Where yt Sompners have their heritage,
And God that made after his image
Mankind, save and guide us all and some,
And leave ye Sompner good man to become.
Lordings I coud have told you (quoth. this friar)
Had I had leisure, of this Sompner here,
After the text of Christ, Poule, and Ihon
And of other doctors many one,
Such pains, as your hearts might agrise,
Albeit so, that no tongue may devise,
Though that I might a thousand winter tell
The pains of that cursed house of hell,
But for to keep us from that cursed place,
Wake we, and pray Jesus of his grace,
So keep he us from the temper Sathanas
Hearkneth this word, beware as in this caas
* The Lion sits in await always
To slay the innocent, if that he may.
Disposes aye your hearts to withstond
The fiend, that you would make thral and bond.
* He may not tempt you over your might,
For Christ woll be your champion and knight,
And prays, that the Sompner him repent
Of his misdeed ere that the fiend him hent.
The Sompners Prologue.
THis Sompner in his stirrops high stood,
Upon this Friar his heart was so wood,
That like an Aspen leaf he quoke for ire:
Lordings (quoth. he) but one thing I desire,
I you beseech, that of your courtesy,
Since ye han heard this false Friar lie,
As suffers me I may my tale tell.
This Friar boasts that he knows hell,
And God wot that is little wonder,
Freres and fiends ben but little asunder.
For parde, ye han often time heard tell,
How that a Friar ravished was to hell
In spirit once by a visioun,
And as an Angel led him up and down,
To shown him the pains that there were:
In all the place saw he not a Friar,
Of other folk he saw ynow in woe.
Unto the Angel spoke the Friar tho:
Now sir (quoth. he) han Freres such a grace,
That none of hem shall come in this place?
Yes (quoth. this Angel) many a millioun:
And unto Sathanas lad he him adoun.
And now has Sathanas such a tail
Broader than of a Caricke is the sail:
Hold up thy tail thou Sathanas (quoth. he)
Show forth thine erse, and let the Friar see
Whereas is the neast of Freres in this place.
And ere that half a furlong way of space
(Right as Bees swarmen out of an Hiue)
Out of the Devils erse they began drive
Twenty thousand Freres all on a rout,
And throughout hell swarmed all about,
And come again, as fast as they might gone,
And into his erse they crepten euerichone:
He clapped his tail again, and lay still.
This Friar, when he looked had his fill
Upon the turments of this sorry place,
His spirit God restored of his grace
Unto his body again, and he awoke,
But nathelesse, yet for fear he quoke,
So was the devils erse aye in his mind:
That is his heritage of very kind.
God save you all, save this cursed Friar,
My Prologue woll I end in this mannere.
The Sompners Tale.
A Begging Friar coming to a Farmers house, who lay sick, obtains of him a
certain Legacy, which must be equally divided among his Covent. A requital to
the Friar, showing their cozenage, loytering, impudent begging, and
hypocritical praying.

LOrdings, there is in Yorkshire as I guess,
A marish Country called Holdernesse,
In which there went a limitour about
To preach, and eke to beg it is no doubt:
And so befell that on a day this Friar
Had preached in a church in his manner,
And specially abouen every thing
Excited he the people in his preaching,
To trentals, and to yeuen for Gods sake,
Wherewith men mighten holy houses make,
There as divine service is honored,
Not there as it is wasted and devoured,
Ne there it needs not to be yeuen,
As to possessioners that mowen else leven,
Thonked be God, in well and abundance
Trentals delivers (quoth. he) fro penance
Her friends souls, as well old as young
If that they be hastily ysong,
Not for to hold a Priest jolly and gay,
(He sings not but one Mess a day)
Delivers out (quoth. he) anon the souls.
Full hard it is, with fleshhooke or with oules
To be yclawed, or to bren or bake:
Now speedeth you hastily for Christ's sake.
And when this Friar had said all his intent,
With qui cum patre, forth his way he went,
When folk in church had give him what hem lest
He went his way, no longer would he rest,
With scrip and tipped staff, ytucked hie:
In every house he began to pore and pry,
And begged meal and cheese, or else corn:
His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,
A pair of tables all of Iuory,
A pointell ypolished fetously,
And wrote always the names as he stood
Of all folk that yaue hem any good,
Askaunce that he woulden for hem prey.
Give us a bushel Wheat, Malt, or Rey,
A Gods kichell, or a trippe of Chese,
Or else what ye list, I may not chese:
A Gods halfepenny, or a Mass penny,
Or give us of your Brawne, if ye have any,
A dagon of your blanket, leave dame,
Our suster dear, lo here I write your name,
Bacon or Beef, or such thing as ye find.
A sturdy harlot went him aye behind,
That was her hosts man, and bare a sack,
And that men yaue hem, laid it on his back.
And when he was out at the door, anon
He plained away the names euerichone,
That he before had written in his tables:
He served hem with nifles and with fables.
Nay there thou lie Sompner (quoth. yt Friar)
Peace (quoth. our host) for Christ's mother dear,
Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at all.
So thrive I (quoth. the Sompner) so I shall.
So long he went fro house to house, till he
Came to an house, there as he was wont to be
Refreshed more than in a hundred placis:
Sick lay the good man, whose the place is,
Bedred upon a couch low he lay:
Deus hic (quoth. he) O Thomas friend good day,
Said this Friar all courteously and soft,
Thomas God yield it you: for full often
Have I upon this bench faren full weal,
Here have I eaten many a merry meal.
And fro the bench he drove away the cat,
And laid adoune his potent and his hat,
And eke his scrip, and set him soft adoune:
His fellow was go walked into the town
Forth with his knave into that hostelrie,
Where as he shope him that like night to lie.
O dear master (quoth. this sick man)
How have ye faren sithen March began,
I saw you not this fourtenight and more.
God wot (quoth. he) labored have I full sore,
And specially for thy salvation
Have I said many a precious orison.
And for our other friends God hem bless.
I have this day ben at your church at mess,
And said a sermon after my simple wit,
Not all after the text of holy writ,
For it is hard to you, as I suppose,
And therefore I woll teach you all the gloss.
Glosing is a glorious thing certain
For letter slaeth, as we clerks sain.
There have I hem taught to ben charitable,
And spend her good there as it is reasonable.
And there I saw our dame, ah where is she?
Yonder in the yard I trow she be
Said this man, and she woll come anon.
Eye master, welcome ye be by saint Ihon
Said this wife, how fare ye heartily?
This Friar arises up full courteously,
And her imbraceth in his arms narrow,
And kisseth her sweet, and chirketh as a sparrow
With his lips: dame (quoth. he) I fare right well.
As he that is your servant every dele.
Thanked be God that you have soul and life,
Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife
In all the whole church, so God save me.
Yea God amend all faults sir (quoth. she)
Algates welcome ye be, by my fay:
Grant mercy dame, yt have I found always.
But of your great goodness, by your leave
I woll pray you that ye not you grieve,
I woll with Thomas speak a little throw:
These curates ben full negligent and slow
To gropen tenderly a man's conscience.
In shrift, and in preaching is my diligence,
And to study on Peter's words and Poules,
I walk to fishen Christen men's souls,
To yield Jesus Christ his proper rent,
To spread his words is all mine intent.
Now by your leave dear master (quoth. she)
Chideth him well for saint Charity:
He is aye angry as a pissemire.
Though that he have all that he can desire,
Though I him wrie a night, and make him warm,
And over him lay my leg or mine arm,
He groneth as our bore that lies in the stie:
Other disport of him right none have I,
I may not please him in no manner caas.
O Thomas, ie vous die, Thomas Thomas:
This makes ye fiend, this must ben amended.
Ire is a thing that God highly defended,
And thereof woll I speak a word or two.
Now master (quoth. the wife) ere that I go,
What woll ye dine? I woll go thereabout.
Now dame (quoth. he) ie vous die sanz dout
Have I of a Capon but the liver,
And of your white bread but a shiuer,
And after that a roasted Pigs head
(But I nold not for me no beast were dead)
Then had I ynow for my suffisaunce:
I am a man of little sustenaunce.
My spirit has his fostring in the Bible,
My body is aye so ready and so penible
To wake, that my body is destroyed.
I pray you dame, be ye naught annoied,
Though I so friendly you my counsel show,
By God I now have told it but a few.
Now sir (quoth. she) but one word ere you go,
My child is dead within these weeks two,
Soon after that ye went out of this town.
His death saw I by reuelatioun,
Said this Friar, at home in our Dortour
I dare well saine, ere that half an hour
After his death, I saw him borne to bliss
In mine auision, God me so wisse,
So did our Sexten, and our Fermerere,
That han been true Freres this fifty year:
They may now, God be thanked of his love,
Maken her Iubelie, and walken alone.
And up I arose, and all our covent eke,
With many a tear trilling on our cheek:
Withouten noise or clattering of bells,
Te deum was our song, and nothing else,
Save that to Christ I said an orison,
Thanking him of my revelation:
For sir and dame, trusts me right well,
Our orisons been more effectuell,
And more we seen of Christ's secret things,
Than borell folk, although they were kings.
We live in pouerte, and in abstinence,
And borell folk in richesse and dispense,
In meat and drink, and in her foul delight:
We han this worldly lust all in despite.
Lazar and Dives liueden diuersely,
And diverse guerdons had they thereby.
* Who so woll pray, he must fast and be clean,
And fat his soul, and make his body lean.
We fare as says the Apostle, cloth and food
Suffices us, though they be not full good:
The cleanenesse and the fasting of us Freres,
Makes that Christ accepts our prayeres.
Lo Moises, forty days and forty night
Fasted, ere that the high God of his might
Spoke with him in the mount of Sinay:
With empty womb, fasting many a day,
Received he the law, that was written
With Gods finger, and Hely well witten:
In mount Oreb, ere he had any speech
With the high God, that is our souls leech,
He fasted long, and was in contemplaunce.
Aaron, that had the temple in governance,
And eke the other priests euerichone
Into the temple when they should gone
To praien for the people, and done service,
They nold drink in no manner wise
No drink, that drunk might hem make,
But there in abstinence pray and wake,
Least that they deiden: take heed what I say,
But they be sober that for the people pray,
Ware that I say no more: for it suffices.
Our Lord Jesus, as holy writ deuiseth,
Yaue us ensample of fasting and prayeres:
Therefore we Mendicantes, we silly Freres
Ben wedded to pouert and continence,
To charity, humbleness, and abstinence,
To persecution for rightwisnesse,
To weeping, misericorde, and cleanenesse.
And therefore may ye see that our prayeres
(I speak of us mendicants, we Freres)
Ben to the high God more acceptable
Than yours, with your feast at your table.
Fro Paradise first, if I shall not lie,
Was man chased out for his gluttony,
And chaste was man in Paradise certain.
But harken now Thomas what I shall sain,
I have no text thereof, as I suppose,
But I find it in manner of a gloss,
That specially our sweet Lord Jesus
Spoke this by Freres, when he said thus.
Blessed be they that poor in spirit been:
And so forth all the Gospel may ye seen,
Whether it be liker our perfection,
Or hers that swimmen in possession.
Fie on her pomp, and on her gluttony,
And on her lewdness, I hem defy.
Me thinks they ben like Iouinian,
Fat as a Whale, and walking as a Swan,
As vinolent as bottle in the spence,
Her prayer is of full little reverence:
When they for souls say the Psalm of David
Lo bouffe they sain (Cor meum eructauit.)
Who follows Christ's Gospel and his lore
But we? that humble be, chaste, and poor.
Workers of gods word, and not auditors.
Therefore right as an hawk at a sours
Up springs into the air, so prayeres
Of charitable and cahst busy Freres,
Maken her sours up to Gods ears two.
Thomas Thomas, so mote I ride or go,
And by that lord that cleaped is saint Yue,
Ne thou our brother were, thou should not thrive.
For in our Chapter pray we day and night
To Christ, that he thee send health and might
Thy body for to welden hastily.
God wot (quoth. he) nothing thereof feel I
As help me Christ: for within few years
Have I spended upon diverse manner Freres
Well many a pound, yet fare I never the bet,
Certain my good have I almost beset:
Farewell my good, for it is almost ago.
The friar answered, o Thomas do thou so?
What needs thee diverse Freres to sech?
What needs him that has a perfect lech,
To sechen other leches in the town?
Your inconstance is your confusion,
Hold ye me then, or else our Covent,
To prayen for you, insufficient?
Thomas, that iape nis not worth a Mite,
Your malady is for we have to lite.
A, give that covent half a quarter Otes:
And give that covent four and twenty gortes,
And give that Friar a penny, and let him go:
Nay, nay Thomas, it may nothing be so.
What is a farthing worth parted in twelve?
Lo, each thing that is oned in himselue
Is more strong than when it is so scattered.
Thomas, of me thou shall not be iflattered,
Thou wolst have all our labor for naught.
The hie God, yt all this world has wrought
* Says, that ye workman is worthy his hire
Thomas, naught of your treasure I desire
As for my self, but that all our covent
To pray for you is aie so diligent:
And holy for to builden Christ own chirch.
Thomas, if ye woll learn for to wirch,
Of building up of Chirches may ye sinde
If it be good, in Thomas life of Inde.
Ye liggen here full of anger and ire
With which the devil set your heart on fire.
And chiden here this holy innocent
Your wife, that is so good and patient.
And therefore trow me Thomas if ye lest,
Ne chide not with thy wife, as for the best:
And bear this word away by thy faith.
Touching such thing lo what the wise says:
* Within thy house be thou no Lion:
To thy subjects do thou none oppression:
Ne make not thine acquaintance to flee.
And yet Thomas, eftsoon charge I thee,
Beware of her that in thy bosom sleeps,
Ware of the serpent, that so slily creeps,
Under the grass, and stingeth full subtly:
Beware my son, and hearken patiently,
That twenty thousand men han lost her lives
For striving with her lemmans and her wives.
Now since you have so holy and meek a wife,
What needs you Thomas to make strife?
* There nis iwis no serpent so cruel
(When men treden on his tail) ne half so fell,
As a woman is, when she has caught an ire,
Vengeance is then all her desire.
Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven,
Abominable unto the high God of heven,
And to himself it is destruction,
This every lewd Vicar and Parson
* Can say, how ire engenders homecide,
Ire is in sooth the executour of pride.
I could of ire say so much sorrow,
That my tale should last till to morrow.
And therefore I pray God both day and night
That to an irous man he send little might.
* It is great harm, and eke great pitee
To see an irous man in high degree.
Whiledom there was an irous potestate,
As says Seneck, that during his estate
Upon a day out riden knights two,
And as fortune would it should be so,
That one of hem came home, yt other naught:
Anon the knight before the judge is brought,
That said thus: thou have thy fellow slain,
For which I deem thee to the death certain.
And to another knight commanded he,
Go, lead him to the death I charge thee.
And happened as they went by the wey
Toward the place there as he should dey,
The knight came, which men wend had be ded
Then thought they that it was the best reed.
To lead hem both to the Judge again:
They saiden lord, the knight has not slain
His fellow, here he stant hole alive.
Ye shullen be dead (quoth. he) so mot I thrive:
That is to say, both one, two, and three,
And to the first knight, right thus spoke he.
I damned thee, thou must algate be dead:
And thou must also leese needs thyn head,
For thou art cause why thy fellow dies.
And to ye third knight, right thus he says,
Thou have not don yt I commanded thee.
And thus he let do fle hem all three.
Irous Cambises was eke drunkelew,
And aie delighted him to been a shrew,
And so befell, a lord of his meine,
That loved well virtuous moralite,
Said on a day betwixt hem two right thus:
A lord is lost, if he be aught vicious,
* And drunkenness eke is a foul record
Of any man, and namely of a lord.
* There is many an ey and many an ear
A waiting on a lord, he not whear.
For Gods love drinks temperatly:
* Wine makes a man to lose wretchedly
His mind, and his limbs euerichone.
The reuers shall thou see (quoth. he) anon,
And preue it by thyn own experience,
That wine ne does to folk no such offense.
There nis no wine bereaueth me my might
Of hond, of foot, ne of mine eyesight.
And for despite he drunk mochell more
An hundred times than he did before,
And right ay, this cursed irous wretch
Let this knights son beforne him fetch
Commanding him he should beforn him stond:
And suddenly he took his how in hond,
And up the string he plucked to his ear,
And with an arrow he slough the child thear,
Now wither have I a siker hond or none,
Quoth. he? Is all my might and mind agon?
Has wine bereuen me mine iyen sight?
What should I tell the answer of y^ knight?
His son was slain, there is no more to say,
* Beware therefore, with lords how ye play,
Sing Placebo, and I shall if I can,
But if it be unto a poor man:
To a poor man one should his vices tell,
But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.
Lo irous Cirus, thilke Percien,
How destroyed he the river of Gisen?
For that an horse of his was dreint therein,
When as he went Babylon to win:
He made that the river was so small,
That men might ride and waden over all.
Lo, what said he, that so well teach can,
* Ne be no fellow to none irous man,
Ne with no wood man walk by the way,
Lest thou repent, I woll no further say.
Now Thomas leave brother, leave thyn ire,
Thou shall me find as just, as is a squire:
Hold not the devils knife aie in thine heart,
Thine anger does thee all to sore smart,
But show to me all thy confession.
Nay, (quoth. the sick man) by saint Simon
I have be shriue this day of my Curate
I have told him wholly mine estate.
It needs no more to speak of it, says he,
But if me list of mine humilite.
Give me then of thy gold tomake our cloister
quoth. he, for many a muskle and many an Oister,
When other men have been full well at ease,
Has been our food, our cloister for to rease:
And yet God wot, uneath the foundament
Parformed is, ne of our pauement
Is not a tile yet within our wones:
By God we owen forty pound for stones,
Now help Thomas, for him yt harrowed hell,
For else mote we needs al our books sell,
And if you lack our predication,
Then goes this world all to destruction.
For who so woll fro this world us bereue,
So God me save, Thomas by your leave,
He would bereave out of this world the son.
For who can techen and worchen as we con?
And that is not of little time (quoth. he)
But since Helie was, or Helise,
Han freres been, that find I of record
In charity, ithonked be our Lord,
Now Thomas, help for saint Charity:
And down anon he sits on his kne.
This sick man waxes nie wood for ire
He would the friar had been on a fire
With his false dissimulation.
Such things as been in my possession
(Quoth. he) that may I give, and none other:
Ye sain me thus, how yt I am your brother.
Ye certes (quoth. this friar) trusts me well,
I took our dame our letter and our sele.
Now (quoth. he) well, and somewhat shall I give
Unto your holy covent while I live:
And in thine hond thou shall it have anon
On this condition, and other none,
That you depart it so, my leave brother,
That every friar have as much as another:
This shall thou swear on thy profession
Without fraud or cauilation.
I swear it, quoth. she friar, by my faith:
And therwithall his hond in his he layth,
Lo here my faith, in me shall be no lack.
Then put thine hond adowne by my back
Said this man, and grope well behind,
Beneath my buttock there thou shall find
A thing, that I have hid in priuitie:
Ah, thought the friar, that shall go with me.
Adown he shofth his hond to the clift,
In hope to find there some good gift.
And when this sick man felt this friar
About his tewell, groping here and there,
Amid his hond he let the friar a fart,
There nis no capell drawing in a cart,
That might have let a fart of such a soun.
The friar up start, as does a wood Lioun:
A false churl, quoth. the friar, for Gods bones,
This have thou in dispite do for the nones:
Thou shall abie this fart, if I may.
His meinie that heard of this affray,
Came leaping in, and chased out the friar,
And forth he goes with a full angry chere,
And fet his fellow, there as lay his store:
He looked as he were a wild Bore,
He grinted his teeth, so was he wroth
A sturdie pace down to the court he goth
Whereas wonned a man of great honor
To whom that he was always confessor:
This worthy man was lord of that village.
This freer came, as he were in a rage,
Where as this lord sat eating at his board:
Uneaths might the friar to speak o word,
Till at the last he said, God you see.
This lord began look, and said Benedicite
What friar Ihon, what manner world is this?
I see well that something is amiss,
* Ye look as though ye wood were full of theuis:
Sit down, and tell me what your grief is,
And it shall be amended, if that I may.
I have, quoth. he, had a dispite to day,
God yield it you, adown in your village,
That in this world is none so poor a page,
That he nolde have abhominatioun
Of that I have received in your town:
And yet me grieueth nothing so sore,
As that the old churl, with locks hoar
Blasphemed has our holy covent eke.
Now master, quoth. this lord, I you beseke.
No master sir, quoth. he, but seruitour,
Though I have had in school that honor.
God likes not, that men us Rabie call
Neither in market, ne in your large hall.
No force, quoth. he, but tell me of your grief.
Sir, quoth. this Friar, an odious mischief
This day is betide, to mine order, and to me,
And so per consequens to each degree
Of holy church, God amend it sone.
Sir, quoth. the lord, ye wot what is to done:
Distemper you not, you be my confessor.
Ye be the salt of the earth, and the savor,
For Gods love your patience now hold,
Tells me your grief: and he anon him told
As ye han heard before, ye wot well what.
The lady of the house, aie still sat
Till she had heard fully what the Friar said.
Eye gods mother, quoth. she, and blisful maid:
Is there naught else, tell me faithfully?
Madame, quoth. he, how thinks ye thereby?
How that me thinks? so God me speed,
I say a churl has done a churles deed:
What should I say, God let him never the,
His sick head is full of vanite:
I hold him in a manner of frenzy.
Madam, quoth. he, by God I shall not lie,
But I in any wise, may been on him awreke,
I shall slander him over all, where I speak:
That false blasphemour that charged me
To part it that might not departed be,
To every man iliche, with mischance.
The lord sat still, as he were in a trance,
And in his heart he roled up and down,
How that this churl had imaginatioun
To show such a problem to the friar.
Never erst or now heard I such a matere,
I trow the Devil put it in his mind.
In all Arsmetricke there shall no man find
Beforne this day of such a question.
Who should make a demonstration,
That every man should have ilike his part
Of a sown or favor of a farte:
O nice proud churl, I beshrew thy face.
Lo sirs, quoth. the lord, with hard grace,
Who ever heard of such a thing or now?
To every man ilike, tell me how?
It is an impossible, it may not be,
Eye nice churl, God let hem never the.
The rombling of a fart, and every soun,
Nys but of air reverberatioun,
And ever it wastes little and little away:
There is no man can demen, by my fay,
If that it were departed equally.
What? lo my churl: lo, how shreudly
Unto my confessor to day he spoke,
I hold him certain a demoniake,
Now eteth your meat, and let the churl go play,
* Let him go hongen himself a devil way.
Now stood the lords squire at the board,
That carf his meat, and heard word by word
Of all thing, of which I have you said.
My lord, quoth. he, be ye not evil apaid:
I couth tell for a gown cloth
To you sir friar, so that ye been not wroth,
How that this fart should even idealed be
Among your covent, if it likes thee.
Tell on (quoth. ye lord) and thou shall have anon
A gown cloth, by God and by saint John.
My lord (quoth. he) when the weder is fair
Withouten wind, or perturbing of air,
Let bring a cart wheel here into this hall,
But look well that he have his spokes all,
Twelve spokes has a cart whele commonly:
And bring me then xii. freres, wot ye why?
For thirteen is a covent as I guess:
Your confessor here for his worthnesse
Shall perform up the number of his covent.
Then shullen they knelen adoun by one assent,
And to every spokes end in this manner
Full sadly lay his nose shall a friar:
Your noble confessor there, God him save,
Shall hold his nose upright under the naue,
Then shall this churl with belly stiff and tought
As any tabour, hither been ibrought,
And set him on the whele right of this cart
Upon the naue, and make him let a fart,
And ye shullen see, up peril of my life,
By good prefe which is demonstratife,
That equally the sown of it will wend,
And eke the stink, unto the spokes end.
Save that this worthy man your confessor
(Because he is a man of great honor)
Shall have the first fruits as reason is:
The noble usage of freres yet is this,
The worthest man of hem shul first be served:
And certainly, he has it well deserved,
He has to day taught us so much good,
With preaching in the pulpet there he stood,
That I may vouchsafe, I say for me,
He had the first smell of farts three,
And so would all his brethren hardely,
He bears him so fair and holyly.
The lord, ye lady, and each man save the friar,
Said that Ienkin spoke in this matere
As well as Euclide did, or Ptholome,
Touching the churles said subtlety,
And hie wit made him speak as he spoke,
He nis no fool, ne no demoniake:
And Ienkin has iwonne a new gown,
My tale is done, we been almost at town.
The Clerk of Oxenfords Prologue.
SIr Clerk of Oxenford our host said,
Ye ride as still and coy, as does a maid
Were new spoused, sitting at the board:
This day ne heard I of your mouth a word.
I trow that ye study about some sophime:
* But Solomon says, all thing has time.
For Gods sake beth of better chere,
It is no time now to study here.
Tell us some merry tale by your fay:
For what man is entered into a play,
He needs mot unto that play assent.
But preaches not, as Freres done in Lent,
To make us for our old sins to weep,
He that thy tale make us not to sleep.
Tell us some merry thing of auentures,
Your terms, your figures, and your colors
Keep hem in store, till so be that ye endite
Hie style, as when men to kings do write.
Speak so plain at this time, I you pray,
That we may understand what ye say.
This worthy Clerk beningly answered,
Host (quoth. he) I am under your yerde,
Ye have of us as now the governance,
And therefore will I do you obeisance,
As far as reason asks hardely:
I woll you tell a tale, which that I
Learned at Padow, of a worthy clerk,
As preued is by his words and his work.
He is now dead, and nailed in his chest,
I pray to God send his soul good rest.
Fraunces Petrarke, the laureat poet
Hight this ilke clerk, whose Rethorike sweet
Enlumined all Itaile of poetry,
As Liuian did of Philosophy,
Or law or other art perticulere:
But death that wol not suffer us dwellen here,
But as it were the twinkling of an eye,
Hem both has slain, and all we shall dye.
But for to tellen of this worthy man,
That taught me this tale, as I first began
I say that he first with hie style enditeth
(Or he the body of his tale writes)
A proheme, in which discriueth he
Piemont, and of Saluce the country,
And speaks of Apenniny the hills hye,
That been the bounds of west Lumbardie:
And of mount Vesulus in special,
Where as the Poo, out of a well small
Takes his first springing and his sours,
That Eastward ever increases in his course
To Emelle ward, to Ferare, and to Venise,
The which a long time were to devise.
And truly, as to my judgment,
Me thinks it a thing impartinent,
Save that him list conueyen his matere:
But this is his tale as ye shullen here.
The Clerk of Oxenfords Tale.
WAlter the Marquess of Saluce proves the patience of his wife Grisill, by
three most sharp trials.

THere is in the West side of Itaile
Down at the ro^e of Vesulus the cold,
A lusty plain habundaunt of vitaile,
Where many a town and tower thou may behold
That founded were, in time of fathers old,
And many another delectable sight:
And Saluce this noble country hight.
A marquis whilom was in that land,
As were his worthy elders him before,
And obeysant aye ready to his hond
Were all his lieges, both less and more:
Thus in delight he lived, and has done yore
Beloved and drad, through favor of fortune
Both of his lords, and of his commune.
Therewith he was, as to speak of lineage
The gentilest iborne of all Lombardy,
A fair person, and strong, and young of age,
And full of honor and courtesy:
Discreet inow, his country for to gye
Save that in some things he was to blame,
And Walter was this young lords name.
I blame him thus, yt he considered naught
In time coming, what he might betide,
But on his lust present was all his thought,
And for to hawk and hunt on every side:
Welny all other cures let he slide,
And eke he ne would (that was worst of all)
Wed no wife for ought that might befall.
Only that point his people bare so sore,
That flockmele on a day to him they went,
And one of hem, that wisest was of lore
(Or else that the lord would best assent
That he should tell him with his people meant,
Or else coud he well show such matere)
He to the Marquis said as ye shullen here.
O noble Marquis, your humanite
Assures us and yeueth us hardiness,
As often time as is necessite,
That we may to you tell our heuinesse:
Accepts lord of your gentilnesse,
That we to you with pitous heart plain,
And let your ears not my voice disdain.
All have I not to done in this matere
More than another has in this place,
Yet for as much, as ye my lord so dear
Have always showed me favor and grace,
I dare the better ask of you a space
Of audience, to shown our request,
And ye my lord to done right as you lest
For certes lord: so well us likes you
And all your works, and ever have don, that we
Ne could our own self deuisen how
We might more liuen in felicite:
Save one thing lord, if it your will be,
That for to be a wedded man, you lest,
Then were your people in souerain herts rest.
Boweth your neck under the blisful yoke
Of souerainte, and not of seruise.
Which men clepen spousaile or wedlock:
And thinks lord, among your thouts wise,
For though we sleep or wake, run, or ride,
* Aye flees the time, it wol no man abide.
And though your grene youth flower as yet,
* In crepeth age always as still as stone,
And death manaseth every age, and smite
In each estate, for there escapes none:
And also certain, as we known echone,
That we shul die, and uncertain we all
Ben of that day that death shall on us fall.
Accepts then of us the true intent,
That never yet refused your hest,
And we wol all lord, if ye wol assent
Chese you a wife in short time, at the lest
Borne of the gentillest and the best
Of all this land, so that it ought seem
Honor to god and you, as nere as we can deem.
Deliver us out of all this busy dred,
And take a wife, for hie Gods sake:
For if it so befell, as god forbed,
That thorogh death your lineage should slake,
And that a strange successor should take
Your heritage, O woe were us on live:
Wherefore we pray you hastily to wiue.
Her meek prayer and her pitious chere
Made the Marquis for to have pite.
Wol ye (quoth. he) mine own people dear
To that I never erst thought, constrain me?
I me rejoiced of my liberty,
That seldom time is found in marriage,
There I was free, I mote ben in seruage.
But natheles, I see your true intent,
And trust upon your wit, and have done aye:
Wherefore of my free will I woll assent
To wedden me, as soon as ever I may.
But there, as ye have profred me to day
To chese me a wife, I you release
That choice, and pray you of that profer cease.
* For God it wot, that children often been
Unlike her worthy eldes hem before,
Bounte comes of God, and not of the streen,
Of which they be engendered and ibore:
I trust in gods bounte, and therefore
My marriage, mine estate, and rest
I him be take, he may don as him lest.
Let me alone in chesing of my wife,
That charge upon my back I woll endure:
But I you pray, and charge upon your life,
That what wife I take, ye me ensure
To worship her whiles her life may dure,
In word and work, both here and elsewhere,
As she an Emperors daughter were.
And furthermore, thus shul ye swear, that ye
Against my choice shall never grutch nestriue.
For since I shall forgo my liberte
At your request, as ever mote I thrive,
There as mine heart is set, there wol I wiue:
And but ye woll assent, in such manner,
I pray you speak no more in this matere.
With hearty will they sworn and assent
To all this thing, there said no wight nay:
Beseeching him of grace ere they went,
That he would hem grant a certain day
Of his spousaile, as soon as ever he may,
For yet always the people somewhat dred,
Lest this Marquis would no wife wed.
He granted hem a day, such as him lest,
On which he would be wedded sekerly:
And said he did all this at her request,
And they with humble intent full buxumely
Kneeling upon her knees full reverently
Him thonked all, and thus they han an end
Of her intent, and home again they wend.
And hereupon he took his officers
Commanding for the feast to purvay,
And to his privy knights and squires
Such charge he yaue, as he list on hem lay:
And they to his commandment obey,
And each of hem does his diligence
To done to the feast all reverence.
Explicit prima pars, and sequitur pars secunda.
Naught far fro thilke place honorable,
Where this Marquis shope his marriage,
There stood a thrope, of sight full delectable,
In which that poor folk of that village
Hadden her beasts and her herbigage,
And of her labor took her sustenance,
After that the earth yaue hem haboundance.
Among this poor folk there dwell a man,
Which that was holden poorest of hem all:
* But the high God sometime senden can
His grace unto a little ox stall:
Ianicola men of that thrope him call.
A daughter had he fair enough to sight,
And Grisilde this young maiden hight.
But for to speak of virtuous beauty,
Then was she one the fairest under son:
And full poorly ifostered was she:
No licorous lust was in her heart yronne:
Well ofter of the well than of the tonne
She drunk, and for she would virtue plese,
She knew well labor, but not idle ease.
But though this maid was tender of age,
Yet in the breast of her virginite
There was enclosed sad and ripe courage:
And in great reverence of charity
Her old pore father fostred she:
A few sheep spinning on the field she kept,
She would not ben idle till she slept.
And when she homeward came, she would bring
Wortes, and other herbs, times full often,
Which she shrad and sethe for her living,
And made her bed full hard, and nothing soft:
And aye she kept her fathers life on loft
With every obeisance and diligence,
That child might do to the fathers reverence.
Upon Grisilde the poor creature
Well often has the Marquis set his eye,
As he a hunting went peradventure:
And when it fell that he might her epsy
He (not with wanton looking of folly)
His eyes cast upon her, but in sad wise,
Upon her chere he would him often auise.
Commending in his heart her womanhede,
And eke her virtue, passing every wight
Of so young age, as well in chere as in deed.
For though the people have no great insight
In virtue: he considered full right
Her bounte, and disposed that he would
Her wed, if he ever wedden should.
The day of wedding come, but no wight can
Tell, what manner woman it should be,
For which marvel, wondered many a man
And saiden, when they were in their priuite,
Woll not our Lord leave his vanite.
Woll he not wed, alas, alas, the while,
Why woll he thus himself and us begile.
But natheles this Marquis has do make
Of iemmes, set in gold and in asure,
Broches and rings, all for Grisildes sake,
And of her clothing took he the measure
Of a maiden like to her stature,
And eke of other ornaments all,
That unto such a wedding should fall.
The time vndren, in the same day
Approached, that the wedding should be,
And all the paleis put was in array,
Both hall and chamber, each in his degree,
Houses of office stuffed with great plente:
There may thou see all dainteous vitaile,
That may be found, as far as lasts Itaile,
This royal Marquis richly araide,
Lords and ladies in his company,
The which that to the feast weren praide
And of his retinue the bachelerie,
With many a sown of sondrie melody,
Unto the village of which I told,
In this array the right way has hold.
Grisilde (God wot of this full innocent,
That for her was shape all this array)
To fetch water at a well is went,
And comes home as soon as ever she may.
For well she heard say, that full ilke day
The Marquis should wed, and if she might,
She would fain seen some of that sight.
She thout I will with other maide^s stond
That been my fellows, in our door and see
The Marquis, and thereto wol I fond
To have done at home as soon as it may be,
The labor which that longs to me,
And then may I at leisure it behold,
If he this way to the castle hold.
And as she would over the dreshold gone,
The Marquis came and began her for to call,
And she set down her water pot anon
Beside the threshold of the ox stall,
And down upon her knees she began to fall,
And with sad countenance she kneeled still,
Till she had herd what was the lords will.
This thoutful Marquis spoke to yt maid
Well soberly, and said in this manner:
Where is your father Grisiilde, he said?
And she with reverence and meek chere
Answered, lord he is all ready here,
And in she goes without longer let,
And to the Marquis she her father fette.
He by the hond then took this old man,
And said thus, when he had him aside:
Ianicola, I neither may ne can
Longer the plesance of mine heart hide,
If that thou vouchsafe, whatsoever betide
Thy daughter woll I take or that I wend
As for my wife, unto my lives end.
Thou love me, I wot well certain,
And art my faithful liegeman ibore,
And all that likes me, I dare well saine
It likes thee, and specially therefore
Tell me that point, that I have said before,
If that thou wolt to this purpose draw,
To take me as for thy son in law?
This sudden case the man astoned so,
That red he wext abashed, and all quaking
He stood, ne uneath said he words mo,
But only thus (quoth. he) Lord my willing
Is as ye woll, ne against your liking
I woll nothing, ye be my lord so dear,
Right as you list, govern this matere.
Then wol I thus (quoth. this Marquis) sothly,
That in thy chamber, I you, and she,
Have a collation, and wotest thou why?
For I woll ask her, if her will be
To be my wife, and rule her after me:
And all this shall she done in thy presence,
I woll not speak out of thine audience.
And in the chamber, while they were about
The treties, where ye shall after hear,
The people came into the house without
And wondered hem, in how honest manner
So tentifly she kept her father dear:
But utterly Grisild wonder might.
For never erst saw she such a sight.
No wonder is though she be astoned,
To see so great a gest come into that place,
She was never to such gestes woned,
For which she looked with full pale face.
But shortly fro this matter for to pace,
These weren the words yt the Marquis said
To this benign and very faithful maid.
Grisilde he said, ye shall well understand,
It likes unto your father and me,
That I you wed, and eke it may so stond
As I suppose, that ye woll it so be:
But these demands I ask first (quoth. he)
That sithen it shall be done in hasty wise,
Woll ye thereto assent, or else you auise?
I say thus, be ye ready with good heart
To all my lust, and that I freely may
As me best likes, though ye laugh or smert,
And never ye to grutch, night ne day:
When I say yea, that ye say not ones nay,
Neither in word, ne by frowning countenance;
Swear this, and here I swear our aliance.
Wondering upon these words, quaking for dred
She said: lord, indigne and unworthy
Am I, to thilke honor, that ye me bid,
But right as you woll, even so woll I:
And here I swear, that never willingly
In word, work, ne thought, I nill you disobie
For to be deed, though me were loath to die.
This is enough Grisilde mine (quoth. he)
And forth he goes with a sober chere,
Out at the door and after came she,
And to the people he said in this manner:
This is my wife, (quoth. he) that stondeth here.
Honors her, and loves her, I you pray,
Who so me loves, there nis no more to say.
And for that nothing of her old gere
She should bring into his house, he bad
That women should dispoilen her there,
Of which these ladies were nothing glad
To handle her cloths in which she was clad:
But natheles this maiden bright of hew
Fro foot to head they clothed han all new.
Her here han they kembe, that lay vntressed
Full rudely, and with her fingers small
A crown on her head they han idressed,
And set it full of ouches great and small,
Of her arraie what should I make a tale,
Uneath the people her knew for her fairnes,
When she transformed was in such riches.
This Marquis has her spoused with a ring
Bought for the same cause, and then her set
Upon an horse snow white, well ambling,
And to his palais, or he longer let
(With joyful people, that her lad and met)
Conveyed her, and thus the day they spend
In revel, till the sun began discende.
And shortly forth this tale for to chase,
I say, that to this new Marquess
God has isent such favor of his grace,
That it seemed not, as by her likelinesse
That she was borne and fed in rudeness,
As in a cote, or in an ox stall,
But nourished in an Emperors hall.
To every wight she woxen is so dear,
And worshipful, ye folk there as she was bore,
And fro her birth knew her year by year,
Uneath trowed they, but durst have swore,
That to Ianicola, of which I spoke before,
She daughter nas, for as by conjecture
Hem thought she was another creature.
For though that ever virtuous was she,
She was increased in such excellence
Of thewes good, set in high bounte,
And so discrete, and fair of eloquence,
So benign, and digne of reverence,
And could the peoples hearts so enbrace,
That each her loved that looked in her face.
Not only of Saluce in the town
Published was the bounte of her name,
But eke beside, in many a regioun,
If one said well, another said the same:
So sprad of her hie bounty the fame,
That men and women, both young and old
Gone to Saluces her for to behold.
Thus Walter lowly, and full royally,
Wedded has with fortunate honesty,
In Gods peace he lives full easily:
At home, and outward, grace enough had he:
And for he saw that under low degree
Was honest virtue hid, the people him held
A prudent man, and that is seen well seld.
Not only this Grisilde, through her wit
Couth all the feate of wifely humbleness,
But eke when the cause required it,
The commen profit could she redress:
There nas discord, rancor ne heaviness
In all the land, that she ne couth apese,
And bring hem all wisely in rest and ese.
Though her husbond absent were or none,
If gentlemen, or other of that country
Were wroth, she would bring hem all at one,
So wise counsel and ripe words had she,
And judgment of so great equity,
That she from heaven sent was, as men wend,
People to save, and every wrong to mend.
Not long time after this fair Grisilde
Was wedded, she a daughter had ibore,
All had she lever have borne a man child:
Glad was the Marquis and his folk therefore,
For though a maid child came all before
She may to a man child after attain
By likelihood, since she is not baraine.
Explicit secunda pars, and incipit pars tertia.
THere fell, as it befalls often times mo,
When that this child had sucked but a throw,
This Marquis in his heart longed so
To tempt his wife, her sadness to know,
That he ne might out his heart throw
This marvelous desire, his wife to assay,
Needless God wot, he thought her to affray.
He had assaied her enough before,
And found her ever good, what needs it
Her for to tempt? And always more and more
Though some man praise it for a subtle wit,
But as for me, I say full evil it sit
To assay a wife when it is no need,
And put her in anguish and in dread.
For which this Marquis wrout in this manner,
He came alone a night there as she lay
With full stern face, and right ugly chere,
And said thus: Grisilde (quoth. he) that day
That I took thee out of thy poor array,
And put thee in estate of high noblesse,
Thou have not that forgotten, as I guess.
I say Grisilde, the present dignite
In which I have put thee, as I trow,
Makes not thee foryetfull for to be,
That I thee took in poor estate full low,
For any well thou must thy self know.
Take heed of every word what I say,
There is no wight that hereth but we tway.
Thou wotest thy self how yt thou came here
Into this house, it is not long ago,
And though to me thou be both lefe and dear,
Unto my Gentiles thou art nothing so:
They say, to hem it is great shame and woe
For to been subject, and been in seruage
To thee, that borne art in so small a village.
And namely since thy daughter was ybore,
These words often have they spoken doutles,
But I desire, as I have done before,
To lead my life with hem in rest and pees:
I may not in this case be recheles.
I mote done with thy daughter for the best.
Not as I would, but as my gentiles lest.
And yet God wot, this is full loath to me:
But natheles without thy witting
I woll naught do, but this I woll (quoth. he)
That thou to me assent, as in this thing,
Show now thy patience in the werking,
That thou me hight and swore in our village
That day that maked was our marriage.
When she had heard all this, she not ameued
Neither in word, in chere, ne countenance,
(For as it seemed, she was not agreeued)
She said lord, all lies in your pleasance,
My child and I, with heartely obeisance
Been yours all, and ye may save or spill,
With your own therefore works your own will.
There may nothing so God my soul save,
Liken to you, that may displease me:
Ne I desire nothing for to have
Ne dread for to lose, save only ye:
This will is in my heart, and aye shall be,
No length of time, or death it may deface
Neither change my courage into another place.
Glad was the Marquis of her answering,
But yet he fained as he were not so,
All drery was his chere and his looking.
When that he should out of the chamber go
Sone after this, a furlong way or two
He privily had told all his intent
Unto a man, and to his wife him sent.
In manner of a sergeant was this privy man
The which he faithful often found had
In things great, and eke such folk well can
Done execution of things bad:
The lord knew well, he him loved and drad.
And when this sergeant wist his lords will,
Into the chamber he stalked him full still.
Madame he said, ye mote foryeue it me,
Though I do thing, which I am constrained:
Ye be full wise, and full well know ye,
That great lords hestes may not be fained,
They may well be wailed and complained,
But men must needs unto her lust obey,
And so woll I, there nis no more to say.
This child I am commanded to take.
And spoke no more, but up the child he hent
Dispitously, and began a chere to make,
As though he would have slain it or he went.
Grisilde must all suffer and consent:
And as a lamb, she sits meek and still,
And let this cruel Sergeant do his will.
Suspect was the fame of this ilke man,
Suspect his face, suspect his word also,
Suspect the time in which he this began:
Alas her daughter, that she loved so,
She wend he would have slain it right tho,
But natheles she neither wept ne liked,
Confirming her to that the Marquis liked.
But at the last to speak she began,
And full meekely she the sergeant praid
(So as he was a worthy gentell man)
That she might kiss her child ere that it deid:
And in her arm, this little child she leid,
With full sad face, and began the child bliss,
And lulled it, and after began it kiss.
And thus she said in her benign voice:
Farewell my child, I shall thee never see,
But sithen I have marked thee with ye croice,
Of th^lke father iblessed mote thou be,
That for us died upon the Roode tree:
Thy soul little child I him betake,
For this night shall thou dien for my sake.
I trow that to a norice in this caas
It had been hard this routh for to see:
Well might a mother then cry alas,
But natheles so sad and steadfast was she,
That she endured all her aduersite,
And to the sergeant meekely she said,
Have here again your little young maid.
And goth now (quoth. she) and does my lords hest:
And o thing would I pray you of your grace,
But if my lord forbid it you at the lest.
Burieth this little body in some place,
That no beasts ne birds it to race.
But he no word to that purpose would say,
But took y^ child and went anon his way.
This sergeant came to the lord again,
And of Grisilds words and of her chere,
He told him word by word, short and plain,
And him presented with his daughter dear.
Somewhat this lord had routh in his manner,
But natheles his purpose held he still,
As lords done, when they woll have their will,
And bad the sergeant that full privily
He should this child well soft wind and wrap,
With all the circumstance tenderly,
And carry it in a cofer, or in a lap:
But on pain of his head off to swap,
That no man should know of his intent,
Ne whens he came ne whither he went.
But at Boleine, to his suster dear,
That thilke time of Pauie was Countess,
He should it take, and show her this matere,
Beseeching her to done her business
This child to fostre in all gentleness,
And whose child that it was he bad her hide
From every wight, for ought yt might betide.
This sergeant goth, and has fulfilde this thing.
But to this Marquis now return we,
For now goes he full often imagining
If by his wives chere, he might ought see
Or else by her words, peceiue that she
Were changed, but he never could find,
But ever in one ilike sad and kind.
As glad, as humble, as busy in service
And eke in love as she was wont to be,
Was she to him in every manner wise,
Ne of her daughter one word spoke she:
None accedent for none adversite
Was seen in her, ne never her daughters name
Nempned she, for ernest ne for game.
Explicit tertia pars, and incipit pars quarta.
IN this estate passed ben four year,
Er she with child was, but as God would,
A man child she bare by this Waltere
Well gracious, and fair to behold:
And when folk it to the father told,
Not only he, but all the country merry
Was for the child, and God they thonke and hery.
When it was two year old, and from the breast
Departed from his norice, on a day
This Marquis cought yet another lest
To tempten his wife eftsoon, if he may.
O needles was she tempted, I dare say.
* But wedded men ne conne no measure,
When they find a patient creature.
Wife (quoth. this Marquis) ye have heard or this
My people heavily bears our marriage,
And namely sithen my son borne is,
Now is it worse than ever in our age:
The murmr slaieth my heart and my courage,
For to my ears comes the voice so smart
That it well nie destroyed has my heart.
Now say they thus, when Walter is agon,
Then shall the blood of Ianicola succeed,
And ben our lord, for other have we non:
Such words say my people, it is no dread.
Well ought I of such murmr take heed,
For certainly I dread such sentence,
Though they not plainly speak in mine audience.
I would live in peace, if that I might:
Wherefore I am disposed utterly,
As I his suster served by night,
Right so I think to serve him privily.
Thus warn I you, that ye not suddenly
Out of your self, for no woe should outraie,
Beth patient, and thereof I you pray.
I have, quoth. she, said, and ever shall,
I woll ne nill nothing for certain,
But as you list: naught greueth me at all,
Though that my daughter and my son be slain
At your commandment: this is to sain,
I have had no part of children twain,
But first sickness, and after woe and pain.
Ye ben our lord, does with your own thing
Right as you list, and takes no reed of me:
For as I left at home my clothing
When I came first to you, right so, quoth. she,
Left I my will and all my liberty,
And took your clothing: wherefore I you pray
Do your will, I woll to it obey.
And certes, If I had prescience
Your will to know, ere ye your lust me told,
I would it done without negligence:
But now I wot your lust, and what ye would,
All your pleasance firm and stable I hold,
For wist I that my death would done you ese,
Gladly would I suffer it you to plese.
Death may not make no comparisoun
Unto your love: and when this Marquis seie
The constance of his wife, he cast adown
His iyen two, and wondered how she may
In such patience suffer all this arraie:
And forth he goth with drery countenance,
But to his heart it was full great pleasaunce.
This eiger sergeant in the same wise
That he her daughter caught, right so he
Or worse, if that he coud wers devise,
Has hent her son, that was full of beauty:
And ever in one so patient was she,
That she no chere made of heaviness,
But kisseth her child and after began him bless.
Save this she prayed him, if yt he might,
Her little son he would in earth grave,
His tender limbs, delicate to sight,
Fro fowls and fro noysom beasts to save.
But she none answer of him might have,
He went his way, as he nothing rought,
But to Boleine he tenderly it brought.
This Marquis wondered ever longer the more
Upon her patience, and if that he
He had soothly known there before,
That perfectly her children loved she,
He would have wend that for some subtilte
And of malice, or cruel courage,
She had suffered this with sad visage.
But he knew well, that next himself, certain
She loved her children best in every wise.
But now of women would I ask fain,
If these assaies mighten not suffice,
What coud a sturdie husbond more devise
To preue her wifehood, and her steadfastness:
But be continuing ever in sturdinesse.
But there be folk of that condition,
That when they han a certain purpose take,
They couth not stint of her entention,
But as they were bounden to a stake
They woll not of that purpose to stake:
Right so this Marquis has fully purposed
To tempt his wife, as he was first disposed.
He waits, if by words or countenance
She were to him changed of her courage:
But never could he find variance,
She was aie in one heart and visage,
And ever the further that she was in age,
The more truer (if it were possible)
She was to him in love, and more penible.
For which it seems thus, that of hem two
There nas but one will: for as Walter lest
The same lust was her pleasance also:
And God be thonked, all fell for the best,
She showed well, for no worldly unrest,
* A wife, as for her self, nothing should
Willen in effect, but as her husbond would.
The sclander of Walter, wonder wide spread
That of cruel heart full wretchedly,
(For he a poor woman wedded had)
Has murdered both his children privily:
Which murmr was among hem commonly.
No wonder was: for to the peoples ere
There came no word, but that they murdered were.
For which whereas his people there before
Had loved him well, the slander of his fame
Made hem that they hated him therefore:
* To been a murderer is an hateful name.
But natheles, for earnest ne for game
He of his cruel purpose would not s^ent,
To tempt his wife was all his intent.
When that his daughter twelve year was of age,
He to the court of Rome, in subtle wise
(Informed of his will) sent his message
Comanding hem, such bills to devise,
As to his cruel purpose may suffice,
How that the Pope, for his peoples rest
Bad him wed another, if that him lest.
I say he bad, they should counterfete
The Popes bull, making mention
That he has leave his first wife to let
As by the Popes dispensacion,
To stint rancor and discencion
Betwixt his people and him: thus spoke the bull,
The which they han published at the full.
The rude people, as no wonder nis
Wenden full fell, it had been right so:
But when these tidings come to Grisildis
I deem, that her heart was full of woe
But she was still lech sad evermo:
Disposed was this humble creature
The adversite of fortune to endure.
Abiding ever his list and his pleasaunce
To whom she was yeuen, heart and all,
As to her very worldly suffisaunce:
But certainly, if I this story tell shall,
This Marquis iwritten has in special
A letter, in which he showed his intent
And prively, he it to Boloine has sent,
To the Earl of Pauie, which that had tho
Wedden his suffer: he prayed specially
To bringen him again his children two
In honorable estate all openly:
But one thing he prayed all utterly,
That he to no wit, thou men would enquere
Should tell whose children that they were.
But say that the maiden should wedded be
Unto the Marquis of Saluce anon:
And as the Earl was prayed, so did he,
For at a day set he on his way is gone
Toward Saluce, and lords many one
In rich araie, this maiden for to gide,
Her young brother riding by her side.
Arrayed was toward her marriage
This maiden fresh, full of gemmes clear,
And her brother, that seven year was of age
Arrayed was eke freshly in his manner:
And thus in great nobles and glad chere
Toward Saluce shapen their iournay
Fro day to day, riding forth her way.
Explicit quarta pars, and sequitur pars quinta.
AMong all this, after his wicked usage
This Marquis his wife yet tempted more
To the vtterest proof of her courage,
Fully to have experience and sore,
If that she were as steadfast (as before.)
He on a day in open audience
Full boistrously has said her this sentence:
Certes Grisilde, I had enough of pleasance
To han you to my wife, for your goodness
And for your troth, and your obeisance,
Not for your lineage, ne for your riches,
But I now know in very soothfastnesse,
* That in great lordship, if I me well auise
There is great servitude in sundry wise.
I may not done as every ploughman may:
My people me constrains for to take
Another wife, and cryen day by day,
And eke the Pope this rancor for to s^ake
Consents it, that dare I undertake:
And truly, thus much I woll you say,
My new wife is coming by the way.
Be strong of heart, and void anon her place,
And thilke dowery that ye brought to me
Take it again, I grant it of my grace,
Returns to your fathers house (quoth. he)
* No man may always have prosperity.
With even heart I read you to endure
The stroke of fortune, or of aventure.
And she again answered in patience:
My lord, quoth. she, I wot and wist always,
How that betwixt your magnificence
And my pouert, no man can ne may
Maken no comparison, it is no nay,
I held me never digne in no manner
To been your wife, ne yet your chamberere.
And in this house there ye me lady made
(The hie God take I as for my witness
And all so wisely, as he my soul glad)
I held me neither lady ne maistresse,
But humble servant to your worthiness,
And ever shall, while my life may endure,
Abouen every worldly creature.
That ye so long of your benignite
Have hold me in honor and nobley
(Where I was not worthy for to be)
That thonke I God and you, to whom I prey
So yield it you, there is no more to sey:
Unto my father gladly wol I wend,
And with him dwell to my lives end,
There I was fostred of a child full small
Till I be deed, my life there woll I lead,
A widow clean in heart, body and all.
For sithen I yave to you my maidenhead,
And am your true wife, it is no dread:
God shilde such a lords wife to take
Another man to husbond or to make.
And of your new wife, God of his grace
So grant you wealth and high prosperity:
For I woll gladly give her my place,
In which I was blisful wont to be.
For sithen it likes you my lord, quoth. she,
(That whilome weren all my hearts rest)
That I shall gone: I shall go when you lest.
But there as ye me profred such dowaire
As I first brought, it is well in my mind,
It were my wretched clothes, nothing fair,
The which to me now were full hard to find.
Oh, good God, how gentle and how kind
Ye seemed by your speech and your visage,
The day that maked was our marriage?
* But sooth is said, algate I find it true,
For in effect it is proved now on me,
Love is not old, as when it is new:
For certes lord, for none adversite
To dien in this case, it shall never be
That ever in word or work I shall repent,
That I you yave mine heart in good intent.
My lord ye wot, that in my fathers place
Ye did me strip out of my poor wede,
And richely ye clad me of your grace,
To you brought I naught else out of dread,
But faith, nakedness, and maidenhede:
But here again your clothing I restore,
And eke my wedding ring for evermore.
The remnaunt of your jewels ready be
Within your chamber, dare I safely saine:
Naked out of my fathers house (quoth. she)
I came, and naked I mote turn again.
All your pleasaunce would I follow feign:
But yet I hope it be not your intent,
That I smockelesse out of your paleis went.
Ye could not do so dishonest a thing,
That ilke womb in which your children lay,
Should before the people, in my walking
Be seen all bare: wherefore I you pray
Let me not like a worm go by the way:
Remembers you mine own lord so dear,
I was your wife, though I unworthy were.
Wherefore in reward of my maidenhede
Which I to you brought, and not again bear,
As vouchsafe to give me to my mede,
But such a smock as I was wont to were:
That I therewith may wrie ye womb of her
That was your wife: and here I take my leave
Of you, mine own lord, least I you grieve.
The smock (quoth. he) yt thou have on thy bake,
Let it be still, and bear it forth with thee:
But well uneath that word had he spoke,
But went his way for routh and pitee:
Before the folk her self strippeth she,
And in her smock, with foot and head all bare,
Toward her fathers house forth is she fare.
The folk followed weeping in her wey,
And fortune ever they cursed as they gone:
But she fro weeping kept her eyes drey,
Ne in all this time word spoke she none.
Her father, that this tidings heard anon,
Cursed the day and time, that nature
Shope him to been a lives creature.
For out of all doubt, this poor old man
Was ever suspect of her marriage:
For ever he deemed, sithen it began,
That when the lord filled had his courage,
Him would think it was a disparage
To his estate, so low for to alight,
And voiden her as soon as ever he might.
Against his daughter hastily goes he,
(For by ye noise of folk he knew her coming)
And with her old coat as it might be,
He covered her, full sore weeping:
But on her body might he it not bring
For rude was the cloth, and she more of age
By days feel than she was at her marriage.
Thus with her father for a certain space
Dwells this flower of wifely patience,
That never by her words nor by her face,
Before the folk ne eke in absence,
Ne showed she that her was done offense,
Ne of her high estate no remembrance
Ne had she, as by her coutenaunce.
No wonder is, for in her great estate
Her ghost was ever in plain humility:
No tender mouth, ne heart delicate,
Ne pomp, ne semblance of roialtie.
But full of patience and benignite,
Discreet, and pridelesse, and aye honorable.
And to her husband ever meek and stable.
Men speak of Job, and most for his humblesse,
(As clerks when hem list can well endite
Namely of men) but in soothfastnesse,
* Though clerks praisen women but a lite,
There can no man in humblesse hem acquit
As women can: ne be half so true
As women been, but it befall of new.
Explicit quinta pars: and sequitur pars sexta.
FRo Boloine is the Earl of Pauie come,
Of which the fame sprung to more and less:
And to the peoples ears all and some
Was couth eke how a new Marquesesse
He with him brought, in pomp and such richesse,
That was never seen with man's eye
So noble array in West Lumbardie.
The Marquis that shope and knew all this,
Er that this Earl was come, sent his message
To thilke poor and silly Grisildis,
And she with humble heart and glad visage,
Not with swelling heart in her courage,
Came at his hest, and on her knees her set,
And reverently and wisely she him great.
Grisilde (quoth. he) my will is utterly,
This maid that wedded shall be unto me,
Received be to morrow so royally
As it is possible in my house to be:
And eke that every wight in his degree
Have his estate in sitting and service,
And also pleasant, as ye can best devise.
I have no woman sufficient certain,
The chambers for to array in ordinance
After my lust, and therefore woll I feign,
That thine weren all such governance:
Thou know eke of old all my pleasaunce,
Though thine array be bad, and evil besey,
Do thou thy deuer at the least wey.
Not only lord I am glad (quoth. she)
To done your lust, but I desire also
You for to please and serve in my degree,
Withouten faining, and shall euermo:
Ne never for no weal, ne for no woe,
Ne shall the ghost within my heart stent
To love you best with all my true intent.
And with yt word she began ye house to dight,
And tables to set, and beds to make,
And pained her to done all that she might,
Praying the chamberers for Gods sake
To hasten hem, and fast sweep and shake,
And she the most serviceable of hem all,
Has every chamber arraied, and his hall.
Abouten vndren began this Earl alight,
yt with him brought these noble children twey:
For which the people ran to see that sight
Of her array, so richely besey:
And then at erst amongs hem they sey,
That Walter was no fool, though him lest
To change his wife: for it was for the best.
For she is fairer, as they deemen all
Than is Grisild, and more tender of age:
And fairer fruit between hem shall fall,
And more pleasant for her high lineage:
Her brother eke so fair was of his age,
That him to seen ye people had caut plesance,
Commending now the Marquis governance.
O stern people, unsad and untrue,
Aye undiscreet, and changing as a fane,
Delighting ever in rumer that is new,
For like the Moon ever wax ye and wane:
Full of clapping, dear enough of a jane.
Your dome is false, your constance ill preveth,
A full great fool is he that on you leveth.
Thus saiden sad folk in that city,
When that the people gased up and down:
For they were glad, right with the novelty
To have a new lady of her town.
No more of this make I now mentioun,
But to Grisilde again woll I me dress,
And tellen her constance, and her business.
Well busy was Grisilde on every thing,
That to the feast was appertinent:
Right naut was she abashed of her clothing,
Though they were rude, and somewhat to rent,
But with glad cheer to the yate is went
With other folk, to greet the Marquesesse,
And after does she forth her business.
With right glad chere ye gests she receives
And buxomely eueriche in his degree,
That no man defaut there perceives,
But ever they wondren what she might be,
That in so poor array was for to see,
And coud such honor and reverence,
And worthyly they praisen her prudence.
In all the mean while she never stent,
This maiden and eke her brother to commend
With all her heart and benign intent,
So well, that no man coud her prise amend:
But at the last when these lords wend
To sitten down to meat, he began to call
Grisilde, as she was busy in the hall.
Grisilde (quoth. he) as it were in his play,
How likes thee my wife, and her beauty?
Right well my lord (quoth. she) for in good fay,
A fairer saw I never none than she:
I pray to God so give you prosperity,
And so hope I, that he woll to you send
Pleasaunce enough unto your lives end.
But one thing I beseech, and warn also
That ye prick with no such turmenting
This tender maiden, as ye han do mo:
For she is fostered in her nourishing
More tenderly, in my supposing
She could not adversity endure,
As could a poor fostred creature.
And when this Walter saw her patience,
Her glad cheer, and no malice at all,
And he so often has done her offense,
And she aye constant, and stable as a wall,
Continuing ever her innocence over all,
This sturdie Marquis began his heart dress
To rue upon her wifely steadfastness.
This is enough, Grisilde mine (quoth. he)
Be no more gast, ne evil apaid,
I have thy faith and thy benignite,
As well as ever woman was assaid
In great estate, or poorly araid:
Now know I dear wife thy steadfastness,
And her in arms took, and began to kesse,
And she for wonder took thereof no keep:
She heard not what thing he to her said:
She fared as she had stert out of her sleep,
Till she out of her masednesse abraid.
Grisilde (quoth. he) by God that for us deid,
Thou art my wife, and none other I have,
Ne never had, as God my soul save.
This is thy daughter, which thou supposed
To be my wife, and none other faithfully:
And this shall be mine heir, as I have disposed,
Thou bare hem in thy body truly:
At Boloine have I kept hem sikerly,
Take hem again, for now may thou not say,
That thou have lorn any of thy children tway.
And folk, that otherwise han said of me,
I warn hem well, that I have done this deed
For no malice, ne for no cruelte,
But for to assay in thee thy womanhede:
And not to sley my children, God forbede,
But for to keepen hem privily and still,
Till I thy purpose knew: and all thy will.
When she this herd, a swoune down she falls
For pitous joy, and after her swouning,
She both her young children to her calls,
And in her arms pitously weeping,
Embraced hem both tenderly kissing
Full like a mother, with her salt tears
She bathed both her visage and her hairs.
O which a pitous thing it was to see
Her swouning, and her pitous voice to hear:
Grant mercy lord, God thonk it you (quoth. she)
That ye have saved me my children dear:
Now recke I never to be dead right here,
Sithen I stond in your love, and in your grace,
No force of death, ne when my spirit pace.
O tender, O dear, O young children mine,
Your woeful mother wend steadfastly,
That cruel hounds, or some foul vermin
Had eaten you, but God of his mercy,
And your benign father so tenderly
Has done you keep: and in yt same stound
All suddenly she swapt down to the ground.
And in her swouning, so sadly held she
Her children two when she began hem embrace,
That with great slight and difficulte
The children from her arms they began to race:
O many a tear, on many a pitous face
Down ran of hem tht stooden there beside,
Uneath about her might no man abide.
Walter her gladdeth, and her sorrow slaketh,
She rises up all abashed from her trance,
And every wight her joy and feast makes,
Till she has caught again her countenance,
Walter her does so faithfully pleasaunce,
That it was deintie to seen the chere
Betwixt hem two when they were met ifere.
These ladies all, when they her time sey,
Han taken her, and into chamber gone,
And strippen her out of her rude arrey,
And in a cloth of gold that bright shone,
With a croune of many a rich stone
Upon her head, they her into hall brought:
And there she was honored as she ought.
Thus has this pitous day a blisful end:
For every man and woman does his might
This day in mirth and revel to dispend,
Till on the welkin shone the sterres bright:
For more solemn in every man's sight
This feast was, and greater of co^^age,
Than was the revell of her marriage.
Well many a year in high prosperity
Liven these two in concord and in rest,
And richly his daughter married he
Unto a lord, one of the worthiest
Of all Itaile, and then in peace and rest
His wives father in his court he kept,
Till that his soul out of his body crept.
His son succeeds in his heritage,
In rest and peace after his fathers day:
And fortunate was eke in marriage,
All put he not his wife in great assay:
This world is not so strong, it is no nay,
As it has been in old times yore,
And her kneth what the autour says therefore.
THis story is said, not for that wives should
Followen Grisild, as in humilite:
For it were importable tho they would,
But that every wight in his degree
Should he constant in all adversite
As was Grisild: wherefore Petrarke writes
This story, which with high style he enditeth.
* For since a woman was so patient
Unto a mortal man, well more we ought
Receive all in gree that God us sent.
For great skill he preueth that he wrought:
* But he ne tempts no man that he bought
As says saint Iame, if ye his pistell read,
He preueth folk but assay, it is no dread.
* And suffers us as for our exercise
With sharp scourges of adversite,
Well often to be beaten in sundry wise:
Not for to know our will, for certes he
Or we were borne, knew all our freelte:
And for our best is all his governaunce,
Let us live then in virtuous suffraunce.
But one word herkeneth lordings or ye go:
It were full hard to find now adays
In all a country, Grisilds three or two:
For if they were put to such assays,
The gold of hem has so bad alayes
With brass, for though it be fair at eye,
It will rather brast a two than plie.
For which here, for the wives love of Bath
Whose life and sect mighty God maintene
In high maistry, or else were it skath,
I will with Iustie heart, fresh, and green,
Say you a song, to glad you I wene:
And let us stint of earnest mattere.
Herkneth my song that says in this manner.
Lenuoye de Chaucer a les mariz de nostre temps.
GRisilde is dead and eke her patience,
And both at once buried in Itaile:
For which I cry in open audience,
No wedded wan be so hardy to assail
His wives patience, in trust to find
Grisildes, for in certain he shall fail.
O noble wives, full of high prudence,
Let no humility your tongue nail:
Ne let no clerk have cause ne diligence
To write of you a story of such marvel
As of Grisild patient and kind,
Lest Chechiface swallow you in her entraile.
Follows Ecco, that holds no silence,
But ever answers at the contretaile:
Beth no addassed for your innocence,
But sharply takes on you the gouernaile:
Enprinteth well this lesson in your mind,
For common profit, since it may avail.
Ne dredeth hem not, does hem no reverence,
For though thine husbond armed be in maile
The arrows of thy crabbed eloquence
Shall perce his breast, and eke his adventaile:
In jealousy eke look thou him bind,
And yt shall make him couch as does a quail.
If thou be fair, there folk ben in presence
Show thou thy visage, and thine apparaile:
If thou be foul, be free of thy dispense,
To get thee friends aye do thy travail:
Be aye of cheer as light as lefe on linde,
And let him care, weepen, wring and wail.
Ye arch wives, stondeth aye at your defense,
Since ye be strong, as is a great camaile:
Ne suffers not that men do you offense.
And ye sclendre wives, feeble as in battle,
Beth eygre as any tygre is in Inde:
Aye clappeth as a mill, I you counsel.
Here ends the clerk of Oxenfords tale.
Here follow the words of our Host.
When this worthy clerk ended had his tale,
Our Host said and sworen by cocks bones,
Me were lever than a barrel af ale
My wife at home had heard this legend ones:
This is a gentle tale for the nones,
As to my purpose, wist ye my will,
But thing that woll not be, let it be still.
The Frankeleins Prologue.
THese old gentle Britons in her days,
Of diverse auentures maden lays,
Rimed at first in her mother tongue:
Which lays with her instruments they song
Or else readen hem for her pleasaunce,
And one of hem have I in remembrance,
Which I shall say, as willing as I can.
But sirs, because I am a borell man,
At my beginning first I you beseech,
Have me excused of my rude speech:
I learned never Rhetoric certain,
Thing that I speak mote be bare and plain:
I slept never on the mount of Pernaso,
Ne learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Colors ne know I none, withouten dread,
But such colors as grown in the mead,
Or else such as men dien or paint:
Colors of Rhetoric been to me quaint,
Ny spirit feels not of such mattere.
This is my tale, if ye woll it here.
The Frankeleins Tale.
Aurelius, after much labor and cost bestowed to win the love of Dorigen,
another man's wife, is content in the end, through the good dealing of her and
her husband, to lose both labor and cost. The scope of this Tale seems a
contention in courtesy.

IN Armorike, that called is Britain,
There was a knight, that loved and did his pain
To serven Ladies in his best wise,
And many a labor, and many a great emprise
He for his Lady wrought, ere she were won:
For she was one the fairest under son;
And eke thereto commen of high kinrede,
That well uneath durst this knight for dread
Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.
But at the last, she of her worthiness,
And namely for his meek obeysaunce,
Has such a pity caught of his pennaunce,
That prively she fell of his accord
To take him for her husbond and her lord,
(Of such lordship as men have over her wives,
And for to lead in the more bliss her lives.)
Of his free will he swore her as a knight,
That never in all his life day ne night
Ne should he take upon him no maistry
Again her will, ne kithe her jealousy,
But her obey, and follow her will in all,
As any lover to his lady shall:
Save that the name of soveraignete
That would he have for shame of his degree.
She thonked him, and with full great humbless
She said: sir, since of your gentleness
Ye profred me to have so large a rain,
Ne would god never betwixt us twain
As in my gilt, were either werre or strife:
Sir, I woll be your true humble wife,
Have here my troth, till that my heart breast:
Thus ben they both in quiet and in rest.
For one thing sirs, safely dare I seine,
* That friends everich other must obeine,
If they woll long holden company:
* Love woll not be constrained by maistry.
When maistry comes, the God of love anon
Beats his wings, and farewell he is gone.
* Love is a thing, as any spirit free.
Women of kind desiren libertee,
And not to be constrained as a thrass:
And so done men, if I sooth say shall.
Look who that most pacient is in love,
He is at his auantage all above:
* Patience is an high virtue certain,
For it venquisheth, as these clerks sain,
Things that rigor shall never attain.
For every word men may not chide or plain,
* Learneth to suffer, or else so mote I gone,
Ye shall it learn whether ye woll or none.
* For in this world certain no wight there is,
That he ne does or says sometime amiss.
Ire, sickness, or constellation,
Wine, woe, or changing of complexion,
Causes full often to done amiss or speaken:
On every wrong a man may not be wreken.
* After the time must be temperaunce
To every wight that can of governaunce.
And therefore has this worthy wise knight,
(To liven in ease) suffraunce her hight:
And she to him full wisely began swear,
That never should there be default in here.
Here may men see, humble and wise accord:
Thus has she take her servant and her lord,
Servaunt in love, and lord in marriage,
Then was he both in lordship and seruage:
Servage? nay, but in lordship above,
Sithen he has both his lady and his love:
His lady certes, and his wife also,
The which that law of land accords to.
And when he was in this prosperity,
Home with his wife he goth into his country,
Not fer fro Denmark, there his dwelling was
Where as he lives in joy and solas.
* Who coud tell, but he had wedded be,
The joy, the ease, and the prosperity,
That is betwixt an husbond and his wife?
Evermore lasted this blisful life,
Till that this knight, of which I speak thus,
(That of Caere Judah, was cleped Aruiragus)
Shope him to dwellen a year or twain
In England, that cleped was Britain,
To seeken in arms worship and honor.
For all his lust he set in such labor,
And dwelt there two year, ye book faith thus.
Now woll I stint of this Aruiragus,
And speak I woll of Dorigen his wife,
That loves her husbond as her hearts life:
For his absence weepeth she and siketh,
As done these noble wives when hem likes:
She mourns, waileth, fasteth, and plaineth,
Desire of his presence her so constrains,
That all this wide world set she at naught.
Her friends, which knew her heavy thought,
Comforten her in all that ever they may,
They preachen her, and tellen night and day,
That causeless she slew her self, alas,
And every comfort possible in this caas,
They done to her, with all her business,
And all to maken her leave her heaviness,
* By process, as ye known euerychone,
Men mowen so long graven in stone,
Till some figure therein printed be:
So long han they comforted her, till she
Received has by hope and by reason,
The enprinting of her constellation:
Through which her great sorrow began assuage,
She may not always enduren such a rage:
And eke Aruiragus in all this care
Has sent his letters home of his welfare,
And that he woll come hastily again,
Or else had this sorrow her heart slain.
Her friends saw her sorrow began to slake.
And praiden her on her knees for Gods sake
To come and romen in her company,
Away to driven her derke fantasy:
And finally she granted that request,
For well she saw it was for the best.
Now stood her castle fast by the sea,
And often with her friends walked she,
Her to disporten on the banks hie,
Where as she may ships and barges sie,
Sailing her course, where him list go.
But yet was that a parcel of her woe,
For to her felfe full often alas said she,
Is there no ship, of so many as I see,
Wol bring home my lord? then were my heart
Warished of these bitter pains smert.
Another time would she sit and think,
And cast her eyes downward fro the brinke
But when she saw the grisly rocks blake,
For very fear so would her heart quake,
That on her feet she might not her sustene.
Then would she sit adoune upon the grene,
And pitously into the sea behold,
And say right thus, with sorrowful sikes cold.
* Eterne God, yt through thy purueiaunce
^eadest this world by certain governance,
In idle as men sain do thou nothing make:
But lord, these grisly fiendly rocks blake,
That seemen rather a foul confusion
Of work, than a fair creation
Of such a perfect God, wise and stable,
Why have ye wrout this werk unreasonable?
For by this work, north, south, west, ne east,
There nis fostred ne man, bird, ne beast:
It does no good at all, but annoyeth:
See ye not lord how mankind it destroys?
An hundred thousand bodies of mankind
Have rocks islaine, all be they not in mind.
Sin mankind is so fair a part of thy work
That thou it made like thy own work,
Then seemed it ye had a great cherte
Toward mankind: but how then may it be,
That ye such means maken it to distroyen?
Which means don no good, but ever anoyen.
* I wot well clerks woll saine as hem lest
By arguments, that all is for the best:
Though I ne cannot the causes well know,
But thilke God that made the wind to blow,
As keep my lord, this is my conclusion.
To clerks let I all this disputation:
And would God that all these rocks blake
Were sonken into hell for his sake.
These rocks do slay mine heart for fear:
Thus would she say with many a pitous tear.
Her friends saw it was for her no disport
To romen by the sea, but discomfort,
And shapen hem to plain some where else,
They leaden her by rivers and by wels,
And eke in other places delectables,
They dauncen and they plaien at the tables.
So on a day, right in the morrow tide,
Unto a garden that was there beside,
In which yt they had made her ordinance
Of vitailes, and other purueyaunce,
They gone and plaien hem all the long day:
And this was in the sixth morrow of May,
Which May has painted with his soft shours
This garden full of leaves and of flours:
And craft of man's hond so curiously
Arrayed had this garden truly,
That never nas there garden of such prise,
But if it were the very paradise.
The odor of flours, and the fresh sight
Would have made any living heart light
That ever was, but it too great sickness
Or too great sorrow held it in distress,
So was it full of beauty, with pleasaunce.
And after dinner gone they to dance
And sing also, save Dorigene alone,
That yet unto her self made her moan.
For she ne seie him on the dance go,
That was her husbond, and her love also:
But nathelesse, she must her time abide,
And with good hope let her sorrow slide.
Upon this dance, among other men
Daunced a squier before Dorigen,
That fresher was and iollier of array,
As to my dome, than is the month of May.
He sings and daunceth, passing every man,
That is or was sithen the world began:
He was therewith, and men should him discriue,
One of the best faring men on live,
Young, strong, virtuous, rich, and wise,
And well beloved, and holden of great prise.
And shortly, if I the sooth tell shall,
Unwitting of this Dorigen at all,
This lusty squier, servant to Venus,
Which ycleaped was Aurelius,
Had loved her best of any creature
Two year and more, as was his adventure:
But never durst he tell her his greuance,
* Withouten cup he drunk all his penance.
He was dispaired, nothing durst he say,
Save in his songs somewhat would he wray
His woe, as in general complaining,
He said he loved, and was beloved nothing:
Of which mattere made he many lays,
Songs, complaints, roundels, and verilayes,
How that he durst not his sorrow tell,
But languish, as does a fury in hell,
And die he must (he said) as did Ecco
For Narcissus, that durst not tell his woe.
In other manner than ye heard me say,
Ne durst not he to her his woe bewray,
Save perauenture sometime at daunces,
There young folk keepen her obseruaunces,
It may well be he looked on her face
In such a wise, as men that asken grace,
But nothing wist she of his intent:
Nathelesse it happed, ere they thence went,
Because yt he was her near neighbor,
And was a man of worship and honor,
And she had yknowne him of time yore,
They fell in speech, and so forth more and more
Unto his purpose then drow Aurelius:
And when he saw his time, he said thus.
Madame (quoth. he) by God yt this World made,
So yt I wist, that I might your heart glade,
I would that day, that your Aruyragus
Went over the sea, that I Aurelius
Had went there yt I should never come again:
For well I wot my service is in vain,
My guerdon nis but bresting of mine heart:
Madam, rueth upon my pains smert,
For with one word ye may me slay or save,
Here at your foot God would yt I were grave.
I have as now no leisure more to sey:
Have mercy sweet, or ye woll do me dey.
She began to look upon Aurelius,
Is this your will (quoth. she) and say ye thus?
Never erst (quoth. she) ne wist I what ye meant:
But now I know Aurelius your intent.
By thilke God that yaue me soul and life,
Ne shall I never be untrue wife
In word ne work, as far as I have wit,
I woll ben his to whom I am knit:
Take this for a final answer of me,
But after this in play thus said she.
Aurelius (quoth. she) by God above
Yet woll I grant you to been your love
(Sithen I see you so pitously complain.)
Look what day that endlong in Britain.
Ye remeue all the rocks, stone by stone,
That they ne let ship ne boat to gone,
I say when ye have made these coasts so clean
Of rocks, that there nis no stone yseen,
Then woll I love you best of any man,
Here have my troth, in all that ever I can.
Is there none other grace in you (quoth. he?)
No by that lord (quoth. she) that maked me.
For well I wot that it shall never betide,
Let such folly out of your heart glide.
* What deintie should a man have in his life
For to go love another man's wife?
That has her body when so that him likes.
Aurelius full often sore siketh:
Woe was Aurely when he this herd,
And with a sorrowful chere he thus answered.
Madame (quoth. he) this were impossible:
Then mote I die on sudden death horrible:
And with that word he turned him anon.
Tho come her other friends everichone,
And in the aleyes romeden up and down,
And nothing wist of this conclusioun,
But suddenly began to revell new,
Till that the bright son had lost his hew.
For the orizont has reft the sun his light,
This is as much to say, as it was night:
And home they gone in joy and in solas,
Save only wretched Aurelius, alas:
He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart,
He said he might not from his death astert
Him seemed, that he felt his heart all cold,
And up to heaven his honds began he hold,
And on his knees bare he set him adoun,
And in his raving said this orisoun:
For very woe out of his wit he braied,
He ne wist what he spoke, but thus he said.
With pitous heart has he his complaint begone
Unto the gods, and first unto the son
He said: God Apollo and governor
Of every plant, herb, tree, and flour,
That yeuest after thy declination
To ilke of hem his time and season,
As thine herberow changes low and hie:
Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciable eye
On wretched Aurelius, which am but lorne,
Lo Lord, my Lady has my death ysworne
Without guilt, but thy benignity
Upon my deadly heart have some pity.
For well I wot lord Phoebus, if ye lest,
Ye may me help, save my lady, best.
Now vouch ye save, that I you devise
How yt I may be helped and in what wise.
Your blisfull suster Lucina the shene,
That of the sea is goddess and queen,
Though Neptunus has deity in the sea,
Yet empress abouen him is she:
Ye known well lord, right as her desire
Is to be quickened and lighted of your sire,
For which she follows you full besily,
Right to the sea desires naturally
To followen her, as she that is goddess
Both of the sea and rivers more and less.
Wherefore lord Phoebus, this is my request,
Do this miracle, or do mine heart breast.
That now next at this oppsition,
Which in sign shall be of the Lion,
As prays her so great a flood to bring,
That five fadome at the least it ouerspring
The highiest rock in Armorike Britain,
And let this flood to duren years twain.
Then certes to my lady may I say,
Holds your hest, the rocks been away:
This thing may ye lightly done for me,
Pray her to gone no faster course than ye.
I say thus, prays your suster that she go
No faster course than ye in years two:
Then shall she be at the full always,
And spring flood lasting both night and day:
And but she vouchsafe in such manner
To grant me my sovereign lady dear,
Pray her to sinken every rock adoun
Into her own derke regioun
Under the ground, there Pluto dwells in,
Or nevermore shall I my lady win.
Thy Temple in Delphos wol I barefoot seek,
O lord Phoebus, see the tears on my cheek,
And on my pain have some compassioun:
And with yt word, in swoune he fell adoun,
And for a long time he lay in a trance.
His brother, which yt knew of his pennaunce,
Up caught him, and to bed him brought.
Dispaired in this turnment and this thought
Let I this woeful creature lie,
Chese he whether he woll live or die.
Aruiragus with heal and great honor
(As he that was of chivalry the flour)
Is comen home, and other worthy men:
O blisfull art thou now Dorigen,
That have thy lusty husbond in thine arms,
That fresh knight, that worthy man of arms,
That loves thee as his own hearts life:
Nothing list him to be imaginatife,
If any wight had spoken (while he was out)
To her of love, thereof had he no dout,
He entendeth not to such matere,
But danceth, justeth, and makes her good chere.
And thus in joy and bliss I let hem dwell,
And of woeful Aurelius woll I tell.
In langour and in turment despitous
Two year and more lay wretched Aurelius,
Ere any foot on earth he might gone,
Ne comfort in this time had he none,
Save of his brother, which was a clerk,
He knew of all this woe and all this work:
For to none other creature certain
Of this mattere durst he no word saine,
Under his breast he bare it more secre,
Than ever did Pamphilus for Galathe.
His breast was whole without for to seen,
But in his heart aye was the arrow keen,
And well ye known, that of a sursanure,
In surgerie, is per^^^ous the cure,
But men might touch the arrow or come thereby.
His brother weepeth and waileth prively,
Till at the last him fell in remembrance,
That while he was at Orleaunce in France
(As these clerks young that been likerous)
To readen arts that been curious,
Seeken in every halke and in every Herne
Particular science for to learn.
He him remembered, that upon a deie
At Orleaunce in study a book he seie
Of Magic natural, which his felaw,
That was in that time a batcheler of law,
All were he there to learn another craft,
Had prively upon his dexe ylaft,
Which book spoke of mochell operations
Touching the eight and twenty Mansions
That longen to the Moon, and such folly
As in our days is not worth a Fly:
For holy church says in our believe,
* Ne suffers none illusion us to grieve.
And when this book was in his remembrance,
Anon for joy his heart began to dance,
And to himself he said prively.
My Brother shall be warished sikerly:
For I am siker that there be sciences,
By which men maken diverse apparences,
Such as these subtle tregetores play.
For often at ^easts have I well heard say,
That tragetors, within an hall large
Have made come in water and a barge,
And in the hall rowen up and down:
Sometime has seemed a grim Lioun,
And sometime flowers spring as in a mede,
Sometime a vine, and grapes white and read:
Sometime a Castle of lime and stone,
And when hem liked, voiden hem anon:
Thus seemed it to every man's sight.
Now then conclude I thus, if yt I might
At Orleaunce some old felaw find,
That had this Moons Mansions in mind,
Or other Magic natural above,
He should well make my brother have his love
For with an apparaunce a clerk may make
To a man's sight, that all the rocks blake
Of Britain were yuoided euerichone,
And ships by the brinke to comen and gone,
And in such form enduren a year or two:
Then were my brother warished of his woe,
Then must she needs holden her behest,
Or else he shall shame her at the lest.
What should I make a longer tale of this?
Unto his brothers bed he commen is,
And such comfort he yaue him, for to gone
To Orleaunce, that he up stert anon,
And on his way then is he forth yfare,
In hope to been lessed of his care.
When they were comen almost to y^ city
(But if it were a two furlong or three)
A young clerk roming by himself they met,
Which that in Latin thriftily hem great,
And afterward he said a wonder thing,
I know the whole cause of your coming:
And ere they farther any foot went,
He told hem all that was in her intent.
This Briton clerk asked him of fellows,
The which he had known in old days,
And he answered him that they dead were,
For which he wept often full many a tere.
Down off his horse Aurelius light anon,
And with this Magician forth is he gone
Home to his house, and made him well at ese:
Hem lacked no vitaile that hem might plese.
So well araied an house as there was one,
Aurelius in his life saw never none.
He showed him or he went to suppere
Forests and parkes full of wild dear,
He saw there Hearts with horns hie,
The greatest that ever were seen with eye,
He see of hem an hundred slain with hounds,
And some of arows bled with bitter wounds.
He saw, when voided were the wild dear,
These fauconers upon a fair riuere,
That with the hawks han the Heron slain.
Tho saw he knights iusting in a plain.
And after this he did him such pleasaunce,
That he him showed his lady in a dance,
On which himself daunced as him thought.
And when this master, yt this magike wrout,
Saw it was time, he clapped his honds to,
And farewell our revel, all was ago,
And remeued never out of his house,
While they saw all this sight marvelous.
But in his study there his books be,
They saten still, no wight but they three.
To him this master called his squier,
And said him thus, is ready our supper?
Almost an hour it is, I undertake,
Sithen I you bad our supper ready make,
When that these worthy men went with me
Into my study, there as my books be.
Sir (quoth. the squier) when it likes you,
It is all ready, though ye woll right now.
Go we sup then (quoth. he) for the best,
These amorous folk sometime mote have rest.
And after supper fell they in treat
What sum should this masters guerdon be,
To remeue all the rocks of Britain,
And eke from Girond to the mouth of Saine.
He made it strange and swore so God him save,
Less than a thousand pound would he not have,
Ne gladly for yt sum nold he it done.
Aurelius with blisfull heart anon
Answered thus: Fie on a thousand pound:
This wide world, which men say is round,
I would it give, if I were lord of it.
This bargain is full drive, for we be knit,
Ye shall be paid truly by my troth:
But look now for no negligence or sloth,
Ne tarien us here no longer than to morrow.
Nay (quoth. this clerk) here my troth to borow.
To bed is gone Aurelius when him lest,
And well nigh all night he had his rest.
What for his labor, and his hope of bliss,
His woeful heart of pennaunce had a lisse.
Upon the morrow when that it was day,
Home to Britain took they the right way,
Aurelius, and this Magicine him beside,
And been descended there they would abide:
And this was, as the book does remember,
In the cold frostie season of December.
Phoebus waxed old, and hewed like laton,
That before in his hot declination
Shone as the brenning gold, with streams bright:
But now in capricorn adoune he light.
Whereas he shone full pale, I dare well saine,
The bitter frost with the slidder rain
Destroyed has the green in every yerd.
Ianus sit by the fire with double berd,
And drinks of his bugle horn the wine:
Beforn him stout brawne of ye tusked swine,
And nowell cries every lusty man.
Aurelius in all that ever he can,
Does to this master chere and reverence,
And prays him to done his deligence
To bringen him out of his pains smart,
Or with a swerd that he would slit his heart.
This clerk such routh has on this man,
That night and day he speedeth him with he can
To wait a time of his conclusion:
This is to say, to make illusion,
Or such an appearance of iogglerie
(I ne can no terms of Astrology)
That she and every wight should wene and say,
That of Britain the rocks were away,
Or else they were sonken under the ground:
Till at the last he has his time yfound
To make his yapes and his wretchedness
Of such superstitious cursednesse:
His tollitan tables he forth brought
Full well corrected, him lacked naught,
Neither his collect, ne his expans years,
Ne his roots, ne yet his other geres
As been his centris, and his arguments,
And his proportionell conuenientes
For his equations in every thing.
And by his eight speres in his werking,
He knew full well how far alnath was shoue
Fro the head of thilke fixed Aries above,
That in the ninth spear considered is,
Full subtly he had calked all this.
And when he had found his first Mansion,
He knew the remnaunt by proportion:
And knew the rising of the Moon well,
And in such face, the term and every dele,
And knew also his other obseruaunces
For such illusions and such mischaunces
As Heathen folk used in thilke days:
For which ne maked he no longer delays,
But through his magic, for a week or tway
It seemed that all the rocks were away.
Aurelius, which that dispaired is,
Whether he shall have his love, or fare amiss,
Awaiteth night and day on this miracle:
And when he knew there was none obstacle,
But yt voided were these rocks euerichone,
Down to the masters feet he fell anon,
And said, I woeful wretch Aurelius,
Thank you lord and lady mine Venus,
That me has helped fro my cares cold,
And to ye temple his way forth has he hold,
Whereas he knew he should his lady see,
And when he saw his time, anon right he
With dreadful heart and with humble chere
Salued has his sovereign lady dear.
My rightful lady (quoth. this woeful man)
Whom I serve and love, as I best can,
And lothest were of all this world displease,
Nere it that I for you have such disease,
That I must die here at your feet anon,
Naught would I tell how woe in me begone.
But certes either must I die or plain,
Ye slay me guiltless for very pain.
But of my death though ye have no routh,
Auisen you, ere that ye break your troth:
Repents you, for that like God above:
For ye slay me, because that I you love.
For Madame, well ye wot that ye have hight
Nut that I challenge any thing of right
Of you my sovereign lady, but of your grace:
But in a garden yonde in such a place,
Ye wot right well what ye behight me,
And how in my hond your troth plight ye
To love me best, God wot ye said so,
Albeit I am unworthy thereto.
Madame I speak for the honor of you
More than for to save my hearts life now:
I have done right as ye commanded me,
And if ye vouchsafe, ye may go see.
Does as you list, haueth your hest in mind,
For quick or dead, right there ye shall me find:
In you lies all to do me live or dey,
But well I wot the rocks been all awey.
He took his leave, and she astonished stood,
In all her face there nas a drop of blood:
She wend never han come in such a trap.
Alas (quoth. she) that ever this should hap,
For wend I never by possibilite:
That such a mister or marvel might be:
It is against the process of nature.
And home she goes a sorrowful creature,
For very fear vnneths may she go,
She weepeth and waileth a day or two,
And swouneth, that it was routh to see:
But why it was, to no wight told she,
For out of town was gone Aruiragus.
But to her self she spoke, and said thus
In her complaint, as ye shall after hear,
With face pale, and with sorrowful cheer.
Alas (quoth. she) on thee fortune I plain,
That unware have wrapped me in thy chain:
Fro which to escape, wot I no succor,
Save only death, or else dishonor:
One of these two behooves me to chese.
But natheles, yet had I lever to lose
My life, than of my body to have shame,
Or know my self false, or lose my name.
And with my death I may be quit ywis:
Has there not full many a wife ere this,
And many a maid yslaine her self alas,
Rather than with her body done trespass?
And certes lo, these stories been witness,
When thirty tyrants full of cursednesse
Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,
They commanded his daughters to arrest,
And bringen hem beforne hem in dispite
All naked, to fulfill her foul delight:
And in her fathers blood he did hem dance
Upon ye pauement, God give him mischance.
For which these woeful maidens full of dread,
Rather than they would lesen her maidenhead,
They privily been stert into a well,
And drenched hemselfe, as books can tell.
They of Messene let enquire and seek
Of Lacedemony fifty maidens eke,
On which they would have done her lechery:
But there was none of all that company
That she nas slain, and with a glad intent
Chese rather for to dien, than to assent,
To been oppressed of her maidenhead.
Why should I then to die been in dread?
Lo eke the tyrant Aristoclides,
That loved a maid that hight Simphalides,
When that her father slain was on a night,
Unto Dianes temple goth she a non right,
And hent the Image with her arms two,
Fro which Image would she never go,
No wight might fro it her honds to race,
Till she was slain right in the self place.
Now since y^ maidens had such despite
To been defouled with man's foul delight,
* Well ought a wife rather her self sle,
Than be defouled, as thinks me.
What shall I say of Hasdrubals wife,
That at Carthage beraft her self her life?
For when she saw the Romans wan the town,
She took her children all, and lept adoun
Into the fire, and chese rather to die,
Than any Roman did her villainy.
Has not Lucrece yslaine her self, alas
At Rome, there as she oppressed was
Of Tarquine? for her thought it was shame
To live, when that she had lost her name.
The eight maidens of Melesie also
Han slain hemselue for very dread and woe,
Rather than folk of Gaul should hem oppress
More than a thousand stories, as I guess,
Couth I now tell as touching this matere.
When Abradas was slain, his wife so dear
Her self slow, and let her blood to glide
In Abradas wounds, broad and wide,
And said, my body at the least way
There shall no wight defoule if I may.
What should I mo ensamples hereof sain,
Since that so many han hem slain,
Well rather than they would defouled be.
I woll conclude that it is best for me
Well rather slay my self in some manner,
As did Demotius daughter dear,
Because that she nolde not defouled be.
O Sedasus, it is full great pite
To readen how thy daughters diden, alas?
That slowen hemselfe for such a manner caas.
As great a pity was it or well more,
Of the Theban maid: for that Nichanore,
One of Macedony, had her oppressed,
With her death her maidenhead she redressed.
What shall I saine of Nicerates wife,
That for such case beraft her self her life?
How true was eke to Alcibades,
His love, that for to dien rather chees,
Than to suffren his body unburied be?
Lo which a wife was Alceste (quoth. she)
What says Homere of good Penelope?
All Greece knows of her chastity.
Parde of Laodomia is written thus,
That when at Troy was slain Protheselaus,
No longer nolde she live after this day.
The same of noble Portia tell I may,
Withouten Brutus couth she not live,
To whom she had all her heart ygiue.
The perfect wifehood of Artemisie
Honored is throughout all Barbary.
Oh Thenta Queen, thy wifely chastity
To all wives living may a mirror be.
The same thing I say of Bilia,
Of Rodogone, and eke Valeria.
Thus plained Dorigene a day or twey,
Purposing ever that she would dey,
But natheles upon the third night
Home came Aruiragus, the worthy knight,
And asked her why she wept so sore:
And she began weepen ever longer the more.
Alas (quoth. she) that ever was I borne,
Thus have I said (quoth. she) thus have I sworn,
And told him all, as ye have heard before:
It needs not to rehearse it no more.
This husbond with glad chere in sundry wise
Answered and said, as I shall you devise.
Is there ought else Dorigene but this?
Nay nay (quoth. she) God help me so as wis,
This is too much, and it were Gods will.
Yea wife (quoth. he) let sleep that may still,
It may be well: yet parauenture to day,
Ye shall your troth hold by my fay.
For God so wis^y have mercy on me,
I had well lever sticked for to be
For very love which that I to you have,
But if ye should your troth keep and save.
* Troth is ye hiest thing that men may keep.
But with that word he brast anon to weep,
And said, I you forbid on pain of death,
That never whiles you lasts life or breath,
To no wight tell of this misauenture.
As I my best I woll my woe endure,
Ne make no countenance of heaviness,
That folk of you may deem harm ne guess.
And forth he cleped a squier and a maid,
Goth forth anon with Dorigene he said,
And brings her in such a place anon.
They took her leave, and on her wey they gone:
But they ne wist why she thider went,
She nolde no wight tellen her intent.
This squier, which that hight Aurelius,
On Dorigene which that was so amorous,
Of adventure happed her to meet
Amid the town, right in the high street,
As she would have gone the way forthright
Toward the garden, there as she had hight.
And he went to the gardenward also,
For well he spied when she would go
Out of her house, to any manner place:
But thus they met of adventure or of grace,
And he salueth her with glad intent,
And assked of her whi^er that she went.
And she answered half as she were mad,
Unto the garden as my husbond bad
My troth for to hold, alas, alas.
Aurelius began wondren of this caas,
And in his heart had great compassion
Of her chere, and her lamentation,
And of Aruiragus the worthy knight,
That bad her hold all that she had hight,
So loath he was yt she should break her troth:
And in his heart he caught of it great routh.
Considering the hest on every side,
That fro his lust were him better abide,
Than do so high a churlish wretchedness
Against fraunchise, and all gentleness,
For which in few words said he thus:
Madame, says to your lord Aruiragus,
That sithen I see this great gentleness
Of him, and eke I see well your distress,
That ye to me shoulden hold your troth,
Certes me thinks it were great routh:
I have well lever ever to suffer woe,
Than depart the love betwixt you two.
I you release madame into your hond
Quite every surement and every bond
That ye have made to me, as here beforne,
Since thilk time which that ye were born.
My troth I plight, I shall you never repreve
Of no behest, and here I take my leve
As of the truest and the best wife
That ever yet I knew in all my life.
But every wight beware of her behest,
On Dorigene remembers at the least.
* Thus can a squier done a gentle deed,
As well as can a knight, withouten dread.
She thonked him upon her knees all bare,
And home unto her husbond is she fare,
And told him all as ye han heard me said:
And be ye siker, he was so well apaied,
That it were impossible me to write.
What should I longer of this case endite?
Aruiragus, and Dorigene his wife
In sovereign bliss leaden forth her life,
Never after was there anger hem between,
He cherished her as though she were a queen,
And she was to him true for evermore.
Of these two folks ye get of me no more.
Aurelius, that his cost has all forlorn,
Cursed the time that ever he was borne.
Alas (quoth. he) alas that ever I beheight
Of pured gold a thousand pound of weight
Unto this Philosopher, how shall I do?
I see no more, but that I am fordoe.
Mine heritage mote I needs go and sell,
And bin a beggar, here may I no longer dwell,
And shame all my kinrede in this place,
But I of him may get better grace.
But nathelesse I woll of him assay,
At certain days, year by year to pay,
And thonke him of his great courtesy,
My troth woll I keep, I woll not lie.
With heart sore he goth unto his cofer
And brought gold unto the Philosopher
The value of five hundred pounds as I guess,
And him beseeches of his gentleness
To grant him days of the remnaunt,
And said: master I dare mell make auaunt,
I failed never of my troth as yet.
For sikerly my debt shall be quit
Toward you, how that ever I fare
To gone a begging in my kirtle bare:
But would ye vouchsafe upon suerte
Two year or three for to respite me,
Then were I well, for else mote I sell
Mine heritage, there is no more to tell.
This Philosopher soberly answered,
And said thus, when he this word herd,
Have I not hold covenant unto thee?
Yes certes, well and truly (quoth. he,)
Have thou not had thy lady as thee likes?
No, no (quoth. he) and sorily he siketh.
What was the cause, tell me if that thou can?
Aurelius anon his tale began,
And told him all as ye han heard before,
It needs not to rehearce it any more.
He said Aruiragus of gentleness
Had lever die in sorrow and in distress,
Than his wife were of her troth falls.
The sorrow of Dorigene he told him als,
How loath she was to been a wicked wife,
And that she had lever have lost her life.
And yt her troth she swore through innocence,
She now erst heard speak of appearance:
That made me have of her so great pite.
And right as freely as he sent her to me,
As freely sent I her to him again:
This is all and some, there nis no more to sain.
The Philosopher answered, leave brother,
Everych of you did gently to other:
Thou art a squier, and he is a knight,
But God forbid for his blisful might,
But if a clerk could done a gentle deed
As well as any of you, it is no dreed.
Sir I release thee thy thousand pound,
As now thou were crope out of the ground,
Ne never ere now had thou known me.
For sir, I woll not taken a penny of thee.
For all my craft, ne naught for my travail:
Thou have ypaied right well for m^ vitaile.
It is enough, and farewell and have good day,
And took his horse, and rode forth on his way.
Lordings this question would I ask now,
Which was the most free, as thinks you?
Now tells me, ere that I further wend,
I can no more, my tale is at an end.
The Second Nonnes Prologue.
THe minister and the norice unto vices,
Which yt men clepen in English idleness,
That is porter of ye gate of delices
To eschew, and by her contrary her oppress,
That is to saine, by lefull business:
* Well ought we to done our intent
Least that ye fiend through idleness us hent.
For he that with his thousand cords sly
Continually us waits to be clap,
When he may man in idleness epsy,
He can so lightly catch him in his trap,
Till that a man be hent right by the lap,
He nis not ware, the fiend has him in hond:
* Well ought us werch, and idleness withstond.
And though men dreaden never for to die,
Yet see men well by reason doubtless,
* That idleness is root of sluggardie,
Of which there comes never good encrees,
For soothly sloth holds hem in a lees,
Only to sleep, and for to eat and drink,
And to deuouren all that other swinke.
And for to put us from such idleness,
That cause is of so great confusion,
I have here done my faithful business
After the Legend in translation,
Right of thy glorious life and passion,
Thou with thy garlond, wrought with rose and lilly,
Thee mean I, maid and martyr saint Cecily.
And thou that art flower of virgins all,
Of whom that Bernard list so well to write,
To thee at my beginning first I call,
Thou comfort of us wretches, do me endite
Thy maidens death, yt wan through her merit
The eterne life, and of the fiend victory,
As men may after read in her story.
Thou maiden and mother, daughter of thy son,
Thou Well of mercy, sinful souls cure.
In whom the God of bounty chese to won:
Thou humble and high over every creature,
Thou noblest, and so far over nature,
That no disdain the maker had of kind,
His son in blood and flesh to cloth and wind.
Within the cloister of thy blisfull sidis,
Took man's shape the eterne love and pees:
That of the true compass Lord and guide is,
Whom heaven, earth, and sea, withouten les
Aye herien, and thou virgin wemles
Bare of thy body, and dwell maiden pure
The creator of every creature.
Assembled is in the magnificence
With mercy, goodness, and with such pitee,
That thou art the son of excellence,
Not only that helpest them that praien thee,
But oftentime of thy benignitee
Full freely, or that men thine help beseech,
Thou go beforne, and art her lives leech.
Now help thou blisfull and meekefaire maid
Me flemed wretch, in this desert of gall:
Think on the woman of Canane, that said,
That whelps eaten some of ye crumbs small
That from her Lords table been yfall:
And though yt I unworthy daughter of Eve
Be sinful, yet accepts my believe.
And for that faith is ded withouten werkis,
So for to werch, give me wit and space,
That I be quit from the place yt most derkis
O thou that art so fair and full of grace,
Be mine advocate in that hie place,
There as without end is song Osanna,
Thou Christ's mother, and daughter of Anna.
And of thy light, my soul in prison light,
That troubled is by the contagion
Of my body, and also by the wight
Of earthly lust, and false affection:
O heaven, O refute, O salvation
Of hem that been in sorrow and distress,
Now help, for to my work I woll me dress.
Yet I pray you that reden that I write,
Foryeueth me, that I do no diligence
This ilke story subtly to endite.
For hoth have I the words and the sentence
Of him that at the saints reverence
The story wrote, and followen her legende,
And pray you that ye woll my work amend.
First woll I you the name of saint Cecily
Expoune, as men may in her story see
It is to say in English, Heavens lilly,
For pure chastnesse of virginity,
Or for she witness had of honesty,
And green of conscience, and of good same,
The sote sauoured Lilly was her name.
Or Cecily is to say, the way to blind:
For she ensample was by good teaching,
Or else Cecily, as I written find,
Is joined by a manner conioining
Of heaven and Lia, in her figuring:
The heaven is set for thought of holiness,
And Lia, for her lasting besinesse.
Cecily may eke be said in this manner,
Wanting of blindness, for her great light,
For her sapience, and for her thewes clear.
Or else Lo, this maidens name so bright:
Of heaven and Leos comes, of which by right
Men might the heaven of people her call,
Ensample of good and wise works all.
For Leos, people, in English is to say:
And right as men may in the heaven see
The sun and moon, and sterres every way,
Right so men ghostly, in this maiden free
Sawen of faith the great magnanimity,
And eke the clerenesse hole of sapience,
And sundry works, bright of excellence.
And right so as these Philosophers write
That heaven is swift, round, and eke brenning,
Right so was fair Cecily the white
Full swift and busy in every good working,
And round and whole in good perseuering,
And brenning ever in charity full bright:
Now have I declared you what she hight.
The second Nonnes Tale.
The life and death of Saint Cecily.

THis maiden bright Cecile, as her life says,
Was comen of Romans and of noble kind:
And so forth fostered up in the faith
Of Christ, and bare his Gospel in her mind:
She never ceased, as I written find,
Of her prayer, and God to love and dread,
Beseeching him to keep her maidenhead.
And when this maid should unto a man
I wedded be, that was full young of age,
Which that ycleped was Valerian,
And day was come of her marriage,
She full devout and humble in her courage,
Under her robe of gold, that sat full fair,
Had next her flesh yclad her in an hair.
And whiles that the organs made melody,
To God alone thus in heart song she,
O lord, my soul and eke my body gie
Vnwemmed, lest I confounded be:
And for his love that died upon a tree.
Every second or third day she fast,
Aye biding in her orison full fast.
The night came, and to bed must she gone
With her husbond, as is the manner,
And privily she said unto him anon,
O sweet and well beloved spouse dear,
There is a counsel, and ye woll it here,
Which that right feign I would to you saine
So that ye me ensure, it not to bewraine.
Valerian began fast unto her swear,
That for no case, ne thing that might be,
He should never to none bewraien here:
And then at erst thus to him said she,
I have an Angel which that loves me,
That with great love, where so I wake or sleep,
Is ready aye my body for to keep.
And if that he may felen out of dread,
That ye me touch or love in vilonie,
He right anon will slay you with the deed,
And in your youth thus shall ye die.
And if that ye in clean love me gie,
He woll you love as me, for your cleanesse,
And show you of his joy and brightness.
This Valerian, corrected as God would,
Answered again, if I shall trust thee,
Let me that angel see, and him behold,
And if that it a very angel be,
Then woll I done as thou have prayed me:
And if thou love another man forsooth,
Right with this sword then woll I slay you both.
Cecile answered anon in this wise,
If that ye lust, that angel shul you see,
So that ye trow on Christ, and you baptize,
Goth forth to Via apia (quoth. she)
That from this town ne stant but miles three,
And to the poor folk that there do dwell
Say hem right thus, as I shall you tell.
Tell hem that I Cecile, you to hem sent
To shown you the good Urban the old,
For secret needs, and for good intent:
And when that ye saint Urban han behold,
Tell him the words that I to you told,
And when that he has purged you from sin,
Then shall ye see that angel ere ye twinne.
Valerian is to that place igon,
And right as him was taught by his lerning,
He found this holy Urban anon
Among these saints burials louting:
And he anon without tareing
Did his message, and when he had it told,
Urban for joy began his honds up hold.
The teres from his eyes let he fall:
Almighty God, O Jesus Christ (quoth. he)
Sower of chaste counsel, hierde of us all,
The fruit of thilke seed of chastity
That thou have sow in Cecile, take to thee:
Lo like a besy be withouten gile
Thee serves aye thine own thrall Cecile.
For thilke spouse, that she took but new
Full like a fierce Lion, she sends here
As meek as any lamb was to ewe:
And with that word anon there began apere
An old man, iclad in white clothes clear,
That had a book with letters of gold in hond,
And began biforne Valerian for to stond.
Valerian as deed, fell down for dread,
When he this old man saw standing so,
Which forthwith anon he herd to read,
O Lord, O faith, O God withouten mo
Of Christendom, and father of all also
Abouen all, and over all every where:
These words all with gold iwritten were,
When this was rad, then said this old man,
Leuest thou this thing or none, say ye or nay:
I leave all this thing (quoth. Valerian)
Under the heaven no ^ight ne think may
Sother thing than this, I dare well say.
Tho vanished the old man, he nist where,
And Pope Urban him christened right there.
Valerian goes home, and finds Cecile
Within his chamber, with an Angel stand:
This angel had of rose and of lillye
Crowns two, the which he bare in hand,
And first to Cecile, as I understand,
He yaue that one, and after began he take
That other to Valerian her make.
With body clean and with vnwemmed thought
Keeps aye well these crowns two (quoth. he)
From paradise to you I have hem brought,
Ne never more shullen they rotten be,
Ne lose her sweet savor, trusts me,
Ne never wight shall seen hem with eye,
But he be chaste, and hate vilonie.
And thou Valerian, for thou so son
Assentedest to good counsel also,
Say what thou list, and thou shall have thy boon.
I have a brother (quoth. Valerian tho)
That in this world I love no man so,
I pray you that my brother may have grace
To know the troth, as I do in this place.
The angel answered, God likes your request,
And both with the palm of martyrdom
Shall ye come unto the blisfull feast:
And with yt word, Tiburce his brother come,
And when that he the savor ^idernome,
Which that the roses and the lillies cast,
Within his heart he began to wonder fast.
And said: I wonder this time of the year
Whence that this sote savor comes so
Of roses and lillies, that I smell here:
For though I had hem in mine hands two,
The savor might in me no deeper go:
The sweet smell, that in mine heart I find
Has changed me all in another kind.
Valerian said, two crowns here have we
Snow white, and rose red, that shines clear,
Which that thine eyes han no might to see:
And as thou smellest hem through my prayer
So shall thou seen hem my leave brother dear,
If it so be that thou will without sloth
Believe aright, and know the very troth.
Tiburce answered, say thou this to me
In soothnesse, or in dreme harken I this?
In dremes (quoth. Valerian) han we be
Unto this time, brother mine iwis:
But now at erst, out dwelling in troth is.
How wost you this (quoth. Tiburce) and in what wise?
Quoth. Valerian, yt I shall thee devise.
The angel of God has me y^ troth taught
Which thou shall seen, and thou will reney
The idols, and be clean, and else naught:
And of the miracles of these crowns twey
Saint Ambrose in his preface lust to sey:
Solemnly this noble doctor dear
Commends it, and says in this manner.
The palm of martyrdom for to receive,
Saint Cecile, fulfilled of Gods ye^t,
The World and eke her chamber began weiue,
Witness Tiburces and Ceciles shrift,
To which God of his bounty would shift
Crowns two, of flowers well smelling,
And made ye angel hem tho crowns bring.
The maid has brought hem to bliss above:
The world has wist what it is worth certain
Devotion and chastity well for to love.
Tho showed him Cecile all open and plain,
That all idols ben but things in vain,
For they ben dumb, and thereto they ben defe,
And charged him his idols for to lefe.
Who that troweth not this, a beast he is
(Quoth. this Tiburce) if that I shall not lie.
She kissed his breast when she heard this,
And was full glad he couth troth epsy:
This day take I thee for mine allie,
Said this blisfull maiden fair and dear,
For after that she said as ye may hear.
Lo right so as the love of Christ (quoth. she)
Made me thy brothers wife, right in yt wise
Anon for mine allie here take I thee,
Since that thou wolt thine idols despise.
Goth with thy brother now, and thee baptize,
And make thee clean, so yt thou may behold
The angels face, of which thy brother told.
Tiburce answered, and said: brother dear
First tell me whither I shall, and to with man:
To whom he said, come forth with good chere
I woll thee lead unto the Pope Urban.
To Urban brother mine Valerian
(Quoth. this Tiburce) will thou me thider led?
Me thinks that it were a wonder deed.
Ne meanest thou not Urban (quoth. he tho)
That is so often damned to be dead,
And wonneth in hal^es to and fro,
And dare not once putten forth his head?
Men should him bren in a fire so red,
If he were found, and men might him spy,
And we also, that bear him company.
And while we seeken thilke divinity,
That is yh^d in heaven privily,
Algate ybrent in this world should be.
To whom Cecile answered boldly,
* All men might dread well and skilfully
This life to le^e, mine own dear brother,
If this were living only and none other.
* But there is better living in other place,
That never shall be lost, ne dread thee naught:
Which Gods son to us told through his grace.
That fathers son which has al thing wroght,
And all iwrought is with a skillful thought,
The ghost that from the father began proceed,
Has souled him withouten any dread.
By word and by miracle, lo Gods son
When he was in this world, declared here,
That there is other life there men may won.
To whom answered Tiburce: O su^ter dear
Ne saidest thou right now in this manner,
There nas but one God in soothfattnesse,
And now of three how may thou bear witness.
That shall I tell (quoth. she) or that I go:
* Right as a man has sapiences three,
Memory, engine, and intellect also,
So in such being of divinity,
Three persons may there full right well be
Tho began she there full busily him preach
Of Christ's son, and of his pains teach.
And many points of his passion,
How Gods son in this world was withhold
To do mankind plain remission,
That was b^und in sins and cares cold.
All these things the unto Tiburce told,
And after this Tiburce in good intent,
With Valerian to Pope Urban went.
That thonked God, and with glad heart and light
He christened him, and made him in yt place
Perfect in his learning Gods knight:
And after this, Tiburce got such grace,
That every day he saw in time and space
The Angel of God, and every boon
That he God asked, it was sped full soon.
It were full hard by order for to saine
How many wonders Jesus for him wrought:
But at the last, to tell short and plain,
The sergeaunt of the to^^e for hem sought.
And hem before Almache ye provost brought,
Which hem aposed, and knew all her intent,
And to the Image of Jupiter hem sent.
And said, who so woll do no sacrifice,
Swap of his head, this is my sentence here:
Anon these martyrs, that I you devise,
One Maximus that was an officere
Of the prefectes, and his councelere
Hem hent, and when he forth the saints lad,
Himself he wept for pity that he had.
When Maximus had herd these saints lore,
He got hem of the turmentours leave,
And had hem to his house withouten more,
And with her preaching, ere yt it were eve,
They began from the turmentour to reave,
And from Maximus. and from his folk echone
The false faith, to trowen in God alone.
Cecile came, when it was woxen night,
With priests, that hem christened all in fere:
And afterward, when day was woxen light,
Cecile hem said with a sober chere:
Now Christ's own knights both leave and dear
Casts all away the works of derkenesse,
And armeth you in armor of brightness.
Ye han forsooth idone a great bataile
Your course is done, your faith has you conserved,
Goth to the croune of life that may not fail,
The rightful judge, which ye han served,
Shall give it you, as ye have it deserved:
And when this thing was said, as I devise,
Men led hem forth to done the sacrifice.
But when they were unto the place ibrought,
To tell shortly the conclusioun,
They ^old ensence ne sacrifice right naught,
But on her knees they saten hem adoun
With humble heart and sad deuotioun,
And l^ssen both her heads in the place,
Her so^^es wenten to the king of grace.
This Maximus, that saw the thing betide,
With (...) tears told it anon right:
That he her souls saw to heaven glide
With angels full of clearenesse and of light:
And with his word converted many a wight.
For which Almachius did him so to beat
With wh^^s of lead, till he his life began let.
Cecile him took, and buried him anon
By Tiburce and Valerian soothly,
Within her durying place under a stone:
And after this Almachius hastily
Bad his ministers fetchen openly
Cecile, so yt she might in his presence
Do sacrfide, and Jupiter encence.
But they converted at her wi^e lore
Weptenfull sore, and yaue full credence
Unto her word, and criden more and more,
Christ, Gods son, withouten difference
Is very God, this is all our sentence,
That has a se^^aunt so good him to serve?
Thus with o voice we trow though we sterue.
Almachius, that heard all this doing,
Bad fetch Cecile, that he might her see:
And alderfirst this was his asking,
What manner woman art thou (quoth he?)
I am a gentlewoman borne (quoth. she:)
I ask of thee (quoth. he) thought it thee grieve,
Of thy religion and of thy believe?
Ye have begun your question fondly
(Quoth. she) that would two answers conclude
In one demand, ye asken leaudly:
Almachius answered to that similitude,
Of whence comes thine answer so rude?
Of whence (quoth. she) when yt she was frained,
Of conscience, and good faith unfeigned.
Almachius said, ne take thou none head
Of my power? and she him answered this:
Your might (quoth. she) full little is to dread:
* For every mortal man's power nis
But ylike a bladder full of wind ywis:
For with a needles point, when it is yblow,
May all the boast of it be laid full low.
Full wrongfully beganst thou (quoth. he)
And yet in wrong is thy perseueraunce:
Wost thou not how our mighty princes free
Have thus commanded and made ordinance,
That every christen wight shall have penance,
But if that he his Christendom withsey,
And gone all quite, if he woll it reney?
Your Princes erren, as your nobles does,
Quoth. tho Cecile, in a wood sentence
Ye make us guilty, and it is not sooth:
For ye that known, well our innocence,
Forasmuch as we done a reverence.
To Christ, and for we hear a Christen name,
Ye put on us a crime, and eke a blame.
But we that well known think name so
For virtuous, we may it not withsey,
Almachius answered, chese one of these two,
Do sacrifice, or Christendom reney,
That thou mow esca^en by that (...).
At which word the holy blisful maid
Began for to laugh, and to the judge she said:
O judge confused (...)
Wolt thou that I reney innocene^?
To make me a wicked wight (quoth. she)
Lo he dissimuleth here in audience,
He stareth and woddeth in his adv^^ence:
To whom Almachius said: O silly wretch,
Thou wost not how far my might may stretch.
Has not our mighty princes (...)
To me both power and eke authorite,
To make folk to dien or to liuen?
Why speak thou so proudly then to me?
I ne speak it but steadfastly (quoth. she)
Not proudely, for I say as for my side,
That I hate deadly thilke vice of pride.
And if thou dread not a sooth for to hear,
Than woll I shown all openly by right,
That thou have made a full great lesing here:
Thou say thy princes han yeven thee might
Both to slay and eke to quite a wight:
Thou ne may but only life bereve,
Thou have none other power ne leve.
But thou may say, thy princes han thee maked
Minister of death, for if thou speak of mo,
Thou lie: for thy power is full naked.
Do way thy boldness, said Almachius tho,
And do sacrifice to our gods ere thou go.
I recke not what wrong thou me proffer,
For I can it suffer, as can a Philosopher.
But thilke wrongs may I not endure,
That thou speak of our gods here (quoth. he.)
Cecile answered, O nice creature,
Thou said no word since thou spakest to me
That I ne knew therewith thy nicete,
And that thou were in every manner wise
And leaud officer, and a vain justice.
Thee lacks nothing to thine utter eien
That thou nart blind: for thing yt we seen all
That is a stone, that men well may aspien,
That ilke stone a god thou wolt it call:
I read thee let thine hond upon it fall,
And taste it well, and stone thou shall it find,
Sens yt thou see not with thine eyes blind.
It is a shame that the people shall
So scorn thee, and laugh at thy folly:
For commonly men wot it well over all:
* That mighty God is in his heavens hie,
And these images well may thou epsy,
To thee ne to hemselfe may they not profit,
For in her effect they be not worth a mite.
These and such other words saiden she,
And he woxe wroth, and bad she should be led
Home to her house, and in her house (quoth. he)
Br^n her in a Bathe, with flames read:
And as he bad, right so was done the deed.
For in a bathe they began her fast sheten,
And night and day great fire under they beten.
All the long night, and eke the day also,
For all the fire, and eke the bathes hete,
She sat all cold, and felt of it no woe,
It made her not a drop for to sweet:
But in that has her life she mote let.
For Almachie, with a full wicked intent,
To sleen her in the bathe, his sonde sent.
Three strokes in the neck he smote her tho
The turmentour, but for no manner chance
He might not smite all her neck atwo:
And for there was at yt time an ordinance
That no man do no person such pennaunce,
The fourth stroke to smiten, soft or sore:
This turmentour durst smite her no more.
But half dead, with her neck ycorven there
He left her lie, and on his way he went:
The christen folk that about her were
With shetes home full fair they her hent:
Three days lived she in this turment,
And never ceased the faith to teach,
That she had fostred hem, she began to preach.
And hem she yave her movables and her thing,
And to the Pope Urban betook hem tho,
And said, I asked this of the heaven king,
To have respite three days and no mo,
To recommaund to you, ere that I go,
These souls, and that I might do werch
Here of mine house perpetuelliche a cherch.
Saint Urban, with his deacons privily
The body fette, and buried it by night
Among his other saints honestly:
Her house the church of saint Cecile hight,
Saint Urban hallowed it, as he well might,
In which unto this day, in noble wise,
Men done to Christ and to his saints servise.
The Chanons Yeomans Prologue.
WHen ended was the life of saint Cecile,
Ere we fully ridden had five mile,
At Boughten under the blee us began a take
A man, that clothed was in clothes blake,
And under that he had a white surplice:
His hackney that was all pomely grise,
So sweat, that it wonder was to see,
It seemed that he had pricked miles three.
The horse eke that his yeoman rode upon,
So sweateth, that uneath might he gone.
About the paytrell stood the foam full hie,
He was of foam as flecked as a pie:
A male twifolde on his croper lay,
It seemed that he carried little array,
All light for summer rode this worthy man.
And in my heart wondren I began
What that he was, till I understood,
How that his cloak was sewed to his hood,
For which when I had long auised me,
I demed him some chanon for to be,
His hat hing at his back by a lace,
For he had ridden more than trot or pace.
He rode aye pricking as he were wode,
A clote lefe he had laid under his hode
For swette, and for to keep his head fro here.
But it was joy for to see him sweet,
His forehead dropped, as a stillutory
Were full of plantaine or of peritory.
And when he was come, he began to cry,
God save (quoth. he) this ioly company:
Fast have I pricked (quoth. he) for your sake,
Because that I would you overtake,
To riden in this merry company.
His yoman was eke full of courtesy,
And said sirs, now in the morrow tide
Out of your hostrie I saw you ride,
And warned here my lord and sovereign,
Which that to ridden with you is full feign,
For his disport, he loves daliance.
Friend for thy warning God give thee good chance.
Then said our host, certain it would seem
Thy lord were wise, and so I may well deem,
He is full ioconde also dare I say:
Can he ought tell a merry tale or twaie,
With which he glad may this company?
Who sir, my lord? Ye without lie,
He can of mirth and eke of iolite
Not but enough also sir trusts me.
And ye him knew all so well as do I,
Ye would wonder how well and thriftely
He couth work, and that in sundry wise.
He has taken on him many a great emprise,
Which were full hard, for any that is here
To bring about, but they of him it lere.
As homely, as he rides among you,
If ye him knew, it would been for your prowe:
Ye would not forgon his acquaintance
For mochell good I dare lay in balaunce
All that I have in my possession.
He is a man of high discression:
I warn you well he is a passing wise man.
Well (quoth. our host) I pray thee tell me than
Is he a clerk or non? tell what he is.
A clerk, nay greater than a clerk iwis,
Said the yoman, and in words few,
Host, of his craft somewhat woll I show.
I say my lord can such a subtelte,
(But all his craft ye may not wete of me,
And somewhat help I yet to his werching)
That all the ground that we be on riding
Till we come to Canterbury town
He could all clean turnen up and down,
And paue it all of silver and of gold.
And when this yoman had thus itolde
Unto our host: he said benedicite,
This thing is wonder marvelous to me:
(Sens that thy lord is of so hie prudence
Because of which, men should him reverence)
That of his worship wreketh he lite:
His ouerest sloppe is not worthy a mite
As in effect to him, so mote I go,
It is all baudy and to tore also.
Why is thy lord so slothliche I thee prey,
And is of power better clothes to bey?
If that his deed acorde with thy speech
Tell me that, and that I thee beseech?
Why (quoth. this yeman) whereto ask ye me?
God help me so, for he shall never ythe:
But I woll not auowe that I say,
And therefore keep it secret I you pray,
He is too wise in fay, as I believe,
* And that is ouerdone nill not preue.
And right (as clerks saine, it is a vice:
Wherefore I hold him in that leude and nice.
* For when a man has ouergreat wit,
Full often it happeth him to misusen it:
So does my lord, and that me greeueth sore.
God amend it, I can say no more.
Thereof no force good yeman quoth. our host)
Sens of the conning of thy lord thou wost,
Tell how he does, I pray thee heartily,
Sens that he is so crafty and so sly
And where dwellen ye, if it to tell be?
In the Subbarbs of a town (quoth. he)
Lurking in hernes and in lanes blind,
Whereas these robbers and thieves by kind
Holden her privy fearful residence,
As they that dare not shown her presence
So fare we, if that I shall say the ^othe.
Yet (quoth. our host) let me talk to thee:
Why art thou so discolored in thy face?
Peter (quoth. he) God give it hard grace:
I am so used in the hot fire to blow,
That it has changed my color as I trow,
I am not wont in no mirror to pry,
But swinke sore, and learn to multiply:
We blondren ever, and poren in the fire,
And for all that, we failen our desire,
For ever we lacken our conclusion.
To much folk we do illusion.
And borow gold, be it a pound or two,
Or ten or twelve, or many sums mo,
And make hem wenen at the least way,
That of a pound we could maken tway:
Yet is it false, and aye han we good hope
It for to done, and after it we grope:
But that science is so far us beforne,
We mow not although we had it sworn
It overtake, it slyt away so fast,
It wol us make beggars at the last.
Whiles this yeman was thus in his taking,
This Chanon drew him near, and herd all thing
Which this yeman spoke, for suspection
Of men's spech ever had this Chanon:
* For Cato says, he that gilty is,
Demeth all thing be spoken of him iwis:
Because of that, he began so nigh to draw
To this yeman, to harken all his saw,
And thus he said unto his yeman tho,
Hold now thy peace, and speak no words mo:
For if thou do, thou shall it sore abie.
Thou slaundrest me here in this company,
And eke discouerest that thou should hide.
Ye (quoth. our host) tell on whatsoever betide
Of all this threting, recke thee not a mite.
In faith (quoth. he) no more do I but lite:
And when this Chanon saw it would not be,
But this yeman would tell his priuite,
He fled away for very sorrow and shame.
A, quoth. the yemon, here shall rise a game:
All that I can anon woll I you tell,
Sens he is gone, the foul tend him quell:
For never hereafter woll I with him mete
For penny ne for pound. I you behete
He that me brought first unto that game,
Er that he die, sorrow have he and shame.
For it is ernest to me by my faith,
That feel I well what so any man says:
And yet for all my smert and all my grieve
For all my sorrow, labor and mischief,
I couth never leave it in no wise.
Now would to God my wit might suffice
To tellen all that longs to that art:
But nathelesse, yet woll I tell you a part,
Sens that my lord is gone, I woll not spare,
Such thing as I know, I woll declare.
The Thanons yeomans Tale.
A Priest of London, more covetous than wise, is deceived by a Chanon
professing the Art of Alchimy.

WIth this Chanon I dwelt seven year,
And of his science I am never the nere:
All that I had, I have lost thereby,
And God wot, so has many mo than I.
There I was wont to be right fresh and gay
Of clothing, and eke of other good array,
* Now may I wear an hose upon mine hedde:
And where my color was both fresh and read,
Now is it wanne, and of a leaden hew,
Who so it uses, sore shall him rue:
* And of my swinke, yet blered is mine eye,
Lo which auantage it is to multiply,
That sliding science, has me made so bare,
That I have no good, where yt ever I fare:
And yet I amendetted so thereby
Of Gold, that I have borrowed truly,
That while I live, I shall it quite never,
Let every man beware by me ever.
What manner man that casts him thereto
If he continue, I hold his thrift ido
* So help me God, thereby shall he never win,
But empte his purse, and make his wits thin:
And when he, through his madness and folly
Has lost his own good through ieopardie,
Than he exiteth other men thereto,
To lose her good as himself has do:
* For unto shrewes, joy it is and ese
To have her felawes in pain and disese.
For thus was I once learned of a clerk,
Of yt no charge: I woll speak of our work.
When we be there as we shall exercise
Our eluish craft, we semen wonder wise.
Our terms been so clergiall and so quaint.
I blow the fire till my heart faint.
What should I tell each proportion
Of things, which that we werchen upon?
As on five or six ounces, may well be
Of silver, or of some other quantite,
And besie me to tellen you the names
Of Orpiment, brent bones, iron squames,
That into powder grounden been full small,
And in an earthen pot, how put is all,
And salt iput in, and also papere,
Before these pouders that I speak of here,
And well icouered with a lamp of glass,
And of much other thing that there was:
And of the pottes and glass engluting,
That of the air might pass out nothing.
And of the elle fire, and smart also,
Which that was made, and of the care and woe
That we had in our matters subliming.
And in amalgaming, and calsening
Of quick silver, icleped Mercury crude,
For all our flight we cannot conclude,
Our Orpiment, and sublimed Mercury,
Our ground litarge eke on porphirie,
Of each of these, ounces a certain,
Not helps us, our labor is in vain:
Ne eke our spirits assentioun,
Ne our matters that lien all fire adoun
Mow in our werking nothing avail.
For lost is all our labor and our travail
* And all the cost a twenty devil way
Is lost also, which we upon it lay.
There is also full many another thing,
That is to our craft appertaining,
Though I by order hem ne rehearce can:
Because that I am a leude man:
Yet wol I tellen hem, as they come to mind,
Though I ne can set hem in her kind,
As Bole Armoniake, Verdegrece, Borace,
And sundry vessels made of earth and glass,
Our vrinals, and our discensories
Viols, crossettes, and sublimatories.
Concurbites, and alembekes eke,
And other such, dear enough of a Leke,
It needs not to rehearce hem all:
Waters ^ubisiyng, and Boles gall,
Arsneke, sal Armoniake, and Brimstone,
And herbs cold I tell eke many one,
As Egremonie, Valerian, and Lunarie,
And other such, if that me list to tarry.
Our lamps eke brenning both night and day,
To bring abo^^ our craft if that we may.
Our fournice eke of calcination,
And of waters albification,
Vns^eked lime, chalk, and gleire of an eye,
Pounders diverse, ashes, doung, piss, and cleie,
Sered pokettes, salt Peter, and Vitriole,
And diverse fires made of wood and cole.
Sal Tartre, Alcaly, and Sal preparate,
And combust matters, and coagulate:
Cley made with horse dung, man's here, and oil
Of tartre alim, glass, berme, wort, and argoile,
Resagor, and other matters enbibing,
And eke of our matters encorporing,
And of our silver citrination,
Our sementing, and eke fermentation
Our yngottes, testes, and many things mo.
I woll you tell as was me taught also
The four spirits, and the bodies seven
By order, as often I heard my lord nemen.
The first spirit, Quickesiluer cleped is:
The second, Orpiment: the third iwis
Sal Armoniake: the fourth Brimstone:
The bodies seven eke, lo here hem anon
Sol gold is, and Luna silver we threpe,
Mars iron, Mercury quick silver we clepe:
Saturnus lead, and Jupiter is tin,
And Venus coper, by my father kin.
This cursed craft, who so woll exercise,
He shall no good have that may him suffice,
For all the good he spends thereabout
He lose shall, thereof have I no doubt.
Who so that listen to utter his folly,
Let him come forth and learn to multiply:
And every man that has ought in his cofer,
Let him appear, and wex a Philosopher:
Askaunce that craft is so light for to lere.
Nay, nay, God wot, all be he Monk or Friar
Priest or Chanon, or any other wight,
Though he sit at his book both day and night
In learning of this eluish nice lore,
All is in vain: and parde much more
Is to lere a leude man this subtilte,
Fie speak not thereof, it woll not be,
All could he lettcure, or could he none
As in effect, he shall find it all one.
For both two, by my salvation
Concluden in multiplication
Iliche well, when they have all ido.
This is to saine, they failen both two.
Yet forgate I much rehearsaile
Of waters corosife, and of limaile
And of bodies mollification
And also of her induration:
Oiles, ablusions, metal fusible
To tellen you all, would pass any bible
That o where is: wherefore as for the best
Of all these names now would I me rest,
For as I trow, I have you told ynow
To reise a fiende, all look he never so row.
A naie let be: the Philosophers stone
Elixer cleped, we siken fast echone:
For had we him, then were we siker inow,
But unto God of heaven I make auow,
For all our craft when that we han all ido
And all our slight, he woll not come us to.
He has made us spenden much good,
For sorrow of which, almost we waxen wood,
But that good hope creeps in our heart
Supposing ever, though we sore smart,
To been relieved of him afterward:
Supposing and hope is sharp and hard.
* I warn you well it is to siken ever,
That future temps has made men disceuer
In trust thereof, all that ever they had,
Yet of that art they could not wax sad
For unto hem it is a bitter sweet
So seems it, for ne had they but a sheet
Which yt they might wrappen hem in a night,
And a bratte towalken in a day light,
They would hem sell, and spend it on this craft,
They conne not stint, till nothing be ilaft:
And evermore, where that ever they gone,
Men may hem ken by smell of Brimstone.
For all the world they stinken as a Got,
Her savor is so Rammish and so hot,
That though a man a mile from hem be,
The savor woll infect him trusts me.
Lo, thus by smelling, and by thredbare array
If that men list, this folk know they may:
And if a man woll ask him privily,
Why they be clothed so unthriftily,
Right anon they woll rowne in his ere,
And saien, if that they aspied were,
Men woll hem slay, because of her science:
Lo thus these folk betraien innocence.
Pass over this, go my tale unto:
Er that the pot be on the fire ido
Of metals, with a certain quantite,
My lord hem tempereth, and no man but he:
Now he is gone, I dare say boldly.
For as men sain, he can done craftly,
Algate I wot well he has such a name,
And yet full often he renneth in the blame,
And wot ye how full often it happeth so,
The pot breaks, and farewell all is go.
These mettales been of so great violence,
Our walls may not make hem resistance.
But if they were wrought of lime and stone,
They percen so, and through the wall they gone:
And some of hem sinken into the ground,
Thus have we lost by times many a pound.
And some are scattered all the flore about,
Some lepen into the roof withouten doubt.
Tho yt the fend not in our sight him show,
I trow that he with us be, that like shrew.
In hell where that he is lord and fire
Ne is there no more woe, ne anger ne ire,
When yt our pot is broke, as I have said
Every man chite, and holte him evil apuied:
Some said it was long of the fire making,
Some said naie, it was on the blowing,
Then was I ferde, for that was mine office.
Straw (quoth. the third) ye been leude and nice,
It was not tempred as it ought to be.
Nay (quoth. the fourth) stint and harken me,
Because our fire was not made of Bech
That is the cause, and none other so theche.
I can not tell whereon it is along,
But well I wot great strife is us among.
What (quoth. my lord) there nis no more to done
Of these perils I woll beware eftsone.
I am right siker, that the pot was crased:
Be as be may, be ye not amassed,
As usage is, let swepe the floor as swithe,
Pluck up your heart and be glad and blithe.
The mullocke on an heap iswept was,
And on the floor yeast a canuas,
And all this mullocke in a Sieve ithrow,
And sifted and I plucked many a throw,
Parde (quoth. one) somewhat of our metal
Yet is there here, though we have not all.
And tho this thing mishapped has as now
Another time it may been well inow.
We mote put our good in adventure,
* A merchant parde may not aie endure,
Trusts me well, in his prosperitee:
Sometime his good is drowned in the sea,
And sometime it comes safe unto the land.
Peace (quoth. my lord) ye next time I woll fond
To bring our craft all in another plite,
And but I do sirs, let me have the wite:
There was default in somewhat well I wot.
Another said, the fire was over hot,
But be it hot or cold, I dare say this,
That we concluden ever more amiss:
We failen of that which we would have,
And in our madness evermore we rave,
And when we be together everychone,
Every man seems as wise as Solomon.
* But all thing, which yt shines as the gold
Is not gold, as that I have heard told:
* Ne every apple that is fair at eye,
Nis not good, what so men clap or cry:
Right so lo it fares among us,
He that seems the wisest by Jesus,
* Is most fool, when it comes to ye prefe:
And he that seems truest is a thief.
That shall ye know, er yt I from ye wend,
By that I of my tale have made an end.
There was a Chanon of religioun
Emongs us, would enfect all a town,
Though it as great were as Niniue:
Rome, Alisaundre, Troie, and other three.
His slight and his infinite falsenesse
There couth no man written as I guess,
Though that he might live a thousand year,
In all this world of falsenesse nis his pere.
For in his terms he woll him so wind,
And speak his words in so sly a kind,
When be comune shall with any wight,
That he woll make him dote anon right,
But if a fiende he be as himself is.
Full many a man has he begiled er this.
And mo woll, if that he may live a while:
And yet men riden and gone full many a mile
Him for to seek, and have his acquaintance,
Not knowing of his false governance.
And if ye lust to give audience.
I woll it tellen here in your presence.
But worshipful Chanons religious,
Ne demeth not that I slander your house,
Although my tale of a Chanon be:
* Of every order some shrew is parde,
* And God forbid that all a company
Should rue a singular man's folly.
To slander you is not mine intent,
But to correct that amiss, is meant.
This tale was not only told for you,
But eke for other mo: ye wot well how
That among Christ's Apostles twelve
There was no traitor but Judas himselue.
Then why should ye remnant have any blame
That guiltless were? by you I say the same,
Save only this, if ye woll hearken me,
If any Judas in your covent be,
Remeueth him betime, I you read,
If shame or loss may causen any dread.
And be nothing displeased I you pray,
But in this case herketh what I say.
IN London was a priest annuellere,
That therein had dwelt many a year,
Which was so pleasant and so seruisable
Unto the wife where he was at Table,
That she would suffer him nothing to pay
For board ne clothing, went he never so gay,
And spending silver had he right ynow:
Thereof no force, I woll proceed as now
And tell forth my tale of the Chanon,
That brought this priest to confusion.
This false chanon came upon a day
Unto this priests chamber, where he lay,
Beseeching him to lene him a certain
Of gold, and he would quite him again:
Leneth me a Mark (quoth. he) but days three,
And at my day I woll quite it thee.
And if it so be, that thou find me false,
Another day hang by the halse.
This priest took him a mark, and that swith,
And this Chanon often thanked him since,
And took his leave, and went forth his wey:
And at third day brought him his money,
And to this priest he took his gold again,
Whereof this priest was full glad and fain.
Certes (quoth. he) nothing anoieth me
To lene a man a noble, two or three,
Or what thing were in my possession,
When he so true is of condition,
That in no wise he break woll his day:
To such a man I can never say nay.
What, quoth. this Chanon, should I be untrue,
Nay, that were a thing fallen of new:
Troth is a thing that I woll ever keep
Unto the day in which I shall crepe
Into my grave, or else God forbede:
Believes this as siker as your creed.
God thank I, and in good time be it said,
That there nas never man yet evil apayed
For gold ne silver that he to me lent,
Ne never falshede in mine heart I meant.
And sir, quoth. he, now of my priuite,
Sens ye so goodliche have been to me,
And kith to me so great gentleness,
Somewhat to quite with your kindness,
I woll you show, if ye woll it lere
(I shall it show to you anon right here)
How I can werche in Philosophy,
Take good heed, ye shall it see with your eye,
That I woll do a maistrie or I go.
Ye sir (quoth. the priest) and woll ye so?
Mary thereof I pray you heartily.
At your commandment sir truly
(Quoth. the Chanon) and else God forbede:
Lo how this thief couth his service bid.
* Full soth it is that such proffered service
Stinketh, as witnesses the old wise,
And that full soon I woll it verefie
In this Chanon, root of all treachery,
That evermore delight has and gladness
(Such fendly thoughts in his heart empress)
How Christ's people he may to mischief bring.
God keep us from his false dissimuling.
What wist this priest with whom yt he dealt?
Ne of his harm coming nothing he felt.
O sely priest, O sely innocent,
With couetise anon thou shall be blent:
O graceless, full blind is thy conceit,
Nothing art thou ware of his disceite.
Which that this Fox has shapen to thee:
His wily wrenches thou may not flee:
Wherefore to go to the conclusion
That refers to thy confusion,
Unhappy man, anon I woll me hie
To till thine unwitte and thy folly,
And eke the falsenesse of that other wretch,
As ferforth as my conning woll stretch.
This Chanon was my lord ye would wene,
Sir host in faith, and by the heaven Queen
It was another Chanon and not he,
That can an hundred fold more subtilte:
He has betrayed folk many a time,
Of his falsenesse it doleth me to rhyme:
Ever when I speak of his falshede
For shame of him my cheeks waxen read:
Algates they beginnen for to glow,
For redness have I none, right well I know,
In all my visage, for fumes diuerce
Of metals, which ye have heard me reherce,
Consumed and washed has my redness.
Now take heed of this Chanons cursednesse.
Sir (quoth. he to the priest) let your man gone
For quicksiluer, that we it had anon,
And let him bring ounces two or three:
And when he comes, as fast shul you see
A wonder thing, which ye saw never er this.
Sir (quoth. the priest) it shall be done iwis.
He had his servant fetch him this thing,
And he all ready was at his bidding,
And went him forth, and came anon again
With this quicksiluer, shortly for to sain,
And took these ounces three to the Chanoun,
And he hem laid well and fair adown:
Add had the servant coals for to bring,
That he anon might go to his werking.
The coals right anon were ifet,
And this Chanon took out a crosselet
Of his bosom, and showed it to the priest:
This instrument (quoth. he) which yt thou see,
Take in thy hond, and put thy self therein
Of this quicksilver an ounce, and begin
In the name of Christ to wex a Philosopher:
There be full few, which I would it profer
To show hem so much of my science:
For here shul ye see by experience,
That this quicksiluer I woll mortify,
Right in your sight anon withouten lie,
And make it as good silver and as fine,
As there is any in your purse or mine,
Or else where: and make it malliable,
And else hold me false and unstable
Emonges folk ever to appear.
I have a powder that cost me dear,
Shall make all good, for it is cause of all
My cunning, which I to you show shall.
Voideth your man, and let him be thereout,
And shet the door, whiles we been about
Our priuitie, that no man us epsy,
Whiles that we werken in our Philosophy.
All, as he had, fulfilled was in deed.
This like servant anon out he yede,
And his master shet the door anon,
And to her labor spedily they gone.
This priest at this cursed Chanons bidding,
Upon the fire anon set this thing,
And blew the fire, and busied him full fast:
And this Chanon into this croslet cast
A powder, I not whereof it was
I made, either of chalk, earth, or glass,
Or somewhat else, was not worth a fly,
To blind with the priest: and bad him hie
These coals for to couchen all above
The crosselet, for in token that I thee love
(Quoth. this Chanon) thine own honds two
Shall work all thing that here shall be do.
Grant mercy (quoth. ye priest) and was full glad,
And couched coals as the Chanon bad:
And while he busy was, this fiendly wretch
This false Chanon, ye foul fend him fetch,
Out of his bosom take a bechen cole,
In which full subtily was made an hole,
And therein was put of silver limaile
An ounce, and stopped was without fail
The hole with wax, to keep the limaile in:
And understands that this false gin
Was not made there, but it was made before,
And other things that I shall you tell more
Hereafter, which that he with him brought,
Er he came there, to begile him he thought,
And so he did, as they went a twin:
Till he had nere undone him, could he not blin.
It dulleth me, when that I of him speak,
On his falshede feign would I me wreke,
If I wist how, but he is here and there,
He is so variaunt, he bideth no where.
But takes head sirs now for Gods love.
He took his cole of which I spoke above,
And in his hand he bare it prively,
And whiles the priest couched besily
The coals together, as I told you er this,
This Chanon said, friend ye done amiss,
This is not couched as it ought to be,
But sone I shall amend it (quoth. he)
Now let me meddle therewith but a while,
For of you have I pity by St. Gile.
Ye been right hot, I see well how ye sweet,
Have here a cloth and wipe away the wete.
And all while the priest him wiped hace,
This Chanon took the cole, I shrew his face,
And laid it abouen upon the midward
Of the croslet, and blew well afterward
Till that the coals began fast to bren,
Now give us drink, (quoth. this Chanon then)
As swithe all shall be well I undertake,
Sit we down, and let us merry make.
And when that this Chanons bechen cole
Was brent all, the limaile out of the hole
Into the croslet anon fell adown,
And so it must needs do by reasoun,
Sens it so even above couched was,
But there of wist the priest nothing alas:
He demed all the coals iliche good,
For of the slight nothing he understood.
And when this Alkamister saw his time,
Reiseth up sir priest (quoth. he) and stondeth by me,
And for I wot well ingot have I none,
Goth walks forth, and bring a chalk stone:
For I woll make it of the same shappe,
That an ingot is, if I may have hap,
And bring eke with you a bolle or a pan
Full of water, and ye shall see than
How that our besines shall hap and preue:
And yet for ye shall have no misbeleue
Ne wrong conceit of me in your absence,
I woll not been out of your presence,
But go with you and come with you again.
The chamber door shortly for to sain
They opened and shet, and went forth her weie,
And forth with hem they carried the keie,
And comen again withouten any delay.
What should I tarry all the long day,
He took the chalk, and shope it in the wise
Of an yngot, as I shall you devise.
I say he took out of his own sleue
A teine of silver, iuell mote he cheue,
Which that was but a just ounce of weight:
And takes heed now of his cursed slight.
He shop his yngot in length and in bread
Of the teine, withouten any dread
So slily that the priest it not espide,
And in his sleue again he began it hide:
And from the fire took up his matere,
And into the yngnot it put with merry chere:
And into the water vessel he it cast,
When that him list, and bad the priest as fast
Look with there is put in thine hond and grope,
Thou shall find there silver as I hope,
What devil of hell should it else be,
Shauing of silver, silver is parde.
He put in his hond, and took up a teine
Of silver fine, and glad in every vain
Was this Priest, when he saw it was so:
Gods blessing and his mothers also
And all Hallowes, have ye sir Chanon,
Said this priest, and I her malison
But and ye vouchsafe to teachen me
This noble craft and this subtilte,
I woll be yours in all that ever I may.
Quoth. the Chanon, yet woll I make assaie
The second time, that ye mow take heed
And been expert of this, and in your need
Another day assay in mine absence
This discipline, and this crafty science.
Let take another ounce (quoth. he) tho
Of quick silver, withouten words mo,
And done therewith as I have done er this
With that other, which that now silver is.
The priest him besieth in all that he can
To done as this Chanon this cursed man
Commanded him, and fast blewe the fire,
For to come to the effect of his desire.
And this Chanon, right in the mean while
All ready was, this priest eft to begile,
And for a countenance in his hond bare
An hollow stick, take keep and beware,
In the end of which an ounce and no more
Of silver limaile put was, as before
Was in his cole, and stopped with wax well
For to keepen in his limaile every dele.
And whiles this priest was in his business,
This Chanon with his stick began him dress
To him anon, and his powder cast in
As he did erst, the devil out of his skin
Him torn, I pray to God for his falshede.
For he was ever false in word and deed:
And with his stick, above the crosselet,
That was ordained with that false iet,
He stirs the coals, till all relent began
The wax again the fire, as every man
But he a fool be, wot well it mote need.
And all that in the hole was, out yede,
And into the crosselet hastily it fell.
The priest supposed nothing but well,
But busied him fast, and was wonder fain,
Supposing naught but troth soth to sain:
He was so glad, that I cannot express
In no manner his mirth and his gladness,
And to the Chanon he proffered eft sone
Body and good: ye (quoth. the Chanon) anon
Tho I be pore, crafty thou shall me find:
I warn thee yet is there more behind.
Is there any coper here within, said he?
Ye sir (quoth. the priest) I trow there be.
Else go and buie some, and that a swithe,
Now good sir go forth thy way and hithe.
He went his way, and with the coper he came,
And this Chanon in his hond it name,
And of that coper wayed out but an ounce:
All to simple is my tongue to pronounce
As to minister by my wit the doubleness.
Of this Chanon, root of all cursednesse.
but semde friendly, to hem yt knew him naught,
But he was fendly, both in work and thought.
It werieth me to tell of his falsenesse,
And natheles, yet woll I it express
To the intent that men may beware thereby,
And not for none other cause truly.
He put this ounce of coper into the crosselet,
And on the fire as swithe he has it set,
And cast in powder, and made ye priest to blow
And in his working for to stoop low
As he did erst, and all nas but a yape,
Right as him list the priest he made his Ape.
And afterward in the ingot he it cast
And in the pan put it at the last
Of water, and in he put his own hond,
And in his sleue, as ye before hond,
Heard me tell, he had a silver teine.
He slily took it out, this cursed heine,
Unwitting this priest of his false craft,
And in the pannes botome he has it laft,
And in the water rombleth too and fro,
And wonder privily took up also
The coper teine, not knowing this priest,
And hid it, and hent him by the breast,
And to him spoke, and thus said in his game:
Stoupeth adown, by God ye be to blame,
Helps me now, as I did you whilere,
Put in your hond, and looks what is there.
This priest took up this silver teine anon,
And then said the Chanon, let us gone
With these three teines which we han wrout,
To some Goldsmith, and wete if it be ought:
For by my faith, I nold for my hood
But if it were silver fine and good,
And that as swithe well proved shall be.
Unto the Goldsmith, with these teines three
They went, and put them in assaie
To fire and hammer: might no man say nay,
But they were as them ought for to be.
This sotted priest, who was gladder than he?
Was never bird gladder against the day,
Ne Nightingale, against the ceason of May
Was never none, that list better to sing,
Ne lady lustier in carolling:
And for to speak of love and womanhede,
Ne knight in arms to done a hardy deed
To stonden in grace of his lady dear,
Than had this priest, this craft now to lere:
And to the Chanon thus he spoke and said,
For the love of God, that for us all deid,
And as I may deserve it unto you,
What shall this receipt cost, tells me now?
By our Lady (quoth. this Chanon) it is dear
I warn you well, save I and a Friar
In England, there can no man it make.
No force (quoth. he) now sir for Gods sake,
What shall I pay, tell me I you pray.
I wis (quoth. he) it is full dear I say.
Sir at one word, if that ye list it have,
Ye shall pay forty pound, so God me save:
And nere the friendship that ye did er this
To me, ye shoulden pay more iwis.
This priest the sum of forty pound anon
Of nobles fet, and told hem euerichon
To this Chanon, for this ilke receipt.
All his worching was fraud and deceit.
Sir priest he said, I keep for to have no loos
Of my craft, for I would it were kept cloos,
And as you love me, keeps it secre,
For and men know all my subtilte,
By God men would have so great envy
To me, because of my Philosophy,
I should be dead, there were none other way.
God it forbid (quoth. the priest) what ye say,
Yet had I lever spend all the good
Which that I have, or else wax I wood.
Than that ye should fallen in such mischefe:
For your good will have ye right good prefe
Quoth. ye Chanon, and farewell grant mercy.
He went his way, and ye priest never him seie
After yt day: and when that this priest should
Maken assay, at such time as he would
Of this receipt, farewell it nold not be.
Lo thus beyaped and beguiled was he:
Thus makes he his introduction
To bring folk to her destruction.
* Considers sirs how in each estate
Betwixt men and gold there is debate
So ferforth, that vnneths there is none,
(This multiplying blinds so many one)
That in good faith I trow that it be
The greatest cause of such scarsite.
These philosophers speaken so mistily
In this craft, yt men cannot come thereby,
For any wit that men have now adays:
They may well chattre and iangle as do ye iaies,
And in her terms set her lust and pain,
But to her purpose shull they never attain.
* A man may lightly learn, if he have ought
To multiply, and bring his good to naught.
Lo, such a lucre is in this lusty game,
A man's mirth it woll turn all to grame,
And emptien also great and heavy purses,
And maken folk to purchase curses
Of hem that han also her good ylent.
O fie for shame they yt han be brent,
Alas, cannot they fly the fires hete?
Ye that it vsen, I read that ye it let,
Least ye lesen all: for bet than never is late:
Never to thrive, were too long a date.
Though yt ye prolle aye, ye shall it never find,
* Ye ben as bold as is bayard the blind
That blondereth forth, and peril casts none:
He is as bold to run against a stone,
As for to go beside in the way:
So faren ye, that multiplien I say.
If that your eyes cannot seen aright,
Looks yt your mind lack not his sight.
For though ye look never so broad and stare,
Ye shall not win a mite in that chaffare,
* But wast all yt ye may repe and run:
Withdraw the fire, least it too fast brenne.
Medleth with that art no more I mean,
For if ye done, your thrift is gone full clean.
And right as swithe I woll you tellen here
What yt ye philosophers sain in this matere.
Lo thus says Arnolde of the new town,
As his Rosarie makes mentioun,
He says right thus, withouten any lie,
There may no man Mercury mortify,
But if it be with his brothers knowledging:
Lo how that he which first said this thing,
Of Philosophers father was, Hermes.
He says how that the dragon doutles
Ne dies not, but if he be slain
With his brother: And this is for to saine
By the dragon Mercury, and none other,
He understood yt brimstone was his brother,
That out of Sol and Luna were ydraw:
And therefore said he, take heed to my saw.
Let no man busy him this art for to seech,
But he that the entention and speech
Of Philosophers understand can:
And if he do, he is a leaud man.
For this science and this cunning (quoth. he)
Is of the secre of the secres parde.
Also there was a disciple of Plato,
That on a time said his master to,
As his book Senior woll bear witness,
And this was his demand in soothfastnesse:
Tell me the name of the privy stone?
And Plato answered unto him anon,
Take the stone that Titanos men name.
Which is that (quoth. he?) Magnetia is ye same
Said Plato: ye sir and is it thus?
This is ignotum per ignotius.
What is Magnetia, good sir I you pray?
It is a water that is made I say
Of the elements four (quoth. Plato.)
Tell me the roche good sir (quoth. he tho)
Of that water, if it be your will.
Nay, nay (quoth. Plato) certain that I nill:
The Philosophers were ysworne eachone,
That they should discover it unto none,
Ne in no book it write in no manner,
For unto Christ it is so lefe and dear,
That he woll not that it discovered be,
But where it likes to his deity,
Man to enspire and eke for to defend,
When that him likes, lo this is his end.
Then conclude I thus, sens yt God of heaven
Ne will not that the Philosophers nemen,
How that a man shall come unto this stone,
I read as for the best, let it gone.
* For who so makes God his adversary
As for to werch any thing in contrary
Unto his will, certes never shall he thrive,
Though yt he multiply term of his live:
And there a point: for ended is my tale.
God send every true man bote of his bale.
The Doctor of Physics Prologue.
WHen this yeoman his tale ended had
Of this false Chanon, which was so bad,
Our host began say, truly and certain
This priest was beguiled, sooth for to saine:
He wened for to be a Philosopher,
Till he right no gold left in his cofer:
And soothly this priest had all the yape,
This cursed Chanon put in his hood an ape.
But all this pass I over as now:
Sir doctor of Physic, yet I pray you,
Tell us a tale of some honest matere.
It shall be done, if that ye woll it here,
Said this doctor, and his tale began anon,
Now good men (quoth. he) herkeneth euerichone.
The Doctor of Physics Tale.
Virginius slays his only Daughter, rather than that she shall be defiled by
the letcherous Judge Appius.

THere was, as tells us Titus Liuius,
A knight, that cleaped was Virginius,
Fulfilled of honor and worthiness,
And strong of friends, and of great richesse.
A daughter he had by his wife,
And never had he mo in all his life:
Fair was this maid in excellent beautee
Abouen every wight that man may see:
For nature has with sovereign diligence
Formed her in so great excellence,
As though she would say, lo I nature,
Thus can I form and paint a creature
When that me list, who can me counterfete?
Pigmalion not, though he always forge and beat,
Or grave or paint: for I dare well saine,
Apelles or Xeuxsis should werch in vain
To grave or paint: or forge or beat,
If they presumed me to counterfete.
For he that is the fourmer principal,
Has made me his vicar general
To form and paint earthly creature
Right as me list. All thing is in my cure
Under the moon, yt may wane and wax:
And for my work nothing woll I axe,
My lord and I been fully of accord.
I made her to the worship of my lord,
So do I all mine other creatures,
Of what color they be, or of what figures:
Thus seems me that nature would say.
This maid was of age xii year and tway,
In which that nature has such delight.
For right as she can paint a lilly white
And rody as rose, right with such painture
She painted has this noble creature
Ere she was borne, upon her lims free
Were als bright as such colors should be,
And Phoebus died had her tresses great,
Like to the streams of his burned hete.
And if that excellent were her beauty,
A thousand fold more virtuous was she:
In her ne lacks no condition
That is to praise, as by discretion
As well in body as in ghost, chaste was she:
For which she floured in virginite
With all humility and abstinence,
With all attemperaunce and patience,
With measure eke, and bering of array.
Discreet she was in answering always,
Tho she were wise as Pallas, dare I saine.
(Her facond eke full womanly and plain)
No counterfeited terms at all had she
To seem wise: but after her degree
She spoke, and all her words more and less
Sowning in virtue and in gentleness.
Shamefast she was in maidens shamefastness,
Constant in heart, and ever in business
To drive her out of all sluggardie:
Bacchus had of her mouth no maistrie.
* For wine and youth done Venus encrece,
As men in fire woll casten oil or greece.
And of her own virtue unconstrained,
She has full often her sick yfained,
For that she would fly the company,
Where likely was to treaten of folly,
As is at feasts, at revels, and at daunces,
That been occasions of daliaunces:
Such things maken children for to be
Too soon ripe and bold, as men may see:
Which is full perillons, and has been yore,
For all too soon may she learn the lore
Of boldness, when as she is a wife.
And ye maistresses in your old life,
That lords daughters han in governance,
Ne takes of my word no displeasaunce:
Think that ye been set in gouernings
Of lords daughters, only for two things,
Either for you han kept your honesty,
Either for ye han fall in freelty,
And known well enough the old dance,
And conne forsake fully all mischaunce:
For evermore therefore for Christ's sake,
Keeps well tho that ye undertake.
A thief of veneson, that has forlaft
His likerousnesse, and all his thieves craft.
Can keep a forest best of any man:
Now keeps hem well, for and ye woll ye can:
* Looks well, to no vice that ye assent,
Least ye be damned for your evil intent.
For who so does, a traitor is certain,
And takes keep of that I shall you saine:
* Of all treason sovereign pestilence
Is, when a wight betrayeth innocence.
Ye fathers, and eke ye mothers also,
Though ye han children, be it one or mo,
Yours is the charge of all her sufferaunce,
Whiles that they been in your governance.
Beth ware, yt by ensample of your living,
Either by your negligence in chastising,
That they ne perish: for I dare well say,
If that they done, ye shall full sore abay.
* Under a shepherd soft and negligent,
The wolf has many a sheep and lamb to rent,
Suffices one ensample now as here,
For I mote turn again to my matere.
This maid of which I tell my tale express,
She kept her selue, she needed no maistresse.
For in her living maidens might read
As in a book, every good work and deed,
That longs to a maid virtuous:
She was so prudent and so bounteous.
For which out sprung on every side
Both of her beauty, and her bounty wide:
That through ye land they preised her echone,
* That loved virtue, save envy alone,
That sorry is of other men's well,
And glad is of her sorrow and vnhele.
The doctor makes this descriptioun,
This maid went on a day into the town
Toward the temple, with her mother dear,
As is of young maidens the manner.
Now was there a justice in the town,
That governor was of that regioun:
And so befell, this Justice his eyes cast
Upon this maid, auising her full fast
As she came foreby, there as the Judge stood:
Anon his heart changed and his mood,
So was he caught with beauty of this maid
And to himself full privily he said,
This maid shall be mine for any man.
Anon the fiend into his heart ran,
And taught him suddenly, by with slight
The maid to his purpose win he might.
For certes, by no force, ne by no meed,
Him thought he was not able for to speed.
For she was strong of friends, and eke she
Confirmed was in such sovereign beauty,
That well he wist he might her never win,
As for to make her with her body sin.
For which with great deliberatioun
He sent after a client into the town,
The which he knew full subtle and full bold.
This Judge this client his tale has told
In secret wise, and made him to ensure,
He should tell it unto no creature:
And if he did, he should lose his head.
When assented was this cursed read,
Glad was the judge, and made good chere
And yaue him gifts precious and dear.
When shapen was all this conspiracy
Fro point to point, how that his letcherie
Performed should be full subtly,
As ye shullen after hear openly:
Home goth this client yt hight Claudius.
But this false judge, that hight Appius,
(So was his name, for it is no fable,
But known for an historiall thing notable
The sentence of it sooth is out of dout)
This false judge I say goth now fast about
To hasten his delight all that he may:
And so befell, that soon after on a day
This false judge, as tells us the story,
As he was wont, sat in his consistory,
And yaue his doomes upon sundry caas,
This false client came forth a full great paas
And said, Lord, if that it be your will,
As does me right upon this pitous bill,
In which I plain upon Virginius.
And if he woll say it is not thus,
I woll prove it, and find good witness,
That sooth is, that my bill woll express.
The judge answered, of this in his absence
I may not give definite sentence:
Let do him call, and I woll gladly here,
Thou shall have all right, and no wrong here.
Virginius came to wete ye judges will,
And right anon was rad this cursed bill,
The sentence of it was as ye shall hear.
To you my lord Appius so dear
Shows your poor servant Claudius,
How that a knight called Virginius,
Against the law and against all equite,
Holds express against the will of me
My servant, which yt is my thral by right,
Which from mine house was stolen on a night
Whiles she was full young, I woll it preue
By witness, lord, so that ye you not grieve:
She is not his daughter, what so he say,
Wherefore my lord justice I you pray:
Yield me my thrall, if it be your will.
Lo this was all the sentence of that bill.
Virginius began upon the client behold:
But hastily, ere he his tale told,
He would have defended it, as should a knight,
And by witness of many a true wight,
That all was false, that said his adversary.
This cursed judge would no longer tarry,
He here a word more of Virginius
But yaue his judgment, and said thus.
I deem anon this client his servant have,
Thou shall no longer her in thine house save,
Go bring her forth, and put her in our ward.
This client shall have his thrall, thus I award.
And when this worthy knight Virginius
Through the assent of the judge Appius
Must by force his dear daughter yeuen
Unto the judge, in letchery to liuen,
He goth him home, and set him in his hall,
And let anon his dear daughter call:
And with a face dead as ashen cold,
Upon her humble face he began behold,
With fathers pity, sticking through his heart,
All would he not from his purpose convert.
Daughter (quoth. he) Virginia by thy name,
There ben two ways, either death, or shame
That thou must suffer, alas yt I was borne,
For never thou deseruedest whereforne
To dien with a sword or with a knife:
Oh dear daughter, comfort of my life,
Which I have fostred up with such plesance,
That thou never were out of my remembrance:
O daughter, which yt art my last woe,
And in my life my last joy also,
O iemmme of chastity, in patience
Take thou thy death this is my sentence:
For love and not for hate thou must be dead,
My pitous hond mote smite of thine head,
Alas that ever Appius thee sey.
Thus has he falsely judged thee to dey.
And told her all the case, as ye before
Han heard, it needs not to tell it more.
O mercy dear father (quoth. this maid)
And with that word both her arms laid
About his neck, as she was wont to do,
The tears brast out of her eyes two,
And said, O good father shall I die,
Is there no grace? Is there no remedy?
No certes dear daughter mine (quoth. he.)
Then give me leave father mine (quoth. she)
My death to complain a little space:
For parde, Iepte yaue his daughter grace
For to complain, ere he her slough, alas,
And God it wot, nothing was her trespass,
But that she ran her father first to see,
To welcome him with great solemnitee:
And with that word she fell aswoune anon,
And after when her swouning was gone,
She rises up, and to her father said:
Blessed be God that I shall die a maid.
Give me my death, ere that I have a shame,
Does with your child your will a gods name:
And with that word she prays him full often,
That with his swerd he should smite her soft,
And with that word, aswoune down she fell.
Her father with sorrowful heart and fell,
Her head off smote, and by the top it hent,
And to the judge he it yaue in present,
As he sat in doom in consistory.
When the judge it saw, as says the story,
He bad take him, and hong him also fast:
But right anon all the people in thrast
To save the knight, for routh and for pity,
For known was the judges iniquity.
The people anon had suspect in this thing
By manner of this clients challenging,
That it was by the assent of Appius:
They wist well that he was letcherous.
For which unto Appius they gone,
And kesten him in prison right anon,
Whereas he slew himself: and Claudius,
That servant was unto this Appius,
Was demed to be honged upon a tree:
But Virginius of his great pitee
So prayed for him, that he was exiled,
And else certes he had been beguiled:
The remnaunt were honged, more and less,
That consented were to his cursednesse.
* Here may men see how sin has his merit:
Beware, for no man wot how God wol smite
In no degree, ne in no manner wise,
The worm of conscience woll arise
Of wicked life, though it so privy be,
That no man wot of it but God and he:
Whether he be leaud man or lered,
He not how soon he may been affered.
* Therefore I read you this counsel take,
To forsake sin, or sin you forsake.
The words of the Host.
OUr host began swear as he were wood,
Harrow (quoth. he) by nails and by blood,
This was a false thief, and a cursed justice:
As shameful death as heart may devise,
Come to the justice and her aduocas,
Algate this silly maiden is slain, alas,
Alas too dear abought she her beautee.
Wherefore I say, that all men may see,
* That yefts of Fortune or of nature,
Been cause of death of many a creature.
Her beauty was her death, I dare well saine:
Alas so pitously as she was slain.
But hereof woll I not proceed as now,
* Men have full often more harm than prow.
But truly truly mine own master dear,
This is a ernefull tale for to here:
But nathelesse, pass over and no force.
I pray to God to save thy gentle corce,
And thy vrinals, and thy iordanes,
Thine ypocras and eke thy galianes,
And every box full of letuarie
God bless hem and our lady saint Marie.
So mote I thee, thou art a proper man,
And ylike a prelate by saint Runian,
Save that I cannot speak well in term.
But well I wot, thou do mine heart to yerne,
That I have almost ycaught a cardiacle:
By corpus domini, But I have triacle,
Or else a draught of moist cornie ale,
Or but I hear anon another merry tale,
My heart is lost for pity of this maid.
Thou belamy, thou John pardoner he said,
Tell us some merry tale, or iape, right anon.
It shall be done (quoth. he) by saint Runion.
But first (quoth. he) here at this ale stake
I woll both drink, and bite on a cake:
But right anon, these gentles began to cry,
Nay, let him tell us of no ribaudrie:
Tell us some moral thing, yt we mow lere
Some wit, and then woll we gladly here.
I grant (quoth. he) ywis, but in ye cup I Will think
On some honest thing, whiles that I drink.
The Pardoners Prologue.
LOrdings (quoth. he) in chirch when I preche,
I pain me to have an hauteine speech,
And ring it out, as round as does a bell,
For I can all by rote that I tell.
My teme is always one, and ever was,
* (Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas)
First I prono^nce fro whence I come,
And then my bills I show all and some:
Our liege lords seal on my patent
That show I first, my body to warrent,
That no man be so bold, priest ne clerk,
Me to disturb of Christ's holy work.
And after that I tell forth my tales
Of Bulls, of Popes, and of Cardinales,
Of Patriarchs, and of Bishops I show,
And in latin I speak words a few
To sauer with my predication,
And for to stere men to devotion.
Then show I forth my long crystal stones,
Ycrammed full of clouts and of bones,
Relickes they been, as wene they echone:
Then have I in laton a shoder bone,
Which that was of an holy jews sheep.
Good men say I, take of my words keep:
If that this bone be washen in any well,
If cow or calfe, sheep, or ox swell
That any worm has eaten, or hem stong,
Take water of this well, and wash his tongue,
And it is hole anon: and furthermore
Of pockes, and of scabs, and every sore
Shall sheep be hole, that of this well
Drinks a draught,, take keep of yt I tell.
If that the good man that beasts owes,
Woll every day ere the cock croweth,
Fasting drink of this well a draught,
(As thilke holy jew our elders taught)
His beasts and his store shall multiply:
And sirs, also it heals jealousy,
For though a man be fall in jealous rage,
Let make with this water his potage,
And never shall he more his wife mistrist,
Though he in sooth the defaut by her wist:
All had she taken priests two or three.
Here is a mittaine eke, that ye may see:
He that his hand woll put in this mittaine,
He shall have multiplying of his grain,
When he has sown, be it wheat or otes,
So that he offer good pens or grotes.
And men and women, o thing I warn you:
If any wight been in this church now,
That has done sin horrible, that he
Dare not for shame of it shriuen be:
Or any woman, be she young or old,
That has made her husbond a cokewold,
Such folk shull have no power ne no grace
To offer to my relickes in this place.
And who so finds him out of such blame,
Comes up and offer in Gods name,
And I assoyle him by the authority,
Such as by bull was granted unto me.
By this gaude have I won every year
An hundred mark, sithen I was pardonere.
I stond like a clerk in my pulpet,
And when the lewd people been down yset,
I preach so as ye have lered before,
And tell to them an hundred yapes more.
Then pain I me to stretch forth my neck,
And east and west upon the people I beck
As does a dove, sitting upon a berne:
My honds and my tongue gone so yerue,
That it is joy to see my business.
Of avarice and of such cursednesse
All my preaching is for to maken hem free
To yeuen her pens, and namely unto me.
For mine intent is not but for to win,
And nothing for correction of sin.
I recke never when that they ben buried,
Though her soul gone a black buried.
* For certes many a predication
Comes often time of evil entention.
Some for pleasaunce of folk, and for flaterie,
To been auaunced by hypocrisy:
And some for vaineglory, and some for hate.
For when I dare not other ways debate,
Then woll I sting hem with my tongue smert
In preaching, so that he shall not astert
To ben defamed falsely, if that he
Has trespassed to my brethren or to me.
For though I tell not his proper name,
Men shall well know that it is the same
By signs, or by other circumstaunces.
Thus quite I folk, yt does us displeasaunces:
Thus put I out my venum under hew
Of holiness, to seemen holy and true,
But shortly mine intent I woll devise,
I preach of nothing but of couetise.
Therefore my teme is yet, and ever was,
Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas.
Thus can I preach against y^ same vice
Which that I use, and that is avarice.
But though my self be guilty in that sin,
Yet can I maken other folk to twinne
From avarice, and sore hem to repent:
But that is not my principal intent,
I preach nothing but for couetise.
Of this matere it ought enough suffice.
Then tell I hem ensamples many a one
Of old stories done long time agone.
For leaud people aye louen tales old,
Which things they can well report and hold.
What, trowen ye whiles that I may prech,
And win gold and silver for to tech,
That I woll live in pouert wilfully?
Nay, nay, I thought it never truly.
For I woll preach and beg in sundry londs,
I woll not do no labor with mine honds,
Ne make baskets and live thereby,
Because I woll not beg idelly.
I woll none of the apostles counterfete:
I woll have money, malt, cheese, and whete,
All were it yeuen of the poorest page,
Or of the poorest widow in a village:
Though her children should sterue for famine.
Nay, I woll drink the licour of the wine,
And have a jolly wench in every town:
But hearkeneth lordings my conclusioun.
Your liking is that I should tell a tale,
Now I have drunken a draught of corny ale:
By God I hope I shall tell you a thing,
That shall by reason been at your liking:
For though my self be a full vicious man,
A moral tale yet I you tell can,
Which I am wont to preach, for to win:
Now hold your peace, my tale I woll begin.
The Pardoners Tale.
A company of Riotours conspire to kill Death, who kills them one after
another.

IN Flanders whilom there was a company
Of young folk, that haunted folly:
As hasard, riot, stews, and tauernes,
Whereas with harps, lutes, and geternes,
They dauncen and plaien at dice night and day,
And eaten also, over that her might may.
Through which they done the devil sacrifice
Within the devils temple, in cursed wise,
By superfluity abominable:
Her oaths been so great and so damnable,
That it is grisly for to hear hem swear:
Our blessed lords body they all to tear,
Hem thought ye Jews rent him not enough:
And each of hem at others sin lough.
And right anon comen in tomblesteres
Fetis and small, and young foiteres,
Singers with harpes, bauds, and waferers,
Which that been verily the devils officers
To kindle and blow the fire of letcherie,
That is annexed unto glotonie.
The holy writ take I to my witness,
That letchery is in wine and drunkenness.
Lo how that dronken Loath unkindly
Lay by his daughters two unwittingly,
So drunk he was he nist what he wrought,
And therefore sore repenten him ought.
Herodes, who so woll the stories seche,
There may ye learn, and by ensample teache,
When he of wine was replete at his feast,
Right at his own table yaue his hest
To sleen Johan the Baptist full guiltless.
Seneke says eke good words doubtless:
He says he can no difference find
* Betwixt a man that is out of his mind,
And a man the which is dronkelew:
But that woodnesse fallen in a shrew,
Perseuereth longer than does drunkenness.
O glotenie, full of cursednesse:
O cause first of our confusion,
O original of our damnation,
Til Christ had bout us with his blood again:
Lo how dear, shortly for to sain,
Bought was first this cursed villainy:
Corrupt was all this world through glotenie.
Adam our fornfather, and his wife also,
Fro Paradise, to labor and to woe
Were driven for that vice, it is no dread:
For whiles that Adam fasted, as I read,
He was in Paradise, and when that he
Eat of the fruit defended on the tree,
Anon he was out cast to woe and pain.
O glotenie, on thee well ought us to plain.
* Oh, wist a man how many maladies
Follows of excess and of glotenies,
He would been the more measurable
Of his diete, sitting at his table.
Alas the short throat, the tender mouth,
Makes that East and West, North and South,
In earth, in air, in water, men to swinke,
To getten a glutton deinte meat and drink.
Of this matter, O Paul, well can thou treat,
* Meat unto womb, and womb eke unto meat
Shall God destroien both, as Paul says.
Alas, a foul thing it is by my faith,
To say this word, and fouler is the deed,
When men so drinks of the white and read,
That of his throat he makes his prive
Through thilke cursed superfluite.
The Apostle says weeping full pitously,
There walken many, of which told have I,
I say it now weeping with pitous voice,
They been enemies of Christ's croice,
Of which the end is death, womb is her God.
O belly, O womb, O stinking cod,
Fulfilled of dong and corruptioun,
At either end of thee foul is the soun.
How great cost and labor is there to find
These cooks? Lord how they stamp, strein, and grind,
And turn substance into accident,
To fulfill all thy likerous talent.
Out of the hard bones knocken they
The mary, for they cast it not away,
That may go through the gullet soft and sote:
Of spicerie, of leaves, bark, and rote,
Shall been his sauce ymade by delight
To maken hem have a newer appetite.
* But certes he that haunteth such delices,
Is dead, whiles that he lives in the vices.
* A lecherous thing is wine and dronkennes,
It is full of striving and of wretchedness.
Oh dronken man, disfigured in thy face,
Sour is thy breath, foul art thou to enbrace:
And through thy dronken nose souneth y^ soun,
As tho thou saidest aie Sampson, Sampsoun:
And yet God wot Sampson dronk never wine.
Thou fallest, as it were a sticked swine:
Thy tongue is lost, and all thine honest cure,
* For drunkenness is very sepulture
Of man's wit, and his discretion.
* In whom that drink has domination,
He can no counsel keep, it is no dread.
Now keep you fro the white and fro the read,
And namely fro the White wine of Lepe,
That is to sell in Fishstreet and in Chepe.
This wine of Spain creeps subtly,
And so do other wines growing fast by:
Of which rises such fumositee,
That when a man has dronk draughts three,
And weneth that he be at home in Chepe,
He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe,
Naught at Rochell, ne at Bordeaux town.
And then woll he say, Sampsoun, Sampsoun,
But herkeneth lordings o word, I you pray,
That all the sovereign acts dare I say
Of victories in the old Testament,
That through very God, yt is omnipotent,
Were done in abstinence and in prayere:
Looks the Bible, and there ye mow it lere.
Looks Attila, the great conqueror
Died in his sleep, with shame and dishonor
Bleeding aye at his nose in drunkenness:
A captain should live in soberness.
And over all this, auise you right well,
What was commanded unto Lamuel?
Not Samuel: but Lamuel say I.
Redeth the Bible, and find it expressly
Of wine yeuing to hem that have justice:
No more of this, for it may well suffice.
And now that I have spoke of glotonie,
Now woll I defend you hasardrie.
Hasard is very mother of lesings,
And of deceit, and cursed forswearings:
Blaspheme of Christ, manslauter, and wast also
Of cattle, of time, and of other mo.
* It is repreue, and contrary to honor,
For to be holden a common hasardour.
And ever the higher that he is of estate,
The more he is holden desolate.
If that a Prince shall use hasardrie
In his governance and policy,
He is as by common opinion
Hold the less in reputation.
Stillebon that was hold a wise ambassador,
Was sent to Corinth with full great honor
Fro Calidone, to maken hem alliance:
And when he came, there happed this chance,
That all the greatest that were of the land
Playing at hasard he hem yfond:
For which, as soon as it might be,
He stale him home again to his country,
And said, There woll I not lose my name,
I nill not take on me so great defame,
For to allie you to none hasardours:
Sends other wiser ambassadors.
For by my troth, me were lever die
Than I should you to hasardours alie.
For ye that been so glorious in honors,
Shall not alie you with hasardours,
As by my will, ne by my treaty:
This wise Philosopher thus said he.
Look eke how to king Demetrius
The king of Parthes, as ye book says us,
Sent him a pair of dice of gold in scorn,
For he had used hasardrie there biforne:
For which he held his glory and his renoun
At no value or reputatioun.
* Lords might find other manner play
Honest enough to drive the day away.
Now wol I speak of oaths false and great
A word or two, as other books entreat,
* Great swearing is thing abominable,
And false swearing is yet more reprouable:
The high God forbad swearing at all,
Witness of Matthew: but in special
Of swearing says the holy Jeremy,
* Thou shall swear sooth thine oaths, and not lie:
And swear in dome and eke in rightwysnes,
But idle swearing is a cursednesse.
Behold and see that in the first table
Of high Gods hestes that been honorable,
How that the second hest of him is this,
Take not my name in idleness amiss.
Lo, he rather forbids such swearing,
Than homicide, or any other cursed thing:
I say as thus, by order it stondeth,
This knows they yt his hests understands,
How that the second hest of God is that:
And furthermore, I woll thee tell all plat,
* That vengeance shall not part fro his house,
That of his oaths is too outrageous,
By Gods precious heart, and his nails,
And by the blood of Christ, that is in Hailes,
Seven is my chance, and thine five and three:
By Gods arms, if thou falsely play me,
This dagger shall through thine heart ygo.
This fruit it comes of thilke bones two,
For swearing, ire, falsenesse, and homicide.
Now for the love of Christ that for us did,
Leaves your oaths, both great and small,
For I shall tell you a meruellous tale.
These roitours three, of which I tell,
Long erst or prime rong any bell,
Were set hem in a Tavern to drink:
And as they sat, they heard a bell clinke
Before a corse that was carried to his grave:
That one of hem began to call to his knave,
Go bette (quoth. he) and ask redily,
What corse is this, that passes forth by:
And look that thou report his name well.
Sir (quoth. he) it needs never a dele:
It was me told ere ye came here two hours,
He was parde an old fellow of yours,
All suddenly was he slain to night:
For drunk as he sat on his bench upright,
There came a privy thief, men clepen death,
That in this country all the people s^aeth:
And with his spear he smote his heart at woe,
And went his way withouten words mo.
He has a thousand slain this pestilence:
And master ere ye come in his presence,
Me thinks that it were necessary:
For to beware of such an adversary:
Bethe ready for to meten him evermore,
Thus taught me my dame, I say no more.
By saint Mary, said this Tauernere,
The child says sooth, for he has this year
Hens over a mile, slain in a great village,
Both man and woman, child, and page,
I trow his habitation be there:
To been auised, great wisdom it were,
Ere that he did a man dishonor,
Ye, Gods arms (quoth. this riotour)
Is it such peril with him for to meet?
I shall him seeche by style and eke by street.
I make auow by Gods digne bones,
Herkeneth fellows, we three been all ones:
Let each of us hold up his hond to other,
And each of us become others brother,
And we woll slay this false traitor death:
He shall be slain, that so many slaeth
By Gods dignity, ere that it be night.
Togider han these three her trouths plight
To live and die each of them with other,
As though he were his own brother.
And up they stert all dronken in this rage,
And forth they gone toward that village,
Of which the Tauerner has spoken before,
And many a gris^y oath ha^ they swore,
And Christ's blessed body they to rent,
Death shall be dead, and we may him hent.
When they han gone not fully a mile,
Right as they would have trodden over a style
An old poor man with hem met.
This old man full meekely hem great,
And said, now lordings God ye see.
The proudest of these riotours three
Answered again, what churl with hard grace,
Why art thou all forwrapped save thy face?
Why live thou so long in so great age?
This old man began looken in his visage,
And said thus: for that I cannot find
A man, though I walked into Jude,
Neither in city, ne in no village,
That would change his youth for mine age,
And therefore mote I have mine age still
As long time as it shall be Gods will.
Ne death alas ^ill not have my life,
Thus walk I like a restless caitife,
And on ye ground, which is my mothers gate,
I knock with my staff erliche and late,
And say still, leave mother let me in,
Lo how I vanish, flesh, blood, and skin:
Alas, when shall my bones been at rest,
Mother with you would I change my chest,
That in my chamber long time has be,
Ye for an heren clout to wrap in me:
But yet to me she woll not done y^ grace,
For which full pale and welked is my face.
* But sirs, to you it is ne courtesy
To speaken unto an old man villainy,
But he trespace in word either in deed,
In holy writ you may your self well read:
* Against an old man, hoar upon his head
Ye should arise: therefore I you read
Ne does to an old man no harm as now,
No more than ye would a man did you
In age, if that ye may so long abide.
And God be with you whether ye go or ride,
I mote go thider as I have to go.
Nay old churl, by God thou shall not so,
Said these other hasardours anon.
Thou partest not so lightly by saint John:
Thou spakest rit now of thilke traitor death,
That in this country all our friends slaeth:
Have here my troth thou art his epsy,
Tell where he is, or else thou shall die
By God and by the holy Sacrament,
For soothly thou art of his assent
To slay us young folk, O thou false thief.
Now sirs, if it be to you so lefe
To find death, turn up this crooked way,
For in that grove I left him by my fay
Under a tree, and there he woll abide:
Ne for your bost he nill him nothing hide.
Se ye yonder oak, right there ye shall him find:
God save you, that bought again mankind,
And you amend, thus said this old man.
Then eueriche of these riotours ran,
Til they came to ye tree, and there they found
Floreines of gold fine, y^oined round,
Well nigh a seven bushels, as hem thought:
No longer than after death they sought,
But each of hem so glad was of that sight,
For that the Floreins so fair been and bright,
That down they sit by the precious hord,
The youngest of hem spoke the first word.
Brethren (quoth. he) take keep what I say,
My wit is great, though I board or play:
This treasure has fortune to us yeuen
In mirth and iollity our life to liuen,
And lightly as it comes, so woll we spend:
Heie, Gods precious heart: who did once wend
To day, yt we should have so fair a grace?
But might this gold be carried fro this place
Home to my house, or else unto yours,
(For well I wot yt all this gold is ours).
Then were we in high felicite.
But truly by day it may not be,
Men would then say that we were thieves strong,
And for our own treasure done us hong.
This treasure must yearied be by night
As wisely and as slily as it might.
Wherefore I read, draw cut among us all,
And let us see where the cut woll fall:
He that has the shortest cut, with heart blithe,
Shall run to the town, and that full swith,
To bring us bread and drink full privily:
And two of us shall keep full subtly
This treasure well, and if he woll not tarry,
When it is night, we woll this treasure carry
By one assent, where as us list best.
That one of hem brought grass in his fest,
And bad hem draw, and look where it would fall,
And it fell on the youngest of hem all:
And forth toward the town he went anon.
And also as soon as he was gone,
That one of hem spoke unto that other,
Thou wost well thou art my sworn brother,
Thy profit woll I tell thee right anon:
Thou wost well that our fellow is gone,
And here is gold, and yt full great plentee,
That shall departed be among us three.
But nathelesse, if that I can shape it so,
That it departed were among us two,
Had I not done a friendly turn to thee?
That other answered, I not how yt might be:
I woll well that the gold were ours two,
What should we do, that it might be so?
Shall it be counsel (said the first shrew)
And I shall tell thee in words few
What we woll done, and bring it well about.
I grant (quoth. that other) out of dout:
That by my troth I woll thee not bewrain.
Now (quoth. he) thou wost well we been twain,
And twain of us shall stronger be than one?
Look when he is set, and then anon
Arise, as though thou would with him play,
And I shall riuen him through the sides tway,
Whiles yt thou struglest with him as in game:
And with thy dagger look thou do ye same,
And then shall all the good departed be
My own dear friend, betwixt thee and me:
Then may we both all our lusts fulfill,
And play at vice, right at our own will.
And thus accorded ben these shrews tway,
To slay the third, as ye heard me say.
This youngest, which yt went to ye town,
Full often in his heart rolled up and down
The beauty of these floreines fair and bright:
O Lord (quoth. he) if so were that I might
Have all this treasure to my self alone,
There nis no man that lives under trone
Of God, that should live so merry as I:
And at the last the fiend our enemy
Put in his thought that he should poison bey,
With which he might slaen his felows twey.
For why, the fiend fond him in such living,
That he had leave to sorrow him to bring.
For this was utterly his intent,
To slaen hem both, and never to repent.
And forth he goth, no longer would he tarry,
Into the town unto a Potecary,
And prayed him that he would him sell
Some poison, that he might his rats quell.
And eke there was a Polkat in his hawe,
That as he said, his Capons had yslaw:
And said, he would wreken him if yt he might
Of vermin, that destroyed hem by night.
The Poticarie answered, thou shall have
A thing, as wisly God my soul save,
In all this world there nis no creature
That eats or drinks of this confecture,
Not but the mountenaunce of a corn of
That he ne shall his life anon forlete,
Ye sterue he shall, and that in less while, where,
Than thou would gone apace, not but a mile:
This poison is so hard and so violent.
This tursed man has in his hond hent
This poison in a box, and swithe he ran
Into the next street unto a man,
And borrowed of him large bottles three,
And in the two the poison poured he:
The third he kept clean for his own drink,
For all the night he shope him for to swinke
In carrying of the gold out of that place.
And when this riotour with sorry grace
Has filled with him his great bottles three,
To his fellows again repaired he.
What needs it thereof to sermon more?
For right as they had cast his death before,
Right so they han him slain, and yt anon.
And when this was done, then spoke yt one,
Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry,
And afterward they wolne his body bury:
And after that it happed hem per caas,
The one took the bottle, there ye poison was,
And drunk, and yaue his fellow drink also,
Through which anon they steruen both two.
But certes I suppose that Auicenne
Wrote never in no chanon, ne in no fenne
More wonder sorrows of empoysoning.
Than had these wretches two in her ending.
Thus ended been these homicides two,
And eke the false empoysoner also.
O cursed sin, full of all cursednesse,
O traitor homicide, O wickedness,
O glotenie, luxury, and hasardie,
Thou blasphemour of Christ with villainy,
And oaths great, of usage and of pride:
Alas mankind, how may it betide,
That to thy creator, which yt thee wrought,
And with his precious blood thee bought,
Thou art so false and so unkind, alas.
Now good men, God foryeue you your trespass:
And ware you fro the sin of avarice,
Mine holy pardon may you all warish,
So that ye offer nobles or starlings,
Other else silver spoones, brooches, or rings.
Boweth your head under this holy Bull.
Comes up ye wives, and offreth of your wol,
Your names here I enter in my roll anon,
Into the bliss of heaven shull ye all gone:
I you assoile by mine high powere
Ye that offren, to been as clean and clear
As ye were borne. Lo sirs, thus I preach:
And Jesus Christ, that is our souls leach,
So grant you his pardon to receive,
For that is best, I woll you not deceive.
But sirs, one word foryate I in my tale,
I have relickes and pardons in my male,
As fair as any man man in England,
Which were yeuen me by the Popes hond.
If any of you woll of devotion
Offren, and have mine absolution,
Comes forth anon, and kneeleth her adoun
That ye may have part of my Pardoun,
Or else takes pardon as ye wend,
All new and fresh at every tounes end,
So that ye offren always new and new
Nobles or pens, which been good and true.
It is great honor to euerich that is here,
That ye may have a sufficient pardonere
To assoile you in country there ye ride,
For auentures, which that may betide.
For perauenture there may fall one or two
Down off her horse, and break her neck atwo.
Look which suertie it is to you all,
That I am in your fellowship yfall,
That may assoile you both more and less,
When that the soul shall fro thy body pass.
I read that our host shall first begin,
For he is most enuelopt of sin.
Comes forth sir host, and offer first anon,
And thou shall kiss the relikes euerichone
Ye for a grote, vnbokell anon thy purse.
Nay nay (quoth. he) then have I Christ's curse:
Let be (quoth. he) it shall not be so theiche,
Thou would make me kiss thine old brech,
And swear it were a relike of a saint,
Though it were with thy foundement depaint.
But by the cross which saint Helain fond,
I would I had thine coilons in mine hond
Instead of relikes, or of sanctuary:
Let cut hem of, I woll help thee hem to carry,
They shull be shrined in an hogs tord.
This Pardoner answered not a word,
So wroth he was, he would no word say.
Now (quoth. our host) I woll no longer play
With thee, ne with none other angry man,
But right anon the worthy knight began,
When that he saw that all the people lough:
No more of this, for it is right enough,
Sir Pardoner, be merry and glad of chere,
And ye sir host, that been to me so dear:
I pray you that ye kiss the Pardonere,
And Pardoner, I pray thee draw thee nere,
And as we did, let us lough and play:
Anon they kissed, and ride forth her way.
The Shipmans Prologue.
NOw friends said our host so dear,
How likes you by John ye Pardonere?
He has vnbokeled well the male,
He has us told right a thriftie tale
As touching of men's misgouernaunce:
I pray to God give him full good chance,
As ye han heard of these riotours three.
Now gentle Mariner, I heartely pray thee,
Tell us a good tale, and that right anon:
It shall be done, by God and by saint John
Said this Mariner, as well as ever I can:
And right anon his tale he thus began.
The Shipmans Tale.
A Merchant of S. Denise is cozened by his own Wife, and by a Monk called Dan
John. This Argument is taken out of Bochas in his Novels.

A Merchant whilome dwelled at saint Denise,
That rich was, for which men held him
A wife he had of excellent beauty,
And compinable, and reuelous was she, wise:
Which is a thing yt causes more dispense,
Than worth is all the chere and reverence,
That men hem done at feasts and at daunces:
* Such salutations and countenaunces
Passes, as does the shadow on a wall:
But woe is him that pay mote for all,
The sely husbond algate he mote pay,
He mote us both clothe and eke array
All for his own worship, richely:
In which array we dauncen jolily.
And if that he may not perauenture,
Or else lust not no such spece endure,
But thinks that it is wast and ylost,
Then mote another pay for our cost,
And lend us gold, and that is perilous.
This noble Merchant held a noble house,
For which he had all day great repair
For his largess, and for his wife was fair,
That wonder is: but herkeneth to my tale.
Among all his guells both great and imale
There was a Monk, a fair man and a bold,
I trow thirty Winter he was old,
That ever in one was drawing to that place:
This young Monk, that so fair was of face,
Acquainted was so well with this good man,
Since that he first knowledge began,
That in his house as familiar was he,
As it is possible any friend to be.
And for as much as this good man
And eke the Monk, of which I began,
Were both two yborne in one village,
The Monk him claimed, as for cousinage,
And he again said him not once nay,
But was as glad thereof, as foul of day:
For to his heart it was a great pleasaunce.
Thus ben they knit with eterne alliance,
And eke of hem began other for to ensure
Of brotherhed, whiles her life may dure.
Free was Dan John, and namely of dispense
As in that house, and full of diligence
To do pleasaunce, and eke great costage:
He foryate not to give the least page
In all that house, but after her degree:
He yaue the lord, and sithen his meinee,
When yt he came, some manner honest thing,
For which they were as glad of his coming
As foul is feign, when the sun up rises:
No more hereof as now, for it suffiseth.
But so befell, this Merchant on a day
Shope him to make ready his array
Toward the town of Bruges for to fare,
To buy there a portion of ware:
For which he has sent to Paris anon
A messenger, and prayed has Dan Ihon
That he should come to S. Denis to plain
With him, and with his wife, a day or twain,
Or he to Bruges went, in all wise.
This noble Monk, of which I you devise,
Has of his Abbot, as him list, license,
(Because he was a man of high prudence
And eke an officer) out for to ride
To seen her graunges, and her bernes wide,
And unto saint Denis he comes anon:
Who was so welcome as my lord Dan John,
Our dear cousin full of courtesy?
With him he brought a jubbe of Maluesie,
And eke another full of fine vernage,
And volatily, as was aye his usage:
And thus I let hem both eat, drink, and play,
This merchant and this monk a day or tway.
The third day this Merchant up rises,
And on his need sadly him aviseth:
And up into his counting house goth he
To reckon with himself, as well may be
Of thilke year, how it with him stood,
And how he dispended had his good,
And if that he increased were or none,
His books and his bags many one
He lays before him on his counter board:
Full rich was his treasure and his hord.
For which full fast his counter door he shet,
And eke he nolde no man should him let
Of his accounts, for the mean time:
And thus he sat till it was passed prime.
Dan John was risen in the morrow also,
And in the garden walked to and fro,
And has his things said full courtes^y:
This good wife come walking privily
Into the garden, there he walked soft,
And him salueth, as she has done full often:
A maiden child came in her company,
Which as her lust she may govern and gie,
For yet under the yerd was the maid.
O dear cousin mine Dan John, she said
What aileth you so rathe to rise?
Nece (quoth. he) it ought enough suffice
Five hours for to sleepen on a night:
But it were for an old palled wight,
As been these old wedded men, yt lie and dare,
As in a form sits a weary Hare
Al forstraught with hounds great and small,
But dear nece, why look ye so pale?
I trowen certes, that our good man
Has you labored, since this night began,
That you were need to resten hastily:
And with that word he lough full merely,
And with his own thought he woxe fall red.
Then this fair wife began to shake her head,
And said thus, ye God wot all (quoth. she)
Nay cousin mine, it stonds not so with me:
For by that God, that yave me soul and life,
In all ye realm of France is there no wife,
That less lust has to that sorry play:
For I may singen alas and welaway
That I was borne, but to no wight (quoth. she)
Dare I not tell how it stont with me.
Wherefore I think out of this world to wend,
Or else of my self soon to make an end,
So full I am of dread and eke of care.
This Monk began upon his wife to stare,
And said alas, nay nece God forbede,
That ye for any sorrow, or for any dread
Fordoe your self: but tells me your grief,
Perauenture I may in your mischief
Counsel or help: and therefore tells me
All your annoy, for it shall secre be:
For on my Porthose I make an oath,
That never in my life, for lefe ne loath
Ne shall I not of no counsel you bewray.
The same again to you (quoth. she) I say:
By God and by this Porthose I you swear,
Though men would me all in pieces tear,
Ne shall I never, for to go to hell,
Bewray o word of thing that ye me tell,
Nor for no cousenage, ne for alliance,
But verily for love and affiaunce.
Thus been they sworn, and hereupon kissed,
And ilke of hem told other what hem list.
Cousin (quoth. she) if I had a space,
As I have none, and namely in this place,
Then would I tell a legend of my life,
That I suffered have since I was a wife
With mine husbond, though he be your cousin.
Nay (quoth. this Monk) by God and S. Martin
He nis no more cousin unto me,
Than is this leaf that hongeth on ye tree:
I clepe him so by saint Denis of France
To have the more cause of acquaintance
Of you, whom I have loved specially
Abouen all other women sikerly,
This swear I you on my profession:
Tells your grief, least he come adoun.
And hastes you, and goth your way anon.
My dear love (quoth. she) O my Dan John,
Full lefe me were this counsel to hide,
But out it mote, it may no longer abide.
My husbond is to me the worst man,
That ever was since the world began:
But sithen I am a wife, it sit not to me
To tellen no wight of our priuite
Neither in bed, ne in none other place,
God shild I should tell it for his grace:
* A wife ne should not say of her husbond
But all honor, as I can understand,
Save unto you thus much tell I shall:
As help me God, he is naught worth at all
In no degree, the value of a fly.
But yet me greueth most his nigardie:
And well ye wot, that women naturally
* Desiren things six, as well as I.
They woulden that her husbonds should be
Hardy, and wise, rich, and thereto free,
And buxome to his wife, and fresh a bed.
But by that ilke Lord that for us bled,
For his honor my self to array
A sunday next coming, I mote needs pay
An hundred frankes, or else am I lorne:
Yet were me lever that I were unborn,
Than me were done a slander or a villainy.
And if mine husbond eke might it epsy,
I nere but lost, and therefore I you prey
Lene me this sum, or else mote I dey:
Dan John I say, lene me this hundred franks,
Parde I woll not fail you my thanks,
If that ye list to do that I you pray.
For of a certain day I woll you pay,
And to don you with pleasaunce and service
That I may done, right as ye list devise:
And but I do, God take on me vengeance,
As foul as ever had Genilion of France.
This gentle monk answered in this manner,
Now truly mine own lady dear
I have (quoth. he) on you so great touth,
That I you swear, and plight you my troth,
That when your husbond is to Flanders fare,
I woll deliver you of all this care,
For I woll bring you an hundred frankes.
And with that he caught her by ye flanks,
And her embraced hard, and kissed her often.
Goth now your way (quoth. he) all still and soft,
And let us dine as soon as ever ye may,
For by my calendar it is prime of ye day:
Goth now, and beth as true as I shall be.
Now else God forbid good sir said she:
And forth she goth, as jolly as a pie,
And bad the cooks yt they should hem hie
So that men might dine, and yt anon:
Up to her husbond is this wife gone,
And knocked at his counter door boldly,
Qui est la (quoth. he) Peter it am I,
Why what (quoth. she) how long woll ye fast?
How long time woll ye reckon and cast
Your sums, your books, and your things?
The devil have part of all such reckonings.
Ye have enough (quoth. she) of Gods sond,
Come down to day, and let your bags stond.
Ne be ye not ashamed, that Dan John
Shall fasting all this long day gone?
What let us go hear mass and go dine.
Wife (quoth. this man) little can thou divine
The curious business that we have:
For of us chapmen so God me save,
And by that lord that called is saint Iue,
Scarsly among twenty, twelve shall thrive
Continually, lasting unto their age.
We may well make chere and good visage,
And drive forth the world as it may be,
And keep our state in priuite
Till we be dead, or else that we play
A pilgrimage, or gone out of the way:
And therefore have I great necessite
Upon this queint world to advise me.
For evermore we mote stand in dread
Of hap and fortune, in our chapmanhede.
To Flanders woll I gone to morrow day,
And come ayene as soon as ever I may:
For which my dear wife I thee beseke
As be to every wight buxom and meke,
And for to keep our good be curiouse,
And honestly govern well our house.
Thou have enough, in every manner wise,
That to a thrifty huswife may suffice:
Thee lacks none array, ne no vitaile,
Of silver in thy purse thou may not fail.
And with yt word his counter door he shette,
And down he goth, no longer would he let.
And hastily a mass was there isaide,
And spedily the tables were ilaide.
And to dinner fast they hem spedde,
And richly the chapman this monk fed.
And after dinner, Dan John soberly
This chapman took apert all privily,
And said him thus, cousin it stondeth so,
That well I see, to Bruges ye woll go,
God and saint Austen speed you and gide:
I pray you cousin wisely that you ride,
Govern you well also of your diete
All temperatly, and namely in this hete:
Betwixt us two needs no strange fare.
Farewell cousin, God shilde you fro care.
If any thing there be by day or night,
And it lie in my power or in my might,
That ye me woll command in any wise,
It shall be done, right as ye woll devise.
O thing or ye go, if that it may be,
I would feign pray you for to lene me
An hundred frankes for a weke or twey,
For certain beasts yt I mote needs bey,
To store therewith a place that is ours:
God help me so, I would it were yours.
I shall not fail surely at my day
Not for a thousand frankes, a mile way.
But let this thing be secret, I you pray:
For yet this night these beasts mote I bey.
And fare now well, mine own cousin dear,
Grant mercy of your cost and your chere
This noble merchant, gentilly anon
Answered and said, O cousin Dan Ihon,
Now likerly, this is a small request.
My gold is yours when that you lest,
And not only my gold, but my chaffare:
That what you list, God shild that ye spare.
But one thing is, ye know it well enough
Of chapmen, that her money is her plough.
We may have creaunce while we have a name,
But goodlesse for to be it is a shame.
Pay it again, when it lies at your ese,
After my might feign would I you plese.
The hundredth frankes fet he forth anon,
And privily took hem to Dan John:
No wight of this world, wist of this lone,
Saving this merchant, and Dan John alone.
They drink, speak, and rome a while and pley,
Till that Dan John rides to his abbey.
The morrow came, and forth rid this Merchant
To Flanders ward, his prentes brought hem auant.
Til he came to Bruges, well and merely,
Now goes this merchant well and besily
About his needs, and buieth, and creaunseth,
He neither plays at dice, ne daunceth:
But as a merchant shortly to tell,
He led his life, and there I let him dwell.
The sunday next yt this merchant was gone,
To saint Denis is comen Dan John
With croune and berde all fresh and new ishaue:
In all this house there nas so little a knave,
Ne no wight else, but he was full feign,
For yt my lord Dan John was comen again.
And shortly to the point for to gone,
This fair wife accords with Dan John,
That for these C. frankes he should all night
Have her in his arms bolt upright:
And this accord parformed was in deed.
In mirth all night a besie life they led
Til it was day, yt Dan John yede his way,
And had the many farewell and have good day.
For none of hem ne no wight in the town
Had of Dan John any suspectioun,
And forth he rides, home to his abbey,
Or where him list, no more of him I sey,
This merchant, when ended was the fair,
To saint Denis he began for to repair,
And with his wife he makes feast and chere,
And tells her that chaffare is so dear,
That needs must he make a cheuesaunce.
For he was bonden in a reconysaunce,
To pay twenty thousand shildes anon:
For which this merchant is to Paris gone
To borrow of certain friends that he had
A certain frankes, and some with him he lad:
And when he was comen in to the town,
For cherite and great affectioun
Unto Dan John he first goth him to pley,
Naught for to borrow of him no money,
But for to wete and see of his welfare,
And for to tellen him of his chaffare
As friends don, when they been met infere.
Dan John him makes feast and mercy chere,
And he him told again full specially,
Now he had bought, full well and graciously,
Thonked be God, all hole his Merchandise:
Save that he must in all manner wise
Maken a cheuesaunce, as for his best:
And then should he be in joy and rest.
Dan John answered, certes I am right fane,
That ye in heal be commen home again:
And if I were rich, as have I bliss,
Of twenty thousand shildes should ye not miss.
For ye so kindly this other day
Lent me gold, and as I can and may
I thonke you, by God and by saint Iame.
But natheles, I t^^k it unto our Dame,
Your wife at home, the same gold again
Upon your bench, she wot it well certain,
By certain tokens that I can here tell:
Now by your leave I may no longer dwell:
Our abbot woll out of this town anon,
And in his company I mote gone.
Great well our dame, mine own niece sweet
And farewell dear cousin, till we mete.
This merchant that was full ware and wise,
Creaunced has, and eke paid in Paris
To certain lombardes ready in her honds
This sum of gold, and gate of hem the bonds,
And home he goth, as merry as a popingay.
For well he knew he stood in such array,
That needs must he win by that viage
A thousand frankes, above all his costage.
His wife full ready mete him at the yate,
As she was wont of old usage algate:
And all that night in mirth they be set,
For he was rich, and clearly out of debt.
When it was day, this merchant began enbrace
His wife all new, and kissed her in her face,
And up he goes, and made it wonder tough:
No more (quoth. she) by God ye have enough:
And wantonly again with him she plaide,
Till at the last this merchant thus said.
By God (quoth. he) I am a little worth
With you my wife, although it be me loathe:
And wot ye why? by God as I guess
For ye have made a manner of strangeness
Betwixt me and my cousin Dan John:
Ye should have warned me, or I had gone,
That he had you an hundred frankes paid
By ready token: and held him evil apaide,
For that I to him spoke of cheuesaunce:
Me seemed so as by his countenance.
But natheles by God our heavenly king,
I thought not to ask of him nothing.
I pray thee wife ne do no more so,
Tell me always er that I fro thee go,
If any dettour has in mine absence
Ypaide thee, lest through thy negligence,
I might him ask a thing that he has paid.
This wife was not aferde ne affraide,
But boldly she said, and that anon,
Mary I defy that false monk Dan John,
I keep not of his tokens never a dele:
He took me certain gold, I wot it well.
What evil the dome on his monks snoute:
For God it wot, I wend without doubt,
That he had give it me, because of you,
To done therewith mine honor and my prow
For cosinage, and eke for belle chere,
That he has had full often times here.
But since I see it stonte in such disioynte,
I woll answer you shortly to the point.
Ye have mo slack dettours than am I:
For I woll pay you well and redely
Fro day to day, and if so be I fail,
I am your wife, score it on my tail.
I shall pay it as soon as ever I may.
For by my truth, I have on mine array,
And not in waste, bestowed it every dele:
And for I have bestowed it so well
To your honor, for Gods sake I say,
As be not wroth but let us laugh and play:
Ye shall my joly body have to wedde,
By God I nill not pay you but a bed:
Foryeue it me now, mine own spouse dear,
Turns hitherward and make better chere.
This merchant saw there was no remedy:
And for to chide, it was but a folly,
Since that the thing may not amended be.
Now wife he said, and I foryeue it thee:
But in thy life be no more so large,
Keep bet my good, this give I thee in charge.
Thus ends now my tale, and God us send
Taling enough, unto our lives end.
Here follows the words of our Host.
WEll said by corpus Domini (quoth. our Host)
Now long mote thou sail all by ye cost
Thou gentle Master, gentle Marinere:
* God give ye monk a thousand last quad year.
A ha fellows, beware of such a iape,
* The monk put in the merchants hode an ape,
And in his wives eke, by saint Austin:
Draws no monks more into your inn.
But now pass over, and let us seek about,
Who shall tell now first of all this route,
Another tale: and with that word he said
As courteously as it had been a maid,
My lady Prioresse, by your leave,
So that I wist that I should you not grieve,
I wolden deem, that ye tellen should
A tale next, if so be that ye would:
Now wol ye vouchsafe, my lady dear?
Gladly (quoth. she) and said in this manner.
The Prioresses Prologue.
Domine dominus noster: quam admirable est nomen tuum in universa terra.
LOrd our lord, thy name how merueilous
Is in this wide world isprad (quoth. she)
For not only thy laud precious
Parformed is by men of dignite,
But by the mouth of children thy bounte
Parfourmed is, for on the breest sucking
Sometime shown they thine heriyng.
Wherefore in laud, as I can best and may,
Of thee and of the white lilly flower,
Which that thee bare, and is a maid always,
To tell a story I wol do my labor:
Naught that I may encrese her honor,
For she her self is honor and rote
Of bounty, next her son, and souls bote.
Mother maiden, O maiden and mother fre,
O bushe vnbrent, brenn and in Moses sight,
That rauishedest down fro the deite
Through thin humblenes, ye ghost that in thee alight:
Of whose virtue, when he in thine heart pight,
Conceived was the fathers sapience:
Help me to tell it in thy reverence.
Lady, thy bounty, and thy magnificence
Thy virtue and thy great humilite
There may no tongue express in no science:
For sometime lady, er men pray to thee
Thou go before, of thy benignite,
And gettest us ye light through thy prayere,
To giden us unto thy son so dear.
My conning is to weak, O blisfull queen,
For to declare thy high worthiness:
That I ne may not the weight sustene,
But as a child of twelve month old and less,
That can uneaths any word express,
Right so fare I, and therefore I you pray,
Gideth my song, that I shall of you say.
The Prioresses tale.
A miracle of a Christians Child, murdered by the Jews.

THere was in Asie, in a great City
Among christen folk a certain iewrie
Sustened by a lord of that Country,
For foul usury, and lucre of villainy,
Hateful to Christ, and to his company:
And through the street men might ride and wend
For it was free, and open at every end.
A little schole of Christen folk there stood
Down at the farther end, in which there were
Children an hepe comen of Christen blood,
That learned in that schole year by year,
Such manner doctrine as men vsen here:
This is to say, to singen and to read
As small children done in her childhede.
Among these children was a widows son
A little clergion, of vii. years of age,
That day by day to schole was his won.
And eke also where he sey the image
Of Christ's mother, had he in usage
As him was taught, to kneel adown and say,
An Aue maria, as he goth by the way.
Thus has this widow, her little child itaut
Our blessed Lady Christ's mother dear
To worship aye, and he foryate it naught:
For the sely child would all day sone lere.
But aye, when I remember on this matere,
Saint Nicholas stondeth ever in my presence:
For he so young to Christ did reverence.
This little child his little book lerning,
As he sat in the schole at his primere,
He (Alma redemptoris matter) herd sing,
As children lered her antiph^nere:
And as he durst, he drew aye nere and nere
And harkened to the words and the note,
Till he the first verse couth al by rote.
Nout wist he to this latin was to say:
For he so young and tender was of age.
But on a day his fellow han he pray
To expound him the song, in his language,
Or tellen him why this song was in usage:
This praid he him to constre and declare,
Full often time upon his knees bare.
His fellow, which that elder was than he
Answered him thus, this song I have herd say,
Was made of our blessed Lady fre,
Her to f^lewe, and eke her for to prey
To been our help, and succor when we dey.
I can no more expoune in this matter:
I learn song, I can but small grammar.
And is this song imade in reverence
Of Christ's mother, said this innocent?
Now ce^^es I woll done my diligence
To conne it all er Christenme^se be went
Though that I for my primer shall be shent,
And should be beten thrice in an hour,
I woll it conne, our Lady to honor.
His fellow taught him homeward privily
Fro day to day, till he couth it by rote,
And than he sung it well and boldly
Fro (...) do word according to the note:
Twice a day it passed through his throat
To (...), and homeward when he went:
On Christ's mother set was all his intent.
As I have said, throughout the Iewrie
This little child as he came to and fro,
Full merely then would he sing and cry,
O alina redemptoris matter, ever mo:
The sweetness has his heart persed so
Of Christ's mother, that to her to pray
He cannot stint of singing by the way.
Our first foe, the Serpent Sathanas,
That has in Jews heart his waspes nest,
Up swale and said, O Chrake people alas,
Is this a thing to you that is honest,
That such a boy shall walk as him le^te
In your dispite, and sing of such sentence,
Which is against your laws reverence?
From thenceforth the Jews han conspired
This innocent out of this world to chase:
An homicide the (...) han they hired,
That in an aley had a privy place,
And as the child began foreby to pa^e,
This cursed Jew him hent, and held fast,
And cut his throat, and in a pit him cast.
I say that in a wardrope they him threw,
Where that the Jews purged her intraile:
O cursed folk, of heraudes all new,
What may your evil intent you avail?
Murder woll out, certes it woll not fail,
And namely there ye honor of God shall spread:
The blood out cries on your cursed deed.
O martyr founded in virginity,
Now may thou sing following ever in on
The white lamb celestial (quoth. she)
Of which the great Evangelist saint John
In Pathmos wrote, which says yt they gone
Before this lamb, and sing a song all new
That never fleshly woman they ne knew.
This poor widow awaiteth all the night
After her little child, and he came naught:
For which as soon as it was day light,
With face pale for dread and busy thought,
She has at schole, and else where him sought,
Till finally she began so far aspie,
That he last seen was in the Iewrie.
With mother pity in her breast enclosed
She goth as she were half out of her mind
To every place, where she has supposed
By likelihood her child for to find:
And ever on Christ's mother good and kind
She cried, and at last thus she wrought,
Among the cursed Jews she him sought.
She freneth and she prays pitously
To every Jew that dwells in thilke place
To tellen her, if her child went there by
They say nay, but Jesus of his grace
Yaue in her thought, within a little space,
That in that place after her son she cryde,
There he was cast in a pit beside.
O great God, that performest thy laud
By mo^th of innocence, lo here thy might:
This Iemme of chastity, this Emerande
And eke of martyrdom the rubie bright,
There he with throat icorne lay upright,
He (Alma redemptoris) began to sing
So loud, that all the place began to ring.
The Christen folk, yt through the street went,
In comen, for to wonder on this thing:
And hasteley they for the Provost sent,
He came anon without tarying,
And herieth Christ that is of heaven king,
And eke his mother honor of mankind,
And after that, the Jews let he bind.
This child with pitous lamentation
Was up taken, singing his song always:
And with honor and great procession,
They carien him to the next abbey,
His mother sowning by the bear lay,
Uneath might the people that were there
This new Rachell bringen fro his bear.
With turment, and with shameful death like one
This Provost does these Jews for to sterue,
That of this murder wiste, and that anon,
He nolde no such cursednesse observe:
Evil shall he have, that evil wol deserve.
Therefore with wild horse he did hem draw,
And afterward he hong hem by the law.
Upon a bear aye, lies this innocent
Beforn cheef altar whiles the mass last:
And after that, the abbot with his couen
Hem spedde for to bury him als fast:
And when they holy water on him cast,
Yet spoke yt child, when sprint was holy water,
And sang, O alma redemptoris matter.
This abbot, which yt was an holy man,
As monks been, or else ought to be,
This young child to cover he began,
And said: O dear child I hailse thee
By virtue of the holy Trinity,
Tell me what is thy cause for to sing,
Since thy throat is cut to my seeming.
My throat is cut unto my neck bone
Said this child, and as by way of kind
I should have deyd ye long time agone:
But Jesus Christ, as ye in books find,
Woll that his glory last and be in mind,
And for the worship of his mother dear,
Yet may I sing (O alma) loud and clear.
This well of mercy, Christ's mother sweet
I loved always, as after my conning:
And when that I my life should forlete,
To me she came, and bad me for to sing
This antem verily in my dying
As ye han herd, and when that I had song,
Me thought she laid a grain upon my tongue.
Wherefore I sing, and sing mote certain
In honor of the blisfull maiden free,
Till fro my tongue off taken is the grain,
And after that thus she said to me:
My little child, now woll I fetch thee,
When yt the grain is fro thy tongue itake:
Be not agaste, I woll thee not forsake.
This holy monk, this abbot him mean I,
His tongue out caught, and took away yt grain,
And he yaue up the ghost full softly,
And when this abbot had this wonder seyne,
His salt teres trikled all down as reyne:
And groffe he fell all flat to the ground,
And still he lay, as he had been ibound.
The covent lay eke upon the pauement
Weeping and herying Christ's mother dear,
And after they risen, and forth ben went,
And took away this martyr fro the bear,
And in a tonthe of marble stones clear
Enclosen they his little body sweet:
There he is now, God leave us for to mete.
O young Hew of Lincoln slain also
With cursed Jews, as it is notable:
For it is but a little while ago,
Pray for us we sinful folk unstable,
That of his mercy God be merciable
On us, his great mercy multiply
For the reverence of his mother Mary.
Here follows the words of the Host to Chaucer.
WHen said was this miracle, every man
As sober was as wonder was to see,
Till that our host to yapen began,
And then at erste he looked upon me,
And said thus: what man art thou (quoth. he)
Thou look, as thou would find an hare,
For ever upon the ground I see thee stare.
Approach near, and look up merely:
Now ware you sirs, and let this man have place,
He in the waste is shapen as well as I:
This were a popet in arms to enbrace
For any woman, small and fair of face.
He seems eluish by his countenance,
For unto no wight does he daliance.
Say now somewhat, since other folk han said:
Tell us a tale of mirth and that anon.
Host (quoth. he) ne be not evil apaide,
For other tale certes can I none,
But of a rhyme I learned yore agone.
Ye that is good (quoth, he) we shullen here
Some deinte thing, me thinks by thy chere.
Here follows the Rhyme of Sir Thopas.
A Northern tale of an outlandish Knight, purposely uttered by Chaucer, in a
differing rhyme and style from the other tales, as though he himself were not
the Author, but only the reporter of the rest.

LIsteneth lordinges in good intent,
And I woll tell you verament
Of mirth and of solas,
All of a knight was fair and gent
In battle and in turnament,
His name was sir Thopas.
Iborne he was in far country
In Flaunders, all beyond the sea
At Popering in the place,
His father was a man full fre
And lord he was of that country,
As it was Gods grace.
Sir Thopas was a doughty swain
White was his face as pain maine
His lips reed as rose,
His rudde is like scarlet in grain,
And I you tell in good certain
He had a seemly nose.
His hair, his berde, was like safroun
That to his girdle raught adowne
His shoone of cordewane,
Of Bruges were his hosen broun
His robe was of chekelatoun,
That cost many a jane,
He couth hunt at the wild dear
And ride an hauking for by the riuere
With gray Goshauke on hand,
Thereto he was a good archere,
Of wrestling was there none his pere
There any Ram should stand,
Full many a maid bright in boure
They mourn for him their paramoure,
When hem were bet to sleep,
But he was chaste and no lechoure,
And sweet as is the bramble flower,
That bears the red hipe.
And so befell upon a day
Forsooth, as I you tell may
Sir Thopas would out ride.
He wroth upon his stead gray
And in his hand a lance gay
A long sword by his side.
He pricketh through a fair forest
Therein was many a wild be
Ye both Bucke and Hare,
And as he pricked North and East
I tellen you him had almeste
Betide a sorry care.
There springen herbs great and small
The Licores and the Setual
And many a clowe Gelofer,
And Nutmiges to put in ale
Whether it be new or stale
Or for to lie in cofer.
The birds singen, it is no nay
The Sperhauke and the Popingaie
That joy it were to here,
The throstell eke made his lay
The Wood dove upon the spraie
She sung full loud and clear.
Sir Thopas fill in love longing
And when he heard the Throstill sing
He pricketh as he were wood,
His fair stead in his pricking
So sweet, that men might him wring
His sides were all blood.
Sir Thopas eke so weary was
For pricking on the soft graas
So fires was his courage,
That down he laid him in that place
To maken his stead some solace
And gave him good forage.
Oh, saint Mary, benedicite
What aileth this love at me
To blind me so sore?
Me dreamed all this night parde
An elfe queen shall my lemman be
And sleep under my gore.
An Elfe Queen woll I love ^wis
For in this world no woman is
To be my make in town,
All other women I forsake
And to an Elfe Queen I me take
By dale and eke by down.
Into his saddle ^e clombe anon
And pricked over style and stone
An Elfe Queen to spy,
Till he so long had ridden and gone
That he found in a privy wone
The country of Fairie.
Wherein he sought North and South
And often he spied with his mouth
In many a forest wild.
And in that country nas there none
As far as he had rid and gone,
Neither wife ne child.
Till him there came a great Giaunt
His name was called sir Oliphaunt
A perilous man of deed,
He swore, child, by Termagaunt
But if you prick out of my haunt
Anon I slay thy steed.
Here is the Queen of Fairie,
With harp, and pipe, and simphonie
Within this place and boure:
The child said, als so mote I thee
To morrow woll I meten thee,
When I have mine armoure.
And yet I hope par ma faie
That thou shall with this lance gaie
Abien it through thy mawe:
Thy Hawberke shall I perce, if I may,
Or it be fully prime of the day
For here thou shall be slawe.
Sir Thopas drove abacke full fast,
This Gyaunt at him stones cast
Out of a fell staff sling:
But fair escaped sir Thopace
And all was through Gods grace.
And through his fair bearing.
Yet listneth lordings to my tale,
Merier than the Nightingale,
For now I woll ye roune,
How sir Thopas with sides small
Pricking over down and dale
Is comen again to town.
His merry men commanded he
To maken him both game and gle,
For needs must he fight
With a Giant with heads three,
For Paramours and iolite
Of one that shone full bright.
Do come he said my ministrales
And iestors for to tellen us tales
Anon in mine arming,
Of Romaunces that been royals
Of Popes and of Cardinals,
And eke of love longing.
They fet him first the sweet wine
And Mede eke in a Mazeline
And royal spicerie,
Of Ginger bread that was full fine,
Of Licores and eke Comine,
With Sugar that is try.
He did next his white lere
Of cloth of lake fine and clear
A breche and eke a shert,
And next his s^ert an haketon
And over that an habergion
For percing of his heart.
And over that a fine hauber^e
Was all iwrought of Jews work
Full strong it was of plate,
And over that his cote armoure
As white as is the Lilie flower
In which he would debate.
His shield was all of gold so red
And therein was a Bores head
A carbocle by his side,
And there he swore on ale and bread
How that the Giant should be dead
Betide what so betide.
His iambeux were of cure buly
His sword sheth of Iuorie,
His helmet of Laton bright,
His saddle was of ruel bone,
His bridle as the Sun shone
Or as the Moon light.
His spear was of fine Sypres
That bids war, and nothing peace,
The head full sharp iground.
His steed was all dapple gray
He goes an aumble by the way
Full softly and round in land.
Lo Lords mine, here is a fit
If ye woll any more of it
To tellen it woll I fond.
NOw hold your mouth for charity
Both knight and also lady fre
And herkeneth to my spell,
Of battle and of cheualrie
And of ladies love drerie
Anon I woll you tell.
Men speken of Romaunces of pris
Of Hornechild, and of Ipotis,
Of Beuis, and of sir Gie,
Of sir Libeaux and Blandamoure
But sir Thopas, he bears the flower
Of riall cheualrie.
His good steed he bestrode
And forth upon his way glode
As spark out of the bronde,
Upon his crest he bare a tour
And therein stricked a Lilie flour
God shilde his cors fro shonde.
And for he was a knight auntrous,
He nolde slepen in none house
But liggen in his hood,
His bright helm was his wanger
And by him fed his destrer
Of herbs fine and good.
Himself drunk water of the well
As did the knight sir Persiuell
So worthy under wede,
The words of our Host.
NO more of this for Gods dignite
(Q. d. out Host) for thou make me
So weary of thy very leudenes,
That also willy God my soul bless,
Mine ears aken of thy draftie speech:
Now such a rich the devil I beteach,
* This may well be clepe rhyme Dogrel (quoth. he:)
Why so (quoth. I) why wolt thou let me
More of my tale, than any other man,
Sins that it is the best time I can?
By God (quoth. he) plainly at a word,
Thy draftie timing is not worth a torde,
Thou do naught else but spendest time.
Sir at one word, thou shall no longer rhyme.
Let see whether thou can tell ought in gest
Or tell in prose somewhat at the lest,
In which there may be some mirth or doctrine.
Gladly (quoth. I) by Gods sweet pine
I woll you tell a little thing in prose,
That ought like you, as I suppose,
Or else ye be certes too dangerous:
It is a moral tale virtuous,
All be it told sometime in sundry wise
Of sundry folk, as I shall you devise.
As thus, ye wot that every Evangelist,
That tells us the pain of Jesus Christ,
Ne says not all thing that his fellow does:
But nathelesse her sentence is all soth,
And all accorden in her sentence,
All be there in her telling difference:
For some of hem saien more, and some less,
When they his pitous passion express:
I mean of Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John,
But doubtless her sentence is all one.
Therefore lordings all, I you beseech,
If that you think I vary in my speech
As thus, although I tell somewhat more
Of Proverbes, than ye han heard before
Comprehended in this little treatise here
To enforcen the effect of my matere,
And though I do not the same words say
As ye han heard, yet to all you I pray
Blames me not: for in my sentence
Shull ye not find mochell difference.
Fro the sentence of this treatise lite,
After the which this little tale I write,
And therefore hearkeneth, what I shall say
And let me tell my tale I you pray.
Chaucers Tale of Melibeus.
Prudence, the discreet wife of Melibeus, persuadeth her husband to patience,
and to receive his Enemies to mercy and grace. A Tale full of Morality, wherein
both high and low may learn to govern their affections.

AYong man called Melibeus, mighty and rich, begat upon his wife that called
was Prudence, a daughter which that called was Sophie.

Upon a day befell that he for his disport is went into the fields him to play:
his wife and eke his daughter had he left within his house, of which the doors
were fast ishet. Four of his old foes han it aspied, and setten ladders to the
walls of his house, and by the windows been entered, and bet his wife, and
wounded his daughter with five mortal wounds, in five sundry places: That is
to say, In her feet, in her honds, in her ears, in her nose, and in her mouth,
and leften her for deed, and wenten her way.

When Melibeus returned was into his house, and see all this mischief, he
like a mad man, renting his clothes, began to weep and cry.

Prudence his wife, as far forth as she durst, besought him of his weping
for to stint: But not for thy, he began to weep and cry ever longer the more.

This noble wife Prudence, remembered her upon the sentence of Ovid, in his
book that cleped is the remedy of love, whereas he says, * He is a fool
that distourbeth the mother to weep, in the death of her child, till she have
wept her fill, as for a certain time: and then shall a man done his diligence
with amiable words, to recomfort and pray her of her weeping for to stint. For
which reason this noble wife Prudence suffered her husbond to weep and cry, as
for a certain space: and when she saw her time, she said him in this wise.
Alas, my Lord (quoth. she) why make ye your self for to be like a fool? Forsooth
it apperteineth not unto a wise man to maken such a sorrow. Your daughter with
the grace of God, shall warish and escape. And all were it so that she right
now were dead, ye ne ought not as for her death your self destroy. Senek
says, * The wise man shall not take to great discomfort for the death of his
children, but certes he should suffer it in patience, as well as he abides ye
death of his own proper person.

This Melibeus answered anon and said: What man (quoth. he) should of his weping
stint, that has so great a cause for to weep: Jesus himself, our Lord, wept
for the death of Lazarus his friend. Prudence answered, certes well I wot, * A
temperat weeping is nothing defended, to him that sorrowful is, among folk in
sorrow, but it is rather granted him to weep. The Apostle Paul unto the
Romans writteth, Men should rejoice with him that makes joye, and weep with
such folk as weepen. But though a temperate weeping be granted, certes
outrageous weeping is defended. Measure of weeping should be considered, after
the lore that teaches us Senek. * When yt thy friend is dead (quoth. he) let not
thine iyen to moist been of teers, ne to much dry: although teeres comen to
thine eyes, let hem not fall. And when thou have forgon thy friend, do
diligence to get another friend: and this is more wisdom than for to weep for
thy friend, which thou have lorne, for therein is no bote. And therefore if ye
govern you by sapience, put away sorrow out of your heart. Remembers you that
Jesus Sirake says, * A man yt is joyous and glad in heart: it him conserueth
flourishing in his age: But sothly a sorrowful heart makes his bones dry. He
says eke thus, That sorrow in heart slays full many a man. Solomon says, *
That right as mouths in the sheep fleise annoieth the clothes, and the small
worms the tree, right so anoieth sorrow the heart of man, wherefore us ought as
well in the death of our children, as in the loss of our temporal goods, have
patience.

Remember you upon patient Job, when he had lost his children and his
temporal substance, and in his bodies endured and received full many a
grievous tribulation, yet said he thus: * Our Lord it sent to me, our Lord
has bereft it me, right so as our Lord would, right so it be done, iblessed be
the name of our Lord. To these foresaid things Melibeus unto his wife Prudence
answered: All thy words (quoth. he) ben true, and thereto profitable, but truly
mine heart is troubled with this sorrow so grievously, that I not what to do.
Let call (quoth. Prudence) your true friends al and thy lineage, which that been
wise, and tells to hem your case, and hearkeneth what they say in
counsailing, and govern you after her sentence. Solomon says, * Work all thy
things by counsel, and thou shall never rue. Then by counsel of his wife
Prudence, this Melibeus let cause a great congregation of people, as Surgiens,
Physicians, old folk and young, and some of his old enemies reconciled (as by
her semblance) to his love and to his grace: and therwithal there came some of
his neighbors, that did him reverence more for dread than for love, as it
hap often.

There comen also full many subtle flatterers, and wise Advocates learned in the
law.

And when these folks togeders assembled were, this Melibeus in sorrowful
wise showed hem his case, and by the manner of his speech, it seemed that in
heart he bare a cruel ire, ready to done vengeance upon his foes, and
suddenly, he desired that war should begin, but natheles, yet asked he
counsel upon this matter. A Surgien, by license and assent of such as were
wise, up rose, and unto Melibeus said, as ye shall hear.

Sir (quoth. he) as to us Surgiens appertains, that we do to every wight the
best that we can, where as we been withholden, and to our patient that we
dooen no damage: wherefore it happeth many time and often, that when two men
have everch wounded other, one Surgien heals hem both, wherefore unto our art
it is not pertinent to norish war, ne parties to support. But certes, as to
ye warishing of your daughter, all be it so that perilously she be wounded, we
shall do so tentife business fro day to night, that with the grace of God,
she shall been whole and sound, as soon as is possible. Almost right in the
same wise the Physicians answered, save yt they saiden a few words more: That
right as maladies been by her contraries cured, right so shall a man warishe
war by peace. His neigbours full of envy, his fained friends yt seemed
reconciled, and his flatterers, maden semblaunce of weeping, and enpaired and
agrutched much of this matter, in praising greatly Melibe, of might, of power,
of riches, and of friends, dispising the power of his adversaries: and said
utterly, that he anon should wreken him on his foes, and begin war.

Up rose then an Advocate that was wise, by leave and by counsel of other
that were wise, and said: The need for the which we been assembled in this
place, is a full heavy thing, and a great matter, because of ye wrong and of
the wickedness yt has be done, and eke by reason of great damages, that in
time coming been possible to fallen for the same, and eke by reason of ye
great riches and power of the parties both, for the which reasons, it were a
full great peril to erren in this matter. Wherefore, Melibeus, this is our
sentence, we counsel you abouen all thing, that right anon thou do thy
diligence in keeping of thy proper person, in such a wise yt thou ne want non
epsy ne watch, thy body for to save: And after yt, we counsel yt in thine
house thou set sufficient garrison, so as they may as well thy body as thy
house defend: But certes to mouen war, or to done suddenly vengeance, we
may not deem in so little time that it were profitable, wherefore we ask
leiser and space to have deliberation in this cause to deem, for the common
proverb says thus: * He yt sone deemeth, sone shall repent. And eke men
saine, * Thilke Judge is wise yt sone understands a matter, and judges by
leiser. * For all be it tarriyng be noifull, algate it is not to be reproved in
yeuing of judgment, ne in vengeance taking, when it is sufficient and
reasonable. And yt showed our lord Jesus Christ by ensample, for when the woman
was taken in auoutrie, and was brought in his presens to known with should be
done of her person, all be it that he wist well himself with he would answer, yet
ne would he nor answer suddenly, but he would have deliberation, and in the
ground he wrote twice, and by this cause we asken deliberation: and we shall
then by the grace of God counsel you that thing that shall be profitable.

Up stert then the young folk at ones, and the most part of that company have
scorned this old wise man, and begun to make noise and said. * Right so as
whiles that iron is hot men should smite, right so men should wreken her wrongs
while that they been fresh and new, and with loud voice they cried war,
war. Up rose then one of the old wise, and with his hand made countenance
that they should holden hem still, and yeuen him audience. Lordings, quoth. he,
There is full many a man that cries war, war, that wot full lite what
war amounts. * War at his beginning has so great an entering and so
large, that every wight may enter when him likes and lightly find war: but
certes what end thereof shall fall, it is not lightly to know. When that war
is once begun, there is full many a child unborn of his mother, that shall
sterue young, because of thilke war, other else live in sorrow, or dien in
wretchedness: And therefore or that any war be begone, men must have great
counsel and good deliberation. And when this old man wend to enforten his
tale by reason, well nie all at ones begone for to rise, for to breaken his tale,
and bidden him full often his words to abredge. * For certes he that preaches
to hem that list not hear his words, his sermon hem annoieth. For Jesus
Sirake says, yt weeping in music is a noious thing, This is as much to say,
as much avails it to speak beforne folk to which his speech anoieth as it is
for to singen before hem that weep. And when this wise man saw that him wanted
audience, all shamefast he set him adown again. For Solomon says: There as thou
may not have audience, enforce thee not to speak. I see well (quoth. this wise
man) that the common Proverb is such, * That good counsel wants when it is
most need.

Yet had this Melibeus in his counsel many folk, yt privily in his ear
counseled him certain things, and counseled him the contrary in general
audience. When Melibeus had heard that the greatest part of his counsel were
accorded that he should make war, anon he consented to her counsailing, and
fully affirmed her sentence. Then Dame Prudence, when that she saw her husbonde
shope him for to awreke him on his enemies, and to begin war: she in full
humble wise, when she saw her time, said to him these words: My lord (quoth.
she) I you beseech as heartily as I dare or can, ne half you not too fast, and
for all guerdons give me audience. For Peter Alphons says, * Whosoever does to
thee good or harm, haste thee not to quite it, for in this wise thy friend
woll abide, and thine enemy shall ye longer live in dread. The proverb
says, * He hastes well that wisely can abide: And in wicked have is no
profit.

This Melibe answered to his wife Prudence: I purpose not (quoth. he) to work by
thy counsel, for many causes and reasons: for certes every wight would hold
me then a fool. This is to say, if I for thy counsailing would change things
that been ordained and affirmed by so many wise. Secondly, I say, that all
women been wicked, and none good of hem all. For of a thousand men says
Solomon, I found one good man: But certes of al women found I never none. And
also certes, if I governed me by thy counsel, it should seem that I had
give thee over me ye maistrie: and God forbid that it so were. For Jesus
Sirake says, that if the wife have maistrie, she is contrarious to her
husbond. And Solomon says, * Never in thy life to thy wife, ne to thy child,
ne to thy friend, ne give no power over thy self: for better it were that thy
children ask of thee things that hem needs, than thy self to be in the
hands of thy children. And also if I woll werche by thy counsel, certes my
counsel must be sometime secret, till it were time that it must be known:
and this ne may not be, if I should be counseled by thee. When dame Prudence
full debonairly and with great patience, had heard all that her husbonde liked
for to say, then asked she of him license for to speak, and said in this
wise. My lord (quoth. she) as to your first reason, it may lightly been answered: *
For I say that it is no folly to change counsel when the thing is changed,
or else when the thing seems otherwise than it seemed before. And moreover I
say, though that ye have sworn and behight to perform your emprise, and by
just cause ye do it not, men should not say therefore ye were a liar and
forsworn: For the book says, * That the wise man makes no lesing, when he
turns his courage for the better. And albeit that your emprise be established
and ordained by great multitude of folk, yet dare you not accomplish thilke
ordinance but you likes: for the troth of things, and the profit, been rather
founden in few: folk that been wise and full of reason, than by great
multitude of folk, there every man cries and clattereth what him likes:
soothly such multitude is not honest. And as to ye second reason, whereas ye
say, * That all women ben wicked: save your grace, Certes ye despise all women
in this wise, and he that all despises, as says the book, al displeases.
And Senecke says, * That who so woll have Sapience, shall no man dispraise,
but he shall gladly teach the science that he can, without presumption or
pride: and such things as he naught ne can, he shall not been ashamed to
learn hem, and to enquire of less folk than himself. And yt there has been
many a good woman, may lightly be proved: for certes sir, our Lord Jesus Christ
nold never han descended to be borne of a woman, if all women had be wicked:
And after yt, for the great bounte that is in women, our Lord Jesus Christ, when
he was risen from death to life, appeared rather to a woman than to his
Apostles. And tho that Solomon said, he found never women good, it follows
not therefore, that all women be wicked: for though that he ne found no good
woman, certes many another man has found many a woman full good and true. Or
else perauenture ye intent of Solomon was this, * That in soueraign bounte he
found no woman, this is to say: yt there is no wight that has parfite bounte
save God alone, as he himself records in his Euangelie. * For there nis no
creature so good yt him ne wants somewhat of ye perfection of God that is his
maker. Your third reason is this. Ye say yt if that ye govern you by my
counsel, it should seem that ye had give me the maistrie and the lordship of
your person, Sir, save your grace it is not so, for if so were that no man
should be counseled but only of hem that han lordship and maistrie of his
person, men nolde not be counseled so often: For sothly thilke man that asks
counsel of a purpose, yet has he free will whither he woll do after that
counsel or non. And as to your fourth reason, there as ye saine that the
ianglerie of women can hide things that they wot not, as who so says, yt a
woman cannot hide that she wot. Sir, these words been understand of women
that been iangelers and wicked, of which women men saine that three things
driven a man out of his house, that is to say, smoke, dropping of rain, and
wicked wives. And of such women Solomon says, * That a man were better dwell
in deserte, than with a woman that is riottous: And sir by your leave, it am
not I, for ye have full often assaied my great silence and my great patience, and
eke how well that I can hide and heal things, that men oughten secretly to
hiden. And sothly as to your fifth reason, whereas you say, yt in wicked
counsel women vanquish men: God wot that thilke reason stant here in no
stead: for understands now, ye asken counsel for to do wickedness: * And if
ye woll werken wickedness, and your wife restrains thilke wicked purpose, and
overcome you by reason and by good counsel: certes your wife ought rather to
be praised than blamed. Thus should you understand the Philosopher yt says,
* In wicked counsel women vanquish her husbondes. And there, as ye blame al
women and her reasons, I shall show you by many ensamples, that many women
have be full good, and yet been, and her counsel wholesome and profitable.
Eke some men han said, that ye counsel of women is either to dear, or too
little worth. But albeit so yt full many women be bad, and her counsel vile
and naught worth, yet han men found full many a good woman, and full discrete
and wise in counsailing. Lo Jacob through the counsel of his mother Rebecke,
wan the benison of his father, and the Lordship of all his brethren: Judith
through her good counsel, delivered the city of Bethule, in which she dwelt,
out of the hand of Holofern that had it all besieged, and would have destroyed
it. Abigaile delivered Naball her husbond fro David the king, yt would have
slain him, and appeased the ire of the King by her wit, and by her good
counsel. Hester by her counsel enhaunced greatly ye people of God, in the
reign of Assuerus the King. And the same bounty in good counsailing of many a
good woman may men read and tell. And furthermore, when that our Lord has
created Adam our former father, he said in this wise: * It is not good to be
a man alone: make we an helper to himself semblable. Here may ye see that if
that women were not good, and her counsel good and profitable, our Lord God
of heaven ne would neither han wrought hem, ne called hem the helper of man,
but rather confusion to man. And there said a clerk ones in two verses: What
is better than gold? * Jasper. What is better than Jasper? Wisdom. And what is
better than Wisdom? Woman. And what is better than a good woman? That is a
good man? And what is better than a good man? Nothing. And sir, by many other
reasons may ye seen, that many women been good, and eke her counsel good
and profitable. And therefore sir, if that ye woll trust to my counsel, I
shall restore you your daughter hole and sound: and eke that I woll do you so
much, yt ye shall have honor in this case.

When Melibe had heard the words of his wife Prudence, he said thus: I see
well that ye words of Solomon be sooth: For he says, * The words yt be spoken
discretly by ordinance, been Honicombes, for they yeuen sweetness to the
soul, and holsomnesse to ye body. And wife, because of thy sweet words, and
eke for I have proved and assaied thy great Sapience and thy great troth, I
woll govern me by thy counsel in all thing.

Now sir, (quoth. dame Prudence) and since that ye vouchsafe to be governed by
my counsel, I woll inform you how that ye shall govern your self, in
choosing of your counsailours. Ye shall first in all your work, mekely
beseeching to the high God, yt he would be your counsailour, and shapeth you to
such intent that he give you counsel and comfort, as taught Thobie his
son. * At all times thou shall bless God, and pray him to dress thy ways,
and look eke that thy counsels been in him evermore. Saint James says, if
any man of you have need of sapience, ask it of God. And afterward, then
shullen ye take counsel in your self, and examine well your own thoughts,
of such things as you thinken that been best for your profit: And then shall
ye drive fro your heart things that be contrarious to good counsel: that is
to say, ire, covetise, and hastiness.

First, * He yt asks counsel of himself, certes he must be withouten ire
and wrath in himself, for many causes, The first is this: He that has great
ire and wrath in himself, he weneth always that he may do thing that he may
not do. And secondly, he that is irous and wrothfull, he may not well deem:
And he that may not well deem, may not well counsel. The third is this, he
that is irous and wroth, as says Seneke, may not speak but blamefull things,
and with thilke vicious words he stirs other folk to anger and to ire.
And eke sir ye must drive covetise out of your heart. For ye Apostle says, *
That covetise is the root of all harms. And trusts right well, that a
covetous man ne can not deem ne think, but only to fulfill the end of his
covetise: and certes that ne may never be accomplished, for evermore, the more
haboundance that he has of richesses, the more he desires. And sir ye must
also drive out of your heart hastiness: For certes ye may not deem for the
best a sudden thought that falls in your heart, but ye must advise you on it
full often: For as ye have heard here before, the common proverb is this. * He
yt sone deemeth, sone repents.

Sir, ye ne be not always in like disposition, for certes some thing that
seems sometime to you that is good for to do, another time it seems to you
the contrary.

And when ye han taken counsel in your self, and han deemed by good
deliberation such thing as you seems best, than read I you that ye keep it
secret. Bewray ye not your counsel to no person, but if so be that ye wene
sikerly, that through your bewraying, your condition shall be to you the more
profitable. For Jesus Sirake says: * Neither to thy foe ne to thy friend
discover not thy secret, ne thy folly: for they woll give you audience and
looking, and supportation in your presence, and scorn you in your absence.
Another Clerk says, * That scarsly shall you find any person that may keep
counsel secretly. The book says, * While that thou keep the counsel
in thine heart, thou keep it in thy prison: and when thou bewrayest thy
counsel to any wight, he holds thee in his snare. And therefore you is
better to hide your counsel in your heart, than to pray him to whom ye have
bewrayed your counsel, that he woll keep it close still. For Seneca says:
If so be that thou may not thine own counsel hide, how dare thou pray
any other wight thy counsel secret to keep. But nathelesse, if thou wene
sikerly that thy bewraying of thy counsel to a person woll make thy condition
stand in ye better plight, then shall thou tell him thy counsel in this
wise. First thou shall make no semblant whether thee were lever peace or war,
or this or that, ne show him not thy will ne thine intent: for trust well that
commonly these counsailours been flatrerers, namely the counsailours of great
lords, for they enforce hem always rather to speak pleasant words enclining to
the lords lust, than words that been true or profitable: and therefore men say,
* that ye rich man has seld good counsel, but if he have it of himself.
And after that thou shall consider thy friends and thine enemies. And as
touching thy friends, thou shall consider which of hem been most faithful and
most wise, and eldest and most approved in counsailing: and of hem shall thou
ask thy counsel, as the case requires.

I say, that first ye shall call to your counsel your friends that been
true. For Saloman says: * That right as ye heart of a man deliteth in savor
that is sote, right so the counsel of true friends yeueth sweetness to the
soul. And he says also, there may nothing be likened to ye true friend: For
certes gold ne silver be not so much worth as the good will of a true friend.
And also he says, that a true friend is a strong defense, who so that it
finds has a great treasure. Then shall ye also consider if that your true
friends be discreet and wise: for the book says, Ask always thy counsel of
them that bin wise. And by this same reason shall ye call to your counsel
your friends yt been of age, such as seem and been expert in many things,
and been approoved in counsailing. For the book says, * That in old men is
Sapience, and in long time the prudence. And Tullius says, * That great
things been not aye accomplished by strength, ne by delivernesse of body, but
by counsel, by authority of persons, and by Science: the which three things
ne been not feeble by age, but certes they enforce and increase day by day,
and then shall ye keep this for a general rule. First shall ye call to your
counsel a few of your friends yt been especial. For Solomon says, * Many
friends have thou, but among a thousand choose thee one to be thy counsailour:
For all be it so, that thou first ne tell thy counsel but to a few, thou
may afterward tell it to mo folk, if it be need. But look always that
thy counsaylours have those conditions that I have said before, yt is to say,
That they be true, wise, and of old experience. And work not always in every
need by one Counsailer alone: for sometimes behooves it to be counseled by
many. For Solomon says, * Salvation of things is where as there be many
counsaylers.

Now have I told you of which folk ye shall be counseled: now woll I tell
you which cousaile ye ought to eschew. First ye shall eschew the counsailing
of fools, Solomon says, * Take no counsel of a fool, for he woll
counsel but after his own lust and his affection. The book says, that the
property of a fool is this: * He troweth lightly harm of every man, and
lightly troweth all bounty in himself. Thou shall eschew the counsailing of
all flaterers, which as enforcen hem rather to praise your person by flattery,
than for to tell you the soothfastnesse of things.

Wherefore Tullius says, * Among all the pestilence that been in friendship,
the greatest is flattery. And therefore it is more need yt thou eschew and
dread flatterers, than any other people. The book says, * Thou shall rather
flee fro the sweet words of flattering and praising, than fro the eagre words
of thy friends that says the sooths. Solomon says, * That the words of a
flatterer is a snare to catch innocence. He says also, * He yt speaks to his
friend words of flattery and of pleasaunce, he sets a net beforne his feet
to catch him. And therefore Tullius says, Incline not thine ears to
flatterers, ne take no counsel of flatterers. And Caton says, * Auise thee
well, and eschew the words of sweetness and of pleasaunce. And eke thou shall
eschew the counsailing of thine old enemies that been reconciled. The book
says, * That no wight retourneth safely into the grace of his old enemy. And
Isope says, * Ne trust not to hem, to which thou have sometime had war or
enmity, ne tell hem not thy counsel. And Seneck tells ye cause why it may
not be, for he says, * There as great fire has long time endured, that there
dwells some vapor of heat. And therefore says Solomon, * In thine old foe
trust thou never. For likerly though thine enemy be reconciled and make the
sign of humility, and loute to thee with his head, trust him never: for
certes he makes thilke feigned humility more for his profit, than for any
humility, or for any love of thy person, because that he deemeth to have
victory over thy person by such fained countenance, the which victory he
might not have by strife or war. And Petrus Alphons says, * Make no
fellowship with thine old enemies, for if thou do hem bounty, they woollen
pervert it to wickedness. And eke thou must eschew the counsailing of hem yt
been thy servaunts, and bearen thee great reverence: for peraventure they said
it more for dread than for love. And therefore says a Philosopher in this wise:
* There is no wight perfitly true to him that he dredeth. And Tullius says,
There is no might so great of any emperor that long may endure, but he have
love of the people and dread. Ye shall eschew also the counsailing of folk
that been dronklewe, for they ne can no counsel hide. For Solomon says, *
There nis no priuity there as reigns drunkenness. Ye shall have also in
suspect ye counsailing of such folk as counsel you one thing privily, and
counsel you the contrary openly. For Cassidorie says, * That it is a
manner of slight to hinder his enemy when he shows to done a thing openly,
and werketh privily ye contrary. Thou shall have also in suspect the
counsailing of wicked folk, that be always full of fraud. And David says, *
That blisfull is the man yt has not followed the counsailing of shrews. Thou
shall also eschew the counsailing of young folk, for her counsailing is not
ripe, as Solomon says.

Now sir, since I have showed you of such folk as ye shall be counseled of,
and follow it: now woll I teach you how ye shall examine your counsel. After
ye doctrine of Tullius, in examining of your counsailers, ye shall consider many
things.

First thou shall consider thilke thing that thou purposest, and upon that
thing that thou wolt have counsel, that very truth be said and conserved,
this is to say, * Tell truly thy tale, for he yt says false, may not well be
counseled in that case, of which he lies. After this, thou shall consider the
things that accorden to yt thou purposest for to do by thy counsailours, if
reason accord thereto, and eke if thy might may attain thereto: and if the more
part and the better part of your counsailours accorden thereto or no. Then
shall thou consider what thing shall follow of her counsailing: As hate, peace,
war, grace, profit, or damage, and many other things: and in all things
shall thou choose the best, and weiue all other things. Then shall thou consider
of what root is engendered the matter of thy counsel, and what fruit it may
conceive and engender. Thou shall eke consider all the causes, from whence they
be sprung. And when thou have examined thy counsel, as I have said, and which
party is the better and more profitable, and have approved it by many wise
folk and old, then thou shall consider, if thou may perform it and make of
it a good end. * For certes reason woll not that any man shall begin a thing,
but if he might perform it as him ought: ne no wight should take upon him so
heavy a charge, but yt he might bear it. For ye proverb says, * He that to
much embraces distraineth little. And Caton says, * Assay to do such things
as thou have power to done, least the charge oppress thee too sore, that thee
behooves weiue thing yt thou have begun, And if so be yt thou be in dout,
whether thou may perform a thing or none, choose rather for to suffer than
to begin. And Peter Alphons says, * If thou have might to do a thing, of
which thou must repent, it is better hold thy tongue still than for to speak.
Then may thou understand by stronger reasons, that if thou have power to
perform a work, of which thou shall repent thee, then it is better thou
suffer than begin. * Well saine they that defenden every wight to assay a thing
of which he is in doubt, whether he may perform it or none. And after when ye
have examined your counsel (as I have said before) and know well that ye may
perform your emprise, conferme it then sadly till it be at an end.

Now it is reason and time that I show you when and wherefore that ye may
change your counsel, withouten reproof. * Soothly, a man may change his
purpose and his counsel, if the cause cease, or when a new case betideth.
For ye law says, * That upon things that newly betideth, behooves new
counsel. And Seneke says, * If thy counsel is come to the ears of thine
enemies, change thy counsel. * Thou may also change thy counsel, if so
be thou find that by error or by any other cause, harm or damage may betide.
* Also if thy counsel be dishonest, other else come of dishonest cause,
change thy counsel. For ye law says, * That all behests that be dishonest,
ne been of no value: And eke, * If so be that it be impossible, or may not
gladly be performed or kept.

And take this for a general rule, * That every counsel that is informed so
strongly, yt it may not be changed for no condition that may betide, I say
that ilke counsel is wicked.

MElibeus, when he had heard the doctrine of his wife Dame Prudence, aunswerd
in this wise. Dame (quoth. he) as yet unto this time ye han well taught me, as in
gouernaile how I shall govern me in ye choosing and in the withholding of my
counsel: But now would I feign that ye would condescend in especial, how yt
ye seems by our counsailours that we have chose in this present need.

My lord (quoth. she) I beseech you in all humblesse, that ye woll not wilfully
reply against my reasons, ne distemper your heart, though I speak thing that
you displease, for God wot as in mine intent, I speak it as for your best and
for your honor and profit eke, and soothly I hope that your benignity woll
take it in patience. And trusts me well yt your counsel in this case
neshould not (as to speak properly) be called a counsailing, but a motion or a
moving of folly, in which counsel ye have erred in many a sundry wise.

First ye have erred in the assembling of your counsailours: For first ye
should have cleped a few folk to your counsel, and after ye might have
showed it to mo, if it had be need. But ye have cleped to your counsel a
great multitude of people, full chargeous and full noyous for to hear. Also ye
have erred, for there as ye should have only cleped to your counsel your
true friends, old and wise, ye have cleped strange folk, young folk, false
flatterers, and enemies reconciled, and folk yt done you reverence withouten
love. * And eke ye have erred, for ye have brought with you to your
counsel, ire, couetise, and hastiness, ye which three things been contrary
to every good counsel, honest and profitable: the which three things ye have
not destroyed neither in your self ne in your counsailours, as ye ought. Ye
have erred also, for ye have showed to your counsailours your talent and your
affections to make war anon, and for to do vengeance, and they have espied by
your words to what thing ye been inclined: and therefore han they rather
counseled you to your talent, than to your profit. Ye han erred eke, for it
seems that you suffices to have be counseled by these counsailours only,
and with little auisement, whereas in so high and in so great a need, it had
been necessary mo counsailours, and more deliberation to perform your
emprise. Ye han erred also, for ye have not examined your counsel in ye
foresaid matters ne in due manner, as y^ case requires. Ye have erred also,
for ye made no division between your true friends and your fained
counsailours: ne ye have not known the will of your true counsailours and
friends, old, and wise, but ye have cast all her words in an hochpot, and
inclined your heart to the more part and to the greater number of fools than
of wise men. * And therefore ye counsaylings that been at congregations and
multitudes of folk, there as men take more regard to the number, than to the
sapience of persons: ye seen well, yt in such counsaylings fools han the
maistrie. Melibeus answered and said again: I grant well that I have erred, but
there as thou have told me here beforne, yt he nis not to blame that changes
his counsel in certain case, and for certain and just cause I am all ready
to change my counsailours right as thou would devise. The Proverb says, *
For to done sin, is mannish, but certes for to persevere long in sin, is
work of the Devil.

To this sentence answers anon dame Prudence, and said: Examineth (quoth. she)
well your counsel, and let us see which of hem has spoke most reasonably,
and taught you best counsel. And for as much as the examination is
necessary, let us begin at Surgiens and Physicians, that first spoke of this
matter. I say that Physicians and Surgiens have said you in your counsel
discreetly, as hem ought: and in her speech said full wisely, that to the
office of hem appertains to done to every wight honor and profit, and no
wight to annoy, and after her craft to done great diligence unto the cure of
hem which they have in her governance: and sir, right as they have answered
wisely and discreetly, right so read I yt they been highly and souerainly
guerdoned for her noble speech, and eke for they shull more done their
ententife business in ye curation of your daughter. For all beit so they been
your friends, therefore shullen ye not suffer, that they serve you for naught,
but ye ought thereafter guerdon hem, and pay hem her largess. And as touching
y^ proposition, which the Physicians entreteden in this case, this is to saine,
that in maladies is, * That contrary is warished by another contrary: I would
feign know how ye understand thilke text, and what is your sentence. Certes
(quoth. Melibeus) I understand it in this wise: Right as they han do me a
contrary, so should I done hem another, for right as they han venged hem upon
me and done me wrong, right so woll I venge me upon hem, and done hem wrong,
and then have I cured one contrary by another.

Lo lo (quoth. dame Prudence) how lightly is every man inclined to his own desire
and his own pleasaunce, Certes (quoth. she) ye words of the Physicians ne should
not been understand in yt wise: for certes wickedness is not contrary to
wickedness, ne vengeance is not contrary to vengeance, ne wrong to wrong,
but every of hem increases and engenders other. But certes the words of the
Physicians should be understand in this wise, for good and wickedness ben two
contraries: and peace and war, vengeance and suffraunce, discord and accord,
and many other things: * But certes, wickedness shall be warished with
goodness, discord by accord, war by peace, and so forth in other things. And
thereto accords saint Paul the Apostle in many places: He says, Ne yield not
harm for harm, ne wicked speech for wicked speech, but do well to hem that
done to thee harm, and bless hem that says thee harm. And in many other
places he admonishes peace and accord. But now woll I speak of ye counsel
which was iyeue unto you by men of Law, and the wise folk, and old folk,
that sayden all by one accord as ye heard beforne, That over all things ye
shall done your business and diligence to keep your person, and to warnstore
your house: And they said also, that in this case ye ought to werchen full
wisely and with great deliberation. And sir, as to the first point, that
touches the keeping of your person: ye shall understand, that he that has
war, shall ever devoutly and meekly praien beforne all things, that Jesus
Christ, of his mercy woll have him in his protection, and to be his sovereign
helper at his need: For certes in this world there nis no wight that may be
counseled and ikept sufficiently without the keeping of our lord Jesus Christ.
To this sentence accords the Prophet David yt says: * If God ne kept the
City, in idle waketh he that it keeps. Now sir, then should he commit the
keeping of your person to your true friends, that been approved and iknow, and
of him should ye ask help, your person to keep. For Caton says: * If thou
have need of help, ask it of thy friends, for there nis none so good a
Hhysician as thy true friend. And after this then shall ye keep you fro all
strange folk, and fro liers, and have always in suspect her company. For
Peter Alphons says: * Ne take no company by the way, of no strange man, but
if so be that thou have known him of longer time: And if so be that he fall
into thy company, peradventure withouten thine assent and good will, enquire
then as subtelly as thou can, of his conversation, and of his life beforne,
and feign thy way, saying thou would go thider as thou wolt not go: and if
he bear a spear, hold thee on the right side of him, and if he bear a swerd,
hold thee on the left side of him. And then shall ye keep you wisely from all
manner of such people as I have said you here before, and hem and her
counsel eschew. And after this then shall ye keep you in such manner, that
for any presumption of your bodily strength, that ye despise not ne account not
the might of your adversary so lite, that ye let the keeping of your person for
your presumption, * For every wise man dredeth his enemy. And Solomon says: *
A very fool is he yt of all has dread: * But certes he that through hardness
of his heart and through ye hardiness of himself, has too great presumption,
him shall evil betide. Then shall ye evermore encounter, wait, embushments,
and all espiaile. For Seneke says: * The wise man yt dredeth harms,
escheweth harms: * He ne falls into no perils, that peril escheweth. And
all be it so, that thou seem yt thou be in secret place, yet shall thou always
done diligence in keeping of thy person, this is to say, ne be not negligent to
keep thine own person, not only for thy greatest enemy, but also for thy
least enemy. Seneke says, * A man yt is well advised, he dreadeth his least
enemy. Ovid says, * That ye little wesell woll slay ye great Bull and the
wild Heart. And the Proverb says, * That a little thorn woll grieve a king
full sore, and a little hound woll hold ye wild Bore. But nathalesse, I say not
thou shall be so coward, that thou doubt where as is no dred. The book says,
That somemen have great lust to deceive, but yet they dread to be deceived.
And keep thee fro ye company of scorners: * For the book says, With
scorners ne make no company, but fly her words as venom.

Now as to the second point, whereas your wise Counsaylours counsayled you to
warnestore your house with great diligence, I would feign know how ye
understand thilke words, and what is your sentence.

Melibeus answered and said, certes I understand it in this wise, that I shall
warnestore mine house with toures, such as have castles and other manner
edifices, and armure, and archeries, between which things I may my person and
my house so keep and defend, that mine enemies shullen be in dread mine house
to approach. To this sentence answered anon Prudence. Warnishing (quoth. she) of
high toures and of high edifices, is with great costages and with great
travail, and when yt they ben accomplished, yet bin they not worth a straw,
but if they been defended with true friends, that been old and wise. And
understondeth well, that the greatest and the strongest garnison that rich men
may have, as well to keepen her person, as her goods, is, that they be beloved
with her subjects, and with her neighbors. For thus says Tullius, * That
there is a manner garrison, yt no man may vanquish ne discomfite, and that is a
lord to be beloved of his citizens, and of his people.

Now sir, as to the third point, whereas your old and wise Counsaylours
said, yt ye ought not suddenly ne hastily proceed in this need, but that ye
ought purueyen and apparaile you in this case, with great diligence and
deliberation. Verily, I trow that they said right truly and right sooth. For
Tullius says: * In every deed or thou begin it, apparaile thee with great
diligence. Then say I, in vengeance taking, in war, in battle, and in
warnestoring, or thou begin, I read that thou apparaile thee thereto, and do it
with great deliberation. For Tullius says: * The long apparailing tofore the
battle, makes short victory. And Cassidorus says: * The garrison is
stronger, when it is long time avised. But now let us speak of the Counsel
that was accorded by your neighbors, such as done you reverence withouten
love, your old enemies reconciled, your flatterers, that counseled you certain
things prively, and openly counseled you the contrary. The young folk also,
that counseled you to venge you, and to make war anon. Certes sir, as I have
said before, ye have greatly erred to clepe such manner of folk to your
counsel, which counsailours ben enough reproved by the reasons aforesaid. But
nathelesse, let us now descend to the special. Ye shull first proceed after the
doctrine of Tullius. Certes the troth of this matter or of this counsel
needs not diligently to enquire, for it is well wist, which they been that han
done you this trespass and villainy, and how many trespassours, and in what
manner they have done all this wrong to you, and all this villainy. And after
this, then shull ye examine the second condition, which Tullius adds in this
matter. For Tullius puts a thing, which that he clepeth consenting: this is
to say, who ben they and which been they, and how many, that consenten to thy
counsel in thy wilfulness, to done hasty vengeance. And let us consider
also who been they, and how many they been that consented to your adversaries.
As to the first point, it is well known which folk they be that consented to
your hasty wilfulness. For truly, all tho that counsel you to maken
sudden war, ne be not your friends. Let see now which been they that ye
holden so greatly your friends, as to your person: For albeit so that ye be
mighty and rich, certes ye been but alone: for truly ye ne have no child but a
daughter, ne ye have no brethren ne cousin Germans, ne none other nigh
kinrede, wherefore your enemies should stint to plead with you, ne to destroy
your person. Ye know also, that your riches mote be dispended in diverse
parties. And when that every wight has his part, they woollen take but little
regard to venge your death. But thine enemies ben three, and they have many
brethren, children, cousins, and other nigh kinrede: and though so were, that
thou had slain of hem two or three, yet dwells there ynowe to avenge her
death, and to slay thy person. And though so be that your kinrede be more
steadfast and siker than the kin of your adversaries, yet nevertheless your
kinrede is but after kinrede, for they ben but little sibbe to you, and the
kin of your enemies ben nigh sibbe to hem. And certes as in that, her
condition is better than is yours. Then let us consider also of the counsayling
of hem that counsayled you to take sudden vengeance, whether it accord to
reason or non: And certes ye know well nay, for as by right and reason, there
may no man take vengeance of no wight, but the judge that has jurisdiction of
it, when it is granted him to take vengeance hastily, or attemperately, as
the Law requires. And yet moreover of thilke word that Tullius clepeth
consenting, thou shall consent, if that thy might and thy power may consent and
suffice to thy wilfulness, and to thy counsaylours: And certes, thou may
well say nay, for sikerly as for to speak properly, * We may do nothing but
such thing as we may done rightfully: and certes rightfully ye may take no
vengeance, as of your own proper authority. Then may ye see that your power ne
consents not, ne accords not with your wilfulness. Now let us examine the
third point, that Tullius clepeth consequence. Thou shall understond, yt the
vengeance that thou purposest for to take, is consequent, and thereof
follows another vengeance, peril, and war, and other damages withouten
number, of which we be not ware, as at this time. And as touching the fourth
point, that Tullius clepeth engendring, thou shall consider, that this wrong
which that is done to thee, is engendered of the hate of thine enemies, and of
the vengeance taking upon hem, yt would engender another vengeance, and
muckell sorrow and wasting of richesse, as I said ere.

Now sir, as touching the fifth point, that Tully cleapeth causes, which is the
last point, thou shall understond, that the wrong that thou have received, has
certain causes, which that clerks callen oryen, and effycien, and causa
longinqua, and causa propinqua, that is to say the far cause, and the nigh
cause. The far cause is almighty God, that is cause of all things. The near
cause, is the three enemies. The cause accidental was hate. The cause
material, ben ye five wounds of thy daughter. The cause formal, is ye manner of
their werking, that brought ladders, and clambe in at thy windows. The cause
final was for to slay thy daughter, it let not in as much as in them was.
But for to speak of the far cause, as to what end they should come, or
finally, what shall betide of them in this case, ne can I not deem, but by
conjecting and supposing: For we shall suppose, that they shall come to a
wicked end, because that the book of Decrees says: * Seld or with great pain
ben causes brought to a good end, when they ben badly begun.

Now sir, if men would ask me, why that God suffered men to do you this
villainy. Truly I cannot well answer, as for no soothfastnesse. For ye Apostle
says, * That the sciences, and the judgments of our Lord God Almighty been
full deep, there may no man comprehend ne search hem. Nathelesse by certain
presumptions and coniectings, I hold and believe, that God, which that is full
of justice and of righteousness, has suffered this betide, by just cause
reasonable.

Thy name is Melibe, this is to say, a man that drinks Honey. Thou have
drunk so much honey of sweet temporal richesse, and delices of honors of
this world, that thou art drunk, and have forgotten Jesus Christ thy creator:
Thou ne have not done to him such honor and reverence as thee ought, ne thou
ne have not taken keep to ye words of Ovid that says: * Under ye Honey of the
goods of thy body is hid ye venom yt slaeth thy soul.

And Solomon says: * If it so be yt thou have found honey, eat of the same
honey that that suffices: for if so be that thou eat of the same honey out of
measure, thou shall spewe, and also be needy and poor. And peraventure
Almighty God Jesus Christ has thee in dispight, and has turned away fro thee
his face, and his ears of misericorde and mercy. And also he has suffered and
give license, that thou thus should be punished and chastised, in ye manner
that thou have trespassed and offended. Thou have done sin against our Lord
Christ, for certes the three enemies of mankind, that is to say: the flesh, the
fiend, and the world, thou have suffered hem enter into thine heart wilfully,
by the windows of thy body, and have not defended thy self sufficiently
against their assaults, and their temptations, so that they have wounded thy
soul in five places, this is to say: the deadly sins that been entered into
thy heart by thy five wits. And in the same manner our Lord Christ has would
and suffered, that thy three enemies been entered into thy house, by yt
windows, and have wounded thy daughter in the foresaied manner.

Truly (quoth. Melibe) I see well that ye enforce you much by words to overcome
me, in such manner, that I shall not venge me on mine enemies, showing me ye
perils and the evils yt might fall of this vengeance: but who so would
consider in all vengeances the perils and evils that might sue of vengeance
taking, a man would never take vengeance, and that were harm: for by the
vengeance taken been ye wicked men discevered fro the good men. And they yt
have will to do wickedness, restrain their wicked purpose, when they see the
punishing and chastising of the trespassours: and yet say I mo^e. * That right
as a singular person sins, in taking vengeance of another man, right so
sins ye judge, if he do no vengeance of hem that have deserved. For
Senecke says thus: * That master, he says is good, that preveth shrews. And
as Cassiodore says: * A man dredeth to do outrages, when he wot and knows,
yt it displeases to ye Judges and Sovereigns. And another says: * The Judge
yt dreadeth to do right; makes men shrewes. Add saint Poule the Apostle
says in his Epistle, when he writes unto the Romans,

* That the Judge bear not the spear without-cause, but they bear it to
punish the shrewes and misdoers, and for to defend the good men.

If ye woll then take vengeance of your enemies, ye shull return and have
your recourse to the Judge, that has the jurisdiction upon hem, and he shall
punish hem, as the law asks and requires.

A ha, said Melibe, this vengeance likes me nothing, I bethink me now, and
take heed how that fortune has nourished me fro my childhood, and has help
me to pass many a strong paas: Now I would assay her, trowing with Gods
help, that she shall help me my shame for to avenge.

TRuly said Prudence, if ye woll work by my counsel, ye shall not assay
fortune by no way: ne ye shall not lean or how unto her, after the words of
Senecke: * For things that been foolishly done, and that been done in hope of
fortune, shall never come to good end. And as ye same Senek says: * The more
clear and the more shining that fortune is, the more britle and the sooner
broke she is. Trusts not in her, for she is not steadfast ne stable. For when
thou trowest to be most sure and steadfast of her help, she woll fail and
deceive thee. And whereas ye say, that fortune has nourished you fro your
childhood, I say that in so much ye shall the less trust in her, and in her
wit. For Seneke says: * What man yt is nourished by fortune, she makes him a
great fool. Now then since ye desire and ask vengeance, and the vengeance
that is done after the law, and before the judge, ne likes you not, and the
vengeance that is done in hope of fortune, is perilous and uncertain, then
have ye none other remedy, but for to have your recourse unto the sovereign
judge that vengeth all villainies and wrongs. And he shall venge you, after that
himself witnesses, whereas he says: * Leave the vengeance to me, and I shall
do it.

Melibeus answered, if I ne venge me of ye villainy yt men have done to me, I
summon or warn hem that have done to me that villainy and all other, to do me
another villainy. For it is written: * If thou take no vengeance of an old
villainy, thou summonest thine adversaries to do thee a new villainy, and also
for my sufferaunce, men would do me so much villainy, that I might neither
bear it ne sustain it, and so should I be put and holden over low. For men
sain, * In mikell suffering shall many things fall unto thee, which thou shall
not mow suffer.

Certes (quoth. Prudence) I grant you, yt overmuch suffraunce is not good, but
yet ne follows it not thereof, that every person to whom men do villainy,
should take of it vengeance: for that appertains and longs all only to
Judges, for they should venge ye villainies and injuries: And therefore those
two authorities, that ye have said before, been only understand in the
Judges: * For when they suffer overmuch the wrongs and villainies to be done,
withouten punishment, they summon not a man all only for to do new wrongs,
but they command it. Also a wise man says, * That ye Judge that corrects
not the sinner, commands and bids him do sin. And the Judges and
soueraines might in their land so much suffer of the shrews and misdoers, that
they should by such suffraunce, by process of time, were of such power and
might, that they should put out the Judges and the Sovereigns from their
places, and at last, make hem lose her Lordships.

But let us now suppose, that ye have leave to venge you: I say ye be not of
might and power, as now to venge you: for if ye woll make comparison unto the
might of your adversaries, ye should find in many things, that I have showed
you er this, yt their condition is better than yours, and therefore say I, that
it is good as now, that ye suffer and be patient.

Furthermore, ye know well, that after the common saw, * It is a woodnesse, a man to strive with a stronger, or a more mighty man than he is himself:
and for to strive with a man of even strength, that is to say, with as strong a
man as he is, it is peril: and for to strive with a weaker man, it is folly,
and therefore should a man fly striving, as mikell as he might. For Solomon
says: * It is a great worship to a man to keep him fro noise and strife: *
And if it so befall and hap, yt a man of greater might and strength than thou
art, do thee greeuaunce: study and busy yt rather to still the same
greeuaunce, than for to venge thee. For Seneke says, * That he puts him in
great peril, that strives with a greater man than he is himself. And Caton
says, * If a man of higher estate or degree, or more mighty than thou, do thee
annoy or greuaunce, suffer him: for he yt once has grieved thee, may another
time relieve thee and help thee. Yet set I case ye have license for to venge
you, I say that there been full many things yt shall restrain you of vengeance
taking, and make you for to incline to suffer, and for to have patience in the
wrongs that have been done to you. First and foremost, if ye woll consider the
faults that been in your own person, for which faults God has suffered you
have his tribulation, as I have said to you here before. For the Poet says,

* That we ought patiently take ye tribulations that come to us, when that we
think and consider, that we have deserved to have them. And saint Gregory
says, * That when a man considers well the number of his defaults and of
his sins, the pains and the tribulatious that he suffers, seem the less
unto him. And in as much as him thinks his sins more heavy and grievous,
in so much seems his pain the lighter and the easier unto him. Also ye own
to incline and bow your heart, to take the patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
says saint Peter in his Epistles. Jesus Christ he says has suffered for us,
and yeuen ensample to every man to follow and sue him, for he did never sin,
ne never came there a villainous word out of his mouth. When men cursed him, he
cursed hem not. And when men beat him, he manaced hem not. Also the great
patience, which Saints that been in Paradise have had in tribulation that they
have suffered, without her desert or guilt, ought much stir you to patience.
Furthermore, ye shull enforce you to have patience, considering that the
tribulations of this world but little while endure, and soon passen been and
gone, and the joy yt a man seeks to have by patience in tribulations is
perdurable: After that the Apostle says in his Epistle, * The joy of God he
says is perdurable: that is to say, everlasting. Also troweth and believes
steadfastly, that he is not well norished and well taught, that cannot have
patience, or woll not receive patience. For Solomon says, * That ye doctrine
and the wit of a man is known by patience. And in another place he says,
That he that is patient, governs him by great prudence.

And y^ same Solomon says: * The angry and wrothfull man makes noises, and
the patient man attempreth and stilleth hem. He says also, It is no more worth
to be patient than to be right strong. And he yt may have ye lordship of his
own heart, is more to praise than he that by his force or strength takes great
cities. And therefore says saint James in his Epistle, * That patience is a
great virtue of perfection.

CErtes (quoth. Melibee) I grant you Dame Prudence, yt patience is a great virtue
of perfection, but every man may not have ye perfection that ye seek, ne I am
not of ye number of right perfect men: For mine heart may never be in peace,
unto the time it be avenged. And albeit so, yt it was great peril to mine
enemies to do me a villainy in taking vengeance upon me, yet took they no
heed of ye peril, but fulfilled her wicked will and her courage: and therefore
me thinks men ought not repreve me, though I put me in a little peril for to
avenge me, and though I do a great excess, yt is to say, that I venge one
outrage by another.

Ah (quoth. dame Prudence) ye say your will as you likes: but in no case of ye
world a man should not do outrage ne excess, for to venge him. For Cassiodore
says, * That as evil does he yt vengeth him by outrage, as he that does y^
outrage. And therefore ye shall venge you after the order of right, that is to
say, by the law, and not by excess, ne by outrage. And also if you woll venge
you of ye outrage of your adversaries, in other manner than right commands, ye
sin. And therefore says Senek: * That a man shall never venge shreudnesse by
shreudnesse. And if ye say that right asks to defend violence by violence,
and fighting by fighting: certes ye say sooth, when the defense is done without
intervall, or without tarrying or delay, for to defend him, and not for to
venge him. And it behooveth, that a man put such attemperaunce in his defense,
that men have no cause ne matter to repreve him that defends him of outrage
and excess, for else were it again reason. Parde ye know well, yt ye make no
defense as now, for to defend you, but for to venge you: and so shows it,
that ye have no will to do your deed attemperately, and therefore me thinks
that patiente is good. For Solomon says, * That he that is not patient, shall
have great harm.

CErtes (said Melibe) I grant you yt when a man is impatient and wroth of
that that touches him not, and that appertains not unto him, though it harm
him, it is no wonder. For ye law says, * That he is culpable that
entermetleth or medleth with such things as appertains not unto him. And
Solomon says, * That he that entremetleth of the noise or strife of another
manne, is like to him that takes a strange hound by ye ears: For right as
he that takes a strange hound by the eeres, is otherwhile bitten by the
hond, right so in the same wise, it is reason that he have harm, that by his
impatience medleth him of the noise of another man, whereas it appertains not
unto him. But ye know well, that this deed, that is to say, my grief and my
disease, touches me right nigh. And therefore though I be wroth and
impatient, it is no mervaile: and saving your grace, I cannot see that it might
greatly harm me, though I took vengeance, for I am richer and more mighty
than mine enemies be: And well know ye, that by money and by having great
possessions, been all things of this world governed. And Solomon says, * All
these things obey to money.

When Prudence had heard her husbond avaunt him of his richesse and his money,
dispraising the power of his adversaries, she spoke and said in this wise:
Certes dear sir, I grant you that ye be rich and mighty, and * That ye
richesse is good to hem that have well gotten hem, and that well can use them.
For right as the body of a man may not live without the soul, no more may it
live without the temporal goods: and by richesse may a man get him great
friends. And therefore says Pamphillus: If a Nerthes daughter he says be
rich, she may chese of a thousand men, which she woll take to her husbond:
for of a thousand one woll not forsake her ne refuse her. And this Pamphillus
says also: * If thou be right happy, that is to say, if thou be rich, thou
shall find a great number of fellows and friends. And if thy fortune change,
farewell friendship and fellowship, for thou shall be alone withouten any
company, but if it be the company of poor folk. And yet says this
Pamphillus moreover, * That they that been bond and thrall of lineage, shall be
made worthy and noble by the richesses. And right so as by the richesses there
come many goodnesses, right so by poverty come there many harms and evils: *
For great poverty constrains a man to do many evils. * And therefore
calls Cassiodor Poverty the mother of ruin, that is to say, the mother of
overthrowing or of falling down. And therefore says Peter Alfonce: * One of ye
greatest adversities of this world is, when a free man by kind or of birth is
constrained by poverty to eat ye almose of his enemy. And the same says
Innocente in one of his books: He says, * That sorrowful and mishap is the
condition of a poor beggar, for if he ask not his meat, he dies for hunger,
and if he ask, he dies for shame: and algates necessity constrains him to
ask. And therefore says Solomon, * That better is to die, than for to have
such poverty. And as the same Saloman says: Better it is to die of bitter
death, than for to live in such wise. By these reasons that I have said unto
you, and by many other reasons that I could say, I grant you that richesses
been good to hem that hem well getten, and to hem that well usen tho richesses:
And therefore woll I show you how ye shall behave you in gathering of riches,
and in what manner she shullen use hem.

First, * Ye shall get hem withouten great desire, by good leisure, sokingly,
and not over hastily, for a man that is too desiring to get richesse,
habandoneth him first to theft and to all other evils, And therefore says
Solomon: * He yt hastes him too busily to wexe rich, he shall be none
innocent. He says also, * That the richesse yt hastily comes to a man,
soon and lightly goes and passes from a man, but that richesse that comes
little and little, wexeth always and multiplieth. And sir, ye shall get richesse
by your wit and by your travail, unto your profit, and that without wrong or
harm doing to any other person. For the Law says, * There makes no man
himself rich, if he do harm to another wight: this is to say, that nature
defends and forbids by right, that no man makes himself rich, unto ye
harm of another person. And Tullius says, * That no sorrow, ne no dread of
death, ne nothing that may fall unto a man, is so much against nature, as a man
to increase his own profit, to the harm of another manne. And though the
great and mighty men get richesses more lightly than thou, yet shall thou
not be idle ne slow to do thy profit, for thou shall in all wise fly
idleness. For Solomon says, * That idleness teaches a man to do many
evils. And the same Solomon says, * That he that trauaileth and busieth him
to tilthe his land, shall eat bread: but he that is idle, and casts him to no
business ne occupation, shall fall into poverty, and die for hunger. And he
that is idle and slow, can never find couenable time for to do his profit.
For there is a verifier says, * That ye idle manne excuses him in Winter,
because of ye great cold, and in Summer because of ye heat. * For these causes
(says Caton) waketh, and incline you not over much for to sleep, for over
much rest nourishes and causes many vices. And therefore says saint
Hierome, * Do some good deeds, yt the devil which is our enemy, ne find you
not unoccupied, for the devil ne takes not lightly unto his werking, such as
he finds occupied in good works.

Then thus in getting richesses ye must fly idleness. And afterward ye shull
use the richesses, which ye have got by your wit and by your travail, in such
manner, that men hold you not too scarce ne too sparing, ne fool large, yt is
to say, over large a spender: for right as men blame an auaricious man, because
of his scarcity and chincherie, in the same wise is he to blame, that spends
over largely. And therefore says Caton: * Use (says he) the richesses that
thou have gotten in such manner that men may have no matter ne cause to call
thee another wretch ne chinche: * For it is a great shame to a man to have a
poor heart and a rich purse. He says also, the goods that thou have got,
use them by measure, that is to say, spend measurably, for they that foolishly
wast and dispend the goods that they have, when they have no more proper of her
own, then they shape hem to take the goods of another manne. I say then that
ye shall fly avarice, using your richesse in such manner, that men say not
that your richesses been buried, but that ye have hem in your might, and in
your welding. For a wise man repreueth the auaricious man, and says thus in
these verses two. * Whereto and why burieth a man his goods by his great
avarice, and knows well that needs he must die, for death is the end of every
man, as in this present life? And for what cause or encheson joineth he him, or
knitteth he him so fast unto his goods, yt al his wits mow not discever him, ne
depart him fro his goods, and knows well, or ought to know, that when he is
dead, he shall nothing bear with him out of this world.

And therefore says saint Augustine. * That the avaricious manne is likened
unto hell, that the more it swalloweth, the more desire it has to swallow and
devour. And as well as ye would eschew to be called an avaricious man or
chinche, as well should ye keep and govern you in such a wise, that men
call you not fool large. Therefore says Tullius: * The goods of thine house
ne should not be hid ne kept so close, but that they might be opened by pity
and debonairte, that is to say, to give hem part that have great need. Ne thy
goods should not be so open, to be every man's goods. Afterward, in getting of
your richesses, and in using hem, ye shall always have three things in your
heart, that is to say, * Our Lord God, conscience, and good name. First, ye
shall have God in your heart, and for no richesse ye should do any thing,
which may in any manner displease GOD your creator and maker. For after ye
word of Solomon, * It is better to have a little good with the love of GOD,
than to have much good and treasure, and lose the love of his Lord GOD. And the
Prophet says, * That better it is to be a good manne, and have little good and
treasure, than to be holden a shrewe, and have great richesse. And yet I say
furthermore, that ye should always do your business to get you richesse, so
that ye get hem with good conscience. And ye Apostle says, * That there nis
thing in this world, of which we should have so great joy, as when our
conscience bears us good witness. And the Wise man says: * That the
substance of a man is full good, when sin is not in man's conscience.
Afterward, in getting of your richesses, and in using hem, ye must have great
bnsinesse and great diligence, that your good name be always kept and
conserved. For Solomon says, * That better it is, and more it avails a man
to have a good name, than for to have many richesses: And therefore he says
in another place: * Do great diligence says Solomon, in keeping of thy
friends, and of thy good name, for it shall longer abide with thee, than any
treasure, be it never so precious. And certes, he should not be called a great
Gentleman, that after God and good conscience all things left, ne does his
diligence and business, to keep his good name. And Cassiodor says, * That
it is a sign of a gentle heart, when a man loves and desires to have a
good name. And therefore says saint Augustine * That there ben two things
that been right necessary and also needful: and that is good conscience, and
good lose, that is to say: good conscience to thine own person inward, and
good lose for thy neighbor outward. And he that trusts him so much in his
good conscience, that he despises and sets at naught his good name or
lose, and recketh not though he keep not his good name, nis but a cruel
churl.

Sir, now have I showed you how ye should do in getting richesses, and how ye
should use hem: and I see well that for the trust that ye have in your
richesses, ye woll move war and battle. I counsel you that ye begin no
war, in trust of your richesses, for they ne suffice not wars to maintain.
And therefore says a Philosopher: * That a man yt desires and would algates
have war, shall never have suffisaunce: for the richer yt he is, the greater
dispences must he make, if he woll have worship and victory. And Solomon
says, * That the greater riches yt a man has, the more dispendours he has.
And therefore sir, albeit so, yt for your richesses ye may have much folk, yet
behooves it not, ne it is not good to begin war, whereas ye may in other
manner have peace, unto your worship and profit: * For the victory of
battles yt been in this world, lies not in great number or multitude of
people, ne in ye virtue of man, but it lies in the will and in the hond of our
Lord God almighty. And therefore Judas Machabeus, which was Gods knight, when
he should fight against his adversary, that had a greater number and a
greater multitude of folk, and stronget than was his people of Machabe, yet he
recomforted his little company, and said right in this wise: Also lightly
(said he) may our Lord God Almighty give victory to a few folk, as to many
folk. For the victory of a battle comes not by ye great number of people,
but it comes from our Lord GOD of heeuen. And dear sir, for as much as
there is no man certain, if it be worthy that God give him victory or not,
after that Solomon says, * Therefore every man should greatly dread wars
to begin: and because yt in battles fall many perils, and happeth other while,
that as soon is the great man slain, as the little man. And as it is written
in ye second book of Kings: The deeds of battles ben adventurous, and
nothing certain, for as lightly is one hurt with a spear, as another: and for
there is great peril in war, therefore should a man fly and eschew war in
as much as a man may goodly. For Solomon says, * He that loves peril,
shall fall in peril.

After that dame Prudence had spoken in this manner, Melibe answered and said: I
see well dame Prudence, that by your fair words and your reasons that ye have
showed me, that ye war likes you nothing: but I have not yet heard your
counsel, how I shall do in this need.

Certes (said she) I counsel you that ye accord with your adversaries, and
that ye have peace with hem. For saint James says in his Epistle: * That by
concord and peace, small riches wexe great: and by debate and discord, riches
decay. And ye know well, that one of the greatest and most sovereign thing
that is in this world, is unity and peace: And therefore says our Lord Jesus
Christ to his Apostles, in this wise: * Well happy been they that love and
purchase peace, for they be called the children of God. Ah, said Melibe, now
see I well, that ye love not mine honor, ne my worship, ye know well that mine
adversaries have begun this debate and brige by their outrage. And ye see
well, yt they ne require ne pray me of peace, ne they ask not to be
reconciled. Woll ye then yt I go meek me, and obey me to hem, and cry hem
mercy? Forsooth yt were not my worship. * For right as men say, over great
humblenes engenders dispraising, so fares it by too great humility or
meekness.

Then began dame Prudence to make semblaunt of wrath, and said: Certes sir,
save your grace, I love your honor and profit, as I do mine own, and ever
have do, ye, ne none other never see ye contrary: And yet, if I had said,
that ye should have purchased peace and reconciliation, I ne had much mistake
me, ne said amiss. For ye Wise man says: * The discention begins by
another man, and the reconciling begins by thy self, And ye Prophet says:
* Fly shreudnesse and do goodness, seek peace and follow it, in as much as
in thee is. Yet say I not, that ye should rather pursue to your adversaries
for peace, than they should to you: for I know well that ye ben so hard
hearted, that ye woll do nothing for me. And Solomon says: He that has over
hard an heart, he at last shall mishap or misbetide.

When Melibe had heard dame Prudence make semblaunt of wrath, he said in this
wise. Dame, I pray you that ye be not displeased of thing that I say, for ye
know well that I am angry and wroth, and that is no wonder: and they that been
wroth, wot not well what they do, ne what they say. Therefore ye Prophet
says: * That troubled eyes have no clear sight. But say and counsel me as
you likes, for I am ready to do right as ye woll desire: And if ye repreue me
of my folly, I am the more holden to love and praise you. For Solomon says, *
That he yt repreueth him yt does folly, he shall find greater grace, than he
that deceives him by sweet words.

Then said Dame Prudence, I make no semblaunt of wrath ne of anger, but for
your great profit. For Solomon says: * He is more wroth, that repreueth or
chideth a fool for his folly, showing him semblaunt of wrath, than he that
supporteth him and praises him in his misdoing, and laugheth at his folly. And
this same Solomon says afterward: That by the sorrowful visage of a man, yt
is to say, * By the sorry and heavy countenance of a man, the fool corrects
and amendeth himself.

Then said Melibe, I shall not conne answer unto so many fair reasons as ye
put to me and show: say shortly your will and your counsel, and I am all
ready to perform and fulfill it.

Then Dame Prudence discovered all her will unto him and said: I counsel you
(said she) above all things yt ye make peace between God and you, and be
reconciled unto him and to his grace, for as I have said you here before, God
has suffered you to have this tribulation and disease for your sins: and if
ye do as I say you, God woll send your adversaries unto you, and make hem fall
at your feet, ready to do your will and your commandment. For Solomon
says, * When the condition of man is pleasant and liking to God, he
changes the hearts of the man's adversaries, and constrains hem to beseech
him of peace and of grace. And I pray you let me speak with your adversaries
privily, for they shall not know that it be of your will* or your assent: * And
then when I know their will and their intent, I may counsel you the more
surely.

Dame, said Melibeus, does your will and your liking, for I put me wholly in
your disposition and ordinance.

Then dame Prudence, when she saw the good will of her husbond, delibered and
took advise in her self thinking how she might bring this need unto a good
conclusion and to a good end: And when she saw her time, she sent for these
adversaries to come unto her in a privy place. And showed wisely unto hem the
great goods that come of peace, and the great harms and perils that been in
war, and said to hem in a goodly manner: how that hem ought have great
repentance of the injury and wrong that they had done to Melibeus her lord,
and unto her and to her daughter.

And when they heard the goodly words of Dame Prudence, they were so surprised
and ravished, and had so great joy of her, yt wonder was to tell.

Ah lady (said they) ye have showed unto us the blessing of sweetness, after
ye saying of David the Prophet. For the reconsiling which we be not worthy to
have in no mannere. But we ought require it with great contrition and humility,
that ye of your goodness have presented unto us. Now see we well, yt the
science and cunning of Solomon is full true, for he says: * That sweet words
multiply and increase friends, and makes shrewes to be debonaire and meek.

Certes (said they) we put our deed and all our matter and cause, all wholly
in your good will, and been ready to obey at ye commandment of our lord
Melibeus. And therefore dear and benign lady: we pray and beseech you as
meekely as we can and may, that it like unto your great goodness to fulfill
indeed your goodly words. For we consider and know, that we have offended
and grieved our lord Melibeus out of measure, so ferforth, that we be not of
power to make him amends. And therefore we oblige and bind us and our friends,
for to do all at his will and commandment: but peradventure he has such
heaviness and such wrath to us ward, because of our offense, that he woll
enjoyne us such a pain, as we mow not bear ne sustain. And therefore noble
lady, we beseech your womanly pity to take such aduisement in this need,
that we ne our friends be not disherited ne destroyed, through our folly.

Certes (said Prudence) it is an hard thing and right perilious, that a man put
him all utterly in arbitration and judgment, and in the might and power of his
enemy: For Solomon says: Leueth me, and yeueth credence to yt I shall say: *
Ne yeueth never ye power ne governance of thy goods, to thy son, to thy
wife, to thy friend, ne to thy brother: ne give thou never might ne mastry over
thy body while thou live. Now since he defends that a man should not give to
his brother ne to his friend, the might of his body: By a stronger reason he
defends and forbids a man to give himself to his enemy. And nathelesse, I
counsel you that ye mistrust not my lord: for I wot well and know verily,
that he is debonaire and meek, large, courteous, and nothing desirous ne
covetous of goods ne riches. For there is nothing in this world that he
desires, save only worship and honor. Furthermore I know, and am right sure,
yt he shall nothing do in this need, without my counsel: and I shall so
work in this case, yt by the grace of our Lord God, ye shall be reconciled
unto us.

Then said they with one voice, worshipful lady, we put us and our goods al
fully in your will and disposition, and been ready to come, what day that it
likes unto your noblesse to limit us or assign us for to make our obligation
and bond, as strong as it likes unto your goodness, that we mow fulfill ye
will of you and of my lord Melibe.

When dame Prudence had herd ye answer of these men, she bad hem go again
privily, and she returned to her lord Melibe, and told him how she found his
adversaries full repentaunt, knowledging full lowly her sins and trespass, and
how they were ready to suffer all pain, requiring and praying him of mercy and
pity.

Then said Melibe, * He is well worthy to have pardon and foryeuenesse of his
sin, that excuses not his sin, but knowledgeth and repents him asking
indulgence. For Seneke says, * There is the remission and foryeuenesse, where
as ye confession is: for confessionis neighbor to innocence. And therefore I
assent and confirm me to have peace, but it is good that we do naught without
ye assent and will of our friends.

Then was Prudence right glad and joyful and said: Certes sir, ye have well
and goodly answered: for right as by ye counsel, assent, and help of your
friends, ye have be steered to venge you and make war: Right so without her
counsel shall ye not accord you, ne have peace with your adversaries. For the
law says: * There is nothing so good by way of kind, as a thing to be unbound
by him yt it was ibound.

Then dame Prudence, without delay or tarying, sent anon her messenger for her
kinsfolk and her old friends, which that were true and wise: and told hem by
order, in ye presence of Melibe, all the matter, as it is above expressed and
declared. And praised hem that they would say their advise and counsel, what
best were to do in this need. And when Melibeus friends had taken her advise
and deliberation of the foresaid matter, and had examined it by great business
and diligence. They yaue full counsel for to have peace and rest, and that
Melibe should receive with good heart his adversaries to foryeuenes and mercy.

And when dame Prudence had herd ye assent of her lord Melibe, and the
counsel of his friends accord with her will and her entention, she was
wondrously glad in her heart, and said: There is an old Proverb (said she) *
That the goodness that thou may do this day, do it, and abide it not, ne
delay it not till the next day. And therefore I counsel, that ye send your
messengers, such as be discreet and wise unto your adversaries: telling hem on
your behalf, yt if they woll treat of peace and accord, that they shape hem
without delay or tarrying, to come unto us: which thing performed was indeed.
And when these trespassours and repenting folk of her follies, that is to say,
the adversaries of Melibeus, had heard what these messengers said unto hem,
they were right glad and joyful, and answered full meekely and benignely,
yielding grace and thanks to her lord Melibeus, and to all his company: and
shope hem without delay to go with the messengers, and obeyed ye commandment
of her lord Melibeus. And right anon they took her way to the court of
Melibe, and took with hem some of their true friends, to make faith for hem,
and for to be her borowes: And when they were comen to the presence of Melibe,
he said to hem these words: It stondeth thus, said Melibe, and sooth it is,
that causeless and without skill and reason, ye have done great injuries and
wrong to me and my wife Prudence, and to my daughter also, for ye have entered
into my house by violence, and have done such outrage, that all men know well
that ye have deserved death. And therefore woll I know and we^e of you, whether
ye wol put ye punishing and ye chastising and the vengeance of this outrage,
in the will of me and of my wife, or ye woll not.

Then the wisest of hem three answered for hem all, and said. Sir (said he) we
know well that we been unworthy to come to the court of so great a lord and so
worthy as ye be, for we have so greatly mistaken us and have offended and
agilted in such wise again your high lordship, that truly we have deserved
the death, but yet for the great goodness and debonairte, that all the world
witnesses of your person, we submit us to the excellence and benignite of
your gracious lordship, and been ready to obey to all your commandments,
beseeching you, yt of your merciful pite ye woll consider our great
repentance and low submision, and grant us forgiveness of our outrageous
trespass and offense: For well we know, that your liberal grace and mercy
stretches further into the goodness, than done outrageous gilt and trespasses
into the wickedness. All be it that cursedly and damnably we have agilted
against your hie lordship.

THan Melibe took hem up fro ye ground full benignly, and received her
obligations and her bonds, by her others upon her pledges and borowes, and
assigned hem a certain day to return unto his court for to receive and accept
sentence and judgment, that Melibeus would command to be done on hem, by the
causes aforesaid, which things ordained, every man returned to his house.

And when dame Prudence saw her time, she fained and asked her lord Belibe,
what vengeance he thought good on his adversaries.

To which Melibe answered, and said: Certes (said he) I think and purpose me
fully to disherite hem of all that ever they have, and for to put them in exile
for ever.

Certes said Dame Prudence, this were a cruel sentence, and much against
reason. For ye be rich enough, and have no need of other men's riches. And ye
might lightly in this wise get you a covetous name, which is a vicious thing,
and ought to be eschewed of every good man. For after the saying of the
Apostle, * Couetise is root of all harms. And therefore it were better to you
to lose so much good of your own, than for to take of their good in this
manner. * For better it is to lose good with worship, than to win good with
villainy and shame. And every man ought to do his diligence and his business,
to get him a good name. And yet shall he not only busy him in keeping his
good name, but he shall also enforce him always to do some thing, by which he
may renew his good name. For it is written, * That ye old good lose of a man
or good name, is soon gone and past when it is not renewed. And as touching yt
ye say, that ye woll exile your adversaries: that thinks me much against
reason, and out of measure, considering the power that they have yaue you upon
them self. And it is written: * That he is worthy to lose his privilege, that
misuseth the might and power that is given him. And set case, ye might enjoyne
hem that pain by right and law, which I trow ye may not do: I say ye might
not put it to execution, for peradventure then it were like to turn to the
war, as it was before. And therefore if ye woll that men do your
obeisaunce, ye must demean you more cuteously, yt is to say: Ye must give most
easy sentences and judgment. For it is written: * He yt most courteously
commands, to him men must obey. And therefore I pray you, that in this
necessity and in this need ye cast ye to overcome your heart. For as Senek
says, * He yt overcomes his heart, overcomes twice. And Tullie says: *
There is nothing so commendable in a great lord, as when he is debonaire and
meek, and appeaseth him lightly. And I pray you that ye woll now forbear to do
vengeance in such a manner, yt your good name may be kept and conserved, and
that men may have cause and matter to praise you of pite and mercy: and yt ye
have no cause to repent you of thing that is done. For Seneke says: * He
overcomes in an evil manner, yt repents him of his victory. Wherefore I
pray let mercy be in your heart, to the effect, and intent, that God almighty
have mercy upon you in his last judgment. For saint James says in his Epistle:
* Judgment without mercy shall be do to him, yt has no mercy of another
wight.

When Melibe had heard the great skilles and reasons of dame Prudence, and her
wise informations and teachings, his heart began incline to ye will of his wife:
considering her true intent, confirmed him anon and assented fully to work
after her counsel: and thanked God, of whom proceeds all goodness and
virtue, that him had sent a wife of so great discretion. And when the day came
that his adversaries should appear in his presence, he spoke to hem goodly,
and said in this wise,

All be it so that of your pride and high presumption and folly, and of your
negligence and vnconning, ye have misborne you, and trespassed unto me, yet
for as mikell as I see and behold your great humility and that ye be sorry and
repentant of your giltes, it constrains me to do you grace and mercy:
Wherefore I receive you to my grace, and foryeue you holy all the offenses,
injuries, and wrongs, that ye have done against me and mine, to theffect and
end, that God of his endless mercy woll at the time of our dying foryeue us
our giltes, that we have trespassed to him in this wretched world. For
doubtless if we be sorry and repentant for the sins and giltes, which we have
trespassed in the sight of our Lord God: he is so free and so merciable, that
he woll foryeue us our giltes, and bring us to the bliss that never shall have
end. Amen.

The Monks Prologue.
WHen ended was the tale of Melibee
And of Prudence, and her benignite,
Our host said, as I am faithful man,
And by the precious corpse Madrian,
I had lever then a barell of ale,
That Goodlefe my wife had heard this tale:
For she nothing is of such patience,
As was this Melibeus wife Prudence.
By Gods bones, when I beat my knaves,
She brings me the great clubbed staves,
And cries, slay the dogs euerichone,
And break of them both back and bone.
And if that any neighbor of mine
Woll not in Church to my wife incline,
Or be so hardy, to her to trespace,
When she comes home she rampeth in my face,
And cries, false coward, wreke thy wife:
By corpus domini, I woll have thy knife,
And thou shall have my distaffe, and go spin:
Fro day till night, she woll thus begin.
Alas, she says, that ever she was shape
To wed a milkesop, or a coward ape,
That woll be ouerleide with every wight,
Thou dare not stond by thy wives right.
This is my life, but if that I woll fight,
And out at door anon I mote me dight,
And else I am lost, but if that I
Be like a wild lion, fool hardy.
I wot well she woll do me slay some day
Some neighbor or other, and then go my way,
For I am perilous with knife in hand,
All be it that I dare not her withstonde:
For she is big in arms by my faith,
That shall he find, that her misdoth or says.
But let us pass away from this mattere.
My lord he said, sir Monk, be merry of chere,
For ye shall tell us a tale truly.
Lo, Rochester stondeth here fast by,
Ride forth mine own lord break not our game,
But by my troth I know not your name,
Wheder I shall call you my lord Dan John
Dan Thomas, Dan Robert, or Dan Albon,
Of what house be ye, by your father kin?
I vow to God, thou have a full fair chin,
It is a gentle pasture there thou ghost,
Thou art not like a pinaunt or a ghost.
Upon my faith thou art some officere,
Some worthy Sexten, or some Celerere.
For by my fathers soul, as to my dome,
Thou art a master, when thou art at home,
No poor cloisterer, ne no poor nouice,
But a governor both ware and wise,
And therewithal of brawne and bones,
A well faring person for the nones:
I pray to God give him confusion,
That first thee brought into religion.
Thou would be a trede foul aright,
Had thou as great leave, as thou have might
To perform all thy lust in ingendrure,
Thou had begotten many a creature.
Alas, why wearest thou so wide a cope?
God give me sorrow, and I were Pope,
Not only thou but every mighty man,
Though he were shore high upon his pan,
Should have a wife, for all this world is lorn,
Religion has take up all the corn
Of treding, and borell men ben shrimps:
* Of feeble trees there comes wretched imps.
This makes that our heirs be so slender
And feeble, yt they may not well engender.
This make that our wives woll assay
Religious folk, for that they may pay
Of Venus payments better than mow we:
For God wot no lussheburghs payen ye.
But be not wroth my lord though I play,
* Full often in game a sooth have I heard say.
This worthy Monk took al in patience,
And said, I woll do my diligence,
As far as souneth into honesty.
To tell you a tale, ye two or three:
And if ye list to harken hitherward,
I woll you saine, the life of saint Edward,
Or else tragidies first I woll tell,
Of which I have an hundred in my cell.
Tragedy is to tell a certain story
As old books us maken memory,
Of hem that stood in great prosperity,
And be fallen out of hie degree
In to misery, and ended wretchedly:
And they ben versified commonly
Of six feet, which men call exemetron:
In prose eke ben endighted many on
And in mitre, many a sundry wise.
Lo, this ought enough you to suffice.
Now herkeneth, if you list for to here,
But first I beseech you in this matere,
Though I by order tell not these things,
Be it of Popes, Emperors, or kings,
After her ages, as men written find,
But tell hem some before and some behind,
As it comes now to my remembrance,
Have me excused of mine ignorance.
The Monks Tale.
A Tragical Discourse of such as have fallen from high estate to extreme misery.

I Will bewail in manner of tragedy
The harm of hem, yt stood in high degree,
And fell so, that there nas no remedy
To bring hem out of their adversity.
* For certain when that fortune list to fly,
There may no man of her ye course witholde:
Let no man trust on blind prosperity,
Beth ware by this ensample young and old.
Lucifer.
AT Lucifer, though he an Angel were
And not a man, at him will I begin,
For though fortune may not Angel dear
From high degree, yet fell he for his sin
Down into hell, where he is yet inn.
O Lucifer, brightest of Angels all,
Now art thou Sathanas, thou may not twin
Out of misery, in which thou art fall.
Adam.
LO Adam, in the field of Damascene
With Gods own finger iwrought was he,
And not begotten of man's sperm unclean,
And welt all Paradise saving o tree:
Never worldly man had so high degree
As Adam, till he for misgouernance
Was driven out of his high prosperity
To labor, and to hell, and to mischance.
Sampson.
LO Sampson, which that was annunciat
By the Angel, long or his nativity:
And was to God Almighty consecrat,
And stood in nobles while he might see:
Was never such another as was he,
To speak of strength, and thereto hardiness.
But to his wives told he his secree
Through which he slough him for wretchedness.
Sampson this noble and mighty champion
Withouten weapon, save his hands twey,
He slough and all to rent the Lion
Toward his wedding, walking by the wey:
His false wife could him so please, and pray,
Till she his counsel knew, and she untrue,
Unto his foes his counsel began bewray,
And him forsook, and took another new.
An hundred foxes took Sampson for ire,
And all her tails he together bond:
And set the foxes tails all on fire,
For he in every tail has put a brond.
And they brent all the corn in that land.
And all her olives, and her vines eke:
A thousand men eke he slough with his hond,
And had no weapen, but an ass cheke.
When they were slain, so thristed him, yt he
Was well me lorne, for which he began to prey,
That God would of his pain have some pite,
And send him drink, or else mote he dey:
And of this ass cheke, that was so drey,
Out of a wang toth, sprang anon a well,
Of which he drunk enough shortly to sey,
Thus halp him God, as Iudicum can tell.
By very force at Gasa on a night,
Maugre the Philistines of that cite,
The gates of the town he has up plight,
And on his back icaried hem has he
High on an hill, where as men might hem se.
O noble mighty Sampson, lefe and dear,
Had thou not told to women thy secre,
In all this world ne had be thy pere.
This Sampson neither sider drank ne wine,
Ne on his head came rasour none ne shere,
By precept of the messenger divine:
For all his strength in his hairs were,
And fully twenty winter year by year
Of Israel he had the governance:
But after soon shall he weep many a tere.
For women shall bring him to mischance.
Unto his lemman Dalida he told,
That in his hairs all his strength lay,
And falsely to his foes she him sold,
And sleeping in her barme upon a day
She made to clip or shere his hairs away:
And made his fomen all his craft espien,
And when that they him found in such array,
They bound him fast, and put out his eyes.
But er his hairs were clipped or ishaue,
There nas no bond with which men might him bind,
But now is he in prison in a cave,
Whereas they made him at ye querne grind.
O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind:
O whildom judge in glory and riches,
Now may thou weepen with thine eyes blind,
Since thou art from well fall to wretchedness.
The end of this caitife was, as I shall sey:
His fomen made a feast upon a day,
And made him as their fool before hem play:
And this was in a temple of great array.
But at the last he made a foul afray,
For he two pillars shoke, and made hem fall,
And down fell the temple all, and there it lay,
And slough himself, and eke his fomen all.
This is to say, the princes euerichone,
And eke three thousand bodies were there slain
With falling of the great temple of stone.
Of Sampson now woll I no more sain:
Beth ware by this example old and plain,
* That no men tell her counsel to her wives
Of such thing, as they would have secret fain,
If that it touch her limbs or her lives.
Of Hercules.
OF Hercules the sovereign Conqueror,
Singen his works, laud, and high renown:
For in his time, of strength he bare ye flower,
He slough and raft the skin of the lion,
And of the Centaurs laid the boste adowne:
He Harpias slew, the cruel birds fell,
He the golden apples raft fro the dragon:
He drew out Cerberus the hound of hell.
He slew the cruel tirant Busirus,
He made his horse to fret him flesh and bone:
He slough the very serpent venomous:
Of Achelous two horns brake he that one.
And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone,
He slough the giant Antacus the strong,
He slough the grisely Bore, and that anon,
And bare his head upon his spear long.
Was neuet wight since the world began,
That slough so many monsters, as did he,
Throughout the wide world his name it ran,
What for his strength, and with for his bounte,
And every realm went he for to see,
He was so strong, yt no man might him let,
And at both worlds ends, he for Trophe
Instead of bounds, of brass a pillour set.
A lemman had this noble champion
That hight Deianire, as fresh as May:
And as these clerks maken mention,
She has him sent a shert fresh and gaie:
Alas this shert, alas and well away
Envenomed was subtly withal,
That er he had weared it half a day,
It made his flesh all fro his bones fall.
But nathelesse, some clerks her excusen
By one that hight Nessus, that it maked:
Be as may be, I woll her not accusen,
But on his body the shert he were al naked,
Till the flesh was with the venim slaked:
And when he saw non other remedy,
In hot coals he has himself iraked,
For with no venim dained he to die.
Thus sterfe this worthy mighty Hercules.
Lo, who may trust in fortune any throw,
For him that follows of the world the pres,
Or he beware, is often laid full low:
* Full wise is he, that himself can know.
Beware, for when that fortune list to gloss,
Then waits she her man down to throw
By such a way, as he would least suppose.
Nabuchodonosor.
THe mighty trone, the precious tresore,
The glorious scepter, and royal majesty,
That has the king Nabuchodonosore.
With tongue uneath may discriued be:
He twice wan Jerusalem that cite,
The vessel of the temple he with him lad:
At Babylon was his sovereign see,
In which his glory and his delight he had.
Of Jerusalem, he did do gelde anon,
The fairest children of the blood royal,
And make each of hem to been his thrall:
Among all other Daniel was one,
That was the wisest of euerichone,
For he the dremes of the king expouned:
Whereas in Caldee clerks were there none
That wist to what fine his dreme sounded.
This proud king let make a statu of gold
Sixty cubits long, and seven in bread,
To the which image, both young and old
Commanded he lout, and have in dread,
Or in a forneis, full of flames read
He should be deed, that would not obey:
But never would assent to that deed
Daniel, ne his young fellows twey.
This king of kings so proud and elate
Weend God, that sits in majesty,
Ne might him not berefe of his estate:
But suddenly he lost his dignity,
And like a beast him seemed for to be,
And ete hey as an ox, and lay therout
In rain, and with wild beasts walked he,
Till a certain time was come about.
And like an Egles feathers were his heeres,
And his neiles also like birds claws were,
God relieved him at certain years,
And yaue him wit, and then with many a tere
He thonked God, and all his life in fere
Was he to do amiss, or more trespace:
And ere that he laid was on his bear.
He knew that God was full of might and grace.
Balthaser.
HIs son, which that high Balthasare,
That held ye reign after his faders day,
He by his fader could not beware,
For proud he was of heart, and of array:
And eke an Ydolaster was he aie.
His high estate assured him in pride.
But fortune cast him down, and there he lay,
And suddenly his reign began divide.
A feast he made unto his lords all
Upon a time, he made hem blithe be,
And then his officers began he call
Goth bring forth all the vessels (quoth. he)
Which that my father in his prosperity
Out of the temple of Jerusalem beraft,
And to our Gods thonkes yelden we,
Of honor, that our elders with us laft.
His wife, his lords, and his concubines
Aie drunken, whiles her appetites last,
Out of these noble vessels foundrie wines.
And on a wall this king his eyes cast,
A^^ saw an hond armelesse, that wrote fast,
For fear of which he quoke, and sighed sore:
This hond that Balthaser made sore aghast,
Wrote (Mane techel phares) and no more.
In all that land, Magicien was there non,
That could expoune what this letter meant,
But Daniel expouned it anon,
And said, O king, God, thy father sent
Glory and honor, reign, tresour, and rent,
And he was proud, and nothing God he drad:
And therefore great wrath God upon him sent,
And him beraft the reign that he had.
He was out cast of man's company,
With Asses was his habitation:
And eat haie, as a beast in wete and dry,
Till that he knew by wit and reason,
That God of heaven has domination
Over every reign, and every creature:
And then had God of him compassion,
And him restored his reign and his figure.
Eke thou yt art his son, art proud also,
And know all these things privily:
And art rebel to God, and his fo,
Thou drank eke of his vessels boldly,
Thy wife eke, and thy wenches sinfully
Drunk of the same vessels sundry winis,
And heried false gods cursedly,
Therefore to thee shapen great pine is.
This hond was sent fro God, yt on the wall
Wrote (Mane techel phares) trust me:
Thy reign is done, thou wotest not all,
Divided is thy realm, and it shall be
To Medes and to Perciens given (quoth. he)
And that same night, the king was slaw:
And Darius occupied his dignity,
Though he thereto had neither right ne law.
* Lordings, here ensample mow ye take,
How that in lordship is no sikernesse:
For when that fortune woll a man forsake,
She bears away his reign, and his richesse:
And his friends, both more and less.
And what man has friends, through fortune,
Mishap woll make hem enemies as I guess.
This proverb is full soth, and full commune.
Zenobia.
ZEnobia of Palmerie Queen
(As writes Perciens of her noblesse)
So worthy was in arms, and so kene,
That no wight passed her in hardiness,
Ne in lineage, ne in other gentilnesse:
Of kings blood of Perce she is descended,
I say that she had not most of fairness,
But of her shape she might not be amended.
From her childhood I find that she fled
Office of a woman, and to wood she went:
And many a wild Hearts blood she shed
With arrows broad that she to hem sent.
She was so swift, that she hem hent,
And when that she was elder, she would kill
Lions, Libards, and Beeres all to rent,
And in her arms weld hem at her will.
She durst the wild beasts dens to seek,
And run in the mountains all the night,
And sleep under a bush, and she could eke
Wrastell by very force and by very might
With any young man, were he never so wight:
There might nothing in her arms stond:
She kept her maidenhead from every wight,
To no man dained she to be bound.
But at last her friends has her married
To Odenat, a prince of that country:
All were it so, that she hem long tarried.
And ye shall understand, how that he
Had such fantasies like as had she:
But natheles, when they were knit in fere,
They lived in joy and in felicite,
For each of hem had other lefe and dear.
Save one thing, she nolde never assent
By no way, that he should by her lie
But ones, for it was her plain intent
To have a child, the world to multiply:
And also so sone as she might epsy,
That she was not with child with that deed,
Then would she suffer him to do his fantasy
Eftsoon, and not but ones out of dreed.
And if she were with child at that cast,
No more should he with her play that game
Till fully forty days were past:
Then would she ones suffer him the same.
All were this Odenat wild or tame,
He gate no more of her, for thus she said,
* It was to wives letcherie and shame,
In other case if men with hem played.
Two sons by this Odenat had she,
The which she kept in virtue and lettrure,
But now unto our tale again turn we:
I say that so worshipful a creature
And wise therewith, and large with measure,
So penible in war, and curteis eke,
Ne more labor might in war endure
Was non, though all this world men would seek.
Her rich array ne might not be told,
As well in vessel as in her clothing:
She was all clad in pierrie and in gold,
And eke she left not for none hunting
To have of sundry tongues full knowing,
When that she leisure had for to entend
To learn in books was all her liking
How she in virtue her life might dispend.
And shortly of this story for to treat:
As doughtie was her husbond as she.
So that they conquered many reigns great
In the Orient, with many a fair cite
Appertainaunt unto the majesty
O Rome, and with strength held the mfull fast
Ne never might her foemen do her fle,
All the while that Odinates days last.
Her battles, who so list hem for to read
Again Sapor the king, and other mo,
And how all this process fill in deed,
Why she conquered, and her title thereto,
And after of her mischief and her woe,
How that she was besieged, and itake,
Let him to my master Petrarke go,
That writes enough of this, I undertake.
When Odenat was dead, she mightily
The realms held, and with her own hand
Against her foes she fought so truly
That there nas no prince ne king in all ye land
But were full glad, if they that grace fond
That she ne should upon his land warrey:
With her they made aliaunce by bond
To be in peace, and let hem ride and pley.
The Emperor of Rome Claudius,
Ne him beforne, the Romain Galien
Ne durst never be so coragious,
Ne non Armen, ne non Egipcien
Ne Surrien, ne none Arabien
Within the field, that durst with her fight,
Lest yt she would hem with her hondes sleen,
Or with her maine put hem to flight.
In kings habit wenten her sons two
As the lawful heirs of her realms all,
And Hermanno and Titamallo
Her names were, as Perciens hem call.
* But aie fortune has in her honey gall:
This mighty Queen, may no while endure,
Fortune out of her reign made her to fall
To wretchedness, and to misauenture.
Aurelian, when that the governance
Of Rome came into his honds twey,
He shope upon this Queen to do vengeance,
And with his legions he took his way
Toward Zenobia, and shortly for to say.
He made her fly, and at last her hent,
And fettered her, and eke her children tway,
And wan the land, and home to Rome he went.
Amongst other things that he wan,
Her chair, that of gold was wrought and pierre,
This great Roman, this Aurelian
Has with him lad, that for men should it see:
All beforne his triumph walked she
With golden chains on her neck honging,
Crowned she was, as after he degree,
And full of pierre charged her clothing.
Alas fortune, she that whilom was
Dredefull to kings and to Emperors,
Now gaureth all the people on her alas:
And she that helmed was in stark stoures,
And wan by force towns strong, and toures,
Shall on her head now wear autremite:
And she that bare the septer full of flowers,
Shall bear a distafe her cost for to quite.
Nero.
ALthough that Nero were as vicious,
As any fend, that lies full low adown:
Yet he, as tells us Suetonius
All this world had in subiectioun,
Both East and West, and Septentrioun.
Of Rubies, Saphires, and of Perles white
Were all his clothes broudred up and down,
For he in gemmes greatly began delight.
More delicate, more pompous of array,
More proud, was never Emperor than he:
That like cloth that he had weared o day,
After that time, he nold it never see:
Nets of gold threde had he great plente,
To fish in Tiber, when him list to play,
His lusts were as law, in his degree,
For fortune as his friend would him obey.
He Rome brent for his dilicacie,
The Senators he slew upon a day,
To hear how her wives would weep and cry:
And slow his brother, and by his sister lay.
His mother made he in a pitous array,
For he her womb let slit, to behold
Where he conceived was, so welaway,
That he so little of his mother told.
No tears out of his eyes, for that sight
He came, but said, a fair woman was she:
Great wonder is, that he coud or might
Be Domisman of her dead beauty:
The wine to bring him commanded he,
And drank anon, none other woe he made.
* When might is joined unto cruelte,
Alas, too deep will the venume wade.
In youth a master had this Emperor
To teach him lettrure, and courtesy,
For of moralite he was the flour.
And in his time, but if his books lie,
And whiles his master had of him maistrie,
He made him so cunning and so souple,
That long time it was or tyranny,
Or any vice durst in him encouple.
Senek his master was, of which I devise,
Because Nero had of him such dread,
For he for his vices would him chastise
Discreetly as by word, and not by deed,
Sir he would say, an Emperor mote need
Be virtuous, and hate tyranny.
For which he made him in a bathe to blede
On both his arms, till he must die.
This Nero had eke a customaunce
In youth against his master to rise:
And afterward, him thought great grevaunce
Because he often would him chastise.
Therefore he made him to die in this wise.
He chose in a bathe to die in this manner,
Rather than to have another turmentise:
And thus has Nero slain his master dear.
Now fell it so, that fortune list no longer
The high pride of Nero to cherishe:
For tho he were strong, yet was she stronger,
She thought thus, by God I am too nice
To set a man, that is fulfilled of vice,
In high degree, and an Emperor him call:
By God out of his seat I woll him trice,
When he least weneth, soonest shall he fall.
The people rose upon him on a night
For his defaut, and when he it aspied,
Out of his doors anon he has him dight
Alone, and there he wend have been allied,
He knocked fast, and aye the more he cried,
The faster shet they the doors all:
Tho wist he well he had himself beguiled,
And went his way, no longer durst he call.
The people cried and rombled up and down,
That with his ears he heard how they said
Where is this false tyrant? this Neroun,
For fear full near out of his wit he braied,
And to his gods right pitously he prayed
For succor, but it might not betide:
For dread of this him thought that he deid,
And ran into a garden him to hide.
And in this garden found he chorles twey
Sitting by a fire great and red,
And to the chorles two he began to prey
To slay him, and to gird off his head,
That to his body, when he were ded,
Were no despite done for his defame.
Himself he slough, he could no better red,
Of which fortune lough and had then game.
Holofernes.
WAs never captain under a king
That reigns mo put in subjectioun,
Ne stronger was in field of all thing
As in his time, ne greater of renoun,
Ne more pompous in high presumptioun,
Than Holoferne, which fortune aye kissed,
And so licourous^y lad him up and down,
Till that he dead was ere that he wist.
* Not only yt this world had of him awe
For lesing of richesse and liberte:
But he made every man renie his law,
Nabuchodonosor was lord, said he:
None other God should honored be.
Against his hest, there dare no wight trespace,
Save in Bethulia, a strong cite,
Where Eliachem was priest of that place.
But take keep of the death of Holoferue:
Amid his host he drunk lay all night
Within his tent, large as is a berue.
And yet for all his pomp and all his might,
Judith, a woman, as he lay upright
Sleeping, his head off smote, and fro his tent
Full privily she stole from every wight,
And with his head unto her town she went.
Antiochus.
WHat needs it of king Antiochus
To tell his high and royal majesty?
His great pride, and his work venemus,
For soch another man nas never as he,
Redeth what that he was in Machabe,
And redeth the proud words that he seid,
And why he fill from his prosperity,
And in an hill how wretchedly he deid.
Fortune him had enchaunsed so in pride,
That verily he wend he might attain
Unto the sterres upon every side,
And in a balaunce to wey each mountain,
And all the floudes of the sea restrain:
And Gods people had he most in hate,
Hem would he slay in torment and in pain,
Wening that God ne might his pride abate.
And for that Nichanore and Timothe
By Jews were venquished mightily,
Unto the Jews soch an hate had he,
That he had greithe his chare full has^ely,
And swore and said, full dispitously:
Unto Jerusalem he would eftsone
To wrecke his ire on it full cruelly,
But of his purpose was he let full sone.
God for his manace him so sore smote,
With invisible wound, aie incurable,
That in his guts carfe so and bote,
That his pains was importable:
And certainly the wreche was reasonable.
For many a man's guts did he pain,
But from his purpose, cursed and damnable,
For all his smert, he nolde him not restrain.
But bade anon, aparaile his host
And suddenly or he then was ware,
God daunted all his pride, and all his bost:
For he so sore fell out of his chare,
That all his limbs and his skin to tare
So that he no more might go ne ride
But in a chair, men about him bare
All forbruised both back and side.
The wreche of God him smote so cruelly,
That in his body wicked worms crept,
And therewithal he stanke so horribly,
That none of all his meine that him kept,
Whether that he woke or else slept,
Ne might not of him the stink endure.
And in his mischief he wayled and wept,
And knew God, Lord of every creature.
To all his host, and to himself also
Full loathsome was the stink of his caraine,
No man might him bear to ne fro.
And in his stink, and in his horrible pain,
He sterfe full wretchedly on a mountain.
Thus has this robber, and this homicide,
That many a man made to weep and plain,
Soch guerdon, as belongs to pride.
Alexander.
THe story of Alexander is so commune,
That every wight that has discretioun
Has heard somewhat or all, of his fortune:
This wide world, as in conclusioun,
He wan by strength, and for his renoun
They were glad for peace unto him send
The pride of man, and bost he laid adown
Where so he came, unto the worlds end.
Comparison might yet never be maked
Betwixt him, and another conqueror,
For all this world for dread of him has quaked
He was of knighthood, and of freedom flower:
Fortune him made the heir of high honor.
Save wine and women nothing might assuage
His high intent in arms and labor
So was he full of loving courage.
What price were it to him, though I you told
Of Darius, and of an hundred thousand mo
Of Princes, Earls, and knights bold,
Which he conquered, and brought to woe:
I say as far as a man may ride or go
The world was his, with should I more devise:
For though I wrote and told you evermo
Of his knighthood, it might not suffice.
Twelve year he reigned, as I read in Machabe:
Phillips son of Macedone he was
That first was King of Greece, that country,
O worthy gentle Alexander, alas
That ever should thee fall soch a case:
Empoisoned of thy folk thou were,
* Thy sice fortune has turned into an ace,
And yet for thee ne wept she never a tere.
Who shall yeve men teres to complain
The death of gentleness, and of fraunchise,
That all the world welded in his demaine,
And yet him thought it might not suffice:
So full was his courage of high emprise,
Alas, who shall me help to endite
False fortune, and her poison to despise?
The which of all this woe I wite.
Julius Caesar.
BY wisdom, manhood, and high labor,
From humble bed to royal Majeste
Up rose he, Julius Conqueror,
That all the Occident by land and see
Wan by strength of hand, or else by trete,
And unto Rome made him tributarie:
And since of Rome Emperor was he
Till that fortune wexe his adversary.
O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
Against Pompey father thine in law,
That of the Orient had the chivalry,
As far as that the day begins to daw:
Then through knighthood have take and islaw,
Save few folk that with Pompeius fled,
Through which thou put all the orient in aw:
Thank fortune that so well thee ysped.
But now a little while I woll bewail
This Pompey, this noble governor
Of Rome, which that fled at this battle.
I say one of his men, a false traitor
His head off smote, to win him favor
Of Julius, and to him the head brought:
Alas Pompey, of the orient conqueror,
That fortune unto such a fine thee wrought.
To Rome again repaireth Julius
With his triumph lauriate full hie,
But on a time Brutus and Cassius,
That ever had of his high estate envy,
Full prively had made conspiracy
Against this Julius in subtle wise:
And cast the place in which he should die,
With bodkins, as I shall you devise.
This Julius unto the Capitol went
Upon a day, as he was wont to gone,
And in the Capitol anon him hent
This false Brutus, and his other sone,
And sticked him with bodkins anon
With many a wound, and thus they let him lie:
But never grutched he at no stroke but one,
Or else at two, but if his story lie.
So manly was this Julius of heart,
And so well loved stately honest,
That tho his deadly wounds so sore smart,
His mantle over his hips yet cast he,
For no man should see his privite:
And as he lay in dying in a trance,
And wist verily that die should he,
Of honesty yet had he remembrance.
Lucan to thee this story I recommend,
And to Sueton, and Valerie also,
That of this story written word and end:
How that to these great conquerours two
Fortune was first a friend, and since a fo.
* No man trust upon her favor long,
But have her in await for euermo,
Witness on all the conquerours strong.
Cresus.
THe rich Cresus, whilom king of Lide,
Of which Cresus, Cirus sore him drad,
Yet was he caught amid all his pride,
And to brenne, men to the fire him lad:
But such a rain down fro the firmament shad
That queint the fire, and made him to escape:
But to beware yet no grace he had,
Till fortune on the gallows made him gape.
When he escaped was, he could not stint
For to begin a new array again:
He wend well, for that fortune him sent
Such hap, that he escaped through the rain,
That of his foes he might not be slain,
And eke a sweven upon a night he met,
Of which he was so proud, and eke so fain,
That on vengeance he all his heart set.
Upon a tree he was, as him thought,
There Jupiter him wisshe, both back and side:
And Phoebus eke a fair towell him brought
To dry him with, and therewith wexe his pride.
And to his daughter that stood him beside,
Which yt he knew in hie sentence habound,
He bad her tell what it signified,
And she his dream right thus did expound.
The tree (quoth. she) yt gallows is to mean,
And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,
And Phoebus with his towell so clean,
Betokens the Sun beams, sooth to sain:
Thou shall honged be, father, certain,
Rain shall thee wash, and sun shall thee dry:
Thus warned him full plat and full plain
His daughter, that called was Phanie.
And honged was Cresus the proud king,
His royal throne might him not avail:
Tragedy is none, ne other manner thing,
That can in singing cry ne bewail,
But that fortune all day woll assail
* With unware stroke, ye reigns yt been proud:
For when men trusts her, then wol she fail,
And cover her bright face with a cloud.
Peter of Spain.
O Noble, O worthy Petro, glory of Spain,
Whom fortune held so high in Majesty:
Well ought men thy pitous death complain.
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
And after at a siege by subteltee
Thou were betrayed, and lad unto his tent,
Where as he with his own hond slew thee,
Succeeding in thy reign and in thy rent.
The field of snow, with thegle of black therein,
Caught with ye limrod, colored as ye glede,
He brewed his cursednesse, and all this sin:
The wicked neste was werker of this deed,
Not Charles, ne Oliver, yt took aye head
Of troth and honor, but of Armorike
Genillion Oliver, corrupt for mede
Brought this worthy king in such a brike.
Petro King of Cipre.
O Worthy Petro, king of Cipre also,
That Alexandrie wan by high maistrie
Full many a heathen wroughtest thou woe,
Of which thine own lieges had envy:
And for no thing but for thy chivalry,
They in thy bed han slain thee by the morrow,
Thus can fortune her whele govern and gie,
And out of joy bringen men to sorrow.
Barnabo Vicount.
OF Millaine great Barnabo Vicounte,
God of delight, and scourge of Lumbardie
Why should not I thine infortune account,
Sens in estate thou clomben were so high:
Thy brothers son, yt was thy double alie,
For he thy nevew was, and son in law,
Within his prison made thee to die,
But why ne how not I, yt thou were slawe.
Hugeline of Pise.
OF the Earl Hugeline of Pise ye langoure
There may no tongue it tell for pite:
But a little out of Pise stont a toure,
In which toure in prison put was he,
And with him been his little children three,
The eldest scarsely five year of age:
Alas fortune, it was a great cruelte
Such birds for to put in such a cage.
Damned was he to die in that prison
For Roger, which that bishop was of Pise
Had on him made a false suggestion,
Through which ye people began upon him rise,
And put him in prison, in such a wise,
As ye have heard, and meat and drink he had
So small, that unneth it may suffice,
And therewithal it was full poor and bad.
And on a day befell, that in that hour,
When yt his meat wont was to be brought,
The geilour shette the doors of the toure,
He heard it well, but he spoke right naught:
And in his heart anon there fill a thought,
That they for hunger would do him dien,
Alas (quoth. he) alas that I was wrought,
Therewithal the tears fill fro his eyes.
His young son, that three year was of age,
Unto him said, father, why do ye weep?
When will the geilour bring our potage,
Is there no morsel bread that ye do keep?
I am so hungry, that I may not sleep,
Now would God that I might sleep ever,
Then should not hunger in my womb crepe.
There nis nothing but bread yt me were lever.
Thus day by day, this child began to cry,
Till in his fathers arm adowne it lay,
And said, farewell father, I mote die,
And kissed his father, and deide the same day.
And when the woeful father did it sey,
For woe, his arms two he began to bite,
And said alas fortune, and well away,
Thy false whele my woe all may it wite.
His children wend, that it for hunger was
That he his arms gnewe, and not for woe,
And said: father do not so (alas)
But rather eat the flesh upon us two,
Our flesh you yaue us, take our flesh us fro
And eat enough: right thus they to him seid
And after that within a day or two
They laid hem in his lap adoun, and deid.
Thus ended is this mighty Earl of Pise.
Himself dispeired eke, for hunger starfe:
Of this tragedy, it ought enough suffice,
From high estate fortune away him carfe.
Who so woll hear it in a longer wise
Reads he the great poet of Itaile
That hight Dante, for he can it all devise
Fro point to point, not a word woll he fail.
Here stinteth the Knight the Monk of his Tale, and here follows the
Prologue of the Nonnes Priest.
HO (quoth. ye knight) good sir no more of this:
That ye have said, is right enough iwis,
And mokell more: for little heaviness
Is right enough to much folk, I guess,
I say for me, it is a great disease,
Where as men have be in wealth and ease,
To hear of her sudden fall, alas:
And the contrary is joy and solas,
As when a man has been in poor estate,
And climbeth up, and wexeth fortunate,
And there abides in prosperity:
Such things is gladsome, as thinks me,
And of such thing were good for to tell.
Ye (quoth. our host) by Saint Poules bell
Ye say right soth, this Monk clappeth loud,
He spoke, how fortune covered with a cloud
I wot not what, and also of a Tragedy
* Right now he heard: And perde no remedy
It is for to bewailen, ne complain
That that is done, and als it is a pain,
As ye have said, to hear of heaviness.
Sir monk no more of this, so God you bless,
Your tale anoyeth all the company,
Such talking is not worth a butterfly,
For therein is there no disport ne game:
Therefore sir monk, dan Piers by your name,
I pray you heartily, tell us somewhat else,
For sikerly, nere clinking of your bells
That on your bridle honge on every side,
By heaven king, that for us all did,
I should ere this han fall down for sleep,
Although the flough had been never so deep:
Then had your tale all be told in vain.
For certainly, as that these clerks saine,
* Where as a man may have none audience,
Naught helps it to tell his sentence.
And well I wot the substance is in me,
If any thing shall well reported be.
Sir, say somewhat of hunting I you pray.
Ne (quoth. this Monk) I have no lust to play:
Now let another tell, as I have told.
Then spoke our host with rude speech and bold,
And said unto the Nonnes Priest anon,
Com nere you priest, com hither thou sir John.
Tell us such a thing, as may our herts glad,
Be blithe, though thou ride upon a jade:
What though thy horse be both foul and lene,
If he woll serve thee recke not a been:
Look that thy heart be merry evermo.
Yes sir (quoth. he) yes host, so mote I go:
But I be merry, iwis I woll be blamed,
And right anon, his tale he has attained,
And thus he said, unto us everichon,
This sweet priest, this goodly man sir John.
The Nonnes Priest his Tale.
Of a Cock and a Hen: the Moral whereof is to embrace true Friends, and to
beware of Flatterers.

A Poor widdowe somdele istept in age,
Was whilom dwelling in a poor cotage
Beside a grove, stonding in a dale:
This widow of which I tell you my tale,
Sens the day that she was last a wife,
In patience, led a full simple life.
For little was her cattle and her rent:
By husbandry, of such as God her sent,
She found her self, and eke her daughters two:
Three large sowes had she, and no mo:
Three kine, and eke a sheep that hight Mall,
Well sooty was her boure, and eke her hall,
In which she ete many a slender mele.
Of poinant sauce ne knew she never adele,
Ne deinty morsel passed through her throat:
Her diet was accordaunt to her cote.
Repletion ne made her never sick,
A temperate diet was her physic,
And exercise, and hearts suffisaunce:
The gout let her nothing for to dance,
Ne apoplexy shent not her head:
No wine drank she, white ne red,
Her board was most served with white and black,
Milk and broun breed, in which she found no lack:
Seinde bacon, and sometime an eye or twey,
For she was as it were a manner dey.
A yerd she had, enclosed all about
With sticks, and dry diched without:
In which she had a cock hight Chaunteclere,
In all the land, of crowing nas his pere.
His voice was merrier than ye merry orgon
On mass days, that in the churches gone:
Well sikerer was his crowing in his loge,
Than is a clock, or in an abbey an orloge.
By nature he knew each assentioun
Of the equinoctial in the town.
For when degrees xv. were ascended,
Then crew he, it might not be amended.
His comb was redder than the fine coral,
And battelled, as it had be a castle wall.
His bill was black, as any jet it shone,
Like as^re were his legs and his tone:
His nails whiter than the lilly flour,
And like the burned gold was his color.
This gentle cock had in governaunce
Seven hens, to done on his pleasaunce:
Which were his susters and his paramours,
And wonder like to him, as of colors:
Of which the fairest hewed in the throat,
Was called fair damsel Pertelote.
He fethered her a hundred times a day,
And she him pleases all that ever she may.
Curteis she was, discreet, and debonaire,
And compenable, and bare her self so fair.
Sens the time that she was sevennight old,
That truliche she has the heart in hold
Of Chaunteclere, looking on every lith:
He loves her so, yt well was him therewith,
But such a joy it was to hear him sing,
When that the bright sun began to spring
In sweet accord: my lefe is far in land.
For that time, as I have understond,
Beasts and birds coulden speak and sing,
And it so fell, that in the dawning,
As Chaunteclere among his wives all
Sat on his perch, that was in the hall,
And next him sat his fair Pertelote,
This Chanteclere began to groan in his throat,
As a man yt in his dreme is drenched sore:
And when yt Pertelot thus herd him rore,
She was aghast, and said her heart dear,
What aileth you to groan in this manner?
Ye be a very sleper, fie for shame:
And he answered thus, by God madame,
I pray you, that ye take it not in grief:
By God I met I was in such mischief
Right now, yt yet mine heart is sore afright.
Now God (quoth. he) my sweven head a right,
And keep my body out of foul prisoun.
Me met, that I romed up and down
Within your yerde, where I saw a be,
Was like an hound, and would have made areest
Upon my body, and would have had me deed.
His color was betwixt yellow and reed,
And tipped was his tail, and both his eeres
With black, unlike ye remnant of his heeres.
His snout small, with glowing eyes twey:
Yet for his look almost for fear I dey:
This causes me my groaning doubtless.
Away (quoth. she) fie for shame heartlesse
Alas (quoth. she) for by that God above
Now have ye lost my heart and all my love,
I cannot love a cowarde by my faith:
For certes, what so any woman says,
* We all desire, if that it might be,
To have husbonds, hardy, wise and free,
And discrete, ne no niggard ne no fool,
Ne him that is aghast of every tool,
Ne none avauntour by that God above,
How durst ye say for shame, unto your love,
That any sweven might make you aferde?
Have ye no man's heart, and have a berde?
Alas, and con ye be aferd of swevenis,
Nothing bnt vanity god wotte in sweven is.
Swevens ben engendered of replecions,
And often of fume, and of complecions.
When humors ben too habundant in a wight:
Certes this dreme which ye have met to night
Comes of the great superfluity
Of red color that is in you parde,
Which causen folk to dred in her dreams
Of arrows, and of fire with red lemes,
Of red beasts that woollen hem bite,
Of conteke, and of wasps great and lite,
Right as the humor of melancholy,
Causes many a man in sleep to cry,
For fear of great bulls, and of beres blake,
Or else that black devils woll hem take.
Of other humors could I tell also,
That work a man in sleep much woe:
But I woll pass, as lightly as I can.
Lo Caton, which yt was so wise a man
Said he not thus, do not force of dreams?
Now sir (quoth. she) when we fly fro the bemes,
For Gods love, as takes some laxative:
Up pexill of my soul, and of my life
I counsel you the best, I woll not lie,
That both of collor, and of melancholy
Ye purge you, and for ye shull not tarry,
Though in this town be none Apotecarie,
I shall my self two herbs techen you,
That shall be for your heal, and for your prow
And in our yerde, tho herbs shall I find
The which have her property by kind
To purge you bineth, and eke above:
Forgets not this for Gods own love:
Ye be right colericke of complexion,
Ware the sun in his ascension
Ne find ye not repleate of humors hot:
For if it do, I dare well lay a grote,
That ye shall have a fever terciane,
Or else an ague that may be your bane.
A day or two ye shall have digestives
Of worms, or ye take your ^axatives,
Of laurel, centorie, and of femetere,
Or else of elder berries, that grow there,
Of Catapuce, or of gaitres bereis,
Of yvie growing in our yard, that merry is.
Pluck hem up as they grow, and eat hem in:
Be merry husbond, for your father kin,
Dredeth no dreme, I can say no more.
Madame (quoth. he) gramercy of your lore.
But nathelesse, as touching dan Caton,
That of wisdom has so great renoun,
Though he had no dreams for to dread,
By God, men may in old books read,
Of many a man, more of authority
Then ever Caton was so mote I thee.
That all the revers says of his sentence,
And have well found by experience,
* That dreams be significations,
As well of joy, as of tribulations,
That folk endure in this life present:
There needs to make of this non argument:
The very prefe shows it indeed.
One of the greatest authors yt men read,
Says thus: yt whilome two fellows went
On pilgrimage in full good intent,
And happed so they came into a town,
Where as there was such congregatioun
Of people, and eke of strait herbigage,
That they ne found as much as a cottage,
In which they both might ylodged be.
Wherefore they mote of necessite
As for that night depart company,
And each of hem goes to his hostelry,
And took his lodging as it would fall.
That one of hem was lodged in a stall,
Far in a yerd, with oxen of the plough:
That other man was lodged well enough,
As was his aventure, or his fortune,
That us governs all, as in commune.
And so befell, long or it were day
This man met in his bed, there as he lay,
How that his fellow began upon him call,
And said (alas) for in an oxes stall
This night shall I be murdered, there I lie:
Now help me dear brother or I die,
In all have, come to me (he said.)
This man out of his sleep for fear abraid:
But when he was waked of his sleeye,
He turned him, and took of this no keep,
Him thought his dream was but a vanite:
Thus twice in his sleep dreamed he.
And at the third time, yet his felaw,
Came as him thought, and said, I now am slaw:
Behold my bloody wounds, deep and wide,
Arise up early, in the morrow tide,
And at the West gate of the town (quoth. he)
A cart full of dung there shall thou see,
In which my body is hid full prively,
Do thou that cart arresten boldly,
My gold caused my death, sooth to saine,
And told him every point how he was slain
With a full pitous face, pale of hew:
And trust well, his dreme he found right true,
For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,
To his fellows inn he took the way:
And when that he came to the oxes stall,
After his fellow he began to call.
The hosteler answered him anon,
And said, sir, your fellow is igone,
As soon as it was day he went out of town:
This man began fall in suspectioun
Remembering of his dreams that he met,
And forth he goes, no longer would he let,
Unto the West gate of the town, and fond
A dung cart, as it were to dung land,
That was araied in the same wise
As ye have heard the dead man devise:
And with hardy heart he began to cry
Vengeance and justice of this fellonie:
My fellow murdered is this same night,
And in this cart he lies, gaping upright.
I cry out on the ministers (quoth. he)
That shoulden keep and rule this cite:
Harow alas, here lies my fellow slain.
What should I more of this tale saine?
The people out start, and cast ye cart to ground,
And in the middle of the dung they found
The dead man, that murdered was all new.
O blisfull God, that art so good and true,
Lo how thou bewrayest murder always.
Murder woll out, that see we day by day:
* Murder is so waltsome and abominable
To God, that so just is and reasonable,
That he ne woll it suffer hylled to be:
Though it abide a year, two, or three,
Murder woll out, this is my conclusioun.
And right anon, the ministers of the town
Have hent the carter, and sore him pined,
And eke the hosteler so sore engined,
That they be knew her wickedness anon,
And were honged up by the neck bone.
Here may ye see that dremes ben to dread.
And certes, in the same lefe I read,
Right in the next chapter after this,
I gabbe not, so have I joy and blis:
Two men would have passed over the sea
For certain causes to a far country,
If the wind ne had be contrary,
That made hem in a city to tarry,
That stood full merry upon an haven side:
But on a day, against an even tide.
The wind began change, and blew as hem lest,
Jolly and glad they wenten to rest,
And cast hem full early for to sail,
But harken, to one man fell a great marvel.
That one of hem in sleeping as he lay,
He met a wonders dreme, again the day:
Him thought a man stood by his beds side,
And him commanded, that he should abide,
And said him thus, if thou to morrow wend,
Thou shall be dreint, my tale is at an end.
He woke, and told his fellow with he met,
And prayed him his voyage for to let,
As for that day, he prayed him for to abide.
His fellow that lay by his beds side,
Began for to laugh, and scorned him full fast:
No dreme (quoth. he) may so my heart aghast,
That I woll let for to do my things:
I set not a straw for thy dreamings,
For sweuens been but vanities and yapes:
Men meten all day of oules and of apes,
And eke of many a mase therewithal,
And dremen of thing that never was, ne shall.
But since I see that thou wolt here abide,
And thus slouthen wilfully thy tide,
God wot it rueth me, and have good day,
And thus he took his leave, and went his way.
But ere he had half his course ysailed,
I not why, ne what mischaunce it ailed,
But casuelly the ships bottom to rent,
And ship and men under the water went
In sight of other ships there beside,
That with hem sailed at the same tide.
And therefore, fair Pertelot so dear,
By such ensamples old may thou lere
That no man should be too rechelesse
Of dremes, for I say thee doubtless,
That many a dreme full sore is for to dread.
Lo, in the life of saint Kenelme, we read,
That was Kenelphus son, the noble king
Of Mercenryke, how kenelm met a thing:
A little ere he were murdered on a deie,
His murder in his vision he seie:
His norice him expouned every dele
His sweuen, and bad him keep him well
Fro treason, but he was but seven year old,
And therefore little tale he thereof told
Of any dream, so holy was his heart:
By God I had rather than my shert,
That ye have herd his legend, as have I.
Dame Pertelot, I say to you truly,
Macrobius, that writes the auision
In Afric of the worthy Scipion,
Affirms dremes, and says that they been
Warning of things that we after seen.
And furthermore, I pray you looks well
In the old Testament, of Daniel,
If he held dreams for vanitee.
Read eke of Joseph, and there shall ye see
Whether dremes ben sometime, but I say not all,
Warning of things that after shall fall.
Look of Egypt the king, yt hight Pharao,
His baker and his butteler also,
Wheder they felt none effect in dremes?
Who so woll seek acts of sundry remes,
May read of dreams many a wonder thing.
Lo Cresus, which that was of Lide king,
Met he not that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified he should honged be?
Lo Andromacha, that was Hectors wife,
That day that Hector should lose his life,
She dreamed in the same night beforne,
How the life of Hector should be lorne,
If that day he went unto battle:
She warned him, but it might not avail,
He went for to fight nevertheless,
But he was slain anon of Achilles.
But that tale is all too long to tell,
And eke it is nigh day, I may not dwell.
Shortly I say, as for conclusion,
That I shall have of this auision
Adversity: and I say furthermore,
That I ne tell of laratiues no store,
For they ben venomous, I wot it well:
I hem defy, I love hem never adele.
But let us speak of mirth, and stint all this,
Madame Perrelot, so have I blis,
Of one thing God has me sent large grace:
For when I see the beauty of your face,
Ye ben so scarlet red about your eyes,
It makes all my dread for to dien.
* For all so siker, as In principio
Mulier est hominis confusio.
Madame the sentence of this latin is,
Woman is man's joy and his blis:
For when I feel on night your soft side,
Albeit that I may not on you ride,
For that our perch is made so narrow alas,
I am so full of joy and of solas.
That I defy both sweuen and dreme:
And with yt word he flew down fro the beme,
For it was day, and eke the hens all:
And with a chucke he began hem for to call,
For he had found a corn lay in the yerd:
Royal he was, and no more aferd:
He feddred Pertelot twenty time,
And trod her eke as often, ere it was prime.
He looks as it were a grim lioun,
And on his toes he romed up and down.
Him deigned not set his feet to the ground:
He chucked, when he had a corn yfound,
And to him then ran his wives all.
As royal as a prince in his hall,
Leave I this chaunteclere in his posture:
And after woll I tell of his adventure.
When y^ month in which the world began,
yt hight March, in which God first made man
Was complete, and passed were also
Since March began, thirty days and two,
Befell that Chaunteclere in all his pride,
His seven wives walking him beside,
Cast up his eyes to the bright sun,
That in the sign of Taurus was irunne
Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more:
He knew by kind, and by none other lore,
yt it was prime, and crew with a blisfull steven:
The sun he said is clombe up to heaven
Forty degrees and one, and somewhat more iwis,
Madame Pertelot, my worlds blis,
Harken how these blisfull birds sing,
And see the fresh flowers how they began spring.
Full is mine heart of reueli, and sollas.
But suddenly him fell a sorrowful caas:
* For ever the latter end of joy is woe,
God wot, worldly joy is soon ago:
And if a rethore coud fair endite,
He in a chronicle might safely write
As for a sovereign notabilite.
Now every wise man harken to me,
This story is all so true I undertake,
As is the book of Lancelot du lake,
That women holden in full great reverence:
Now woll I turn again to my sentence.
A col fox (full of slight and iniquitee)
That in the grove had wonned years three,
By high imagination aforne cast,
The same night through the hedge brast
Into the yerd, there Chaunteclere the fair
Was wont and eke his wives to repair:
And in a bed of wortes still he lay,
Till it was passed vndren of the day,
Waiting his time, on Chaunteclere to fall:
As gladly done these homicides all,
That in await lie to murder men.
O false murder, rucking in thy den:
O new Scariot, and new Gauilion,
O false dissimuler, O Greek Sinon
That broughtest Troy utterly to sorrow,
O Chaunteclere, accursed be the morrow,
That thou in thy yerd flew from the bemes:
Thou were full well warned by thy dremes,
That ilke day was perilous to thee.
But what yt God before wot, must needs be,
After the opinion of certain clerkis,
Witness of him that any clerk is,
That in schole is great altercation
In this matter, and great disputation
And has been, of an hundred thousand men,
But I ne cannot boult it to the bren,
As can the holy doctor saint Austin,
Or Boece, or the bishop Bradwardin,
Whether that Gods worthy foreweting
Straineth me needly to do a thing:
(Needly clepe I simple necessite)
Or if the free choice be granted me
To do the same thing, or do it naught,
Though God forewot it, or it was wrought:
Or of his weting streineth never a dele,
But by necessity condicionele,
I woll not have to done of such matere,
My tale is of a cock, as ye shall here,
That took his counsel of his wife with sorrow
To walk in the yerd upon the morrow,
That he had met the dreme, as I you told.
* Women's counsels been often full cold:
Women's counsel brought us first to woe,
And made Adam fro paradise to go,
There as he was full merry, and well at ease.
But for I not, whom I might displease
If I counsel of women would blame,
Pass over, I said it in my game.
Redeth authors, where they trete of such mattere,
And what they say of women, ye mow here.
These ben the Cocks words, and not mine,
I can of women no harm divine.
Fair in the sond, to bath her merely,
Lies Pertelot, and all her susters by
Against the sun, and Chaunteclere so free,
Sung merrier than the Mermaid in the sea.
For Phisiologus says utterly,
How that they singen well and merely.
And so befell as he cast his eye
Among the wortes on a butterfly,
He as ware of the fox that lay full low,
Nothing then list him for to crow,
But cried cock, cock, and up he stert,
As one that was afraid in his heart.
For naturally beasts desires to flee
Fro her contrary, if he may it see,
Tho he never erst had seen it with his eye.
This chaunteclere, when he began him epsy,
He would have fled, but the fox anon
Said: gentle sir alas, what woll ye done?
Be ye afraid of me that am your friend?
Now certes, I were worse than a fiend,
If I to you would harm or villainy:
I am not come your counsel to epsy.
But truly the cause of my coming
Was only to heren how ye sing:
For soothly ye have as merry a steven,
As any Angel has, that is in heaven,
Therewith ye have of music more feeling,
Than had Boece, or any that can sing.
My lord your father, God his soul bless,
And eke your mother of her gentleness
Have in my house ben, to my great ease:
And certes sir, full feign would I you please.
But for men speaken of singing, I woll sey,
So mote I broken well mine eyes twey,
Save you, ne herd I never man so sing,
As did your father in the morning.
Certes it was of heart, all that he song,
And for to make his voice the more strong,
He would so pain him, y^ with both his eyes
He must wink, so loud he must crien,
And stonden on his tiptoes therewithal,
And stretchen forth his neck long and small.
And eke he was of such discretion,
That there was no man in no region,
That him in song or wisdom might pass.
I have well red dan Burnel the ass
Among his verses, how there was a Cock,
For that a priests son yaue him a knock
Upon his legs, while he was young and nice;
He made him for to lose his benefice.
But certain there is no comparison
Betwixt the wisdom and discretion
Of your father, and of his subtilty.
Now sings sir, for saint charity,
Let see, can ye your father counterfete?
This Chaunteclere his wings began to beat,
As a man that could not his treason epsy,
So was he ravished with his flattery.
* Alas ye lords, many a false flatterour
Is in your court, and many a false lesingour,
That pleases you well more, by my faith,
Than he that soothfastnesse unto you says.
Reads Ecclesiast of flattery,
Beware ye lords of her treachery.
This Chaunteclere stood high upon his toos
Stretching his neck, and held his eyes cloos,
And began to crowen loud for the nones:
And dan Russell the fox start up at ones,
And by the gorget hent Chaunteclere,
And on his back toward the wood him bear.
For yet was there no man that him sued.
O destiny, that may not be eschued:
Alas that Chaunteclere flew fro the beams,
Alas that his wife rought not of dreams:
And on a friday fell all this mischaunce.
O Venus that art goddess of pleasaunce,
Since yt thy servant was this chaunteclere,
And in thy service did all his powere,
More for delight, than y^ world to multiply,
Why woldst thou suffer him on thy day to die?
O Gaulfride, dear master sovereign,
That when y^ worthy king Richard was slain
With shot, complainedest his death so sore,
Why ne had I now thy science and thy lore,
The friday for to chide, as did ye?
For on a friday, shortly slain was he.
Than would I show you how y^ I coud plain,
For Chauntecleres dread, and for his pain.
Certes such cry, ne lamentation
Nas never of Ladies made, when that Ilion
Was won, and Pirrus with his bright swerd
When he hent king Priam by the beard,
And slough him (as says Eneidos)
As made all the hens in the cloos,
When they had lost of Chaunteclere y^ sight:
But souerainly dame Pertelot shright
Well louder than did Hasdruballes wife,
When that her husbond had lost his life,
And that the Romans had brent Cartage.
She was so full of torment and of rage,
That wilfully into the fire she stert,
And brent her self, with a steadfast heart.
O woeful hens, right so cried ye,
As when that Nero brent the cite
Of Rome, cried the senators wives,
For that her husbonds should lose her lives,
Withouten gilt Nero has hem slain.
Now woll I turn to my tale again.
The sely widow, and her daughters two,
Heard the hens crien and make such woe,
And out at the door stert they anon,
And saw the fox toward the wood gone,
And bare upon his back the Cock away:
They cried out harow and well away:
A ha the Fox, and after hem they ran,
And eke with staves, many another man:
Ran Coll our dog, Talbot, and eke Garlond,
And Malkin, with her distaffe in her hond:
Ran Cow and Calfe, and eke the very Hogs,
For they so sore aferd were of the dogs,
And shouting of men and of women eke,
They ran yt they thought her herts should break.
They yellen as loud fendes do in hell:
The Duckes cried as men would hem quell:
The Geese for fear flew over the trees,
Out of the Hiues came the swarm of Bees,
So hidous was the noise, a benedicite:
Certes Jack Straw, ne all his meine,
Ne made never shoutes half so shrill,
When that they would any Flemming kill,
As that day was made upon the Fox.
Of brass they blew the trompes and of box,
Of horn and bone, in which they blew and pouped
And therewith they shriked and shouted:
It seemed, as though heaven should fall,
Now good men I pray you harken all.
Lo how fortune tourneth suddenly
The hope and the pride of her enemy.
This Cock that lay upon the Foxes back,
In all his dread, unto the Fox he spoke,
And said: good sir, if I were as ye,
Yet should I say, as wise God help me,
Tourneth again, ye proud churles all:
A very pestilence upon you fall.
Now am I come unto this woods side,
Maugre your head, the Cock shall here abide,
I woll him eat in faith, and that anon.
The Fox answered, in faith it shall be don:
And as he spoke the word, all suddenly
This Cock brake from his mouth deliuerly,
And high upon a tree he flew anon:
And when the Fox saw that he was gone,
Alas (quoth. he) O Chaunteclere, alas,
I have (quoth. he) done to you trespass,
In as much as I made you aferd.
When I you hent, and brought out of your yerd.
But sir, I did it in no wicked intent:
Come down, and I shall tell you with I meant,
I shall you say sothe God help me so.
Nay then (quoth. he) I shrew us both two,
And first I shrew my self, both blood and bones,
If thou begile me o^ter than ones:
Thou shall no more with thy flattery
Do me to sing with a winking eye.
* For he that winketh, when he should see,
All wilfully, God let him never thee.
* Nay (quoth. y^ Fox) but God give him mischance,
That is so discrete of governance,
That iangleth, when that he should have pees.
Lo, soch it is for to be recheles
And negligent, and trust on flattery.
But ye that hold this tale for a lie
As of a Fox, of a cock, and of a Hen,
Takes the moralite good men.
For saint Poule says, All that written is,
To our doctrine it is written iwis.
* Takes the fruit, and let the chafe be still.
Now good God, if that it be thy will,
As says my Lord, so make us all good men:
And bring us to the high bliss. Amen.
The Manciples Prologue.
SIr Nonnes Priest, our host said anon,
I blessed be thy brech and every stone:
This was a merry tale of Chaunteclere:
But by my troth, if thou were seculere,
Thou would be a tredfoule aright:
For if thou have courage as thou have might
Thee were need of hens, as I wene,
Ye more than seven times seuentene.
Se which braunes has this gentle priest,
So great a neck, and such a large breest:
He looks like a Sparhauke with his eyes,
Him needs not his colors for to dien
With Brasill, ne with gram of Portingale.
But sir, yet fair fall you for your tale.
And after that, he with full merry chere
Said to another man, as ye shall here.
Wot ye not where stondeth a little town,
Which that is called Bob up and down
Under the blee, in Canterbury way?
There began our host to yape and to play,
And said: sirs, what? Dunne is in y^ mire:
Is there no man for prayer ne for hire,
That woll awake our fellow behind?
A thief he might full lightly rob and bind:
See how he nappeth, see for cocks bones
How he woll fall from his horse atones.
Is that a Cook of London, with mischaunce?
Do him comfort, he knows his penance:
For he shall tell a tale by my fey.
* Although it be not worth a bottle of Hey.
Awake thou cook (quoth. he) God give thee sorrow
What eileth thee to sleep by the morrow?
Have thou had fleen al night, or art thou dronk?
Or have thou al night with some queen iswonk,
So that thou may not hold up thy head?
This Cook y^ was full pale, and nothing red,
Said: sir host, so God my soul yblesse,
There is fallen on me great heuinesse,
But I not why, me were lever to sleep,
Than the best gallon of wine in Chepe.
Well (quoth. y^ Mancipie) if it may do ease
To thee sir Cook, and to no wight displease,
Which that here ride in this company,
And that our host will of his courtesy,
I woll as now excuse thee of thy tale,
For in good faith thy visage is full pale:
Thine eyes dase, soothly as me thinks,
And well I wot, thy breath full sour stinketh,
That shows well thou art not well disposed:
Of me certain that* shall not be glosed,
See how he galpeth, lo this dronken wight,
As though he would us swallow anon right.
Hold close thy mouth, by thy father kin:
The devil of hell set his foot therein,
Thy cursed breath will infect us all:
Fie stinking swine, fie foul mote thee befall.
Takes heed sirs of this lusty man,
Now sweet sir, woll ye just at the van,
Thereto me thinks ye be well shape:
I trow that ye have dronken wine ape,
And that is when as men play at straw.
And with his speech y^ cook waxed all wraw,
And on the Manciple he began to nod fast
For lack of speech: and down his horse him cast
Where as he lay, till that men him up took:
This was a fair cheuesaunce of a cook:
Alas that he ne had hold him by his ladill.
And ere that he again were in the sadill,
There was a great shouing to and fro
To lift him up, and much care and woe,
So unwieldy was this sely palled ghost:
And to the Manciple then spoke our host.
Because that drink has domination
Upon this man, by my salvation
I trow leudly woll he tell his tale:
For were it wine, or old moistie ale
That he has dronk, he speaks so in the nose,
And sniueleth fast, and eke has the pose.
He also has to done more than enough
To keep him on his caple out of the slough:
And if he fall from his caple eftsone,
Then shall we all have enough to done
In lifting up again his dronken corce.
Tell on thy tale, of him make I no force.
But yet Manciple, in faith thou art too nice,
Thus openly to repreue him of his vice:
Another day he woll perauenture
Recleime thee, and bring thee to the lure:
I mean that he speak will of small things,
And for to pinch at thy rekenings
That were not honest, if it came to prefe.
No (quoth. y^ Manciple) y^ were a great mischefe:
So might he bring me into the snare.
Yet had I lever pay for the Mare
Which he rides on, than he should with me strive:
I woll not wrath him so mote I thrive:
That I spoke, I said it but in bourd,
And wot ye what, I have here in my gourd
A draught of wine, ye of a ripe grape.
And right anon ye shall see a good yape.
This Cook shall drink thereof, if I may,
Up pain of my life he woll not say nay.
And certainly, to tellen as it was,
Of this vessel the Cook drank fast, alas,
What needs it, he drank enough beforne.
And when he had pouped in his horn,
To the Manciple he took the gourd again,
And of the drink the Cook was full fain:
And thonked him in such wise as he coud.
Then began our host to laugh wonder loud,
* And said: I see well it is necessary
Where yt we gone, good drink with us to carry
For that will turn rancour and disease
To accord and love, and many a word pease.
O Bacchus, yblessed be thy holy name,
That so can turn earnest into game:
Worship and thonke be to thy deite.
Of that matter ye get no more of me.
Tell on thy tale thou Manciple, I thee pray.
Well sir (quoth. he) herkeneth what I say.
The Manciples Tale.
Phoebus keeps a white Crow, which can speak as a Jay: The Crow accuses his
wife, of whom he was too jelous, to have played false in his absence. Hereupon
with an arrow he slays his wife: but after repenting of his rashness, he
takes revenge of the Crow.

WHen Phoebus dwelled here in earth adoun,
As old books to us make mentioun:
He was the most lusty batcheler
Of all the world, and eke ye best archer:
He slough Pheton the serpent, as he lay
Sleeping against the Sun upon a day.
And many another noble worthy deed
He with his bow wrought, as men mow read.
Play he could on every minstralcie,
And sing, that it was a melody
To heren of his clear voice the soun.
Certes the king of Thebes, Amphioun,
That with his song, walled the cite,
Could never sing half so well as he:
And thereto he was the seemelist man
That is or was, since the world began.
What needs it his feture to discriue?
For in this world nas none so fair alive.
He was therewith fulfilled of gentleness,
Of honor, and of perfect worthiness.
This Phoebus, yt was flower of bachelerie,
As well in freedom, as in chivalry,
For his disport, in sign eke of victory
Of Pheton, so as tells us the story,
Was wont to bear in his hond a bow:
Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow
Within a cage yfostred many a day,
And taught in speech, as men teach a Iay.
White was this crow, as is a white Swan,
And counterfete the speech of every man
He could, when as he should tell a tale.
There was in all this world no Nightingale
Ne could by an hundred thousand dele
Sing so wonderly merry and well.
Now had this Phoebus in his house a wife,
Which that he loved more than his life,
And night and day did ever his diligence
Her for to please, and do her reverence:
Save only, if I the sooth shall sain,
Ielous he was, and would have kept her fain.
For him were loath yaped for to be,
And so is every wight in such degree:
But all for naught, for it avails naught:
* A good wife, yt is clean of work and thought,
Should not be kept in none await certain:
And truly the labor is in vain
To keep a shrew, for it woll not be:
This hold I for a very nicete
To spill labor, for to keep our wives:
Thus writes old clerks in her lives.
But now to purpose, as I first began:
This worthy Phoebus does all that he can
To please her, wening through such plesaunce
And for his manhood and for his governance
That no man should put him from her grace:
But God it wot, there may no man embrace,
* As to distraine a thing, which that nature
Has naturally set in a creature.
Take any bird, and put him in a cage,
And do all thine intent, and thy courage,
To foster it tenderly with meat and drink
Of all dainties that thou can bethink,
And keep it also cleanely as thou may,
Although the cage of gold be never so gay,
Yet had this bird by twenty thousand fold,
Lever in a forest, that is wide and cold,
Go eaten worms, and such wretchedness.
For ever this bird will do his business
To escape out of his cage when he may:
His liberty the bird desires aye.
Let take a Cat, and foster her with milk
And tender flesh, and make her couch of silk,
And let her see a Mouse go by the wall,
Anon she weiueth flesh, and couch, and all,
And every deintie that is in that house,
Such appetite has she to eat the Mous.
* Lo here has lust his domination,
And appetite flemeth discretion.
A she Wolf has also so villainous kind,
The leudest Wolf that ever she may find,
Or least of reputation, that she woll take
In time when her lust to have a make.
All these ensamples speak I by those men
That been untrue, and nothing by women.
* For men have ever a licorous appetite
On lower thing to perform her delight,
Than on her wives, be they never so fair,
Ne never so true, ne so debonaire.
Flesh is so newfangle, with mischaunce,
That we ne con in nothing have pleasaunce,
That souneth unto virtue any while.
Now this Phoebus which thought no gile,
Disceiued was for all his iolite:
For under him another had she,
A man of little reputation,
Naught worth to Phoebus in comparison:
The more harm is, it happeth often so:
Of which there comes much harm and woe.
And so befell, when Phoebus was absent,
His wife anon has for her lemman sent
Her lemman, certes that is a knauish speech,
Foryeue it me, and that I you beseech.
The wise Plato says, as ye mow read,
* The word must needs accord with ye deed.
If men should tell properly a thing,
The word must cousin be to the working.
I am a boistous man, right thus say I,
There is but little difference truly
Betwixt a wife that is of high degree,
(If of her body dishonest she be)
And a poor wench, any other than this,
If it so be they work both amiss.
But for the gentill is in estate above,
She shall be called his lady and his love,
And for that the other is a poor woman,
She shall be called his wench or his lemman:
* And God it wot, mine own dear brother,
Men lay as low that one as that other.
Right so betwixt a titlelesse tiraunt,
And an outlaw, or a thief erraunt,
The same I say, there is no difference.
(To Alexander was told this sentence)
That for the tyrant is of greater might
By force of meine to slay down right,
And bren house and home, and make all plain,
Lo therefore is he called a captain.
And for the outlaw has but small meine,
And may not do so great an harm, as he,
Ne bring a Country to so great mischief,
Men callen him an outlawe or a thief.
But for I am a man not textuele,
I woll not tell of textes never a dele.
I woll go to my tale, as I began.
When Phoebus wife had sent for her lemman,
Anon they wrought all their lust volage.
This white crow, yt hing aie in the cage,
Beheld their work, and said never a word:
And when home was come Phoebus the lord,
This crow song, cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo.
What bird (quoth. Phoebus) with singest thou?
Were thou not wont so merrily to sing,
That to my heart it was rejoicing
To hear thy voice? alas, what song is this?
By God (quoth. he) I sing not amiss:
Phoebus (quoth. he) for all thy worthiness,
For all thy beauty, and thy gentilnesse,
For all thy song, and thy minstralcie,
* For all thy waiting, blered is thine iye.
With one of little reputation,
Not worth to thee in comparison
The mountenance of a gnat, so mote I thrive:
For on the bed, thy wife I saw him swiue,
What wol you more? ye crow anon him told,
By full sad tokens, and by words bold,
How that his wife had done her lechery
Him to great shame, and to great villainy,
And told him eft, he saw it with his iyen.
This Phoebus began awayward for to wryen.
Him thought his woeful heart brast a two.
His bow he bent, and set therein a flo,
And in his ire he has his wife slain:
This is the effect, there is no more to sain.
For sorrow whereof he brake his minstralsie:
Both Harp and Lute, Getern, and Sautrie,
And eke he brake his arrows, and his bow,
And after that, thus spoke he to the crow.
Traitor (quoth. he) with tongue of Scorpion
Thou have me brought to my confusion:
Alas that I was wrought, why nere I dedde.
O dear wife, O gemme, O lusty hedde,
That were to me so sad, and eke so true,
Now lie thou dedde with face pale of hew.
Full giltlesse, that durst I swear iwis:
O rakell hond, to do so foul amiss.
* O troubled wit, O ire retchelesse,
That vnauised smitest guiltless.
O wantrust, full of false suspection,
Where was thy wit and thy discretion?
* Oh every man beware of rekilnesse,
Ne trow nothing, without strong witness.
Smite not to sone, er that thou wete why,
And be auised well and sikerly
Or ye do any execution
Upon your ire, for suspection.
* Alas, a thousand folk has rekell ire
Fully fordoen, and brought hem in the mire.
Alas for sorrow I woll my self sle.
And to the crow, O false thief said he,
I woll thee quite anon thy false tale.
Thou song whilom, as any Nitingale,
Now shall thou false thief, thy song forgone,
And eke thy white feathers euerychone.
Ne never in all thy life shall thou speak,
Thus shull men on a traitor be a wreake.
Thou and thine offspring ever shall be blake,
Ne never after sweet noise shall ye make,
But ever cry against tempest and rain,
In token, that through thee my wife is slain.
And to the crow he stert, and that anon,
And pulled of his white feathers euerychon,
And made him black, and reft him of all his song
And eke his speech, and out at door him slong
Unto the devil, which I him betake:
And for this cause been all crows blake.
Lordings, by this ensample I wol you pray
* Beware, and take keep what I say:
Ne tells never no man in your life,
How that another man has dight his wife,
He woll you hate mortally certain.
Dan Solomon, as wise Clerks sain,
Teaches a man to keep his tongue well:
But as I said, I am not textuell.
But nathelesse, thus taught me my dame,
My son think on the crow a Gods name:
My son keep well thy tongue, and keep thy friend
A wicked tongue is worse then a fend:
My son, from a fend men may hem bless.
My son, God of his endless goodness,
Walled a tongue with teeth, and lips eke,
For man should him auise what he speak.
* My son, full often for too mikell speech,
Has many a man be spilt, as Clerks teach:
But for little speech spoken auisedly
Is no man shent, to speak generally.
My son, thy tongue should thou restrain,
At all times, but when thou do thy pain
To speak of God in honor and prayere.
The first virtue son, if thou wolt lere,
Is to restrain, and keep well thy tongue:
Thus learn Children, when they be young.
* My son, of mikell speaking vnauised,
(There less speaking had enough suffised)
Comes mikell harm, thus was me taught,
In much speech there sin wants naught.
Woste thou wherefore a rakell tongue serves:
Right as a sword forcutteth and forkerueth
An arm on two, my dear son right so
A tongue cutteth friendship all atwo.
A iangler is to God abominable,
Read Solomon, so wise and honorable,
Read David in his Psalms, read Seneck,
My son speak not, ne with thy head beck:
* Dissimule as thou were deaf, if yt thou here
The janglour speaks of perlous mattere.
The Flemming says, learn if that thou lest,
* That little jangling causes much rest.
* My son, If thou no wicked word have said,
Thee dare not dread for to be bewraid:
But he that has missaied, I dare well saine,
He may by no way clepe his word again.
Thing that is said, is said, and forth it goth,
Though him repent, or be never so loath,
He is thrall to him to whom he has said
A tale, for which he is now evil apaied.
* My son beware, and be none author new
Of tidings, whether they be falls or true.
Where so thou come, among high or low,
Keep well thy tongue, and think on the crow.
The Plowmans Prologue.
THe Plowman plucked up his plowe,
When Midsummer Moon was comen in,
And said his beasts should eat ynowe,
And lieg in the grass up to the chin:
They been feeble both Ox and Cow,
Of hem nis left but bone and skin:
He shoke off shere, and coulter off drowe,
And honged his harneis on a pin.
He took his tabard and his staff eke,
And on his head he set his hat:
And said he would saint Thomas seek,
On pilgrimage he goth forth plat:
In scrippe he bare both bread and leekes,
He was forswonke, and all forswat,
Men might have seen through both his chekes,
And every wang tooth, and where it sat.
Our host beheld well all about:
And saw this man was Son ybrent,
He knew well by his senged snout,
And by his clothes that were to rent,
He was a man wont to walk about,
He was not always in cloister ypent:
He could not religiousliche lout,
And therefore was he fully shent.
Our host him asked, what man art thou?
Sir (quoth he) I am an hine,
For I am wont to go to plow,
And earne my meat ere that I dine:
To swette and swinke I make auow,
My wife and children therewith to find,
And serve God and I wist how,
But we leaud men been full blind.
For clerks say we shullen be feign
For her livelod swette and swinke,
And they right naught us give again,
Neither to eat, ne yet to drink:
They mow by law as they saine,
Us curse and damn to hell brinke,
Thus they putten us to pain
With candles queint, and bells clinke.
They make us thrals at her lust,
And saine we mow not else be saved:
They have the corn, and we the dust,
Who speaks thereagaine, they say he raued.
What man (quoth. our host) can thou preach?
Come near and tell us some holy thing:
Sir (quoth he) I heard ones teach
A priest in pulpit a good preaching.
Say on (quoth our host) I thee beseech:
Sir, I am ready at your bidding:
I pray you that no man me reproach
While that I am my tale telling.
The Plowmans Tale.
A complaint against the Pride and Covetousness of the Clergy: made no doubt by
Chaucer with the rest of his Tales. For I have seen it in written hand in John
Stowes Library, in a Book of such Antiquity, as seems to have been written
near to Chaucer's time.

ASterne strife is stirred new,
In many steedes in a stound,
Of sundry seeds that been sewe,
It seems that some been unsound:
For some be great grown on ground,
Some been soukle, simple, and small,
Whether of hem is falser found,
The falser foul mote him befall.
That one side is, that I of tell
Popes, Cardinals, and Prelates,
Parsons, Monks, and Freres fell,
Priours, Abbots, of great estates:
Of heaven and hell they keep the yates,
And Peter's successors they been all,
This is deemed by old dates,
But falshed foul mote it befall.
The other side ben poor and pale,
And people put out of prease,
And seem caitiues sore a cale,
And ever in one without increase,
Icleped lollers and londlese:
Who toteth on hem they ben vntall
They ben araied all for the peace,
But falshed foul mote it befall.
Many a country have I sought,
To know the falser of these two:
But ever my travail was for naught,
All so far as I have go.
But as I wandered in a wro,
In a wood beside a wall,
Two fowls saw I sitten tho
The falser foul mote him befall.
That one did plete on the Popes side
A Griffon of a grimme stature,
A Pellicane withouten pride
To these lollers laid his lure:
He mused his matter in measure,
To counsel Christ ever began he call:
The Griffon showed a sharp fuyre.
But falshed foul mote it befall.
The Pellicane began to preach
Both of mercy and of meekness:
And said that Christ so began us teach,
And meek and merciable began bless:
The Euangely bears witness,
A lamb he likeneth Christ over all,
In tokening that he meekest was,
Since pride was out of heaven fall.
And so should every Christened be:
Priests, Peter's successors
Beth lowliche and of low degree,
And vsen none earthly honors:
Neither croune, ne curious couetours,
Ne pillour, ne other proud pall,
Ne naught to cofren up great treasours,
For falshed foul mote it befall.
Priests should for no cattle plede,
But chasten hem in charity:
Ne to no battle should men led,
For inhaunsing of her own degree.
Not wilne firting in high see,
Ne sovereignty in house ne hall,
All wordly worship defy and flee:
For who wills highness, foul shall fall.
Alas who may such saints call,
That wilneth welde earthly honor:
As low as Lucifere such shall fall
In balefull blackness to builden her boure,
That eggeth the people to error,
And makes them to hem thrall:
To Christ I hold such one traitor,
As low as Lucifer such one shall fall.
That wills to be kings peers,
And higher than the Emperor:
And some that were but poor Freres,
Now woollen wax a warrior.
God is not her governor,
That holds no man his permagall,
While couetise is her counsailour,
All such falshed mote need fall.
That high on horse wills ride
In glitterande gold of great array,
Ipainted and portred all in pride,
No common knight may go so gay:
Change of clothing every day,
With golden girdles great and small
As boistous as is Bear at bay,
All such falshed mote need fall.
With pride punishes they the poor,
And some they sustain with sale,
Of holy church make they an hoar,
And fills her womb with wine and ale:
With money fill they many a male,
And chaffren churches when they fall,
And tells the people a leaud tale,
Such false faitours foul hem befall.
With change of many manner meats;
With song and solas sitting long,
And fills her womb, and fast fretes,
And from the meat to the gong:
And after meat with harp and song.
And each man mote hem Lords call,
And hot spices ever among,
Such false faitours foul hem fall.
And miters mo than one or two,
Ipearled as the queens head:
A staff of gold, and perrie lo,
As heavy as it were made of lead,
With cloth of gold both new and read,
With glitterande gold as green as gall:
By dome they damn men to dedde,
All such faitours foul hem fall.
And Christ's people proudly curse
With broad book, and braying bell:
To put pennies in her purse,
They wol fell both heaven and hell.
And in her sentence and thou will dwell,
They willen guess in her gay hall,
And thou the sooth of hem will tell,
In great cursing shall thou fall.
That is blessed, that they bless,
And cursed that they curse woll:
And thus the people they oppress,
And have their lordships at full.
And many be marchaunts of wull,
And to purse pennies woll come thrall:
The poor people they all to pull,
Such false faitours foul hem fall.
Lords also mote to hem loute,
Obeysaunt to her broad blessing.
The riden with her royal route
On a courser, as it were a king,
With saddle of gold glittering,
With curious harness quaintly crall it,
Stirrops gay of gold mastling,
All such falshed foul befall it.
Christ's ministers clepen they been,
And rulen all in robbery:
But Antichrist they seruen clean,
Attired all in tyranny:
Witness of John's prophecy,
That Antichrist is her admiral,
Tiffelers attired in treachery,
All such faitours foul hem fall.
Who says, that some of hem may sin,
He shall be dome to be ded:
Some of hem woll gladly win
All against that which God forbed:
All holiest they clepen her head,
That of her rule is regal:
Alas that ever they eaten bread,
For all such falshed wol foul fall.
Her head loves all honor,
And to be worshipped in word and deed.
Kings mote to hem kneel and coure,
To the Apostles that Christ forbede.
To popes hestes such takes more head,
Than to keep Christ's commandment:
Of gold and silver mote been her wede,
They holds him hole omnipotent.
He ordains by his ordinance
To parish priests a powere:
To another a greater auaunce,
A greater point to his mistere.
But for he is highest in earth here,
To him reserves he many a point:
But to Christ that has no pere,
Reserves he neither o pin ne point.
So seems he above all,
And Christ above him nothing:
When he sits in his stall,
He damneth and saves as him think:
Such pride tofore God does stink:
An angel had John to him not kneel,
But only to God do his bowing,
Such willers of worship must need evil feel:
They ne clepen Christ, but sanctus deus,
And clepen her head Sanctissimus:
They that such a sect sewis,
I trow they taken hem amiss:
In earth here they have her bliss,
Her high master is Beliall.
Christ's people from hem wisse,
For all such false will foul fall.
They mow both bind and lose,
And all is for her holy life:
To save or damn they mow chose,
Between hem now is great strife.
Many a man is killed with knife,
To wete which of hem have lordship shall,
For such Christ suffered wounds five,
For all such falshed will foul fall.
Christ said: Qui gladio percutit,
With swerd surely he shall die:
* He had his priests peace and grith,
And bad hem not dread for to die.
And bad them he both simple and sly,
And carke not for no cattle,
And trusts on God that sits on hie,
For all false shall full foul fall.
These woollen make men to swear
Against Christ's commandment:
And Christ's members all to tere
On roode, as he were new yrent.
Such laws they maken by common assent:
Each one it throws as a ball,
Thus the poor be fully shent,
But ever falshed foul it befall.
They vsen no simonie,
But sellen churches and priories:
Ne they usen no envy,
But cursen all hem contraries,
And hireth men by days and years,
With strength to hold hem in her stall:
And culleth all her adversaries.
Therefore falshed foul thou fall.
With purse they purchase personage,
With purse they paynen hem to plede,
And men of war they woll wage
To bring her enemies to the deed:
And lords lives they woll led,
And much take, and give but small:
But he it so get, from it shall shede,
And make such false right foul fall.
They halow nothing but for hire
Church, ne font, ne vestement,
And make orders in every shire,
But priests pay for the parchment.
Of riotours they taken rent,
Therewith they smere the shepes skall:
For many Churches ben often suspent
And all such falshed foul it fall.
Some lives not in lechery,
But haunt wenches, widows, and wives,
And punishes the poor for putree.
Them self it uses all their lives:
And but a man to them him shrives,
To heaven come he never shall,
He shall be cursed as be caitiues,
To hell they saine that he shall fall.
There was more mercy in Maximien,
And in Nero, that never was good,
Than is now in some of them,
When he has on his furred hood.
They follow Christ that shed his blood
To heaven, as buckette into the wall:
Such wretches ben worse than wood,
And all such faitours foul hem fall.
They give her alms to the rich,
To mainteynours, and men of law:
For to lords they well be liche,
An harlots son not worth an hawe
Sothfastnesse all such han slawe:
They kembe her crokettes with crystal,
And dread of God they have down draw,
All such faitours foul hem fall.
They maken parsons for the penny,
And Canons, and her Cardinals,
Uneaths among hem all is any,
That he ne has glosed the gospel falls.
For Christ made never no Cathedrals,
Ne with him was no Cardinal,
With a red hatte as vsen minstrals.
But falshede foul mote it befall.
Their tithing, and her offering both.
They clemeth it by possession,
Thereof nill they none forgo,
But robben men as ransom.
The tithing of Turpe lucrum
With these Masters is vrniall.
Tithing of brybry, and larson
Will make falsehood full foul to fall.
They taken to ferme her sompnours
To harm the people what they may:
To pardoners, and false faitours
Sell her seals I dare well say:
And all to holden great array,
To multiply hem more metal.
They dread full little domes day,
When all such falshed shall foul fall.
Such harlottes shul men disclaunder,
For they shullen maken hem gree:
And ben as proud as Alexander,
And saine to the poor, woe be ye.
By year each Priest shall pay his fee
To increase his lemmans call:
Such heerdes shul well iuel thee,
And al such false shul foul fall.
And if a man be falsely famed,
And wol make purgatioun,
Than woll the officers be agramed,
And assign him fro town to town:
So need he must pay ransom,
Though he be clean, as is Crystal,
And then have an absolution.
But al such false shull foul fall.
Though he be guilty of the deed,
And that he may money pay,
All the while his purse wol blede,
He may use it fro day to day:
The Bishops officers gone full gay,
And this game they vsen over all,
The poor to pill is all their pray.
Al such false shull foul fall.
Alas, God ordained never such law
Ne no such craft of couetise:
He forbad it by his saw,
Such governors mowen of God agrise,
For all his rules he is right wise,
These new points ben papal,
And all Gods law they despise.
All such faitours shull foul fall.
They saine that Peter had the key
Of heaven and hell, to have and hold,
I trow Peter took no money
For no sins that he sold:
Such successors ben to bold,
In winning al their wit they wral,
Her conscience is waxen cold:
And al such faitours foul hem fall.
Peter was never so great a fool
To leave his key with such a lorell:
Or take such a cursed tole,
He was advised nothing well.
I trow they have the key of hell,
Their Master is of that place marshall,
For there they dressen hem to dwell:
And with false Lucifer there to fall.
They been as proud as Lucifarre,
As angry and as envious,
From good faith they ben full far,
In couetise they ben curious:
To catch cattle as covetous
As hound, that for hunger woll yall,
Ungodly and ungracious,
And needly such falshed shall foul fall.
The Pope and he were Peter's heir,
Me think he erreth in this case:
When chose of Bishops is in despair
To chosen hem in diverse place:
A lord shall write to him for grace,
For his clerk anon pray he shall,
So shall he speed his purchase.
And all such false foul hem fall.
Though he can do no good,
A lords prayer shall be sped:
Though he be wild of will or wood,
Not understanding what men han red:
A lewd boster, and that God forbed.
* As good a bishop is my horse ball:
Such a Pope is foul bested,
And at last he woll foul fall.
He makes bishops for earthly thank,
And nothing at all for Christ's sake:
Such that been full fat and rank,
To soul heal none heed they take.
All is well done whateuer they make,
They shall answer at ones for all,
For worlds thank such worch and wake.
And all such false shall foul fall.
Such that cannot say her Creed,
With prayer shall be made prelates,
Another can the Gospel read,
Such shull now weld high estates.
The high gods friendship hem makes:
They toteth on her sum total,
Such bear the keys of hell yates.
And such false shall foul fall.
They forsake for Christ's love
Travail, hunger, thirst, and cold,
For they ben ordered over all above
Out of youth till they ben old.
By the door they go not into the fold,
To help their sheep they naught trauall
Hired men all such I hold,
And all such false foul hem fall.
For Christ our king they woll forsake,
And know him naught for his pouerte:
For Christ's love they woll wake,
And drink piement and ale aparte.
Of God they seem nothing aferd,
As lusty lives as did Lamual,
And driven her sheep into desert.
All such faitours shul foul fall.
Christ has xii. Apostles here,
Now, say they, there may be but one,
That may not err in no manner,
Who leueth not this ben lost echone.
Peter erred, so did not Ihon:
Why is he cleped the principal?
Christ cleped him Peter, but himself y^ stone:
All false faitours foul hem fall.
Why cursen they the croisery
Christ's christen creatures?
For between hem is now envy
To be enhaunsed in honors,
And Christen livers with her labors,
For they leuin on no man mortal,
Been do to death with dishonours.
And al such false foul hem fall.
What knows a tillour at the plow
The Popes name, and what he hate?
His creed suffiseth to him inow,
And knows a cardinal by his hatte,
Thus is the poor unrightly latte,
That knows Christ his God royal,
Such matters be not worth a gnatte.
But such false faitours foul hem fall.
A king shall kneel and kiss his show:
Christ suffered a sinful to kiss his fete.
Me thinks he holds him high ynow,
So Lucifer did, that high set.
Such one me thinks himself foryet,
Either to the troth he was not call
Christ that suffered wounds wete,
Shall make such falshed foul fall.
They lays out her large nets
For to take silver and gold:
Fillen coffers, and sackes fettes,
There as they souls catch should.
Her servants be to them vnhold,
But they can doublin their rentall
To big hem castles, and big hem hold.
And all such false foul hem fall.
Here ends the first part of this Tale, the second part follows.
TO accord with this word fall,
No more English can I find:
Show another now I shall,
For I have much to say behind:
How priests han the people pinde,
As curteis Christ has me kende,
And put this matter in my mind:
To make these manner men amend.
Shortly to shend hem, and show now
How wrongfully they werch and walk:
O high God, nothing they tell, ne how,
But in Gods word tilleth many a balke:
In hernes hold hem and in halke,
And prechen of tithes and offrend,
And untruly of the Gospel talk.
For his mercy God it amend.
What is Antichrist to say?
But even Christ's adversary:
Such has now ben many a day
To Christ's bidding full contrary,
That from the truth clean vary,
Out of the way they ben wend,
And Christ's people untruly carry.
God for his pity it amend.
They liuen contrary to Christ's life
In high pride against meekness.
Against suffraunce they vsen strife,
And anger against soberness,
Against wisdom wilfulness:
To Christ's tales little tend,
Against measure outrageousnesse.
But when God wol it may amend.
Lordly life against lowliness,
And demin al without mercy,
And couetise against largess,
Against treweth treachery:
And against alms envy,
Against Christ they comprehend,
For chastity they maintain lechery,
God for his grace this amend.
Against pennaunce they use delights,
Against suffraunce strong defense,
Against God they vsen evil rights,
Against pity punishments:
Open evil against continence,
Her wicked winning they worse dispend,
Soberness they set into dispense.
But God for his goodness it amend.
Why claimen they wholly his powere,
And wranglen against al his hests?
His living follow they nothing here,
But liuen worse than witless beests.
Of fish and flesh they louen feests,
As lords they ben broad ykend,
Of Gods poor they haten gests.
God for his mercy this amend.
With Dives such shall have her dome,
That saine that they be Christ's friends,
And do nothing as they should done:
All such been falser than ben fiends.
On the people they ley such bendes.
As God is in earth they han offend,
Succor fro such Christ now send us.
And for his mercy this amend.
A token of Antichrist they be,
His careckes ben now wide iknow,
Received to preach shall no man be
Without token of him I trow.
Each christen priest to preachen owe,
From God above they ben send,
Gods word to al folk for to show.
Sinful man for to amend.
Christ sent the poor for to preach,
The royal rich he did not so:
Now dare no poor the people teach,
For Antichrist is over all her foe.
Among the people he mote go,
He has bidden all such suspend,
Some has he hent, and thinks yet mo.
But all this God may well amend.
All they that han the world forsake,
And liuen lowly, as God bad,
Into her prison shullen be take,
Betin and bounden, and forth lad.
Hereof I read no man be drad,
Christ said, his should be shend:
Each man ought hereof be glad,
For God full well it woll amend.
They take on hem royal powere,
And say they have swerds two,
One curse to hell, one slay men here:
For at his taking Christ had no mo.
Yet Peter had one of tho,
But Christ, to Peter smite began defend,
And into the sheath bad put it tho.
And all such mischeues God amend.
Christ bad Peter keep his sheep,
And with his sword forbade him smite:
* Swerd is no tool with sheep to keep,
But to shepherds that sheep woll bite:
Me thinks such shepherds ben to wite,
Again her sheep with sword that contend:
They drive her sheep with great despite.
But all this God may well amend.
So successors to Peter be they noght,
Whom Christ made chief pasture.
A swerd no shepherd vsen ought,
But he would flea, as a butchoure.
For who so were Peter's successoure,
Should bear his sheep til his back bend,
And shadow hem from every shoure
And all this God may well amend.
Successors to Peter ben these
In that, that Peter Christ forsook,
That had lever the love of God lose,
Than a shepherd had to lose his hook:
He culleth the sheep as does the Cook
Of hem seeken they woll to rend,
And falsely gloss the Gospel book.
God for his mercy them amend.
After Christ had take Peter the kay,
Christ said, he must die for man:
That Peter to Christ began withsay,
Christ bad him go behind Satan:
Such counsailours many of these men han,
For worlds well, God to offend
Peter's successors they ben for than.
But al such God may well amend.
For Satan is to say no more,
But he that contrary to Christ is,
In this they learn Peter's lore,
They sewen him when he did miss.
They follow Peter forsooth in this,
In all that Christ would Peter reprehend,
But not in that, that longs to heaven bliss.
God for his mercy hem amend.
Some of the Apostles they sewen in case
Of ought that I can understand,
Him that betrayed Christ, Judas,
That bare the purse in every land:
And all that he might set on hond,
He hid and stale, and mispend,
His rule these traitors han in hond,
Almighty God hem all amend.
And at the last his lord began tray
Cursedly through his false couetise:
So would these train him for money,
And they wisten in what wise.
They be seker of the self ensise,
From all soothnesse they ben friend,
And couetise chaungen with queintise:
Almighty God all such amend.
Were Christ on earth here eftsoone,
These would damn him to die:
All his hestes they han fordone,
And saine his sawes ben heresy:
And against his commandments they cry,
And damn all his to be brend,
For it likes not hem such losengerie.
God almighty hem amend.
These han more might in England here,
Than has the King and all his law:
They han purchased hem such powere,
To taken hem whom list not knawe:
And say that heresy is her saw,
And so to prison wol hem send:
It was not so by elder dawe.
God for his mercy it amend.
The kings law wol no man deem
Angerliche without answer:
But if any man these misqueme,
He shall be baighteth as a bear:
And yet well worse they wol him tere,
And in prison woll him pende,
In gives, and in other gere.
When God woll, it may amend.
The king taxes not his men
But by assent of the comminalte:
But these each year woll ransom hem
Maisterfully, more than does he.
Her seals by year better be,
Than is the kings in extend,
Her officers han greater fee.
But this mischief God amend.
For who so woll pruve a testament,
That is not all worth ten pound,
He shall pay for the parchement
The third of the money all round.
Thus the people is raunsound:
They say such part to hem should apend,
There as they gripen, it goes to ground.
God for his mercy it amend.
For a simple fornication
Twenty shillings he shall pay,
And then have an absolution,
And all the year vsen it forth he may:
Thus they letten hem go astray,
They recke not though the soul be brend,
These keepen evil Peter's kay.
And all such shepherds God amend.
Wonder is, that the parliament
And all the lords of this land
Here to taken so little intent,
To help the people out of her hond:
For they ben harder in their bond,
Worse beat, and bitter brend,
Than to the king is understand.
God him help this to amend.
What Bishops, what religions
Lordshippes and possessions
More than Lords, it seems me:
That makes hem lose charity:
They mow not to God attend,
In earth they have so high degree.
God for his mercy it amend.
The Emperor yafe the Pope sometime
So high lordeship him about,
That at last the silly kime
The proud Pope put him out.
So of this Realm is in dout:
But lords beware, and them defend,
For now these folks be wonders stout.
The King and Lords now this amend.
Thus ends the second part of this Tale, and hereafter follows the third.
Moses law forbode it tho,
That priests should no lordships welde:
Christ's gospel bids also,
That they should no lordshippes held.
Ne Christ's Apostles were never so bold,
No such Lordshippes to hem enbrace,
But smeren her sheep and keep her fold.
God amend hem for his grace.
For they ne ben but counterfeit,
Men may know hem by her fruit,
Her greatness makes hem God foryete,
And take his meekness in dispite:
And they were pore and had but lite,
They nold not demen after the face,
But nourish her sheep, and hem not bite.
God amend him for his grace.
Griffon.
What can thou preach against Chanons,
That men clepen seculere?
Peli. They ben curates of many tounes,
On earth they have great powere:
They have great prebendes and dear,
Some two or three, and some mo,
A personage to ben a playing fere,
And yet they serve the King also.
And let to ferme all that fare,
To whom that woll most give therefore,
Some woll spend, and some woll spare,
And some woll lay it up in store.
A cure of soul they care not fore,
So that they mow much money take,
Whether her souls be won or lore.
Her profits they woll not forsake.
They have a gadering procuratour,
That can the poor people enplede,
And robben hem as a rauinour,
And to his Lord the money led:
And catch of quick and eke of deed,
And richen him, and his Lord eke,
And to rob can give good read,
Of old and young, of hole and sick.
Therewith they purchase hem lay fee
In land, there hem likes best,
And build also as broad as a cite
Both in the East, and eke in the West:
To purchase thus they ben full pressed,
But on the poor they woll naught spend,
Ne no good give to Gods gest,
Ne send him some that all has send.
By her service such woll live,
And trusse that other into treasure:
Though all her parish die vnshriue,
They woll not give a rose flower.
Her life should be as a mirror,
Both to lered and to leude also,
And teach the people her lele labor,
Soche mister men been all misgo.
Some of them been hard nigges,
And some of hem been proud and gaie,
Some spend her goods upon gigges,
And finden hem of great araie:
Alas, what think these men to say,
That thus dispenden Gods good,
At the dreadful domes day
Soche wreches shull be worse than wood.
Some her churches never ne sie,
Ne never o penny, thider ne send,
Though the poor parishens for hunger die,
O penny on hem woll they not spend:
Have they receiving of the rent,
They recke never of the remenaunt,
Alas, the devil has clean hem blent.
Soche one is sathanas soiournaunt.
And vsen horedome and harlottrie,
Couetise, pomp, and pride,
Slothe, wrath. and eke envy,
And sewen sin by every side.
Alas, where think such tabide:
How woll they accomptes yield,
From high God they mow hem not hide.
Soche willers wit is not worth a nelde.
They ben so rooted in richesses,
That Christ's pouert is foryet,
Served with so many messes,
Hem thinks that Munna is no mea^*
All is good that they mowen geat:
They wene to live evermore,
But when God at dome is seat,
Such tresure is a feeble store.
Uneath mote they Matins say
For counting and courtholding:
And yet he iangleth as a Iaie,
And vnderstont himself nothing.
He woll serve both Earl and King
For his finding and his fee,
And hide his tithing and his offering,
This is a feeble charity.
Other they been proud, or covetous,
Or they been hard, or hungry:
Or they ben liberal, or lecherous,
Or else medlers with marchandry:
Or mainteiners of men with mastry,
Or stewardes, countours, or pleadours,
And serve God in Ypocrisie:
Soch Priests been Christ's false traitors.
They been false, they been vengeable,
And begilen men in Christ's name:
They been unsteadfast and unstable,
To traie her Lord, hem thinks no shame.
To serve God they been full lame,
Gods thieves, and falsely steal,
And falsely Gods word defame:
In winning is her worlds weal.
Antichrist these serve all.
I pray thee who may say naie?
With Antichrist soch shull fall,
They followen him in deed and faie:
They seruen him in rich arraie,
To serve Christ such falsely fain,
Why, at the dreadful domes day
Shull they not follow him to pain?
That known hem self that they done ill
Against Christ's commandment,
And amend hem never ne will,
But serve satan by one assent?
Who says sothe he shall be shent,
Or speaks against her false living:
Who so well lives shall be brent,
For soch been greater than the king.
Popes, Bishops, and Cardinals,
Chanons, Parsons, and Vicare
In Gods service I trow been falls,
That Sacraments sellen here:
And been as proud as Lucifere,
Each man look whether that I lie,
Who so speaks against her powere,
It shall be holden heresy.
Look how many orders take
Only of Christ, for his service,
That the worlds goods forsake:
Who so takes orders otherwise,
I trow that they shall sore agrise,
For all the gloss that they conne,
All sewen not this (...),
In evil time they thus begone.
Look how many among hem all
Holden not this hie way,
With Antichrist they shullen fall:
For they wullen God betraie.
God amend them that best may:
For many men they maken shende,
They weten well the sothe I say.
But the devil has foul hem blende.
Some on her churches dwell
Apparailled poorly, proud of port:
The seven sacraments they done sell,
In cattle catching is her comfort:
Of each matter they woollen mell,
To done hem wrong is her disport,
To afraie the people they been fell,
And hold hem lower than does the Lord.
For the tithing of a Ducke
Or of an Apple, or an Aie,
They make men swear upon a book,
Thus they foulen Christ's faie.
Soche bearen evil heaven kaie:
They mowen assoile, they mow shriue,
With men's wives strongly play,
With true tillers sturte and strive,
At the wrestling, and at the wake.
And chief chauntours at the nale
Market beaters, and meddling make,
Hoppen and houten with heue and hale:
At fair fresh, and at wine stale:
Dine and drink, and make debate:
The seven sacraments set a sail,
How keep soche the kaies of heaven gate?
Men's wives they woollen hold,
And though that they been right sorye,
To speak they shull not be so bold,
For sompning to the Consistorye:
And make hem say mouth I lie,
Though they it saw with her iye,
His lemman holden openly,
No man so hardy to ask why.
He woll have tithing and offering
Maugre whosoever it grutch:
And twice on the day he woll sing,
Gods priests nere none soche.
He mote on hunting with dog and bitch,
And blown his horn, and crien hey,
And sorcerie vsen as a Witch.
Soche kepen evil Peter's key.
Yet they mote have some stock or stone,
Gaily painted, and proudly dight,
To maken men leven upon,
And say that it is full of might:
About such men set up great light,
Other soche stocks shull stand thereby,
As dark as it were midnight,
For it ma^e make no mastrie.
That it lewd people see mow:
Thou Mary, thou worchest wonder things:
About that, that men offren to now,
Hongen broches, ouches, and rings.
The priest purchases the offerings,
But he nill offer to none Image:
Woe is the soul that he for sings,
That preaches for soche a pilgrimage.
To men and women that been poor,
That been Christ's own likeness
Men shullen offer at her door,
That suffer hunger and distress:
And to soche Images offer less,
That mow not feel thurst ne cold,
The poor in spirit began Christ bless.
Therefore offreth to feeble and old.
Bucklers broad, and sweardes long
Baudrike, with baselardes kene,
Soche toles about her neck they hong:
With Antichrist soche priests been.
Upon her deeds it is well seen
Whom they serven, whom they honouren,
Antichrists they been clean,
And Gods goods falsely devouren.
Of scarlet and grene gaie gounes,
That mote be shape of the new:
To clippen and kissen they counten in tounes
The damoseles that to the dance sewe.
Cutted clothes to show her hew,
With long pikes on her shone,
Our Gods Gospel is not true,
Either they serven the devil or none.
Now been priests pokes so wide,
That men must enlarge the vestiment:
The holy Gospel they done hide,
For they contrarien in raiment.
Soche priests of Lucifer been sent,
Like conquerours they been araied,
The proud pendaunts at her ars is ipent.
Falsely the truth they han betrayed.
Shrift silver soche woollen ask
And woll men crepe to the crouche
None of the Sacraments save ask
Without mede shall no man touch:
On her Bishop their warant vouch
That is law of the decre:
With mede and money thus they mouch.
And this they sain is charity.
In the mids of her Mass
They nill have no man but for hire:
And full shortly let forth pass,
Such shull men find in each shire,
That Personages for profit desire,
To live in liking and in lusts:
I dare not saine, Sans ose ie dire.
That such been Antichrists priests.
For they yef the bishops why,
Or they mote been in his service:
And holden forth her harlottry,
Such prelates been of feeble emprise.
Of Gods grain such men agrise,
For such matters that taken mede:
How they excuse hem, and in what wise,
Me thinks they ought greatly dread.
They s^ine that it to no man longs
To reprove them though they err:
But falsely Gods goods they fongeth
And therewith meintein woe and war.
Her deeds should be as bright as sterre,
Her living lewd man's ^ight:
They say the Pope may not err,
Need must that pass man's might.
Though a priest lie with his lemman all night,
And tellen his fellow, and he him,
He goth to Mass anon right,
And says he sings out of sin:
His bird abides him at his Inn,
And dighteth his diner the mean while,
He sings his Mass for he would win,
And so he weneth God begile.
Hem thinks long till they be met,
And that they usen forth all the year,
Among the folk when he is set,
He holds no man half his pere:
Of the Bishop he has powere
To soil men, or else they been lore,
His absolution may them skere,
And woe is the soul that he sings for.
The Griffon began for to threte,
And said, of Monks can thou ought?
The Pelican said, they been full great,
And in this world much woe has wrought:
Saint Benet, that her order brought,
Ne made hem never on such mannere,
I trow it came never in his thought,
That they should use so great powere.
That a man should a Monk lord call,
Ne serve on knees, as a king:
He is as proud as prince in pall,
In meat, and drink, and all thing:
Some wearen mitre and ring,
With double Worsted well ydight,
With royal meat and rich drink,
And rides on a courser as a knight.
With hawk and with hounds eke,
With brooches or ouches on his hood:
Some say no Mass in all a week,
Of deinties is her most food.
They have lordships and bondmen:
This is a royal religion.
Saint Benet made never none of hem
To have lordship of man ne town.
Now they ben queint and curious,
With fine cloth clad, and served clean:
Proud, angry, and envious,
Malice is much that they mean.
In catching, crafty and covetous,
Lordly they liven in great liking,
This living is not religious,
According to Benet in his living.
They ben clerks, her courts they oversee,
Her poor tenaunce fully they slite:
The higher that a man amerced be,
The gladlier they woll it write:
This is far from Christ's poverty,
For all with covetise they endite,
On the poor they have no pity,
Ne never hem cherish, but ever hem bite.
And commonly such been comen
Of poor people, and of hem begete,
That this perfection han inomen,
Her fathers riden not but on her fete,
And travailen sore for that they eat,
In povert lives young and old:
Her fathers suffers drought and weate,
Many hungry meals, thurst, and cold.
And all this these Monks han forsake
For Christ's love and saint Benete:
To pride and ease have hem take,
This religion is evil beseate:
Had they been out of religion,
They must have hanged at the plowe,
Threshing and diking fro town to town
With sorry meat, and not half ynowe.
Therefore they han this all forsake,
And taken to riches, pride and ease:
Full few for God woll Monks hem make,
Little is such order for to praise:
Saint Benet ordained it not so,
But bad hem be churchliche,
In churchliche manner live and go,
Boistous in earth, and not lordliche.
They disclaunder saint Benet,
Therefore they have his holy curse:
Saint Benet with hem never met,
But if they thought to rob his purse.
I can no more hereof tell,
But they ben like tho before,
And clean serve the devil of hell,
And ben his treasure and his store.
And all such other counterfaitours,
Chanons, Canons, and such disguised,
Been Gods enemies and traitors,
His true religion han foul despised.
Of Freres I have told before
In a making of a Creed,
And yet I could tell worse and more,
But men would werien it to read.
As Gods goodness no man tell might,
Write ne speak, ne think in thought,
So her falshed, and her unright,
May no man tell that ever God wrought.
The Griffon said, thou can no good,
Thou came never of no gentle kind,
Other I trow thou waxest wood,
Or else thou have lost thy mind.
Should holy church have no hedde?
Who should be her governaile?
Who should her rule, who should her read?
Who should her forthren, who should avail?
* Each man shall live by his travail,
Who best does, shall have most mede:
* With strength if men the church assail,
With strength men must defend her need.
And the Pope were purely poor,
Needy, and nothing ne had,
He should be driven from door to door,
The wicked of him nolde not be drad:
Of such an head men would be sad,
And sinfully liven as hem lust:
With strength to amend such be made,
* With wepen Wolves from sheep be wust.
If the Pope and Prelates would
So beg, and bid, bow, and borrow,
Holy church should stand full cold,
Her servaunts sit and soupe sorrow:
And they were noughtie foul and horow,
To worship God men would wlate:
Both on even and on morrow
Such harlottrie men would hate.
Therefore men of holy church
Should be honest in all thing,
Worshipfully Gods works werch.
So seems it to serve Christ her king
In honest and in clean clothing,
With vessels of gold and clothes rich,
To God honestly to make offering:
To his Lordship none is liche.
The Pelican cast a huge cry,
* And said, alas, why say thou so:
Christ is our head that sits on hie,
Heads ne ought we have no mo:
We ben his members both also,
And father he taught us to call him als,
Masters to be called defended he tho:
All other masters ben wicked and falls,
That takes maisterie in his name,
Ghostly, and for earthly good:
Kings and lord should lordships have,
And rule the people with mild mood.
* Christ for us that shed his blood
Bad his priests no maistership have,
Ne carke not for cloth ne food,
From every mischief he will hem save.
Her rich clothing shall be rightwisnesse,
Her treasure true life shall be:
Charity shall be her richesse,
Her Lordship shall be unite:
Hope in God her honest,
Her vessel clean conscience,
Poor in spirit, and humilite,
Shall be holy churches defense.
What, said the Griffon, may thee greve,
That other folks faren well?
What have thou to done with her live?
Thy falshed each man may feel.
For thou can no cattle get,
But live in land as a lorell,
With glosing gettest thou thy mete:
So fares the devil that wonneth in hell.
He would that each man there should dwell.
For he lives in clean envy,
So with the tales that thou do tell
Thou would other people destrie
With your gloss, and your heresy:
For ye can live no better life,
But clean in Hypocrisy,
And bring thee in woe and strife.
And therewith have not to done.
For ye ne have here no cure:
Ye serve the Devil, neither God ne man,
And he shall pay you your hire.
For ye woll fare well at feasts,
And warm clothed for the cold,
Therefore ye gloss Gods heestes,
And begile the people young and old.
And all the seven Sacraments
Ye speak against, as ye were sly:
Against tithinges, offringes, with your entents,
And on our Lords body falsely lie.
And all this ye done to live in ease,
As who says, there been no ne soche:
And sain the Pope is not worth a pease,
To make the people again him groche.
And this comes in by fendes
To bring the christen in distaunce:
For they would that no man were friends.
Leave thy chattring with mischaunce:
* If thou live well, what will thou more?
Let other men live as hem list,
Spend in good, or keep in store:
Other men's conscience never thou nist.
Ye han no cure to answer fore:
What meddle ye, that han not to done?
Let men live as they han done yore,
For thou shall answer for no man.
The Pelican said, sir, naie,
I despised not the Pope:
Ne no Sacrament, soth to say,
But speak in charity and good hope.
But I despise her hye pride,
Her richesse, that should be poor in spirit:
Her wickedness is known so wide,
They serve God in false habit:
And tournen meekness into pride,
And lowliness into high degree,
And Gods words turn and hide.
And that am I moved by charity.
To let men to live so,
With all my cunning and my might,
And to warn men of her woe,
And to tellen hem troth and right.
The Sacraments be soul heal,
If they been used in good use,
Against that speak I never a deal:
For then were I nothing wise.
But they that usen hem in miss manner,
Or set hem up to any sale,
I trow they shall abie hem dear,
This is my reason, this is my tale:
Who so takes hem unrightfulliche
Against the ten commandments,
Or by gloss wrechedliche
Sells any of the Sacraments,
I trow they do the devil homage,
In that they weten they do wrong:
And thereto I dare well wage,
They serven Satan for all her song.
To tithen and offren is wholesome life,
So it be done in due manner:
A man to houselin, and to shrive,
Wedding, and all the other in fere,
So it be another sold ne bought,
Ne take ne give for covertise:
And it be so taken, it is naught,
Who sells hem so, may sore agrise.
On our Lords body I do not lie,
I say sooth through true read,
His flesh and blood through his mystery
Is there, in the form of bread:
How it is there, it needs not strive,
Whether it be sunget or accident,
But as Christ was, when he was on live,
So is he there verament:
If Pope or Cardinal live good live,
As Christ commanded in his Gospel,
Against that woll I not strive:
But methinketh they live not well.
For if the Pope lived as God bed,
Pride and highness he should despise,
Richesse, covetise, and croune on hedde,
Meekness and poverte he should use.
The Griffon said he should abie,
Thou shall be brent in balefull fire,
And all thy sect I shall destrie,
Ye shall be hanged by the swire.
Ye shullen be hanged and to draw,
Who gives you leave for to preach
Or speak against Gods law,
And the people thus falsely teach?
Thou shall be cursed with book and bell,
And discevered from holy church,
And clean ydamned into hell,
Otherwise but ye woll worch.
The Pelican said, that I ne dread,
Your cursing is of little value.
Of God I hope to have my mede,
For it is falshed that ye sewe.
For ye been out of charity,
And wilneth vengeance, as did Nero:
To suffren I woll ready be,
I dread not that thou can do.
Christ bad ones suffer for his love:
And so he taught all his servaunts,
And but thou amend for his sake above,
I dread not all thy maintenance.
For if I dread the worlds hate,
Me thinks I were little to praise.
I dread nothing your high estate,
Ne I dread not your disease.
Woll ye turn and leave your pride,
Your high port, and your richesse,
Your cursing should not go so wide,
God bring you into rightwisenesse:
For I dread not your tyranny,
For nothing that ye can done,
To suffer I am all ready,
Siker I recke never how soon.
The Griffon grinned as he were wood,
And looked lovely as an Owl,
And swore by cocks heart blood,
He would him tear every doule:
Holy church thou disclaundrest foul,
For thy reasons I woll thee all to race,
And make thy flesh to rot and moule,
Losell, thou shall have hard grace.
The Griffon fiew forth on his way.
The Pelican did sit and weep,
And to himself he began say:
God would that any of Christ's sheep
Had heard, and ytaken keep
Of each word that here said was,
And would it write and well it keep:
God would it were all for his grace.
Plowman.
I answered, and said I would,
If for my travail any man would pey:
Pelli. He said yes, these that God han sold,
For they han store of money:
Plowman. I said, tell me and thou may,
Why tellest thou men's trespass?
Pelican. He said, to amend hem in good fay,
If God woll give me any grace.
For Christ himself is likned to me,
That for his people died on rood:
As fare I, right so fares he,
He feeds his birds with his blood.
But these done evil against good,
And ben his foen under friends face,
I told hem how her living stood:
God amend hem for his grace.
Plowman.
What aileth the Griffon, tell why
That he holds on the other side?
Pelli. For they two been likely,
And with her kinds roven wide.
The foul betokens pride:
As Lucifer, that high flew was,
And since he did him in evil hide:
For he agilted Gods grace.
As bird flies up in the air,
And lives by birds that been meke
So these been flow up into despair,
And shenden silly fowls eke:
The souls that been in sins seek,
He culieth hem kneel: therefore alas.
For briberie Gods forbode break:
God amend it for his grace.
The hinder part is a Lioun,
A robber and a ravinere,
That robs the people in earth down,
And in earth holds none his pere:
So fares this foul both far and nere,
And with temporell strength ye people chase,
As a Lion proud in earth here.
God amend him for his grace.
Pelican.
He flew forth with his wings twain,
All droping, dased, and dull:
But soon the Griffon came again,
Of his fowls the earth was full:
The Pelican he had cast to pull,
So great a number never seen there was,
What manner of fowls tellen I woll,
If God woll give me of his grace.
With the Griffon comen fowls feel,
Ravins, Rokes, Crows, and Pie,
Gray fowls, agadred well,
I gurde above they would hie:
Gledes and Buzzards weren hem by,
White moles and puttockes token her place,
And lapwings, that well conneth lie,
This fellowship han forgard her grace.
Long the Pelican was out,
But at last he comes again:
And brought with him the Phoenix stout,
The Griffon would have flow full feign:
His fowls that flewen as thick as rain,
The Phoenix tho began hem chase,
To fly from him it was in vain,
For he did vengeance and no grace.
He slew hem down without mercy,
There a start neither free ne thrall,
On him they cast a rufull cry,
When the Griffon down was fall:
He beat hem not, but slew hem all,
Whither he hem drove, no man may trace:
Under the earth me thought they yall,
Alas they had a feeble grace.
The Pelican then asked right,
For my writing if I have blame,
Who woll for me fight or flight?
Who shall sheld me from shame?
He that had a maid to dame,
And the lamb that slain was
Shall sheld me from ghostly blame,
For earthly harm is gods grace.
Therefore I pray every man,
Of my writting have me excused:
This writing writes the Pelican,
That thus these people has despised.
For I am fresh fully advised,
I nill not maintain his manace.
For the devil is often disguised,
To bring a man to evil grace.
Witeth the Pelican and not me,
For hereof I nill not avow:
In high ne in low, ne in no degree,
But as a fable take it ye mow:
To holy church I will me bow,
Each man to amend him Christ send space:
And for my writing me allow
He that is almighty for his grace.
The Parsons Prologue.
BY that the Plowman had his tale ended,
The sun fro ye south side is descended,
So low, that it was not to my sight
Degrees of five and twenty on hight
Two a clock it was, so as I guess,
For eleven foot, a lite more or less,
My shadow was at that time, as there
Of such feet as my length parted were
In six feet equal of proportion:
Therewith the moons exaltation,
I mean Taurus, always began ascend,
As we were entering at the thropes end:
For which our Host, as he was wont to gie
Aye in this case, this jolly company
Said in this wise, lordings everichone
Now lacks us no tale more than one:
Fullfilled is my sentence and my decree.
Who woll now tell us a tale, let see:
Almost fulfilled is my ordinance:
I pray to God so yeve him right good chance,
That tells his tale to us lustely.
Sir priest (quoth. he) art thou a vicary,
Or art thou a Parson, say sooth by thy fay,
Be what thou be, break thou not our play.
For every man, save thou, has told his tale,
Vnbokell, and show us what is in thy male.
For truly me thinks by thy chere,
Thou should knit up well a great matere.
Tell us a fable anon, for cocks bones.
This Parson him answered all at ones:
Thou gettest fable none told of me,
For Poule, that writes to Timothe,
Repreveth hem that waiven soothfastnesse,
And teachen fables, and such wretchedness.
* Why should I sow draffe out of my fist,
When I may sow wheat, if that me list?
For which I say, if that ye list to here
Morality, and of virtuous matere,
And then, if ye wol yeve me audience,
I would full feign at Christ's reverence
Done you pleasaunce lefull, as I can:
But trusts well, I am a sotherne man,
I cannot jest, rum, ram, ruf, by letter,
And God wot, rhyme hold I but little better.
And therefore if ye list, I woll not gloss,
I woll you tell a little tale in prose,
To knit up all this feast, and make an end:
And Jesus for his grace wit me send
To show you the way in this voyage
Of thilke perfect glorious pilgrimage,
That hight Jerusalem celestial.
And if you vouchsafe, anon I shall
Begin upon my tale, for which I pray
Tell your advise, I cannot better say.
But nathelesse, this meditation
I put it aye under the correction
Of clerks, for I am not textuell,
I take but the sentence, trusts well.
Therefore I make protestation,
That I woll stand to correction.
Upon this word we have assented sone:
For as it seemed, it was for to done,
To end in some virtuous sentence,
And for to yeve him space and audience:
And bad our host he should to him say,
That all we to tell his tale him pray.
Our host had the words for us all:
Sir priest (quoth. he) now fair mote you befall,
Say y^ what ye list, and we shall gladly here.
And with that word he said in this manner.
Tells (quoth. he) your meditatioun,
But hastes you, the sun woll adoun.
Beth fructuous, and that in little space,
And to do well God send you his grace.
The Parsons Tale.
A Sermon against diverse grievous Sins, and remedies for the same, persuading
men to penitence.

Jeremy.vi. State super vias, and videte, and interrogate de semitis antiquis,
quae sit via bona, and ambulate in ea: and invenietis refrigerium animabus
vestris.
OUR sweet Lord God of Heaven, that no man woll perish, but woll that we turn
all to the knoweledge of him, and to the blisfull life that is perdurable,
admonishes us by the Prophet Jeremy, that says in this wise: * Stondeth
upon the ways, and sees and asks of old paths: that is to say, of old
sentences, which is the good way, and walks in that way, and ye shall find
refreshing for your souls, etc. Many been the ways espirituels that lead
folk to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reign of glory: Of which ways,
there is a full noble way, and full covenable, which may not fail to man ne to
woman, that through sin has misgone fro the right way of Jerusalem
celestial: and this way is called penitence, of which, manne should gladly
hearken and enquire with all his heart, to wete, what is penitence, and which is
called penitence, and how many manners been of actions or werkinges of
penitence, and how many speces there been of penitence, and which things
appertain and behoove to penitence, and which things distourbe penitence.

Saint Ambrose says, * That penitence is the plaining of man for the guilt
that he has done, and no more to do any thing for which him ought to plain.
And some Doctors says, Penitence is the waymenting of man that sorroweth for
his sum, and paineth him self, for he has misdone. Penitence with certain
circumstaunces, is very repentance of a man that holt himself in sorrow, and
other pain for his guiltes: and for he shall be very penitent, he shall first
bewail sins that he has done, and steadfastly purpose in his heart to have
shrift of mouth, and to do satisfaction, and never to do thing, for which him
ought more bewail or complain, and continue in good works: or else his
repentance may not avail. For as Saint Isiodor says, * He is a yaper and a
liar, and no very repentaunt, yt e^tsoone does thing, for which him ought
repent. Weeping, and not for to stint to do sin, may not avail: But
nathelesse, men shall hope, that at every time that man falls, be it never
so often, that he may arise through pennaunce, if he have grace: but certain,
it is great doubt, for as says saint Gregory: * Uneaths arises he out of
sin, yt is charged with y^ charge of evil usage. * And therefore repentaunt
folk, that stint for to sin, and leave sin or sin leave them, holy Church
holds them siker of their salvation. * And he that sins, and verily
repents him in his last end: holy Church yet hops his salvation, by the
great mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, for his repentance: but take the siker
way.

And now since I have declared you, what thing is Penitence: now ye shall
understand, that there been three actions of Penitence. The first is, that a man be baptized after that he has sinned. Saint Augustine says, * But he be
penitent for his old sinful life, he may not biginne the new clean life:
For certes, if he be baptized without penitence of his old guilt, he retains
ye mark of baptism, but not ye grace, ne ye remission of his sins, till he
have very repentance. Another default is this, yt men do deadly sin after
that they have received baptism. The third default is this, yt men fall in
venial sins after her baptism, fro day to day. Thereof says Saint
Augustine, * That penitence of good and humble folk, is the penitence of every
day.

The speces of penitence ben three: That one of hem is solemn, another is
commune, and the third is privy. That pennaunce yt is solemn, is in two
manners: As to be put out of holy church in lent, for slaughter of children,
and such manner thing. Another is when a man has sinned openly, of which sin
the fame is openly spoken in the country: and then holy church by judgment
distrayneth him for to do open pennaunce.

Common pennaunce is, yt priests enioyn men in certain case: as for to go
perauenture naked in pilgrimage, or bare foot. Privy pennaunce is that, yt men
do all day for privy sins, of which we shriue us privily, and receive privy
pennaunce.

Now shall thou understand what is behoueful and necessary to very perfect
penitence: and this stont on three things. * Contrition of heart, confession of
mouth, and satisfaction. For which says saint John Chrysostom: * Penitence
disstraineth a man to accept benignely every pain y^ him is enioined, with
contrition of heart, and shrift of mouth, with satisfaction: and in werking of
all manner humility. And this is fruitful penitence against three things, in
which we wrath our Lord Jesus Christ: this is to say, By delight in thinking,
by retchlesse in speaking, and by wicked sinful werking. And against these
wicked guilts is penitence, that may be likened unto a tree:

* The root of this tree is contrition, y^ hides him in the heart of him that
is very repentaunt, right as the root of the tree hides him in the earth. Of
this root of contrition springs a stalk, that bears branches and leaves
of confession, and fruit of satisfaction. For which Christ says in his
gospel: * Does digne fruit of penitence, for by this fruit men may know the
tree, and not by the root that is hid in the heart of man, ne by the
branches, ne the leaves of confession. And therefore our lord Jesus Christ
says thus: By the fruit of hem shall ye know hem. Of this root also springs
a seed of grace, the which seed is mother of all sikernesse, and this seed is
eager and hot. The grace of this seed springs of God, through remembrance
on y^ day of doom, and on the pains of hell. Of this matter says Solomon, *
That in ye dread of God man forletteth his sin. The heat of this seed is ye
love of God, and the desiring of the joy perdurable: This heat draws the
heart of man to God, and does him hate his sin: For soothly there is nothing
that sauoureth so well to a child, as ye milk of his nurce, ne nothing is to
him more abominable than that milk, when it is meddled with other meat.
Right so the sinful man y^ loves his sin, him seems, that it is to him
most sweet of any thing: but fro yt time he loves sadly our lord Jesus
Christ, and desires ye life perdurable, there is to him nothing more
abominable: for soothly, The law of God is ye love of God. For which David the
prophet says: I have loved thy law, and hated wickedness: He that loves God,
keeps his law and his word.

This tree saw the Prophet Daniel in spirit, on ye vision of Nabuchodonosor,
when he counsayled him to do penitence. Pennaunce is the tree of life, to hem
that it receive: and he that holds him in very penitence, is blessed, after
the sentence of Solomon. In this penitence or contrition, man shall understand
four things, that is to say: What is contrition, and which been ye causes
that moove a man to contrition, and how he should be contrite, and what
contrition avails to the soul. Then is it thus, that contrition is y^ very
sorrow yt a man receives in his heart for his sins, with sad purpose to
shriue him, and to do pennaunce, and never more to do sin: And this sorrow
shall be in this manner, as says Saint Bernard, * It shall be heavy and
grievous, and full sharp and poinant in heart.

First, for a man has agilted his Lord and his Creator, and more sharp and
poinaunt, for he has agilted his father celestial: And yet more sharp and
poynaunt, for he has wrathed and agilted him that boughte him, that with his
precious blood has delivered us fro the bonds of sin, and fro ye cruelte of
the devil, and from the pains of hell.

The causes yt ought move a man to contricion been fix. First, a man shall
remember him of his sins, But look that that remembrance ne be to him no
delight, by no way, but great shame and sorrow for his sins. For Job says,
sinful men done works worthy of confession. And therefore says Ezechiell:
* I woll remember me all ye years of my life, in the bitterness of my heart.
And God says in the Apocalipse: Remember ye from whence that ye been fall,
for before that time that ye sinned, ye were children of God, and limbs of the
reign of God: But for your sin ye ben waren thral and foul, and members of
ye fend: hate of Angels, slander of holy church, and food of the false
Serpent, perpetual matter of the fire of hell: And yet more foul and
abominable, for ye trespass so often times, as does an hounde that returns
again to eat his own spewing: and yet be ye fouler, for your long continuing
in sin, and your sinful usage, for which ye be roted in your sin, as a
beeste in his donge. Such manner of thoughts make a man to have shame of
his sin, and no delight. As God says, by ye Prophet Ezechiel: * Ye shall
remember you of your ways, and they shull displese you sothly. Sins ben the
ways that led folk to Hell.

THe second cause that ought make a man to have disdain of sin is this, that
as says saint Peter: * Who so does sin, is thrall of sin, and sin
puts a man in great thraldom. And therefore says the prophet Ezechiell:
* I went sorrowful, in disdain of my self. Certes, well ought a man have
disdain of sin, and withdraw him fro that thraldom and villainy. And lo, with
says Seneke in this matter, he says thus: * Though I wist, that neither God
ne manne should never know it, yet would I have disdain for to do sin. And
the same Seneke also says: * I am borne to greater thing, than to be thrall
to my body, or for to make of my body a thrall. Ne a fouler thrall may no man
ne woman make of his body, than for to give his body to sin, all were it the
foulest churl, or the foulest woman that lives, and least of value, yet is he
then more foul, and more in servitude. Ever fro the higher degree yt man
falls, the more is he thrall, and more to God and to the world vile and
abominable. O good God, well ought man have great disdain of sin, since yt
through sin, there he was free, he is made bond. And therefore says saint
Augustine: * If thou have disdain of thy servant, if he offend or sin,
have thou then disdain, that thou thy self should do sin. Take regard of
thine own value, that thou ne be too foul to thy self. Alas, well ought they
then have disdain to be servant and thralles to sin, and sore to be
ashamed of themself, that God of his endless goodness has set in high
estate, or give hem wit, strength of body, heal, beauty, or prosperity,
and bought hem fro the death with his heart blood, that they so unkindly against
his gentleness, quite him so villanously, to slaughter of her own souls. Oh
good God, ye women that been of great beauty, remembers you on the proverb
of Solomon, * He says he likeneth a fair woman, that is a fool of her
body, to a ring of gold that were worn on the groine of a sow: For right as a
sow wroteth in every ordure, so wroteth she her beauty in stinking ordure of
sin.

THe third cause that ought meue a man to contrition, is dread of the day of
doom, and of the horrible pains of hell. For as saint Jerome says: * At
every time that me remembers of the day of doom, I quake: For when I eat and
drink, or what so that I do, ever seems me y^ the trompe sowneth in mine
ear: Rises ye up that been ded, and comes to the judgment. O good God,
much ought a man to dread such a judgment, there as we shall be all, * as
Saint Poule says, before the seat of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereas he shall
make a general congregation, whereas no man may be absent, for certes there
avails none essoyne ne excusation, and not only, that our defaults shall be
judged, but also that all our works shall openly be known. And as says
saint Bernard, * There ne shall no pleading avail, ne no slight: We shall
give reckoning of every idle word. There shall we have a judge that may not
be deceived ne corrupt, and why? For certes, all our thoughts been discovered,
as to him: ne for prayer ne for mede, he shall not be corrupt. And therefore
says Solomon: * The wrath of God ne woll not spare no wight, for prayer ne for
yeft. And therefore at the day of doom there is no hope to escape. Wherefore,
as says saint Anselme: * Full great anguish shall ye sinful folk have at
yt time: There shall ye fires and wroth judge sit above, and under him the
horrible pit of hell open, to destroy him yt must be know his sins, which
sins openly been showed before God and before every creature: And on the
left side, mo Devils than any heart may think, for to hale and draw the
sinful souls to the pain of hell: and within the hearts of folk shall be
the biting conscience, and without forth shall be the world all brenning:
whither shall then the wretched sinful man fly to hide him? Certes he may not
hide him, he must come forth and show him. For certes, as says S. Ierom, the
earth shall cast him out of it, and the sea also, and y^ air that shall be full
of thonder clappes and lightnings. Now sothly, who so well remembers him of
these things, I guess that his sin shall not turn him in delight, but to
great sorrow, for dread of the pain of hell. And therefore says Job to God:
* suffer lord yt I may a while bewail and weep, er I go without returning to
the dark land, covered with the derkenesse of death, to the land of misese
and of derkenesse, whereas is the shadow of death, where as there is none
order or ordinance, but fearful dread that ever shall last. Lo, here may you
see, that Job prayed respite a while, to bewepe and wail his trespass: For
sothely one day of respite is better than all the treasure of this world. And
for as much as a man may acquit himself before god by penitence in this
world, and not by treasure, therefore should he pray to God to give him respite
a while, to bewepe and wail his trespass: for certes, all the sorrow that a
man might make fro y^ beginning of the world, nis but a little thing, at
regard of the sorrow of hell. The cause why that Job calls hell the land of
derkenesse, understondeth that he calls it land or earth, for it is stable
and never shall fail, and derke: For he that is in hell has defaute of light
material, for certes the derke light that shall come out of the fire that ever
shall brenne, shall turn him all to pain ye is in hell, for it shows him to
the horrible Devils that him turmenteth, covered with ye derkenesse of death,
that is to say, * That he that is in hell, shall have defaut of ye sight of
God: for certes the sight of god is ye life perdurable. The derknes of death,
been y^ sins that ye wretched man has don, which that disturb him to see ye
face of God, right as the derke cloud betwixt us and y^ sun. Land of misese,
because yt there been three manner of defautes against three things that folk of
this world have in this present life, that is to say: honors, delices, and
richesse. Against honor have they in hell shame and confusion: For well ye
wot, that men call honor ye reverence y^ man does to man, but in hell is none
honor ne reverence. For certes no more reverence shall be do there to a king,
than to a knave. For which God says by the Prophet Jeremy: Those folk that
me despise, shall be in dispite. Honor is also called great lordeship: there
shall no wight serve other: but of harm and turment. Honor is also called
great dignity and highness, but in hell shall they be all fortroden of
devils. As God says: the horrible Devils shall go and come upon the heddes of
damned folk: and this is, for as much as the higher that they were in this
present life, y^ more shall they be abated and defoiled in hell. Ayenste the
richesse of this world shall they have misese of poverte, that shall be in four
things. In defaut of treasure. Of which David says: * The rich folk that
embrace and knit all her heart to treasour of this world, shall sleep in the
sleeping of death, and nothing ne shull they find in her hondes of all her
tresour. And moreover, ye misease of hell shall be in defaut of meat and
drink. For God says thus by Moses: * They shall be wasted with hunger, and
the birds of hell shall devour hem with bitter death, and ye gall of the
Dragon shall be her drink, and y^ venum of the Dragon her morsels. Also her
misease shall be in defaut of clothing, for they shall be naked in body, as of
clothing, save the fire in which they brenne, and other filthes: and naked
shall they be of soul, of all manner virtues, which that is ye clothing of the
soul, Where been than the gay robes, ye soft shetes, and ye small sherts? Lo,
what says God of hem by the Prophet Esaie, * That under hem shall be strewed
moughtes, and her covertures shall be of worms of hell. Also her misease shall
be in defaut of friends, for he is not poor ye has good friends: but there is no
friend, for neither God ne no creature shall be friend to hem, and each of hem
shall hate other with deadly hate: The sons and the daughters shall rebel
against father and mother, and kindred against kindred, chide, and despise each
other, both day and night, as God says by the prophet Micheas: * And y^
loving children that whilom loved so fleshly each other, would each of hem eat
other if they might. * For how should they love together in the pains of hell,
when they hated each other in prosperity of this life? for trust well, her
fleshly love was deedly hate. As says y^ Prophet David: Whosoever that loves
wickedness, he hates his soul, and who so hates his own soul, certes he may
love none other wight in no manner: And therefore in hell is no solace ne no
friendship, but ever ye more kinredes that been in hell, y^ more cursinges, the
more chidinges, and ye more deadly hate there is among hem. Also they shall
have defaut of all manner delices, for certes delices ben after the appetites
of ye five wits: As sight, hearing, smelling, favoring, and touching. But in
Hell her sight shall be full of derkenesse and of smoke, and therefore full of
tears, and her hearing full of wailing and grinting of teeth: As says Jesus
Christ. Her nosthrilles shall be full of stinking. And, as says Esaias ye
Prophet: Her savouring shall be full of bitter gall, and as touching of all her
bodies, icovered with fire, that never shall quench, and with worms that never
shall die. As God says by y^ mouth of Esaias: and for as much as they shall not
wene that they may die for pain, and by death fly fro pain, that they may
understond in the words of Job, that says: There is the shadow of death.
Certes a shadow has likeness of the thing of which it is shadowed, but shadow
is not the same thing of which it is shadowed: right so fares the pain of
Hell, it is like death, for ye horrible anguish. And why? For it paineth hem
ever as though they should die anon, but certes they shall not die. For as says
saint Greg. * To wretched caitiffes shall be death without death, and end
without end, and defaut without failing, for her death shall always live, and
her end shall ever more begin, and her defaut shall not fail.

And therefore says saint John the Evangelist, * They shall follow death, and
they shall not find him, and they shall desire to die, and death shall fly
from hem. And also Job says, That in hell is no order or rule. And all be it
so, y^ God has create all thing in right order, and nothing without order, but
all things been ordered and numbered, yet nathelesse they that been dampened been
nothing in order, ne hold none order, for ye earth ne shall bear hem no fruit.
For, as the Prophet David says: God shall destroy ye fruit of the earth, as
for hem, ne water, ne shall yeve hem no moisture, ne the air no refreshing, ne
fire no light. For as says saint Basilie: * The brenning of y^ fire of this
world shall God yeve in hell to hem that been dampened, but ye light and the
clearness shall he yeve in Heaven to his children: right as good men yeve
flesh to her children, and bones to her hounds. And for they shall have none
hope to escape, says saint Job at last, * That there shall terror and
gresly dread dwell without end. Horror is always dread that is to come, and
this dread shall always dwell in the hearts of hem that be dampened. And
therefore have they lost all her hope for seven causes. First, for God that is
her judge shall be without mercy to hem, and they may not please him, ne none
of his saints, ne they may not yeve nothing for her ransom, ne they shall
have no voice to speak to him, ne they may not fly fro pain, ne they have no
goodness in hem yt they may show to deliver hem fro pain. And therefore says
Solomon: * The wicked man dies, and when he is dead, he shall have no hope to
escape fro pain. Who so then would well understond the pains, and bethink
him well that he has deserved those pains for his sins, certes he should
have more talent to sighe and weep, than for to singe and play. For as says
Solomon, * Who so that had ye science to know the pains that been ordained for
sin, he would make sorrow. That science, as says Saint Austin, makes a man
to weiment in his heart.

THE fourth point that ought make a man have contrition, is the sorrowful
remembrance of the good that he has left to do hear in earth, and also
the good that he has lost. Sothly the good works that he has left, either
they be the good works that he wrought er he fell in deadly sin, or else
y^ good works that he wrought while he lay in sin. Sothly the good works
that he did before that he fell in sin, been all mortified, astoned, and dull
by often sinning. The works that he did while he lay in sin, he dead, as to ye
life perdurable in heaven: then the good works that been mortified by often
sinning, which he did being in charity, may not quick again without very
penitence. And of it says God by the mouth of Ezechiel: * If ye rightful man
retourn again fro his rightwisenesse and do wickedness, shall he live? nay, for
all y^ good works that he has do, ne shall never be in remembrance, for he
shall die in his sin. And upon y^ chapter says saint Gregory thus, that we
shall understond this principally: * If y^ we done deadly sin, it is for
naught then to rehearse or draw into memory the good works that we have
wrought before: for certes in the werking of deadly sin, there is no trust ta
no good work yt we have done before, that is to say, as for to have thereby
the life perdurable in Heaven. But nathelesse, ye good werks quicken and come
again, and help and avail to have the life perdurable in Heaven, when we
have contricion: but soothly y^ good works that men don while they be in
deedly sin, for as much as they were done in deedly sin, they may never
quick: For certes, thing that never had life, may never quick: And nathelesse,
albeit that they avail not to have the life perdurable, yet avail they to
abredge of y^ pain of hell, or else to get temporal richesses, or else that God
woll y^ rather enlumine or light the heart of y^ sinful man to have
repentance, and eke they avail for to use a man to do good works, that the
feende have the less power of his soul. And thus the curteis Lord Jesus Christ,
ne woll that no good work be lost, for in somewhat it shall avail. But for
as much as the good works that men done while they been in good life, been
all amortised by sin following: and also sith that all ye good works that
men done while they be in dedly sin, been utterly dead, as for to have the
life perdurable, well may that manne that no good work ne does, sing that new
fresh song (lay tout pardu mon temps, et mon labure.) * For certes sin
bereaveth a man both goodness of nature, and also the goodness of grace. For
soothly the grace of the holy ghost, fares like fire that may not be idle, for
fire fails anon as it foreletteth his werking: and right so grace fails
anon, as it foreletteth his werking. Then leseth the sinful man the goodness
of glory, that only is beheight to good men that labor and werk. Well may he
be sorry then, that owes all his life to God, as long as he has lived, and
also as long as he shall live, that no goodness ne has to pay with his debt
to God, to whom he owes all his life: * for trust well he shall yeve accounts
as says Saint Bernard, of all the goods that have been yeve him in this
present life, and how he has hem dispended, in so much that there shall not
perish an here of his hedde, ne a moment of an hour ne shall not perish of
his time, that he ne shall yeve of it a reckoning.

THE fifthe thing that ought to moove a man to contricion, is remembrance of
the passion that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered for our sins. For as says
saint Bernarde, * While that I live, I shall have remembrance of the
travailes, that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered in preaching, his weariness in
travailing, his temptations when he fasted, his long wakings when he prayed,
his veares when that he wept for pite of good people: the woe, ye shame, and
the filthe that men said to him: of the foul spitting that men spitte in his
face, of the buffettes that men yave him: of the foul mowes and of the
reproves that men said to him: of the nails with which he was nailed to the
cross, and of all ye remnaunt of his passion, that he suffered for my sins,
and nothing for his gilte.

And ye shall understond, yt in man's sin is every manner order or ordinance,
turned up so down. For it is soth, yt God, reason, sensualite, and the body
of man, been ordained that each of these four things should have lordship over
that other: as thus, God should have lordship over reason, and reason over
sensualite, and sensualite over the body of man. But sothly when man sins,
all this order or ordinance, is turned up so down. And therefore then, for as
much as reason of man, ne woll not be subject ne obeysaunt to God, that is his
Lord by right, therefore leseth it the worship that it should have over
sensualite, and also over the body of man. And why? For sensualite rebelleth
than against reason: and by that way leeseth reason the lordship over
sensualite, and over the body: For right as reason is rebel to God, right so
is both sensualite rebel to reason, and to the body also. And certes this
disordinaunce and this rebellion, our Lord Jesus Christ bought upon his precious
body full dear: and herkeneth in what wise. * For as much then as reason is
rebel to God, therefore is man worthy to have sorrow, and to be deed. This
suffered our Lord Jesus Christ for manne, after that he had be betrayed of his
disciple, and distrained and bound, so that his blood brast out at every nail
of his hondes, as says S. Augustine. And ferthermore, for as much as reason of man, woll not daunt sensualite, when it may, therefore is manne worthy to
have shame: and this suffered our Lord Jesus Christ for man, when they spit in
his visage. And ferthermore, for as much then as the caitiffe body of man, is
rebel both to reason and to sensualite, therefore it is worthy death: and this
suffered our Lord Jesus Christ upon ye Cross, whereas there was no part of his
body free, without great pain and bitter passion: and all this suffered our
Lord Jesus Christ that never forfaited. And therefore reasonably may be said of
Jesus in this manner: To much am I pained, for things that I never deserved: and
to much defouled for shame that man is worthy to have. And therefore may the
sinful man well say, as says saint Bernard: * Accursed be the bitterness of
my sin, for which there must be suffered so much bitterness. For certes,
after the diverse discordance of our wickedness, was the passion of Jesus Christ
ordained in diverse things, as thus: Certes sinful man's soul is betrayed of
the Devil, by covetise of temporal prosperity, and scorned by deceit, when
that he cheseth fleshly delices, and yet it is turmented by impatience of
adversity, and bespet by servage and subjection of sin, and at the last it is
slain finally. For this disordinaunce of sinful man, was Jesus Christ first
betrayed, and after that was he bound, that came for to unbind us of sin and
of pain. Then was he bescorned, that only should have be honored in all
things. Then was his visage that ought be desired to be seen of all mankind
(in which visage Angels desire to look) villainously bespet. Then was he
scourged that nothing had trespassed, and finally, then was he crucified and
slain. Then was accomplished the words of Esaie: * He was wounded for our
misdeeds, and defoiled for our felonies. Now since that Jesus Christ took on him
the pain of all our wickednesses, much ought sinful man weep and bewail,
that for his sins, Gods son of Heaven should all this pain endure.

THE Sixth thing that should meve a man to contricion, is the hope of three
things, that is to say: forye venesse of sin, and the gift of grace for to
do well, and the glory of Heaven with which God shall reward manne for his
good deeds: And for as much as Jesus Christ, yeveth us these gifts of his
largeness, and of his Sovereigne bounty, therefore is he called (Jesus
Nazarenus Rex Iudeorum) Jesus is to say, savior or salvation, on whom men shall
hope to have foryevenesse of sins, which that is properly salvation of
sins. And therefore said the Angel to Joseph, Thou shall call his name
Jesus, that shall save his people of her sins. And hereof says Saint Peter:
* There is none other name under Heaven, that is yeve to any man, by which a
man may be saved, but only Jesus. Nazarenus is as much for to say, as
flourishing, in which a man shall hope that he that yeveth him remission of
sins, shall yeve him also grace well for to do. * I was at the door of
thine heart, says Jesus, and called for to enter: He that opens to me, shall
have foryevenesse of his sin. I woll enter into him by my grace, and sup with
him by the good works that he shall do, which works been the food of the
soul, and he shall suppe with me, by the great joye that I shall yeve him.
Thus shall man hope for his works of penance, that GOD shall yeve him his
reign, as he behight him in the Gospel. Now shall a man understonde, in which
manner shall be his contricion: I say, that it shall be universal and total,
this is to say: a man shall be very repentant for all his sins that he has
dooen in delight of his thought, for it is right perilous.

For there been two manner of consentings that one of hem is called consenting
of affection, when a man is moved to do sin, and then deliteth him long, for
to think on that sin, and his reason apperceiveth it well, that it is sin
against the Law of God, and yet his reason refraineth not his foul delight on
talent, though he see well apertly, yt it is against the reverence of God,
although his reason consent not to do yt sin indeed: yet say some Doctors,
that soche delight that dwells long is full perilous, albeit never so
little. And also a man should sorrow, namely for all that ever he has desired
against the Law of God, with perfect consenting of his reason, for thereof is no
doubt, that it is deadly sin in consenting: for certes there is no deadly
sin, but that it is first in man's thought, and after that in his delight, and
so forth into consenting, and into deed. Wherefore I say that many men, ne
repent hem never of such thoughts and delices, ne never shrive hem of it, but
only of the deed of great sins outward: wherefore, I say that soche wicked
delites been subtle begilers of hem that shall be dampened.

Moreover, man ought to sorrow for his wicked words, as well as for his wicked
deeds: for certes the repentance of a singular sin, and not repentant of all
his other sins: or else repent him of all his other sins, and not of a
singular sin, may not avail: * For certes GOD almighty is all good, and
therefore, either he foryeveth all, or else right naught. And therefore says
saint Augustine: I wot certainly, that God is enemy to every sinner: and how
then he that observes one sin, shall he have foryevenesse of those other
sins? Nay. And moreover, contricion should be wonder sorrowful and
anguishous: and therefore yeveth him God plainly his mercy: and therefore when
my soul was anguished, and sorrowful within me, then had I remembrance of God,
yt my prayer might come to him. Ferthermore, contricion must be continual, and
that manne have steadfast purpose to shrive him, and to amend him of his life.
For sothly while contricion lasts, man may ever hope to have foryevenes. And
of this comes hate of sin, that destroys both sin in himself, and also
in other folk at his power. For which says David: * They that love God, hate
wickedness: For to love GOD, is for to love that he loves, and hate that he
hates. The last thing yt men shall understand is this, Wherefore avails
contrition? I say, yt contricion sometime delivers man fro sin: Of which
David says, I say (said David) I purposed firmly to shrive me, and thou Lord
releasedest my sin. And right so as contricion avails not without sad purpose
of shrift, if man have oppertunity, right so little worth is shrift or
satisfaction without contrition. And moreover contricion destroys the prison
of hell, and makes weak and feeble all the strengths of the Devils, and
restores the yeftes of the holy Ghost, and of all good virtues, and it
cleanses the soul of sin, and delivers it fro the pain of hell, and fro
the company of the Devil, and fro the servage of sin, and restores it to
all goods spirituals, and to the company and communion of holy Church.
Ferthermore, it makes him that whilome was son of ire, to be the son of
Grace: And all these things been prooved by holy writ. And therefore he that
would set his intent to these things, he were full wise: for truly he ne should
have then in all his life courage to sin, but yeve his heart and body to
serve Christ, and thereof do him homage. For truly our Lord has spared us so
meekly in our foilies, that if he ne had pity of man's soul, a sorry song might
we all sing.

Explicit prima pars poenitentiae: and incipit pars secunda.
THE second part of penitence is Confession, that is a sign of contricion. Now
shull ye understond what is Confession, and it ought needs be done or no: and
which things be covenable to very confession.

First shall thou understonde, that confession is very showing of sins to the
Priest: this is to say very, for he must confess him of all the conditions
that belong to his sin, as ferforthe as he can: all must be said, and
nothing excused ne hid, * And not avaunt thee of thy good works. Also it is
necessary to understonde whence that sins spring, and how they entere, and
which they been.

Of the spring of sins, says Saint Poule in this wise: * That right as by one
man sin entered first into this world, and through sin death, right so the
death enters into all men that sin: and this man was Adam, by whom sin
entered into this world, when he broke the commandment of God. And therefore he
that first was so mighty, that he ne should have died, became so that he must
needs die, whether he would or no, and all his progeny in this world, that in
the said man sinned. Look that in the estate of innocence, when Adam and Eve
were naked in Paradise, and shamed not hereof, how the serpent, wilyest of all
other beasis y^ GOD made, said to the woman: Why commanded God you, that ye
should not eat of every tree in Paradise: The woman answered: Of the fruit
said she of trees of Paradise we feed us, but of the fruit of the middle tree
of Paradise God forbode us to eat and touch, least we should die. The Serpent
said to the woman: Nay, nay, ye shall not die of death, for sooth God wotte,
that what day that ye eat thereof your eyes shall open, and ye shall be as
gods, knowing good and harm. The woman then saw that the tree was good to
feeding, and fair to the eyes, and delectable to sight, she took of the fruit
of the tree and did eat, and yave to her husbond, and he eat, and anon the eyes
of hem both opened: and when that they knew that they were naked, they sowed
of Figg leaves in manner of breches, to hide her members. There may ye see That
deadly sin has first suggestion of the send, as shows here by the Adder:
and afterward the delight of the flesh, as shows by Eve, and after that,
consenting of reason, as shows here by Adam. For trust well, though so it
were, that the fend tempted Eve, that is to say, the flesh, and the flesh had
delight in the beauty of the fruit defended: yet certes till that reason, that
is to say, Adam consented to the eating of the fruit, yet stood he in the
state of innocence. Of the said Adam took we the said original sin, for of
him fleshly descended be we all, and engendered of vile and corrupt matter:
And when the soul is put in our bodies, right anon is contract original
sin, and that that was erst, but only pain of concupiscence, is afterward
both pain and sin: and therefore we been all borne sons of wrath, and of
dampnation perdurable, if it nere Baptism that we receive, which benimmeth us
the coulpe: but forsooth the pine dwells with us as to temptation, which pine
hight concupiscence. This concupiscence when it is wrongfully disposed or
ordained in man, it makes him covet by covetise of flesh, fleshly sin by sight
of his eyes, as to yerthly things, and also covetise of highness by pride of
heart.

Now as to speak of the first covetise, that is concupiscence, after the law
of our members, that were lawfully made, and by rightful judgment of God, I
say, * For as much as man is not obeisant to God, that is his Lord, therefore
is the flesh to him disobeisaunt through concupiscence, which is called
nourishing of sin, and occasion of sin. Therefore, all the while that a man has within him the pine of concupiscence, it is impossible, but he be
tempted sometime, and moved in his flesh to sin. And this thing may not fail
as long as he lives. It may well wax feeble by virtue of Baptism, and by the
grace of God through penitence, but fully ne shall it never quench, that he ne
shall sometime be moved in himself, but if he were all refrained by sickness,
or by malice of sorcery, or cold drinks. For lo, what says S. Poule: the flesh
coveteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: they been so
contrary and so striven, that a man may not always do as he would. The same S.
Poule, after his great Penance, in water and in land: in water by night and by
day, in great peril, and in great pain: in land, famine and thurst, cold and
clothlesse, and ones stoned almost to death: Yet (said he) alas, I caitiffe
manne, who shall deliver me fro the prison of my caitiffe body? And saint
Ierom, when he long time had dwelled in desert, whereas he had no company but
of wild beasts, where as he had no meat, but herbs, and water to drink,
ne no bed, but the naked earth, wherefore his flesh was black, as an Ethyopian
for heat, and nie destroyed for cold: Yet (said he) that the brenning of
lechery boiled in all his body. Wherefore I wot well that they be deceived
that say, they be not tempted in her bodies. Witness S. James that says, * That
every wight is tempted in his own conscience, y^ is to say: That each of us
has matter and occasion, to be tempted of the norishing of sin, that is in
his body. And therefore says saint John the Evangelist: If we say that we been
without sin, we deceive our self, and truth is not in us. Now shall ye
understond, how sin waxes and increases in man. The first thing is the same
nourishing of sin, of which I spoke before, the fleshly concupiscence: and
after that, comes suggestion of the Devil, this is to say, ye Devils belous,
with which he blows in man, the fire of concupisence: and after that, a man
bethinketh him whether he woll do or no that thing to which he is tempted.
And then if a man withstond and weive the first intising of his flesh, and of
the fiend, then it is no sin: and if so be he do not, then feels he anon a
flame of delight, and then it is good to beware and keep him well, or else he
woll fall anon to consenting of sin, and then woll he do it, if he may have
time and place. And of this matter says Moses by the Devil, in this manner:
The fiend says, I woll chase and pursue man by wicked suggestion, and I woll
take him by mooving and ^^irring of sin, and I woll depart my prise of my
preie by deliberation, and my lust shall be accomplished in delight, I woll
draw my swerd in consenting. For certes, right as a sword departs a thing in
two pieces, right so consenting departs God fro manne, and then woll I slay
him with my hand in deed of sin: thus says the fiend. For certes, then is
a man all dead in soul, and thus is sin accomplished with temptation, by
delight and consenting: and then is the sin actual. Forsooth sin is in two
manners, either it is venial, or deadly sin. * Sothly, when man loves any
creature, more than Jesus Christ our Creator, then it is deadly sin: and
venial sin it is, if a man love Jesus Christ less than him ought. Forsooth the
deed of this venial sin is full perilous, for it minisheth the love that man
should have to God, more and more. And therefore if a man charge himself with
many such venial sins, certes, but if so be yt he sometime discharge him of
hem by shrift, they may full lightly minish in him all the love that he has to
Jesus Christ: and in this wise skippeth venial sin into deadly sin. For
certes, the more that a man charge his soul with venial sins, the more
he is inclined to fall into deadly sin. And therefore let us not be negligent,
to charge us of venial sins. For the Proverb says, * That many small make a
great. Hearken this ensample: A great wave of the sea comes sometime with so
great a violence, yt it drouneth the ship. And the same harm does sometime
the small drops of water, that enters through a little creveis into the
timber, and into the bottom of the ship, if men be so negligent, that they
discharge hem not by times. And therefore although there be a difference
betwixt these two causes of drowning, algates the ship is drouned. Right so
fares it sometime of deadly sin, and of annoious venial sins, when they
multiply in man so greatly, that those worldly things that he loves,
through which he sins venially, is as great in his heart as ye love of God,
or more: and therefore the love of every thing yt is not beset in God, ne done
principally for Gods sake, although that a man love it less than God, yet is
it venial sin; and deadly sin, when the love of any thing weighs in the
heart of man, as much as ye love of God, or more. Deadly sin, as says saint
Augustine, is, * When a man turns his heart fro God, which that is very
sovereign bounty, that may not change, and yeueth his heart to thing that may
change and flit: and certes, that is every thing save God of heaven. For
sooth is, yt if a man give his love, which that he owes to God with all his
heart, unto a creature, certes, as much of love as he yeueth to the same
creature, so much he bireaueth fro God, and therefore does he sin: for he
that is debitour to God, ne yeldeth not to God all his debt, yt is to say, all
the love of his heart. Now since man understands generallye which is venial
sin, then it is couenable to tell specially of sin, which that many a man,
peradventure, deemeth hem no sins, and shriueth him not of the same things,
and yet nathelesse they be sins soothly, as these Clerks write, this is to
say: * At every time that manne eats or drinks more than suffices to the
sustenance of his body, in certain he does sin: and also when he speaks
more than it needs, it is sin.

Also when he hearkeneth not benignely the complainte of the poor: Also when
he is in heal of body, and woll not fast when other folk fast, without cause
reasonable: Also when he sleeps more than needs, or when he comes
perchance to late to the Church, or to other works of charity: Also when he
uses his wife without sovereign desire of engendrure, to the honor of God,
or for the intent to yield to his wife debte of his body. Also when he woll
not visit the sick, or the prisoner, if he may. Also if he love wife or
child, or other worldly thing, more than reason requires. Also if he flatter
or blandise more than him ought for any necessity. Also if he minish or
withdraw the almose of the poor. Also if he apparaile his meat more
deliciously than need is, or eat too hastily by lickorousnes. Also, if he talk
vanities at Church, or at Gods service, or that he be a talker of idle words,
of folly or villainy, for he shall yield accounts of it at the day of doom.
Also, when he behighteth or assures to do things that he may not
perform. Also, when that he by lightness or folly, missayeth or scorneth
his neighbor. Also, when he has any wicked suspection of thing, that he ne
wot of sothfastnesse. These things and mo without number be sins, as says
S. Augustine. Now shall men understand, that all be it so that none earthly
manne may eschew all venial sins, yet may he refrain hem, by the brenning
love that he has to our Lord Jesus Christ, and by prayers and confession, and
other good works, so that it shall be but little grief. For as says S.
Augustine: * If a man love God in such manner, that all that ever he does is
the love of God, or for the love of God verily, for he brenneth in the love of
God: look how much that one drop of water, which does fall into a great
furnace full of fire, annoieth or greueth the brenning of the fire: in like
manner annoieth or greueth a venial sin, unto that man which is steadfast and
perfect in the love of our Savior Jesus Christ. Ferthermore, men may also
refrain and put away venial sin, by commening and receiving worthily ye
body of our Savior Jesus Christ. Also, by taking of holy water, by almosedeed,
by general confession of Confite or at Mass, and at Complin, and by blessings
of Bishops and Priests, and by other good works.

De septem peccatis mortalibus, and de eorum dependentiis, circumstantiis, and
speciebus.
NOw it is expedient to tell which been the seven deadly sins, that is to
say, chiefetaines of sins. All they ren in o lees, but in diverse manners.

Now been they called seven sins, for as much as they be chief, and
spring of all other sins. Of the root of these seven sins, then is Pride
the general root of all harms. For of this root springs certain branches:
as Ire, Envy, Accidie or Sloth, Avarice or Couetise, (to common
understanding) Gluttony, and Lechery: and each of these chief sins have her
branches and twigs, as it shall be declared in her Chapiters following. And
though so be that no man can utterly tell the number of twigges, and of the
harms that come of Pride, yet woll I show a part of hem, as ye shall
understand. There is inobedience, auaunting, ipocrisie, dispite, errogance,
impudence, swelling of heart, insolence, elation, impatience, strife,
contumacie, presumption, irreuerence, pertinacie, vaineglorie, and many other
twigs that I cannot declare. Inobedience, is he that disobeyeth for dispite,
the commandments of God, to his sovereigns, and to his ghostly father.
Auaunter, is he that boasts of the harm or of the bounty y^ he has done.
Ipocrite, is he that hides to show him such as he is, and shows him to seem
such as he is not. Dispitous, is he that has disdain of his neibour, that is
to say, of his euin Christen, or has dispite to do that him ought to do.
Errogance, is he that thinks that he has those bounties in him that he
has not, or weneth that he should have hem by his deserts, or else that he
deemeth, he is that he is not. Impudent, is he that for his pride, has no
shame of his pride ne sin. Swelling of heart, is when man rejoices him of
harm that he has done. Insolence, is he that dispiseth in his judgment all
other folk, as in regard of his value, of his cunning, of his speaking, and
of his bering. Elation, is when he ne may neither suffer to have master ne
fellow. Impatience, is he that woll not be taught, ne rebuked of his vice, and
by strife denies truth wittingly, and defends his folly. Contumacie, is he
that through his indignation, is against every authority or power of hem y^
been his Soueraines. Presumption, is when a man undertakes an emprise that
him ought not to do, or else that he may not do, and this is called surquidie.
Irreuerence, is when man does not honor there as him ought to do, and look to
be reverenced. Pertinacie, is when men defend her folly, and trust too much on
her own wit. Vaineglorie, is for to have pomp, and delight in his temporal
highness, and glory him in worldly estates. Iangling, is when men speak too
much before folk, and clappeth as a mill, and take no keep what they say.

And yet there is a privy spece of pride, that waits first to be salewed,
or he woll salew, all be he less worthy than that other is. And also he
waits or desires to sit, or else to go above him in the way, or kiss paxe,
to be encenced, or go to offering before his neighbor, and such semblable
things, against his duty peradventure, but that he has his heart and his
intent in such a proud desire to be magnified and honored before the people.

Now ben there two manner of prides. One of hem is within the heart of a man,
and that other is without. Of which foresaid things soothly, and mo than I
have said, appertain to pride, that is in the heart of man, and other speces
of pride been without: but nathelesse, that one of these speces of pride, is
sign of that other, right as the gaye leuesell at the Tavern, is sign of the
wine that is in the Seller. And this is in many things: as in speech and
countenance, and outrageous arraye of clothing: for certes, if there had been
no sin in clothing, Christ would not so sone have noted and spoken of the
clothing of the rich men in the Gospel. And as S. Greg. says, * That
precious clothing is culpable for the dearth of it, and for his softness, and
for his strangeness and disguising: and for the superfluity, or for the
inordinate scantnes of it. Alas, may not a man see as in our days, the
sinful costlewe arraie of clothing, and namely in too much superfluity, or
else in too disordinate scantnesse.

As to the first sin in superfluity of cloathinge, such that makes it so
dear, to the harm of the people, not only the cost of enbroudering, the
disguised endenting, or barring, ounding, paling, winding, or bending, and
semblable wast of cloth in vanity: but there is also the costlewe Furring in
her gounes, so much pounsing of chesell to make holes, so much dagging of
Sheres, with the superfluity in length of the foresaid gounes, trayling in ye
dong and in ye mire, on horse and also on foot, as well of man as of woman:
that all that trayling is verily (as in effect) wasted, consumed, thredbare,
and rotten with doung, rather than it is give to the poor, to great damage of
the foresaid pore folk, and that in sundry wise: this is to say, that the
more the cloth is wasted, the more must it cost to the poor people for the
scarceness. And moreover, if so be that they would give such pounsed and
dagged clothing to the poor people, it is not convenient to were for her
estate, ne sufficient to her necessity, to keep hem fro the distemperaunce of
the firmament. Upon that other side, to speak of the horrible disordinate
scantnesse of clothing, as been these cutted sloppes or hanselines, that
through her shortenesse cover not the shameful members of man, to wicked
intent. Alas, some of hem show the bosse of her shape, and the horrible swole
members that seems like the malady of Hernia, in the wrapping of her hosen,
and also the buttocks of hem fare as it were the hinder part of a she Ape in
the full of the moon. And moreover the wretched swollen members that they show
through disguising, in departing of her hosen, in white and read, seems
that half her shameful privy members were flaine. And if so be that they
depart her hosen in other colors, as is white and blewe, or white and black,
or black and read, and so forth: Then seems it as by variaunce of color
that the half part of her prive members ben corrupt by the fire of saint
Anthony, or by canker, or other such mischaunce. Of the hinder part of the
buttockes it is full horrible for to see, for certes in that party of her
body there as they purge her stinking ordure, that foul party show they to
the people proudly in dispite of honesty, which honesty that Jesus Christ and
his friends observed to show in her life. Now as to the outrageous arraie of
women, God wot, yt though the visages of some of hem seem full chaste and
debonaire, yet notify in her array or attire, licorousnes and pride: I say not
that honesty in clothing of man or woman is vncouenable, but certes the
superfluity of disordinate quantity of clothing is reprouable. Also the sin
of ornament or of apparaile, is in things that appertain to riding, as in
company, delicate horses that been holden for delight, y^ been so fair, fat,
and costlewe, and also in many a nice knave, that is sustained because of hem,
in curious harneis, as in saddles, cropers, peitrels, and bridles covered with
precious clothing, and rich bars of plates of gould and of silver. For which
God says by Zachary the Prophet, I woll confound the riders of such horses.
These folk take little regard of ye riding of Gods son of heaven, and of
his harneis, when he rode upon the Ass, and had none other harneis but the
poor clothes of his disciples ne we read not that ever he rode on other
be. I speak this for ye sin of superfluity, and not for reasonable
honest, when reason it requires. And moreover, certes pride is greatly
notified in holding of great meine, when they been of little profit or of
right no profit, and namely when that meine is felonous and dammageous to the
people by hardiness of high lordship, or by way of offices. For certes, such
Lords sell then her lordshippe to the Devil of Hell, when they sustain the
wickedness of her meine. Or else, when these folk of low degree, as those
that keep hostleries, sustain theft of her hostellers, and that is in many
manner of deceits: those manner of folk been ye flies that follow the honey, or
else the hounds that follow the caraine. Such foresaid folk strangle
spirituelly her lordeships: For such, thus says David the Prophet: * Wicked
death might come on those lordeshippes, and God yeve that they might descend
into hell, all down, all down: For in her houses been iniquities and
shrewdness, and not God of heaven. And certes, till they done amendment, right
as God yaue his blessing to Pharao by the service of Joseph, and to Laban by
the service of Jacob: Right to God will give his curse to such lordeshippes as
sustain the wickedness of her servant, but they come to amendment. Pride of
the table appears also full often: for certes, rich men be called to
feasts, and poor folk been put away and rebuked. And also in excess of
diverse meats and drinks, and namely such manner bake meats and dishe meats
brenning of wild fire, peinted and castelled with paper and semblable wast, so
that it is abusion to think. And also in too great preciousnesse of vessel,
and curiosity of minstralcie, by which a man is sterred more to delices of
lecherye, if so be that he set his heart the less upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, certainly it is a sin. And certainly the delices might be so great
in this case, that a man might lightly fall by hem into deadly sin. The
especes that sourde of pride, soothly when they sourde of malice imagined,
auysed, and forecaste, or else of usage, ben deadly sin, it is no doubt. And
when they sourde by freelte vnauised suddenly, and sodaynely withdraw again, all
be they grievous sins, I guess that they be not deadly. Now might men ask,
whereof that pride sourdeth and springs. I say that sometime it springs of
ye goods of nature, sometime of the goods of fortune, and sometime of the
goods of grace. Certes the goods of nature stondeth only in goods of body,
or goods of the soul. Certes, goods of body ben hele of body, strength,
deliuernesse, beauty, gentry, franchise. Goods of nature of the soul, ben
good with sharp understanding, subtle engine, virtue natural, good memory.
Goods of fortune, be riches, hie degrees of lordships, praysinges of the
people. Goods of grace, ben science, power to suffice spirituell travail,
benign, virtuous contemplation, understanding of temptation, and semblable
things: of which foresaid goods, certes it is a full great folly, a man to
have pride in any of hem all. Now, as for to speak of goods of nature, God wot
that sometime we have hem in nature as much to our damage as to our profit. As
to speak of hele of body, truly it passes full lightly, and also it is full
often occasion of sickness of the soul: for God wot, * The flesh is a great
enemy to the soul: and therefore the more that the body is whole, the more we be
in peril to fall. Also for to have pride in his strength of body, it is an hie
folly: for certes ye flesh coueteth against the spirit: and the more strong
that the flesh is, the sorrier may the soul be. And over all, this strength of
body and worldly hardiness causes full often many man to peril and
mischaunce. And also to have pride of gentry, is right great folly: * For often
time the gentry of the body takes away the gentry of the soul: and also we
been all of o father and mother: and all we ben of o nature, rotten and
corrupt, both rich and poor. Forsooth o manner gentry is for to praise, that
apparelleth man's courage: wit, virtue, and morality, makes him Christ's
child. * For trust well, That over what man that sin has maystry, he is a
very churl to sin.

Now been there general signs of gentleness: as eschewing of vice and
ribaudrye, and seruage of sin: in word, in work, and continuance and using
of virtue, courtesy, and cleanenesse, and to be liberal: that is to say,
large by measure: for that that passes measure, is folly and sin: Another is
to remember him of bounty, that he of other folk has received: Another is to
be benign to his good subjects. Wherefore says Senecke: * There is nothing
more couenable to a man of high estate, than debonairtie and pity. And
therefore these flies that men call bees, when they make her king, they chese
one that has no prick wherewith he may sting.

Another is, manne to have a noble heart and a dilligent, to attain to the
high virtuous things. Now certes, a man to have pride in y^ goods of grace,
is also an outrageous folly: for those gifts of grace that should have turned
him to goodness, and to medicine, tourneth him to venom and confusion, as
says saint Gregory. Certes also, who so has pride in the goodness of
fortune, he is a full great fool: For sometime is a man a great lord by the
morn, that is a caitiffe and a wretch or it be night: and sometime the
riches of a man is cause of his death. Sometime the delices of a man is cause
of grievous malady, through which he dies. Certes, the commendation of ye
people is sometime full false and brotell for to trust. This day they praise,
to morrow they blame. God wot, desire to have commendation of the people, has
caused death to many a busy manne. Now since that so is, that ye have
understand what is pride, and which be the speces of it, and whence it
sourdeth and springs: now ye shall understand which is the remedy against
it. Humility or meekness is the remedy against pride, that is a virtue, through
which a man has very knowledge of himself, and holds of himself nor
price ne dainty, as in regard of his deserts, considering ever his freelte.
Now been there three manner of humilities: As humility in heart, another
humility is in mouth, and the third is in works. The humility in heart is in
four manners: That one is, when a man holds himself as naught worth before
God of heaven. The second is, when he despises none other man. The third is,
when he ne recketh not though men hold him naught worth. And the fourth is,
when he is not sorry of his humiliation. Also the humility of mouth is in four
things. In a temperate speech, in humility of speech, and when he confesses
with his own mouth, that he is such as him thinks that he is in his heart:
Another is, when he praises the bounty of another man and nothing thereof
minisheth. Humility also in work, is in four manners. The first is, when he
puts other men before him, the second is, to these the lowest place over al,
the third is, gladly to assent to good counsel, the fourth is, to stond gladly
to the award of his souereigns, or of him that is in hier degree: Certain this
is great work of humility.

De Invidia.
AFter pride woll I speak of the foul sin of Envy, which that is after the
word of the Philosopher, sorrow of other men's prosperity. And after the word
of Saint Augustine: * It is the sorrow of other men's weal, and the joy of other
men's harm. This foul sin is platly against the holy Ghost: All be it so,
that every sin is against the holy Ghost, Yet nathelesse, for as much as
bounty appertains properly to the holy Ghost, and Envy comes properly of
malice, therefore it is properly against the bounty of the holy Ghost. Now
has malice two speces, that is to say, hardness of heart in wickedness, or else
the flesh of a man is so blind, that he considreth not that he is in sin,
or recketh not that he is in sin, which is the hardiness of the Devil. That
other spece of Envy is, when that a man dennieth troth, when he knows that
it is troth, and also when he repents the grace that god has give to his
neighbor: and all this is by Envy. Certes, then is Envy the worst sin that
is, for soothly all other sins be sometime only against a special virtue: but
certes, envy is against all virtues and all goodness. For it is sorry against all
the bounties of her neighbor, and in this manner it is diverse from all other
sins. Alas: * For there ne is any sin that it ne has some delight in it self,
save only Envy, that ever has in it self anguish and sorrow. The speces of
Envy ben these: there is first sorrow of other men's goodness and of her
prosperity, and prosperity is kindly matter of joy: Then is envy a sin
against kind. The second spece of Envy, is joy of other men's harm, and that
is properly like to ye Devil, that ever reioyseth him of man's harm. Of
these two backbiting or detracting has certain speces, as thus: Some manne
praises his neighbor by a wicked intent, for he makes always a wicked knot at
the last end: always he makes a but at the last end, that is digne of more
blame, than is worth all the praising. The second spece is, that if a man be
good, or does or says a thing to good intent, ye backbiter woll turn all that
goodness up so down, to his shrewd intent. The third is, to amonish the
bounty of his Neighbor. The fourth spece of backbiting is this, that if men
speak goodness of a man, then wol the backbiter say: Perfay such a man is
yet better than he, in dispraising of him that men praise. The fifth spece is
this, for to consent gladly and herk gladly to the harm that men speak of other
folk: This sin is full great, and aye increases after the wicked intent of
ye backbiter. After backbiting comes grutching or murmuration, and sometime
it springs of impatience against God, and sometime against manne. Against God it
is when a man grutcheth against ye pain of hell, or against poverty, or loss of
cattle, or against rain or tempest, or else grutcheth that shrews have
prosperity, or else for that good men have adversity: and all these things
should men suffer patiently, for they come by the rightful judgment and
ordinance of God. Sometime comes grutching of avarice, as Judas grutched
against Maudelein, when she anointed the head of our Lord Jesus Christ with her
precious ointment. This manner murmuring is such as when man grutcheth of
goodness that himself does, or that other folk done of her own cattle.
Sometime comes murmr of pride, as when Simon the Pharisee grutched against
Maudelein when she approached to Jesus Christ and wept at his feet for her sins.
And sometime it sourdeth of Envy, when men discover a man's harm that was
privy, or bears him on hond thing that is false. Murmr also is often among
servaunts that grutch when her souereigns bid hem do lefull things, and for as
much as they dare not openly withsaye the commaundment of her souereigns, yet
wol they say harm and grutche and murmr privily for very spite: which words
they call the devils Pater noster, though so be that the devil had never Pater
noster, but that lewd folk yeueth it such a name. Sometime it comes of ire or
privy hate, that norisheth rancour in ye heart, as afterward I shall declare.
Then comes also bitterness of heart, through which bitterness, every good
deed of his neighbor seems to him bitter and unsauery. Then comes discord yt
vnbindeth all manner of friendship. Then comes scorning of his neighbor, all
do he never so well. Then comes accusing, as when a man seeks occasion to
annoy his neighbor, which is like the craft of the devil, that waits both
day and night to accuse us all. Then comes malignity, through which a man
annoieth his neighbor privily if he may, and if he may not, algate his wicked
will shall not let, as for to brenne his house privily, or enpoison or s^ea his
beasts, and semblable things. Now woll I speak of the remedy against this foul
sin of envy. First is the love of God principally, and loving of his neighbor
as himself: for soothly that one ne may not be without that other. And trust
well that in the name of thy neighbor thou shall understand the name of thy
brother, for certes all we have one father fleshly, and one mother, that is to
say, Adam and Eve: and also one father spirituel, that is God of heaven. Thy
neighbor art thou bound for to love, and will him all goodness, and therefore
says God: Love thy neighbor as thy self, that is to say, to salvation both of
life and soul. And moreover thou shall love him in word and in benig^e
admonishing and chastising, and comfort him in his noyaunces, and pray for him
withal thy heart. And in deed thou shall love him in such wise that thou shall
do to him in charity, as thou would that it were don to thine own person:
and therefore thou ne shall do him no damage in wicked word, ne harm in his
body, ne in his cattle, ne in his soul, by entising of wicked ensample. Thou
shall not desire his wife, ne none of his things. Understand also that in the
name of neighbor, is comprehended his enemy: Certes man shall love his enemy by
the commandment of god, and soothly thy friend thou shall love in God. I say
thine enemy, shall thou love for Gods sake, by his commandment: for if it were
reason that man should hate his enemy, forsooth God nold not receive us to his
love that been his enemies. Against three manner of wrongs that his enemy does
to him, he shall do three things as thus: against hate and rancour of heart, he
shall love him in heart: Against chiding and wicked words, he shall pray for his
enemy: Against wicked deeds, he shall do him bounty. For Christ says: Love your
enemies, and pray for hem that speak you harm, and for hem that chase and
pursue you: and do bounty to hem that hate you. Lo, thus commands us our
Lord Jesus Christ to do to our enemies: forsooth nature drives us to love our
friends, and perfay our enemies have more need of love than our friends, and
they that more need have, certes to hem shall men do goodness. And certes in
that deed have we remembrance of the love of Jesus Christ y^ died for his
enemies: And in as much as that love is more grievous to perfourm, so much is
the more great the merit, and therefore the loving of our enemy has confounded
the devils venim: * For right as the devil is confounded by humility, right so
is he wounded to the death by the love of our enemy: certes then is love the
medicine that casts out the venim of envy fro man's heart. The speces of this
place shall be more largely declared in her chapters following.

De Ira.
AFter Envy woll I discriue the sin of Ire: for soothly who so has Envy upon
his Neighbor, anon he woll commonly find him a matter of wrath in word or in
deed, against him to whom he has Envy: And as well comes Ire of Pride as of
Envy, for soothly he that is proud or envious is lightly wroth.

This sin of Ire, after the disriuing of S. Austin, is wicked will to be
avenged by word or by deed. * Ire, after the Philosopher, is the fervent blood
of man iquicked in his heart, through which he would harm to him that he
hates: for certes the heart of man by eschausing and moving of his blood,
waxes so troubled, yt it is out of all manner judgment of reason. But ye shall
understand that * Ire is in two manners, that one of hem is good, and that
other is wicked. The good ire is by jealousy of goodness through which a man is
wroth with wickedness, and against wickedness. And therefore says a wise man,
that ire is bet than play. This ire is with debonairte, and it is wrath without
bitterness: not wroth against the man, but wroth with the misdeed of the manne.
As says the Prophet David: Irascimini, and nolite peccare. Now understond that
wicked Ire is in two manners, that is to say, sudden ire or hasty ire without
auisement and consenting of reason: The meaning and the sense of this is, that
ye reason of a man ne consent not to that sudden ire, and then it is venial.
Another ire is full wicked, that comes of felony of heart, auised and cast
before with wicked will to do vengeance, and thereto his reason consents:
and soothly this is deadly sin. This ire is so displeasant to God, yt it
troubles his house, and chaseth the holy ghost out of man's soul, and wastes
and destroys that likeness of God, that is to say, ye virtue that is in man's
soul, and puts in him the likeness of the devil, and takes the man fro
God that is his rightful Lord. This is a full great pleasaunce to the devil, for
it is ye devils forance that is eschaused with y^ fire of hell: For certes
right so as fire is more mighty to destroy earthly things, than any other
Element, right so ire is mighty to destroy all spiritual things. Look how
that fire of small coals that been almost dead under ashen, wol revive or quick
again when they ben touchen with brimstone, right so ire woll evermore quick
again, when it is touched by the pride that is covered in man's heart. For certes
fire ne may not come out of nothing, but if it were first in the same thing
naturally: as fire is drawn out of flints with steel. And right so as pride is
many times matter of ire, right so is rancour norice and keeper of Ire. There
is a manner tree, as says saint Isodore, that when a man makes a fire of the
said tree, and cover the coals of it with ashen, soothly the fire of it will
last a year or more: And right so fares it of rancour, when it is ones
conceived in y^ hearts of some men, certes it woll last peradventure from one
Easter day until another Easter day, or more. But certes the same man is full
far from the mercy of God all that while.

In this foresaid devils fournace there forge three shrewes: Pride, that aye
blows and increases the fire, by chiding and wicked words: Then stondeth
Envy, and holds hot iron in the fire upon y^ heart of man, with a pair of
long tongs of long rancour: And then stondeth the sin of Contumely or strife
and cheste, and battereth and forgeth by vilainous repreuings. Certes this
cursed sin annoyeth both to the man himself, and also his Neighbor. For
soothly almost all the harm or damage that any man does to his Neighbor comes
of wrath: for certes, outrageous wrath does all that ever the foul fend
wills or commands him: for he ne spares neither our Lord Jesus Christ,
neither his sweet mother. And in his outrageous anger and ire, alas, alas, full
many and diverse at that time, feleth in his heart full wickedly, both of
Christ, and also of all his hallowes: Is not this a cursed vice? Yes certes.
Alas it takes fro man his wit and his reason, and all his debonaire life
spirituel, that should keep his soul. Certes it withdraws also Gods due
lordship (and that is man's soul) and the love of his Neighbors. It strives
also all day against troth, it reaueth him the quiet of his heart, and
subverteth his soul.

Of Ire comes these stinking engendrures, First, Hate, that is old wrath:
Discord, through which a man forsakes his old friend that he has loved full
long: and then comes War, and every manner of wrong that a man does to his
neighbor in body or in cattle. Of this cursed sin of ire comes also
manslaughter. And understond well that homicide (that is, manslaughter) is in
diverse wise.

Some manner of homicide is spirituell, and some is bodily. Spirituell
manslaughter is in vi. things. First by hate, as says Saint John: * He that
hates his brother, is an homicide. Homicide is also by backbiting, of which
backbiting, says Solomon, that they have two swerds, with which they slay her
neighbors: * For soothly as wicked is to take fro him his good name as his
life. Homicide is also in yeuing of wicked counsel by fraud, as for to give
counsel to areise wrongful customs and talages. Of which, says Solomon: * A
Lion roaring, and a Bear hungry, be like to the cruel Lords, in withholding or
abridging of the sheep or the hire of the wages of Servant, or else in
usury, or in withdrawing of the Alms of poor, folk. For which the wise
manne says: * Feeds him that almost dies for honger, for soothly but if
you feed him you slay him. And all these ben deadly sins. Bodily manslaughter
is when thou sleest him with thy tongue: Another manner is, when thou
commaundest to slay a man, or else yeuest counsel to slay a man. Mauslaughter
indeed is in four manners. That one is by law, right as a Justice dampueth him
that his culpable to the death: But let the Justice beware that he do it
rightfully, and that he do it not for delight to spill blood, but for keeping
of rightwisenesse. Another homicide is done for necessity, as when a man
slays another in his defense, and that he ne may none otherwise escape,
without slaughter of his adversary, he does sin, and he shall bear pennaunce
as for deadly sin. Also if a man by case or adventure shoot an arrow or cast a
stone, with which he slaieth a man, he is an homicide. And if a woman by
negligence ouerlyeth her child in her sleeping, it is homicide and deadly sin.
Also when a man disturbleth conception of a child, and makes a woman either
barren by drinking of venomous herbs, through which she may not conceive, or
slaieth a child by drinks, or else puts certain material things in her
secret places to slaie the child, or else does unkindly sin, by which a man or
woman sheddeth her nature in manner or in a place there as a child may not be
conceived. Or else if so be that a woman has conceived, and hurts her self,
and by that mishap the child is slain, yet it is homicide. What say we of
those women that murderen her children for because of eschewing of worldly
shame? Certes, it is an horrible homicide. Homicide is also, if a man
approach to a woman by desire of letchery, through which ye child is perished:
or else smites a woman wittingly, through which she leseth her child: All these
been homicides, and horrible deadly sins. Yet come there of ire mo sins, as
well in word, as in thought and deed. As he that arreteth upon God, or
blames God of the thing of which he is himself guilty, or despises God and
all his hallows, as done the cursed hasardors in diverse countries: This cursed
sin done they, when they feel in her heart full wickedly of God and of his
halowes. Also when they treat unreuerently the sacrament of the altar, that
sin is so great, y^ uneath it may be releaced, but that the mercy of God
passes all his werks, it is so great, and he so benign. Then comes of Ire an
atterly anger, when a man is sharply amonested in his shrift to leave his sin:
Then woll he be angry, and answer hokerly and angerly, or defend or excuse
his sin by unstedfastnesse of his flesh, or else he did it for to hold
company with his fellows, or else he says the fiend enticed him, or else he
does it for his youth, or else his complexion is so courageous that he may not
forbear, or else it is his destiny he says unto a certain age, or else he says
it comes him of gentleness of his ancestors, and semblable things. All these
manner of folk so wrappe hem in her sins, that they ne woll not deliver
hemself: For soothly, No wight that excuses himself wilfully of his sin, may
not be delivered of his sin, till that he meekly beknoweth his sin. After this
then comes swearing, that is express ayenste the commandment of God: and
this befalls often of Anger and of Ire. God says: * Thou shall not take the
name of thy Lord God in vain or in idle. Also our Lord Jesus Christ says by
the word of Saint Matthew: Ne shall ye not swear in all manner, nether by heaven,
for it is Gods trone: ne by earth, for it is the bence of his feet: ne by
Jerusalem, for it is y^ city of a great King: ne by thine head, for thou
may not make an hair neither white ne black: but say by your word, yea,
yea, nay, nay: and what that is more, it is of evil. Thus says Christ. For
Christ's sake swear not so sinnefully in dismembring of Christ, By soul, heart,
bones, and body: for certes it seems, that ye think that the cursed Jews ne
dismembered not enough y^ precious person of Christ, but ye dismember him more.
And if so be that the law compel you to swear, then rules you after y^ law of
god in your swearing, as says Jeremy. iiii. cap. * Thou shall keep three
conditions, Thou shall swear in troth, in doom, and in rightwisenes: this is
to say, thou shall swear sooth. For every lesing is against Christ, for Christ
is very troth. * And think well this, That every great swearer, not compelled
lawfully to swear, y^ plague shall not depart fro his house, while he uses such
unleful swearing. Thou shall swear also in dome, when thou art constrained by
thy doms man to witness troth: Also thou shall not swear for envy, neither for
favor, neither for mede or reward, but only for rightwisenesse, and for
declaring of it to the honor and worship of God, and to the ayding and help of
thine euin Christen. And therefore every man that takes Gods name in idle, or
falsely swears with his mouth, or else takes on him the name of Christ, to be
called a Christen man, and lives against Christ's living and his teaching: all
they take Gods name in idle. Look also what says saint Peter: Actuum iiii.
capitu. Non est aliud nomen sub coelo, etc. There is none other name (says
saint Peter) under heaven give to men, in which they may be saved, that is to
say, but the name of Jesus Christ. Take heed eke how precious is the name of
Jesus Christ, as says S. Poule, ad Philipenses. ii. In nomine Jesu, etc. * That
in the name of Jesus every knee of heavenly creatures, earthly, and of hell,
should bow: for it is so high and so worshipful, that the cursed fiend in hell
should tremble to hear it named. Then seems it, that men that swear so
horribly by his blessed name, that they despise it more boldly than the cursed
Jews, or else the devil, that trembles when he hears his name.

Now certes, since y^ swearing (but if it be lawfully done) is so highly
defended: much more is forswearing falsely, and yet needless.

What say we also of hem that delight hem in swearing, and hold it a gentery or
a manly deed to swear great oaths? And what of hem that of very usage ne cease
not to swear great oaths, all be the cause not worth a straw? Certes, this is
horrible sin. Swearing suddenly is also a great sin. But let us go now to that
horrible sin, swearing of adiuration and conjuration, as done these false
Enchauntours or Nigromanters in Basins full of water, or in a bright swerd, in
a Circle, in a fire, or in the shoulder bone of a sheep? I cannot say, but that
they do cursedly and damnably against Christ, and all the faith of holy church.

What say we of hem that believe on Deuinales, as by flight or by noise of
birds or of beasts, or by sort, by Geomancie, by dreams, by chirking of doors,
or cracking of houses, by gnawing of rats, and such manner wretchedness?
Certes, all these things been defended by God and holy church, for which they
been accursed, till they come to amendment, that on such filth set her believe.
Charms for wounds, or malady of men, or of beasts, if they take any effect, it
may be peradventure y^ God suffers it, for folk should give the more faith
and reverence to his name.

Now woll I speak of leasings, which generally is false signifiaunce of word in
intent, to deceive his euin Christien. Some leasing is, of which there comes
none advantage to no wight: and some leasing turns to the profit and ease of
a man, and to the damage of another man. Another leasing is, for to save his
life or his cattle, which comes of delight for to lie, in which delight, they
woll forge a long tale, and paint it with all circumstances, where all the tale
of the ground is false. Some leasing comes, for he woll sustain his words:
Some leasing comes of retchlesnesse without auisement, and semblable things.

Let us now touch the vice of Flattery, which ne comes not gladly, but for
dread, or for couetise. Flattery is generally wrongful praising. Flatterers
been the devils nourices, that nourish his children with milk of losengerie:
forsooth Solomon says, That Flattery is worse than detraction: for sometime
detraction makes an hautein man be the more humble, for he dreadeth
detraction, but certes flattery makes a man to enhaunce his heart and his
countenance. Flatterers be the Devils enchauntours, for they make a man to
wene himself be like that he is not like. Those be like to Judas, that betray a
man, to sell him to his Enemy. Flatterers been the devils Chapleins, that ever
sing Placebo. I reckon flattery in the vices of ire: for often time if a man be
wroth with another, then woll he flatter some wight, to sustain him in his
quarrel.

Speak we now of such cursing as comes of irous heart. Malison generally may be
said, every manner power of harm: such cursing bereaueth man fro the reign of
God, as says S. Poule. And often time such cursing wrongfully, returns again to
him that curses, as a bird that turns again to his own neast. * And over all
thing, men ought eschew to curse her children, and give to the devil her
engendrure, as far forth as in hem is: certes, it is great peril and great
sin.

Let us then speak of Chiding and Reproach, which been full great wounds in
man's heart, for they unsow the seams of friendship in man's heart: For certes,
Uneath may a man plainly be accorded with him, that him openly has reviled and
repreued, and disclaundred: This is a full ghostly sin, as Christ says in the
Gospel. And take heed now, that he that repreueth his neighbor, either he
repreueth him by some harm of pain, that he has upon his body, as Mesell,
crooked, harlot, or by some sin that he does. Now if ye repreue him by harm of
pain, then turns the repreue to Jesus Christ: for pain is send by the
rightwise sond of God, and by his sufferaunce, be it meselrie, maim, or
malady: and if he repreue him uncharitably of sin, as thou holour, thou
dronkelewe harlot, and so forth: then pertains that to the rejoicing of the
devil, which ever has joy that men done sin. And certes, chiding may not come
but of villainous heart, for after the haboundance of the heart speaks the
mouth full often. And ye shall understond, that look by any way, when any man
shall chastise or correct another, that he beware from chiding or repreuing:
for truly but he beware, he may full lightly quicken the fire of anger and of
wrath, which he should quench: and peradventure, slaeth him, which he might
chastise with benignity. For as says Solomon: * The amiable tongue is the tree
of life, y^ is to say, of life spirituel. And soothly, a dissolute tongue slaeth
the spirits of him that repreueth, and also of him which is repreued. Lo, what
says saint Augustine: * There is nothing so like the deuiis child, as he
which often chideth. A servant of God behooves not to chide. And though that
chiding be a villainous thing betwixt all manner folk, yet it is certes most
uncouenable between a man and his wife, for there is never rest. And therefore
says Solomon: * An house that is uncouered and drooping, and a chiding wife,
ben alike.

A man, which is in a dropping house in many places, though he eschew the
dropping in o place, it droppeth on him in another place: So fares it by a
chiding wife, if she chide him not in one place, she wol chide him in another:
And therefore. * Better and greatly more pleasant is a morsel or little gobbet
of bread with joy, than an house silled full of delices with chiding and
gnerring, says Solomon. Saint Poule says: O ye women, beth ye subject to
your husbands, as you behooves and ought in God. And ye men love your wives. Ad
Colonicences. iii.

Afterward speak we of Scorning, which is a wicked sin, and namely, when he
scorneth a man for his good werks: For certes, such scorners fare like the foul
tode, that may not endure to smell the sweet savor of the vine, when it
flourishes. These scorners been parting fellows with the devil, for they have
joy when the devil wins, and sorrow if he leseth. They been adversaries of
Jesus Christ, for they hate that he loves, that is to say, salvation of soul.

Speak we now of wicked counsel, the which is a Traitor, for he deceives him
that trusts in him: Vt Achitophel ad Salomonem. But nathelesse, yet is his
wicked counsel first against himself: for as says the wise man: * Every false
living has this property in himself, that he y^ woll annoy another man, he
annoyeth first himself. And men shall understond, that man shall not take his
counsel of false folk, ne of angry folk, or grievous folk, ne of folk that love
specially too much worldly folk, namely, in counsailing of Souls.

Now comes the sin of hem that sow and make discord among folk, which is a
sin that Christ hates utterly, and no wonder is: for he died for to make
concord. And more shame do they to Christ, than did they that him crucified: *
For God loves better, that friendship be amongs folk, than he did his own
body, which that he gave for unity. Therefore ben they likened to the devil,
that ever be about to make discord. Now comes the sin of Double tongue, such
as speak fair before folk, and wickedly behind: or else they make semblaunt,
as though they spoke of good entention, or else in game and play, and yet they
speak of wicked intent.

Now comes bewraying of counsel, through which a man is defamed: certes
unneth may he restore the damage. Now comes menace, y^ is an open folly: for
he that often menaceth, he threateth more than he may perform full often time. Now
comes idle words, that is, without profit of him that speaks the words,
and also of him that hearkeneth the words: Or else idle words been those that
been needless, or without intent of natural profit. And albeit that idle
words be sometime venial sin, yet should men doubt hem, for we shall give
reckoning of hem before God. Now comes iangling, that may not be without
sin: and as says Solomon, It is a sign of apert folly. And therefore a
Philosopher said, when men asked him how that he should please the people, he
answered: * Do many good works, and speak few vanities. After this comes the
sin of yaperies, that been the devils Apes, for they make folk to laugh at her
yaperie, as folk do at the gaudes of an Ape: which yapes defends saint Poule.
Look how that virtuous words and holy, comfort hem that trauail in the service
of Christ, right so comfort the villainous words and knacks of yapers, hem
that trauail in the service of the devil. These ben the sins of the tongue,
that come of ire, and of other sins.

The remedy against Ire.
THe remedy against Ire, is a virtue that men call mansuetude, that is,
Debonairtie: and also another virtue, that men clepe patience or sufferaunce.

Debonairtie withdraws and refraineth the stirrings and moouings of man's
courage in heart, in such manner, that they ne skip not out by Anger ne Ire.
Sufferaunce, suffers sweetly all the annoyances and wrongs that men done
to man outward. Saint Jerome says this of debonairte, That it does no harm
to no wight, ne says: ne for no harm that men do ne say, he ne chafeth
against reason. This virtue sometime comes of nature: for as says the
Philosopher: A man is a quick thing by nature, debonaire, and treatable to
goodness: but when debonairty is informed of grace, then it is the more worth.

Patience is another remedy against ire, and is a virtue y^ suffers sweetly
every man's goodness, and is not wroth for no harm that is done to him. The
Philosopher says, That patience is the virtue that suffers debonairly, all
the outrages of adversity, and every wicked word. This virtue makes a man like
to God, and makes him Gods own child: as says Christ. This virtue
discomfiteth thine enemies. And therefore says the Wise man: If thou would
vanquish thine enemy, learn to suffer. And thou shall understond, that a man
suffers four manner of greeuances in outward things, against the which four,
he must have four manner of patiences.

The first greeuaunce is of wicked words, which suffers Jesus Christ, without
grutching, full patiently, when the Jews despised him full often. Suffet thou
therefore patiently, for the Wiseman says: * If thou strive with a fool,
though the fool be wroth, or though he laugh, always thou shall have no rest.

That other greeuaunce outward, is to have dommage of thy cattle: There against
suffered Christ full patiently, when he was despoyled of all that he had in
this life, and that was but his clothes. The third greeuaunce, is a man to have
harm in his body: that suffered Christ full patiently in all his passion. The
fourth greeuaunce, is in outrageous labor in werks: wherefore I say, that folk
that make her servant to travail too grievously, or out of time, as in holy
days, soothly they do great sin. Here against suffered Christ full patiently,
and taught us patience, when he bare upon his blessed shoulders the cross,
upon which he should suffer despitous death. Here may men learn to be patient,
for certes, not only Christen be patient for love of Jesus Christ, and for
reward of the blessed life that is perdurable, but certes the old Painems, that
never were Christened, commended and used the virtue of patience.

* A Philosopher upon a time, that would have beat his disciple for his great
trespace, for which he was moved, and brought a rod to beat the child, and
when this child saw the rod, he said to his master: what think ye to do? I
woll beat thee said the master for thy correction: Forsooth, said the child,
ye ought first correct your self, that have lost all your patience, for the
offense of a child. Forsooth said the master all weeping, thou say sooth:
have thou the rod my dear child, and correct me for mine impatience. Of
patience comes obedience, through which a man is obedient to Christ, and to
all hem to which he ought be obedient in Christ. And understand well, that
obedience is perfect, when that a man does gladly and hastily, with good heart
entirely, all that he should do. Obedience generally, is to perform the
doctrine of God, and of his sovereigns, to which him ought to be obeysaunt in
all rightwisenesse.

De Accidia.
AFter the sins of Envy and Ire, now woll I speak of the sin of Accidie:
tor Envy blinds the heart of a man, and Ire troubles a man, and Accidie
makes him heavy, thoughtful, and pensife. Envy and Ire maken bitterness in
heart, which birternesse is mother of Accidie, and takes fro him the love of
all goodness, then is accidie the anguish of trouble of heart. And S. Augustine
says: It is annoy of goodness and annoy of harm. Certes this is a damnable
sin, for it does wrong to Jesus Christ, in as much as it benummeth the
service y^ men ought to do to Christ, as says Solomon: but Accidie does no
such diligence. He does all thing with annoy, and with wrawnesse, slacknesse,
and excusation, with idleness and unlust. For which the book says: * Accursed
be he that does the service of God negligently. Then is Accidie enemy to every
estate of man. For certes the estate of man is in three manners: Either it is
in the estate of innocence, as was the estate of Adam, before that he fell into
sin, in which estate he was hold to work, as in praising and lauding God.
Another estate is the estate of sinful men: in which estate men ben holden to
labor in praying to God for amendment of her sins, and that he would grant hem
to rise out of her sins.

Another estate is the estate of grace, in which estate he is holden to works
of penitence: and certes, to all these things is accidie contrary, for he
loves no business at all. Now certes, this foul sin accidie, is also a full
great enemy to the liuelode of the body: * For it ne has no purueiaunce against
temporel necessity, for it forsloweth, forslogeth, and destroieth all goods
temporel by retchlesnesse.

The fourth thing is, that Accidie is like hem that been in the pain of hell,
because of her sloth and heaviness: for they that be damned, ben so bound, that
they may neither well do ne think. Of accidie comes first, that a man is
annoied and encombred to do any goodness, and makes that God has abomination
of such accidie, as says Saint John.

Now comes Sloth, that woll not suffer no hardness ne penance: for soothly,
s^oth is so tender and so delicate, as says Solomon, that he woll suffer no
hardness ne pennaunce, and therefore he marreth all that he does. Against this
rotten sin of accidie and sloth, should men exercise hemselfe, and use hem to
do good works: and manly and virtuously catch courage to do, thinking that our
Lord Jesus Christ quiteth every good deed, be it never so lite. Usage of labor
is a great thing. For it makes, as says S. Bernard, the labourer to have
strong arms and hard senewes: and sloth makes heeuy, feeble, and tender. Then
comes dread to begin to work any good works. For certes, * He that
enclineth to sin, him thinks it is so great an emprise for to undertake the
works of goodness, and casts in his heart, that the circumstances of
goodness been so grievous and weighty for to suffer, that he dare not
undertake to do works of goodness, as says Saint Gregory.

Now comes wanhope, y^ is, despair of the mercy of God, y^ comes sometime
of too much outrageous sorrow, and sometime of too much dread, imagining that he
has do so much sin, that it woll not avail him, tho he would repent him,
and forsake sin: through which despair or dread, he abandonneth all his heart
to every manner sin, as says Saint Augustine. Which dampnable sin, if it
continue unto his end, it is called sinning in the holy ghost. This horrible
sin is so perilous, that he yt is despaired, there nis no fellonie, ne no
sin, that he doubts for to do, as shows well by Judas. Certes, above all
sins then is this sin most displeasaunt to Christ, and most adversary.

Sothly, he yt dispaireth him, is like to the coward champion recreaunt, that
flies without need. Alas, alas, needless is he recreant, and needless
despaired. Certes. * The mercy of God is ever ready to y^ penitent person, and
is above all his werks. Alas, cannot a man bethink him on y^ Gospel of S.
Luke.xv. Whereas Christ says, * That as well shall there be joy in heaven
upon a sinful manne that does penitence, as upon xcix. rightful men that need
no penitence. Look further in the same Gospel, the joy and the feast of the
good man that had lost his son, when his son was returned with repentance
to his father. Can they not remember hem also, that (as says Saint Luke,
Chapi. xx.) How that the thief that was hanged beside Jesus Christ, said: Lord
remember me, when thou come into thy reign. Forsooth said Christ, I say to
thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Certes, there is none so
horrible sin in manne, that ne may in his life be destroyed by penitence,
through virtue of the passion and of the death of Christ. Alas, what need men
then to be despaired, since that his mercy is so ready and large? Ask and have.

Then comes Sompnolence, that is sluggie, slumbring, which makes a man
heavy, and dull in body and in soul, and this sin comes of sloth: And
certes, the time that by way of reason man should not sleep, is by the morrow,
but if there were cause reasonable. For soothly, the morrow tide is most
couenable, a man to say his prayers, and for to thank God, and to honor God,
and to give almose to the poor that comes first in the name of Jesus Christ.

Lo, what says Solomon? Who so woll by the morrow awake to seek me, he shall
find me. Then comes negligence or retchlesnes that recketh of nothing. And
though y^ ignorance be mother of all harms, certes, negligence is the norice.
Negligence ne does no force, when he shall do a thing, whether he do it well or
evil.

The remedy of these two sins is, as says the Wise man: * That he that
dreadeth God, spares not to do that he ought to do: and he that loves God, he
woll do diligence to please God by his works, and abandon himself, with all
his might, well for to do. Then comes idleness, that is the yate of all
harms. An idle manne is like to a place that has no walls, the devil may enter
on every side, or shoot at him that is discouerte, by temptation on every side.
This idleness is the thorruke of all wicked and villainous thoughts, and of
all ordure. Certes, the heaven is give to hem that will labor, and not to idle
folk. Also David says, * That they ne be not in the labor of men, ne they
shall not be whipped with men, that is to say, in Purgatory. Certes, then
seems it they shall be tormented with the devils in hell, but if they do
pennaunce.

Then comes the sin that men call Tarditas, as when a man is so latered, or
tarrying or he woll tourn to God: and certes, that is a great folly. He is like
him that falls in the ditch, and woll not arise. And this vice comes of
false hope, that he thinks he shall live long, but that hope fails full often.

Then comes Lochesse, that is, he that when he begins any good work, anon
he woll leave and stint it, as done they that have any person to govern, and ne
take of him no more heed, anon as they find any contrary or any annoy. These
ben the new sheepheards, that let their sheep wittingly go ren to the Wolf,
that is in the breres, or do not force of her own governance. Of this comes
pouerte and destruction, both of spirituel and temporel things. Then comes a
manner coldness, that freeseth the heart of man. Then comes undeuotion,
through which a man is so blont, and as says S. Bernard, has such langour in
his soul, that he may neither read ne sing in holy church, ne hear ne think of
no devotion, ne trauail with his honds in no good work, that it nis to him
unsauory and all apalled. Then wexeth the slow and slombry, and soon woll be
wroth, and soon is inclined to hate and envy. Then comes the sin of worldly
sorrow, such as is called Tristitia, that staeth a man, as says Saint Poule.
For certes, such sorrow works the death of the soul and body also, for
thereof comes, that a man is annoyed of his own life. Wherefore such sorrow
shorteth full often the life of man, ere that his time is come, by way of kind.

Remedium contra peccatum Accidiae.
Against this horrible sin of Accidie, and the branches of the same, there is
a virtue yt is called Fortitudo, or strength, through which a man despises
annoyous things: this virtue is so mighty and so rigorous, that it dare
withstond mightily, and wisely keep himself fro perils that been wicked, and
wrestle against the assaults of the devil, for it enchaunceth and enforces the
soul, right as Accidie abateth and makes it feeble: for this fortitude may
endure by long sufferaunce the trauails that been couenable.

This virtue has many speces, the first is called Magnanimity, that is to
say, great courage. For certes, there behooves great courage against Accidie,
least that it ne swallow the soul by the sin of sorrow, or destroy it by
wanhope. Certes, this virtue makes folk undertake hard and grievous things
by her own will, wisely and reasonably. And for as much as the devil fights
against a man more by subtilty and slight than by strength, therefore shall a
man withstand him by wit, reason and discretion. Then are there the virtues of
faith, and hope in God and in his saints, to follow and accomplish the good
works, in the which he purposes fermely to continue. Then comes surety or
sikernesse, and that is when a man ne doubts no trauail in time coming, of
the good works that he has begun. Then comes Magnificence, that is to say,
when a man does and performs great works of goodness, that he has begun,
and that is the end why that men should do good works. For in the
accomplishing of good works, lies the great guerdon. Then is there
Constaunce, that is stablenes of courage, and this should be in heart by
steadfast faith, and in mouth, in bearing, in chere, and in deed. And there been
mo special remedies against Accidie, in diverse works: as in consideration of
the pains of hell, the joys of heaven, and in trust of the grace of the holy
ghost, that will give him might to perform his good intent.

De Avaricia.
AFter Accidie woll I speak of Avarice, and of Couetise. Of which sin Saint
Poule says: * The root of all harms is Couetise. Ad Timoth.vi. For soothly,
when the heart of man is confounded in it self and troubled, and that the soul
has lost the comfort of God, then seeks he an sole sollace of worldly things.

Avarice, after the description of S. Augustine, is a licorousnesse in heart to
have earthly things. Some other folk say, that Avarice is for to purchase many
yearthly things, and nothing to give to hem that have need. And understand,
that avarice stands not only in land ne cattle, but sometime in science and
glory, and in every manner of outrageous things, is Avarice. And Couetise is
this:

Couetise, is for to covet such things that thou have not. And Avarice is, to
withhold and keep such things as thou have, without right. Soothly, this
avarice is a sin that is full dampnable, for all holy writ curses it, and
speaks against yt vice, for it does wrong to Jesus Christ: for it takes fro
him, the love that men to him owe, and tourneth it backward against all reason,
and makes that the auaricious man has more hope in his cattle than in Jesus
Christ, and does more obseruaunce in keeping of his treasour, than he does in
the service of Jesus Christ. And therefore says Saint Poule. Ad Ephesios
quinto: * That an auaricious man is the thraldom of Idolatry.

What difference is there betwixt an Idolater and an auaricious man? But that
an Idolaster, peradventure ne has not but a Maumet, or two, and the auaricious
man has many: For certes, every Florein in his cofer, is his Maumet. And
certes, the sin of Maumetrie, is the first that God defended, as in the x.
commaundment it bears witness, in Exodi. Capi. xx. Thou shall have no false
gods before me, ne thou shall make to thee no graven thing. Thus is an
auaricious man that loves his treasure before God, an Idolaster. And through
this cursed sin of avarice and couetise, comes these hard Lordships, through
which they ben strained by tallages, customs, and cariages, more than her duty
or reason is: or else take they of her bondmen amerciaments, which might more
reasonably be called extortions, than merciamentes. Of which amerciaments, or
raunsoming of bondmen, some Lords stewards say, that it is rightful, for as
much as a churl has no temporel thing, that it ne is his Lords, as they say.
But certes, these Lordships do wrong, that bereave their bondmen things that
they never yaue hem. Augustinus de Ciuitate dei. Libro.ix. Sooth is, * That the
condition of thraldom, and the first cause of thraldom was for sin.

Thus may ye see, that the offense deserved thraldom, but not nature.
Wherefore these Lords ne should not much glorify hem in her Lordships, since
that they by natural condition, been not Lords over thrals, but for that
thraldom came first by the desert of sin. And more over, there as the Law
says, That temporal goods of bondfolk been the goods of her Lord: yea, that is
for to understond, the goods of the Emperor, to defend hem in her right, but
not to rob hem ne reave hem. Therefore says Seneca: * Thy prudence should live
benignely with the thrals. Those that thou call thy thrals, been Gods
people: and for humble people been Christ's friends, they been contubernial with
the Lords.

* Think also, that of such seed as churls spring, of such seed spring Lords:
As well may y^ churl be saved, as the Lord. The same death that takes the
churl, such death takes the Lord. Wherefore I read, do right so with the
churl, as thou would yt thy Lord did with thee, if thou were in his plight.
* Every sinful man is a churl to sin: I read the Lord certes, yt thou werk in
such wise with thy churls, that they rather love thee than dread thee. I wot
well, that there is degree above degree, as reason is, and skill is, that men
do her deuoir, there as it is due. But certes, extortions, and despite of your
underlings, is damnable.

And furthermore understand well, that these Conquerors or Tyrants make full
often thrals of hem that been born of as royal blood as been they that hem
conquer. This name of Thraldom was never erst know, till that Noe said, that
his son Cham should be thral to his brethren for his sin. What say we then of
hem that pill and do extortions to holy Church: Certes, the swerd that men
give first to a knight when he is new dubbed, signifies, that he should defend
holy Church, and not rob and pill it: and who so does, is traitor to
Christ. And as says S. Augustine, * They been the devils Wolves, that strangle
the sheep of Jesus Christ, and done worse than Wolves: for soothly, when the
Wolf has full his womb, he stinteth to strangle sheep: But soothly, the
pillours and destroyers of holy Church goods, ne do not so, for they ne stint
never to pill. Now as I have said, since so is, that sin was first cause of
thraldom, then is it thus, that at the time that all this world was in sin,
then was all this world in thraldom, and in subjection: but certes, since the
time of grace came, God ordained, that some folk should be more high in estate
and in degree, and some folk more low, and that each should be served in his
estate.

And therefore in some countries there they be thrals, when they have turned
hem to their faith, they make her thrals free out of the thraldom: and
therefore, certes the Lord owes to his man, that the man owes to the Lord.
The Pope calls himself servant to the servants of God, but for, as the
estate of holy Church ne might not have been, ne the common profit might not
have be kept, ne peace ne rest in earth, but if God had ordained, that some man
have higher degree, and some men lower: therefore was sovereignty ordained to
keep, maintain, and defend her underlings and her subjects in reason, as fer
forth as it lies in her power, and not to destroy ne confound hem. Wherefore I
say, that those lords that been like wolves, that devour the possessions or
the cattle of poor folks wrongfully, without mercy or measure, they shall
receive by the same measure that they have measured to poor folk, y^ measure of
Jesus Christ, but it be amended. Now comes deceit betwixt merchant and
merchant. And thou shall understond, yt marchaundise is in two manners, that
one is bodily, and that other is ghostly: that one is honest and leful, and
that other is dishonest and unleful. The bodily marchaundise that is leful and
honest, is this: that there as God has ordained, that a reign or a country
is suffisaunt to himself, then it is honest and lefull, that of haboundance of
this country men help another country that is needy: And therefore there
must be marchaunts to bring fro one country to that other, her marchaundise.
That other marchaundise that men haunten with fraud, and treachery, and
deceit, with leasinges and false oaths, is right cursed and dampnable.
Espirituell Marchaundise is properly Simonie, that is, ententiue desire to buy
any thing espirituell, that is, a thing which appertains to the sanctuary of
God, and to cure of the soul. This desire, if so be that a man do his
diligence to perform it, all be it that his desire ne take none effect, yet
it is to him a deadly sin: and if he be ordered, he is irregular. Certes
Simonie is called of Simon magus, that would have bought for temporel cattle
the yest that God had give by the Holy Ghost to Saint Peter, and to the
Apostles: And therefore understand, that he that sells and he that buyeth
things espirituell, ben called Simoniackes, be it by cattle, be it by
procuring, or by fleshly prayer of his friends, fleshly friends, or espirituell
friends, fleshly in two manners, as by kindred or other friends: Soothly, if they
pray for him that is not worthy and able, it is Simonie, if he take the
benefice: and if he be worthy and able, there is none. That other manner is,
when man or woman prays for folk to auaunce hem only, for wicked fleshly
affection which they have unto the persons, and that is foul Simonie. But
certes, in service, for which men yeuen things espirituell unto her
servant, it must be understand, that y^ service must be honest, or else not,
and also, that it be without bargaining, and that the person be able. For (as
says Saint Damasen:) * All the sins of the world, at regard of this sin,
are as thing of naught, for it is the greatest sin that may be after the sin
of Lucifer and of Antichrist: For by this sin God forleseth the Church and
the Soul, which he bought with his precious blood, by hem yt give Churches to
hem that been not worthy, for they are put in thieves honds, that steal the
souls of Jesus Christ, and destroy his patrimony. By such unworthy Priests and
Curates, have leaud men less reverence of the Sacraments of holy Church: and
such yeuers of Churches put the children of Christ out, and put in y^ Church
the Devils own sons: they sell the souls that Lambs should keep, to the
Wolf, which strangleth hem: and therefore shall they never have part of the
pasture of Lambs, that is, the bliss of Heaven. Now comes hasardry, with his
apertenaunces, at tables and rafles, of which comes deceit, false oths,
chidings, and all ravenous blasphemings, and renyings of God, and hate of his
neighbors, wast of goods, mispending of time, and sometime manslaughter.
Certes, hasardours ne mow not be without great sin. Of Avarice comes also
leasinges, theft, false witness, and false oaths: and ye shall understand,
that these be great sins, and express against the commandments of God, as
I have said. False witness is in word, and also in deed: In word, as for to
bereave thy neighbors good name by thy false witness, or bereave him his
cattle or his heritage, by thy false witnessing, when thou for ire, or for
meede, or for envy, bear false witness, or accusest him, or excuses thy
self falsely. Ware ye questmongers and notaries: certes, for false witnessing,
was Susan in full great sorrow and pain, and many another mo. The sin of
theft is also express against Gods hest, and in two manners (corporell, and
spirituell) the temporell theft is: As, for to take thy neighbors cattle
against his will, be it by force or by sleight, be it by met or by measure: by
stealing also of false enditements upon him, and in borrowing of thy neighbors
cattle, in intent never to pay it again, and semblable things. Espirituell
theft is sacrilege, that is to say, hurting of holy things sacred to Christ in
two manners, by reason of the holy place, as Churches or Churchyards: For which
every villainous sin that men done in such places, may be called sacrilege,
or every violence in the semblable places. Also they that withdraw falsely the
rightes that long to holy Church and pleasing. And generally sacrilege is to
reave holy thing fro holy place, or unholy thing, out of holy place, or holy
thing out of unholy place.

Revelatio contra peccatum Avaritiae.
NOw shall ye understand, that releeuing of Avarice, is misericorde and pity
largely taken. And men might ask, why that misericorde and pity are releeuing
of Avarice: Certes, the auaricious man shows no pity ne misericorde to the
needful man.

For he delights him in the keeping of his treasure, and not in the rescuing
ne releeuing of his euin Christen. And therefore speak I first of misericorde.
Then is misericorde (as says the Philosopher) a virtue, by which the courage
of man is stirred by the misease of him that is diseased. Upon which
misericorde follows pity, in performing and fulfiling of charitable works of
mercy, helping and comforting him that is miseased. And certes, these things
move and stir a man to misericorde of Jesus Christ, that he yaue himself for
our offense, and suffered death for misericorde, and foryaue us our original
sins, and thereby released us fro the pains of hell, and minished y^ pains of
purgatory by penitence, and yeueth grace well to do, and at last, the bliss of
heaven. The speces of misericorde ben for to lene, and also for to give, for to
foryeue and release, and for to have pity in heart, and compassion of the
mischeef of his euin Christen, and also to chastise there as need is. Another
manner of remedy against Avarice, is reasonable largess: but soothly, here
behooves the consideration of that grace of Jesus Christ, and of the temporell
goods, and also of the goods perdurable that Jesus Christ yaue to us, and to
have remembrance of the death which he shall receive, he knows not when,
where, ne who: and also that he shall forgo all that he has, save only that
which he has expended in good works.

But for as much as some folk ben unmeasurable, men ought for to avoid and
eschew foolish largess, the which some people call waste.

Certes, he that is fool large, yeueth not his cattle, but he leseth his
cattle. Soothly, what thing that he yeueth for vainglory, as to minstrels,
and to folk that bear his renome in the world, he has sin thereof, and
none alms: certes, * He leseth foul his good, that he ne seeks with the
yeft of his good nothing but sin. He is like to an horse that seeks rather
to drink drouy or troubled water, than for to drink water of the clear well.
To hem appertainen the said cursing that Christ shall give at the day of doom
to hem that shall be damned.

Sequitur de Gula.
AFter Avarice comes Glotenie, which is express against the commandment of
God. Glotenie, is unmeasurable appetite to eat or to drink, or else to do
enough to the unmeasurable appetite and disordained couetise to eat or to
drink. This sin corrupts all this world, as is well showed in the sin of
Adam and of Eve. Look also what says saint Poul of glotenie. * Many (says
he) gone, of which I have often said to you, and now I say it weeping, that
been the enemies of the cross of Christ, of which the end is death, and of
which her womb is her God and her glory, in confusion of hem that so devour
earthly things.

He that is used to this sin of Glotenie, he ne may no sin withstond, he must
be in seruage of all vices, for it is the Devils hourd, there he hides and
rests him. This sin has many speces: The first is drunkenness, * That is
the horrible sepulture of man's reason: and therefore when a man is drunk, he
has lost his reason: And this is deadly sin. But soothly, when that a man is
not wont to strong drink, and peradventure ne knows not the strength of the
drink, or has feeblesse in his head, or has trauayled, through which he
drinks the more, all be he suddenly caught with drink, it is no deadly
sin, but venial. The second spece of glotenie is, that the spirit of a man
wexeth all troubled, for drunkenness bireaueth him the discretion of his wit.

The third manner spece of Glotonie, is when a man deuoureth his meat, and has
not rightful manner of eating. The fourth is, when through the great abundance
of his meat, the humors in his body been distempered. The fifth is,
foryetfulnesse by too much drinking, for which sometime a man forgets ere
the morning what he did on the evening before.

In other manner been distinct the speces of glotonie, after S. Gregory. The
first is, for to eat before time to eat. The second is, when a man gives him
to delicate meat or drink. The third is, when men take too much over measure.
The fourth is, curiosity, with great intent to make and appareill his meat.
The fifth is, for to eat too greedily.

These ben the five fingers of the devils hond, by which he draws folk to
sin.

The Remedy against Glotenie.
Against Glotenie, the remedy is abstinence, as says Galiene: but that I hold
not meritorious, if he do it for the heal of his body. Saint Augustine woll
that abstinence be done for virtue, and with patience. Abstinence (says he) is
little worth, but if a man have good will thereto, and but if he be enforced by
patience and charity, and that men do it for Gods sake, and in hope to have
bliss in heaven.

The fellows of abstinence be attemperaunce, that holds the mean in all
things. Also Shame, that escheweth all dishonestie. Suffisaunce, that seeks
no rich meats ne drinks, ne does not force of outrageous appaireling of meat.
Measure also, that restrains by reason the unmeasurable appetite of eating.
Soberness also, that restrayneth the outrage of drink. Sparing also, that
restrayneth the delicate ease, to sit long at meat, wherefore some folk
standen of her own will when they eat, because they woll eat at less
leisure.

De Luxutia.
AFter Glotenie comes Letcherie, for these two sins been so nigh cousins,
that often time they woll not depart. God wot this sin is full displeasant to
God, he forsaid himself: Do no letcherie. And therefore he puts great
pains against this sin.

For in the old law, if a woman thrall were take in this sin, she should be
beat with staves to death. And if she were a gentlewoman, she should be slain
with stones. And if she were a bishops daughter, she should be brent by Gods
commandment.

Moreover, by the sin of Lechery God drowned all the world, and after that he
brent five cities with thunder and lightning, and sanke hem into hell.

Now let us speak then of the said stinking sin of Lechery, that men call
auoutrie of wedded folk, that is to say, if that one of hem ben wedded, or else
both. Saint John says, That auouterers shall be in hell in a stacke bre^ning
of fire and of brimstone, for the stenche of her ordure: certes, the breaking
of this sacrament is an horrible thing: it was made of God himself in Paradise,
and confirmed by Jesus Christ, as witnesses Saint Matthew in the Gospel: * A
man shall leave father and mother, and take him to his wife, and they shall be
two in one flesh.

This Sacrament betokens the knitting together of Christ and holy Church.
And not only that God forbade auoutrie indeed, but also he commanded, That
thou should not covet thy neighbors wife.

In this heste (says Saint Augustine) is forbode all manner couetise to do
Letcherie. Lo, what says Saint Matthew in the Gospel, * That who so sees a
woman, to couetise of his lust, he has done Lechery with her in his heart.
Here may ye see, that not only the deed of this sin is forboden, but also
the desire to that sin. This cursed sin annoyeth grievously hem that it haunt:
and first to her soul, for he obliges it to sin, and to pain of death, which
is perdurable: then of the body annoyeth it grievously also, for it dries him
and wastes, and shenteth him, and of his blood he makes sacrifice to the
fiend of hell: It wastes his cattle and his substance. And certes, if it be
a foul thing, a man to waste his cattle on women: yet it is a fouler thing,
when that for such ordure, women dispend upon men her cattle and her
substance. * This sin, as says the Prophet, takes from man and woman her
good fame and her honor, and it is full delectable and pleasant to the devil:
for thereby wins he the more part of this wretched world. And right as a
Merchant delights him most in that chaffare which he has most advantage and
profit of, right so delights the fiend in this ordure.

This is that other hond of the devil, with five fingers, to catch the people
to his villainy. The first is the foolish looking of the foolish woman and of
the foolish man, that s^aeth right as the Basilicocke or Cocatrice steeth folk
by venim of his sight: for the couetise of y^ eyes follows the couetise of
the heart. The second finger is the villainous touching in wicked manner. And
therefore says Solomon: * That who so touches and handles a woman, he fares
as the man that handeleth the Scorpion, which stingeth and suddenly sleeth
through his enueniming, or as who so that touches warm pitch blemisheth his
fingers. The third is foul words, which fares like fire, which right anon
brenneth the heart. The fourth finger is the kissing: And truly he were a
great fool that would kiss the mouth of a brenning oven or of a fournace.
And more fools ben they that kiss in villainy, for that mouth is the mouth of
hell, and namely these old dotardes holours, which woll kiss and flicker, and
busy hemselfe tho they may naught do. Certes they been like to hounds: For an
hound when he comes nigh to the roser, or by other benches, though so be that
he may not piss, yet woll he heave up his leg and make a countenance to
piss. And for that many man weeneth that he may not sin for no
licorousnesse that he does with his wife, truly that opinion is false: * God
wot a man may slay himself with his own knife, and make himself drunk
with his own tun. Certes be it wife, be it child, or any worldly thing yt
he loves before God, it is his maumette, and he is an idolaster. * A man
should love his wife by discretion, patiently and attemperately, and then is
she as though it were his suster. The fifth finger of ye Devils hond, is the
stinking deed of lechery. Truly the five fingers of gluttony the Devil
puts into the womb of a man: And with his five fingers of lechery he
grypeth him by the reins, for to throw him into the furnace of Hell, there as
they shall have the fire and the worms that ever shall last, and weping and
wayling, and sharp hunger and thurst, grimnesse of Devils, which shall all to
tread hem withouten end. Of lechery, as I said, sourdeth and springs diverse
speces: as fornication, that is between man and woman which be not married,
and is deadly sin, and against nature. All that is enemy and destruction to
nature, is against nature. Perfay the reason of a man tells him well also that
it is deadly sin, for as much as God forbad lechery. And Saint Paul yeueth
hem the reign that nis dew to no wight but to hem that done deadly sin.
Another sin of lechery is, to bereave a maids maidenhead, for he y^ so does,
certes he casts a maiden out of y^ highest degree that is in this present
life, and bereaueth her that precious fruicte that the book calls the
hundredth fruits, I ne can say it none otherwise in English, but in Latin it
hight (Centesimus fructus:) Certes he that so does, is y^ cause of many damages
and villainies, mo than any man can reckon: right as he is cause of many damages
sometime that beasts do in the field, that break the hedge or ye closure,
through which he destroys that may not be restored: For certes no more may
maydenhead be restored, than an arm that is smitte fro the body, may return
again and wax: She may have mercy, this wot I well, if that she have will to
do penitence, but never shall it be that she nas corrupt. And all be it so that
I have spoke somewhat of auoutrie, also it is good to show the perilles that
long to auoutrie, for to eschew that foul sin. Auoutrie in latin, is for to
say, approaching of another man's bed, through which those that sometime
were one flesh, abandone her bodies to other persons. Of this sin, as says
the wise man, follow many harms: First breaking of faith, and certes in faith
is the key of christendom: and when that faith is broke and lost, soothly
christendom stont vein and without fruit. This sin also is theft, for theft
generally is to reaue a wight his things against his will. * Certes, this is the
foulest theft that may be, when that a woman steals her body from her
husbond, and yeueth it to her holour to defoyle her: and steals her soul fro
Christ, and yeueth it to the Devil: This is a fouler theft than for to break
a Church and steal away the chalice, for these auouterers break the temple of
God spiritually, and steal the vessel of grace, that is the body and the
soul: For which Christ shall destroy hem, as says saint Poule. Sothly of
this theft doubted greatly Joseph, when that his Lords wife prayed him of
villainy, when he said: Lo my Lady, how my Lord has take to me under my
ward, all that he has in this world, ne nothing of his things is out of my
power, but only ye that be his wife: and how should I then do this
wickedness, and sin so horrible against God, and against my Lord, God it
forbede. Alas, all too little is such troth now found. The third harm is the
silth, through which they break the commandment of God, and defoyle the
auter of matrimony, that is Christ. For certes, in so much as the Sacrament of
marriage is so noble and so digne, so much is it greater sin for to break it:
For God made marriage in Paradise in the estate of innocence, to multiply
mankind in the service of God, and therefore is the breaking thereof the more
grievous, of which breaking come false heirs often time, that wrongfully occupy
folks heritages: and therefore woll Christ put hem out of the reign of heaven,
that is heritage to good folk. Of this breaking comes also often time, that
folk unware wed or sin with her own kinrede: and namely these harlots, that
haunt brodels of these foul women, that may be likened to a commune gong,
whereas men purge her ordure. What say we also of putours, that live by the
horrible sin of putrie, and constrain women to give to hem a certain rent of
her bodily puterie, yea, sometime of his own wife or his child, as done these
bauds: Certes, these been cursed sins. Understand also, that aduoutrie is set
gladly in the ten commandments between theft and manslaughter, for it is the
greatest theft that may be, for it is theft of body and of soul, and it is like
an homicide, for it kerueth atwo and breaks atwo hem that first were made of
one flesh. And therefore by the old law of God they should be slain, but
nathelesse, by the law of Jesus Christ, that is, law of pity, when he said to
the woman that was found in auoutrie, and should have be slain with stones,
after the will of the Jews, as was her law: Go, said Jesus Christ, and have no
more will to do sin. Soothly, the vengeance of auoutrie is awarded to the pains
of Hell, but if so be that it be disturbed by penitence. Yet been there mo
speces of this cursed sin, as when that one of hem is religious, or else both,
or of folk that been entered into order, as Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest, or
Hospitaliers: and ever the higher that he is in order, the greater is the sin.
The things that greatly agredge her sin, is the breaking of her auow of
chastity, when they received the order. And moreover, sooth is that holy order
is chief of all the treasorie of God, and his especial sign and mark of
chastity, to show that they been joined to chastity, which is the most
precious life that is: and these ordered folk ben specially titled to God, and
of the special meine of God: for which when they done deadly sin, they been
the traitors of God and of his people, for they live of the people. Priests
been Angels, as by the dignity of her mystery: but forsooth Saint Poul says,
That Sathanas transfourmeth him in an Angel of light. Soothly, the Priest that
haunteth deadly sin, he may be likened to the Angel of darkness,
transformed into the Angel of light. He seems Angel of light, but forsooth
he is Angel of darkness. Such Priests be the sons of Hely, as shows in the
book of Kings, that they were the sons of Beliall, that is, the Devil. Beliall
is to say, without judge, and so fare they, hem thinks they be free, and have
no judge, no more than has a free Bull, yt takes which Cow that him likes in
the town. So fare they by women, for right as one free Bull is enough for all a
town, right so is a wicked Priest corruption enough for all a parish, or for
all a country: These Priests, as says the book, ne cannot minister the
mystery of Priesthood to the people, ne they know not God, they ne held hem
not apayed, as says the book, of sodden flesh that was to hem offered, but
they took by force y^ flesh that was raw. Certes, so these shrews ne held hem
not apayed of roasted and sodde flesh, with which the people fed hem in great
reverence, but they woll have raw flesh of folks wives and her daughters: and
certes, these women that consent to her harlottrie, done great wrong to Christ
and to holy Church, all Hallowes, and all Souls, for they bireaue all these,
hem that should worship Christ and holy Church, and pray for Christian Souls:
and therefore have such Priests, and her lemmans also that consent to her
lechery, the cursing of all the court Christian, till they come to amendment.
The third spece of auoutrie, is sometime betwixt a man and his wife, and that
is, when they take no regard in her assembling, but only to her fleshly
delight, as says Saint Ierom, and ne reckon of nothing but that they ben
assembled because they ben married, all is good enough, as they think: but in
such folk has the Devil power, as said the Angel Raphael to Tobie, for in
her assembling, they put Jesus Christ out of her heart, and give hemselfe to all
ordure. The fourth spece is, the assembly of hem that been of one affinity, or
else of hem with which her fathers or her kindred have dealed in the sin of
lechery: This sin makes hem like to hounds, that take no keep to kinrede.
And certes, parentele is in two manners: either ghostly or fleshly: ghostly, as
for to deal with his godsib, for right so as he that engenders a child, is his
fleshly father, right so is his Godfather his father espirituell: for which a
woman may in no less sin assemble with her Godsib, than with her own
fleshly father. The fifth spece is, that abominable sin, of which
abominable sin no man uneath ought speak ne write, nathelesse it is openly
rehearsed in holy writ. This cursed sin done men and women in diverse intent
and in diverse manner: But though that holy writ speak of horrible sin,
certes, holy writ may not be defoyled, no more than the sun that shines on
the dunghill. Another sin appertains to lechery, that comes sleeping, and
this sin comes often to hem that been maidens, and also to hem that be
corrupt, and this sin men call Pollution, that comes of three manners:
Sometime of languishing of body, for the humors been too rank and habundant in
the body of man, sometime of infirmity, for feebleness of ye virtue retentife, as
physic makes mention: Sometime for surfeit of meat and drink, and sometime of
villainous thoughts that been enclosed in man's mind when he goes to sleep,
which may not be without sin, for which men must keep hem wisely, or else
may men sin full greevously.

Remedium contra peccatum Luxuriae.
NOw comes the remedy against lechery, and that is, general chastity and
continence, that restrain all disordinate mevings that come of fleshly talents.
And ever the greater merit shall he have that most restrains the wicked
chausinges of the ordour of this sin, and this is in two manners: That is to
say, chastity in marriage, and chastity in widdowhood. Now shall thou
understand that matrimony is leful assembling of man and woman that receiuen
by virtue of this Sacrament the bond through which they may not be departed
in all her life, yt is to say, while that they live both. This, as says the
book, is a full great sacrament, God made it (as I have said) in paradise, and
would himself be borne in marriage: and for to hallow marriage, he was at a
wedding, whereas he turned water into wine, which was the first miracle that
he wrought in earth before his disciples. True effect of marriage cleanses
fornication, and replenisheth holy Church of good lineage, for that is the end
of marriage, and changes deadly sin into venial sin between hem that been
wedded, and makes the hearts as one of hem that been wedded, as well as the
bodies.

Very marriage was established by God, ere that sin began, when natural law
was in his right point in Paradise. And it was ordained, that o man should have
but o woman, and o woman but o man, as says saint Augustine, by many reasons.

First, for marriage is figured betwixt Christ and holy Church.

Another is, for a man is head of a woman, always by ordinance it should be so.
For if a woman had more men than one, then should she have more heads than one,
and that were a right horrible sin before God, and also a woman might not
please so many folk at ones: and also there should never be rest ne quiet
among hem, for each of hem would ask her own right. And furthermore, no man
should know his own engendrure, ne who should have his heritage, and the woman
should be the less beloved.

Now comes how that a man should bear him with his wife, and namely in two
things, that is to say, in sufferaunce and reverence, as showed Christ when he
first made woman. For he ne made her of the head of Adam, for she should not
claim to great lordshippe, * For there as the woman has the maistry, she
makes too much variaunce: there need no mo ensamples of this, the experience
all day ought enough suffice.

Also certes, God ne made not woman of the foot of Adam, for she should not be
hold too low, for she cannot patiently suffer: but God made woman of the rib
of Adam, for woman should be fellow unto man.

Man should bear him to his wife in faith, in troth, and in love, (as says
saint Poul) that a man should love his wife, as Christ loves holy Church, that
loved it so well that he dyed for it: so should a man for his wife, if it were
need.

Now how that a woman should be subject to her husband: that tells saint
Peter, first in obedience. And also as says the Decree: * A woman that is a
wife, as long as she is a wife, she has none authority to swear ne bear
witness, without leave of her husband, that is her Lord, always he should be so
by reason. She should also serve him in all honesty, and be attemperate of her
array.

I woll well that they should set her intent to please her husbonds, but not by
queintise of her array. Saint Ierom says: Wives that be apparelled in like and
precious purple, ne mow not cloth hem in Jesus Christ. S. Gregory says also:
yt no wight seeks precious array, but only for vainglory to be honored the
more of the people. It is a great folly, a woman to have great array outward,
and in her self be foul inward. A wife should also be measurable in looking, in
bearing, and in laughing, and discreet in all her words and her deeds, and
above all worldly things she should love her husbonde with all her heart, and
to him be true of her body: so should an husbond be to his wife: For since that
all the body is the husbonds, so should her heart be, or else there is betwixt
hem two, as in that, no perfect marriage. Then shall men understond, that for
three things a man and his wife fleshly may assemble. The first is, for the
intent of engendrure of children, to the service of God, for certes, that is
the cause final of matrimony. Another cause is, to yield each of hem to other
the debts of her bodies; for neither of hem has power over her own bodies.
The third is, for to eschew lechery and villainy. The fourth is for sooth deadly
sin. As to the first, is meritorie: the second also, for as says the Decree,
That she has merit of chastity, that yields to her husbond the debt of her
body, yea though it be against her liking, and the lust of her heart. The third
manner is venial sin, and truly, scarcely may any of these be without venial
sin, for the corruption and for y^ delight. The fourth manner is for to
understond, if they assemble only for amorous love, and for none of the
foresaid causes, but for to accomplish their brenning delight, they recke not
how often, soothly it is deadly sin: and that with sorrow, some folk woll pain
hem more to do than to her appetite suffiseth.

The second manner of chastity is, for to be a clean widow, and eschew the
embracings of a man, and desire the embracing of Jesus Christ. These ben those
that have been wives, and have forgot her husbonds, and also women yt have done
lechery, and been received by penitence. And certes, if that a wife could keep
her all chaste, by license of her husband, so y^ she yeve never none occasion yt
he offend, it were to her a great merit. This manner of women, that observes
chastity in clothing and in countenance, abstinent in eating and drinking, in
speaking, and in dead, she is the vessel or the bore of the blessed Magdelain,
yt fulfilleth holy Church of good odor. The third manner of chastity is
virginity, and it behooveth that she be holy in heart, and clean of body, then
is she spouse of Jesus Christ, and she is the life of Angels: she is the
praising of this world, and she is as these martyrs in egallity: she has in
her that tongue may not tell, ne heart think. Virginity bare our Lord Jesus
Christ, and virgin was himself.

Another remedy against lechery is, specially to withdraw such things as yeve
occasion to that villainy: as ease, eating, and drinking: for certes, when the
pot boyleth strongly, the best remedy is to withdraw the fire. Sleping long in
great quiet, is also a great nourice to Lechery.

Another remedy against lechery is, That a man or a woman eschew the company of
hem by which he doubts to be tempted: For all be it so, that the deed is
withstond, yet is there great temptation. Soothly, a white wall, although it ne
bren not fully, by sticking of the candle, yet is the wall black of the flame.
Full often time I read, that no man trust in his own perfection, but he be
stronger than Sampson, or holier than Daniel, or wiser than Solomon.

Now after that I have declared you as I can, the seven deadly sins, and some
of her branches, with her remedies. Soothly, if I could, I would tell you the
ten commandments, but so high doctrine I put to Divines. Nathelesse, I hope
to God they ben touched in this treatise each of hem.

Sequitur secunda pars Poenitentiae.
NOw for as much as the second part of penitence stont in confession of mouth,
as I began in the first chap. I say S. Augustine says: Sin is every word and
every deed, and all that men conject against the law of Jesus Christ, and this
is for to sin in heart, in mouth, and in deed, by the five wits, which ben
sight, hearing, smelling, tasting or savor, and feeling. Now is it good to
understand, that that agregeth much every sin. Thou shall consider what thou
art that do the sin, whether thou be male or female, young or old, gentle
or thrall, free or servant, whole or sick, wedded or single, ordered or
vnordred, wise or fool, clerk or seculer, if she be of thy kindred bodily or
ghostly or no, if any of thy kindred have sinned with her or no, and many mo
things.

Another circumstaunce is this, Whether it be done in fornication, or in
advoutry, or no, in manner of homicide or no, horrible great sins, or small,
and how long thou have continued in sin. The third circumstaunce is, the
place there thou have done sin, whether in other men's houses, or in thine
own, in field, in church, or in churchyard, in church dedicate, or no. For if
the church be hallowed, and man or woman spili his kind within that place, by
way of sin or wicked temptation, the church is enterdicted, and the Priest
that did such a villainy, the term of all his life he should no more sing
Mass: and if he did, he should do deadly sin, at every time that he so sung
Mass. The fourth circumstaunce is, by which mediators or by which
messengers, or for enticement, or for consentment, to bear company with
fellowshippe. * For many a wretch for to bear company, woll go to the Devil
of hell. Wherefore, they that egg or consent to the sin, ben partners of the
sin, and of the temptation of the sinner. The fifth circumstaunce is, how
many times that he has sinned, if it be in his mind, and how often he has
fallen. For he that often falls in sin, he dispiseth the mercy of God, and
increases his sin, and is unkind to Christ, and he waxes the more feeble to
withstand sin, and sins the more lightly, and the latter rises, and is more
slow to shriue him, and namely to him that is his confessor. For which that
folk when they fall again to her old follies, either they leave their old
confessor, or else they depart her shrift in diverse parts: But soothly such
departed shrift deserves no mercy of God for her sins. The sixth circumstance
is, why that a man sins as by temptation: and of himself procure that
temptation, or by the exciting of other folk, or if he sin with a woman by
force or by her assent, or if the woman, maugre her head, have be aforced or
none. This shall she tell, wheder it were for couetise of poverty, or if it
were by her procurement or no, and such other things. The seventh circumstance
is, in what manner he has do his sin, or how that she has suffered that
folk have do to her. And the same shall the man tell plainly, with all the
circumstaunces, and wheder he has sinned with common bordell women or non, or
done his sin in holy times or non, in fasting time or non, or before his
shrift, or after his latter shrift, and has peradventure broke thereby his
penance enjoined, by whose help or whose counsel, by sorcery or craft, all
must be told, and all these things after as they be great or small, and grudge
y^ conscience of man or woman. And eke the Priest that is thy judge, may the
better be advised of his judgment in yeuing of penance, and that is after thy
contrition. For understond well that after time that a man has defoyled his
baptime by sin, if he woll come to salvation there is none other way but by
pennaunce, shrifte, and satisfaction, and namely by they two, if there be a
confessor to whom he may shriue him, and the third if he have life to perform
it. Then shall a man look and consider, that if he woll make a true and a
profitable confession, there must be four conditions. First it must be in
sorrowfulness of heart, as says the King Ezechiell to God, * I woll remember
me all the years of my life in bitterness of my heart. This condition of
bitterness has five signs: The first is, that confession must be shamefast,
not for to cover ne hide her sin, for he has offended his Lord God and
defoyled his soul. And hereof says S. Augustine: * The heart travaileth for
shame of his sin, and for he has great shamefastness he is worthy to have
great mercy of God: which was the confession of the Publican, that would not
heave up his eyes to heaven for he had offended God of heaven: for which
shamefastness he had anon the mercy of God. And thereof says saint Augustine:
That such shameful folk be next foryeuenesse and mercy.

Another sign is, humility in confession: of which says saint Peter, *
Humbles you under the might of GOD: the hond of God is strong inconfession,
for thereby God foryeueth thee thy sins, for he alone has the power. And this
humility shall be in heart, and in outward signs: For right as he has humility
to God in his heart, right so should he humble his body outward to the priest,
that sits in Gods stead. For which in no manner, since that Christ is
sovereign, and the priest mean and mediator betwixt Christ and the sinner,
and the sinner is lost by way of reason, then should not the sinner sit as
hye as his confessor, but kneel before him or at his feet, but if sickness
cause it: For he shall not take heed who sits there, but in whose place he
sits. A man that has trespassed to a Lord, and comes to ask mercy and
make his accord, and sits him down by him, men would hold him outrageous,
and not worthy so soon for to have remission of his trespass.

The third sign is, how thy shrifte should be full of tears if thou may, and
if thou may not weep with thy bodily eyes, then weep in thine heart, which
was the confession of saint Peter. For after that he had forsake Jesus Christ,
he went out and wept full bitterly.

The fourth sign is, that thou ne let not for shame to show thy confession:
Such was the confession of Magdalein, that ne spared for no shame of hein that
were at the feast, to go to our Lord Jesus Christ and beknow to him her sins.
The fifth sign is, that a man or a woman be obeysaunt to receive the
pennaunce yt hem is enjoined. For certes Jesus Christ, for the offenses of man,
was obedient to death. The second condition of very confession is, that it be
hastily done. For certes, if a man had a deadly wound, ever the longer that he
taryeth to heal himself, the more would it corrupt and haste him to his death,
and also the wound would be y^ worse for to hele. And right so fares sin,
that long time is in a man unshewed. Certes a man ought hastily show his sins
for many causes, as for dread of death, that comes often suddenly, and no
certain what time it shall be, ne in what place, and also the drenching of o
sin draws in another: and also the longer that he tarrieth, the farther is
he fro Christ. And if he abide to his last day, scarcely may he shriue him or
remember him of his sins, or repent for the grievous malady of his death. *
And for as much as he ne has in his life hearkened Jesus Christ when he has
spoken, he shall cry to Jesus Christ at his last day, and scarcely woll he
hearken him. And understonde that this condition must have four things.

Thy shrift must be provided before, and advised, for wicked have does not
profit, if a man shrive him of his sins: be it of Pride, or envy, and so forth
with the speces and circumstaunces of sin. And that he have comprehended in
his mind the number and greatness of his sins, and how long he has lain in
sin. And also that he has be contrite for his sins, and in steadfast purpose
(by the grace of God) never again to fall to sin. And also that he dread and
counterfaite himself that he fly the occasion of sin, to which he is
inclined. Also thou shall shriue thee of all thy sins to o manne, and not
part to o manne, and part to another: That is to understand, in intent to
depart thy confession for shame or dread, for it is but strangling of thy soul.
* For certes, Jesus Christ is entierly all good, in him is none imperfection,
and therefore either he foryeueth all perfectly, or else never a deal. I say not
that if you be assigned to thy penitencer for certain sin, that thou art bound
to show him all the remenaunt of thy sins, of which thou haste be shriuen of
thy curat, but if it like to thee of thy humility, this is no part of thy
shrift. Ne I say not, there as I speak of division of confession, that if thou
have license to shriue thee likes, and by license of thy Curate, that thou ne
may well shriue thee to him of all thy sins. Let no sin be untold as far as
thou have remembrance. And when thou shall be shriuen to thy Curat, tell him
all thy sins that thou have do since thou were last shriuen. This is no wicked
intent of division of shrift.

Also the very shrift asks certain conditions. First that thou shriue thee
by thy free will, not constrained for shame of folk, sickness, ne such other
things: For it is reason that he that trespasseth by his free will, that by his
free will he confess his trespass, and that none other man tell his sin but
himself: ne he shall not nay, ne deny his sin, ne wrath him against the Priest
for admonishing him to leave his sin. The second condition is, that thy shrift
be lawful, that is to say, that thou shriuest thee. And also the Priest that
hears thy confession be verily in the faith of holy Church, and that a man ne
be not dispeired of the mercy of Jesus Christ, as Cain or Judas. And also a man
must accuse himself of his own trespass and not another, but he shall blame
and wite himself and his own malice of his sin, and none other: But
nathelesse, if that another man be occasion or enticer of his sin, or the
estate of a person be such by which his sin is agredged, or else that he may
not plainly shriue him, but he tell the person with which he has sined, then
may he tell, so that his intent ne be not to backbite the person, but only to
declare his confession.

Thou ne shall not also make no leasinges in thy confession for humility,
peradventure, to say that thou have committed and done such sins, as of which
that thou ne were never guilty. For saint Augustine says, if that thou because
of thine humility, make lesings on thy self, though thou were not in sin
before, yet art thou then in sin through thy leasing. Thou must also show thy
sin, by thine own proper mouth, but thou be dombe, and not by no Letter: sor
thou that have done the sin, shall have the shame therefore. Thou shall not
eke paint thy confession with fair subtle words, to cover the more thy sin:
for then begilest thou thy self, and not the priest: thou must tell it plain,
be it never so foul ne horrible. Thou shall also shriue thee to a priest that
is discreet to counsel thee: and also thou shall not shriue thee for vain
glory, ne for ypocrisie, ne for no cause, but only for the love and fear of
Jesus Christ, and heal of thy soul. Thou shall not also ren to the priest
suddenly, to tell him lightly thy sin, as who says, to tell a yape or a tale,
but auisedly and with good devotion: and generally shriue thee often: if thou often
fall, often arise by confession. And though thou shriue the ofter than ones of
the sin which thou have be shriuen of, it is the more merit: And as says
saint Augustine, Thou shall have the more lightly foryeuenesse and grace of
God, both of sin and pain. And certes ones a year at least it is lawful to
be houseled, for surely ones a year all things renouellen.

Now have I told you of very confession, that is the second part of penitence.

Explicit secunda pars penitentiae: Et sequitur tertia pars.
THe third part of penitence is Satisfaction, and that stont most generally in
almose deed and holy pain. Now been there three manner of almose. Contrition of
heart, where a man offreth himself to God: Another is, to have pity of defaute
of his neighbor: And the third is, in giving of good counsel, ghostly and
bodily, where as men have need, and namely in sustenaunce of man's food. And
take keep that a man has need of these things generally, he has need of food,
of clothing, and of herborow, he has need of charitable counsel, visiting in
prison, in sickness, and sepulture of his body. And if thou may not visit
the needful in prison in thy person, visit hem with thy message and yefts.
These ben generally the almose and works of charity, of hem that have
temporell riches, or discretion in counsailing. Of these works shall thou hear
at the day of dome.

These almose shall thou do of thine own proper things, and hastily and privily
if thou may: but nathelesse, if thou may not do it privily, thou shall not
forbear to do almose, though men see it, so that it be not to do for thank of
the world, but only for thank of Jesus Christ. For as witnesses faint Matthew
Capi. v. A City may not be hid that is set on a mountain, ne men light not a
lantern, to put it under a bushel, but set it upon a candlestick, to give
light to men in the house: * Right so shull your light, light before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify our Father that is in heaven.

Now as to speak of bodyly pain, it stont in prayers, waking, fasting, virtuous
teaching of orisons. And ye shall understond, y^ orisons or prayers, is to say,
a pitous will of heart, that sets it in God, and expresses by word outward
to remeeue harms, and have things spirituel and perdurable, and sometime
temporel things. Of which Orisons, certes in the orison of the Paternoster,
has Jesus Christ enclosed most things. Certes it is privileged of three
things in this dignity, for which it is more digne than any other prayer, For
that Jesus Christ himself made it, and it is short, for it should be learned the
more lightly, and to hold it the more easy in heart, and help himself the
ofter in this Orison: and for a man should be the less weary to say it, and
not excuse him to learn it, it is so short and easy: and for it comprehends
in it self, all good prayers. The exposition of this holy prayer, that is so
excellent and digne, I refer to the Master of Theology, save thus much woll
I say, * That when thou prayest that God should foryeue thee thine offenses as
thou foryeuest hem that have offended thee, be well ware that thou be not out
of charity. This holy Orison aminisheth also venial sin, and therefore it
apperteineth specially to penitence.

This prayer must be truly said, and in perfect faith, and that men pray to
God ordinately, discreetly, and devoutly: and always a man shall put his will,
to be subject to the will of God. This Orison must also be said with great
humbleness, and full pure and honestly, and not to the annoyaunce of any man or
woman. It must also be continued with the works of charity. It avails also
against the vices of the soul: for as says S. Irom, * By fasting been saved the
vices of the flesh, and by prayer the vices of the soul.

After this thou shall understond, that bodyly prayer stont in waking. For Jesus
Christ says: wake ye and pray, that ye ne enter into wicked temptaion. Ye
shull understond also, that fasting stont in three things: in forbearing of
bodyly meat and drink, in forbearing of worldly iollitye, and in forbearing of
deadly sin: this is to say, that a man shall keep him fro deadly sin with
all his might.

And thou shall understond also, that God ordained fasting, and to fasting
partayneth four things. Largeness to poor folk: gladness of heart
spirituel: not to be angry ne annoyed, ne grutch for he fasteth: and also
reasonable hour to eat by measure, that is to say, a man shall not eat in
untime, ne sit the longer at the table, for he fasteth.

Then shall thou understond, that bodyly pain stont in discipline, or teaching
by word or writing, or by ensample. Also in wearing of here or stamin, or of
harbergeons on her naked flesh for Christ's sake, and that such manner
penaunces, ne make not thine heart bitter or angry, ne annoyed of thy self,
for better is to cast away thine here, than to cast away the sweetness of
Jesus Christ. And therefore says saint Poule: clothe you, as they that been
chosen of God in heart, of misericorde, debonairte, suffraunce, and such manner
of clothing, of which Jesus Christ is more pleased than with the heers or
herbergeons.

Then is discipline also, in knocking of thy breast, in scourging with rods,
in kneeling, in tribulation, in suffering patiently wrongs that been done to
thee, and also in patient suffering of sickness, or lesing of worldly goods,
or cattle, or wife, child, or other friends.

Then shall thou nnderstond, which things disturb pennaunce, and that is in
four manners, drrade, shame, hope, and wanhope, that is, desperation. And for
to speak first of dread, for which he weneth that he may suffer no penance.
There against is remedy, for to think that bodyly penance, is but short and
little at regard of the pain of hell, that is so cruel and so long, that it
lasts without end.

Now against the shame that a man has to shriue him, and namely these
Ipocrites, that would be hold so perfect, that they have no need to shriue hem:
Against that shame would a man think, that by way of reason, that he that has
not be ashamed to do foul things, certes him ought not be ashamed, for to do
fair things, and that is confessions. A man should also think, that God sees
and knows al his thoughts, and all his werks: to him may nothing be hid ne
covered. Men should also remember hem of the shame that is to come at the day
of dome, to hem that be not penitent, and shriuen in this present life: for all
the creatures in earth and in hell shall see apertly, all that they hid in
this world.

Now for to speak of the hope of hem, that been so negligent and slow to
shriue hem: that stondeth in two manners. That one is, that he hops for to
live long, and for to purchase much riches for his delight, and then he woll
shriue him: And as he says, him seems then timely enough to come to shrift:
* Another is, of surquidrie that he has in Christ's mercy. Against the first
vice, he shall thenk that our life is in no sikernesse, and also that all the
riches in this world been in adventure, and pass as a shadow on the wall. And
as says saint Gregory, That it appartayneth to the great righteousness of
God, that never shall the pain stinte of hem, that never would withdrewe hem
from sin her thanks, but ever continued in sin: for that perpetual will to
do sin, shall they have perpetual pain. Wanhope, is in two manners. The first
wanhope is in the mercy of God: That other is, that they think that they ne
might not long persevere in goodness.

The first wanhope comes of that, he demeth that he has sinned so greatly
and so often, and so long lain in sin, that he shall not be saved. * Certes
against that cursed wanhope should he think, that the Passion of Jesus Christ is
more strong for to unbinde, than sin is strong for to bind. Against the
second wanhope he shall think, * That as often as he falls, he may rise
again by penitence: and though he never so long has lain in sin, the
mercy of Christ is always ready to receive him to mercy. Against the Wanhope
that he deemeth he should not long persevere in goodness, he shall think, *
That the feebleness of the devil, may nothing do, but if men woll suffer
him: and also he shall have strength of the help of Jesus Christ, and of all
holy Church, and the protection of Angels, if him list.

Then shall men understonde, what is the fruit of penance, and after the
words of Jesus Christ, It is an endless bliss of heaven: There joy has
never end, no contrary of woe ne greuaunce: there all harms ben passed of
this present life, there as is the sikernesse fro the pain of hell, there as is
the blisful company, that rejoice hem euermo, euerich of others joy: there as
the body of man that sometime was foul and dark, is more clear than the
Sun: there as the body that sometime was sick, freile, and feeble, and
mortal, is immortal, and so strong and hole, that there ne may nothing appeire
it: there as is neither hunger, thirst, ne cold, but every soul replenished
with the sight of the perfect knowing of God. This blisfull reign may men
purchase by poverty espirituel, and the glory by lowlines, the plenty of joy
by hunger and thurst, and the rest by travail, and the life by death and
mortification of sin: to which life he us bring, that bought us with his
precious blood. Amen.

Here ends the Parsons tale. Thus ends the Book of Canterbury tales.
THE Romaunt of the Rose.
THis Book was begun in French Verse by William de Lorris, and finished forty
years after by John Clopinell, alias John Moon, born at Mewen upon the River
of Loyer, not far from Paris, as appears by Molinet, the French Author of the
Morality upon the Romaunt; and afterward translated for the most part into
English Meter by Geffrey Chaucer, but not finished. It is entitled, The
Romaunt of the Rose; or, The Art of Love: wherein is showed the helps and
furtherances, as also the lets and impediments that Lovers have in their Suits.
In this Book the Author has many glaunces at the Hypocrisy of the Clergy:
whereby he got himself such hatred amongst them, that Gerson, Chancellor of
Paris, writes thus of him: says he, There was one called Johannes
Meldinensis, who wrote a Book called, The Romaunt of the Rose; which Book if I
only had, and that there were no more in the World, if I might have five
hundred pound for the same, I would rather burn it than take the Money. He
says more, That if he thought the Author thereof did not repent him for that
Book before he dyed, he would vouchsafe to pray for him no more than he would
for Judas that betrayed Christ.
MAny men sain that in sweueninges,
There nis but fables and lesinges:
But men may some sweuen seen,
Which hardely that false ne been,
But afterward ben apparaunt:
This may I draw to warraunt.
An author that hight Macrobes,
That halt not dreams false ne lees,
But undoth us the auisioun,
That whilom met king Cipioun.
And who so says, or weneth it be
A yape, or else nicete
To wene that dreams after fall,
Let who so list a fool me call.
For this trow I, and say for me,
That dreams signifiaunce be
Of good and harm to many wightes,
That dreamen in her sleep a nights
Full many things covertly,
That fallen after all openly.
Within my twenty year of age,
When that love takes his courage
Of young folk, I went soon
To bed, as I was wont to done:
And fast I slept, and in sleeping,
Me met such a sweuening,
That liked me wondrous well,
But in that sweuen is never a dele
That it nis afterward befall,
Right as this dream woll tell us all.
Now this dream woll I rhyme a right,
To make your hearts gay and light:
For love it prays, and also
Commands me that it be so,
And if there any ask me,
Whether that it be he or she,
How this Book which is here
Shall hight, that I read you here:
It is the Romaunt of the Rose,
In which all the art of love I close.
The matter fair is of to make,
God grant me in gree that she it take
For whom that it begonnen is,
And that is she, that has Iwis
So mokel prise, and thereto she
So worthy is beloved to be,
That she well ought of prise and right,
Be cleped Rose of every wight.
That it was Mey me thought tho
It is five year or more ago,
That it was Mey, thus dreamed me,
In time of love and iolitie,
That all thing ginneth waxen gay:
For there is neither buske nor hay
In Mey, that it nill shrouded been,
And it with new leaves wrene:
These woods eke recoueren grene,
That dry in winter ben to seen,
And the earth waxes proud withal,
For swote dewes that on it fall,
And the poor estate forget,
In which that winter had it set:
And then become the ground so proud,
That it woll have a new shroude,
And makes so queint his robe and fair,
That it had hewes an hundred pair,
Of grass and flowers, Inde and Pers,
And many hewes full diverse:
That is the robe I mean iwis,
Through which the ground to praisen is.
The birds that han left her song,
While they han suffered cold full strong,
In wethers grille, and derke to sight,
Ben in Mey, for the sun bright,
So glad, that they show in singing,
That in her heart is such liking,
That they mote singen and ben light:
Then does the Nightingale her might,
To maken noise, and singen blithe:
Then is blisfull many a since,
The chelaundre, and the popingaye,
Then young folk entenden aye,
For to ben gay and amorous,
The time is then so sauorous.
Hard is his heart that loves naught
In Mey, when all this mirth is wrought,
When he may on these branches here
The small birds singen clear
Her blisfull sweet song piteous,
And in this season delitous:
When love affirms all thing,
Me thought one night, in my sleeping,
Right in my bed full readyly,
That it was by the morrow early,
And up I rose, and began me cloth,
Anon I wish mine hondes both,
A silver needle forth I drow,
Out of an aguiler queint inow,
And began this needle thread anon,
For out of town me list to gone,
The sound of birds for to hear
That on the buskes singen clear,
That in the sweet season that lefe is,
With a thread basting my sleuis,
Alone I went in my playing,
The small fowls song hearkening,
That payned hem full many a pair,
To sing on bows blossomed fair,
Iolife and gay, full of gladness,
Toward a River began I me dress,
That I heard ren fast by,
For fairer playen none saw I:
Then playen me by that Riuere
For from an hill that stood there nere,
Come down the stream full stiff and bold,
Clear was the water, and as cold
As any Well is, sooth to saine,
And somedele less it was than Saine,
But it was straiter, weleaway,
And never saw I er that day,
The water that so well liked me,
And wonder glad was I to se
That lusty place, and that Riuere:
And with that water that ran so clear,
My face I wish, tho saw I well,
The bottom ypaued eueridele
With grauel, full of stones shene,
The meadows soft, sote, and grene,
Beet right on the water side,
Full clear was than the morrow tide,
And full attempre out of dread,
Tho began I walken through the Mede,
Dounward aye in my playing,
The Rivers side coasting.
And when I had a while igone,
I saw a garden right anon,
Full long and broad, and eueridele
Enclosed was, and walled well,
With high walls enbatailed,
Portrayed without, and well entayled
With many rich portraitures,
And both yet Images and peintures,
Began I behold besely,
And I woll tell you readyly,
Of thilke Images the semblaunce,
As far as I have remembrance.
Amidde saw I Hate stand,
That for her wrath and ire and onde,
Seemed to be a mynoresse,
An angry wight a childeresse,
And full of gile, and fell courage:
By semblaunt was that like Image,
And she was nothing well araide,
But like a wode woman afraid,
Ifrounced foul was her visage,
And grinning for dispitous rage,
Her nose snorted up for tene,
Full hidous was she for to seen,
Full foul and rustie was she this,
Her head iwrithen was iwis
Full grimly with a great towaile.
An image of another entaile,
A lift half was her fast by,
Her name above her head saw I,
And she was called Felony.
Another Image, that Villainy
Icleped was, saw I and fond
Upon the wall on her right hand.
Villainy was like somedele
That other Image, and trusts well
She seemed a wicked creature,
By countenance in portreiture,
She seemed be full despitous,
And eke full proud and outrageous.
Well coud he paint I undertake,
That such an image coud make:
Full foul and churlish seemed she,
And eke villainous for to be,
And little could of nurture,
To worship any creature.
And next was painted Couetise,
That eggeth folk in many a gise,
To take and give right naught again,
And great treasours up to lain.
And that is she, that for usure
Leneth to many a creature,
The less for the more winning,
So covetous is her brenning,
And that is she for pennies feel,
That teaches for to rob and stele
These thieves, and these small harlotes,
And that is routh, for by her throtes,
Full many one hongeth at the last:
She makes folk compass and cast
To taken other folks thing,
Through robbery, or miscoueting.
And that is she that makes treachours,
And she makes false pleadours,
That with her terms and her domes,
Done maidens, children, and eke gromes,
Her heritage to forgo:
Full crooked were her honds two,
* For Couetise is ever wood,
To gripen other folks good.
Couetise, for her winning,
Full lefe has other men's thing.
Another Image set saw I,
Next Couetise fast by,
And she was cleped Avarice,
Full foul in painting was that vice,
Full sad and caitife was she eke,
And also grene as any leke,
So evil hewed was her color,
Her seemed to have lived in langour,
She was like thing for hunger dead,
That lad her life only by bread
Kneden with eisell strong and egre,
And thereto she was lene and megre,
And she was clad full poorly,
All in an old torn courtpy,
As she were all with dogs torn,
And both behind and eke beforne
Clouted was the beggarly.
A mantle honge her fast by,
Upon a bench weak and small,
A burnette cote hong there withal,
Furred with no mineuere,
But with a furre rough of here,
Of lamb skins heavy and black,
It was so old I undertake.
For Avarice to cloth her well,
Ne hastes her never a dele,
For certainly it were her loath
To wearen of that ilke cloth,
And if it were forweared, she
Would have full great nicete
Of clothing, er she bought her new,
All were it bad of woll and hew.
This Avarice held in her hand,
A purse that hong by a band,
And that the hid and bond so strong,
Men must abide wonder long,
Out of the purse er there come ought,
For that ne comes in her thought,
It was not certain her intent,
That fro that purse a penny went.
And by that Image nigh enough,
Was painted Envy, that never lough
Nor never well in her heart feared,
But if she either saw or heard
Some great mischaunce, or great disease,
Nothing may so much her please
As mischeife and misauenture,
Or when she sees discomfiture
Upon any worthy man fall,
Then likes her well withal.
She is full glad in her courage,
If she see any great lineage
Be brought to naught in shameful wife:
And if a man in honor rise,
Or by his wit, or by his prowess,
Of that has she great heaviness
For trusts well she goes nie wood,
When any chance happeth good.
* Envy is of such cruelte,
That faith ne troth holds she,
To friend ne fellow, bad or good.
Ne she has kin none of her blood
That she nis full her enemy,
She nolde, I dare saine hardely
Her own father fared well,
And sore abieth she every dele
Her malice, and her male talent:
For she is in so great turment
And hate such, when folk does good,
That nigh she melts for pure wood,
Her heart kerueth and so breaks
That God the people well awreaketh,
* Envy iwis shall never let,
Some blame upon the folk to set.
I trow that if Envy iwis,
Knew the best man that is,
On this side or beyond the sea,
Yet somewhat lacken him would she:
And if he were so hende and wise,
That she ne might all abate his prise,
Yet would she blame his worthiness,
Or by her words make it less.
I saw Envy in that painting,
Had a wonderful looking,
For she ne looked but awrie,
Or overwhart, all baggingly.
And she had a foul usage,
She might look in no visage
Of man ne woman, forth right plain,
But shette her one eye for disdain,
So for Envy brenned she
When she might any man see
That fair, or worthy were, or wise,
Or else stood in folks prise.
Sorrow was painted next Envy
Upon that wall of masonrie:
But well was seen in her color
That she had lived in languour:
Her seemed to have the jaundice,
Not half so pale was Avarice,
Ne nothing like of leanness
For sorrow, thought, and great distress
That she had suffered day and night
Made her yellow, and nothing bright:
Full sad, pale, and megre also,
Was never wight yet half so woe
As that her seemed for to be
Nor so fulfilled with ire as she,
I trow that no wight might her please
Nor do that thing that might her ease,
Nor she ne would her sorrow stake
Nor comfort none unto her take,
So deep was her woe begone
And eke her heart in anger run,
A sorrowful thing well seemed she:
Nor she had nothing slow be
For to scratchen all her face
And for to rent in many place
Her clothes, and for to tear her swire
As she that was fulfilled of ire
And all to torn lay eke her here
About her shoulders, here and there,
As she that had it all to rent
For anger and for male talent.
And eke I tell you certainly
How that she wept full tenderly:
In world nis wight so hard of heart
That had seen her sorrows smart
That nolde have had of her pite
So woe begone a thing was she.
She all to dashed her self for woe
And smote togider her hands two
To sorrow was she full ententife
That woeful retchelesse caitife
Her wrought little of playing
Or of clipping or kissing.
* For who so sorrowful is in heart
Him lust not to play ne start,
Nor for to dauncen, ne to sing,
Ne may his heart in temper bring
To make joy on even or morrow,
For joy is contrary unto sorrow.
Elde was painted after this,
That shorter was a foot iwis
Than she was wont in her yonghede
^nneth her self she might feed,
So feeble and eke so old was she
That faded was all her beauty.
Full salow was waxen her color,
Her head for hoar was white as flour,
Iwis great qua^me ne were it none,
Ne sin, although her life were gone.
All woxen was her body vnwelde
And dry and dwined all for elde,
A foul forw^lked thing was she
That whilom round and soft had be,
Her heeres shoken fast withal
As from her head they would fall:
Her face frounced and forpined
And both her honds lorne fordwined
So old she was that she ne went
A foot, but it were by potent.
The time that passed night and day
And restless trauayleth aye
And steals from us so priuyly
That to us seems sikerly
That it in one point dwells ever
And certes it ne rests never
But goes so fast, and passes aye
That there nis man that think may
What time that now present is
Asks at these Cleres this,
For men think it readily
Three times been passed by
The time that may not soiourne
But goth, and may never return
As water that down runs aye
But never drop return may:
There may nothing as time endure
Metal, nor yearthly creature.
For all thing is frette and shall
The time eke that changes all
And all does wax, and fostred be
And all thing destroys he.
The time that eldeth our Ancestors
And eldeth Kings and Emperors
And that us all shall ouercommen
Er that death us shall have nommen,
The time that has all in welde
To elden folk, had made her elde
So inly, that to my weting
She might help her self nothing
But turned again unto childhede
She had nothing her self to lead
Ne wit ne pith in her hold
More than a child of two year old.
But nathelesse I trow that she
Was fair sometime, and fresh to se,
When she was in her rightful age:
But she was past all that passage
And was a doted thing becommen
A furred cappe on had she nommen
Well had she clad her self and warm
For cold might else done her harm,
These old folk have always cold,
* Her kind is such, when they been old.
Another thing was done their write,
That seemed like an Ipocrite,
And it was cleped Pope Holy,
That ilke is she, that privily
Ne spared never a wr^ked deed,
When men of her taken none heed
And makes her outward precious,
With pale visage and piteous,
And seems a simple creature,
But there nis no misaduenture,
That she ne thinks in courage,
Full like to her was thilke Image:
That maked was like her semblaunce,
She was full simple of countenance.
And she was clothed and eke shod,
As she were of the love of God
Yolden to Religion,
Soch seemed her devotion.
A Psalter held she fast in hond,
And busily she began to fond:
To make many a faint prayere,
To God, and to his Saints dear,
Ne she was gay, fresh, ne iolife,
But seemed to be full ententife:
To good works, and to fair,
And thereto she had on an hair.
Ne certes she was fat nothing
But seemed weary for fasting,
Of color pale and dead was she,
From her the gates aie warned be
Of Paradise that blisfull place,
For such folk maken lean her grace:
As Christ says in his Euangile,
To get hem prise in town a while,
And for a little glory vain,
They lesen God and eke his reign.
And alderlast of euerichone,
Was painted Pouert all alone,
That not a penny had in hold,
Although she her clothes sold,
And though she should an honged be,
For naked as a worm was she,
And if the weather stormy were,
For cold she should have died there.
She ne had on but a strait old sack,
And many a cloute on it there stacke,
This was her cote, and her mantele,
No more was there never a dele,
To cloth her with, I undertake,
Great leaser had she to quake:
And she was put, that I of talk,
Far fro these other, up in an halke,
There lurked and there coured she,
For poor thing where so it be,
Is shamefast, and despised aie,
Accursed may well be that day,
That poor man conceived is,
For God wot all to seld iwis,
Is any poor man well ifed,
Or well arrayed or icled,
Or well beloved, in such wise,
In honor, that he may arise.
All these things well auised,
As I have you er this devised,
With gold and azure over all,
Depainted were upon the wall.
Square was the wall, and high somde^e:
Enclosed, and ibarred well,
In stead of hedge, was that gardin,
Come never shepherd therein,
Into that gardin, well wrought.
Who so that me coud have brought,
By ladders or else by degree,
It would well have liked me,
For such solace, such joy, and pleie,
I trow that never man ne seie,
As was in that place delicious:
The gardin was not dangerous,
To herborow birds many one,
So rich a year was never none
Of birds song, and branches grene,
Therein were birds mo I wene,
Than been in all the Realm of France:
Full blisfull was the accordaunce,
Of sweet pitous song they made,
For all this world it ought glade.
And I my self so merry feared,
When I her blisfull songs heard,
That for an hundred pound would I,
If that the passage openly
Had be unto me free
That I nolde entren for to see
Thassemble (God keep it fro care)
Of birds, which therein ware,
That songen through her merry throtes,
Daunces of love, and merry notes.
When I thus heard fowls sing,
I fell fast in a waymenting,
By which art, or by what engine,
I might come into that gardin,
But way I couth find none,
Into that gardin for to gone,
Ne naught wist I if that there were
Either hole or place where,
By which I might have enter,
Ne there was none to teach me,
For I was all alone iwis,
For woe and anguish of this,
Till at last bethought I me,
That by no way ne might it be,
That there nas ladder ne way to pace,
Or hole, into so fair a place.
Tho began I go a full great paas,
Enuiron, even in compass,
The closing of the square wall,
Till that I found a wicket small
To shette, that I ne might in gone,
And other enter was there none.
Upon this door I began to smite
That was fetis, and so lite:
For other way coud I not seek
Full long I shote, and knocked eke.
And stood full long all herkening
If that I heard any wight coming:
Till that the door of thilke enter
A maiden curteis opened me:
Her hair was as yellowe of hew
As any basin scoured new,
Her flesh tender as is a chicke
With bent brows, smooth and slicke,
And by measure large were
The opening of her eyes clear:
Her nose of good proportion,
Her eyes graie, as is a faucon,
With sweet breath and well favored,
Her face white and well colored,
With little mouth, and round to see:
A cloue chinne eke had she,
Her neck was of good fashion
In length and greatness by reason
Without bleine, scabbe, or roine,
Fro Jerusalem unto Burgoine
There nis a fairer neck iwis
To feel how smooth and soft it is.
Her throat also white of hew,
As Snow on braunce snowed new.
Of body full well wrought was she,
Men neden not in no country
A fairer body for to seek:
And of fine Orfrais had she eke
A chapelet, so semely on,
Ne never wered maid upon
And fair above that chapelet
A rose garlond had she set
She had a gay mirror
And with a rich gold treasour,
Her head was tressed queintly
Her sleeves sewed fetously.
And for to keep her hondes fair
Of gloves white she had a pair:
And she had on a coat of grene
Of cloth of Gaunt, withouten wene:
Well seemed by her apparaile
She was not wont to great travail.
For when she kempt was feteously
And well araied and richly,
Then had she done all her iournee,
For merrye and well begone was she.
She led a lusty life in May,
She had no thought, by night ne day
Of nothing, but if it were only
To grayeth her well and vncouthly.
When that this door had opened me
This May, seemly for to see,
I thonked her as I best might,
And asked her how that she hight:
And what she was, I asked eke,
And she to me was naught vnmeke
Ne of her answer dangerous.
But fair answerde, and said thus:
Lo sir, my name is Idleness,
So clepe men me, more and less:
Full mighty and full rich am I,
And that of one thing namely,
For I entende to nothing
But to my joye, and my playing,
And for to kembe and tresse me:
Acquainted am I and prive
With Mirthe, Lord of this gardin
That fro the land of Alexandrin
Made the trees hither be fet,
That in this gardin been iset:
And when the trees were woxen an hight,
This wall that stant here in thy sight,
Did Mirth enclosen all about,
And these Images all without
He did hem both entaile and paint,
That neither been jolife ne quaint,
But they been full of sorrow and woe
As thou have see ne a while ago.
AND often time him to solace
Sir Mirth comes into this place,
And eke with him comes his meine.
That liuen in lust and iolite:
And now is Mirth therein, to here
The birds how they singen clear
The Mauis and the Nightingale,
And other jolly birds small:
And thus he walked to solace
Him and his folk, for sweeter place
To playen in, he may not find,
Although he sought one in till Inde.
The alther fairest folk to see
That in this world may found be
Has Mirth with him in his rout
That followen him always about,
When Idleness had told all this,
And I had herkened well ywis,
Then said I to dame Idleness,
Now also wisely God me bless,
Since Mirth, that is so fair and fre
Is in this yerd with his meine,
Fro thilke assemble, if I may,
Shall no man werne me to day,
That I this night ne mote it see,
For well wene I there with him be
A fair and jolly company
Fulfilled of all courtesy:
And forth with out words mo
In at the wicked went I tho,
That Idleness had opened me,
Into that garden fair to see.
And when I was in ywis,
Mine heart was full glad of this.
For well wend I full sikerly
Have been in Paradise earthly,
So fair it was, that trusts well,
It seemed a place espirituell.
For certes at my devise,
There is no place in Paradise,
So good in for to dwell or be,
As in that garden thought me.
For there was many a bird singing,
Throughout the yerde all thringing,
In many places were Nightingales,
Alps, Finches, and Wodwales,
That in her sweet song delighten
In thilke places as they habiten.
There might men see many flocks
Of Turtles and Lauerockes,
Chalaundres feel saw I there,
That very nigh forsongen were.
And Thrustles, Terins, and Mauise,
That songen for to win hem prise,
And eke to sermount in her song
That other birds hem among
By note made fair seruise:
These birds, that I you devise,
They song her song as fair and well,
As Angels done espirituell,
And trusts me, when I hem heard,
Full lusty and well I feared:
For never yet such melody
Was heard of man that might die.
Such sweet song was hem among,
That me thought it no birds song,
But it was wonder like to be
Song of Meremaidens of the sea,
That for her singing is so clear:
Though we Meremaidens clepe hem here
In English, as is our vsaunce,
Men clepe hem Sereins in France.
ENtentiue weren for to sing
These birds, that not vnkonning
Were of her craft, and a prentise,
But of song subtle and wise:
And certes, when I heard her song,
And saw the green place among,
In heart I wext so wonder gay,
That I was never erst, ere that day
So iolife, nor so well bigo,
Ne merry in heart, as I was tho:
And then wist I, and saw full well,
That Idleness me served well,
That me put in such iolite,
Her friend well ought I for to be,
Since she the door of that gardin
Had opened, and me let in.
From henceforth, how that I wrought
I shall you tell, as me thought:
First whereof Mirth served there,
And eke what folk there with him were,
Without fable I woll discriue.
And that garden eke as bliue:
I woll you tellen after this
The fair fashion all ywis.
That well wrought was for the nones,
I may not tell you all atones,
But as I may and can, I shall
By order tellen you it all.
Full fair service, and eke full sweet
These birds maden as they sete:
Lays of love, full well souning
They songen in her iargoning,
Some high, and some eke low song
Upon the branches green isprong:
The sweetness of her melody
Made all mine heart in reuelrie.
And when that I heard I trow
These birds singing on a row,
Then might I not withhold me
That I ne went in for to see
Sir Mirth, for my desiring
Was him to seen over all thing,
His countenance and his manner:
That sight was to me full dear.
THo went I forth on my right hond
Down by a little path I fond
Of Mints full, and Fennel green
As fast by without wene,
Sir Mirth I found, and right anon
Unto Sir Mirth began I gone,
There as he was him to solace,
And with him in that lusty place,
So fair folk and so fresh had he,
That when I saw, I wondered me
Fro whence such folk might come,
So fair they weren all and some:
For they weren like, as to my sight,
To Angels, that been fethered bright.
These folk, of which I tell you so,
Upon a karole wenten tho:
A Lady karoled hem, that hight
Gladness, blisfull, and light,
Well could she sing and lustely
None half so well and seemly:
And coth make in song such refraining,
It sat her wonder well to sing.
Her voice full clear was and full sweet,
She was not rude ne unmete,
But couth enough for such doing
As longs unto karolling:
For she was wont in every place
To singen first, folk to sol^ace,
For singing most she gave her to,
No craft had she so lefe to do.
THO might thou karols seen,
And folk dance and merry been,
And made many a fair tourning
Upon the green grass springing.
There might thou see these Flutours,
Minstrals, and eke joglours,
That well to sing did her pain:
Some song songs of Loraine,
For in Loraine her notes be
Full sweeter than in this country.
There was many a Timbestere,
And saliours, that I dare well swear
Couth her craft full perfitly:
The Timbres up full subtelly
They cast, and hent full often
Upon a finger fair and soft,
That they failed never mo.
Full fetis damsels two,
Right young, and full of semelyhede
In kirtles, and none other wede,
And fair tressed every tresse
Had Mirth done for his noblesse
Amid the carole for to dance,
But hereof lies no remembrance,
How that they daunced queintly:
That one would come all prively
Again that other, and when they were
Together almost, they threw ifere
Her mouths so, that through her play
It seemed as they kissed always:
To dauncen well couth they the guise.
What should I more to you devise?
Ne bode I never thence go,
Whiles that I saw hem dance so
Upon the caroll wonder fast,
I began behold, till at last
A Lady began me for to epsy,
And she was cleped Courtesy,
The worshipful, the debonaire,
I pray to God ever fall her fair:
Full courtessy she called me,
What do ye there Beau sire (quoth. she)
Come, and if it like you
To dance, daunceth with us now:
And I without tarrying
Went into the carolling,
I was abashed never adele,
But it to me liked right well,
That Courtesy me cleped so,
And bade me on the dance go.
For if I had durst certain,
I would have carolled right feign
As man that was to dance right blithe:
Then began I looken often sith
The shape, the bodies, and the cheres,
The countenance and the maneres
Of all the folk that daunced there,
And I shall tell what they were.
Full fair was Mirth, full long and high,
A fairer man I never sigh:
As round as apple was his face,
Full roddie and white in every place:
Fetis he was and well besey,
With meetly mouth and eyes gray,
His nose by measure wrought full right,
Crispe was his hair, and eke full bright:
His shoulders of large bread,
And smallish in the girdle stead:
He seemed like a purtreiture,
So noble he was of his stature,
So fair, so jolly, and so fetise,
With lims wrought at point devise
Deliver, smert, and of great might:
Ne saw thou never man so light.
Of berd unneth had he nothing,
For it was in the first spring,
Full young he was, and merry of thought
And in samette, with birds wrought,
And with gold beaten full fetous^y,
His body was clad full richely:
Wrought was his robe in strange egise,
And all to slittered for queintise
In many a place, low and hie,
And shode he was with great maistrie,
With shoone decoped, and with lace,
By drurie, and by solace,
His leefe a rosen chapelet
Had made, and on his head it set.
And wete ye who was his lefe,
Dame Gladness there was him so lefe,
That sings so well with glad courage,
That from she was twelve year of age,
She of her love grant him made
Sir Mirth her by the finger hade
Dancing, and she him also,
Great love was atwixt hem two:
Both were they fair and bright of hew,
She seemed like a rose new
Of colors, and her flesh so tender,
That with a brere small and tender,
Men might it cleve, I dare well say:
Her forhead frounceles all play,
Bent were her brows two,
Her eyes gray, and glad also,
That laughden aye in her semblaunt,
First or the mouth by covenant.
I wot not what of her nose I shall discrive,
So fair has no woman alive:
Her hair was yellow, and clear shining,
I wot no lady so liking.
Of Orfraies fresh was her garland,
I which seen have a thousand
Saw never ywis no garland yet,
So well wrought of silk as it.
And in an over gilt samite
Clad she was, by great delight,
Of which her leefe a robe werde
The merrier she in her heart ferde.
And next her went, on her other side,
The God of Love, that can divide
Love, and as him likes it be
But he can cherles daunten, he,
And many folks pride fallen,
And he can well these Lords thrallen,
And Ladies put at low degree
When he may hem too proud see.
This God of Love of his fashion
Was like no knave, ne quistron:
His beauty greatly was to prise,
But of his robe to devise
I dread encombred for to be,
For not yelad in silk was he,
But all in flowers and flourettes,
I painted all with amorettes,
And with losenges and scochons,
With Birds, Liberdes, and Lions,
And other beasts wrought full well:
His garment was every dele
I purtraied and ywrought with flours,
By diverse meddling of colors:
Flowers there were of many gise
Iset by compass in a sise,
There lacked no flower to my dome,
Ne not so much as flower of Brom,
Ne violet, ne eke peruinke,
Ne flower none, that men can on think:
And many a rose lefe full long
Was entermedled there among:
And also on his head was set
Of roses red a chapelet.
But Nightingales a full great rout
That flien over his head about,
The leaves felden as they flien,
And he was all with birds wrien,
With Popinjay, with Nightingale,
With Chalaundre, and with wodewale.
With finch, with lark, and with archangell,
He seemed as he were an angel,
That down were comen fro heaven clear.
Love had with him a bachelere,
That he made always with him be,
Sweet looking cleped was he:
This batcheler stood beholding
The dance, and in his hond holding
Turk bows two, full well devised had he,
That one of hem was of a tree
That bears a fruit of savor wicke,
Full crooked was that foul stick,
And knottie here and there also
And black as berrie, or any slo.
That other bow was of a plant
Without wemme, I dare warrant,
Full even and by proportion,
Trectes and long, of full good fashion,
And it was painted well and thwitten,
And over all diapred and written
With ladies and with bacheleres,
Full lightsome and glad of cheres:
These bows two held Sweet looking,
That seemed like no gadling:
And ten broad arrows held he there,
Of which sive in his hond were,
But they were shaven well and dight,
Nocked and feathered aright:
And all they were with gold begone,
And strong pointed everichon,
And sharp for to kerven well,
But iron was there none ne stele:
For all was gold, men might see,
Out take the feathers and the tree.
THe swiftest of these arrows five
Out of a bow for to drive,
And best feathered for to fly,
And fairest eke, was cleped Beauty:
That other arrow that hurts less,
Was cleped (as I trow) Simplesse:
The third cleped was Fraunchise,
That feathered was in noble wise
With valor and with courtesy?
The fourth was cleped Company,
That heavy for to shooten is,
But who so shoots right ywis,
May therewith done great harm and woe:
The fifth of these, and last also,
Fair Semblaunt men that arrow call,
The least greevous of hem all,
Yet can it make a full great wound,
But he may hope his sores sound
That hurt is with that arrowe ywis,
His woe the bette bestowed is:
For he may sooner have gladness,
His langour ought be the less.
FIve arrows were of other gise,
That been full foul to devise:
For shaft and end sooth for to tell.
Were also black as fiend in hell
The first of hem is called Pride,
That other arrow next him beside,
It was cleped Villainy,
That arrow was, as with fellonie
Envenimed, and with spitous blame:
The third of hem was cleped Shame.
The fourth, Wanhope cleped is,
The fifth, the New thought ywis.
These arrows that I speak of here,
Were all five on one mannere,
And all were they resemblable
To hem was well sitting and able,
The foul crooked bow hidous,
That knottie was, and all roinous,
That bow seemed well to shete
The arrows five, that been unmete
And contrary to that other five:
But though I tell not as blive
Of her power, ne of her might,
Hereafter shall I tellen right
The sooth, and eke signifiaunce
As far as I have remembrance:
All shall be said I undertake,
Ere of this book an end I make.
Now come I to my tale again:
But aldersirst, I woll you saine
The fashion and the countenaunces
Of all the folk that on the dance is.
The God of Love jolife and light,
Led on his hond a Lady bright
Of high prise, and of great degree,
This Lady called was beauty,
And an arrow, of which I told:
Full well thewed was she hold,
Ne she was derke ne brown, but bright,
And clear as the Moon light:
Again whom all the Stars semen
But small candles, as we demen:
Her flesh was tender as dew of flower,
Her cheer was simple as bird in boure,
As white as Lilly or Rose in rise.
Her face gentle and treatise:
Fetis she was, and small to see,
No wintred brows had she,
Ne popped here, for it needed naught
To winder her, or to paint her ought:
Her tresses yellow, and long straughten,
Unto her heels down they raughten,
Her nose, her mouth, and eye and cheke
Well wrought, and all the remnaunt eke.
A full great savor and a swote,
Me thought in mine heart rote:
As help me God, when I remember,
Of the fashion of every member,
In world is none so fair a wight:
For young she was, and hewed bright
Sore pleasant, and fetis with all,
Gent, and in her middle small.
Beside beauty yede Richesse,
An high Lady of great noblesse,
And great of price in every place:
But who so durst to her trespace
Or till her folk, in work or deed,
He were full hardy out of dread:
For both she help and hinder may,
And that is not of yesterday
That rich folk have full great might
To help, and eke to grieve a wight.
The best and greatest of valor
Didden Richesse full great honor,
And busy weren her to serve,
For that they would her love deserve,
They cleped her Lady, great and small,
This wide world her dredeth all:
This world is all in her daungere,
Her court has many a losengere,
And many a traitor envious,
That been full busy and curious
For to dispraise, and to blame
That best deseruen love and name,
To forne the folk hem to begilen,
These losenge ours hem preise and smilen.
And thus the world with word annointen,
But afterward they prill and pointen
The folk, right to the bare bone,
Behind her back when they ben gone,
And foul abaten folks prise.
Full many a worthy man and wise
Han hindered, and idoen to die
These losengeours with her flattery,
And makes folk full strange be,
There as hem ought ben prive:
Well evil mote they thrive and thee,
And evil arrived mote they be
These losengeours full of envy.
No good man loves her company.
Richesse a robe of purple on had,
Ne trow not that I lie or mad:
For in this world is none it liche,
Ne by a thousand deal so rich,
Ne none so fair, for it full well,
With Orfreis laid was every dele,
And purtraid in the ribanings
Of Dukes stories, and of Kings,
And with a bend of gold tassiled,
And knops fine of gold amiled:
About her neck of gentle entaile
Was shet the rich Cheuesaile,
In which there was full great plente
Of stones clear, and fair to se.
Richesse a girdle had upon
The bokell of it was of ston:
Of virtue great, and mokell of might:
For who so bare the stone so bright,
Of venim durst him nothing doubt
While he the stone had him about:
That stone was greatly for to love,
And till a rich man's behoue,
Worth all the gold in Rome and Frise:
The Mourdant wrought in noble gise
Was of a stone full precious,
That was so fine and virtuous,
That whole a man it couth make
Of palsy, and of toothake,
And yet the stone had such a grace,
That he was seker in every place
All thilke day not blind to been,
That fasting might that stone seen:
The bars were of gold full fine,
Upon a tissue of Sattine
Full heavy, great, and nothing light,
In eueriche was a besaunt wight.
Upon the tresses of Richesse
Was set a circle of noblesse
Of brend gold, that full light shone,
So fair trow I was never none:
But he were cunning for the nones,
That could devise all the stones
That in that circle shown clear,
It is a wonder thing to here:
For no man could preise or guess
Of hem the value or richesse,
Rubies there were, Saphirs, Ragounces,
And Emeraudes, more than two ounces.
But all before full subtly
A fine Carbuncle set saw I,
The stone so clear was and so bright,
That all so soon as it was night,
Men might seen to go for need
A mile or two, in length and bread.
Such light sprang out of the stone,
That Richesse wonder bright shone
Both her head, and all her face,
And eke about her all the place.
Dame Richesse on her hond began led
A young man full of semely head,
That she best loved of any thing,
His lust was much in housholding:
In clothing was he full fetise,
And loved well to have horse of prise,
He wend to have reproved be
Of theft or murder, if that he
Had in his stable an hacknay,
And therefore he desired aye
To been acquainted with Richesse,
For all his purpose as I guess,
Was for to make great dispense,
Withouten warning or defense:
And Richesse might it well sustain,
And her dispences well maintain,
And him always such plenty send
Of gold and silver for to spend
Without lacking or daungere,
As it were pourde in a garnere.
And after on the dance went
Largess, that set all her intent
For to ben honorable and free,
Of Alexanders kin was she:
Her most joy was ywis,
When that she yafe: and said, have this.
Not Avarice the foul caitife
Was half to gripe so ententife
As Largess, is, to give and spend,
And God always ynowe her send,
So that the more she yaue away,
The more iwis she had always.
Great loos has Largess, and great prise,
For both wise folk and unwise
Were wholly to her bandon brought,
So well with yefts has she wrought.
And if she had an enemy,
I trow that she couth craftily
Make him full soon her friend to be
So large of yefts, and wise was she,
Therefore she stood in love and grace
Of rich and poor in every place.
* A full great fool he is ywis,
That both rich and poor, and niggard is.
A Lord may have no manner vice,
* That greeueth more than Avarice.
For niggard never with strength of hand
May win him great lordship or land:
For friends all too few has he
To done his will performed be:
* And who so woll have friends here,
He may not hold his treasure dear.
For by ensample tell I this,
Right as an Adamant ywis
Can drawn to him subtelly
The iron that is laid thereby,
So draws folks hearts ywis
Silver and gold that yeuen is.
Largess had on a robe fresh
Of rich purpure Sarlinish:
Well formed was her face and clear,
And opened had she her colere,
For she right there had in present
Unto a Lady made present
Of a gold brooch, full well wrought,
And certes it missate her naught:
For through her smock wrought with silk,
The flesh was seen as white as milk:
Largess, that worthy was and wise,
Held by the hond a knight of prise,
Was sibbe to Arthour of Breteigne,
And that was he that bare the enseigne
Of worship, and the Gousfaucoun:
And yet he is of such renoun,
That men of him say fair things
Before Barons, Earls, and Rings.
This knight was commen all newly
Fro tourneying fast by,
There had he done great chivalry
Through his virtue and his maisirie,
And for the love of his lemman
He cast down many a doughty man.
And next him daunced dame Fraunchise,
Arrayed in full noble gise:
She has not broune ne dunne of hew,
But white as snow ifallen new:
Her nose was wrought at point devise,
For it was gentle and tretise,
With eyes glad, and brows bent,
Her hair down to her heels went,
And she was simple as dove on tree,
Full debonaire of heart was she.
She durst neither say ne do,
But that, that her longs to:
And if a man were in distress,
And for her love in heaviness,
Her heart would have full great pitee
She was so amiable and free:
For were a man for her bestad.
She would ben right sore adrad,
That she did ouergreat outrage,
But she him help his harm taswage,
Her thought it all a villainy,
And she had on a suckeny,
That not of hemp herdes was,
So fair was none in all Arras,
Lord it was riddled fetisly,
There nas not a point truly
That it nas in his right assise
Full well yclothed was Fraunchise,
For there nis no cloth sits bette
On damsel, than does rokette:
A woman well more fetise is
In rokette, than in cote ywis,
The white rokette riddeled fair,
Betokens, that full debonaire
And sweet was she that it bear.
By her daunced a Bachelere,
I cannot tellen you what he hight,
But fair he was, and of good height,
All had he ben, I say no more,
The lords son of Windsore.
And next that daunced Courtesy,
That preised was of low and hie,
For neither proud ne fool was she:
She for to dance called me,
I pray God give her good grace,
For when I came first into the place,
She nas not nice, ne outrageous,
But wise and ware, and virtuous,
Of fair speech, and fair answer,
Was never wight missaid of her:
She bare no rancour to no wight,
Clear broune she was, and thereto bright
Of face and body auenaunt
I wot no lady so pleasant,
She were worthy for to been
An Empress or crowned Queen.
And by her went a knight dancing
That worthy was and well speaking,
And full well coud he done honor:
The knight was fair and stiff in stour,
And in armure a seemly man,
And well beloved of his lemman,
Fair Idleness then saw I,
That always was me fast by,
Of her have I without fail
Cold you the shape and apparaile:
For (as I said) Lo, that was she
That did to me so great bounte.
She the gate of that gardin
Undid, and let me passen in,
And after daunced as I guess.
And she fulfilled of lustiness,
That nas not yet xii year of age,
With heart wild, and thought volage.
Nice she was, but she ne meant
None harm ne slight in her intent,
But only lust and iolite,
* For young folk, well weten ye,
Have little thought but on her play.
Her lemman was beside always,
In such a gise, that he her kissed
At all times that him list,
That all the dance might it see,
They make no force of priuetee:
For who so spoke of hem evil or well,
They were ashamed never adele,
But men might seen hem kiss there,
As it two young doves were,
For young was thilke Bachelere,
Of beauty wot I non his pere,
And he was right of such an age,
As Youth his lefe, and such courage.
The lusty folk that daunced there,
And also other that with him were
That weren all of her meinee
Full hend folk, wise, and free,
And folk of fair port truly,
There were all comenly.
When I had seen the countenaunces
Of hem that ladden thus these daunces,
Then had I will to go and see
The garden that so liked me,
And looken on these fair Laureres,
On Pine trees, Cedrres, and Olmeres,
The daunces then ended were,
For many of hem that daunced there,
Were with her loves went away
Under the trees to have her play.
A Lord they lived lustely,
A great fool were he sikerly,
That nold his thanks such life led:
For this dare I saine out of dread,
That who so might so well fare,
For better life durst him not care,
For there nis so good paradise,
As to have a love at his devise:
Out of that place went I tho,
And in that garden began I go,
Playing along full merely.
The God of Love full hastily
Unto him Sweet Looking clept,
No longer would he that she kept
His how of gold, that shone so bright.
He had him bent anon right,
And he full soon set an end,
And at a braide he began it bend,
And took him of his arrows five,
Full sharp and ready for to drive.
Now God that sits in majesty
Fro deadly wounds he keep me,
If so be that he had me shete,
For if I with his arrow mete,
It had me grieved sore ywis,
But I that nothing wist of this,
Went up and down full many a way,
And he me followed fast always,
But no where would I rest me,
Till I had in all the garden be.
THe Garden was by measuring
Right even and square in compassing,
It as long was as it was large,
Of fruit had every tree his charge,
But it were any hidous tree
Of which there were two or three.
There were, and that wot I full well,
Of Pomgranettes a full great deal,
That is a fruit full well to like,
Namely to folk when they ben sike:
And trees there were great foison,
That baren nuts in her season,
Such as men nutmegs call,
That swote of savor been withal,
And Almandres great plentee,
Figs, and many a Date tree
There weren, if men had need,
Through the Gardin in length and bread.
There was eke wexing many a spice,
As Clowe, Gilofre, and Licorice,
Gingere, and Grein de Paris,
Canell, and Setewale of pris,
And many a spice delitable,
To eaten when men rise fro table.
And many homely trees there were,
That Peaches, Coins, and Apples bear,
Medlers, Plommes, Peers, Thesteinis,
Cherise, of which many one feign is,
Nuts, Aleis, and Bolas,
That for to seen it was solas,
With many high Laurer and Pine,
Was renged clean all that gardine,
With Cipres, and with Oliueris,
Of which that nigh no plenty here is.
There were Elmes great and strong,
Maples, Ash, Oak, Alps, Planes long,
Fine Ewe, Popler, and Lindes fair,
And other trees full many a pair.
What should I tell you more of it?
There were so many trees yet,
That I should all encombred be,
Cre I had reckoned every tree.
These trees were set that I devise,
One from another in assise
Five fadome or six, I trow so,
But they were high and great also:
And for to keep out well the Sun,
The croppes were so thick irunne,
And every branch in other knitte,
And full of green leaves sit,
That Sun might there none descend,
Least the tender grasses shend.
There might men Does and Roes isee,
And of Squirrels full great plentee,
From bough to bough always leping,
Connis there were also playing,
That comen out of her clapers
Of sundry colors and manners,
And maden many a tourneying
Upon the fresh grasie springing.
In places saw I wels there,
In which there no frogs were,
And fair in shadow was every well
But I ne can the number tell
Of stremis small, that by devise
Mirth had done come through condise,
Of which the water in renning
Began make a noise full liking.
About the brinkes of these wels,
And by the streams over all else
Sprang up the grass, as thick iset
And soft as any velvet,
On which men might his lemman ley,
As on a featherbed to pley,
For the earth was full soft and sweet:
Through moisture of the well wete
Sprung up the sote green gras,
As fair, as thick, as mister was.
But much amended it the place,
That therth was of such a grace
That it of flowers has plente,
That both in summer and winter be.
There sprang the violet all new,
And fresh peruinke rich of hew,
And flowers yellow, white, and read,
Such plenty grew there never in mede:
Full gay was all the ground and queint,
And poudred, as men had it peint,
With many a fresh and sundry flour,
That casten up full good savor.
I woll not long hold you in fable
Of all this garden dilectable,
I mote my tongue stinten need,
For I ne may withouten dread
Naught tellen you the beauty all,
Ne half the bounty therewithal.
I went on right hond and on left
About the place, it was not left
Till I had all the garden been
In the esters that men might seen.
And thus while I went in my play,
The God of Love me followed aye,
Right as an Hunter can abide
The beast, till he sees his tide
To shooten at goodness to the dear,
When that him needs go no near.
And so befell, I rested me
Besides a well under a tree,
Which tree in France men call a Pine,
But since the time of king Pepine
Ne grew there tree in man's sight
So fair, ne so well woxe in hight,
In all that yard so high was none.
And springing in a marble stone
Had nature set, the sooth to tell,
Under that Pine tree a well,
And on the border all without
Was written in the stone about
Letters small, that saiden thus,
Here starfe the fair Narcissus.
Narcissus was a bachelere,
That love had caught in his daungere,
And in his net began him so strain,
And did him so to weep and plain,
That need him must his life forgo:
For a fair lady that hight Echo,
Him loved over any creature,
And began for him such pain endure,
That on a time she him told,
That if he her louen nolde,
That her behooved needs die,
There lay none other remedy.
But nathelesse, for his beauty
So fierce and dangerous was he
That he nolde graunten her asking,
For weeping, ne for fair praying.
And when she heard him werne her so,
She had in heart so great woe,
And took it in so great despite,
That she without more respite
Was dead anon: but ere she deide,
Full pitously to God she preide,
That proud hearted Narcissus,
That was in love so dangerous,
Might on a day ben hampered so
For love, and ben so hot for woe,
That never he might to joy attain:
Then should he feel in very vain
What sorrow true lovers maken,
That been so villainously forsaken.
THis prayer was but reasonable,
Therefore God held it ferme and stable:
For Narcissus shortly to tell,
By adventure came to that well
To rest him in the shaddowing
A day, when he came from hunting.
This Narcissus had suffered pains
For renning all day in the plains,
And was for thurst in great distress
Of heart, and of his weariness,
That had his breath almost benomen.
When he was to that well icomen,
That shaddowed was with branches grene,
He thought of thilke water shene
To drink and fresh him well withal,
And down on knees he began to fall,
And forth his neck and head outstraught
To drink of that well a draught:
And in the water anon was seen
His nose, his mouth, his even shene,
And he thereof was all abashed,
His own shadow had him betrashed,
For well wend he the form see
Of a child of great beautee,
Well couth love him wreke tho
Of daungere and of pride also
That Narcissus sometime him bear,
He quite him well his guerdon there,
For he mused so in the well
That shortly the sooth to tell,
He loved his own shadow so,
That at last he starfe for woe:
For when he saw that he his will
Might in no manner way fulfill,
And that he was so fast caught
That he him couth comfort naught,
He lost his wit right in that place
And deid within a little space,
And thus his warison he took
For the lady that he forsook.
Ladies I pray ensample takes,
Ye that against your love mistaketh:
For if of her death be you to wite,
God can full well your wile quite.
When that this letter of which I tell,
Had taught me that it was the well
Of Narcissus in his beauty,
I began anon withdraw me,
When it fell in my remembrance,
That him betide such mischaunce:
But at the last then thought I,
That scathlesse, full sikerly,
I might unto the well go,
Whereof shull I abashen so.
Unto the well then went I me,
And down I louted for to see
The clear water in the stone,
And eke the gravel, which that shone
Down in the bottom, as silver fine:
For of the well, this is the fine,
In world is none so clear of hew,
The water is ever fresh and new
That welmeth up with waves bright
The mountenaunce of two finger hight:
About it is grass springing,
For moist so thick and well liking,
That it ne may in winter die,
No more than may the sea be dry.
Down at the bottom set saw I
Two crystal stones craftily
In thilke fresh and fair well:
But o thing soothly dare I tell,
That ye woll hold a great marvel
When it is told withouten fail:
For when the sun clear in sight
Cast in that well his beams bright,
And that the heat descended is,
Then takes the Crystal stone iwis,
Again the sun an hundred hewis,
Blew, yellow, and red, that fresh and new is:
Yet has the marvelous Crystal
Such strength, that the place over all,
Both foul and tree, and leaves green,
And all the yerd in it is see ne:
And for to done you to understand,
To make ensample woll I fond:
Right as a mirror openly
Shows all thing that stondeth thereby,
As well the color as the figure,
Withouten any couerture:
Right so the Crystal stone shining,
Withouten any deceiving,
The entrees of the yerd accuses
To him that in the water museth:
For ever in which half that ye be,
Ye may well half the garden see:
And if he turn, he may right well
Seen the remnaunt every dele:
For there is none so little thing
So hid ne closed with shitting,
That it ne is seen, as though it were
Painted is the Crystal there.
This is the mirror perillus,
In which the proud Narcissus
Sey all his fair face bright,
That made him since to lie upright:
For who so look in that mirror,
There may nothing ben his succor
That he ne shall there see something
That shall him led into laughing:
Full many a worthy man has it
Yblent, for folk of greatest wit
Ben soon caught here and waited,
Withouten respite ben they baited:
Here comes to folk of new rage,
Here changes many wight courage
Here lithe no read ne with thereto,
For Venus son, dan Cupido,
Has sown there of love the sede,
That help ne lithe there none, ne read,
So cercleth it the well about:
His ginnes has he set without
Right for to catch in his panters
These Damsels and Bachelors.
Love will none other bird catch,
Though he set either net or latch:
And for the seed that here was sown,
This well is cleped, as well is known,
The well of Love, of very right,
Of which there has full many wight
Spoken in books diversely:
But they shull never so verily
Description of the well here,
Ne eke the sooth of this matere,
As ye shull, when I have undo
The craft that her belongs to.
Always me liked for to dwell,
To seen the Crystal in the well,
That showed me full openly
A thousand things fast by,
But I may say in sorry hour
Stood I to looken or to pour:
For sithen I sore sighed,
That Mirror has me now entriked:
But had I first known in my wit
The virtue and strengthes of it,
I nolde not have mused there,
Me had bette ben elsewhere,
For in the snare I fell anon,
That had bitreshed many one.
In thilke Mirror saw I tho,
Among a thousand things mo,
A roser charged full of rosis,
That with an hedge about enclosis,
Tho had I such lust and envy,
That for Paris ne for Pauie,
Nolde I have left to gone and see,
There greatest heap of Roses be.
When I was with that rage hent,
That caught has many a man and shent,
Toward the Roser began I go,
And when I was not far therefro,
The sauer of the roses swote
Me mote right to the heart rote,
As I had all enbaumed me:
And if I ne had endouted me
To have been hated or assailed,
My thanks woll I not have failed
To pull a rose of all that rout
To bear in mine hond about,
And smellen to it where I went,
But ever I dread me to repent,
And least it greved or forthought
The lord that thilke gardin wrought
Of roses there were great wone,
So fair were never in Rone:
Of knops close, some saw I there,
And some well better woxen were,
And some there been of other moison,
That drowe nigh to her season,
And sped hem fast for to spread,
I love well such roses red:
For broad roses, and open also,
Ben passed in a day or two,
But knoppes will fresh be
Two days at least, or else three.
The knoppes greatly liked me,
For fairer may there no man see:
Who so might have one of all,
It ought him been full lefe withal:
Might I garlond of hem getten,
For no richesse I would it letten.
Amongs the knoppes I chese one
So fair, that of the remnaunt none
Ne preise I half so well as it,
When I avise in my wit,
For it so well was enlumined
With color red, as well fined
As nature couth it make fair,
And it has leaves well four pair,
That kind has set through his knowing
About the red roses springing,
The stalk was as rishe right,
And thereon stood the knoppe upright,
That it ne bowed upon no side,
The swore smell sprung so wide,
That it died all the place about.
When I had smelled the savor swote,
No will had I fro thence yet go,
But somedele nere it went I tho
To take it, but mine hond for dread
Ne durst I to the Rose bid,
For thistles sharp of many manners,
Nettles, thorns, and hooked briers,
For much they distourbled me,
For sore I drad to harmed be.
THe God of Love, with bow bent,
That all day set had his talent
To pursue and to spien me,
Was stonding by a fig tree,
And when he saw how that I
Had chosen so ententisely
The bothum more unto me pey,
Than any other that I sey:
He took an arrow full sharply whet,
And in his bow when it was set,
He straight up to his ear drough
The strong bow, that was so tough,
And shot at me so wonder smert,
That through mine eye unto mine heart
The takell sinote, and deep it went:
And therewithal such cold me hent,
That under clothes warm and soft,
Sithen that day I have chivered often.
When I was hurt thus in stound,
I fell down plat unto the ground,
Mine heart failed and fainted aye,
And long time in swoune I lay:
But when I came out of swouning,
And had my wit, and my feeling.
I was all mate, and wend full well
Of blood, have lorne a full great deal,
But certes the arrow that in me stood,
Of me ne drew no drop of blood,
For why, I found my wounds all drey.
Then took I with mine honds twey
The arrow, and full fast it out plight,
And in the pulling sore I sight,
So at the last the shaft of tree
I drough out, with the feathers three,
But yet the hooked head ywis,
The which Beauty called is,
Began so deep in mine heart pace,
That I it might not arace,
But in mine heart still it stood,
All bled I not a drop of blood:
I was both anguishous and trouble,
For the peril that I saw double,
I nist what to say or do,
Ne get a leach my wounds to,
For neither through grass ne rote,
Ne had I help of hope ne bote.
But to the bothum evermo
Mine heart drew, for all my woe,
My thought was in none other thing,
For had it been in my keeping,
It would have brought my life again,
For certes evenly, I dare well same,
The sight only, and the savor,
Alegged much of my langour.
Then began I for to draw me
Toward the bothum fair to see,
And love had get him in his throw
Another arrowe into his bow,
And for to shoot began him dress,
The arrows name was Simplesse,
And when that Love began nigh me nere,
He drowe it up withouten were,
And shot at me with all his might,
So that this arrow anon right
Throughout eigh as it was found,
Into mine heart has made a wound.
Then I anon did all my craft
For to drawn out the shaft,
And therewithal I sighed eft,
But in mine heart the head was left,
Which aye increased my desire,
Unto the bothum drow I nere,
And evermo that me was woe
The more desire had I to go
Unto the Roser, where that grew
The fresh bothum, so bright of hew,
Better me were to have letten be,
But it behoved need me
To done right as mine heart bad:
* For ever the body must be lad
After the heart, in well and woe,
Of force together they must go.
But never this archer would fine
To shoot at me with all his pine,
And for to make me to him mete.
The third arrow he began to shete,
When best his time he might epsy,
The which was named Courtesy,
Into mine heart he did avale,
A swoune I fell, both dead and pale,
Long time I lay, and stirred naught,
Till I abraied out of my thought.
And fast then I avised me
To draw out the shaft of tree,
But ever the head was lest behind
For ought I couth pull or wind,
So sore it sticked when I was hit,
That by no craft I might it flit,
But anguishous and full of thought,
I felt such woe, my wound aye wrought,
That summoned me always to go
Toward the Rose, that pleased me so,
But I ne durst in no manner
Because the archer was so nere.
For evermore gladly as I read
* Brent child of fire has much dread.
And certes yet for all my pein,
Though that I sigh, yet arrows rein,
And ground quarrels, sharp of stele,
Ne for no pain that I might feel,
Yet might I not my self withhold
The fair Roser to behold,
For Love me yave such hardement
For to fulfill his commandment,
Upon my feet I rose up than
Feeble, as a forwounded man:
And forth to gone might I set,
And for the Archer nold I let,
Toward the Roser fast I drow
But thorns sharp, mo than ynow
There were, and also thistles thick,
And breres brimme for to prick,
That I ne might get grace
The rough thorns for to pace
To seen the Roses fresh of hew,
I must abide, though it me rue,
The hedge about so thick was,
That closed the Roses in compass.
But o thing liked me right well,
I was so nigh, I might feel
Of the bothum the swote odor,
And also see the fresh color,
And that right greatly liked me,
That I so nere might it see,
Such joy anon thereof had I,
That I forgot my malady,
To seen I had such delight,
Of sorrow and anger I was all quite,
And of my wounds that I had thore,
For nothing liken me might more,
Than dwellen by the Roser aye,
And thence never to pass away:
But when a while I had be their,
The God of Love, which all to share
Mine heart with his arrows kene,
Casts him to yeve me wounds grene,
He shot at me full hastily
An arrow named Company,
The which takell is full able
To make these Ladies merciable,
Then I anon began chaungen hew
For greevaunce of my wound new,
That I again fell in swouning,
And sighed sore in complaining.
Sore I complained that my sore
On me began greven more and more,
I had none hope of Allegiaunce,
So nigh I drow to disperaunce,
I rought of death, ne of life,
Whether that love would me drife,
If me a martyr would he make,
I might his power not forsake:
And while for anger thus I woke,
The God of Love an arrow took,
Full sharp it was and pugnaunt,
And it was called Fair semblaunt,
The which in no wise would consent,
That any lover him repent
To serve his love with heart and all,
For any peril that may befall.
But thought his arrow was kene ground,
As any rasour that is found,
To cut and kerve at the point,
The God of Love it had anoint
With a precious ointment,
Somedele to yeve allegement
Upon the wounds that he hade
Through the body in my heart made
To help her sores, and to cure,
And that they may the bette endure:
But yet this arrow, without more,
Made in mine heart a large sore,
That in full great pain I abode,
But aye the ointment went abroad
Throughout my wounds large and wide,
It sprede about in every side:
Through whose virtue and whose might,
Mine heart joyful was and light.
I had been dead and all to shent
But for the precious ointment:
The shaft I drow out of the arrow,
Looking for woe right wonder narrow
But the head, which made me smart,
Left behind in mine heart
With other four, I dare well say,
That never woll be take away,
But the ointment halpe me well,
And yet such sorrow did I feel,
That all day I changed hew
Of my wounds fresh and new,
As men might see in my visage,
The arrows were so full of rage,
So variaunt of diversitee,
That men in everiche might see
Both great annoy and eke sweetness,
And joy meint with bitterness:
Now were they easy, now were they wood,
In hem I felt both harm and good,
Now sore without alleggement,
Now softing with ointment,
It softened here, and pricked there,
Thus ease and anger together were.
THe God of Love deliverly
Come lepande to me hastily,
And said to me in great yape,
Yield thee, for thou may not escape,
May no defense avail thee here:
Therefore I read make no daungere.
If thou wolt yield thee hastily,
Thou shall rather have mercy:
* He is a fool in sikernesse,
That with danger or stoutnesse
Rebelleth there that he should please,
In such folly is little ease.
Be meek, where thou must needs bow,
To strive again is not thy prowe:
Come at ones, and have ido,
For I woll that it be so,
Then yield thee here debonairly.
And I answered full humbly,
Gladly sit, at your bidding,
I woll me yield in all thing:
To your service I woll me take,
For God defend that I should make
Again your bidding resistance.
I woll not done so great offense,
For if I did, it were no skill,
Ye may do with me what ye will,
Save or spill, and also slo,
Fro you in no wise may I go,
My life, my death, is in your hond,
I may not last out of your bond,
Plain at your list I yield me,
Hoping in heart, that sometime ye
Comfort and ease shull me send:
Or else shortly, this is the end,
Withouten health I mote aye dure,
But if ye take me to your cure:
Comfort or health, how should I have,
Sith ye me hurt, but ye me save?
The health of Love mote be found,
Whereas they tooken first her wound:
And if ye list of me to make
Your prisoner, I woll it take
Of heart and will fully at gree,
Holy and plain I yield me
Without feining or feintise,
To be governed by your emprise:
Of you I hear so much prise,
I woll been whole at your devise
For to fulfill your liking
And repent for nothing,
Hoping to have yet in some tide
Mercy, of that I abide:
And with that covenant yield I me,
Anon down kneeling upon my knee,
Profering for to kiss his fete,
But for nothing he would me let.
And said, I love thee both and preise,
Sens that thine answer does me ese:
For thou answered so curtesly,
For now I wot well utterly,
That thou art gentle by thy speech:
For thou a man far would seech,
He should not finden in certain,
No such answer of no villain:
For such a word ne might naught
Issue out of a villains thought.
Thou shall not lesen of thy speech,
For thy helping woll I each,
And eke encreasen that I may:
But first I woll that thou obey
Fully for thine avauntage
Anon to do me here homage:
And sith kiss thou shall my mouth,
Which to no villain was never couth
For to approach it, ne for to touch,
For saufe of cherles I ne vouch
That they shall never neigh it nere
For curteis, and of fair manner,
Well taught, and full of gentleness
He must be, that shall me kiss,
And also of full high Fraunchise,
That shall attain to that emprise.
And first of o thing warn I thee,
That pain and great adversitee
He mote endure, and eke travail
That shall me serve, without fail,
But there against thee to comfort,
And with thy service to disport,
Thou may full glad and joyful be,
So good a master to have as me,
And Lord of so high renoune,
I bear of love the Gonfenoune,
Of Courtesy the banere,
For I am of the self manner,
Gentle, courteous, meek and free,
That who ever ententive be,
Me to honor, dout, and serve:
And also that he him observe
Fro trespass and fro villainy,
And him govern in courtesy,
With will and entention,
For when he first in my prison
Is caught, then must he utterly,
Fro thenceforth full busily,
Cast him gentle for to be,
If he desire help of me.
Anon without more delay,
Withouten danger or affray,
I become his man anon,
And gave him thanks many a one,
And kneled down with honds joint,
And made it in my port full queint:
The joy went to my heart rote,
When I had kissed his mouth so swote,
I had such mixth and such liking,
It cured me of languishing.
He asked of me then hostages,
I have he said taken feel homages
Of one and other, where I have been,
Distreined often, withouten wene,
These felons full of falsite,
Have many sithes beguiled me,
And through her falshed her lust achieved,
Whereof I repent, and am agreeved,
And I hem get in my daungere,
Her falshed shall they bie full dear,
But for I love thee, I say thee plain,
I woll of thee be more certain,
For thee sore I woll now bind,
That thou away ne shall not wind,
For to denien thy covenant,
Or done that is not avenaunt,
That thou were false, it were great ruth,
Since thou seem so full of truth.
Sir, if thee list to understand,
I marvel thee asking this demand,
For why or wherefore should ye,
Hostages or borowes ask of me,
Or any other sikernesse,
Since ye wot in sothfastnesse,
That ye me have surprised so,
And hole mine heart, taken me fro,
That it woll do for me nothing,
But if it be at your bidding,
Mine heart is yours, and mine right naught
As it behooves, in deed and thought,
Ready in all to work your will,
Whether so turn to good or ill,
So sore it lusts you to please,
No man thereof may you disease,
Ye have thereon set such justice,
That it is werried in many wise,
And if ye doubt it nolde obaie,
Ye may thereof do make a kaie,
And hold it with you for hostage.
Now certes this is none outrage,
(Quoth Love) and fully accord,
For of the body he is full Lord
That has the heart in his treasore,
Outrage it were to asken more.
THen of his aumener he drough,
A little keie fetise enough,
Which was of gold polished clear
And said to me, with this keye here,
Thine heart to me now woll I shet,
For all my joyful look and knet,
I bind under this little kay,
That no wight may carry away.
This keye is full of great post,
With which anon he touched me,
Under the side full softely,
That he mine heart suddenly,
Without any had speered,
That yet right naught it has me deered.
When he had done his will all out,
And I had put him out of doubt,
Sir I said, I have right great will,
Your lust and pleasure to fulfill,
Look ye my service take at gree,
By thilke faith ye owe to me,
I say naught for recreaundise,
For I naught doubt of your service.
* But the servaunt travaileth in vain,
That for to serven does his pain
Unto that Lord, which in no wise,
Conne him no thank for his service.
LOve said, dismay thee naught,
Since thou for succor have me sought,
In thank thy service woll I take,
And high of degree I woll thee make,
If wickedness ne hinder thee,
But (as I hope) it shall nouht be,
* To worship no wight by aventure,
May come, but he pain endure.
Abide and suffer thy distress,
That hurts now, it shall be less.
I wot my self what may thee save,
What medicine thou would have.
And if thy truth to me thou keep,
I shall unto thine helping eke,
To cure thy wounds and make hem clean,
Where so they be old or grene,
Thou shall be helped at words few,
For certainly thou shall well show,
Where that thou servest with good will,
For to accomplishen and fulfill
My commandments day and night,
Which I to lovers yeve of right.
AH sir, for Gods love (said I)
Er ye pass hence enterntifely,
Your commandments to me ye say,
And I shall keep hem if I may,
For hem to keepen is all my thought:
And if so be I wot hem naught,
Then may I unwittingly,
Wherefore I pray you entierly,
With all mine heart, me to lere,
That I trespace in no manner.
The God of Love then charged me
Anon, as ye shall here and see,
Word by word, by right emprise,
So as the Romaunt shall devise.
The master leseth his time to lere,
When the Disciple woll not here,
* It is but vain on him to swinke,
That on his learning woll not think,
Who so lust love, let him entend,
For now the Romance begins to amend.
Now is good to hear in fay,
If any be that can it say,
And point it as the reason is
Set for other gate iwis,
It shall not well in all thing,
Be brought to good understanding,
* For a Reader that points ill,
A good sentence may often spill:
The book is good at the ending,
Made of new and lusty thing:
For who so woll the ending here,
The craft of love he shall now lere,
If that he woll so long abide,
Till I this Romance may unhide,
And undo the signifiaunce
Of this dream, into Romaunce,
The soothfastnesse that now is hid,
Without coverture shall be kid,
When I undoen have this dreaming,
Wherein no word is of leasing.
Villainy at the beginning,
I woll say love over all thing
Thou leave, if thou wolt be
False, and trespace against me,
I curse and blame generally
All them that loven villainy,
* For villainy makes villeine
* And by his deeds a chorle is seine.
These villains ar ne without pity,
Friendship, love, and all bounty.
I nill receive unto my servise
Hem that been villains of emprise.
But understond in thine intent,
That this is not mine entendement,
To clepe no wight in no ages
Only gentle for his linages:
* But who so is virtuous,
And in his port not outrageous,
When such one thou see thee beforne,
Though he be not gentle borne,
Thou may well seine this in sooth,
That he is gentle, because he does
As longs to a gentleman:
Of hem none other deem I can,
* For certainly withouten dreede,
A churl is demed by his deed,
Of hye or low, as ye may see,
Or of what kindred that he be.
Ne say naught for none evil will,
Thing that is to holden still,
It is no worship to missaie,
Thou may ensample take of Kaie,
That was sometime for missayeng,
Hated both of old and yeng,
As far as Gawein the worthy,
Was praised for his courtesy,
Kaie was hated, for he was fell,
Of word dispitous and cruel,
Wherefore be wise and acqueintable,
Goodly of word, and reasonable:
Both to less and eke to mare,
And when thou come there men are,
Look that thou have in custom ay,
First to salve hem if thou may:
And if it fall, that of hem sum
Salve the first, be not domme,
But quite him courtesly anon
Without abiding, ere they gone.
* For nothing eke thy tongue apply,
To speak words of ribauldrie,
To villain speech in no degree,
Let never thy lip unbounden be:
* For I naught hold him in good faith
Curteis, that foul words says:
And all women serve and preise,
And to thy power her honor reise:
And if that any missayere,
Despise women, that thou may here,
Blame him, and bid him hold him still,
And set thy might and all thy will
Women and ladies for to please,
And to do thing that may hem ease,
That they ever speak good of thee,
For so thou may best praised be.
Look fro pride thou keep thee well,
For thou may both perceive and feel,
* That pride is both folly and sin,
And he that pride has him within,
Ne may his heart in no wise,
Meken ne souplen to service:
For pride is found in every part,
Contrary unto Loves art:
And he that loves truly,
Should him contain iollily,
Without pride in sundry wise,
And him disguisen in queintise,
For queint array, without dread,
Is nothing proud, who takes head,
* For fresh array, as men may see,
Without pride may often be.
* Maintain thy self after thy rent,
Of robe and eke of garment,
For many since fair clothing,
A man amendeth in much thing.
And look always that they be shape,
(What garment that thou shall make)
Of him that can best do,
With all that partaineth thereto,
Points and sleeves be well sittand,
Right and straight on the hand,
Of shone and boots, new and fair,
Look at the least you have a pair,
And that they sit so fetously,
That these rude may utterly
Marvel, since that they sit so plain,
How they come on or off again.
Wear straight gloves with aumere
Of silk: and always with good chere
Thou give, if thou have richesse,
And if thou have naught, spend the less.
* Always be merry, if thou may,
But wast not thy good always,
Have hatte of flowers fresh as May,
Chapelet of Roses of Witsunday:
For such arrie ne costneth but lite,
Thine hondes wash, thy teeth make white,
And let no filth upon thee be,
Thy nails black, if thou may see,
Void it away deliuerly,
And kembe thine head right iollily:
Farce not thy visage in no wise,
For that of love is not themprise,
* For love does haten, as I find,
A beauty that comes not of kind,
Always in heart I read thee,
Glad and merry for to be,
* And be as joyful as thou can,
Love has no joy of sorrowful man,
That evil is full of courtesy,
That knows in his malady,
* For ever of love the sickness
Is meint with sweet and bitterness,
The sore of love is maruailous,
For now the lover is joyous,
Now can he plain, now can he groan,
Now can he singen, now maken moan,
To day he plaineth for heaviness,
To morrow he plaineth for iolynesse,
The life of love is full contrary,
Which stoundemeale can often vary,
But if thou can mirthes make,
That men in gre woll gladly take,
Do it goodly I command thee,
* For men should wheresoever they be,
Do thing that hem fitting is,
For thereof comes good loos and pris.
Whereof that thou be virtuous,
Ne be not strange ne dangerous:
For if that thou good rider be,
Prick gladly that men may see,
An arms also if thou conne,
Pursue till thou a name have won:
And if thy voice be fair and clear,
Thou shall maken no great daungere.
When to sing they goodly pray,
It is thy worship for to obey:
Also to you it longs aye,
To Harp and Gitterne, dance and play,
For if he can well foot and dance,
It may him greatly do auaunce,
Among eke for thy Lady sake,
Songs and complaints that thou make,
For that woll meuen in her heart,
When they readen of thy smart.
Look that no man for scarce thee hold,
For that may grieve thee manifold:
* Reason woll that a lover be,
In his yeftes more large and free
Than churles that been not of loving,
For who thereof can any thing,
He shall be lefe aie for to give,
In lands lore who so woll leave,
For he that through a sudden sight,
Or for a kissing anon right,
Yaue hole his heart, in will and thought,
And to himself keeps right naught,
After this swift, it is good reason,
He give his good in abandon.
NOw woll I shortly here rehearse,
Of that I have said in verse,
All the sentence by and by,
In words few compendiously,
That thou the better may on hem think,
Whether so it be thou wake or wink,
* For the words little grieve,
A man to keep, when it is breeue.
* Who so with Love woll gone or ride
He mote be courteous, and void of pride,
Merry and full of jollite,
And of Largess a losed be.
First I join thee here in penance,
That ever without repentance,
Thou set thy thought in thy loving
To last without repenting,
And think upon thy mirthes sweet
That shall follow after when ye meet.
And for thou true to Love shall be,
I will and command thee,
That in one place thou set all hole
Thine heart, without halfen dole,
For treachery and sikernesse,
For I loved never doubleness:
* To many his heart that woll depart,
Euerich shall have but little part,
But of hem dread I me right naught,
That in one place sets his thought:
Therefore in o place it set,
And let it never thence flet:
For if thou yeuest it in lening,
I hold it but wretched thing:
Therefore give it whole and quite,
And thou shall have the more merit.
If it be lent then after sone,
The bounty and the thanks is done,
* But in Love, free yeuen thing
Requires a great guerdoning.
Give it in yeft all quite fully,
And make thy gift devonairly:
* For men that yeft hold more dear
That yeuen is with gladsome chere.
* That gift naught to praysen is
That man yeueth maugre his:
When thou have yeuen thine heart (as I
Have said) thee here openly:
Then adventures shull thee fall,
Which hard and heavy been withal:
For often when thou bethinkest thee
Of thy loving, where so thou be,
Fro folk thou must depart in hie,
That none perceive thy malady,
But hide thine harm thou must alone,
And go forth sole, and make thy moan:
Thou shall no while be in o state,
But whilom cold and whilom hate,
Now red as Rose, now yellow and fade,
Such sorrow I trow thou never hade:
Cotidien, ne quarteine,
It is not so full of peine,
For often times it shall fall,
In love among thy pains all,
That thou thy self all holy,
For yetten shall so utterly,
That many times thou shall be,
Still as an Image of tree,
Domme as a stone, without stirring
Of foot or hand, without speaking.
Then soon after all thy pain,
To memory shall thou come again,
A man abashed wonder sore,
And after sighen more and more:
For wit thou well withouten wene,
In such a state full often have been,
That have the evil of love assaide,
Where through thou art so dismaide.
AFter a thought shall take thee so,
That thy love is too far the fro:
Thou shall say (God) what may this be,
That I ne may my Lady see?
Mine heart alone is to her go,
And I abide all sole in woe,
Departed fro mine own thought,
And with mine eien se right naught.
Alas mine eyes seen I ne may,
My careful heart to convey,
Mine hearts guide, but they be,
I praise nothing what ever they se:
Shull they abide then, nay,
But gone and visiten without delay
That mine heart desires so
For certainly, but if they go.
A fool my self I may well hold,
When I ne se what mine heart would,
Wherefore I woll gone her to seen,
Or eased shall I never been,
But I have so tokenning.
Then go thou forth without dwelling,
But often thou faylest of thy desire,
Er thou may come her any nere,
And wastest in vain thy passage:
Then fallest thou in a new rage,
For want of sight thou ginnest murne,
And homeward pensive thou do return:
In great mischief then shall thou be,
For then again shall come to thee
Sighs and plaintes with new woe,
That no itching pricketh so:
Who wot it naught, he may go lere,
Of hem that buyen love so dear.
Nothing thine heart appeasen may,
That often thou wolt gone and assay,
If thou may seen by adventure
Thy lives joy, thine hearts cure,
So that by grace, if thou might
Attain of her to have a sight,
Then shall thou done none other deed,
But with that sight thine eyes feed:
That fair fresh when thou may see,
Thine heart shall so ravished be,
That never thou would thy thanks let
Ne remove, for to see that sweet:
The more thou see in sooth fastness,
The more thou covetest of that sweetness:
The more thine heart brenneth in fire,
The more thine heart is in desire.
For who considreth every dele,
It may be likened wonder well,
The pain of love unto a fere,
For evermore thou neighest nere,
Thought, or who so that it be,
For very sooth I tell it thee,
The hotter ever shall thou brenne,
As experience shall thee kenne,
Where so come in any cost,
* Who is next fire he brenneth most,
And yet forsooth for all thine heat,
Though thou for love swelt and sweat,
Ne for no thing thou felen may,
Thou shall not willen to pass away,
And though thou go, yet must thou need,
Think all day on her fair head,
Whom thou be held with so good will,
And hold thy self beguiled ill,
That thou ne had ne hardiment,
To show her ought of thine intent,
Thine heart full sore thou wolt despise,
And eke repreue of cowardice,
That thou so dull in every thing,
Were domme for dread, without speaking.
Thou shall eke think thou did folly,
That thou were here so fast by,
And durst not aventure thee to say
Some thing er thou came away,
For thou had no more won,
To speak of her when thou begone:
But yet she would for thy sake,
In arms goodly thee have take,
It should have be more worth to thee,
Than of treasour great plente.
Thus shall thou mourn and eke complain,
And yet encheson to gone again,
Unto thy walk, or to thy place,
Where thou beheld her fleshly face,
And never for false suspection,
Thou would find occasion,
For to gone unto her house,
So art thou then desirouse,
A sight of her for to have,
If thou thine honor might save,
Or any errand might make
Thider, for thy loves sake:
Full feign thou would, but for dreede
Thou go not, least that men take heed,
Wherefore I read in in thy going,
And also in thine again coming,
Thou be well ware that men ne wit,
Feine thee other cause than it,
To go that way, or fast bie,
* To heal well is no folly:
And if so be it hap thee,
That thou thy Love there may see,
In siker wise thou her salewe,
Wherewith thy color woll transmewe,
And eke thy blood shall all to quake,
Thy hew eke chaungen for her sake,
But word and wit, with chere full pale
Shull want for to tell thy tale,
And if thou may so far forth win,
That thou reason durst begin,
And would saine three things or mo,
Thou shall full scarcely saine the two,
Though thou bethink thee never so well,
Thou shall foryete yet somedele.
But if thou deal with treachery,
For false Lovers mow all foully
Sain what hem lust withouten dred,
They be so double in her falshed,
For they in heart can think o thing
And saine another, in her speaking,
And when thy speech is ended all,
Right thus to thee it shall befall:
If any word then come to mind,
That thou to say have left behind,
Then thou shall brenne in great martire,
For thou shall brenne as any fire,
This is the strife and eke the affraie,
And the battle that lasts aie:
This bargain, end may never take,
But if that she thy peace will make.
And when the night is commen anon,
A thousand angres shall come upon,
To bed as fast thou wolt thee dight.
There thou shall have but small delight,
For when thou wenest for to sleep,
So full of pain shall thou creep,
Stert in thy bed about full wide,
And turn full often on every side:
Now downward groffe, and now upright,
And wallow in woe the long night,
Thine arms shall thou sprede a bread,
As man in war were forwerede.
Then shall thee come a remembrance
Of her shape and her semblaunce,
Where to none other may be pere,
And wete thou well without were,
That thee shall see sometime that night,
That thou have her, that is so bright,
Naked between thine arms there,
All sooth fastness as though it were,
* Thou shall make Castles then in Spain,
And dream of joy, all but in vain,
And thee delighten of right naught.
While thou so siumbrest in that thought,
That is so sweet and delitable,
The which in sooth nis but a fable,
For it ne shall no while last,
Then shall thou sigh and weep fast,
And say dear God, what thing is this,
My dream is turned all amiss,
Which was full sweet and apparent:
But now I wake it is all shent,
Now yede this merry thought away,
Twenty times upon a day,
I would this thought would come again,
For it alleggeth well my pain,
It makes me full of joyful thought,
It sleeth me that it lasts naught,
Ah Lord, why nill ye me succor?
The joy I trow that I langour,
The death I would me should sio,
While I lie in her arms two,
Mine harm is hard withouten wene,
My great unease full often I mean.
But would Love do so I might
Have fully joy of her so bright,
My pain were quit me richly,
Alas too great a thing ask I:
It is but folly, and wrong wening,
To ask so outrageous a thing,
* And who so asks follily,
He mote be warned hastily,
And I ne wot what I may say,
I am so far out of the way,
For I would have full great liking,
And full great joy of less thing,
For would she of her gentleness,
Withouten more, me ones kesse,
It were to me a great guerdon,
Release of all my passion:
But it is hard to come thereto,
All is but folly that I do,
So high I have mine heart set,
Where I may no comfort get,
I wot not where I say well or naught,
But this I wot well in my thought,
That it were bette of her alone
For to slint my woe and moan,
A look on her I cast goodly,
That for to have all utterly,
Of another all hole the play,
Ah Lord, where I shall bide the day
That ever she shall my Lady be,
He is full cured, that may her see.
A God, when shall the dauning spring,
To leggen thus as an angry thing,
I have no joy thus here to ly,
When that my love is not me by,
* I man to lain has great disease,
Which may not sleep ne rest in ease,
I would it dawed, and were now day,
And that the night were went away,
For were it day, I would up rise,
Ah slow sun, show thine enprise,
Speed thee to spread thy beams bright,
And chase the darkness of the night,
To put away the stoundes strong,
Which in me lasten all too long.
The night shall thou continue so,
Without rest, in pain and woe,
If ever thou knew of love distress,
Thou shall mow learn in that sickness,
And thus enduring shall thou lie
And rise on morrow up earlye,
Out of thy bed, and harneis thee
Er ever dawning thou may see:
All privily then shall thou gone,
What whider it be thy self alone,
For rain, or hail, for snow, for slete,
Theder she dwells that is so sweet,
The which may fall a sleep be,
And thinks but little upon thee.
Then shall thou go, full foul aferde,
Look if the gate be unsperde,
And wait without in woe and pain,
Full evil a cold in wind and rain:
Then shall thou go the door before,
If thou may find any shore,
Or hole, or reft, what ever it were,
Then shall thou stoop, and lay to ear
If they within a sleep be,
I mean all save thy Lady free,
Whom waking if thou may aspie,
Go put thy self in jeopardie,
To ask grace, and thee bimene,
That she may wete without wene,
That thou night no rest have had,
So sore for her thou were bestad.
* Women well ought pity to take
Of hem that sorrowen for her sake.
And look for love of that relike,
That thou think none other like,
For when thou have so great anney,
Shall kiss thee er thou go awey,
And hold that in full great deinte,
And for that no man shall thee see
Before the house, ne in the way,
Look thou be gone again er day.
Such coming, and such going,
Such heaviness, and such walking,
Makes lovers withouten wene,
Under her clothes pale and lene,
* For Love leaves color ne clearness,
Who loves true has no fatness,
Thou shall well by thy self see
That thou must needs assaied be:
For men that shape hem other way
Falsely her ladies for to betray,
It is no wonder though they be fat,
With false oaths her loves they gatte,
For often I see such loengeours
Fatter than Abbots or Priours.
Yet with o thing I thee charge,
That is to say, that thou be large
Unto the maid, that her does serve,
So best her thank thou shall deserve.
Give her gifts, and get her grace,
For so thou may thank purchase,
That she thee worthy hold and free,
Thy Lady, and all that may thee see.
Also her servaunts worship aie,
And please as much as thou may,
Great good through hem may come to thee,
Because with her they been prive:
They shall her tell how they thee fand
Courteous and wise, and well do and,
And she shall preise well thee more.
Look out of land thou be not fore,
And if such cause thou have, that thee
Behooves to gone out of country,
Leave hole thine heart in hostage,
Till thou again make thy passage,
Think long to see the sweet thing
That has thine heart in her keeping.
Now have I told thee, in what wise
A Lover shall do me servise,
Do it then, if thou wolt have
The mede that thou after crave.
WHen Love all this had boden me,
I said him: sir how may it be
That Lovers may in such manner,
Endure the pain ye have said here?
I marvel me wonder fast,
How any man may live or last
In such pain, and such brenning,
In sorrow and thought, and such sighing,
Aie vnreleased woe to make,
Whether so it be they sleep or wake,
In such annoy continually,
As help me God this marvel I
How man, but he were made of steel,
Might live a month, such pains to feel.
THe God of Love then said me,
Friend, bye the faith I owe to thee,
* May no man have good, but he it buy:
A man loves more tenderly
The thing that he has bought most dear.
For were thou well without were,
* In thank that thing is taken more,
For which a man has suffered sore:
Certes no woe ne may attain,
Unto the sore of Loves pain,
None evil thereto ne may amount,
No more than a man count
The drops that of the water be:
* For dry as well the great see
Thou might, as the harms tell
Of hem that with love dwell
In service, for pain hem sleeth,
And that each would flee the death
And trow they should never escape,
Nere that hope couth hem make,
Glad as man in prison sete,
And may not getten for to ete.
But Barley bread, and water pure,
And lies in vermin and in ordure,
With all this yet can he live,
Good hope such comfort has him give,
Which makes wene that he shall be
Delivered and come to liberty,
In fortune is full trust,
Though he lie in straw or dust,
In hope is all his sustaining:
And so fair Lovers in her wening,
Which Love has set in his prison
Good hope is her salvation:
Good hope (how sore that they smart)
Yeueth hem both will and heart
To profer her body to martire,
For Hope so sore does hem desire
To suffer each harm that men devise,
For joy that afterward shall arise.
* HOpe in desire catch victory,
In hope of Love is all the glory,
* For hope is all that Love may give,
Nere hope, there should no longer live.
Blessed be hope, which with desire,
Auaunceth Lovers in such manire.
Good hope is curteis for to please,
To keep Lovers from all disease.
* Hope keeps his land, and woll abide,
For any peril that may betide,
For hope to lovers, as most chief,
Does hem endure all mischief,
Hope is her help when mister is.
And I shall give thee eke iwis,
Three other things, that great sollace
Does to hem that be in my lace.
The first good that may be found,
To hem that in my lace be bound,
Is Sweet thought, for to record
Thing wherewith thou can accord
Best in thine heart, where she be,
Thinking in absence is good to thee,
When any lover does complain,
And lives in distress and in pain
Then Sweet thought shall come as bliue,
Away his anger for to drive,
It makes Lovers to have remembrance
Of comfort, and of high pleasaunce,
That Hope has hight him for to win,
For Thought anon then shall begin,
As far God wot as he can find,
To make a mirror of his mind,
For to behold he woll not let,
Her person he shall before him set,
Her laughing eyes persaunt and clear,
Her shape, her form, her goodly chere,
Her mouth that is so gracious,
So sweet, and eke so sauourous,
Of all her feiters he shall take heed,
His eyes with all her limbs feed.
Thus Sweet thinking shall aswage
The pain of Lovers, and her rage,
Thy joy shall double without guess
When thou think on her seemelinesse,
Or of her laughing, or of her chere
That to thee made thy Lady dear,
This comfort woll I that thou take,
And if the next thou wolt forsake
Which is not less sauerous,
Thou should not ben too dangerous.
THe second shall be Sweet speech,
That has to many one be leech,
To bring hem out of woe and were,
And help many a bachelere,
And many a Lady sent succor,
That have loved Paramour,
Through speaking, when they might hear
Of her Lovers to hem so dear:
To me it voideth all her smart,
The which is closed in her heart.
In heart it makes hem glad and light,
Speech, when they mow have sight.
And therefore now it comes to mind,
In old dawes as I find,
That Clerks written that her knew,
There was a Lady fresh of hew,
Which of her Love made a song,
On him for to remember among,
In which she said, when that I hear
Speaken of him that is so dear,
To me it voideth all smart,
Iwis he sits so nere mine heart,
To speak of him at eve or morrow,
It cures me of all my sorrow,
To me is none so high pleasaunce
As of his person daliaunce:
She wist full well that Sweet speaking
Comfort in full much thing,
Her she had full well assaide,
Of him she was full well apaide,
To speak of him her joy was set.
Therefore I read thee that thou get,
A fellow that can well counsele,
And keep thy counsel, and welhele
To whom go show wholly thine heart
Both well and woe, joy and smart:
To get comfort to him thou go,
And privily between you two,
Ye shall speak of that goodly thing,
That has thine heart in her keeping,
Of her beauty and her semblaunce,
And of her goodly countenance,
Of all thy state, thou shall him say,
And ask him counsel how thou may,
Do any thing that may her please,
For it to thee shall do great ease,
That he may wete thou trust him so,
Both of thy well and of thy woe.
And if his heart to love be set,
His company is much the bet,
For Reason woll he show to thee
All utterly his priuite,
And what she is he loves so
To thee plainly he shall undo,
Without dread of any shame,
Both tell her renome and her name.
Then shall he further far and nere,
And namely to thy Lady dear
In siker wise, ye every other,
Shall helpen as his own brother,
In troth without doubleness,
And keepen close in sikernesse:
* For it is noble thing in fay,
To have a man thou dare say,
Thy privy counsel every dele,
For that woll comfort thee right well,
And thou shall hold thee well apaide,
When such a friend thou have assaide.
THe third good of great comfort
That yeueth to Lovers most disport,
Comes of sight and beholding,
The cleped is Sweet looking,
The which may none ease do,
When thou art far thy Lady fro,
Wherefore thou prese always to be
In place, where thou may her see:
For it is thing most amerous
Most delectable and fauerous.
For to assuage a man's sorrow
To seen his Lady by the morrow,
For it is a full noble thing
When thine eyes have meeting,
With that relike precious,
Whereof they be so desirous.
But all day after sooth it is,
They have no dread to faren amiss,
They dreden neither wind ne rain,
Ne none other manner pain:
For when thine eyes were thus in bliss,
Yet of her courtesy iwisse,
Alone they cannot have her joy,
But to the heart they conuoy
Part of her bliss to him thou send,
Of all this harm to make and end.
* The eye is a good messenger,
Which can to the heart in such manner
Tidings send, that has seen
To void him of his pains clean:
Whereof the heart rejoyseth so
That a great party of his woe
Is voided, and put away to flight.
Right as the darkness of the night
Is chased with clerenesse of the moon,
Right so is all his woe full soon
Deuoided clean, when that the sight
Beholden may that fresh wight
That the heart desires so,
That all his darkness is ago,
* For then the heart is all at ease,
When they seen that may hem please.
Now have I declared thee all out,
Of that thou were in dread and dout,
For I have told thee faithfully,
What thee may curen utterly,
And all Lovers that woll be
Faithful, and full of stabilite.
Good hope always keep by thy side,
And sweet thought make eke abide,
Sweet looking and sweet spech
Of all thine harms they shall he lech,
Of every thou shall have great pleasaunce,
If thou can bide in suffraunce,
And serve well without fantise,
Thou shall be quite of thine emprise
With more guerdoun, if that thou live,
But all this time this I thee give.
THe God of Love, when all the day
Had taught me, as ye have heard say,
And informed compendously,
He vanished away all suddenly,
And I alone left all soole,
So full of complaint and of doole,
For I saw no man there me by.
My wounds me grieved wondersly,
Me for to curen nothing I knew,
Save the bothum bright of hew,
Whereon was set holly my thought,
Of other comfort knew I naught,
But it were through the God of Love,
I knew not else to my behoue
That might me ease or comfort get,
But if he would him entermette.
The Roser was withouten dout
Closed with an hedge without,
As ye toforne have heard me saine,
And fast I besied, and would feign
Have passed the haie, if I might
Have getten in by any slight
Unto the bothum so fair to see,
But ever I dradde blamed to be,
If men would have suspection
That I would of entention
Have stole the Roses that there were,
Therefore to enter I was in fere.
But at the last, as I bethought
Whether I should pass or naught,
I saw come with a glad chere
To me, a lustly Bachelere,
Of good slature and of good height,
And Bialacoil forsooth he height:
Son he was to Courtesy,
And he me granted full gladly,
The passage of the utter hay,
And said: sir, how that you may
Pass, if your will be
The fresh Roser for to see:
And ye the sweet savor feel,
Your warrans may right well,
So thou thee keep fro folly,
Shall no man do thee villainy,
If I may help you in ought,
I shall not feign, dredeth naught,
For I am bound to your seruise,
Fully deuoid of feintise.
Then unto Bialacoil said I,
I thank you sir full heartily,
And your behest take at gree,
That ye so goodly profer me,
To you it comes of great fraunchise,
That ye me profer your seruise.
Then after full deliuerly,
Through the breres anon went I,
Whereof encombred was the haie,
I was well pleased, the soth to say,
To se the bothum fair and swote,
So fresh sprung out of the rote.
ANd Bialacoil me served well,
When I so nigh me might feel
Of the bothum the sweet odor,
And so lusty hewed of color:
But then a churl, foul him betide,
Beside the Roses began him hide,
To keep the Roses of that Rosere,
Of whom the name was Daungere:
This churl was hid there in the greues,
Covered with grass and with leaves,
To spy and take whom that he fond
Unto that Roser put an hond.
He was not soole, for there was mo,
For with him were other two
Of wicked manners, and evil fame,
That one was cleped by his name,
Wicked tongue, God yeve him sorrow,
For neither at eve ne at morrow,
He can of no man good speak,
On many a just man does he wreake.
There was a woman that eke hight
Shame, that who can reckon right,
Trespass was her fathers name,
Her mother Reason, and thus was Shame
Brought of these like two:
And yet had Trespass never ado
With Reason, ne never leie her by,
He was hidous and so ugly,
I mean this that Trespass hight,
But Reason conceiueth of a sight,
Shame of that I spoke aforne.
And when that Shame was thus borne,
It was ordained, that Chastity,
Should of the Roser Lady be:
Which of the bothums more and las,
With sundry folks assailed was,
That she ne wist what to do,
For Venus her assaileth so,
That night and day for her she stall
Bothoms and Roses our all.
To Reason then prays Chastity,
Whom Venus has flemed over the sea,
That she her daughter would her lene,
To keep the Roser fresh and grene.
Anon Reason to Chastity,
Is fully assented that it be,
And granted her at her request,
That Shame, because she is honest,
Shall keeper of the Roser be:
And thus to keep it, there were three,
That none should hardy be ne bold,
(Were he young or were he old)
Again her will away to bear
Bothoms ne Roses, that there were*
I had well sped, had I not been
Awaited with these three, and seen:
For Bialacoil, that was so fair,
So gracious and debonaire,
Quitte him to me full courteously,
And me to please bad that I,
Should draw to the bothom nere,
Prease in to touch the Rosere
Which bare the Roses, he yave me leave,
This grant ne might but little grieve:
And for he saw it liked me,
Right nigh the bothom pulled he
A leaf all grene, and yaue me that
T^^ which full nigh the bothom sat.
I ^ade of that leaf full queint,
And when I felt I was acqueint
With Bialacoil, and so prive,
I wend all my will had be.
Then wext I hardy for to tell
To Bialacoil how me befell,
Of Love, that took and wounded me,
And said: sir so mote I thee,
I may no joy have in no wise,
Upon no side, but it arise,
For since (if I shall not feign)
In heart I have had so great pain,
So great annoy, and such affraie,
That I ne wotte what I shall say,
I dread your wroth to deserve,
Lever me were, that knives kerue
My body should in pieces small,
Than in any wise it should fall,
That ye wrothed should been with me.
Say boldly thy will (quoth he)
I nill be wroth if that I may,
For naught that thou shall to me say.
THen said I sir, not you displease,
To known of my great unease,
In which only Love has me brought,
For pains great, disease and thought,
Fro day to day it does me dry,
Supposes not sir, that I lie,
In me five wounds did he make,
The sore of which shall never slake,
But ye the bothom grant me,
Which is most passaunt of beauty,
My life, my death, and my martire,
And treasour that I most desire.
Then Bialacoil affraied all
Said sir, it may not fall,
That ye desire it may not arise,
What would ye shend me in this wise?
A mokell fool then I were,
If I suffered you away to bear
The fresh bothom, so fair of sight,
For it were neither skill ne right,
Of the Roser ye broke the rind,
Or take the Rose aforne his kind,
Ye are not courteous to ask it,
Let it still on the Roser sit,
And let it grow till it amended be,
And perfectly come to beauty,
I nolde not that it pulled were,
Fro the Roser that it bear,
To me it is so lefe and dear.
With that anon start out Daungere,
Out of the place where he was hid,
His malice in his chere was kidde:
Full great he was and black of hew,
Sturdy, and hidous, who so him knew,
Like sharp vrchons his hair was grow,
His eyes red sparkling as the fire glow,
His nose frounced full kirked stood,
He come criand as he were wood,
And said, Bialacoil tell me why
Thou bring hider so boldly
Him that so nigh the Rosere,
Thou worchest in a wrong manner,
He thinks to dishonor thee,
Thou art well worthy to have maugre,
To let him of the Rosere wit,
* Who serves a Felon is evil quitte.
Thou would have done great bounte,
And he with shame would quite thee,
Fly hence fellow, I read thee go,
It wants little he woll thee slo,
For Bialacoil ne knew thee naught,
When thee to serve he set his thought,
For thou wolt shame him if thou might,
Both again reason and right,
I woll no more in thee affie,
That come so slightly for tespie:
For it proves wonder well,
Thy slight and treason every dele.
I durst no more make there abode,
For the churl he was so wode,
So began he threat and manace,
And throught the haie he did me chase,
For fear of him I trembled and quoke,
So churlish his head he shoke,
And said, if eft he might me take,
I should not from his hands escape.
Then Bialacoil is fled and mate,
And I all soole and disconsolate,
Was left alone in pain and thought,
Fro shame to death I was nigh brought
Then thought on my high folly,
How that my body utterly,
Was give to pain and martire,
And thereto had I so great desire,
That I ne durst the haies pass,
There was no hope, there was no grace,
* I trow never man wist of pain,
But he were laced in Loves chain,
Ne no man, and sooth it is,
But if he love, what anger is.
Love holds his hest to me right well,
When pain (he said) I should feel,
No heart may think, no tongue saine,
A quarter of my woe and pain,
I might not with the anger last,
Mine heart in point was for to brast,
When I thought on the Rose, that so,
Was through danger cast me fro,
A long while stood I in that state,
Till that me saw so mad and mate,
The Lady of the high ward,
Which from her tower looked thiderward.
Reason, men clepe that Lady,
Which from her tower deliuerly,
Come down to me without more,
But she was neither young, ne hoar,
Ne high ne low, ne fat ne lean,
But best, as it were in a mean,
Her eyes two were clear and light
As any candle that brenneth bright,
And on her head she had a croune,
Her see mede well an high persoune:
For round enuiron her crounet
Was full of rich stones fret.
Her goodly semblaunt by devise,
I trow was made in Paradise,
For nature had never such a grace,
To forge a work of such compace:
For certain, but if the letter lie,
God himself that is so hye
Made her after his image,
And yafe her since such auantage,
That she has might and seignory
To keep men from all folly,
Who so woll trow her lore,
Ne may offenden neuermore.
And while I stood this dark and pale,
Reason began to me her tale,
She said: alhaile my sweet friend,
Folly and childhood woll thee shend,
Which thee have put in great affraie
Thou have bought dear time of May,
That made thine heart merry to be,
In evil time thou wentest to see
The gardin, whereof Idleness
Bare the key and was maistresse
When thou yedest in the dance
With her, and had acquaintance:
Her acquaintance is perilous,
First soft, and after noyous,
She has thee trashed without wene,
The God of Love had thee not seen,
Ne had Idleness thee conuaid
In the verge where Mirth him pleid,
If Folly have surprised thee,
Do so that it recovered be,
* And be well ware to take no more
Counsel, that greeueth after sore:
He is wise, that woll himself chastise.
* And though a young man in any wise
Trespass among, and do Folly,
Let him not tarry, but hastily
Let him amend what so be mis.
And eke I counsel thee iwis,
The God of Love holly foryete,
That has thee in such pain sete,
And thee in heart tormenteth so,
I cannot seen how thou may go
Other ways thee to garisoun,
For danger, that is so feloun,
Fellie purposes thee to werreie,
Which is full cruel the sooth to seie.
AND yet of Danger comes no blame,
In reward of my daughter shame,
Which has the Roses in her ward,
As she that may be no musard,
And wicked tongue is with these two,
That suffers no man thider go
For er a thing be do he shall,
Where that he comes over all,
In forty places, if it be sought,
Say thing that never was done ne wrought,
So much treason is in his male,
Of falsenesse for to feign a tale,
Thou dealest with angry folk iwis,
Wherefore to thee better is,
From these folk away to fare,
For they woll make thee live in care,
This is the evil that love they call,
Wherein there is but folly all,
For love is folly every dell
Who loves, in no wise may do well
Ne set his thought on no good work,
His school he leseth, if he be a Clerk,
Or other Craft eke, if that he be,
He shall not thrive therein, for he
In love shall have more passioun,
Than Monk, Hermit, or Chanoun:
This pain is heard out of measure,
The joy may eke no while endure,
And in the possession,
Is much tribulation,
The joy it is so short and lasting,
And but in hap is the getting,
For I see there many in travail,
That at last foul fail,
I was nothing thy counsailer,
When thou were made the homager
Of God of love so hastily:
Where was no wisdom but folly,
Thine heart was jolly, but not sage,
When thou were brought in such a rage,
To yield thee so readyly,
And to Love of his great maistrie.
I Read thee Love away to drive,
That makes the retch not of thy live,
* The folly more fro day to day
Shall grow, but thou it put away,
Take with thy teeth the bridle fast,
To daunt thy heart, and eke the cast
If that thou may, to get the defense
For to redress thy first offense.
* Who so his heart always woll leve,
Shall find among that shall him greve.
When I her heard thus me chastise,
I answeard in full angry wife,
I prayed her cesse of her speech,
Either to chastise me or teach,
To bid me my thought refrein,
Which Love has caught in his demein:
What wene ye Love woll consent,
(That me assaieth with bow bent)
To draw mine heart out of his hond,
Which is so quickly in his bond?
That ye counsel, may never be,
For when he first arested me,
He took mine heart so sore him till,
That it is nothing at my will,
He tought it so him for to obey,
That he it sparred with a key.
I pray you let me be all still,
For ye may well, if that ye will,
Your words wast in idleness,
For utterly withouten guess,
All that ye saine is but in vain,
Me were lever die in the pain,
That love to me ward should arette,
Falshed or treason on me set,
I woll me get pris or blame,
And Love true to save my name,
Who that me chastises, I him hate.
With that word, Reason went her gate,
When she saw for no sermoning
She might me fro my folly bring.
Then dismayed I left all soole,
Forwearie, forwandred as a fool,
For I ne knew ne cherisaunce.
Then fell into my remembrance,
How love bad me to purvey
A fellow, to whom I might sey
My counsel and my privite,
For that should much avail me.
With that bethought I me, that I
Had a fellow fast by,
True and siker, courteous, and hend,
And he called was by name a Friend,
A true fellow was no where none,
In have to him I went anon,
And to him all my woe I told,
Fro him right naught I would withhold,
I told him all without were,
And made my complaint on Daungere,
How for to sey he was hidous,
And to me ward contrarious,
The which through his cruelte,
Was in point to have meimed me,
With Bialacoil, when he me sey
Within the gardin walk and pley,
Fro me he made him for to go,
And I be left alone in woe:
I durst no longer with him speak,
For Danger said he would be wreake,
When that he saw how I went,
The fresh bothum for to hent,
If I were hardy to come nere,
Between the haie and the Rosere,
This Friend when he wist of thought,
He discomforted me right naught,
But said fellow, be not so mad,
Ne so abashed nor bestadde,
My self I know full well Daungere,
And how he is fierce of chere,
At prime temps, Love to manace,
Full often I have been in his case,
A felon first though that he be,
After thou shall him souple see,
Of long passed I knew him well,
Ungodly first though men him feel,
He woll meek after in his bearing
Been, for service and obeissing,
I shall thee tell what thou shall do:
Meekely I read thou go him to,
Of heart pray him specially
Of thy trespace to have mercy,
And hot him well here to please,
That thou shall never more him displease,
* Who can best serve of flattery,
Shall please Danger most utterly.
My Friend has said to me so well,
That he me easeli has somedele,
And eke allegged of my tourment,
For through him had I hardement
Again to Danger for to go,
To preue if I might meek him so.
TO Danger came I all ashamed,
The which aforne me had blamed,
Desiring for to pease my woe,
But over hedge durst I not go:
For he forbode me the passage,
I found him cruel in his rage,
And in his hond a great bourdoun,
To him I kneeled low adoun,
Full meek of port, and simple of chere,
And said, sir, I am comen here
Only to ask of you mercy,
It greeueth me full greatly
That ever my life I wrathed you,
But for to amend I am come now,
With all my might, both loud and still,
To done right at your own will,
For Love made me for to do
That I have trespassed hiderto,
Fro whom I ne may withdraw mine heart,
Yet shall I never for joy ne smart
(What so befall good or ill)
Offend more again your will,
Lever I have endure disease,
Than do that should you displease.
IYou require, and pray that ye
Of me have mercy and pite,
To stint your ire that greueth so,
That I woll swear for euermo
To be redressed at your liking
If I trespace in any thing,
Save that (I pray thee) grant me
A thing, that may not warned be,
That I may love all only,
None other thing of you ask I:
I shall done all ywis,
If of your grace ye grant me this,
And ye may not letten me,
For well wot ye that love is free:
And I shall louen such that I will,
Who ever like it well or ill:
And yet ne would I not for all France
Do thing to do you displeasaunce.
Then Danger fell in his intent
For to foryeue his male talent,
But all his wrath yet at last
He has released, I praide so fast:
Shortly (he said) thy request
Is not too mockell dishonest,
Ne I woll not werne it thee,
For yet nothing engreeueth me:
For though thou love thus evermore,
To me is neither soft ne sore:
Love where that thee list, what retcheth me,
So far fro my Roses be:
Trust not on me for none assaie,
In any time to pass the haie.
Thus has he granted my prayere,
Then went I forth withouten were
Unto my friend, and told him all,
Which was right joyful of my tale,
(He said) now goes well thine affair,
He shall to thee be debonaire,
Though he aforne was dispitous,
He shall hereafter be gracious:
If he were touched on some good vein,
He should yet rewen on thy peine,
Suffer I read, and no boast make,
Till thou at good mes may him take.
* By suffraunce, and by words soft,
A man may overcome often
Him that aforne he had in dread,
In books soothly as I read.
Thus has my friend with great comfort
Auaunced me with high disport,
Which would me good, as much as I:
And then anon full suddenly
I took my leave, and straight I went
Unto the hay, for great talent
I had to seen the fresh bothom,
Wherein lay my salvation,
And Danger took keep, if that I
Keep him covenant truly,
So sore I dread his manasing,
I durst not break his bidding,
For least that I were of him shent,
I brake not his commandment,
For to purchase his good will,
It was for to come there till,
His mercy was too far behind
I kept, for I ne might it find.
I complained and sighed sore,
And languished evermore,
For I durst not ouergo,
Unto the Rose I loved so,
Throughout my deming utterly,
That he had knowledge certainly:
Then Love me ladde in such wise,
That in me there was no feintise,
Falsehood, ne no treachery:
And yet he full of villainy,
Of disdain, and cruelty,
On me ne would have pity
His cruel will for to refrain,
Tho I wept always, and me complain.
ANd while I was in this turment,
Were come of grace, by God sent,
Fraunchise, and with her Pity,
Fulfilde the bothum of bounty,
They go to Danger anon right
To ferther me with all her might,
And help in word and in deed,
For well they saw that it was need.
First of her grace dame Fraunchise
Has taken of this emprise:
She said, Danger great wrong ye do
To worche this man so much woe,
Or pinen him so angerly,
It is to you great villauy:
I cannot see why ne how
That he has trespassed again you,
Save that he loves, wherefore ye should
The more in charity of him hold:
The force of love makes him do this,
Who would him blame he did amiss,
He leueth more than he may do,
His pain is hard, ye may see lo:
And Love in no wise would consent
That ye have power to repent,
For though that quick ye would him slo,
Fro Love his heart may not go.
Now sweet sir, it is your ease
Him for to anger or disease.
Alas, what may it you auaunce
To done to him so great greauaunce,
What worship is it again him take,
Or on your man a werre make,
Since he so lowly every wise
Is ready, as ye lust devise.
If Love have caught him in his laas,
You for to beie in every caas,
And been your subject at your will,
Should ye therefore willen him ill,
Ye should him spare more all out,
Than him that is both proud and stout:
Courtesy would that ye succoure
Hem that been meek under your cure,
* His heart is hard that woll not meek,
When men of meekness him beseeke.
THis is certain, said Pity,
* We see often that Humility,
Both ire, and also felony
Venquisheth, and also malanchollie,
To stond forth in such duresse
This cruelty and wickedness:
Wherefore I pray you sir Daungere
For to maintain no longer here
Such cruel war again your man,
As wholly yours as ever he can,
Nor that ye worchen no more woe
Upon this caitife that languisheth so,
Which woll no more to you trespace,
But put him wholly in your grace,
His offense ne was but lite,
The God of Love it was to wite,
That he your thrall so greatly is,
And if ye harm him ye done amiss,
For he has had full hard pennaunce,
Since that ye reft him thaquaintaunce
Of Bialacoil, his most joy,
Which all his pains might acoy:
He was before annoyed sore,
But then ye doubled him well more,
For he of bliss has been full bare,
Since Bialacoil was fro him fare,
Love has to him great distress,
He has no need of more duresse:
Voided from him your ire I read,
Ye may not winnen in this deed,
Makes Bialacoil repair again,
And haveth pity upon his pain,
For Fraunchise woll, and I Pite,
That merciful to him ye be,
And since that she and I accord,
Have upon him misericorde,
For I you pray, and eke moneste,
Naught to refusen our request:
For he is hard and fell of thought,
That for us two woll do right naught.
Danger ne might no more endure,
He meeked him unto measure.
I woll in no wise, says Daungere,
Deny that ye have asked here:
It were too great vncourtesie,
I woll ye have the company
Of Bialacoil, as ye devise,
I woll him let in no wise.
To Bialacoil then went in hie,
Fraunchise, and said full curteslie:
Ye have too long be deignous
Unto this lover, and dangerous
For him to withdraw your presence,
Which has do to him great offense,
That ye not would upon him see,
Wherefore a sorrowful man is he:
Shape ye to pay him, and to please,
Of my love if ye woll have ease,
Fulfill his will, since that ye know
Danger is daunted and brought low
Through help of me and of Pite
You dare no more afterde be.
I shall do right as ye will
Says Bialacoil, for it is skill,
Since Danger woll that it so be,
Then Fraunchise has him sent to me.
BIalacoil at the beginning
Salued me in his coming,
No strangeness was in him seen,
No more than he ne had wrathed been,
As fair semblaunt then showed he me,
And goodly, as aforne did he,
And by the hond without dout,
Within the haie right all about,
He lad me with right good chere,
All enuiron the vergere,
That Daungere had me chased fro:
Now have I leave over all to go,
Now am I raised at my devise,
Fro hell unto Paradise.
Thus Bialacoil of gentleness
With all his pain and business,
Has showed me only of grace
The efters of the swote place.
I saw the Rose when I was nigh,
Was greater woxen, and more high,
Fresh, roddy, and fair of hew,
Of color ever iliche new:
And when I had it long seen,
I saw that through the leaves green
The Rose spread to spannishing,
To seen it was a goodly thing,
But it ne was so sprede on bread,
That men within might know the sede,
For it covert was and close
Both with the leaves and with the Rose,
The stalk was even and grene upright,
It was thereon a goodly sight,
And well the better without wene
For the seed was not seen,
Full fair it sprad the God of bless,
For such another, as I guess,
Aforne ne was ne more vermaile,
I was abawed for marvel,
For ever the fairer that it was,
The more I am bounden in loves laas.
Long I abode there sooth to say,
Till Bialacoil I began to pray,
When that I saw him in no wise
To me warnen his seruise,
That he me would grant a thing,
Which to remember is well sitting:
This is to saine, that of his grace
He would me give leisure and space
To me that was so desirous
To have a kissing precious
Of the goodly fresh Rose,
That so sweetly smells in my nose,
For if it you displeased naught,
I woll gladly, as I have sought,
Have a kiss thereof freely
Of your yeft, for certainly
I woll none have but by your leave;
So loath me were you for to grieve.
HE said, friend so God me speed,
Of Chastity I have such dread,
Thou should not warned be for me,
But I dare not for Chastity:
Again her dare I not mis do,
For always bids she me so
To give no lover leave to kiss,
For who thereto may winnen iwisse,
He of the surplus of the pray
May live in hope to get some day,
For who so kissing may attain,
Of Loves pain has (sooth to saine)
The best and most auenaunt,
And earnest of the remenaunt.
OF his answer I sighed sore,
I durst assay him tho no more,
I had such dread to greve him aye,
* A man should not too much assaye
To chafe his friend out of measure,
Nor put his life in adventure,
For no man at the first stroke
Ne may not fell down an Oak,
Nor of the reisins have the wine,
Till grapes be ripe and well a fine,
Before empressed, I you ensure,
And drawn out of the pressure:
But I forpeined wonder strong,
Though that I abode right long
And after the kiss, in pain and woe,
Since I to kiss desired so:
Till that renning on my distress,
There come Venus the goddess
(Which aye werrieth Chastity)
Came of her grace to succor me,
Whose might is know far and wide,
For she is mother of Cupide.
THe God of Love, blind as stone,
That helps lovers many one.
This lady brought in her right hond
Of brenning fire a blasing brond,
Whereof the flame and hot fire
Has many a Lady in desire
Of Love brought, and sore hette,
And in her service her heart is set.
This Lady was of good entaile,
Right wonderful of apparaile,
By her attire so bright and shene,
Men might perceive well and seen,
She was not of Religioun:
Nor I nill make mentioun
Nor of robe, nor of treasour,
Of broche, neither of her rich attour,
Ne of her girdle about her side,
For that I nill not long abide,
But knows well, that certainly
She was arraied richely,
Deuoid of pride certain she was,
To Bialacoil she went apaas,
And to him shortly in a clause
She said: sir, what is the cause
Ye ben of port so dangerous
Unto this lover, and dainous,
To grant him nothing but a kiss
To warn it him ye done amiss,
Since well ye wot, how that he
Is Loves servant, as ye may see,
And has beauty, where through is
Worthy of Love to have the blis:
How he is seemly behold and see,
How he is fair, how he is free,
How he is swote and debonaire,
Of age young, lusty, and fair,
There is no Lady so hautaine,
Duchess, Countess, ne Chastelaine,
That I nolde hold her ungodly,
For to refuse him utterly.
His breath is also good and sweet,
And eke his lips roddy and mete,
Only to plain, and to kiss,
Grant him a kiss of gentlenisse.
His teeth arne also white and clean,
Me thinks wrong withouten wene,
If ye now warn him, trusts me,
To grant that a kiss have he,
The less ye help him that ye have,
And the more time shull ye wast.
When the flame of the very brond
That Venus brought in her right hond,
Had Bialacoil with his hete smete,
Anon he had me withouten let,
Grant to me the Rose kiss,
Then of my pain I began to lisse,
And to the Rose anon went I,
And kissed it full faithfully:
There need no man ask if I was blithe,
When the savor soft and lith
Stroke to mine heart without more,
And me allegged of my sore,
So was I full of joy and bliss,
It is fair such a flower to kiss,
It was so swote and sauerous,
I might not be so anguishous,
That I mote glad and jolly be,
When that I remember me,
Yet ever among soothly to saine,
I suffer noie and much pain.
The sea may never be so still,
That with a little wind at will
Over whelme and turn also,
As it were wood in wawes go,
After the calm the trouble soon
Mote follow, and change as the moon.
Right so fares Love, that selde in one
Holds his anchor, for right anon
When they in ease wene best to live,
They ben with tempest all fordriue:
Who serves Love, can tell of woe,
The stoundmele joy mote ouergo,
Now he hurts, and now he cures,
* For selde in o point Love endures.
Now is it right me to proceed,
How Shame began meddle and take heed,
Through whom fell angers I have hade,
And how the strong wall was made,
And the Castle of bread and length,
That God of Love wan with his strength,
All this Romance will I set,
And for no thing ne will I let,
So that it liking to her be,
That is the flower of beauty,
For she may best my labor quite,
That I for her Love shall endite.
Wicked tongue, that the couine
Of every Lover can divine
Worst, and adds more somdele
* (For wicked tongue says never well)
To me ward bare he right great hate,
Espying me early and late,
Till he has seen the great chere
Of Bialacoil and me ifere:
He might not his tongue withstond
Worse to report than he fond,
He was so full of cursed rage,
It sat him well of his lineage,
For him an irous woman bare,
His tongue was filed sharp and square,
Poiguaunt and right keruing,
And wonder bitter in speaking,
For when that he me began espy,
He swore (affirming sikerly)
Between Bialacoil and me
Was evil acquaintance and prive,
He spoke thereof so folilie,
That he awaked Jealousy,
Which all afraied in his rising,
When that he heard iangling,
He ran anon as he were wood
To Bialacoil there that he stood,
Which had lever in this caas
Have been at Reins or Amias,
For foot hot in his fellonie,
To him thus said Jealousy:
Why have thou ben so negligent,
To keepen, when I was absent,
This verger here left in thy ward?
To me thou had no regard,
To trust (to thy confusion)
Him thus, to whom suspection
I have right great, for it is need,
It is well showed by the deed.
Great fault in thee now have I found,
By God anon thou shall be bound,
And fast locken in a Toure,
Without refuite or succoure.
FOr Shame too long has be thee fro,
Ouersoone she was ago,
When thou have lost both dread and fere,
It seemed well she was not here,
She was busy in no wise,
To keep thee and chastise,
And for to helpen Chastity
To keep the Roser, as thinks me,
For then this boy knave so boldly,
Ne should not have be hardy
In this verge and such game,
Which now me turns to great shame.
BIalacoil nist what to say,
Full feign he would have fled away,
For fear have hid, nere that he
All suddenly took him with me:
And when I saw he had so,
This Jealousy take us two,
I was astonished, and knew no read,
But fied away for very dread.
Then Shame came forth full simply,
She wend have trespaced full greatly,
Humble of her port, and made it simple,
Wearing a veil instead of wimple.
As Nonnes done in her Abbey,
Because her heart was in affray,
She began to speak within a throw
To Jealousy, right wonder low.
First of the grace she besought,
And said: sir, ne leueth naught
Wicked tongue, that false epsy,
Which is so glad to feign and lie,
He has you made, through flattering,
On Bialacoil a false leasing:
His falsenesse is not now anew,
It is too long that he him knew:
This is not the first day,
For Wicked tongue has custom aie,
Young folks to bewrie,
And false lesings on hem lie.
Yet nevertheless I see among,
That the soigne it is so long
Of Bialacoil, hearts to lure,
In Loves service for to endure,
Drawing such folk him to,
That he has nothing with to do,
But in foothnesse I trow naught,
That Bialacoil had ever in thought
To do trespace or villainy,
But for his mother Courtesy
Has taught him ever to be
Good of acquaintance and prive,
For he loves none heaviness,
But mirth and play, and all gladness,
He hates all trechous,
Soleine folk and envious:
For ye weten how that he
Woll ever glad and joyful be
Honestly with folk to pley,
I have be negligent in good fey
To chastise him, therefore now I
Of heart I cry you here mercy,
That I have been so recheles
To tamen him withouten lees,
Of my folly I me repent,
Now woll I hole set mine intent
To keep both low and still
Bialacoil to do your will.
Shame, Shame (said Ielousy)
To be bitrashed great dread have I.
Lechery has clombe so hie,
That almost bleared is mine eye,
No wonder is, if that dread have I,
* Over all reigns Lechery,
Whose might grows night and dey,
Both in Cloister and in Abbey,
Chastity is werried over all,
Therefore I woll with siker wall
Close both Roses and Rosere,
I have too long in this manner
Left hem unclosed wilfully:
Wherefore I am right inwardly
Sorrowful, and repent me,
But now they shall no longer be
Unclosed, and yet I dread sore,
I shall repent ferthermore,
For the game goes all amiss,
Counsel I must new ywis,
I have too long trusted thee,
But now it shall no longer be:
* For he may best in every cost
Deceive, that men tresten most:
I see well that I am nigh shent,
But if I set my full intent
Remedy to puruey:
Wherefore close I shall the wey
From hem that woll the Rose epsy,
And come to wait me villonie,
For in good faith and in troth
I woll not let for no sloth
To live the more in sikernesse,
Do make anon a fortress.
Then close the Roses of good savor,
In mids shall I make a tour,
To put Bialacoil in prison,
Forever I dread me of treason,
I trow I shall him keep so,
That he shall have no might to go
About to make company
To hem that think of villainy,
Ne to no such as has been here
Aforne, and found in him good chere,
Which han assailed him to shend,
And with her trowandise to blend,
* A fool is eith to beguile,
But may I live a little while,
He shall forthinke his fair semblaunt.
And with that word came Dread auaunt,
Which was abashed, and in great fere,
When he wist Jealousy was there,
He was for dread in such affray,
That not a word durst he say,
But quaking stood full still alone
(Till Jealousy his way was gone)
Save Shame, that him not forsook,
Both Dread and she full sore quoke,
That at last Dread abraide,
And to his cousin Shame said.
Shame (he said) in soothfastnesse,
To me it is great heaviness,
That the noise so far is go,
And the slander of us two:
But since that it is befall,
We may it not again call,
When once sprung is a fame:
For many a year withouten blame
We have been, and many a day,
For many an April and many a May
We han passed, not ashamed,
Till Jealousy has us blamed
Of mistrust and suspection
Causeless, without encheson:
Go we to Danger hastily,
And let us show him openly,
That he has not aright wrought,
When that he set not his thought
To keep better the purprise,
In his doing he is not wise.
He has to us do great wrong,
That has suffered now so long
Bialacoil to have his will
All his lusts to fulfill:
He must amend it utterly,
Or else shall he villanously
Exiled be out of this land:
For he the war may not withstond
Of Jealousy, nor the grief,
Since Bialacoil is at mischief.
TO Danger Shame and Dread anon
The right way ben gone:
The chorle they found hem aforne
Ligging under an hawthorne.
Under his head no pillow was,
But in the stead a trusse of gras:
He slombred, and a nappe he took,
Till Shame pitously him shoke,
And great manace on him began make.
Why sleep thou when thou should wake
(Quoth. Shame) thou do us villainy,
Who trusts thee, he does folly,
To keep roses or bothums
When they be fair in her seasons,
Thou art woxe too familiere
Where thou should be strange of chere,
Stout of thy port, ready to grieve,
Thou do great folly for to leave
Bialacoil here in to call
The younger man to shenden us all,
Though that thou sleep, we may here
Of Jealousy great noise here,
Art thou now late, rise up an hye,
And stop soon and deliuerlye
All the gaps of the hay,
Do no favor I thee pray,
It falls nothing to thy name,
To make fair semblant, were thou may blame.
IF Bialacoil he sweet and free,
Dogged and fell thou should be,
Froward and outrageous iwis,
* A chorle changes that curteis is:
This have I heard often in saying,
* That man may for no daunting
Make a sperhauke of a bosarde,
All men hold thee for musarde,
That debonaire have founden thee,
It sits thee naught curteis to be,
To do men pleasaunce or seruise,
In thee it is recreaundise:
Let thy works far and nere
Be like thy name, which is Daungere.
Then all akashed in showing,
Anon spoke Dread, right thus saying,
And said, Danger I dread me,
That thou ne wolt besie be
To keep that thou have to keep,
When thou should wake, thou art asleep:
Thou shall be grieved certainly,
If thee aspie Ielousy,
Or if he find thee in blame.
He has to do assailed Shame,
And chased away with great manace
Bialacoil out of this place,
And swears shortly that he shall
Enclose him in a sturdy wall,
And all is for thy wickedness,
For that thee fails strangeness,
Thine heart I trow he failed all,
Thou shall repent in special,
If Jealousy the sooth knew,
Thou shall forthinke, and sore rue.
With that the chorle his clubbe began shake,
Frouning his eyes began to make,
And hidous chere, as man in rage,
For ire he brent in his visage,
When that he heard him blamed so,
He said, out of my wit I go,
To be discomfite I have great wrong,
Certes, I have now lived too long,
Since I may not this closer keep,
All quick I would be doluen deep,
If any man shall more repair
Into this garden for foul or fair,
Mine heart for ire gothe afere,
That I let any enter here,
I have do folly now I see,
But now it shall amended be,
Who sets foot here any more,
Truly he shall repent it sore,
For no man more into this place
Of me to enter shall have grace.
Lever I had with swerds twain,
Throughout mine heart, in every vain
Perced to be, with many a wound,
Than sloth should in me he sound:
From henceforth by night or day,
I shall defend it if I may
Withouten any exception
Of each manner condition,
And if I it any man grant,
Holds me for recreaunt.
THen Danger on his feet began stond,
And hent a burdon in his hond,
Wroth in his ire ne left he naught,
But through the verger he has sought,
If he might find hole or trace,
Where through that me mote forth by pace,
Or any gappe, he did it close,
That no man might touch a Rose
Of the Roser all about,
He shetteth every man without.
Thus day by day Danger is wers,
More wonderful and more diverse,
And feller eke than ever he was,
For him full often I sing alas,
For I ne may naught, through his ire
Recover that I most desire,
Mine heart alas woil breast a two,
For Bialacoil I wrathed so:
For certainly in every member
I quake, when I me remember
Of the bothum, which I would
Full often a day seen and behold,
And when I think upon the kiss,
And how much joy and bliss,
I had through the savor sweet,
For want of it I groan and great,
Me thinks I feel yet in my nose
The sweet savor of the Rose,
And now I wot that I mote go
So far the fresh flowers fro,
To me full welcome were the death,
Absence thereof (alas) me sleath,
For whylome with this Rose, alas,
I touched nose, mouth, and face,
But now the death I must abide,
But Love consent another tide,
That ones I touch may and kiss,
I trow my pain shall never lisse,
Thereon is all my couetise,
Which brent my heart in many wise.
Now shall repair again sighing,
Long watch on nights, and no sleeping,
Thought in wishing, turment, and woe,
With many a turning to and fro,
That half my pain I cannot tell,
For I am fallen into hell,
From paradise and wealth, the more
My turment greueth more and more,
Annoyeth now the bitterness,
That I toforne have felt sweetness,
And Wicked tongue, through his falshede,
Causes all my woe and dread,
On me he lies a pitous charge,
Because his tongue was too large.
Now it is time shortly that I
Tell you something of Jealousy,
That was in great suspection,
About him left he no mason,
That stone could lay, ne querrour,
He hired hem to make a tour:
And first the Roses for to keep,
About hem made he a ditch deep,
Right wonder large, and also broad,
Upon the which also stood
Of squared stone a sturdy wall,
Which on a cragge was founded all,
And right great thickness eke it bare,
About it was founded square
An hundred fadome on every side,
It was all liche long and wide,
Least any time it were assailed,
Full well about it was battailed,
And round enuiron eke were set
Full many a rich and fair tournet,
At every corner of this wall
Was set a tour full principal,
And eueriche had without fable
A portcullise defensable
To keep off enemies, and to grieve,
That there her force would preue.
And eke amidde this purprise
Was made a tour of great maistrise,
A fairer saugh no man with sight,
Large and wide, and of great might,
They dradde none assaut,
Of ginne, gonne, nor skaffaut,
The temprure of the mortere
Was made of liquour wonder dear,
Of quick lime persaunt and egre,
The which was tempred with vinegre.
The stone was hard of Adamaunt,
Whereof they made the foundemaunt,
The toure was round made in compass,
In all this world no richer was,
Ne better ordained therewithal,
About the tour was made a wall,
So that betwixt that and the tour,
Roses were set of sweet savor,
With many Roses that they bear,
And eke within the castle were
Springolds, Gonnes, Bows, and Archers;
And eke about at corners
Men seine over the wall stond
Great engines, who were nere hond,
And in the kernels here and there,
Of arblasters great plenty were.
None armor might her stroke withstond,
It were folly to prease to hond,
Without the ditch were listes made,
With wall battaited large and brade,
For men and horse should not attain
Too nigh the ditche over the plain,
Thus Jealousy has enuiron,
Set about his garnison
With walls round, and diche deep,
Only the Roser for to keep,
And Danger early and late
The keys kept of the utter gate,
The which opened toward the east,
And he had with him at least
Thirty servant echone by name.
That other gate kept Shame,
Which opened, as it was couth,
Toward the part of the South,
Sergeaunts assigned were her to
Full many, her will for to do.
Then Dread had in her Baillie
The keeping of the constablerie,
Toward the North I understand,
That opened upon the left hond,
The which for nothing may be sure,
But if she do busy cure
Early on morrow and also late,
Strongly to shette and bar the gate:
Of every thing that she may see,
Dread is aferde, where so she be,
For with a puff of little wind,
Dread is astonished in her mind,
Therefore for stealing of the Rose,
I read her not the yate unclose,
A fowls flight would make her flee,
And eke a shadow if she it see.
THen Wicked tongue full of envy,
With soldiers of Normandy,
As he that causes all debate,
Was keeper of the fourth gate,
And also to the the other three,
He went full often for to see,
When his lotte was to walk a night,
His instruments would he dight,
For to blow and make soune,
Ofter than he has enchesoune,
And walken often upon the wall,
Corners and wickettes over all,
Full narrow searchen and epsy,
Though he naught fond, yet would he lie
Discordaunt ever fro armonie,
And dissoned from melody,
Controue he would, and foul fail,
With hornepipes of Cornewaile.
In floites made he discordaunce,
And in his music with mischaunce,
He would seine with notes new,
* That he fond no woman true,
Ne that he saw never in his life,
Unto her husbond a true wife:
Ne none so full of honest,
That she nill laugh and merry be,
When that she hears or may epsy
A man speaken of Lechery.
Eueriche of hem has some vice,
One is dishonest, another is nice,
If one be full of villainy,
Another has a licorous eye,
If one be full of wantonness,
Another is a chideresse.
Thus Wicked tongue, God give him shame,
Can put hem euerichone in blame,
Without desert and causeless,
He lies, though they ben guiltless,
I have pity to seen the sorrow,
That waketh both even and morrow,
To innocents does such greuaunce,
I pray God give him evil chance,
That he ever so busy is,
Of any woman to seine amiss.
Eke Jealousy God confound,
That has made a toure so round,
And made about a garrison,
To set Bialacoil in prison,
The which is shette there in the tour,
Full long to hold there soiour,
There for live in pennaunce,
And for to do him more greuaunce,
Which has ordained Jealousy,
And old vecke for to spy
The manner of his governance,
The which Devil in her enfaunce
Had learned of Loves art,
And of his plais took her part,
She was except in his seruise,
She knew each wrenche and every gise
Of Love, and every wile,
It was hard her to beguile.
Of Bialacoil she took aye head,
That ever he lives in woe and dread,
He kept him coy and eke prive,
Least in him she had see
Any folly countenance,
For she knew all the old dance.
And after this, when Jealousy
Had Bialacoil in his Baillie,
And shette him up that was so free,
For sure of him he would be:
He trusts sore in his castle,
The strong work him likes well,
He dradde not that no glotons
Should steal his Roses or bothoms,
The Roses weren assured all
Defenced with the strong wall,
Now Jealousy full well may be
Of dread deuoid in liberte,
Whether that he sleep or wake,
For of his Roses may none be take.
But I (alas) now mourn shall,
Because I was without the wall,
Full much dole and moan I made,
Who had wist what woe I hade,
I trow he would have had pite,
Love too dear had sold me
The good that of his love had I,
I went about it all queintly,
But now through doubling of my pain
I see he woll it sell again,
And me a new bargain lere,
The which all out the more is dear,
For the sollace that I have lorne,
Than I had it never aforne,
* Certain I am full like indeed
To him that cast in earth his seed,
And has joy of the new springing,
When it greeneth in the ginning,
And is also fair and fresh of flour,
Lusty to seen, swote of odor,
But ere he it in his sheues shere,
May fall a weather that shall it dear,
And make it to fade and fall,
The stalk, the greine, and flowers all,
That to the tillers is fordone,
The hope that he had too soon:
I dread certain that so fare I,
For hope and travail sikerly
Ben me beraft all with a storm,
The flower nill seden of my corn,
For Love has so auaunced me,
When I began my priuite,
To Bialacoil all for to tell,
Whom I ne found froward ne fell,
But took agree all whole my play,
But Love is of so hard assay,
That all at ones he reued me,
When I weent best abouen to have be.
* It is of Love, as of Fortune,
That changes often, and nill contune,
Which whylome woll of folk smile,
And glombe on hem another while,
* Now friend, now foe, shall her feel,
For a twinkling tourneth her wheel.
* She can writhe her head away,
This is the concourse of her play,
She can areise that does mourn,
And whirle adoune, and ouertourne
Who sits highest, but as her lust,
A fool is he that woll her trust,
For it is I that am come down
Through charge and reuolutioun,
Since Bialacoil mote fro me twin,
Shette in her prison yonde within,
His absence at mine heart I feel,
For all my joy and all mine hele
Was in him, and in the Rose,
That but you will, which him does close,
Open, that I may him see,
Love woll not that I cured be
Of the pains that I endure,
Nor of my cruel adventure.
AH, Bialacoil mine own dear,
Though thou be now a prisonere,
Keep at least thine heart to me,
And suffer not that it daunted be,
Ne let not jealousy in his rage,
Putten thine heart in no seruage,
Although he chastise thee without,
And make thy body unto him lout
Have heart as hard as Diamaunt,
Steadfast, and naught pliaunt:
* In prison though thy body be
At large keep thine heart free,
A true heart will not plie
For no mannace that it may dry.
If Jealousy does thee pain,
Quite him his while thus again,
To venge thee at least in thought,
If other way thou may naught.
And in this wise subtelly
Worch, and win the maistrie.
But yet I am in great affray,
Least thou do not as I say,
I dread thou can me great maugre,
That thou emprisoned art for me,
But that not for my trespass,
For through me never discovered was
Yet thing that ought be secre:
Well more annoy is in me,
Than is in thee of this mischaunce,
For I endure more hard pennaunce
Than any can saine or think,
That for the sorrow almost I sink,
When I remember me of my woe,
Full nigh out of my wit I go.
Inward mine heart I feel blede,
For comfortless the death I dread,
Owe I not well to have distress,
When false, through her wickedness,
And traitors, that arne enviours,
To noien me be so coragious.
Ah, Bialacoil full well I see,
That they hem shape to deceive thee,
To make thee buxum to her law,
And with her cord thee to draw
Where so hem lust, right at her will,
I dread they have thee brought theretill:
Without comfort, thought me sleath,
This game would bring me to my death,
For if your good will I lose,
I mote be dead, I may not chese,
And if that thou foryete me,
Mine heart shall never in liking be,
Nor elsewhere find sollace,
If I be put out of your grace,
As it shall never ben I hope,
Then should I fall in wanhope.
Alas, in wanhope, nay parde,
For I woll never dispaired be,
If hope me fail, then am I
Ungracious and unworthy,
In hope I woll comforted be,
For Love, when he betaught her me,
Said, that Hope where so I go,
Should aye be relees to my woe.
But what and she my bales beat,
And be to me curteis and sweet,
She is in nothing full certain,
Lovers she put in full great pain,
And makes hem with woe to dele,
Her fair beheste deceives feel,
For she woll behote sikerly,
And failen after utterly.
Ah, that is a full noyous thing,
For many a lover in loving
Hangs upon her, and trusts fast,
Which lose her travail at the last.
Of thing to commen she wot right naught,
Therefore if it be wisely sought,
Her counsel folly is to take,
For many times, when she woll make
A full good sillogisme, I dread,
That afterward there shall indede
Follow an evil conclusion,
This put me in confusion,
* For many times I have it seen,
That many have beguiled been,
For trust that they have set in Hope,
Which fell hem afterward a slope.
But nathelesse yet gladly she would,
That he that woll him with her hold,
Had all times her purpose clear,
Without deceit any where,
That she desires sikerly,
When I her blamed, I did folly,
But what avails her good will,
When she ne may staunch my stound ill,
That helps little that she may do,
Or take behest unto my woe:
* And heste certain in no wise,
Without ifete is not to preise.
* When heste and deed asunder vary,
They done a great contrary:
Thus am I posted up and down
With dole, thought, and confusioun,
Of my disease there is no number,
Danger and Shame me encumber,
Dread also, and Jealousy,
And wicked Tongue full of envy,
Of which the sharp and cruel ire
Full often me put in great martire,
They have my joy fully let,
Since Bialacoil they have beshet
Fro me in prison wickedly,
Whom I love so entierly,
That it woll my bane be,
But I the sooner may him see.
And yet moreover worst of all,
There is set to keep, foul her befall,
A Rimpled vecke far run in rage,
Frouning and yellow in her visage,
Which in await lies day and night,
That none of him may have a sight.
NOw mote my sorrow enforced be,
Full sooth it is, that Love yafe me
Three wonder yefts of his grace,
Which I have lorne now in this place,
Since they ne may without dread
Helpen but little, who takes head:
For here avails no Sweet thought,
And Sweet speech helps right naught,
The third was called Sweet Looking,
That now is lorne without lesing.
Yefts were fair, but not for thy
They help me but simply,
But Bialacoil loosed be
To gone at large and to be free,
For him my life lies all in dout,
But if he come the rather out.
Alas I trow it woll not been,
For how should I evermore him seen?
He may not out, and that is wrong,
Because the toure is so strong,
How should he out, or by whose prowess
Of so strong a forteresse?
By me certain it nill be do,
God wot I have no with thereto,
But well I wot I was in rage,
When I to Love did homage,
Who was the cause (in soothfastnesse)
But her self dame Idleness?
Which me conueide through fair prayers
To enter into that fair vergere:
She was to blame me to leave,
The which now does me sore grieve,
* A fools word is naught to trow,
Ne worth an apple for to low,
Men should hem snibbe bitterly,
At prime temps of his folly:
I was a fool, and she me leued,
Through whom I am right naught releued,
She accomplished all my will,
That now me greueth wonder ill.
REason me said what should fall,
A fool my self I may well call,
That love aside I had not laid,
And trowed that dame Reason said.
Reason had both skill and right,
When she me blamed with all her might
To meddle of Love, that has me shent,
But certain now I woll repent.
ANd should I repent? Nay parde,
A false traitor then should I be,
The devils engines would me take,
If I love would forsake,
Or Bialacoil falsely betray,
Should I at mischief hate him? nay,
Since he now for his courtesy
Is in prison of Jealousy,
Courtesy certain did he me,
So much, that it may not yolden be,
When he the haie passen me let,
To kiss the Rose, fair and sweet,
Should I therefore conne him maugre,
Nay certainly, it shall not be,
For Love shall never (give God will)
Here of me, through word or will,
Offense or complaint more or less,
Neither of Hope nor Idleness:
For certes, it were wrong that I
Hated hem for her courtesy.
There is not else, but suffer and think,
And waken when I should wink,
Abide in hope, till love through chance
Send me succor or allegeaunce,
Expectaunt aye till I may mete,
To getten mercy of that sweet.
Whilome I think how Love to me
Said he would take at gree
My service, if vnpatience
Caused me to done offense:
He said, in thank I shall it take,
And high master eke thee make,
If wickedness ne reave it thee,
But soon I trow that shall not be.
These were his words by and by,
It seemed he loved me truly.
Now is there not but serve him well,
If that I think his thank to feel,
My good, mine harm, lithe hole in me,
In Love may no defaut be,
For true Love ne failed never man:
Soothly the fault mote needs than
As God forbide, be found in me,
And how it comes, I cannot see.
Now let it gone as it may go,
Whether Love woll succor me or slo,
He may do hole on me his will,
I am so sore bound him till,
From his service I may not flene,
For life and death withouten wene
Is in his hand, I may not chese,
He may me do both win and lose,
And since so sore he does me grieve,
Yet if my lust he would acheue,
To Bialacoil goodly to be,
I give no force what fell on me:
For though I die, as I mote need,
I pray Love of his goodlyhede,
To Bialacoil do gentleness,
For whom I live in such distress,
That I mote dien for penance,
But first, without repentance,
I woll me confess in good intent,
And make in have my Testament,
As lovers done that feelen smart:
To Bialacoil leave I mine heart
All hole, without departing,
Or doubleness of repenting.
Coment Raison vient a Lamant.
THus as I made my passage
In complaint, and in cruel rage,
And I not where to find a leche,
That couth unto mine helping each
Suddenly again comen down,
Out of her toure I saw Reasoun,
Discreet and wise, and full pleasant,
And of her port full auenaunt,
The right way she took to me,
Which stood in great perplexite
That was poshed in every side,
That I nist where I might abide,
Till she demurely sad of chere
Said to me as she came nere.
Mine own friend, art thou grieved,
How is this quarrel yet atcheued
Of loves side? Anon me tell,
Have thou not yet of Love thy fill?
Art thou not weary of thy service?
That thee has in such wise.
What joy have thou in thy loving?
Is it sweet or bitter thing,
Can thou yet chese, let me see
What best thy succor might be.
Thou seruest a full noble Lord,
That makes thee thrall for thy reward,
Which aye renews thy tourment,
With folly so he has thee blent,
Thou fell in mischief thilke day,
When thou did the sooth to say
Obeisaunce and eke homage
Thou wroughtest nothing as the sage,
When thou became his liege man,
Thou did a great folly than,
Thou wistest not what fell thereto,
With what Lord thou had to do,
If thou had him well know
Thou had naught be brought so low,
For if thou wist what it were,
Thou noldest serve him half a year,
Not a week, nor half a day,
Ne yet an hour without delay,
Ne never iloved paramours,
His Lordship is so full of shours,
Know him ought?
Lamaunt. Ye dame parde.
Raisoun. Nay, nay. Lamaunt. Yes I.
Raisoun. Wherefore let see.
Lamaunt. Of that he said I should be
Glad to have such Lord as (he)
And master of such seignorie.
Raisoun. Know him no more?
Lamaunt. Nay certes, I
Save that he yafe me rules there,
And went his way I nist where,
And I abode bound in ballaunce,
Lo there a noble cognisaunce.
Raisoun.
But I woll that thou know him now
Ginning and end, since that thou
Art so anguishous and mate,
Disfigured out of astate,
There may no wreche have more of woe,
Ne caitife none enduren so,
It were to every man sitting,
Of his Lord have knowledging:
For if thou knew him out of dout,
Lightly thou should scapen out
Of thy prison that marreth thee.
Lamaunt.
YEa dame since my Lord is he,
And I his man made with mine hond,
I would right feign understand
To know of what kind he be,
If any would inform me.
Raisoun.
I Would (said Reason) thee lere,
Since thou to learn have such desire,
And show thee withouten fable
A thing that is not demonstrable,
Thou shall withouten science,
And know withouten experience
The thing that may not known be,
Ne wist ne showed in no degree,
Thou may the sooth of it not witten,
Though in thee it were written,
Thou shall not know thereof more,
While thou art ruled by his lore,
But unto him that love woll fly,
The knotte may unloosed be,
Which has to thee, as it is found,
So long to knitte and not unbound,
Now set well thine entention,
To hear of Love the description.
Love it is an hateful pees,
A free acquitaunce without relees,
And through the fret full of falshede,
A sikernesse all set in dread,
In heart is a despairing hope,
And full of hope it is wanhope,
Wise Woodnesse, and void Reasoun,
A Sweet peril in to droun,
An heavy burden light to bear,
A wicked wawe away to wear.
It is Caribdes perilous,
Disagreeable and gracious,
It is discordaunce that can accord,
And accordaunce to discord,
It is conning without science,
Wisdom without sapience,
Wit without discretion,
Hauoire without possession,
It is like heal and hole sickness,
A trust drowned and drunkenness,
And health full of malady,
And Charity full of envy,
And anger full of abundance,
And a greedy suffisaunce,
Delight right full of heaviness,
And dreried full of gladness,
Bitter sweetness and sweet error,
Right evil sauoured good savor,
Sin that pardon has within,
And pardon spotted without sin,
A palne also it is joyous,
And fellonie right pitous,
Also play that selde is stable,
And steadfast right meuable,
A strength weiked to stond upright,
And feebleness full of might,
Wit unauised, sage folly,
And joy full of tourmentrie,
A laughter it is weeping aie,
Rest that trauaileth night and day,
Also a sweet hell it is,
And a sorrowful Paradis,
A pleasant gaile and easy prisoun,
And full of Frost Summer seasoun,
Prime temps full of Frostes white,
And May deuoid of all delight,
With seer branches, blossoms vngrene,
And new fruit filled with Winter tene,
It is a slow may not forbear,
Rags ribaned with gold to wear:
* For also well woll love be set
Under rags as rich rotchette,
And eke as well by amorettes
In mourning black, as bright burnettes,
For none is of so mokell prise,
Ne no man founden so wise,
Ne none so high of parage,
Ne no man found of wit so sage,
No man so hardy ne so wight,
Ne no man of so mokell might,
None so fulfilled of bounte,
That he with Love may daunted be,
All the world holds this way,
Love makes all to gone misway,
But it be they of evil life,
Whom Genius cursed man and wife,
That wrongly work again nature,
None such I love, ne have no cure
Of such as loves servant been,
And woll not by my counsel fleene,
For I ne preise that loving,
Wherethrough man at the last ending
Shall call hem wretches full of woe,
Love greueth hem and shendeth so,
But if thou wolt well love eschew,
For to escape out of his mew,
And make all whole the sorrow to slake
No better counsel may thou take,
Than think to fleen well iwis,
May naught help else: for wit thou this,
* If thou fly it, it shall fly thee,
Follow it, and followen shall it thee.
Lamaunt.
WHen I had heard Reason sain,
Which had spilt her speech in vain:
Dame (said I) I dare well say
Of this auaunt me well I may
That from your school so deuiaunt
I am, that never the more auaunt.
Right naught am I through your doctrine,
I dull under your discipline,
I wot no more than wist ever
To me so contrary and so fer
Is every thing that ye me lere,
And yet I can it all by partuere:
Mine heart foyeteth thereof right naught,
It is so written in my thought,
And deep graven it is so tender
That all by heart I can it render,
And read it over communely,
But to my self lewdest am I.
But since ye Love discriuen so
And lack and preise it both two
Defines it into this Letter,
That I may think on it the better:
For I heard never defined here,
And wilfully I would it lere.
* If Love be searched well and sought
It is a sickness of the thought
Annexed and knedde betwixt tweine,
With male and female with o cheine,
So freely that binds, y^ they nill twinne,
Wheder so thereof they lose or win,
The root springs through hot brenning
Into disordinate desiring,
For to kissen and embrace,
And at her lust them to solace,
Of other thing love retcheth naught
But sets her heart and all her thought,
More for delectatioun
Than any procreatioun
Of other fruit by engendrure:
Which love, to God is not pleasure,
For of her body fruit to get
They give no force, they are so set
Upon delight to play in fere.
And some have also this manner,
To fainen hem for Love seek,
Such love I preise not at a leke,
* For Paramours they do but feign,
To love truly they disdain,
They falsen Ladies traitorously,
And swerne hem oaths utterly,
With many a leasing, and many a fable,
And all the finden deceiuable.
And when they han her lust getten
The hot ernes they all foryetten,
Women the harm buyen full sore:
But men thus thinke^ evermore,
* The less harm is, so mote I thee,
Deceive them, than deceived be.
And namely where they ne may
Find none other mean way.
For I wot well in soothfastnesse,
That who does now his business
With any woman for to dele,
For any lust that he may feel,
But if it be for engendru^e,
He does trespass I you ensure:
For he should setten all his will
To getten a likely thing him till,
And to sustain, if he might,
And keep forth by kinds right
His own likeness and semblable:
For because all is corrumpable
And fail should succession
Ne were there generation,
Our sects stern for to save,
When father or mother arne in grave,
Her children should, when they been dead,
Full diligent been in her stead
To use that work on such a wise,
That one may through another rise.
Therefore set kind therein delight,
For men therein should hem delight,
And of that deed be not erke,
But often sithes haunt that work:
For none would draw thereof a draught
Ne were delight, which has hem caught,
This had subtle dame Nature:
For none goes right I thee ensure
Ne has intent hoole ne perfect,
For her desire is for delight,
The which fortened crease and eke
The play of Love, for often seek
And thrall hem self they be so nice
Unto the Prince of every vice:
* For of each sin it is the root
Unlawful lust, though it be soote,
And of all evil the racine,
As Tullius can determine,
Which in his time was full sage,
In a book he made of age,
Where that more he praises Elde
Though he be crooked and vnwelde,
And more of commendatioun:
Then youth in his discriptioun:
For Youth set both man and wife
In all peril of soul and life.
And peril is, but men have grace,
The peril of Youth for to pace,
Without any death or distress,
It is so full of wildness
So often it does shame and damage
To him or to his lineage,
It leads man, now up now down
In mokell dissolutioun,
And makes him love evil company,
And lead his life disrulilie,
And halt him paid with none estate
Within himself is such debate,
He changes purpose and intent,
And yalt into some covent,
To liuen after her emprise,
And leeseth freedom and fraunchise,
That nature in him had set,
The which again he may not get,
If he there make his mansion,
For to abide profession,
Though for a time his heart absent
It may not fail, he shall repent,
And eke abide thilke day,
To leave his abite, and gone his way,
And leaseth his worship and his name,
And dare not come again for shame,
But all his life he does so mourn,
Because he dare not home return,
Freedom of kind so lost has he
That never may recured be,
But that if God him grant grace
That he may, er he hence pace,
Contain under obedience
Through the virtue of patience.
For Youth set man in all folly,
In unthrift and in ribaudrie,
In lechery, and in outrage,
So often it changes of courage.
Youth ginneth often such bargain,
That may not end without pain.
In great peril is set Youth head
Delight so does his bridell led,
Delight this hangs, dread thee naught,
Both man's body and his thought,
Only through Youths chambere,
That to done evil is customere,
And of naught else takes head,
But only follies for to lead
Into disport and wildenesse,
So is froward from sadness,
But Elde draws hem therefro,
Who wot it not, he may well go,
And mo of them, that now arne old,
That whilom Youth had in hold,
Which yet remembers of tender age
How it him brought in many a rage,
And many a folly therein wrought:
But now y^ Elde has him through sought
They repent hem of her folly,
That Youth hem put in jeopardie,
In peril and in much woe,
And made hem often amiss to do,
And sewen evil company
Riot and advoutrie.
But Elde began again restrain
From such folly, and refrain
And set men by her ordinance
In good rule and governaunce,
But evil she spends her servise,
For no man woll her love, neither preise,
She is hated, this wot I well,
Her acquaintance would no man feel,
Ne han of Elde company,
Men hate to be of her alie,
For no man would becommen old,
Ne die, when he is young and bold,
And Elde maruaileth right greatly,
When they remember hem inwardly
Of many a perilous emprise
Which that they wrought in sundry wise,
However they might without blame
Escape away without shame,
In youth without damage
Or reprefe of her lineage,
Loss of member, shedding of blood,
Peril of death, or loss of good,
Wost thou not where youth abit,
That men so preisen in her wit?
With Delight she halt sojour,
For both they dwellen in o tour,
As long as youth is in season,
They dwellen in one mansion:
Delight, of Youth woll have servise
To do what so he woll devise,
And Youth is ready evermore
For to obey, for smert or sore,
Unto Delight, and him to yeve
Her servise, while that she may live.
Where Elde abitte, I woll thee tell
Shortly, and no while dwell,
For thider behooves thee to go
If death in youth thee not slo:
Of this journey thou may not fail,
With her labor and travail,
Lodged keen with sorrow and woe,
That never out of her Court go:
Pain and distress, sickness, and ire,
And melancholy that angry sire,
Ben of her pale is senators,
Groaning and grutching, her herbegeours,
The day and night her to tourment
With cruel death they her present,
And tellen her erltch and late
That death stondeth armed at her gate:
Then bring they to her remembrance
The folly deeds of her enfaunce,
Which causen her to mourn in woe
That youth has her beguiled so
Which suddenly away is ha^ted,
She weeped the time that she has wasted,
Complaining of the preteritte,
And the present, that not abitte,
And of her old vanitee
That but aforne her she may see,
In the future some succor,
To leggen her of her dolor
To grant her time of repentance,
For her sins to do penance,
And at the last so her govern
To win the joy that is eterne,
Fro which go backward youth he made
In vanity to drown and wade,
* For present time abides naught,
It is more swift than any thought,
So little while it does endure
That there nis count ne measure.
But how that ever the game go
Who list to love joy and mirth also
Of love, be it he or she,
Hie or low who it be,
In fruit they should hem delight,
Her part they may not else quite,
To save hem self in honest,
And yet full many one I see
Of women, soothly for to saine,
That desire and would feign
The play of Love, they be so wild
And not covet to go with child:
And if with child they be perchance
They woll it hold a great mischaunce,
But whatsoever woe they feel,
They woll not plain, but concele,
But if it be any fool or nice,
In whom that shame has no justice,
For to Delight eachone they draw,
That haunt this work both hie and law,
Save such that arne worth right naught,
That for money woll be bought,
* Such love I preise in no wise,
When it is given for covetise
* I praise no woman, though she be wood
That yeveth her self for any good:
For little should a man tell
Of her, that will her body sell,
Be she maid, be she wife,
That quick woll sell her by her life,
How fair chere that ever she make,
He is a wretch I undertake
That loved such one, for sweet or sour,
Though she him called her Paramoure,
And laugheth on him, and makes him feast,
For certainly no such beast
To be loved is not worthy
Or bear the name of Drury,
None should her please, but he were wood,
That woll dispoile him of his good:
Yet nathelesse I woll not say
That she for solace and for play,
May a Jewel or other thing
Take of her Loves free yeving:
But that she ask in no wise,
For dread of shame, or covetise.
And she of hers may him certain
Without slander yeven again,
And join her hearts together so
In Love, and take and yeve also.
Trow not that I will hem twinne,
When in her love there is no sin,
I woll that they together go,
And done all that they han ado,
As curtes should and debonaire,
And in her love beren hem fair,
Without vice, both he and she,
So that always in honest,
Fro folly love to keep hem clear
That brenneth herts with his fere,
And that her love in any wise,
Be devoide of Covetise.
* Good love should engendered be
Of true heart, just, and secree,
And not of such as set her thought
To have her lust, and else naught:
So are they caught in Loves lace,
Truly for bodily solace,
Fleshly delight is so present
With thee, that set all thine intent,
Without more, what should I gloss,
For to get and have the Rose,
Which makes thee so mate and wood
That thou desire none other good,
But thou art not an inch the nerre,
But ever abidest in sorrow and werre,
As in thy face it is seen,
It makes thee both pale and leene,
Thy might, thy virtue goes away:
* A sorry guest (in good fay)
Thou harbourest in thine Inn
The God of Love when thou let inn:
Wherefore I read thou shette him out,
Or he shall greve thee out of dout,
For to thy profit it woll turn,
If he no more with thee sojourne.
In great mischief and sorrow sonken,
Ben hearts, that of Love arne dronken,
As thou peraventure known shall,
When thou have lost the time all,
And spent thy thought in idleness,
In wast, and woeful lustiness:
If thou may live the time to see
Of love for to delivered be,
Thy time thou shall beweepe sore
The which never thou may restore:
* For time lost, as men may see,
For nothing may recovered be,
And if thou escape, yet at last,
Fro love that has thee so fast
Knitte and bounden in his lace,
Certain I hold it but a grace,
For many one as it is seine
Have lost, and spent also in vein
In his servise without succor
Body and soul, good, and treasour,
Wit, and strength, and eke richesse,
Of which they had never redress.
Lamant.
THus taught and preached has Reason,
But Love spilt her Sermon,
That was so imped in my thought,
That her doctrine I set at naught,
And yet ne said she never a dele,
That I ne understood it well,
Word by word the matter all,
But unto Love I was so thrall,
Which calls over all his pray,
He chaseth so my thought aie,
And holds mine heart under his sele,
As trusty and true as any stele:
So that no devotion
Ne had I in the Sermon
Of dame Reason, ne of her read
I took no soiour in mine head.
For all yede out at one ere
That in that other she did lere,
Fully on me she lost her lore
Her speech me greeved wonder sore.
THat unto her for ire I said
For anger, as I did abraid:
Dame, and is it your will algate,
That I not Love, but that I hate
All men, as ye me teach,
For if I do after your speech,
Since that you seine Love is not good,
Then must I needs say with mood
If I it leve, in hatred aie
Liven, and void love away,
From me a sinful wretch,
Hated of all that tetch,
I may not go none other gate,
For either must I love or hate,
And if I hate men of new,
More than Love it woll me rue
As by your preching seems me
For Love nothing ne praises thee
Ye yeve good counsel sikerly
That precheth me all day, that I
Should not loves lore allow,
He were a fool would you not trow?
In Speech also ye han me taught,
Another Love that known is naught
Which I have heard you not repreve,
To love each other by your leve,
If ye would diffine it me,
I would gladly here to see,
At the least if I may lere
Of sundry Love the manner.
Raison.
CErtes friend, a fool art thou
When that thou nothing wilt allow
That I for thy profit say:
Yet woll I say thee more in fay,
For I am ready at the leest,
To accomplish thy request,
But I not where it woll avail,
In vain perauenture I shall travail:
Love there is in sundry wise,
As I shall thee here devise.
For some Love lefull is and good,
I mean not that which makes thee wood,
And brings thee in many a fit,
And rauisheth fro thee all thy wit,
It is so maruailous and queint,
With such love be no more aquaint.
Comment Raison diffinist Aunsete.
Love of friendship also there is
Which makes no man done amiss,
Of will knitte betwixt two,
That woll not break for well ne woe,
Which long is likely to continue,
When will and goods been in commune,
Grounded by Gods ordinance,
Hoole without discordaunce,
With hem holding commaunce
Of all her good in charity,
That there be none exceptioun,
Through changing of ententioun,
That each help other at her need,
And wisely hele both word and deed,
True of meaning, deuoide of Sloth,
* For wit is naught without Troth:
So that the tone dare all his thought
Saine to his friend, and spare naught,
As to himself without dreding,
To be discovered by wreiyng,
* For glad is that conjunction,
When there is none suspection,
Whom they would prove
That true and perfect weren in Love.
* For no man may be amiable:
But if he be so firm and stable,
That fortune change him not ne blind,
But that his friend always him find,
Both poor and rich in o state:
For if his friend through any gate,
W^ll complain of his pouerte,
He should not bide so long, till he
Of his helping him require,
* For good deed done through praiere
Is sold and bought too dear iwis
To heart that of great valor is.
* For heart fulfilled of gentleness,
Can evil demean his distress.
* And man that worthy is of name,
To asken often has great shame.
* A good man brenneth in his thought,
For shame when he asks ought,
He has great thought, and dredeth aie
For his disease when he shall pray
His friend, least that he warned be
Till that he preue his stabilitie:
But when that he has founden one
That trusty is and true and stone,
And assayed him at all,
And found him steadfast as a wall,
And of his friendship be certain,
He shall him show both joy and pain,
And all that dare think or say,
Without shame, as he may,
For how should he ashamed be,
Of such one as I told thee?
For when he wot his secret thought,
The third shall know thereof right naught,
* For twey in number is ^et than three,
In every counsel and secree:
Repreue he dredeth never a dele,
Who that beset his words well,
For every wise man out of dread,
Can keep his tongue till he see need.
* And fools cannot hold her tongue,
A fools bell is soon ronge,
Yet shall a true friend do more
To help his fellow of his sore,
And succor him when he has need
In all that he may done indeed,
And gladder that he him pleases
Than his fellow that he eases,
And if he do not his request,
He shall as much him molest
As his fellow, for that he
May no fulfill his volunte
Fully, as he has required,
If both the hearts love has fired
Joy and woe they shall depart,
And take euenly each his part,
Half his annoy he shall have aie,
And comfort what that he may,
And of this bliss part shall he,
If Love woll departed be.
ANd whilom of this unity
Spoke Tullius in a ditie,
And should maken his request
Unto his friend, that is honest,
And he goodly should it fulfill,
But it the more were out of skill,
And otherwise not grant thereto,
Except only in causes two.
* If men his friend to death would drive
Let him be busy to save his live.
* Also if men woollen hem assail,
Of his worship to make him fail
And hindren him of his renoun
Let him with full ententioun,
His deuer done in each degree
That his friend ne shamed be.
In this two case with his might,
Taking no keep to skill nor right,
As far as Love may him excuse,
This ought no man to refuse.
This Love that I have told to thee
Is nothing contrary to me,
This woll I that thou follow well,
And leave the other every dele,
This Love to virtue all attends,
The the other fools blent and shendeth.
Another Love also there is,
That is contrary unto this,
Which desire is so constrained
That is but will fained
Away fro troth it does so vary
That to good Love it is contrary,
For it maymeth in any wise
Sick hearts with couetise,
All in winning and in profit,
Such love sets his delight:
This love so hangs in balaunce
That if it lose his hope perchance,
Of lucre, that he is set upon,
It woll fall, and quench anon,
* For no man may be amorous,
Ne in his living virtuous,
But he love more in mood
Men for hem self than for her good:
For Love that profit does abide,
Is false, and bideth not in no tide.
Love comes of dame Fortune,
That little while woll contune,
For it shall chaungen wonders soon,
And take Eclips as the Moon
When he is from us let
Through earth, that betwixt is set
The sun and her, as it may fall,
Be it in party, or in all,
The shadow makes her beams merke,
And her horns to show derke,
That part where she has lost her light
Of Phoebus fully, and the sight,
Till when the shadow is ouerpast,
She is enlumined again as fast,
Through the brightness of the sun beams
That yeueth to hem again her leames:
That Love is right of such nature,
Now is fair, and now obscure,
Now bright, now Clipsy of manner,
And whilom dim, and whilom clear,
As Soon as pouerte ginneth take,
With mantell and weeds blake
Hides of Love the light away,
That into night it tourneth day,
It may not see richesse shine,
Till the black shadows fine,
* For when richesse shines bright
Love recouereth again his light,
And when it fails, he woll flit,
And as she greeueth, so greeueth it.
Of this Love hear what I say,
The rich men are loved aie:
And namely tho that sparand been,
That woll not wash her hearts cleene
Of the filth, nor of (...) ^^ice
Of greedy brenning Avarice.
* The rich man full fond is iwis,
That weneth that he loved is,
If that his heart it understood,
It is not he, it is his good,
He may well weten in his thought,
His good is loved, and he right naught:
For if he be a Niggard eke,
Men would not set by him a leke,
But haten him, this is the sooth,
Lo what profit his cattle does,
Of every man that may him see,
It gets him naught but enmitee:
But he amend himself of that vice,
And know himself, he is not wise.
Certes he should aye friendly be,
To get him love also been free,
Or else he is not wise ne sage
No more than is a got ramage
That he not loves, his deed proves,
When he his richesse so well loves,
That he woll hide it aie and spare,
His poor friends seen forfare
To keepen aie his purpose
Till for dread his eyes close,
And till a wicked death him take
Him had lever asunder shake,
And let all his limbs asunder riue,
Than leave his richesse in his live,
He thinks to part it with no man,
Certain no love is in him than:
How should love with him be,
When in his heart is no pite,
That he trespasseth well I wate,
For each man knows his estate,
For well him ought to be reproved
That loves naught, ne is not loved.
But since we arne to fortune comen,
And has our Sermon of her nomen,
A wonder will I tell thee now,
Thou hardest never such one I trow,
I not where thou me leven shall
Though soothfastnesse it be all
As it is written, and is sooth
That unto men more profit does
The froward fortune and contraire,
Than the swote and debonaire:
And if they think it is doutable,
It is through argument prouable
For the debonaire and soft,
Falseth and beguileth often,
For lich a mother she can cherish
And milken as does a norice,
And of her good to him deles
And yeueth him part iweles,
With great riches and dignity,
And hem she hoteth stabilitie,
In state that is not stable,
But changing aie and variable,
And feeds him with glory vain,
And worldly bliss none certain,
When she him sets on her whele,
Then wene they to be right well,
And in so stable state withal
That never they wene for to fall,
And when they set so high to be,
They wene to have in certainte
Of heartly friends to great number,
That nothing might her state encombre,
They trust hem so on every side,
Wening with hem they would abide,
In every peril and mischaunce
Without change or variaunce,
Both of cattle and of good,
And also for to spend her blood,
And all her members for to spill
Only to fulfill her will,
They maken it whole in many wise
And hoten hem her full servise
How sore that it do hem smert,
Into her very naked shert,
Heart and also hole they yeve,
For the time that they may live
So that with her flattery,
They maken fools glorify
Of her words speaking,
And han there of a rejoysing,
And trow hem as the Evangile
And it is all falshede and gile,
As they shall afterward see,
* When they arne full in poverte
And ben of good and cattle bare
Then should they seen who friends ware,
For of an hundred certainly,
Nor of a thousand full scarcely,
Ne shall they find unnethes one,
When poverty is commen upon.
For thus Fortune that I of tell,
With men when her lust to dwell,
Makes hem to lose her conisaunce,
And nourishes hem in ignorance.
But froward Fortune and perverse,
When high estates she does reverse,
And makes hem to tumble down
Off her whele with sudden turn,
And from her richesse does hem fly,
And plungeth hem in poverty,
As a stepmother envious,
And lays a plaster dolorous,
Unto her hearts wounded egre,
Which is not tempered with vinegre,
But with poverty and indigence,
For to show by experience,
That she is Fortune verily
In whom no man should affie,
Nor in her yeftes have fiaunce,
She is so full of variaunce.
Thus can she maken hye and low,
When they from richesse arne throw
Fully to known without were
Friend of effect, and friend of chere,
And which in love weren true and stable,
And which also weren variable,
After Fortune her Goddess,
In poverty, either in richesse,
For all that yeveth here out of dread,
Unhappy bears it indeed,
For infortune let not one
Of friends, when Fortune is gone,
I mean tho friends that woll fle
Anon as enters Poverte,
And yet they woll not leave hem so,
But in each place where they go
They call hem wretch, scorn and blame,
And of her mishappe hem diffame,
And namely such as in richesse,
Pretends most of stablenesse
When that they saw him set on loft,
And weren of hem succored often,
And most iholpe in all her need:
But now they take no manner heed,
But saine in voice of flattery,
That now appears her folly,
Over all where so they fare.
And sing, go farewell field fare.
All such friends I beshrew,
For of true there be too few,
But soothfast friends, what so betide
In every fortune woollen abide,
They han her hearts in such no bless
That they nill love for no richesse,
Nor for that fortune may hem send,
They woollen hem succor and defend,
And change for soft ne for sore,
* For who his friend loves evermore
Though men draw sword him to slo,
He may not hew her love a two:
But in case that I shall say,
For pride and ire lose it he may,
And for reproove by nicete,
And discovering of privite,
With tongue wounding, as felon,
Through venomous detraction.
Friend in this case will gone his way,
For nothing grieve him more ne may,
And for naught else woll he fle,
If that he love in stabilitie.
And certain he is well begone
Among a thousand that finds one:
For there may be no richesse,
Against friendship of worthiness,
For it ne may so high attain,
As may the valor, sooth to saine,
Of him that loves true and well.
Friendship is more than is cattle
* For friend in Court aie better is
Than penny in purse certis.
And fortune mishaping,
When upon men she is fabling,
Through misturning of her chance,
And cast hem out of balaunce.
* She makes through her adversite,
Men full clearly for to see
Him that is friend in existence
From him that is by appearence:
For infortune makes anon,
To know thy friends fro thy fone,
By experience, right as it is,
The which is more to praise iwis,
Than in much richesse and treasour,
For more deep profit and valor,
Poverty, and such adversity
Before, than does prosperity
For that one yeveth conisaunce,
And the the other ignorance.
And thus in poverty is indeed,
Troth declared fro falshede,
For faint friends it woll declare,
And true also, what way they fare,
For when he was in his richesse,
These friends full of doubleness,
Offered him in many wise,
Heart and body, and service,
What would he then have you to have bought,
To known openly her thought,
That he now has so clearly seen.
The less beguiled he should have been,
And he had then perceived it,
But Richesse nolde not let him wit,
Well more avauntage does him than,
Since that it makes him a wise man,
The great mischief that he perceives
Than does Richesse that him deceives,
Richesse rich ne makes naught
Him that on treasour set his thought:
* For richesse stont in suffisaunce,
And nothing in abundance:
For suffisaunce all only
Makes men to live richly.
FOr he that has mitches tweine,
Ne value in his demeine,
Lives more at ease, and more is rich,
Than does he that is chich,
And in his barn has sooth to saine,
An hundred mavis of wheat grain,
Though he be chapman or merchant,
And have of Gold many besaunt:
* For in getting he has such woe,
And in the keeping dread also,
And set evermore his business
For to increase, and not to less,
For to augment and multiply,
And though on heaps that lie him by,
Yet never shall make his richesse,
Asseth unto his greediness:
But the poor that retcheth naught,
Save of his livelode in his thought,
Which that he gets with his travail,
He dredeth naught that it shall fail,
Though he have little worlds good,
Meat and drink, and easy food,
Upon his travail and living,
And also suffisaunt clothing,
Or if in sickness that he fall,
And loath meat and drink withal,
Though he have not his meat to buy
He shall bethink him hastily,
To put him out of daungere,
That he of meat has no mistere,
Or that he may with little eke
Be founden, while that he is seek,
Or that men shull him berne in have,
To live till his sickness be past,
To some Maisondewe beside,
He cast naught what shall him betide,
He thinks naught that ever he shall
Into any sickness fall,
ANd though it fall, as it may be,
That all be time spare shall he
As mokell as shall to him suffice,
While he is sick in any wise,
He does for that he woll be
Content with his poverte
Without need of any man,
So much in little have he can,
He is apaide with his fortune,
And for he nill be importune
Unto no wight, ne onerous,
Nor of her goodness covetous:
Therefore he spares, it may well been,
His poor estate for to susteen.
OR if him lust not for to spare,
But suffers forth, as not yet were,
At last it happens, as it may
Right unto his last day,
And take the world as it would be:
For ever in heart thinks he
The sooner that death him slo,
To Paradise the sooner go
He shall, there for to live in bliss
Where that he shall no good miss
Thider he hops God shall him send
After this wretched lives end,
Pythagoras himself rehearses
In a Book that the gold verses
Is cleped, for the Nobilite
Of the honorable dite.
* Then when thou go thy body fro,
Free in the air thou shall up go
And leaven all humanity,
And purely live in deity,
He is a fool withouten were
That troweth have his country here.
In earth is not our Country,
That may these Clerks seine and sey,
In Boece of consolation
Where it is maked mention
Of our Country plain at the eye,
By teaching of Philosophy,
Where lewd men might lere wit
Who so that would translaten it,
If he be such that can well live
After his rent, may him yeve,
And not desires more to have,
Than may fro poverty him save.
* A wise man said, as we may seen,
Is no man wretched, but he it ween,
Be he king, knight, or ribaude,
And many a Ribaud is merry and baude,
That swinketh, and bears both day and night,
Many a burden of great might,
The which does him less offense,
For he suffers in patience,
They laugh and dance, trippe and sing,
And lay naught up for her living,
But in the Tavern all dispendeth
The winning that God hem sends,
Then goes he fardels for to bear,
With as good chere as he did ear
To swinke and travail he not faineth,
For to robben he disdaineth
But right anon, after his swinke,
He goes to Tavern for to drink,
All these are rich in abundance,
That can thus have suffisance,
Well more than can an usurere
As God well knows, without were.
* For an usurer, so God me see
Shall never for richesse rich he,
But evermore poor and indigent,
Scarce, and greedy in his intent.
For sooth it is, whom it displease
There may no merchant live at ease,
His heart in such a where is set
That it quick brenneth to get
Ne never shall, though he has getten
Though he have gould in garners yeten,
For to be needy he dredeth sore:
Wherefore to getten more and more
He set his heart and his desire,
So hot he brenneth in the fire
Of covetise, that makes him wood
To purchase other men's good,
He vnderfongeth a great pain,
That undertakes to drink up Saine:
For the more he drinks aie
The more he leaves, the sooth to say:
Thus is thurst of false getting,
That last ever in coveting,
And the anguish and distress
With the fire of greediness,
She fights with him aie, and striveth
That his heart asunder riveth,
Such greediness him assaileth,
That when he most has, most he fails.
Physicians and Advocates
* Gone right by the same yates,
They sell her science for winning,
And haunt her craft for great getting:
Her winning is of such sweetness,
That if a man fall in sickness,
They are full glad, for her increase:
For by her will, without lease,
Everich man should beseeke,
And though they die, they set not a Leeke,
After when they the gould have take,
Full little care of hem they make,
They would that forty were sick at ones,
Yea two hundred, in flesh and bones,
And yet two Thousand, as I guess,
For to encreasen her richesse.
They woll not worchen in no wise,
But for lucre and couetise,
For Physic ginneth first by (Phi)
The Physician also soothly,
And sithen it goes fro fie to fie,
To trust on hem it is folly,
For they nill in no manner gree,
Do right naught for charitee,
Eke in the same sect are set,
All tho that preachen for to get
Worships, honor, and richesse.
Her hearts arne in great distress,
That folk live not holyly,
But aboven all specially,
Such as preachen vain glory
And toward God have no memory,
But forth as Ipocrites trace,
And to her souls death purchase
And outward showing holiness,
Though they be full of cursednesse,
Not lich to the Apostles twelve,
They deceive other and hem selve:
* Beguilded is the guiler than,
For preaching of a cursed man
Though to other may profit
Himself it avails not a mite:
* For often good predicatioun
Comes of evil ententioun,
To him not vaileth his preaching
All help he other with his teaching
For where they good example take,
There is he with vain glory shake.
But let us leaven these preachours,
And speak of hem which in her tours
Heap up her gould, and fast shet,
And sore thereon their heart set,
They neither love God ne dread,
They keep more than it is need,
And in her bags sore it bind
Out of the Sun, and of the wind,
They put up more than need ware,
When they seen poor folk forfare
For hunger die, and for cold quake,
God can well vengeance thereof take,
The great mischiefs hem assaileth,
And thus in gadering ay travaileth,
With much pain they win richesse,
And Dread hem holds in distress,
To keep that they gather fast,
With sorrow they leave it at the last:
* With sorrow they both die and live,
That unto richesse her hearts yeve.
And in defaute of Love it is
As it shows full well iwis:
For if these greedy, the sooth to saine,
Loveden, and were loved again,
And good Love reigned over all,
Such wickedness ne should fall,
* But he should yeve, that most good had
To hem that weren in need bestad,
And live without false usure,
For charity, full clean and pure,
If they hem yeve to goodness
Defending hem from idleness,
In all this world then poor none
We should find, I trow not one:
But changed is this world unstable,
For Love is over all vendable.
* We see that no man loves now
But for winning and for prow,
And love is thralled in servage
When it is sold for advantage,
Yet women woll her bodies sell,
Such souls goes to the Devil of hell.
When Love had told hem his intent,
The baronage to counsel went,
In many sentences they fill,
And diversely they said her will:
But after discord they accorded,
And her accord to Love recorded:
Sir sayden they, we been at one,
By even accord of everichone,
Out take richesse all only
That sworn has full hauteinly,
That she the Castle nill not assail
Ne smite a stroke in this battle,
With dart, ne mace, spear, ne knife,
For man that speaks and bears the life.
And blames your emprise iwis,
And from our host departed is,
At least way, as in this plite
So has she this man in dispite:
For she says he ne loved her never,
And therefore she woll hate him ever,
For he woll gather no treasore,
He has her wrath for evermore,
He agilte her never in other caas,
Lo here all holly his trespass.
She says well, that this other day
He asked her leave to gone the way
That is cleped Too much yeving,
And spoke full fair in his praying:
But when he prayed her, poor was he,
Therefore she warned him the enter,
Ne yet is he not thriven so
Thar he has getten a penny or two,
That quietly is his own in hold,
Thus has Richesse us ali told:
And when Richesse us this recorded,
Withouten her we been accorded,
And we find in our accordaunce,
That false Semblaunt and Abstinaunce,
With all the folk of her battle
Shull at the hinder gate assail,
That Wicked tongue has in keeping,
With his Normans full of jangling,
And with hem courtesy and Largess,
That shull show her hardynesse,
To the old wife that kept so hard
Fair welcomming within her ward:
Then shall Delight and well Heling,
Fond, Shame adoune to bring,
With all her host early and late,
They shull assaylen that like gate,
Against Dread shall Hardynesse
Assail, and also Sikernesse,
With all the folk of her leading
That never wist what was staying.
FRaunchise shall fight and eke Pite,
With Danger full of cruelte,
Thus is your host ordained weal
Down shall the Castle every d^^le,
If everiche do his intent,
So that Venus be present,
Your mother full of vesselage
That can enough of such usage,
Withouten her may no wight speed
This work, neither for word ne deed:
Therefore is good ye for her send,
For through her may this work amend.
LOrdinges my mother the Gooddes,
That is my Lady, and my Mistres,
Nis not all at my willing,
Ne does all my desiring.
Yet can she sometime done labor,
When that her lust, in my succor.
As my need is for to atchieve:
But now I think her not to grieve,
My mother is she, and of childhede,
I both worship her, and eke dread,
* For who that dredeth sire ne dame,
Shall it abie in body or name.
And nathelesse, yet can we
Send after her if need be,
And were she nigh, she commen would,
I trow that nothing might her hold.
My mother is of great prowess,
She has taken many a forteresse,
That cost has many a pound er this,
There I nas not present iwis,
And yet men said it was my deed,
But I come never in that steed,
Ne me ne likes so mote I thee,
That such towers been take with me,
For why? Me thinks that in no wise,
It may be cleped but marchaundise.
GO by a courser black or white,
And pay therefore, then art thou quite,
The Merchant owes thee right naught,
Ne thou him when thou it bought.
* I woll not selling clepe yeving,
For selling asks no guerdoning,
Here lithe no thank, ne no merit,
That one goes from that other all quite,
But this selling is not semblable:
For when his horse is in the stable
He may it sell again parde,
And winnen on it, such hap may be,
All may the manne not lose iwis,
For at the least the skin is his.
Or else, if it so betide
That he woll keep his horse to ride,
Yet is he Lord aie of his horse:
* But thilke chafare is well worse,
There Venus entermeteth ought,
For who so such chaffare has bought,
He shall not worchen so wisely,
That he ne shall lose utterly
Both his monney and his chaffare:
But the seller of the ware,
The prise and profit have shall,
Certain the buyer shall lose all,
For he ne can so dear it buy
To have lordship and full maistry,
Ne have power to make letting,
Neither for yeft ne for preaching,
That of his chaffare maugre his,
Another shall have as much iwis,
If he woll yeve as much as he,
Of what country so that he be,
Or for right naught so hap may,
If he can flatter her to her pay.
Been then such marchaunts wise?
No, but fools in every wise,
When they buy such thing wilfully,
There as they lose her good follily.
But nathelesse, this dare I say,
My mother is not wont to pay,
For she is neither so fool ne nice,
To entremete her of such vice,
But trust well, he shall pay all,
That repent of his bargain shall,
When poverte put him in distress,
All were he schooller to richesse,
That is for me in great yerning,
When she assenteth to my willing.
But my mother saint Venus,
And by her father Saturnus,
That her engendered by his life,
But not upon his wedded wife,
Yet woll I more unto you swear,
To make this thing the surere.
Now by that faith, and that beautee
That I owe to all my brethren free,
Of which there nis wight under hevin,
That can her fathers names nevin,
So diverse and so many there be,
That with my mother have be prive,
Yet woll I swear for sikernesse,
The Pole of hell to my witness,
Now drink I not this year clarre,
If that I lie, or forsworn be,
For of the Gods the usage is,
That who so him forsweareth amiss,
Shall that year drink no clarre.
Now have I sworn enough parde,
If I forswear me then am I lorne,
But I woll never be forsworn:
Since richesse has me failed here,
She shall abie that trespass full dear,
At least way but her harm
With sweard, or sparth, or gisarme.
For certes since she loves not me,
Fro thilke time that she may see
The Castle and the Tower to shake,
In sorry time she shall awake,
If I may gripe a rich man
I shall so pull him, if I can,
That he shall in a few stoundes,
Lose all his marks, and his pounds.
I shall him make his pence out sting,
But they in his garner spring,
Our maidens shall eke pluck him so,
That him shall needen feathers mo,
And make him sell his land to spend,
But he the bet can him defend.
Poor men han made her Lord of me,
Although they not so mighty be,
That they may feed me in delight,
I woll not have them in dispite:
No good man hates hem, as I guess,
For chinch and feloun is Richesse,
That so can chase hem and despise,
And hem defoule in sundry wise,
They loven full bette, so God me speed
Than does the rich chinchy grede,
And been (in good faith) more stable
And truer, and more serviable:
And therefore it suffiseth me
Her good heart, and her beauty,
They han on me set all their thought,
And therefore I foryete hem naught.
I woll hem bring in great noblesse,
If that I were God of Richesse,
If that I were God of Love soothly,
Such ruth upon her plaint have I:
Therefore I must his succor be,
That paineth him to serven me,
For if he dyed for love of this,
Then seems in me no love there is.
Sir said they, sooth is every dele
That ye rehearse, and we wot well
Thilke oath to hold is reasonable,
For it is good and covenable,
That ye on rich men han sworn:
For sir, this wot we well beforne
If rich men done you homage,
That is as fools done outrage,
But ye shull not forsworn be,
Ne let therefore to drink clarre,
Or piment maked fresh and new,
Ladies shull hem such pepir brew,
If that he fall into her laas,
That they for woe mow saine alas,
Ladies shullen ever so courteous be,
That they shall quite your oath all free,
Ne seeks never other vicaire,
For they shall speak with him so fair
That ye shall hold you paid full well,
Though ye you meddle never a deal,
Let Ladies worch with her things,
They shall hem tell so feel tidinges,
And moove hem eke so many requests
By flattery, that not honest is,
And thereto yeve hem such thankinges,
What with kissing, and with talkinges:
That certes if they trowed be,
Shall never leave hem land ne fee
That it nill as the moeble fare,
Of which they first delivered are:
Now may you tell us all your will,
And we your hestes shall fulfill.
But false Semblaunt dare not for dread
Of you sir, meddle him of this deed,
For he says that ye been his foe,
He not, if ye will worch him woe:
Wherefore we pray you all beau sire,
That ye foryeve him now your ire,
And that he may dwell as your man
With Abstinence his dear lemman,
This our accord and our will now.
Parfey said Love, I grant it you,
I woll well hold him for my man,
Now let him come, and he forth ran.
False Semblant (quoth. Love) in this wise,
I take thee here to my service,
That thou our friends help alwaie,
And hinders hem neither night ne day,
But do thy might hem to relieve,
And eke our enemies that thou grieve,
Thine be this might, I grant it thee,
My king of harlotes shall thou be:
We woll that thou have such honor,
Certain thou art a false traitor,
And eke a thief, since thou were borne,
A thousand times thou art forsworn:
But nathelesse in our hearing,
To put our folk out of doubting,
I bid thee teach hem, wost thou how*
By some general sign now,
In what place thou shall founden be,
If that men had mister of thee,
And how men shall thee best epsy,
For thee to know is great maistrie,
Tell in what place is thine haunting.
Sir I have full diverse wonning,
That I keep not rehearsed be,
So that ye would respiten me,
For if that I tell you the sooth,
I may have harm and shame both,
If that my fellows wisten it,
My tales shoulden me be quit,
For certain they would hate me,
If ever I knew her cruelte,
For they would over all hold hem still
Of troth, that is again her will,
Such tales keepen they not here,
I might eftsoone buy it full dear,
If I said of hem any thing,
That ought displeases to her hearing,
For what word that hem pricketh or biteth,
In that word none of hem deliteth,
All were it Gospel the Euangile,
That would reprove hem of her guile,
For they are cruel and hautain,
And this thing wot I well certain,
If I speak ought to pair or loos,
Your court shall not so well be cloos,
That they ne shall wite it at last,
Of good men am I naught aghast,
For they woll taken on hem nothing,
When that they know all my meaning,
But he that woll it on him take,
He woll himself suspecious make,
That he his life let covertly,
In guile and in hypocrisy,
That me engendered and yave fostring.
They made a full good engendring
(Quoth. Love) for who so soothly tell,
They engendered the devil of hell.
But needely, howsoever it be
(Quoth. Love) I will and charge thee,
To tell anon thy wonning placis,
Hearing each wight that in this place is:
And what life thou live also,
Hide it no longer now, whereto?
Thou must discover all thy worching,
How thou seruest, and of what thing,
Though that thou should for thy sothsaw,
Ben all to beaten and to draw,
And yet art thou not wont parde,
But nathelesse, though thou beaten be,
Thou shall not be the first, that so
Has for soothsaw suffered woe.
Sir, since that it may liken you,
Though that I should be slain right now,
I shall done your commandment,
For thereto have I great talent.
Withouten words mo, right than
False Semblaunt his sermon began,
And said hem thus in audience,
Barons, take heed of my sentence,
That wight that list to have knowing
Of false Semblant full of flattering,
He must in worldly folk him seek,
And certes in the Cloisters eke,
I won no where, but in hem tway,
But not like even, sooth to say,
Shortly I woll herborow me,
There I hope best to hulstred be,
* And certainly, sikerest hiding,
Is underneath humblest clothing.
Religious folk ben full covert,
Seculer folk ben more apert:
But nathelesse, I woll not blame
Religious folk, ne hem diffame,
In what habit that ever they go:
Religion humble, and true also,
Woll I not blame, ne despise,
But I nill love it in no wise,
I mean of false religious,
That dout been, and malicious,
That woollen in her habit go,
And setten not her heart thereto.
REligious folk been all pitous,
Thou shall not seen one dispitous,
They loven no pride, ne no strife,
But humbly they woll led her life,
With which folk woll I never be,
And if I dwell, I feign me
I may well in her habit go,
But me were lever my neck atwo,
Than let a purpose that I take,
What covenant that ever I make.
I dwell with hem that proud be,
And full of wiles and subtelte,
That worship of this world coueiten,
And great need connen expleiten,
And gone and gadren great pitaunces,
And purchase hem the acquaintaunces
Of men that mighty life may leden,
And feign hem poor, and himself feden
With good morsels delicious,
And drinken good wine precious,
And preach us pouert and distress,
And fishen hemselfe great richesse,
With wily nets that they cast,
It woll come foul out at the last.
They ben fro clean religion went,
They make the world an argument,
That has a foul conclusion.
I have a robe of religion,
Then am I all religious,
This argument is all roignous,
It is not worth a crooked Brere,
* Habit ne makes neither Monk ne Friar,
But clean life and devotion,
Makes men of good religion.
Nathelesse, there can none answer,
How high that ever his head he ^here,
With rasour whetted never so kene,
That guile in branches cut thurtene,
There can no wight distinct it so,
That he dare say a word thereto.
But what herborow that ever I take,
Or what semblaunt that ever I make,
I mean but guile, and follow that,
For right no more than Gibbe our Cat,
(That awaiteth Mice and Rattes to killen)
Ne entend I but to beguilen,
Ne no wight may, by my clothing
Wete with what folk is my dwelling,
Ne by my words yet parde,
So soft and so pleasant they be.
Behold the deeds that I do,
But thou be blind thou ought so,
For vary her words fro her deed,
They think on guile withouten dreed,
What manner clothing that they were,
Or what estate that ever they bear,
Lered or lewd Lord or Lady,
Knight, Squire, Burgeis, or Bailie.
Right thus while falls Semblant sermoneth,
Eftsoons Love him aresoneth,
And brake his tale in his speaking
As though he had him told leasing,
And said: what devil is that I hear?
What folk have thou us nempned here:
May men find religioun
In worldly habitatioun?
* Yea sir, it follows not that they
Should lead a wicked life parfey,
Ne not therefore her souls lose,
That hem to worldly clothes chese,
For certes it were great pitee,
Men may in secular clothes see,
Florishen holy religiouns
Full many a saint in field and town,
With many a virgin glorious,
Devout, and full religious,
Han died, that common cloth aye beren,
Yet saints nevertheless they weren.
I could reckon you may a ten.
Yea welnigh all these holy women
That men in churches herry and seek,
Both maidens, and these wives eke,
That baren full many a fair child here,
Weared always clothes seculere,
And in the same diden they
That saints weren, and ben always.
The ix. thousand maidens dear,
That beren in heaven her cierges clear,
Of which men read in church and sing,
Were take in secular clothing,
When they received martyrdom,
And wonnen heaven unto her home.
* Good heart makes the good thought,
The clothing yeueth ne reueth naught:
The good thought and the worching,
That makes the religion flouring,
There lies the good religioun,
After the right ententioun.
* Who so took a weathers skin,
And wrapped a greedy wolf therein,
For he should go with lambs white,
Wenest thou not he would hem bite?
Yes: Nevertheless as he were wood
He would hem wirry, and drink the blood,
And well the rather hem deceive,
For since they coud not perceive
His tregette, and his cruelty,
They would him follow, although he fly.
IF there be wolves of such hew,
Amongs these Apostles new
Thou holy church thou may be wailed,
Since that thy city is assailed
Through knights of thine own table,
God wot thy lordship is doutable,
If they enforce it to win:
That should defend it fro within:
Who might defense against hem make,
Without stroke it mote be take,
Of trepeget or mangonell,
Without displaying of pensell,
And if God nill done it succor,
But let run in this color,
Thou must thy hestes letten be,
Then is there naught, but yield thee,
Or give him tribute doutles,
And hold it of hem to have pees,
But greater harm betide thee,
That they all master of it be,
Well con they scorn thee withal,
By day stuffen they the wall,
And all the night they minen there,
Nay, thou planten must else where
Thine impes, if thou wolt fruit have,
Abide not there thy self to save.
But now peace, here I turn again,
I woll no more of this thing feign,
If I might maken you weary,
But I woll heten you always;
To help your friends what I may;
So they woollen my company,
For they been shent all utterly,
But if so fall, that I be
Often with hem, and they with me,
And eke my lemman mote they serve,
Or they shull not my love deserve,
Forsooth I am a false traitor,
God judged me for a thief trechour,
Forsworn I am, but well nigh none
Wot of my guile, till it be done.
Through me has many one death received,
That my treget never aperceiued,
And yet receives, and shall receive,
That my falsenesse shall never apperceiue:
But who so does, if he wise be,
Him is right good beware of me.
But so sligh is the aperceiuing
That all to late comes knowing,
For Protheus that coud him change,
In every shape homely and strange,
Coud never such guile ne treasoun
As I, for I come never in town
There as I might known be,
Though men me both might here and see.
Full well I can my clothes change,
Take one, and make another strange.
Now am I Knight, now Chastelaine,
Now Prelate, and now Chaplain,
Now Priest, now Clerk, now Fostere,
Now am I Master, now Schollere
Now Monk, now Chanon, now Baily,
What ever mister man am I.
Now am I Prince, now am I Page,
And can by heart every language,
Sometime am I hoore and old,
Now am I young, stout, and bold,
Now am I Robert, now Robin,
Now Friar Minor, now Iacobin,
And with me follows my loteby,
To done me sollace and company,
That hight dame Abstinence, and reigned
In many a queint array feigned,
Right as it comes to her liking,
I fulfill all her desiring.
Sometime a woman's cloth take I,
Now am I a Maid, now Lady.
Sometime I am religious,
Now like an Anchor in an house.
Sometime am I Prioresse,
And now a Nonne, and now Abbess,
And go through all regiouns,
Seeking all religiouns.
But to what order that I am sworn,
I take the straw and beat the corn,
To jolly folk I enhabite,
I ask no more but her habit.
What woll ye more in every wise,
Right as me list I me disguise?
Well can I bear me under wede,
Unlike is my word to my deed,
Thus make I into my trappes fall
The people, through my privileges all,
That been in Christendom alive.
I may assoile, and I may shrive,
That no Prelate may let me
All folk, where ever they found be,
I not no Prelate may done so,
But it the Pope be, and no mo,
That made thilke establishing,
Now is not this a proper thing?
But were my sleights apperceiued
As I was wont, and woll thou why?
For I did hem a tregetry,
But there of give I a little tale,
I have the silver and the male,
So have I preached and eke shriuen,
So have I take, so have I yeuen,
Through her folly, husbond and wife,
That I led right a jolly life,
Through simplesse of the Prelacie,
They know not all my tregettrie.
But for as much as man and wife
Should show her parish Priest her life
Ones a year, as says the Book,
Ere any wight his housel took:
Then have I privileges large,
That may of much thing discharge,
For he may say right thus pardee:
Sir Priest, in shrift I tell it thee,
That he to whom that I am shriven,
Has me assoyled, and me yeven
Pennaunce soothly for my sin,
Which that I found me guilty in,
Ne I ne have never entencion
To make double confession,
Ne rehearse eft my shrift to thee,
O shrift is right enough to me,
This ought thee suffice well,
Ne be not rebel never adele,
For certes, though thou had it sworn,
I wot no Priest ne Prelate borne,
That may to shrift eft me constrain,
And if they done I woll me plain,
For I wot where to plain well,
Thou shall not strein me adele,
Ne enforce me ne not me trouble,
To make my confession double,
Ne I have none affection
To have double absolution:
The first is right enough to me,
This latter assoyling quite I thee,
I am unbound, what may thou find
More of my sins me to unbind?
For he that might has in his hond,
Of all my sins me unbond,
And if thou wolt me thus constrain
That me mote needs on thee plain,
There shall no judge imperial,
Ne bishop, ne official,
Done judgment on me, for I
Shall gone and plain me openly
Unto my shriftfather new,
That hight Friar Wolf untrew,
And he shall choose him for me,
For I trow he can hamper thee,
But lord he would be wroth withal,
If men would him Friar Wolf call,
For he would have no patience,
But done all cruel vengience,
He would his might done at the leest,
Nothing spare for Gods heest,
And God so wise be my succor,
But thou yeve me my savior
At Easter, when it likes me,
Without preasing more on thee,
I woll forth, and to him gone,
And he shall housell me anon,
For I am out of thy grutching,
I keep not deal with thee nothing.
Thus may he shrive him, that forsakes
His parish priest, and to me takes,
And if the priest woll him refuse,
I am full ready him to accuse,
And him punish and hamper so,
That he his church shall forgo.
But who so has in his feeling
The consequence of such shriving,
Shall seen, yt priest may never have might
To know the conscience aright
Of him that is under his cure:
And this is against holy scripture,
That bids every herd honest,
Have very knowing of his be.
But poor folk that gone by street,
That have no gold, ne sums great,
Hem would I let to her Prelates,
Or let her Priests know her states,
For to me right naught yeve they,
And why it is, for they ne may.
They ben so bare, I take no keep,
But I woll have the fat sheep,
Let parish Priests have the lene,
I yeve not of her harm a been,
And if that Prelates grutch it,
That oughten wroth be in her wit,
To lose her fat beasts so,
I shall yeve hem a stroke or two,
That they shall lesen with force,
Yea, both her Mitre and her Croce.
Thus yape I hem, and have do long,
My privileges ben so strong.
False Semblant would have s^inted here,
But Love ne made him no such chere,
That he was weary of his saw,
But for to make him glad and faw,
He said, tell on more specially,
How that thou servest untruly.
Tell forth, and shame thee never adele,
For as thine habit shows well,
Thou servest an holy Hermit.
Sooth is, but I am but an hypocrite,
Thou go and preachest poverte?
Yea sir, but richesse has post,
Thou preachest abstinence also?
Sir, I woll fillen so mote I go
My paunch, of good meat and wine,
As should a master of divine,
For how that I me poor feign,
Yet all poor folk I disdain.
I Love better the acquaintance
Ten times of the king of France,
Than of a poor man of mild mood,
Though that his soul be also good.
For when I see beggars quaking,
Naked on mixins all stinking,
For hunger cry, and eke for care,
I entremet not of her fare,
They ben so poor, and full of pine,
They might not ones yeve me a dine,
For they have nothing but her life,
* What should he yeve yt licketh his knife?
It is but folly to entremete
Te seek in hounds nest fat mete:
Let bear him to the spittle anon,
But for me, comfort get they none,
But a rich sick usurere
Would I visit and draw nere,
Him would I comfort and rehete,
For I hope of his gold to get,
And if that wicked death him have,
I woll go with him in his grave,
And there any reprove me,
Why that I let the poor be,
Wost thou how I not ascape,
I say and swear him full rape,
That rich men han more tetches
Of sin, than han poor wretches,
And han of counsel more mistere,
And therefore I would draw hem nere,
But as great hurt, it may so be,
Has a soul in right great poverte,
As soul in great richesse forsooth,
Albeit that they hurten both,
* For richesse and mendicities
Ben cleped two extreamities,
The mean is cleped Suffisaunce,
There lies of virtue the abundance.
For Solomon full well I wot,
In his Parables us wrote,
As it is known of many a wight,
In his thirteen chapter right,
God thou me keep for thy post,
* Fro richesse and mendicite,
For if a rich man him dress,
To think too much on richesse,
His heart on that so far is set,
That he his creator does foryette,
And him that beggeth, woll aye greve,
How should I by his word him leve,
Uneath that he nis a micher,
Forsworn, or else Gods lier,
Thus says Solomon sawes.
Ne we find written in no laws,
And namely in our Christen lay,
(Who says ye, I dare say nay)
That Christ, ne his Apostles dear,
While that they walked in earth here,
Were never seen herbred begging,
For they nolden beggen for nothing.
And right thus were men wont to teach,
And in this wise would it preach,
The masters of divinity
Sometime in Paris the city.
ANd if men would there gain appose
The naked text, and let the gloss,
It might soon assoiled be,
For men may well the sooth see,
That parde they might ask a thing
Plainly forth without begging,
For they weren Gods heerdes dear,
And cure of souls hadden here,
They nolde nothing beg her food,
For after Christ was done on rood,
With their proper honds they wrought,
And with travail, and else naught,
They wonnen all her sustenaunce,
And liueden forth in her pennaunce,
And the remenaunt yafe away
To other poor folks always.
They neither builden toure ne halle,
But they in houses small with all.
A mighty man that can and may,
Should with his hond and body always,
Win him his food in laboring,
If he ne have rent or such a thing,
Although he be religious,
And God to serven curious,
Thus mote he done, or do trespaas,
But if it be in certain caas,
That I can rehearse, if mister be,
Right well, when the time I see.
Seek the book of saint Augustine,
Be it in paper or perchemene,
There as he writ of these worchings,
Thou shall seen that none excusings
A perfect man ne should seek
By words, ne by deeds eke,
Although he be religious,
And God to serven curious,
That he ne shall, so mote I go,
With proper honds and body also
Get his food in laboring,
If he ne have properte of thing,
Yet should he sell all his substance,
And with his swinke have sustenaunce,
If he be perfect in bounte,
Thus han the books told me:
* For he that woll gone idelly,
And uses it aye busily
To haunten other men's table,
He is a trechour full of fable,
Ne he ne may by good reason
Excuse him by his orison,
For men behooves in some gise,
Ben sometime in Gods service,
To gone and purchasen her need.
Men mote eaten, that is no dread,
And sleep, and eke do other thing,
So long may they leave praying.
So may they eke her prayer blinne,
While that they work her meat to win,
Saint Austine woll thereto accord,
In thilke book that I record.
Justinian eke, that made laws,
Has thus forboden by old sawes:
No man, up pain to be dead,
Mighty of body, to beg his bread,
If he may swinke it for to get,
Men should him rather maine or beat,
Or done of him aperte justice,
Than suffren him in such malice.
They done not well so mote I go,
That taken such alms so,
But if they have some privilege,
That of the pain hem woll allege.
But how that is, can I not see,
But if the prince deceived be,
Ne I ne wene not sikerly,
That they may have it rightfully.
But I woll not determine
Of princes power, ne define,
Ne by my word comprehend ywis,
If it so far may stretch in this,
I woll not entremete a dele,
But I trow that the book says well,
Who that takes almesses, that be
Dew to folk that men may see
Lame, feeble, weary, and bare,
Poor, or in such manner care,
That con win hem nevermo,
For they have no power thereto:
He eats his own dampning,
But if he lie that made all thing.
And if ye such a truant find,
Chastise him well, if ye be kind,
But they would hate you parcaas,
If ye fillen in her laas.
They would eftsoons do you scathe,
If that they might, late or rathe,
For they be not full patient,
That han the world thus foul blent,
* And weteth well, that God bad
The good man sell all that he had,
And follow him, and to poor it yeve,
He would not therefore that he live,
To serven him in mendience,
For it was never his sentence,
But he bad werken when that need is,
And follow him in good deedis.
* Saint Poule that loved all holy church,
He bade the Apostles for to wurch,
And winnen her live lode in that wise,
And hem defended truandise,
And said, werketh with your honden,
Thus should the thing be vnderstonden.
He nolde iwis have bid hem begging,
Ne sellen Gospel, ne preaching,
Least they beraft, with her asking,
Folk of her cattle or of her thing.
For in this world is many a man
That yeveth his good, for he ne can
Werne it for shame, or else he
Would of the asker delivered be,
And for he him encombreth so,
He yeveth him good to let him go:
But it can him nothing profit,
They lose the yest and the merit.
The good folk that Poule to preached,
Profred him often, when he hem teached,
Some of her good in charity,
But thereof right nothing took he,
But of his hond would he get
Clothes to wrine him, and his mete.
TEll me then how a man may liven,
That all his good to poor has yeven,
And woll but only bid his bedes,
And never with honds labor his needs.
May he do so? Yea sir: And how?
Sir I woll gladly tell you:
Saint Austen faith, a man may be
In houses that han properte,
As templers and hospitelers,
And as these Chanons regulers,
Or white Monks, or these blake,
I woll no mo ensamples make,
And take thereof his susteining,
For therein lithe no begging,
But otherways not iwis,
Yet Austen gabbeth not of this,
And yet full many a Monk labors,
That God in holy Church honors:
For when her swinking is agone,
They read and sing in Church anon.
And for there has been great discord,
As many a wight may bear record,
Upon the estate of mendicience,
I woll shortly in your presence,
Tell how a man may beg at need,
That has not wherewith him to feed,
Maugre his fellows ianglings,
For soothfastnesse woll none hidings,
And yet percase I may abey,
That I to you soothly thus sey.
LO here the case especial,
If a man be so bestiall,
That he of no craft has science,
And naught desires ignorence,
Then may he go a begging yerne,
Till he some other craft can learn,
Through which without truanding,
He may in troth have his living.
Or if he may done no labor,
For elde, or sickness, or langour,
Or for his tender age also,
Then may he yet a begging go.
Or if he have peraventure,
Through usage of his noriture,
Lived over deliciously,
Then oughten good folk comenly,
Han of his mischief some pite,
And suffren him also, that he
May gone about and beg his bread,
That he be not for honger dead,
Or if he have of craft conning,
And strength also, and desiring
To worchen, as he had what,
But he find neither this ne that,
Then may he beg till that he
Have getten his necessite.
Or if his winning be so lite,
That his labor woll not aquite
Sufficiauntly all his living,
Yet may he go his bread begging
Fro door to door, he may go trace,
Till he the remnaunt may purchase.
Or if a man would undertake
Any emprise for to make,
In the rescous of our lay,
And it defenden as he may,
Be it with arms or lettrure,
Or other convenable cure,
If it be so he poor be,
Then may he beg, till that he
May find in troth for to swinke,
And get him cloth, meat, and drink,
Swinke he with his honds corporell,
And not with hondes espirituell.
IN all this case, and in semblables,
If that there ben mo reasonables,
He may beg, as I tell you here,
And else not in no manner,
As William saint Amor would preach,
And often would dispute and teach
Of this matter all openly
At Paris full solemnly,
And also God my soul bless,
As he had in this steadfastness,
The accord of the vniversite
And of the people, as seems me.
No good man ought it to refuse,
Ne ought him thereof to excuse,
Be wroth or blithe, who so be,
For I woll speak, and tell it thee,
All should I die, and be put down,
As was saint Poule in derke prisoun,
Or be exiled in this caas
With wrong, as master William was,
That my mother Hypocrisy
Banished for her great envy.
My mother flemed him saint Amor,
This noble did such labor
To sustain ever the loyalte,
That he too much agilte me,
He made a book, and let it write,
Wherein his life he did all write,
And would each remed begging,
And live by my traveling,
If I ne had rent ne other good,
What weneth he that I were wood?
For labor might me never please,
I have more will to ben at ease,
And have well lever, sooth to say,
Before the people patter and pray,
And wrie me in my foxerie
Under a cope of papelardie.
(Quoth. Love) what devil is this that I here,
What words tellest thou me here,
What sir Falsenesse that apert is,
Then dredest thou not God? No certes:
For selde in great thing shall he speed
In this world, that God woll dread,
For folk that hem to virtue yeven,
And truly on her own liven,
And hem in goodness aye content,
On hem is little thrift isent,
Such folk drinken great misease,
That life may me never please.
But see what gold han vserers,
And silver eke in garners,
Tailagiers, and these moniours,
Bailiffes, Beadles, Provost, Countours,
These liven well nigh by ravine,
The small people hem mote incline,
And they as wolves woll hem eten:
Upon the poor folk they geten
Full much of that they spend or keep,
Nis none of hem that he nill strepe,
And wrine hem self well at full
Without scalding they hem pull.
* The strong the feeble overgothe,
But I that wear my simple clothe,
Rob both robbed, and robbours,
And guile guiling, and guilours:
By my treget, I gather and threste
The great treasour into my cheste,
That lies with me so fast bound,
Mine high paleis do I found,
And my delights I fulfill,
With wine at feasts at my will,
And tables full of entremees,
I woll no life, but ease and pees,
And win gold to spend also,
For when the great bag is go,
It comes right with my yapes,
Make I not well tomble mine apes,
To winnen is always mine intent,
My purchase is better than my rent,
For though I should beaten be,
Over all I entremete me,
Without me may no wight dure,
I walk souls for to cure,
Of all the world cure have I
In bread and length boldly,
I woll both preach and eke counsailen,
With honds woll I not travailen,
For of the Pope I have the bull,
I ne hold not my wits dull,
I woll not stinten in my live
These Emperors for to shrive,
Of Kings, Dukes, and Lords great:
But poor folk all quite I let,
I love no such shriving parde,
But it for other cause be:
I recke not of poor men,
Her estate is not worth an ben.
Where find thou a swinker of labor
Have me to his confessor?
But Empresses, and Duchesses,
These Queens, and eke Countesses,
These Abbesses, and eke Bigins,
These great Ladies palasins,
These jolly Knights, and Bailives,
These Nonnes, and these Burgeis wives
That rich been, and eke pleasing,
And these Maidens welfaring,
Where so they clad or naked be,
Vncounsailed goes there none fro me,
And for her souls safete,
At Lord and Lady, and her meine,
I ask, when they hem to me shrive
The property of all her live,
And make hem trow both most and least
Her parish Priest is but a beast
Against me and my company,
That shrewes been as great (as I)
For which I woll not hide in hold,
No privete that me is told,
That I by word or sign iwis,
Ne woll make hem know what it is,
And they woollen also tellen me,
They hele fro me no privite.
And for to make you hem perceiven,
That vsen folk thus to deceiven,
I woll you saine withouten dread,
What men may in the Gospel read,
Of saint Matthew the Gospellere,
That says, as I shall you say here.
Upon the chair of Moses
Thus it is glosed doubtless,
(That is the old Testament,
For thereby is the chair meant)
Sit Scribes and Pharisen,
That is to saine, the cursed men,
Which that we, Ipocrites call:
Does that they preach I read you all,
But does not as they done adele,
That been not weary to say well,
But to do well, no will have they,
And they would bind on folk always,
(That been to be beguiled able)
Burdons that been importable,
On folks shoulders things they couchen,
That they nill with their fingers touchen.
And why woll they not touch it, why?
For hem ne list not sikerly,
For sad burdons that men taken,
Make folks shoulders aken.
And if they do ought that good be,
That is for folk it should see,
Her burdons larger maken they,
And maken her hemmes wide alwey,
And loven seats at the table
The first and most honorable,
And for to han the first chairis,
In Synagogues, to hem full dear is,
And willen that folk hem lout and great,
When that they passen through the street,
And woollen be cleped master also:
But they ne should not willen so,
The Gospel is there against I guess,
That shows well her wickedness.
ANother custom use we
Of hem that woll against us be,
We hate hem deadly everychone,
And we woll werrey him, as one,
Him that one hates, hate we all,
And coniect, how to done him fall:
And if we seen him win honor,
Richesse or preise, through his valor,
Provende, rent, or dignite,
Full fast iwis compassen we,
By what ladder he is clomben so,
And for to maken him down to go,
With treason we woll him defame,
And done him lose his good name.
Thus from his ladder we him take,
And thus his friends foes we make,
But word ne wete shall he none,
Till all his friends been his fone,
For if we did it openly,
We might have blame readily,
For had he wist of our malice,
He had him kept, but he were nice.
Another is this, that if so fall,
That there be one among us all,
That does a good turn, out of dread,
We saine it is our alder deed,
Yea sikerly, though he it fained,
Or that him list, or that him dained
A man through him avaunced be,
Thereof all parteners be we,
And tellen folk where so we go,
That man through us is sprongen so.
And for to have of men praising,
We purchase through our flattering
Of rich men of great post
Letters, to witness our bounte,
So that man weeneth that may us see,
That all virtue in us be.
And always poor we us feign,
But how so that we beg or plain,
We ben the folk without leasing,
That all thing have without having.
Thus be dradde of the people iwis,
And gladly my purpose is this.
I deal with no wight, but he
Have gold and treasour great plente,
Her acquaintance well love I,
This much my desire shortly,
I entremete me of brocages,
I make peace and marriages,
I am gladly executour,
And many times a procuratour,
I am sometime messangere,
That falls not to my mistere.
And many times I make enquest,
For me that office is not honest,
To deal with other men's thing,
That is to me a great liking:
And if that ye have ought to do
In place that I repair to,
I shall it speden through my wit,
As soon as ye have told me it,
So that ye serve me to pay,
My service shall be yours always.
But who so woll chastise me,
Anon my love lost has he,
For I love no man in no gise,
That woll me reprove or chastise,
But I woll all folk undertake,
And of no wight no teaching take,
For I that other folk chastie,
Woll not be taught fro my folly.
I Love none Hermitage more,
All deserts and holtes hoore,
And great woods everychon,
I let hem to the Baptist John,
I queth him quite, and him relesse
Of Egypt all the wilderness,
Too far were all my mansiouns
Fro all cities and good touns.
My paleis and mine house make I
There men may run in openly,
And say that I the world forsake,
But all amidde I build and make
My house, and swim and play therein
Bette than a fish does with his sin.
OF Antichrists men am I,
Of which that Christ says openly,
They have habit of holiness,
And liven in such wickedness:
To the copy, if him talent took
Of the Evangelistes book,
There might he see by great traisoun
Full many a false comparisoun.
As much as through his great might,
Be it of heat or of light,
The Sun surmounteth the Moon,
That troubler is, and changes soon,
And the nutte kernel the shell,
I scorn not that I you tell.
Right so withouten any gile
Surmounteth this noble Evangile,
The word of any Evangelist,
And to her title they tooken Christ,
And many such comparisoun,
Of which I make no mentioun,
Might men in that book find,
Who so could of hem have mind.
The university that tho was asleep,
Began for to braied, and taken keep,
And at the noise, the head up cast,
Ne never sithen slept it fast,
But up it stert, and arms took
Against this false horrible book,
All ready battle for to make,
And to the Judge the book they take.
But they that broughten the book there,
Hent it anon away for fear,
They nolde show it no more adele,
But then it kept, and keepen well,
Till such a time that they may see,
That they so strong woxen be,
That no wight may hem well withstond,
For by that book they durst not stond,
Away they gonne it for to here,
For they ne durst not answer
By exposition no gloss
To that that clerks woll appose,
Against the cursednesse iwis
That in that book written is.
Now wot I not, ne I can not see
What manner end that there shall be
Of all this that they hide,
But yet algate they shall abide,
Till that they may it bette defend,
This trow I best woll be her end.
Thus Antechrist abiden we,
For we been all of his meine,
And what man that woll not be so,
Right soon he shall his life forgo.
Outward Lamben seemen we,
Full of goodness and of pite,
And inward we withouten fable
Been greedy Wolves ravisable.
We enviroun both land and see,
With all the world werrien we,
We woll ordain of all thing
Of folks good, and her living.
If there be castle or cite
Within that any bougerons be,
Although that they of Millaine were,
For thereof been they blamed there.
Or of a wight out of measure,
Would lene her gold, and take usure,
For that he is so covetous,
Or if he be too lecherous,
Or these that haunten Simonie,
Or Provost full of treachery,
Or Prelate living iollily,
Or Priest that halt his quein him by,
Or old hoores hostillers,
Or other baudes or bordellers,
Or else blamed of any vice,
Of which men shoulden done justice.
By all the saints that we prey,
But they defend them with lamprey,
With luce, with elis, with samons,
With tender geese, and with capons,
With tartes, or with cheffes fat,
With dainty flaunes, broad and flat,
With caleweis, or with pullaile,
With coninges, or with fine vitaile,
That we under our clothes wide,
Maken through our gollet glide,
Or but he woll do come in have,
Rae venison bake in past,
Whether to that loure or groine,
He shall have of a cord a loigne,
With which men shall him bind and led,
To brenne him for his sinful deed,
That men shull hear him cry and rore
A mile way about and more,
Or else he shall in prison die,
But if he woll his friendship buy,
Or smerten that, that he has do,
More than his guilt amounts to.
But and he couth through his slight
Do maken up a toure of height,
Naught rought I whether of stone or tree,
Or earth, or turves though it be,
Though it were of no vounde stone,
Wrought with squier and scantilone,
So that the toure were stuffed well
With all riches temporell.
And then that he would up dress
Engines, both more and less,
To cast at us by every side,
To bear his good name wide.
Such sleights I shall you yeven
Barrels of wine, by six or seven,
Or gold in sackes great plente,
He should soon delivered be,
And if he have no such pitences,
Let him study in equipolences,
And let lies and fallaces,
If that he would deserve our graces,
Or we shall bear him such witness
Of sin, and of his wretchedness,
And done his lose so wide run,
That all quick we should him brenne,
Or else yeve him soch pennaunce,
That is well worse than the pitaunce.
* For thou shall never for nothing
Con known aright by her clothing,
The traitors full of treachery,
But thou her works can epsy.
And ne had the good keeping be
Whylome of the vniversite,
That keeps the key of Christendom,
We had been tourmented all and some.
Such been the stinking Prophetis,
Nis none of hem, that good Prophet is,
For they through wicked entention,
The year of the incarnation
A thousand and two hundred year,
Five and fifty ferther ne nere,
Broughten a book with sorry grace,
To yeven ensample in common place,
That said thus, though it were fable,
This is the Gospel perdurable,
That fro the holy ghost is sent.
Well were it worth to be brent.
Entitled was in such manner
This book, of which I tell here,
There nas no wight in all Paris,
Beforne our Lady at parvis,
That they ne might the book by,
The sentence pleased hem well truly.
But I woll stint of this matere,
For it is wonder long to here,
But had that ilke book endured,
Of better estate I were ensured,
And friends have I yet pardee,
That han me set in great degree.
OF all this world is Emperor,
Guile my father, the trechour,
And Empress my mother is,
Maugre the holy ghost iwis,
Our mighty lineage and our rout
Reigns in every reign about,
And well is worthy we ministers be,
For all this world govern we,
And can the folk so well deceive,
That none our guile can perceive,
And though they done, they dare not say,
The sooth dare no wight bewray.
But he in Christ's wrath him leads,
That more than Christ my brethren dredeth,
He nis no full good champion,
That dreadeth such similation,
Nor that for pain woll refusen,
Us to correct and accusen.
He woll not entremete by right,
Ne have God in his eyesight,
And therefore God shall him punice,
But me ne recketh of no vice,
Sithen men us loven communably,
And holden us for so worthy,
That we may folk repreve echone,
And we nill have reprefe of none,
Whom shoulden folk worshippen so,
But us that stinten never mo
To patren while that folk may us see,
Though it not so behind hem be.
ANd where is more wood folly,
Than to enhaunce chivalrie,
And love noble men and gay,
That jolly clothes wearen always,
If they be such folk as they seemen,
So clean, as men her clothes demen,
And that her words follow her deed,
It is great pity out of dread,
For they woll be none Hypocritis,
Of hem me thinks great spite is,
I cannot love hem on no side.
But beggars with these hoods wide,
With sleigh and pale faces lean,
And gray clothes not full clean,
But fretted full of tatarwagges,
And high shoes knopped with dagges,
That frouncen like a quale pipe,
Or boots riveling as a gipe.
To such folk as I you devise,
Should princes and these lords wise,
Take all her lands and her things,
Both war and peace in governings,
To such folk should a prince him yeve,
That would his life in honor live.
And if they be not as they seem,
They serven thus the world to queme,
There would I dwell to deceive
The folk, for they shall not perceive.
But I ne speak in no such wise,
That men should humble habit despise,
So that no pride there under be,
No man should hate, as thinks me,
The poor man in such clothing,
But God ne preiseth him nothing,
That says he has the world forsake,
And has to worldly glory him take,
And woll of such delices use,
Who may that beggar well excuse?
That papelarde, that him yields so,
And woll to worldly ease go,
And says that he the world has left,
And greedily it gripeth eft,
He is the hound, shame is to saine,
That to his casting goes again.
But unto you dare I not lie,
But might I feelen or epsy,
That ye perceived it nothing,
Ye should have a stark leasing,
Right in your hond thus to begin,
I nolde it let for no sin.
The God lough at the wonder tho,
And every wight began lough also,
And said: lo here a man right,
For to be trusty to every wight.
FAlse Semblant (quoth. Love) say to me,
Since I thus have avaunced thee,
That in my court is thy dwelling,
And of ribaudes shall be my king,
Wolt thou well holden my forwards?
Yea sir, from hence forwards,
We woll a people upon him areise,
And through our guile done him ceise,
And him on sharp spears riue,
Or other ways bring him fro live,
But if that he woll follow ywis,
That in our book written is.
THus much woll our book signify,
That while Peter had maistrie
May never John show well his might.
Now have I you declared right,
The meaning of the bark and rind,
That makes the entencions blind,
But now at erst I woll begin,
To expoune you the pith within,
And the seculers comprehend,
That Christ's law woll defend,
And should it kepen and maintainen
Against hem that all sustenen,
And falsely to the people teachen,
That John betokens hem to preachen,
That there nis law couenable,
But thilke Gospel perdurable,
That fro the holy ghost was sent.
To turn folk that been miswent.
The strength of John they understand,
The grace in which they say they stond,
That does the sinful folk convert,
And hem to Jesus Christ reuert,
Full many another horriblee,
May men in that book see,
That been commanded doubtless
Against the law of Rome express,
And all with Antichrist they holden,
As men may in the book beholden.
And then commaunden they to sleen,
All tho that with Peter been,
But they shall never have that might,
And God toforne, for strife to fight,
That they ne shall enough find,
That Peter's law shall have in mind,
And ever hold, and so mainteen,
That at the last it shall be seen,
That they shall all come thereto,
For aught that they can speak or do.
And thilke law shall not stond,
That they by John have understand,
But maugre hem, it shall adoun,
And been brought to confusioun,
Had never your father here beforne,
Servant so true, since he was borne,
That is against all nature.
Sir, put you in that adventure,
For though ye borowes take of me,
The sikerer shall ye never be
For hostages, ne sikernesse,
Or chartres, for to bear witness,
I take your self to record here,
That men ne may in no manner
Tearen the Wolf out of his hide,
Till he be slain back and side,
Though men him beat and all defile,
What wene ye that I woll beguile?
For I am clothed meekely,
There under is all my treachery,
Mine heart changes never the mo
For none habit, in which I go,
Though I have chere of simpleness,
I am not weary of shreudnesse
My lemman, strained Abstenaunce,
Has mister of my purueiaunce,
She had full long ago be ded,
Nere my counsel and my red,
Let her alone, and you and me.
And Love answered, I trust thee
Without borow, for I woll none.
And false Semblant the thief anon,
Right in that ilke same place,
That had of treason all his face,
Right black within, and white without,
Thanking him, began on his knees lout.
Then was there naught, but every man
Now to assaute, that sailen can
(Quoth. Love) and that full hardely:
Then armed they hem comenly
Of such armor as to hem fell.
When they were armed fires and fell,
They went hem forth all in a rout,
And set the castle all about,
They will not away for no dread,
Till it so be that they ben dead,
Or till they have the castle take,
And four battles they began make,
And patted hem in four anon,
And took her way, and forth they gone,
The four gates for to assail,
Of which the keepers woll not fail,
For they ben neither sick ne deed,
But hardy folk, and strong in deed.
Now woll I saine the countenance
Of false Semblant, and Abstinaunce,
That been to Wicked tongue went,
But first they held her parliament,
Whether it to done were,
To maken hem be known there,
Or else walken forth disguised:
But at the last they devised,
That they would gone in tapinage,
As it were in a pilgrimage,
Like good and holy folk unfeigned:
And dame Abstinence streined
Took on a robe of Cameline,
And began her gratche as a bigine.
A large couerchief of thread,
She wrapped all about her head,
But she forgate not her Psaltere.
A pair of beads eke she bear
Upon a lace, all of white thread,
On which that she her beads bid,
But she ne bought hem never adele,
For they were given her, I wot well
God wot of a full holy Friar,
That said he was her father dear,
To whom she had after went,
Than any Friar of his covent.
And he visited her also,
And many a sermon said her to,
He nolde let for men on live,
That he ne would her often shriue,
And with so great devotion
They made her confession,
* That they had often for the nones
Two heads in one hood at ones.
Of fair shape I devised her thee,
But pale of face sometime was she,
That false tratouresse untrue,
Was like that sallow horse of hew,
That in the Apocalips is showed,
That signifies tho folk beshrewed,
That been all full of treachery,
And pale, through hypocrisy,
For on that horse no color is,
But only dead and pale iwis,
Of such a color enlangoured,
Was Abstinence iwis colored,
Of her estate she her repented,
As her visage represented.
She had a burdoune all of theft,
That Guile had give her of his yeft,
And a scrippe of faint distress,
That full was of elengenesse,
And forth she walked soberlie,
And false Semblant saint, ievous die,
And as it were for such mistere,
Done on the cope of a Friar,
With cheer simple, and full pitous,
His looking was not disdeinous,
Ne proud, but meek and full peasible.
About his neck he bare a Bible,
And Squierly for began he gone,
And for to rest his limbs upon,
He had of treason a potent,
As he were feeble, his way he went.
But in his sleue he began to thring
A rasour sharp, and well biting,
That was forged in a forge,
Which that men clepen Coupe gorge.
So long forth her way they nomen,
Till they to Wicked Tongue comen,
That at his gate was sitting,
And saw folk in the way passing.
The pilgrims saw he fast by,
That bearen hem full meekely,
And humbly they with hem met,
Dame Abstinence first him grette,
And since him False Semblant salued,
And he hem, but he not remeued,
For he ne dread him not adele:
For when he saw her faces well,
Always in heart him thought so,
He should know hem both two,
For well he knew dame Abstinaunce,
But he ne knew not Constrainaunce,
He knew not that she was constrained,
Ne of her thieves life fained,
But wend she come of will all free,
But she come in another degree,
And if of good will she began,
That will was failed her than.
ANd false Semblant had he seine alse,
But he knew not that he was faise,
Yet false was he, but his falsenesse
Ne coud he not epsy, nor guess,
For Semblant was so sly wrought,
That Falsenesse he ne espied naught,
But had thou known him beforne,
Thou would on a book have sworn,
When thou him saw in thilke arraie
That he, that whilom was so gaie,
And of the dance Jolly Robin
Was tho become a Iacobin:
But soothly what so men him call
Friar Preachours been good men all,
Her order wickedly they bearen
Such minstrels, if they wearen.
So been Augustins, and Cordileers,
And Carmes, and eke sacked Freers,
And all Freers shode and bare,
Though some of hem ben great and square,
Full holy men, as I hem deem,
Everich of hem would good man seem:
* But shall thou never of appearance
Seen conclude good consequence
In none argument iwis,
If existence all failed is:
For men may find always sopheme
The consequence to enueneme,
Who so that has had the sobtiltee
The double sentence for to see.
When the Pilgrims commen were
To wicked Tongue that dwelled there,
Her harneis nigh hem was algate,
By wicked Tongue adoune they sat,
That had hem nere him for to come,
And of tidinges tell him some,
And said hem: what case makes you
To come into this place now?
SIr said strained Abstinance,
We for to dry our penance,
With hearts pitous and devout
Are commen, as Pilgrims gone about,
Well nigh on foot always we go
Full doughtie been our heels two,
And thus both we be sent
Throughout the world that is miswent,
To yeve ensample, and preach also,
To fishen sinful men we go,
For other fishing, ne fish we,
And sir, for that charity,
As we be wont, herborow we crave,
Your life to amenne Christ it save,
And so it should you not displease,
We woulden, if it were your ease,
A short Sermon unto you sain,
And wicked Tongue answered again.
The house (quoth. he) such (as ye see)
Shall not be warned you for me,
Say what you list, and I woll hear,
Grant mercy sweet sir dear.
(Quoth. alderfirst) dame Abstinence,
And thus began she her sentence.
* Sir, the first virtue certain,
The greatest, and most sovereign
That may be found in any man,
For having, or for wit he can,
That is his Tongue to refrain,
Thereto ought every wight him pain:
* For it is better still be,
Than for to speaken harm parde,
And he that hearkeneth it gladly,
He is no good man sikerly.
And sir, abouen all other sin,
In that art thou most guilty ninne:
Thou speak a yape, not long ago.
And sir, that was right evil do
Of a young man, that here repaired,
And never yet this place repaired:
Thou saidest he awaited nothing,
But to deceive Fair Welcomming
Ye said nothing sooth of that,
But sir, ye lie I tell ye plat,
He ne comes no more, ne goes parde,
I trow ye shall him never see,
Fair Welcomming in prison is,
That often has played with you er this,
The fairest games that he could.
Without filth still or loud,
Now dare she not her self solace,
Ye han also the man do chase,
That he dare neither come ne go,
What mooveth you to hate him so?
But properly your wicked thought,
That many a false lesing has thought,
That mooveth your foul eloquence,
That iangleth ever in audience,
And on the folk arises blame,
And does hem dishonor and shame,
For thing that may have no preuing,
But likelinesse, and contriuing.
* For I dare saine, that Reason deemeth,
It is not all sooth thing that seems,
And it is sin to controue
Thing that is to reprove,
This wot ye well, and sir, therefore
Ye arne to blame the more,
And nathelesse, he recketh lite
He yeueth not now thereof a mite,
For if he thought harm parfaie,
He would come and gone all day,
He coud himself not abstain,
Now comes he not, and that is seen,
For he ne takes of it no cure,
But if it be through aventure,
And less than other folk algate,
And thou her watchest at the gate,
With spear in thine arest alwaie,
There muse musard all the day,
Thou wakest night and day for thought,
Iwis thy travail is for naught,
And Jealousy withouten fail,
Shall never quite thee thy travail,
And skath is, that fair Welcoming,
Without any trespassing,
Shall wrongfully in prison be,
There weepeth and languisheth he,
And though thou never yet iwis,
A giltest man no more but this,
Take not a grief it were worthy
To put thee out of this Baily,
And afterward in prison lie
And fettred thee till that thou die,
For thou shall for this sin dwell
Right in the Devils arse of Hell,
But if that thou repent thee.
Maifaie, thou lie falsely (quoth. he:)
What, welcome with mischaunce now,
Have I therefore herboured you
To say me shame, and eke reprove,
With sorry hap to your behoue,
Am I to day your herbegere
Go herber you elsewhere than here,
That han a liar called me,
Two tregetours art thou and he,
That in mine house do me this shame,
And for my soothsaw ye me blame.
Is this the Sermon that ye make?
To all the Devils I me take,
Or else God thou me confound,
But er men didden this Castle found,
It passes not ten days or twelve,
But it was told right to my selue,
And as they said, right so told I,
He kissed the Rose privily:
Thus said I now, and have said yore,
I not where he did any more.
Why should men say me such a thing,
If it had been gabbing,
Right so said I, and woll say yet,
I trow I lied not of it,
And with my bemes I woll blow
To all neighbors arrow,
How he has both commen and gone.
Tho spoke false Semblant right anon,
* All is not Gospel out of dout,
That men saine in the town about,
Lay no defe ear to my speaking,
I swear you sir, it is gabbing,
I trow you wot well certainly,
That no man loves him tenderly,
That says him harm, if he wot it,
All be he never so poor of wit,
And sooth is also sikerly,
This know ye sir, as well as I,
That Lovers gladly woll visiten
The places there her loves habiten,
This man you loves and eke honors,
This man to serve you labors,
And clepeth you his friend so dear,
And this man makes you good cheer,
And every man that you meets,
He you saleweth, and he you greeteth,
He preseth not so often, that ye
Ought of his coming encombred be:
There presen other folk on you,
Full ofter than he does now,
And if his heart him strained so
Unto the Rose for to go,
Ye should him seen so often need,
That ye should take him with the deed,
He coud his coming not forbear,
Though ye him thrilled with a spear,
It nere not then as it is now,
But trusts well, I swear it you,
That it is clean out of his thought.
Sir, certes he ne thinks it naught,
No more ne does Fair Welcomming,
That sore abieth all this thing,
And if they were of one assent,
Full soon were the Rose hent,
The maugre yours would be.
And sir, of o thing hearkeneth me,
Since ye this man, that loves you,
Han said such harm and shame, now
Witteth well, if he gessed it,
Ye may well demen in your wit,
He nolde nothing love you so
Ne callen you his friend also,
But night and day he woll wake,
The Castle to destroy and take,
If it were sooth, as ye de vise,
Or some man in some manner wise
Might it warn him everidele,
Or by himself perceive well,
For since he might not come and gone
As he was whilom wont to done,
He might it soon wite and see,
But now all otherwise wot he.
Then have we sir, all utterly
Deserved Hell, and iollyly
The death of Hell doubtless
That thrallen folk so guiltless.
False Semblant so prooveth this thing,
That he can none answering,
And sees alwaie such apparaunce,
That nigh he fell in repentance,
And said him, sir, it may well be,
Semblant, a good man seemen ye,
And Abstinence, full wise ye seem,
Of a talent you both I deem,
What counsel woll ye to me yeven?
Right here anon thou shall be shriven
And say thy sin, without more
Of this shall thou repent sore,
For I am Priest, and have post,
To shrive folk of most dignite
That been as wide as world may dure,
Of all this world I have the cure,
And that had yet never persoun,
Ne vicarie of no manner town.
And God wot I have of thee,
A thousand times more pitee,
Than has thy Priest parochial
Though he thy friend be special.
I have avauntage, in o wife,
That your Priests be not so wise
Ne half so lettred (as am I)
I am licensed boldly,
In Divinity for to read,
And to confessen out of dread.
If ye woll you now confess,
And leave your sins more and less,
Without abode, kneel down anon,
And you shall have absolution.
Here after follows the Book of Troilus and Creseide.
In this excellent Book is showed the fervent love of Troylus to Creiseid, whom
he enjoyed for a time: and her great untruth to him again in giving herself to
Diomedes, who in the end did so cast her off, that she came to great misery. In
which discourse Chaucer liberally treats of the divine purveyance.
THE double sorrow of Troilus to
tellen,
That was King Priamus Son of Troy,
In loving, how his aventures fellen
From woe to well, and after out of joy,
My purpose is, er that I part froy.
Thou Thesiphone, thou help me for tendite
These woeful verses, that wepen as I write.
To thee I clepe, thou Goddess of tourment
Thou cruel fury, sorrowing ever in pain,
Help me that am the sorrowful instrument,
That helps Lovers, as I can complain:
* For well sit it, the sooth for to saine,
A woeful wight to have a drery fear,
And to a sorrowful tale a sorry cheer.
For I that God of Loves servaunts serve,
Ne dare to Love (for mine vnlikelynesse)
Prayen for speed, all should I therefore sterve,
So far am I fro his help in derkenesse.
But nathelesse, if this may done gladness
To any Lover, and his cause avail,
Have he my thank, and mine be the travail.
But ye Lovers that bathen in gladness,
If any drop of pite in you be,
Remembers you of passed heaviness
That ye have felt, and on the adversite
Of other folk, and thinks how that ye
Han felt, that love durst you to displease,
Else ye han won him with too great an ease.
And prays for hem that been in the case
Of Troilus, as ye may after hear:
That he hem bring in heaven to solace.
And eke for me prays to God so dear,
That I have might to show in some manner,
Such pain and woe, as loves folk endure,
In Troilus vnsely aventure.
And bids eke for hem that been dispeired
In Love, that never will recovered be:
And eke for hem that falsely ben apeired,
Through wicked tongues, be it he or she:
Thus bids God for his benignite,
So grant hem sone out of this world to pace
That been dispaired out of Loves grace.
And bids eke for hem that been at ease,
That God hem grant aie good perseverance,
And send hem grace her loves for to please,
That it to love be worship and pleasance:
For so hope I my self best to avance
To pray for hem, that loves servaunts be,
And write her woe, and live in charity.
And for to have of hem compassioun,
As though I were her own brother dear,
Now hearkeneth with a good ententioun,
For now woll I go straight to my matere:
In which ye may the double sorrows here
Of Troilus, in loving of Creseide,
And how she forsook him er that she deide.
IT is well wist, how that y^ greeks strong
In arms all with a thousand ships went
To Troie wards, and the City long
Besiegeden, nigh ten years ere they stent,
And in diverse wise, and one intent,
The ravishing to wreake of Queen Heleine,
By Paris don, they wroughten all her peine.
Now fell it so, y^ in the town there was
Dwelling a Lord of great authorite
A great divine, that cleped was Calcas,
That in that science so expert was, that he
Knew well, that Troie should destroyed be,
By answer of his God, that hight thus,
Dan Phoebus, or Apollo Delphicus.
So when this Calcus knew by calculing,
And eke by y^ answer of this God Apollo,
That the greeks should such a people bring,
Through which that Troy must be fordo,
He cast anon out of the town to go:
For well he wist by sort, that Troie should
Destroyed be, ye would who so or nolde.
Wherefore he to departen softly,
Took purpose full, this forknowing wise,
And to the Greeks host full prively
He stale anon, and they in courteous wise
Did to him both worship and servise,
In trust that he has cunning hem to read
In every peril, which that was to dread.
Great rumor rose, when it was first espied,
In all the town, and openly was spoken,
That Calcus traitor fled was and alied
To hem of Greece: and cast was to be wroken
On him, that falsely has his faith broken,
And said: he and all his kin atones,
* Were worthy to be brent, both fell and bones.
Now had Calcas left in this mischaunce,
Vnwist of this false and wicked deed,
A daughter, which was in great penance,
And of her life she was full sore in dread,
And wist never what best was to read:
And as a widow was she, and all alone,
And nist to whom she might make her moan.
Creseide was this Ladies name aright,
As to my dome, in all Troies City
Most fairest Lady, far passing every wight
So angellike shone her native beauty,
That no mortal thing seemed she:
And therewith was she so perfect a creature,
As she had be made in scorning of nature.
This Lady, that all day heard at ear
Her Fathers shame, falshede, and treasoun,
(Full nigh out of her wit for sorrow and fear,
In widows habit large of samite broun)
Before Hector on knees she fell adoun,
And his mercy bad, her self excusing,
With pitous voice, and tenderly weeping.
Now was this Hector pitous of nature,
And saw that she was sorrowful begone,
And that she was so fair a creature,
Of his goodness he gladed her anon,
And said: let your fathers traison gone
Forth with mischance, and ye your self in joy,
Dwells with us while you list in Troy.
And all y^ honor that men may do ye have,
As ferforth as though your father dwelt here,
Ye shull have, and your body shull men save,
As far as I may ought enquire and here:
And she him thanked with full good chere,
And ofter would, and it had been his will.
She took her leve, went home, and held her still.
And in her house she abode with such meine,
As till her honor need was to hold,
And while she was dwelling in that cite,
She kept her estate, and of young and old
Full well beloved, and men well of her told:
But whether that she children had or none,
I read it not, therefore I let it gone.
The things fellen as they don of werre,
Betwixen hem of Troy and Greeks often,
For sometime boughten they of Troy it derre,
And este the Greeks founden nothing soft
The folk of Troy: and thus fortune aloft,
And under efte began hem to whelmen both,
After her course, aie while yt they were wroth.
But how this town came to destruction,
Ne falls not to purpose me to tell,
For it were a long digression
Fro my matter, and you too long to dwell,
But the Troyan iestes all as they fell,
In Omer, or in Dares, or in Dite,
Who so yt can, may reden hem as they write.
But though the Greeks hem of Troy in shetten,
And her city besieged all about,
Her old usages nolde they not letten,
As to honouren her gods full devout,
But aldermost in honor out of dout,
They had a relike hight Palladion,
That was her trust aboven everychon.
And so befell, when comen was the time
Of April, when clothed is the mede,
With new grene, of lusty veer the prime,
And with sweet smelling flowers white and read
In sundry wise showed as I read:
The folk of Troie, their observances old,
Palladions feast went for to hold.
Unto the Temple in all their best wise,
Generally there went many a wight,
To hearken of Palladions servise,
And namely many a lusty knight,
And many a Lady fresh, and maiden bright,
Full well arraied both most and least,
Both for the season and the high feast.
Among these other folk was Creseida,
In widows habit black: but natheles
Right as our first letter is now an a
In beauty first, so stood she makeles,
Her goodly looking gladed all the prees,
Nas never seen thing to be praised so derre
N^r under cloud black so bright a sterre,
As was Creseide, they sayden everichone,
That her behelden in her black wede,
And yet she stood full low and still alone,
Behind other folk in little bread,
And nie the door under shames dread,
Simple of attire, and debonaire of chere,
With full assured looking and manner.
This Troilus as he was wont to guide
His young knights, he lad hem up and down,
In thilke large Temple on every side,
Beholding aie the Ladies of the town,
Now here now there, for no devotioune,
Had he to none, to reven him his rest,
But began to praise and lack whom he lest.
And in his walk full fast he began to waiten,
If knight or squier of his company,
Began for to sike, or let his eyes baiten
On any woman, that he coud epsy,
He would smile, and hold it a folly,
* And say hem thus: O Lord she sleeps soft
For love of thee, when thou turnest full often.
I have heard tell pardieux of your living
Ye Lovers, and eke your lewd observaunces,
And which a labor folk have in winning,
Of love, and in keeping such doutaunces,
And when your pray is lost, woe and penaunces:
O, very fools, blind and nice be ye,
There is not one can ware by another be.
And with y^ word he began cast up the brow,
Ascaunces lo, is this not well ispoken,
At which the God of Love began looken low,
Right for dispite, and shope him to be wroken.
He kidde anon his bow was not broken:
For suddenly he hitte him at the full,
* And yet as proud a peacocke began he pull.
O blind world, o blind entention,
How often falls all the effect contraire
Of sequedrie and foul presumption,
* For caught is proud, and caught is debonaire:
This Troilus is clomben on the staire,
And little weneth that he mote descenden,
* But all day it fails that fools wenden.
* As proud bayard begins for to skippe
Out of the way, so pricketh him his corn,
Till he a lash have of the long whippe,
Then thinks he, tho I praunce all beforn
First in the traise, full fat and new ishorne,
Yet am I but an horse, and horses law
I must endure, and with my feeres draw.
So fared it by this fires and proud knight,
Though he a worthy kings son were,
And wend nothing had had such might,
Against his will, that should his heart stere,
Yet with a look his heart woxe on fire,
That he that now was most in pride above,
Woxe suddenly most subject unto Love.
For thy ensample takes of this man,
Ye wise, proud, and worthy folks all,
To scornen love, which that so soon can
The freedom of your hearts to him thrast,
For ever it was, and ever it be shall,
* That love is he that all thing may bind,
For no man may fordo the law of kind.
That this be sooth, has preved and does yet
For this (I trow) ye know all and some
Men reden not that folk han greater wit
Than they y^ han ben most with love inome,
And strengest folk been therewith overcome,
The worthyest and greatest of degree,
This was and is, and yet man shall it see.
And trueliche that sit well to be so,
For alderwisest han therewith ben pleased,
And they that han ben aldermost in woe,
With love, han ben comforted and most eased,
And often it has the cruel heart appeased,
And worthy folk made worthier of name,
And causes most to dreden vice and shame.
Now since it may not goodly be withstond,
And is a thing so virtuous and kind,
Refuses naught to love, ne to ben bond,
Since as him selven list he may you bind,
* The yerde is bette that bowen woll and wind
Than that that breast, and therefore I you read,
Now follows him, yt so well can you led.
But for to tellen forth in special,
As of this kings son, of which I told,
And leven other thing collateral,
Of him think I my tale forth to hold,
Both of his joy, and of his cares cold,
And his work, as touching this matere,
For I it began, I woll thereto refere.
Within ye temple he went him forth playing
This Trouilus, of every wight about,
Now on this Lady, and now on that looking,
Where so she were of town, or of without:
And upon case befell, that through a rout
His eye peirced, and so deep it went
Till on Creseide it smote, and there it stent.
And suddenly for wonder wext astoned,
And began her bet behold in thrifty wise:
O very God thout he where have thou woned,
That art so fair and goodly to devise,
Therewith his heart began to spread and rise,
And soft sighed, least men might him here,
And caught again his first playing chere.
She nas not with the most of her stature,
But all her limbs so well answearing
Weren to womanhood, that creature
Was never less mannish in seeming.
And eke the pure wise of her meaning
Showed well, that men might in her guess
Honor, estate, and womanly noblesse.
Tho Troilus, right wonder well withal
Began for to like her meaning and her chere,
Which somdele deignous was, for she let fall
Her look a little aside, in such manner
Ascaunces, what may I not stonden here,
And after that her looking began she light,
That never thought him seen so good a sight.
And of her look in him there began to quicken
So great desire, and such affection,
That in his hearts bottom began to sticken
Of her six, and deep impression:
And though he erst had pored up and down,
* Then was he glad his horns in to shrink,
Uneaths wist he how to look or wink.
Lo, he that let him selven so cunning,
And scorned hem that loves pains drien,
Was full unware that love had his dwelling
Within the subtle streams of her eyes,
That suddenly him thought he felt dyen,
Right with her look, the spirit in his heart,
Blessed be love, that thus can folk convert.
She thus in black, liking to Troilus,
Over all thing he stood for to behold:
But his desire, ne wherefore he stood thus,
He neither chere made, ne word thereof told,
But from a far, his manner for to hold,
On other thing sometime his look he cast,
And eft on her, while that the service last:
And after this, not fullish all awhaped,
Out of the Temple eselich he went,
Repenting him that ever he had iaped
Of loves folk, least fully the descent
Of scorn fill on himself, but what he meant,
Least it were wist on any manner side,
His woe he began dissimulen and hide.
When he was fro yt Temple thus departed,
He straight anon unto his Pallaice turns,
Right with her look through shotten and darted
All faineth he in lust that he soiourneth
And all his chere and speech also he burns,
And aie of Loves servaunts every while
Him self to wrie, at hem he began to smile,
And said Lord, so they live all in lust
Ye Lovers, for the cunningest of you,
That servest most ententifelich and best
Him tite as often harm thereof as prow,
Your hire is quit again, ye God wot how,
Not well for well, but scorn for good servise,
In faith your order is ruled in good wise.
In no certain been your observaunces,
But it only a sely few points be,
Ne nothing asks so great attendaunces,
As does your lay, and that know all ye,
But that is not the worst, as mote I thee:
But told I you the worst point, I leve,
All said I sooth, ye woulden at me greve.
But take this: that ye Lovers often eschew,
Or else done of good entention:
Full often thy Lady woll it miss constrew,
And deem it harm in her opinion,
And yet if she for other encheson,
Be wroth, then shall thou have a groin anon
Lord, well is him that may been of you one.
But for all this, when yt he sees his time
He held his peace, none other bote him gained,
For Love began his feathers so to lime,
That well uneath unto his folk he fained,
That other busy needs him distrained,
So woe was him, that what to done he nist,
But had his folk to gone where as hem list.
And when that he in chamber was alone,
He down upon his beds feet him set,
And first he began to sike, and eft to groan,
And thought aie on her so withouten let,
That as he sat and woke, his spirit met
That he her saw and temple, and all the wise
Right of her look, and began it new avise.
Thus began he make a mirror of his mind,
In which he saw all wholly her figure,
And that he well coud in his heart find
It was to him a right good aventure
To love such one, and if he did his cure
To serven her, yet might he fall in grace,
Or else, for one of her servants pace.
Imagining, that travail nor grame
Ne might, for so goodly one be lorne
As she, ne him for his desire no shame
All were it wist, but in prise and up borne
Of all Lovers, well more than beforne
Thus argumented he, in his ginning,
Full vnavised of his woe coming.
Thus took he purpose loves craft to sewe
And thought he would worken privily
First for to hide his desire in mewe
From every wight iborne, all overly,
But he might ought recovered been thereby
* Remembering him, y^ love too wide iblowe
Yelt bitter fruit, though sweet seed be sow.
And over all this, full mokell more he thought
What for to speak, and what to holden inn
And what to arten, er to love he sought,
And on a song anon right to begin.
And began loud on his sorrow for to win
For with good hope, he began fully assent,
Creseide for to love, and naught repent.
And of his song not only his sentence,
As write mine Author called Lolius,
But plainly save our tongues difference,
I dare well say, in all that Troilus
Said in his song, lo every word right thus,
As I shall saine, and who so list it hear
Lo this next verse, he may it find there.
The song of Troilus.
If no love is, O God what feel I so?
And if Love is, what thing and which is he?
If love be good, from whence comes my woe?
If it be wicke, a wonder thinks me,
When every torment and adversite
That comes of him, may to me savery think:
* Foraie thurst I the more that iche it drink.
And if that at mine own lust I brenne,
From whence comes my wailing and my plaint:
If harm agree me, whereto plain I then,
I not, ne why, unwery that I feint,
O quick death, o sweet harm so queint,
How may of thee in me be such quantite,
But if that I consent that it so be?
And if that I consent, I wrongfully
Comylaine iwis, thus possed to and fro,
All sterelesse within a boat am I
Amidde the sea, atwixen winds two,
That in contrary stonden ever mo,
Alas, what is this wonder malady?
* For heat of cold, for cold of heat I die.
And to the God of love thus said he
With pitous voice, O Lord now yours is
My spirit, which that oughten yours to be,
You thank I Lord, yt han me brought to this:
But whether goddess or woman iwis
She be, I not, which that ye do me serve,
But as her man I woll aie live and sterve.
Ye stonden in her eyes mightily,
As in a place to your virtue digne:
Wherefore Lord, if my servise or I
May liken you, so beth to me benign,
For mine estate royal here I resign
Into her hand, and with full humble chere
Become her man, as to my Lady dear.
In him ne deigned to sparen blood royal
The fire of love, wherefro God me bless,
Ne him forbear in no degree, for all
His virtue, or his excellent prowess,
But held him as his thrall low in distress,
And brend him so in sundry wise aie new,
That sixty times a day he lost his hew.
So muchell day fro day his own thought
For lust to her, began quicken and increase,
That everiche other charge he set at naught,
For thy full often, his hot fire to cease,
To seen her goodly look he began to prease,
For thereby to ben eased well he wend,
And aie the nere he was, the more he brend.
* For aie the nere the fire the hotter is,
This (trow I) knows all this company:
But were he far or nere, I dare say this,
By night or day, for wisdom or folly,
His heart, which that is his breasts eye,
Was aie on her, that fairer was to seen
Than ever was Helein, or Polixene.
Eke of the day there passed not an hour,
Than to himself a thousand times he said,
God goodly, to whom I serve and labor
As I best can, now would to God Creseide
Ye woulden on me rue, er that I deide:
My dear heart alas, mine hele and my hew,
And life is lost, but ye woll on me rue.
All other dredes weren from him fled,
Both of thassiege, and his salvation,
Ne in desire none other founes bred,
But arguments to his conclusion,
That she on him would have compassion
And he to ben her man, while he may dure,
Lo here his life, and from his death his cure.
The sharp showers fell of arms preve
That Hector or his other brethren didden
Ne made him only therefore ones meve,
And yet was he, where so men went or ridden,
Found one the best, and lengest time abiden
There peril was, and eke did such travail
In arms, that to think it was a marvel.
But for none hate he to the Greeks had,
Ne also for the rescous of the town,
Ne made him thus in arms for to mad,
But only lo, for this conclusioun
To liken her the bet for his renoun,
Fro day to day in arms so he sped,
That all the Greeks as y^ death him dred.
And fro this forth tho rest him love his sleep
And made his meat his foe, and eke his sorrow
Began multiply, that who so took keep,
It showed in his hew both even and morrow:
Therefore a title he began him for to borow
Of other sickness, least men of him wend
That the hot fire of love him brend.
And said he had a fever, and fared amiss,
But were it certain I cannot sey
If that his Lady understood not this
Or fained her she nist, one of the twey:
But well read I, that by no manner wey
Ne seemed it that she on him rought,
Or of his pain, what so ever he thought.
But then felt this Troilus such woe
That he was welnigh wood, for aie his dread
Was this, that she some wight loved so,
That never of him she would han take heed:
For which him thought he felt his heart bleed,
Ne of his woe ne durst he naught begin
To tellen her, for all this world to win.
But when he had a space left from his care,
Thus to himself full often he began to plain:
He said, o fool now art thou in the snare,
That whilom yapedest at lovers pain:
* Now art thou hent, now gnaw thine own chain
Thou were aie woned each lover reprehend
Of thing fro which thou can not thee defend.
What woll now every lover saine of thee,
If this be wist? But ever in thine absence
Laughen in scorn, and saine, lo there goes he
That is the man of great sapience,
That held us lovers least in reverence:
* Now thanked be God, he may gone on that dance
Of hem that love lift feebly avaunce.
But o, thou woeful Troilus, God would,
(Since thou must loven, through thy destine)
That thou beset were of soch one, that should
Know all thy woe, all lacked her pitee:
But all too cold in love toward thee
Thy lady is, as frost in Winter Moon,
And thou fordo, as Snow in fire is soon.
God would I were arrived in the port
Of death, to which my sorrow woll me led:
Ah Lord, to me it were a great comfort,
Then were I quite of languishing in dread:
For by my hid sorrow iblowe in bread,
I shall beiaped been a thousand time,
More than that fool, of whose folly men rhyme.
But now help God, and ye my sweet, for whom
I plain, icought ye never wight so fast:
O mercy dear heart, and help me from
The death, for I, while that my life may last,
More than my self woll love you to my last,
And with some friendly look gladeth me sweet,
Though nevermore thing ye to me behete.
These words, and full many another mo
He spoke, and called ever in his compleint
Her name, for to tellen her his woe,
Till nigh that he in salt tears was dreint,
All was for naught, she heard not his pleint:
And when that he bethought on that folly,
A thousand fold his woe began multiply.
Bewailing in his chamber thus alone,
A friend of his, that called his Pandare,
Came ones in unware, and heard him groan,
And saw his friend in such distress and care:
Alas (quoth. he) who causes all this fare?
O mercy God, what unhappy may this mean?
Han now thus sone y^ Greeks made you lene?
Or have thou some remorse of conscience?
And art now fall in some devotion,
And wailest for thy sin and thine offense,
And have for ferde cought contrition?
God save hem, that besieged han our town,
That so can lay our iollitie on press,
And bring our lusty folk to holiness.
These words said he for y^ nones all,
That with such thing he might him angry maken
And with his anger done his sorrow fall,
As for a time, and his courage awaken:
But well wist he, as far as tongues speaken,
There nas a man of greater hardiness
Than he, ne more desired worthiness.
What cas (quoth. Troilus) or what aventure
Has guided thee to seen me languishing,
That am refuse of every creature?
But for the love of God, at me praying
Go hence away, for certes my dying,
Woll thee disease, and I mote needs deie,
Therefore go way, there nis no more to seie.
But if thou wene, I be thus sick for dread,
It is not so, and therefore scorn naught:
There is an other thing I take of head,
Well more than ought y^ greeks han yet wrout
Which cause is of my death for sorrow and thout:
But though that I now tell it thee ne lest,
Be thou not wroth, I hide it for the best.
This Pandare, yt nigh malt for woe and routh
Full often said alas, what may this be?
Now friend (quoth. he) if ever love or troth
Has been er this betwiren thee and me,
Ne do thou never such a cruelte,
To hiden fro thy friend so great a care,
Wost thou not well that I am Pandare?
I woll parten with thee all thy pain,
If it so be I do thee no comfort
* As it is friends right, sooth for to saine,
To enterparten woe, as glad disport
I have and shall, for true or false report
In wrong and right loved thee all my live,
Hide not thy woe fro me, but tell it blive.
Then began this sorrowful Troilus to sike,
And laid him thus, God leve it be my best
To tellen thee, for since it may thee like,
Yet woll I tell it, though my heart breast,
And well wot I, thou may do me no rest,
But least thou deem I trust not to thee
Now hark friend, for thus it stant with me.
Love, against the which who so defends
Him selven most, him alder lest avails,
With despair so sorrowfully me offends
That straight unto yt death my heart fails:
Thereto desire, so b^enningly me assaileth,
That to been slain, it were a greater joy
To me, than King of Greece be and of Troy.
Suffiseth this, my full friend Pandare,
That I have said, for now wotest thou my woe:
And for the love of God my cold care
So hide it well, I told it never to mo:
For harms mighten followen mo than two
If it were wist, but be thou in gladness,
And let me sterve unknown of my distress.
How have thou thus unkindly and long
Hid this fro me, thou fool? (quoth. Pandarus)
Peraventure thou may after such one long,
That mine a vise anon may helpen us:
This were a wonder thing (quoth. Troilus)
Thou could never in love thy selfen wisse,
How devil may thou bringen me to bliss.
Ye Troilus, now hearken (quoth. Pandare)
Though I be nice, it happeth often so,
That one that of ares does full evil fare,
By good counsel can keep his friend therfro:
I have my self seen a blind man go
There as he fell, that could looken wide,
* A fool may eke a wise man often guide.
* A whetstone is no carving instrument,
But yet it makes sharp kerving tolis,
And after thou wost yt I have aught miswent,
Eschew thou that, for such thing to schole is,
* Thus often wise men bewaren by foolis:
If thou so do, thy wit is well bewared,
* By his contrary is every thing declared.
For how might ever sweetness have be know
To him, that never tasted bitterness?
No man wot what gladness is I trow,
That never was in sorrow, or some distress:
Eke white by black, by shame eke worthiness
Each set by other, more for other seems,
As men may seen, and so the wise it deemeth.
Since thus of two contraries is o lore,
* I that have in Love so often assayed,
Greuaunces, ought connen well the more
Counsailen thee, of that thou art dismayed,
And eke the ne ought not been evil apaied,
Though I desire with thee for to bear
Thine heavy charge, it shall thee less dear.
I wot well that it fared thus by me,
As to thy brother Paris, an hierdesse,
Which that icleped was Oenone,
Wrote in a complaint of her heaviness:
Ye saw the letter that she wrote I guess:
Nay never yet iwis (quoth. Troilus)
Now (quoth. Pandare) hearkeneth it was thus.
Phoebus, that first found art of medicine,
(Quoth. she) and coud in every wightes care
Remedy and read, by herbs he knew fine,
Yet to himself his cunning was full bare,
For love had him so bounden in a snare,
All for the daughter of king Admete,
That all his craft ne coud his sorrow beat.
Right so fare I, unhappy for me,
I love one best, and that me smerteth sore:
And yet peraventure I can reden thee
And not my self: repreue me no more,
I have no cause I wot well for to sore,
As does an hawk, that lists for to play,
But to thine help, yet somewhat can I say.
And of o thing, right siker may thou be,
That certain, for to dyen in the pain
That I shall never mo discover thee,
Ne by my troth, I keep not to restrain
Thee fro thy love, although it were Helleine,
That is thy brothers wife, if iche it wist,
Be what she be, and love her as thee list.
Therefore as friendfullich in me assure,
And tell me platte, what is thine encheson,
And final cause of woe, that ye endure:
For doubts nothing, mine entention
Nas not to you of reprehension
* To speak, as now, for no wight may bereue
A man to love, till that him list to leave.
And weteth well, that both two been vicis,
Mistrusten all, or else all believe:
But well I wot, the mean of it no vice is,
As for to trusten some wight is a preue
Of troth, and for thy, would I feign remeue
Thy wrong conceit, and do the some wight trust
Thy woe to tell: and tell me if thou lust.
The wise eke says, woe him y^ is alone,
For and he fall, he has ^one help to rise:
And since thou have a fellow, tell thy moan,
For this nis naught certain the next wise
To winnen love, as teachen us the wise,
To wallow and weep, as Niobe ye Queen,
Whose tears yet in marble been iseene.
Let be thy weeping, and thy drerinesse,
And let us lesen woe, with other speech,
So may thy woeful time seem the less,
Delight naught in woe, thy woe to seech,
As done these fools, that her sorrows each
With sorrow, when they han misaventure,
And lusten naught to sechen other cure.
* Men saine, to wretch is consolation
To have another fellow in his pain,
That ought well been our opinion,
For both thou and I of love do plain,
So full of sorrow am I, sooth to saine,
That certainly, as now no more hard grace
May sit on me, for why there is no space.
If God woll, thou art naught aghast of me,
Least I would of thy Lady thee beguile:
Thou wost thy self, whom that I love parde
As I best can, gone sithen long while,
And sithen thou wost, I do it for no wile,
And since I am he, that thou trusts most,
Tell me somewhat, since all my woe thou wost.
Yet Troilus, for all this no word said,
But long he lay still, as he dead were,
And after this, with siking he abraid,
And to Pandarus voice he lent his ear,
And up his eyes cast he: and then in fear
Was Pandarus least that in frenseye,
He should either fall or else soon deye.
And said awake, full wonderlich and sharp.
What slumbrest thou, as in a litergie?
Or art thou like an Ass to the harp,
That hears sound, when men y^ strings ply?
But in his mind, of that no melody
May sink him to gladen, for that he
So dull is, in his beastialite.
And with this Pandare of his words stent:
But Troilus to him nothing answerde,
For why, to tell was naught his intent
Never to no man, for whom yt he so ferde:
* For it is said, men maken often a yerde
With which the maker is himself ibeten
In sundry manner, as these wise men treten.
And nameliche in his counsel telling,
That touches Love, that ought been secre:
For of himself it woll enough out spring
But if that it the bet governed be.
* Eke sometime it is craft to seem flee
Fro thing which in effect men hunten fast:
All this began Troilus in his heart cast.
But natheles, when he had heard him cry,
Awake he began, and sike wonder sore:
And said my friend, though that I still lie,
I am not deefe, now peace and cry no more:
For I have heard thy words and thy lore,
But suffer me my Fortune to bewailen,
For thy proverbs may naught me availen.
Nor other cure can thou none for me
Eke I nill not been cured, I woll die:
What know I of the Queen Niobe?
Let be thine old ensamples, I thee prey.
No friend (quoth. Pandarus) therefore I sey,
* Such is delight of fools to beweepe
Her woe, but to seeken bote they ne keep.
Now know I that reason in thee fails:
But tell me, if I wist what she were
For whom that thee all misaventure aileth,
Durst thou that I told it in her ear
Thy woe, since thou dare not thy self for fear,
And her besought on thee to han some routh?
Why nay (quoth. he) by God and by my troth.
What, not as busily (quoth. Pandarus)
As though mine own life lay in this need:
Why no parde sir (quoth. this Troilus)
And why? for that thou should never speed:
Wost thou that well? ye that is out of dreed,
(Quoth. Troilus) for all that ever ye conne,
She woll to no such wretch as I be won.
(Quoth. Pandarus) alas what may this be,
That thou dispaired art, thus causeless,
What, lives not thy Lady, benedicite?
How wost thou so, that thou art graceless,
Such evil is not always botelesse:
Why put not impossible thus thy cure,
* Since thing to come is often in aventure.
I grant well that thou endurest woe,
As sharp as does he Tesiphus in hell,
Whose stomach fowls tiren evermo,
That highten vultures, as books tell:
But I may not endure that thou dwell
In so unskilful an opinion,
That of thy woe nis no curation.
But ones nill thou, for thy coward heart,
And for thine ire, and foolish wilfulness,
For wantrust tellen of thy sorrows smert,
Ne to thine own help do business,
As much as speak a word, yea more or less,
But lie as he that of life nothing retch,
What woman living coud love such a wretch?
What may she demen other of thy death,
If thou thus die, and she not why it is,
But that for fear, is yolden up thy breath,
For Greeks han besieged us iwis:
Lord which a thank shall thou have than of this
Thus woll she saine, and all the town atones,
The wretch is deed, the devil have his bones.
Thou may alone here weep, cry, and knele,
* And love a woman yt she wot it naught,
And she will quite it that thou shall not feel:
* Unknow vnkist, and lost that is unsought.
What, many a man has love full dear ibout
Twenty winter that his Lady ne wist,
That never yet his Ladies mouth he kissed.
What, should he therefore fallen in despair?
Or he receaunt for his own tene,
Or slain himself, all be his Lady fair?
Nay nay: but ever in one be fresh and green,
To serve and love his dear hearts queen,
And think it is a guerdone her to serve
A thousand part more than he can deserve.
And of that word took heed Troilus,
And thought anon, what folly he was in,
And how that sooth him said Pandarus,
That for to-slaien himself might he not win,
But both done vnmanhood and a sin
And of his death his Lady naught to wite,
For of his woe, God wot she knew full lite.
And with that thought, he began full sore sike,
And said, alas, what is me best to do?
To whom Pandare said, if thee it like,
The best is, that thou tell me thy woe,
And have my troth, but if thou find it so
I be thy boot, or it been full long,
To pieces do me draw, and sithen hong.
Yea, so say thou (quoth. Troilus) alas,
But God wot it is naught the rather so:
Full hard it were to helpen in this caas,
For well find I, that fortune is my fo:
Ne all the men that ride con or go,
May of her cruel whele the harm withstond
For as her list, she plays with free and bond.
(Quoth. Pandarus) then blamest thou fortune,
For thou art wroth, ye now at erst I see
Wost thou not well y^ Fortune is commune
To every manner wight, in some degree?
And yet thou have this comfort, lo parde,
That as her joys moten overgone,
So mote her sorrows passen everichone.
For if her whele stint, any thing to turn,
Then cesseth she fortune anon to be:
Now since her whele by no way may soiourn,
What wost thou of her mutabilitie.
Whether as thy self lust she woll don by thee
Or that she be naught far fro thine helping:
Peraventure thou have cause for to sing.
And therefore wost thou what, I thee beseech,
Let be thy woe, and tourning to the ground:
* For who so list have healing of his leech,
To him behooveth first vnwrie his wound:
To Cerberus in hell aie be I bound,
Were it for my suster all thy sorrow,
By my will she should be thine to morrow.
Look up I say, and tell me what she is
Anon, that I may gone about thy need:
Know ich her aught, for my love tell me this,
Then would I hope rather for to speed:
Tho began the vein of Troilus to bleed,
For he was hit, and woxe all read for shame,
Aha (quoth. Pandara) here begins game.
And with that word, he began him for to shake,
And said him thus, thou shall her name tell:
But tho began sely Troilus for to quake,
As though men should han had him into hell,
And said alas, of all my woe the well,
Than is my sweet foe called Creseide,
And well nigh with y^ word for fear he deide.
And when y^ Pandare herd her name neven
Lord he was glad, and said, friend so dear,
Now fare a right, for Jove's name in heaven,
Love has beset thee well, be of good cheer,
For of good name, and wisdom, and manner
She has enough, and eke of gentleness,
If she be fair, thou wost thy self, I guess.
Ne never seie I a more bounteous
Of her estate, ne a gladder: ne of speech
A friendlyer, ne more gracious
For to do well, ne less had ned to seech
What for to done, and all this bet to each
In honor, to as far as she may stretch
* A kings heart seems by hers a wretch.
And for thy, look of good comfort thou be:
For certainly the first point is this
Of noble courage, and well ordain the
A man to have peace within himself iwis:
So ought thou, for naught but good it is,
* To loven well, and in a worthy place,
Thee ought not clepe it hap, but grace.
And also think, and therewith glad thee,
That since the Lady virtuous is all
So follows it, that there is some pitee
Among all these other in general,
And for they see that thou in special
Require naught, that is again her name,
* For virtue stretches not himself to shame.
But well is me, that ever I was born,
That thou beset art in so good a place:
For by my troth in love I durst have sworn,
Thee should never have tidde so fair a grace,
And wost thou why? for thou were wont to chase
At love in scorn, and for dispite him call
* Saint Idiote, lord of these fools all.
How often have thou made thy nice yapes,
And said, that loves servaunts overichone
* Of nicete, ben very Gods Apes,
And some would monche her meat all alone,
Ligging a bed, and make hem for to groan,
And some thou saidest had a blaunch fevere,
And praidest God, they should never kevere.
And some of hem, took on hem for the cold,
More than enough, so saydest thou full often:
And some han fained often time and told,
How that they waken, when they sleep soft,
And thus they would have set hem self a loft,
And nathelesse were under at the last,
Thus saydest thou, and yapedest full fast.
Yet saydest thou, that for the more part,
These Lovers would speak in general,
And thoughten it was a siker art,
For sailing, for to assayen over all:
Now may I yape of thee, if that I shall.
But nathelesse, though that I should deie,
Thou art none of tho, I dare well seie.
Now beat thy breast, and say to God of love,
Thy grace Lord, for now I me repent
If I misspake, for now my self, I love:
Thus say with all thine heart, in good intent,
(Quoth. Troilus) ah Lord, I me consent,
And pray to thee, my yapes thou foryeve,
And I shall never more while I live.
Thou say well (quoth. Pandare) and now I hope
That thou y^ gods wrath have all appeased:
And since thou have wepten many a drop,
And said such thing wherewith thy God is plesed,
Now would never God, but thou were eased:
* And think well she, of whom rest all thy woe,
Here after may thy comfort been also.
* For thilk ground, y^ bears y^ wedes wick
Bears eke these wholesome herbs, as full often:
Next the foul nettle, rough and thick,
The Rose wexeth, soote, smooth, and soft,
* And next the valey is the hill a loft,
And next the derke night the glad morrow,
And also joy is next the fine of sorrow.
Now look that attempre be thy bridell,
And for the best aie suffer to the tide,
Or else all our labor is on idell,
* He hastes well, that wisely can abide:
Be diligent and true, and aie well hide,
Be lusty, free, persever in thy servise,
And all is well, if thou work in this wise.
* But he that departed is in every place
Is no where hole, as written Clerks wise:
What wonder is, if such one have no grace?
Eke wost thou how it fares of some service,
* As plant a tree or herb, in sondrie wise,
And on the morrow pull it up as blive,
No wonder is, though it may never thrive.
And since y^ God of love has thee bestowed
In place digne unto thy worthiness,
* Stond fast, for to good port have thou rowed,
And of thy self, for any heaviness,
Hope alwaie well, for but if drerinesse.
Or over have both our labor shend,
I hope of this to maken a good end.
And wost thou why, I am the less afered
Of this matter, with my nece to trete?
For this have I heard say of wise lered,
Was never man or woman yet beyete,
That was unapt to suffer loves hete
Celestial, or else love of kind:
For thy, some grace I hope in her to find.
And for to speak of her in special,
Her beauty to bethinken, and her youth,
It sit her naught, to been celestial
As yet, though that her list both and kouth:
And truly it sit her well right nouth,
A worthy knight to loven and cherice,
And but she do, I hold it for a vice.
Wherefore I am, and woll be aye ready
To pain me to do you this service:
For both you to please, this hope I
Here after, for that ye been both wise,
And con counsel keep in such a wise,
That no man shall the wiser of it be,
And so we may ben gladded all three.
And by my troth I have right now of thee
A good conceit, in my wit as I guess:
And what it is, I woll now that thou see,
I think that since Love of his goodness,
Has thee converted out of wickedness,
That thou shall been the best post, I leave,
Of all his lay, and most his foes grieve.
Ensample why, see now these great clerks,
That erren aldermost again a law,
And ben converted from her wicked works
Through grace of god, y^ lest hem to withdraw:
They arne the folk y^ han god most in aw,
And strengest faithed been I understand,
And con an error alder best withstond.
When Troilus had herd Pandare assented
To ben his help in loving of Creseide,
He wext of his woe, as who says vnturmented,
But hotter wext his love, and then he said
With sober chere, as though his heart played:
Now blisfull Venus help, ere that I sterue,
Of thee Pandare I mow some thank deserve.
But dear friend, how shall my woe be less,
Till this be done? and good eke tell me this,
How will thou saine of me and my distress,
Least she be wroth, this dread I most iwis,
Or woll not heren all, how it is,
All this dread I, and eke for the manner
Of thee her Eme, she nill no such thing here.
(Quoth. Pandarus) thou have a full great care,
* Lest the chorle may fall out of the moon:
Why lord? I hate of thee the nice fare.
Why entremete of that thou have to done
For Gods love, I bid thee a boon:
So let me alone, and it shall be thy best.
Why friend (quoth. he) then done right as thee lest.
But herke Pandare o word, for I nolde,
That thou in me wendest so great folly,
That to my lady I desiren should,
That touches harm, or any villainy:
For dredelesse me were lever to die,
Than she of me ought else understood,
But that, that might sownen into good.
Tho lough this Pandarus and anon answered:
And I thy borow, fie no wight does but so,
I raught not though she stood and herd,
How that thou say, but farewell I woll go:
Adieu, be glad, God speed us both two,
Give me this labor and this business,
And of my speed be thine all the sweetness.
Tho Troilus began down on knees to fall,
And Pandare in his arms hent fast,
And said, now fie on the Greeks all:
Yet parde, God shall helpen at last,
And dredelesse, if that my life may last,
And God toforne, lo some of hem shall smerte,
And yet me a thinks yt this auaunt masterte.
And now Pandare, I can no more say,
Thou wise, thou wost, thou may, thou art all:
My life, my death, hole in thine hond I say,
Help me now (quoth. he.) Yes by my troth I shall:
God yield thee friend, and this in special
(Quoth. Troilus) that thou me recommaund
To her that may me to y^ death command.
This Pandarus tho, desirous to serve
His full friend, he said in this manner:
Farewell, and think I wol thy thank deserve.
Have here my troth, and that thou shall here,
And went his way, thinking on this matere,
And how he best might beseechen her of grace,
And find a time thereto and a place.
* For every wight yt has a house to found,
He renneth not the work for to begin,
With rakel hond, but he woll biden stound,
And send his hearts line out fro within,
Alder first his purpose for to win:
All thus Pandare in his heart thought,
And cast his work full wisely ere he wrought.
But Troilus lay tho no longer down,
But anon gat upon his stead baie,
And in the field he played the Lioun,
Woe was ye Greek, that with him met y^ day:
And in the town, his manner tho forth aye
So goodly was, and gat him so in grace,
That each him loved that looked in his face.
For he became the friendliest wight,
The gentilest, and eke the most free,
The thriftiest, and one the best knight
That in his time was, or else might be:
Dead were his yapes and his cruelte,
His high port and his manner strange,
And each of hem began for a virtue change.
Now let us stint of Troilus a stound,
That fares like a man that hurt is sore,
And is some dele of a king of his wound
Ylessed well, but healed no dele more:
And as an easy patient the lore
Abite of him that goes about his cure,
And thus he drives forth his aventure.
Explicit liber primus.
OVt of these black wawes let us for to sail,
O wind, now the weather ginneth clear:
For in the sea the boat has such travail
Of my conning, that uneath I it stere:
This sea clepe I the tempestous matere
Of deep despair, that Troilus was in:
But now of hope the kalends begin.
O lady mine, that called art Cleo,
Thou be my speed fro this forth, and my muse
To rhyme well this book till I have do,
Me needs here none other art to use:
For why to every lover I me excuse,
That of no sentement I this endite,
But out of latin in my tongue it write.
Wherefore I nil have neither thank ne blame
Of all this work: but pray you mekely,
Disblameth me, if any word be lame,
For as mine author said, so say I:
Eke though I speak of love vnfeelingly,
No wonder is, for it nothing of new is,
* A blind man cannot judgen well in hewis.
I know, y^ in form of speech is change
Within a thousand year, and words tho
That hadden prise, now wonder nice and strange
Thinks hem, and yet they spoke hem so,
And spedde as well in love, as men now do:
* Eke for to winnen love, in sundry ages,
In sundry londs sundry ben vsages.
And for thy, if it hap in any wise,
That here be any lover in this place,
That herkeneth, as the story woll devise,
How Troilus came to his ladies grace,
And thinks, so nolde I not love purchase,
Or wondreth on his speech or his doing,
I not, but it is to me no wondering:
* For every wight, which y^ to Rome went,
Halt not o pathe, ne always o manner:
Eke in some land were all the gamen shent,
If that men farde in love, as men done here,
As thus, in open doing or in chere,
In visiting, in form, or said our saws,
* For thy men sain, each country has his laws.
Eke scarsely ben there in this place three,
That have in love said like, and done in all:
For to this purpose this may liken thee,
And thee right naught, yet all is done or shall:
* Eke some men grave intre, some in stone wall,
As it betide, but since I have begone,
Mine author shall I follow, as I konne.
Explicit Prohemium.
IN May, y^ mother is of months glade,
That y^ fresh flowers, both blew, white, and read
Ben quick again, that winter dead made,
And full of baume is fleting every mede,
When Phoebus does her bright beams spread,
Right in the white Bole, it so betidde,
As I shall sing, on Maies day the thridde,
That Pandarus for all his wise speech,
Felt eke his part of loves shottes kene,
That coud he never so well of loving preach,
It made his hew a day full often grene:
So shope it, that him fill that day a tene
In love, for which in woe to bed he went,
And made ere it were day full many a went.
The swallow Progne, with a sorrowful lay
When morrow come, began make her waimenting
Why she forshapen was: and ever lay
Pandare a bed, half in a slombering,
Till she so nigh him made her waimenting,
How Tereus began forth her suster take,
That with the noise of her he began awake,
And to call, and dress him up to rise,
Remembering him his arrand was to done
From Troilus, and eke his great emprise,
And cast, and knew in good plite was y^ moon
To done voyage, and took his way full soon
Unto his neces paleis there beside:
Now Ianus God of enter, thou him guide.
When he was come unto his neces place,
Where is my lady, to her folk (quoth. he)
And they him told, and he forth in began pace,
And found two other ladies sit and she,
Within a paued parlour, and they three
Herden a maiden hem reden the geste
Of the siege of Thebes, while hem lest:
(Quoth. Pandarus) madame God you see
With your book, and all the company:
Eigh uncle mine, welcome iwis (quoth. she)
And up she rose, and by the hond in hie,
She took him fast, and said, this night thrie,
To good mote it turn, of you I met,
And with ye word, she down on bench him set.
Yea nece, ye shull faren well the bet,
If God woll, all this year (quoth. Pandarus)
But I am sorry that I have you let
To hearken of your book, ye praisen thus:
For Gods love what says it, tell it us,
Is it of love, or some good ye me lere?
Uncle (quoth. she) your maistresse is not here.
With yt they gonnen laugh, and tho she seide,
This romaunce is of Thebes, that we read,
And we have heard how y^ king Laius deide:
Through Edippus his son, and all the deed:
And here we stinten, at these letters read,
How the bishop, as the book can tell,
Amphiorax, fell through the ground to hell.
(Quoth. Pandarus) all this know I my selue,
And all thassiege of Thebes, and the care,
For hereof ben there maked books twelve:
But let be this, and tell me how ye fare,
Do way your barbe, and show your face bare,
Do way your book, rise up and let us dance,
And let us to done to May some obseruaunce.
Eighe, God forbid (quoth. she) be ye mad?
Is that a widows life, so God you save?
By God ye maken me right sore adrad,
Ye ben so wild, it seems as ye rave,
* It sat me well bet aye in a cave
To bide, and read on holy saints lives:
Let maidens gone to dance, and young wives.
As ever thrive I (quoth. this Pandarus)
Yet could I tell o thing, to done you play:
Now uncle dear (quoth. she) tell it us
For Gods love, is then thassiege awey?
I am of Greeks ferde, so that I dey:
Nay, nay (quoth. he) as ever mote I thrive,
It is a thing well bet than such five.
Ye holy God (quoth. she) what thing is that,
What bet than such five? eighe nay iwis,
For all this world ne can I reden what
It should ben some iape I trow it is,
And but your selven tell us what it is,
My wit is for to arede it all to lean:
As help me God, I not what that ye mean:
And I your borow, ne never shall (quoth. he)
This thing be told to you, as mote I thrive:
And why uncle mine, why so (quoth. she)
By God (quoth. he) that woll I tell as blive,
For prouder woman is there none on live,
And ye it wist, in all the town of Troy:
I iape not, so ever have I joy.
Tho began she wondren more than before,
A thousand fold, and down her eyes cast:
For never since the time that she was bore,
To known thing desired she so fast,
And with a sike, she said him at the last,
Now uncle mine, I nill you not displease,
Nor asken more, that may do you disease.
So after this, with many words glade,
And friendly tales, and with merry chere,
Of this and that they speak, and gonnen wade
In many an unkouth glad and deep matere,
As friends done, when they bethe ifere,
Till she began asken him how Hector ferde,
That was the tounes wall, and Greeks yerde.
Full well I thank it God, said Pandarus,
Save in his arm he has a little wound,
And eke his fresh brother Troilus,
The wise worthy Hector the secound,
In whom that every virtue list habound,
And first all troth, and all gentleness,
Wisdom, honor, freedom, and worthiness.
In good faith eme (quoth. she) that likes me,
They faren well, God save hem both two:
* For trewliche, I hold it great deintie,
A kings son in arms well to do,
And be of good conditions thereto.
* For great power, and moral virtue here
Is selde iseene in one person ifere.
In good faith that is sooth (quoth. Pandarus)
But by my troth ye king has sons twey,
That is to mean, Hector and Troilus,
That certainly though that I should dey,
They ben as void of vices, dare I sey,
As any men that liven under sun,
Her might is wide iknow, and what they conne.
Of Hector needs it no more for to tell,
In all this world, there nis a better knight,
Than he that is of worthiness the well,
And he well more virtue has than might,
This knows many a wise and worthy knight:
And the same prise of Troilus I sey,
God help me so, I know not such twey.
By God (quoth. she) of Hector that is sooth,
And of Troilus the same thing trow I:
For dredelesse, men tells that he does
In arms day by day, so worthily,
And bears him here at home so gently
To every wight, that all prise has he,
Of hem that me were levest praised be.
Ye say right sooth iwis (quoth. Pandarus)
For yesterday, who so had with him been,
Mighten have wondered upon Troilus,
For never yet so thick a swarm of been,
Ne flew, as Greeks from him began fleen,
And through the field in every wights ear,
There was no cry, but Troilus is there.
Now here, now there, he hunted hem so fast,
There nas but Greeks blood, and Troilus,
Now him he hurt, and him all down he cast,
Aye where he went it was arraied thus:
He was her death, and shield and life for us,
That as yt day there durst him none withstond,
While yt he held his bloody swerd in hond:
Thereto he is the friendliest man
Of great estate, that ever I saw my live:
And where him list, best fellowship can
To such as him thinks able for to thrive,
And with that word, tho Pandarus as blive
He took his leave, and said I woll gone hen:
Nay, blame have I uncle (quoth. she then.)
What eileth you to be weary thus soon,
And nameliche of women, woll ye so?
Nay sits down, by God I have to done
With you, to speak of wisdom er ye go,
And every wight that was about hem tho,
That heard that, began far away to stond,
While they two had all yt hem list in hond.
When yt her tale all brought was to an end
Of her estate, and of her governaunce,
(Quoth. Pandarus) now time is that I wend,
But yet I say, arises let us dance,
And cast your widows habit to mischaunce:
What list you thus your self to disfigure,
Since you is tidde so glad an aventure:
But well bethought: for love of God (quoth. she)
Shall I not weten what ye mean of this?
No, this thing asks leaser tho (quoth. he)
And eke me would full much greve iwis:
If I it told, and ye it took amiss:
Yet were it bette my tongue to hold still,
Than say a sooth, that were against your will.
For nece mine, by the goddess Minerve,
And Jupiter, that makes the thunderring,
And the blisfull Venus, that I serve,
Ye ben the woman in this world living
Withouten paramours, to my weting,
That I best love, and lothest am to greve,
And that ye weten well your self, I leve.
Iwis mine uncle (quoth. she) grant mercy,
Your friendship have I founden ever yet,
I am to no man beholden truly
So much as you, and have so little quit:
And with the grace of God, emforth my wit
As in my guilt, I shall you never offend,
And if I have ere this, I woll amend.
But for the love of God I you beseech
As ye be he that I love most and trist,
Let be to me your fremed manner speech,
And say to me your nece what you list:
And with that word her uncle anon her kissed,
And said, gladly my leve nece so dear,
Take it for good that I shall say you here.
With that she began her eien down to cast,
And Pandarus to cough began a lite,
And said: Nece always lo, to the last
How so it be, that some men hem delight
With subtle art her tales for tendite,
Yet for all that in her entention,
Her tale is all for some conclusion.
And since the end is every tales strength,
And this matter is so behovely,
What should I paint it or drawn it on length
To you, that been my friend so faithfully:
And with that word he began right inwardly
Beholden her, and looken in her face,
And said, on such a mirror much good grace.
Then thought he thus, if I my tale endite
Ought hard, or make a process any while,
She shall no savor have therein but lite,
And trow I would her in my will beguile:
* For tender wits wenen all be wile,
Whereas they con not plainliche understond:
For thy her wit to serven woll I fond.
And looked on her in a busy wise,
And she was ware that he beheld her so:
Ah lord (quoth. she) so fast ye me avise,
Saw ye me never ere now, what say ye no?
Yes, yes (quoth. he) and bet woll ere I go:
But by my troth I thought now, if ye
Be fortunate: for now men shall it see.
* For every wight some goodly aventure,
Sometime is shape, if he it can receiven:
But if he nill take of it no cure
When that it comes, but wilfully it weiven:
Lo, neither case nor fortune him deceiven,
But right his own sloth and wretchedness:
And such a wight is for to blame, I guess.
Good aventure, O belie nece, have ye
Full lightly founden, and ye conne it take:
And for the love of God, and eke of me
Catch it anon, least aventure slake:
What should I longer process of it make,
Yeve me your hond, for in this world is non,
If that you list, a wight so well begone.
And since I speak of good ententioun,
As I to you have told well here beforne
And love as well your honor and renoun,
As any creature in all the world iborne:
By all the oaths that I have you sworn,
And ye be wroth therefore or wene I lie,
Ne shall I never seen you eft with eye.
Beth not aghast, ne quaketh not, whereto?
Ne change not for fere so your hew,
For hardely the worst of this is do:
And though my tale as now be to you new,
Yet trust always: ye shall me find true,
And were it thing that me thought unfitting,
To you would I no such tales bring.
Now my good Eme, for Gods love I prey,
(Quoth. she) come off and tell me what it is:
For both I am aghast what ye woll say,
And eke me longs it to wit iwis:
For whether it be well, or be amiss,
Say on let me not in this fear dwell.
So woll I done, now hearkeneth I shall tell:
Now nece mine, ye kings own dear son,
The good, wise, worthy, fresh, and free,
Which always for to done well is his won,
The noble Troilus so loves thee,
That but ye help, it woll his bane be,
Lo here is all, what should I more sey,
Does what you list, to make him live or dey.
But if ye let him die, I woll sterven,
Have here my troth, nece I nill not lien,
All should I with this knife my throat kerven:
With that the tears burst out of his eien,
And said, if that ye done us both dien
Thus guiltless, then have ye fished fair:
What mend ye, though yt we both apaire?
Alas, he which that is my lord so dear,
That true man, that noble gentle knight,
That naught desires but your friendly chere,
I see him dien, there he goes upright:
And hastes him with all his full might
For to ben slain, if his fortune assent,
Alas that God you such a beauty sent.
If it be so that ye so cruel be,
That of his death you lists naught to retch,
That is so true and worthy as we see,
No more than of a yaper or a wretch,
If ye be such, your beauty may not stretch,
To make amends of so cruel a deed:
* Avisement is good before the need.
* Woe worth the fair gemme vertulesse,
Woe worth that herb also yt does no bote,
Woe worth the beauty that is routhlesse,
Woe worth that wight y^ trede each under foot:
And ye that been of beauty croppe and rote,
If therewithal in you ne be no routh,
Then is it harm ye liven by my troth.
And also think well, that this is no gaud,
For me were lever, thou, I, and he
Were honged, than I should ben his baud,
As high as men might on us all isee:
I am thine Eme, the shame were to me,
As well as thee, if that I should assent
Through mine abet, yt he thine honor shent.
Now understond, for I you naught requere
To bind you to him, through no behest,
Save only that ye make him better chere
Than ye han done ere this, and more feast,
So that his life be saved at the least:
This is all and some, and plainly our intent,
God help me so, I never other meant.
Lo, this request is naught but skill iwis,
Ne doubt of reason parde is there none:
I set the worst, that ye dreden this,
Men would wonder to seen him come and gone:
There against answer I thus anon,
That every wight, but he be fool of kind,
Woll deem it love of friendship in his mind.
* What, who woll demen tho he see a man
To temple gone, that he the images eats:
Think eke, how well and wisely that he can
Govern himself, that he nothing foryetteth,
That where he comes, he pris and thonk him geteth,
And eke thereto he shall come here so seld,
What force were it, though all y^ town beheld.
Such love of friends reigns through all this town:
And wrie you in that mantle ever mo,
And God so wis be my salvatioun
As I have said, your best is to do so:
But good nece, always to stint his woe,
* So let your danger sugared ben alite,
That of his death ye be not all to wite.
Creseide, which that herd him in this wise,
Thought, I shall felen with he means iwis:
Now Eme (quoth. she) what would ye devise?
What is your read, I should done of this?
That is well said (quoth. he) certain best is,
That ye him love again for his loving,
* As love for love is skillful guerdoning.
Think eke how elde wastes every hour
In each of you a part of beauty,
And therefore, ere that age thee devour,
Go love, for old there woll no wight of thee:
Let this proverb, a lore unto you be,
* Too late iware (quoth. beauty) when it past,
And elde daunteth danger, at the last.
The kings fool is wont to cry aloud,
When yt he thinks a woman bears her hie,
* So long mote ye liven, and all proud,
Till Crows feet grown under your eye,
And send you then a mirror in to pry,
In which that ye may see your face a morrow,
Nece, I bid him wish you no more sorrow.
With this he stint, and cast down y^ head,
And she began to breast and weep anon,
And said, alas for woe, why nere I dead,
For of this world the faith is all agone:
Alas, what shoulden strange unto me done,
When he that for my best friend I wend,
Rate me to love, and should it me defend.
Alas, I would have trusted doubtless,
That if that I, through my disaventure
Had loved either him or Achilles,
Hector, or any other creature,
Ye nolde have had mercy ne measure
On me, but always had me in repreve:
This false world alas, who may it leve.
What? is this all y^ joy and all the feast?
Is this your read? is this my blisfull caas?
Is this the very mede of your behest?
Is all this painted process said (alas)
Right for this fine, O lady mine Pallas,
Thou in this dredefull case for me purvey,
For so astonished am I, that I dey.
With that she began full sorrowfully to sike,
Ne may it be no bet (quoth. Pandarus)
By God I shall no more come here this weke,
And God toforne, yt am mistrusted thus:
I see well now ye setten light of us,
Or of our death alas, I woeful wretch,
Might he yet live, of me were naught to retch.
O cruel God, O dispitous Mart,
O furies three of Hell, on you I cry,
So let me never out of this house depart,
If that I meant harm or villainy:
But since I see my Lord mote needs die,
And I with him, here I me shrive and sey,
That wickedly ye done us both dey.
But since it likes you, that I be dead,
By Neptunus, that God is of the sea,
Fro this forth shall I never eaten bread,
Till that I mine own heart blood may see:
For certain I woll die as soon as he,
And up he stert, and on his way he raught,
Till she again him by the lap caught.
Creseide, which y^ well nigh starf for fear,
So as she was the fearfullest wight
That might be, and heard eke with her ear,
And saw the sorrowful earnest of the knight,
And in his prayer saw eke none unright,
And for the harm eke that might fall more,
She began to rue and dread her wonder sore.
And thought thus, unhaps do fallen thick
Alday for Love, and in such manner caas,
As men ben cruel in hemselfe and wicke:
And if this man slay here himself, alas,
In my presence, it nill be no sollas,
What men would of it deem I can not say,
It needs me full slighly for to play.
And with a sorrowful sigh, she said thrie,
Ah lord, what me is tidde a sorry chance,
For mine estate lies in jeopardie,
And eke mine emes life lies in ballaunce:
But nathelesse, with Gods governaunce
I shall so done, mine honor shall I keep,
And eke his life, and stint for to weep.
* Of harms two, the less is for to chese,
Yet had I lever maken him good chere
In honor, than my emes life to lose.
Ye saine, ye nothing else me requere.
No wis (quoth. he) mine own nece so dear.
Now well (quoth. she) and I woll done my pain,
I shall mine heart again my lust constrain.
But that I nill not holden him in hond,
Ne love a man, that can I naught ne may
Against my will, but else woll I fond,
Mine honor save, plesen him fro day to day,
Thereto nolde I not ones have said nay,
But that I dredde, as in my fantasy:
* But cesse cause, aie cesseth malady.
But here I make a protestacion
That in this process if ye deper go,
That certainly, for no salvacion
Of you, though that ye sterven both two,
Though all the world on o day be my fo,
Ne shall I never on him have other routhe:
I grant well (quoth. Pandare) by my truth.
But may I trust well to you (quoth. he)
That of this thing yt ye han hight me here
Ye woll it hold truly unto me:
Ye doubtless (quoth. she) mine uncle dear,
Ne that I shall have cause in this matere
(Quoth. he) to plain, or ofter you to preach:
Why no parde, what needs more speech.
Tho fill they in other tales glade
Till at the last, O good Eme (quoth. she tho)
For love of God which that us both made,
Tell me how first ye wisten of his woe,
Wot none of it but ye? he said no:
Can he well speak of love (quoth. she) I preie?
Tell me, for I the bet shall me purveie.
Tho Pandarus a litel began to smile
And said: By my troth I shall now tell,
This other day, not gone full long while,
Within the paleis gardin by a well
Began he and I, well half a day to dwell,
Right for to speaken of an ordinance,
How we the Greeks mighten disavaunce.
Sone after that we gone for to lepe,
And casten with our darts to and fro:
Till at the last, he said, he would sleep,
And on the grass adoune he laid him tho,
And I after began to romen to and fro,
Till that I heard, as I walked alone,
How he began full woefully to groan.
Tho began I stalk him softly behind,
And sikerly the sothe for to saine,
As I can clepe again now to my mind,
Right thus to love he began him for to plain,
He said: Lord, have routh upon my pain,
All have I been rebel in mine intent,
Now (Mea culpa) Lord I me repent.
O God, that at thy disposicion
Ledest the ^ine, by just purveiaunce
Of every wight, my low confession
Accept in gree, and send me soche penance
As likes thee, put from me disperaunce,
That may my ghost depart always fro the,
Thou be my shilde for thy benignite.
For certes lord, so sore has she me wounded,
That stood in black, with loking of her iyen,
That to mine hearts botome it is ifounded,
Through which I wot, yt I must needs dien:
This is the worst, I dare me nout bewrien.
* And well the hoter been the gledes read
That men wrien, with ashen pale and deed.
With that he smote his head adoune anon,
And began to muttre, I not what truly:
And I with that began still a way to gone,
And let thereof, as nothing wist had I,
And come again anon, and stood him by,
And said awake, ye slepen all to long,
It seems me naught yt love does you wrong
That stepen so, yt no man may you wake:
Who seie ever er this so dull a man.
Ye friend (quoth. he) do ye your heddes ache
For love, and let me liven as I can:
But lord that he for woe was pale and wan,
Yet made he tho as fresh a countenance,
As though he should have led ye new dance.
This passed forth, till now this other day,
It fell that I come roming all alone
Into his chamber, and found how that he lay
Upon his bed: but man so sore groan
Ne heard I never, and what was his moan
Ne wist I naught, for as I was coming
All suddenly, he left his complaining.
Of which I took somewhat suspection
And nere I come, and found him weep sore,
And God so wise be my salvation,
As never of thing had I no routh more:
For neither with engine, ne with no lore,
Uneaths might I fro the death him keep,
That yet feel I mine heart for him weep.
And God wot never since that I was borne
Was I so busy no man for to preach,
Ne never was to wight so deep sworn,
Er he me told who might be his leach:
But not to you rehearsen all his speech,
Or all his woeful words for to sown,
Ne bid me naught, but ye woll se me swone.
But for to save his life, and else naught,
And to non harm of you, thus am I driven:
And for the love of God that us has wrout,
Soche chere him does, that he and I may liven.
Now have I plat to you mine heart shriven,
And since ye wot that mine intent is clean
Take heed thereof, for none evil I mean.
And right good thrift, I pray to God have ye,
That han soch one icaught withouten net:
And be ye wise, as ye be fair to se,
Well in the ring then is the Rubie set,
There were never two so well imet,
When ye been his all hole, as he is your,
The mighty God yet grant us se that hour.
Nay thereof spoke I not: A ha (quoth. she)
As help me God, ye shenden every dele:
A mercy dear nece, anon (quoth. he)
What ^o I spoke, I meant naught but well
By Mars the God, that helmed is of stele:
Now beth not wroth, my blood, my nece dear.
Now well (quoth. she) foryeven be it here.
With this he took his leave, and home he went,
Ye Lord how he was glad, and well bigon:
Creseide arose, no longer she ne stent,
But straight into her closet went anon,
And set her down, as still as any stone,
And every word began up and down to wind,
That he had said, as it came her to mind.
And woxe somdele astonished in her thought,
Right for the new case, but when that she
Was full avised, tho found she right naught,
Of peril, why that she ought aferde be:
* For man may love of possibilite
A woman so, his heart may to breast,
And she not love again, but if her lest.
But as she sat alone, and thought thus,
Thascrie arose at skarmoch all without,
And men cried in the street, se Troilus
Has right now put to flight y^ Greeks rout.
With that gonne all her meine for to shout:
A, go we se, cast up the gates wide,
For throu this street he mote to paleis ride.
For other way is fro the yates none,
Of Dardanus, there open is the cheine:
With that come he, and all his folk anon
An easy pace riding, in routes tweine,
Right as his happy day was sothe to seine:
* For which men says, may not distourbed be
That shall betiden of necessite.
This Troilus sat on his baie stead
All armed save his hedde, full richely,
And wounded was his horse, and began to blede,
On which he rode a pace full softly:
But soch a knightly sight truly
As was on him, was not withouten fail,
To look on Mars, that God is of battle.
So like a man of arms, and a knight
He was to seen, fulfilled of high prowess,
For both he had a body, and might
To done that thing, as well as hardiness,
And eke to seen him in his gear dress
* So fresh, so young, so weldy seemed he,
It was an heaven upon him for to se.
His helm to hewn was in twenty places,
That by a tissue hong, his back behind,
His shield to dashed with swerds and with maces,
In which men might many an arowe find,
That thirled had both horn, nerf, and rind:
And aie y^ people cried, here comes our joy,
And next his brother, holder up of Troie.
For which he wext a little read for shame
When he so heard ye people upon him crien,
That to behold it was noble game,
How soberliche he cast adoune his iyen:
Creseide anon began all his chere espien,
And let it so soft in her heart sink.
That to her self she said, who yave me drink?
For of her own thought, she woxe all read,
Remembering her right thus, Lo this is he,
Which that mine uncle swereth he mote he dedde,
But I on him have mercy and pite:
And with that thought, for pure ashamed (...)
Began in her hedde to pull, and that as fast,
While he and all the people forth by past.
And began to cast, and rollen up and down
Within her thought his excellent prowess,
And his estate, and also his renoun,
His wit, his shape, and eke his gentilnesse,
But most her favor was: for his distress
Was all for her, and thought it were a routh,
To slaen soch one, if that he meant troth.
Now might some envious iangle thus,
This was a sudden love, how might it be,
That she so lightly loved Troilous?
Right for the first sight: ye parde?
Now whosoever said so, mote he never thee:
For every thing a ginning has it need
* Er all be wrought, withouten any dread.
For I say not that she so suddenly
Yafe him her love, but that she began incline
To liken him tho, and I have told you why:
And after that, his manhood and his pine,
Made that love within her began to mine:
For which by process, and by good service
He wanne her love, and in no sudden wise.
And all so blisfull Venus well araied
Satte in her seventh house of heven tho,
Disposed well, and with aspectes paid,
To help sely Troilus of his woe:
And sothe to said, she nas not all a foe
To Troilus, in his nativite,
God wot, that well the sooner sped he.
Now let us stente of Troilus a throw,
That rides forth, and let us turn fast
Unto Creseide, that heng her hedde full low,
There as she satte alone, and began to cast
Whereon she would appoint her at the last,
If it so were her Eme ne would cesse,
For Troilus upon her for to press.
And lord so she began in her thought argue
In this matter, of which I have you told,
And what to done best were, and what eschew,
That plited she full often in many fold:
Now was her heart warm, now was it cold,
And what she thought, somewhat shall I write,
As mine author lists for tendite.
She thought first, that Troilus person
She knew by sight, and eke his gentelnesse:
And thus she said, all were it naught to done
To grant him love, yet for his worthiness,
It were honor with play, and with gladness,
In honest with soch a Lord to deal,
For mine estate, and also for his heal.
Eke well wot I, my kings son is he,
And since he has to see me soch delight,
If I would vtterliche his sight fly,
Paraventure he might have me in dispite,
Through which I might stond in wors plite:
Now, were I wise, me hate to purchase
Without need, there I may stand in grace?
* In every thing, I wot there lies measure:
For though a man forbid drunkenness,
He naught forbids that every creature
Be drinkelesse for always as I guess:
Eke, sith I wot for me is his distress,
I ne ought not for that thing him despise,
Since it is so, he means in good wise.
And eke I know, of long time agone
His thewes good, and that he nis not nice,
No vauntour saine men, certain he is none,
To wise is he to done so great a vice:
Ne als I nill him never so cherice,
That he shall make avaunt by just cause:
He shall me never bind in soche a clause.
Now set I case, the hardest is iwis,
Men might demen that he loves me:
What dishonor were it unto me this?
May iche him let of that? why naie parde:
I know also, and always hear and se,
Men loven women all this town about,
Be they the wers? Why naie withouten dout?
I think eke how, he worthy is to have
Of all this noble town the thriftiest,
That woman is, if she her honor save:
For out and out he is the worthiest,
Save only Hector, which that is the best,
And yet his life lies all now in my cure,
But soche is love, and eke mine aventure.
Ne me to love, a wonder is it naught:
For well wot I my self, so God me speed,
All woll I that no man wist of this thought,
I am one the fairest out of dread
And goodliest, who so that takes head:
And so men saine in all the town of Troie,
What wonder is though he of me have joy?
I am mine own woman well at ease,
I thank it God, as after mine estate,
Right young, and stond untied in lusty lease,
Withouten jealousy, and such debate:
Shall no husbonde saine to me check mate,
* For either they be full of jealousy,
Or maisterfull, or loven novelrie.
What shall I done? to what fine live I thus?
Shall I not love, in case if that me lest?
What pardieux I am not religious:
And though that I mine heart set at rest
Upon this knight, that is the worthiest,
And keep always mine honor, and my name,
By all right it may do me no shame.
But right as when the sun shines brigh^
In March, that changes often time his face,
And that a cloud is put with wind to flight,
Which oversprat the Sun, as for a space,
A cloudy thought began through her soul pace,
That overspradde her bright thoughts all,
So that for fear almost she began to fall.
That thout was this: alas since I am free,
Should I now love, and put in ieopardie
My sikernesse, and thrallen liberty?
Alas, how durst I thinken that folly?
May I not well in other folk aspie
Her dreadful joy, her constreint, and her pain:
* There loves none, yt she ne has why to plain.
For love is yet the most stormy life,
Right of himself, that ever was begone:
For ever some mistrust, or nice strife,
There is in love, some cloud over the Sun:
Thereto we wretched women nothing conne
When us is woe, but weep and sit and think,
* Our wretch is this, our own woe to drink.
Also wicked tongues been ay so pressed
To speak us harm: eke men ben so untrue,
That right anon as cessed is her lest,
So cesseth love, and forth to love a new:
But harm idoe is done, who so it rue:
For thou these men for love hem first to rende,
* Full sharp beginning breaks often at end.
How often time may men both read and seen,
The treason, that to women has be do
To what fine is soche love, I can not seen
Or where becomes it, when it is go?
There is no wight that wot, I trow so,
Where it becomes, lo, no wight on it sporneth
* That erst was nothing, into naught turns.
How busy (if I love) eke must I be
To pleasen hem, that iangle of love, and demen,
And coyen hem, that they say no harm of me:
For though there be no cause, yet hem semen
Al be for harm, that folk her friends quemen
* And who may stoppen every wicked tongue?
Or soune of belles, while that they been rong?
And after that her thought began for to clear
And said, he which that nothing undertakes
Nothing acheveth, be him loath or dear
And with an other thought her heart quaketh
Then slepeth hope, and after dread awaketh,
Now hot, now cold, but thus bitwixen twey
She rist her up, and went her for to pley.
Adoune the staire anon right tho she went
Into her gardine, with her neces three,
And up and down, they maden many a went
Flexippe and she, Tarbe, and Antigone,
To plaien, that it joy was to see
And other of her women a great rout
Her followed in the gardine all about.
This yerde was large, and railed all the alies
And shadowed well, with blosomy bows grene
And benched new, and sonded all the ways
In which she walks arm in arm between,
Till at the last Antigone the shene
Began on a Trojan song to singen clear,
That it an heven was, her voier to here.
She said, O love, to whom I have, and shall
Been humble subject, true in mine intent
As I best can, to you lord yeve iche all
For evermore mine hearts lust to rent:
For never yet thy grace to no wight sent
So blisfull cause as me, my life to lead
In all joy and surety, out of dread.
The blisfull God, has me so well beset
In love iwis, that all that bears life
Imaginen ne could how to be bet,
For Lord withouten jelousie or strife
I love one, which that most is ententife
To serven well, vnwerily or unfeigned
That ever was, and lest with harm distained.
As he that is the well of worthiness,
Of troth ground, mirror of goodlihedde,
Of wit Apollo, stone of sikernesse,
Of virtue root, of lusty finder and hedde,
Through which is all sorrow fro me dedde:
Iwis I love him best, so does he me,
Now good thrift have he, where so ever he be.
Whom should Ithanken but you God of love,
Of all this bliss, in which to bath I ginne,
And thanked be ye Lord, for that I love,
This is the right life that I am inn,
To flemen all manner vice and sin:
This does me so to virtue for to entende
That day by day I in my will amend.
And who so yt says that for to love is vice,
Or thraldom, though he feel in it distress,
He either is envious, or right nice,
Or is vnmightie for his shreudnesse,
To loven, for soch manner folk I guess
Diffamen love, as nothing of him know,
* They speaken, but they bent never his bow.
What is ye Sun worse of his kind right?
Though that a man, for feblenesse of his iyen
May not endure on it to se for bright,
Or love the worst, that wretches on it crien:
* No well is worth, yt may no sorrow drien:
And for thy, who that has an hedde of verre
Fro cast of stones ware him in the werre.
But I with all mine heart and all my might,
As I have said, woll love unto my last
My own dear heart and all mine own knight,
In which mine heart grown is so fast
And is in me, that it shall ever last:
All dredde I first love him to begin:
Now wot I well there is no peril in.
And of her song right with y^ word she stent,
And therewithal, now nece (quoth. Creseide)
Who made this song now with so good intent
Antigone answerde anon and said,
Madame iwis the goodliest maid
Of great estate in all the town of Troie
And led her life in most honor and joy.
Forsothe so seems it by her song
Quoth. tho Creseide, and began therewith to sike,
And said: Lord, is there soche bliss among
These lovers, as they can fair endite:
Ye wisse quoth. fresh Antigone the white,
* For all the folk that have or been on live
Ne con well the bliss of love discrive.
But wene ye that every wretch wot
The parfite bliss of love, why naie iwis
They wenen all be love, if one be hot,
Do way do way, they wot nothing of this.
* Men mote asken of saints, if it is
Ought fair in heven, and why? for they can tell,
And ask fendes, if it be foul in hell.
Creseide unto y^ purpose naught answerde,
But said, iwis it woll be night as fast,
But every word, which yt she of her herd,
She began to printen in her heart fast,
And aie began love her less for to aghast
Than it did erst, and sinken in her heart,
That she wax somewhat able to conuarte.
The days honor, and the heavens iye,
The nights foe, all this clepe I thee son,
Began westren fast, and dounward for to wrie,
As he that had his days course ironne,
And white things woxen al dim and done
For lack of light, and sterres for to apere,
That she and all her folk in went ifere.
So when it liked her to gone to rest,
And voided weren they that voiden ought,
She said, that to slepen well her lest:
Her women sone till her hedde her brought
When al was hust, then lay she still and thought
Of all this thing the manner and the wise,
Rehearce it needs not, for ye been wise.
A Nightingale upon a Cedre grene
Under the chamber wall, there as she lay,
Full loud song again the Moon shene
Paraventure in his birds wise a lay,
Of love, that made her heart fresh and gaie,
That herkened she so long in good intent,
Till at the last the dedde sleep her hent.
And as she slept, anon right tho her met,
How that an Egle fethered white as bone,
Under her breast his long claws iset,
And out her heart he rent, and that anon,
And did his heart into her breast to gone,
Of which she nout agrose, ne nothing smart,
And forth he flies, with heart left for heart.
Now let her sleep, and we our tales hold
Of Troilus, that is to Paleis ridden,
Fro the scarmishe of which I of told,
And in his chamber sat, and has abidden,
Till two or three of his messengers yeden
For Pandarus, and soughten him full fast,
Til they him found, and brought him at ye last.
This Pandarus came leaping in at ones,
And said thus, who has been well ibete
To day with swerdes, and slong stones,
But Troilus, that has caught him an hete,
And began to yape, and said, Lord ye sweet,
But rise and let us soupe, and go to rest,
And he answerde him, do we as thee lest.
With all the have goodly as they might,
They sped hem fro the souper, and to bed,
And every wight out at the door him dight,
And whider him list, upon his way him sped:
But Troilus thought that his heart bledde
For woe, till that he heard some tiding,
And said friend, shall I now weep or sing.
(Quoth. Pandarus) be still and let me sleep,
And do on thy hoode, thine needs spedde be,
And chose if thou wolt sing, dance, or lepe,
At short words thou shall trow all by me,
Sir, my nece woll done well by thee,
And love thee best, by God and by trothe,
But lack of pursuit mar it in thy slothe.
For thus ferforth I have thy werk begone,
Fro day to day, till this day by the morrow,
Her love of friendship have I to thee won,
And therefore has she laid her faith to borow,
Algate a foot is hameled of thy sorrow:
What should I longer sermon of it hold,
As ye have heard before, all he him told.
But right as flours through ye cold of night
Iclosed, stoupen in her stalks low,
Redressen hem again the Sun bright,
And spreden in her kind course by row,
Right so began tho his iyen up to throw
This Troilus, and said: O Venus dear,
Thy might, thy grace, iheried be it here.
And to Pandarus he held up both his honds,
And said, Lord all thine be that I have,
For I am hole, and broken been my bonds,
A thousand Troies, who so that me yave
Each after other, God so wis me save,
Ne might me so gladen, lo mine heart
It spredeth so for joy it woll to starte.
But lord how shall I done? how shall I liven,
When shall I next my dear heart se?
How shall this long time away he driven?
Till that thou be again at her fro me,
* Thou may answer, abide abide: but he
That hangs by the neck, sothe to saine,
In great disease abides for the pain.
All easily now, for the love of Mart
(Quoth. Pandarus) for every thing has time,
So long abide, till that the night depart,
For also siker as thou lie here by me,
And God toforne, I woll be there at prime,
And for thy work somewhat, as I shall say,
Or on some other wight this charge lay.
For parde, God wot, I have ever yet
Ben ready thee to serve, and this night
Have I not fained, but emforthe my wit
Done all thy lust, and shall with all my might:
Do now as I shall saine, and fare aright:
And if thou nilte, wite all thy self the care,
On me is naught along thine evil fare.
I wot well, that thou wiser art than I
A thousand fold: but if I were as thou,
God help me so, as I would utterly
Right of mine own hond write her now
A letter, in which I would her tellen how
I farde amiss, and her beseech of routh:
Now help thy self, and leave it for no sloth.
And I my self shall therewith to her gone,
And when thou wost that I am with her there
Worth thou upon a courser right anon,
Ye hardely, and that right in thy best gere,
And ride forth by y^ place, as naught ne were,
And thou shall find us (if I may) sitting
At some window, into the street looking.
And if thee list, then may thou us salve,
And upon me make thou thy countenance,
But by thy life beware, and fast eschew
To tarien ought, God shild us fro mischaunce
Ride forth thy way, and hold thy governaunce,
And we shall speak of thee somewhat I trow
When thou art gone, to do thine ears glow.
Touching thy letter, thou art wise enough,
I wot thou nilte it deigneliche endite,
As make it with these arguments tough,
Ne scriveinishe or craftily thou it write,
Beblotte it with thy tears eke alite,
* And if thou write a goodly word all soft,
Though it be good, rehearse it not too often.
* For though the best Harpour upon live
Would on the best souned jolly Harp
That ever was, with all his fingers five
Touch aye o strong, or aye o warble Harp,
Were his nails pointed never so sharp,
It should make every wight to dull,
To hear his glee, and of his strokes full.
Ne iombre eke no discordaunt thing ifere,
As thus, to vsen terms of Physic,
In loves terms hold of thy matere
The form always, and do that it be like,
* For if a painter would paint a pike
With Asses feet, and headed as an Ape,
It cordeth not, so were it but a yape.
This counsel liked well unto Troilus,
But as a dredefull lover he said this:
Alas my dear brother Pandarus,
I am ashamed for to write amiss,
Least of mine innocence I said amiss,
Or that she nolde it for dispite receive,
Then were I dead, there might it nothing weive.
To that Pandare answerde, if thee lest,
Do that I say, and let me therewith gone,
For by that Lord that formed East and West,
I hope of it to bring answer anon
Right of her hond, and if that thou nilte none,
Let be, and sorry mote he been his live,
Against thy lust, that helps thee to thrive.
(Quoth. Troilus) depardieux iche assent,
Since that thee list, I woll arise and write,
And blisfull God pray iche with good intent
The voyage and the letter I shall endite,
So speed it, and thou Minerva the white,
Yeve thou me wit, my letter to devise:
And set him down, and wrote right in this wise.
First he began her his right Lady call,
His hearts life, his lust, his sorrows leche,
His bliss, and each these other terms all,
That in such case ye lovers all seche,
And in full humble wise, as in his speech,
He began him recommaund unto her grace,
To tell all how, it asks mokell space.
And after this full lowly he her prayed
To be naught wroth, though he of his folly
So hardy was to her to write, and said
That love it made, or else must he die,
And pitously began mercy for to cry:
And after that he said, and lied full loud,
Himself was little worth, and less he coud.
And yt she would have his conning excused,
That little was, and eke he dradde her so,
And his unworthiness aye he accused:
And after that then began he tell his woe,
But that was endless withouten ho:
And said, he would in troth always him hold,
And read it over, and began the letter fold.
And with his salt tears began he bathe
The rubie in his signet, and it set
Upon the wexe deliverliche and rathe,
Therewith a thousand times, er he let
He kissed tho the letter that he shette,
And said, letter a blisfull destine
Thee shapen is, my Lady shall thee see.
This Pandare took the letter, and betime
A morrow to his neecis pallaice stert,
And fast he swore, that it was passed prime:
And began to yape, and said iwis my heart
So fresh it is, although it sore smert,
I may not sleep never a Mayes morrow,
I have a iollie woe, a lusty sorrow.
Creseide when that she her Uncle heard,
With dreadful heart, and desirous to hear
The cause of his coming, thus answeard,
Now by your faith mine uncle (quoth. she) dear,
What manner winds guides you now here?
Tell us your jolly woe, and your penance,
How far forth be ye put in loves dance.
By God (quoth. he) I hop always behind,
And to laugh, it thought her heart breast,
* (Quoth. Pandarus) Look always that ye find
Game in mine hood: but herkeneth if you lest,
There is right now come into y^ town a gest,
A Greek ^spie, and tells new things,
For which I come to tell you new tidinges.
Into the garden go we, and ye shall hear
All privily of this a long sermoun:
With that they wenten arm in arm ifere,
Into the gardin fro the chamber down.
And when he was so far, that the soun
Of that he spoke, no man heren might,
He said her thus, and out the letter plight.
Lo, he that is all holly yours free,
Him recommaundeth lowly to your grace,
And sent you this letter here by me,
Aviseth you on it, when ye han space,
And of some goodly answer you purchase,
Or help me God so, plainly for to saine,
He may not long liven for his pain.
Full dredefully tho began she stand still,
And took it not, but all her humble chere
Began for to change, and said, scripe nor bill
For love of God, that touches such matere
Ne bring me none: and also uncle dear
To mine estate have more regard I pray
Than to his lust, what should I more say.
And looks now if this be reasonable,
And lets not for favor ne for sloth
To sain a sooth, now is it covenable
To mine estate, by God and by my troth
To take it, or to have of him routh,
In harming of my self or in repreve:
Bear it again, for him that ye on leve.
This Pandarus began on her for to stare,
And said, now is this the greatest wonder
That ever I saw, let be this nice fare,
To death mote I smiten be with thunder,
If for the City which that stondeth yonder,
Would I a letter unto you bring or take,
To harm of you: what list you thus it make.
* But thus ye faren well nigh all and some,
That he that most desires you to serve,
Of him ye retch least where he become,
And whether that he live, or else sterve:
But for all that, that ever I may deserve,
Refuse it not (quoth. he) and hent her fast,
And in her bosom the letter down he thrast.
And said her, now cast it away anon
That folk may seen, and gauren on us twey,
(Quoth. she) I can abide till they be gone
And began to smile, and said him, eme I pray
Such answer as you list your self purvey:
For truly I woll no letter write:
No, then woll I (quoth. he) so ye endite.
Therewith she lough, and said go we dine,
And he began at himself yapen fast,
And said Nece, I have so great a pine
For love, that everich other day I fast,
And began his best yapes forth to cast,
And made her so to laugh at his folly,
That she for laughter weent for to die.
And when that she was comen into y^ hall,
Now eme (quoth. she) we woll go dine anon,
And began some of her women to her call,
And straight into her chamber began she gone,
But of her business this was one,
Amongs other things, out of dread,
Full prively this letter for to read.
Avised word by word in every line,
* And found no lack, she thought he coud his good,
And up it put, and went her in to dine,
And Pandarus, that in a study stood,
Ere he was ware, she took him by the hood,
And said ye were caught ere that ye wist,
I vouchsafe (quoth. he) do what you list.
Tho weshen they, and set him down and ete,
And after noone fall slighly Pandarus
Began draw him to the window nigh the street,
And said, nece, who has araied thus
The yonder house, that stant aforeyene us?
Which house (quoth. she) and began for to behold,
And knew it well, and whose it was him told.
And fellen forth in speech of things small,
And saten in the window both twey:
When Pandarus saw time unto his tale,
And saw well that her folk were all awey:
Now nece mine, tell on (quoth. he) I prey,
How likes you the letter that ye wot,
Can he thereon, for by my troth I not.
Therewith all rosy hewed tho woxe she,
And began to hum, and said, so I trow,
Aquite him well for Gods love (quoth. he)
My self to medes woll the letter sow,
And held his honds up, and sat on know,
Now good nece, be it never so lite,
Give me the labor, it to sow and plite.
Ye, for I can so written (quoth. she) tho,
And eke I not what I should to him say:
Nay nece (quoth. Pandare) say not so,
Yet at the least, thonketh him I pray
Of his good will: O, does him not to dey,
Now for the love of me my nece dear,
Refuses not at this time my praiere.
Depardieux (quoth. she) God leve all be well,
God help me so, this is the first letter
That ever I wrote, ye all or any dele,
And into a closet for to avise her better,
She went alone, and began her heart vnfetter
Out of disdaines prison, but a lite,
And set her down, and began a letter write.
Of which to tell in short is mine intent
Theffect, as far as I can understand:
She thonked him, of all that he well meant
Toward her, but holden him in hond
She nolde not, ne make her seluen bond
In love, but as his suster him to please,
She would aye feign to done his heart an ease.
She shette it, and to Pandare into gone
There as he sat, and looked into street,
And down she set her by him on a stone
Of jasper, upon a quisshen of gold ibete,
And said, as wisely help me God the great,
I never did a thing with more pain,
Than write this, to which ye me restrain,
And took it him: he thonked her, and seide,
* God wot of thing full often loathe begone,
Comes end good: and nece mine Creseide.
That ye to him of hard now ben iwonne,
Ought he be glad, by God and yonder son:
* For why, men says impressions light
Full lightly ben aye ready to the flight.
But ye han played the tiraunt all too long,
And hard was it your heart for to grave,
Now stint, that ye no longer on it hong,
All woulden ye the form of danger save,
But hastes you to done him joy have:
* For trusts well, too long idone hardness
Causes dispite full often for distress.
And right as they declared this matere,
Lo Troilus, right at the streets end
Came riding with his tenth sum ifere
All softely, and thiderward began bend
There as they sat, as was his way to wend
To paleis ward, and Pandare him aspide,
And said, nece, isee who comes here ride.
O fly not in, he sees us I suppose,
Least he may thinken that ye him eschew.
Nay, nay (quoth. she) and woxe as red as rose,
With that he began her humbly salve
With dredefull chere, and often his hewes mue,
And up his look debonairely he cast,
And becked on Pandare, and forth by past.
God wot if he sat on his horse aright,
Or goodly was beseene that like day,
God wot where he were like a manly knight,
What should I dretche, or tell of his array:
Creseide, which that all these things sey,
To tell in short, her liked all ifere
His person, his array, his look, his chere,
His goodly manner, and gentillesse,
So well, that never since that she was borne,
Ne had she such routh of his distress,
And how so, she has hard ben here beforne,
* To God hope I, she has now caught a thorn,
She shall not pull it out this next wike,
God send her mo such thorns on to pike.
Pandare, which that stood her fast by,
* Felt iron hot, and he began to smite,
And said, nece, I pray you heartely,
Tell me that I shall asken you alite,
A woman that were of his death to wite
Withouten his gilt, but for her lack of routh,
Were it well done (quoth. she) nay by my troth.
God help me so (quoth. he) ye say me sooth,
Ye feelen well your self that I naught lie,
Lo, yonde he rides (quoth. she) ye so he does:
Well (quoth. Pandare) as I have told you thrie,
Let be your nice shame, and your folly,
And speak with him in easing of his heart,
Let nicete not do you both smert.
But thereon was to heaven and to done,
Considering all thing, it may not be,
And why? for shame, and it were eke too soon
To graunten him so great a liberte:
For plainly her intent, as (said she)
Was for to love him vnwist, if she might,
And guerdon himwith nothing but with sight.
But Pandare thought, it shall not be so
If that I may, this nice opinion
Shall not ben holden fully years two.
What should I make of this a long sermon?
He must assent on that conclusion,
As for the time, and when that it was eve,
And all was well, he rose and took his leve.
And on his way fast homeward he spedde,
And right for joy he felt his heart dance,
And Troilus he found alone abedde,
That lay, as done these lovers in a trance,
Betwixen hope and derke desperaunce,
But Pandare, right at his in coming,
He song, as who says, lo, somewhat I bring.
And said, who is in his bed so soon
Yburied thus? it am I friend (quoth. he)
Who, Troilus? nay, help me so the moon
(Q. d. Pandarus) thou shall up rise and see
A charm that was sent right now to thee,
The which can healen thee of thine access,
If thou do forthwith all thy business.
Ye through the might of God (quoth. Troilus)
And Pandarus began him the letter take,
And said, parde God has helped us,
Have here a light, and look on all these blake,
But often began the heart glad and quake
Of Troilus, while he it began to read,
So as the words yave him hope or dread.
But finally he took all for the best
That she him wrote, for somewhat he beheld,
On which he thought he might his heart rest,
All covered she the words under sheld,
Thus to the more worthy part he held,
That what for hope, and Pandarus behest,
His great woe foryede he at the lest.
But as we may all day our selven see,
* Through wood or cole kindles the more fire,
Right so increase of hope, of what it be,
Therewith full often increases eke desire,
Or as an oak comes of a little spire,
So through this letter, which y^ she him sent,
Encreasen began desire of which he brent.
Wherefore I say always, that day and night
This Troilus began to desiren more
Than he did erst through hope, and did his might
To presen on, as by Pandarus lore,
And written to her of his sorrows sore
Fro day to day, he let it naught refreide,
That by Pandare he somewhat wrote or seide.
And did also his other observaunces,
That till a lover longs in this caas,
And after as his dice turned on chances,
So was he either glad, or said alas,
And held after his gestes aye his paas,
And after such answers as he had,
So were his days sorry either glad.
But to Pandare always was his recours,
And pitously began aye on him to plain,
And him besought of read, and some socours,
And Pandarus, that saw his wood pain,
Wext well nigh dead for routh sooth to saine,
And busily with all his heart cast,
Some of his woe to sleen, and that as fast.
And said, Lord and friend, and brother dear,
God wot that thy disease does me woe,
But wolt thou stinten all this woeful chere,
And by my troth, ere it be days two,
And God toforne, yet shall I shape it so,
That thou shall come into a certain place,
There as thou may thy self praien her of grace,
And certainly I not if thou it wost,
But they that been expert in love, it say,
* It is one of these things forthereth most,
A man to have a le^ser for to pray,
And siker place, his woe for to bewray,
* For in good heart it mote some routh impresse
To hear and see the guiltless in distress.
Peraventure think thou, though it be so,
That kind would her done for to begin,
To have a manner routh upon my woe,
Says danger nay, thou shall me never win,
So rules her hearts ghost within,
* That though she bend, yet she stont on rote,
What in effect is this unto my hot.
* Think here again, when that y^ sturdy oak,
On which men hacketh often for the nones,
Received has the happy falling stroke,
The great sweight does it come all at ones,
As done these great rocks or these miln stones
* For swifter course comes thing y^ is of wight
When it discendeth, than done things light.
But read that boweth down for every blast
Full lightly cesse wind, it woll arise,
But so nill not an oak, when it is cast,
It needs me naught long thee forvise,
* Men shall reioysen of a great emprise,
Achieved well, and stant withouten dout,
All have men ben the longer thereabout.
But Troilus, now tell me if thee lest
A thing, which that I shall asken thee,
Which is thy brother, that thou love best?
As in thy very hearts privite?
Iwis my brother Deiphebus tho (quoth. he.)
Now (quoth. Pandare) ere hours twice twelve,
He shall the ease, vnwist of it himselve.
Now let me alone, and worken as I may
(Quoth. he) and to Deiphebus went he tho,
Which had his lord, and great friend ben aye,
Save Troilus no man he loved so,
To tell in sort withouten words mo
(Quoth. Pandarus) I pray you that ye be
Friend to a cause, which that touches me.
Yes parde (quoth. Deiphebus) welthou wotest
All that ever I may, and God tofore,
All nere it but for the man I love most,
My brother Troilus, but say wherefore
It is, for since the day that I was bore,
I nas, ne never mo to ben I think,
Against a thing that might thee forthinke.
Pandare began him thank, and to him seide,
Lo sir, I have a Lady in this town
That is my nece, and called is Creseide,
Which some men would done oppressioun,
And wrongfully have her possessioun,
Wherefore I of your lordship you beseech
To ben our friend, withouten more speech.
Deiphebus him answered: O, is not this
That thou speak of to me thus straungly,
Creseide my friend? He said him yes.
Then needs (quoth. Deiphebus) hardely
No more of this to speak, for trusts well y^ I
Woll be her Champion with spore and yerde,
I ne raught not though all her foes it herd.
But tell me how, for thou wost this matere,
I might best availen, now let see?
(Quoth. Pandarus) if ye my lord so dear
Woulden as now do this honor to me,
To praien her to morrow, lo that she
Came unto you, her plaints to devise,
Her adversaries would of it agrise.
And if I more durst praien as now,
And chargen you to have so great travail,
To have some of your brethren here with you,
That mighten to her cause bet avail,
Then wore I well she might never fail
For to ben helped, what at your instaunce,
What with her other friends governaunce.
Deiphebus, which y^ comen was of kind
To all honor and bounty to consent,
Answered, it shall be done: and I can find
Yet greater help to this mine intent,
What would thou saine, if for Heleine I sent
To speak of this, I trow it be the best,
For she may leden Paris as her lest.
Of Hector, which y^ is my Lord my brother,
It needs not to praien him friend to be,
For I have heard him o time and eke other
Speaken of Creseide such honor, that he
May saine no bet, such hap to him has she,
It needs not his helps more to crave,
He shall be such, right as we woll him have.
Speak thou thy self also to Troilus
On my behalf, and pray him with us dine.
Sit, all this shall be done (quoth. Pandarus)
And took his leave, and never began to fine,
But to his neces house as straight as line
He came, and found her fro the meat arise,
And set him down, and spoke right in this wise:
He said, O very God, so have I run,
Lo nece mine, see ye not how I sweet,
I not whete ye the more thank me conne,
Be ye not ware how false Poliphete
Is now about eftsoons for to plete,
And bring on you advocacies new?
I, no (quoth. she) and changed all her hew.
What, is he more about me to dretche
And done me wrong, what shall I done, alas,
Yet of himself nothing would I retche,
Nere it for Antenor and Eneas,
That been his friends in such manner caas:
But for the love of God mine uncle dear,
No force of that, let him have all ifere,
Withouten that, I have enough for us.
Nay (quoth. Pandare) it shall nothing be so,
For I have been right now at Deiphebus,
At Hector, and mine other lords mo,
And shortly maked each of hem his fo,
That by my thrift he shall it never win,
For aught he can, when so that he begin.
And as they casten what was best to done,
Deiphebus of his own courtesy
Came her to pray, in his proper person,
To hold him on the morrow company
At dinner, which she nolde not deny,
But goodly began to his prayer obey,
He thonked her, and went upon his wey.
When this was done, this Pandare anon
To tell in short forth he began to wend
To Troilus, as still as any stone,
And all this thing he told him word and end,
And how that he Deiphebus began to blend,
And said him, now is time of that ye conne
To bear thee well to morrow, and all is won.
Now speak, now pray, now pitously complain,
Let not for nice shame, for dread or sloth,
* Sometime a man mote tell his own pain,
Believe it, and she woll have on thee routh,
Thou shall ben saved by thy faith in troth,
But well wot I, thou now art in a dread,
And what it is, I lay that I can arede.
Thou think now, how should I don all this,
For by my cheres mosten folk epsy,
That for her love is that I fare amiss,
Yet had I lever unwist for sorrow die:
Now think not so, for thou do great folly,
For I right now have founden a manner
Of slight, for to coveren all thy chere.
Thou shall gone overnight, and that blive,
Unto Deiphebus house, as thee to play,
Thy malady away the bet to drive,
For which thou seems sick, sooth to say,
Soon after that, in thy bed thee lay,
And say thou may no longer up endure,
And lie right there, and bide thine aventure.
Say that thy fever is wont thee for to take
The same time, and last till a morrow,
And let see now how well thou can it make:
* For parde sick is he that is in sorrow.
Go now farewell, and Venus here to borow,
I hope and thou this purpose hold ferme,
Thy grace she shall fully there conferme.
(Quoth. Troilus) iwis thou all needless
Counsailest me, that sickeliche I me feign,
For I am sick in earnest doubtless,
So that well nigh I sterve for the pain:
(Quoth. Pandarus) thou shall the better plain,
And have the less need to counterfete,
* For him demeth men hot, yt sees him sweet.
Lo, hold thee at thy triste close, and I
* Shall well the dear unto the bow drive:
Therewith he took his leave all softly,
And Troilus to his paleis went blive,
So glad ne was he never in all his live,
And to Pandarus read began all assent,
And to Deiphebus house at night he went.
What needs it you to tellen all the chere
That Deiphebus unto his brother made,
Or his axis, or his sickeliche manner,
How men gone him with clothes for to lade,
When he was laid, and how men would him glade:
But all for naught, he held forth aye the wise,
That ye han heard Pandare ere this devise.
But certain is, ere Troilus him leide,
Deiphebus had prayed him over night
To ben a friend, and helping to Creseide:
God wot that he granted anon right,
To ben her full friend with all his might:
* But such a need was it to praien him then,
As for to bidden a wood man to run.
The morrow came, and nighen began the time
Of mealtide, that the fair queen Heleine
Shope her to ben an hour after the prime
With Deiphebus, to whom she nolde feign,
But as his suster, homely sooth to saine
She came to dinner in her plain intent,
But God and Pandare wist all what this meant.
Came eke Creseide all innocent of this,
Antigone her nece, and Tarbe also,
But fly we now prolixitie best is,
For love of God, and let us fast go
Right to theffect, withouten tales mo,
Why all this folk assembled in this place,
And let us of all her salvings pace.
Great honor did hem Deiphebus certain,
And fed hem well, with all that might like,
But evermo alas, was his refrain:
My good brother Troilus the sike
Lithe yet, and therewithal he began to sike,
And after that he pained him to glade
Hem as he might, and chere good he made.
Complained eke Heleine of his sickness
So faithfully, that it pity was to here,
And every wight began wexen for axes
A leche anon, and said in this manner
Men curen folk, this charm I wol thee lere,
But there sat one, all list her not to teache,
That thought, yet best could I ben his leche.
After complaint him gonnen they to preise,
As folk don yet when some wight has begone
To preise a man, and with preise him reise
A thousand fold yet higher than the son,
He is, he can, that few other Lords conne,
And Pandarus of that they would afferme,
He naught forgate her praising to conferme.
Herd all this thing fair Creseid well enough,
And every word began for to notify,
For which with sober chere her heart lough,
For who is that ne would her glorify,
To mowen such a knight done live or die,
But all pass I, least ye too long idwell,
But for o fine is all that ever I tell.
The time came, fro dinner for to rise,
And as hem ought, arisen everychone,
And gane a while of this and that devise,
But Pandarus brake all this speech anon,
And said to Deiphebus, woll ye gone,
If your will be, as erst I you preide,
To speaken of the needs of Creseide.
Heleine, which that by the hond her held,
Took first the tale, and said, go we blive,
And goodly on Creseide she beheld,
And said, Jove's let him never thrive
That does you harm, and reve him sone of live,
And yeve me sorrow, but he shall it rue,
If that I may, and all folk be true.
Tell thou thy nices case (quoth. Deiphebus
To Pandarus) for thou can best it tell.
My Lords and my Ladies, it stant thus,
What should I longer (quoth. he) do you dwell,
* He rong hem out a process like a bell
Upon her foe, that hight Poliphete,
So heinous, that men might on it spete.
Answered of this each worse of hem than other,
And Poliphete they gonnen thus to warien,
And honged be such one, were he my brother,
And so he shall, for it ne may naught varien,
What should I longer in this tale tarien,
Plaineliche all at ones they her highten
To ben her friend in all yt ever they mighten.
Spoke then Heleine, and said Pandarus,
Wot aught my lord my brother of this matter,
I mean Hector, or wot it Troilus.
He said ye, but woll ye me now here,
Me thinks thus, since that Troilus is here,
It were good, if that ye would assent,
She told him her self all this ere she went.
For he wol have y^ more her grefe at heart,
Because lo, that she a Lady is,
And by your will, I woll but in right start,
And do you wete, and that anon iwis,
If that he sleep, or woll aught here of this,
And in he lept, and said him in his ere,
* God have thy soul, for brought have I thy bear.
To smilen of this began tho Troilus,
And Pandarus without reckoning,
Out went anon to Heleine and Deiphebus,
And said hem, so there be no tarying
Ne more prease, he woll well that ye bring
Creseide my Lady, that is now here,
And as he may enduren, he woll her here.
But well ye wot, the chamber is but lite,
And few folk may lightly make it warm,
Now looks ye, for I woll have no wite
To bring in prease, y^ might done him harm,
Or him diseasen, for my better arm:
Yet were it bette she bid till often soonis,
Now look ye that known what to donis.
I say for me best is, as I can know,
That no wight in ne wend, but ye twey,
But it were I, for I cannot in a throw
Rehearse her case, unlike that she can sey,
And after this she may him ones prey
To ben good Lord in short, and take her leve,
This may not mokell of his ease him reve.
And eke for she is strange, he woll forbere
His ease, which that him dare not for you,
Eke other thing that touches not to her,
He woll it tell, I wot it well right now,
That secret is, and for the towns prow,
And they that knew nothing of his intent,
Without more, to Croilus in they went.
Heleine in all her goodly soft wise
Began him salve, and womanly to play,
And said iwis, ye mote algate arise:
Now fair brother be all hole I pray,
And began her arm right over his shoulder lay,
And him with all her wit to recomfort,
As she best could, she began him to disport.
So after this (quoth. she) we you beseke
My dear brother Deiphebus and I,
For love of God, and so does Pandare eke,
To been good lord and friend right heartily
Unto Creseide, which that certainly
Received wrong, as wot well here Pandare,
That can her case well bet than I declare.
This Pandarus began new his tongue affile,
And all her case rehearse, and that anon,
When it was said, soon after in a while,
(Quoth. Troilus) as soon as I may gone,
I wol right faint with all my might ben one,
Have God my troth, her cause to sustene.
Now good thrift have ye (quoth. Helein ye queen.)
(Quoth. Pandarus) and it your will be,
That she may take her leave ere that she go.
O else God forbid it tho (quoth. he)
If that she vouchsafe for to do so:
And with that word (quoth. Troilus) ye two
Deiphebus, and my suster lefe and dear,
To you have I to speak of a matere.
To been avised by your read the better,
And found (as hap was) at his beds hedde
The copy of a treatise, and a letter
That Hector had him sent, to asken read
If such a man was worthy to ben deed,
Wot I naught who, but in a grisly wise
He prayed hem anon on it avise.
Deiphebus began this letter for to unfold
In earnest great, so did Heleine the queen,
And roming outward, fast it gonne behold
Dounward a steire, into an herbor green:
This ilke thing they redden hem between,
And largely the mountenaunce of an hour
They goone on it to reden and to pour.
Now let hem read, and turn we anon
To Pandarus, that began full soft pry,
That all was well, and out he began to gone
Into the great chamber, and that in hie,
And said, God save all this company:
Come nece mine, my lady Queen Heleine
Abides you, and eke my Lords tweine.
Rise, take with you your nece Antigone,
Or whom you list, or no force hardely,
The less prease the bet, come forth with me,
And look that ye thonken humbly
Hem all three, and when ye may goodly
Your time isee, takes of hem your leave,
Least we too long his restes him bireave.
All innocent of Pandarus intent
(Quoth. tho Creseide) go we uncle dear,
And arm in arm, inward with him she went,
Avising well her words and her chere,
And Pandarus in earnestfull manner,
Said, all folk for Gods love I pray,
Stinteth right here, and softly you play.
Aviseth you what folk ben here within,
And in what plite one is, God him amend,
And inward thus full softely begin,
Nece I conjure, and highly you defend
On his half, which that soul us all send,
And in the virtue of corounes twain
Slay not this man, yt has for you this pain.
Fie on the devil, think which on he is,
And in what plite he lies, come off anon,
* Think all such tarried tide but lost it nis,
That woll ye both saine, when ye been one:
Secondly, there yet deuineth none
Upon you two, come off now if ye conne,
* While folk is blent, lo, all y^ time is won.
* In titering and pursuit, and delays
The folk devine, at wegging of a stre,
And though ye would han after merry days,
Then dare ye not, and why? For she and she
Spoke such a word, thus looked he and he:
Least time be lost, I dare not with you deal,
Come off therefore, and brings him to heal.
But now to you, ye lovers that been here,
Was Troilus not in a cankedort,
That lay, and might the wispring of hem here
And thought O lord, right now renneth my sort
Fully to die, or have anon comfort,
And was the first time he should her pray
Of love, O mighty God, what shall he say.
Explicit Liber Secundus.
O Blisfull light, of which the bemes clear
Adorneth all the third heaven fair
O sons lefe, O Jove's daughter dear,
Pleasaunce of love, O goodly debonaire,
In gentle hearts aye ready to repair,
O very cause of heal and of gladness,
Iheried be thy might and thy goodness.
In heaven and hell, in earth, and salt see,
Is felt thy might, if that I well discern,
As man* and beast, fish, herb, and grene tree,
They feel in times with vapor eterne,
God loves, and to love woll naught werne,
* And in this world no lives creature,
Withouten love is worth, or may endure.
Ye Jove's first, to thilke affects glade
Through which that things liven all and be,
Commenden, and amorous hem made
On mortal thing, and as you list aye ye
Yeve hem in love, ease, or aduersite:
And in a thousand forms down hem sent
For love in earth, and whom you list he hent.
Ye fires Mars appeasen of his ire,
And as you list, ye maken hearts digne:
Algates hem that ye woll set a fire,
They dreden shame, and vices they resign,
Ye done him curteis be, fresh, and benign,
And high or low, after a wight entendeth
The ioies yt he has, your might it sends.
Ye holden reign and house in unity;
Ye soothfast cause of friendship ben also,
Ye known all thilke covered quality
Of things, which that folk wondren at so,
When they can not construe how it may go,
She loves him, or why he loves here,
* As why this fish, and not y^ comes to were.
Ye folk a law have set in universe,
And this know I by hem that lovers be,
* That who so striveth with you has y^ werse:
Now Lady bright, for thy benignite,
At reverence of hem that serven thee,
Whose clerk I am, so teaches me devise,
Some joy of that is felt in thy servise.
Yea, in my naked heart sentement
In hilde, and do me show of thy sweetness
Caliope, thy voice be now present,
For now is need, see thou not my distress,
How I mote tell anon right the gladness
Of Troilus, to Venus herying,
To the which who need has, God him bring.
Incipit Liber Tertius.
LAy all this mean while this Troilus
Recording his lesson in this manner,
Mafey thought he, thus woll I say, and thus,
Thus woll I plain unto my Lady dear,
That word is good, and this shall be my chere
This nill I not foryetten in no wise,
God leve him werken as he can devise.
And Lord so that his heart began to quappe,
Hearing her come, and short for to sike,
And Pandarus that led her by the lap,
Came nere, and began in at the curtein pike,
And said, God do bote on all that are sike,
See who is here you comen to visit,
Lo, here is she that is your death to wite.
Therewith it seemed as he wept almost,
A, a (quoth. Troilus) so routhfully,
Whether me be woe, O mighty god thou wost,
Who is all there, I see not truly:
Sir (quoth. Creseide) it is Pandare and I,
Ye sweet heart alas, I may not rise
To kneel, and do you honor in some wise.
And dressed him upward, and she right tho
Began both her honds soft upon him ley,
O for the love of God do ye not so
To me (quoth. she) eye what is this to sey,
Sir comen am I to you for causes twey,
First you to thonke, and of your Lordship eke
Continuance I would you beseke.
This Troilus that heard his Lady pray
Of Lordship, him wox neither quick ne dedde,
Ne might o word for shame to it say,
Although men shoulden smiten off his hedde,
But Lord so he wox sodaineliche read:
And sir, his lesson that he wend conne
To praien her, is through his wit ironne.
Creseide all this aspied well enough,
For she was wise, and loved him never ye less,
* All nere he in all apert, or made it tough,
Or was too bold to sing a fool a Mass,
But when his shame began somewhat to pass
His reasons, as I may my rimes hold,
I woll you tell, as teachen books old.
In changed voice, right for his very dread,
Which voice eke quoke, and thereto his manner
Goodly abasht, and now his hewes read,
Now pale, unto Creseide his lady dear,
With look down cast, and humble iyolden chere,
Lo, the alder first word that him astart,
Was twice, mercy, mercy, O my sweet heart.
And stint a while, and when he might out bring,
The next word was, God wot for I have
As faithfully as I have had konning,
Ben yours all, God so my soul do save,
And shall, till that I woeful wight be grave,
And though I dare ne can unto you plain,
I wis I suffer not the less pain.
Thus much as now, ah, womanliche wife
I may out bring, and if this you displease,
That shall I wreke upon mine own life
Right soon I trow, and do your heart an ease,
If with my death your heart may appease:
But sens y^ ye han heard me somewhat sey,
Now retch I never how soon that I dey.
Therewith his manly sorrow to behold,
It might have made an heart of stone to rue,
* And Pandare wept as he to water would,
And poked ever his nece new and new,
And said, woe begone been hearts true,
For love of God, make of this thing an end,
Or slay us both at ones, ere that ye wend.
I, what (quoth. she) by God and by my troth
I not not what ye wilne that I sey:
Eye, what (quoth. he) yt ye have on him routh
For Gods love, and does him not to dey:
Now then thus (quoth. she) I woll him prey,
To tell me the fine of his intent,
Yet wist I never well what that he meant.
What that I mean, O my sweet heart dear
(Quoth. Troilus) O goodly fresh and free,
That with the streams of your eyes so clear
Ye shoulden sometime friendly on me see,
And then agreen that I may ben he
Withouten branch of vice, on any wise,
In troth always to do you my servise.
As to my lady right, and chief resort,
With all my wit and all my diligence,
And to have right as you list comfort,
Under your yerde egall to mine offense,
As death, if that I break your defense,
And that ye digne me so much honor,
Me to commaunden aught in any hour.
And I to ben your very humble, true,
Secret, and in my pains patient,
And ever to desiren freshly new
To serven, and to ben aye like diligent,
And with good heart all holly your talent
Receiven well, how sore that me smart,
Lo this mean I, O mine own sweet heart.
(Quoth. Pandarus) lo here an hard request,
And reasonable, a Lady for to werne:
Now nece mine, by Natall Jove's feast,
Were I a God, ye should sterve as yerne,
That heren well this man wol nothing yerne,
But your honor, and seen him almost sterve,
And ben so loath to suffer him you to serve.
With that she began her eyes on him cast
Full easily, and full debonairely
Avising her, and hied not too fast,
With never a word, but said him softely,
Mine honor safe, I woll well truly,
And in such form, as I can now devise,
Receiven him fully to my servise.
Beseeching him for Gods love, that he
Would in honor of troth and gentillesse,
As I well mean, eke meanen well to me:
And mine honor with wit and business
Aye keep, and if I may done him gladness
From henceforth iwis I nill not feign:
Now beth all hole, no longer ye ne plain.
But nathelesse, this warn I you (quoth. she)
A kings son although ye be iwis,
Ye shall no more have soverainte
Of me in love, than right in that case is,
Ne nill forbear, if that ye done amiss
To wrath you, and while that ye me serve,
Cherishen you, right after that ye deserve.
And shortly, dear heart and all my knight,
Beth glad, and draws you to lustiness,
And I shall truly, withal my full might
Your bitter tournen all to sweetness,
If I be she that may do you gladness,
* For every woe ye shall recover a bliss,
And him in arms took, and began him kiss.
Fell Pandarus on knees, and up his eyes
To heaven threw, and held his honds hie:
Immortal God (quoth. he) that may not dien,
Cupide I mean, of this may glorify,
And Venus, thou may maken melody
* Withouten hond, me seems yt in town,
For this miracle iche here each bell soune.
But ho, no more now of this mattere,
For why? This folk woll comen up anon,
That have the letter read, lo I hem here,
But I conjure thee Creseide, and one
And two, thou Troilus when thou may gone
That at mine house ye ben at my warning,
For I full well shall shapen your coming.
And eases there your hearts right enough,
And let see which of you shall bear the bell
To speak of love aright, and therewith he lough,
For there have I a leiser for to tell:
(Quoth. Troilus) how long shall I here dwell
Ere this be done? quoth. he, when thou may rise
This thing shall be right as you list devise.
With that Heleine and also Deiphebus
Tho comen upward right at y^ stairs end,
And Lord so tho began gronen Troilus,
His brother and his suffer for to blend:
(Quoth. Pandarus) it time is that we wend,
Take nece mine your leave at hem all three,
And let hem speak, and comes forth with me.
She took her leave at hem full thriftely,
As she well could, and they her reverence
Unto the full didden heartily,
And wonder well speaken in her absence
Of her, in praising of her excellence,
Her governaunce, her wit, and her manner
Commendeden, that it joy was to here.
Now let her wend unto her own place,
And turn we unto Troilus again,
That began full lightly of the letter pace,
That Deiphebus had in the garden seine,
And of Heleine and him he would feine
Delivered ben, and said, that him lest
To sleep, and after tales have a rest.
Heleine him kissed, and took her leave blive,
Deiphebus eke, and home went every wight,
And Pandarus as fast as he may drive
To Troilus tho came, as any line right,
And on a paillet, all that glad night
By Troilus he lay, with merry chere
To tale, and well was hem they were ifere.
When every wight was voided but they two,
And all the doors weren fast ishet,
To tell in short, withouten words mo,
This Pandarus, without any let
Up rose, and on his beds side him set,
And began to speaken in a sober wise
To Troilus, as I shall you devise.
Mine alderlevest Lord, and brother dear,
God wot, and thou, that it sat me so sore,
When I thee saw so languishing to here,
For love of which thy woe woxe always more,
That I with all my might, and all my lore,
Have ever sithen done my business
To bring thee to joy out of distress.
And have it brought to such plite as thou wost
So y^ through me thou stondest now in way
To faren well, I say it for no bost,
And wost thou why, but shame it is to say,
For thee have I begone a gamen play,
Which that I never done shall eft for other,
All tho he were a thousand fold my brother.
That is to say, for thee am I becomen,
Betwixen game and earnest such a mean,
As maken women unto men to comen,
All say I not, thou wost well what I mean,
For thee have I my nece, of vices clean,
So fully made thy gentillesse trist,
That all shall ben right as thy self list.
But God, y^ all woteth, take I to witness,
That never I this for covetise wrought,
But only for to abredge that distress,
For which welnie thou did, as me thought:
But good brother do now as thee ought,
For Gods love, and keep her out of blame,
Sins thou art wise, and save always her name.
For well thou wost, the name as yet of her
Emongs y^ people as (who says) hallowed is,
For that man is unbore I dare well swear,
That ever wist that she did amiss,
But woe is me, that I that cause all this,
May thinken that she is my nece dear,
And I her eme, and traitor eke ifere.
And were it wist, yt I through mine engine
Had in mine nece iput this fantasy
To done thy lust, and holly to be thine:
Why all the world would upon it cry,
And say, that I the worst treachery
Did in this case, that ever was begone,
And she fordone, and thou right naught iwon.
Wherefore ere I woll further gone or paas,
Yet eft I thee beseech, and fully say,
That privete go with us in this caas,
That is to saine, that thou us never wray,
And be not wroth, though I thee often pray,
To holden secre such an high mattere,
For skillful is, thou wost well, my praiere.
And think with woe there has betid ere this
For making of avauntes, as men read,
And what mischaunce in this world yet is
Fro day to day, right for that wicked deed,
For which these wise clerks that been deed
Have ever this proverbed to us young,
* That the first virtue is to keep the tongue.
And nere it that I wilne as now abredge
Diffusion of speech, I could almost
A thousand old stories thee allege
Of women lost, through false and fools bost,
Proverbes can thy self inow, and wost
Against that vice for to been a blabbe,
All said men sooth, as often as they gabbe.
O tongue alas, so often here beforne
Have thou made many a lady bright of hew,
Said welaway the day that I was borne,
And many a maidens sorrow for to new,
* And for the more part all is untrew
That men of yelpe, and it were brought to preve,
Of kind, none avauntour is to leve.
Avauntour and a lier, all is one,
As thus: I pose a woman grant me
Her love, and says that other woll she none,
And I am sworn to holden it secree,
And after I tell it two or three,
Iwis I am a vauntour at the lest,
And lier eke, for I break my behest.
Now look then if they be not to blame,
Such manner folk, with shall I clepe hem, what,
That hem avaunt of women, and by name,
That yet behight hem never this ne that,
Ne know hem no more than mine old hat,
* No wonder is, so God me send hele,
Though women dreden with us men to dele.
I say not this for no mistrust of you,
Ne for no wise men, but for fools nice,
And for the harm that in the world is now,
As well for folly often, as for malice,
For well wot I, in wise folk that vice
No woman dredeth, if she be well avised,
* For wise been by fools harm chastised.
But now to purpose leve brother dear
Have all this thing that I have said in mind,
And keep thee close, and be now of good chere
For all thy days thou shall me true find,
I shall thy process set in such a kind,
And God toforne, that it shall thee suffice,
For it shall be right as thou wolt devise.
For well I wot, thou meanest well parde,
Therefore I dare this fully undertake,
Thou wost eke what thy lady granted thee,
And day is set the charters to make,
Have now good night, I may no longer wake
And bid for me, since thou art now in bliss,
That God me send death, or some lisse.
Who might tellen half the joy or feste
Which that the soul of Troilus tho felt,
Hearing theffect of Pandarus beheste:
His old woe, that made his heart to swelt,
Began tho for joy wasten, and to melt,
And all the richesse of his sighs sore
At ones fled, he felt of hem no more.
But right so as these holts and these hayis
That han in Winter dead ben and dry,
Revesten hem in grene, when that May is,
When every lusty lists to pley,
Right in that self wise, sooth for to sey,
Woxe suddenly his heart full of joy,
That gladder was there never man in Troy.
And began his look on Pandarus up cast
Full soberly, and friendly on to see,
And said, friend, in April the last,
As well thou wost, if it remember thee,
How nigh the death for woe thou found me,
And how thou did all thy business
To know of me the cause of my distress.
Thou wost how long I it forbear to say
To thee, that art the man that I best trist,
And peril none was it to thee to bewray,
That wist I well: but tell me if thee list,
Since I so loath was that thy self it wist,
How durst I mo tellen of this matere?
That quake now, and no wight may us here.
But nathelesse, by that God I thee swear,
That as him list may all the world govern,
And if I lie, Achilles with his spear
Mine heart cleave, all were my life eterne,
As I am mortal, if I late or yerne
Would it bewray, or durst or should conne,
For all the good that God made under son.
That rather die I would, and determine
As thinks me now, stocked in prison,
In wretchedness, in filth, and in vermin,
Captive to cruel king Agamenmon,
And this in all the temples of this town,
Upon the Gods all, I woll thee swear
To morrow day, if that thee likes here.
And that thou have so much idoen for me,
That I ne may it nevermore deserve,
This know I well, all might I now for thee
A thousand times on a morrow sterve,
I can no more, but that I woll thee serve
Right as thy slave, whether so thou wend,
For evermore, unto my lives end.
But here with all mine heart I thee beseech,
That never in me thou deem such folly
As I shall saine: me thought by thy speech,
That this which thou me do for company,
I should wenen it were a baudrie,
* I am not wood, all if I lewd be,
It is not so, that wot I well parde.
But he that goes for gold, or for richesse,
On such messages, call him what ye list,
And this that thou do, call it gentleness,
Compassion, and fellowship, and trist,
Depart it so, For wide where is wist
* How that there is diversity required
Betwixen things like, as I have lered.
And that thou know I think not ne wene,
That this service a shame be or iape,
I have my fair sister Polexene,
Cassandre, Helein, or any of the frape,
Be she never so fair, or well ishape,
Tell me which thou will of everychone
To have for thine, and let me then alone.
But since yt thou have done me this service,
My life to save, and for none hope of mede:
So for the love of God, this great emprise
Perform it out, now is the most need
For high and low, withouten any dread,
I woll always thine hestes all keep,
Have now good night, and let us both sleep.
Thus held hem each of other well apaied,
That all the world ne might it bet amend,
And on the morrow when they were araied,
Each to his own needs began to entend:
But Troilus, though as the fire he brend,
For sharp desire of hope, and of pleasaunce,
He not forgate his good governaunce.
But in himself, with manhood began restrain
Each rakell deed, and each unbridled chere,
That all that liven sooth for to saine,
Ne should have wist by word or by manner
What yt he meant, as touching this matere,
From every wight, as far as is the cloud,
He was so wise, and well dissimulen coud.
And all the while which that I now devise,
This was his life, with all his full might:
By day he was in Martes high servise,
That is to saine, in arms as a knight,
And for the more part all the long night,
He lay and thought how that he might serve
His lady best, her thank for to deserve.
Nill I not swear, although he lay soft,
That in his thought nas somewhat diseased,
Ne that he turned on his pillowes often,
And would of that him missed have been eased,
But in such case men be not always pleased,
For naught I wot: no more then was he,
That can I deem of possibilite.
But certain is, to purpose for to go,
That in this while, as written is in geste,
He saw his lady sometime, and also
She with him spoke, when yt she durst and lest,
And by her both avise, as was the best,
Appointeden full warely in this need,
So as they durst, how they would proceed.
But it was spoken in so short a wise,
In such awaite always, and in such fear,
Least any wight divinen or devise
Would of hem two, or to it lay an ear,
That all this world so lefe to hem ne were,
As that Cupide would hem his grace send,
To maken of her speech right an end.
But thilke little yt they spoke or wrought,
His wise ghost took aye of all such head,
It seemed her he wist what she thought,
Withouten word, so that it was no need
To bid him aught to done, or aught forbede,
For which she thought yt love, all come it late,
Of all joy had opened her the yate.
And shortly of this process for to pace,
So well his work and words he beset,
That he so full stood in his ladies grace,
That twenty thousand times ere she let,
She thonked God she ever with him met,
So could he him govern in such servise,
That all the world ne might it bet devise.
For she found him so discreet in all,
So secret, and of such obeisaunce,
That well she felt he was to her a wall
Of steel, and shield of every displeasaunce,
That to been in his good governaunce,
So wise he was, she was no more afered,
I mean as far as aught ben requered.
And Pandarus to quick always the fire,
Was ever ilike pressed and diligent,
To ease his friend was set all his desire,
He shone aye on, he to and fro was sent,
He letters bare, when Troilus was absent,
That never man, as in his friends need,
Ne bare him bet than he, withouten dread.
But now peraventure some man waiten would
That every word, or sond, look, or chere
Of Troilus, that I rehearcen should
In all this while, unto his lady dear,
I trow it were a long thing for to here,
Or of what wight that stant in such disjoint
His words all, or every look to point.
Forsooth I have not herd it done ere this,
In story none, ne no man here I wene,
And though I would, I could not iwis,
For there was some epistle hem between,
That would (as says mine author) well contene
Ny half this book, of which him list not write,
How should I then a line of it endite?
But to the great effect, then say I thus,
That stonden in concord and in quiet
This ilke two, Creseide and Troilus,
As I have told, and in this time sweet,
Save only often might they not mete,
Ne leisure have, her speeches to fulfell,
That it befell right as I shall you tell,
That Pandarus, that ever did his might,
Right for the fine that I shall speak of here,
As for to bringen to his house some night
His fair nece, and Troilus ifere,
Where as at leiser all this high matere
Touching her love were at y^ full up bound,
Had out of doubt a time to it found.
For he with great deliberation
Had every thing that thereto might avail
Forne cast, and put in execution,
And nether left for cost ne for travail,
Come if hem list, hem should nothing fail,
And for to ben in aught aspied there,
That wist he well in impossible were.
Dredelesse it clear was in the wind
Of every pie, and every let game,
Now all is well, for all the world is blind
In this matter, both fremed and tame,
* This timber is all ready up to frame,
Us lacks naught, but yt we weten wouldd*
A certain hour, in which she comen shoul
And Troilus, that all this purveyaunce
Knew at the full, and waited on it aye,
And hereupon eke made great ordinance,
And found his cause, and therewith his arraye,
If that he were missed night or day,
They thought there while he was about this servise,
That he was gone to done his sacrifice.
And must at soch a temple alone wake,
Answered of Apollo for to be,
And first to seen the holy laurer quake:
Er that Apollo spoke out of the tree,
To tellen him next when Greeks should fly,
And for thy let him no man, God forbede
But pray Apollo help in this need.
Now is there litell more for to done,
But Pandare up, and shortly for to saine,
Right sone upon the changing of ye Moan,
When lightlesse is ye world a night or twain,
And that the welken shope him for to rain,
He straight a morrow unto his nece went,
Ye have well herd the fine of his intent.
When he was comen, he began anon to play,
As he was wont, and of himself to yape,
And finally he swore, and began her say,
By this and that, she should him not escape,
No longer done him after her to gape:
But certainly, she must by her leve,
Come soupen in his house with him at eve.
At which she lough, and began her first excuse,
And said: it raineth: lo, how should I gone,
Let be (quoth. he) ne stand not thus to muse,
This mote be don, ye shall come there anon,
So at the last, hereof they fell at one:
Or else fast he swore her in her eere,
He nolde never comen there she were.
Sone after this, she to him began rowne,
And asked him if Troilus were there,
He swore her nay, for he was out of town:
And said, nece, I suppose that he were there,
You durst never thereof have the more fere,
For rather than men might him there aspie,
Me were lever a thousand fold to die.
Naught list mine auctour fully to declare,
What that she thought, when as he said so,
That Troilus was out of town ifare,
And if he said thereof soth or no,
But that withouten awaite with him to go,
She granted him, since he her that besought,
And as his nece obeyed as her ought.
But nathelesse, yet began she him beseech,
(Although with him to gone it was no fere)
For to beware of gofisshe peoples spech,
That dremen things, which that never were,
And well avise him whom he brought there:
And said him eme, sens I must on you trist,
Look al be well, and do now as you list.
He swore her this, by stocks and by stones,
And by the Gods that in heven dwell,
Or else were him leaver soul and bones,
With Pluto king, as deep ben in Hell
As Tantalus, what should I more tell:
When al was well, he rose and took his leve,
And she to souper came when it was eve.
With a certain number of her own men,
And with her fair nece Antigone,
And other of her women nine or ten,
But who was glad now, who as trow ye?
But Troilus, that stood and might it see
Throughout a litel window in a stewe,
There he beshet, since midnight, was in mewe,
Vnwist of every wight, but of Pandare.
But to the point, now when yt she was come,
With all joy, and al her friends in fare,
Here Eme anon in arms has her nome,
And then to the souper al and some,
When as time was, full soft they hem set,
God wot there was no deinte far to fet.
And after souper gonnen they to rise,
At ease well, with heart full fresh and glade,
And well was him that could best devise
To liken her, or that her laughen made,
He song, she plaide, he told a tale of Wade:
But at the last, as every thing has end,
She took her leave, and neds would thence wend.
But O fortune, executrice of wierdes,
O influences of these hevens hie,
Soth is, that under God ben our hierdes,
Though to us beestes ben the causes wrie,
This mean I now, for she began homward hie:
But execute was all beside her leve,
At the gods will, for which she must bleve.
The bente Moan with her horns all pale,
Saturnus and Jove, in Cancro joined were,
That such a rain from heven began avail,
That every manner woman that was there,
Had of that smoky rain a very feere:
At which Pandare tho lough, and said then,
Now were it time a Lady to go hen.
But good nece, if I might ever please
You any thing, then pray I you (quoth. he)
To don mine heart as now so great an ease,
As for to dwell here all this night with me,
For why? this is your own house parde:
For by my troth, I say it not in game,
To wend as now, it were to me a shame.
* Creseide, which yt could as much good
As half a world, took head of his praire,
And sens it rained, and al was in a flode,
* She thout, as good chepe may I dwell here
* And grant it gladly with a friends chere,
And have a thonk, as grutch and then abide,
For home to go it may not well betide.
I wol (quoth. she) mine uncle liefe and dear,
Sens that you list, it skill is to be so,
I am right glad with you to dwellen here,
I said but again that I would go,
Iwis grant mercy nece (quoth. he) tho:
Were it agame or no, sothe to tell,
Now am I glad, sens that you list to dwell.
Thus al is well, but tho began aright
The new joy, and all the fest again,
But Pandarus, if goodly had he might,
He would have hied her to bed full feign,
And said, O Lord this is an huge rain,
This were a wether for to sleepen in,
And that I read us soon to begin.
And nece, wot ye where I woll you lay,
For that we shul not liggen far a sonder,
And for ye neither shullen, dare I say,
Here noise of rain, ne yet of thonder,
By God right in my closet yonder,
And I wol in that utter house alone,
Ben wardain of your women everichone.
And in this middle chamber that ye se,
Shall your women slepen, well and soft,
And there I said, shall your selven be:
And if ye liggen well to night, come often,
And cares not what wether is aloft.
The wine anon, and when so you lest,
Go we to sleep, I trow it be the best.
There nis no more, but hereafter sone
They void, drunk, and travers draw anon,
Began every wight that has naught to done
More in the place, out of the chamber gone,
And ever more so stereliche it rone,
And blewe therewith so wonderliche loud,
That well nigh no man heren other could.
Tho Pandarus her Eme, right as him ought
With women, such as were her most about,
Full glad unto her beds side her brought,
And took his leave, and began full low lout,
And said, here at this closet door without,
Right overtwhart, your women liggen all,
That whom ye list of hem, ye may sone call.
Lo when that she was in the closet laid,
And al her women forth by ordinance,
A bed weren, there as I have said,
There nas no more to skippen nor to praunce,
But boden go to bed with mischaunce,
If any wight stering were any where,
And let hem slepen, that abedde were.
* But Pandarus, yt well couth each adele,
The old dance, and every point therein,
When that he saw that all thing was well,
He thought he would upon his work begin:
And began the stewe door al soft vnpin,
As still as a stone, without longer let,
By Troilus adoun right he him set.
And shortly to the point right for to gone,
Of all this work he told him word and end,
And said, make thee ready right anon,
For thou shall into heven bliss wend.
Now blisfull Venus, thou me grace send
(Quoth. Troilus) for never yet no deed,
Had I er now, ne halfendele the dread.
(Quoth. Pandarus) ne dread thee never a dele,
For it shall be right as thou wolt desire,
So thrive I, this night shall I make it we^e,
* Or casten in all the gruel in the fire,
Yet blisful Venus this night thou me enspire
(Quoth. Troilus) as wis as I the serve,
And ever bet and bet shall till I sterve.
And if I had, O Venus full of mirth,
Aspectes badde of Mars, or of Saturn,
Or thou combuste, or let were in my birth,
Thy father pray, al thilke harm disturne,
Of grace, and that I glad again may turn:
For love of him thou lovedst in the shawe,
I mean Adon, that with y^ bore was slawe.
Jove eke, for the love of fair Europe,
The which in form of a bulle away thou fet,
Now help, O Mars, thou with thy blody cope
For love of Cipria, thou me naught ne let,
O Phoebus, think when Daphne herselven shet
Under ye bark, and Laurer woxe for dread,
Yet for her love, O help now at this need.
Mercury, for the love of her eke,
For which Pallas was with Aglauros wroth
Now help and eke Diane I the beseke,
That this viage be not to the loath:
O fatal sustren, which or any cloth
Me shapen was, my destine me sponne,
So helps to this work that is begone.
(Quoth. Pandarus) thou wretched mouces heart,
Art thou aghast so that she will the bite,
Why do on this furred cloak on thy sherte,
And follow me, for I wol have the wite:
But bide, and let me gone before alite,
And with that he began undone a trappe,
And Troilus he brought in by the lap.
The stern wind so loud began for to rout
That no wight other noise might here,
And they that laien at the door without,
Full sikerly they slepten al ifere:
And Pandarus, with full sobre chere,
Goth to the door anon withouten let,
There as they lay, and softly it shette.
And as he came again prively
His nece awoke, and asks, who goes there?
My own dear nece (quoth. he) it am I,
Ne wondreth not, ne have of it no fere,
And nere he came, and said her in her eere:
No word for love of God I you beseech,
Let no wight arise, and here of our spech.
What, which way be ye comen? benedicite,
(Quoth. she) and how vnwiste of hem all.
Here at this secret trap door (quoth. he)
(Quoth. Tho Creseide) let me some wight call:
Eigh, God forbid that it should so fall,
(Quoth. Pandarus) that ye such folly wrought,
They might dementhing they never erthoust.
* It is not good a sleping hound to wake,
Ne yeve a wight a cause for to devine,
Your women slepen al, I undertake,
So that for hem the house men might mine,
And slepen woollen till the sun shine,
And when my tale is brought to an end,
Vnwist right as I came, so wol I wend.
Now nece mine, ye shul well understand,
(Quoth. he) so as ye women demen all,
* That for to hold in love a man in hand,
And him her lefe and dear heart to call,
And maken him an howne above to call:
I mean, as love an other in this mean while,
She does her self a shame, and him a gile.
Now whereby that I tell you all this,
Ye wot your self, as well as any wight,
How that your love al fully granted is
To Troilus, the worthiest wight
One of the world, and thereto troth iplight,
That but it were on him alone, ye nold
Him never falsen, while ye liven should.
Now stonte it thus, yt since I fro you went
This Troilus, right platly for to seine
Is through a gutter by a privy went,
Into my chamber come in all this reine:
Vnwist of every manner wight certain,
Save of my self, as wisely have I joy,
And by the faith I owe to Priam of Troy.
And he is come in such pain and distress,
That but if he be al fully wood by this,
He suddenly mote fall into woodnesse,
But if God help: and cause why is this,
He says him told is of a friend of his,
How yt ye should loven one, that hight Horast,
For sorrow of which this night shall be his last.
Creseide, which that all this wonder herd
Began suddenly about her heart cold,
And with a sighe she sorowfully answered,
Alas, I wend who so ever tales told,
My dear heart woulden me not have hold
So lightly faulse, alas conceits wrong,
What harm they done, for now live I to long.
Horaste alas, and falsen Troilus,
I know him not, God help me so (quoth. she)
Alas, what wicked spirit told him thus,
Now certes eme, to morrow and I him se,
I shall thereof as full excusen me,
As ever did woman, if him like,
And with that word she began full sore sike.
* O God (quoth. she) so worldy selinesse
Which clerks callen false felicite,
Ymedled is with many bitterness,
Full anguishous, then is God wot (quoth. she)
Condition of vein prosperity,
* For either joys comen not ifere,
Or else no wight has hem always here.
O brotil well of man's joy unstable,
With with wight so thou be, or thou who play
Either he wot, that thou joy art mutable,
Or wot it not, it mote ben one of tway:
Now if he wot it not, how may he say,
That he has very joy and silinesse,
That is of ignorance aie in derkenesse.
* Now if he wot that joy is transitory,
As every joy of worldly thing mote flee,
Then every time he that has in memory,
The dread of lesing, makes him that he
May in no parfite sikernesse be:
And if to lose his joy, he set a mite,
Then seems it, that joy is worth full lite.
Wherefore I wol define in this matere,
That truly for aught I can epsy,
There is no very well in this world here.
But O thou wicked serpent Ialousie,
Thou misbeleved, and envious folly,
Why have thou Troilus made to me vntrist,
That never yet agilte, that I wist?
(Quoth. Pandarus) thus fallen is this caas,
Why uncle mine (quoth. she) who told him this,
And why does my dear heart thus, alas?
Ye wot, ye nece mine (quoth. he) what it is,
I hope al shall be well, that is amiss,
For ye may quench all this, if that you lest,
And does right so, I hold it for the best.
So shall I do to morrow, iwis (quoth. she)
And God toforne, so that it shall suffice:
To morrow alas, that were fair (quoth. he)
Nay nay, it may not stonden in this wise:
For nece mine, this written clerks wise,
That peril is with dretching in draw,
Nay soche abodes ben not worth an hawe.
* Nece, all thing has time I dare avow,
For when a chamber a fire is or an hall,
Well more need is, it suddenly rescow,
Then to disputen and ask amongs all,
How the candle in the straw is fall:
Ah benedicite, for all among that fare,
* The harm is done, and farwell feldefare.
And nece mine, ne take it not a grefe,
If that ye suffer him al night in this woe,
God help me so, ye had him never lefe,
That date I sain, now there is but we two,
But well I wot that ye wol not so do,
Ye ben to wise to done so great folly,
To put his life al night in jeopardie.
Had I him never lefe? By God I wene,
Ye had never thing so lefe, (quoth. she)
Now by my thrifte (quoth. he) that shall be seen,
For since ye make this ensample of me,
If iche al night would him in sorrow se,
For all the treasour in the tonne of Troie,
I bid God, I never mote have joie,
Now look then, if ye that been his love,
Should put his life al night in jeopardie,
For thing of naught, now by y^ God above
Not only this delay comes of folly,
But of malice, if that I should not lie,
What, platly and ye suffer him in distress,
Ye neither bounte done ne gentilnesse.
(Quoth. tho Creseide) wol ye done a thing,
And ye therewith shall stinte al his disease,
Have here and bear to him this blew ring,
For there is nothing might him better plese,
Save I my self, ne more his heart apese,
And say my dear heart, that his sorrow,
Is causeless, that shall he seen to morrow.
* A ring (quoth. he) ye hasel wodes shaken,
Ye nece mine, that ring must have a stone,
That might deed men a live all maken,
And such a ring trow I that ye have none:
Discrecion out of your heed is gone,
That feel I now (quoth. he) and that is routh,
* O time ilost, well may thou cursen sloth.
Wot ye not well that noble and hie courage,
Ne soroweth not, ne stinteth eke for lite,
But if a fool were in a jalous rage,
I nolde setten at his sorrow a mite,
But fesse him with a few words all white,
Another day, when that I might him find,
But this thing stant al in another kind.
This is so gentle and so tender of heart,
That with his death he wol his sorows wreke
For trust it well, how sore that him smart,
He woll to you no jealous words speak,
And for thy nece, er that his heart break,
So speak your self to him of this matere,
For with a word ye may his heart stere.
Now have I told what peril he is in,
And his coming vnwist is to every wight,
Ne parde harm may there be none, ne sin,
I wol my self be with you all this night,
Ye know eke how it is your own knight,
And that by right, ye must upon him triste,
And I al pressed to fetch him when you list.
This accident so pitous was to here,
And eke so like a sothe, at prime face,
And Troilus her knight, to her so dear,
His prive coming, and the liker place,
That though she did him as then a grace,
Considred all things as they now stood,
No wonder is, sens he did al for good.
Creseide answerde, as wisely God at rest
My soul bring, as me is for him woe,
And eme iwis, feign would I don the best,
If that I grace had for to do so,
But whether that ye dwell, or for him go,
I am, till God me better mind send,
* At Dulcarnon, right at my wits end.
(Quoth. Pandarus) ye nece wol ye here,
Dulcarnon is called fleming of wretches,
It seems herd, for wretches wol naught lere,
For very sloth, or other wilful ^etches,
This is said by hem y^ be not worth two fetches,
But ye ben wise, and y^ ye han on hond,
Nis neither hard, ne skillful to withstond.
Then eme (quoth. she) does here as you list,
But ere he come, I wol up first arise,
And for the love of God, sens all my trist
Is on you two, and ye beth both wise,
So werketh now, in so discrete a wise,
That I honor may have, and he plesaunce,
For I am here, al in your governance.
That is well said (quoth. he) my nece dear,
There good thrifte on that wise gentill heart,
But liggeth still, and takes him right here,
It needs not no ferther for him start,
And each of you eases other sorrows smart,
For love of God, and Venus I the herie,
For sone hope I, that we shall ben merry.
This Troilus full sone on knees him set,
Full sobrely, right by her beds heed,
And in his best wise his Lady grette,
But Lord so she woxe sodainliche reed:
Ne though men should smiten of her heed,
She could not o word a right out bring,
So suddenly for his sudden coming.
But Pandarus, that so well could feel
In every thing, to play anon began,
And said, nece se how this Lord began knele:
Now for your troth: se this gentil man,
And with that word, he for a quishen ran,
And said kneleth now while that thou lest.
There as God your hearts bring sone at rest.
Can I naught sain, forshe bad him not rise,
If sorrow it put out of her remembrance,
Or else that she took it in the wise
Of duty, as for his observaunce,
But well find I, she did him this pleasaunce,
That she him kissed, although she siked sore,
And bad him sit adoun withouten more.
(Quoth. Pandarus) now wol ye well begin,
Now does him sit down, good nece dear
Upon your beds side, al there within,
That each of you the bet may other here,
And with that word he drew him to ye fiere,
And took a light, and found his countenance,
As for to look upon an old romaunce.
Creseide that was Troilus lady right,
And clear stood in a ground of sikernesse,
All thought she her servant and her knight,
Ne should none untruth in her guess:
That nathelesse, considred his distress,
And that love is in cause of such folly,
Thus to him spoke she of his jalousie.
Lo heart mine, as would the excellence,
Of love, against the which that no man may,
Ne ought eke goodly maken resistance,
And eke because I felt well and say,
Your great troth, and service every day:
And yt your heart al mine was, soth to saine,
This drove me for to rewe upon your pain,
And your goodness have I founden always yet,
Of which may dear heart, and al my knight,
I thank it you, as far as I have wit,
Al can I not as much as it were right,
And I emforth my conning and my might
Have, and aie shall, how sore that ye smert,
Ben to you true and hole with all mine heart.
And dredelesse yt shall be founden at preue,
But heart mine, what all this is to sain,
Shall well be told, so yt he nout you grieve
Though I to you right on your self complain,
For there with mean I finally the pain,
That halte your heart and mine in heaviness,
Fully to slain, and every wrong redress.
My good mine, not I, for why ne how
That jelousie alas, that wicked wivere,
Thus causeless is cropen into you:
The harm of which I would feign delivere,
Alas, that he all hole or of him some slivere,
Should have his refute in so digne a place,
That Jove, him sone out of your heart race.
But O thou, O auctour of nature,
Is this an honor to thy dignite,
That folk unguilty suffren here iniure,
And who that gilty is, al quite goes he:
O were it lefull for to plain of the,
That undeserved suffer jalousie,
O, that I would upon thee plain and cry.
Eke al my woe is this, that folk now vsen
* To saine right thus: ye jalousie is love,
And would a bushel of venim al excusen,
For that a grane of love is on it shove,
But that wot high Jove that sit above,
If it be liker love, hate, or grame,
And after that it ought bear his name.
But certain is, some manner jalousie
Is excusable, more than some iwis,
As when cause is, and some such fantasy
With pite so well expressed is,
That it uneath does or says amiss,
But goodly drinks up al his distress,
And that excuse I for the gentilnesse.
And some so full of fury is, and despite,
That it surmounteth his repression,
But heart mine, ye be not in that plite,
That thonke I God, for which your passion,
I will not call it but illusion
Of haboundance of love, and best cure,
That does your heart this disease endure.
Of which I am sorry, but not wroth,
But for my deuoir and your hearts rest,
When so you list, by ordal or by oath,
By sort, or in what wise so you lest,
For love of God, set preue it for the best,
And if that I be gilty, do me die,
Alas, what might I more done or seie.
With that a few bright teeres new,
Out of her eien fell, and thus she seid,
Now God thou wost, in thought ne deed untrew,
To Troilus was never yet Creseid,
With that her heed down in the bed she leid,
And with the shete it wrigh, and sighed sore,
And held her piece, not a word spoke she more.
But now help God, to quench all this sorrow,
So hope I that he shall, for he best may,
* For I have seen of a full misty morrow,
Folowen full often a merry summers day,
And after winter follows grene May,
Men seen all day, and reden eke in stories,
That after sharp shoures ben victories.
This Troilus, when he her words herd,
Have ye no care, him list not to sleep,
For it thought him no strokes of a yerde
To here or see Creseide his lady weep,
But well he felt about his heart crepe,
For every tear which that Creseide astert,
The crampe of death, to strain him by ye heart,
And in his mind he began the time accurse
That he came there, and that he was borne,
For now is wicke turned into worse,
And all that labor he has done beforne,
He wendeit lost, he thought he nas but lorne,
O Pandarus thought he, alas thy wile,
Serves of naught, so welaway the while.
And therwithall he hing adoun his hedde,
And fell on knees, and sorowfully he sight,
What might he sain? he felt he nas but dedde,
For wroth was she yt should his sorows light:
But nathelesse, when that he speaken might,
Then said he thus, God wot yt of this game,
When all is wist, then am I not to blame.
Therewith the sorrow of his heart shet,
That from his iyen fell there not a tere,
And every spirit his vigor in knet,
So they astonished or oppressed were:
The feling of sorrow, or of his fere,
Or of aught else, fled were out of town,
A down he fell all suddenly in swoune.
This was no little sorrow for to se,
But all was hushed, and Pandare up as fast,
O nece peace, or we be lost (quoth. he)
Bethe not aghast, but certain at last,
For this or that, he into bed him cast,
And said, O thief, is this a man's heart?
And off he rent all to his bare sherte.
And said nece, but and ye help us now,
Alas your own Troilus is forlorn.
Iwis so would I, and I wist how
Full fain (quoth. she) alas that I was borne.
* Ye nece, woll ye pullen out the thorn
That sticks in his heart (quoth. Pandare)
Say all foryeve, and stint is all this fare.
Ye that to me (quoth. she) full lever were
Than all the good the Sun about goes,
And therwithall she swore him in his ear,
Iwis my dear heart I am not wroth,
Have here my troth, and many other oath,
Now speak to me, for it am I Creseide,
But all for naught, yet might he not abreide.
Therewith his poulce, and paums of his hondes
They began to frote, and wete his temples twain,
And to deliver him fro bitter bonds,
She often him kissed, and shortly for to sain,
Him to rewaken she did all her pain,
And at the last he began his breath to draw,
And of his swough sone after that adawe.
And began bet mind, and reason to him take,
But wonder sore he was abashed iwis,
And with a sigh when he began bet awake
He said, O mercy God, what thing is this?
Why do ye with your selven thus amiss?
(Quoth. tho Creseide) is this a man's game,
What Troilus, woll ye do thus for shame?
And therwithal her arm over him she laid,
And all foryave, and oftime him kest,
He thonked her, and to her spoke and said
As fill to purpose, for his hearts rest,
And she to that answerde him as her lest,
And with her goodly words him disport
She began, and often his sorrows to comfort.
(Quoth. Pandarus) for ought I can aspies,
This light nor I ne se^ven here of naught,
Light is not good for sike folks iyes,
But for y^ love of God, sens ye been brought
In this good plite, let now none hevy thought
Been hanged in the hearts of you twey,
And bare the candle to the chimney.
Soon after this, though it no need were,
When she soche oaths as her list devise
Had of hem take, her thought tho no fere,
Ne cause eke none, to bid him thens rise:
Yet less thing than oaths may suffice,
* In many a case, for every wight I guess,
That loves well, means but gentilnesse.
But in effect she would wete anon,
Of what man, and eke where, and also why
He jalous was, sens there was cause non:
And eke the sign that he took it by,
She bade him that to tell her busily,
Or else certain she bare him on hand,
That this was done of malice her to fond.
Withouten more, shortly for to sain
He must obey unto his ladies hest,
And for ye less harm he must somewhat fain,
He said her, when she was at soche a fest,
She might on him have looked at the lest,
Not I not what, all dear enough a rishe,
As he that needs must a cause out fish.
And she answerde, sweet, all were it so
What harm was yt, sens I non evil mean,
For by that God that bought us both two,
In all manner thing is mine intent clean:
Soch arguments ne be not worth a bean,
Woll ye the childish ialous counterfete,
Now were it worthy that ye were ibete.
Tho Troilus began sorowfully to sike
Lest she be wroth, him thout his heart deide,
And said, alas, upon my sorrows sike,
Have mercy, O sweet heart mine Creseide:
And if that in tho words that I seide,
Be any wrong, I woll no more trespace,
Does what you list, I am all in your grace.
And she answerde, of gilt misericorde
That is to saine, that I foryeve all this,
And evermore on this night you record,
And bethe well ware ye do no more amiss:
Nay dear heart mine no more (quoth. he) iwis,
And now (quoth. she) that I have you do smart,
Foryeve it to me, mine own sweet heart.
This Troilus with bliss of that surprised,
Put all in Gods hand, as he that meant
Nothing but well, and suddenly avised
He her in his arms fast to him hent:
And Pandarus, with a full good intent,
Laid him to sleep, and said, if ye be wise,
Sweveneth not now, lest more folk arise.
What might or may the sely Lark say,
When yt the sparhauke has him in his foot,
I can no more, but of these ilke tway,
(To whom this tale sugre be or sote)
Though I tarry a year, sometime I mote,
After mine aucthour tellen her gladness,
As well as I have told her hevinesse.
Creseide, which that felt her thus itake,
(As written clerks in her books old)
Right as an aspen lefe she began to quake,
When she him felt her in his arms fold:
But Troilus all hole of cares cold,
Began thanken tho y^ blisfull Gods seven,
Through sundry pains to bring folk to heven.
This Troilus in arms began her strain,
And said sweet, as ever mote I gone,
Now be ye caught, here is but we twain,
Now yeldeth you, for other boot is none:
To that Creseide answerde thus anon,
Ne had I er now, my sweet heart dear,
Been yolde iwis, I were now not here.
* O soth is said, that healed for to be
As of a fever, or other great sickness,
Men must drinken, as we often se,
Full bitter drink: and for to have gladness,
Men drinken often pain, and great distress,
I mean it here by, as for this aventure,
That through a pain has founden al his cure.
* And now swetnesse seems far more sweet,
That bitterness assaied was biforne,
For out of woe in bliss now they flete,
Non soch they felten seus they were borne:
Now is this bet, than both two be lorne,
For love of God, take every woman head,
To werken thus, if it come to the need.
Creseide all quite from every dread and tene,
As she that just cause had him to trist,
Made him soche feast, it joy was to seen,
When she his troth and clean intent wist:
And as about a tree with many a twist,
Bitrent and writhe the sweet Wodbinde,
Can each of hem in arms other wind.
And as the new abashed Nightingale,
That stinteth first, when she begins sing,
When that she hears any heerdes tale,
Or in the hedges any wight stearing,
And after siker does her voice out ring:
Right so Creseide, when that her dread stent,
Opened her heart, and told him her intent.
And right as he yt sees his death ishapen,
And dien mote, in aught that he may guess,
And suddenly rescous does hem escapen,
And from his death is brought in sikernesse:
For all this world, in soche present gladness,
Was Troilus, and has his lady sweet:
With worse hap God let us never mete.
Her arms small, her straight back and soft,
Her sides long, fleshy, smooth, and white,
He began to stroke, and good thrift bad full often,
Her snowisse throat, her breasts round and lite:
Thus in this heaven he began him to delight,
And therwithall a thousand times her kissed,
That what to done for joy unneth he wist.
Then said he thus, O Love, O Charity,
Thy mother eke, Citheria the sweet,
That after thy self, next heried be she
Venus I mean, the well willy planete:
And next that, Imeneus I thee great,
For never man was to you Gods hold,
As I, which ye have brought fro cares cold.
Benign Love, thou holy bond of thingen,
Who so woll grace, and list thee honouren,
Lo, his desire woll fly withouten wingen,
For noldest thou of bounte hem socouren
That serven best, and most always labouren,
Yet were all lost, y^ dare I well sain certes,
But if thy grace passed our deserts.
And for thou me, y^ lest thonke coud deserve
Of them that nombred been unto thy grace,
Have helped, there I likely was to sterve,
And me bestowed in so high a place,
That thilke bounds may no bliss surpace,
I can no more, but land and reverence
Be to thy bounte and thine excellence.
And therwithall Creseide anon he kissed,
Of which certain she felt no disease,
And thus said he, now would God I wist,
Mine heart sweet, how I you best might please:
What man (quoth. he) was ever thus at ease,
As I? On which the fairest, and the best
That ever I sey, deineth her to rest.
Here may men seen y^ mercy passes right,
The experience of that is felt in me,
That am unworthy to so sweet a wight,
But heart mine, of your benignite
So think, that though I unworthy be,
Yet mote I need amenden in some wise,
Right through the virtue of your hie service.
And for the love of God my lady dear,
Since he has wrout me for I shall you serve,
As thus I mean: woll ye be my fere,
To do me live, if that you list or sterve:
So teaches me, how that I may deserve:
Your thonk, so y^ I through mine ignorance,
Ne do nothing that you be displeasaunce.
For certes fresh and womanliche wife,
This dare I say, that troth and diligence,
That shall ye finden in me all my life,
Ne I woll not certain breaken your defense,
And if I do, present or in absence,
For love of God, let slay me with the deed,
If that it like unto your womanhede.
Iwis (quoth. she) mine own hearts lust,
My ground of ease, and al mine heart dear,
Grant mercy, for on that is all my trust:
But let us fall away fro this matere,
For it suffiseth, this that said is here,
And at o word, without repentance,
Welcome my knit, my peace, my suffisaunce.
Of her delight or ioies, one of the least,
Were impossible to my wit to say,
But judges ye that have been at the feast,
Of soche gladness, if that him list play:
I can no more, but thus these ilke tway,
That night, betwixen dread and sikernesse,
Felten in love the great worthiness.
O blisfull night, of hem so long isought
How blithe unto hem both two thou were?
Why ne had I soch feast with my soul ibout?
Ye, or but the least joy that was there,
Away thou foul danger and thou fere,
And let him in this heaven bliss dwell,
That is so high, that all ne can I tell.
But sothe is, though I can not tellen all,
As can mine aucthour of his excellence,
Yet have I said, and God toforne shall,
In every thing all holly his sentence:
And if that I, at loves reverence,
Have any word in eched for the best,
Does therwithall right as your selven lest.
For my words here, and every part,
I speak hem all under correction,
Of you that feling have in loves art,
And put it all in your discrecion,
To increase or make diminicion
Of my language, and that I you beseech,
But now to purpose of my rather speech.
These ilke two that been in arms laft,
So loathe to hem a sonder gone it were,
That each from other wenden been biraft,
Or else lo, this was her most fere,
That all this thing but nice dreams were,
For which full often each of hem said, O sweet,
Clippe I you thus, or else do I it mete.
And Lord so he began goodly on her se,
That never his look ne blent from her face,
And said, O my dear heart may it be
That it be soth, that ye been in this place:
Ye heart mine, God thank I of his grace,
(Quoth. tho Creseide) and therwithall him kissed,
That where her spirit was, for joy she nist.
This Troilus full often her iyen two
Began for to kiss, and said: O iyen clear,
It weren ye that wrought me soche woe,
Ye humble nets of my lady dear:
* Tho there be mercy written in your chere,
God wot the text full hard is for to find,
How coud ye, withouten bond me bind?
Therewith he began her fast in arms take,
And well an hundred times began he sike,
Not such sorrowful sighs as men make
For woe, or else when that folk be sike:
But easy sighs, soche as been to like,
That showed his affection within,
Of soche manner sighs could he not blin.
Sone after this, they spoke of sundry things
As fill to purpose of this aventure,
And plaiyng enterchaungeden her rings,
Of which I can not tellen no scripture,
But well I wot, a broche of gold and azure,
In which a Rubbie set was like an heart,
Creseide him yave, and stacke it on his sherte.
Lord trow ye that a coveitous wretch,
That blames love, and halte of it dispite,
Of tho pens that he can muckre and ketch
Ever yet yave to him soche delight,
As in love, in o poinct in some plite:
Nay doubtelesse, for all so God me save
* So parfite joy may no nigard have.
They woll say yes, but Lord so they lie,
Tho busy wretches full of woe and dread,
That callen love a woodnesse of folly,
But it shall fall hem, as I shall you read:
They shall forgon y^ white and eke the read,
And live in woe there god yeve hem mischaunce,
And every lover in his troth avaunce.
As would God tho wretches, that despise
Service of love, had ears also long
As had Mida, full of covetise,
And thereto dronken had as hot and strong
As Cresus did, for his affectes wrong
To teachen hem, that they been in the vice,
And lovers not, although they hold hem nice.
These ilke two, of whom that I you say,
When that her hearts well assured were,
Tho gonnen they to speak and to play,
And eke rehearcen how, when, and where
They knew first, and every woe or fere
That passed was, but all such heaviness.
I thonke it God, was turned to gladness.
And evermore, when yt hem fell to speak,
Of any thing of soche a time agone,
With kissing all that tale should break,
And fallen into a new joy anon,
And didden all her might, sens they were one
For to recoveren bliss, and been at ease,
And paised woe with joys counterpaise.
Reason woll not that I speak of sleep,
For it accords not to my mattere,
God wot they took of it full little keep,
But lest this night that was to hem so dear
Ne should in vain escape in no manner,
It was biset in joy and business,
Of all that souneth unto gentilnesse.
But when the cock, commune Astrologer,
Began on his breast to heat, and after crow,
And Lucifer, the days messanger,
Began to rise, and out her beams throw,
And Estward rose, to him that could it know,
Fortuna mayor, that anon Creseide
With heart sore, to Troilus thus seide:
Mine hearts life, my trust, all my pleasaunce
That I was borne alas, that me is woe,
That day of us mote make disceveraunce,
For time it is to rise, and hence go,
Or else I am lost for ever mo:
O night alas, why nilt thou over us hove,
As long as when Alcmena lay by Jove.
O black night, as folk in book read,
That shapen art by God, this world to hide
At certain times, with thy derke wede,
That under that men might in rest abide,
Well oughten beasts to plain, and folk to chide
That there as day with labor would us breast
That thou thus fliest, and deinest us not rest.
Thou do alas, to shortly thine office,
Tho rakle night, there God maker of kind,
Thee for thine have, and thine unkind vice,
So fast a^e to our hemisperie bind,
That nevermore under ye ground thou wind,
For now for thou so highest out of Troie,
Have I forgone thus hastily my joy.
This Troilus, that with tho words felt
As thought him tho, for pitous distress,
The bloody tears from his heart melt,
As he that yet never soche hevinesse,
Assaied had, out of so great gladness:
Began therewithal Creseide his lady dear,
In arms strain, and hold in lovely manner.
O cruel day, accuser of the joy
That night and love have stole, and fast iwrien,
Accursed be thy coming into Troie,
For every bower has one of thy bright iyen:
Envious day, what list thee so to spien,
What have thou lost, why seek thou this place?
There God thy light so quench for his grace.
Alas, what have these lovers thee agilt?
Dispitous day, thine be the pain of hell,
For many a lover have thou slain, and wilt,
Thy poring in woll no where let hem dwell:
What profrest thou thy light here for to sell?
Go sell it hem that small seals grave,
We woll thee not, us needs no day have.
And eke the son Titan began he chide,
And said, O fool, well may men thee despise,
That have all night the dauning by thy side,
And suffrest her so sone up fro thee rise:
For to disease us lovers in this wise,
What hold your bed, there thou and thy morrow,
I did God so yeve you both sorrow.
Therewith full sore he sighed, and thus he seide
My lady right, and of my weal or woe
The well and root, O goodly mine Creseide,
And shall I rise alas, and shall I so?
Now feel I that mine heart mote a two,
And how should I my life an hour save,
Sens that with you is all the life I have?
What shall I done? For certes I not how
Ne when alas, I shall the time see
That in this plite I may been eft with you,
And of my life God wot how shall that be,
Sens that desire right now so biteth me,
That I am dedde anon, but I return,
How should I long alas, fro you soiourne?
But nathelesse, mine own lady bright,
Were it so that I wist utterly,
That your humble servaunt, and your knight
Were in your heart iset so fermely,
As ye in mine: the which truly
Me leaver were than these worlds twain,
Yet should I bet enduren all my pain.
To that Creseide answerde right anon,
And with a sigh she said, O heart dear,
The game iwis so ferforth now is gone,
That first shall Phoebus fallen from the sphere,
* And everiche Egle been the Douues fere,
And every rock out of his place sterte,
Er Troilus go out of Creseides heart.
Ye been so deep within mine heart grave,
That tho I would it turn out of my thought,
As wisely very God my soul save,
To dien in the pain, I could naught:
And for the love of God, y^ us has wrought,
Let in your brain none other fantasy
So crepen, that it cause me to die.
And that ye mewould have as fast in mind,
As I have you, that would I you beseech:
And if I wist forhly that to find
God nught not apoint my ioies to each.
But heart mine, withouten more spech,
Bethe to me true, or else were it routh,
For I am thine, by God and by my troth.
Bethe glad for thy, and live in sikernesse,
Thus said I never er this, ne shall to mo,
And if to you it were a great gladness,
To turn again sone after that ye ga,
As feign would I as ye, it were so,
As wisely God mine heart bring to rest,
And him in arms took, and often keste.
Against his will, sith it mote needs be,
This Troilus up rose and fast him cled,
And in his arms took his lady free,
An hundred times, and on his way him sped,
And with soche words, as his heart bled,
He said: fare well my dear heart swece,
That God us grant sound and sone to mete.
To which no word for sorrow she answered,
So sore began his parting her distrain,
And Troilus unto his Paleis ferd,
As woe bigon as she was, sothe to sain,
So hard him wrong of sharp desire the pain,
For to been efte there he was in pleasaunce,
That it may never out of his remembrance.
Returned to his royal paleis sone,
He soft unto his bed began for to sink,
To sleep long, as he was wont to done,
But all for naut, he may well ligge and wink,
But sleep may there none in his heart sink,
Thinking how she, for whom desire him brend,
A M. fold was worth more than he wend.
And in his thought, began up and down to wind
Her words all, and every countenance,
And fermely impressen in his mind
The lest point that to him was pleasaunce,
And verily of thilke remembrance,
Desire al new him brende, and lust to bread,
Began more than erst, and yet took he non head.
Creseide also, right in the same wise,
Of Troilus began in her heart shet
His worthiness, his lust, his deeds wise,
His gentilnesse, and how she with him met:
Thonking love, he so well her beset,
Desiring often to have her heart dear,
In soche a place as she durst make him chere.
Pandare a morrow, which y^ commen was
Unto his nece, began her fair to great,
And said, all this night so rained it alas,
That all my dread is, that ye nece sweet,
Have little leiser had to sleep and mete,
All this night (quoth. he) has rain so do me wake,
That some of us I trow her heddes ache.
And nere he came and said, how stant it now
This merry morrow, nece how can ye fare?
Creseide answerde, never the bet for you,
Fox that ye been, God yeve your heart care,
God help me so, ye caused all this fare,
Trow I (quoth. she) for all your words white,
O who so sees you, knows you full lite.
With that she began her face for to wrie,
With the shete and woxe for shame all read,
And Pandarus began under for to pry,
And said nece, if that I shall been dedde,
Have here a sword, and smites of my hedde,
With that his arm, all suddenly he thrist,
Under her neck and at the last her kissed.
I pass all yt, which charge naught to say,
What, God foryave his death, and she also
Foryave: and with her uncle began to play,
For other cause was there none than so,
But of this thing right to theffect to go,
When time was, home to her house she went,
And Pandarus has fully his intent.
Now turn we again to Troilus,
That restless full long a bed lay,
And prively sent after Pandarus,
To him to come in all the has^ he may,
He come anon, not ones said he nay,
And Troilus full soberly he great,
And down upon the beds sides him sete.
This Troilus with all thaffectioun
Of friendly love, that heart may devise,
To Pandarus on knees fill adoun:
And er that he would of the place arise,
He began him thanken on his best wise,
An hundred time he began the time bless,
That he was born, to bring him fro distress.
He said, O friend of friends, the alderbest
That ever was, the sothe for to tell,
Thou have in heaven i brought my soul at rest,
Fro Phlegeton the fiery flood of hell,
That though I might a thousand times sell
Upon a day my life in thy service,
It might not a mote in that suffice.
The son, which y^ all the world may se
Saw never yet, my life that dare I let,
So ioily, fair, and goodly, as is she
Whose I am all, and shall till that I deie,
And that I thus am hers, dare I seie,
That thanked be the high worthiness
Of love, and eke thy kind business.
Thus have thou me no little thing iyeve,
For why to thee obliged be for aie,
My life, and why? for through thine help I live,
Or else dedde had I been ago many a day,
And with that word down in his bed he lay,
And Pandarus full soberly him herd,
Till all was said, and then he him answerde.
My dear friend, if I have done for thee,
In any case, God wot it is me lefe,
And am as glad as man may of it be,
God help me so, but take now not agrife,
That I shall saine, beware of this mischief,
That there as now thou brought art to thy blis,
That thou thy self ne cause it not to mis.
For of Fortunes sharp adversite,
The worst kind of infortune is this,
* A man that has been in prosperity,
And it remember, when it passed is.
Thou art wise enough, for thy, do not amiss,
* Be not to rakell, though thou sit warm,
For if thou be, certain it woll thee harm.
Thou art at ease, and hold thee well therein,
For all so sure as read is every fire,
As great a craft is to keep well as win,
Bridle always well thy speech and thy desire,
For worldly joy holds not by a wire,
That preveth well, it breast alday so often,
For thy need is to werken with it soft.
(Quoth. Troilus) I hope, and God to forne,
My dear friend, that I shall so me bear,
That in my gilt there shall nothing been lorne,
Ne I nill not rakle, as for to greven here,
It needs not this matter often tere,
For wistest thou mine heart well Pandare,
God wot of this thou would lite care.
Tho began he tell him of his glad night,
And whereof first his heart dradde, and how,
And said friend, as I am true knight,
And by that faith I owe to God and you,
I had it never half so hot as now,
And aie the more that desire me biteth
To love her best, the more it me deliteth.
I not my self not wisely, what it is,
But now I feel a new qualite,
Ye all another than I did er this:
Pandare answered and said thus, that he
That ones may in heaven bliss be,
He feels other ways dare I lay,
Than thilke time he first heard of it say.
This is a word for all, that Troilus
Was never full to speak of this matere,
And for to praisen unto Pandarus,
The bounte of his right lady dear,
And Pandarus to thank, and maken chere,
This tale was aie span new to begin,
Til that the night departed hem a twinne.
Soon after this, for that fortune it would,
Icomen was the blisfull time sweet,
That Troilus was warned, that he should
There he was erst, Creseide his lady mete:
For which he felt his heart in joy flete,
And faithfully began all the gods hery,
And let see now, if that he can be merry.
And holden was the form, and all the gise
Of her coming, and of his also,
As it was erst, which needs naught devise,
But plainly to theffect right for to go:
In joy and surete Pandarus hem two
Abedde brought, when hem both lest,
And thus they ben in quiet and in rest.
Naught needs it to you since they ben met
To ask at me, if that they blithe were,
For if it erst was well, tho was it bet
A thousand fold, this needs not enquere:
A go was every sorrow and every fere,
And both iwis they had, and so they wend,
As much joy as heart may comprehend.
This nis no litel thing of for to sey,
This passes every wit for to devise,
For each of hem began others lust obey,
Felicite, which that these clerks wise
Commenden so, ne may not here suffice,
This joy ne may not iwritten be with ink,
This passes all that heart may bethink.
But cruel day, so welaway the stound,
Began for to aproche, as they by signs knew,
For which hem thought felen dethes wound,
So woe was hem, that chaungen began her hew
And day they gonnen to despise al new,
Calling it traitor, envious and worse,
And bitterly the days light they corse.
(Quoth. Troilus) alas, now am I ware
That Pirous, and tho swifte stedes three,
Which that drawn forth the suns chare,
Han gone some by pathe in dispite of me,
And makes it so sone day to be,
And for the sun him hasten thus to rise,
Ne shall I never don him sacrifice.
But needs day depart hem must fone,
And when her speech done was, and her chere,
They twin anon, as they were wont to done,
And setten time of meting eft ifere:
And many a nit they wroght in this manner:
And thus fortune a time ladde in joy,
Creseide, and eke this kings son of Troie.
In suffisaunce, in bliss, and in singings,
This Troilus began all his life to lead,
He spends, justeth, and makes feestings,
He geveth freely often, and changes wede,
He held about him always out of dread,
A world of folk, as come him well of kind,
The freshest and the best he could find.
That such a voice was of him, and a steven,
Throughout the world, of honor and largess,
That it up ronge unto the yate of Heven;
And as in love he was in such gladness,
That in his heart he demed, as I guess,
That there nis lover in this world at ease,
So well as he, and thus began love him please.
The goodlihede or beauty, which the kind,
In any other lady had isette,
Can not y^ mountenaunce of a gnat unbind,
About his heart, of al Creseides net,
He was so narowe imasked, and iknette:
That is undone in any manner side,
That nil not ben, for aught that may betide
And by the hand full often he would take
This Pandarus, and into gardin led,
And such a feast, and such a process make
Him of Creseide, and of her womanhede,
And of her beauty, that withouten dread,
It was an heven his words for to here,
And then he would sing in this manner:
Love, that of earth and sea has governaunce,
Love, that his heestes has in heven hie,
Love, that with an wholesome aliaunce
Halte people joined, as him list hem gie,
Love, that knitteth law and company,
And couples does in virtue for to dwell,
Bind this accord, that I have told and tell.
That, y^ the world with faith, which yt is stable
Diverseth so his stoundes according,
That elements that be the discordable,
Holden a bond, perpetually during,
That Phoebus mote his rosy day forth bring,
And y^ the moon has lordship over y^ nights,
All this does love, aie heried be his mights.
That, that the sea, yt greedy is to flowen,
Constrains to a certain end so
His floods, that so fiercely they ne grown
To drenchen earth and all for evermo,
And if that love aught let his bridle go,
All that now loves asunder should lepe,
And lost were all, that love halt now to hepe.
So would to God, that author is of kind,
That with his bond, love of his virtue list
To searchen hearts all, and fast bind,
That from his bond no wight y^ wey out wist,
And hearts cold hem, would I that hem twist,
To maken hem love, and that list hem aie rue
On hearts sore, and keep hem that been true.
In all needs for the towns werre
He was, and aye the first in arms dight:
And certainly, but if that books err,
Save Hector, most idradde of any wight,
And this increase of hardiness and might
Come him of love, his ladies thank to win,
That altered his spirit so within.
In time of truce on hauking would he ride,
Or else hunt Bore, Bear, or Lioun,
The small beasts let he gone beside,
And when y^ he come riding into the town,
Full often his lady from her window down,
As fresh as faucon, comen out of mue,
Full redely was him goodly to salve.
And most of love and virtue was his speech,
And in dispite had all wretchedness,
And doubtless no need was him beseech
To honouren hem, that had worthiness,
And easen hem that weren in distress,
And glad was he, if any wight well ferde
That lover was, when he it wist or herd.
For sooth to saine, he lost held every wight,
But if he were in loves high servise,
I mean folk that aught it ben of right,
And over all this, so well could he devise
Of sentement, and in so uncouth wise
All his array, that every lover thought,
That al was well, what so he said or wrought.
And though that he be come of blood royal,
Him list of pride at no wight for to chase,
Benign he was to each in general,
For which he gate him thank in every place:
Thus would love iheried by his grace,
That Pride, and Ire, Envy, and Avarice,
He began to fly, and every other vice.
Thou lady bright, the daughter of Diane,
Thy blind and winged son eke dan Cupide,
Ye sustren nine eke, that by Helicone
In hill Pernaso, listen for to abide,
That ye thus far han deined me to gide,
I can no more, but sens that ye woll wend,
Ye heried ben for aye withouten end.
Through you have I said fully in my song
Theffect and joy of Troilus servise,
All be that there was some disease among,
As mine author lists to devise,
My third book now end I in this wise,
And Trolius in lust and in quiet,
Is with Creseide his own heart sweet.
Explicit liber tertius.
But all too little, welaway the while
Lasts such joy, ithonked be fortune,
That seems truest, when she woll begile,
And can to fools her song entune,
That she hem hent, y^ blent traitor commune:
* And when a wight is from her whele ithrow,
Then laugheth she, and makes him the mow.
From Troilus she began her bright face
Away to writhe, and took of him none head,
And cast him clean out of his ladies grace,
And on her whele she set up Diomede,
For which mine heart right now ginneth blede,
And now my pen alas, with which I write,
Quaketh for dread of that I must endite.
For how Creseide Troilus forsook,
Or at the least, how that she was unkind,
Mote henceforth ben matter of my book,
As written folk, through which it is in mind
Alas, that they should ever cause find
To speak her harm, and if they on her lie,
Iwis hemselfe should have the villainy.
O ye Herines nights daughters three,
That endless complain ever in pain,
Megera, Alecto, and eke Tesiphonee,
Thou cruel Mars eke, father of Quirine,
This ilke fourth book help me to fine,
So that the loos, and love, and life ifere
Of Troilus be fully showed here.
Incipit liber quartus.
LIgging in host, as I have said ere this,
The Greeks strong, about Troy town,
Befell, that when that Phoebus shining is
Upon the breast of Hercules Lion,
That Hector, with many a bold Baron
Cast on a day with Greeks for to fight,
As he was wont, to greve hem what he mit.
Not I how long or short it was bitwene
This purpose, and that day they fighten meant,
But on a day well armed bright and shene,
Hector and many a worthy knight out went
With spear in hond, and big bows bent,
And in the berde withouten longer let,
Her fomen in the field anon hem met.
The long day with spears sharp iground
With arrows, darts, swerds, and maces fell,
They fight, and bringen horse and man to ground,
And with her axes out the brains quell,
But in the last shoure, sooth to tell,
The folk of Troy hem selven so misleden,
That with y^ worse at night home they fleden.
At which day was taken Anthenor,
Maugre Polimidas, or Monesteo,
Xantippe, Sarpedon, Palestinor,
Polite, or eke the Troyan dan Rupheo,
And other less folk, as Phebuseo,
So that for harm that day the folk of Troy
Dreden to lose a great part of her joy.
Of Priamus was yeve at Greeks request
A time of truce, and tho they gonnen trete
Her prisoners to chaungen most and lest,
And for the surplus yeven sommes great,
This thing anon was couth in every street,
Both in thassiege, in town, and every where,
And with the first it came to Calcas ere.
When Calcas knew this tretise should hold
In consistory among the Greeks soon
He began in thringe, forth with lords old,
And set him there as he was wont to done,
And with a changed face hem bade a boon
For love of God, to done that reverence,
To stinten noise, and yeve him audience.
Then said he thus, lo lords mine I was
Troyan, as it is known out of dread,
And if that you remember, I am Calcas,
That alderfirst yave comfort to your need,
And told well how that you should speed,
For dredelesse through you shall in a stound
Ben Troy ibrent, and beaten down to ground.
And in what form, or in with manner wise
This town to shend, and all your lust atcheve,
Ye have ere this well herd me devise:
This know ye my lords, as I leve,
And for the Greeks weren me so leve,
I came my self in my proper person
To reach in this how you was best to done.
Having unto my treasour, ne my rent,
Right no regard in respect of your ease,
Thus all my good I left, and to you went,
Wening in this you lords for to please,
But all that loss ne does me no disease,
I vouchsafe, as wisely have I joy,
For you to lose all that I have in Troy.
Save of a daughter that I left, alas,
Sleeping at home, when out of Troy I stert,
O stern, O cruel father that I was,
How might I have in that so hard an heart?
Alas that I ne had brought her in my shert,
For sorrow of which I wol not live to morrow,
But if ye lords rue upon my sorrow.
For because that I saw no time ere now
Her to deliver, iche holden have my pees,
But now or never, if that it like you,
I may her have right now doubtlees
O help and grace, among all this prees
Rue on this old caitife in distress,
Since I through you have all this hevinesse.
Ye have now caught, and fettred in prison
Troyans inow, and if your wills be,
My child with one may have redemption,
Now for the love of God, and of bounte,
One of so feel alas, so yefe him me,
What need were it this prayer for to werne,
Since ye shull have both folk and town as yerne.
On peril of my life I shall not lie,
Apollo has me told full faithfully,
I have eke found by astronomy,
By sort, and by augurie truly,
And dare well say the time is fast by,
That fire and flambe on all the town shall sprede,
And thus shall Troy turn to ashen deed.
For certain, Phoebus and Neptunus both
That makeden the walls of the town,
Ben with the folk of Troy always so wroth,
That they woll bring it to confusioun
Right in despite of king Laomedoun,
Because he nolde paien hem her hire,
The town of Troy shall ben set on fire.
Telling his tale always this old gray,
Humble in his speech and looking eke,
The salt tears from his eyes twey
Full fast ronnen down by either cheke,
So long he began of succor hem beseke,
That for to heal him of his sorrows sore,
They gave him Antenor withouten more.
But who was glad enough, but Calcas tho,
And of this thing full soon his needs leide
On hem that shoulden for the treatise go
And hem for Antenor full often preide,
To bringen home king Thoas and Creseide,
And when Priam his safeguard sent,
Thembassadours to Troy straight they went.
The cause ytold of her coming, the old
Priam the king, full soon in general,
Let here upon his parliment hold,
Of which theffect rehearsen you I shall,
Thembassadours ben answerde for final,
The eschaunge of prisoners, and all this need
Hem likes well, and forth in they proceed.
This Troilus was present in the place,
When asked was for Antenor Creseide,
For which full sone chaungen began his face,
As he that with tho words well nigh deide,
But nathelesse he no word to it seide,
Lest men should his affection epsy,
With man's heart he began his sorrows dry.
And full of anguish and of gresly dread,
Abode what other lords would to it sey,
And if they would grant, as God forbede,
Theschange of her, then thought he thing twey:
First, how to save her honor, and with wey
He might best theschaunge of her with stond,
Full fast he cast how all this might stond.
Love him made all pressed to done her bide,
And rather dien than she should go,
But Reason said him on that other side,
Withouten assent of her do not so,
Lest for thy work she would be thy so,
And saine, y^ through thy meddling is yblow
Your brother love, there it was noterst know.
For which he began deliberen for the best,
And though the lords would that she went,
He would let hem grant what hem lest,
And tell his lady first what that they meant,
And when that she had said him her intent,
Thereafter would he worken also blive,
Tho all the world again it would strive.
Hector, which that well the Greeks herd,
For Antenor how they would have Creseide,
Began it withstond, and soberly answered:
Sirs, she nis no prisoner (he seide)
I not on you who that this charge leide,
But on my part, ye may estsoones hem tell,
We useli here no women for to sell.
The noise of people up siert then at^nes,
As brimme as blase of straw iset on fire,
For infortune it would for the nones,
They shoulden her confusion desire:
Hector (quoth. they) with ghost may you enspire
This women thus in shild, and done us ^ese
Dan Antenore, a wrong way now ye chese.
That is so wise, and eke so bold baroun,
And we have need of folk, as men may see,
He is one of the greatest of this town:
O Hector, let thy fantasies be,
O king Priam (quoth. they) thus segge we,
That all our voice is to forgone Creseide,
And to delive Antenor they preide.
O Iuvenall lord, true is thy sentence,
That little wenen folk what is to yerue,
That they ne finden in her desire offense,
For cloud of error ne let hem discern
What best is, and lo, here ensample as yerne:
These folk desiren now deliverance
Of Antenor, y^ brought hem to mischaunce.
For he was after traitor to the town
Of Troy alas, they quitte him out to rathe,
O nice world, lo thy discretioun,
Creseide, which that never did hem scathe,
Shall now no longer in her bliss bathe,
But Antenor, he shall come home to town,
And she shall out, thus said here and houn.
For which delibered was by parliment,
For Antenor to yeelden out Creseide,
And it pronounced by the president,
Though that Hector nay full often praid,
And finally, what wight that it withsaid,
It was for naught, it must ben, and should,
For substance of the Parliment it would.
Departed out of the parliment echone,
This Troilus, without words mo,
Unto his chamber spedde him fast alone,
But if it were a man of his or two,
The which he bad out fast for to go,
Because he would slepen, as he said,
And hastily upon his bed him laid.
And as in Winter, leaves ben birast
Each after other, till trees he hare,
So that there nis but bark and branch ilast,
Lithe Troilus, biraft of each welfare,
Ibounden in the black bark of care,
Disposed wode out of his wit to breide,
So sore him sat the changing of Creseide.
He rist him up, and every door he shette,
And window eke, and tho this sorrowful man
Upon his beds side down him set
Full like a dead image, pale and wan,
And in his breast the heaped woe began
Out brust, and he to worken in this wise
In his woodnesse, as I shall you devise.
Right as the wild Bull begins spring
Now here, now there, idarted to the heart,
And of his death roreth, in complaining,
Right so began he about the chamber stert,
Smiring his breast aye with his fistes smert,
His head to the wall, his body to y^ ground,
Foll often he swapt, himselven to confound.
His eyes two for pity of his heart,
Out stremeden as swift as wells twey,
The high sobs of his sorrows smert
His speech him reft, unnethes might he sey,
O death alas, why nilt thou do me dey?
Accursed by that day which that nature
Shope me to ben a lives creature.
But after when the fury and all the rage
Which that his heart twist, and fast threst,
By length of time somewhat began assuage,
Upon his bed he laid him down to rest,
But tho begone his tears more out to breast,
That wonder is the body may suffice
To half this woe, which that I you devise.
Then said he thus: Fortune alas y^ while
What have I done? what have I thee agilt?
How might thou for routhe me begile?
Is there no grace? and shall I thus be spilt?
Shall thus Creseide away for y^ thou will?
Alas, how might thou in thine heart find
To ben to me thus cruel and unkind?
Have I thee not honored all my live
As thou well wotest, above the Gods all?
Why will thou me fro joy thus deprive?
O Troilus, what may men now thee call,
But wretch of wretches, out of honor fall
Into misery, in which I woll bewail
Creseide alas, till that the breath me fail.
Alas Fortune, if that my life in joy
Displeased had unto thy foul Envy,
Why ne had thou my father king of Troy
Biraft the life, or done my brethren die,
Or slain my self, y^ thus complain and cry,
I combre world, that may of nothing serve,
But ever dye, and never fully sterve.
If that Creseide alone were me laft,
Naughtraut I whider thou woldst me stere,
And her alas, then have thou me byraft:
But evermore, lo this is thy manner,
To reve a wight that most is to him dear,
To preve in that thy gierfull violence,
Thus am I lost, there helps no defense.
O very Lord, O love, O God alas,
That know best mine heart and al my thought,
What shall my sorrowful life done in this caas,
If I to go that I so dear have bought,
Sens ye Creseide and me have fully brought
Into your grace, and both our hearts sealed,
How may ye suffer alas it be repealed.
What I may done, I shall while I may dure
On live, in turment and in cruel pain,
This infortune, or this disaventure,
Alone as I was borne I woll complain,
Ne never woll I seen it shine or rain,
But end I woll as Edippe in derkenesse
My sorrowful life, and dien in distress.
O weary ghost, that errest to and fro,
Why (...) thou flien out of the wofullest
Body, that ever might on ground go?
O soul, lurking in this woeful neste,
Fly forthout mine heart, and let it breast,
And follow always Creseide thy lady dear,
Thy right place is now no longer here.
O woeful eien two, sens your disport
Was all to seen Creseides eyes bright,
What shall ye done, but for my discomfort
Stoden for naught, and wepen out your sight,
Sens she is queint, y^ wont was you to light,
* In vein from this forth have I eyes twey
I formed, sens your virtue is awey.
O my Creseide, O lady sovereign,
Of this woeful soul that thus cries,
Who shall now yeven comfort to thy pain,
Alas, no wight, but when mine heart dies,
My spirit, which that so unto you hieth,
Recei^e in gree, for that shall aye you serve,
For thy no force is, though the body sterve.
O ye lovers, that high upon the whele
Ben set of Fortune in good aventure,
God lene that ye finden aye love of stele,
And long more your life in joy endure,
But when ye comen by my sepulture,
Remembers that your fellow rests there,
For I loved eke, though I unworthy were.
O old unholsome and mislived man,
Calcas I mean, alas what eiled thee
To (...) a Greek, sens thou art borne Trojan?
O Calcas, which that wolt my bane be,
In cursed time was thou borne for me,
As would blisfull Jove for his joy,
That I thee had where I would in Troy.
A thousand sighs hotter than the glede,
Out of his breast, each after other went,
Meddled with plaint new, his woe to feed,
For which his woeful tears never stent,
And shortly so his sorrows him to rent,
And wore so mate, that joy or pennaunce
He feels none, but heth in a trance.
Panoare, which that in the parliment
Had heatd with every Lord and burgeis seid,
And how full granted was by one assent,
For Antenor to yelden o^t Creseid:
Began well nigh wood out of his wit to breid,
So that for woe he niste what he meant,
But in a (...) went.
A certain knight, that for the (...)
The chamber door, undid it him anon,
And Pandare, that full tenderly wept,
Into the derke chamber as still as stone,
Toward the bed began softly to goue,
So confuse, that he ^^st what to say,
For very woe, his wit was nigh away.
And with chere and leeking all to torn,
For sorrow of this, and with his arms folden,
He stood this woeful Troilus beforne,
And on his pitous face he began beholden,
But so often began his heart colden,
Seeing his friend in woe, whose heaviness
His heart slough, as thought him for distress.
This woeful wight, this Troilus y^ felt
His friend Pandare icomen him to see,
Began as the snow against the sun melt,
For which this woeful Pandare of pite
Began for to weep as tenderly as he:
And speechless thus ben these ilke twey,
That neither might for sorrow o word sey.
But at the last, this woeful Troilus,
Nigh dead for smert, began bresten out to rore,
And with a sorrowful noise he said thus
Among his sobs and his sighs sore,
Lo Pandare I am dead withouten more,
Have thou not heard at parliment he seide,
For Antenor how lost is my Creseide.
This Pandare full dead and pale of hew,
Full pitously answerde, and said yes,
As wisely were it false as it is true,
That I have heard, and wot all how it is,
O mercy God, who would have trowed this,
Who would have wend, y^ in so little a throw
Fortune our joy would overthrow.
For in this world there is no creature,
As to my dome, that ever saw ruin
Stranger than this through case or aventure,
But who may all eschew or all devine,
Such is this world, for thy I thus define:
* Ne trust no wight to find in Fortune
Aye property, her yeftes ben commune.
But tell me this, why thou art now so mad
To sorrowen thus, why list thou in this wise,
Sens thy desire all holly have thou had,
So that by right it ought enough suffice,
But I that never felt in my servise
A friendly chere or looking of an eye,
Let me thus weep and wailen till I die.
And over all this, as thou well wost thy selve,
This town is full of ladies all about,
And to my dome, falcer than such twelve
As ever she was, shall I finden in some rout,
Ye one or twey, withouten any dout:
For thy be glade mine own dear brother,
If she be lost, we shall recover another.
* What God forbid always y^ each pleasaunce
In a thing were, and in none other wight,
If one can sing, another can well dance,
If this be goodly, she is glad and light,
And this is fair, and that can good aright,
Each for his virtue holden is for dear,
Both herones and faucon for rivere.
And eke as writ Zansis, that was full wise,
* The new love out chaseth often the old:
And upon new case lies new avise,
Think eke thy self to saven art thou hold,
Such fire by process shall of kind cold,
For sens it is but casuell pleasaunce,
Some case shall put it out of remembrance.
* For also sure as day comes after night,
The new love, labor or other woe,
Or else selde seeing of a wight,
Done old affections all overgo,
And for thy part, thou shall have one of tho
To abredgs with thy bitter pains smart,
Absence of her shall drive her out of heart.
These words said he for the nones all
To help his friend, least he for sorrow deide,
For doubtless to done his woe to fall,
He raught not what unthrift that he seide:
But Troilus that nigh for sorrow deide,
Took little head of all that ever he meant,
One ear it heard, at the other out it went.
But at y^ last he answered, and said friend,
This lechcraft, or dealed thus to be,
Were well fitting, if that I were a fiend,
To traien a wight, that true is unto me,
I pray God let this counsel never ithee
But do me rather sterue anon right here,
Ere thus I done, as thou me would lere.
She that I serve iwis, what so thou sey,
To whom mine heart enhabite is by right,
Shall have me holly hers, till that I dey,
For Pandarus, sens I have troth her hight,
I woll not ben untrue for no wight,
But as her man I woll aye live and sterve,
And never none other creature serve.
And there thou say thou shall as fair find
As she, let be, make no comparison,
To creature iformed here by kind,
O leve Pandare, in conclusion,
I woll not been of thine opinion
Touching all this, for which I thee beseech,
So hold thy peace, thou slaest me with thy speech.
Thou biddest me I should love another
All freshly new, and let Creseide go,
It lithe not in my power leve brother,
And though I might, yet would I not do so,
* But can thou plaien raket to and fro,
* Nettle in dock out, now this, now y^ Pandare,
Now foul fall her for thy woe, y^ care.
Thou farest eke by me Pandarus,
As he, that when a wight is woe bigon,
He comes to him apace, and says right thus,
Think not on smart, and thou shall feel none,
Thou may me first transmewen in a stone,
And reve me my passions all,
Or thou so lightly do my woe to fall.
The death may well out of my breast depart
The life, so long may this sorrow mine:
But fro my soul shall Creseides dart
Out nevermore, but down with Proserpine
When I am dead, I woll won in pine,
And there I woll eternally complain
My woe, and how that twinned be we twain.
Thou have here made an argument full fine,
How that it should less pain be
Creseide to forgone, for she was mine,
And lived in ease and in felicite:
Why gabbest thou, that saidest unto me,
* That him is wors that is fro well ithrow,
Than he had erst none of that well know.
But tell me now, sen y^ thee thinks so light
To chaungen so in love aye to and fro,
Why have thou not done busily thy might
To chaungen her, y^ does thee all thy woe?
Why nilt thou let her fro thine heart go?
Why nilt thou love another lady sweet,
That may thine heart setten in quiet?
If thou have had in love aye yet mischance,
And can it not out of thine heart drive,
I that lived in lust and in pleasance
With her, as much as creature on live,
How would I that foryet, and that so blive,
O where have thou ben hid so long in mew,
Thou can so well and formeliche agrew.
Nay God wot, naught worth is al thy read,
For which, for what that ever may befall,
Withouten words mo I woll ben deed,
O death, that ender art of sorrows all,
Come now, sens I so often after thee call,
* For sely is that death, sooth sor to saine,
That often icleped, comes and ends pain.
Well wot I, while my life was in quiet,
Ere thou me slew, I would have yeven hire,
But now thy coming is to me so sweet,
That in this world I nothing so desire,
O death, sens with this sorrow I am a fire,
Thou either do me anon in tears drench,
Or with thy cold stroke mine heart quench.
Sens y^ thou slaest so feel in sundry wise
Against her will, vnpraied day and night,
Do me at my request this servise,
Deliver now the world, so do thou right,
Of me that am the wofullest wight
That ever was, for time is that I sterve,
Sens in this world of right naut do I serve.
This Troilus in tears began distill
As licour out of Allambike full fast,
And Pandarus began hold his tongue still,
And to the ground his eyes down he cast,
But nathelesse, thus thought he at last,
What parde, rather than my fellow dey,
Yet shall I somewhat more unto him sey.
And said friend, sens thou have such distress,
And sens thee list mine arguments blame,
Why nilt thy selven help done redress,
And with thy manhood letten all this game,
To ravish her, ne caust thou not for shame?
And either let her out of town fare,
Or hold her still, and leave thy nice fare.
Art thou in Troy, and have non hardiment
To take a wight, which that loves thee,
And would her selven been of thine assent,
Now is not this a nice vanite,
Rise up anon, and let this weeping be,
And since thou art a man, for in this hour
I woll been dead, or she shall ben our.
To this answerde him Troilus full soft,
And said, iwis my leve brother dear,
All this have I my self yet thought full often,
And more thing than thou devisest here,
But why this thing is laft, thou shall well here
And when thou have me yeven audience,
Thereafter may thou tell all thy sentence.
First, sin thou wost this town has all this werre
For ravishing of women so by might,
It should not been suffced me to err,
As it stont now, ne done so great unright,
I should have also blame of every wight,
My fathers grant if that I so withstood,
Sens she is changed for the tounes good.
I have eke thought, so it were her assent,
To ask her of my father of his grace,
Then think I, this were her accusement,
Sens well I wot I may her not purchase,
For sens my father in so high a place
As Parliment, has her eschaunge ensealed,
He nill for me his letter be repealed.
Yet dread I most her heart to perturbe
With violence, if I do such a game,
For if I would it openly disturb,
It must be disclaunder to her name,
And me were lever die than her diffame,
As nolde God, but I should have
Her honor, lever than my life to save.
Thus am I lost, for aught that I can see,
For certain is that I am her knight,
I must her honor lever have than me
In every case, as lover ought of right,
Thus am I with desire and reason twight:
Desire for to disturben her me redeth,
And Reason nill not, so mine heart dredeth.
Thus weeping, that he could never cease,
He said alas, how shall I wretch fare,
For well feel I always my love increase,
And hope is less and less Pandare,
Encreasen eke the causes of my care,
So welaway, why nill mine heart breast,
For as in love there is but little rest.
Pandare answerde, friend thou may for me
Done as thee list, but had I it so hot,
And thine estate, she should go with me,
Tho all this town cried on this thing by note,
I nolde set at all that noise a grote,
* For when men have cried, then wol they roun,
Eke wonder last but ix. deies never in town.
Devine not in reason aye so deep,
Ne curtesly, but help thy self anon,
Bet is that other than thy selven weep,
And namely, sens ye two ben al one,
Rise up, for by mine head she shall not gone,
And rather ben in blame a little ifound,
Than sterve here as a gnat withouten wound.
It is no shame unto you, ne no vice,
Her to withholden, that ye loves most,
Peraventure she might hold thee for nice,
To letten her go thus unto the Greeks host,
* Think eke fortune, as well thy selven woste,
Helps hardy man unto his emprise,
And weiueth wretches for her cowardice.
And though thy lady would alite her greve,
Thou shall thy self thy peace hereafter make,
But as to me certain I cannot leve,
That she would it as now for evil take,
Why should then for fear thine heart quake,
Think how Paris has, y^ is thy brother,
A love, and why shall thou not have another?
And Troilus, o thing I dare thee swear,
That if Creseide, which that is thy lefe,
Now loves thee, as well as thou do here,
God help me so, she nill not take a grefe,
Though thou do bote anon in this mischefe,
And if she wilneth fro thee for to pass,
Then is she false, so love her well the less.
For thy, take heart, and think right as a knight,
Through love is broken alday every law,
Kith now somewhat thy courage and thy might,
Have mercy on thy self for any awe,
Let not this wretched woe thine heart gnawe,
* But manly set the world on six and seven,
And if thou die a martyr, go to heaven.
I woll my self ben with thee at this deed,
Though I and all my kin upon a stound,
Should in a street, as dogs, liggen deed,
Through girt with many a bloody wound,
In every case I woll a friend be found,
And if thee lists here sterven as a wretch,
Adieu, the devil speed him that retch.
This Troilus began with the words quicken;
And said, friend, grant mercy, I assent,
But certainly, thou may not so me pricken,
Ne pain none ne may me so torment,
That for no case it is not mine intent,
At short words, though I dien should,
To ravishen her, but if her self it would.
Why, so mean I (quoth. Pandarus) all this day,
But tell me then, have thou her well assaid,
That sorowest thus? and he answerde him nay.
Wherofart thou (quoth. Pandare) then dismayed,
That noste not that she woll ben evil apaid
To ravishen her, sens thou have not ben there,
But if that Jove told it in thine ear.
For thy, rise up as naught ne were, anon,
And wash thy face, and to the king thou wend,
Or he may wondren whider thou art gone,
Thou must with wisdom him and other blend,
Or upon case he may after thee send,
Or thou beware, and shortly brother dear
Be glad, and let me work in this mattere.
For I shall shape it so, that sikerly
Thou shall this nit sometime in some manner
Come speaken with thy Lady prively,
And by her words eke, as by her chere,
Thou shall full soon aperceive and well here
Of her intent, and in this case the best,
And fare now well, for in this point I rest.
The swifte fame, which that falls things
Equal reports, like the things true,
Was throghout Troy ifled, with pressed wings,
Fro man to man, and made his tale all new,
How Calcas daughter with her bright hew,
At Parliment without words more,
I granted was in change of Antenore.
The which tale anon right as Creseide
Had heard, she which y^ of her father rought
(As in this case) right naught, ne when he deide
Full busily to Jupiter besought
Yeve him mischance, that this tretis brought:
But shortly, least these tales sooth were,
She durst at no wight asken it for fere.
As she that had her heart and all her mind
On Troylus yset so wonder fast,
That all this world ne might her love unbind,
Ne Troylus out of her heart cast,
She would been his while y^ her life may last,
And she thus brenneth both in love and dread,
So that she nist what was best to read.
But as men seen in town, and all about,
That women vsen her friends to visit,
So to Creseide of women came a rout,
For pitous joy, and wenden her delight,
And with her tales dear enough a mite,
These women, which that in the city dwell,
They set hem down, and said as I shall tell.
(Quoth. first that one) I am glad truly,
Because of you, that shall your father see,
Another said, iwis, so am not I,
For all too little has she with us be:
(Quoth. tho the third) I hope iwis that she
Shall bringen us the peace on every side,
That when she goth, almighty God her gide.
Tho words and tho womannish things
She herd hem right as though she thencewere:
For God it wot, her heart on other thing is,
Although the body sat among hem there,
Her advertence is always else where,
For Troilus full fast her soul sought,
Withouten word, on him always she thought.
These women y^ thus wenden her to please,
About naught began all her tales spend,
Such vanity ne can done her none ease,
As she that all this mean while brend
Of other passion than they wend,
So that she felt almost her heart die
For woe, and werie of that company.
For which might she no longer restrain
Her tears, they began so up to well,
That gave signs of her bitter pain,
In which her spirit was, and must dwell
Remembering her from heaven unto which hell
She fallen was, sens she forgo the sight
Of Troilus, and sorrowfully she sight.
And thilke fools, sitting her about,
Wend that she wept and sighed sore,
Because that she should out of the rout
Departen, and never play with hem more,
And they that had known her of yore,
See her so weep, and thought it was kindness,
And each of hem wept eke for her distress.
And bustly they gonnen her to comforten
On thing God wot, on which she little thought,
And with her tales wenden her disporten,
And to be glad they often her besought,
But such an ease therewith they her wrought,
* Right as a man is eased for to feel,
For ache of head, to clawen him on his hele.
But after all this nice vanity,
They took her leve, and home they wenten all,
Creseide full of sorrowful pity,
Into her chamber up went out of the hall,
And on her bed she began for dead to fall,
In purpose never thence for to rise,
And thus she wrought, as I shall you devise.
Her ownded hair, that sonnish was of hew,
She rent, and eke her fingers long and small
She wrong full often, and bad God on her rue,
And with the death to do bote on her bale,
Her hew whylom bright, that tho was pale,
Bare witness of her woe, and her constreint,
And thus she spoke, sobbing in her compleint.
Alas (quoth. she) out of this religioun,
I woeful wretch and infortuned wight,
And borne in cursed constellatioun,
Mote gone, and thus departen fro my knight,
Woe worth alas, that ilke days light,
On which I saw him first with eyes twain,
That causes me, and I him all this pain.
Therewith the tears from her eyes two
Down fell, as shoure in April swithe,
Her white breast she bet, and for the woe,
After the death she cried a thousand sith,
Sens he that wont her woe was for to lithe,
She mote forgone, for which disaventure
She held her self a forlost creature.
She said, how shall he done and I also
How should I live, if that I from him twin,
O dear heart eke that I love so,
Who shall that sorrow slaen, that ye ben in?
O Calcas, father, thine be all this sin:
O mother mine, that cleped were Argive,
Woe worth that day yt thou me bare on live.
To with fine should I live and sorowen thus,
* How should a fish withouten water dure?
What is Creseide worth from Troilus?
How should a plant or lives creatur^
Live withouten his kind noriture,
For which full often a by word here I sey,
* That rootlesse mote green soon dey,
I shall done thus, sens neither sword ne dart,
Dare I none handle, for the cruelte,
That like day that I fro you depart,
If sorrow of that nill not my bane be,
Then shall no meat ne drink come in me,
Till I my soul out of my breast vnsheath,
And thus my selven woll I done to death.
And Troilus, my clothes everychone
Shull black ben, in tokening heart sweet,
That I am as out of this world agone,
That wont was you to set in quiet,
And of mine order aye till death me mete,
The observaunce ever in your absence,
Shall sorrow ben complaint and abstinence.
Mine heart and eke the woeful ghost therein
Bequeath I with your spirit to complain
Eternally, for they shall never twin,
For though in earth twinned be we twain,
Yet in the field of pity, out of pain,
That hight Elisos, shall we ben ifere,
As Orpheus and Erudice his fere.
Thus heart mine, for Antenor alas
I soon shall be changed, as I wene,
But how shull ye done in this sorrowful caas,
How shall your tender heart this sustene?
But heart mine, foryet this sorrow and tene,
And me also, for soothly for to sey,
So ye well fare, I retche not to dey.
How might it ever read ben or isong
The plaint that she made in her distress,
I not, but as for me my little tongue
If I discriven would her heaviness,
It should make her sorrow seem less
Than that it was, and childishly deface
Her high complaint, and therefore I it pace.
Pandare, which that sent from Troilus
Was unto Creseide, as ye have heard devise,
That for the best it was recorded thus,
And he full glad to done him that servise,
Unto Creseide in a full secret wise,
There as she lay in tourment and in rage,
Came her to tell all holly his message.
And fond that she her selven began to great
Full pitously, for with her salt teres,
Her breast and face ibathed was full wete,
Her mighty tresses of her sonnish here is
Vnbroiden, hangen all about her ears,
Which yave him very sign of mattire
Of death, which that her heart began desire.
When she him saw, she began for sorrow anon
Her tearie face atwixt her arms hide,
For which this Pandare is so woe bigon,
That in the house he might uneath abide,
As he that felt sorrow on every side,
For if Creseide had erst complained sore,
Tho began she plain a thousand times more.
And in her aspre plaint, thus she seide:
Pandare, first of joies more than two
Was cause, causing unto me Creseide,
That now transmued ben in cruel woe,
Whether shall I say to you welcome or no?
That alderfirst me brought unto servise
Of love alas, that ends in such wise.
* Ends then love in woe? Ye or men lies,
And all worldly bliss, as thinks me,
The end of bliss aye sorrow it occupies,
And who troweth not that it so be,
Let him upon me woeful wretch see,
That my self hate, and aye my birth curse,
Feeling always, fro wicke I go to worse.
Who so me sees, he sees sorrow all atonis,
Pain, tourment, plaint, woe and distress,
Out of my woeful body harm there none is,
As langour, anguish, cruel bitterness,
Annoy, smart, dread, fury, and eke sickness,
I trow iwis from heaven tears rain,
For pity of my aspre and cruel pain.
And thou my suster, full of discomfort,
(Quoth. Pandarus) what think thou to do?
Why ne have thou to thy selven some resport?
Why will thou thus thy self alas fordo?
Leave all this work, and take now heed to
That I shall saine, and harken of good intent
This message, y^ by me Troilus you sent.
Turned her tho Creseide a woe making,
So great, that it a death was for to see,
Alas (quoth. she) what words may ye bring,
What woll my dear heart saine to me,
Which that I dread nevermore to see,
Woll he have plaint or tears ere I wend,
I have enough, if he thereafter send.
She was right such to seen in her visage,
As is that wight that men on bear bind,
Her face like of Paradis the image,
Was all ichaunged in another kind,
The play, y^ laughter men were wont to find
On her, and eke her joys everichone
Ben fled, and thus lies Creseide alone.
About her eyes two, a purpre ring
Bitrent, in soothfast tokening of her pain,
That to behold it was a deadly thing,
For which Pandare might not restrain
The tears from his eyes for to rain,
But nathelesse as he best might he seide
From Troilus these words to Creseide.
Lo nece, I trow ye han heard all how
The king with other Lords for the best,
Has made eschaunge of Antenor and you,
That cause is of this sorrow and this unrest,
But how this case does Troilus molest,
This may none yearthly man's tongue say,
For very woe, his wit is all away.
For which we have so sorowed, he and I,
That into little it had us both slaw,
But through my counsel this day finally,
He somewhat is fro weeping withdraw,
And seems me that he desires faw
With you to ben all might for to devise
Remedy of this, if there were any wise.
This short and plain, theffect of my message,
As ferforth as my wit can comprehend,
For ye that been of tourment in such rage,
May to no long prologue as now entend.
And hereupon ye may answer him send,
And for the love of God my nece dear,
So leave this woe or Troilus be here.
Great is my woe (quoth. she) and sighed sore,
As she that feels deadly sharp distress,
But yet to me his sorrow is mokell more,
That love him bet than he himself I guess,
Alas, for me has he such hevinesse,
Can he for me so pitously complain,
Iwis this sorrow doubleth all my pain.
Grievous to me God wot is for to twin
(Quoth. she) but yet it harder is to me,
To seen that sorrow which that he is in,
For well wot I, it woll my bane be,
And die I woll in certain tho (quoth. she)
But bid him come, er death y^ thus me threteth,
Drive out y^ ghost which in mine heart beteth.
These words said, she on her arms two
Fill gruffe, and began to weepen pitously:
(Quoth. Pandarus) alas, why do ye so,
Sens ye well wot the time is fast by
That he shall come, arise up hastily,
That he you not biwopen thus ne find,
But ye woll have him wode out of his mind.
For wist he that ye farde in this manner;
He would himself slay: and if I wend
To have this fare, he should not come here;
For all the good that Priam may dispend:
For to what fine he would anon pretend:
That know I well, and for thy yet I sey,
So leave this sorrow, or plainly he woll dey.
And shapeth you his sorrow for to abredge,
And not increase, lefe nece sweet,
* Bethrather to him cause of plat than edge,
And with some wisdom ye his sorrows beat,
What helps it to weepen full a street,
Or though ye both in salt tears dreint,
* Bet is a time of cure aye than of pleint.
I mean thus, when I him hither bring,
Sens ye be wise, and both of one assent,
So shapeth how to distour be your going,
Or come again soon after ye be went,
Women been wise, in short avisement,
And let seen how your wit shall avail,
And what that I may help, it shall not fail.
Go (quoth. Creseide) and uncle truly.
I shall done all my might me to restrain
From weeping in his sight, and busily
Him for to glad, I shall done all my pain,
And in my heart seeken every vain,
If to his sore there may ben founden salve,
It shall not lack certain on mine halve.
Goth Pandarus, and Troilus he sought,
Till in a temple he found him all alone,
As he that of his life no longer rought,
But to the pitous gods everichone,
Full tenderly he praid, and made his moan,
To done him soon out of the world to pace,
For well he thought there was none other grace.
And shortly all the soothe for to sey,
He was so fallen in despair that day,
That utterly he shope him for to dey,
For right thus was his argument always,
He said he nas but lorne, welaway,
* For all yt comes, comes by necessity,
Thus to ben lorne, it is my destiny.
For certainly, this wot I well he said,
That foresight of devine purveiaunce
Had seen always me to forgone Creseide,
* Sens God see the very thing out of doutance
And hem disposes through his ordinance,
In his merits soothly for to be,
As they shull comen by predestine.
But nathelesse alas, whom shall I leve,
For there ben great clerks many one,
That destiny, through arguments preve,
And some saine, that nedely there is none,
But that free choice is yeven us everychone,
* O welaway, so sigh arne clerks old,
That I not whose opinion I may hold.
* For some men sain, yt God sees all biforne,
Ne God may not deceived ben parde,
Then mote it fallen, though men had it sworn,
That purveiaunce has seen beforne to be,
Wherefore I say, that from eterne if he
Has wist beforn our thought eke as our deed,
* We have no free choice, as these clerks read.
For other thought, nor other deed also,
Might never been, but such as purueyaunce,
Which may not been deceived never mo,
Has feled biforne, withouten ignorance,
* For if there might ben a variaunce
To writhen out fro Gods purveying,
There nere no prescience of thing coming.
But it were rather an opinion
Uncertain, and no steadfast foreseeing,
* And certes that were an abusion,
That God should have no perfect clear weting
More than we men yt have doutous wening,
But such an error upon God to guess.
Were false, and foul, and wicked cursednesse.
Eke this is an opinion of some,
That have her top full high and smooth ishore,
* They saine right thus, yt thing is not to come,
For that the prescience has seen before
That it shall come, but they sain yt therefore
That it shall come, therefore ye purveyaunce
Wot it beforne withouten ignorance.
And in this manner this necessite
Retourneth in his part contrary again,
For needfully behooves it not to be,
That thilke things fallen in certain
* That been purveied, but needfully as they saine
Behooves it that things which that fall,
That they in certain ben purveyed all.
I mean as though I labored me in this,
To inquire which thing cause of which thing be,
* As whether that the prescience of God is
The certain cause of the necessite
Of things that to comen be parde,
Or if necessity of thing coming,
Because certain of the purveying.
But now ne enforce I me not in showing,
How ye order of ye causes stant, but well wot I
That it behooves, that the befalling
Of things wist before certainly,
Be necessary, all seem it not thereby,
That prescience put falling necessaire
To thing to come, all fall it foul or fair.
For if there sit a man yond on a see,
That by necessity behooves it,
That certes thine opinion sooth be,
That wenest or conjectest that he sit,
And further over, now ayenward yet,
Lo right so is it on the part contrary,
As thus, now hearken, for I woll not tarry.
I say, that if the opinion of thee
Be sooth for that he sit, then say I this,
That he mote sitten by necessitee,
And thus necessity in either is,
For in him need of sitting is iwis,
And in the need of sooth, and thus forsooth
There mote necessity ben in you both.
But thou may saine yt man sit not therefore,
That thine opinion of his sitting sooth is,
But rather for the man sat there before,
Therefore is thine opinion sooth iwis,
And I say though the cause of sooth of this
Comes of his sitting, yet necessitee
As enterchaunged both in him and in thee.
Thus in the same wise out of doutaunce,
I may well maken, as it seems me,
My reasoning of Gods purveyaunce,
And of the things that to comen be,
By which reason men may well isee,
That thilke things that in earth yfall,
That by necessity they comen all.
For although that forthing shall come iwis
Therefore is it purveyed certainly,
Not that it comnieth, for it purveyed is,
Yet nathelesse behooves it needfully,
That thing to come be purveyed truly,
Or else things that purveyed be,
That they betiden by necessite.
And this suffiseth right enough certain,
For to destroy our free choice everydell,
But now is this abusion to saine,
That falling of the things temporell,
Is cause of the gods prescience eternell.
Now truly that is a false sentence,
That thing to com should cause his prescience.
What might I wene, and I had such a thought?
But that God purveieth thing yt is to come,
For that it is to come, and else naught:
So might I wene, that things all and some,
That whylome ben befall and overcome,
Ben cause of thilke sovereign purveyaunce,
That forwote all, withouten ignorance.
And over all this, yet say I more thereto,
That right as when I wot there is a thing,
Iwis that thing mote needfully be so,
Eke right so, when I wot a thing coming,
So mote it come, and thus they befalling
Of things that been wist before the tide,
They mow not ben eschewed on no side.
Then said he thus, almighty Jove in trone,
That wotest of all this thing ye soothfastnesse,
Rue on my sorrow and do me dien sone,
Or bring Creseide and me fro this distress.
And while he was in all this heaviness,
Disputing with himself in this matere,
Came Pandare in, and said as ye may here.
O mighty God (quoth. Pandarus) in trone,
Eigh, who saw ever a wise man faren so?
Why Troilus, what think thou to done?
Have thou such lust to ben thine own fo?
What parde, yet is not Creseide ago,
Why list thee so thy self fordone for dread,
That in thine head thine eyes semen deed.
Have thou not lived many a year beforne
Withouten her, and farde full well at ease?
Art thou for her and for none other borne,
Has kind thee wrought al only her to please?
Let be and think right thus in thy disease,
* That in y^ dice right as there fallen chances,
Right so in love there come and gone plesaunces.
And yet this is a wonder most of all,
Why thou thus sorowest, since thou wost not yet
Touching her going, how that it shall fall,
Ne if she can her self distourben it,
Thou have not yet assaied all her wit,
* A man may all betime his neck bid
When it shall off, and sorowen at the need.
For thy, take heed of all that I shall say,
I have with her ispoke, and long ibe,
So as accorded was betwixe us twey,
And evermore me thinks thus, that she
Has somewhat in her hearts privite,
Wherewith she can, if I shall aright read,
Disturb all this, of which thou art in dread.
For which my counsel is, when it is night,
Thou to her go, and make of this an end,
And blisfull Juno, through her great might,
Shall (as I hope) her grace unto us send,
Mine heart seith certain she shall not wend,
And for thy, put thine heart a while in rest,
And hold thy purpose, for it is the best.
This Troilus answerde, and sighed sore,
Thou say right well, and I will do right so,
And what him list, he said unto him more,
And when that it was time for to go,
Full prively himself withouten mo
Unto her came, as he was wont to done,
And how they wrought, I shall you tell soon.
Sooth is, that when they gone first to mete,
So began the pain her hearts for to twist,
That neither of hem other might great,
But hem in arms took, and after kissed,
The less woeful of hem both nist
Where y^ he was, ne might o word outbring,
As I said erst, for woe and for sobbing.
The woeful tears that they leten fall,
As bitter weren out of tears kind
For pain, as is ligne aloes, or gall,
So bitter tears wept not as I find
The woeful Mirra, through the bark and rind,
That in this world there nis so hard an heart,
That nolde have rewed on her pains smart.
But when her woeful weary ghosts twain
Returned ben, there as hem ought to dwell,
And that somewhat to weken began the pain
By length of plaint, and ebben began the well
Of her tears, and the heart vnswell,
With broken voice, al horse for shright, Creseid
To Troilus these ilke words seid.
O Jove I die, and mercy thee beseech,
Help Troilus: and therewithal her face
Upon his breast she laid, and lost her speech,
Her woeful spirit from his proper place
Right with the word, away in point to pace,
And thus she lith, with hewes pale and grene,
That whilom fresh and fairest was to seen.
This Troilus that on her began behold,
Cleping her name, and she lay as for deed,
Withouten answer, and felt her simmes cold,
Her eien thrown upward to her heed:
This sorrowful man, can now non other read
But often time her cold mouth he kissed,
Where him was woe, God and himself it wist.
He rises him up, and long strait he her leide,
For sign of life, for aught he can or may,
Can he none find, in nothing of Creseide,
For which his song full often is welaway:
But when he saw that spechlesse she lay,
With sorrowful voice, and heart of bliss al bare,
He said, how she was fro this world ifare.
So after that he long had her complained,
His hondes wrong, and said that was to sey,
And with his teeres salt her breast berained,
He began tho teeres wipen off full drey,
And pitously began for the soul prey,
And said, Lord that set art in thy trone,
Rewe eke on me, for I shall follow her sone.
She cold was, and without sentement,
For ought he wot, for brethe felt he none,
And this was him a preignant argument,
That she was forth out of this world agone:
And when he saw there was non other won,
He began her limbs dress, in such manner,
As men don hem that shall ben laid on bear.
And after this, with stern and cruel heart,
His sword anon out of his sheth he twight,
Him self to sleen, how sore that him smart,
So that his soul, her soul folowen might,
There as y^ dome of Minos would it dight,
Since love and cruel fortune it ne would,
That in this world he longer liven should.
Then said he thus, fulfilde of high disdain,
O cruel Jove, and thou fortune adverse,
This is all and some, that falsely have ye slain
Creseide, and since ye may do me ne werse,
Fie on your might and works so diverse,
Thus cowardly ye shull me never win,
There shall no death me fro my lady twinne.
For I this world, since ye have slain her thus
Woll let, and follow her spirit low or hie,
Shall never lover saine that Troilus,
Dare not for fear with his lady die,
For certain I woll bear her company,
But sith ye wol not suffer us liven here,
Yet suffers that our souls ben ifere.
And thou City in which I live in woe,
And thou Priam, and brethren al ifere,
And thou my mother, farewell for I go,
And Attropose make ready thou my bear:
And thou Creseide, O sweet heart dear,
Receive now my spirit, would he sey
With sword at heart, all ready for to dey.
But as God would, of swough she abraide,
And began to sighe, and Troilus she cride,
And he answerde, lady mine Creseide,
Live ye yet? and let his sword down glide:
Ye heart mine, that thanked be Cupide,
(Quoth. she) and therewithal she sore sight,
And he began to glade her as he might.
Took her in arms two and kissed her often,
And her to glad, he did al his intent,
For which her ghost, that flikered aie a loft,
Into her woeful heart again it went:
But at the last, as that her eye glent
Aside, anon she began his sword aspie,
As it lay bare, and began for fear cry.
And asked him why he had it out draw,
And Troilus anon the cause her told,
And how himself therewith he would have slaw,
For which Creseide upon him began behold,
And began him in her arms fast fold,
And said, O mercy God, lo which a deed
Alas, how nigh we weren both deed.
Then if I nadde spoken, as grace was,
Ye would have slain your self anon (quoth. she)
Ye doutlesse: and she answerde alas,
For by that ilke lord that made me,
I nolde a forlong way on live have be,
After your death, to have been crouned Queen
Of all the land the sun on shines shene.
But with this selve sword, which yt here is
My self I would have slain (quoth. she) tho:
But ho, for we have right enough of this,
And let us rise and strait to bed go:
And there let us speken of our woe,
For by that mortar, which that I see brenne,
Know I full well, that day is not far hen.
When they were in her bed in arms fold,
Naught was it like tho nights here beforne,
For petously each other began behold,
As they that hadden al her bliss ilorne,
Bewailing aie the day that they were borne,
Til at the last, this sorrowful wight Creseide,
To Troilus these ilke words seide.
Lo heart mine, well wot ye this (quoth. she)
* That if a wight always his woe complain,
And seeks not how helped for to be,
It nis but folly, and encreace of pain:
And sens that here assembled be we twain,
To find bote of woe that we ben in,
It were time al sone to begin.
I am a woman, as full well ye wotte,
And as I am avised suddenly,
So wol I tell you, while it is hot,
Me thinks thus, that neither ye nor I,
Ought half this woe to maken skilfully,
For there is art enough for to redress,
That yet is miss, and sleen this hevinesse.
Soth is, the woe the which we ben inn,
For aught I wot, for nothing else is,
But for the cause that we should twinne,
Considred al, there nis no more amiss:
And what is then a remedy unto this?
But that we shape us sone for to mete,
This al and some, my dear heart sweet.
Now that I shall well bringen it about
To comen again, sone after that I go,
Thereof am I no manner thing in dout,
For dredelesse, within a weke or two
I shall ben here: and that it may be so,
By all right, and in words few,
I shall you well an heap of ways show.
For which I woll not maken long sermon,
* For time ilost may not recovered be,
But I will go to my conclusion,
And to the best, in aught that I can see:
And for the love of God foryeve it me,
If I speak aught against your hearts rest,
For trewly I speak it for the best.
Making always a protestacion,
That now these words which I shall say,
Nis but to show you my mocion,
To find unto our help the best way,
And take it no otherwise I pray,
For in effect, what so ye me command,
That wol I done, for that is no demand.
Now herkeneth this, ye have well understand
My going granted is by parliment,
So ferforth that it may not ben withstond,
For all this world, as by my judgment:
And sith there helps none avisement,
To letten it, let it pass out of mind,
And let us shape a better way to find.
The sothe is, the twinning of us twain,
Wol us disease, and cruelly anoie:
* But him behooves sometime have a pain,
That serves love, if that he woll have joie:
And since I shall no farther out of Troie
Than I may ride again on half a morrow,
It ought less causen us for to sorrow.
So as I shall not so ben hid in mew,
That day by day, mine own heart dear,
Sens well ye wot that it is now a true,
Ye shall full well al mine estate here:
And er that truce is done, I shall ben here,
Than have ye both Antenor iwonne,
And me also, bethe glad now if ye conne.
And think right thus, Creseid is now agon,
But what, she shall come hastily again,
And when alas? by God, lo right anon
Er days ten, this dare I safely saine,
And then at erst, shall we be so feign,
So as we shall togithers ever dwell,
That all this world ne might our bliss tell.
I see that often time, there as we ben now
That for the best, our counsel for to hide,
Ye speak not with me, nor I with you
In fourtenight, ne see you go ne ride:
May ye not ten days then abide,
For mine honor, in such aventure?
Iwis ye mow, or else lite endure.
Ye know eke how that all my kin is here,
But if that only it my father be,
And eke mine other things al ifere,
And namely my dear heart ye,
Whom that I nolde leaven for to see,
For all this world, as wide as it has space,
Or else see I never Jove's face.
Why trow ye my father in this wise,
Coveiteth so to see me, but for dread,
Lest in this town that folks me despise,
Because of him, for his unhappy deed?
What wot my father what life that I led,
For if he wist in Troie how well I fare,
Us neded for my wending not to care.
Ye, that every day eke more and more,
Men treat of peace, and it supposed is,
That men the queen Heleine shall restore,
And Greeks us restore that is mis:
Though there nere comfort none but this,
That men purposen peace on every side,
Ye may the better at ease of heart abide,
For if that it be peace, mine heart dear,
The nature of the peace mote needs drive,
That men must entrecomune ifere,
And to and fro eke ride and gone as blive,
Al day as thick as Been flien from an hive,
And every wight have liberty to bleve
Where as him list, the bet withouten leve.
And tho so be yt peace there may been none,
Yet hither, though there never peace ne were,
I must come, for whider should I gone,
Or how mischaunce should I dwell there
Among tho men of arms ever in fere,
For which, as wisely God my soul read,
I can not seen whereof ye should dread.
Have here another way, if it so be
That all this thing ne may you not suffice,
My father as ye known well parde,
Is old, and eke full of covetise,
And I right now have founden all the gise,
Withouten net, wherewith I shall him hent,
And herkeneth now, if that ye woll assent.
Lo Troilus, men saine, That full hard it is
* The wolf full, and the wedder hole to have,
This is to saine, that men full often iwis,
Mote spenden part, the remnant for to save:
For aie with Gold, men may the heart grave,
Of him that set is upon covetise,
And how I mean, I shall it you devise.
The moveable, which yt I have in this town
Unto my father shall I take, and say,
That right for trust, and for salvatioun,
It sent is from a friend of his or tway,
The which friends fervently him pray,
To send after more, and that in hie,
While that this town stant thus in ieopardie.
And that shall be of gold an huge quantite,
Thus shall I sain, but lest folk it aspide,
This may be sent by no wight but by me:
I shall eke shown him, if peace betide
What friends that I have on every side,
Toward the court, to don the wrath pace,
Of Priamus, and do him stand in grace.
So what for o thing and for other, sweet,
I shall him so enchaunten with my sawes,
That right in heven his soul is, shall he mete,
For all Apollo, or his clerks laws,
Or calculing, avails not three hawes:
Desire of Gold shall so his soul blend,
That as me list, I shall well make an end.
And if he would aught by his sort it preve,
If that I lie, in certain I shall fond
To disturben him, and pluck him by the sleve,
Making his sort, and bearen him on hond,
He has not well the gods understand,
* For gods speak in amphibologies,
And for o sothe, they tellen twenty lies.
* Eke dread fond first gods, I suppose,
Thus shall I saine, and that his coward heart,
Made him amiss the gods text to gloss,
When he for ferde out of Delphos stert:
And but I make him sone to convert,
And done my read, within a day or twey,
I wol to you oblige me to dey.
And trewly, as written well I find,
That all this thing was said of good intent,
And that her heart true was and kind
Toward him, and spoke right as she meant,
And that she starfe for woe nigh when she went,
And was in purpose ever to be true,
Thus written they, that of her works knew.
This Troilus, with heart and eeres sprad
Herd all this thing devised to and fro,
And verily it seemed that he had
The selve wit, but yet to let her go
His heart misyave him evermo,
But finally he began his heart wrest,
To trusten her, and took it for the best.
For which the great fury of his penance,
Was queint with hope, and therewith hem between
Began for joy the amorous dance,
And as the birds, when the sun shene,
Deliten in her song, in leves green,
Right so the words, that they spoke ifere,
Deliten hem, and made her hertes chere.
But nathelesse, the wending of Creseide,
For all this world may not out of his mind,
For which full often he pitously her preide,
That of her heste he might her true find:
And said her, certes if ye be kind,
And but ye come at day set, in Troie,
Ne shall I never have heal, honor, ne joie.
For also sothe as sun vprist to morrow,
And God so wisely thou me woeful wretch
To rest bring, out of this cruel sorrow,
I wol my selven slay, if that ye dretch:
But of my death though little be to retch,
Yet er that ye me causen so to smart,
Dwell rather here my own sweet heart.
For trewly mine own lady dear,
The sleights yet, that I have herd you stere,
Full shapely ben to fallen all ifere,
* For thus men says, yt one thinks the bear,
But al another thinks the ledere,
Your sire is wise, and said is out of dread,
* Men may the wise out run, and not out read.
* It is full hard to halten unespied
Before a crepil, for he can the craft,
Your father is in slight as Argus eied,
For all be it that his movable is him biraft,
His old slight is yet so with him laft,
Ye shall not blende him for your womanhede
Ne feign aright, and that is all my dread.
I not if peace shall evermo betide,
But peace or no, for ernest ne for game,
I wot since Calcas on the Greeks side,
Has ones ben, and lost so foul his name,
He dare no more come here again for shame,
For which that we, for ought I can epsy,
To trusten on, nis but a fantasy.
Ye shall eke seen your father shall you gloss,
To ben a wife, and as he can well prech,
He shall some Greek so preise and well alose,
That ravishen he shall you with his spech:
Or do you done by force, as he shall tech,
And Troilus on whom ye nil have routh,
Shall causeless so sterven in his troth.
And over all this your father shall despise
Us al, and saine this cite is but lorne,
And that thassege never shall arise,
For why the Greeks have it al sworn,
Til we ben slain, and down our walls torn,
And thus he shall you with his words fere,
That aie dread I, that ye wol bleven there.
Ye shall eke seen so many a lusty knight,
Among the Greeks full of worthiness,
And each of hem, with heart, wit, and might
To pleasen you, done al his business,
That ye shull dullen of the rudeness
Of lely Trojans, but if routhe
Remorde you, or virtue of your truth.
And this to me so grevouse is to think,
That fro my breast it wol my soul rende,
Ne dredelesse, in me there may not sink
O good opinion, if that ye wend,
For why, your fathers slight woll us shende,
And if ye gone, as I have told you yore,
So think I nam but deed, withouten more.
For which with humble, true and pitous heart
A thousand times mercy I you pray,
So reweth on mine aspre pains smart,
And does somewhat, as that I shall you say:
And let us steal away betwixt us tway,
And think yt folly is, when a man may chese
For accident, his substance for to lose.
I mean thus, that sens we mow or day
Well steal away, and ben together so,
What wit were it to putten in assay,
(In case ye shoulden to your father go)
If that ye mighten come again or no:
Thus mean I, that were a great folly
To put that sikernesse in jeopardie.
And vulgarly to speken of substance,
Of treasour may we both with us led,
Enough to live in honor and pleasaunce,
Til unto time that we shall ben deed:
And thus we may eschewen all this dread,
For every other way ye can record,
Mine heart iwis may therewith not acord.
And hardely ne dredeth no poverte,
For I have kin and friends else where,
That though we comen in our bare sherte,
Us should never lack Gold ne geere,
But ben honored while we dwelten there,
And go we anon, for as in mine intent,
This is the best, if that ye woll assent.
Creseide with a sigh, right in this wise
Answerde, iwis my dear heart true,
We may well steal away, as ye devise,
And finden such unthrifty ways new:
But afterward full sore it woll us rue,
And help me God so at my most need,
As causeless ye suffren all this dread.
For thilke day that I for cherishing,
Of dread of father, or for any other wight,
Or for estate, delight, or for wedding,
Be false to you, my Troilus my knight,
Saturnus daughter Juno, through her mit
As wood as Achamante do me dwell
Eternally with Stix in the pit of Hell.
And this, on every God celestial
I swear it you, and eke on each Goddess,
On every nimphe, and deite infernal,
On Satiry and fauny more and less,
That halve gods ben of wilderness,
And Attropos my threde of life to breast,
If I be false, now trow me if you lest.
And thou Simois, that, as an arowe, clear
Through Troy rennest, aie dounward to y^ see,
Be witness of this word, that said is here,
That thilke day that I untrue be
To Troilus, mine own heart fre,
That thou return backwarde to thy well,
And I with body and soul sink to hell.
But that ye speak away thus for to go,
And letten all your friends, God forbede,
For any woman that ye shoulden so,
And namely, sens Troy has now such need
Of help, and eke of o thing takes head,
If this were wist, my life lay in ballaunce,
And your honor, God shild us fro mischaunce.
And if so be that peace hereafter be take,
* As all day happeth after anger game,
Why lord the sorrow and woe ye wolden make,
That ye ne durst come again for shame,
And ere that ye ieoparden so your name,
* Beth not too hasty in this hot fare,
For hasty man ne wants never care.
What trow ye the people eke all about
Would of it say? it is full light to arede,
They woulden say, and swear it out of dout,
That love ne drove you not to done this deed
But lust voluptuous, and coward dread,
Thus were all lost iwis mine heart dear
Your honor, which that now shines clear.
And also thinks on mine honest,
That floureth yet, how foul I should it shend,
And with what filth it spotted should be,
If in this form I should with you wend,
Ne though I lived unto the worlds end,
My name should I never ayenward win,
Thus were I lost, and that were routh and sin.
And for thy, slay with reason all this hete,
Men sain, the suffraunt overcommeth parde,
Eke whosoever woll have lefe, he lefe mote let,
Thus makes virtue of necessite
By patience, and think that lord is he
Of fortune aye, that naught woll of her retch,
And she ne daunteth no wight but a wretch.
And trusts this, that certes heart sweet,
Or Phoebus suster, Lucina the shene,
The Lion pass out of this Arite,
I woll been here, withouten any wene,
I mean, as help me Juno heavens Queen,
The tenth day, but if that death m^assaile,
I woll you seen, withouten any fail.
And now so this be sooth (quoth. Troilus)
I shall well suffer unto the tenth day,
Sens that I see that need it mote ben thus,
But for the love of God, if be it may,
So let us stealen prively away,
For ever in one, as for to live in rest,
Mine heart says that it woll be the best.
O mercy God, what life is this (quoth. she)
Alas, ye slay me thus for very tene,
I see well now that ye mistrusten me,
For by your words it is well isene,
Now for the love of Scinthia the shene,
Mistrust me not thus causeless for routh,
Sens to be true I have you plight my troth
And thinks well, that sometime it is wit
To spend a time, a time for to win,
Ne parde lorne am I not fro you yet,
Though that we ben a day or two atwin,
Drive out tho fantasies you within,
And trusts me, and leaves eke your sorrow,
Or here my troth, I wol not live til morrow.
For if ye wist how sore it does me smart,
Ye would cesse of this, for God thou wost
The pure spirit weepeth in mine heart
To seen you weepen, which that I love most,
And that I mote gone unto the Greeks host,
Ye, nere it that I wist a remedy
To come again, right here I would die.
But certes I am not so nice a wight,
That I ne can imaginen a way
To come again that day that I have hight,
For who may holden a thing that woll away,
My father naught, for all his queint play,
And by my thrift, my wending out of Troy
Another day shall turn us all to joy.
For thy, with all mine heart I you beseke,
If that you list done aught for my prayere,
And for the love which that I love you eke,
That ere I depart fro you here,
That of so good a comfort and a chere
I may you seen, that ye may bring at rest
My heart, which is at point to breast.
And over all this I pray you (quoth. she) tho,
My own herts soothfast suffisaunce,
Since I am thine all hole withouten mo,
That while that I am absent, no pleasaunce
Of other, do me fro your remembrance:
For I am ever aghast, for why men read,
* That love is thing aye full of busy dread.
For in this world there lives lady none,
If that ye were untrue, as God defend,
That so betrayed were, or woe begone,
As I, that all troth in you entend:
And doubtless, if that iche other wend,
I nere but dead, and ere ye cause find,
For Gods love, so beth ye not unkind.
To this answered Troilus, and seide,
Now God, to whom there nis no cause iwrie,
Me glad, as wis I never unto Creseide,
Since thilke day I saw her first with eye,
Was false, ne never shall till that I die,
At short words, well ye may me leave,
I can no more, it shall be found at preue.
Grant mercy good heart mine iwis (quoth. she)
And blisful Venus let me never sterve,
Er I may stand of pleasaunce in degree,
To quite him well, that so well can deserve:
And while that God my wit will me conserve
I shall so done, so true I have you found,
That aie honor to me ward shall rebound.
For trusts well, that your estate royal,
Ne vain delight, nor only worthiness
Of you in werre or turnay marciall,
Ne pomp, array, nobley, or eke richesse:
Ne made me to rue on your distress,
But moral virtue, grounded upon troth,
That was the cause I first had on you routh.
Eke gentle heart, and manhood that ye had,
And that ye had (as me thought) in dispite
Every thing that sowned in to bad,
As rudeness, and peoplish appetite
And that your reason bridled your delight,
This made aboven every creature,
That I was yours, and shall while I may dure.
And this may length of years itat fordoe,
Ne remuablest fortune deface,
But Jupiter, that of his might may do
The sorrowful to be glad, so yeve us grace
Er nights ten, to meten in this place,
So that it may your heart and mine suffice,
And fares now well, for time is that ye rise.
And after that they long yplained had,
And often ikist, and strait in arms fold,
The day began rise, and Troilus him clad,
And rufully his Lady began behold:
As he that felt deaths cares cold,
And to her grace he began him recommaund,
Where he was woe, this hold I no demand.
For man's hedde imaginen ne can,
Ne entendement consider, ne tongue tell
The cruel pains of this sorrowful man,
That passen every torment down in hell:
For when he saw that she ne might dwell,
Which that his soul out of his heart rent,
Withouten more, out of ye chamber he went.
Incipit Liber Quintus.
A Prochen began the fatal destine,
That Jove's has in disposicioun,
And to you angry Parcas sustren three,
Commits to done execucioun,
For which Creseide must out of the town,
And Troilus shall dwell forth in pine,
Till Lachesis his threde no longer twine.
The golden tressed Phoebus high on loft,
Thrice had all with his beams clear
The Snowes molte, and Zephirus as often
I brought again the tender leaves grene:
Sens that the son of Eccuba the Queen,
Began to love her first, for whom his sorrow
Was all, that she depart should a morrow.
Full ready was at prime Diomede,
Creseide unto the Greeks host to lead,
For sorrow of which, she felt her heart blede,
As she that nist what was best to read:
And truly, as men in books read,
Men wist never woman have the care,
Ne was so loathe out of a town to fare.
This Troilus withouten read or lore,
As man that has his joies eke forlore,
Was waiting on his lady evermore,
As she that was sothfast croppe and more,
Of all his lust or joys here tofore:
But Troilus now farewell all thy joie,
For shall thou never seen her eft in Troie.
Soth is, that while he bode in this manner,
He began his woeful manly for to hide,
That well uneath it seen was in his chere,
But at the yate there she should out ride,
With certain folk he hoved her to abide,
So woe bigon, all would he not him plain,
That on his horse uneath he sat for pain.
For ire he quoke, so began his heart gnaw,
When Diomede on horse began him dight,
And said unto himself this ilke saw,
Alas (quoth. he) thus foul a wretchedness
Why suffer I it? Why nill I it redress?
Were it not bet at ones for to die,
Than evermore in langour thus to cry?
Why nill I make at ones rich and poor,
To have enough to done er that she go?
Why nill I bring all Troie upon a roore?
Why nill I slaen this Diomede also?
Why nill I rather with a man or two,
Steal her away? Why woll I this endure?
Why nill I helpen to mine own cure?
But why he nolde done so fell a deed,
That shall I sain, and why him list it spare,
He had in heart always a manner dread,
Lest that Creseide, in rumor of this fare
Should have been slain, lo this was al his care,
And else certain, as I said yore,
He had it done withouten words more.
Creseide when she ready was to ride,
Full sorowfully she sighed, and said alas,
But forth she mote, for aught y^ may betide,
And forth she rides full sorowfully apaas:
There is no other remedy in this caas,
What wonder is, though that her sore smart
When she forgoeth her own sweet heart?
This Troilus in gise of courtesy,
With hawk on hond, and with an huge rout
Of knights, rode and did her company,
Passing all the valey far without,
And ferther would have ridden out of doubt,
Full feign, and woe was him to gone so sone,
But turn he must, and it was eke to done.
And right with that was Antenor icome,
Out of the Greeks host, and every wight
Was of him glad, and said he was welcome,
And Troilus, al nere his heart light,
He pained him, with all his full might
Him to with hold of weping at least,
And Antenor he kissed, and made feast.
And therewithal he must his leave take,
And cast his iye upon her pitously,
And nere he rode, his cause for to make,
To take her by the hand al soberly:
And Lord so she began wepen tenderly,
And he full soft and slighly began her sele,
Now hold your day, and do me not to deie.
With that his courser turned he about,
With face pale, and unto Diomede
No word he spoke, ne none of all his rout,
Of which the son of Tideus took head,
As he that kouthe more than the creed,
In soche a craft, and by the rain her hent,
And Troilus to Troie homewards went.
This Diomede, that lad her by ye bridell,
When that he saw the folk of Troy away,
Thought, all my labor shall not been on idell,
If that I may, for somewhat shall I say:
For at the worst, it short may our way,
* I have heard say eke, times twice twelve,
He is a fool that woll foryete him selve.
But nathelesse, this thought he well enough
That certainly I am about naught,
If that I speak of love, or make it to tought,
For doubtless, if she have in her thought,
Him that I guess, he may not been ibrought
So sone away, but I shall find a mean,
That she not yet wete shall what I mean.
This Diomede, as he y^ could his good,
When this was done, began fallen forth in spech
Of this and that, and ask why she stood
In soth disease, and began her eke beseech
That if that he encreasen might or each,
With any thing her ease, that she should
Command it him, and said he done it would.
For truly he swore her as a knight,
That there nas thing, with which he might her plese
That he nolde done his pain, and al his might
To done it, for to done her heart an ease:
And prayed her she would her sorrow appease,
And said, iwis we Greeks can have joy
To honouren you, as well as folk of Troy.
He said eke thus, I wot you thinks strange,
No wonder is, for it is to you new,
Thacquaintance of these Trojans to change
For folk of Greece, that ye never knew:
But would never God, but if as true
A Greek ye should among us all find,
As any Trojan is, and eke as kind.
And because I swore you right now,
To ben your friend, and helply to my might,
And for that more acquaintance eke of you
Have I had, than an other stranger wight:
So fro this forth, I pray you day and night,
Commands me, how sore that me smart,
To done all that may like unto your heart.
And that ye me would, as your brother treat,
And takes not my friendship in dispite,
And thou your sorrows been for things great,
Not I not why, but out of more respite,
Mine heart has for to amend it great delight,
And if I may your harms not redress,
I am right sorry for your heaviness.
For though ye Trojans, with us Geeekes wroth
Have many a day been, always yet parde,
O God of Love, in sothe we serven both:
And for the love of God my lady free,
Whom so ye hate, as beth not wroth with me,
For truly there can no wight you serve,
That half so loath your wrath would deserve.
And nere it that we been so nere the tent
Of Calcas, which that seen us both may,
I would of this you tell all mine intent,
But this ensealed till an other day,
Yeve me your hand, I am and shall be aie,
God help me so, while y^ my life may dure,
Your own, aboven every creature.
Thus said I never e^ now to woman borne,
For God mine heart as wisely glad so,
I loved never woman here beforne,
As paramours, ne never shall no mo:
And for the love of God be not my so,
All can I not to my Lady dear
Complain a right, for I am yet to lere.
And wondreth naught mine own Lady bright,
Though y^ I speak of love to you thus blive,
For I have heard or this of many a wight,
Has loved thing he never saw his live:
Eke I am not of power for to strive
Against the God of Love, but him obey
I woll always, and mercy I you pray.
There beeth so worthy knights in this place,
And ye so fair, that everiche of hem all
Woll pain him to stonden in your grace,
But might me so fair a grace fall
That ye me for your servant would call,
So lowly, ne so truly you serve,
Nill none of hem, as I shall till I sterve.
Creseide unto that purpose lite answerde,
As she that was with sorrow oppressed so,
That in effect she naught his tales herd,
But here and there, now here a word or two:
Her thought her sorrowful heart breast a two,
For when she began her father far epsy,
Well nigh down of her horse she began to sle.
But nathelesse she thonketh Diomede,
Of all his travail and his good chere,
And that him list his friendship to her bid,
And she accepts it in good manner,
And woll do fain that is him lefe and dear,
And trusten him she would, and well she might,
As said she, and from her horse she alight.
Her father has her in his arms nome,
And twenty times he kissed his daughter sweet,
And said: O dear daughter mine welcome,
She said eke, she was fain with him to mete:
And stood forth muet, mild, and mansuete,
But here I leave her with her father dwell,
And forth I woll of Troilus you tell.
To Troy is come this woeful Troilus,
In sorrow above all sorrows smert,
With felon look, and face dispitous,
Tho suddenly down from his horse he stert,
And through his paleis with swollen heart,
To chamber he went, of nothing took he bid
Ne none to him dare speak o word for dread.
And there his sorrows that he spared had,
He yave an issue large, and death he cride,
And in his throws, frenetike and mad
He curses Juno, Apollo, and eke Cupide,
He curses Bachus, Ceres, and Cipride,
His birth, himself, his fate, and eke nature,
And save his Lady, every creature.
To bed he goth, and welleth there and turns,
In fury, as does he Ixion in hell,
And in this wise he nigh till day sojourneth,
But tho began his heart alite vnswell,
Through tears, which y^ gonnen up to well
And pitiously he cried upon Creseide,
And to him self right thus he spoke and seide.
Where is mine own lady lefe and dear?
Where is her white breast, where is it where?
Where been her arms, and her iyen clear
That yesterday this time with me were?
Now may I weep alone many a tear,
And graspe about I may, but in this place
Save a pilow, I find naught to embrace.
How shall I done, when shall she come again?
I not alas, why let I her go?
As would God I had as tho be slain,
O heart mine Creseide, O sweet fo,
O Lady mine, that I love and no mo,
To whom for ever more mine heart I vow,
See how I die, ye nill me not rescowe.
Who sees you now, my right lodesterre?
Who sits right now in your presence?
Who can comforten now your hearts werre?
Now I am gone, whom yeve ye audience?
Who speaks for me rit now in your absence,
Alas no wight, and that is all my care,
For well wot I, as evil as I ye fare.
How should I thus ten days full endure,
When I the first night have all this tene,
How shall she eke sorrowful creature,
For tenderness, how shall she this sustene:
Soche woe for me, o pitous, pale, and grene,
Shall been your fresh womanly face,
For langour er ye turn unto this place.
And when he fill in any slombrings,
Anon begin he should for to groan,
And dreamen of the dreadfullest things
That might been: as mete he were alone
In place horrible, making aie his moan,
Or meten that he was emonges all
His enemies, and in her hondes fall.
And therewithal his body should start,
And with the start all suddenly awake,
And soche a tremour feel about his heart,
That of the fear his body should quake:
And therwithall he should a noise make,
And seem as though he should fall deep,
From high alofe, and then he would weep.
And rewen on himself so pitously,
That wonder was to here his fantasy,
An other time he should mightily
Comfort himself, and sain it was folly,
So causeless, soche dread for to dry,
And eft begin his aspre sorrows new,
That every man might on his pains rue.
Who could tell all, or fully discrive
His woe, his plaint, his langour, and his pine?
Not all the men that han or been on live,
Thou reader may thy self full well devine,
That soche a woe my wit can not define,
Vnidell for to write it should I swinke,
When that my wit is werie it to think.
On heaven yet the sterres weren seen
Although full pale iwoxen was the Moon,
And whiten began the Orisont shene,
All Eastward, as it was wont to done,
And Phoebus with his rosy carte sone,
Began after that to dress him up to fare,
When Troilus sent after Pandare.
This Pandare, that of all the day beforne
Ne might him comen this Troilus to se,
Although he on his hedde it had sworn,
For with the king Priam alday was he,
So that it lay not in his liberte,
No where to gone, but on the morrow he went
To Troilus, when that he for him sent.
For in his heart he could well devine,
That Troilus al night for sorrow woke,
And that he would tell him of his pine,
This knew he well enough without book:
For which to chamber straight ye way he took,
And Troilus tho soberly he grette,
And on the bed full sone he began him set.
My Pandarus (quoth. Troilus) the sorrow
Which that I dry, I may not long endure,
I trow I shall not liven till to morrow,
For which I would always on aventure
To thee devisen of my sepoulture
The form, and of my movable thou dispoen
Right as thee seems best is for to done.
But of the fire and flambe funeral,
In which my body brennen shall to glede,
And of the feast and plays palestrall,
At my vigile, I pray thee take good head
That that be well: and offer Mars my stead,
My sword, mine helm: and leve brother dear,
My shield to Pallas yeve, that shines clear.
The poudre in which min heart ibrend shall turn
That pray I thee thou take, and it conserve
In a vessel that men clepeth an vrne
Of Gold, and to my lady that I serve,
For love of whom thus pitously I sterve,
So yeve it her, and do me this pleasaunce,
To praien her to keep it for a remembrance.
For well I feel by my malady,
And by my dreams, now and yore ago,
All certainly, that I mote needs die:
The oule eke, which that hight Ascaphilo,
Has after me shright, all these nights two,
And God Mercury, now of me woeful wretch
The soul guide, and when thee list it fetch.
Pandare answerde and said, Troilus
My dear friend, as I have told thee yore,
That it is folly for to sorowen thus,
And causeless, for which I can no more:
But who so woll not trowen read ne lore,
I can not seen in him no remedy,
But let him worchen with his fantasy.
But Troilus I pray thee tell me now,
If that thou trow er this that any wight,
Has loved paramours as well as thou,
Ye God wot, and fro many a worthy knight
Has his Lady gone a fourtenight,
And he not yet made halvendele the fare,
What need is the to maken all this care?
Sens day by day thou may thy selven see
That from his love, or else from his wife
A man mote twinnen of necessity,
Ye though he love her as his own life:
Yet nill he with himself thus maken strife,
* For well thou wost my leve brother dear,
That always friends may not been ifere.
How done this folk, yt seen her loves wedded
By friends might? as it betideth full often,
And seen hem in her spouses bed ibedded,
God wot they take it wisely fair and soft:
For why, good hope halt up her heart aloft,
And for they can a time of sorrow endure,
* As time hem hurts, a time does hem cure.
So should thou endure, and letten slide
The time, and fond to been glad and light,
Ten days nis not so long to abide,
And sens she to comen thee has behight,
She nill her hest breaken for no wight,
For dread thee not, that she nill find way
To come again, my life that durst I lay.
Thy sweuenes eke, and all soch fantasy
Drive out, and let hem faren to mischaunce,
For they proceed of thy melancholy,
That does thee feel in sleep all this penance:
A straw for all sweuenes signifiaunce,
* God help me so, I caunt hem not a Bean,
There wot no man aright with dremes mean.
For priests of the temple tellen this,
That dreams been the reuelacions
Of Gods, and als well they tell iwis,
That they been infernalles illusions
And Leches saine, that of complections
Proceden they of fast, or glotonie,
Who wot in sothe thus what they signify?
Eke other saine, that through impressions,
As if a wight has fast a thing in mind,
That thereof comes soche avisions:
And other sain, as they in books find,
That after times of the year by kind,
Men dreme, and that theffect goth by ye moan,
But leve no dreme, for it is not to done.
Well worth of dreams aie these old wives,
And truly eke, augurie of these fowls,
For fear of which, men wenen lose her lives,
As ravens qualm, or schriching of these oules:
To trowen on it, both false and foul is,
Alas alas, that so noble a creature
As is a man, should dread such ordure.
For which with all mine heart I thee beseech,
Unto thy self, that all this thou foryeve,
And rise now up, withouten more speech,
And let us cast how forth may best be driven
The time, and eke how freshly we may liven,
When she comes, ye which shall be right sone,
God help me so, the best is thus to done.
Rise, let us speak of lusty life in Troy
That we have lad, and forth the time drive,
And eke of time coming us rejoy,
That bringen shall our bliss now so blive,
And langour of these twice days five,
We shall therewith so foryet or oppress,
That well uneath it done shall us duresse.
This town is full of lords al about,
And truce lasten all this mean while,
Go we plaien us in some lusty rout,
To Sarpedon, not hens but a mile,
And thus thou shall the time well beguile,
And drive it forth unto that blisfull morrow,
That thou her see, that cause is of thy sorrow.
Now rise my dear brother Troilus,
For certes it non honor is to thee
To weep, and in thy bed to rouken thus,
For truly of o thing trust to me,
If thou thus ligge, a day two or three,
The folk woll wene, yt thou for cowardice,
Thee fainest sick, and that thou dare not rise.
This Troilus answerde: O brother dear
This folk know that have isuffred pain,
That though he weep, and make sorrowful chere
That feels harm and smart in every vain:
No wonder is, and though I ever plain
Or always weep, I am nothing to blame,
Sens yt I have lost ye cause of all my game.
But sens of fine force I mote arise,
I shall arise, as soon as ever I may,
And God, to whom mine heart I sacrifice,
So send us hastily the tenthe day:
For was there never foul so feign of May
As I shall ben, when yt she comes in Troie,
That cause is of my tourment and my joie.
But whider is thy read (quoth. Troilus)
That we may play us best in all this town?
By God my counsel is (quoth. Pandarus)
To ride and play us with king Sarpedoun.
So long of this they speaken up and down,
Till Troilus began at the last assent
To rise, and forth to Sarpedon they went.
This Sarpedon, as he that honorable
Was ever his live, and full of hie prowess,
With all that might iserved been on table,
That deintie was, all cost it great richesse,
He fed hem day by day, that such noblesse
As saiden both the most and eke the least,
Was never er that day wiste at any feast.
Nor in this world there is none instrument,
Delicious, through wind or touch on cord,
As far as any wight has ever iwent,
That tongue tell, or heart may record,
But at yt feast, it was well heard record:
Ne of Ladies eke so fair a company,
On dance er tho, was never iseen with eye.
But what avails this to Troilus,
That for his sorrow, nothing of it rought,
But ever in one, as heart pitous,
Full busily Creseide his Lady sought:
On her was ever all that his heart thought,
Now this now that, so fast imagining,
That glad iwis can him no feasting.
These Ladies eke, that at this feast been,
Sens that he saw his Lady was away,
It was his sorrow upon hem for to seen,
Or for to hear on instruments play:
For she that of his heart has the kay,
Was absent, lo this was his fantasy
That no wight should maken melody.
Nor there nas hour in all the day or night,
When he was there as no man might him here,
That he ne said, O lovesome Lady bright,
How have ye faren sins that ye were there:
Welcome iwis mine own Lady dear,
But welaway, all this nas but a mase,
Fortune his hove intended bet to glase.
The letters eke, that she of old time
Had him isent, he would alone read
An hundred since, atwixt noone and prime,
Refiguring her shape, and her womanhede,
Within his heart, and every word and deed
That passed was, and thus he drove to an end,
The fourth day, and said he wol wend.
And said leve brother Pandarus,
Intendest thou that we shall here bleve,
Til Sarpedon woll forth conveyen us,
Yet were it fairer that we took our leve:
For Gods love, let us now sone at eve
Our leave take, and homeward let us turn,
For trewely I nill not thus sojourne.
Pandare answerde, be we comen hither
To fetchen fire, and rennen home again,
God help me so, I can not tellen whither
We might gone, if I shall sothly saine:
There any wight is of us more feign
Than Sarpedon, and if we hence hie
Thus suddenly, I hold it vilanie.
When that we saiden we would bleve
With him a weke, and now thus suddenly
The fourth day to take of him our leve,
He would wondren on it trewly:
Let us holden forth our purpose fermely,
And sens that ye behighten him to abide,
Hold forward now, and after let us ride.
This Pandarus, with all pine and woe
Made him to dwell, and at the wekes end,
Of Sarpedon they took her leave tho,
And on her way they speden hem to wend:
(Quoth. Troilus) now Lord me grace send,
That I may find at mine home coming,
Creseide comen, and therewith began he sing.
Ye haselwode thought this Pandare,
And to himself full softly he seide,
God wotte refroiden may this hot fare,
Er Calcas send Troilus Creseide:
But nathelesse he yaped thus and seide,
And swore iwis, his heart him well behight,
She would come as soon as ever she might.
When they unto the paleis were ycomen,
Of Troilus, they down of horse alight,
And to ye chamber her way have they nomen,
And unto time that it began to night,
They speken of Creseide the lady bright,
And after this, when hem both lest,
They speed hem fro the supper unto rest.
On morrow as soon as day began to clear,
This Troilus began of his sleep to abreide,
And to Pandarus, his own brother dear
For love of God, full pitously he seide:
As go we seen the paleis of Creseide,
For sens we yet may have no more feast,
So let us seine her paleis at the leest.
And therewithal his meine for to blende,
A cause he fond in town for to go,
And to Creseides house they began wend,
But lord this sely Troilus was woe,
Him thought his sorrowful heart brast atwo,
For when he saw her doors sparred all,
Well nigh for sorrow adoun he began to fall.
Therewith when he was ware, and began behold
How shet was every window of the place,
As frost him thought his heart began to cold,
For which with changed deedly pale face,
Withouten word, he forth by began to pace,
And as god would, he began so fast ride,
That no wight of his countenance aspide.
Then said he thus: O paleis desolate,
O house of houses, whilom best ihight,
O paleis empty and disconsolate,
O thou lantern, of which queint is the light,
O paleis whilom day, that now art night,
Well ought thou to fall, and I to die,
Sens she is went, that wont was us to gie.
O paleis whilom crown of houses all,
Enlumined with sun of all bliss,
O ring, of which the rubie is out fall,
O cause of woe, that cause have ben of bliss:
Yet sens I may no bet, fain would I kiss
Thy cold doors, durst I for this rout,
* And farewell shrine of which the saint is out.
Therewith he cast on Pandarus his eye,
With changed face, and pitous to behold,
And when he might his time aright aspie,
Aie as he rode, to Pandarus he told
His new sorrow, and eke his joys old.
So petously, and with so deed an hew,
That every wight might on his sorrow rue.
Fro thence forth he rides up and down
And every thing came him to remembrance,
As he rode forth by the places of the town,
In which he whilom had all his pleasaunce:
Lo, yonder saw I mine own Lady dance,
And in that temple with her eien clear,
Me caught first my right Lady dear.
And yonder have I herd full lustely
My dear heart laugh, and yonder play
Saw I her ones eke full blisfully,
And yonder ones to me began she say
Now good sweet, love me well I pray,
And yonde so goodly began she me behold,
That to the death mine heart is to her hold.
And at the corner in the yonder house,
Herd I mine alderlevest lady dear,
So womanly, with voice melodiouse,
Singen so well, so goodly and so clear,
That in my soul yet me thinks I here
The blisfull sown, and in that yonder place
My lady first me took unto her grace.
Then thout he thus, O blisful lord Cupide
When I the process have in memory,
How thou me have weried on every side,
Men might a book make of it like a story:
What need is thee to seek on me victory,
Sens I am thine, and holly at thy will,
What joy have thou thine own folk to spill?
Well have thou Lord iwroke on me thine ire,
Thou mighty God, and dredful for to greve,
Now mercy Lord, thou wost well I desire
Thy grace most, of all lusts leve,
And live and die I wol in thy beleve,
For which I ne ask in guerdon but a bone,
That thou Creseide again me send sone.
Distraine her heart as fast to return,
As thou do mine to longen her to see,
Then wot I well that she nil not sojourne,
Now blisful Lord, so cruel thou ne be
Unto the blood of Troy, I pray thee,
As Juno was unto the blood Thebane,
For which ye folk of Thebes caut her bane.
And after this he to the yates went,
There as Creseide out rode, a full good paas,
And up and down there made he many a went,
And to him self full often he said alas:
Fro hence rode my bliss and my solas,
As would blisful God now for his joie,
I might her seen again come to Troie.
And to the yonder hill I began her guide,
Alas, and there I took of her my leve,
And yonde I saw her to her father ride,
For sorrow of which mine heart shall to cleve:
And hither home I come when it was eve,
And here I dwell, out cast from all joie,
And shall, til I may seen her eft in Troie.
And of him self imagined he often,
To ben defaited, pale, and woxen less
Than he was wont, and that men saiden soft,
What may it be? who can the sothe guess,
Why Troilus has all this hevinesse?
And all this nas but his melancholy,
That he had of him self such fantasy.
Another time imaginen he would,
That every wight that went by the wey,
Had of him routh, and that they saine should,
I am right sorry, Troilus wol dey:
And thus he drove a day yet forth or twey,
As ye have herd, such life began he led,
As he that stood betwixen hope and dread.
For which him liked in his songs show
Thencheson of his woe, as he best might,
And made a song, of words but a few,
Somewhat his woeful heart for to light:
And when he was from every man's sight,
With soft voice, he of his Lady dear,
That absent was, began sing as ye may here.
O sterre, of which I lost have all the light,
With heart sore, well ought I to bewail,
That ever derke in turment, night by night
Toward my death, with wind I stere and sail:
For which the tenth night, if that I fail,
The guiding of thy bemes bright an hour,
My ship and me Caribdes woll devour.
This song when he thus songen had sone,
He fell again into his sighs old,
And every night, as was he wont to done,
He stood the bright moon to behold:
And al his sorrow he to the moon told,
And said, iwis when thou art horned new,
I shall be glad, if all the world be true.
I saw thine horns old eke by that morrow,
When hence rode my right lady dear,
That cause is of my turment and my sorrow,
For which, O bright Lucina the clear,
For love of God ren fast about thy sphere,
For when thine horns new ginnen spring,
Then shall she come that may my bliss bring.
The day is more, and longer every night
Than they ben wont to be, him thought tho,
And that the sun went his course unright,
By longer way than it was wont to go,
And said, iwis, I dread me evermo
The suns son Pheton be on live,
And that his fathers cart amiss he drive.
Upon the walls fast eke would he walk,
And on the Greeks host he would see,
And to himself right thus he would talk:
Lo, yonder is mine own lady free,
Or else yonder, there the tents be,
And thence comes this air that is so soote,
That in my soul I feel it does me boot.
And hardly, this wind that more and more
Thus stoundmeale increases in my face,
Is of my ladies deep sighs sore,
I preve it thus, for in none other space
Of all this town, save only in this place,
Feel I no wind, that souneth so like pain,
It says alas, why twined be we twain.
This long time he drives forth right thus,
Till fully passed was the ninth night,
And aye beside him was this Pandarus,
That busily did all his full might
Him to comfort, and make his heart light,
Yeving him hope always the tenth morrow,
That she shall comen, and stinten all his sorrow.
Upon that other side eke was Creseide
With women few among y^ Greeks strong,
For which full often a day, alas she seide
That I was borne, well may mine heart long
After my death, for now live I too long
Alas, and I ne may it not amend,
For now is worse than ever yet I wend.
My father nill for nothing do me grace
To gone again, for aught I can him queme,
And if so be that I my term pace,
My Troilus shall in his heart deem
That I am false, and so it may well seem,
Thus shall I have vnthonke on every side,
That I was borne so welaway the tide.
And if that I me put in jeopardie,
To steal away by night, and it befall
That I be caught, I shall be hold aspie,
Or else lo, this dread I most of all,
If in the honds of some wretch I fall,
I nam but lost, all be mine heart true,
Now mighty God, thou on my sorrow rue.
Full pale iwoxen was her bright face,
Her limbs lean, as she that all the day,
Stood when she durst, and looked on the place
There she was borne, and dwelt had aye,
And all the night weeping alas she lay,
And thus dispeired out of all cure
She lad her life, this woeful creature.
Full often a day she sighed eke for distress,
And in her self she wene aye purtraying
Of Troilus the great worthiness,
And all his goodly words recording,
Sens first that day her love began to spring,
And thus she set her woeful heart afire,
Through remembrance of y^ she began desire.
In all this world there nis so cruel heart,
That her had heard complainen in her sorrow,
That nold have wepten for her pains smart,
So tenderly she wept, both eve and morrow,
Her needed no tears, for to borow,
And this was yet the worst of all her pain,
There was no wight, to whom she durst plain.
Full rewfully she looked upon Troy,
Beheld the Toures high, and eke y^ Hallis,
Alas (quoth. she) the pleasaunce and the joy,
The which that now all turned into gall is,
Have I had often within yonder wallis,
O Troilus, what do thou now she ^ide,
Lord, whether thou yet think upon Creseide.
Alas that I ne had itrowed on your lore,
And went with you, as ye me read ere this,
Then had I now not sighed half so sore,
Who might have said, that I had done amiss
To steal away with such one as he is,
* But all too late comes the lectuarie,
When men the corse unto the grave carry.
Too late is now to speak of that matere,
Prudence, alas, one of thine eyes three
Me lacked always, ere that I came here:
For on time passed well remembered me,
And present time eke would I well see,
But future time, ere I was in the snare,
Could I not seen, that causes now my care.
But nathelesse, betide what betide,
I shall to morrow at night, by east or west,
Out of this host steal, on some side,
And gone with Troilus, where as him lest,
This purpose woll I hold, and this is ye best,
* No force of wicked tongues ^onglerie,
For ever on love have wretches had Endie.
* For who so woll of every word take heed,
Or rule hem by every wights wit,
Ne shall he never thriven out of dread,
For that that some men blamen ever yet,
Lo, other manner folk commenden it,
And as for me, for all such variaunce,
Felicity clepe I my suff^^aunce.
For which withouten any words mo,
To Troy I woll, as for conclusioun,
But God it wot, ere fully months two,
She was full far fro that ententioun,
For both Troilus and Troy town
Shall knotlesse throughout her heart slide,
For she woll take a purpose for to abide.
This Diomede, of whom I you tell began,
Goth now within himself aye arguing,
With all the slight and all that ever he can,
How he may best with shortest tarying,
Into his nerre Creseides heart bring,
To this intent he couth never fine,
To fishen her, he laid out book and line.
But nathelesse, well in his heart he thought,
That she nas not without a love in Troy,
For never sithen he her thence brought,
Ne couth he seen her laugh, or maken joy,
He nist how best her heart for taco^e,
But for tassey, he said naught it ne greveth,
* For he y^ naught assaieth, naught atcheveth.
Yet said he to himself upon a night,
Now am I not a fool, that wot well how
Her woe is, for love of another wight,
And hereupon to gone assay her now,
I may well wete, it nill not ben my prow.
* For wise folk in books it express,
Men shall not woe a wight in hevinesse.
But who so might winnen such a flower
Fro him, for whom she mourns night and day,
He might saine he were a conqueror:
And right anon, as he that bold was aye,
Thought in his heart, hap how hap may,
All should I dye, I woll her heart seech,
I shall no more lesen but my speech.
This Diomede, as books us declare,
Was in his needs pressed and courageous,
With stern voice, and mighty limbs square,
Hardy, testife, strong, and chevalrous
Of deeds like his father Tideus,
And some men saine he was of tongue large,
And heir he was of Calcidony and Arge.
Creseide mean was of her stature,
Thereto of shape, of face, and eke of chere,
There might ben no fairer creature,
And often time this was her manner,
To gone itressed with her hairs clear
Down by her colere, at her back behind,
Which with a thread of gold she would bind.
And save her brows joyneden ifere,
There nas no lack, in aught I can espien,
But for to speaken of her eyes clear,
Lo, truly they written that her seien,
That Paradis stood formed in her eien,
And with her rich beauty evermore
Strove love in her, aie which of hem was more.
She sobre was eke, simple, and wise withal,
The best inorished eke that might be,
And goodly of her speech in general,
Charitable, estately, lusty, and free,
Ne nevermore ne lacked her pitee,
Tender hearted, sliding of courage,
But truly I cannat tell her age.
And Troilus well woxen was in hight,
And complete formed by proportioun,
So well, y^ kind it naught amenden might,
Young, fresh, strong, and hardy as Lioun,
True as steel, in each conditioun,
One of the best entetched creature,
That is or shall, while yt the world may dure.
And certainly, in story as it is fond,
That Troilus was never unto no wight
As in his time, in no degree second,
In daring do that longs to a knight,
All might a Giaunt passen him of might,
His heart aye with ye first and with the best,
Stood peregall to dare done what him lest.
But for to tellen forth of Diomede,
It fill, that after on the tenthe day,
Sens that Creseide out of the city yede,
This Diomede, as fresh as branch in May,
Came to the tent there as Calcas lay,
And fained him with Calcas have to done,
But what he meant, I shall you tellen sone.
Creseide at short words for to tell,
Welcomed him, and down him by her set,
And he was ethe enough to maken dwell,
And after this, withouten long let,
The spices and the wine men forth hem fette,
And forth they speak of this and that ifere,
As friends done, of which some shall ye here.
He began first fallen of the war in speech
Betwixen hem and the folk of Troy town,
And of thassiege he began eke her beseech,
To tellen him what was her opinioun:
Fro that demand he so discendeth down,
To asken her, if that her strange thought
The Greeks gise, and works yt they wrought.
And why her father tarieth so long
To wedden her unto some worthy wight?
Creseide that was in her pains strong,
For love of Troilus her own knight,
So ferforth as she cunning had or might,
Answerde him tho, but as of his intent,
It seemed not she wiste what he meant.
But nathelesse, this ilke Diomede
Began on himself assure, and thus he seide:
If I aright have taken on you head,
Methinketh thus, O lady mine Creseide,
That sens I first hond on your bridle leide,
When I out came of Troy by the morrow,
Ne might I never seen you but in sorrow.
I can not saine what may the cause be,
But if for love of some Trojan it were,
The which right sore would a thinken me,
That ye for any wight that dwells there,
Shoulden spill a quarter of a tere,
Or pitously your selven so begile,
For dredelesse it is not worth the while.
The folk of Troy, as who says all and some,
In prison ben, as ye your selven see,
Fro thence shall not one on live come,
For all the gold at wixen sun and see,
Trusts well, and understondeth me,
There shall not one to mercy gone on live,
All were he lord of worlds twice five.
Such wrech on hem for fetching of Heleine
There shall be take, ere that we hence wend,
That Maunes, which yt Gods ben of peine,
Shall ben aghast that Greeks wol hem shend,
And men shall dread unto the worlds end
From henceforth to ravishen any Queen,
So cruel shall our wreche on hem be seen.
And but if Calcas led us with ambages,
That is to saine, with double words sly,
Such as men clepen a word with two visages,
Ye shall well known that I not ne lie,
And all this thing right seen it with your eye,
And that anon, ye nill not trow how soon,
Now takes head, for it is for to done.
What wene ye your wise father would
Have yeven Antenor for you anon,
If he ne wist that the city should
Destroyed ben? why nay so mote I gone,
He knew full well there shall not scapen one
That Trojan is, and for the great fere
He durst not that ye dwelt longer there.
What woll ye more, O lovesome lady dear,
Let Troy and Trojans fro your heart pass,
Drive out y^ bitter hope, and make good chere,
And clepe again the beauty of your face,
That ye with salt tears so deface,
For Troy is brought in such a ieopardie,
That it to save is now no remedy.
And thinks well, ye shall in Greeks find
A more perfect love, ere it be night,
That any Trojan is, and more kind,
And bet to serven you woll done his might,
And if ye vouchsafe my lady bright,
I woll ben he, to serven you my selve,
Ye lever than be lord of Greces twelve.
And with that word he began to waxen reed,
And in his speech a little while he quoke,
And cast aside a little with his heed,
And stint a while, and afterward he woke,
And soberly on her he threw his look,
And said I am, albeit to you my joy,
As gentill a man as any wight in Troy.
For if my father Tideus (he seide)
I lived had, I had been ere this,
Of Calcidonie and Arge a king, Creseide,
And so hope I that I shall be iwis:
But he was slain alas, the more harm is,
Unhappily at Thebes all to rathe,
Polimite, and many a man to scathe.
But heart mine, sith that I am your man,
And ben the first, of whom I feche grace,
To serve you as heartely as I can,
And ever shall, while I to live have space,
So that, ere I depart out of this place,
Ye woll me grant, that I may to morrow
At better laiser tell you of my sorrow.
What should I tell his words that he seide?
He spoke enough for o day at the mest,
It preveth well he spoke so, that Creseide
Granted on the morrow at his request
For to speak with him at the least,
So that he nolde speak of such matere,
And thus she to him said, as ye mow here.
As she that had her heart on Troilus
So fast, that there may it none arace,
And straungely she spoke, and said thus:
O Diomede, I love that ilke place
There was I borne, and Jove's of thy grace
Deliver it soon of all that does it care,
God for thy might so leve it well to fare.
That Greeks would her wrath on Troy wreke
If that they might, I know it well iwis,
But it shall naught befallen as ye speak,
And God toforne, and farther over this,
I wot my father wise and ready is,
And that he me has bought, as ye me told,
So dear am I the more unto him hold.
That Greeks ben of high conditioun,
I wot eke well, but certain men shall find
As worthy folk within Troy town,
As conning, as persite, and as kind,
As ben betwixt Orcades and Inde,
And that ye could well your lady serve
I trow eke well, her thonke for to deserve.
But as to speak of love, iwis (she seide)
I had a lord, to whom I wedded was,
His whole mine heart was all till he deide,
And other love, as help me now Pallas,
There in mine heart nis, ne never was,
And that ye ben of noble and high kinrede,
I have well herd it tellen out of dread.
And y^ does me to have so great a wonder,
That ye woll scornen any woman so,
Eke God wot, love and I ben fer asonder,
I am disposed bet, so mote I go,
Unto my death plain and make woe,
What I shall after done, I can not say,
But truly as yet me list not play.
Mine heart is now in tribulatioun,
And ye in arms busy day by day,
Hereafter when ye wonnen have the town,
Paraventure then, so it happen may,
That when I see that I never ere sey,
Then woll I work yt I never ere wrought,
This word to you enough suffisen ought.
To morrow eke wol I speken with you feign,
So that ye touchen naught of this matere,
And when you list, ye may come here again,
And ere ye gone, thus much I say you here,
As help me Pallas, with her hairs clear,
If that I should of any Greek have routh,
It should be your selven by my troth.
I say not therefore that I woll you love,
Ne say not nay, but in conclusioun,
I mean well by God that sit above:
And therewithal she cast her eien down,
And began to sigh, and said, Troilus and Troy town
Yet bid I God, in quiet and in rest
I may you seen, or do mine heart breast.
But in effect, and shortly for to say,
This Diomede all freshly new again
Began preasen on, and fast her mercy pray,
And after this, the soothe for to saine,
Her glove he took, of which he was full feign,
And finally, when it was woxen eve,
And all was well, he rose and took his leve.
The bright Venus followed and aie taught
The way there broad Phoebus down alight,
And Cithera her chare horse over taught,
To whirle out of the Lion, if she might,
And Signifer his candles shows bright,
When that Creseide unto her bed went,
Within her fathers fair bright tent.
Retourning in her soul aye up and down
The words of this sudden Diomede,
His great estate, and peril of the town,
And that she was alone, and had need
Of friends help, and thus began to bread
The cause why, the soothe for to tell,
She took fully purpose for to dwell.
The morrow came, and ghostly for to speak,
This Diomede is come unto Creseide,
And shortly, least that ye my tale break,
So well he for himself spoke and seide,
That all her sighs sore down he leide,
And finally, the soothe for to saine,
He rest her the great of all her pain.
And after this, the story tells us,
That she him yave the fair bay stead,
The which she ones wan of Troilus,
And eke a brooch (and that was little need)
That Troilus was, she yave this Diomede,
And eke the bet from sorrow him to releve,
She made him wear a pencell of her sleve.
I find eke in stories elsewhere,
When through the body hurt was Diomede
Of Troilus, tho wept she many a tere,
When that she saw his wide wounds blede,
And that she took to kepen him good head,
And for to healen him of his smart,
Men saine, I not, that she yave him her heart.
But truly the story tells us,
There made never woman more woe
Than she, when that she falsed Troilus,
She said alas, for now is clean ago
My name in troth of love for evermo,
For I have falsed one the gentillest
That ever was, and one the worthiest.
Alas, of me unto the worlds end
Shall neither ben iwritten or isong
No good word, for these books woll me shend:
Irolled shall I been on many a ^ong,
Throughout the world my bell shall be rong,
And women most woll hate me of all,
Alas, that such a caas me should fall.
They woll saine, in as much as in me is,
I have hem done dishonor welaway,
* All be I not the first that did amiss,
What helps that, to done my blame away,
But sens I see there is no better way,
And that too late is now for me to rue,
To Diomede I woll algate be true.
But Troilus, sens I no better may,
And sens that thus departen ye and I,
Yet pray I God so yeve you right good day,
As for the gentillest knight truly
That ever I saw, to serven faithfully,
And best can aye his ladies honor keep,
And with that word she brast anon to weep.
And certes, you ne haten shall I never,
And friends love, that shall ye have of me,
And my good word, all should I liven ever,
And truly I would right sorry be,
For to seen you in adversite,
And guiltless I wot well I you leave,
And all shall pass, and thus take I my leave.
But truly how long it was bitwene,
That she forsook him for this Diomede,
There is none author tells it I wene,
Take every man now to his books head,
He shall no term finden, out of dread,
For though that he began to woe her sone,
Ere he her wan, yet was there more to done.
Ne me ne list this silly woman chide,
Ferther than the story woll de vise,
Her name alas is published so wide,
That for her gilt it ought enough suffice,
And if I might excuse her in any wise,
For she so sorry was for her untruth,
Iwis I would excuse her yet for routh.
This Troilus, as I before have told,
Thus drives forth, as well as he has might,
But often was his heart hot and cold,
And namely that ilke ninth night,
Which on the morrow she had him behight
To come again, God wot full little rest
Had he that night, nothing to sleep him lest.
The laurer crowned Phoebus, with his heat
Began in his course aie upward as he went,
To warmen of the East sea the waves wete,
And Circes daughter song, with fresh intent,
When Troilus his Pandare after sent,
And on the walls of the town they pleide,
To look, if they can seen aught of Creseide.
Till it was noone, they stooden for to see
Who that there came, and every manner wight
That came fro far, they saiden it was she,
Till that they coulden known him aright,
Now was his heart dull, now was it light,
And thus beyaped stooden for to stare
About naught, this Troilus and Pandare.
To Pandarus this Troilus tho seide
For aught I wot, before noone sikerly,
Into this town ne comes not here Creseide,
She has enough to done hardely
To winnen from her father, so trow I,
Her old father woll yet make her dine
Ere that she go, God yeve his heart pine.
Pandarus answered, it may well been certain
And for thy let us dine, I thee beseech,
And after noone then may thou come again,
And home they go, without more speech,
And comen again, but long may they seech,
Ere that they find that they after gape,
Fortune hem both thinks for to yape.
(Quoth. Troilus) I see well now that she
Is tarried with her old father so,
That ere she come, it woll nigh even be,
Come forth, I woll unto the yate go,
These porters ben vnkonning ^vermo,
And I woll done hem holden up the yate,
As naught ne were, although she come late.
The day goth fast, and after that came eve,
And yet came not to Troilus Creseide,
He looks forth by hedge, by tree, by greve,
And far his head over the wall he leide,
And at the last he turned him, and seide,
By God I wot her meaning now Pandare,
Almost iwis all new was my care.
Now doubtless this Lady can her good,
I wot she comes riding prively,
I commend her wisdom by mine hood,
She woll not maken people nicely
Gaure on her when y^ she comes, but softely
By night into the town she thinks ride,
And dear brother, think not long to abide.
We have naught else for to done iwis,
And Pandarus, now will thou trowen me,
Have here my troth, I see her, yond she is,
Heave up thine eyes man, may thou not see:
Pandare answerde, nay, so mote I thee,
Al wrong by God, with say thou man, where art,
That I see yonde afar, nis but a cart.
Alas thou say right sooth (quoth. Troilus)
But hardely it is not all for naught,
That in mine heart I now rejoice thus,
It is against some good, I have a thought,
Not I not how, but sens yt was wrought,
Ne felt I such a comfort dare I say,
She comes to night, my life yt durst I lay.
Pandarus answerde, it may be well enough,
And held with him of all that ever he said,
But in his heart he thought, and soft lough,
And to himself full soberly he said,
* From hasell wood, there jolly Robin played,
Shall come all that thou abidest here,
Ye, farewell all the snow of fern year.
The Wardein of the yates began to call
The folk, which yt without the yates were,
And bad hem driven in her beasts all,
Or all the night they must bleven there,
And far within the night, with many a tere,
This Troilus began homeward for to ride,
For well he sees it helps not to abide.
But nathelesse, he gladded him in this,
He thought he misacompted had his day,
And said, I understand have all amiss,
For thilke night I last Creseide sey,
She said I shall ben here, if that I may,
Ere that the Moon, O dear heart sweet,
The Lion pass out of this Ariete.
For which she may yet hold all her behest,
And on the morrow unto the yate he went,
And up and down, by West and eke by East
Upon the walls made he many a went,
But all for naught, his hope always him blent,
For which at night, in sorrow and sighs sore,
He went him home, withouten any more.
This hope all clean out of his heart fled,
He ne has whereon now longer for to hong,
But for y^ pain him thought his heart bled,
So were his throws sharp, and wonder strong,
For when he saw that she abode so long,
He nist what he judgen of it might,
Sens she has broken yt she him behight.
The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth day
After tho days ten, of which I told,
Betwixen hope and dread his heart say,
Yet somewhat trusting on her hestes old,
But when he saw she nolde her term hold,
He can now seen none other remedy,
But for to shape him soon for to die.
Therewith the wicked spirit, God us bless,
Which that men clepen wood jealousy,
Began in him crepe, in all this hevinesse,
For which because he would soon die,
He ne eat ne drunk for his melancholy,
And eke from every company he fled,
This was the life that all this time he led.
He so defaite was, that no manner man,
Uneath he might known there he went,
So was he lean, and thereto pale and wan,
And feeble, that he walks by potent,
And with his ire he thus himself shent:
But who so asked him whereof him smart,
He said, his harm was all about his heart.
Priam full often, and eke his mother dear,
His brethren and his sustren began him frain
Why he so sorrowful was in all his chere,
And what thing was ye cause of all his pain?
But all for naught, he nolde his cause plain,
But said, he felt a grievous malady
About his heart, and feign he would die.
So on a day he laid him down to sleep,
And so befell, that in sleep him thought,
That in a forest fast he walked to weep
For love of her ye him these pains wrought,
And up and down as he that forest sought,
He met he saw a Bore, with tuskes great,
That slept against the bright Suns heat.
And by this Bore, fast in her arms fold
Lay kissing aye his lady bright Creseide,
For sorrow of which, when he it began behold,
And for dispite, out of his sleep he breide,
And loud he cried on Pandarus, and seide,
O Pandarus, now know I crop and root,
I nam but dead, there nis none other boot.
My lady bright Creseide has me betrayed,
In whom I trusted most of any wight,
She elsewhere has now her heart apaied,
The blisfull Gods, through her great might,
Have in my dream ishewed it full right,
Thus in my dream Creseide have I behold,
And all this thing to Pandarus he told.
O my Creseide, alas, what subtelte?
What new lust? What beauty? What science?
What wrath of just cause have ye to me?
What guilt of me? What fell experience
Has me rafte alas thine advertence?
O trust, O faith, O deep assurance,
Who has me raft Creseide all my pieasaunce?
Alas, why let I you from hence go?
For which well nigh out of my wit I breide,
Who shall now trow on any oaths mo?
God wot I wend, O lady bright Creseide,
That every word was Gospel that ye seide,
* But who may bet beguile, if him list,
Than he on whom men wenen best to trist.
What shall I done, my Pandarus, alas?
I feel now so sharp a new pain,
Sens that there is no remedy in this caas,
That bet were it I with mine honds twain
My selven slow than always thus to plain,
For through ye death my woe should have an end,
There every day with life my self I shend.
Pandare answerde and said, alas y^ while
That I was borne, have I not said er this,
That dreams many a manner man beguile:
And why? For folk expounden hem amiss,
How dare thou saine that false thy lady is,
For any dream, right for thine own dread,
Let be this thought, thou can no dreams read.
Peraventure there thou dremest of this bore,
It may so be that it may signify
Her father, which that old is and eke hoar,
Again the sun lies on point to die,
And she for sorrow ginneth weep and cry,
And kisseth him, there he lies on the ground,
Thus should thou thy dreme aright expound
How might I then done (quoth. Troilus)
To know of this, yea were never so lite:
Now say thou wisely (quoth. this Pandarus)
My read is this, sens thou can well endite,
That hastily a letter thou her write,
Through which thou shall well bringen about
To know a sooth of that thou art in dout.
And see now why? for this dare I well sain,
That if so is, that she untrue be,
I cannot trowen that she woll write again,
And if she write, thou shall full sone isee,
As whether she has any liberte
To come again, or else in some clause
If she be let, she woll assign a cause.
Thou have not written to her sens she went,
Nor she to thee, and this I durst lay,
There may such cause ben in her intent,
That hardely thou wolt thy selven say,
That her abode the best is for you tway,
Now write her then, and thou shall feel sone
A sooth of all, there is no more to done.
Accorded ben to this conclusioun,
And that anon, these like lords two,
And hastily sat Troilus adoun,
And rolleth in his heart too and fro,
How he may best descriven her his woe,
And to Creseide his own lady dear,
He wrote right thus, and said as ye may here.
The copy of the Letter.
Right fresh flour, whose I have been and shall,
Withouten part of elsewhere servise,
With heart, body, life, lust, thought, and all,
I woeful wight in every humble wise
That tongue can tell, or heart may devise,
As often as matter occupies place,
Me recommaund unto your noble grace.
Likes it you to weten sweet heart,
As ye well know, how long time agon
That ye me left in aspre pains smart,
When that ye went, of which yet bote non
Have I non had, but ever worse bigon,
Fro day to day am I, and so mote dwell,
While it you list, of well and woe my well.
For which to you, with dredefull heart true,
I write (as he that sorrow drives to write)
My woe, that every hour increases new,
Complaining as I dare, or can endite,
And that defaced is, that may ye wite,
The tears, which that from mine eyes rain,
That wulden speak, if that they durst, and plain.
You first beseech I, that your eyes clear
To look on this defouled not hold:
And over all this, that ye my lady dear
Woll vouchsafe this letter to behold,
And by the cause eke of my cares cold,
That slaeth my wit, if aught amiss me start,
Foryeve it me mine own sweet heart.
If any servant durst or ought of right
Upon his lady pitously complain,
Then wene I that I ought be that wight,
Considred this, that ye these months twain
Have raried, there ye saiden sooth to saine,
But ten days ye nolde in host soiourne,
But in two months yet ye not return.
But for as much as me mote needs like
All that you list, I dare not plain more,
But humbly, with sorrowful sighs sike,
You right I mine vnrestie sorrows sore,
Fro day to day, desiring evermore
To known fully, if your will it were,
How ye have fared and don while ye be there.
Whose welfare and heal eke God increase
In honor such, that upward in degree
It grow always, so that it never cease,
Right as your heart aye can my lady free
Devise, I pray to God so mote it be,
And grant it, that you soon upon me rue,
As wisely as inall I am to you true.
And if you likes known of the fare
Of me, whose woe there may no wight discrive,
I can no more, but chest of every care,
At writing of this letter I was on live,
All ready out my woeful ghost to drive,
Which I delay, and hold him yet in hond,
Upon the sight of matter of your sond.
Mine eyes two, in vain with which I see,
Of sorrowful teres salt arne woxen wellis,
My song in plaint of mine adversite,
My good in harm, mine ease eke woxen hell is,
My joy in woe, I can sey now naught ellis,
But turned is, for which my life I wary
Every joy or ease in his contrary.
Which with your coming home again to Troy
Ye may redress, and more a thousand sith,
Than ever I had encreasen in me joy,
For was there never heart yet so blithe
To save his life, as I shall ben as swithe
As I you see, and though no manner routh
Can meuen you, yet thinks on your troth.
And if so be my gilt has death deserved,
Or if you list no more upon me see,
In guerdon yet of that I have you served,
Beseeeh I you, mine own lady free,
That hereupon ye woulden write me
For love of God, my right lodesterre,
That death may make an end of al my werre.
If other cause aught does you for to dwell,
That with your letter ye may me recomfort,
For though to me your absence is an hell,
With patience I woll my woe comfort,
And with your letter of hope I woll disport,
Now writes sweet, and let me thus not plain
With hope or death, delivers me fro pain.
Iwis mine own dear heart true,
I wot that when ye next upon me see
So lost have I mine heal and eke mine hew,
Creseide shall not conne known me,
Iwis mine herts day, my lady free,
So thursteth aye mine heart to behold.
Your beauty, that uneath my life I hold.
I say no more, all have I for to sey
To you well more than I tell may,
But whether that ye do me live or dey,
Yet pray I God, so yeve you right good day,
And fares well goodly fair fresh May,
As ye that life or death me may command,
And to your troth aye I me recomaund.
With heal such, that but ye yeven me
The same heal, I shall none heal have,
In you lies, when you list that it so be,
The day in which me clothen shall my grave,
And in you my life, in you might for to save
Me fro disease of all my pains smart,
And fare now well mine own sweet heart.
La vostre T.

This letter forth was sent unto Creseide,
Of which her answer in effect was this,
Full pitously she wrote again, and seide,
That all so soon as she might iwis,
She would come, and amend all that was amiss
And finally, she wrote and said then,
She would come, ye, but she nist when.
But in her letter made she such feasts,
That wonder was, and swore she loved him best,
Of which he found but bottomless bihests,
But Troilus thou may now East and West
* Pipe in an Iuie leaf, if yt thee lest,
Thus goth the world, god shild us fro mischaunce,
And every wight yt means troth avaunce.
Encreasen began the woe fro day to night
Of Troilus, for tarying of Creseide,
And lessen began his hope and eke his might,
For which all down he in his bed him leide,
He ne eat, drunk, ne slept, ne word seide,
Imagining aye that she was unkind,
For which well nigh he wext out of his mind.
This dreme, of which I told have eke beforne,
May never come out of his remembrance,
He thought aye well he had his lady lorne,
And that Jove's, of his purveyaunce,
Him showed had in sleep the signifiaunce
Of her untruth, and his disaventure,
And that the bore was showed him in figure.
For which he for Sibille his suffer sent,
That called was Cassandre eke all about,
And all his dream he told her ere he stent,
And her be sought assoilen him the dout,
Of the strong Bore, with tuskes stout,
And finally, within a little stound,
Cassandre him began thus his dreme expound.
She began first smile, and said, O brother dear,
If thou a sooth of this desire to know,
Thou must a few of old stories here,
To purpose how that fortune overthrow
Has lords old, through which within a throw
Thou shall this Bore know, and of what kind
He comen is, as men in books find.
Diane, which that wroth was and in ire,
For Greeks nolde done her Sacrifice,
Ne incens upon her Alter set on fire,
She for that Greeks gone her so despise,
Wrake her in a wonder cruel wise,
For with a Bore as great as ox in stall,
She made up frete her corn and vines all.
To slay yt Bore was all the country raised,
Among which there came this Bore to
A maid one of this world the best ipraised
And Meleager, lord of that country,
He loved so this fresh maiden free,
That with his manhood, ere he would stent,
This Bore he slough, and her the head he sent.
Of which, as old books tellen us,
There rose a conteke and great envy,
And of this lord descended Tideus
By line, or else old books lie:
But how this Meleager began to die
Through his mother, woll I you not tell,
For all too long it were for to dwell.
She told eke how Tideus, ere she stent,
Unto the strong city of Thebes
(To claimen kingdom of the city) went
For his fellawe dan Polimites,
Of which the brother dan Ethiocles
Full wrongfully or Thebes held yt strength,
This told she by proesse all by length.
She told eke how Hemonides affart,
When Tideus stough fifty knights stout,
She told eke all the Prophesies by heart,
And how that seven kings with her rout
Besiegeden the city all about,
And of the holy Serpent, and the well,
And of the furies all she began him tell.
Associat profugus Tideus primo Polynicem
Tidea ligatum docet insidiasque secundo,
Tertius Harmoniam canit, and vatem latitantem
Quartus habet reges ineuntes praelia septem
Lemniadum furiae quinto narrantur and anguis
Archemori bustum: sexto ludique seguuntur.
Dat Thebis vatem Graiorum septimus umbris
Octavo cecidit Tideus spes vita Pelasgum
Hippomedon nono moritur cum Parthenopeo
Fulmine percussus decimo Capaneus superatur
Undecimo perimunt sese per vulnera fratres
Argivum flentem, narrat duodenus and ignem.
Of Archinories burying, and the plays,
And how Amphiorax fill through the ground,
How Tideus was slain, lord of Argeis,
And how Hippomedon in a little stound
Was dreint, and dead Parthenope of wound,
And also how Campaneus the proud
With thunder dint was slain, y^ cried loud.
She began eke tell him how y^ either brother
Ethiocles and Polimites also
At a scarmishe each of hem slough other,
And of Argiues weeping and her mo,
And how the town was brent she told eke tho,
And tho descended down from lestes old
To Diomede, and thus she spoke and told.
This like Bore betokens Diomede,
Tideus son, that down descended is
Fro Meleager, that made the Bore to blede,
And thy Lady, where so she be iwis,
This Diomede her heart has, and she is his,
Weep if thou wolt, or leave, for out of dout
This Diomede is in, and thou art out.
Thou say not sooth (quoth. he) thou sorceresse,
With all thy false ghost of Prophecy,
Thou wenest been a great devineresse,
Now see thou not this fool of fantasy,
Painen her on ladies for to lie,
Away (quoth. he) there Jove's yeve the sorrow,
That shall be falls peraventure yet to morrow.
As well thou might lien on good Alceste,
That was of creatures (but men lie)
That ever weren, kindest, and the best,
For when her husbond was in ieopardie
To die himself, but if she would die,
She chese for him to die, and to hell,
And starfe anon, as us the books tell.
Cassandre goes, and he with cruel heart
Foryate his woe, for anger of her speech,
And fro his bed all suddenly he start,
As though all hole him had I made a seech,
And day by day he began require and seech
A sooth of this, with all his full cure,
And thus he drives forth his aventure.
Fortune which that permutation
Of all things has, as it is her committed,
Through purveyaunce and disposition
Of high Jove, as reigns shall ben flitted
Fro folk to folk, or when they shall ben smitted,
Began pull away the feathers bright of Troy
Fro day to day till they ben bare of joy.
Among all this, the fine of the ieopardie
Of Hector began approchen wonder blive,
The fate would his soul should vnbodie,
And shapen had a mean it out to drive,
Against which fate him helps not to strive,
But on a day to fighten began he wend,
At which alas, he caught his lives end.
For which me thinks every manner wight
That haunteth arms, ought to bewail
The death of him yt was so noble a knight:
For as he drough a king by thauentaile
Unware of this, Achilles through y^ maile
And through the body began him for to rive,
And thus the worthy knight was reft of live.
For whom, as old books tellen us,
Was made such woe, yt tongue it may not tell,
And namely, the sorrow of Troilus,
That next him was of worthiness ye well,
And in this woe began Troilus to dwell,
That what for sorrow, love, and for unrest,
Full often a day he had his heart breast.
But nathelesse, tho he gone him despair,
And dread aye that his lady was untrue,
Yet aye on her his heart began repair,
And as these lovers done, he sought aye new
To get again Creseide bright of hew,
And in his heart he went her excusing,
That Calcas caused all her tarying.
And often time he was in purpose great,
Himselven like a pilgrim to disguise,
To seen her, but he may not counterfeat,
To ben unknowen of folk that weren wise,
He find excuse aright that may suffice,
If he among the Greeks known were,
For which he wept full often many a tere.
To her he wrote yet often time all new,
Full pitously, he left it not for sloth,
Beseeching her, sens that he was true,
That she wol come again, and should her troth,
For which Creseide upon a day for routh,
I take it so, touching all this matere,
Wrote him again, and said as ye may here.
Cupides son, ensample of goodlihede,
O sword of knighthood, sours of gentilnesse,
How might a wight in turment and in dread,
And healelesse you send, as yet gladness,
I heartlesse, I sick, I in distress,
Sens ye with me, nor I with you may deal,
You neither send I heart may nor heal.
Your letters full the paper all iplainted,
Conceived has mine hearts pite,
I have eke seen with tears all depainted,
Your letter, and how that ye requiren me
To come again, which yet ne may not be,
But why, least yt this letter founden were,
No mention ne make I now for fere.
Grevous to me (God wot) is your unrest,
Your have, and that the Gods ordinance
It seems not ye take it for the best,
Nor other thing nis in your remembrance,
As thinks me, but only your pleasaunce,
But beth not wroth, and that I you beseech,
For that I tarry is all for wicked speech.
For I have heard well more than I wend
Touching us two, how things have istond,
Which I shall with dissimusing amend,
And beth not wroth, I have eke understond,
How yene do but holden me in hond,
But now no force, I can not in you guess,
But all troth and all gentilnesse.
Come I woll, but yet in such disjoint
I stond as now, that with year, or what day
That this shall be, that can I not appoint,
But in effect I pray you as I may
Of your good word, and of your friendship aye,
For truly while that my life may dure,
As for a friend ye may in me assure.
Yet pray I you, no evil ye ne take
That it is short which that I to you write,
I dare not there I am well letters make,
Ne never yet ne could I well endite,
* Eke great effect, men write in place lite,
Thentent is all, and not the letters space,
And fares well, God have you in his grace.
La vostre C.
This Troilus thought this letter all strange
When he it saw, and sorowfully he sight
Him thought it like a kalends of eschaunge,
But finally he full ne trowen might,
That she ne would him holden yt she hight,
For with full evell will list him to leve,
That loves well in such case, though him greve.
But nathelesse, men saine that at the last,
For any thing, men shall the soothe see,
And such a case betide, and that as fast,
That Troilus well understood that she
Nas not so kind as that her ought be,
And finally, he wot now out of dout,
That all is lost that he has been about.
Stood on a day in his melancholy
This Troilus, and in suspectioun
Of her, for whom he wend to dye,
And so befell, that throughout Troy town
As was yt guise, iborne was up and down
A manner cote armoure, as says the story,
Beforne Deiphebe, insigne of his victory.
The which cote, as tells Lollius,
Deiphebe it had rent fro Diomede
The same day,and when this Troilus
It saw, he began to taken of it head,
A vising of the length and of the bread,
And all the work, but as he began behold,
Full suddenly his heart began to cold.
As he that on the coler found within
A brooch, that he Creseide yave at morrow
That she from Troy must needs twin,
In remembrance of him, and of his sorrow,
And she him laid again her faith to borow,
To keep it aye: but now full well he wist,
His lady nas no longer on to trift.
He goth him home, and began full soon send
For Pandarus, and all this new chance,
And of this broch, he told him word and end,
Complaining of her hearts variaunce,
His long love, his troth, and his pennaunce,
And after death without words more,
Full fast he cried, his rest him to restore.
Then spoke he thus, O lady mine Creseide,
Where is your faith, and where is your behest?
Where is your love, where is your troth he seide,
Of Diomede have ye now all the fest?
Alas, I would have trowed at the least,
That sens ye nolde in truth to me stond,
That ye thus nolde have holden me in hond.
Who shall now trowen on any oaths mo?
Alas I never would have wend ere this,
That ye Creseide could have changed so,
Ne but I had agilt, and done amiss,
So cruel wend I not your heart iwis,
To slay me thus, alas your name of troth
Is now fordone, and that is all my routh.
Was there none other broche you list let,
To feast with your new love (quoth. he)
But thilke broche that I with teres wete
You yave, as for a remembrance of me,
None other cause alas, ne had ye,
But for dispite, and eke for that ye meant
All utterly to shown your intent.
Through which I see, y^ clean out of your mind
Ye have me cast, and I ne can nor may
For all this world within mine heart find,
To unloven you a quarter of a day:
In cursed time I borne was, welaway,
That you that done me all this woe endure,
Yet love I best of any creature.
Now God (quoth. he) me send yet the grace,
That I may meten with this Diomede,
And truly, if I have might and space,
Yet shall I make I hope his sides blede:
Now God (quoth. he) that aughtest taken head
To forthren troth, and wrongs to punice,
Why nilt thou don a vengeance of this vice.
O Pandarus, that in dremes for to trift
Me blamed have, and wont art often upbreide,
Now may thou seen thy self, if yt thee list,
How true is now thy niece bright Creseide:
In sundry forms (God it wot) he seide,
The gods shown both joy and tene
In sleep, and by my dreme it is now seen.
And certainly, withouten more speech,
From henceforth, as ferforth as I may,
Mine own death in arms woll I seech,
I retch not how soon be the day,
But truly Creseide, sweet may,
Whom I have with all my might iserved,
That ye thus done, I have it not deserved.
This Pandarus, that all these things herd,
And wist well he said a sooth of this,
He not a word again to him answered,
For sorry of his friends sorrow he is,
And shamed for his nece has done amiss,
And stant astonished of these causes twey,
As still as stone, o word ne could he sey.
But at the last, thus he spoke and seide,
My brother dear, I may do thee no more,
What should I saine, I hate iwis Creseide,
And God it wot, I woll hate her evermore:
And that thou me besoughtest done of yore,
Having unto mine honor ne my rest
Right no regard, I did all that thee lest.
If I did aught that might liken thee,
It is me lefe, and of this treason now,
God wot that it a sorrow is to me,
And dredelesse, for hearts ease of you,
Right feign I would amend it, wist I how:
And fro this world, almighty God I pray
Deliver her soon, I can no more say.
Great was the sorrow and plaint of Troilus,
But forth her course fortune aye began hold,
Creseide loves the son of Tideus,
And Troilus mote weep in cares cold,
Such is this world, who so it can behold,
* In each estate is little hearts rest,
God leve us to take it for the best.
In many cruel battle out of dread,
Of Troilus, this ilke noble knight,
(As men may in these old books read)
Was seen his knighthood and his great might,
And dredelesse his ire day and night
Full cruelly the Greeks aye abought,
And always most this Diomede he sought.
And often time (I find) that they met
With bloody strokes, and with words great,
Assaying how her spears were whette,
And God it wot, with many a cruel heat
Began Troilus upon his helm to beat,
But nathelesse, fortune it naught ne would
Of others hond that either dien should.
And if I had itaken for to write
The arms of this ilke worthy man,
Then would I of his battles endite,
And for that I to written first began
Of his love, I have said as I can
His worthy deeds, who so list hem here,
Read Dares, he can tell hem all ifere.
Beseeching every lady bright of hew,
And every gentill woman, what she be,
Albeit that Creseide was untrue,
That for that gilt ye be not wroth with me,
Ye may her gilt in other books see,
And gladder I would write, if you lest,
Penelopes troth, and good Alceste.
Ne say I not this all only for these men,
But most for women that betrayed be
Through falls folk, God yeve hem sorrow, amen,
That with her great wit and subtilte
Betraien you: and this meveth me
To speak, and in effect you all I pray
Beth ware of men, and herkeneth what I say.
Go little book, go my little tregedie,
There God my maker yet ere that I die,
So send me might to make some comedy:
But little book, make thou none envy,
But subject ben unto all poesy,
And kiss the steps whereas thou see pace
Of Vergil, Ovid, Homer, Lucan, and Stace.
* And for there is so great diversite
In English, and in writing of our tongue,
So pray I to God, that none miswrite thee,
Ne thee miss meter, for defaut of tongue:
And read where so thou be, or else song,
That thou be understand, God I beseech,
But yet to purpose of my rather speech.
The wrath (as I began you for to sey)
Of Troilus, the Greeks boughten dear,
For thousands his honds maden dey,
As he that was withouten any pere,
Save in his time Hector, as I can here,
But welaway, save only Gods will,
Dispitously him slough the fierce Achill.
And when that he was slain in this manner,
His light ghost full blisfully is went
Up to the hollownesse of the seventh sphere,
In his place leting everiche element,
And there he saw with full avisement
The erratike sterres, herkening armonie,
With sownes full of heavens melody.
And down from thence, fast he began avise
This little spot of earth, that with the sea
Enbraced is, and fully began despise
This wretched world, and held all vanite
To respect of the plain felicite
That is in heaven above: and at the last,
There he was slain, his looking down he cast.
And in himself he lough, right at the woe
Of hem that wepten for his death so fast,
And damned all our works that follows so
The blind lust, which that may not last,
And shoulden all our heart on heaven cast,
And forth he went, shortly for to tell,
There as Mercury sorted him to dwell.
Such fine has lo this Troilus for love,
Such fine has all his great worthiness,
Such fine has his estate royal above,
Such fine his lust, such fine has his noblesse,
Such fine has false worlds brotelnesse,
And thus began his loving of Creseide,
As I have told, and in this wise he deide.
O young fresh folks, he or she,
In which yt love up grows with your age,
Repaireth home from worldly vanite,
And of your herts up casts the visage
To thilke God, that after his image
You made, and thinks all nis but a fair,
This world that passes sone, as flowers fair.
And loves him, the which y^ right for love,
Upon a cross our souls for to bey,
First starfe and rose, and sit in heven above,
For he nill falsen no wight dare I sey,
That woll his heart all wholly on him ley,
And sens he best to love is, and most meek,
What needs fained loves for to seek.
* Lo here of painems cursed old rites,
Lo here what all her gods may avail,
Lo here this wretched worlds appetites,
Lo here the fine and guerdon for travail,
Of Jove, Apollo, of Mars, and such raskaile,
Lo here the form of old clerks speech
In poetry, if ye her books seech.
O moral Gower, this book I direct
To thee, and to the Philosophical Strode,
To vouchsafe there need is, to correct,
Of your benignities and zeales good,
And to the soothfast Christ that starfe on rood,
With all mine heart of mercy ever I pray,
And to the Lord aright, thus I speak and say,
Thou one, two, and three, eterne on live,
That raignest aie in three, two, and one,
Vncircumscript, and all may circumscrive,
Us from visible and invisible fone
Defend, and to thy mercy everichone,
So make us Jesus to thy mercy digne,
For love of maid, and mother thine benign.
Thus ends the fifth and last Book of Troilus.
The Testament of Creseide.
A Doly season till a careful dite,
Should corespond, and be equivolent,
Right so it was when I began to write
This tragedy, the weder right fervent,
When Aries in mids of the Lent,
Showers of hail can fro the North descend,
That scantly fro the cold I might me defend.
Yet nevertheless within mine orature
I stood, when Titan had his beams bright
Withdrawn down, and scyled under cure,
And fair Venus the beauty of the night,
Vpraise, and set unto the Weste full right,
Her golden face in oppositioun,
Of God Phoebus direct discending down.
Throughout y^ glass her beams brast so fair,
That I might see on every side me by,
The northren wind had purified the air,
And shed his misty clouds fro the sky:
The froste fresed, the blastes bitterly,
Fro pole Artike come whisking loud and shrill,
And caused me remove against my will.
For I trusted that Venus, loves Queen,
To whom sometime I hight obedience,
My faded heart, of love she would make grene,
And there upon with humble reverence,
I thought to pray her high magnificence,
But for great cold as then I let was,
And in my chamber to the fire can pas.
Though love be hot, yet in a man of age,
It kindles not so soon as in youtheed,
Of whom the blood is flowing in a rage,
And in the old, the courage dull and deed,
Of which the fire outward is best remeed,
To help by Phisike where that nature failed,
I am expert, for both I have assailed.
I made the fire, and beaked me about,
Then took I drink my spirits to comfort,
And armed me well fro the cold theroute,
To cut the winter night and make it short
I took a queare, and left all other sport,
Written by worthy Chaucer glorious,
Of fair Creseide, and lusty Troilus.
And there I found, after that Dioniede
Received had that lady bright of hew,
How Troilus nere out of his wit abrede,
And wept sore, with visage pale of hew:
For which wanhope his tears began renew,
While Esperus rejoysed him again:
Thus while in joy he lived, and while in pain.
Of her behest he had great comforting,
Trusting to Troy that she would make retour
Which he desired most of al earthly thing,
For why she was his only paramour:
But when he saw passed both day and hour
Of her gainecome, in sorrow can oppress
His woeful heart, in care and hevinesse.
Of his distress me needs not rehearse,
For worthy Chaucer in that same book,
In goodly terms, and in joly verse,
Compiled has his cares, who will look:
To break my sleep another queare I took,
In which I found the fatal desteny
Of fair Creseide, which ended wretchedly.
Who wot if al y^ Chaucer wrate, was true?
Nor I wot not if this narracion
Be authorized, or forged of the new,
Of some Poet by his invencion,
Made to report the lamentacion,
And woeful end of this lusty Creseide,
And what distress she was in or she deide.
When Diomede had al his appetite,
And more fulfilled of this fair lady,
Upon another set was all his delight,
And send to her a libel repudy,
And her excluded fro his company:
Then desolate she walked up and down,
As some men saine, in the court as commune.
O fair Creseide, the flower and a per se
Of Troy and Greece, how were thou fortunate,
To change in filth all thy feminite,
And be with fleshly lust so maculate,
And go among the Greeks early and late,
So giglotlike, taking thy foul pleasaunce?
I have pite thee should fall such mischaunce.
Yet nevertheless, with ever men deem or say
In scornful language of thy brutelnesse,
I shall excuse, as ferforth as I may,
Thy womanhed, thy wisdom and fairness:
The which fortune has put to such distress,
As her pleased, and nothing through the gilt
Of thee, through wicked langage to be spilt.
This fair lady on this wise destitute
Of al comfort and consolatioun,
Right prively without fellowship or refute,
Disheuelde, passed out of the town
A mile or two unto a mansioun,
Bilded full gaie, where her father Calcas
Which then among y^ Greeks dwelling was.
When her he saw, the cause he began enquire
Of her coming: she said sighing full sore,
Fro Diomede had gotten his desire,
He woxe weary and would of me no more.
quoth. Calcas, Daughter weep thou not therefore
Paraventure al comes for the best,
Welcome to me thou art full dear a gest.
This old Calcas, after the law was tho
Was keeper of the temple as a priest,
In which Venus and her son Cupido
Were honored, and this chamber was nest,
To which Creseide with bale enewed in breast,
Used to pass, her prayers for to say,
While at the last upon a solemn day,
As custom was, the people far and nere
Before the noone unto the temple went,
With sacrifice devout in their manner,
But still Creseide heuie in her intent,
Into the Church would not her self present,
For giving as of the people any deeming,
Of her expulse fro Diomede the King.
But passed into a secret oratore,
Where she might weep her woeful destiny,
Behind her back she closed fast the door,
And on her knees bare fell down in hie,
Upon Venus and Cupide angerly,
She cried out, and said in this wise,
Alas that ever I made you sacrifice.
Ye gave me ones a divine responsaile,
That I should be the flower of love in Troy,
Now am I made an unworthy outwaile,
And al in care translated is my joy:
Who shall me gide, who shall me now conuoie,
Since I fro Diomede, and noble Troilus
Am clean excluded, as abject odious?
O false Cupide, none is to wite but thou
And the mother of love, that blind goddace,
Ye caused me understand always and trow
The seed of love was sown on my face,
And aie grew grene through your sople grace
But now alas, that seed with frost is slain,
And I fro lovers left and all forlaine.
When was this said, down in an ecstasy
Ravished in spirit, in a dream she fell,
And by apparaunce herd where she did lie,
Cupide the King tinging a silver bell,
Which men might here fro heven into hell:
At whose sound before Cupide aperes,
The seven planets discending fro their speres.
Which has power of al thing generable,
To rule and stere by their great influence,
Weder and wind, and course variable:
And first of all Saturn gave his sentence,
Which gave to Cupide litel reverence,
But as a boistous chorle in his manner,
Came crabbedly with austrine look and chere.
His face frounsed, his lere was like ye led,
His teeth chattered, and sheuered with y^ chin,
His eien drouped hole sonken in his heed,
Out at his nose the mildrop fast began rin,
With lips blo, and chekes lean and thin,
The Iseickeles that fro his here down hong,
Was wonder great, and as a spear as long.
Attour his belte his liart locks lay,
Feltred vnfaire, over fret with frostes hoore,
His garment and his gate full gay of graie,
His widdred wede fro him y^ wind out wore,
A boistous bow within his hand he bore,
Under his girdle a fashe of felone flains,
Feddred with ise, and heeded with holstains.
Then Jupiter right fair and amiable,
God of the sterres in the firmament,
And norice to all thing generable,
Fro his father Saturn far different,
With burly face, and brows bright and brent,
Upon his heed a garlond wonders gaie,
Of flours fair, as it had been in May.
His voice was clear, as cristal was his eien,
As golden wier so glittering was his hear,
His garment and his gite full gaie of grene,
With golden listes gilte on every gear,
A burly brande about his middle he bear,
And in his right hand he had a grounden spear,
Of his father, y^ wroth fro us to bear.
Next after him came Mars y^ God ofrei,
Of strife, debate, and all discensioun,
To chide and fight, as fierce as any fire,
In hard harness hewmonde and habergioun,
And on his haunch a rusty fell fauchoun,
And in his hand he had a rusty sword,
Writhing his face, with many angry word.
Shaking his brande, before Cupide he come
With reed visage, and grisly glowing eien,
And at his mouth a blubber stood of foam,
Like to a Bore, whetting his tuskes kene,
Right tulsure like, but temperaunce in tene,
An horn blewe with many boustous brag,
Which all this world with war has made to wagge.
Then fair Phoebus, lantern and lamp of light,
Of man and beast, both fruit and flourishing,
Tender norice, and banisher of night,
And of the world, causing by his moving
And influence, life in all earthly thing,
Without comfort of whom of force to naught,
Must go die, yt all this world has wrought.
As king royal, he rode upon a chare,
The which Phiton sometime gided unright,
The brightness of his face when it was bare,
Non might behold, for persing of his sight:
This golden carte with fiery beams bright,
Four yoked stedes full different of hew,
Bout bait or tiring through y^ spheres drew.
The first was sord, with mane as reed as rose
Called Eoye into the Orient,
The second stead to name, hight Ethiose,
Whitely and pale, and somdele ascendent,
The third Perose, right hot and eke fervent,
The fourth was black, called Phlegone,
Which rolleth Phoebus down into the sea.
Venus was there present, that gods gay
Her sons quarrel to defend and make
His own complaint, cladde in a nice array
The one half green, the other half sable blake
White here as Gold, kembet and shede abake,
But in her face seemed great variaunce,
While parfite truth, and whiles inconstaunce.
Under smiling she was dissimulate,
Provocative with blinkes amorous,
And suddenly changed and alterate,
Angry, as any ferpent venomous:
Right pungitive with words odious,
Thus variaunt she was who list take keep,
* With one eye laugh, and with the other weep.
In tokening that all fleshly paramour,
Which Venus has in rule and governaunce,
Is sometime sweet, sometime bitter and sour,
Right unstable and full of variaunce:
Minged with careful joy and false pleasaunce,
Now hot, now cold, now blithe, now full of woe,
Now grene as lefe, now widred and ago.
With book in hand, then come Mercurious
Right eloquent and full of rethorie,
With polite terms and delicious,
With pen and ink to report al ready,
Setting songs, and singing merely,
His hode was reed hecled attour his croun,
Like til a Poet of the old fasioun.
Boxes he bare with fine electuares,
And sugared siropes for digestion,
Spices belonging to the potiquares,
With many wholesome sweet confection:
Doctor in phisike cledde in a scarlet goun,
And furred well as such one ought to be,
Honest and good, and not a word couth lie.
Next after him come lady Sinthia,
The last of all, and swiftest in her sphere,
Of color blake, busked with horns two,
And in the night she lists best tapere,
Hawe as the leed, of color nothing clear,
For all the light she boroweth at her brother
Titan, for of her self she has none other.
Her gite was gray and full of spots blake,
And on her breast a chorle painted full even,
Bearing a bushe of thorns on his bake,
Which for his theft mit clime no ner y^ heven:
Thus when they gadred were y^ gods seven,
Mercurius they chosed with one assent,
To be forespeker in the Parliment.
Who had been there and liking for to here
His faconde tongue and terms exquisite,
Of rethorike the practike he might lere,
In brefe sermon, a preignant sentence write:
Before Cupide valing his cappe a lite,
Sper is the cause of that vocacioun,
And he anon shewde his entencioun.
Lo (quoth. Cupide) who wol blaspheme y^ name
Of his own God, either in word or deed,
To all gods he does both loss and shame
And should have bitter pains to his mede:
I say this by yonder wretch Creseide,
The which through me was sometime flour of love
Me and my mother she stately can reprove.
Saying of her great infelicite
I was the cause, and my mother Venus
She called a blind gods and might not se,
With sclaunder and defame injurious,
Thus her living unclean and lecherous,
She would retorte in me and my mother,
To whom I shewde my grace above al other.
And sith ye are al seven deficate,
Perticipant of divine sapience,
This great injury don to our hie estate,
Me think with pain we should make recompense
Was never to gods done such violence,
As well for you as for my self I say,
Therefore go help to revenge I you pray.
Mercurius to Cupide gave answer
And said, sir king, my counsel is that ye
Refer you to the hiest planet here,
And take to him the lowest of degree,
The pain of Creseide for to modifie,
As God Saturn with him take Sinthia,
I am content (quoth. he) to take they two.
Then thus proceeded Saturn and the Moon,
When they the matter ripely had degest,
For the dispite to Cupide that she had done,
And to Venus open and manifest,
In all her life with pain to be oprest,
And turment sore, with sickness incurable,
And to all lovers be abominable.
This doleful sentence Saturn took in hand,
And passed down where careful Creseide lay,
And on her heed he laid a frosty wande,
Then lawfully on this wise began he say,
Thy great fairness, and al thy beauty gay,
Thy wanton blood, and eke thy golden here,
Here I exclude fro thee for evermeere.
I change thy mirthe into melancoly,
Which is the mother of all pensiveness,
Thy moyster and thy hete, into cold and dry,
Thine insolence, thy play, and thy wantonness
To great disease, thy pomp and thy richesse,
Into mortal need and great penury,
Thou suffer shall, and as a beggar die.
O cruel Saturn, froward and angry,
Hard is thy dome, and too malicious,
Of fair Creseide why have thou no mercy,
Which was so sweet, gentill and amorous,
Withdraw thy sentence and be gracious,
As thou were never, so shows through thy deed,
A wrekeful sentence given on Creseide.
Then Sinthia, when Saturn past away,
Out of her seat, descended down blive,
And reed a bill on Creseide where she lay,
Containing this sentence diffinitive:
Fro heal of body here I thee deprive,
And to thy sickness shall be no recure,
But in dolor thy days to endure.
Thy crystal iyen menged with blood I make,
Thy voice so clear, unpleasant here and hace,
Thy lusty lere overspred with spots blake,
And lumps hawe appering in thy face,
Where thou come each man shall fly the place,
Thus shall thou go begging fro house to house
With cup and clapper like a Lazarous.
This doolie dream, this ugly visioun
Brought till an end, Creseide fro it awoke,
And all that court and convocatioun,
Vanished away: then rose she up and took
A polished glass, and her shadow couth look,
And when she saw her visage so deformate,
If she in heart were woe, I ne wite God wate.
Weping full sore, lo what it is (quoth. she)
With froward langage to move and stere
Our crabbed Gods, and so is seen on me,
My blaspheming now have I bought full dear,
All yearthly joy and mirthe I set arere,
Alas this day, alas this woeful tide,
When I began with my Gods to chide.
Be this was said, a child came fro the hall
To warn Creseide the supper was ready,
First knocked at the door, and eft couth call,
Madame, your father bids you cum in hie
He has marveile so long on grofe ye lie,
And says your beads bethe to long somdele,
The Gods wot all your intent full well.
(Quoth. she) fair child, go to my father dear
And pray him come to speak with me anon,
And so he did, and said daughter what chere,
Alas (quoth. she) father, my mirth is gone,
How so (quoth. he) and she can all expon,
As I have told, the vengeance, and the wrake,
For her trespass, Cupide on her couth take.
He looked on her ugly Lepers face,
The which before was white as Lely flower,
Wringing his hands, often times said alace
That he had lived to see that woeful hour:
For he knew well that there was no socour
To her sickness, and that doubled his pain,
Thus was there care inow betwixt hem twain.
When they togider mourned had full lang,
(Quoth. Creseide) father, I would not be kend,
Therefore in secret wise ye let me gang
To yon Hospital at the tounes end:
And thider some meat for charity me send,
To live upon, for all mirthe in this earth
Is fro me gone, such is my wicked wearth.
When in a mantill, and a Bever hat,
With cup and clapper wonder prively,
He opened a secret gate and out thereat
Conveied her, that no man should epsy,
There to a village half a mile thereby,
Delivered her in at the Spittell house,
And daily sent her part of his almous.
Sum knew her well, and sum had no knowledge
Of her, because she was so deformate,
With biles blake overspred in her visage,
And her fair color faded and alterate:
Yet they presumed for her hie regrate,
And still mourning, she was of noble kin,
With bitter will there they took her in.
The day passed, and Phoebus went to rest,
The clouds blake overwheled all the Sky,
God wot if Creseide were a sorrowful gest,
Seeing that uncouth fare and herborie:
But meat or drink, she dressed her to lie
In a dark corner of the house alone,
And on this wise weping she made her moan.
The Complaint of Creseide.
O Soppe of sorrow sonken into care,
O caitife Creseide now and evermare,
Gone is thy joy and all thy mirth in earth,
Of all blithnesse now art thou blake and bare
There is no salve may help thy sare,
Fell is thy fortune, wicked is thy werth
Thy bliss is vanished and thy bale vnberde,
Under y^ great God if I graven ware,
Where men of Greece ne yet of Troie mit herd.
Where is thy chamber wantonly beseen,
With burly bed and bankers brouded been,
Spices and wine to thy colatioun,
The cups all of gold and silver shene,
Thy sweet meats served in plates clean,
With savery sauce of a good fashioun,
Thy gay garments with many goodly goun,
Thy plesaunt saune pinned with golden pene,
All is arere thy great royal renoun.
Where is thy gardien with thy greces gay
And fresh flowers, which the queen Floray
Had painted pleasauntly in every way,
Where thou were wont full merrily in May
To walk, and take the dew by it was day,
And hear the Merle and Mavile many one,
With Ladies fair in carrolling to gone,
And see the royal renkes in their ray.
This leper loge take for thy goodly boure,
And for thy bed, take now a bounche of stro,
For wailed wine and meats thou had tho,
Take mouled bread, pirate, and sider sour
But cup and clapper is all now ago.
My clear voice and my courtly carrolling,
Is rank as roke, full hidous here and hace
Deformed is the figure of my face,
To look on it no people has liking,
So sped in sight, I say with sore sighing
Lying among the leper folk alas.
O Ladies fair of Troy and Greece attend
My freile fortune, mine infelicite,
My great mischief which no man can amend,
And in your mind a mirror make of me:
As I am now paraventure that ye,
For all your might may come to y^ same end,
Or else worse, if any worse may be,
Beware therefore approches nere your end.
* Naught is your fairness but a fading flower,
Naught is your famous laud and hie honor,
But wind inflate in other men's ears,
Your rosing read to rotting shall retoure,
Exemple make of me in your memore:
Which of such things, woeful witness bears,
* Al wealth in earth, as wind away it wears,
Beware therefore approches nere your hour.
Thus chiding with her drery disteny,
Weping, she woke the Night fro end to end,
But all in vain her dole, her careful cry
Might not remedy, ne yet her mourning mend,
A leper Lady rose, and to her wend,
And said, Why spurns thou again y^ wall,
To slay thy self, and mende nothing at all?
Since y^ thy weping but doubleth thy woe,
* I counsel thee make virtue of a need,
Go learn to clappe thy clapper to and fro,
And learn after ye law of lepers led.
There was no bote but forthwith then she yede
Fro place to place, while cold and hunger sore
Compelled her to be a rank beggore.
That same time of Troy the garnisoun,
Which had the chieftain worthy Troilus
Throu jeopardy of war had stricken down,
Knights of Greece in number marveilous,
With great triumph, and laud victorious,
Again to Troy right royally they rode,
The way where Creseide with y^ leper stood.
Seeing that company come, al with o stevin
They gave a cry, and shoke cupps good speed
Worthy lords, for Gods love of hevin,
To us seper, part of your almose deed:
Then to her cry noble Troilus took head,
Having pite, nere by the place began pas,
Where Creseide sat, not weting with she was.
Then upon him she kest up both her iyen,
And with a blinke it come in til his thought,
That he sometime her face before had sein,
But she was in soch plite he knew her naught,
Yet then her look into his mind he brought,
The sweet visage, and amorous blenking,
Offaire Creseid, sometime his own derling,
No wonder was, suppose in mind that he
Took her figure so sone, and lo now why,
* The Idol of a thing in case may be
So deep enprinted in the fantasy,
That it deludeth the wits outwardly,
And so apereth in form and like estate,
Within the mind, as it was figurate.
A spark of love then til his hartcouth spring,
And kindeled his body in a fire,
With hot fever, in swette, and trembling
Him took, while he was ready to exspire,
To hear his shield his breast began to tire,
Within a while he changed many a hew,
And nevertheles not one an other knew.
For knightly pite and memoriell
Of fair Creseide, a girdel began he take,
A purse of gold and many a gaie jewel,
And in the skirt of Creseide down began shake:
Then rode away, and not a word he spoke,
Pensife in heart while he came to the town,
And for great care often since almost fell down.
The lepre folk to Creseide then couth draw,
To see the equal distributioun
Of the almose, but when the gold they saw,
Each one to other privily can roun,
And said, yon lord has more affectioun,
How ever it be, unto yon Lazarous
Than to us al, we know by his almous.
What lord is yon (quoth. she) have ye no feel,
That does to us so great humanite?
Yes quoth. a lepre man, I know him well
Sir Troilus it is, a knight gentle and free.
When Creseide understood that it was he,
Stiffer than stele there sterte a bitter stound,
Throughout her heart, and fill down to y^ ground.
When she over come with sighing sore and sad,
With many a careful cry and cold atone,
Now is my breast with stormy stoundes stad,
Wrapped in woe wretchfull will of one,
Then fell in swoun full often or she would fone,
And ever in her swouning cried she thus,
O false Creseide, and true knight Troilus.
Thy love, thy laud, and all thy gentleness,
I counted small in my prosperity,
So effated I was in wantonness,
And clambe upon the fickell whele so hie,
All faith and love I promitted to thee,
Was in thy self fekell and furious,
O false Creseide, and true knight Troilus.
For love of me thou kept countenance,
Honest and chaste in conversation,
Of all women protector and defense
Thou were, and helped their opinion:
My mind and fleshly foul affection
Was inclined to lusts lecherous,
Fie false Creseide, O true knight Troilus.
Lovers beware, and take good head about
Whom that ye love, for when ye suffer pain,
I let you wit there is right few throughout,
Whom ye may trust to have true love again,
Prove when ye woll your labor is in vain,
Therefore I read ye take them as ye find,
For they are sad as Wedercocke in wind.
Because I know the great unstableness,
Brittle as glass, unto my self I say,
Trusting in other as great brutelnesse,
As inconstaunt, and as untrue of fay:
Though some be true, I wot rit few ar they,
Who finds truth, let him his lady ruse,
None but my self as now I woll accuse.
When this was said, with paper she sat down
And in this manner made her testament:
Here I bequethe my corse and carioun,
With worms and with Toodes to be rent,
My cup, my clapper, and mine ornament,
And all my gold, these lepre folk shall have,
When I am dedde, to bury me in grave.
This royal ring set with this Ruby red,
Which Troilus in dowry to me send,
To him again I leave it when I am dedde,
To make my careful death unto him kend:
Thus I conclude shortly and make an end,
My spirit I leave to Diane where she dwells,
To walk with her in wast wodes and wells.
O Diomede thou have both broche and belt,
Which Troilus gave me, in tokening
Of his true love, and with that word she swelt,
And soon a leaper man took off the ring,
Then buried her withouten tarying,
To Troilus forthwith the ring he bare,
And of Creseide the death he began declare.
When he had heard her great infirmite,
Her legacy, and lamentacioun,
And how she ended in such poverte,
He swelt for woe and fell down in a swoun,
For sorrow his heart to brast was boun,
Sighing full sadly said, I can no more,
She was untrue, and woe is me therefore.
Some says he made a tomb of marble gray,
And wrote her name and superscripcioun,
And laid it on her grave whereas she lay,
In golden letters, containing this reasoun:
Lo fair Fadies, Creseide of Troie town,
Sometime counted the flower of womanhed,
Under this stone, late leper lies dedde.
Now worthy women in this balade short,
Made for your worship and instruction,
Of charity I monish and exhort,
Minge not your love with false discepcion:
Bear in your mind this sore conclusion
Of fair Creseide, as I have said before,
Since she is dedde, I speak of her no more.
The Legend of good Women.
For that some Ladies in the Court took offense at Chaucers large speeches
against the untruth of Women, the Queen enjoined him to compile this Book in
the commendation of sundry Maidens and Wives, who showed themselves faithful to
faithless men.
A Thousand times I have heard men tell,
That there is joy in heaven, and pain in hell,
And I accord it well that it is so,
But nathelesse yet wot I well also,
That there nis non dwelling in this country,
That either has in heaven or in hell ibe,
Ne may of it none other ways witten,
But as he heard said, or found it written,
For by assay there may no man it preve.
But God forbede but men should leve
Well more thing than they have seen with iye,
Men shall not we^en every thing a lie
But if himself it sees, or else it does,
For God wot thing is never the less soth,
Though every wight ne may it not isee.
Bernarde the Monk ne saugh all parde,
Then mote we to books that we find,
(Through which y^ old things ben in mind)
And to the doctrine of the old wise,
Yeve credence, in every skilful wise,
That tellen of the old appreued stories,
Of holiness, of reigns, of victories,
Of love, of hate, and other sundry things,
Of which I may not make rehearsings:
* And if that old books were away,
Ilorne were of all remembrance the kay.
Well ought us then, honouren and beleve
These books, there we han none other preve.
And as for me, though that I can but lite,
On books for to read I me delight,
And to hem yeve I faith and full credence,
And in mine heart have hem in reverence
So hertely, that there is game none,
That fro my books makes me to gone,
But it be seldom on the holy day,
Save certainly, when yt the month of May
Is comen, and that I hear the fowls sing,
And that the flowers ginnen for to spring,
Farewell my book, and my devotion,
Now have I then eke this condition,
That of all the flowers in the Mede,
Then love I most these flowers white and read,
Soch that men callen Daisies in our town,
To hem I have so great affectioun,
As I said erst, when comen is the May,
That in my bed there daweth me no day,
That I nam up and walking in the Mede,
To seen this flower against the Sun sprede,
When it up rises early by the morrow,
That blisfull sight softeneth all my sorrow,
So glad am I, when that I have presence
Of it, to done it all reverence,
As she that is of all flours flower,
Fulfilled of all virtue and honor,
And every ilike fair, and fresh of hew
And ever I love it, and ever ilike new,
And ever shall, till that mine heart die,
All swear I not, of this I woll not lie.
There loved no wight hotter in his life,
And when that it is eve I run blithe,
As soon as ever the Sun ginneth West,
To seen this flower, how it woll go to rest,
For fear of night, so hates she derkenesse,
Her chere is plainly spread in the brightness
Of the Sun, for there it woll unclose:
Alas that I ne had English rhyme, or prose
Suffisaunt, this flower to praise aright,
But helps ye, y^ han conning and might,
Ye lovers that can make of sentement,
In this case ought ye be diligent,
To forthren me somewhat in my labor,
Whether ye been with ye lefe or with ye flour,
For well I wot, that ye han here beforne
Of making, ropen, and had always the corn,
And I come after, glening here and there,
And am full glad, if I may find an ear,
Of any goodly word that ye han left,
And though it happen me to rehearsen eft,
That ye han in your fresh songs said,
Forbeareth me, and beth not evil apayd,
Since that ye se, I do it in the honor
Of love, and eke of service of the flour,
Whom that I serve, as I have wit or might,
She is the clerenesse and the very light,
That in this derke world me wint and ledeth
The heart within my sorrowful breast you dredeth,
And loves so sore, that ye ben verily
The maistres of my wit, and nothing I,
My word, my works, is knit so in your bond
That as an harp obeieth to the hand,
And make it soune after his fingering,
Right so mow ye out of mine heart bring,
Soch voice, right as you list, to laugh or pain,
Be ye my guide, and Lady souerain,
As to mine yearthly God, to you I call,
Both in this work, and my sorrows all,
But wherefore that I spoke to yeve credence
To old stories, and done hem reverence,
And that men musten more thing bileve
That men may seen at iye or else preve,
That shall I sein, when that I see my time,
I may not all atones speak in rhyme,
My busy ghost, that thursteth always new,
To seen this flour so young, so fresh of hew,
Constrained me, with so gredy desire,
That in my heart I feel yet the fire,
That made me rise ere it were day,
And this was now the first morrow of May,
With dreadful heart, and glad devotion
For to been at the resurrection
Of this flower, when that it should unclose,
Again the Sun, that rose as red as rose,
That in the breast was of the beast that day,
That Angenores daughter ladde away:
And down on knees anon right I me set,
And as I could, this fresh flower I grette:
Kneeling always, till it unclosed was,
Upon the small, soft, sweet gras,
That was with flowers sweet embrouded all,
Of such sweetness, and soch odor over all,
That for to speak of gomme, herb, or tree,
Comparison may not imaked be,
For it surmounteth plainly all odoures,
And of rich beauty of flowers,
Forgotten had the earth his poor estate
Of Winter, that him naked made and mate,
And with his sword of cloud so sore greved,
Now has the attempre sun all that releved
That naked was, and clad it new again,
The small fowls of the season fain,
That of the panter and the net been escaped,
Upon the fouler, that hem made awhaped
In Winter, and destroyed had her brood,
In his dispite hem thought it did hem good
To sing of him, and in her song despise
The foul chorle, that for his couetise,
Had him betrayed, with his Sophistry,
This was her song, The fouler we defy,
And all his craft: and some songen clear,
Lays of Love, that joy it was to here,
In worshipping and praising of her make,
And for the new blisfull Summers sake,
Upon the branches full of blosmes soft,
In her dilite, they turned hem full often,
And songen, blissed be saint Valentine,
For on his day I chese you to be mine,
Withouten repenting mine heart sweet,
And therewithal her bekes gonnen mete,
Yelding honor, and humble obeisaunce
To love and didden her other observaunce
That longs unto love, and unto nature,
Constre we that as you list, I do no cure:
And tho that had done unkindness,
As does the Tidife, for new fanglenesse,
Besought mercy of her trespasing,
And humbly song her repenting,
And sworen on the blosmes to be true,
So that her makes would upon hem rue,
And at the last maden her acorde,
All found they Danger for the time a lord,
Yet Pite, through his strong gentill might,
Foryave, and made Mercy passen right
Through Innocence, and ruled Courtesy:
But I ne cleape it not Innocence folly,
Ne false pite, for virtue is the mean,
As Eticke says, in soch manner I mean.
And thus these foul, void of all malice,
Acordeden to Love, and laften vice
Of hate, and song all of one acorde,
Welcome Summer, our governor and lord.
And Zephirus, and Flora gentelly,
Yave to the flowers soft and tenderly,
Her swote breath, and made hem for to sprede,
As God and Goddess of the flourie Mede,
In which me thought I might day by day,
Dwellen always, the joly month of May,
Withouten sleep, withouten meat or drink,
Adowne full softly I began to sink,
And leaning on my elbow and my side,
The long day I shope me for to abide,
For nothing else, and I shall not lie,
But for to look upon the Daisie,
That well by reason men it call may
The Daisie, or else the iye of the day,
The emprise, and flower of flowers all,
I pray to God that fair mote she fall,
And all that loven flowers, for her sake,
But nathelesse, ne wene not that I make
In praising of the flower again the lefe,
No more than of the corn again the shefe:
For as to me nis lever none ne other,
I nam withholden yet with never another,
Ne I not who serves lefe, ne who the flower,
Well brouken they her service or labor,
For this thing is all of another tonne,
Of old story, er soch thing was begone,
When yt the sun out the South began West,
And that this flower began close, and began to rest,
For derknes of the night, the which she dred,
Home to mine house full swiftly I me sped
To gone to rest, and early for to rise,
To seen this flower to sprede, as I devise,
And in a little herber that I have,
That benched was on turves fresh igrave,
I bad men should me my couche make,
For deintie of the new Summers sake,
I bad hem strawen flowers on my bed,
When I was laid, and had mine iyen hedde,
I fell a sleep, and slept an hour or two,
Me met how I lay in the Meadow tho,
To seen this flower, that I love so and dread,
And from a far came walking in the Mede
The God of Love, and in his hand a Queen,
And she was clad in royal habit grene,
A fret of gold she had next her here,
And upon that a white croune she bear,
With flourouns small, and I shall not lie,
For all the world right as a Daisie
Icrouned is, with white leaves lite,
So were the florouns of her croune white,
For of o perle fine oriental,
Her white croune was imaked all,
For which the white croune, above the grene,
Made her like a Daisie for to seem,
Considred eke her fret of gold above:
Iclothed was this mighty God of Love
In silk embroided, full of grene greves,
In which a fret of red rose leves,
The freshest sens the world was first begone,
His gilt here was crouned with a son,
Instead of gold, for hevinesse and weight,
Therewith me thout his face shone so bright
That well uneaths might I him behold,
And in his hand, me thought I saw him hold
Two fiery darts, as the gledes read,
And Angelike his wings saw I sprede:
And all be that men sain, that blind is he,
Algate me thought that he might se,
For sternely on me he began behold,
So that his loking does mine heart cold,
And by the hand he held this noble Queen,
Crouned with white, and clothed al in green,
So womanly, so benign, and so meke,
That in this world though yt men would seek,
Half her beauty should they not find
In creature that formed is by kind,
And therefore may I sain as thinks me,
This song in praising of this Lady fre.
Hide Absolon thy gilte tresses clear,
Hester lay thou thy meekness all adoun,
Hide Ionathas all thy friendly manner,
Penelopee, and Marcia Catoun,
Make of your wifehode no comparisoun,
Hide your beauties, Isoude and Helein,
My Lady comes, that all this may distain.
Thy fair body let it not appear,
Lavine, and thou Lucrece of Rome town,
And Polixene, that boughten love so dear,
And Cleopatras, with all thy passioun,
Hide your truth of love, and your renoun,
And thou Tisbe, that have of love soch pain,
My Lady comes, that all this may distain.
Hero, Dido, Laodomia, al ifere,
And Phillis, hanging for Demophoun,
And Canace, espied by thy chere,
Hipsiphile betrayed with Iasoun:
Makes of your troth neither boste ne soun,
Nor Hipermistre, or Ariadne, ye twain,
My Lady comes, that all this may distain.
This balade may full well isongen be,
As I have said erst, by my Lady fre,
For certainly, all these mow not suffice,
To apperen with my Lady in no wise,
For as the Sun woll the fire distain,
So passes all my lady soverain,
That is so good, so fair, so debonaire,
I pray to God that ever fall her fair,
For and comfort ben of her presence,
I had been dead, withouten any defense,
For dread of Loves words, and his chere,
As when time is, hereafter ye shall here.
Behind this God of Love upon the grene,
I saw coming of Ladies ninetene,
In royal habit, a full easy pace,
And after hem came of women soch a trace,
That sens y^ God, Adam had made of yerth,
The third part of mankind, or the ferth,
Ne wend I not by possibilite,
Had ever in this wide world ibe,
And true of love, these women were echon,
Now whether was yt a wonder thing or non,
That right anon, as that they gonne epsy
This flower, which that I clepe the Daisie,
Full suddenly they stinten all at ones,
And kneled down, as it were for the nones,
And songen with o voice, heal and honor
To troth of womanhede, and to this flour,
That bears our alderprise in figuring,
Her white croune bears the witnessing,
And with that word, a compass enviroun,
They sitten hem full softely adoun:
First sat the god of Love, and since his queen,
With the white croune, clad all in grene,
And sithen all the remnaunt by and by,
As they were of estate, full curtesly,
Ne not a word was spoken in the place,
The mountenance of a furlong way of space.
I kneling by this flower, in good intent
Abode to known what this people meant,
As still as any stone, till at the last
This God of Love, on me his iyen cast,
And said, who kneleth there? and I answerde
Unto his asking, when that I it herd,
And said, sir it am I, and come him nere,
And salued him: (quoth. he) what do thou here,
So nigh mine own flower, so boldly?
It were better worthy truly,
A worm to nighen nere my flower than thou.
And why sir (quoth. I) and it like you?
For thou (quoth. he) art thereto nothing able,
It is my relike, digne and delitable,
And thou my fo, and all my folk werriest,
And of mine old servaunts thou missaiest,
And hindrest hem, with thy translacion,
And let folk from her devocion,
To serve me, and hold it folly
To serve Love, thou may it not deny,
For in plain text, withouten need of gloss,
Thou have translated the Romaunt of y^ rose,
That is an heresy against my law,
And make wise folk fro me withdraw;
And of Creseide, thou have said as the list,
That makes men to women less trist,
That been as true as ever was any stele:
Of thine answer avise thee right well,
For though thou renied have my lay,
As other wretches have done many a day,
By seint Venus, that my mother is,
If that thou live, thou shall repenten this,
So cruelly, that it shall well be seen.
Tho spoke this lady, clothed all in green
And said, God right of your courtesy,
Ye mote harken if he can reply
Against all this that ye have to him meved,
A God ne should not be thus agreved,
But of his deite he shall be stable,
And thereto gracious and merciable:
And if ye nere a God that known all,
Then might it be as I you tellen shall,
This man to you may falsely ben accused,
That as by right, him ought ben excused,
For in your court is many a losengeour,
And many a queinte totoler accusour,
That tabouren in your ears many a soun,
Right after her imaginacioun,
To have your daliaunce, and for envy,
These ben the causes, and I shall not lie,
Envy is lavender of the court always,
For she ne parts neither night ne day,
Out of the house of Caesar, thus says Dant,
Who so that goes algate she wol not want.
And eke peraunter for this man is nice,
He might done it, gessing no malice,
But for he uses things for to make,
Him recketh naught of what matter he take,
Or him was boden make thilke twey,
Of some person, and durst it not withsey:
Or him repents utterly of this,
He ne has not done so grevously amiss,
To translaten that old clerks written,
As though that he of malice would enditen,
Dispite of love, and had himself it wrought,
This should a ritwise lord have in his thout,
And not be like tiraunts of Lombardie,
That han no reward but at tyranny,
* For he that king or lord is naturell,
Him ought not be tiraunt ne cruel,
As is a fermour, to done the harm he can,
He must think it is his liege man,
And is his tresour, and his gold in cofer:
This is the sentence of the Philosopher,
A king to keep his lieges in Justice,
Withouten doubt that is his office,
All woll he keep his lords in her degree,
As it is right and skill, that they be
Enhaunsed and honored, and most dear,
For they ben half gods in this world here,
Yet mote he done both right to poor and rich,
All be that her estate be not both iliche,
And have of poor folk compassion,
For lo, the gentill kind of the lion,
For when a fly offends him or biteth,
He with his tail away the fly smites,
Al easily, for of his gentry,
Him deineth not to wreke him on a fly,
As does a curre, or else another be,
* In noble courage ought ben areest,
And waien every thing by equite,
And ever have regard unto his own degree:
For sir, it is no maistrie for a lord
To dampne a man, without answer of word,
And for a lord, that is full foul to use
And it so be, he may him not excuse,
But asks mercy with a dreadful heart,
And profereth him, right in his bare sherte
To ben right at your own judgment.
Then ought a God by short avisement,
Consider his own honor, and his trespace,
For since no cause of death lies in this case,
You ought to ben the lightlier merciable,
Lets your ire, and bethe somewhat tretable:
The man has served you of his conninges,
And forthred well your law in his makinges,
All be it that he can not well endite,
Yet has he made leude folk delight
To serve you, in preising of your name,
He made the book, yt hight, The house of fame,
And eke the death of Blaunche the Duchess,
And the Parliament of Fowls, as I guess,
And all the love of Palamon and Arcite
Of Thebes, though the story is known li^e,
And many an Himpne, for your holy days,
That highten balades, rondels, virelaies:
And for to speak of other holiness,
He has in prose translated Boece,
And made the life also of saint Cecile:
He made also, gone is a great while,
Origenes upon the Maudelaine:
Him ought now to have the less pain,
He has made many a ley, and many a thing.
Now as ye be a God, and eke a king,
I your Alceste, whilom queen of Trace,
I ask you this man right of your grace,
That ye him never hurt in all his live,
And he shall swearen to you, and that blive,
He shall never more agilten in this wise,
But shall maken as ye woll devise,
Of women true in loving al her life,
Where so ye woll, of maiden or of wife,
And forthren you as much as he misseide,
Or in the Rose, or else in Creseide.
The God of Love answerde her thus anon,
Madame (quoth. he) it is so long agon,
That I you knew, so charitable and true,
That never yet, sens the world was new,
To me ne found I better none than ye,
If that I woll save my degree:
I may nor woll not werne your request,
Al lies in you, does with him as you lest.
I al foryeve withouten longer space,
* For who so yeveth a yefte or does a grace,
Do it betime, his thank shall be the more,
And demeth ye what ye shall do therefore.
Go thank now my lady here (quoth. he)
I rose, and down I set me on my knee,
And said thus: Madame, the God above
For yield you that the God of Love
Have maked me his wrath to foryeve,
And grace so long for to live,
That I may know sothely what ye be,
That have me helped, and put in this degree,
But trewly I wend, as in this caas
Naught have a gilte, ne done to love trespass,
* For why a true man withouten dread,
Has not to parten with a theves deed.
Ne a true lover ought me not to blame,
Though y^ I speak a false lover some shame:
They ought rather with me for to hold,
For that I of Creseide wrote or told,
Or of the Rose, what so mine author meant,
Algate God wotte it was mine intent
To forthren troth in love, and it cherice
And to ben ware fro falsenesse and fro vice,
By which ensample, this was my mening.
And she answerde, let be thine arguing,
For love ne wol not counterpleted be,
In right ne wrong, and learn that of me:
Thou have thy grace, and hold the right thereto
Now woll I saine with penance thou shall do
For thy trespace, understand it here,
Thou shall while yt thou live year by year,
The most party of thy time spend,
In making of a glorious legende,
Of good women, maidens, and wives,
That weren true in loving all her lives,
And tell of false men that hem betraien,
That al her life ne do not but assaien
How many women they may done a shame,
For in your world that is now hold a game:
And though thee like not a lover be,
Speak well of love, this penance yeve I thee,
And to the God of love I shall so pray,
That he shall charge his servants by any way,
To forthren thee, and well thy labor quite,
Go now thy way, this penance is but lite:
And when this book is made, yeve it y^ queen
On my behalf, at Eltham, or at Shene.
The God of love began smile, and then he said:
Wost thou (quoth. he) where this be wife or maid,
Or queen, or countess, or of what degree,
That has so littell penance yeven thee,
That have deserved sore for to smart,
* But pite renneth soon in gentle heart:
That may thou seen, she kitheth what she is?
And I answerde, naie sir so have I blis,
No more, but that I see well she is good.
That is a true tale by mine hood,
(Quoth. Love) and thou know well parde,
If it be so that thou avise the,
Have thou not in a book in thy cheste,
The great goodness of the queen Alceste,
That turned was into a Daiesie,
She that for her husband chese to die,
And eke to gone to hell, rather than he,
And Hercules rescued her parde,
And brought her out of hell again to blis?
And I answerde again, and said yes,
Now know I her, And is this good Alceste,
The Daiesie, and mine own herts rest?
Now feel I well the goodness of this wife,
That both after her death, and in her life,
Her great bounte doubleth her renoun,
Well has she quit me mine affectioun,
That I have to her flower the daiesie,
No wonder is though Jove her stellifie,
As tells Agaton, for her great goodness,
Her white corowne bears of it witness:
For all so many virtues had she,
As small florounes in her corowne be,
In remembrance of her, and in honor,
Cibilla made the daiesie and the flower,
I crowned al with white, as men may se,
And Mars yave to her a corowne reed parde,
Instead of Rubies set among y^ white,
Therewith this queen woxe reed for shame alite.
When she was praised so in her presence,
Then said Love, a full great negligence
Was it to thee, that ilke time thou made,
(Hide Absolon thy tresses) in balade,
That thou forget in thy song to set,
Since that thou art so greatly in her debt,
And wost well that calendar is she
To any woman, that woll lover be:
For she taught all the craft of true loving,
And namely of wifehode the living,
And all the bonds that she ought keep,
Thy litel wit was thilke time a sleep:
But now I charge thee upon thy life,
That in thy legende make of this wife,
When thou have other small imade before,
And fare now well I charge thee no more,
But er I go, thus much I will the tell,
* Ne shall no true lover come in hell.
These other ladies sitting here a row,
Ben in my balade, if thou constable hem know,
And in thy books, al thou shall hem find,
Have hem now in thy legende al in mind,
I mean of hem that been in thy knowing,
For here ben twenty thousand mo sitting
Than thou know, good women all,
And true of love, for ought that may befall:
Make the metres of hem as the lest,
I mote gone home, the sun draws west,
To paradis, with all this company,
And serve always the fresh Daiesie.
At Cleopatras I woll that thou begin,
And so forth, and my love so shall thou win,
For let see now what man that lover be,
Wol done so strong a pain for love as she,
I wot well that thou may not all it rhyme,
That such lovers did in her time:
It were too long to reden and to here,
Suffiseth me thou make in this manner,
That thou reherce of al her life the great,
After these old authors listen for to treat,
For who so shall so many a story tell,
Sey shortly or he shall to long dwell:
And with that word my books began I take,
And right thus on my legende began I make.
Thus ends the Prologue.
Here begins the legende of Cleopatras Queen of Egypt.
AFter ye death of Ptholome the King,
That all Egypt had in his governing,
Reigned his Queen Cleopatras,
Till on a time bifel there such a caas,
That out of Rome was sent a senator,
For to conqueren realms and honor,
Unto the town of Rome, as was vsaunce,
To have the world at her obeisaunce,
And soth to say, Antonius was his name,
So fill it, as fortune him ought a shame,
When he was fallen in prosperity,
Rebel unto the town of Rome is he,
And over all this, the suster of Cesare
He left her falsely, er that she was ware,
And would algates han another wife,
For which he took with Rome, and Caesar strife.
Nathelesse, forsooth this ilke Senator,
Was a full worthy gentill werriour,
And of his death it was full great damage,
But love had brought this man in such a rage
And him so narow bounden in his laas,
And all for the love of Cleopatras,
That all the world he set at no value,
Him thout there was nothing to him so due,
As Cleopatras, for to love and serve,
Him thought that in arms for to sterve
In the defense of her, and of her right.
This noble queen, eke loved so this knight,
Through his desert, and for his chevalrie,
As certainly, but if that books lie,
He was of person, and of gentilnesse,
And of discretion, and of hardiness,
Worthy to any wight that liven may,
And she was fair, as is the rose in May:
And for to maken short is the best,
She woxe his wife, and had him as her lest.
The wedding and the feast to devise,
To me that have itake such emprise,
And so many a story for to make,
It were to long, lest that I should slake
Of thing that bears more effect and charge,
For men may overlade a ship or barge,
And for thy, to effect then woll I skippe,
And all the remnaunt I woll let it slip.
Octavian, that wood was of this deed,
Shope him an hooste on Antony to lead,
Al utterly for his destruction,
With stout Romans, cruel as Lion
To ship they went, and thus I let hem fail.
Antonius was ware, and woll not fail
To meten with these Romans, if he may,
Took eke his read, and both upon a day
His wife and he, and all his host forth went
To ship anon, no longer they ne stent,
And in the sea it happed hem to mete,
Up goes the trumpe, and for to shoute and shete
And painen hem to set on with the sun,
With grisly sown out goes the great gunne,
And hertely they hurtlen in all at ones,
And fro the top down comes y^ great stones,
In goes the grapenel so full of crokes,
Among the ropes ran the shering hokes,
In with the polaxe preaseth he and he,
Behind the maste begins he to flee,
And out again, and drives him over board,
He sticks him upon his spears orde,
He rent the sail with hooks like a since,
He brings the cup, and bids hem be blithe,
He pours peesen upon the hatches slider,
With pots full of lime, they gone togider,
And thus the long day in fight they spend,
Till at the last, as every thing has end,
Antony is shent, and put him to the flight,
And all his folk to go, that best go might,
Flees eke y^ queen, with all her purple sail,
For strokes which y^ went as thick as hail,
No wonder was, he might it not endure:
And when that Antony saw that aventure,
Alas (quoth. he) the day that I was borne,
My worship in this day thus have I lorne,
And for despair out of his wit he start,
And rofe himself anon throughout the heart,
Ere that he ferther went out of the place:
His wife, that could of Caesar have no grace,
To Egypt is fled, for dread and for distress,
But herkeneth ye that speken of kindness.
Ye men that falsely swearen many an oath,
That ye woll die, if that your love be wroth,
Here may ye seen of women such a troth.
This woeful Cleopatra had made such routh,
That there nis tongue none that may it tell,
But on the morrow she woll no longer dwell,
But made her subtle werkmen make a shrine
Of all the rubies and the stones fine
In all Egypt, that she could epsy,
And put full the shrine of spicerie,
And let the corse enbaume, and forth she fette
This dead corse, and in the shrine it shette,
And next the shrine a pit than does she grave,
And all the serpents that she might have,
She put hem in that grave, and thus she seid:
Now love, to whom my sorrowful heart obeid,
So ferforthly, that fro that blisfull hour
That I you swore to ben all freely your,
I mean you, Antonius my knight,
That never waking in the day or night,
Ye nere out of mine herts remembrance,
For well or woe, for carole, or for dance,
And in my self this covenant made I tho,
That right such as ye felten well or woe,
As ferforth as it in my power lay,
Vnreprovable unto my wifehood aye,
The same would I felen, life or death,
And thilke covenant while me lasts breath
I woll fulfill, and that shall well be seen,
Was never unto her love a truer queen:
And with y^ word, naked with full good heart,
Among the serpents in the pit she start,
And there she chese to have her burying.
Anon the neders gonne her for to sting,
And she her death receives with good chere,
For love of Antony that was her so dear.
And this is storiall, sooth it is no fable,
Now ere I find a man thus true and stable,
And woll for love his death so freely take,
I pray God let our hedes never ache.
The Legend of Tisbe of Babylon.
AT Babiloine whylome fill it thus,
The which town y^ queen Simiramus
Let dichen about, and walls make
Full hie, of hard tiles well ibake:
There were dwelling in this noble town,
Two lords, which y^ were of great renoun,
And woneden so nigh upon a grene,
That there nas but a stone wall hem between,
As often in great tounes is the won:
And sothe to saine, that one man had a son,
Of all that land one of the lustiest,
That other had a daughter, the fairest
That estward in y^ world was tho dwelling,
The name of everiche, began to other spring,
By women that were neighbors about,
For in that country yet withouten doubt,
Maidens ben ikept for jealousy,
Full strait, lest they didden some folly.
This young man was cleped Piramus,
Thisbe hight the maid (Naso says thus)
And thus by report, was her name ishove,
That as they woxe in age, so woxe her love:
And certain, as by reason of her age,
There might have been betwixt hem marriage,
But that her fathers ^olde it not assent,
And both in love ilike sore they brent,
That none of all her friends might it let,
But prively sometime yet they met
By sleight, and spaken some of her desire,
As wrie the glede and hotter is the fire,
Forbid a love, and it is ten times so wode.
This wall, which y^ bitwixt hem both stood,
Was cloven atwo, right fro the top adoun,
Of old time, of his foundatioun,
But yet this clift was so narrow and lite
It was not seen, dear enough a mite,
But what is that, that love cannot epsy?
Ye lovers two, if that I shall not lie,
Ye founden first this little narrow clift,
And with a sound, as soft as any shrift,
They let her words through the clift pace,
And tolden, while that they stoden in y^ place,
All her complaint of love, and all her woe,
At every time when they durst so.
On that one side of the wall stood he,
And on that other side stood Tisbe,
The sweet soune of other to receive,
And thus her wardeins would they disceive,
And every day this wall they would threte,
And wish to God that it were down ibete,
Thus would they sain, alas thou wicked wall*
Through thine envy, thou us let all,
Why nilt thou cleave, or fallen all atwo,
Or at the least, but thou would so,
Yet would thou but ones let us mete,
Or ones that we might kissen sweet,
Then were we cured of our cares cold,
But nathelesse, yet be we to thee hold,
In as much as thou suffrest for to gone,
Our words through thy lime and eke thy stone,
Yet ought we with thee ben well apaid.
And when these idle words weren said,
The cold wall they woulden kiss of stone,
And take her leave, and forth they wolden gone,
And this was gladly in the eventide,
Or wonder erly, least men it espide.
And long time they wrought in this manner,
Till on a day, when Phoebus began to clear,
Aurora with the stremes of her hete
Had dried up the dew of herbs wete,
Unto this clift, as it was wont to be,
Come Piramus, and after come Tisbe,
And plighten truth fully in her faie,
That ilke same night to steal away,
And to beguile her wardeins everychone,
And forth out of the City for to gone,
And for the fields ben so broad and wide,
For to mete in o place at o tide:
They set marks, her meetings should be
There king Ninus was graven, under a tree,
For old painems, that idolles heried,
Vseden tho in fields to ben buried,
And fast by his grave was a well,
And shortly of this tale for to tell,
This covenant was affirmed wonder fast,
And long hem thought that the sun last,
That it nere gone under the sea adoun.
This Tisbe has so great affectioun,
And so great liking Piramus to see,
That when she saw her time might be,
At night she stale away full prively,
With her face iwimpled subtelly,
For all her friends (for to save her troth)
She has forsake alas, and that is routh,
That ever woman would be so true,
To trusten man, but she the bet him knew:
And to the tree she goes a full good pace,
For love made her so hardy in this case,
And by the well adoun she began her dress,
Alas, then comes a wild Lioness
Out of the wood, withouten more arrest,
With bloody mouth, strangling of a beast,
To drinken of the well there as she sat,
And when that Tisbe had espied that,
She rist her up, with a full drery heart,
And in a cave, with dreadful foot she start,
For by the Moon she saw it well withal,
And as she ran, her wimple let she fall,
And took none head, so sore she was a whaped,
And eke so glad that she was escaped,
And thus she sat, and lurketh wonder still:
When that this Lioness has drunk her fill,
About the well began she for to wind,
And right anon the wimple began she find,
And with her bloody mouth it all to rent,
When this was done, no longer she ne stent,
But to y^ wood her way then has she nome.
And at the last this Piramus is come,
But all too long (alas) at home was he,
The Moon shone, men might well isee,
And in his way, as that he come full fast,
His eyes to the ground adoun he cast,
And in the sonde, as he beheld adoun,
He saw the steps broad of a Lioun,
And in his heart he suddenly agrose,
And pale he wext, therewith his heart arose,
And here he came, and found the wimple torn,
Alas (quoth. he) the day that I was borne,
This o night woll both us lovers slay,
How should I asken mercy of Tisbee,
When I am he that have you slain, alas,
My bidding has you slain in this caas,
Alas, to bid a woman gone by night
In place thereas peril fallen might,
And I so slow, alas I ne had be
Here in this place, a furlong way ere ye,
Now what Lion that is in this forest,
My body mote he rent, or what beast
That wild is, gnawen mote he mine heart,
And with that word he to the wimple start,
And kissed it often, and wept on it full sore,
And said wimple alas, there nis no more,
But thou shall feel as well the blood of me,
As thou have felt the bleeding of Tisbe:
And with that word he smote him to y^ heart,
The blood out of the wound as broad start,
As water, when the conduit broken is.
Now Tisbe, which that wist not this,
But sitting in her dread, she thought thus,
If it so fall out that my Piramus
Be comen hither, and may me not ifind,
He may me holden false, and eke unkind,
And out she comes, and after him began espien,
Both with her heart, and with her eien,
And thought, I woll him tellen of my dread,
Both of the Lioness and of my deed.
And at the last her love then has she found,
Beating with his heels on the ground,
All bloody, and therewithal abacke she start,
And like the wawes, quappe began her heart,
And pale as box she woxe, and in a throw
Avised her, and began him well to know,
That it was Piramus her heart dear.
Who could write which a deadly chere
Has Tisbe now, and how her hair she rent,
And how she began her self to turment,
And how she lies and swouneth on the ground,
And how she wept of tears full his wound,
How medleth she his blood with her complaint,
How with her blood her selven began she paint,
How clippeth she the red corse, alas,
How does this woeful Tisbe in this caas,
How kisseth she his frosty mouth so cold:
Who has don this? and who has been so bold
To sleen my lefe? o speak Piramus,
I am thy Tisbe, that thee calls thus,
And therwithall she lifts up his head.
This woeful man that was not fully dead,
When that he herd y^ name of Tisbe crien,
On her he cast his heavy deadly eyes,
And down again, and yields up the ghost.
Tisbe rist up, without noise or bost,
And saw her wimple and his empty sheath,
And eke his swerd, yt him has done to death,
Then spoke she thus, thy woeful hand (quoth. she)
Is strong enough in such a work to me,
For love shall yeve me strength and hardiness,
To make my wound large enough I guess,
I woll thee followen dead, and I woll be
Felaw, and cause eke of thy death (quoth. she)
And though that nothing save y^ death only,
Might thee fro me depart trewly,
Thou shall no more depart now fro me
Than fro the death, for I woll go with thee.
And now ye wretched jelous fathers our,
We that weren whylome children your,
We praien you, withouten more envy,
That in o grave we moten lie,
Sens love has brought us this pitous end,
And right wise God, to every lover send,
That loves trewly, more prosperity
Than ever had Piramus and Tisbe,
And let no gentill woman her assure,
To putten her in such an aventure,
* But God forbid but that a woman can
Ben as true and loving as a man,
And for my part I shall anon it kithe:
And with y^ word, his sword she took switche,
That warm was of her loves blood, and hot,
And to the heart she her selven smote.
And thus are Tisbe and Piramus ago,
Of true men I find but few mo
In all my books, save this Piramus,
And therefore have I spoken of him thus;
For it is deintie to us men to find
A man that can in love be true and kind.
Here may ye seen, what lover so he be,
A woman dare, and can as well as he.
The Legend of Dido, Queen of Cartage.
GLory and honor, Virgile Mantuan,
Be to thy name, and I shall as I can
Follow thy lantern, as thou go beforne,
How Eneas to Dido was forsworn,
In thine Eneide, and Naso woll I take
The tenor and the great effects make,
When Troy brought was to destruction
By Greeks slight, and namely by Sinon,
Faining the horse offered unto Minerue,
Through which yt many a Trojan must sterve,
And Hector had after his death apered,
And fire so wood, it might not ben stered,
In all the noble toure of Ilion,
That of the city was the chief dungeon,
And all the country was so low ybrought,
And Priamus the king fordone and naught,
And Eneas was charged by Venus
To flien away, he took Ascanius
That was his son, in his right hand and fled,
And on his back he bare and with him led
His old father, cleped Anchises,
And by the way his wife Creusa he lees,
And mokell sorrow had he in his mind,
Ere that he could his fellawship find:
But at the last, when he had hem found,
He made him ready in a certain stound,
And to the sea full fast he began him hie,
And saileth forth with all his company
Toward Itaile, as would destinee:
But of his aventures in the sea,
Nis not to purpose for to speak of here,
For it accords not to my matere,
But as I said, of him and of Dido
Shall be my tale, till that I have do.
So long he sailed in the salt see,
Till in Libie uneath arrived he,
So was he with the tempest all to shake,
And when that he the haven had itake,
He had a knight was called Achatees,
And him of all his fellowship he chees,
To gone with him, the country for tespie,
He took with him no more company,
But forth they gone, and left his ships ride,
His feere and he, withouten any guide.
So long he walks in this wilderness,
Till at the last he met an hunteresse,
A bow in hond, and arrows had she,
Her clothes cutted were unto the knee,
But she was yet the fairest creature
That ever was iformed by nature,
And Eneas and Achates she great,
And thus she to hem spoke, when she hem met.
Saw ye (quoth. she) as ye han walked wide,
Any of my sustren walk you beside,
With any wild Bore or other beast,
That they have hunted into this forest,
I tucked up with arrows in her caas?
Nay sothly Lady (quoth. this Eneas)
But by thy beauty, as it thinks me,
Thou might never yearthly woman be,
But Phoebus suster art thou, as I guess,
And if so be that thou be a goddess,
Have mercy on our labor and our woe.
I nam no goddess soothly (quoth. she) tho,
For maidens walken in this country here,
With arrows and with bow, in this manner:
This is the realm of Libie there ye been,
Sf which that Dido lady is and queen,
And shortly told all the occasion
Why Dido came into that region,
Of which as now me lifts not to rhyme,
It needs not, it nere but loss of time,
For this is all and some, it was Venus
His own mother, that spoke with him thus,
And to Cartage she bade he should him dight,
And vanished anon out of his sight.
I could follow word for word Vergile,
But it would lasten all to long while.
This noble queen, that cleped was Dido,
That whylom was the wife of Sicheo,
That fairer was than the bright sun,
This noble town of Carthage has begun,
In which she reigns in so great honor,
That she was hold of all Queen's flour,
Of gentillesse, of freedom, and of beauty,
That well was him that might her ones se,
Of Kings and Lords so desired,
That all the world her beauty had ifired,
She stood so well in every wights grace.
When Eneas was come unto the place,
Unto the master temple of all the town,
There Dido was in her deuotioun,
Full privily his way then has he nome:
When he was in the large temple come,
I cannot saine, if that it be possible,
But Venus had him maked invisible,
Thus says the book, withouten any lees.
And when this Eneas and Achates
Hadden in this temple ben over all,
Then found they depainted on a wall,
How Troy and all the land destroyed was,
Alas that I was borne (quoth. Eneas)
Through the world our shame is kid so wide,
Now it is painted upon every side:
We that weren in prosperity,
Ben now disclaundred, and in such degree,
No longer for to liven I ne keep,
And with that word he brast out for to weep
So tenderly that routh it was to seen.
This fresh Lady, of the city Queen,
Stood in the temple, in her estate royal,
So richely, and eke so fair withal,
So young, so lusty, with her eyes glade,
That if that God yt heaven and earth made,
Would have a love, for beauty and goodness,
And womanhede, troth, and semelinesse,
Whom should he loven but this lady sweet?
There nis no woman to him half so mete:
Fortune, that has y^ world in governaunce,
Has suddenly brought in so new a chance,
That never was there yet so frened a caas,
For all the company of Eneas,
Which that we wend have lorne in the sea,
Arrived is naught far fro that city,
For which the greatest of his lords, some
By aventure ben to the city come
Unto that same temple for to seek
The Queen, and of her socour her beseke,
Such renome was there sprung of her goodness.
And when they had told all her distress,
And all her tempest and all her hard caas,
Unto the Queen appeared Eneas,
And openly beknew that it was he,
Who had joy then, but his meine,
That hadden found her lord, her governor.
The Queen saw they did him such honor,
And had heard of Eneas, ere tho,
And in her heart had routh and woe,
That ever such a noble man as he
Shall ben disherited in such degree,
And saw the man, that he was like a knight,
And suffisaunt of person and of might,
And like to ben a very gentilman,
And well his words he beset can,
And had a noble visage for the nones,
And formed well of brawne and of bones,
And after Venus had such fairness,
That no man might be half so fair I guess,
And well a lord him seemed for to be,
And for he was a stranger, somewhat she
Liked him the bet, as God do bote,
To some folk often new thing is sote,
Anon her heart has pitee of his woe,
And with pity, Love came also,
And thus for pity and for gentilnesse,
Refreshed must he ben of his distress.
She said, certes, that she sorry was,
That he has had such peril and such caas,
And in her friendly speech, in this manner
She to him spoke, and said as ye may here.
Be ye not Venus son and Anchises,
In good faith, all the worship and encrees
That I may goodly done you, ye shall have,
Your ships and your meine shall I save,
And many a gentle word she spoke him to,
And commanded her messengers to go
The same day withouten any fail
His ships for to seek and hem vitaile,
Full many a beast she to the ships sent,
And with the wine she began hem to present,
And to her royal paleis she her sped,
And Eneas she always with her led.
What needs you the feasts to discrive,
He never better at ease was in live,
Full was the feast of deinties and richesse,
Of instruments, of song, and of gladness,
And many an amorous looking and devise.
This Eneas is come to Paradise
Out of the swolowe of hell and thus in joy
Remembers him of his estate in Troy,
To dancing chambers full of paraments,
Of rich beds, and of pavements,
This Eneas in led after the meat,
And with the queen when that he had seat,
And spices parted, and the wine agon,
Unto his chamber was he lad anon
To take his ease, and for to have his rest
With all his folk, to done what so him lest,
There nas courser well ibridled none,
Ne stead for the Iusting well to gone,
Ne large palfrey, easy for the nones,
Ne jewel fret full of rich stones
Ne sackes full of gold, of large wight,
Ne Rubie none that shines by night,
Ne gentill hauten faukon hereonere,
Ne hound for Heart, wild Bore, or Dear,
Ne cup of gold, with floreins new ibette,
That in the land of Libie may ben get,
That Dido ne has Eneas it isent,
And all is paid, what that he has spent.
Thus can this honorable queen her gests call,
As she that can in freedom passen all.
Eneas soothly eke, without lees,
Has sent to his ship by Achates
After his son, and after rich things,
Both scepter, clothes, broches, and eke rings,
Some for to wear, and some to present
To her, that all these noble things him sent,
And bad his son how that he should make
The presenting, and to the queen it take.
Repaired is this Achates again,
And Eneas full blisfull is and feign,
To seen his young son Ascanius,
For to him it was reported thus,
That Cupido, that is the god of Love,
At prayer of his mother high above,
Had the likeness of the child itake,
This noble queen enamoured for to make
On Eneas: but of that scripture
Be as be may, I make of it no cure,
But soth is this, y^ queen has made such chere
Unto this child, that wonder was to here,
And of the present that his father sent,
She thanked him often in good intent.
Thus is this queen in pleasaunce and joy,
With all these new lusty folk of Troy,
And of the deeds has she more enquired
Of Eneas, and all the story lered
Of Troy, and all the long day they tway
Entendeden for to speak and for to play,
Of which there began to breden such a fire,
That silly Dido has now such desire
With Eneas her new guest to deal,
That she lost her hew and eke her heal.
Now to theffect, now to the fruit of all,
Why I have told this story, and tellen shall.
Thus I begin, it fell upon a night,
When that the Moon vpreised had her light,
This noble Queen unto her rest went,
She sighed sore, and gone her felfe tourment,
She walks, waloweth, and made many brayd,
As done these lovers, as I have heard said,
And at the last, unto her suster Anne
She made her moan, and rit thus spoke she than.
Now dear suster mine, what may it be
That me agasteth in my dreme (quoth. she)
This ilke new Trojan is so in my thought,
For that me thinks he is so weil iwrought.
And eke so likely to ben a man,
And therewith so mikell good he can,
That all my love and life lies in his cure,
Have ye not heard him tell his aventure?
Now certes Anne, if that ye read me,
I woll feign to him iwedded be,
This is the effect, what should I more seine,
In him lies all, to do me live or deine.
Her suster Anne, as she yt coud her good,
Said as her thought, and somdele it withstood,
But hereof was so long a sermoning:
It were to long to make rehearsing:
But finally, it may not be withstonde,
* Love woll love, for no wight woll it wonde,
The dawning up rist out of the sea,
This amorous Queen charge her meine,
The nets dress, and speres broad and kene,
An hunting woll this lusty fresh Queen,
So pricketh her this new jolly woe,
To horse is all her lusty folk igo,
Unto the court the hounds ben ibrought,
And up on courser swift as any thought,
Her young knights heven all about,
And of her women eke an huge rout,
Upon a thick palfray, paper white,
With saddle read, enbrouded with delight,
Of gold the bars, up enbossed high,
Sat Dido, all in gold and perrey wrigh,
And she is fair as is the bright morrow,
That heals sick folks of nights sorrow:
Upon a courser, startling as the fire,
Men might turn him with a little wire.
But Eneas, like Phoebus to devise,
So was he fresh arrayed in his wise,
The fomie bridle, with the bitte of gold,
Governs he right as himself has would,
And forth this noble Queen, this lady ride
On hunting, with this Trojan by her side,
The herd of Hearts founden is anon,
With hey gobet, prick thou, let gone, let gone,
Why nill the Lion comen or the Bear,
That Imit him ones meten with this spear,
Thus saine this young folk, and up they kill
The wild Hearts, and have hem at her will.
Among all this, to romblen began y^ heven,
The thunder rored with a grisly steven,
Down come ye rain, with hail and sleet so fast,
With heavens fire, that made so sore aghast
This noble Queen, and also her meine,
That each of hem was glad away to fly,
And shortly, fro y^ tempest her to save,
She fled her self into a little cave,
And with her went this Eneas also,
I not with hem if there went any mo,
The author makes of it no mention:
And here began the deep affection
Betwixt hem two, this was ye first morrow
Of her gladness, and ginning of her sorrow,
For there has Eneas ikneled so,
And told her all his hurt and all his woe,
And sworn so deep to her to be true,
For well or woe, and change for no new,
And as a false lover, so well can plain,
That silly Dido rewed on his pain,
And took him for husbond, and became his wife
For evermore, while that hem last life,
And after this, when that the tempest stent,
With mirth out as they came, home they went.
The wicked fame up rose, and y^ anon,
How Eneas has with the Queen igon
Into the cave, and demed as hem list:
And when y^ king (that Yarbas hight) it wist,
As he that had her loved ever his life,
And woed her to have her to his wife,
Such sorrow as he has maked, and such chere,
It is a routh and pity for to here,
* But as in love, alday it happeth so,
That one shall laughen at another woe.
Now laugheth Eneas, and is in joy,
And more richesse than ever was in Troy.
O silly woman, full of innocence,
Full of pity, of truth, and continence,
What maked you to men to trusten so?
Have ye such routh upon her fained woe,
And have such old ensamples you beforne?
See ye not all how they ben forsworn,
Where see ye one, y^ he ne has laft his lefe,
Or ben unkind, or done her some mischefe,
Or pilled her or bosted of his deed,
Ye may as well it seen, as ye may read.
Take heed now of this great gentilman,
This Trojan, that so well her please can,
That faineth him so true and obeising,
So gentill, and so privy of his doing,
And can so well done all his obeysaunce
To her, at feasts and at dance,
And when she goes to temple, and home again,
And fasten till he has his lady sein,
And bearen in his devises for her sake,
Not I not what, and songs would he make,
Iusten, and done of arms many things,
Send her letters, tokens, brooches, and rings.
Now herkneth how he shall his lady serve:
There as he was in peril for to sterve
For hunger and for mischefe in the sea,
And desolate, and fled fro his country,
And all his folk with tempest all to driven,
She has her body and eke her realm yeven
Into his hond, there she might have been
Of other land than of Cartage a Queen,
And lived in joy enough, with would ye more.
This Eneas, that has thus deep iswore,
Is weary of his craft within a throw,
The hot earnest is all overblow,
And prively he does his ships dight,
And shapeth him to steal away by night.
This Dido has suspection of this,
And thought well that it was al amiss,
For in his bed he lies a night and siketh,
She asks him anon, what him misliketh,
My dear heart, which that I love most.
Certes (quoth. he) this night my fathers ghost
Has in my sleep me so sore tourmented,
And eke Mercury his message has presented,
That needs to the conquest of Itaile
My destiny is soon for to sail,
For which me thinks, brosten is mine heart:
Therewith his false tears out they start,
And takes her within his arms two.
Is that in earnest (quoth. she) woll ye so,
Have ye not sworn, to wife me to take,
Alas, what woman woll ye of me make?
I am a Gentlewoman, and a Queen,
Ye woll not fro your wife thus foul fleen,
That I was borne alas, what shall I do?
To tellen in short, this noble Queen Dido
She seeks hallowes, and does Sacrifise,
She kneeleth, cries, that routh is to devise,
Coniureth him, and profereth him to be
His thrall, his servaunt, in the best degree,
She falls him to foot, and sowneth there,
Discheuile with her bright gilt here,
And says, have mercy, let me with you ride,
These lords, which that wonnen me beside,
Woll me destroyen only for your sake:
And ye woll me now to wife take,
As ye have sworn, then woll I yeve you leve
To slaen me with your swerd now sone at eve,
For then yet shall I dien as your wife,
I am with child, and yeve my child his life,
Mercy lord, have pity in your thought.
But all this thing a vaileth her right naught,
And as a traitor forth began to sail
Toward the large country of Itaile,
And thus has he laft Dido in woe and pine,
And wedded there a lady hight Lavine,
A cloth he laft, and eke his sword standing,
When he fro Dido stale in her sleeping,
Right at her beds head, so began he hie,
When that he stale away to his navy.
Which cloth, when silly Dido began awake,
She has it kissed full often for his sake,
And said, O sweet cloth, while Jupiter it lest,
Take my soul, unbind me of this unrest,
I have fulfilled of fortune all the course,
And thus alas, withouten his socourse,
Twenty time iswouned has she than,
And when that she unto her suster Anne
Complained had, of which I may not write,
So great routh I have it for to endite,
And bad her norice and her sustren gone
To fetchen fire, and other things anon,
And said that she would sacrifie,
And when she might her time well aspie,
Upon the fire of Sacrifice she start,
And with his sword she rofe her to the heart:
But as mine author says, yet this she seide,
Or she was hurt, beforne or she deide,
She wrote a letter anon, and thus began.
Right so (quoth. she) as the white Swan
Against his death begins for to sing,
Right so to you I make my complaining,
Not that I trow to getten you again,
For well I wot it is all in vain,
Sens that the gods ben contrarious to me,
But sin my name is lost through you (quoth. she)
I may well lose a word on you or letter,
Albeit I shall be never the better,
For thilke wind that blew your ship away,
The same wind has blow away your fay,
But who so woll all this letter have in mind,
Read Ovide, and in him he shall it find.
The Legend of Hipsiphile and Medea.
THou root of false lovers, Duke Jason,
Thou sleer, devourer, and confusion
Of gentlewomen, gentle creatures,
Thou made thy reclaiming and thy lures
To Ladies of thy scathliche apparaunce,
And of thy words farsed with pleasaunce,
And of thy fained troth, and thy manner,
With thine obeisaunce and humble chere,
And with thine counterfeited pain and woe,
There other fallen one, thou falsed two,
O often swore thou that thou would die
For love, when thou ne feltest malady,
Save foul delight, which thou call love,
If that I live, thy name shall be shove
In English, that thy deceit shall be know,
Have at thee Jason, now thine honor is blow,
But certes, it is both routh and woe,
That Love with false lovers werketh so,
For they shall have well better love and chere,
Than he that has bought love full dear,
Or had in arms many a bloody box,
* For ever as tender a Capon eats ye Fox,
Though he be falls, and has the foul betrayed,
As shall the good man that therefore paid,
Although he have to the Capon skill and right,
The false Fox woll have his part at night.
On Jason this ensample is well iseene,
By Hipsiphile and Medea the Queen.
In Thessalie, as Ovide tells us,
There was a knight, that hight Peleus,
That had a brother, which that hight Eson,
And when for age he might uneaths gone,
He yave to Peleus the governing
Of al his reign, and made him lord and king,
Of which Eson, this Jason getten was,
That in his time in all that land there nas
Not such a famous knight of gentillesse,
Of freedom, of strength, and of lustiness,
After his fathers death he bare him so,
That there nas none that list ben his fo,
But did him all honor and company,
Of which this Peleus has great envy,
Imagining, that Jason might be
Enhaunsed so, and put in such degree,
With love of lords of his regioun,
That from his reign he may be put adoun.
And in his wit a night compassed he
How Jason might best destroyed be,
Withouten slander of his compasment:
And at the last he took avisement,
That to send him into some far country,
There as this Jason may destroyed be,
This was his wit, all made he to Jason
Great chere of look, and of affection,
For dread least his lords it espide,
So fell it, as fame ronneth wide,
There was such tiding over all, and such loos,
That in an Isle, that called was Colcos,
Beyond Troy Eastward in the sea,
That there was a Ram, that men might see,
That had a flees of gold, that shone so bright,
That no where was there such another sight,
But it was kept always with a Dragoun,
And many other marvailes up and down,
And with two Bulls, maked all of Bras,
That spitten fire, and much thing there was,
But this was eke the tale nathelees,
That who so would winnen thilke Flees,
He must both, or he it winnen might,
With the Bulls and the Dragon fight.
And king Otes lord was of that I Will,
This Peleus bethought upon this while,
That he his nephew Jason would exhort,
To sailen to that land, him to disport,
And said, nephew, if it might be,
That such worship might fall thee,
That thou this famous treasure might win,
And bring it my region within,
It were to me great pleasaunce and honor,
Then were I hold to quite thy labor,
And all thy costs I woll my self make,
And chose with folk thou wolt with thee take,
Let see now, darste thou taken this voyage.
Jason was young, and lusty of courage,
And undertook to done this like emprise,
Anon Argus his ships began devise.
With Jason went the strong Hercules,
And many another, that he with him ches,
But who so asks, who is with him gone,
Let him read Argonauticon,
For he woll tell a tale long enough.
Philoctetes anon the sail up drough,
When the wind was good, and began him hie
Out of his country, called Thessalie,
So long they sailed in the salt see,
Till in the Isle of Lemnon arrived he,
All be this not rehearsed of Guido,
Yet says Ovide in his Epistles so,
And of this Isle lady was and Queen,
The fair young Hipsiphile the shene,
That whylom Thoas daughter was y^ king.
Hipsiphile was gone in her playing,
And roming on the clevis by the sea,
Under a bank anon esped she
Where lay the ship, that Jason began arrive:
Of her goodness adoune she sends blive,
To weten, if that any strange wight
With tempest thider were iblow anight,
To done him succor, as was her vsaunce,
To further en every wight, and done pleasaunc^
Of very bounty, and of courtesy.
This messenger adoune him began to hie,
And found Jason and Hercules also,
That in a cogge to land were igo,
Hem to refreshen, and to take the air.
The morning attempre was and fair,
And in her way this messenger hem met,
Full cunningly these lords two he grette,
And did his message, asking hem anon
If y^ they were broken, or ought woe begone,
Or had need of lodesmen or vitaile,
For succor they should nothing fail,
For it was utterly the Queens will.
Jason answerde meekely and still:
My lady (quoth. he) thank I heartily
Of her goodness, us needs truly
Nothing as now, but that we weary be,
And come for to play out of the sea,
Till that the wind be better in our way.
This lady rometh by the cliffe to play
With her meine, endlong the strond,
And finds this Jason and this other stond
In speaking of this thing, as I you told.
This Hercules and Jason began behold
How that the queen it was, and fair her great,
Anon right as they with this lady mete,
And she took heed, and knew by her manner,
By her array, by words, and by chere,
That it were gentill men of great degree,
And to the castle with her leads she
These strange folk, and does hem great honor,
And asks hem of travail and of labor
That they have suffered in the salt see,
So that within a day two or three
She knew by the folk that in his ships be,
That it was Jason full of renomee,
And Hercules, that had the great loos,
That soughten the aventures of Colcos,
And did hem honor more than before,
And with hem dealed ever longer the more,
For they ben worthy folk withouten lees,
And namely most she spoke with Hercules,
To him her heart bare, he should be
Sad, wise, and true, of words avisee,
Withouten any other affection
Of love, or any other imagination.
This Hercules has this Jason praised,
That to the Sun he has it up raised,
That half so true a man there nas of love
Under the cope of heaven, that is above,
And he was wise, hardy, secret, and rich,
Of these iii. points, there nas none him liche,
Of freedom passed he, and lusty head,
All tho that liven, or ben dead,
Thereto so great a gentill man was he,
And of Thessalie likely king to be,
There nas no lack, but that he was aghast
To love, and for to speak shamefast,
Him had lever himself to murder and die,
Than that men should a lover him epsy,
As would God that I had iyeve
My blood and flesh, so that I might live
With the bones, y^ he had aught where a wife
For his estate, for such a lusty life
She shoulden led with this lusty knight.
And all this was compassed on the night
Betwixt him Jason, and this Hercules,
Of these two here was a shreud lees,
To come to house upon an innocent,
For to bedote this Queen was her intent:
And Jason is as coy as is a maid,
He looks pitously, but naught he said
But freely yave he to her counsailers
Yefts great, and to her officers,
As would God that I leaser had and time,
By process, all his wrong for to rhyme:
But in this house, if any false lover be,
Right as himself now does, right so did he,
With faining, and with every subtle deed,
Ye get no more of me, but ye woll read
Thoriginall, that tells all the caas,
The sooth is this, that Jason wedded was
Unto this queen, and took of her substance
What so him list, unto his purveyaunce,
And upon her begat children two,
And drough his fail, and saw her never mo:
A letter sent she him certain,
Which were too long to written and to saine,
And him reproves of his great untruth,
And prays him on her to have some routh,
And on his children two, she said him this,
That they be like of all thing iwis
To Jason, save they couth not beguile,
And prayed God, or it were long while,
That she that had his heart ireft her fro,
Must ^nden him untrue also:
And that she must both her children spill,
And all tho that suffers him his will:
And true to Jason was she all her life,
And ever kept her chaste, as for his wife,
Ne never had she joy at her heart,
But died for his love of sorrows smart.
To Colcos come is this duke Jason,
That is of love devourer and dragon,
As Matire appeteth form always,
And from form to form it passen may,
Or as a well that were bottomless,
Right so can Jason have no pees,
For to desiren through his appetite,
To done with gentlewomen his delight,
This is his lust, and his felicite,
Jason is romed forth to the city,
That whylome cleped was Iasonicos,
That was the master town of all Colcos,
And has itold the cause of his coming
Unto Otes, of that country king,
Praying him that he must done his assay
To get the Fleece of gold, if that he may,
Of which the king assenteth to his boon,
And does him honor, as it is done,
So ferforth, that his daughter and his heir,
Medea, which that was so wise and fair,
That fairer saw there never man with eye,
He made her done to Jason company
At meat, and sit by him in the hall.
Now was Jason a seemly man withal,
And like a Lord, and had a great renoun,
And of his look as royal as a Lioun,
And godly of his speech, and famil lere,
And coud of love all the craft and art plenere
Withouten book, with everiche observaunce,
And as fortune her ought a foul mischaunce,
She woxe enamoured upon this man.
Jason (quoth. she) for ought I see or can,
As of this thing, the which ye ben about,
Ye and your self ye put in much dout,
For who so woll this aventure atcheve,
He may not well asterten as I leve,
Withouten death, but I his help be,
But nathelesse, it is my will (quoth. she)
To forthren you, so that ye shall not die,
But turnen sound home to your Thessalie.
My right lady (quoth. this Jason) tho,
That ye have of my death or my woe
Any regard, and done me this honor,
I wot well, that my might, ne my labor,
May not deserve it my lives day,
God thank you, there I ne can ne may,
Your man am I, and lowely you beseech
To ben my help, withouten more speech,
But certes for my death shall I not spare.
Tho began this Medea to him declare
The peril of this case, fro point to point
Of his battle, and in what desioint
He mote stand, of which no creature
Save only she, ne might his life assure:
And shortly, right to the point for to go,
They ben accorded fully betwixt hem two,
That Jason shall her wedde, as true knight,
And term yset to come soon at night
Unto her chamber, and make there his oath
Upon the gods, that he for lefe or loathe
Ne should her never falsen night ne day,
To ben her husband while he live may,
As she that from his death him saved here,
And her upon at night they mete yfere,
And does his oath, and gothe with her to bed,
And on the morrow upward he him spedde,
For she has taught him how he shall not fail
The flees to win, and stinten his bataile,
And saved him his life, and his honor,
And gate him a name, as a conqueror,
Right through ye sleight of her enchantment,
Now has Jason the flese, and home is went
With Medea, and treasours fell great won,
But vnwist of her father she is gonne
To Thessalie, with duke Jason her lefe,
That afterward has brought her to mischeife,
For as a traitor he is from her go,
And with her left young children two,
And falsely has betrayed her, alas,
And ever in love a chief traitor he was,
And wedded yet the third wife anon,
That was the daughter of king Creon,
This is the meede of loving and guerdon,
That Medea received of duke Jason
Right for her troth, and for her kindness,
That loved him better than her self I guess,
And left her father, and her heritage,
And of Jason this is the vassalage,
That in his days nas never none yfound
So salse a lover, going on the ground,
And therefore in her letter thus she said,
First when she of his falsenesse him vpbraid:
Why liked the my yellow hair to see,
More than the bounds of mine honesty?
Why liked me my youth and thy fairness,
And of thy tongue the infinite graciousnesse?
O had thou in thy conquest dead ybe,
Full mikel untruth had there diede with thee,
Well can Ovide her letter in verse endite.
Which were as now too long for to write.
The Legende of Lucrece of Rome.
NOw mote I saine thexiling of kings
Of Rome, for her horrible doings
Of the last king Tarquinius,
As says Ovid, and Titus Liuivs,
But for that cause tell I not this story,
But for to praysen, and drawn in memory
The very wife, the very Lucresse,
That for her wifehood, and her steadfastness,
Not only that the painems her commend,
But that cleped is in our Legend
The great Austyn, that has compassioun
Of this Lucrece that starfe in Rome town,
And in what wise I woll but shortly treat,
And of this thing I touch but the great.
When Ardea besieged was about
With Romans, yt full stern were and stout,
Full long lay the siege, and little wroughten,
So yt they were half idle, as hem thoughten,
And in his play Tarquinius the young,
Began for to yape, for he was light of tongue,
And said, that it was an idle life,
No man did there no more than his wife,
And let us speak of wives that is best,
Praise every man his own as him lest,
And with our speech let us ease our heart.
A knight (that hight Collatin) up stert,
And said thus, nay sir it is no need
To trowen on the word, but on the deed:
I have a wife (quoth. he) that as I trow
Is holden good of all that ever her know,
Go we to Rome to night, and we shull see.
Tarquinius answerde, that likes me.
To Rome they be comen, and fast hem dight
To Colatins house, and down they light,
Tarquinius, and eke this Colatine,
The husbond knew the efters well and fine,
And full prively into the house they gone.
Nor at the gate porter was there none,
And at the chamber door they abide:
This noble wife sat by her beds side
Discheueled, for no malice she ne thought,
And soft wool says Liuie that she wrought,
To keep her from sloth and idleness,
And bad her servaunts done her business,
And asks hem, what tidings heren ye?
How says men of the siege, how shall it be?
God would the walls were fallen adoun,
Mine husbond is too long out of this town,
For which dread does me sore to smert,
Right as a sword it stingeth to mine heart,
When I think on this or of that place,
God save my lord, I pray him for his grace:
And therwithall so tenderly she began weep,
And of her work she took no more keep,
But meekely she let her eyes fall,
And thilke semblant sat her well withal,
And eke her tears full of heaviness,
Embesessed her wifely chastnesse,
Her countenance is to her heart digne,
For they acordeden in deed and sign,
And with that word her husbond Collatin,
Or she of him was ware, came stertling in,
And said, dread thee not, for I am here,
And she anon up rose, with blisfull chere,
And kissed him, as of wives is the won.
Tarquinius, this proud kings son
Conceived has her beauty and her chere,
Her yellow hair, her bounty, and her manner,
Her hew, her words, y^ she has complained,
And by no craft her beauty was not fained,
And caught to this lady such desire,
That in his heart he brent as any fire,
So woodly, that his wit was all forgotten,
For well thought he she should not be gotten,
And aye the more he was in despair,
The more coveiteth, and thought her fair,
His blind lust was all his coveiring.
On morrow, when the bird began to sing,
Unto the siege he comes full prively,
And by himself he walks soberly,
The image of her recording always new,
Thus lay her hair, and thus fresh was her hew,
Thus sat, thus span, this was her chere,
Thus fair she was, and this was her manner:
All this conceit his heart has new itake,
And as the sea, with tempest all to shake,
That after when the storm is all ago,
Yet woll the water quappe a day or two,
Right so, though that her form were absent,
The pleasaunce of her form was present,
But nathelesse, not pleasaunce, but delight,
Or an unrightful talent with dispite,
For maugre her, she shall my lemman be:
* Hap helps hardy man always (quoth. he)
What end that I make, it shall be so,
And girt him with his sword, and began to go,
And he forthright, till to Rome he come,
And all alone his way that he has nome,
Unto the house of Colatin full right,
Down was y^ sun, and day has lost his light,
And in he come, unto a privy halke,
And in the night full theefely began he stalk,
When every wight was to his rest brought,
Ne no wight had of treason such a thought,
Whether by window, or by other gin,
With swerd ydraw, shortly he comes in
There as she lay, this noble wife Lucresse,
And as she woke, her bed she felt press:
What beast is that (quoth. she) that wayeth thus?
I am the kings son Tarquinius
(Quoth. he) but and thou cry, or any noise make,
Or if thou any creature awake,
By thilke God, that formed man of live,
This swerd through thine heart shall I rive,
And therwithall unto her throat he stert,
And set the swerd all sharp on her heart:
No word she spoke she has no might thereto,
What shall she saine, her wit is all ago,
Right as when a wolf finds a lamb alone,
To whom shall she complain or make moan:
What, shall she fight with an hardy knight,
Well wot men a woman has no might:
What, shall she cry, or how shall she astert?
That has her by ye throat, with swerd at heart,
She asks grace, and said all that she can.
No wolt thou not (quoth. this cruel man)
As wisely Jupiter my soul save,
I shall in thy stable slay thy knave,
And lay him in thy bed, and loud cry,
That I thee find in such avoutrie,
And thus thou shall be dead, and also lose
Thy name, for thou shall not chese.
This Romans wives loveden so her name
At thilke time, and dreden so the shame,
That with for fere of slander, and dread of death
She lost both at ones wit and breath,
And in a swough she lay, and woxe so dead,
Men mighten smite off her arm or head,
She feleth nothing, neither foul ne fair.
Tarquinius, that art a kings heir,
And should as by lineage and by right
Done as a lord, and a very knight,
Why have thou done dispite to chivalrie?
Why have thou done thy lady villainy?
Alas, of thee this was a villainous deed,
But now to the purpose, in the story I read,
When he was gone, and this mischaunce is fall,
This lady sent after her friends all,
Father, mother, and husbond, all ifere,
And discheveled with her hair clear,
In habit such as women used tho
Unto the burying of her friends go,
She sat in hall, with a sorrowful sight,
Her friends asken what her aylen might,
And who was dead, and she sat aye weeping,
A word for shame ne may she forth out bring,
Ne upon hem she durst not behold,
But at the last of Tarquiny she hem told
This rufull case, and all this thing horrible,
The woe to tell were impossible
That she and all her friends make at ones,
All had folks herts ben of stones,
It might have maked hem upon her rue,
Her heart was so wifely and so true,
She said, that for her gilt ne for her blame
Her husbond should not have ye foul name,
That would she not suffren by no way:
And they answerde all unto her fay,
That they foryave it her, for it was right,
It was no gilt, it lay not in her might,
And saiden her ensamples many one,
But all for naught, for thus she said anon:
Be as be may (quoth. she) of forgiving,
I will not have no forgift for nothing,
But prively she cought forth a knife,
And therwithall she raft her self her life,
And as she fell adowne she cast her look,
And of her clothes yet heed she took,
For in her falling yet she had a care,
Least that her feet or such things lay bare,
So well she loved cleanness, and eke troth,
Of her had all the town of Rome routh,
And Brutus has by her chaste blood swore,
That Tarquin should ybanished be therefore,
And all his kin, and let the people call,
And openly the tale he told hem all,
And openly let carry her on a bear
Through all y^ town, that men may see and here
The horrible deed of her oppressioun,
Ne never was there king in Rome town
Sens thilke day, and she was holden there
A saint, and ever her day yhallowed dear,
As in her law: and thus ends Lucresse
The noble wife, Titus bears witness:
I tell it, for she was of love so true,
Ne in her will she changed for no new,
And in her stable heart, sad and kind,
That in these women men may all day find
There as they cast her heart, there it dwells,
For well I wot, that Christ himself tells,
That in Israel, as wide as is the land,
That so great faith in all the land he ne fond,
As in a woman, and this is no lie,
And as for men, look ye such tyranny
They done all day, assay hem who so list,
* The truest is full brothell for to trist.
The Legend of Ariadne of Athens.
JVdge infernal Minos, of Crete king,
Now comes thy lot, thou come on
the ring,
Not for thy sake only written is this story,
But for to clepe again unto memory,
Of Theseus the great untruth of love,
For which the gods of heaven above
Ben wroth, and wrath have take for thy sin,
Be red for shame, now I thy life begin.
Minos, that was y^ mighty king of Crete,
That had an hundred cities strong and great,
To school has sent his son Androgeus
To Athens, of the which it happed thus,
That he was slain, learning Phylosophie,
Right in that city, not but for envy.
The great Minos, of the which I speak,
His sons death is come for to wreke,
Alcathoe he besieged hard and long,
But nathelesse, the walls be so strong,
And Nisus, that was king of that cite,
So chivalrous, that little dredeth he,
Of Minos or his host took he no cure,
Till on a day befell an aventure,
That Nisus daughter stood upon the wall,
And of the siege saw the manner all:
So happed it, that at scarmishing,
She cast her heart upon Minos the king,
For his beauty, and his chevalrie,
So sore, that she wend for to die.
And shortly of this process for to pace,
She made Minos winnen thilke place,
So that the city was all at his will,
To saven whom him list, or else spill,
But wickedly he quit her kindness,
And let her drench in sorrow and distress,
Nere that the gods had of her pite,
But that tale were too long as now for me,
Athenes wan this king Minos also,
As Alcathoe, and other towns mo,
And this the effect, that Minos has so driven
Hem of Athenes, that they mote him yeven
Fro year to year her own children dear
For to be slain, as ye shall after here.
This Minos has a monster, a wicked best,
That was so cruel, that without areest,
When y^ a man was brought into his presence,
He would him eat, there helps no defense:
And every third year withouten dout,
They casten lotte, as it came about,
On rich and poor, he must his son take,
And of his child he must present make
To Minos, to save him or to spill,
Or let his beast devour him at his will.
And this has Minos done right in dispite,
To wreke his son was set all his delight,
And make hem of Athenes his thrall
Fro year to year, while he liven shall.
And home he saileth when this town is won,
This wicked custom is so long iron,
Till of Athenes king Egeus
Mote senden his own son Theseus,
Sens that the lotte is fallen him upon
To ben devoured, for grace is there non.
And forth is ladde this woeful young knight
Unto ye country of king Minos full of might,
And in a prison fettred fast is he,
Till the time he should yfreten be.
Well may thou weep, O woeful Theseus,
That art a kings son, and damned thus,
Me thinks this, that thou art deep yhold
To whom that saved thee fro cares cold,
And now if any woman help thee,
Well ought thou her servaunt for to be,
And ben her true lover year by year,
But now to come again to my matere.
The toure, there this Theseus is throw,
Down in the bottom derk, and wonder low,
Was joining to the wall of a foreine,
Longing unto the doughtren tweine
Of Minos that in her chambers great
Dwelten above the master street
Of the town, in joy and in sollas:
Not I not how it happed percaas,
As Theseus complained him by night,
The kings daughter, that Ariadne hight,
And eke her suster Phedra, herden all
His complaint, as they stood on the wall,
And looked upon the bright moon,
Hem list not to go to bed so soon:
And of his woe they had compassion,
A kings son to be in such prison,
And ben devoured, thought hem great pite:
Then Ariadne spoke to her suster free,
And said: Phedra lefe suster dear,
This woeful lords son may ye not here,
How pitously he complains his kin,
And eke his poor estate that he is in?
And guiltless, certes now it is routh,
And if ye woll assent, by my troth,
He shall ben helped, how so that we do.
Phedra answerde, iwis me is as woe
For him, as ever I was for any man,
And to his help the best read I can,
Is, that we done the gailer prively
To come and speak with us hastily,
And done this woeful man with him to come,
For if he may this monster overcome,
Then were he quit, there is none other boot,
Let us well taste him at his heart root,
That if so be that he a weapon have,
Where that he his life dare keep or save,
Fighten with this fiend, and him defend,
For in the prison, here as he shall descend,
Ye wot well, that the beast is in a place
That is not derke, and has room and eke space
To welde an axe, or sword, staff, or knife,
So that me thinks he should save his life,
If that he be a man, he shall do so:
And we shall make him balls eke also
Of were and towe, that when he gapeth fast,
Into the beestes throat he shall hem cast,
To sleke his honger, and encomber his teeth,
And right anon when that Theseus sees
The beast acheked, he shall on him leepe
To sleen him, or they comen more to heepe:
This we apen shall the gailer, or that tide,
Full prively within the prison hide:
And for the house is crencled to and fro,
And has so queint ways for to go,
For it is shapen as the mase is wrought,
Thereto have I a remedy in my thought,
That by a clewe of twine, as he has gone,
The same way he may return anon,
Following always the threde, as he has come,
And when this be is overcome,
Then may he flien away out of this stead,
And eke the gailer may he with him led,
And him avaunce at home in his country,
Sens that so great a Lords son is he.
This is my read, if that ye dare it take.
What should I longer sermon of it make,
The gailer comes, and with him Theseus,
When these things ben accorded thus.
Down sat Theseus upon his knee,
The right lady of my life (quoth. he)
I sorrowful man, ydamned to the death:
Fro you, whiles that me lasts breath,
I wol not twinne, after this aventure,
But in your service, thus I woll endure,
That as a wretch unknow, I woll you serve
Forevermore, till that mine heart sterve,
Forsake I woll at home mine heritage,
And as I said, ben of your court a page,
If that ye vouchsafe that in this place,
Ye grant me to have soche a grace,
That I may have not but my meat and drink,
And for my sustinaunce yet woll I swinke,
Right as you list, that Minos ne no wight.
Sens that he saw me never with eyes sight,
Ne no man else shall me epsy,
So slily, and so well I shall me gie,
And me so well disfigure, and so low,
That in this world there shall no man me know,
To have my life, and to have presence
Of you, that done to me this excellence,
And to my father shall I send here,
This worthy man, that is your gaylere,
And him so guerdon, that he shall well be
One of the greatest men of my country,
And if I durst saine, my lady bright,
I am a kings son and eke a knight
As would God, if that it might be,
Ye weren in my country all three,
And I with you, to bear you company,
Then should ye seen if that I thereof lie,
And if that I profer you in low manner,
To ben your page, and serven you right here,
But I you serve as lowly in that place,
I pray to Mars to yeve me soch grace,
That shames death on me there mote fall,
And death and poverte to my friends all,
And that my sprite by night mote go,
After my death, and walk to and fro,
That I mote of traitor have a name,
For which my sprit mote go, to do me shame,
And if I claim ever other degree,
But ye vouchsafe to yeve it me,
As I have said, of shames death I dey,
And mercy Lady, I can naught else sey.
A semely knight was this Theseus to see,
And young, but of twenty year and three,
But who so had ysene his countenance,
He would have wept, for routh of his penance:
For which this Ariadne in this manner,
Answerde to his profre and to his chere.
A kings son, and eke a knight (quoth. she)
Go ben my servaunt in so low degree,
God shilde it, for the shame of women all,
And lene me never soch a case befall,
And send you grace, and sleight of heart also
You to defend, and knightly to sleen your foe,
And lene hereafter I may you find
To me, and to my suster here so kind,
That I ne repent not to yeve you life,
Yet were it better I were your wife,
Since ye ben as gentill borne as I,
And have a realm not but fast by,
Than that I suffered your gentillesse to sterve,
Or that I let you as a page serve,
It is no profit, as unto your kinrede,
But what is that, y^ man woll not do for dred,
And to my suster since that it is so,
That she mote gone with me, if that I go,
Or else suffer death as well as I,
That ye unto your son as trewly,
Done her be wedded, at your home coming,
This is the final end of all this thing,
Ye swear it here, upon all that may be sworn?
Ye Lady mine (quoth. he) or else to torn
Mote I be with the Minotaure or to morrow,
And haveth here of mine heart blood to borow,
If that ye woll, if I had knife or spear,
I would it letten out, and thereon swear,
For then at erste, I wot ye would me leve,
By Mars, that is chief of my beleve,
So that I might liven, and not fail
To morrow for to taken my bataile,
I nolde never fro this place fly,
Till that ye should the very proof se,
For now, if that the soth I shall you say,
I have loved you full many a day,
Though ye ne wist not, in my country,
And aldermost desired you to see,
Of any earthly living creature,
Upon my truth I swear and you assure,
This seven year I have your servaunt be,
Now have I you, and also have ye me,
My dear heart, of Athenes duchess.
This Lady smileth at his steadfastness,
And at his heartily words, and at his chere,
And to her luster said in this manner:
And sothly suster mine (quoth. she)
Now be we duchesses both I and ye,
And sikerde to the regals of Athenes,
And both hereafter likely to be Queens,
And saved fro his death a kings son,
As ever of gentill women is the won,
To save a gentil man, enforth her might,
In honest cause, and namely in his right,
Me thinks no wight ought us her of blame,
Ne bearen us therefore an yvel name,
And shortly of this matter for to make,
This Theseus of her has leave ytake,
And every point was performed in deed,
As ye have in this covenant herd me read,
His wepen, his clewe, his thing yt I have said,
Was by the gailer in the house ylaid,
There as the Minotaure has his dwelling,
Right fast by the door, at his entering,
And Theseus is lad unto his death,
And forth unto this Minotaure he gethe,
And by the teaching of this Adriane,
He overcame this be, and was his bane,
And out he comes by the clewe again
Full prively, when he this be has slain,
And the gailer gotten has a barge,
And of his wives treasure began it charge
And took his wife, and eke her suster free,
And by the gailer, and with hem al three
Is stole away out of the land by night,
And to the country of Enupie him dight,
There as he had a friend of his knowing,
There feesten they, there daunsen they and sing,
And in his arms has this Adriane,
That of the beast has kept him fro his bane,
And get him there a noble barge anon,
And of his country folk a full great wone,
And takes his leave, and homeward saileth he,
And in an isle, amidde the wild see,
There as there dwelt creature none,
Save wild beestes, and that full many one,
He made his ship a land for to set,
And in that isle half a day he let e.
And said, that on the land he must him rest,
His mariners have done right as him lest.
And for to tell shortly in this caas,
When Ariadne his wife a sleep was,
For that her suster fayrer was than she,
He takes her in his hand, and forth goes he
To ship, and as a traitor stale away,
While that this Ariadne a sleep lay,
And to his country ward he sailed blive,
A twenty devil way, the wind him drive.
And found his father drenched in the sea,
Me list no more to speak of him parde,
These false lovers, poison be her bane.
But I wol turn again to Adriane,
That is with sleep for werinesse ytake,
Full sorowfully her heart may awake.
Alas, for thee mine heart has pite,
Right in the dawning awaketh she,
And gropeth in the bed, and fond right naught:
Alas (quoth. she) that ever I was wrought,
I am betrayed, and her here to rent,
And to the stronde barefote fast she went,
And cried: Theseus mine heart sweet,
Where he ye, that I may not with you mete?
And might thus with beestes ben yslaine.
The halow rocks answerde her again,
No man she saw, and yet shone the moon,
And hie upon a rock she went soon,
And saw his barge sailing in the sea,
Cold woxe her heart, and right thus said she:
Meker then ye find I the beestes wild,
Has he not sin, that he her thus begilde,
She cried, O turn again for routhe and sin,
Thy barge has not all his meine in,
Her kerchefe on a pole sticked she,
Ascaunce he should it well yse,
And him remember that she was behind,
And turn again, and on the stronde her find.
But all for naught, his way he is gone,
And down she fell a swowne on a stone,
And up she riste, and kissed in all her care
The steps of his feet, there he has fare,
And to her bed right thus she speaks tho:
Thou bed (quoth. she) that have received two,
Thou shall answer of two, and not of one,
Where is the greater part, away gone.
Alas, where shall I wretched wight become?
For though so be that bote none here come,
Home to my country dare I not for dread,
I can my self in this case not read.
What should I tell more her complaining,
It is so long, it were an heavy thing?
In her epistle, Naso tells all,
But shortly to the end tell I shall,
The gods have her helped for pite,
And in the sign of Taurus men may see,
The stones of her crown shine clear,
I will no more speak of this matere,
But thus this false lover can begile
His true love, the devil quite him his wile.
The Legende of Philomene.
THou yever of ye forms yt have wrought
The fair world, and bare it in thy thought
Eternally, er thou thy work began,
Why made thou unto the slander of man,
Or all be that it was not thy doing,
As for that end to make soch a thing,
Why suffredest thou that Tereus was bore,
That is in love so false and so forswore,
That fro this world up to the first heven,
Corrumpeth, when yt folk his name neven?
And as to me, so grisly was his deed,
That when that I this foul story read,
Mine iyen wexen foul, and sore also,
Yet lasts the venime of so long ago,
That enfecteth him that would behold
The story of Tereus, of which I told,
Of Trace was he lord, and kin to Mart
The cruel God that stante with blody darte,
And wedded had he with blisfull chere
King Pandionis fair daughter dear,
That hight Progne, flower of her country,
Though Juno list not at the feast be,
Ne Himeneus, that god of Wedding is,
But at the feast ready ben iwis,
The furies three, with all her mortal bronde,
The Oule all night above the balkes wonde,
That Prophet is of woe, and of mischaunce.
This revell, full of song, and full of dance,
Last a fourtenight, or little less,
But shortly of this story for to pass,
(For I am weary of him for to tell)
Five year his wife and he together dwell,
Till on a day she began so sore long
To seen her suster, that she saw not long,
That for desire she nist what to say,
But to her husbond began she for to pray
For Gods love, that she mote ones gone
Her suster for to seen, and come again anon,
Or else but she mote to her wend,
She prayed him that he would after her send:
And this was day by day all her prayere,
With all himblesse of wifehood, word and chere.
This Tereus let make his ships yare,
And into Greece himself is forth ifare,
Unto his father in law began he pray,
To vouchsafe, that for a month or tway,
That Philomene his wives suster might
On Progne his wife but ones have a sight,
And she shall come to you again anon
My self with her, I will both come and gone,
And as my herts life I will her keep.
This old Pandion, this king began weep
For tenderness of heart, for to leve
His daughter gone, and for to yeve her leve,
Of all this world he loved nothing so,
But at the last, leave has she to go,
For Philomene with salt tears eke
Began of her father grace to beseke,
To seen her suster, that her longs so,
And him enbraceth, with her arms two,
And there also young and fair was she,
That when that Tereus saw her beauty,
And of array, that there was none her liche,
And yet of beauty was she to so rich,
He cast his fiery heart upon her so,
That he woll have her, how so that it go,
And with his wiles kneled, and so prayed,
Till at the last Pandion thus said.
Now son (quoth. he) that art to me so dear,
I thee betake my young daughter dear,
That bears the key of all mine herts life,
And great well my daughter, and thy wife,
And yeve her leave sometime for to pley,
That she may seen me ones or I deie.
And sothly he has made him rich feast,
And to his folk, the most and eke the least,
That with him came: and yave him yefts great,
And him conveieth through the master streat
Of Athenes, and to the sea him brought,
And tourneth home, no malice he ne thought.
The Ores pulls forth the vessel fast,
And into Trace arriveth at the last,
And up in to a Forest he her led,
And to a cave prively he him sped,
And in this dark cave, if her lest
Or list naught, he bad her for to rest,
Of which her heart agrose, and said thus:
Where is my suster, brother Tereus?
And therewithal she wept tenderly,
And quoke for fear, pale and pitiously,
Right as y^ lamb, that of y^ Wolf is bitten,
Or as y^ Culver, that of the Egle is smitten,
And is out of his claves forth escaped,
Yet it is aferde, and a waped,
Lest it be hent eftsoon: so sat sehe,
But utterly it may none other be,
By force has this traitor done a deed,
That he has reft her of her maidenhede,
Maugre her head, by strength and by his might.
Lo here a deed of men, and that aright.
She cries suster, with full loud steven,
And father dear help me God in heven:
All helps not, and yet this false thief,
Has done this Lady yet a more mischefe,
For fear lest she should his shame cry,
And done him openly a villainy,
And with his sweard her tongue of kerfe he,
And in a Castle made her for to be,
Full prively in prison evermore,
And kept her to her usage and to his store,
So that she ne might never more astarte.
O sely Philomene, woe is in thine heart,
Huge been thy sorrows, and wonder smart,
God wreke thee, and send thee thy bone,
Now is time I make an end sone.
This Tereus is to his wife icome,
And in his arms has his wife inome,
And pitiously he wept, and shoke his hedde,
And swore her, that he found her suster dedde,
For which this selie Progne has soch woe,
That nigh her sorrowful heart brake a two.
And thus in tears let I Progne dwell,
And of her suster forth I woll you tell.
This woeful Lady ilearned had in youth,
So that she worken and enbrauden couth,
And weaven in stole the rade vore,
As it of women has be woved yore,
And sothly for to saine, she has her fill
Of meat and drink, of clothing at her will,
And couthe eke read well enough and endite,
But with a pen she could not write,
But letters can she weave to and fro,
So that by the year was all ago,
She had woven in a stames large,
How she was brought fro Athens in a barge,
And in a cave how that she was brought,
And all the thing that Tereus wrought,
She wave it well, and wrote the story above,
How she was served for her susters love,
And to a man a ring she yave anon,
And prayed him by signs for to gone
Unto the queen, and bearen her that clothe,
And by sign swore many an oath,
She should him yeve what she getten might.
This man anon unto the queen him dight,
And took it her, and all the manner told,
And when y^ Progne has this thing behold,
No word she spoke, for sorrow and eke for rage,
But fained her to gone on pilgrimage
To Baccus remple, and in a little stound
Her dombe suster sitting has she found
Weeping in the castle her self alone,
Alas the woe, constraint, and the moon
That Progne upon her dombe suster makes,
In arms everich of hem other takes,
And thus I let hem in her sorrow dwell,
The remnaunt is no charge to tell,
For this is all and some, thus was she served
That never agilt, ne deserved
Unto this cruel man, that she of wist
Ye may beware of men if that you list,
* For all be that he woll not for shame
Done as Tereus, to lose his name,
Ne serve you as a murderer or a knave,
Full little while shull ye true him have,
That wol I sain, al were he now my brother,
But it so be that he may have another.
The Legende of Phillis.
BY prove, as well as by aucthorite,
That wicked fruicte comes of a wicked tree,
That may ye find, if that it likes you,
But for this end, I speak this as now,
To tell you of false Demophon,
In love a falser heard I never non,
But it were his father Theseus,
God for his grace fro soch one keep us,
Thus these women prayed, that it here,
Now to the effect turn I of my matere.
Destroyed is of Troie the City,
This Demopon came sailing in the sea
Toward Athenes, to his paleis large,
With him came many a ship, and many a barge
Full of folk, of which full many one
Is wounded sore, and sick, and woe begone,
And they have at the siege long ilaine,
Behind him came a wind, and eke a rain,
That shofe so sore, his sail might not stand,
Him were lever than all the world a land,
So hunteth him the tempest to and fro,
So dark it was, he could no where go,
And with a wave brusten was his stere,
His ship was rent so low, in such manner,
That Carpenter could it not amend,
The sea by night as any Torche brende,
For wood, and posseth him up and down,
Till Neptune has of him compassioun,
And Thetis, Chorus, Triton, and they all,
And maden him up a land to fall,
Whereof that Phillis Lady was and Queen,
Lycurgus daughter, fairer unto seen
Than is the flower again the bright Son,
Uneath is Demophon to land iwonne,
Weak and eke werie, and his folk forpined
Of werinesse, and also enfamined,
And to the death he was almost idriven,
His wise folk counsel have him yeven,
To seken help and succor of the Queen,
And loken what his grace might been,
And maken in that land some chevesaunce,
And kepen him fro woe, and fro mischaunce,
For sick he was, and almost at the death,
Uneath might he speak, or draw breath,
And lies in Rhodopeia him for to rest,
When he may walk, him thought it was best
Unto the country to seeken for succor,
Men knew him well, and did him honor,
For at Athenes Duke and Lord was he,
As Theseus his father has ibe,
That in his time was great of renoun,
No man so great in all his regioun,
And like his father of face and of stature,
And false of love, it came him of nature,
As does the Fox Renarde, the Foxes son,
Of kind he could his old father won
Without lore, as can a Drake swim
When it is caught, and carried to the brimme:
This honorable queen Phillis does him chere,
Her likes well his sport and his manner,
But I am agroted here beforne,
To write of hem that in love been forsworn,
And eke to haste me in my Legende,
Which to perform, God me grace send,
Therefore I pass shortly in this wise,
Ye have well heard of Theseus the gise,
In the betraiyng of fair Adriane,
That of her pite kept him fro his bane,
At short words, right so Demophon,
The same way, and the same pathe has gone
That did his false father Theseus,
For unto Phillis has he sworn thus,
To wedden her, and her his troth plight,
And piked of her all the good he might,
When he was hole and sound, and had his rest,
And does with Phillis what so that him lest,
As well I could, if that me list so,
Tellen all his doing to and fro.
He said to his country mote him sail,
For there he would her wedding apparaile,
As fill to her honor, and his also,
And openly he took his leave tho,
And to her swore he would not sojourne,
But in a month again he would return,
And in that land let make his ordinance,
As very Lord, and took the obeisaunce,
Well and humbly, and his ships dight,
And home he goes the next way he might,
For unto Phillis yet came he naught,
And that has she so hard and sore ibought,
Alas, as the story does us record,
She was her own death with a cord,
When that she saw y^ Demophon her traied.
But first wrote she to him, and fast him prayed
He would come, and deliver her of pain,
As I rehearse shall a word or twain,
Me list not vouchsafe on him to swinke,
Dispenden on him a pen full of ynke,
For false in love was he, right as his sire,
The Devil set her souls both on a fire,
But of the letter of Phillis woll I write,
A word or twain, although it be but lite.
Thine hostess (quoth. she) O Demophon,
Thy Phillis, which that is so woe begone,
Of Rhodopeie, upon you mote complain,
Over the term set betwixt us twain,
That ye ne holden forward, as ye said:
Your ancre, which ye in our haven laid,
Hight us, that ye would comen out of doubt,
Or that the Moon ones went about,
But times four, y^ Moon has hid her face
Sens thilke day ye went fro this place,
And four times light the world again,
But for all that, yet shall I sothly sain,
Yet has the streme of Scython not brought
From Athens the ship, yet came it naught,
And if that ye the term reken would,
As I or other true lovers do should,
I plain not (God wot) before my day.
But al her letter written I ne may,
By order, for it were to me a charge,
Her letter was right long, and thereto large,
But here and there, in rhyme I have it laid
There as me thought that she has well said.
She said, the sails comes not again,
Ne to the word, there nis no ^ey certain,
But I wot why ye come not (quoth. she)
For I was of my love to you so fre,
And of the Gods that ye have swore,
That her vengeance fall on you therefore,
Ye be not suffisaunt to bear the pain,
To much trusted I, well may I sain,
Upon your lineage, and your fair tongue,
And on your tears falsely out wrong,
How coud ye weep so by craft? quoth. she)
May there soche tears fained be?
Now certes, if ye would have in memory,
It ought be to you but little glory,
To have a selie maid thus betrayed,
To God (quoth. she) pray I, and often have prayed,
That it be now the greatest price of all,
And most honor, that ever you shall befall,
And when thine old aunceters painted be,
In which men may her worthiness see,
Then pray I God, thou painted be also,
That folk may reden, forth by as they go.
Lo this is he, that with his flattery
Betrayed has, and done her villainy,
That was his true love, in thought and deed.
But sothly of o point yet may they read,
That ye been like your father, as in this,
For he begiled Ariadne iwis,
With such an art, and such subtelte,
As thou thy selves have begiled me:
As in that poinct, although it be not feire
Thou folowest certain, and art his heir.
But sens thus sinfully ye me begile,
My body mote ye seen, within a while
Right in the haven of Athenes fleeting,
Withouten Sepulture and buriyng,
Though ye been harder then is any stone.
And when this letter was forth sent anon,
And knew how brotell and how falls he was,
She for despair fordid her self, alas,
Such sorrow has she, for she beset her so.
Beware ye women of your subtle fo,
Sens yet this day men may ensample se,
And trusts now in love no man but me.
The Legende of Hypermestre.
IN Grecen whilom were brethren two,
Of which that one was called Danao,
That many a son has of his body won,
As soch false lovers often conne.
Among his sons all there was one,
That aldermost he loved of everychone,
And when this child was borne, this Danao
Shope him a name, and called him Lino,
That other brother called was Egiste,
That was of love as false as ever him list,
And many a daughter gate he in his life,
Of which he gate upon his right wife,
A daughter dear, and did her for to call,
Hypermestra, youngest of hem all,
The which child of her nativite,
To all good thewes borne was she,
As liked to the Gods or she was borne,
That of the shefe she should be the corn,
The werdes that we clepen destine,
Has shapen her, that she must needs be
Pitous, sad, wise, true as stele,
And to this woman it accords well,
For though y^ Venus yave her great beauty,
With Jupiter compowned so was she,
That conscience, troth, and dread of shame,
And of her wifehode for to keep her name,
This thought her was felicite as here,
And reed Mars, was that time of the year
So feeble, that his malice is him raft,
Repressed has Venus his cruel craft,
And what with Venus, and other oppression
Of houses, Mars his venime is a don,
That Hypermestre dare not handle a knife,
In malice, though she should lose her life,
But nathelesse, as heaven began tho turn,
Two bad aspectes has she of Saturn,
That made her to die in prison,
And I shall after make mention,
Of Danao and Cgistes also,
And though so be y^ they were brethren two,
For thilke time nas spared no lineage,
It liked hem to maken marriage
Betwixt Hypermestre, and him Lino,
And casten soch a day it shall be so,
And full accorded was it utterly,
The array is wrought, the time is fast by,
And thus Lino has of his fathers brother,
The daughter wedded, and each of hem has other,
The torches brennen, and ye lamps bright
The Sacrifice been full ready dight,
Thensence out of the fire reketh soote,
The flower, the leefe, is rent up by the root,
To maken garlandes and crounes hie,
Full is the place of sound of Minstralcie,
Of songs amourous of marriage,
As thilke time was the plain usage,
And this was in the paleis of Egiste,
That in his house was lord, right as him list
And thus that day they driven to an end,
The friends taken leve, and home they wend,
The night is come, the bride shall go to bed,
Egiste to his chamber fast him sped,
And prively let his daughter call,
When that the house voided was of hem all,
He looks on his daughter with glad chere,
And to her spoke, as ye shall after here.
My right daughter, tresour of mine heart,
Sens first that day, y^ shapen was my shert,
Or by the fatal suster had my dome,
So nie mine heart never thing ne come,
As thou Hypermestre, daughter dear,
Take heed what thy father says thee here,
* And work after thy wiser ever mo,
For alderfirst daughter I love thee so,
That all the world to me nis half so lefe,
Ne nolde read thee to thy mischefe,
For all the good under the cold Moan,
And what I mean, it shall be said right sone,
With protestacion, as saine these wise,
That but thou do, as I shall thee devise,
Thou shall be ded by him y^ al has wrought,
At short words thou ne scapest naught
Out of my paleis, or that thou be deed,
But thou consent, and work after my reed,
Take this to the fearful conclusioun.
This Hypermestre cast her iyen down,
And quoke as does the leefe of ash grene,
Deed wext her hew, and like ashen to seen,
And said: Lord and father all your will,
After my might, God wot I will fulfill,
So it be to me no confusion.
I nill (quoth. he) have none excepcion,
And out he caught a knife, as rasour kene,
Hide this (quoth. he) that it be not isene,
And when thine housbond is to bed go,
While that he slepeth cut his throat atwo,
For in my dreme it is warned me,
How that my nevewe shall my bane be,
But which I not, wherefore I woll be siker,
If thou say nay, we two shall have a biker,
As I have said, by him that I have sworn.
This Hipermestre has nigh her wit forlorn,
And for to passen harmless out of that place,
She granted him, there was none other grace:
And withal a costrell takes he tho
And said, hereof a draught or two,
Yeve him drink, when he goes to rest,
And he shall sleep as long as ever thee lest,
The narcotikes and apies been so strong,
And go thy way, lest that him think to long.
Out comes the bride, and with full sobre chere,
As is of maidens often the manner,
To chamber brought, with revel and with song,
And shortly, lest this tale be to long,
This Lino and she beth brought to bed,
And every wight out at the door him sped,
The night is wasted, and he fell aslepe,
Full tenderly begins she to weep,
She rist her up, and dredfully she quaketh,
As does the branch, that Zephirus shakes,
And hushed were all in Aragone that city,
As cold as any Frost now wexeth she,
For pite by the heart strained her so,
And dread of death does her so much woe,
That thrice down she fill, in soche a were,
She riste her up, and stakereth here and there,
And on her hands fast looks she,
Alas, shall mine hands bloody be,
I am maid, and as by my nature,
And by my semblaunt, and by my vesture,
Mine hands been not shapen for a knife,
As for to reve no man fro his life,
What Devil have I with the knife to do?
And shall I have my throat corve a two?
Then shall I blede alas, and be shende,
And needs this thing mote have an end,
Or he or I mote needs lose our life,
Now certes (quoth. she) sens I am his wife,
And has my faith, yet is it bette for me
For to be dedde, in wifely honest,
Than be a traitor, living in my shame,
Be as be may, for earnest or for game,
He shall awake, and rise and go his way
Out at this gutter er that it be day:
And wept full tenderly upon his face,
And in her arms began him to embrace,
And him she joggeth, and awaketh soft,
And at the window lepe he fro the loft,
When she has warned him, and done him bote
This Lino swift was, and light of foot,
And from her ran, a full good paas.
This selie woman is so weak, alas
And helpless, so that er she far went,
Her cruel father did her for to hent,
Alas Lino, why art thou so unkind,
Why ne have thou remembered in thy mind,
And taken her, and led her forth with thee,
For when she saw that gone away was he,
And that she might not so fast go,
Ne folowen him, she sat down right tho,
Until she was caught, and fettred in prison
This tale is said for this conclusion.
Here ends the Legende of good Women.
A goodly Ballade of Chaucer.
MOther of norture, best beloved of all,
And fresh flower, to whom good thrift God send,
Your child, if it lust you me so to call,
All be I unable my self so to pretend,
To your discrecion I recommende
Mine heart and al, with every circumstaunce,
All wholly to be under your governaunce.
Most desire I, and have, and ever shall,
Thing, which might your herts ease amend:
Have me excused, my power is but small,
Nathelesse of right ye ought to commend
My good will, which feign would entend
To do you service, for all my suffisaunce
Is holly to be under your governaunce.
Meulx un, in heart, which never shall apall,
Aie fresh and new, and right glad to dispend
My time in your service, what so befall,
Beseching your excellence to defend
My simpleness, if ignorance offend
In any wise, since that mine affiaunce,
Is holly to been under your governaunce.
Daisie of light, very ground of comfort,
The Suns daughter (ye hight) as I read,
For when he Westreth, farewell your disport,
By your nature anon right for pure dread,
Of the rude night, yt with his boistous wede
Of darkness, shadoweth our emispere,
Then closen ye, my lives Lady dear.
Dauning the day, to his kind resort
And Phoebus your Father, with his streams read,
Adorneth the morrow, consuming the sort
Of mistie clouds, that woulden overlede
True humble herts, with her mistie head,
Nere comfort a days, when iyen clear,
Disclose and sprede my lives Lady dear.
* Ie vouldray: but great God disposes
And makes casuel by his providence,
Soch thing, as man's frele wit purposes,
All for the best, if that your conscience
Not grutche it, but in humble patience
* It receive: for God says without fable,
A faithful heart ever is acceptable.
Cautels who so uses gladly, gloseth,
To eschew soch it is right high prudence,
What ye said ones, mine heart opposes,
That my writing yapes in your absence,
Pleased you much better than my presence:
Yet can I more, ye be not excusable,
A faithful heart ever is acceptable.
Quaketh my pen, my spirit supposes,
That in my writing ye find woll some offense,
Min heart welkneth thus sone, anon it rises,
Now hot, now cold, and eft in feruence:
That miss is, is caused of negligence,
And not of malice, therefore beth merciable,
A faithful heart ever is acceptable.
Lenuoye.
Forth complaint, forth lacking eloquence,
Forth little letter of enditing lame,
I have besought my ladies Sapience,
Of thy behalf, to accept in game,
Thine inabilitie, do thou the same:
Abide, have more yet: Ie serve Iouesse,
Now forth, I close thee in holy Venus name,
Thee shall unclose my hearts governeresse.
Boecius de Consolatione Philosophiae.
In this Book are handled high and hard obscure Points, viz. The purveyance of
God; The force of Destiny; The freedom of our Wills; and the infallible
Prescience of the Almighty; and that the Contemplation of God himself is our
Summum bonunt.
Carmina qui quondam studio florenti peregi Flebilis heu moestos coger inire
modos.
ALas, I weeping am constrained to begin verse of sorrowful matter, y^ whilom
in flourishing study made delitable ditees. For lo, rending Muses of Poets,
enditen to me things to be written, and drerie teates. At last no dread ne
might overcome tho muses, that they ne werren fellows, and folowden my way,
that is to say: when I was exiled, they that weren of my youth, whilom weelful
and grene, comforten now sorrowful wierdes of me old man: for elde is commen
unwarely upon me, hasted by the harms that I have, and sorrow has commanded
his age to be in me. Heeres hoar aren shad overtimeliche upon my head: and the
stacke skin trembles of mine empted body. Thilke death of men is weleful,
y^ ne comes not in years that be swet, but comes to wretches often y^leped:
Alas, alas, with how deaf an ear death cruel turns away from wretches, and
^^aieth for to close weepying iyen. While Fortune unfaithful, favored me with
light goods, the sorrowful hour, that is to say, y^ death, had almost dreint
mine hedde: but now for Fortune cloudie, has changed her deceivable chere to
meward, mine vnpitous life draws along vngreable dwellings. O ye my friends,
what, or whereto auaunted ye me to been wilful? For he that has fallen, stood
in no steadfast degree.

Haec dum mecum tacitus ipse reputarem, querimoniamque lacrimabilem stili
Officio designarem; astitisse mihi supra verticem visa est mulie^ reverendi
admodum vultus, oculis ardentibus, and ultra communem, etc.
IN the mean while, that I still recorded these things with my self, and marked
my wepely complainte, with office of poinctell: I saugh stondyng abouen the
hight of mine head a woman of full great reverence, by semblant. Her iyen
brennyng and clear, seeing over y^ common might of men, with a lively color,
and with soch vigor and strength y^ it ne might not been nempned, all were it
so y^ she were full of so great age, that men woulden not trowen in no manner
that she were of our elde.

The stature of her was of doutous judgment for sometime she constrained and
shronke her seluen, like to y^ common measure of men: And sometime it seemed,
that she touched y^ heaven, with ye hight of her hedde. And when she houe her
hedde higher, she perced ye self heaven so that the sight of men looking was
in idell: her clothes were maked of right delie thredes, and subtell craft of
per durable mattier. The which clothes she had wouen with her own honds, as I
knew well after, by her self declaring, and showing to me the beauty: The
which clothes a darkness of a forleten and despised elde had dusked and
darked, as it is wont to dark by smoked Images.

In the netherest hemme or border of these clothes, men read iwouen therein, a
Grekish A. that signifies the life Active: and above that letter, in y^ hiest
bordure, a Grekish C. y^ signifies the life Contemplatife. And between these
two letters, there were seen degrees nobly wrought in manner of ladders, by
which degrees men might climben from the netherest letter to ye vpperest:
nathelesse, hands of some men hadden kerue that cloth by violence or by
strength, and eueriche man of hem had borne away such pieces as he might getten.
And forsothe this foresaid woman bare small books in her right hand, and in
her left hand she bare a Scepter. And when she saw these Poetical Muses
approaching about my bed, and endityng words to my wepinges, she was a little
amoued, and glowe o with cruel iyen. Who (quoth. she) has suffered approchen to
this sick man, these commen strompets, of which is the place that men callen
Theater, the which only ne asswagen not his sorrows with remedies, but they
would feden and norish him with sweet venime? Forsooth, that been tho that with
thorns, and prickings of talentes of affections, which that been nothing
fructuous nor profitable, distroyen the Come, plentuous of fruictes of reason.
For they holden hearts of men in usage, but they ne deliver no folk fro
malady. But if y^ Muses had withdrawn fro me with your flatteries, any an
uncunning and unprofitable man, as been wont to find commenly among y^ people,
I would well suffer the less grievously. For why, in soche an unprofitable man,
mine ententes were nothing endammaged. But ye withdrowen fro me this man, that
has been norished in my studies or scoles of Eleaticis, and of Achademicis in
Greece. But goes now rather away ye Metmaydens, which that been sweet, till it
be at the last, and suffers this man to be cured and healed by my Muses, yt is
to say, by my notefull Sciences. And thus this company of muses iblamed, casten
wrothly their chere douneward to the earth, and showing by redness her shame,
they passeden sorowfully the threshold. And I of whom the sight plounged in
tears was darked, so that I ne might not know what that woman was, of so
Imperial authority, I wo^e all abashed and astonished, and cast my sight down
to the earth and began still for to abide what she would done afterward. Then
came she nere, and set her down upon the vtterest corner of my bed, and she
beholding my chere, that was cast to the earth, heavy and grievous of weeping,
complained with these words (that I shall ^aine) the perturbation of my
thought.

Heu quam praecipiti mersa profundo. Men's habet, and propria luce relicta.
Tendit ad externas ire tenebras. Terrenis quoties flatibus acta. Crescit in
immensum noxia cura. Hic quondam coelo liber aperto, etc.
ALas, how the thought of this manne, dreinte in overthrowing depenesse,
dulleth and foreleteth his proper cleerenesse, mintyng to gone into forayne
darkness, as often as his anoious besinesse wexeth without measure, yt is driven
with worldly Winds. This manne that whilome was free, to whom the heaven was
open and known, and was wont to gone in heavenly paths, and saw the
lightness of the red Sun, and beheld ye Sterres of the cold Moon, and
which Sterre in heaven uses wandering recourses y^lit by diverse spheres. This
man ouercomer had comprehended all this thing, by number of accompting in
Astronomy. And over this, he was wont to seken the causes, whence ye sowning
winds mouen, and besien the smothe water of the Sea. And what Spirit tourneth
the stable heaven, And why the Sterre rises out of the red East, to fallen in
y^ westren waves. And what attempreth the lusty hours of ye first Summer
season, and highteth and apparayleth the earth with rosy flowers. And who
makes the plumtuous Autumpne, in full years fleeten with heavy Grapes. And
eke this manne was wont to tell the diverse causes of nature that were hid.
Alas, how lightly is empted the light of his thought, and his neck is pressed
with heavy chains, and bears his chere inclined adoune for ye great weight,
and is constrained to looken on the foolish earth.

Sed magis medicinae (inquit) tempus est quam querelae. Boe. Tum vero totis in
me intenta luminibus. Philo. Tu ne ille es (ait) qui nostro quondam lacte
nutritus, nostris educatus alimentis, in virilis animi robur evaseras, etc.
BUt time is now of Medicine (quoth. she) more than complaint. Forsooth then she
entending to mewarde, with all ye lookyng of her iyen, said. Art not thou he
(quoth. she) yt whilom I nourished with my milk, and fostred with my meats, were
escaped and commen to y^ courage of a parfite man? Certes, I yaue thee soche
armours, that if thou thy self ne had first cast hem away, they shoulden
have defended thee in sikernesse, that may not be ouercomen. Know thou not
me? Why art thou still? Is it for shame, or for astoniyng? It were me lever it
were for shame, but it seems me that astoniyng has oppressed thee. And when
she saw me not only still, but rather without office of tongue, and all
dombe, she laid her hand softely on my breast, and said: Here is no peril
(quoth. she) he is fallen into a litarge, which that is a common sickness to
hearts that been deceived. He has a little foryeten himself. But certes, he
shall lightly remembren himself, if so be that he has known me er now. And
that he may done so, I will wipe his iyen a little, that be darked by the cloud
of mortal things. These words said she, and with the lap of her garment,
iplited in a frounce, she dried mine iyen, that weren full of the waves of my
weepings.

Tunc me discussa liquerunt nocte tenebre, Luminibusque prior redit vigor. Ut
cum praecipiti glomerantur sidera choro. Nimbosisque polus stetit imbribus. Sol
later, ac nondum coelo venientibus astris, etc.
THus when that night was discussed away, Darkness forlette me, and to my iyen
repaired again her first strength. And right as by ensample, as ye Sun is
hid when the Sterres been covered with clouds, by a swift wind that hight
Chorus, and the Firmament stant derked by were plungy clouds: And that the
Sterres not apperen upon ye heaven, so that the night seemed sprad upon the
earth. If then the wind that hight Boreas, isent out of the Cave of the
Country of Trace, beats this night, that is to saine, chaseth it away, and
discovers y^ closed day, then shines Phoebus, ishaked with sudden light, and
smites with his beams in marueyling iyen.

Haud aliter tristitiae nebulis dissolutis, hausi coelum, and ad cognoscendam
medicantis faciem, mentem recepi. Itaque ubi in eam deduxi oculos, intuitumque
defixi, respicio nutricem meam, in cujus ab adolescentia, etc.
RIght so and none otherwise, the Clouds of sorrow dissolved, and done away,
I took heaven, and received mind to known the face of my Phisicien: so that I
set mine iyen upon her, and fastened my looking. I beheld my Nourice
Philosophy, in whose house I had conuersed fro my youth, and I said thus. O
thou Maistresse of all virtues, descended from the sovereign seat, why art
thou commen into this solitary place of mine exile? Art thou commen, for thou
art made coulpable with me of false blames. O (quoth. she) my nourice, should I
forsake thee now, and should I not parten with thee by commen travail, the
charge that thou haste suffered for envy of my name? Certes it were not lefull
ne fitting to Philosophy, to leten without company, the way of him that is
innocent: Should I then redout my blame, and agrise though there were befallen a
new thing? For trowest thou that Philosophy, be now alderfirst assailed in
perilles, by folk of wicked manner? Have I not striuen with full grate strife,
in old time, before the age of my Plato, against the foolehardinesse of folly?
And eke the same Plato living, his Master Socrates, deserved victory of
unrightful death in my presence. The heritage of the which Socrates, the
heritage, is to saine the Doctrine, of the which Socrates, in his opinion of
felicite, yt I cleape welefulness: when that the people of Epicuriens and
Stoiciens, and many other, enforced them to go ravish, every many for his
part, that is to saine, ye everich of hem would drawn, to the defense of his
opinion, the words of Socrates. They as in party of their pray, to droune
me, criyng and debating there against, and coruen and renten my clothes, that I
had wouen with mine own hands. And with tho clothes that they had araced out
of my clothes, they wenten away, wening that I had gone with hem every dele. In
which Epicuriens and Stoiciens, for as much as there seemed some traces and
steps of my habit. The folly of wenyng tho Epicuriens and Stoiciens, my
familiers, perverted some, through ye error of the wicked multitude of hem:
This is to sain, for they seemed Philosophers they weren pursued to the death
and slain. So if thou haste not known the exiling of Anaxagoras, ne the
enpoysoning of Socrates, ne the tourments of Zeno, for they weren strangers,
yet might thou have known the Senecas, the Canios, and the Soranos: Of
which folk, the renome is neither over old ne vnsolempne. The which men
nothing else ne brought to the death, but only for they were informed of my
manners, and semeden most unlike to the studies of wicked folk. And for thy,
thou ought not to wondren, though that I in the bitter Sea, be driven with
tempests blowing about. In the which this is my most purpose, that is to
saine, to displeasen wicked men. Of which shrewes, all be the host never so
great, it is to despise, for it is not governed with no leader of reason, but
it is ravished only by fletyng error, folily and lightly. And if they
sometime make an hooste against us, assail us as strenger: our leader draws
together his richesses into his Toure, and they been ententife, about sarpleris
or sachelles, unprofitable for to taken. But we then been high abouen, siker
from all tumulte and wood noise, warenestored and enclosed in soche a Paleis,
whither as the clatering or anoiyng folly may not attain, we scorn soch
raveners, and henters of foulest things.

Quisquis composito serenus evo, Fatum sub pedibus egit superbum: Fortunamque
tuens utramque rectus, Invictum potuit tenere vultum, etc.
* WHo so it be that clear of virtue, sad, and well ordinate of living, that
has put under foot the proud wierdes, and looks upright upon either
Fortune, he may holden his chere vndiscomfited.

The rages ne the manaces of the sea, commoving and chasing unware, heat from
the bottom, ne shall not move that man, ne the unstable Mountaigne that hight
Vesenus, that writheth out through his broken Chimeneis, smoking Fires, ne the
way of Thonder leites that is wont to smiten high Coures, ne shall not move
that man. Whereto then wretches dread ye Tyrants, that been wood, and felonnous
with any strength? * Hope after nothing, ne dread thou not: and so shall thou
disarmen ye ire of thilke vnmighty Tiraunt. But who that quaking dredeth, or
desires thing that is not stable of his right, that man that so does, has
cast away his shilde, and is removed fro his place, and enlaseth him in the
chain, with the which he may be drawn.

Sentis ne (inquit) haec? Atque animo illabuntur tuo? Expers ne es lyrae? Quid
fles? Quid lachrimis manas? Si operam medicantis expectas, oportet ut vulnus
detegas tuum, etc.
FElest thou (quoth. she) these things? And entren they aught in thy courage? Art
thou like an Ass to the Harp? Why wepest thou? Why spillest thou tears? * If
thou abidest after help of the Leche, thee behooves discover thy wound? Tho I
had gathered strength in my courage, and answered and said: And needs it
(quoth. I) of rehearsing, or of amonicion, and shows it not enough by himself,
the sharpenes that wexeth wood against me. Ne moves it not thee to see the
face, or the manner of this place? Is this the Library that thou had chosen
for a right certain liege, to thee in mine house there as thou disputest often
with me of the Science of things, touching divinity, and touching mankind? Was
then mine habit soche as it is now? was my face or chere, soche as it is now,
when I sought with the secrets of nature, when thou enformedest my manners, and
the reason of al my life, to thensample of thorder of heaven: Is not this the
guerdon that I refer to thee, to whom I have be obeysaunt? Certes, thou
enformedest by ye Mouth of Plato this sentence, that is to saine: That comen
things or communalties weren blisful, if they that had studied all fully to
wisdom, gouerneden thilke things: or else it so befell, yt the governors of
communalties, studien to get wisdom. Thou saidest eke by ye mouth of the said
Plato, that it was a necessary cause, wisemen to taken and desiren the
governance of comen things, for that ye governaunce of Citees, ileft in the
hands of felonous tourmentors, citizeins ne shoulden not bringen in pestilence
and destruction to good folk. And therefore I followyng thilke authors,
desired to put forth in execucion and in act, of commen administracion thilke
things, yt I had learned of thee among my secret vesting whiles, thou and GOD,
y^ put in the thoughts of wise folk, been known with me, that nothing ne
brought me to mastrie or dignity, but the common study of all goodness. And
therefore comes it, that between wicked folk and me have been grievous
discordes, that ne mighten not be released by Prayers: for this liberty has
the freedom of conscience, that ye wrath of more mighty folk, has always
been despised of me, for sauacion of right. How often have I resisted and
withstand ye man y^ hight Canigast y^ made always thassaut against ye prosper
fortunes of poor feoble folk? How often eke have I put of or cast out him
Triguill, Provost of ye Kings house, both of the wrongs that he had begone to
done, and eke fully performed. How often have I covered and defended by the
authority of me, put against perils, yt is to saine, put mine authority in
peril, for the wretched poor folk, y^ the couetise of strangers unpunished,
turmenteden always with miseases, and greuaunces out of number? Never man yet
drowe me fro right to wrong. When I saw the Fortunes and the richesses of the
people of the Provinces been harmed and amenused, either by privy rauenes, or
by commen tributes or cariages, as sorry was I as they that suffreden the harm.
Gloss. When Theoderike King of Goths in a dedde year had his garners full of
Corn, and commanded y^ no man should buy no corn, till his corn were sold,
and at a grievous dear price: Beoce withstood ye ordinance, and overcame it,
knowing all this ye king Theodorike himself. Coempcion is to say, commen achate
or buiyng together, yt were established upon the people, by soch a manner of
imposicion, as who so bought a bushel of Corn, he must yeuen the king ye
fiueth part. Cextus. When it was in ye sore hongry time, there was established
grievous and unprofitable coempcion, that men seen well, it should greatly
tourmenten and endomagen all the Province of Campaine. I took strise against ye
Provost of the Pretorie, for ye common profit. And ye knowing of it, I
overcame it, so that the coempcion was not asked, ne took effect.

Pauline a Counsailour of Room, the richesses of the which Pauline, the
hondes of the Paleis, that is to say, the officers woulden have devoured by
hope and couetise: yet drowe I out of the jowes of hem that gapeden. And for as
much as the pain of ye accusacion adjudged beforne, ne should not suddenly
henten, ne punishen wrongfully Albine a Counsailour of Room, I put me against
the hates and indignacions of the accusour, Cyprian. Is it not then enough sens
that I have purchased great discords against my self? But I ought be more
assured against other folk, that for ye love of right wisenesse I never
reserved nothing to my self, to hemward of the kings hall, by which I were the
more siker. But through tho same accusours accusing, I am condemned. Of the
number of which accusours, one Basilius that whilome was chased out of the
Kings service, is now compelled in accusing of my name, for need of foraine
money.

Also, Opilion and Gaudencius, have accused me: All be it so that the Justice
Regal had whilome deemed them both to gone into exile, for her tretcheries
and frauds without number. To which judgment they nolden not obey, but
defended hem by the sikernesse of holy houses, that is to sain, fledden into
Seintewarie: And then when this was apperceyued by ye King, he commanded, but
if they avoided the City of Rauenne, by certain day assigned, that men should
marken hem on the forehedde with an hot iron, and chasen hem out of the town.
Now what thing seems might be likened to this cruelty, for certes, this same
day was received, the accusing of my name by thilke same accusoures? What may
be said hereto? Has my study and my coning deserved thus, or else the
foresaied dampnacion of me, made them rightful accusours or no? Was not Fortune
ashamed of this? Certes, all had not Fortune ben ashamed, that innocence was
accused, yet ought she have had shame of the filth of mine accusours. But ask
thou in some, of what gilte I am accused. Men saine that I would sauen the
company of ye Senators. And desire thou to heren in what manner I am accused,
y^ I should have distourbed ye accusour to bearen Letters, by which he should
have made the Senators guilty, against the Kings royal Majesty. O Maistresse,
what demest thou of this? Shall I forsake this blame that I ne no shame to thee?
Certes, I have would it (y^ is to say) the sauacion of ye Senate, ne I shall
never let to wilne it, and that I confess and am know, but the entente of the
accusour to been distourbed, shall cease. Shall I clepe that a felony or a
sin, that I have desired the sanacion of the order of the Senate. And certes,
had thilk same Senate done through her decretes and her judgments, as though it
were a sin and a felony, that is to wilne the sauacion of them. But folly
that lies always to himself, may not change the merit of things, ne I trow
not by the judgment of Socrates, that it were lefull to me to hide the sooth,
ne assent to leasings: but certes, howsoever it be of this, I put it to
gessen or prisen, of the judgment of thee, and of wise folk, of which thing
all ye ordinance and the sooth (for as much as folk that been to comen after
our days, shall knowenit) I have put it in Scripture, and in remembrance.
For touching the Letters falsely made, by which Letters I am accused to have
hoped the freedom of Rome, with appertains me to speaken thereof. Of which
Letters, y^ fraud had been showed apertly, if I had had liberty for to have
used and been at confession of mine accusours, the which thing in all needs
has great strength. For what other freedom may men hopen? Certes, I would that
some other freedom might be hoped, I would then have answered by the words of a
man that hight Camus: for when he was accused of Canius, Caesar Germans son,
that he was knowing and consenting of a coniuration made against him: This
Canius answered thus: If I had wist it, thou had not wist it. In which
thing sorrow has not so dulled my wit, that I plain only, that shreud
folk apparailen Fellonies against virtue, but I wonder greatly, how that they
may perform things that they have hoped for to done, for why ne will ne
shreudnesse that comes perauenture of our defaut. But it is like a Monster
and a maruail, how that in ye present sight of God may been atcheued and
performed such things, as every fellonous manne has conceived in his thought
against innocents. For which thing, one of thy familiers, not unskillfully,
asked thus: If God is, whence commen wicked things. But al had it been leful,
that fellonous folk, that now desiren the blood and the death of all good men,
and eke of the Senate, have wilned to gone destroyen me, whom they have seen
always batailen and defenden good men, and eke all the Senate, that had not
deserved of the fathers (that is to sain, of the Senators) that they shoulden
will my destruction. Thou remembrest well as I guess, that when I would done or
sain any thing, thou thy self always present ruledest me.

At the city of Verone, when that the king, gredie of common slaughter, cast
him to transporten upon all the order of the Senate the guilt of his royal
Majesty, of the which gilt that Albin was accused: with how great sikernesse
of peril to me, defended I all the Senate: Thou wotest well that I say sooth,
ne I ne auaunted me never in praising of my self: For always, when any wight
receives precious renome in auaunting of himself or his works, he amenuseth
the secree of his conscience.

But now thou may well seen to what end I am comen for mine innocence, I
receive pain of false Fellonie, for guerdoun of very virtue. And what open
confession of fellome had ever Judges so accordaunt in cruelty, that is to
sain, as mine accusing has, that either error of man's wit, or else condition
of Fortune, that is uncertain unto all mortal folk, ne submitted some of hem,
that is to say, that it ne inclined some Judge to have pity or compassion. For
although I had been accused, that I would brenne holy houses, and strangle
Priests with wicked swearde, or that I had greithed death to all good men,
algates the sentence should have punished me present, confessed and convict.

But now I am removed from ye City of Rome almost five hundred thousand paas,
I am without defense dampened to proscription and to death, for the studies and
bounties that I have done to the Senate. But o well been they worthy of merit:
as who says, nay, there might yet never none of hem be convict of such a
blame as mine is, of which trespace, mine accusours seen full well ye dignity,
for they would darken it with meddling of some fellonie. They baren me on hond,
and said, that I had pollute and defouled my conscience with Sacrilege, for
couetise of dignity: and certes, thou thy self that art planted in me,
chasedest out of the siege of my courage all couetise of mortal things, ne
Sacrilege ne had no leave to have a place in me before thine eyes. For thou
droppedest every day in mine ears, and in my thought, thilke commandment of
Pythagoras, y^ is to say: * Men shall seruen to God, and not to gods. Ne it
was not convenient, ne none need to taken help of the foulest spirits. I that
thou have ordained, and set in such excellence, that thou made me like to
God, and over this, the right clean secret chamber of mine house, that is to
say, my wife, and the company of mine honest friends, and my wives father, as
well holy as worthy to be reverenced for his deeds, defenden me from al
suspection of such blame. But oh malice. For they that accusen me, taken of y^
Philosophy faith of so great blame, for they trowen, that I have had affinity
to malefice or enchauntment, because that I am replenished and fulfilled with
thy teachings, and informed of thy manners. And thus it suffices not only, that
thy reverence ne auail me naught, but if thou of thy free will rather he
blemished with mine oftencion. But certes, to y^ harms y^ I have, there
betideth yet this increase of harm, that the guessing and the judgment of much
folk, ne looken nothing to ye deserts of things, but only to y^ adventure of
fortune, and iudgen that only such things ben purueyed of God, which y^
temporal wilfulness commands. Glosa. As thus, that if a wight have
prosperity, he is a good man, and worthy to have that prosperity: and who so
has adversity, he is a wicked man, and God has forsake him, and he is worthy
to have that adversity. This is the opinion of some folk, and thereof comes
that good gessing, first of all thing forsaked wretches. Certes, it greeueth me
to think right now, in diverse sentences that the people says of me: and thus
much I say, * That the last charge of contrarious Fortune, is this, that when
any blame is laid upon a caitife, men wenen that he has deserved that he
suffers. And I that am put away from good men, and dispoyled of dignities,
and defouled of my name by gessing, have suffered turments for my good deeds.
Certes, me seems, that I see the felonous couines of wicked men habounden in
joy and gladness, and I see, that every lorell shapeth him to find new frauds
for to accuse good folk, and I see that good folk be ouerthrown for dread of my
peril, and every luxurious tourmentour dare done all fellonie unpunished, and
be excited there to by yefts, and innocents be not only dispoiled of
sikernesse, but of defense, and thereto me list to crien to God in this manner.

O stelliferi Conditor Orbis, Qui perpetuo nixus solio, Rapido Coelum turbine
versas, Legemque pati sidera cogis, ut nunc pleno lucida cornu. Totis fratris
obvia flammis. Condat stellas Luna minores: Nunc obscuro pallida cornu Phoebo
proprior lumina perdat, etc.
THou maker of the wheel that bears the sterres, which that art fastened to
thy perdurable chair, and turnest the heaven with a rauishing sweigh, and
constrainest the sterres to suffer thy Law: so that the Moon sometime shining
with her full horns, meeting with all the beams of the Sun her brother, hides
the sterres that been less. And sometime, when the Moon pale, with her dark
horns, approaches the Sun, leseth her lights: and that the euin sterre
Hesperus, which that in the first time of the night, brings first her cold
arising, comes eft again her used course, and is pale by ye morrow at rising of
the Sun, and is then icleped Lucifer. Thou restrainest the day by shorter
dwelling, in the time of the cold Winter, that makes the leaves fall. Thou
diuidest the swift tides of the night, when the hot Summer is commen. Thy
might attempreth the variaunt seasons of the year, so that Zepherus, the
debonaire wind, brings again in the first Summer season the leaves that the
wind that hight Boreas has rest away in Autumn, that is to say, the last end
of Summer: and the seeds that the sterre that hight Arcturus sew, be woxen high
corns, when the sterre Sirius enchaseth hem. There is nothing unbounden from
this old Law, ne forletteth the werk of his proper estate.

O thou governor, governing all things by certain end, why refulest thou only
to govern the werks of men by due manner: Why suffrest thou, y^ sliding fortune
turns so great enterchaunges of things, so that annoyous pain that should
duly punish Felons, punishes Innocents: And folk of wicked manners sitten in
high chaires, and annoying folk, treden (and that unrightfully) on the necks
of holy men. And virtue clear and shining naturally, is hid in derk derknesses,
and the rightful man bears the pain and the blame of the fellons. Ne the
forswearing, ne the fraud couerd and kempt with a false color, ne annoieth not
to shrewdness, the which shrewdness, when hem list usen her strength, they
reioycen hem to put under hem the sovereign kings, which that the people
without number dreden. O thou, whatsoever thou be that knittest all bonds of
things, look on these wretched earths, we men that been not a foul party, but
a fair part of so great a work, we been tourmented in this see of fortune.
Thou governor, withdraw and restrain the rauishing floods, and fasten and
ferme these earths stable, with thilke bond, with which thou gouernest heaven,
that is so large.

Haec ubi continuato dolor delatravi: illa vultu placido, nihilque meis
questubus mota. Phi. Cum te (inquit) moestum, lachrymantemque vidissem: illico
miserum exulemque cognovi. Sed quam id longinquum esser exilium.
WHen I had with a continual sorrow sobbed, or broken out these things, she
with her chere pesible and nothing amoved with my complaints, said thus. When I
saw thee (quoth. she) sorrowful and weeping, I wist anon that thou were a wretch
and exiled: But I wist never how far thine exile was, if thy tale ne had
yshewed it me. But certes, all be thou far fro thy country, thou nart not
put out of it, but thou have failed of thy way, and gone amiss. And if thou
have lever for to wene that thou be put out of thy country, then have thou put
out thy self, rather than any other wight has: for no wight (but thou thy
self) ne might never have done that to thee. For if thou remember thee of what
country thou art borne, it nis not governed by Emperors, ne by government of
multitude, as weren ye countries of hem of Athens: but one Lord, and one King,
and that is God, that is Lord of thy country, which y^ reioyseth him of the
dwelling of his citizens, and not for to put hem in exile. Of ye which Lord, it
is a feeedome to be governed by y^ bridle of him, and obey to his justice. Have
thou forgotten thilke old law of thy city, in the which city it is ordained
and established, That what wight has lever found therein his ^eat or his house,
than else where, he may not be exiled by no right from that place? For who so
that is contained within the paleis of thilk city, there is no dread that he
may deserve to be exiled. But who that lets the will tenhabit there, he
forletteth also to deserve to be a citezein of thilke city. So yt I say, that
the face of this place ne moves me not so mikell, as thine own face. Ne I ne
ask not rather ye walls of thy library, apparailed and wrought with yuorie and
with glass, than after the seat of thy thought, in which I put not whilom
books, but I put that that makes books worthy of price, or precious, yt is to
say, sentence of my books. And certainly, of thy deserts bestowed in common
good, thou have said sooth, but after ye multitude of thy good deeds, thou have
said few. And of ye honesty or of ye falsenesse of things that been opposed
against thee, thou have remembered things that be known to all folk. And of
the felonies and frauds of thine accusours, it seems thee to have touched it,
forsooth rightfully and shortly, all mighten tho same things better and more
plenteously been couth in the mouth of the people, that knows all this. Thou
haste eke blamed greatly and complained of the wrongful deed of the Senate.
And thou have sorrowed for my blame, and thou have wopen for the dommage of thy
renoun that is apaired, and thy last sorrow enchased again fortune, complaynest
the guerdons, ne be not euenly yolden to the deserts of folk. And in thy
latter end of thy wood muse, thou prayedst that thilke peace yt governs the
heaven, should govern the earth. But for that many tribulations of affections
have assailed thee, and sorrow, and ire, and weping, to draw thee diversely, as
thou art now feeble of thought, mightier remedies ne shullen not yet touchen
thee, for which we willen somdele usen lighter medecines, so so that thilke
passions that be waxen hard in swelling, by perturbations flowing into thy
thought, mowen wax easy and soft, to receive ye strength of a more mighty and
more eagre medicine, by an easier touching.

Cum Phoebi radiis grave Cancri sidus inaestuat, Tum qui largo negantibus,
Sulcis semina credidit, Elusus Cereris fide, Quarnas pergat ad arbores. Nunquam
purpureum nemus lecturus violas petas, etc.
WHen that the heavy sterre of the Cancre enchaseth by the beams of Phoebus,
that is to said, When that Phoebus ye sun is in the sign of Cancre, who so
yeueth then largely his seeds to the fields that refusen to receive hem, let
him gone beguiled of trust that he had to his corn, to Achornes of Oaks. If
thou will gather Violets, ne go thou not to ye purple wood, when the field
chirkinge, agriseth of cold, by the felenesse of the wind, that hight
Aquilone. If thou desire or wilt vsen grapes, ne seek thou not a gluttons hand
to strain and press the stalks of the vine in the first Summer season. For
Bacchus the god of wine, has rather yeuen his yeftes to Autumn, the latter
end of summer. * God tokeneth and assygneth the times, abling hem to her
proper offices, ne he suffers not the stounds, which that himself has
divided and constrained to been imedled togider: and for thy, he that
forletteth certain ordinance of doing by overthrowing way, he ne has no glad
issue or end of his works.

Primum igitur, pateris ne me pauculis rogationibus statum tuae mentis
attingere, atque tentare? ut quis modus sit tuae curationis intelligam, etc.
FIrst would thou suffer me to touch and assay the estate of thought by a
few demands, so yt I may understond by the manner of thy curacion? Ask me (quoth.
I) at thy will, that thou wolt, and I shall answer. Tho said she thus: Whether
wenest thou (quoth. she) that this world be governed foolishly by haps and
fortunes, or else wenest thou that there be in it any government of reason? B.
Certes (quoth. I) I ne trow not in no manner, yt so certain things should be
moved by Fortunous fortune. But I wot well, that God, maker and master, is
governor of his werk, ne was never yet day that might put me out of the
soothnesse of that sentence. P. So is it (quoth. she) for ye same thing sang thou
a little here beforne, and bewailedest and weptest, that only men were put out
of the cure of God, for of all other things thou ne doubtest not, that they
nere gouerued by reason. But ough, I wonder certes greatly why yt thou art
sick, sens that thou art put in so wholesome a sentence: But let us seeken
deeper, I conjecte, that there lacks I not what. But say me this. Sens that
thou ne doubtest not yt this world be governed by God, with which gouernaile
take thou heed that it is governed? Uneath (quoth. I) know I ye sentence of thy
question, so that I ne may not yet answeren to thy demands. I was not deceived
(quoth. she) yt there ne failed somewhat, by which ye malady of perturbation is
crept into thy thought, so as the strength of thy paleis shining is open: but
say me this. Remembrest thou with is ye end of things, and whider the entention
of all kind tends? I have heard told it some time (quoth. I) but drerinesse has
dulled my memory. Certes (quoth. she) thou wotest well whence all things be
comen, and proceden. I wot well (quoth. I) and aunswerde, that God is beginning
of all. And how may this be (quoth. she) ye sens thou know the beginning of
things, yt thou know not what is ye end of things, but such been ye
customs of perturbation, and this power they han, yt they may move a man from
his place, that is to say, from y^ stablenesse and perfection of his knowing:
but certes, they may not al arace him, ne alien him in all: but I would yt thou
would answer to this. Remembrest thou yt thou art a man? B. Why should I not
remember yt (quoth. I.) Phi. May thou not tell me then (quoth. she) what thing is a
man? Asks thou not me (quoth. I) whether yt I be a reasonable mortal beast, I
wot well and confess that I am it. Will thou never yet that thou were any
other thing (quoth. she.) No (quoth. I.) Now well know I (quoth. she) other cause of thy
malady, and that right great: Thou have left for to known thy self what thou
art, through which I have plainly founden the cause of thy malady, or else the
enter of recovering of thy heal. For why? For thou art confounded with
foryeting of thy self: For thou sorowdest that thou art exiled of thy proper
goods. And for thou ne wist what is the end of things, for thy, demest thou
that fellonous and wicked men be mighty and welefull: and for thou have
foryetten by which governments the world is governed, for thy, wenest thou that
these mutations of fortune fleten without governor. These ben the causes not
only to malady, but certes great causes to death: But I thank the actour and
the maker of heal, that nature has not all forleten thee. I have great
norishing of thine heal, and that is the sooth sentence of governance of the
world, that thou beleeuest, that the governing of it is not subject ne underput
to the folly of these haps auenturous, but to the reason of God: and therefore
doubt thee nothing, for of this little spark thine heat of life shall shine.
But for as much as it is not time yet of faster remedies, and the nature is of
thoughts thus deceived, that as often as they cast away sooth opinions, they
clothen hem in false opinions. Of the which false opinions, the derkenesse of
perturbation wexeth up, that confounds the very insight. And that darkness
shall I somewhat assay to maken thin and weak, by light and meaneliche
remedies, so that after that the darkness of deceyuing things be done away,
thou may know the shining of very light.

Nubibus atris condita nullum fundere possunt sidera lumen. Si mare voluens
turbidus auster misceat estum: Vitrea dudum, Parque serenis, etc.
THe sterres covered with black clouds ne mow yeten adowne no light, if the
troubled wind that hight Auster, turning and wallowing the sea, medeleth the
heat, that is to saine, the boiling up from the botome. The waves that were
whylome clear as glass, and like to the fair bright days, withstand anon the
sights of men, by the filth and ordure that is resolved. And the fleeting
stream that reileth down diversely from high mountaignes, is arrested and
resisted often time by the encounteriog of a stone, that is departed and fallen
from some roch. And for thy, if thou will looken and deem sooth with clear
light, and holden the way with a right path, weiue thou joy, drive fro dread,
fleme thou hope, ne let no sorrow approach, that is to saine, Let none of these
four passions overcome or blend thee. For cloudie and derke is thilke thought,
and bound with bridles, where as these things reignen.

Explicit Liber primus.
Post haec paulisper obticuit, atque ubi attentionem meam modesta taciturnitate
collegit, sic exhorsa est. Si poeuitus egritudinis tuae causas, habitumque, etc.
AFter this she slint a little, and after that she had gadered by a temper
stylnesse mine attencion, as who so might saine thus: After these things she
slint a little, and when she apperceiued by a temper stillness, that I was
ententiue to hearen her, she began to speak in this wise. If I (quoth. she) have
understonden and known utterly the causes and the habit of thy maladye, thou
languishest, and art defected for desire and talent of thy rather fortune. She
that ilke Fortune only, that is changed as thou fainest to thee ward, has
perverted the clerenesse and the estate of thy courage. I understonding the
fell or manyfold colors and deceits of thilke maruailous monster Fortune, and
how she uses full flattering familiarity with hem that she enforces to
beguile, so long, till that she confound with unsufferable sorrow hem that she
has left in despair, unpurueyed. And if thou remembrest well the kind, the
manners, and the desert of thilke Fortune, thou shall well know, that as in
her thou never ne had ne haste yloste any fair thing: But (as I trow) I
shall not greatly trauailen to done thee remembren on these things. For thou
were wont to hurtelen and despisen her with manly words, when she was
blandishing and present, and pursudest her with sentences that weren drawn out
of mine enter, that is to say, of mine enformacion: but no sudden mutacion ne
betideth not without a manner changing of courages. And so it is befall, that
thou art a little departed fro y^ peace of thy thought, but now is time yt thou
drink and atast some soft and delitable things, so that when they be entered
within thee, it mowen make way to strenger drinks of medecines. Come now forth
therefore the suasion of sweetness rethorien, which that goes only the right
way, while she forsakes not mine estatutes. And with Rhetorike, come forth
Music, a damosel of our house, that sings now lighter moods or prolacions,
and now heavier. What eyleth thee man? What is it that has cast thee into
mourning and into weeping? I trow that thou have seen some new thing and
uncouth? Thou wenest that fortune be changed again me, but thou wenest wrong,
if that thou wene always tho been her manners. She has rather kept as to thee
ward her proper stablenesse in the changing of her self: right such was she,
when she flattered thee and deceived thee with unleful likings and false
wilfulness. Thou have now known and atteint the doubtous or double visage of
thilke blind goddess Fortune. She that yet covers and wimpleth her to other
folk, has showed her self every dele to thee: If thou approuest her, and
think, that she is good, use her manners, and plain thee not, and if thou
agrisest her false treachery, despise and cast away her y^ plaieth so
harmfully, for she that is now cause of so much sorrow to thee, should be to
thee cause of peace and of joy. She has forsaken thee forsooth, y^ which that
never man may be siker, y^ she ne shall forsaken him. Gloss. But nathelesse,
some books have the text thus. For sooth she has forsaken thee, ne there nis
no man siker, y^ she ne has not forsaken. Hold thou then thilk welefulnesse
precious to thee that shall passen? and is present fortune dear worth to thee,
which yt nis not faithful for to dwell, and when she goes away, that she
brings a wight in sorrow? For sens she may not be withholden at a man's will,
she makes him a wretch when she departs fro him. What other thing is
fleeting fortune, but a manner showing of wretchedness that is to come. Ne it
suffiseth not only to looken on thing that is present before the eyes of a man,
but wisdom looks and measures the end of things, and the same changing from
one to another, that is to sain, from adversity into prosperity, makes that
the menaces of fortune ne been not for to dreden, ne the flattering to be
desired. Thus at last it be hooueth the^ to suffren with evil will in
patience, all that is done within the floor of fortune, that is to lay, in
this world, since thou half ones put thy neck under y^ yoke of her. For if thou
wolt written a law of wending and of dwelling to Fortune, which that thou have
chosen freely to ben thy lady: Art thou not wrongful in that, and make
Fortune wroth and asper by thine impacience, and yet thou may not chaungen
her?

If thou committest and betakest thy fails to the wind, thou shall be shouen,
not thider that thou would, but whider that the wind shoueth thee. If thou
castest thy seeds in the fields, thou should have in mind, that the years
been amongs other while plentuous, and other whiie barrein. Thou have betaken
thy self to the governance of Fortune, and for thy, it behooves thee to been
obeysant to the manners of thy lady. Enforcest thou thee to arresten or
withholden the swiftness and the sweigh of her tourning wheel? O thou fool of
all mortal fools, if Fortune began to dwell stable, she ceased then to ben
Fortune.

Haec cum superba verterit vices dextra, Ex aestuantis more fertur Euripi.
Dudum tremen dos seva proterit reges, Humilemque victi sublevat fallax vultum.
Non illa dura miseros audit, haud curat flerus, etc.
WHen Fortune with a proud right hand withtourned her changing stounds, she
fares like the manners of the boiling Euripe.

Glosa. Euripe is an arm of the sea, that ebbeth and flows, and sometime the
streme is on o side, and sometime on that other.

Text. She cruel Fortune casseth adown kings, that whylome weren ydrade, and
she deceiuable, enhaunseth up the humble there of him that is discomfited: ne
she neither hears ne recketh of wretched weepings. And she is so hard, that
she laugheth and scorneth the weeping of hem, the which she has maked to weep
with her free will. Thus she plays and thus she proves her strengths, and
shows a great wonder to all her servants, if that a wight is seen welefull,
and overthrown in an hour.

Vellem autem pauca tecum, Fortunae ipsius verbis agitare. Tu igitur an jus
postulet animadverte. P. Quid tu o homo ream me agis quotidianis querelis, etc.
CErtes, I would pleaden with thee a few things, using the words of Fortune:
take heed now thy self, if that she ask right. O thou man, wherefore make
thou me guilty by thine every days plainings?

What wrong have I done thee? with goods have I beraft thee, that were thine?
Strive or plete with me before what judge that thou will, of the possession, of
richesses, or of dignities, and if thou may shown me, that ever any mortal
manne has received any of tho things, to ben his in proper, then will I grant
freely, yt thilk things were thine, which that thou ask. When that nature
brought thee forth out of thy mothers womb, I received thee naked and needy of
all things, and I nourished thee with all my richesses, and was ready and
ententife through my favor to sustain thee: and that makes thee now impacient
against me. And I enuironned thee with all haboundance and shining of all goods,
that been in my right: now it likes me to withdraw mine hond. Thou have had
grace as he that has used foreign goods. Thou have no right to plain thee, as
though thou had utterly forlorn all thy things. Why plainest thou then? I
have done to thee no wrong: richesses, honors, and such other things ben of my
right: my servants known me for her lady: they come with me, and departen when
I wend. I dare well affirm hardly, that if tho things, of which thou plainest
that thou have forlorn, had been thine, thou ne had not forlorn hem. Shall I
then be defended only to use my right? Certes, it is lefull to the heaven to
make clear days, and after that, to overcome tho same days with derk nights.
The year has eke leave to apparaile the visage of the earth, now with flowers,
and now with fruit, and to confound hem sometime with rains and with cold.

The sea has eke his right, to ben sometime caulm and blandishing, with smooth
water, and sometime to be horrible, with waves and with tempests. But couetise
of men, yt may not be stanched, shall it bind me to be steadfast, sithen yt
steadfastness is uncouth to my manners. Such is my strength, and such play I
play commonly. I turn the whirling wheel with the turning circle, I am glad to
changen the lowest to the highest, and the highest to the lowest. Worth up if
thou wolt, so it be by this law, yt thou ne hold not that I do thee wrong,
though thou descend adown, when ye reason of my play asks it. Wost thou not
how Cresus, king of Lidians, of which king Cyrus was full sore aghast, a little
beforne that this Cresus was caught of Cyrus, and led to the fire to be
brend, but that a rain descended from heaven, that rescowed him? And it is out
of mind, how that Paulus, Consul of Rome, when he had taken the king of
Perciens, weped pitously for the captivity of ye self king? What other thing
bewaylen the cryings of tragedies, but only the deeds of fortune, yt with an
awkward stroke ouertourneth the realms of great nobley. Gloss. Tragedy is to
saine, a ditee of a prosperity for a time, that ends in wretchedness.
Lernedest not thou in Greece when thou were young, that in the enter or in the
seller of Jupiter, there ben couched two tonnes, that one is full of good, that
other is full of harm? What right have thou to plain, if thou have taken more
plentuously of the good side, that is to sain, of richesse, and prosperity? And
what eke if I be not all departed fro thee? What eke if my mutabilitie yeueth
thee rightful cause of hope to have yet better things? nathelesse, dismay thee
not in thy thought. And thou yt art put in the commune realm of all, ne desire
not to liuen by thine own proper right.

Si quantas rapidis flatibus incitus Pontus versat arenas. Aut quot stellifei
is edita noctibus Coelo Sidera fulgent: Tantas fundat opes, nec retrahat manum
pleno copia cornu: Humanum miseras haud ideo genus cesset flere querelas, etc.
THough plenty, goddess of riches, hylde a down with a full horn, and
withdraw not her hand, as many richesse as the sea tourneth upward sands, when
it is moved with rauishing blasts, or else, as many richesses as there shinen
bright sters in the heaven on the sterrie nights: yet for all that, mankind
nolde not cease to weep wretched plaints. And all be it so, that God received
her prayers, and yeueth hem as full large much gold, and apparaileth covetous
folk with noble or clear honors: yet seems him have gotten nothing. But
always cruel rauine devouring all that they have gotten, shows other gapings,
that is to say, gapen and desiren yet after mo richesses. What bridles might
withholden to any certain end the disordinant couetie of men, when ever the
rather that it fleteth in large yefts, the more brenneth in hem the lust of
having? Certes, * He that quaking and dredefull weneth himself needy, he ne
lives neuermore rich.

His igitur, si pro se tecum, verbis fortuna loqueretur, quid profecto
contrahisceres, non haberes. At si quid est, quo querelam tuam jure tuearis,
proferas oportet.
THerefore if that fortune speak with thee for her self in this manner,
forsooth thou ne had not what thou might answer. And if thou have any
thing wherewith thou may rightfully defenden thy complaint, it behooves
thee to shown, and I woll yeuen to thee space to tellen it. Boecius.
Certainly (quoth. I then) these been fair things, and anointed with honey,
sweetness of Rhethorike and Music, and only while they been heard and sown
in ears, they been delicious. But to wretches it is a deeper felyng of harm,
this is to said, that wretches feelen the harms that they suffer more
grievously, than the remedies or the delights of these words may gladden or
conforten hem: So that when these things stinten for to sown in ears, that
sorrow that is inset, greueth ye thought. P. Right so it does (quoth. she.) For
these ne been yet no remedies of the malady, but they been a manner nourishing
of thy sorrows, that rebel against thy curacion. For when time is, I shall
move and ajust such things that peircen hem full deep. But nathelesse that thou
shall not wilne to leten thy self a wretch. Have thou foryeten the number and
the manner of thy welefulnesse, I speak not how that the soueraign men of the
City took thee in cure and keeping, when. thou were orphelyn of father and of
mother, and were chosen in affinity of princes of the city, And thou began
rather to be lefe and dear, than for to be a neighbor, the which thing is the
most precious kind of any propinquitie or alliance that may been. Who is it
that ne said tho, that thou ne were right welefull, with so great nobley as
thy fathers in law, and with the chastity of thy wife, and with the
opportunity and noblesse of thy masculine children, that is to said, thy
sons? And over all this (me list to passen of common things) how thou had
in thy youth dignities, that were warned to old men: but it deliteth me now to
commen to the singular up-heaping of thy welefulnesse. If any fruit or mortal
things may have any wight or price of welefulnesse, might thou ever
foryeten for any charge of harm which might befall, the remembrance of
thilke day, that thou saw thy two sons made counsailours, and ladde together
from thy house under so great assemble of Senators, and under the blithnesse
of the people? And when thou saw hem set in the court in high chaires of
dignities. Thou Rhetorien or pronouncer of kings praisings, deseruedest glory
of wit and of eloquence, when thou sitting between thy two sons, counsaylours,
in the place that hight Circo, and fulfille dest the bidding of the multitude
of people that was spradde about thee with so large praising and laud, as men
sing in victories. Tho yaue thou to Fortune, as I trow, that is to say, tho
feoffedest thou Fortune with glorious words, and deceive dest her when she
acoyed and nourished thee as her own delices. Thou bare away of Fortune a yest,
y^ is to say, such guerdon that she never yaue to private man. Will thou
therefore lay a reckning with Fortune? She has now first twidckled upon thee
with a wicked eye. If thou consider the number and the manner of thy blisses
and of thy sorows, thou may not forsaken, that nart yet blisful. For if
therefore thou wenest thy self not welefull for tho things that seemeden
joyful, ben passed, there nis not why thou should seem thy self a wretch,
for things that seemed now sorry, passen also. Art thou now commen a sudden
ghest into the shadow or tabernacle of this life? or trowest thou that any
steadfastness be in man's things? When often a swift hour dissolueth the same man,
that is to say, when the soul departed from the body. For although, that selde
is there any faith that fortunous things would dwellen: yet nathelesse, the
last day of a man's life is a manner death to Fortune, and also to thike that
has dwelt. And therefore what wenest thou does recke, if thou forlet her in
dying, or else that she Fortune forlete thee in flyen away.

Cum polo Phoebus, roseis quadrigis Lucem spergere caeperit, Pallet albentes
hebetara vultus Flammis stella permentibus, etc.
WHen Phoebus the Sun begins to spread his clearenesse with Rosen
charriots, then the sterre dimmed, paleth her white cheres by the flames of the
sun that over comes the sterre light: that is to said, when the sun is
risen, the day-sterre wexeth pale, and leseth her light. For the great
lightness of the sun, when the wood wexeth rodie of rosen flours in ye first
Summer season, through the breath of the wind Zepherus, that wexeth warm: if
the cloudie wind Auster blow fell liche, then goes away fairness of
thorns. Often the sea is clear and caulme with moving floodes, and often the
horrible wind Aquilon moves boiling tempest, and over whelueth the sea. If the
form of this world is so selde stable, and if it turns by so many
enterchaunges, will thou then trusten in the tumbling fortunes of men? Will thou trowen on fleeting goods? It is certain, and established by law
perdurable, that nothing that is engendered, is steadfast ne stable.

Tum ego, vera inquam, commemoras o virtutum omnium nutrix: nec inficiati
possum prosperitatis meae velocissimum cursum. Sed hoc est, quid, etc.
THen said I thus: O nourice of all virtues, thou say full sooth, ne I may
not forsake the right swifte course of my prosperitye, that is to saine, that
the prosperitye ne be commen to me wonder swiftly and soon. But this is a
thing that greatly smarteth me, when it remembers me: For in all adversities
of Fortune, the most vnselie kind of contrarious Fortune, is to have been
welefull. Phi. But that thou abiest thus (quoth. she) yt tourment of thy false
opinion, that may thou not rightfully blamen, ne aretten to things, as who
says, that thou have yet many haboundances of things. Textus. For all be it
so, that the idle name of aduenturous welefulnesse moves thee now, it is
lefull, that thou reckon with me of how many things thou have yet plenty. And
therefore, if yt thilk thing that thou had for more precious, in all thy
richesse of Fortune, be kept to thee, yet by the grace of God, vnwemmed and
vndefouled: may thou then plain rightfully upon the mischief of Fortune,
sithen thou have yet thy best things? Certes, yet lives in good point thilke
precious honor of mankind, Symachus thy wives father, which yt is a man made of
all Sapience and Virtue, the which man thou would buy with the price of thine
own life, he bewayleth the wrongs that men done to thee, and not for himself:
For he lives in sikernesse of any Sentence put against him. And yet lives thy
wife, that is attempre of wit, and passing other women in cleanenesse of
chastity: and for I would close. ^ shortly her hounties, she is like her
father: I tell thee yt she lives, loath of this life, and keeps to thee only
her ghost, and is all mate and overcome by weeping and sorrow, for desire of
thee. In the which thing only, I mote graunten thee, yt thy welefulnesse is
amenused. What shall I saine eke of thy two sons, counsaylours, of which, as of
children of her age, there shines the likeness of the wit of her father, and
of her elde father? And sithen the souerain cure of all mortal folk, is to
sauen her own lives, if thou know thy self, thy goods make thee more welefull.
For yet ben there things dwelled to thee ward, that no man doubts, that they
ne been more deereworth to thee, than thine own life. And for thy, dry tears,
for yet is not every Fortune hateful to thee ward: ne ouergreat tempest ne
has not yet fallen upon thee, when thine ankers cleven fast, that neither woll
sufferen ye comfort of this time present, ne the hope of time coming, to passen
ne to failen. Bo. And I pray (quoth. I) that fast mote they holden: for ye whiles
that they holden, howsoever that things been, I shall well fleten forth and
escapen. But thou may well seen, how great apparailes and array that me
lacked, that be passed away fro me. Phi. I have somewhat advanced and furthered
thee (quoth. she) if yt thou annoy not, or forthink not of all thy fortune, as who
says, I have somewhat comforted thee, so yt thou tempest not thee thus with
all thy fortune, sithen thou have yet thy best things. But I may not fuffren
thy delices, y^ plainest so weeping and anguishous, for that there lacks
somewhat to thy welefulnesse. For what man is he that is so sad, or of great
perfect welefulnesse, that he ne strives and playneth on some half again the
quality of his estate?* For why, full anguishous thing is ye condition of man's
goods. For either it comes not all together to a wight, or else it ne lasts
not perpetuell. For some man has great richesse, but he is ashamed of his
vngentill lineage. And some man is renomed of noblesse of kinrede, but he is
enclosed in so great anguish of need of things, yt him were lever that he were
unknow. And some man haboundeth both in richesse and noblesse, but yet he
bewayleth his chaste life, for he ne has no wife. And some man is, and selily
married, but he has no children, and nourishes his richesses to strange folk.
And some man is gladded with children, but he weepeth full sore for the
trespace of his son, ^or of his daughter. And for this there ne accords no
wight lightly to yt condition of his fortune. For always, to every man there is
in somewhat that unassayed, he ne wot naught, or else he dreadeth that he has
assayed. And add this also, that every welefull man has a full delicate
feeling: so that but if all things befallen at his own will, he is impacient,
or is not used to have none adversity, anon he is thrown adown for every
little thing: and full little things been tho, that withdrawn the sum or the
perfection of blissfulness, fro hem that been most fortunate. How many men
trowest thou, would deemen hemselfe to ben almost in heaven, if they mighten
attain to the least party of the remenaunt of thy fortune? This same place,
that thou cleapest exile, is country to them that enhabiten here. And for thy,
nothing wretched, but when thou wenest it: as who says, thou thy self, ne no
wight else nis a wretch, but when he weneth himself he is a wretch, by
reputation of his courage. And ayenward, all fortune is blisful to a man, by
the agreeabilitie or by the egalitie of him that suffers it. What man is
that, that is so weleful, that nold changen his estate when he has lost his
patience? The sweetness of man's welefulnesse, is sprant with many
bitternesses. The which welefulnesse, although it seem sweet and joyful to him
that uses it, yet may it not been withholden, that it ne goes away when it
woll. Then it is well seen, how wretched is the blissfulness of mortal things,
that neither it dureth perpetuel with hem, that every fortune receiuen
agreeably or egally, ne it deliteth not in all to hem that been anguishous. O ye
mortal folk, what seek ye then blissfulness out of your own self, which is put
in your self? Error and folly confounds you. I shall show thee shortly the
point of soueraign blissfulness.

Is there any thing to thee more precious than thy life? Thou will answer,
nay. Then, if it so be, that thou art mighty over thy self, that is to sain,
by tranquillity of thy soul, then have thou thing in thy power, that thou
noldest never lesen: Ne Fortune may not bynemme it thee. And that thou may
know that blissfulness ne may not stand in things that been fortunous and
temporell, now understand and gather it together thus. If blissfulness be the
soueraign good of nature, that lives by reason: ne thilke thing is not
soueraign good, that may be taken away in any wise.

For more worthy thing is, and more dign thilke thing, that may not be taken
away. Then shows it well, that the unstableness of Fortune may not attain
to receive very blissfulness. And yet moreover, what manne that this tumbling
welefulnesse leads, either he wot that it is changeable, or else he wot it
not? And if he wot it not, what blisful fortune may there been in the
blindness of ignorance? And if he wot that it is chaungeable, he mote always
ben adrad, that he ne lose that thing, that he ne doubts not but that he may
lesen it. As who faith, he mote always be aghast, least he lose that, that he
woteth right well he may lose. For which, the continual dread that he has, ne
suffers him not to be welefull. Or else if he lose it, he weneth to be
despised and foreleten. Certes, eke that is a full little good, that is born
with even heart, when it is lost, that is to sain, that men do no more force of
the loss, than of the having. And for as much as thou thy self art he, to whom
it has be showed, and preued by full many demonstrations, as I wot well, that
the souls of men ne mowen not dien in no wise. And eke sens it is clear and
certain, yt fortunous welefulnesse ends by the death of the body: it may not
be doubted, that if death may take away blissfulness, that all y^ kind of
mortal thing ne descends into wretchedness, by the end of death. And sithen
we know well, that many a man has sought the fruit of blissfulness, not only
with suffering of death, but eke with suffering of pains and tourments: how
might then this present life make men blisfull, sens that thilk self life
ended, it ne makes folk no wretches.

Quisquis volet perennem
Cautus ponere sedem.
Stabilisque nec sonori
Sterni flatibus Euri,
Et fluctibus minantem.
Curat spernere pontum
Montis cacumen alti,
Bibulas vitet arenas, etc.
WHat manner of folk, ware and stable, that woll founden hem a perdurable seat,
and ne will not be cast down with the loud blasts of the wind Eurus, and will
despise the Sea, menasing with floudes: let him eschew to builden on the coppe
of the Mountain, or in the moist Sands. For if the fell wind Auster tormenteth
the coppe of the Mountains with all her strengths, and the lose sands refusen
to bear the heavy weights. And for thy, if thou wolt flien the perilous
adventure, that is to say, of the world, have mind certainly to set thine house
of a merry seat in a low stone. For although the wind troubling the sea,
thunder with overthrowing, thou that art put in quiet, and welefull, by
strength of thy palleis, shall lead a clear age, scorning the woodnesse and the
ires of the air.

Sed quoniam rationum jam in te mearum fomenta discendunt, paulo validioribus
utendum puto. Age enim. Si jam caduca ac momentaria fortunae, etc.
But for as much as the nourishings of my reason discenden now into thee, I
trow it were time to vsen a little stronger medicines. Now understand here, all
were it so, that the yefts of Fortune ne were not brittle, ne transitory, what
is there in hem that may be thine in any time? Or else, that it ne is foul, if
that it be looked and considered perfitly. Richesses, been they precious by the
nature of hemself, or else by the nature of thee? What is most worth of
richesse? Is it not gold, or might of money assembled? Tertes, that gold and
that money shines, and yeueth better renome to them that dispenden it, than to
thilk folk that muckeren it: for avarice makes always muckerers to ben hated,
and largess makes folk clear of renome. For since that such things as ben
transferred from one man to another, ne may not dwell with no man: Certes, then
is that money precious, when it is translated into other folk, and stinten to
be had by usage of large yeuing, of him that has yeuen it. And also, if all
the money that is over all, in all the world, were gadered toward one man, it
should make all other men to be needy, as of that. And certes, a voice all
hole, yt is to sain, without amenusing, fulfilleth together the hearing of much
folk. And when they ben apassed, needs they maken hem poor, that forgone tho
richesses.

O, strait and needy clepe I these richesses, sens yt many folk ne may not have
it all, ne all ne may it not commen to one man, without poverty of all other
folk. And the shining of gems, that I call precious stones, draws it not the
eyes of folk to hemward, that is to sain, for the beauty? But certes, if there
were beauty or bounty in shining of stones, thilk clearness is of the stones
hemself, and not of men. For which I wonder greatly, that men maruailen on such
things. For why, what thing is it, that if it wants moving, and joyncture of
soul and body, that by right might seemen a fair creature to him that has a
soul of reason. For all be it so, yt gems drawn to hemself a little of the last
beauty of the world, through thentent of her creator and y^ distinction of
hemself: yet for as mikel as they ben put under your excellence, they ne have
not deserved by no way, that ye should maruailen on hem. And the beauty of
fields, delights it not mikell unto you?

B. Why should it not delighten us, since that it is a right fair portion of
the right fair work, that is to said, of this world? And right so been we
gladded sometime of y^ face of the sea, when it is clear: And also maruailen we
on the Heaven, and on the Stars, and on the Sun, and on the Moon. Phi.
Appertains (quoth. she) any of thilk things to thee? Why dare thou glorify
thee in the shining of any such things? Art thou distingued and embelised by
the springing flowers of the first Summer season? Or swells thy plenty in
fruits of Summer? Why art thou ravished with idle joys? Why embracest thou
strange goods, as they were thine? Fortune ne shall never make, that such
things been thine, that nature of things has maked foreign fro thee. Sooth it
is, that withouten doubt the fruits of the earth owen to be to the nourishing
of beasts. And if thou wolt fulfill thy need, after that it suffiseth to
nature, then is it no need yt thou seek after the superfluity of fortune. *
For with full few things and with full little things, nature has her apaid.
And if thou wolt achoken yt fulfilling of nature with superfluities, certes,
thilke things yt thou wolt thresten or pouren into nature, shullen ben unjoyful
to thee, or else annoyous. Wenest thou eke, yt it be a fair thing, to shine with
diverse clothings? Of which clothing, if yt beauty be agreeable to looken upon,
I woll maruailen on ye nature of the matter of thilk clothes, or else on the
workman that wrought hem. Does also a long rout of meine make thee a blisfull
man? The which servants, if they ben vicious of conditions, it is a great
charge, and destruction to the house, and a great enemy to ye sord himself: And
if they ben good men, how shall strange and foreign goodness be put in the
number of thy richesses? So that by all these foresaid things it is clearly
showed, that never one of thilk things, yt thou accomptedest for thy goods, nas
not thy good. In which things, if there be no beauty to be desired, why
should thou be sorry to lose them? Or why should thou rejoice thee to
hold hem? For if they been fair of their own kind, with appertains yt to thee?
For also well shoulden they have been fair by himself, though they were departed
from thy richesses. For why, fair ne precious were they not, for that they
commen among thy richesses: but for they seemed fair and precious, therefore
thou had lever reckon hem among thy richesses. But what desire thou of
Fortune, with so great afare? I trow thou sekest to drive away need, with
abundance of things: but certes, it turns you all into the contrary. For
why, certes it needs full many helpings to keepen ye diversity of precious
hostile ments. And sooth it is, * That of many things they have need, yt many
things have: And ayenward, of little thing needs him that measures his fill
after the need of kind, and not after outrage of couetise. It is so then, that
ye men have no proper good set in you, for such ye moten seek outward, in
foreign and subject things. So is then the condition of things turned up so
down, that a man yt is a divine creature, by merit of his reason, thinks that
himself nis neither fair ne noble, but if it be through possession of
hostiliments, that ne han no life: and certes al other things ben apaied of her
own beauties: but ye men that be semblable to God by your reasonable thought,
desiren to apparailen your excellent kind with the lowest things. Ne ye
understood not how great a wrong is done to your creator. For he would that
mankind were most worthy and noble of any yearthly thing: and ye thresten down
your dignities beneathen the lowest things. For if that all the good of every
thing be more precious than is thilke thing, whose that the good is, since ye
deemen, that the foulest things been your goods, then submitten ye, and put
your selven under the foulest things by your estimation. And certes, this
betideth not without your desert. For certes, such is the condition of all
mankind, that only when he has knowing of it self, then passes it in
noblesse all other things. And when it forletteth the knowing of it self, then
it is brought beneathen all beasts. For why, all other living creatures han of
kind to known not himself. But when that men letten the knowing of hemselfe,
it comes hem of vice. But how broad shows the error and the folly of you
men, yt wenen that any thing may ben apparailed with strange apparailements?
But forsooth that may not be done. For if a wight shines with things that been
put to him, as thus: If thilke things shinen with which a man is apparailed,
certes, thilke things been commended and praised, with which he is apparailed;
but natheles, the thing that is covered and wrapped under that, dwells in his
filthe. And I deny that thilk thing be good, yt anoyeth him yt has it. Gabbe I
of this? Thou wolt say nay. Certes, richesses have annoyed full often hem that
han had tho richesse: Since y^ every wicked shrew for his wickedness is ye more
greedy after other folks richesses. Whersoever it be in any place, be it gold
or precious stones; he weneth him only most worthy that has hem. Thou then yt
so busy dredest now the swerd and the spear, if thou had entered in the
path of this life, annoyen wayfaring men, then would thou sing before the
thief, as who says, * A poor man that bears no richesse on him by ye way,
may boldly sing beforne thieves, for he has not whereof to be robbed. O
precious and right clear is the blisfulness of mortal richesse, that when thou
have gotten it, then have thou lorne thy sikernesse.

Foelix nimium prior aetas, Contenta fidelibus arvis. Nec inerti perdita luxu.
Facilique sera solebat Jejunia solvere glande. Nec bacchia munera norat liquido
confundere melle. Nec lucida vellera serum, etc.
BLisful was the first age of men, they held hem apayed with the meats that the
true fields broughten forth: they ne destroyed nor deceived not hemselfe with
outrage: they weren wont lightly to slaken her hunger at even with Achornes of
Oaks: they ne could not medell the yefte of Bacchus to the clear honey, that
is to sain, they could make ne piemente or clarre: Ne they could not medell the
bright fleeces of the Country of Syrians with the venime of Tirie: this is to
saine, they could not dyen white fleeces of Syrian country, with the blood of
a manner Shellfish that men finden in Tyrie, with which blood men dyen Purple.

They slepten wholesome sleeps upon ye grass, and dronken of the renning waters,
and lien under ye shadows of ye high Pine trees. Ne no gheste or stranger ne
carfe yet ye high sea with oars or with ships: ne they ne hadden seine yet
no new stronds to leaden Merchandise into diverse Countries. Tho weren the
cruel clarions full hust, and full still. Ne blood y^^ad by eagre hate, ne had
dyed yet armures. For whereto would woodnesse of enemies first mouen arms,
when they sawen cruel wounds, ne none meedes be of blood yshad? I would that
our times should turn again to the old manners. But the anguishous love of
having, in folk, burns more cruelly than the mountain of Ethna, that aye
brenneth. Alas, what was he that first dalfe up the gobbets or the weights of
gold, covered under earth, and the precious stones that woulden have be hid? *
He dalfe up precious perils, that is to sain, that he hem first up dalfe, he
dalfe up a precious peril, for why, for the preciousnesse of such thing has
many man ben in peril.

Quid autem de dignitatibus, potentiaque disseram, quas vos, vere dignitatis,
ac potestatis inscii, Coelo exaequatis? Quae si in improbissimum quemque
ceciderint, etc.
But what shall I say of dignities and powers, the which ye men, that neither
known very dignity ne very power, areisen as high as the heaven? The which
dignities and powers, if they commen to any wicked man, they done as great
damages and destructions, as does the flame of ye mountain Ethna, when ye
flame walloweth up, ne no deluvy ne does so cruel harms. Certes, ye remember
well (as I trow) yt thilke dignity, ye men cleape the Imperie of counsaylours,
the which whylome was beginning of freedom, your elders coueited to have done
away, for the pride of the counsailours. And right for that same, your elders
before that time had done away out of the City of Rome the Kings name, that is
to sain, they nolde have no longer no King. But now, if so be yt dignities and
powers ben yeuen to good men, the which thing is full seld, what agreeable things
is there in tho dignities and powers, but only the goodness of folk that
vsen hem? And therefore is it thus, yt honor comes not to virtue, because of
dignity: but ayenward, honor comes to dignity for cause of virtue. But
which is thilke your deere-worth power, that is so clear, and so requirable?
O ye yearthly creatures, consider ye not over which thing it seems that ye
have power? Now, if thou saw a mouse among other mice, that challenged to
himselfeward right and power over all other Mice, how great scorn would
thou have of it? Glosa. So fares it by men, the body has power over ye body:
for if thou look well upon the body of a wight, what thing shall thou find more
frail than is mankind? The which men full often be slain by biting of Flies,
or else with entering or creeping worms into the priuities of man's body. But
where shall men finden any man y^ may exercisen or haunten any right upon
another man, but only on his body or else upon things that been lower than the
body, the which I cleape Fortunes possessions? May thou have ever any
commandment over a free courage? May thou remeue fro the state of his
proper rest a thought yt is cleaving together in himself by steadfast reason?
As whylome a tyrant wened to confound a free man of courage, and wend to
constrayne him by tourments, to maken him discoueren and accusen folk that
wislen of coniuracion, which I clepe confederacy, yt was cast again this
tyrant: but this freeman hot off his own tongue, and cast it in the visage
of thilke wood Tyrant. So that the torments that this wood Tyrant wend to
have made matter of cruelty, this wise man made matter of virtue. But with thing
is it that a man may do to another man yt he ne may receiuen the same thing of
other folk in himself? or thus: What may a man done to folk, yt folk ne may
done to him the same? I have heard told of Busiride, that was wont to slean
his ghestes that harbouren in his house: and he was slain himself by
Hercules, that was his ghest.

Regulus had taken in battle many men of Afric, and cast hem into fetters:
but soon after he must yeuen his hands to be bound with the cheines of hem
that he had whylome ouercommen. Wenest thou then, that he be mighty, that has
power to done that y^ other ne may done in him, that he can do to other? And
yet moreover, if so were, yt these dignities of powers hadden any proper or
natural goodness in hem, never nold they commen to shrewes. For contrarious
things ne been wont to been ifellowshipped togethers. Nature refuses yt
contrarious things ben joined. And so as I am in certain that wicked folk
have dignities often time, then shows it well, that dignities and powers ne
been not good of her own kind, sens that they sufferen hemself to cleauen or
joynen hemself to shrewes. And certain the same thing may I most dignely
judgen, and saine of all ye yefts of Fortune, yt most plenteously commen to
shrewes, of which yefts I trow, it ought be considred, that no man doubts
that he is strong, in whom he sees strength: and in whom swiftness is, sooth
it is that he is swift.

Also Music makes Musiciens, and Physic makes Physiciens, and Rhetoric
eke Rhetoriciens. For why, the nature of every thing makes his property, ne
it is not entermedled with yt effect of contrarious things. But certes,
richesses may not restrain avarice vnstaunched. * Ne power ne makes not a man
mighty over himself, which yt vicious lusts holden distrained with chains,
that ne mowen not be vnbounden. And dignities, that be yeuen to shreud folk,
not only ne makes hem not digne, but shows rather all openly that they been
unworthy and indigne. And it is thus. For certes, ye have joy to clepe things
with false names, that bearen hem in all the contrary, the which names ben full
often reproved by the effect of the same things. So that these ilke richesses
ne oughten not by right to be cleped richesses, ne such power ne ought not to
be cleped power, ne such dignity ne ought not to be cleaped dignity. And at
last I may conclude y^ same thing of all the yefts of fortune: In which there
nis nothing to be desired, ne yt has in himself natural bounty, as it is
well iseene, for neither they ioynen hem not always to good men, ne maken hem
always good, to whom they been joined.

Novimus, quantas dederit ruinas. Urbe flammata, patribusque caesis. Fratre qui
quondam ferus interempto, matris effuso maduit cruore. Corpus and visu gelidum
pererrans, ora non tinxit lachrimis: sed esse, Censor extincti potuit decoris,
etc.
WE have well known, how many great harms and distructions were done by the
Emperor Nero. He let brennen the City of Rome, and made slay the Senators,
and he cruel whilome slough his brother: and he was made moiste with the blood
of his mother, that is to say, he let sleen and slitten ye womb of his mother,
to seen where he was conceived, and he looked on every halue of her dedde cold
body, ne no tear wette his face, but he was so hard hearted, yt he might be
domes man, or Judge of her dedde beauty. And nathelesse, yet governed this
Nero by scepter, all the people that Phoebus may seen coming, from his vtterest
arising, till he hid his beams under the wawes: yt is to saine, he governed all
ye peoples, by Septre Imperial, that the Sun goes about fro East to west.
And eke this Nero governed by Septre, all the peoples that be under ye cold
sterres, that highten the Septentrions, that is to sain, he governed all the
peoples yt be under ye party of the North. And eke Nero governed all the
peoples that ye violent wind Nothus skorclith, and baketh the brenning sands,
by his dry heat, that is to say, all ye peoples in the South. But yet ne
might not all his power turn the woodnesse of this wicked Nero. * Alas it is
a grievous Fortune as often as a wicked sweard is joined to cruel venime, that is
to say, venomous cruelty to Lordship.

Tunc ego. Scis (inquam) ipsa, minimam nobis ambitionem mortalium rerum fuisse
dominatam. Sed materiam gerendis rebus optavimus, quo ne virtus cacita
consenesceret. P. Et illa. Atqui hoc unum est, etc.
THen said I thus: Thou wotest well thy self, that the couetise of mortal
things, ne hadden never Lordship in me. But I have well desired matter of
things to done, as who says, I desire to have matter of gouernaunces over
comminalties, for virtue still should not elden: that is to saine, lest er that
he wext old his virtue that lay now still ne should not perish unexercised in
governance of commune, for which men might speaken or written of his good
government. Phi. Forsooth (quoth. she) and that is a thing that may drawn to
governance soche hearts as been worthy and noble of her nature: but nathelesse
it may not drawn or tellen such hearts as been ybrought to the full perfection
of virtue, that is to sain, couetise of glory and renome, to have well
administered ye common things, or done good deserts, to profit of ye common.
For see now and consider, how little and how void of all price is thilke glory,
certain thing is as thou have learned by ye demonstracion of Astronomy, that
al ye enuironning of ye earth about, ne halt but the reason of a prick, at ye
regard of the greatness of ye heaven, that is to sain, y^ if there were maked
comparison of the earth to ye greatness of heaven, men would judgen in all
that ne held no space. Of ye which little region of this world, the fourth part
of the earth is inhabited with living beasts that we known, as thou have thy
self ilearned by Ptholome that proves it. And if thou had withdrawn and
abated in thy thought for thilke fourth part, as much space as the sea and the
mary's conteynen and ouergone: as much space as ye region of drought over
stretches, that is to saine, sands and deserts, well uneath should there
dwellen a right strait place to the habitacion of men. And ye, that he
environed and closed with the lest prick of thilke prick, thinken ye
manifesten or publishen your renome and done your name for to ben borne forth.
But your glory, yt is so narow and so straight throngen into so litel bounds,
how mikell conteyneth it in larges and in great doing. And also set thereto, yt
many a nation, diverse of tongue and of manners, and eke of reason of her living,
inhabit in the close of thilke habitacle: to ye which nations, what for
difficulty of ways, and what for diversity of language, and what for
defaulte of vnusage, and entrecomming of Merchandise, not only ye names of
singular men ne may not stretchen, but eke ye fame of Cities may not stretchen.
At the last, certes in the time of Marcus Tullius, as him self writes in his
book, that renome of ye commonwelth of Rome, ne had not yet passed ne clomben
over the mountain yt hight Caucasus: and yet was Rome well waxen, being
redoubted of ye Parthes, and eke of other folk enhabiting about. See thou not
then how strait and how compressed is thilke glory that ye trauailen about to
shown and to multiply? May then the glory of a singular Roman stretchen
thider as the fame of the name of Rome may not climben ne passen? And eke see
thou not yt the manners of diverse folk and her laws been discordant among
hemlelf, so yt thilke thing yt some men judge worthy of praising, other folk
judgen that that is worthy of tourment? And hereof comes it, yt though a man
deliteth him in praising of his renome, he may not in no wise bringen forth ne
spreden his name to many manner peoples: and therefore every man ought to be
apaid of his glory, ye is published among his own neighbors, and thilke noble
renome shall be restrained within the bounds of tho manner folk. But how many a
man, yt was full noble in his time, has the wretches and nedy foryeting of
writers put out of mind and don away: al be it so yt certes thilke things
profiten litell, the which things and writings long and derke elde do away both
hem and eke her auctours. But ye men semen to getten you a perdurabilitie, when
ye thinken in time coming your fame shall lasten. But nathelesse if thou will
make comparison to the endless spaces of eternite, with thing have thou, by
which thou may rejoycen thee of long lasting of thy name? For if there were
made comparison of ye abiding of a moment to ten thousand winter, for as much
as both tho spaces ben ended, yet has the moment some portion of it although
it be litell. But nathelesse thilke self nombre of years, and eke as many
years as thereto may be multiplied, ne may not certes be comparisoned to ye
perdurabilite yt is endless. * For of things which yt have end may be made
comparison, but of things which that been withouten end, to things that have
end, may be maked no comparison. And for thy is it, that although renome of as
long time as ever thee list to thinken, were compared to the regard of ye
eternity, that is vnstaunchable and infinite, it ne should not only seem
littell, but plainly right naught. But ye semen certes ye can do nothing a
right, but if it be for ye audience of the people, and for idle rumors. And ye
forsaken the great worthiness of conscience and of virtue, and ye seken your
guerdons of the small words of strange folk. Have now here and understand in
the lightness of soche pride and vein glory, how a man skorned festinally and
merrily soche vanite. Whilom there was a man, yt had assaied with striving words
another manne, the which not for usage of very virtue, but for proud vain
glory, had taken upon him falsely y^ name of a Philosophre. This rather man that
I speak of, thought he would assay, wheder he thilke were a Philosophre or no,
that is to say: if yt he would have suffered lightly in patience the wrongs y^
were done to him: this fained philosophre took patience a litel while, and when
he had received words of outrage, he as in striving again and rejoicing of him
self, said at last thus: Understand thou not that I am a philosophre? That
other man answerde again bitingly and said: I had well understand it, if thou
had holden thy tongue still. But with is it to these noble worthy men (for
certes of such folk speak I, that seken glory with virtue?) What is it (quoth.
she) what atteyneth fame to soche folk, when the body is resolved by death at
the last? for if so be that men dien in all, that is to say body and soul, the
which thing our reason defends us to believe, then is there no glory in no
wise: for with should thilke glory be, when he, of whom thilke glory is said to
be, nis right naught in no wise? And if ye soul, which that has in it self
science of good works, unbounden from the prison of ye yerth, wendeth freely
to the heaven, dispiseth it not then all erthly occupacion, and being in heaven
reioyseth that it is exempt from all erthly things? as who faith, then recketh
the soul never of no glory of renome of this world.

Quicunque solam mente praecipiti petit, summumque credit gloriam, Lace
patentes aetheris cernat plagas, Artumque terrarum situm, Brevem replere non
valentis ambitum, etc.
WHo so that with overthrowing thought only seeks glory of fame, and weneth
that it be sovereign good, let him loken upon the broad showing countries of
the heaven, and upon the strait seat of this earth, and he shall be ashamed
of thencrease of his name, that may not fulfill the littel compass of the earth.
O what coueyten proud folk to liften up her necks in idle, in the deadly yoke
of this world? For although that renome ysprad passing toforn peoples, goth by
diverse tongues, and although great houses of kindreds shinen by clear titles of
honors, yet nathelesse death dispiseth all high glory of fame, and death
wrappeth togithers the high heads and the low, and makes equal and even the
hiest with the lowest.

Where wonen now the bones of true Fabricius? What is now Brutus, or stern
Caton? The thynne fame yet lastyng of her idle names, is marked with a few
letters. But although that we have known the fair words of the fame of hem, it
is not yeuen to know hem that he deed and consumpt. Liggeth then still all
utterly unknowable, ne fame ne makes you not know. And if ye wene to live ye
longer for wind of your mortal name, when one cruel day shall take away this
also, then shall ye die the second death. The first death he clepeth here the
departing of the body, and the second death here the stinting of the renome of
fame.

Sed ne me inexorabile contra fortunam gerere Bellum putes, est aliquando, cum
de hominibus fallax illa non nihil been mereatur: tum scilicet cum se aperit,
etc.
But for as much as thou shall not wenen (quoth. she) that I bear an untreatable
battle against Fortune, yet sometimes it be falls that she, nothing
disceiuable, deserves to have right good thank of men: and that is when she
her self opens, and when she discovers her front, and shows her manners.
Perauenture yet understandest thou not that I shall say. It is a wondre that I
desire to tell, and therefore uneath may I unpliten my sentence with words. For
I deem yt contrarious fortune profits more to men, than fortune debonayre.
For always when fortune seems debonayre, then she lies falsely, biheting the
hope of welefulnesse. But contrarious fortune is always sothfaste, when she
shows her self unstable through her chaungyng. * The amiable fortune
disceiueth folk: yt contrary fortune teaches. The amiable fortune blinds
with the beauty of her false goods the hearts of folks that usen hem: the
contrary Fortune unbindeth hem with the knowing of frele welefulnesse.
Thamyable fortune may thou seen always windy and flowing, and ever misknowing
of her self: The contrary fortune is attempre and restrained and wise, through
exercise of her aduersite. At the last, amiable Fortune with her flaterings
draws miswandring men fro the sovereign good: the contrarious fortune leads
often folk again to sothfast goods, and halteth hem again as with an hoke. Wenest
thou then that thou ought to leten this a litell thing, that this aspre and
horrible Fortune has discovered to thee the thoughts of thy true friends? For
why, this ilke Fortune has departed and uncouered to thee both the certain
visages, and eke the doutous visages of thy felawes. When the departed away fro
thee, she took away her friends and laft thee thy friends. Now when thou were
rich and welefull, as thee seemed, with how mykell would thou have bought the
full knowing of this, that is to sain, the knowing of thy very friends? Now
plain thee not then of richesse lorne, since thou haste found the most precious
kind of richesse, that is to saine, thy very friends.

Quod mundus stabili fide, concordes variat vices, quod pugnantia semina,
Faedus perpetuum tenet, etc.
THat the world with stable faith varieth accordable chaungings: that the
contrarious qualitees of Elements holden among hem self alyaunce perdurable:
that Phoebus the son with his golden chariot brings forth the rosy day:
that the moon has commandment over the nights, which nights Esperus the
even sterre has brought: that the sea, gredy to flowen, constrains with a
certain end his floods, so that it is not lefull to stretch his broad terms or
bounds upon the earth: all this ordinance of things is bounden with love,
that governs earth and sea, and also has commandment to the heaven. And if
this love slaked the bridles, all things that now louen togithers wolden make
bataile continuelly, and striuen to fordone the facion of this world, the which
they now leden in accordable faith by fair mouings. This love holds togider
people joined with an holy bond, and knitteth sacrament of marriage of chaste
loves. And love ends laws to true felawes. O welefull were mankind if
thilke love that governs the Heaven governed your courages.

Here ends the second book.
Jam cantum illa finierat, cum me audiendi avidum, stupentemque arrectis adhuc
auribus carminis dulcedo defixerat. Itaque paulo post, O inquam summum lassorum
solamen animorum, quantum me, etc.
BY this she had ended her song, when the sweetness of her dytie had through
perced me, that was desirous of herkening. And I astonished had yet straight
mine ears, yt is to saine, to harken the bet what she should say: so yt a
litel after I said thus, O thou that art souerain comfort of corages
anguishous, so thou have remounted and nourished me with ye weight of thy
sentences, and with delight of singing so that I trow not that I be unperegall
to y^ strokes of Fortune: as who says, I dare well now suffren all thassauts
of Fortune, and well defend me from her. And tho remedies, which that thou
saidest here beforne, yt weren right sharp, not only y^ I am not agrisen of
hem now, but I desirous of hearing, ask greatly to hearen ye remedies. Then
said she thus: That feled I well (quoth. she) when that thou ententife and still,
rauishedest my words: and I abode till thou had soche habyte of thy
thought, as thou have now, or else till that I my self had maked it to the same
habit, which is a more true thing. And certes ye remnant of things that been yet
to say ben soch, yt first when men taste hem they been biting: But when they
been received within a wight, then ben they sweet. But for thou say that thou
art so desirous to hearken hem, with how great brenning would thou glowen,
if thou wiltes whider I would leden thee? B. Whider is that (quoth. I) P. To thilke
very blissfulness (quoth. she) of which thine heart dremeth. But for as much as thy
sight is occupied and distourbed of earthly things, thou may not yet seen
thilk self welefulnesse. B. Do (quoth. I) and show me what thilke very welefulnes
is, I pray thee without taryeng. P. That woll I gladly done (quoth. she) for cause
of thee. But I wol first marken by words, and I woll enforcen me to inform
thee thilk false cause of blissfulness, which that thou more know: so that
when thou haste beholden thilke false goods, and turned thine iyen so to that
other side, thou may known the eleerenesse of very blissfulness.

Qui serere ingenuum volet agrum, liberat arva prius fruticibus, falce rubos,
filicemque resecat, etc.
WHo so woll sow a field plenteous, let him first deliueren it of thorns, and
kerue asonder with his hoke the bushes and the fern, so that the corn may
commen heavy of eres and of greines. * Honey is the more sweet if mouths have
first tasted sauors that he wycke. The Sterres shinen more agreably when the
wind Nothus lets his plungy blastes. And after that Lucifer the day sterre
has chased away the dark night, y^ day the fairer ledeth the rosen horse of
the son. * And right so thou, beholding first y^ false goods, begin to
withdraw thy neck fro yt yearthly affections, and afterward the very goods
shullen entren into thy courage.

Tum defixo paululum visu, and velut in angustam suae mentis sedem recepta: sic
cepit. P. Omnis mortalium cura quam multiplicium studiorum labor exercet, etc.
THo fastened she a litel the sight of her eien, and she withdrew her right as
it were into the strait seat of her thought, and began to speak right thus:
All the cures (quoth. she) of mortal folk, which that trauailen hem in many
manner studies, gone certes by diverse ways: but nathelesse they enforcen hem all
to commen only to the end of blisfulnes. And blisfulnes is soch a good, that
who so has gotten it, he ne may over that thing more desire. And this thing
forsooth is so sovereign good, that it conteyneth in himself all manner of
goods, to the which good if there failed any thing, it might not been
sovereign good, for then were some good out of this sovereign good, that might
be desired. Now it is clear and certain that blissfulness is a parfite state,
by ye congregation of all goods, ye which blissfulness (as I have said) all
mortal folk enforcen hem to get by diverse ways. For why, the couetise of every
good is naturelly planted in ye hearts of men: but the miswandring error
misledeth hem into false goods. Of the which men, some of hem wenen that
sovereign good be to liuen without need of any thing. And other men demen, that
sovereign good to be right digne of reverence, and enforcen hem to be
reverenced among her neighbors, by the honors that they have gotten. And some
folk there ben that holden, that right hie power be sovereign good, and
enforcen hem for to reignen or else to ioynen hem to hem that reign. And it
seems to other folk, that noblesse of renome be the sovereign good, and
hasten hem to getten hem glorious name by the arts of werre or of peace. And
many folk measuren and gessen, that sovereign good be joy and gladness, and
wenen that it be right blisful thing to plongen in voluptuous delites. And
there ben some folk, that enterchaungen the causes and the ends of these
foresaid goods: As they that desiren richesses to have power and delights, or
else they desire power for to have money, or for cause of renome. In these
things and soch other is turned all the entencion of desirings and works of
men, as thus: Noblesse and favor of people, which that yeueth to all men, as
it seems hem, a manner cleerenesse of renome: and wife and children, that men
desiren, for cause of delight and merinesse. But forsooth friends ne shullen not
be rekened among the goods of Fortune, but of virtue, for it is a full holy
manner thing. All these other things forsooth be taken for cause of power, or else
for cause of delight. Certes now I am ready to referren the goods of the body,
to these foresaid things abouen: For it seems that strength and greatness of
body yeuen power and worthiness, and that beauty and swiftness yeuen glory
and renome: and health of body seems to yeuen delight. In all these things it
seems only that blissfulness is desired: for why, thilke thing that every
man desires most over all things, he deemeth that it be sovereign good. But I
have defined, that blissfulness is souerain good, for which every wight deemeth
that thilke estate that he desires over all things, that it be blissfulness.
Now have thou then before thine eyes almost all the purposed form of the
welefulnesse of mankind that is to sain, richesse, honors, power, glory, and
delites, the which delight only considred Epicurus, and judged and established
that delight is the sovereign good: for as much as all other things, as him
thought, byrest away joy and myrthe from the heart. But I return again to the
studies of men, of which men the courage always reherseth and seeks the
sovereign good, all be it so that it be with a dyrked memory, but he not by
which pathe, right as a dronken man, note naught by which path he may return
home to his house. Seems it then that folk forleyen and erren to enforcen hem
to have need of nothing. Certes there is none other thing that may so much
performen blissfulness, as an estate plenteous of all goods, that ne has need
of none other thing, but that is suffisaunt of himself unto himself. And
folien soche folk then that wenen, that thilke thing that is right good, that
it is eke right worthy of honor and of reverence? certes nay. For that thing
nys neither foul ne worthy to be despised, that well nigh all the entencion of
mortal folk travailen to get it. And power eke ought not to be rekened amongs
goods. What else? for it nis not to wene that thilke thing that is most worthy
of all things, be feeble and without strength. And clerenesse of renome, ought
yt to ben despised? Certes there may no man forsake that all thing yt is right
excellent and noble, that it ne seems be right clear and renomed. For certes
it needs not to say, that blissfulness be anguishous ne drerie, ne subject to
greuaunces ne sorrows, sens that in right littell things folk seken to have
and to usen that may delighten hem. Certes these ben the things that men willen
and desiren to getten: and for this cause desiren they richesses, dignities,
reigns, glory and delites. For thereby wened they to have suffisaunce, honor,
power, renome, and gladness. Then is it good that men seken thus by so many
diverse studies, in which desire, it may not lightly be showed how great is the
strength of nature. For how so men have diverse sentences and discordings,
algates men accorden all in loving the end of good.

Quantas rerum flectit habenas Natura potens, quibus immensum, Legibus orbem
provida servet, stringatque ligans irresoluto. Singula nexu, placet arguto,
fidelibus lentis promere cantu, etc.
IT lyketh me to show by subtle song, with slack and delitable sown of
strings, how that nature mightily enclineth and flitteth by the government of
things, and by soche law she purueiable keeps the great world, and how she
binding restrains all things by a bond that may not be unbounden. All be it
so that the Lions of the country of Pene beren the fair chains and taken
meats of the hands of folk that yeuen it hem, and dreden her sturdie
masters, of which they be wont to suffer beatings, if that her horrible
mouths been bledde, that is to sain, of beestes devoured: her courage of time
passed that has been idle and rested, repaireth again, and they roren
grievously, and remembren on her nature, and staken her necks from her chains
unbound, and her master first to torn with bloody teeth, assaieth the wood
wrathes of hem, that is to sain, they fretten her master. And the iangling
bird that sings on the hie branches, that is to saine, in the wood, and
after is enclosed in a strait cage, although the plyeng besinesse of men give
hem honied drinks, and large meats with sweet study: yet natheles if thilke
bird skipping out of her strait cage, sees the agreeable shadows of the
woods, she defouleth with her feet her meat ishad, and seeks on morning
only the wood, and twireth desiring the wood with her sweet voise. The yerde
of a tree that is haled adown by mighty strength, boweth redily the croppe a
down: but if that the hand that is bent let it gone again, anon the croppe
looks upright to the heaven. The son Phoebus, that falls at even in the
westren wawes, returns again eftsoon his carte by a privy pathe there as it
is wont arise. All things seken again to her proper course, and al things
rejoysen on her returning again to her nature: ne none ordinance is betaken to
things, but that has joined the end to the beginning, and has made the course
it self stable, that it change not fro his proper kind.

Vos quoque o terrena animalia, tenui licet imagine, vestrum tamen principium
somniatis. Verumque illum beatitudinis finem, licet minime perspicaci, etc.
CErtes also ye men that been erthly creatures dreamen always your beginning,
although it be with a thin imaginacion, and by a manner thought, all be it not
clearly ne perfectly, ye loken from a far to thilke very fine of
blissfulness. And therefore naturel entencion leads you to thilke very good,
but many manner errors mistourneth you therefro. Consider now if that be thilke
things, by which a man weneth to get him blissfulness, if that he may commen to
thilke end that he weneth to come to by nature. For if that money, honors, or
these other foresaid things bringen men to soch a thing that no good ne fail
them ne seems to fail, certes then would I grant that they be maked blisfull
by things that they have gotten. But if so be that thilke things ne mowen not
perform that they byheten, and that there be defaut of many goods, shows it
not then clearly the false beauty of blissfulness is known and atteint in
thilk things? First and forward thou thy self, that had abundance of
richesse not long agon, I ask thee that in thaboundance of al thilk riches, if
thou were never anguishous or sorry in thy courage of any wrong or greuaunce
that betide thee in any side. B. Certes (quoth. I) it ne remembers me not, that
ever I was so free of my thought, that I ne was always in anguish of somewhat.
P. And was that not (quoth. she) for that thee lacked somewhat that thou noldest
not have lacked? Or else thou had that thou noldest have had? B. Right so it
is (quoth. I.) P. Then desire thou the presence of the one, and thabsence of
that other? B. I grant well (quoth. I.) P. Forsooth (quoth. she) then needs there
somewhat that every man desires. B. Ye there needs (quoth. I.) P. Certes (quoth.
she) and he that has lack or need of aught, nis not in every way suffisant
to himself. B. No (quoth. I.) P. And thou (quoth. she) in all the plenty of thy
richesse had thilke lack of suffisance? B. What else (quoth. I.) P. Then may
not riches maken that a man nis nedy, ne that he be sufficient to himself: and
yet that was it that they beheten as it seemed. And eke certes I trow that this
be greatly to consider, that money has not in his own kind, that it ne may
been bynomen from hem that have it, maugre hem. Bo. I know it well (quoth. I.) P.
Why should thou not beknowen it (quoth. she) when every day the strenger folk
benomen it from the feobler, maugre hem? From whens come else all these forain
complaints, quarrels, or pleadings, but for that men asken her money, that has
been binomed hem, by strength or by gyle, and always maugre hem? Boec. Right so
it is (quoth. I.) Phi. Then has a man need (quoth. she) to seeken him forain help,
by which he may defend his money. Boecius. Who may say nay (quoth. I.) Phil.
Certes (quoth. she) and him needed no help, if he ne had no money that he might
lose. Boecius. That is doubtless (quoth. I.) Philosophy. Then is this thing
turned in to the contrary (quoth. she:) for richesse, that men wenen should maken
suffisaunce, they maken a man rather have need of forain help. Which is the
manner or the guise (quoth. she) that richesse may driven away need? Rich folk,
may they never have honger ne thurst? These rich men, may they feel no cold on
their lims in Winter? But thou will answer, that rich men have enough,
wherewith they may staunchen her honger, and slaken her thurst, and done away
cold.

In this wise may need been comforted by richesse: but certes, need ne may not
all utterly be done away. For if this need, that always is gaping and greedy, be
fulfilled with richesse, and any other thing, yet dwells then a need that
mote be fulfilled. I hold me still, and tell not how that little thing sufiseth
to nature: * but certes, to avarice suffiseth not enough of nothing. For since
that riches ne may not done away need, and they maken their own need, with may it
then be, that ye wenen that richesses mowen yeuen you suffisaunce?

Quamvis fluente dives auri gurgite. Non expleturas cogat avarus opes, etc.
AL were it so, that a noble covetous man had a river, or a gutter fleeting all
of gold, yet should it never staunch his couetise: and although he had his neck
charged with precious stones of the red Sea: And though he do ere his fields
plenteous with an hundred oxen, never ne shall his biting business forleten him
while he lives: ne the light of richesses, ne shall not bearen him compaigny
when he is dead.

Sed dignitatis honorabilem, reverendumque cui provenerint, reddunt. Number vis ea
est magistratibus, ut utentium mentibus vi^tutes inserant, vicia depellant, etc.
BUT dignities, to whom they be commen, maken they them honorable and
reverent? Have they not so great strength that they then may putten virtue in
hertes of folks that usen the lordship of hem, or else may they done away the
vices? Certes they be not wont to don away wickedness, but they be wont rather
to show wickedness: And thereof comes it that I have right great disdain
that dignities been yeuen to wicked men. For which thing Catullus cleped a
consul of Rome (that hight Nonius) postome or boche, as who says, he cleped
him a congregation of vices in his breast, as a postome is full of corrupcion:
All were Nonius set in a chair of dignite. See thou not then, how great
vilonies dignities done to wicked men? Certes unworthines of wicked men should
be the less seen, if they nere renomed with none honor. Certes thou thy self
ne might not be brought with as many perils as thou might suffer, that
thou would bear the Magistrate with Decorate: that is to saine, that for
peril that might befall thee by offense of the king Theodorike, thou noldest
not be felawe in governance with Decorate, when thou saw that he had wicked
courage of a licorous shrew and of an accusour. Ne I may not for soche honors
iudgen hem worthy of reverence, that I deem and hold unworthy to have thilke
same honors. Now if thou saw a man that were fulfild of wisdom, certes, thou
ne might not deem that he were unworthy to that honor, or else to the
wisdom of which he is fulfilled. Boecius. No (quoth. I) Philosophy. * Certes
(quoth. she) dignities appertainen properly to virtue, and virtue transporteth
dignity anon to thilke man to which she her self is conjoined. And for as
much as honors of people ne may not make folk digne of honor, it is well
seen clearly, that they ne have no proper beauty of dignity. And yet men
oughten take more heed in this: for if a wight be in so much the more outcast,
that he is despised of most folk, so as dignity ne may not maken shrewes
worthy of no reverence, then makes dignite shrewes rather despised than
praised, the which shrewes dignite shows to much folk. And forsooth not
unpunished, that is to saine, that shrewes reuengen hem ayenward upon
dignities. For they yelden again to dignities as great guerdons, when they
dispotten and defoulen dignities with her vilonie. And for as much as thou now
know, that thilke very reverence ne may not commen by these shadowy
transitory dignities, understonde now thus: that if a man had used and had
many manner dignities of consuls, and were parauenture commen among strange
nations, should thilke honor maken him worshipful and redoubted of strange
folk? Certes if that honor of people were a naturel yefte to dignities, it ne
might never cessen no where among no manner folk to done his office. Right as
fire in every country ne stinteth not to enchaufen and maken hot. But for as
much as for to been honorable or reverent, ne comes not to folk of her proper
strength of nature, but only of the false opinion of folk, that is to saine,
that wenen that dignities maken folk digne of honors: anon therefore when
they commen there as folk ne known not thilke dignities, her honors vanishen
away, and that anon: But that is among strange folk may thou saine. Ne
amongs hem there they were borne, ne dureth not thilke dignities always. Certes
the dignity of the prouostry of Rome was whilom a great power: now it is
nothing but an idle name, and the rent of the Senatorie a great charge. And if
a wight whilom had the office to taken head to the vitailes of the people, as
of corn and of other things, he was holden amongs hem great. But what thing
is more now out cast than thilke prouostrie? As I have said a little here
beforne, that thilke thing that has no proper beauty of it self, receives
sometime price and shining, and sometime leseth it by thopinion of usaunces.
Now if that dignities then ne mow not make folk digne of reverence, and if
that dignities wexen foul of her will, by the silthe of shrewes. And if
dignities lesen her shining by changing of times, and if they wexen foul by
estimacion of people, what is it that they han in hem self of beauty, that
ought to be desired? as who says, none: then ne mowen they yeuen no beauty of
dignite to none other.

Quamvis se Tyrio superbus ostro comeret and niveis lapillis, etc.
AL be it so, that the proud Nero with all his wode luxure, kembe him and
apparelled him with fair purpure of Tirie, and with white peerles. Algates yet
thereof he hateful to all folk, that is to say, that all was he behated of
all folks, yet this wicked Nero had great lordshippe. And yafe whilome to the
reverent Senators the unworshipful seats of dignities. Vnworshipfull seats
he clepeth here, for that Nero that was so wicked yafe the dignities.

Who would then reasonably wenen, that blissfulness were in soch honors, as
been yeuen by vicious shrewes.

An vero regna, regnumque familiaritas efficere potentem valent? Quidni, etc.
But reigns and familiarities of kings, may they maken a man to ben mighty?
How else? when his blissfulness dureth perpetually. But certes, the old age of
time passed, and eke of present time now, is full of ensamples, how that Kings
have changed into wretchedness, out of her welefulnes. O, a noble thing and a
clear thing is power, that nis not founden mighty to keep it self. And if
that power of realms be author and maker of blissfulness, if thilk power
lacks on any side, amenuseth it not thilke blissfulness, and brings in
wretchedness? But yet al be it so, yt the realms of mankind stretchen broad,
yet mote there need ben much folk, over which that every King ne has no
lordship ne commandment. And certes upon thilk side that power falls, which
yt makes folk blisfull, right on ye same side no powere enters underneath
that makes hem wretches. In this manner then moten kings have more portion of
wretchedness than of welefulnesse.

A tyrant that was king of Cecile, yt had assayed ye peril of his essate,
showed by similitude ye dredes of realms by gastenesse of a sword, that hong
over the head of his familier. What thing is then this power, yt may not done
away the bitings of business, ne eschew the pricks of dread?

And certes yet woulden they liuen in sikernesse, but they may not. And yet
they glorifyen hem in her power. Hold thou then yt thilke man be mighty, yt
thou see that he would done yt he may not done? And hold thou then him a
mighty man, yt has enuironned his sides with men of arms or sergeants, and
dredeth more hem that he makes aghast, than they dreden him? and that is put in
ye hands of his servant, why he should seem mighty? But of familiers or
servant of kings, why should I tell thee any thing, since that I my self have
showed thee that realms hemselfe ben full of great feeblesse? The which
familiers, certes, ye royal power of kings in hole estate, and in estate
abated, full often throws adowne.

Nero constrained Senecke, his familier and his master, to chesen on what
death he would die. Antonius commanded yt knights slowen with her swerds
Papinian his familier, which Papinian had been long time full mighty among
hem of the court. And yet certes, they woulden both have renounced her power.
Of which two, Seneck enforced himself to yeuen to Nero his richesse, and also
to have gone into solitary exile. But when ye great weight, that is to saine,
of lords power, or of Fortune, draws hem that shullen fall, neither of hem ne
might do yt he would. What thing is then thilk power that though men have it
yet they ben aghast, and when thou would have it, thou nart not siker? And if
thou would forleten it, thou may not eschewen it. But wheder ben such men
friends at need, as been counsayled by fortune, and not by virtue? certes such
folk as weleful fortune makes friends, contrarious fortune makes hem enemies.
And what pestilence is more mighty for to annoy a wight, than a familiar enemy?

Qui se volet esse potentem, Animos domet ille feroces: Nec victa libidine
colla, etc.
WHo so woll be mighty, he mote daunten his cruel courages, ne put not his
neck ouercommen, under ye foul raynes of lechery. For all be it so, that the
lordship stretch so far, yt the country of Inde quaketh at thy commandments,
or at thy laws, and at the last isle in yt see, that hight Tyle, be thrall to
thee: yet if thou may not putten away thy foul derke desires, and driven
out fro thee wretched complaints, certes, it nis no power that thou have.

Gloria vero quam fallax saepe, quam turpis est; Unde non injuria tragicus
exclamat. O gloria, gloria, millibus mortalium nihil aliud facta, nisi aurium
inflatio magna, etc.
BUt glory, how deceiuable and how foul is it often? For which thing, not
unskillfully, a tragedian, yt is to saine, maker of dities, yt highten
tragedies, cried and said: O glory, glory, quoth. he, thou nart nothing else to
thousands of folks, but a sweller of ears. For many have full great renome by
the false opinion of the people.

And what thing may been thought fouler than such praising? For thilke folk
that been praised falsely, they moten needs have shame of her praising. And if
that folk have getten hem thank or praising by her deserts, what thing has
thilk prise eched or increased to the conscience of wise folk, that measured
her good, not by the rumor of ye people, but by ye soothfastnesse of
conscience? And if it seem a fair thing, a man to have increased and sprad his
name, then follows it, yt it is deemed to ben a foul thing, if it ne be
ysprad and increased. But as I said a little here before, yt since there mote
needs been many folks, to which folk the renome of a man ne may not commen,
it befalls, that he that thou wenest be glorious and renomed, seems in the
next part of the erthes to ben without glory and without renome. And certes
amongs these things, I ne trow not that the prise and the grace of the people
nis neither worthy to ben remembered, ne comes of wise judgment, ne is ferme
perdurably. But now of this name of gentilesse: what man is it that ne may well
seen how vain and flitting it is? For if the name of gentilesse be referred
to renome and clereness of lineage, then is gentil name but a forain thing, that
is to say, to hem that glorifien hem of her lineage: For it seems that
gentilnes is a manner praising that comes of the deserts of auncesters. And
if praising makes gentilnesse, then moten they needs been gentill that been
praised. For which thing it follows, that if thou ne have no gentilnes of thy
self, that is to sain, prise, that comes of thy desert, foreign gentilnesse
ne makes thee not gentill. But certes, if there be any good in gentilnesse, I
trow it be all only this: that it seems as that a manner necessite be
imposed to gentilmen, for that they ne should not outragen or forleauen fro the
virtues of her noble kindred.

Omne hominum genus in terris Simili surgit ab hortu. Unus enim rerum pater
est. Unus cuncta ministrat, etc.
ALL the lineage of men, that been in earth, been semblable of birth. One alone
is father of things: one alone ministers all things: he yafe to the Sun his
beams: he yafe to the Moon her horns: he yafe to men the earth: he yafe the
sterres to the heaven: he closed with members the souls that camen from his
hie seat: Then commen all mortal folk of noble seed. Why noisen or bosten ye
of your elders? for if ye look your beginning, and God your father author and
your maker, then nys there no foreliued wight or ungentill but if he nourishe
his courage unto vices, and forlete his proper birth.

Quid autem de corporis voluptatibus loquar, quarum appetentia quidem plena est
anxietatis, etc.
BUt what shall I sain of delices of body, of which delices the desirings ben
full of anguishes, and the fulfillings of hem ben full of penance? how great
sicknesses and how great sorrows unsufferable, right as a manner fruit of
wickedness, ben thilke delices wont to bringen to the bodies of folk yt usen
hem? of which delices I not what joye may been had of her moving. But this wot
I well, * That who so ever woll remembren him of his luxures, he shall well
understand, that the issues of delices ben sorrowful and sorry. And if thilke
delices mow make folk blisful, then by that same cause moten these beests ben
cleped blisful. Of which beests all the entencion hastes to fulfill her bodily
jolitee. And the gladness of wife and children were an honest thing, but it
has been said that it is over mokell against kind, that children have been
founden tourmentours to her Fathers, I not how many. Of which children, how
biting is every condition, it needs not to tellen it thee, that have er this
time assayed it, and art yet now anguishous. In this time approve I the
sentence of my disciple Euripidis, that said, * That he that has no children
is welefull by infortune.

Habet hoc voluptas omnis stimulis agit fruentes: Apiumque par volantium ubi
gratia mella sudit. Fugit and nimis tenaci ferit icta corda morsu, etc.
EVery delight has this, that it anguisheth hem with pricks that usen it. It
ressembleth to these flyeng flies that we clepen Bees, that after that he has
shed his agreeable honnyes, he flies away, and stingeth the hertes of hem
that been smitten with biting ouerlong holden.

Nihil igitur dubium est, quin hae ad beatitudinem viae devia quaedam sint, nec
perducere eo quenquam valiant, etc.
NOw it is no doubt then, that these ways ne been a manner mistidings to
blissfulness: ne that they ne mowen not seden folk thider, as they beheten to
leden hem. But with how great harms these forsaid ways ben enlaced, I shall
show you shortly. For why, if thou enforcest thee to assemble money, thou must
byreuen him his money that has it. And if thou will shinen with dignities,
thou must besechen and supplien hem that yeuen tho dignities. And if thou
coueitest by honor to gone beforne other folks, thou shall defoule thy self
through humblesse of asking. If thou desire power, thou shall by awaits of thy
subjects anoyouslie be cast under by many parils. Ask thou glory? thou shall
been so distract by aspre things, that thou shall forgone sikernesse. And if
thou would leden thy life in delites, every wight shall dispisen thee and
forleten thee, as thou that art thrall to thing, yt is right foul and britel,
yt is to saine, servant to thy body. Now is it well yseen, how litel and how
brytel possession they coueiten, that putten the goods of the body above her
own reason. For may thou surmounten these Olifaunts in greatness or in
weight of body? or may thou ben strenger than ye Bull? may thou be swifter
than the Tygre? Behold the spaces and the stablenesse, and the swift course of
Heaven, and stint sometime to wondren on foul things. The which heaven certes
nys not rather for these things to be wondren upon, than for the reason by
which it is governed. But the shyning of thy form, that is to said, the
beauty of thy body, how swiftly passing is it, and how transitory, certes, it
is more flitting than the mutabilitie of flowers of the summer season. For so
as Aristotel tells, that if the men had eyes of a beeste that hight Lynx, so
that the loking of folk might percen through tho things that withstond it: who
so looked then in thentrailes of the body of Alcibiades, that was full fair in
the superficie without, it should seem right foul. And for thy, if thou
seem fair, thy nature ne makes not that, but the disceiuaunce of
feblenesse of the eyes that loken. But praise the goods of the body as much as
ever thee list, so that thou know algates that what so it be, that is to saine,
of the goods of the body, which that thou wondrest upon, may been distroyed or
else dissolved by the heet of a fever of three days. Of which foresaid things I
may reducen this shortly in a sum, that these worldly goods, which that ne
mowen yeuen that they behighten, ne been not parfite by the congregation of all
goods, yt they ne ben not ways ne paths that bringen men to blissfulness, ne
maken men to be blisfull.

Heu heu quae miseros tramite devios abducit ignorantia, non aurum in viridi
quaeritis, arbore, etc.
ALas, which folly, and which ignorance misleadeth wandering wretches fro the
path of very good. Certes ye seken no gold in grene trees, ne ye gadren not
precious stones in vines: ne hyden not your ginnes in hie mountains to catch
fish, of the which ye may maken rich feests.

And if you like to hunte to Roes, ye ne go not to the fords of yt water that
hight Thyrene. And over this, men know well the crekes and the cauernes of the sea yhyd in the floodes, and known eke, which water is most plenteous of white
perles, and known which water haboundeth most of reed purpure, yt is to
saine, of a manner shelfish, with which men dien purpure: and known which
strondes habounden most of tender fishes, or of sharp fishes, that hight
Echines. But folks suffren hemselfe to ben so blind yt hem ne retchen not to
know where thilke goods ben yhid, which that they coueiten, but plungen hem in
yerth, and seken there thilke good that surmounteth the heaven, that bears ye
sterres. What prayer may I maken that be digne to the nice thoughts of men?
But I pray that they coueiten richesse and honors, so that when they have
gotten tho false goods with great travail, that thereby they mowen known the
very goods.

Hactenus mendacis formam faelicitatis ostendisse sufficerit, quod si
perspicaciter intuearis, ordo est deinceps, etc.
IT suffiseth that I have said hyderto, the form of false welefulnesse: so yt
if thou look now clearly, ye order of mine entencion requires from hensforth,
to she wen ye very welefulnes. B. Forsooth (quoth. I) I see well now, the
suffisance may not commen by richesse, ne power by realms, ne reverence by
dignities, ne gentillesse by glory, ne joy by delices. P. And have thou well
known ye causes (quoth. she) why it is? B. Certes me seems (quoth. I) ye I see hem,
right as though it were through a litel clifte: But me were leauer known hem
more openly of thee. Phi. Certes (quoth. she) ye reason is al ready. For thilke
thing that simply is one thing without any division, yt error and folly of
mankind, devideth, and departs it, and misledeth it, and transporteth from
very and parfit good, to goods that be false and vnparfit. But say me this:
wenest thou that he that has need of power, that him ne lacks nothing?
Boethius. Nay, quoth. I. Philos. Certes (quoth. she) thou say aright: for if so be
yt there is a thing yt in any party be febler of power, certes as in yt it
mote needs be needy of foraine help. Boethius. Right so it is (quoth. I.) Philos.
Suffisaunce and power ben of one kind. Boet. So seems quoth. I.) Philosophy. And
demest thou (quoth. she) that a thing yt is of this manner, yt is to say,
suffisaunt and mighty, ought ben despised, or else that it be right digne of
reverence above all things? Boet. Certes (quoth. I) it is no doubt that it is
right worthy to be reverenced. Phil. Let us adden (quoth. she) reverence to
suffisaunce and to power, so that we demen that these three things be one thing.
Boethius. Certes (quoth. I) let us adden it if we will grant yt soth. P. What
demest thou (quoth. she) then is yt a derk thing and not noble, yt is suffisant,
reverent, and mighty? or else that it is right noble and right clear by
celebrate of renome? Consider then (quoth. she) as we have granted here byforne
y^ he that ne has no need of nothing, and is most mighty and most digne of
honor, if him needs any clerenesse of renome, which clerenesse he might not
graunten of himself, so for lack of thilke clerenesse he might semen the
febler on any side, or the more outcast. Gloss. That is to say, nay: For who so
yt is suffisaunt, mighty, and reverent, clerenesse of renome follows of the
foresaid things: he has it all ready of his suffisaunce. Boethius. I may not,
quoth. I, deny it, but I mote graunten as it is, that this thing is right
celebrable by clerenesse of renome and noblesse. P. Then follows, quoth. she,
that we adden clerenesse of renome to ye foresaid things, so that there be
amongs hem no difference. B. This is a consequence, quoth. I. P. This thing then,
quoth. she, that ne has need of no foraine thing, and that may do all things by
his strengthes, and that is noble and honorable, is it not a merry thing and
joyful? Boethius. But whence, quoth. I, that any sorrow might come to this thing
that is soche, certes I may not think. Philosophy. Then mote we graunten,
quoth. she, that this thing be full of gladness, if the foresaid things be sothe.
And certes, also mote we graunten, that suffisance, power, noblesse, reverence,
and gladness, be only diverse by names, but her substance has no diversity.
Boethius. It mote needly be so, quoth. I. Philosoph. Thilke thing then, quoth. she,
that is one and simple in his nature, ye wickedness of men departs and
deuideth it: And when they enforcen hem to getten party of a thing, that ne
has no part, they ne getten hem neither thilke party that nys none, ne the
thing all whole y^ they desire. Boethius. In which manner, quoth. I. Philosophy.
Thilke man, quoth. she, that secheth richesse to flyen poverty, he ne trauaileth
him not for to get power, for he has leauer be derke and vile, and eke
withdraws from himself many naturell delytes, for he nolde lose the money
that he has assembled. But certes in this manner he ne gets him no
suffisaunce, that power foreleteth, and that molestie pricketh, and that filthe
makes out-caste, and that derkenesse hides. And certes he that desires only
power, wastes and scatters richesse, and despises delyces and eke honor
that is without power, ne he ne prayseth glory nothing. Certes this see thou
well that many things faylen to him: For he has sometime defaute of many
necessitees, and many anguishes byten him. And when he may not done tho
defaltes away, he forletteth to be mighty, and that is the thing that he most
desires. And right thus may I make semblable reasons of honor, of glory, and
of delices: For so every of these foresaid things is the same y^ these other
things been, that is to saine, al one thing. Whosoever seeks to getten that
one of these, and not yt other, he ne gets not that he desires. Boethius.
What say thou then, if that a man coueite to getten all these things
togider. Philoso. Certes (quoth. she) I would say yt he would get him souerain
blisfulnes, but yt shall he not find in tho things that I have showed, yt mow
not give that they beheten. Boethius. Certes no (quoth. I.) Phi. Then (quoth. she) ne
shullen men not by no way seken blisfulnes in soch things, as men wenen that
they ne mow given but one thing singlerly of all that men seken. Boethius. I
grant well (quoth. I) ne non sother thing may be said. Philosoph. Now have thou
then (quoth. she) the form and the cause of false welefulnesse: Now turn and
flitte again to thy thought, for there shall thou seen anon thilke very
blissfulness that I have behight thee. B. Certes (quoth. I) it is clear and open,
though it were to a blind man: And yt shewdest thou me a litel here be forne,
when thou enforcedest thee to show me the causes of ye false welefulnesse. For
(but if I be begiled) then is yt thilke very blissfulness and parfite, that
parfitly makes a man suffisaunt, mighty, honorable, noble and full of
gladness. And for thou shall well know, that I have well understood these
things within my heart: I know well, that thilke blissfulness yt men verily
yeuen one of ye foresaid things, sens they be all one: I know doubtless that
thilke thing is full of blissfulness. Philosophy. O my norice (quoth. she) by
this opinion I say that thou art blisfull, if thou put this thereto that I
shall sain. Boethius. What is that (quoth. I.) Ph. Trowest thou yt there be any
thing in this erthly mortal tombling things, yt may bringen this estate? Bo.
Certes (quoth. I) I trow it not: and thou have showed me well, yt over thilk good
there nis nothing more to ben desired. P. These things then (quoth. she) yt is to
saine, earthly suffisaunce and power, and soch things erthly, they semen
likeness of very good, or else it seems that they yeuen to mortal folk a
manner of goodness, that ne be not parfite, but thilke good that is very and
parfite, that may they not yeuen. Boe. I accord me well (quoth. I.) Phil. Then
(quoth. she) for as much as thou haste known which is thilke very blisfulnes, and
eke which thilke things ben, yt lien falsely blissfulness, that is to say, yt
they by deceit semen very goods: Now behooves thee to know whence and where
thou mow seek thilke very blissfulness. B. Certes (quoth. I) yt desire I greatly,
and have abyden long time to harken it. P. But for as much (quoth. she) as it
likes to my disciple Plato in his book of Tymeo, that in right littell things
men shoulden beseech ye help of God: What judge thou yt be now to done, so
that we may deserve to find ye seat of thilke souerein God? B. Certes (quoth. I)
I deny yt we shullen cleape to the father of all goods, for withouten him nys
there nothing founded aright. P. Thou say aright (quoth. she) and began anon to
singen right thus.

O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas, Terrarum caelique sator, qui tempus ab
aevo, Ire jubes, stabilisque manens dans cuncta moveri: Quem non externae
pepulerunt fingere causae, etc.
O Thou father, sovereign and creator of heaven and of erthes, that gouernest
this World by pardurable reason, that command the times to gone, since that
age had beginning. Thou that dwell thy self aye steadfast and stable, and
yeuest al other things to be meued, ne foryeue causes ne cesseden thee never to
compoun work of flattering matter, but only the form of souerain good yset,
within thee without envy, that meued thee freely. Thou that art alder fairest,
hearing the fair world in thy thought, formedest this world to thy likeness
semblable, of that fair world in thy thought. Thou drawest all thing on thy
sovereign ensampler, and commaundest that this world perfetlich ymaked, have
freely and absolute his perfect parties. Thou bindest y^ elements by nombres
proporcionables, that the cold things mowen accorden with the hot things,
and the dry things with the moist: That the fire, that is purest, ne fly not
over hie, ne that the heaviness ne draw not adoun ouerlow the yerthes, yt be
plonged in the waters. Thou knittest togider ye mean soul of treble kind
moving all things, and deuidest it by members according. And when it is thus
divided, it has assembled amouing in to roundes, it goes to turn again to
himself, and enuironneth a full deep thought, and turns the heaven by a
semblable image. Thou by even like causes enhancest the souls and the less
lives, and abling hem to height by light waines or carts. Thou sowest hem in
to heaven and in to yerth, and when they be converted to thee by thy benign
law, thou make hem return again to thee by again ledyng fire. O father, give
thou to yt thought to styen up in to thy strait seat, and grant hem to
enuironne the well of good. And ye light yfound, grant him to sixen ye clear
sights of his courage in thee, and scatter thou and to break ye weyghts and
the clouds of earthly heaviness, and shine thou by thy brightness. For thou
art clerenesse, thou art pesyble rest to debonayre folk, thou thy self art
beginning, bearer, leder, path, and term to look on thee that is our end.

Quoniam igitur, quae sit imperfecti, quae etiam perfecti boni forma vidisti,
nunc demonstrandum reor, etc.
FOrasmoche then, as thou have seen which is the form of good that nys not
parfite, and the form of good which that is parfite. Now trow I yt it were
good to show in what this perfection of blisfulnes is set. And in this thing I
trow that we shall first enquire for to weten, if that any soch manner good, as
thilke good as thou have diffinished a litell here beforne, that is to saine,
sovereign good, may be found in the nature of things. For that vain
imagination of thought ne desceue us not, and put us out of the sothefastnesse
of thylke thing yt is submitted to us. But it may not be denied that thilke ne
is, and that is right as a well of all goods. For all thing that is cleped
imparfite is proved imparfite by ye amenusing of perfection of thing that is
parfite. And hereof comes it that every thing general, if that men seen any
thing that is imparfite, certes in thilke thing is general, there mote be
some thing that is parfite. For if so be yt perfection is don away, men may not
think ne say from whence thilke thing is, that is cleped imparfite. For the
nature ne took not her beginning of things amenused and imparfite, but it
proceeds of things that been all hole absolute, and discendeth so down in to
ye vttrest things, and into things empty and without fruit. But as I have
showed a little here beforne, that if that there be a blisfulness that be
freele, and vain, and imperfite, there may no man doubt that there nis some
blissfulness that there is sad, steadfast and parfite. Boecius. This is
concluded (quoth. I) firmly and soothfastly. Phi. But consider also (quoth. she) in
whom this blissfulness inhabiteth. The commune accord and conceit of the
courage of men proves and grants, that God, prince of all things, is good.
For so as nothing may be thought better than good, it may not be doubted then,
than he yt nothing nys better than he, nys good. Certes, reason shows that
God is so good, that it proves by very force, that perfect good is in him. For
if God nis such, he ne may not ben prince of al thing. For certes, some thing
possessing in it self perfect good, should be more worthy than God: and it
should seemen, that thilke thing were first and older than God. For we have
showed apertly, that all things that been parfite, been first, or things that been imparfite. And for thy, forasmuch as that my reason, or my process, ne go
not a way without an end, we owen to granten, that the sovereign good is right
full of soueraign perfect good. And we have established, that the soueraign good
is very blisfulnes: then mote it needs be, that very blisfulnes is set in
sovereign good. Boecius. This take I well (quoth. I) ne this ne may not be
withsaid in no manner. Philos. But I pray thee (quoth. she) see now how thou
may proven holily, and withouten corrupcion, this that we have said, that
the soueraign God is full of right sovereign good. Bo. In which manner (quoth.
I.) Phil. Wenest thou aught (quoth. she) that the father of all things has taken
thilke sovereign good any where out of himself? Of which sovereign good, men
proves that he is full. Right as thou might thinken, that God, that has
blisfulnes in himself, and thilk blisfulnese that is in him were diverse in
substance. For if thou wene that God has received thilke good out of himself,
thou may wene, that he that yaue thilke good to God, be more worthy than
God. But I am beknow and confess, and that right dignely, that God is right
worthy above all things: And if so be that this good be in him by nature, but
that is diverse from him by wening reason, sens we speaken of God, prince of
all things. Feign whosoever feign may, who was he that conioined these things
together. And eke at the last, see well, that a thing yt is diverse fro any
thing, that thilke thing nis not the same thing, for which it is understood
to ben diverse. Then follows it well, that thilke thing yt by his nature is
diverse from sovereign good, that thing is not sovereign good. But certes, it
were a felonous cursednesse, to thinken that of him, that nothing nis more
worth. For always, of all things, the name of hem ne may not ben better than her
beginner. For which I may concluden, by right very reason, that thilke that is
beginning of all things, thilke same thing is sovereign God in his substance.
Bo. Thou have said rightfully (quoth I.) Pholos. But we have granted (quoth. she)
that the sovereign good is blissfulness. Bo. That is sooth (quoth. I.) Philos.
Then, quoth. she, we mote needs graunten and confessen, that the ilke same
sovereign good be God. Boe. Certes, quoth. I, I ne may not deny, ne withstand
the reasons purposed, and I see well that it follows by strength of the
premises. Philos. Look now, quoth. she, if this be proved yet more firmly thus,
that there ne mowen not been two sovereign goods, that been diverse among
hemselfe. For certes, the goods that been diverse among hemselfe, that one is
not that the other is. Then ne mowen neither of hem be perfect, so as either of
hem lacks to other, but that that nis not perfect, men may seen apertly that
it nis not sovereign. The things then yt be soveraignly good, ne mowen by no
way be diverse. But I have well concluded, that blissfulness and GOD been the
sovereign good, for which it mote needs been that sovereign blissfulness is
sovereign dignity. Boe. Nothing, quoth. I, is more soothfast than this, ne more
firm by reason, ne a more worthy thing than God, may not be concluded.

Philoso. Upon these things then, quoth. she, right as these Geometricians, when
they have showed their propositions, been wont to bringen in things, yt they
clepen porrismes, or declarations of foresaid things: right so woll I give thee
here, as a Corollary, or a mede of crown. For why, for as much as by the
getting of blissfulness men been maked blisful, and blissfulness is dignity:
then it is manifest and open, that by the getting of dignity men ben maked
blisful, right as by the getting of Justice. And by yt getting of Sapience they
be maked wise, right so, needs by the semblable reason, when they have gotten
divinity, they be made gods. Then is every man blisful a god. But certes by
nature there nis but one God, but by the participation of the Divinity, there
ne lets ne distourbeth nothing, that there ne be many gods. Bo. This is, quoth.
I, a fair thing and a precious. clepe it as thou will, be it Corollary, or
Porrisme, or mede of Croune, or declaring. P. Certes (quoth. she) nothing nis
fairer than is the thing, that by reason should be added to these foresaid
things. Bo. What thing, (quoth. I.) Ph. So, quoth. she, as it seems that
blissfulness contains many things, it were for to weten, whether that all
these things maken or conioynen, as a manner body of blissfulness, by the
diversity of parties of members, or else if any of all these things be such,
that it accomplish by himself the substance of blissfulness. So all these
other things been referred and brought to blissfulness, that is to say, as to
the cheef of hem. Bo. I would, quoth. I, that thou made me clearly to understand
what thou say, and with what thou recordest me the foresaid things. Phi.
Have I not judged, quoth. she, that blissfulness is good? Boe. Yes forsooth, quoth.
I, and that sovereign good. Phi. Add then, quoth. she, thilke good that is made
blissfulness to all the foresaid things: For thilke same blissfulness, that is
deemed to be soueraign suffisaunce, thilke self is sovereign power,
sovereign reverence, sovereign clearenesse or noblesse, and sovereign delight.

What say thou then of all these things, that is to say, suffisaunce, power,
and these other things? Been they then as members of blissfulness, or been they
referred and brought to sovereign good, right as all things that been brought
to the cheef of hem? Bo. I understond well, quoth. I, what thou purposest to seek:
but I desire for to hearken, that thou show it to me. Ph. Take now thus the
discretion of this question, quoth. she. If all these things, quoth. she, weren
members to felicity, then weren they diverse that one from that other: and such
is the nature of parties or of members, that diverse members compounen a body.
Bo. Certes, quoth. I, it has well ben showed here beforne, that all these things
ben all one thing. Phi. Then been they no members, quoth. she. For else it should
seem, that blissfulness were comoyned all of o member alone, but that is a
thing may not be done. Bo. This thing, quoth. I, then nis not doubtous, but I
abide to hearken the remenaunt of thy question. This is open and clear, quoth.
she, that all other things ben referred and brought to good: For therefore is
suffisaunce required, for it is deemed to be good: and for thy, is power
required, for men trowen also that it be good. And this same thing mowen we
thinken, and conjecten of reverence, of noblesse, and of delight. Then is
sovereign good the sum and the cause of all that ought to been desired. For
why, thilke thing that withholdeth no good in it self, ne semblaunce of good,
it ne may not well in no manner be desired ne required. And the contrary: for
though that things by her nature ne ben not good, algates if men wenen that
they been good, yet ben they desired, as though they were verily good. And
therefore it is said, that men ought to wene by right, that bounty be the
sovereign fine, and the cause of all the things that been to requiren. But
certes, thilke that is cause, for which men requiren any thing, it seems that
thilke same thing be most desired, as thus: if that a wight would riden for
cause of heal, he ne desires not so much the mooving to riden, as the effect
of his heal. Now then sens that all things ben required for the grace of good,
they ne ben not desired of all folk, more than the same good. But we have
granted, that blissfulness is that same thing, for which that all these other
things ben desired. Then is it thus, that certes only blissfulness is required
and desired. By which thing it shows clearly, that of good and blissfulness
is all one and the same substance. Bo. I see not, quoth. I, wherefore that men
might discorden in this. Philos. And we have showed, that God and very
blissfulness is all one thing. Bo. That is sooth, quoth. I. Phi. Then mow we
conclude sikerly, that the substance of God is set in thilke same good, and in
none other place.

Huc omnes pariter venite capti. Quos fallax ligat improbis catenis. Terrenas
habitans libido mentes. Hic erit vobis requies laborum, etc.
Comes all together now ye that been ycaught and bound with wicked chains, by
the delight of earthly things inhabiting in your thought. Here shall be the rest
of your labor: here is the haven stable, in quiet pesible. This alone is the
open refute to wretches, that is to sain, that ye that be combred and deceived
with worldly affections, comes now to this sovereign good, that is, God, that
is refute to hem that willen commen to him. All the things y^ the river Tagus
yeueth you, with his golden gravels: or else all the things that the river
Hermus yeueth with his red brink: or that Indus yeueth, that is next the hot
party of the world, that medleth the green stones with the white: ne should
not cleren the looking of your thout, but hiden rather your blind courage within
her derknes. All that likes you here, and exciteth and moves your thoughts,
the earth has nourished it within his low caves. But the shining, by which the
heaven is governed, and whence that his strength, that escheweth the dark
overthrowing of the soul, and whosoever may known thilke light of
blissfulness, he will saine, that the white beams of the Sun ne be not clear.

Assentior (inquam) cuncta enim firmissimis nexa rationibus constant. Tum illa,
quanti, inquit, tu aestimabis, si bonum ipsum, quid sit, agnoveris, etc.
BOecius. I assent me, quoth. I, for all things ben strongly bounden with right
ferme reasons. Philosophy. How much will thou praisen it, quoth. she, if that
thou know what the like good is? Boecius. I woll praise it, quoth. I, by price
without end, if it shall betide me to know also together God that is good.
Philosophy. Certes, quoth. she, that shall I do thee by very reason, if that tho
things, that I have concluded a little here beforne, dwellen only in her
granting. Boecius. They dwellen granted to thee, quoth. I, that is to saine, as
who says, I grant to thy foresaied conclusions. Philosophy. I have showed
thee, quoth. she, that the things that been required of many folk, ne been not
very goods, ne perfect: for they ben diverse, that one from that other. And so
as each of hem is lacking to other, they ne have no power to bring a good, that
is full and absolute. But then at erst been they very good, when they been
gathered togider all into one form, and into one werking: so that thilke thing
that is suffisaunt, thilke same is power, and reverence, noblesse, and mirth.
And forsooth, but if all these things be al one same thing, they ne have not
whereby that they mow be put in ye number of things that ought to be required
and desired. Bo. It is shown. quoth. I, ne hereof may there no man doubten.
Philosophy. The things then, quoth. she, that ne been no goods, when they ben
diverse, and when they beginnen to be all one thing, then ben they goods, ne
comes it not then, by the getting of unity, that they be maked goods? Boeci.
So seems it, quoth. I. Philoso. But all thing that is good, quoth. she, grauntest
thou that it be good, by the participation of good or no? Boecius. I grant it,
quoth. I. Philoso. Then must thou graunten, quoth. she, by semblable reason, that one
and good be one same thing. For of things, of which the effect nis not
naturally diverse, needs her substance must be one same thing. Boecius. I ne
may not deny it, quoth. I. Philosophy. Have thou not known well, quoth. she, that
all things that is, has so long his dwelling and his sustaunce, as long as it
is one: but when it forletteth to been one, it must needs dien, and corrumpen
together? Boecius. In which manner, quoth. I. Philoso. Right as in beasts, quoth.
she, when the soul and the body been conjoined in one, and dwelling together,
it is cleped a beast; and when her unity is destroyed, by thy disceueraunce of
that one from that other, then shows it well, that it is a dead thing, and it
is no longer no beast.

And the body of a wight, while it dwells in one form, by conjunction of
members, it is well seen, that it is a figure of mankind: And if the parties
of the body be divided and disceuered that one from that other, that they
destroy the unity, the body forletteth to be that it was beforne. And who so
would ren in the same manner by all things, he should seen that without doubt
every thing is in his substance, as long as it is one: and when it forletteth
to be one, it dies and perishes.

Bo. When I consider, quoth. I, many things, I see none other. Philosophy. Is
there any thing, quoth. she, that in as much as it lives naturally, that
foreletteth that talent or appetite of his being, and desires to come to death
and to corrupcion? Boe. If I consider, quoth. I, the beasts, that have any manner
nature of willing and of nilling, I ne find no beast, but if it be constrained
fro withoutforth, that foreletteth or despises the entencion to liuen and to
duren, or that will his thanks hasten him to dien.

For every beast trauaileth him to desende and keep the salvation of his life,
and escheweth death and destruction. But certes, I doubt me of herbs and
trees, that ne have no feling Souls, ne no natural workings, serving to
appetites, as beasts have, whether they have appetite to dwellen and to duren.

Philosophy. Certes, quoth. she, thereof dare thee not doubt. Now look upon ye
Herbs and Trees, for they wexen first in such places as been conuenable to
hem: in which places they mow not dien ne drien, as long as her nature may
defend hem. For some of hem wexen in Fields, and some wexen in Mountains, and
other wexe in Mareis, and other cleauen on rocks, and some wexen plenteous in
sondes. And if any wight enforce him to bear hem into other places, they wexen
dry. * For nature yeueth to every thing that is convenient to hem, and
trauayleth that they ne die, as long as they have power to dwellen and to
liuen. What will thou sain of this, yt they drawn all her nouryshings by her
roots, right as they hadden her mouths yplunged within the earthes, and shedden
by her mareis her wood and her bark? And what will thou saine of this, that
the ilke thing that is right soft, as the marie is, that is always hid in the
seat of all within, and that is defended from without, by the steadfastness of
wood, and that the utterest Barks is put against yt distemperaunce of the
heaven, as a defendour, mighty to sufferen harm? And thus certes may thou
well seen, how great is the diligence of nature: for all things renouelen and
publishen hem with seed ymultiplied.

Ne there nis no man, that ne wot well, that they ne been right as a
foundement and edifice, for to duren not only for a time, but right as for to
dure perdurably by generation. And ye things eke yt men wenen ne have no souls,
ne desire they not by semblable reason to keep that is his, yt is to saine, yt
is according to her nature, in conseruacion of her being and enduring? For
wherefore else bears lightness the flames up, and the weight presses the
earth adoun, but for as much as thilke place and thilke mouings be couenable
to eueriche of hem. And forsooth, every thing keeps thilke that is according
and proper to him, right as things that been contrarious and enemies corrumpen
hem. And yet the hard things (as stones) cleauen and holden her parties
together right fast and hard, and defenden hem in withstanding, that they ne
departen lightly, and yeuen place to hem, that breaken or deuiden hem: but
nathelesse, they return again soon into the same things from whence they be
araced. But fire flees and refuses all division. Ne I ne treat not now here
of wilful moouings of the soul that is knowing, but of naturell entencion of
things, as thus: right as we swallowen the meat that we receiuen, and ne think
not on it, and as we draw our breath in sleeping, that we were not while we
sleepen. For certes in the beasts, the love of her livings, ne of her beings,
ne comes not of the w^^nings of the soul, but of the beginnings of nature.
For certes, through constrayning causes, will desires and embraces full often
times the death, that nature dredeth, that is to saine, as thus: That a man may
be constrained so by some cause, that his will desires, and takes the death,
which that nature hates and dreadeth full sore. And sometime we seen the
contrary, as thus: that the will of a wight disturbeth and constrains that,
that nature always desires and requires, that is to say, the works of
generation, by the which generation only dwells, and is sustained the long
durabilitie of mortal things, as thus: This charity and this love, that every
thing has to himself, ne comes not of the moving of the soul, but of the
entencion of nature. For the purueyaunce of God has yeuen to things, that been
create of him this, that is a full great cause to liuen and to duren, for which
they desiren naturelly her life, as long as ever they mowen: for which thou
may not dreaden by no manner, that all things that been any where, that they
ne requiren naturally the firm stablenesse of perdurable dwelling, and eke the
eschewing of destruction.

Boeci. I confess (quoth. I) that I see well now, and certainly, withouten
doubt, the things that a while ago seemeden uncertain to me. Philos. But (quoth.
she) thilk thing that desires to be and dwell perdurably, he desires to been
one: for if that one were destroyed, certes, being should there none dwellen to
no wight. Boecius. That is sooth (quoth. I.) Philosophy. Then (quoth. she) desiren
all things one. Boecius. I assent (quoth. I) Philosophy. And I have showed (quoth.
she) that ilke same one is thilke that is good. Boecius. Ye forsooth (quoth. I)
Philosophy. All things then (quoth. she) requiren good, and thilke may thou
discriuen thus: good is thilke thing that every wight desires. Boecius. There
ne may be thought no more very thing (quoth. I) for either all things be referred
and brought to naught, and flotten without governor dispoiled of one, as of
her proper head: or else if there be any thing, to which that all things tenden
and hyen to, that thing must be the soueraign good of all goods. Philosophy.
Then said she thus: O my nourice (quoth. she) I have great gladness of thee, for
thou have fixed in thy heart the middle soothfastnesse, that is to saine, the
prick: but this thing has be discovered to thee, in that thou saidest, that
thou wistest not a little here beforne. Boecius. What is that (quoth. I) Philos.
That thou ne wistest not (quoth. she) which was the end of things, and certes,
that is the thing that every wight desires. And for as much as we have
gathered and comprehended, that good is thilk thing that is desired of all,
then mote we needs confess, that good is the fine of all things.

Quisquis profunda mente vestigat verum. Cupitque nullis ille deviis falli, in
se revolvat intimi lucem visus, etc.
WHo so seeks sooth by a deep thought, and coueiteth to been disceyued by no
miswayes, let him rollen and treaten within himself, the light of his inward
sight: and let him gatheren again, enclyning into a compace, the long moouinges
of his thoughts. And let him teachen his courage, that he has enclosed and
hid in his treasours all that he has compassed or sought from without: and
then thilke thing, that the black clouds of error whylome had covered, shall
light more clearly than Phoebus himself ne shines. Glosa. Who so woll seek
the deep grounds of sooth in his thought, and woll not be deceived by false
proposicions that gone amiss from the troth, let him well examine and roll
within himself the nature and properties of the thing. And let him eftsoons
examine and rollen his thoughts, by good deliberacion, or that he deem. And let
him teachen his soul, that it has by naturell principles kindliche thidde
within it self all the troth, ye which he imagines to been in things without:
and then all the darkness of his misknowing shall seem more evidently to y^
sight of his understanding, than the Sun ne seems to the sight withoutforth.
For certes, the body bringing y^ weight of foryeting, ne has not chased out
of your thought all y^ clerenesse of your knowing: for certainly, the seed of
sooth holds and cleaves within your courage, and it is awaked and excited by
the winds, and by the blasts of doctrine.

For wherefore else deemen ye of your own will ye rights, when ye be asked, but
if so were that the nourishing of reason ne lived yplunged in the deep of your
heart: that is to sain, how should men demen y^ sooth of any thing that were
asked, and if there nere a root of soothfastnesse, that were yplunged and hid
in naturel principles, the which soothfastnesse lived within the deepnesse of
the thought? And if it be so, that the muse and the doctrine of Plato sings
footh, all that every wight learneth, he ne does nothing else then, but
records, as men recorden things that been foryetten.

Tum ego, Platoni (inquam) vehementer assentior. Nam me horum jam secundo
commemoras. Primum quod memoriam corporea contagione, etc.
THen said I thus: I accord me greatly to Plato, for thou recordest and
remembrest me these things yet the second time, that is to say, when first I
left my memory by the contrarious conjunction of the body with the soul: and
eftsoons afterward, when I lost it, confounded by thy charge, and by the
burden of my sorrow: and then said she thus. If thou look (quoth. she) first the
things that thou have granted, it ne shall not been right far, that thou ne
shall remembren the ilke thing that thou saidest that thou nistest not. Bo.
What thing (quoth. I.) Philos. By which ye government (quoth. she) that this world is
governed. Bo. I remember it well (quoth. I) and I confess well, that I ne wist it
naught. But all be it so, that I see now from afar what thou purposest,
algates I desire yet to hearken it of thee more plainly. Phil. Thou ne wendest
not (quoth. she) a little here beforne ye men should dout, that this world is
governed by God. Bo. Certes (quoth. I) ne yet, ne dout I it not, ne I nill never
wene that it were to dout: as who says but I wot well that God governs this
world. And I shall answeren thee by what reasons I am brought to this. This
world, quoth. I, of so many diverse and contrarious parties, ne might never have been assembled in o form, but if there were one, that conjoined so many diverse
things. And the same diversity of her natures, that so discorden, that one fro
that other must departen, and vnioynen the things y^ been conjoined, if there
ne were one that contained that he has conjoined and ybound. Ne the certain
order of nature ne should not bring forth so ordeyne mouings, by places, by
times, by doings, by spaces, by qualities, if there ne were one that were aye
steadfast dwelling, that ordained and disposed these diversities of moouings.
And thilke thing, whatsoever it be, by which that all things be ymaked and
ladde, I clepe him God, that is a word that is used to all folks. Phil. Then
said she: Since thou felest thus these things, I trow that I have little more to
done, that thou, mighty of welefulnesse, hole and sound, ne see eftsoons thy
country. But let us looken these things that we have purposed here beforne.
Have I not numbered and said (quoth. she) that suffisaunce is in blissfulness. And
we have accorded, that God is the ilke same blissfulness. Bo. Yes forsooth,
(quoth. I.) Philos. And that to govern this world, quoth. she, ne shall he never have
need of none help fro without. For else if he had need of any help, he ne should
not have no full suffisaunce. Boet. Yes thus it mote needs be (quoth. I.) Philos.
Then ordained he by himself alone all things (quoth. she.) Boet. That may not be
denied, quoth. I. Philos. And I have showed that God is the same good. Bo. It
remembers me well, quoth. I. Philosoph. Then ordeyneth he all things by thilke
good, quoth. she, since he which we han accorded to be good, governs all things
by himself. And he is a key and a steire, by which the edifice of this world
is kept stable, and without corrumping. Bo. I accord me greatly, quoth. I. And I
have apperceived a little here beforne, that thou would say thus: all were
it so that it were by a thin suspection. Phi. I trow well, quoth. she. For as I
trow thou leadest now more ententifely thine eye to looken the very goods. But
natheles, the thing that I shall tell thee, yet ne shows not less to token.
Bo. What is that, quoth. I. Phil. So as men trow, quoth. she, and that rightfully,
that God governs all things by the key of his goodness. And all these same
things that I have taught thee, hasten hem by natural contencion to come to
good, there may no man doubten, that they ne be governed voluntarily. And that
they ne conuerten hem of her own good will to her ordeynour. As that they ben
according, and enclining to her governor and to her king. Bo. It mote needs be
so, quoth. I, for the realm ne should not seem blisful, if there were a yoke of
misdrawings in diverse parties, ne the saving of obedient things ne should not
be then. Phi. Is there nothing, quoth. she, that keeps his nature, that
enforces him to gone against God? Boet. No, quoth. I. Philos. And if that any
thing enforced him to withstand God, might it avaylen at last again him, that
we have granted to be Almighty by the right of blissfulness? Certes, quoth. I,
all utterly it ne might not avail him. Philos. Then is there nothing, quoth. she,
that either may or will withstand to his Sovereign God. Bo. I trow not, quoth. I.
Philos. Then, quoth. she, is thilke the Sovereign GOD, that all things governs
strongly, and ordayneth hem softely. Boethius. Then said I thus, I delight me,
quoth. I, not only in the ends, or in the sum of the reasons, that thou have
concluded and proved, but thilke words that thou usest deliten me much more, so
that at last, fools, that sometime renden great things, oughten been ashamed
of hemselfe, that is to sain, that we fools that reprehenden wickedly the
things that touchen Gods governance, we oughten been ashamed of our self. As
I, that said, that God refuses only the works of men, and ne entermeteth
not of it. Phi. Thou have well heard, quoth. she, the fables of the Poets, how the
Gyaunts assaileden heaven with the gods: but forsooth the debonaire force of
God disposed hem as it was worthy, that is to sain, destroyed the Gyaunts as it
was worthy. But will thou that we rejoynen together thilk same reasons? For
perauenture of such conjunctions may sterten up some fair spark of sooth.
Boecius. Do (quoth. I) as thee list. Philosophy. Wenest thou (quoth. she) that God ne
be almighty? Boecius. No man is in doubt of it certes (quoth. I.) Philosophy. No
wight ne doubts it, if he be in his mind (quoth. she.) But he that is almighty,
there nis nothing that he ne may. Boecius. That is sooth (quoth. I.) Philosophy.
May God do evil (quoth. she?) Boe. Nay forsooth (quoth. I.) Phi. Then is evil nothing
(quoth. she) since that he may done none evil, that may done all things. Boecius.
Scornest thou me (quoth. I) or else playest thou, or deceiuest thou me, that have
so wonnen with thy reasons, the house of Dedalus so enterlacing, that it is
unable to be unlaced, that thou otherwhile enterest there thou issuest, and
otherwhile issuest there thou enterest. Ne foldest thou not together, by
replicacion of words, a manner wonderful circle, or enuironning of the
simplicity divine. For certes, a little here beforne, when thou began at
blissfulness, thou saidest that it is a souerain good, and y^ God is the
blissfulness, for which thou yaue me as a couenable yeft, that is to sain, that
no wight nis blisful, but if he be God also therewith. And saidest eke, that
the form of good is the substance of God and of blissfulness. And saidest, y^
thilke one is thilk same good, that is required and desired of all the kind of
things. And thou prouedst in disputing, that God governs all the things of
the world by the governance of bounty, and saidest that all things would obeyen
to him, and saidest that y^ nature of evil is nothing. And these things
shewedst thou not with no reasons taken fro without, but by proves in cercles
and homeliche knowing. The which proves drawn to hemself her faith and her
accord, eueriche of hem of other. Philosophy. Then said she thus: I ne scorn
not, ne play, ne deceive thee, but I have showed the thing that is greatest
over all things, by y^ yeft of God, that we whylom praiden. For this is the
form of divine substance, that is such, that it ne slideth not into vtterest
foreign things, ne receives not no strange things in him. But right as
Permenides said in Greek of thilk divine substance: He said thus, * That thilk
divine substance tourneth the world, and the moouable cercle of things, while
the ilke divine substance keeps it self without moouings, that is to saine,
that he moves never mo, and yet it moves all other things. But nathelesse,
if I have styred reasons, that be not taken fro without the compass of the
thing of the which we treaten, but reasons that been bestowed within compass:
there nis not why thou should meruaylen, since thou have learned by the
sentence of Plato, * That needs the words mote been cosins to the things of
which they speaken.

Felix qui potuit boni, Fontem visere lucidum. Felix qui potuit gravis, etc.
BLessed is that man that may seen the clear well of good: Blisfull is he that
may vnbinden him from the bounds of heavy earth. The Poet of Thrace, Orpheus,
that whylom had right great sorrow for the death of his wife. After that he had
maked and constrained by his weepely songs the woods mouable to run, and had
maked the rivers to stonden still, and had maked the Hearts and Hindes to joynen
dredelesse her sides to cruel Lions, to hearken his song, and had maked that
the Hare was not aghast of the Hound, which was pleased by song: So when the
most ardaunt love of his wife brend the entrails of his breast, ne the songs
that had ouercommen all things, ne mighten not assuagen her lord Orpheus. He
plained him of the heaven gods, which that were cruel to him: he went him to
the houses of the hell: And he tempered his blandishing songs, by resouning of
strings, and spekest and song in weeping, all yt ever he had received, and
laued out of ye noble wells of his mother Caliope y^ gods. And he sang with
as much as he might of weeping, and with as much as love, that doubled his
sorrow, might yeuen him and teach him, and commoued the hell, and required and
besought by sweet prayer y^ lords of souls in hell of releasing, that is to
say, to yeelden him his wife. Cerberus the porter of hell, with his three
heads, was caught and all abashed of the new song. And the three goddesses,
Furies and vengeresses of fellonies, that tormenten and agasten the souls, by
annoy woxen sorrowful and sorry, and tears wepten for pity. Tho was not y^
head of Ixion tourmented by the overthrowing wheel. And Tantalus, yt was
destroyed by the woodnesse of long thurst, despised y^ floods to drink. The
foul, that hight Vultor, that eats the stomach or the gisern of Tytius, is so
fulfilled of his song, that it nill eaten ne tyren no more. At the last the
lord and judge of souls was moved to misericordies, and cried, we been
ouercommen (quoth. he) give we to Orpheus his wife to bear him company, he has
well ybought her by his songs and his dities: but we will putten a law in this,
and covenant in the yeft, that is to sain, that till he be out of hell, if he
look behind him, that his wife shall come again unto us. * But what is he that
may give a law to lovers? love is a greater law, and stronger to himself than
any law that men may yeuen. Alas, when Orpheus and his wife were almost at the
terms of the night, that is to sain, at y^ last bounds of hell, Orpheus looked
backward on Euridice his wife, and lost her, and was dead. This fable
appertains to you all, whosoever desires or seeks to lead his thought into
the souerain day, that is to say, to clearness of soueraign good. For
whosoever be so ouercommen, that he fix his eyes into the pit of hell, that is
to saine, who so ever set his thoughts in earthly things, all that ever he
has drawn of the noble good celestial, he leseth it, when he looks to the
hells, that is to sain, into low things of the earth.

Thus ends the third book of Boece. Now follows the fourth.
Haec cum Philosophia dignitate vultus, and oris gravitate servata, leviter
suaviterque cecinisset, Tum ego nondum penitus insiti maeroris oblitus, etc.
WHEN Philosophy had songen softly and delectably the foresaid things, keeping
the dignity of her chere, and the weight of her words. I then that ne had all
utterly foryeten the weeping and the mourning that was set in mine heart,
forbrake the entencion of her, that intended yet to said some other things.

O (quoth. I) thou that art guideresse of very light, the things that thou have
said me hitherto, ben to me so clear, and showing by the divine looking of hem,
and by thy reasons, that they ne mowen ben ouercommen. And thilke things that
thou toldest me, all be it so, y^ I had whylom foryeten hem, for the sorrow of
y^ wrong that has be done to me: yet nevertheless they ne weren not utterly
unknown to me. But this same is namely a right great cause of my sorrow, so
yt as the governor of things is good, if that evils mowen been by any ways,
or else if yt evils passen without punishing, the which thing only, how worthy
is it to ben wondered upon. Thou considrest it well thy self certainly. But yet
to this thing there is yet another thing joined more to be wondered upon. For
fellonie is Emperesse, and floureth full of richesse, and virtue nis not all
only without medes, but it is cast down, and eke fortroden under y^ feet of
fellonous folk: and it abieth y^ turments in steed of wicked fellons. Of all
which things there is no wight may maruailen enough ne complainen, yt such
things be done in the reign of God, that all things wot, and all things
may, and ne will not only but good things. Then said she thus: Certes (quoth. she)
that were a great marvel, and an abashing without end, and well more horrible
than all the monsters, if it were as thou wenest, that is to saine, yt in the
right ordained house of so much a father, and an ordaynour of meine, that the
vessels that been foul and vile, should ben honored and heried, and the
precious vessels that should ben defouled and vile. But it is not so, for if
the things yt I have concluded a little here beforn, ben kept whole and
vnaraced, thou shall well know by the authority of God, (of y^ whose reign
speak) that certes the good folk be always mighty and shrewes ben always
outcast and feeble. Ne the vices be neuermore without pain, ne the virtues ne
be not without mede. And that blissfulness comes always to good folk, and
infortune comes always to wicked folk. And thou shall well known many things
of this kind that should ceasen thy plaints, and strengthen thee with steadfast
sadness. And for thou have seen the form of very blissfulness by me, that
have whylome showed it thee, and thou have known in whom blissfulness is set:
all thing treated, yt I trow be necessary to put forth, I shall shown thee the
way, that shall bringen thee again unto thy house, and I shall fix feathers in
thy thought, by which it may arisen in height, so that all tribulacion ydone
away, thou by my guiding, and by my path, and by my sledes, shall mowen return
hole and sound into thy country.

Sunt enim pennae volucres mihi, Quae celsa conscendunt poli, Quas sibi cum
velox men's induit, etc.
THen for thy swift feathers yt surmounten the height of the heaven, when the
swift thought has clothed it in tho feathers, it despises ye hateful earths,
and surmounteth the roundenesse of yt great air, and it sees y^ clouds
behind his back, and passes the height of the region of the fire, that
enchaufeth by y^ swift moving of the firmament, till that he arises into the
houses that bearen the sterres, and joyneth the way with the sun Phoebus, and
fellawshippeth the way of the old cold Saturnus, and be ymaked a knight of y^
clear sterre, y^ is to saine, when yt thought is made Gods knight, by ye
seeking of clear troth to commen to the very knowledge of God. And thilke
soul renneth by the circle of sterres, in all y^ places there as yt shining
night is ipainted, that is to sain, the night, yt is cloudlesse. For on nights
yt be cloudlesse, it seems that y^ heaven were painted with diverse images of
sterres. And when he has done there enough, he shall forleten ye last heaven,
and he shall present and wenden on the back of the swift firmament, and he
shall be maked perfect of y^ worshipful light of God. There holds the lord of
things the scepter of his might, and attempreth the governments of the world,
and the shining judge of things stable in himself, governs the swift cart or
waine, that is to saine, the circular moving of the sun. And if thy way
leads thee again, so yt thou be brought thider, then will thou say that is y^
country that thou requirest, of which thou ne had no mind: But now it
remembers me well, here was I born, here wol I fasten my degree, here woll I
dwell. But if thee likes then to looken on the derkenesses of the earth, that
thou have forleten, then shall thou seen, that these fellonous tyraunts, that
the wretched people dreadeth now, shullen be exiled from thilke fair country.

Turn ego pape inquam, ut magna promittis. Nec dubito, quin possis efficere, tu
modo quem excitaveris, ne moreris, etc.
THen said I thus. O I wonder me yt thou behetest me so great things. Ne I ne
doubt nor, that thou ne may well perfourm that thou behetest: But I pray thee
this, that thou ne tarry not to tell me thilk things that thou have moved.
Phil. First (quoth. she) thou must needs know, that good folk been always strong
and mighty, and the shrewes been feeble and deserte, and naked of all
strengths. And of these things certes euerich of hem is declared and showed by
other. For as good and evil been two contraries, if so be that good be
steadfast, then shows the feeblesse all openly. And if thou know clearly y^
freelenesse of evil, the steadfastness of good is known. But for as much as
the faith of my sentence shall be the more ferme and haboundaunt, I woll gone
by that one way and by that other, and I woll confirm ye things that been
purposed now on this side, and now on yt side. * Two things there been, in
which the effect of all the deeds of mankind stands: that is to said, will
and power: and if that one of these two fails, there nis nothing that may be
done. For if that will lacks, there nis no wight that undertakes to do that
he woll not done: And if power fails, the will nis but idle, and stant for
naught. And thereof comes it, yt if thou see a wight that would getten yt he
may not getten, thou may not doubt yt power ne fails him to haven that he
would. Boe. This is open and clear (quoth. I) ne it ne may not been denied in no
manner. P. And if thou see a wight, quoth. she, that has done that he would done,
thou nilt not doubt, that he ne has had power to done it. Bo. No, quoth. I. Phi.
And in that that every wight may, in that men holden hem mighty to don a
thing: Insomuch, as a man is mighty to don a thing, insomuch, men hold him
mighty: and in that that he ne may, in that men demen him to be feeble. Bo. I
confess it well, quoth. I. P. Remember thee, quoth. she, yt I have gathered and
showed by yt foresaid reasons, yt all y^ entencion of the will of mankind, which
y^ is lad by diverse studies, hastes to commen to blissfulness. Boet. It
remembers me well, quoth. I, that it has been showed. Philoso. And records yt
naught then, quoth. she, that blissfulness is thilk same good that men requiren.
so yt when blissfulness is required of all? Boethius. It records me not, quoth.
I. For I have it always in my memory fixed. Philoso. All folk then, quoth. she,
good and eke bad, enforcen hem without difference of entencion to comen to
good. Boethius. This is very consequence, quoth. I. Philos. And certain is, quoth.
she, yt by getting of good be men maked good. Boeti. That is certain, quoth. I.
Philos. Then getten good men yt they desiren. Boe. So it seems, quoth. I.
Philosophy. But wicked folk, quoth. she, if they getten the good that they
desiren, they ne mowen not be wicked. Bo. So it is, quoth. I, Philos. Then so as
that one and that other, quoth. she, desiren the good, and the good folk getten
the good, and not the wicked folk: then it is no doubt that the good folk ne
be mighty, and wicked folk be feeble. Boeti. Who so yt ever douteth of this,
he ne may not consider the nature of things, ne y^ consequence of reasons.
Philos. And over this, quoth. she, if that there been two things yt have one same
purpose by kind, and that one of hem pursues and performs that same thing by
natural office, and that other ne may not don thilk office naturell, but
follows by other manner then is couenable to nature, him yt accomplisheth his
purpose kindly, and yet he ne accomplisheth not his own purpose: whether of
these two demest thou for more mighty? B. If yt I conject, quoth. I, yt thou
would say, algates I desire yet to harken it more plainly of thee. Philosoph.
Thou nilt not then deny, quoth. she, that the moouement of goings nis in men by
kind. Boeti. No forsooth, quoth. I. Philosophy. Ne thou doubtest not, quoth. she, yt
thilk naturell office of going ne be ye office of feet, Boe. I ne doubt it
not, quoth. I. Philos. Then, quoth. she, if that a wight be mighty to move, and
goes upon his feet, and another to whom thilke naturell office of feet
lacks, enforces him to go creeping on his hand, which of these two ought to
be holden the more mighty by right? Boeti. Knit forth, quoth. I, y^ remnaunt,
Philosophy. For no wight ne douteth, y^ he that may gone by naturell office of
feet, ne be more mighty than he yt ne may not. But yt sovereign good, quoth.
she, that is even like purposed to the good and to the bad: y^ good folk
seeken it by naturell office of virtues, and shrewes enforcen hem to getten it
by diverse couetises of earthly things, which y^ nis no naturell office to
getten thilk sovereign good. Trowest thou that it be any otherwise? Bo. Nay,
quoth. I. For y^ consequence is open, and showing of things that I have granted,
y^ needs good folk moten ben mighty, and shrews moten ben feeble and
vnmightie. Phil. Thou rennest aright beforne me, quoth. she, and this is the
judgment, yt is to sain, I judge of right, as these leeches been wont to
hopen of sick folk, when they apperceiuen yt nature is redressed, and
withstandeth to yt malady. But for I see thee now all ready to y^ withstanding,
I shall show thee more thilke and continuell reasons. For look how greatly
shows the feebleness and infirmity of wicked folk, y^ ne mowen not commen
to yt her naturel entencion leads hem: And yet almost thilk naturell
entencion constrains hem. And what were to demen then of shrewes, if thilk
naturell help had forleten hem, y^ which naturell help of entencion goth
always beforn hem, and is so great, yt uneath it may be ouercommen? Consider
then how great defaut of power, and how great feeblesse there is in wicked
fellonous folk: as who says, y^ greater thing yt is coueited, and the desire
not accomplished, of yt less might is he that coueiteth it, and may not
accomplish. And for thy, Philosophy says thus by sovereign good. Ne shrews ne
requiren not light medes ne vain games, which they ne may not followen ne
holden, but they faylen of thilk sum of the height of things, that is to
sain, sovereign good. Ne these wretches ne commen not to the effect of souerain
good, the which they enforcen hem only to getten by nights and by days: in
getting of which good, the strength of good folk is full well yseen. For right
as thou might demen him mighty of going, that goes on his feet till he
might commen to thilk place, fro the which place there ne lay no way further to
be gone: right so must thou needs demen him for right mighty, which that
gets and attayneth to the end of all things, which that been to desiren,
beyond the which end there nis nothing to desire. Of the which power of good
folk, men may conclude, that we wicked men seemen to be barrain and naked of
all strength. For why forleten they virtues, and followen vices, nis it not for
that they ne known not the goods? But what thing is more feeble and more
caitife, than is y^ blindness of ignorance? or else they known well which things
they oughten followen, but lechery and couetise overthrows hem mistourned.
And certes, so does distemperance to feeble men, that mow not wrastlen again
these vices. Ne know they not well, that they forleten the good wilfully, and
tournen hem wilfully to vices. And in this wise they ne forleten not only to be
mighty, but they forleten all utterly in any wise for to been. For they yt
forleten the commune fine of all things yt ben, they forleten also therewithal
for to been. And perauenture, it should seemen to some folk, y^ this were a
marvel to sain, that shrews, which that containen the more parts of men, ne
been not, ne have no being. But nathelesse it is so, and thus stant this thing:
For they that be shrews, I deny not but y^ they be shrews, but I deny simply
and plainly, y^ they ne be not, ne have no being. For right as thou might
sain of y^ cerrain of a man, y^ it were a dead man: so grant I well forsooth,
that vicious folk ben wicked, but I ne may not absolutely and simply grant that
they ben. For thilk thing that withholdeth order, and keeps nature, thilk
thing is and has being. But with thing fails that, that is to say, he that
forleteth natural order, he forleteth thilk being that is set in his nature?
But thou wolt sain, the shrews mowen. Certes that ne deny I not: but certes,
her power ne descends not of strength, but of feeblesse, for they mowen done
wickedness, the which they ne might not, if they mighten dwellen in the form
and in y^ doing of good people. And thilk power shows evidently, y^ they
mowen right naught. For so as I have gadered and proved a litel here beforn,
that evil is not, and so as shrews may only but shrewdnes. This conclusion is
all clear, that shrews ne mowen right naught, ne have no power. And for as much
as thou vnderstondest which is y^ strength of this power, I have definished a
litel here beforn, that no thing nis so mighty as souerain good. B. That is
sooth (quoth. I) Phil. And thilk same souerain good may done none evil. Boe.
Certes no (quoth. I) Phil. Is there any wight then (quoth. she) that weneth y^ men
mowen done all things. Boe. No man (quoth. I) but if he be out of his wit. Phil.
But certes shrews mowen done evils (quoth. she.) Bo. Ye would God (quoth. I) that
they ne mighten done none. P. Then (quoth. she) so as he that is mighty to done
only good things, he may done all things, and they that been mighty to done
evil things, ne mowen not all things. Then is it open thing and manifest, y^
they that mowen done evil, ben of less power. And yet to prove this
conclusion, there helps me this, that I have showed here beforn, y^ all power
is to be numbered among things y^ men oughten require. And I have showed, y^ all
things that oughten been desired, be referred to God, right as to a manner
height of her nature: but for to mowen done evil and fellonie, ne may not ben
referred to God. Then is not evil of the number of things, y^ oughten to ben
desired and required. Then is it open and clear, that the power ne the moving
of shrews nis no power. And of all these things it shows well, that the good
folk ben certainly mighty, and the shrews doubtless vnmighty. And it is clear
and open, that thilk sentence of Plato is very and soth, y^ says, That only
wise men may done that they desiren, and shrews mowen haunten that hem likes,
but that they desiren, that is to sain, to come to souerain good, they ne have
no power to accomplish that: for shrews done what hem list, when by tho things
in which they delighten, they wenen to attain to thilk good that they desiren,
but they ne getten ne attain not thereto, for vices ne commen not to
blissfulness.

Quos vides sedere celsos, Solii culmine reges, Purpura claros nitente, etc.
WHo so that the couerture of her vain apparailes, might stripen of these proud
kings that thou see sitten on high in her chairs, glittering in shining
purpure, enuironned with sorrowful armures, menasing with cruel mouth, blowing
by woodnes of heart, he should seen, y^ thilk lords heaten within her courages
full strait chains: for lecherit tormenteth hem on y^ one side with greedy
venimes and troublable ire, that araiseth in hem the flood of troublings,
tormenteth on that other side, her thought or sorrow halt hem werie and
y^aught, or sliding and deceiving hope tormenteth hem. And therefore since thou
see one head, that is to sayn, one tyrant bearen so many tyrannies, then ne
does thilk tyrant not that he desires, since he is cast down with so many
wicked lords, that is to sain, so many vices that have so wickedly lordships
over him.

Vides ne igitur quanto in coeno probra volvantur, qua probitas luce
resplendeat? in quo perspicuum est nunquam bonis praemia, etc.
See thou not then, in how great filth these shrews been ywrapped, and with
which clerenesse these good folk shinen. In this shows it well, that to good
folk ne lacks never mo her medes, ne shrews lacken never more tourments. For
of all things that be done, thilk thing for which any thing is done, it
seems, as by right, that thilk thing be the mede of that, as thus: If a man
renneth in the stady or in the forlong for the crown, then lies the mede in
the crown, for which he renneth. And I have showed that blissfulness is thilk
same good, for which that all things ben done. Then is thilk same good purposed
to the werks of mankind, right as a commune mede, which mede ne may not be
disceuered from good folk: For no wight, as by right, from thenceforth that him
lacks goodness, ne shall be cleaped good: for which thing folk of good
manners her medes ne forsaken hem never mo. For all be it so, that shrewes waxen
as wood as hem list against good folk, yet nevertheless, the crown of wise men
ne shall not fallen ne faden fro foreign shreudnesse, ne benimmen not fro the
courage of good people her proper honor. But if any wight rejoiced him of
goodness, that he had taken fro without, as who says: if a man had his
goodness of any other man, than of himself, certes, he that yaue him thilke
goodness, or else some other wight, might bynome it him. But for as much as to
every wight his proper bounty yeueth him his mede, then at erst shall he faylen
of mede, when he forleteth to be good. And at the last, so as all medes been
required, for men wenen that they be good, who is he that nolde deem, that he
that is right mighty of good, were part less of mede? And of what mede shall
he be reguerdoned? Certes, of right fair mede and right great abouen all medes.
Remember thee of thilk noble corallary that I yaue thee a little here beforne,
and gather it together in this manner. So as God himself is blissfulness, then
is it clear and certain, that all good people been maked blisful, for they been
good: and thilk people that been blisful, it accords and is conuenable to be
Gods. Then is the mede of people such, that no day ne shall empairen it, ne no
wickedness shall drinken it, ne power of no wight ne shall not amenuse it,
that is to sain, that been maked goods. And since it is thus, that good men ne
faylen never more of her mede, certes, no man ne may doubt of the vndepartable
pain of shrews, that is to sain, that the pain of shrewes departs not from
hemself never mo. For so as good and evil, and pain and medes, be contrary: it
mote needs be, that right as we see betiden in guerdon of good, that also mote
the pain of the evil answer by the contrary parts to shrews. Now then, so as
bounty and prowess ben mede to good folk, also is shrewdness it self tourment
to shrews. Then whosoever is entetched and defouled with pain, he ne doubts
not, that he is entetched and defouled with evil. If shrews then woollen praysen
hemself, may it seemen to hem that they been withouten party of tourment, since
they been such, that the vttrest wickedness, that is to say, wicked thewes,
which is the vttrest and worst kind of shreudnesse, ne defouleth ne entetcheth
not hem only, but enfecteth and enuenimeth greatly. And also look on shrews,
that been the contrary party of good men, how great pain fellowshippeth and
fouleth hem: for thou have learned a little here beforn, that all thing that is
and has being, is one, and thilk same one is good: then is this the
consequence, that it seems well, that all thing that is and has being, is
good, that is to sain, as who says, that being, unity, and goodness, is all
one. And in this manner it follows then, that all thing that fails to be
good, it stinteth for to be, and for to have any manner being: wherefore it is,
that shrewes stinten for to be that they weren. But thilk other form of
mankind, that is to sain, the form of the body without, shows that these
shrews weren whilom men, wherefore when they been perverted and turned into
malice, certes then they have forlorn the nature of mankind: but so, as only
bounty and prowess may enhauncen every man over men: then mote it needs be,
that shrews, which that shrewdness has cast out of the condition of mankind,
been put under the merit and desert of men. Then betideth it, that if thou
see a wight, which that is transformed into vices, thou may not wene that
he be a man: For if he be ardant in avarice, and that he be a rauenour by
violence of foreign richesse, thou shall sain that he is like a wolf. And if he
be fellonous, and withouten rest, and exercise his tongue to chidings, thou
shall liken him to the hound. And if he be a privy awaytour hid, and
rejoices him to ravish by wiles, thou shall sain him like to the fox whelps.
And if he be distempred and quaketh for ire, men shall wenen that he deareth
the courage of a Lion. And if he be dredefull and flying, and dredeth things
which that ne oughten not to be dread, men shall hold him like to the Heart. And
if he be slow, and astonished and lache, men shall hold him like to an Ass. And
if he be light and unsteadfast of courage, and changes aye his studies, men
shall hold him like to the birds. And if he be piunged in foul and unclean
luxuries, he is withholden in the foul delices of the foul sow: then follows
it, that he that forleteth bounty and prowess, he forleteth to be a man, since
he ne may not passen in the condition of God, he is turned into a beast.

Vela Naricii ducis, and vagas pelago rates, Eurus appulit insulae, pulchra qua
residens dea, Solis edita semine, etc.
EUrus the wind, arrived the sails of Vlixes, duke of the country of Narice,
and his wandering ships by the sea, into the Isle, there as Circes the fair
goddess, daughter of the sun, dwells, that meddleth to her new ghests drinks
that been touched and maked with enchauntments. And after that her hand, mighty
over the herbs, had changed her ghests into diverse manners, that one of hem is
covered his face with form of a Bore, that other is changed into a Lion of the
country of Marmorike, and his nayls and his teeth wexen. That other of hem is
newlych changed into a wolf, and howlyth when he would weep: that other goes
debonairly in the house as a Tygre of Inde. But all be it so, that the godhead
of Mercury, that is cleped the bird of Archadia, has had mercy of the Duke
Vlyxes, besieged with diverse evils, and has vnbounden him fro the pestilence
of his hostess, algates the rowers and the mariners hadden by this ydrawen
into her mouths, and dronken the wicked drinks. They that weren woxen swine,
hadden by this ychaunged her meat of bread, for to eaten Acorn of Oaks. None of
her limbs ne dwells with hem whole, but they have lost the voice and the
body, only her thought dwells with hem stable, that weepeth and bewayleth
the monstrous changing that they sufferen. O over light hand, as who says,
feeble and light is the hand of Circes the enchaunteresse, that changes the
bodies of folk into beasts, to regard and to comparison of mutacion, that is
maked by vices: ne the herbs of Circes ne be not mighty, for all be it so that
they may chaungen the limbs of the body, algate yet they may not change the
hearts, for within is yhid the strength and vigor of men in the secretor of her
hearts, that is to sain, the strength of reason: but thilk venimes of vices, do
drawn a man to hem more mightily than the venime of Circes, for vices ben so
cruel, that they piercen and through passen the courage within, and though they
ne annoy not the body, yet vices wooden to destroyen men by wound of thought.

Tu ego fateor, inquam, nec injuria dici video vitiosos, tam and si humani
corporis speciem servent, etc.
THen said I thus: I confess and am aknow it (quoth. I) ne I ne see not that men
may say, as by right, that shrews been changed into beasts by the quality of
her souls, all be it so, that they keepen yet the form of the body of
mankind: but I would not of shrews, of which, the thought cruel and wood,
woodeth always to the destruction of good men, that it were leful to hem to done
that.

Certes (quoth. she) ne it is not leful to hem as I shall well show the
incouenable place: but nathelesse, if so were, that thilk that men wene been
leful to shrews, were bynommed hem, so that they ne might not annoien or done
harm to good men, certes, a great party of the pain to shrews should ben
alleged and releued. For all be it so, that it ne seem credible thing,
peradventure to some folk, that it mote needs be, that the shrews been more
wretches and silly, when they may full done and perform that they coueyten,
than if they might not accomplish that they coueyten. For if so be, that it be
wretchedness to wilnen to done evil, then is it more wretchedness to mowen
done evil, without which mowing, the wretched will should languish without
effect. Then since every of these things has his wretchedness, that is to
sain, will to done evil, and mowing to done evil, it mote needs be, that they
shrews be constrained by her vnselinesses, that woollen and mowen, and performen
fellonies and shreudnesses. Boet. I accord me (quoth. I) but I desire greatly,
that shrews losten soon thilk vnselinesse, that is to sain, that shrews weren
dispoyled of mowing to done evil.

Philosophy. So shullen they (quoth. she) sooner paraduenture then thou would, or
sooner than they hemself wene: for there nis nothing so late in so short bonds
of this life, that is long to abide, namely to a courage immortel. Of which
shrews, the great hope and the hie compassings of shreudnesse, is often destroyed
by a sodein end, or they be ware. And that thing establishes to shrews the end
of her shrewdness: for if that shrewdness makes wretches, then must he needs
be most wretch that longest is a shrew: the which wicked shrews would I demin
aldermost caytifes and vnsely, if her shrewdness ne were finished at least way
by vtterest death, for if I have concluded sooth of the vnselinesse of
shrewdness, then shows it plainly, that thilk wretchedness is withouten
end, the which is certain to be pardurable. Bo. Certes (quoth. I) this conclusion
is hard and wonderful to grant. But I know well that it accords much to
things that I have granted here beforne. Phil. Thou have (quoth. she) right
estimacion of this. But who so ever wene that it be a hard thing, to accord him
to a conclusion, it is right that he show that some of the premises ben false,
or else he mote show that the collacion of propoficions nis not spedeful to a
necessary conclusion. And if it ne be not so, but that the premises been
igraunted, there nis not why he should blame the argument. For this thing that
I shall tell thee now, ne shall not seem less wonderful, but of the things
that been taken. Also it is necessary, as who faith, it follows of that which
that is purposed beforne. Boec. What is that (quoth. I) Phil. Certes (quoth. she)
that is, that these wicked shrews be more blisful, or else less wretches that
abien the tourments that they have deserved, than if no pain of justice ne
chastised hem. Ne this ne say I not now, for y^ any man might think that the
manners of shrewes been coriged and chastised by vengeance, and that they be
brought to the right way by the dread of tourment, ne for that they yeuen to
other folks ensample to flyen fro vices.

But I understand yet in another manner, y^ shrewes been more vnsely when they
ne be not punished, al be it so that there ne be had no reason or law of
correction, ne none ensample of looking. Boet. And what manner shall y^ been,
quoth. I, other than has be told here beforn? Ph. Have we not granted then, quoth.
she, that good folk ben blisfull, and shrewes ben wretches? Boet. Yes, quoth. I.
Philosoph. Then, quoth. she, If that any good were added to y^ wretchedness of
any wight, nys he not more weleful than he y^ ne has no meddling of good in his
solitary wretchedness. Bo. So seems it (quoth. I.) Phil. And what say thou
then, quoth. she, of thilke wretch that lacks all goods, so that no good nys
meddled with his wretchedness, and yet over all his wickedness for which he is
a wretch, that there be yet another yuel annexed and knit to him, shall not men
demen him more unsely than thilke wretch, of which the vnselines is releued by
the participation of some good. Boet. Why should he not, quoth. I. Ph. Then
certes, quoth. she, han shrewes when they been punished, somewhat of good annexed
to her shrewdness, that is to saine, the same pain that they suffren, which
that is good, by the reason of Justice. And when thilke same shrewes escapen
without tourment, then have they somewhat more of yuel yet, over the wickedness
that they han done, that is to saine, default of pains, which default of pain
thou have granted is yuel, for the desert of felony. Boet. I ne may not deny
it, quoth. I. Philos. * Much more then, quoth. she, been shrewes vnsely, when they
been wrongfully delivered fro pain, then when they been punished by rightful
vengeance. But this is open thing and clear, y^ it is right that shrewes been
punished, and it is wickedness and wrong that they escapen unpunished.
Boethius. Who might deny it, quoth. I. Philosop. But, quoth. she, may any man deny y^
all that is right, ne is good? and also the contrary, y^ all y^ is wrong ne is
wicked? Boet. Certes, quoth. I, these things been clear enough, and that we have
concluded a litell here beforn. But I pray thee y^ thou tell me, if thou
accordest to letten no tourment to y^ souls, after y^ the body is ended by y^
death, that is to saine: understand thou aught, that souls have any
tourment after y^ death of y^ body? Philos. Certes, quoth. she, yea, and that right
great, of which souls, quoth. she, I trow y^ some been tourmented by asprenesse
of pain, and some souls I trow been exercised by a purging meekness, but my
counsel nys not to determine of this pains. But I have trauayled and told
yet hyderto, for thou should know y^ the mowing of shrews, which mowing thee
seems to be unworthy, nys no mowyng, and eke of shrewes, of which thou
playnedest yt they ne were not punished, yt thou would see that they ne weren
never mo withouten the tourments of her wickedness. And of the license of the
mowing to done evil, that thou praydest that it might sone be ended, and that
thou would feign lernen that it ne should not long endure. And that
shrewes been more vnsely if they were of longer duringe, and most vnsely if
they weren perdurable. And after this I have showed thee that more vnsely ben
shrewes, when they escapen without her rightful pain, than when they ben
punished by rightful vengeance. And of this sentence follows it, y^ then
been shrewes constrayued at the last with most grievous tourment, when men wene
that they ne be not punished. Boethius. When I consider thy reasons, quoth. I, I ne
trow not y^ men saine any thing more verily. And if I turn again to the
studies of men, who is he to whom it should seem, yt he ne should not only
leven these things, but eke gladly harken hem. Philoso. Certes, quoth. she, so it
is, but men may not, for they have their eyes so wont to the derkenesse of
earthly things, that they ne may not lift hem up to the light of clear
soothfastnesse. But they been like to birds, of which the night lightneth her
lookings, as the day blinds hem. For when men looken not the order of
things, but her lusts and talents, they wene that either the leave or the
mowyng to done wickedness, or else the scaping without pain, be welefull. But
consider the judgment of the perdurable law, for if thou confirm thy courage
to the best things, thou ne have no need of no judge, to yeuen thee price or
mede, for thou have joined thy self to y^ most excellent things. And if thou
have inclined thy studies to y^ wicked things, ne seek no foraine wrekerie out
of thy self, for thou thy self have thriste thy self into wicked things,
right as thou might looken by diverse times, the foul earth and the heaven,
and yt all other things stinten fro without, so y^ thou were in neither, ne see
nothing more. Then should it seemen to thee, as by only reason of loking, y^
thou were now in the Sterres, and now in the earth, but y^ people looks not on
these things. What then, shall we then approach us to hem that I have showed that
been like to beasts? And what would thou sain of this, if y^ a man had all
forlorn his sight, and had foryeten y^ he ever saw, and wened that nothing
failed him of perfection of mankind? Now we which mighten seen the same
things, would we not saine, y^ he were blind, ne also ne accords not ye
people to yt I shall saine, the which thing is sustained, by as strong
foundements of reason, yt is to saine, * That more vnselie been they yt done
wrongs to other folk, than they yt the wrong suffren. Boet. I would hearen
thilke same reasons, quoth. I. Philos. Deniest thou, (quoth. she) that all shrewes ne
been worthy to have tourment? Boethius. Nay (quoth. I.) Phil. But (quoth. she) I am
certain by many reasons, that shrewes been vnsely. Boethius. It accords (quoth.
I.) Phil. Then ne doubtest thou not (quoth. she) that thilke folk, that been
worthy of tourment, yt they ne be wretches. Boethius. It accords well (quoth. I.)
Phil. If thou were then set a Judge, or a knower of things, whither trowest thou
that men should tourmenten hem yt has done wrong, or else hem that suffered the
wrong? Boethius. I doubt not (quoth. I) that I nolde do sufficient satisfaction
to hem that have suffered wrong, by the sorrow of hem that has done wrong.
Phil. Then seems it (quoth. she) that the dooer of wrong is more wretch than he
that suffered wrong. Boethius. That follows well (quoth. I.) Phil. Then (quoth. she)
by these causes, and by other causes, that been enforced by the same root,
that filth or sin, by the proper nature of it, makes men wretches: and it
shows well, that the wrongs that men done, nis not the wretchedness of him
that receives the wrong, but the wretchedness of him that does the wrong.
But certes (quoth. she) these Orators or Advocates done all the contrary, for they
enforcen hem to commoue the Judges to have pity of hem that done the
greevaunces and the wrongs, the which shrews, it were a more couenable thing,
that ye accusours or advocates, not wroth, but piteous and debonaire, ledden
tho shrews that have done wrongs, to the judgment, right as men leden sick
folk to the Leche, for that they shoulden seeken out the maladies of sin, by
tourment. And by this covenant, either the intent of advocates, should cessen
in all, or else thoffice of the advocates would better profiten to men: it
should be turned into the habit of accusacion, that is to saine, they
shoulden accuse shrews, hemself, if it were leful to hem, to seen at any clift
the virtue that they have forletten, and sawen that they should putten adoune
the filthes of her vices, by the tourments of pains: they ne oughten not,
right for that recompensacion, for to getten hem bounty and prowess, which
that they have lost, demen and hold that the ilke pains weren tourments to
hem, and eke they woulden refuse the attendaunce of her advocates, and taken
hemselfe to her Judges, and to her accusours: for the which it betideth, that
as to y^ wise folks there nis no place iletten to hate, that is to saine, that
hate ne has no place among wise men. For no wight nill haten good men, but if
he were ouermoch a fool: and for to haten shrews, it nis no reason, for right
as languishing is malady of body, right so been vices and sin malady of
courage, and so as we ne deem not that they which that been sick of her body
been worthy to been hated, but rather worthy of pity. Well more worthy not to
been hated, but for to been had in pity been they, of which the thoughts been
constrained by felonous wickedness, that is more cruel than any languishing
of body.

Quid tantos juvat excitare motus. Et propria fatum sollicitate manu? Si mortem
petitis, propinquat ipsa sponte sua, volucres nec remoratur equos, etc.
WHat deliteth you to exciten so great moving of Hatredes, and to hasten and
busien the fatal disposicion of your death, with your proper hands, that is to
saine, by battles or conteke? For if ye asken the death, it hastes him of
his own will, ne death ne tarieth not his swift horse. And the men that the
Serpents, and the Lion, and the Tigre, and the Bear, and the Bore, seken to
slean with their teeth, yet thilke same men seken to slean euerich of hem other
with sweard. Lo, for her manners been diverse and discordaunt, they mouen
vnrightful hosts, and cruel battayles, and wilnen to perish by enterchaungyng
of darts, but the reason of cruelty, nys not enough rightful. Will thou then
yelden a couenable guerdon to the deserts of men? Love rightfully good folks,
and have pity on shrewes.

Hinc ego video inquam, quae sit vel felicitas vel miseria in ipsis proborum
atque improborum meritis constituta. Sed in hac ipsa fortuna populari, etc.
THis I see (quoth. I) either what blissfulness, or else what vnselinesse is
established in the deserts of good men, and of shrewes. But in this ilke
Fortune of the people, I see somewhat of good, and some what of evil. For no
wise man had not leauer be exiled poor and needy, and namelesse, than for to
dwellen in his City, and flouren of richesse, and be redoubtable of honor,
and strong of power. For in this wise more clearly and witnesfully is the
office of wise men treated, then the blissfulness of power, and governors, is
as it were shad amongs the people, that be neighbors and subjects, since that
namely prison, law, and these other torments of lawful pains, be rather owed to
felonous citizens: for the which selonous citizens, the pains be established,
more then for good people. Boet. Then I marvel greatly (quoth. I) why that the
things be so miss enterchaunged, that torments of felonies pressen and
confounden good people, and shrewes rauishen medes of virtue, and been in
honors, and great estates. And I desire eke for to weten of thee, what seems
thee to be the reason of this so wrongful a conclusion? For I would wonder
well the less, if that I trowed that all things were meddled with fortunous
hap. But now crepeth and increases mine astoniyngs, God governor of things,
that so as God yeveth often times to good men, goods and mirths, and to shrews,
evil and aspre things: And yeueth again to good folk hardness, and to shrews
he grants hem her will, and that they desiren. What difference may there be,
between that that God does, and hap of fortune, if men know not the cause why
it is. Philosophy. Ne it is no marvel, quoth. she, though that men wenen, that
there be somewhat foolish and confuse, when the reason of the order is
unknowen: but although that thou ne know not the cause of so great a
disposicion. Nathelesse, for as much as God the good governor attempreth and
governs the world, ne doubt thee not, but all things been done a right.

Si quis Arcturi sidera nescit. Mergatque seras aequore flammas. Propinqua
summo cardine labi. Cum nimis sceleris explicet ortus. Cur legate tardus
plaustra Boots, etc.
WHo so that know not the Sterres Arcture, turned to the sovereign centure or
poinct, that is to saine, turned nigh to the Sovereign Pole of y^ firmament,
and wot not why y^ sterre Boots passes, or gathers his waines, and
drencheth his late flambes in the sea, and why that Boots the Sterre unfolds
his ouerswift arisings, then shall he wondren of the Law of y^ high air. And
eke, if that he ne know not why y^ the horns of the full Moon waxen pale and
infect by the bounds of the dark night, and how the Moon dark and confuse,
discovers the Sterres, that she had covered by her clear visage.

The common error moves folks, and makes weary her basins of Brass by
thilke strokes, that is to say, that there is a manner people, that hight
Coribantes, that wenen that when the Moon is in the Eclipse that it be
enchaunted, and therefore for to rescue y^ Moon, they beaten her basins with
the ilke strokes. Ne no man ne wondreth when the blastes of the wind Chorus,
beaten y^ stronds of the Sea, by quaking floodes. Ne no man ne wondreth, when
the weight of the Snow, harded by the cold, is resolved by the brenning heat of
Phoebus the Sun, for here seen men readily the causes. But the causes ihid,
that is to saine in heaven, troublen ye breasts of men. The mouable people is
astonished of all things that commen selde and suddenly in our age, but the
troubly error of our ignorance, departs fro us, so yt if they wisten the
cause, why that soche things betiden, certes they shoulden cease to seem
wonders.

Ita est inquam. Sed cum tui muneris sit latentium rerum causas evolvere,
velatasque caligine explicare rations: quaeso uti hinc decernas, etc.
THus it is (quoth. I) but so as thou haste yeuen or beheight me, to vnwrappe ye
hid causes of things, and to discover me the reasons covered with darkness,
I pray thee, that thou devise and judge me of this matter, and that thou do me
to understand it, for this miracle of this wonder troubles me right greatly.
And then she a little what smiling said. Thou clepest me (quoth. she) to tell yt
is greatest of al things y^ mowen been asked, and to the which question,
uneath there aught enough to leaven it, as who says, uneath is there any
thing to answer perfitly to thy question: for ye matter of it is soch, that
when o doubt is determined and cut away, there waxen other doubts without
number, right as the heddes of Idre the Serpent waxen, the which Serpent
Hercules slough: ne there ne were no manner, ne none end, but if a wight
constrained the doubts, by a right lively and quick fire of thought, that is
to saine, by vigor and strength of wit. For in this matter men weren wont to
maken questions, of ye simplicity of the purueighaunce of GOD, and of y^ order
of Destiny, and of sudden hap, and of knowing of predestinacion divine, and
of the liberty of Freewill: the which things, thou thy self apperceiuedest
well of what weight they been. But for as much as the knowings of these things,
is a manner portion or Medicine to thee, all be it so, that I have little time
to done it, yet nevertheless I would enforcen me to shown somewhat of it: But
although the nourishings of ditee of Music deliteth thee, thou must suffren
and forbearen a little of the ilke delight, while that I wene to the reasons
knit by order. Boethius. As it likes to thee (quoth. I) so do. Philosophy. Tho
spoke she right, as by an other beginning, and said right thus: The
engendering of all things (quoth. she) and all the progressions of moveable
Nature, and all that moves in any manner, takes his causes, his order, and his
forms, of y^ stablenesse of Divine thought: And the ilke Divine thought, that
is set and put in the Tower, yt is to saine, in the height of the simplicity
of God, establishes many manner gises to y^ things that been to done, the which
manner, when the men looken it, in the pure cleanesse of the Divine
intelligence, is cleaped purueighaunce.

But when the ilke manner is referred by men, to things that it moves or
disponeth, then of old men it was cleaped Destenie, y^ which things, if that
any wight looks well in his thought, the strength of that one, and of that
other, he shall lightly mow seen, that these two things be diverse. For
purueighaunce is the ilke Divine reason that is established in the Sovereign
Prince of things, y^ which pueueighaunce disponeth al things. But certes,
Destiny is the disposicion and the ordinance, cleaving to moveable things,
by the which disposicion, ye purueighaunce knitteth all things in her order:
For purueighaunce embraseth al things to heap, although they be diverse, and
although they be infinite, but destiny certain departs and ordains all
things singulerly, and deuideth in moving, in places, in forms, and in times,
as thus: Let the unfolding of temporal ordinance, assembled and oned in ye
loking of the Divine thought, be cleaped purueighaunce, and thilke same
assembling and oning divided and vnfolden, let that be called Destine. And all
beit so, that these things been diverse, yet nevertheless, hanged yt one on
that other, for why, the order destinably proceeds of the simplicity of
purueighaunce.

For right as a werkman perceives in his thought the form of thing yt he wol
make, and moves the effect of the work, and leads y^ he had looked beforne
in his thought, simply and presently by corporal ordinance: certes, right so
God in his purueighaunce, disponeth singulerly and stably the things yt be to
done, but he administreth in manners, and in diverse time by Destiny, the ilke
same things that he has disponed: then whether Destiny be exercised either
by some Divine spirits, servant to the Divine purueighaunce, or else by some
soul, or else by all nature serving God, or else by the celestial mouings of
Sterres, or else by the virtue of Angels, or else by diverse subtelty of Devils,
or else by any of hem, or else by hem all, the destinable ordinance is wouen and
accomplished. Certes, it is open thing, yt the purueighaunce is an immovable
and simple form of things to done, and the moveable bond, and the temporel
ordinance of things, which that the Divine simplicity of purueyaunce has
ordained to done, that is destiny. For which it is yt all things that been put
under destiny, been certes subjects unto purueiaunce, to which purueyaunce
destiny it self is subject and under: but some things been put under
purueiaunce, y^ surmounten the ordinance of destiny: and tho been thilke that
stably been fixed nigh to the first godhed, they surmounten ye order of
destinable mouabilitee. For right as circles turnen about a same center, or
about a poinct, thilke cercle that is innerest or most within, he joyneth to
the simplesse of the middle, and is as it were a center or a poinct to that
other cercles that turnen about him: and thilk y^ is vtterest, compassed by
larger enuironning, is unfold by larger spaces, in so much as it is fertherest
fro the middelest simplicity of the poinct. And if there be any thing that
knitteth and felowshippeth himself to thilke middle poinct, it is constrained
into simplicity, yt is to say, into vnmouability, and it cease to ben shad,
and flit diversely. Right so by semblable reason, thilke thing y^ departs
furtherest fro y^ first thought of God, it is vnfolden, and also submitted to
greater bonds of destiny, and in so much is ye thing more free and loce fro
destiny, as it asks and holds nere to thilke center of things, that is to
saine, to God. And if the thing cleaves to the steadfastness of y^ thought of
God, and be without mouyng, certes it surmounteth the necessity of destiny.
Then soche comparison as is skilling to understanding, and of thing yt was
engendered, to thing that is of time to eternity, and of the cercle to the
center, right so is y^ order of mouable distinie, to yt stable simplicity of
purueighaunce. Thilke ordinance moves y^ heaven and the sterres, and
attempreth y^ elements together among hem self, and transformeth hem by
enterchaungeable mutacion. And thilke same order neweth again all things growing
and falling adoune, by semblable progressions of seeds and of sexes, that is
to saine, male and female: and this ilke order constrains y^ fortunes and the
deeds of men by a bond of causes not able to be vnbounden: the which
destinable causes, when they passen out fro the beginnings of vnmovable
purueyaunce, it mote needs be yt they ne be not mutable, as thus: be y^ things
well governed, if that the simplicity dwelling in y^ Divine thought, shows
forth the order of causes unable to be bowed: And this order constrayneth by
the proper stabilitie y^ mouable things, or else they shoulden flete folilie.
For which it is that things semen confuse, and troubly to us men, for we ne
mowen not consider thilke ordinance. Nevertheless, y^ proper manner of every
thing dressyng him to good, disponeth hem all, for there nis nothing dooen for
evil, for thilke thing that is done by wicked folk nis not done for evil.
The which shrewes, as I have showed plenteously, seek good, but wicked error
misturneth hem, ne y^ order coming fro y^ poinct of Sovereign good, ne
enclineth not fro his beginning. But thou may say, with unrest may been a
worse confusion, than that good men have sometime adversity, and sometime
prosperity: and shrewes have now also things that they desiren, and now things
yt they haten. Whether men live now in soch holiness of thought, as who says
be men now so wise, that soch folk as they demen to be good folk or shrewes,
that it mote needs be, that folk be soch as they wenen. But in this manner
domes of men discorden, that thilk men yt some folk deem hem worthy of mede,
other folk deem hem worthy of turment, but let us grant: I suppose yt some
man may well deem or know y^ good people and the bad, may he then know and see
thilke innerest attemperaunce of courage, as it has be wont to be said of
bodies, as who says: may a man speaken of complexions, and attemperaunce of
bodies, ne it ne is not, as who says, but it is like a marvel or a miracle
to hem yt ne know it not, why yt sweet things be couenable to some bodies y^
been hole, and to some people bitter things be couenable: and also why some
people been helped with light medicines, and some people ben helped with bitter
medicines but nathelesse tho yt known the manner, and y^ temperaunce of heal
and of malady ne marueyleth it nothing. But what other thing seems health of
courages but bounty, and with other thing seems malady of courage but vices? *
Who is else keeper of good, and driuer away of evil, but God y^ governor and
leader of thoughts: y^ which God, when he has beholden from yt high toure of
his purveiaunce, he knows what is conuenable to any wight, and leans hem
that he wot well yt is conuenable to hem. Lo hereof comes and hereof is done
this miracle or thorder destinable, when God that all knows, does soch thing,
of which thing unknowing folk been astonished, but for to constrayne, as who
says, but for to comprehend and tell a few things of the divine deepenesse,
the which that man's reason may understand. Thilke manne that thou wenest to
been right just, and right keeping of equity, the contrary of yt seems to
the Divine purueighaunce that all wot. And Lucan my familier tells, yt the
victorious cause lyked to the Gods, and the causes overcome, likes to Caton.
Then what so ever thou may seen, yt is done in this world unhoped or else
unknown, certes, it is y^ right order of things, but as to thy wicked opinion,
it is a confusion. But I suppose yt some man be so well thewed, that the Divine
judgment, and the judgment of mankind accorden hem togider of him: but he is
so unsteadfast of courage, yt if any adversity come to him, he woll forleten
parauenture to continue innocence, by the which he ne may not withholden
fortune: then y^ wise dispensacion of GOD spares him, which man adversity
might enpairen, for y^ God will not him to travail, to whom y^ trauail nis not^
conuenable. Another man is parfite in all virtues, and is an holy man, and nigh
to GOD, so that the purueighaunce of God would deem, that it were a felony,
that he were touched with any adversities, so yt he would not suffer, that
soch a man be with any bodily malady moved. But so, as said the Philosopher,
the more excellent is by me said in great, that virtues have edified the body
of the holy man. And often time it betideth, yt the sum of things that been to
done is taken to govern to good folk, for yt the malice habundant of shrewes
should ben abated. And God yeueth and departs to other folk prosperities and
adversities, meddled to heap after the quality of her courages, and remordeth
some folk by adversities, for they ne should not waxen proud by long
welefulnesse. And other folk he suffers to be travayled with hard things,
for that they should confermen the virtues of courage by the exercitation of
usage of patience. And other folk dreden more than they oughten, the which
they mighten well bearen, and some despise that they mow not bear, and thilk
folk God leads into experience of hemselfe, by aspre and sorrowful things.
And many folk have bought honorable renome of this world by the price of
glorious death.

And some men that ne mow not been ouercomen by tourment, have yeuen ensample
to other folk, yt virtue may not been ouercommen by adversities. And of all
these things there nys no doubt, that they ne been done rightfully and
ordeinly, to the parfite good of hem to whom we seen these things betiden. For
certes, that adversities comes sometime to shrewes, and sometime that they
desiren, it comes of these foresaid causes. And of sorrowful things that
betiden to shrews, certes, no man ne wondreth, for all men wene that they have
deserved it, and that they ben of wicked merit. Of which shrewes, the
tourmente agasteth sometime other to done felonies: And sometime it amendeth
hem that suffers the tourments. And the prosperity yt is yeuen to shrewes,
shows a great argument to good people, what thing they should demen of thilke
welefulnesse, which prosperity men seen often serve to shrewes: In which
thing, I trow that GOD dispenses, for parauenture, y^ nature of some man is
so ouerthrowyng to evil, and so vncouenable, that ye needy poverty of his
household might rather agreue him to done felonies, and to the malady of him,
GOD puts remedy, to yeuen him richesse. And some other man beholds his
conscience defouled with sins and makes comparison of this Fortune, and of
himself: and dredeth paraduenture, that the blissfulness, of which the usage
is joyful to him, that the lesing of thilke blissfulness ne be not sorrowful
to him, and therefore he would change his manners: and for he dredeth to lose
his Fortune, he forleteth his wickedness. To other folks welefulnesse is
yeuen unworthily, the which overthrows hem into destruction that they han
deserved, and to some other folk is yeuen power to punishen, for that it shall
be cause of continuacion, and exercising to good folks, and cause of tourment
to shrewes.

For so as there nis none aliaunce between good folks and shrewes, ne shrewes
ne mowen not accorden among hemselfe: and why not? For that shrewes discorden
of hemselfe by her vices, the which vices all to renden her consciences, and
done often time things, the which things, when they have done hem, they deem
that tho things ne should not have be done, for which thing y^ soverain
purueiance has maked often time miracle: So that shrewes have maked shrewes to
been good men. For when that some shrewes seen, that they suffer wrongfully
felonies of other shrewes, they waxen eschaufed into hate of hem that anoied
hem, and retournen to the fruict of virtue. Then they studien to be unlike to
hem that they have hated. Certes only is this the divine might, to y^ which
might yuels been then good, when it uses ye yuels couenably, and draws out
the effect of any good, as who says, yt yuel is good only to y^ might of
God, for y^ might of God ordeyneth thilke evil to be good: for one order
embraces all things, so that what wight departs from ye reason of thilke
order yt is assigned to him, algates yet he slideth into another order, so yt
nothing is lefull to folly, in the realm of divine purueiaunce, as who says,
nothing is without ordinance in the realm of divine purueiaunce, since that the
right strong God governs all things in this world, for it is not lefull for
men to comprehend by wit, ne vnfolden by word, all the subtell ordinance,
and the disposicion of the divine intent, for only it ought to suffice, to
have looked that God himself, maker of all natures, ordains all things to
good, while that he hastes to withhold the things that he has maked into his
semblance, that is to say, for to withholden the things into good, for he
himself is good. He chaseth out all iuels fro the bond of his comminalties, by
thorder of the necessity destinable: for which it follows, that if thou look
the purueiaunce, ordeyning the things that men wenen be outrageous or
haboundant in yerthes, thou shall not seen in no place nothing of iuell. But I
see now that thou art charged with the weight of the question, and weary with
length of my reason, and that thou abidest some sweetness of song, take then
this draught, and when thou art well refreshed and refect, thou shall be more
steadfast to fly into higher questions or things.

Si vis oelsi jura tonantis. Plura solers cernere mente. Aspice summi culmina
coeli.
IF thou wise wolt demen in thy pure thought, the rights or the laws of the
hie thonder, that is to sain, of God, look thou and behold the heightes of
the sovereign heaven: There kepen the Sterres, by rightful aliaunce of things
her old peace: The Sun imoued by his roddie fire, ne distourbeth not the
cold cercle of the Moon, ne the sterre icleped the Bear, that enclineth his
rauishing courses, abouten the sovereign height of this world: Ne the same
sterre Vrsa, nis never mo washen in the deep Westren sea, ne coueteth not to
dien his ^ames in the sea of the Occian, although it see other Sterres iplonged
in the Sea: And Hesperus the Sterre boodeth and tells always the late nights:
And Lucifer the Sterre brings again the clear day.

And thus makes love enterchaungeable, the perdurable courses, and thus is
discordable battle yput out of the country of the sterres. This accordaunce
attempreth by euenlike manners the Elements, that the moist things striving with
the dry things, yeuen place by stoundes: And that the cold things joynen hem
by faith to the hot things, and that the light fire arises in to height, and
the heavy yearths avails by her weights: by the same causes the flourie year
yeldeth sweet smells: in the first Summer season warming, and the hot Summer
dries the Corns, and Autumpne comes again of heavy Appels, and the fleeting
rain be deweth the Winter, this attempraunce nourishes and brings forth all
things that bears life in this world, and thilke same attempraunce
rauishing, hides, benimeth, and drencheth under the last death all things
iborne.

Among these things sits the high maker, King and Lord, weal and
beginning, Law and wise Judge, to done equitee, and governs and enclineth
the bridels of things: And tho things that he sterreth to gone by moving, he
withdraws and aresteth, and affirms the moveable or wandering things. For if
that he ne called not again the right going of things, and if that he ne
constrained hem not efte sons into roundnesse inclined, the things that been
now continued by stable ordinance, they should departen from her weal, that
is to saine, from her beginning and fallen, that is to saine, tournen into
naught. This is the common love to all things: and all things asken to been
holden by the fine of good, for else ne mighten they not fasten, if they ne
come not e^tsones again by love, returned to the cause that has yeuen hem
being, that is to saine, God.

Jam ne igitur vides quid haec omnia quae diximus consequantur. Quid nam
inquit. Omnem inquit, etc.
See thou not then, what thing follows all the things that I have said.
Boethius. What thing (quoth. I.) Philosophy. Certes (quoth. she) all utterly, that
all fortune is good. Boethius. And how may that be (quoth. I.) Philosophy. Now
understand (quoth. she.) So as all fortune, wheder so it be joyful fortune, or
aspre fortune, is yeuen either because of guerdoning, or else of exercising of
good folks, or else because to punishen, or else chastisen shrews: then is
all fortune good, the which fortune is certain, that it be either rightful or
else profitable.

Boethius. Forsothe this is a full very reason (quoth. I) and if I consider the
purueighaunce and the destiny that thou ought me a little here beforne,
this sentence is sustained by steadfast reasons. But if it like unto thee, let
us nombren hem emonges the ilke things, of which thou saidest a little here
beforne, that they ne were not able to ben wened to the people. Philosophy.
Why so (quoth. she?) Boet. For that the common word of men (quoth. I) misuseth this
manner speech of fortune, and saine often times, that the fortune of some wight is
wicked. Philosophy. Will thou then (quoth. she) that I approach a little to the
words of the people, so that it seem not to hem, that I be ouermoch departed,
as fro the usage of mankind. Boethius. As thou wolt (quoth. I.) Philosophy.
Wenest thou not (quoth. she) that all thing that profits, is good? Boethius. Yes
(quoth. I.) Philosophy. Certes all thing that exerceth or corrigeth, it
profits. Boethius. I confess well (quoth. I.) Philosophy. Then is it good (quoth.
she.) Boethius. Why not (quoth. I.) Philosophy. But this is the fortune (quoth. she)
of hem that either be put in virtue, and battaylen against aspre things, or else
of hem that enclinen, and declinen fro vices, and taken the way of virtue.
Boethius. This ne may I not deny (quoth. I.) Philosophy. But what say thou of
the merry fortune that is yeuen to good people in guerdon, demeth often the
people that it be wicked? Boethius. Nay forsooth (quoth. I) but they demen as it is
soth, that it is right good. Philosophy. What say thou of the other fortune
(quoth. she) that although that it be aspre, and restrains the shrews by
rightful tourment, weneth aught the people that it be good? Boet. Nay (quoth. I.)
but the people demeth that it is most wretched of all things that may be
thought. Philosophy. Ware now, and look well (quoth. she) least we in followyng
the opinion of the people, have confessed and concluded thing which that is
unable to been wened to the people. Boethius. What is that (quoth. I.) Philosophy.
Certes (quoth. she) it follows or comes of things that been granted, that all
fortune what so ever it be, of hem that been either in possession of virtue,
or in thencrease of virtue, or else in the purchasing of virtue, that thilke
Fortune is good, and that all Fortune is right wicked, to hem that dwellen in
shreudnesse, as who says, and thus weneth not the people. Boethius. That is
soth (quoth. I.) Albeit so that no man dare confess it, ne know it. Philosophy.
Why so (quoth. she.) For right as the strong man, ne seems not to abashen or
disdaynen, as often time as he hears the noise of the battle: ne also it
seems not to the wiseman, to bearen it grievously, as often as he is led into
strife of fortune. For both to that one man, and eke to that other, the ilke
difficulty is the matter, to that one man of increase of his glorious renome,
and to that other man, to conserve his sapience, that is to say, to the
asprenesse of his estate. * For therefore is it called virtue, for that it
susteyneth and enforces by his strengthes, so that it is not ouercommen by
adversities. Ne certes, thou that art put in increase, or in the height of
virtue, ne have not commen to fleten with delices, and for to walken in bodily
lust. Thou sowest or plantest a full eigre battle in thy courage against every
Fortune: for that the sorrowful fortune confound thee not, ne that the merry
Fortune ne corrumpe thee not, occupy the mean by steadfast strengthes. For all
that ever is under the mean, or all that ouerpasseth the mean, dispiseth
welefulnesse, as who says, it is vicious, and ne has no mede of his
travail, for it is set in your hand, as who says, it lies in your power,
what Fortune you is leuest, that is to say, good or iuel, for all fortune that
seems sharp or aspre, if it ne exercise not the good folk, ne chastise the
wicked folk, it punishes.

Bella bis quinis operatus annis. Ultor Atrides phrygiae ruinis, etc.
THe werker Atrides, that is to sain, Agamemnon, that wrought and continued the
battayles by ten year, recovered and purged in wreking by the destruction of
Troie, the lost chambers of Marriage in his brother, that is to say, that
Agamemnon wan again Heleine, that was Menelaus wife, his brother. In the mean
while that thilke Agamemnon desired to yeuen sails to the Greeks navy, and
brought again the winds by blood: He unclothed him of pitee of father, and the
sorry Priest yeueth in sacrifiyng, the wretched cuttyng of the throat of the
daughter: that is to say, that Agamemnon let cut the throat of his daughter by
the Priest, to maken aliaunce with his Gods, and for to have wind, with which
he might wenden to Troy. Itacus, that is to say, Vlixes bewept his fellows
ylorne, the which fellows, the fires Poliphemus, liggyng in his great cave,
had fretten and dreint in his empty womb: But natheles Poliphemus wood for
his blind visage yield to Vlixes joy, by his sorrowful tears, that is to say,
that Vlixes smote out the iye of Poliphemus, that stood in the forehead, for
which Vlixes had joy, when he saw Poliphemus weeping and blind. Hercules is
celebrable for his hard travail, he daunted the proud Centaurus, half horse,
half man, and byraft the dispoiling fro the cruel Lion, that is to say, he
slough the Lion, and birafte him his skin. He smote the birds that hight
Arpies, with certain arrows. He ravished Apples fro the waking dragon: and his
hand was the more heavy for the golden metal. He drough Cerberus the hound of
hell by the triple chains. He ouercomer, as it is said, has put an vnmeke
lord fodder to his cruel horse, that is to say, Hercules slough Diomedes, and
made his horse to fretten him: and he Hercules slough Idra the Serpent, and
brent the venim. And Achileus the flood defouled in his forehedde, dreint his
shamefast visage in his stroundes, that is to say, that Achileus could
transfigure himself into diverse likeness, and as he fought with Hercules, at
last he turned him into a Bull, and Hercules brake one of his horns: and he
for shame hid him in his River. And over that, he Hercules, cast adoune
Antheus the Giaunt in the strondes of Libie. And Cacus appeised the wrathes of
Euander, that is to say, that Hercules slough the monster Cacus, and apeised
with that death the wrath of Euander. And the bristled Bore, marked with vomes
the shoulders of Hercules, the which sholders, the hie cercle of heaven should
thrist. And the last of his labors was, that he sustained the heaven upon his
neck vnbowed, and he deserved eftsoon the heaven to be y^ last end of
travail. Goes now ye strong men, there as the great ensample leads you. O
nice men, why make ye your backs, as who says: O ye slow and delicate men,
why see ye adversities, and ne fight against hem by virtue, to winnen the mede
of heaven: for the mede ouercommen, yeueth the Sterres, that is to saine, that
when that yearthly lust is ouercommen, a man is maked worthy to the heaven.

Thus ends the fourth Book of Boethius.
Dixerat, orationisque cursum ad alia quaedam tractanda atque expedienda
vertebat. B. Tum ego, recta quidem inquam, etc.
SHe had said, and turned the course of her reason to some other things, to be
treated and to be sped. Boethius. Then said I, certes rightful is thine
amonesting, and full digne by authority. But that thou saidest whilom, that
the question of the Divine purveiaunce, is enlaced with many other questions, I
understand well and prove it by the same thing. But I ask, if that thou
wenest, that hap be any thing, in any ways? and if thou wenest that hap
be any thing, what is it? Philosophy. Then (quoth. she) I haste me to yelden and
assoilen to the debte of my behest, and to shown and open the way, by which
way thou may come again to thy country: but albeit so that the things which
that thou ask been right profitable to know, yet been they diverse, somewhat
fro the path of my purpose, and it is to doubt, that thou ne be maked weary by
miss ways, so that thou ne may not suffice to measure the right way.
Boethius. Ne doubt thee thereof nothing (quoth. I,) for to known thilke things
togider, in the which things I delight me greatly, that shall been to me in
steed of rest, since it nis not to doubten of the things following, when every
thing of thy disputacion, shall haven ben steadfast to me, by vndoubtous faith.
Philosophy. Then (said she) that manner woll I done to thee: and began to
speaken right thus. Certes (quoth. she) if any wight definishe hap in this manner,
that is to saine, that hap is betiding ibrought forth by foolish moving, and
by no knitting of causes, I confirm that hap nys right naught in no wise, and
I deem all utterly, that hap nys, ne dwells but a voice, as who says, but
an idell word, without any significacion of thing committed to that voice.
For what place might been left, or dwelling in folly, and to disordenaunce,
sith that God leads and constrayneth all things by order: for this sentence
is very sooth, that nothing has his being of naught, to the which sentence,
none of these old folk ne withsayed never, all be it so, that they ne
understood it not by God, Prince and beginner of workyng, but they easten, as
a manner foundement of subject material, that is to saine, of the nature of
all reason. And if that any thing is waxen or commen of no causes, then shall
it seem, that thilke thing is commen or woxen of naught. But if this ne may
not be done, then is it not possible that hap be any soche thing, as I have
definished a little here beforne. Boethius. How shall it then be (quoth. I) nis
there then nothing, that by right may been cleaped, either hap, or else
adventure, or fortune? Or is there ought, all be it so, that it is hid fro
the people, to which thing these words been couenable. Philosophy. Mine
Aristotle (quoth. she) in the book of his Phisike, difinisheth this thing by
short reason, and nigh to the sothe. Boethius. In which manner (quoth. I?)
Philosophy. As often (quoth. she) as men done any thing for grace of any other
thing, and another thing than thilke thing that men entenden to done betideth
by some causes, it is icleaped hap: right as a man dalfe the earth, because
of tillyng of the field, and found there a gobet of gold bedoluen, then wenen
folk, that it is befall by fortunous betidyng. But forsooth it nis not of
naught, for it has his proper causes, of which causes, the course vnforeseen
and unware, seems to have maked hap. For if the tiller of the field, ne dolue
not in the earth, and if the hider of the gold ne had hid the gold in that
place, the gold ne had not been found. These been then the causes, of the
abredgyng of fortuit hap, the which abredgyng of fortuit hap comes of causes
of encountryng, and flowyng together to hemselfe, and not by thentencion of the
doer. For neither the hider of the gold, ne the deluer of the field, ne
understood not that the gold should have been found. But as I said, it
betide and ran together, that he dalfe there as the other had hid the gold.
Now may I thus definishe hap. * Hap is an unware betidyng of causes, assembled
in things that been done for some other thing. But thilke order, procedyng by
an vneschuable betiding together, which that discendeth from the well of
purueighaunce, that ordeyneth all things in her places, and in her times
makes, that the causes rennen and assemblen together.

Rupis Achimeniae scopulis ubi versa sequentum. Pectoribus figit spicula, etc.
TIgris and Eufrates, resoluen and springen of o well, in the cragges of the
roche of the country of Achemenee, there as the fliyng battayles fixen her
darts, retourning in the breasts of hem that folowen hem. And sone after the
same rivers, Tigris and Eufrates, vnjoynen and departen her waters, and if they
commen together, and been assembled, and cleaped together into o course, then
moten thilke things fleten togider, which that the water of thenterchaunging
flood brings. The ships and the stocks araced with the flood moten
assemblen, and the waters imedled, wrappeth or emplieth many fortunell happes
or manners, the which wandering happes nathelesse, thilke declinyng lowness of
the yerth, and the flowyng order of the slidyng water governs. Right so
fortune, that seems as it suffers with slaked or ungoverned bridles, it
suffers bridles, that is to saine, to been governed, and passes by thilke
law, that is to saine, by the divine ordinance.

Animadverto inquam, idque uti tu dicis ita esse, consentio. Sed in hac
haerentium, etc.
THis understand I well (quoth. I) and I accord me that it is right as thou
say. But I ask if there be any liberty of Free Will, in this order of
causes, that cleauen thus together in hemself? or else I would weten if that the
destinall cheyne, constrayneth the mouyng of the courages of men? Philosophy.
Yes (quoth. she) there is liberty of free will, ne there ne was never no nature of
reason, that it ne had liberty or free will. * For every thing that may
naturally vsen reason, it has dome, by which it decerneth and deemeth every
thing. Then knows it by it self, things that been to flien, and things that
been to desiren, and the ilke thing that any wight demeth to been desired, that
asks or desires he, and flies thilke thing, that he troweth be to flien.
Wherefore in all things that reason is, in him also is liberty of willing and
of nillyng, but I ne ordain not, as who says, I ne grant not, that this
liberty be even like in all things. For why, in the Soueraines devines
substaunces, that is to sain, in spirits, judgment is more clear and will not
corrumpen, and mighty ready to speden things that been desired. But the souls
of men moten needs been more free, when they looken hem in the speculacion, or
looking of the divine thought, and less free when they sliden into the bodies,
and yet less free when they ben gathered together and comprehended in yearthly
members, but the last servage is, when that they been yeuen to vices, and have
ifall from the possession of her proper reason. For after that they have cast
away her iyen, fro the light of the Sovereign sothfastnesse, to low things and
darcke, anon they darcken by the cloud of ignorance, and be troubled by
felonious talentes, to the which talentes, when they approchen and assenten,
they heapen and encreasen the servage, which they have joined to hemselfe. And
in this manner they been caytiues, fro her proper liberty, the which thing
nathelesse, the lookyng of the divine purueiaunce sees, that all things
beholds and sees fro eterne, and ordeyneth hem euerich in her merits, as
they been predestinate, and it is said in Greek, * That all things he sees,
and all things he hears.

Puro clarum lumine Phoebum. Melliflui canit oris Homerus, etc.
HOmer with his honey mouth, that is to saine, Homer with the sweet ditees
sings, that the Sun is clear by pure light. Nathelesse, yet ne may it not
by the infirm light of his beams, breaken or percen the inward entrails of
the earth, or else of the Sea. So ne sees not God maker of the great world,
to him that looks all things from on high, ne understands no things by
heaviness of the earth, ne the night ne withstandeth not to him by the black
clouds. * Thilke God sees in o stroke of thought, all things that been,
weren, or shull come: and thilke God, for he looks and sees all things
alone, thou may saine that he is the very son.

Tum ego: en inquam difficiliori rursus ambiguitate confundor, etc.
THen said I thus, now am I confounded, by a more hard doubt than I was.
Philos. What doubt is that (quoth. she) for certes, I conject now by soche
things, thou art troubled. B. It seems (quoth. I) to repugnen and to contrary
greatly, that God knows beforne all things, and that there is any freedom or
liberty, for if so be that God looks all things beforne, ne God ne may not
been deceived in no manner. Then mote it needs be, that all things the which
that the purueiaunce of God, has seen beforne to come, for which if that God
knows toforne, not only the works of men, but also her counsels and her
wills, then ne shall there be no liberty of arbitree, ne certes, there ne may
be none other deed, ne no will, but the ilke which that the divine purueiaunce
(that ne may not been deceyved) has feeled beforne: for if that they mighten
wrythen away, in other manner than they been purueied, then ne should there be
no steadfast prescience of thing to commen, but rather an uncertain opinion,
the which thing to trowen to God, I deem it felony and unlawful. Ne I ne prove
not the ilke same reason, as who says, I ne allow not, or I ne praise not
thilke same reason, by which that some men wenen, that they mowen assoilen and
vnknitten the knot of this question. For certes they saine, that thing nis not
commen, for that the purueiaunce of God has seen beforne that it is to commen,
but rather the contrary, and that is this, that for that the things is to
commen, that therefore ne may it not been hid fro the purueiaunce of God. And
in this manner, this necessity slideth again into the contrary party, ne it ne
behooves not needs, that things betiden that been ypurueighed, but it behooves
needs that things yt been to commen been ypurueighed, but as it were
ytrauailed, as who says, that thilke answer proceeds right as though men
trauaileden or weren busy to enquiren, the which thing is cause of the which
things. As whether the prescience is cause of the necessity of things to
commen, or else yt the necessity of things to commen is cause of the
purueighaunce. But I ne enforce me not now to shown it, that the betiding of
things iwiste beforne is necessary, how so or in what manner, yt the order of
causes has it self, although yt it ne seem not that the prescience bring in
necessity of betiding, to things to commen. For c^^tes, if that any wight
sits, it behooves by necessity that the opinion be sooth of him that
coniecteth that he sits: and ayenwarde also is it of the contrary, for if y^
opinion be soothe of any wight, for that he sits, it behooves by necessity
that he sit. Then is here necessity in that one, and in that other: for in
that one is necessity of sittyng, and certes in that other is necessity of
soth. But therefore ne sits not a wight, for that the opinion of the sitting
is soth, but the opinion is rather soth, for that a wight sits beforne. And
thus although that the cause of soth comes of that other side, as who says,
that although the cause of sothe comes of the sitting, and not of the true
opinion, algates yet is there a common necessity in that one, and in that
other. Thus seems it, y^ I may make semblable skilles of the purueighaunce of
God, and of things to commen. For although that for yt things been to commen,
therefore been they purueighed, and not certes for they been purueighed,
therefore ne betide they not, nathelesse it behooves by necessity, that either
the things to commen been ypurueyed of God, or else yt y^ things that been
purueighed of God, betiden. And this things only suffiseth enough to destroyen
the freedom of our arbitty, yt is to saine, of our freewill. But certes, now
shows it well how far fro the sothe, and how up so down is this thing, y^
we seen that the betidyng of temporal things is cause of the eterne
prescience. But for to wenen y^ God purueyeth y^ things to commen, for they ben
to commen, what other thing is it but for to wene, that thilke things that
betide whilom, been causes of thilk souerain purueighaunce that is in God? And
hereto add I things, that right as when that I wot that a thing is, it
behooves by necessity that thilke self thing be: and eke when I have known
that any thing shall betyden, so behooves it by necessity, that thilke same
things betyde. So follows it then, that the betidyng of the things iwist
beforne, ne may not be eschewed, and at y^ last, if that any wight wene a thing
to been otherwise than it is, it nis not only vnscience, but it is deceivable
opinion, full diverse and far fro the sothe of science. Wherefore, if any thing
he so to commen, that the betidyng of it ne be not certain, ne necessary, who
may weten beforne y^ thilke thing is to commen. For right as science ne may not
be meddled with falsenesse, as who says, that if I wot a thing, it ne may not
be false that I ne wot it, right of thilke thing that is conceived by science,
ne may not be none otherwise than as it is conceived: for that is y^ cause why
that Science wants lesing, as who says, why that weting ne receives not
lesing of that it wot, for it behooves by necessity, y^ every thing be right,
as Science comprehends it to be. What shall I then saine, in which manner
knows God beforne all the things to commen, if they ne be not certain, for
if that he deem that they been to commen vneschuably, and so may be that it is
possible that they ne shullen not comen, God is deceived, but not only to
trowen that God is deceived: but for to speak it with mouth, it is a felonous
sin. But if that God wot, that right so as things been to commen, so shullen
they commen, so that he wot egally, as who says indifferently, that things
may be done or else not ydone. What is thilk prescience, that ne comprehends
no certain thing ne stable, or else what difference is there between y^
prescience of thilke jape, worthy Deuining of Tiresie Deuinour, y^ said: All
that I say (quoth. he) either it shall be, or else it ne shall not be, or else how
much is worth the Divine prescience more than the opinion of mankind, if so be
that it demeth y^ things uncertain, as men done? Of y^ which domes of men, the
betiding nys not certain. But if so be, that none uncertain things ne may been
in him that is right certain well of all things, then is the betidyng certain
of thilke things which that he has wiste beforne, fermely to commen: for
which it follows, that the freedom of the counsels, and of the works of
mankind nis none, since y^ the thought of GOD that sees all things without
error of falsenesse, binds and constrayneth hem to a betidyng by necessity.
And if this thing be ones igraunted and received, this is to saine, that there
nis no freewill, then shows it well, how great destruction and how great
domages there folowen of things of mankind, for in idell been there then
purposed and behight medes to good folk, and pains to bad folk, since that no
mouyng of free courage voluntary, ne has not deserved hem, y^ is to saine,
neither mede ne pain. And it should seem then, that thilke thing is
alderworst, which that is now demed for aldermost just, and most rightful. That
is to sain, that shrewes ben punished, or else that good folk be iguerdonned,
the which folks, sen that her proper will ne sent hem to that one, ne to y^
other, that is to said, neither to good ne harm, but constrains hem certain
necessity of things to comen, then ne shullen there never ben, ne never weren
vice ne virtue, but it shullen rather be confusion of all deserts, meddled
without discrecion. And yet there follows another inconvenience, of y^ which
there ne may be thought no more felonous ne more wicked, and y^ is thus, That
so as y^ order of things comes of the purueiaunce of God, ne that nothing nis
leful to the counsels of mankind, as who says, that men have no power to
done nothing, ne will nothing, then follows it that our vices been referred
to the maker of al good, as who says, then follows it, that God ought to
have the blame of our vices, since he constrains us by necessity to done
vices: then nis there no reason to hopen in God, ne to prayen to God, for with
should any wight hopen to God, or why should he praien to God, since yt the
ordinance of destiny, which y^ ne may not been inclined, knitteth and
streyneth all things that men may desiren. Then should there be done away
thilke only aliaunce between God and man, that is to saine, to hopen and to
prayen. But by y^ price of rightwisenesse, and of very meekness, we deserven
y^ guerdon of Divine grace, which yt is inestimable, that is to say, that is so
great y^ it ne may not been full praised, and this is only the manner, that is
to say, hope and prayers. For which it seems y^ men woll speak with God, and
by reason of supplicacion, ben conjoined to thilk clearnes, that nis not
approached no rather than men seken it and impetren it. And if men ne wene not
the hope ne prayers ne have no strengthes by y^ necessity of things to comen
received, what thing is there then, by which we mowen be conjoined, and cleuen
to thilke sovereign Prince of things. For which it behooves by necessity, that
the lineage of mankind, as thou song a little here beforne, be departed and
unjoyned from his well, and failen of his beginning, that is to saine, God.

Quae nam discors federa rerum, Causa resolvit? Quis tanta deus, etc.
WHat discordable cause has to rent and vnjoyned the binding or the aliaunce
of things, that is to saine, the conjunctions of GOD, and of man? Which GOD
has established so great battle between these two soothfaste or very
things, that is to saine, between the purueyaunce of God, and free will, that
been singular, and divided, ne that they ne woollen not been meddled, ne
coupsed togeder? But there nis no discord to the very things, but they cleauen
always certain to hemselfe. But the thought of man, confounded and overthrown
by y^ dark members of y^ body, ne may not by fire of his darked looking, that
is to saine, by y^ vigor of his insight, while the soul is in the body,
known the thin subtle knittings of things. But wherefore eschaufeth it so
by so great love, to finden thilke notes of sooth ycovered, y^ is to saine,
wherefore eschaufeth y^ thought of man by so great desire, to know thilk
notifications y^ ben ihid under y^ couertures of sooth? Wot it ought thilke
things, that it anguishous desires to know? As who says, nay. For no man ne
trauayleth for to weten things that he wot. And therefore y^ text says thus.

But who trauayleth to weten things yknowe? And if that he ne knows hem not,
with seeks thilke blind thought? What is he that has desired any things, of
which he wot right naught? As who says, who so desires any things, needs
somewhat he knows of it, or else he ne coud not desiren it. Or who may follow
things that ne been not iwist, and though that he seek the things, where shall
he find hem? What wight that is all uncunning and ignorant may know that
form that is ifound.

But when the soul beholds and sees the high thought, y^ is to said God,
then knows it together y^ sum and singularities, that is to said, the
principles, and eueriche of hem by himself. But now while the soul is hid in
the cloud, and in y^ darkness of the members of ye body, it ne has not all
foryeten it self, but it withholdeth y^ sum of things, and leseth the
singularities. Then who so that seeks soothnesse, he nis in neither another
habit, for he wot not all, ne he ne has not all foryeten, but yet him
remembers the sum of things y^ he withholdeth, and asks counsel, and
retreateth deepliche things iseene beforne, that is to said, the great sum
in his mind, so that he mow adden the parts y^ he has foryeten, to thilke
parties that he has withholden.

Tum illa. Vetus inquit, haec est de providentia querela: Marco Tullio, etc.
THen said she, This is (quoth. she) the old question of the purueyaunce of God.
And Marcus Tullius, when he divided the Deuinacions, that is to saine, in his
books that he wrote of deuinacions, he moved greatly this question, and thou
thy self haste isought it much, and utterly and long, but yet ne has it not
been determined, ne isped fermely and diligently of any of you, and the cause
of this darkness and of this difficulty is, for yt the moving of ye reason of
mankind ne may not mouen to, yt is to said, applien or joynen to the
simplicity of the divine prescience, the which simplicity of ye divine
prescience if y^ men mighten thinken it in any manner, yt is to said, yt if
men mighten think and comprehenden the things yt God sees himself, then there
dwelled utterly no doubt: the which reason and cause of difficulties, I shall
assay at last to show and to speeden, when I have first ispended and answered
to thy reasons, by which thou art moved, for I ask why thou wenest, y^ thilke
reasons of hem that assoilen this question, ne be not spedfull enough ne
sufficient, y^ which solucion, or y^ which reason, for y^ it deemeth, yt the
prescience is not of necessity of things to come, as who says any other way
than thus, but yt thilke things that y^ prescience wot beforn, ne may not
vnbetiden, yt is to said, that they moten betide. But then, if that prescience
ne puts none necessity to things to commen, as thou thy self have
confessed it, and beknow a little here beforne, what cause, or what is it, as
who says, there may no cause be, by which that the ends voluntary of things,
mighten be constrained to certain betiding. For by grace of posicion, so yt
thou may the better understand this y^ follows, I suppose yt there ne be no
prescience: then ask I (quoth. she) in as much as appertains to that, shoulden
then things yt commen of free will be constrained to betiding by necessity?
Boecius. Nay (quoth. I.) Philoso. Then ayenward (quoth. she) I suppose yt there be
prescience, but that it ne puts no necessity to things, then trow I that
thilke same freedom of will shall dwellen all hole and absolute, and
unbounden. But thou will said, that all be it so, that prescience nis not
cause of y^ necessity of betiding to things to commen, algates yet it is a
sign that the things been to betiden by necessity. By this manner then,
although y^ prescience had never be, yet algates or at least way it is a
certain thing, that ends of betidings of things to commen shoulden be
necessary. For every thing shows and signifies only what y^ thing is, but
it ne makes not the thing that it signifies. For which it behooves, first to
show, that nothing ne betideth, that it ne betideth by necessity: so that it
may appear, that the prescience is sign of necessity: or else, if there nere
no necessity, certes thilke prescience ne might not be sign of thing that
nis not. But certes, it is now certain, that ye prove of this, ysusteined by
steadfast reason, ne shall not ben lad ne proved by signs ne by arguments
taken fro without, but by causes covenable and necessary. But thou may
saine, how may it be, that the things ne betiden not, that been purueyed to
commen? But certes, right as we trowen, that the things which that the
purueyaunce wot beforne to commen, ne be not to betiden. But that ne should we
not deemen, but rather, although they shall betiden, yet ne have they no
necessity of her kind to betiden: and this may thou lightly apperceyuen by
this yt I shall saine. For we seen many things, when they been beforne our
eyes, right as men seen y^ Carter worching in the tourning and in the
attempring or addressing of his carts or chariots, and by this manner, as who
says, may thou understand of all other werkemen. Is there then any
necessity, as who says, in our looking, that constrayneth or compels any
of thilke things to been done so? Boeci. Nay (quoth. I) for in idle and in vain
were all the effect of craft, if yt all things weren moved by constrayning of
our eyes, or of our sight. Philoso. The things then (quoth. she) that when that
men done hem, ne have no necessity y^ men done hem, eke tho same things first
or they be done, they been to commen without necessity: for why, there ben
some things to betiden, of which the ends and the betidings of hem been
absolute and quit of all necessity. For certes, I ne trow not yt any man
would said this, that the things that men done now, that they ne were to
betiden first, ere they were done. And thilk same things, although men hadden
wist hem beforne, yet they have free betidings. For right as science of things
present, ne brings in no necessity to things y^ men done, right so to the
prescience of things to commen, ne brings in none necessity to things to
betiden. But thou may said, that of thilke same it is doubted, as whether
y^ of thilke things, that ne have none issues and betidings necessaries, if
thereof may ben any prescience. For certes, they seemen to discorden, for thou
wenest, that if that things been seen before, y^ necessity follows hem, and
if necessity fails hem, they ne might not been wist before, and y^ nothing
may be comprehended by science, but certain. And if tho things ne have no
certain betidings, be purveighed as certain, it should be darkness of
opinion, not soothfastnesse of science. And thou wenest that it be diverse fro
the holiness of science, that any man should deem a thing to be otherwise
than it is it self: and the cause of this error is, y^ of all the things y^
every wight has know, they wene y^ tho things been know only by y^
strength, and by the nature of the things y^ been wist or know, and it is all
y^ contrary: for all that ever is know, it is rather comprehended and know,
not after his strength and his nature, but after yc faculty, yt is to said,
the power and the nature of hem y^ known. And for y^ this thing should now
show by a short ensample the roundnesse of a body, otherwise than the sight
of y^ eye knows it, and otherwise than the touching. The looking, by casting
of his beams, waits and sees from afar all y^ body together, without
moving of it self, but the touching cleaves to the round body, and moves
about y^ enuironning, and comprehends the parties by roundnesse, and the man
himself otherwise beholds him, and otherways imaginacion, and otherwise
reason, and otherwise intelligence. For the wit comprehended without forth the
figure of the body of man, that is vnstablished in the matter subject. But the
imaginacion comprehends only the figure without the matter. Reason
surmounteth imaginacion, and comprehends by universal looking the common
speech, but y^ eye of intelligence is higher, for it surmounteth y^ enuironning
of the university, and looks over that, by pure subtlety of thought. The
ilke same simple form of man, that is perdurable in the divine thought, in
which this ought greatly to be considered, y^ the highest strength for to
comprehenden things, embraces and contains the lower strength, but the
lower strength ne arises not in no manner to y^ higher strength. For wit ne
may comprehend nothing out of matter, ne the imaginacion ne looks not the
universal speces, ne reason ne takes not the simple form, so as intelligence
takes it. But intelligence, that looks all abouen, when it has comprehended
the form, it knows and deemeth all the things that been under the form,
but she knows hem in thilke manner in which it comprehends thilke same
simple form, that ne may never be known of none of the other, that is to
say, to none of tho three foresayed strengthes of the soul, for it knows the
university of reason, and the figure of imaginacion, and the sensible
material conceived by wit, ne it ne uses not ne of reason, ne of imaginacion,
ne of wit withoutforth, but it beholds all things, so as I shall say, by a
stroke of thought fermely, without discourse of collacion. Certes, reason when
it looks any thing vniuersell, it ne uses not of imaginacion ne wit, and
algates yet it comprehends y^ things imaginable and sensible, for reason is
she that definisheth y^ universal of her conceit, right thus. Man is a
reasonable two-footed beast, and how so that this knowing is universal, yet
nis there no wight, that ne wot well, y^ a man is a thing imaginable and
sensible, and this same considers well reason, but that nis not by
imaginacion, nor by wit, but it looks it by reasonable concepcion. Also
imaginacion, albeit so, that it takes of wit the beginning, to seen and formen
the figures, algates although y^ wit ne were not present, yet it enuironneth
and comprehends all things sensible, not by reason sensible of deeming, but
by reason imaginatife. See thou not then, y^ all the things in knowing, vsen
more of her faculty, or of her power, than they done of the faculty or of
power of things that been to known: ne y^ is no wrong, for so as every
judgment is, that deed or doing of him yt demeth, it behooves that every wight
perform his work, and his entencion, not of foreign power, but of his proper
power.

Quondam porticus attulit, Obscuros nimium senes, etc.
THen the porch, that is to say, a gate of the town of Athens, there as
Philosopers hadden congregation to dispute, thilk porch brought sometime old
men full dark in her sentences, that is to say, Philosophers, that highten
Stoiciens, that wend that Images and sensibilities, that is to say, sensible
imaginacions, or else imaginacions of sensible things, were emprinted into
souls fro bodies withoutfoorth: as who says, thilke Stoiciens wenden, that
the soul had be naked of himself, as a mirror, or a clean perchemine, so
that all figures musten first commen fro things fro without into souls, and
ben emprinted into souls, right as we ben wont sometime by a swift pointel, to
fixen letters emprinted in y^ smoothness, or in the plainness of the table
of wax, or in y^ parchemine, that has no figure ne note in it. Gloss. But now
argues Boece against y^ opinion, and says thus. But if the thriuing soul ne
vnpliteth nothing, that is to saine, ne does thing by his proper moving, but
suffers and lies subject to the figures, and to y^ notes of bodies without
forth, and yields Images idle, evil and vain, in the manner of a mirror.
Whence thriueth then, or whence comes thilke knowing in our soul that
discerns and beholds all things, and whence is thilke strength, that
beholds the singular things, or else whence is the strength, that deuideth
things yknowe, and thilke strength that gathers together things divided, and
strength that choseth y^ enterchaunged way: for sometime it heaueth the head,
yt is to say, yt it heaueth up the entencion to right high things, and sometime
it discendeth into right low things, and when it returns into himself it
reproves and destroieth y^ false things by the true things.

Certes, this strength is cause more efficient and much more mighty, to seen
and to known things, than thilke cause that suffers and receives the notes
and figures impressed in manner of matter. Algates the passion, yt is to say,
the sufferaunce or the wit in y^ quick body, goes before exciting, and
moving y^ strengths of the thought, right so as when y^ clearenesse smites the
eyes, and moves hem to seeene, or right so as voice or soun hurleth to the
ears, and commoueth hem to hearken, then is the strength of the thought moved
and excited, cleapeth forth to semblable mouings the speces that it halt within
it self, and adds the speces to the notes, and to things withoutfoorth, and
medleth the Images of things withoutforth, to things hid within himself.

Quod si in corporibus sentiendis quamvis efficiant Instrumenta sensuum, etc.
But what is that in bodies to be feeled, that is to say, in the taking: and in
the knowing of bodily things. And albeit so yt the qualities of bodies yt be
object fro withoutfoorth, mouen and entalenten the instruments of the wits, and
all be it so, yt the passion of the body, that is to saine, the wit, or the
sufferaunce, goes beforne the strength, or the worching courage, y^ which
passion or sufferaunce clepeth forth y^ deed of the thought in it self, and
moves and exciteth in this mean while the forms y^ resten withinforth, and
in sensible bodies, as I have said, our courages nis not taught oremprinted by
passion to know these things, but demeth and knows of his own strength the
passion or sufferance subject to the body: much more then tho things been
absolute, and quick fro all talents or affections of bodies, as God or his
Angels, ne followen not in discerning things object fro without forth, but
they accomplishen and speden the deeds of her thought. By this reason then
there commen many manner of knowings, to diverse and to differing substaunces.

For the wit of the body, the which wit is naked, and dispoiled of all other
knowing, thilke wit commen to beasts, the which ne mowen not mouen hemselfe
here and there, as Disters and Muskles, and other such shellfish of the sea,
that cleauen and been nourished to rocks: but the imaginacion comes of
remouable beasts, that seemen to have talent to flien, or to desiren any thing:
But reason is all only the lineage of mankind, right as intelligence is all
only the divine nature, of which it follows, that thilke knowing is more
worth than is either, sens it knows by his proper nature, not only his
subject, as who says, it ne knows not all only that appertains properly to
his knowing, but it knows the subjects of all other knowings. But how shall
it then be, if that wit and imaginacion striuen again reasoning, and said, that
of thilke universal thing that reason weneth to seen, that it nis right
naught, for wit and imaginacion said, that that is sensible or imaginable, it
ne may not been universal.

Then is there either the judgment of reason sooth, ne that there nis nothing
sensible, or else for that reason wot well, that many things ben subject to
wit, and to imaginacion: then is the concepcion of reason vain and false, which
that looks and comprehends that that is sensible and singular, as
universal. And if that the reason would answer against these two, that is to
say, to wit and imaginacion, and say that soothly she her self, that is to
said, reason, looks and comprehends by reason of universality both that
that is sensible, and that that is imaginable, and thilke two, that is to
saine, wit and imaginacion, ne mowen not stretchen hemselfe to the knowing of
universality, for that the knowing of hem ne may not exceeden ne surmounten
the bodily figures. Certes, of the knowing of things, men oughten rather yeuen
more credence to the more steadfast, and to the more perfect judgment, in this
manner striving, then we that have strength of reasoning, and of imaginacion,
and of wit, that is to say, by reason and by imaginacion, we should rather
praise the cause of reason, as who says, than the cause of wit and of
imaginacion. Semblable thing is it, that the reason of mankind ne weneth not,
that the divine intelligence beholds or knows things to come, but right as
the reason of mankind knows hem: For thou arguest thus, that if that it ne
seem not to men, that some things have certain betidings, they ne may not be
wist, before certainly they betiden, and then is there no prescience of thilke
things, and if we trow, that prescience be in these things, then is there
nothing that betideth by necessity. But if we might have the judgment of the
divine thought, as we been partners of reason, right so as we have demed, that
it behooves by imaginacion and wit, and beneath reason, right so would we
deemen, that it were rightful thing, that man's reason ought to submit it self
to be beneath the divine thought, for which if we may, as who says, that if we
may, I counsel, that we enhaunce us in the height of thilke sovereign
intelligence, for there shall reason well seen that, that it ne may not behold
in it self: and certes, that is thus, in what manner the prescience of God
sees all things, and definisheth, although they have no certain betidings: ne
this is none opinion, but rather the simplicity of the souerain science that
is not shet within no manner of bounds.

Quam variis terras animalia permeant figuris. Namque alia extento sunt
corpore, etc.
THe beasts passen by the earths by full diverse figures, for some of hem have
her bodies straught, and crepen in the dust, and drawn after hem a trace, or a
forough continued, that is to say, as Neders and Snails: and other beasts, by
the wandering lightness of her wings, beaten the winds, and ouerswimmen the
spaces of the long air, by most flying.

And other beasts gladden hemself to diggen her traces or her steps in the
earth with her going, or with her feet, and to gone either by the green
fields, or else to walken under the woods. And all be it so, that thou see,
that they discorden by diverse forms, algates her faces inclined, heauieth her
dull wits, only the lineage of man heaueth highest his high head, and stands
light with his upright body, and beholds the earths under him. And but if
thou earthly man waxest evil out of thy wit, this figure amonesteth thee, that
ask the heaven with thy right visage, and have areised thy forehead, to
bearen up on high thy courage, so that thy thought ne be not heauied, ne put
low under foot, since that thy body is so high areised.

Quoniam igitur uti paulo ante monstratum est, omne quod scitur, etc.
THerefore then, as I have showed a little here beforne, that all thing that is
wist, nis not known by his nature proper, but by the nature of hem that
comprehenden it. Let us looken now, in as much as it is lefull to us, as who
says, let us looken now as we may, which that is the estate of the Divine
substance, so that we may well know eke with his science is. The common
judgment of all creatures reasonables then is, that God is eterne. Let us
consider then what is eternity, for certes, that shall shown us togider the
divine nature, and the divine science. Eternity then is perfect possession, and
all together of life interminable, and that shows the more clearly by the
comparison or collacion of temporal things.

For all things that lives in time, it is present, and proceeds fro
preterities into futures, that is to sain, from time passed into time coming:
ne there nis nothing established in time that may embracen together all the
space of this life, for certes, yet ne has it not taken the time of to morrow,
and it has lost that of yesterday. And certes, in the life of this day ye ne
liuen no more, but right as in this moouable and transitory moment. Then
thilke thing that suffers temporal condition, although that it never began
to be, ne though it never cease to be, (as Aristotle demed of the world) and
although the life of it be stretched with infinite of time, yet algates nis it
no such thing, as men might trowen by right that it is eterne. For although
that it comprehend and embrace the space of the life infinite, yet algates ne
embraces it not the space of the life altogether, for it ne has not the
futures that be not yet: Ne it ne has no longer the preterities that been done
or passed. But thilke thing then, that has and comprehends togider all the
plenty of the life interminable, to whom there ne fails naught of the future,
and to whom there nis naught of the preteritie escaped or passed, thilke same
is ywitnessed and prooved by right to ben etern. And it behooves by necessity,
that thilk thing be always present to himself, and competent: as who says,
always present to himself, and so mighty, that all be right at his pleasaunce,
and that he have all present the infinite of the moouable time. Wherefore some
men trowen wrongfully, that when they heren that it seemed to Plato, that this
world had never beginning of time, that it never shall have failing: they wene
in thilke manner, that this world be maked eterne, with his maker, as who
says, they wene that this world and God be maked together eterne. And that is
a wrongful wening, for other thing it is to be lad by the life interminable,
as Plato granted to the world, and other thing it is to embrace together all
the presence of the life that is interminable, which thing is clear and
manifest to the divine thought. Ne it ne should not seem to us, that God is
elder than things that been maked by quantity of time, but rather by the
prosperity of his simple nature. For this ilk infinite mouings of temporal
things follows this presentarie estate of this life immouable, and so, as it
ne may not countrefeten ne feign it, ne be euenlike to it for the immobilitie,
that is to say, that is in the eternity of God, it fails and fails into
moving fro the simplicity of the presence of God, and disincreaseth in the
infinite quantity of future and preterity. And so as it may not have togider
all the plenty of the life, algates yet for as much as it cease never for to
ben in some manner, yet it seems somedele to us, that it follows and
resembles thilke thing, that it ne may not attain to, ne fulfillen, and
binds it self to some manner presence of this little moment: the which
presence of this little and swift moment, for that it bears a manner image of
likeness of the aye dwelling of God, it grants to such manner things, as it
betideth to, that it seems hem, as these things have been, and ben. And for
that the presence of such little moment ne may not dwell, therefore it ravished
and took the infinite way of time, that is to say, by succession, and by this
manner it is done, for that it should continue the life in going, of the which
life it ne might not enbrace the plenty of dwelling. And for thy, if we woollen
put worthy names to things that followen Plato, let us say then soothly, that
God is eterne, and that the world is perpetuell. Then since every judgment
knows and comprehends by his own nature, things that been subject unto him,
there is to God always an eterne and a presentarie estate. And the science of
him that ouerpasseth all temporal moment, dwells in simplicity of his
presence, and embraces and considers all the infinite spaces of times
preterities, and of times futures. And looks in his simple knowing all things
of preteritie, right as they weren ydone presently right now. If thou wolt then
thinken and advise the prescience, by which it knows all things, thou ne
shall not deemen it as prescience of things to commen, but thou shall deemen
more rightfully that is science of presence or of instance, that never ne
fails, for which it nis not ycleped providence, but it should rather been
cleped purueyaunce, which is established full far fro right low things, and
beholds from aferre all things, right as it were fro the hie height of
things. Why ask thou then, or why disputest thou then, that thilke things
been done by necessity, which that been yseene and yknown by the divine sight?
since that forsooth men ne maken not thilke things necessary, which that they
seen been ydone in her sight, for adds thy beholding any necessity to
thilke things which thou beholdest present? Bo. Nay (quoth. I.) Phi. Certes (quoth.
she) then, if men mighten maken any digne comparison or collacion of the
presence divine, and of the presence of mankind, right so as ye seen some
things in this temporal presence, right so sees God all things by his eterne
presence. Wherefore this divine prescience ne changes not the nature of the
property of things, but beholds such things present to him ward, as they
shoulden betiden to you ward in time to commen. Ne it ne confounds not the
judgment of things, but by one sight of his thought, he knows the things to
commen, as well necessary as not necessary. Right so when ye seen together a
man walk on the earth, and the sun arisen in the heaven, all be it so, that
ye seen all together that one and that other: yet nevertheless we deemen and
discernen, that that one is voluntary, and that other is necessary: Right so
then the divine looking, beholding all things under him, ne troubles not the
quality of things that been certainly present to him ward, but as to the
condition of time, forsooth they ben future, for which it follows, that this
nis none opinion, but rather a steadfast knowing ystrengthned by soothnesse,
that when that God knows any thing to he, he ne vnwote not that thilk thing
wants necessity to be, this is to said, that when that God knows any
thing to betide, he wot well that it ne has no necessity to betide. And if
thou see here, that thilke thing that God sees to betide, it ne may not
vnbetide, as who says it more betide, and thilke thing that ne may not
vnbetide, it more betiden by necessity, and that thou strein me to this name of
the necessity: Certes I will well confessen and beknowen a thing of full sad
troth, but uneath shall there any wight now seen it, or come thereto, but if
that he be beholder of the divine thought, for I will answer thee thus, * That
thilke thing that is future, when it is referred to the divine knowing, then it
is necessary. But certes, when it is understood in his own kind, men seen
it utterly free and absolute fro all necessities. For certes there ben two
manners of necessities, that one necessity is simple, that it behooves by
necessity, that all men be mortal or deadly: another necessity is
condicionell, as thus, if thou wost that a man walks, it behooves by
necessity that he walk, thilke thing then that any wight has iknow to be, it
ne may not be none otherwise than he knows it to be. But this condition ne
draws not with her thilke necessity simple, for certes, this necessity
condicionell, the proper nature of it ne makes it not, but the adjection of
the condition makes it. For no necessity ne constrayneth a man to gone, that
goth by his proper will, all be it so, that when he goth, that is necessary
that he goes. Right on this same manner then, if that the purueyaunce of God
sees any thing present, then mote thilk thing been by necessity, although that
it ne have no necessity of his own nature. * But certes, the futures that
betiden by freedom of arbitry, God sees hem all togider present. These things
then if they been referred to the divine sight, then been they maked necessary
by the condition of the divine knowing. But certes, if thilke things been
considered by hemselfe, they been absolute of necessity, and ne for^eten not,
ne ceasen not of the liberty of her own nature. Then certes, without doubt,
all the things shulien been done, which that God wo^e beforne, that they ben to
commen and betiden of free arbitry, or of free will, that all be it so that
they betiden, yet algates ne lose they not her proper nature in being, by the
which, first or they weren done, they hadden power not to have betidde.
Boethius. What is this to said then (quoth. I) that things ne be not necessary by
her proper nature, so that they commen in all her manners in the likeness of
necessity, by condition of the divine science? Philosophy. This is the
difference (quoth. she) that tho things, which that I purposed thee a little here
beforn, that is to same, Sun arising, and the man walking, that there whiles
that thilke things been done, they ne might not been undone: Nathelesse, that
one of hem or it was done, it behooves by necessity that it was done, but not
that other. Right so it is here, that the things which that God has present,
withouten doubt they shullen been, but some of hem discendeth of the nature of
things, as the Sun arising, and some discendeth of the power of the doers, as
the man walking. Boethius. Then said I no wrong, that if these things be
referred to the divine knowing, then been they necessary, and if they been
considered by hemself, then been they absolute fro the bond of necessity.
Right so as all things that appears or shows to the wits, if thou refer
hem to reason, it is universal, and if thou look it or refer it to it
self, then is it singular. But now if thou say thus, that if that it be in
my power to chaungen my purpose, then shall I voiden the purueyaunce of God,
when peradventure I shall have changed the things which that he knows
beforne. Philosophy. Then shall I answeren thee thus: Certes, thou may well
change thy purpose, but for as much as the present soothnesse of the divine
purueyaunce beholds that thou may change thy purpose, and whether thou
change it or no, and whiderward that thou turn it, thou ne may not eschew
the divine prescience, right so thou ne may not flid the sight of the present
eye, although that thou turn thy self by thy free will into diverse actions.
But thou may said again to this, thus: How shall it then be, shall not the
divine science ben changed by my disposicion, when that I will one thing now,
and now another thing? And thilke prescience ne see meth it not to enterchaunge
stounds of knowing, as who says, ne shall it not seemen to us, that the divine
prescience enterchaungeth his diverse stounds of knowing, so that it know
sometime one thing, and sometime it knows the contrary of that thing?
Philosophy. No forsooth (quoth. she) for the divine sight renneth beforne and
sees all the futures, and clepeth hem again, and retourneth hem to the proper
prescience of his proper knowing, ne he enterchaungeth not, so as thou wenest,
the stounds of his foreknowing, as now this, now that: but he dwelling aye
comes beforn, and embraces at o stroke all the mutacions. And this
prescience to comprehenden and to seen all things, God ne has not taken it of
the betidings of things to commen, but of his proper simplicity. And hereby is
assoiled thilke things that thou put a little here beforne, that is to
said, that it is unworthy thing to said, that our futures yeven cause of the
prescience of God. For certes, strength of the divine science, which that
embraces all things by his presentary knowing, establishes manner to all
things, and it ne owes not to latter things. And since that these things ben
thus, that is to sain, that necessity is not in things by the divine
prescience, then is there freedom of arbitry, that dwells hole and vnwemmed
to mortal men, ne the laws ne purposen not wicked medes and pains to the
willings of men, that been vnbounden and quite of all necessity: * And God
beholder and foreweter of all things dwells above, and the present eternity
of sight renneth always with the diverse quality of our deeds, dispensing or
ordeining medes to good men, and tourments to wicked men. Ne in idle ne in vain
ne been there not put in God hope and prayers, that ne mowen not been
vnspeedfull, ne without effect, when they ben rightful.

* Withstand then and eschew thou vices, worship and love thou virtues, areise
thy courage to rightful hopes, yield thou humble prayers and high. Great
necessity of prowess and of virtue is encharged and commanded to you, if ye
nill not dissimulen, since that ye worchen and done, that is to saine, your
deeds and your werks beforne the eyes of the judge, that sees and also that
demeth all things. Deo gratias.

Thus ends the Book of Boethius, of the Consolation of Philosophy.
The Book commonly entitled, Chaucer's Dream.
By the Person of a mourning Knight sitting under an Oak, is meant John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, greatly lamenting the death of one whom he entirely
loved, supposed to be Blanch the Duchess.
I Have great wonder by this light,
How I live, for day ne night
I may not sleep welnigh naught,
I have so many an idle thought,
Purely for default of sleep,
That by my troth I take no keep
Of nothing, how it comes or gothe,
To me nis nothing lefe nor loathe,
All is yliche good to me,
Joy or sorrow, where so it be:
For I have feeling in nothing,
But as it were a mased thing,
All day in point to fall adoun,
For sorrowful imaginacioun
Is always wholly in my mind.
And well ye wot, against kind
It were to liuen in this wise,
For nature would not suffice,
To none earthly creature,
Not long time to endure
Without sleep, and be in sorrow:
And I ne may ne night ne morrow
Sleep, and this melancholy
And dread I have for to die,
Defaut of sleep and heaviness
Has slain my spirit of quickenesse,
That I have lost all lustyhead,
Such fantasies ben in mine head,
So I not what is best to do:
But men might ask me why so
I may not sleep, and what me is.
But nathelesse, who ask this,
Leseth his asking truly,
My seluen cannot tell why
The sooth, but truly as I guess,
I hold it be a sickness
That I have suffered this eight year,
And yet my boot is never the nere:
For there is phisicien but one,
That may me heal, but that is done:
Pass we over until eft,
That will not be, mote needs be left,
Our first matter is good to keep.
So when I saw I might not sleep,
Now of late this other night
Upon my bed I sat upright,
And bade one reach me a book,
A Romaunce, and he it me took
To read, and drive the night away:
For me thought it better play,
Than either at Chesse or Tables.
And in this book were written fables,
That Clerks had in old time,
And other Poets put in rhyme,
To read, and for to be in mind,
While men i^ued the law of kind.
This book ne spoke but of such things,
Of queens lives, and of kings,
And many other things small.
Among all this I found a tale,
That me thought a wonder thing.
This was the tale: There was a king
That hight Seys, and had a wife,
The best that might bear life,
And this queen hight Alcione.
So it befell, thereafter soon
This king woll wenden over see:
To tellen shortly, when that he
Was in the sea, thus in this wise,
Such a tempest began to rise,
That brake her mast, and made it fall,
And cleft her ship, and dreint hem all,
That never was found, as it tells,
Board, ne man, ne nothing else.
Right thus this king Seys lost his life.
Now for to speak of Alcione his wife,
This lady that was left at home,
Has wonder that the king ne come
Home, for it was a long term:
Anon her heart began to yerne,
And for that her thought euermo
It was not well, her thought so,
She longed so after the king,
That certes it were a pitous thing
To tell her heartely sorrowful life,
That she had, this noble wife,
For him alas she loved alderbest,
Anon she sent both east and west
To seek him, but they found him naught.
Alas (quoth. she) that I was wrought,
Whether my lord my love be dead,
Certes I nill never eat bread,
I make a vow to my god here,
But I mow of my lord here.
Such sorrow this lady to her took,
That truly I that made this book,
Had such pity and such routh
To read her sorrow, that by my troth
I farde the worse all the morrow
After, to thinken on her sorrow.
So when this lady coud here no word,
That no man might find her lord,
Full often she swowned, and said alas,
For sorrow full nigh wood she was,
Ne she coud no read but one,
But down on knees she sat anon,
And wept, that pity were to here.
A mercy sweet lady dear
(Quoth. she) to Juno her goddess,
Help me out of this distress,
And yeve me grace my lord to see
Soon, or wete where so he be.
Or how he fares, or in what wise,
And I shall make you sacrifice,
And holly yours become I shall,
With good will, body, heart, and all,
And but thou wolt this, lady sweet,
Send me grace to sleep and mete
In my sleep some certain sweuen,
Where through that I may know even
Whether my lord be quick or dead.
With that word she hing down the head,
And fell in a swowne, as cold as stone,
Her women caught her up anon,
And brought her in bed all naked,
And she forweped and forwaked,
Was weary, and thus the dead sleep
Fell on her, or she took keep,
Through Juno, that had heard her boon,
That made her to sleep soon,
For as she praide, right so was done
Indeed, for Juno right anon
Called thus her messengere
To do her erraund, and he come nere,
When he was come, she had him thus.
Go bet (quoth. Juno) to Morpheus,
Thou know him well, the God of sleep,
Now understand well, and take keep,
Say thus on my half, that he
Go fast into the great see,
And bid him that on all thing
He take up Seis body the king,
That lies full pale, and nothing rody,
Bid him creep into the body,
And do it gone to Alcione
The queen, there she lies alone,
And show her shortly, it is no nay,
How it was dreint this other day,
And do the body speak right so,
Right as it was wonted to do,
The whiles that it was alive,
Go now fast, and hye thee bliue.
This messenger took leave and went
Upon his way, and never he stent
Till he came to the dark valley,
That stant between rocks twey,
There never yet grew corn ne gras,
Ne tree, ne naught that aught was,
Beast ne man, ne naught else,
Save that there were a few wels
Came renning fro the cliffes adowne,
That made a deadly sleeping sown,
And rennen down right by a cave,
That was under a rock ygraue,
Amid the valley wonder deep,
There these gods lay asleep,
Morpheus and Eclympasteire,
That was the god of sleeps heir,
That slept, and did none other work.
This cave was also as derke
As hell pit, over all about,
They had good leyser for to rout,
To vye who might sleep best,
Some hing her chin upon her breast,
And slept upright her head yhed,
And some lay naked in her bed,
And slept whiles their days last.
This messenger come renning fast,
And cried ho, ho, awake anon,
It was for naught, there heard him none,
Awake (quoth. he) who lies there,
And blew his horn right in her ear,
And cried awaketh wonder hye.
This god of sleep, with his one eye
Cast up, and asked who clepeth there,
It am I (quoth. this messengere)
Juno bade thou should gone,
And told him what he should done,
As I have told you here before,
It is no need rehearse it more,
And went his way when he had said:
Anon this god of sleep abraide
Out of his sleep, and began to go,
And did as he had bid him do,
Took up the dead body soon,
And bare it forth to Alcione
His wife the queen, there as she lay,
Right even a quarter before day,
And stood right at her beds fete,
And called her right as she hete
By name and said: My sweet wife
Awake, let be your sorrowful life,
For in your sorrow there lies no read,
For certes sweet love I am but deed,
Ye shall me never on live ysee.
But good sweet heart look that ye
Bury my body, for such a tide
Ye mow it find the sea beside,
And farewell sweet, my worlds bliss,
I pray God your sorrow lisse,
Too little while our bliss lasts.
With that her eyes up she casts,
And saw naught: alas (quoth. she) for sorrow,
And used within the third morrow.
But what she said more in that swowe,
I may not tell it you as now,
It were too long for to dwell,
My first matere I will you tell,
Wherefore I have told this thing,
Of Alcione, and Seis the king.
For thus much dare I say well,
I had be bolden every dele,
And dead, right through defaut of sleep,
If I ne had red, and take keep
Of this tale next before,
And I will tell you wherefore,
For I ne might for bote ne bale
Sleep, or I had read this tale
Of this dreint Seis the king,
And of the gods of sleeping.
When I had red this tale well,
And overlooked it everydele,
Me thought wonder if it were so,
For I had never heard speak or tho
Of no gods, that coud make
Men to sleep, ne for to wake,
For I ne knew never God but one,
And in my game I said anon,
And yet me lift right evil to pley,
Rather than that I should dey
Through defaut of sleeping thus,
I would give thilke Morpheus,
Or that goddess dame Juno,
Or some wight else, I ne rought who,
To make me sleep, and have some rest,
I will give him the alther best
Yest, that ever he abode his live,
And here onward, right now as blive,
If he woll make me sleep alite,
Of down of pure Doves white,
I woll yeve him a featherbed,
Raied with gold, and right well cled,
In fine black Satin doutremere,
And many a pillow, and every bear,
Of cloth of raines to sleep on soft,
Him there not need to turn often,
And I woll yeve him all that falls
To his chamber and to his hals,
I woll do paint with pure gold,
And tapite hem full manyfold,
Of one suit this shall he have,
If I wi^t where were his cave,
If he can make me sleep soon,
As did the goddess, queen Alcione,
And thus this like god Morpheus
May will of me mo fees thus
Than ever he wan: and to Juno,
That is his goddess, I shall so do,
I trow that she shall hold her paid.
I had uneath that word ysaid,
Right thus as I have told you,
That suddenly I nist how,
Such a lust anon me took
To sleep, that right upon my book
I fell a sleep, and therewith even
Me met so inly such a sweven,
So wonderful, that never yet
I trow no man had the wit
To conne well my sweden read.
No, not Joseph without dread,
Of Egypt, he that rad so,
The kings meting Pharao,
No more than coud the least of us.
Ne not scarcely Macrobeus,
He that wrote all the avision
That he met of king Scipion,
The noble man the Affrican,
Such meruailes fortuned than,
I trow arede my dreams even,
Lo thus it was, this was my sweven.
Me thought thus, that it was May,
And in the dawning there I lay,
Me met thus in my bed all naked,
And looked forth for I was waked,
With small fowls a great hepe,
That had afraied me out of my sleep,
Through noise and sweetness of her song,
And as me met, they sat among
Upon my chamber roof without
Upon the tyles over all about,
And eueriche song in his wise
The most solemn seruise
By note, that ever man I trow
Had heard, for some of hem song low,
Some high, and all of one accord,
To tell shortly at o word,
Was never heard so sweet steven,
But it had be a thing of heven,
So merry a sown, so sweet entunes,
That certes for the town of Tewnes
I noide, but I had heard hem sing,
For all my chamber began to ring,
Through singing of her ermony,
For instrument nor melody
Was no where heard, yet half so sweet,
Nor of accord half so mete,
For there was none of hem that fained
To sing, for each of hem him pained
To find out many crafty notes,
They ne spared not her throtes,
And sooth to saine, my chamber was
Full well depainted, and with glass
Were all the windows well yglased
Full clear, and not an hole ycrased,
That to behold it was great joy,
For holly all the story of Troy
Was in the glaising ywrought thus,
Of Hector, and of King Priamus,
Of Achilles, and of king Laomedon,
And eke of Medea and of Jason,
Of Paris, Heleine, and of Lavine,
And all the walls with colors fine
Were paint, both text and gloss,
And all the Romaunt of the Rose,
My windows weren shit echone,
And through the glass the sun shone
Upon my bed with bright bemes,
With many glad glidy stremes,
And eke the welkin was so fair,
Blew, bright, clear was the air,
And full attempre, for sooth it was,
For neither too cold ne hot it nas,
Ne in all the welkin was no cloud.
And as I lay thus wonder loud
Me thought I heard a hunt blow
Tassay his great horn, and for to know
Whether it was clear, or horse of sown.
And I heard going both up and down
Men, horse, hounds, and other thing,
And all men speak of hunting,
How they would slay the heart with strength,
And how the heart had upon length
So much enbosed, I not now what.
Anon right when I heard that,
How that they would on hunting gone,
I was right glad, and up anon
Took my horse, and forth I went
Out of my chamber, I never stent
Till I come to the field without,
There ouertooke I a great rout
Of hunters and eke forresters,
And many relaies and limers,
And highed hem to the forest fast,
And I with hem, so at the last
I asked one lad, a lymere
Say fellow, who shall hunt here
(Quoth. I) and he answered again,
Sir, the Emperor Occtonyen
(Quoth. he) and is here fast by.
A gods half, in good time (quoth. I)
Go we fast, and began to ride,
When we come to the forest side,
Every man did right soon,
As to hunting fell to done.
The master hunt, anon foot hot
With his horn blew three mote
At the vncoupling of his houndis,
Within a while the heart found is
I hallowed, and rechased fast
Long time, and so at the last
This heart rouzed and stale away
Fro all the hounds a preuie way.
The hounds had ouershot him all,
And were upon a default yfall,
Therewith the hunt wonder fast
Blew a forloyn at the last,
I was go walked fro my tree,
And as I went, there came by me
A whelpe, that fawned me as I stood,
That had yfollowed, and coud no good,
It came and crept to me as low,
Right as it had me yknow,
Held down his head, and joined his ears,
And laid all smooth down his hears.
I would have caught it anon,
It fled, and was fro me gone,
As I him followed, and it forth went
Down by a floury green it went
Full thick of grass, full soft and sweet,
With flowers feel fair under feet,
And little used, it seemed thus,
For both Flora, and Zepherus,
They two, that make flowers grow,
Had made her dwelling there I trow,
For it was on to behold,
As though the earth envy would
To be gayer than the heaven,
To have mo flowers such seven,
As in the welkin sterres be,
It had forget the pouerte
That winter, through his cold morrowes
Had made it suffer, and his sorrows
All was foryeten, and that was seen,
For all the wood was woxen green,
Sweetness of dew had made it wax.
It is no need eke for to axe
Where there were many green greues
Or thick of trees, so full of leaves,
And every tree stood by himselue
Fro other, well ten foot or twelve,
So great trees, so huge of strength,
Of forty or fifty fadome length,
Clean without bow or stick,
With crops broad, and eke as thick,
They were not an inch asunder,
That it was shadde over all under,
And many an heart and many an hind
Was both before me and behind,
Of fawnes, sowers, buckes, does,
Was full the wood, and many roes,
And many squirrels, that sete
Full high upon the trees and ete,
And in her manner made feasts:
Shortly, it was so full of beasts,
That though Argus the noble countour
Sat to reckon in his countour,
And reckon with his figures ten,
For by tho figures new all ken,
If they be crafty, reckon and number,
And tell of every thing the number,
Yet should he fail to reckon even
The wonders me met in my sweven:
But forth I romed right wonder fast
Down the wood, so at the last
I was ware of a man in black,
That sat, and had yturned his back
To an Oak, an huge tree:
Lord thought I, who may that be,
What eyleth him to sitten here,
Anon right I went nere,
Then found I sit, even upright,
A wonder welfaring knight,
By the manner me thought so,
Of good mokell, and right young thereto,
Of the age of four and twenty year,
Upon his beard but little here,
And he was clothed all in black.
I stalked even unto his back,
And there I stood as still as ought,
The sooth to say, he saw me naught,
For why he hing his head adowne,
And with a deadly sorrowful sown,
He made of time ten verses or twelve,
Of a complaint to himselue,
The most pity, the most routh
That ever I heard, for by my troth
It was great wonder that nature
Might ^uffer any creature
To have such sorrow, and he not ded:
Full pitous pale, and nothing red,
He said a lay, a manner song,
Without note, without song,
And was this, for full well I can
Rehearse it, right thus it began.
I have of sorrow so great wone,
That joy get I never none,
Now that I see my lady bright,
Which I have loved with all my might,
Is fro me dead, and is agone,
And thus in sorrow left me alone,
Alas death, what eyleth thee,
That thou noldest have taken me,
When that thou took my lady sweet,
Of all goodness she had none mete,
That was so fair, so fresh, so free,
So good, that men may well see.
When he had made thus his complaint,
His sorrowful heart began fast faint,
And his spirits wexen dead,
The blood was fled for pure dread
Down to his heart, to maken him warm,
For well it feeled the heart had harm,
To wete eke why it was adrad
By kind and for to make it glad,
For it is member principal
Of the body, and that made all
His hew change, and wexe green
And pale, for there no blood is seen
In no manner limme of his.
Anon therewith, when I saw this,
He farde thus evil there he sete,
I went and stood right at his fete,
And grette him but he spoke naught,
But argued with his own thought,
And in his wit disputed fast,
Why, and how his life might last,
Him thought his sorrows were so smert,
And lay so cold upon his heart.
So through his sorrow and holy thought,
Made him that he heard me naught,
For he had welnigh lost his mind,
Though Pan, that men clepeth god of kind,
Were for his sorrows never so wroth.
But at the last, to saine right sooth,
He was ware of me, how I stood
Before him and did off my hood,
And had ygret him, as I best coud
Debonairly, and nothing loud,
He said, I pray thee be not wroth,
I heard thee not, to saine the sooth,
Ne I saw the not, sir truly.
Ah good sir, no force (quoth. I)
I am right sorry, if I have ought
Distroubled you out of your thought,
Foryeve me, if I have miss take.
Yes, thamends is light to make
(Quoth. he) for there lithe none thereto,
There is nothing missaide, nor do.
Lo how goodly spoke this knight,
As it had be another wight,
And made it neither tough ne queint,
And I saw that, and began me acqueint
With him, and found him so tretable,
Right wonder skillful and reasonable,
As me thought, for all his bale,
Anon right I began find a tale
To him, to look where I might ought
Have more knowledging of his thought.
Sir (quoth. I) this game is done,
I hold that this heart be gone,
These hunts can him no where see.
I do no force thereof (quoth. he)
My thought is thereon never adele,
By our Lord (quoth. I) I trow you well,
Right so me thinks by your chere,
But sir, o thing woll ye here,
Me thinks in great sorrow I you see,
But certes sir, if that ye
Would aught discure me your woe,
I would, as wise God help me so,
Amend it, if I can or may,
Ye mow prove it by assay,
For by my troth, to make you hole,
I woll do all my power whole,
And tells me of your sorrows smart,
Paraunter it may ease your heart,
That seems full sick under your side.
With that he looked on me aside,
As who says nay, that nill not be.
Grant mercy good friend (quoth. he)
I thank thee, that thou would so,
But it may never the rather be do,
No man may my sorrow glade,
That makes my hew to fall and fade,
And has mine understanding lorne,
That me is woe that I was borne,
May naught make my sorrows slide,
Not all the remedies of Ovide,
Ne Orpheus god of melody,
Ne Dedalus, with his plays sly,
Ne heal me may no Phisicien,
Naught Ipocras, ne Galien,
Me is woe that I live hours twelve,
But who so woll assay hemselue,
Whether his heart can have pite
Of any sorrow let him see me,
I wretch that death has made all naked
Of all the bliss that ever was maked,
Iwroth, werste of all wights,
That hate my days, and my nights,
My life* my lusts, be me loath.
For all fare and I be wroth,
The pure death is so full my fo,
That I would die, it will not so,
For when I follow it, it will fly,
I would have him, it nill not me,
This is pain without reed,
Always dying, and be not deed,
That Tesiphus that lies in hell,
May not of more sorrow tell,
And who so wist all, by my troth,
My sorrow, but he had routh
And pity of my sorrows smart,
That man has a fiendly heart:
For whosoever sees me first on morrow,
May saine he has met with sorrow,
For I am sorrow, and sorrow is I,
Alas, and I will tell thee why,
My sorrow is turned to plaining,
And all my laughter to weeping,
My glad thoughts to heaviness,
In travail is mine idleness,
And eke my rest, my well is woe,
My good is harm, and euermo
In wrath is turned my playing,
And my delight into sorrowing,
Mine heal is turned into sickness,
In dread is all my sikernesse,
To derke is turned all my light,
My wit is folly, my day is night.
My love is hate, my sleep wakyng,
My mirth and meals is fasting,
My countenance is nicete,
And all abawed, where so I be,
My peace pleding, and in werre
Alas, how might I fare werre.
My boldness is turned to shame,
For false fortune has played a game
At the cheffe with me, alas the while,
The trayteresse false and full of gyle,
That al behoteth, and nothing halte,
She gothe upright, and yet she halte,
That baggeth foul, and looks fair,
The dispitous debonaire,
That scorneth many a creature,
An ydole of false purtraiture
Is she, for she woll sone wryen
She is the monstres heed ywryen,
As filth, over ystrowed with flowers,
Her most worship and her flowers
To lain for that is her nature,
Without faith, law, or mesure
She false is, and ever laughing
With one eye, and that other weping,
That is brought up, she set al down:
I liken her to the Scorpiowne,
That is a false flattering be,
For with his head he makes feast,
But all amid his flattering,
With his tail he will sting
And enuenim, and so will she:
She is the envious charity,
That is aye false, and seems well,
So turns she her false whele
About, for it is nothing stable,
Now by the fire, now at table,
Full many one has she thus yblent,
She is play of enchauntement,
That seems one, and is not so
The false these, what has she do,
Trowest thou, by our Lord I will thee say,
At the Chesse with me she began to play,
With her false draughtes full diverse
She stale on me, and took my fers,
And when I saw my fers away,
Alas I couth no longer play,
But said, farewell sweet ywis,
And farewell all that ever there is:
Therewith fortune said, check here,
And mate in the mid point of the checkere,
With a paune errant, alas,
Full craftier to play she was
Than Athalus, that made the game
First of the Chesse, so was his name:
But God would I had ones or twice,
Iconde, and know the jeoperdise,
That could the Greek Pythagores,
I should have plaide the bet at ches,
And kept my feers the bet thereby,
And though whereto, for trewly
I hold that wish not worth a fire,
It had be never the bet for me,
For fortune can so many a wyle,
There be but few can her begile,
And eke she is the less to blame,
My self I would have do the same,
Before God, had I been as she,
She ought the more excused be,
For this I say yet more thereto,
Had I be God, and might have do
My will, when she my feers caught,
I would have draw the same draught:
For also wise, God give me rest,
I dare well swear, she took the best,
But through that draught I have sorne
My bliss, alas that I was borne,
For evermore I trow trewly,
For all my will, my lust wholly
Is turned, but ye, what to done
By our Lord it is to die sone:
For nothing I leave it naught,
But live and die, right in this thought.
For there nys planet in ^irmament,
Ne in air ne in earth none element,
That they ne give me a yeft echone,
Of weping when I am alone:
For when that I advise me well,
And bethink me euerydele,
How that there lies in rekening,
In my sorrow for nothing,
And how there lives no gladness
May glad me of my distress,
And how I have lost suffisaunce
And thereto I have no pleasaunce:
Then may I say, I have right naught,
And when all this falls in my thought,
Alas, than am I overcome,
For that is done, is not come
I have more sorrow than Tantale.
And I herd him tell this tale
Thus pitously, as I you tell
Uneath might I longer dwell:
It did mine heart so much woe.
A good sir (quoth. I) say not so,
Have some pite on your nature,
That fourmed you to creature,
Remembers you of Socrates,
For he counted not three strees
Of naught that fortune could do.
No (quoth. I) I can not so,
Why good sir, yes parde (quoth. I)
Ne say not so for truly,
Though ye had lost the feerses twelus
And ye for sorrow murdered your selue,
Ye should be dampened in this caas,
By as good right as Medea was,
That slough her children for Jason,
And Phillis also for Demophon
Hing her sefe, so welaway,
For he had broke his term day
To come to her: Another rage
Had Dido, the queen eke of Cartage,
That slough her self, for Eneas
Was false, which a fool she was:
And Ecquo died, for Narcissus
Nolde not love her, and right thus
Has many another folly done,
And for Dalida died Sampsone,
That slough himself with a pillere,
But there is no man alive here
Would for her feeres make this woe.
Why so (quoth. he) it is not so,
Thou wotest full little what thou menest,
I have lost more than thou wenest:
How may that be (quoth. I)
Good sir, tell me all holly,
In what wise, how, why and wherefore,
That ye have thus your bliss lore?
Blithely (quoth. he) come sit down,
I tell thee upon a conditioun,
That thou shall holly with all thy wit
Do thine intent to hearken it.
Yes sir: Swear thy troth thereto,
Gladly do then hold here to,
I shall right blithely, so God me save,
Holly with all the wit I have,
Here you as well as I can:
A gods half (quoth. he) and began.
Sir (quoth. he) since first I couth
Have any manner wit fro youth,
Or kindly understanding,
To comprehend in any thing
What love was, in mine own wit,
Dredelesse I have ever yet
Be tributarie, and give rent
To love holly, with good intent,
And through pleasaunce become his thrall,
With good will, body, heart, and all,
All this I put in his seruage,
As to my lord, and did homage,
And full devoutly I praide him tho,
He should beset mine heart so,
That it pleasaunce to him were,
And worship to my lady dear.
And this was long, and many a year
(Ere that mine heart was set o where)
That I did thus, and nist why,
I trow it came me kindly,
Paraunter I was thereto most able,
As a white wall, or a table,
For it is ready to catch and take
All that men will therein make,
Whether so men will portrey or paint,
Be the works never so quaint.
And thilke time I fared right so,
I was able to have learned tho,
And to have conde as well or better
Paraunter either art or letter,
But for love came first in my thought,
Therefore I forgate it naught,
I chees love to my first craft,
Therefore it is with me laft,
For why, I took it of so young age,
That malice had my courage
Not that time turned to nothing,
Through too mokell knowledging,
For that time youth my maistresse
Governed me in idleness,
For it was in my first youth,
And tho full little good I couth,
For all my works were flitting
That time, and all my thought varying,
All were to me yliche good,
That knew I tho, but thus it stood.
It happed that I came on a dey
Into a place, there that I sey
Truly the fairest company
Of ladies, that ever man with eye
Had seen together in o place,
Shall I clepe it hap, either grace,
That brought me there, not but fortune,
That is to lien full commune,
The false traiteresse perverse,
God would I could clepe her werse,
For now she worcheth me full woe,
And I woll tell soon why so.
Amongs these ladies thus echone,
Sooth to saine, I saw one
That was like none of the rout,
For I dare swear, without dout,
That as the summers sun bright
Is fairer, clerer, and has more light
Than any other plannet in heaven,
The moon, or the sterres seven,
For all the world so had she
Surmounten hem all of beauty,
Of manner, and of comeliness,
Of stature, and of well set gladness,
Of goodly heed, and so well besey,
Shortly what shall I more sey,
By God and by his holowes twelve,
It was my sweet, right all her selue,
She had so steadfast countenance,
So noble port, and maintenance:
And Love, that well hard my bone,
Had espied me thus sone,
That she full soon in my thought,
As help me God so was I cought
So suddenly, that I ne took
No manner counsel, but at her look,
And at mine heart, for why her eyes
So gladly I trow mine heart seyne,
That purely tho, mine own thought,
Said, it were better serve her for naught,
Than with another to be well,
And it was soth, for every dele,
I will anon right tell thee why.
I saw her dance so comely,
Carol and sing so swetely,
Laugh, and play so womanly,
And look so debonairly,
So goodly speak and so freendly:
That certes I trow that evermore,
Nas seen so blisfull a tresore:
For every here on her heed,
Sothe to say it was not reed,
Ne neither yelowe ne brown it nas,
Me thought most like gold it was,
And which eyes my lady had,
Debonaire, good, glad, and sad,
Simple, of good mokel, not to wide,
Thereto her look nas not aside,
Ne ouertwhart, but beset so well,
It drew and took up euerydele
All that on her began behold,
Her eyes seemed anon she would
Have mercy, folly wenden so,
But it was never the rather do,
It nas no counterfeted thing,
It was her own pure loking:
That the Goddess dame Nature,
Had made hem open by measure,
And close, for were she never so glad,
Her loking was not folish sprad,
He wildely, though that she played,
But ever me thought her eyes said,
By God my wrath is al foryeue.
Therewith her list so well to live,
That dullness was of her adrad,
She nas to sobre ne to glad,
In all things more measure,
Had never I trow creature,
But many one with her look she heart,
And that sat her full litel at heart:
For she knew nothing of her thought,
But whether she knew, or knew it naught,
Algate she ne rought of hem a stree,
To get her love no nere nas he
That woned at home, than he in Inde,
The formest was always behind,
But good folk over all other,
She laued, as man may his brother,
Of which love she was wonder large,
In skillful places that bear charge,
But which a visage had she thereto,
Alas my heart is wonder woe,
That I ne can discriuen it,
Me lacks both English and wit.
For to undo it at the full,
And eke my spirits been so dull
So great a thing for to devise,
I have not wit that can suffice
To comprehend her beauty,
But thus much I dare saine, that she
Was white, rody, fresh, and lifely hewed,
And every day her beauty newed,
And nigh her face was alderbest,
For certes nature had soch lest,
To make that fair, that truly she
Was her chief patron of beauty,
And chief ensample of all her work:
And monstre, for be it never so verke,
Me thinks I see her ever mo,
And yet more over, though all tho
That ever lived, were now a live,
Ne would have found to discriue
In all her face, a wicked sign,
For it was sad, simple, and benign.
And soch a goodly sweet spech,
Had that sweet, my lives lech,
So frendely, and so well ygrounded
Upon all reason, so well ifounded,
And so tretable to all good,
That I dare swear well by the ^ood,
Of eloquence was never fond
So sweet a sowning faconde,
Ne trewer tonged, ne scorned less,
Ne bet could heal, that by the mass,
I durst swear though the Pope it song,
That there was never yet through her tongue,
Man ne woman greatly harmid,
As for her, was all harm hid:
Ne less flattering in her word,
That purely her simple record,
Was found as true as any bond,
Or troth of any man's hond.
Ne chide she could never a dele,
That knows all the world full well.
But such a fairness of a neck,
Had that sweet, that bone nor brecke
Nas there none seen, that miss satte,
It was white, smoth, straight, and pure flat,
Without hole, or canel bone,
And by seming, she had none.
Her throat, as I have now memoire,
Seemed as a round toure of yuoire,
Of good greatness, and not to great,
And fair white she hete,
That was my Ladies name right,
She was thereto fair and bright,
She had not her name wrong,
Right fair shoulders, and body long
She had, and arms ever lith
Fattish, fleshy, not great therewith,
Right white hands, and nails read,
Round breasts, and of good bread,
Her lips were a straight flat back,
I knew on her none other lack,
That all her limbs nere pure sewing,
In as far as I had knowing,
Thereto she could so well play
What that her list, that I dare say
That was like to torch bright,
That every man may take of light
Enough, and it has never the less
Of manner and of comeliness.
Right so farde my lady dear,
For every wight of her manner
Moght catch enough, if that he would
If he had eyes her to behold,
For I dare swear well, if that she
Had among ten thousand be,
She would have be at the best,
A chief myrrour of all the feste,
Though they had stand in a row,
To men's eyes, that could have know,
For where so men had plaide or waked,
Me thought the fellowship as naked
Without her, that I saw ones,
As a crown without stones,
Trewly she was to mine eye,
The solein Fenix of Arabie,
For there lives never but one,
Ne such as she, ne know I none:
To speak of goodness, trewly she
Had as much debonairte,
As ever had Hester in the Bible,
And more, if more were possible,
And soth to said, therewithal
She had a wit so general,
So whole inclined to all good,
That al her wit was set by the rood,
Without malice, upon gladness,
And thereto I saw never yet a less
Harmefull, then she was in doing,
I say not that she ne had knowing
What harm was, or else she
Had could no good, so thinks me,
And trewly, for to speak of troth,
But she had had, it had be routh
Thereof she had so much her dele,
And I dare saine, and swear it well,
That troth himself, over al and al,
Had chose his manner principal
In her, that was his resting place,
Thereto she had the most grace,
To have steadfast perseueraunce,
And easy attempre, governance,
That ever I knew, or wist yet,
So pure suffraunt was her wit,
And reason gladly she understood,
It followed well, she could good,
She used gladly to do wese,
These were her manners every dele.
Therewith she loved so well right,
She wrong do would to no wight,
No wight might do her no shame,
She loved so well her own name.
Her lust to hold no wight in hond,
Ne be thou siker, she would not fond,
To hold no wight in balaunce,
By half word, ne by countenance,
But if men would upon her lie,
Ne send men into Walakie,
To Pruise, and to Tartarie,
To Allsaundrie, ne into Turkey,
And bid him fast, anon that he
Go hoodlesse into the dry see,
And come home by the Carrenare.
And sir, be now right ware,
That I may of you here saine,
Worship, or that ye come again.
She ne used no soch knackes small,
But therefore that I tell my tale,
Right on this same I have said,
Was wholly all my love laid,
For certes she was that sweet wife,
My suffisaunce, my lust, my life,
Mine hope, mine heal, and all bless,
My worlds welfare, and my goddess,
And I wholly hers, and every dele.
By our Lord (quoth. I) I trow you well,
Hardly, your love was well beset,
I not how it might have do bet.
Bet, ne not so well (quoth. he)
I trow sir (quoth. I) parde.
Nay leave it well: Sir so do I,
I leave you well, that trewly
You thought that she was the best,
And to behold, the alderfairest,
Who so had looked her with your eyes?
With mine, nay all that her seyen,
Said and swore it was so,
And though they ne had, I would tho
Have loved best my lady free,
Though I had had all the beauty
That ever had Alcibiades,
And all the strength of Hercules,
And thereto had the worthiness
Of Alisaunder, and all the richesse
That ever was in Babiloine,
In Cartage, or in Macedoine,
Or in Rome, or in Niniue,
And thereto also hardy be,
As was Hector, so have I joy,
That Achilles slough at Troy,
And therefore was he slain also
In a temple, for both two
Were slain, he and Antilegius,
And so says Dares Fregius,
For love of Polixena,
Or ben as wise as Minerua,
I would ever, without dread
Have loved her, for I must need.
Need? Nay trewly I gabbe now,
Naught need, and I woll tellen how,
For of good will mine heart it would,
And eke to love her, I was hold,
As for the fairest and the hest,
She was as good, so have I rest,
As ever was Penelope of Greece,
Or as the noble wife Lucrece,
That was the best, he tells thus
The Roman Titus Liuius,
She was as good, and nothing like,
Though her stories be autentike,
Algate she was as true as she.
But wherefore that I tell thee,
When I first my lady sey,
I was right young, soth to sey,
And full great need I had to learn,
When mine heart would yerne,
To love it was a great emprise,
But as my wit would best suffice,
After my young childely wit,
Without dread I beset it,
To love her in my best wise
To do her wurship, and the seruise
That I could tho, by my troth
Without faining, either sloth,
For wonder feign I would her see,
So mokell it amended me,
That when I saw her amorowe,
I was warished of all my sorrow
Of all day after, till it were eve,
Me thought nothing might me grieve,
Were my sorrows never so smert,
And yet she sit so in mine heart,
That by my troth, I nold naught
For all this world, out of my thought
Leave my Lady, no trewly.
Now by my troth sir (quoth. I)
Me thinks ye have such a chance,
As shrift, without repentance.
Repentance, nay fie (quoth. he)
Should I now repent me
To love, nay certes then were I well
Worse than was Achitofell,
Or Antenor, so have I joy,
The traitor that betrayed Troy:
Or the false Ganelion,
He that purchased the traison
Of Rouland, and of Oliuere:
Nay, while I am a live here,
I nil foryet her never mo.
Now good sir, (quoth. I) tho,
Ye have well told me here before,
It is no need to rehearse it more,
How ye saw her first, and where,
But would ye tell me the manner,
To her which was your first speech,
Thereof I would you beseech,
And how she knew first your thought,
Whether ye loved her or naught,
And tells me eke, what ye have lore,
I herd you tell here before,
Ye said, thou notest what thou meanest,
I have lost more than thou weenest
What loss is that (quoth. I tho)
Nil she not love you, is it so?
Or have ye ought done amiss,
That she has left you, is it this.
For Gods love tell me all.
Before God (quoth. he) and I shall,
I say right as I have said,
On her was all my love laid,
And yet she nist it not never a dele,
Not long time, leve it well,
For by right siker, I durst naught
For all this world tell her my thought,
Ne I would have wrathed her trewly,
For wost thou why, she was lady
Of the body that had the heart.
And who so has that may not asterte.
But for to keep me fro idleness,
Trewly I did my business
To make songs, as I best could,
And often time I song hem loud,
And made songs, this a great deal,
Although I could not make so well
Songs, ne knew the art al,
As could Lamekes son, Tubal,
That found out first the art of song,
For as his brothers hamers ronge,
Upon his anvelt up and down,
Thereof he took the first sown,
But Greeks saine of Pithagoras,
That he the first finder was
Of the art, Aurora tells so,
But thereof no force of hem two,
Algates songs thus I made,
Of my feling, mine heart to glade:
And lo this was alther first,
I not where it were the werst.
Lord it makes mine heart light,
When I think on that swear wight,
That is so semely one to se
And wish to God it might so be
That she would hold me for her knight,
My Lady that is so fair and bright.
Now have I told thee, soth to say,
My first song: upon a day,
I bethought me what woe
And sorrow that I suffered tho,
For her, and yet she wist it naught,
Ne tell her durst I not my thought:
Alas thought I, I can no read,
And but I tell her, I am but deed,
And if I tell her, to say right soth
I am a dradde she woll be wroth,
Alas, what shall I then do.
In this debate I was so woe,
Me thought mine heart brast a twain,
So at the last, sothe for to saine,
I bethought me that Nature,
Ne formed never in creature,
So much beauty trewly
And bounty, without mercy.
In hope of that, may tale I told,
With sorrow, as that I never should,
For needs, and maugre mine heed
I must have told her, or be deed:
I not well how that I began,
Full yvell reherce it I can,
And eke as help me God withal,
I trow it was in the dismal,
That was the ten wounds of Egypt,
For many a word I overskipt
In my tale for pure fere,
Lest my words miss set were,
With sorrowful heart, and wounds deed,
Soft and quaking for pure dread,
And shame, and stinting in my tale,
For ferde, and mine hew al pale,
Full often I wexte both pale and reed,
Bowing to her I hing the heed,
I durst not ones look her on,
For wit, manner and all was gone,
I said: mercy and no more,
It nas no game, it sat me sore.
So at the the last soth to saine,
When that mine heart was com again,
To tell shortly all my speech,
With hole heart I began her beseech
That she would be my Lady sweet
And swore, and hertely began her hete,
Ever to be steadfast and true,
And love her always freshly new,
And never other Lady have,
And all her worship for to save,
As I best could, I swear her this,
For yours is all that ever there is,
For evermore, mine hertswete,
And never to false you, but I mete
I nyl, as wise God help me so.
And when I had my tale ydo,
God wot she acompted not a stre
Of all my tale, so thought me,
To tell shortly right as it is
Trewly her answer it was this,
I can not now well countrefete
Her words, but this was the great
Of her answer, she said nay
All utterly, alas that day,
The sorrow I suffered and the woe,
That trewly Caisandra that so
Bewailed the destruction
Of Troy, and of Illyon,
Had never soch sorrow as I tho,
I durst no more say thereto,
For pure fear, but stale away,
And thus I lived full many a day,
That trewly I had no need,
Ferther than my beds heed,
Never a day to seche sorrow,
I found it ready every morrow,
For why I loved in no gere.
So it befell another year,
I thought ones I would fond,
To do her know, and understand
My woe, and she well understood,
That I ne wilned thing but good,
And worship, and to keep her name,
Over all things, and dread her shame,
And was so busy her to serve,
And pity were that I should sterve,
Since that I wilned no harm iwis.
So when my Lady knew all this,
My Lady yave me all holly,
The noble yeft of her mercy,
Saving her worship by all ways,
Dredelesse, I mean none other ways,
And therewith she yave me a ring,
I trow it was the first thing,
But if mine heart was iwaxe
Glad, that it is no need to axe.
As help me God, I was as blive
Raised, as fro death to live,
Of all happes the alderbest,
The gladdest, and the most at rest,
For truly that sweet wight,
When I had wrong, and she the right,
She would always so goodly
Foryeve me so debonairly,
In all my youth, in all chance,
She took in her governance,
Therewith she was always so true,
Our joy was ever iliche new,
Our hertes were so even a pair,
That never nas that one contraire
To that other, for no woe
For sothe iliche they suffered tho.
O bliss, and eke o sorrow both,
Ilich they were both glad and wroth,
All was us one, without were,
And thus we lived full many a year,
So well, I can not tell how.
Sir (quoth. I) where is she now?
Now (quoth. he) and stinte anon,
Therewith he woxe as dedde as stone,
And said, alas, that I was bore,
That was the loss, that here before
I told thee that I had lorne.
Bethink thee how I said here beforne,
Thou woste full little what thou menest,
I have lost more than thou wenest.
God wot alas, right that was she.
Alas sir how, what may that be?
She is dedde: Nay, Yes by my troth,
Is that your loss, by God it is routhe.
And with that word right anon,
They began to struck forth, all was done
For that time, the Heart huntyng.
With that me thought that this king,
Began homeward for to ride,
Unto a place was there beside,
Which was from us but a lite,
A long castle with walls white,
By saint Johan, on a rich hill,
As me met, but thus it fill.
Right thus me met, as I you tell,
That in the castle there was a bell,
As it had smitte hours twelve,
Therewith I awoke my selue,
And found me lying in my bed,
And the book that I had read,
Of Alcione and Seis the king,
And of the Gods of sleping,
I found it in mine hond full even,
Thought I, this is so queint a sweven,
That I would by process of time,
Fond to put this sweven in ryme,
As I can best, and that anon,
This was my sweven, now it is done.
Explicit.
MY master, etc. When of Christ our king,
Was asked, what is troth or sothfastnesse,
He not a word answerde to that asking,
As who says, no man is all true, I guess:
And therefore, though I hight to express
The sorrow and woe that is in Marriage,
I dare not written of it no wickedness,
Lest I my self fall eft in soche dotage.
I woll not say how that it is the chain
Of Sathanas, on which he knaweth ever,
But I dare saine were he out of his pain,
As by his will he would be bounden never:
But thilke doted fool, that eft has lever
Ichayned be, than out of prison crepe,
God let him never fro his woe discever,
Ne no man him bewail, though he weep.
But yet lest thou do worse, take a wife,
* Bet is to wedde, than brenne in worse wise,
But thou shall have sorrow on thy flesh thy life,
And ben thy wives thrale, as sain these wise,
And if that holy writ may not suffice,
Experience shall thee teach, so may hap,
* Take the way lever to be taken in Frise,
Than eft to fall of wedding in the trappe.
This little writ, Proverbs or figures,
I send you, take keep of it I read,
Unwise is he, that can no well endure,
* If thou be siker, put thee not in dread,
The wife of Bathe, I pray you that ye read
Of this matter that we have on hand,
God grant you your life freely to lead
In fredome, for foul is to be bond.
Explicit.
The Assembly of Fowls.
All Fowls are gathered before Nature on S. Valentines day, to chose their
makes. A Formell Eagle, being beloved of three Tercels, requires a years
respite to make her choice: upon this trial, Qui bien aim tard oublie. He that
loves well, is slow to forget.
THe Life so short, the craft so long to learn,
Thassay so hard, so sharpy ye conquering,
The dreadful joy, always y^ flit so yerne,
All this mean I by love yt my feeling
Astonieth with his wonderful werkyng*
So sore I wis, that when I on him think,
Naught wete I well, whether I flete or sink.
For all be that I know not love in deed,
Ne wot how that he quiteth folk her hire,
Yet happeth me full often in books read
Of his miracles, and of his cruel ire,
There read I well, he woll be lord and sire:
I dare not say his strokes be sore,
But God save soch a lord, I can no more.
Of usage, what for lust and what for lore,
On books read I of, as I you told,
But wherefore speak I all this? naught yore
Agon, it happed me to behold
Upon a book was iwritten with letters old,
And there upon a certain thing to learn,
The long day, full fast I radde and yerne.
* For out of the old fields, as men says,
Comes all this new corn fro year to year
And out of old books, in good faith,
Comes all this new science that men lere,
But now to purpose, as of this mattere,
To read forth it began me so delight,
That all that day, me thought it but a lite.
This book of which I make mention,
Entitled was right thus, as I shall tell,
Tullius, of the dream of Scipion:
Chapiters seven^t had, of heaven and hell,
And earth, and souls that therein dwell,
Of which as shortly as I can it treat,
Of his sentence I woll you saine the great.
First tells it, when Scipion was come
In Affricke, how he meteth Massinisse,
That him for joy, in arms has inome,
Then tells he her speech and all the bliss,
That was betwixt hem til the day began miss,
And how his auncester Affrikan so dear,
Began in his sleep that night til him appear.
Then tells it, that from a sterrie place,
How Affrikan has him Cartage showed,
And warned him before of all his grace,
And said him what man lered either leude,
That loves common profit well itheude,
He should into a blisfull place wend,
There as the joy is without any end.
Then asked he, if folk that here been deed
Have life, and dwelling in another place?
And Affrikan said ye, without any dread,
And how our present lives space,
Meant but a manner death, with way we trace,
And rightful folk, shull gone after they die
To heaven, and showed him the Galaxie.
Then showed he him, ye little yerth yt here is
To regard of the heavens quantite,
And after showed he him the nine speris,
And after that the melody heard he,
That comes of thilke speres thrice three,
That wells of Music been, and melody
In this world here, and cause of armonie.
Then said he him, sens earth was so lite,
And full of tourment, and of hard grace,
That he ne should him in this world delight:
Then told he him, in certain years space,
That every sterre should come into his place,
There it was first, and all should out of mind,
That in this world is done of all mankind.
Then prayed him Scipion, to tell him all
The way to come into that heaven bliss,
And he said: First know thy self immortal,
And look aie busely, that thou werche and wisse,
To common profit, and thou shall not miss
To come swiftly unto that place dear,
That full of bliss is, and of souls clear.
And breakers of the law, soth to saine,
And likerous folk, after that they been deed,
Shall whirle about the world, always in pain
Till many a world be passed out of dread,
And then foryeven all her wicked deed,
Then shullen they come to yt blisfull place,
To which to comen, God send thee grace.
The day began failen, and the dark night,
That reveth beasts from her business,
Beraft me my book for lack of light,
And to my bed I began me for to dress,
Fulfilled of thought and busy heaviness,
For both I had thing, which that I nold,
And eke I ne had that thing that I would.
But finally my spirit at last,
For weary of my labor all that day,
Took rest, that made me to sleep fast,
And in my sleep I met, as that I lay,
How Affrikan, right in the self array
That Scipion him saw, before that tide
Was come, and stood right at my beds side.
The weary hunter sleping in his bed,
The wood again his mind goes anon,
The Judge dremeth, how his plees be spedde,
The Carter dremeth, how his carts gone,
The rich of gold, yt knight fight with his fone,
The sick met he drinks of the tonne,
The lover met he has his lady won.
Can I not saine, if that the cause were,
For I had radde of Affrikan beforne,
That made me to mete that he stood there,
But thus said he: thou have thee so well borne
In looking of mine old book all to torn,
Of which Macrobie raught not a lite,
That some dele of thy labor would I quite.
Citherea, thou blisfull Lady sweet,
That with thy fire brond, dauntest when the lest
That made me this sweven for to mete,
Be thou my help in this, for thou may best,
As wisely as I seigh the North Northwest,
When I began my sweven for to write,
So yeve me might to rhyme it and endite.
This aforesaid Affrikan me hent anon,
And forthwith him to a gate brought,
Right of a Park, walled with grene stone,
And over ye gate, with letters large iwrought,
There were verse ywritten as me thought
On either half, of full great difference,
Of which I shall you say y^ plain sentence:
Through me men gone into ye blisful place
Of hearts heal and dedly wounds cure,
Through me men gone into ye well of grace,
There grene and lusty May shall ever endure,
This is the way to all good adventure,
Be glad thou reader, and thy sorrow off cast,
All open am I, pass in and speed thee fast.
Through me men gone (then spoke the other side
Unto the mortal strokes of the spear,
Of which disdain and danger is the gide,
There never tree shall fruit ne leaves bear,
This streme you ledeth to ye sorrowful were,
There as the fish in prison is all dry,
The eschewing is only the remedy.
These verses of gold and Asure ywritten wear,
Of which I began astonished to behold,
For with that one increased all my fear,
And with that other began my heart to bold,
That one me het, that other did me cold,
No wit had I for error for to chese,
To enter or fly, or me to save or lose.
Right as between Adamants two,
Of even weight, a piece of iron set,
Ne has no might to move to ne fro,
For what that one may hale that other let,
So fared I, that I nist where me was bet
To enter or leave, till Affrikan my gide,
Me hent and shove in at the gates wide.
And said, it stands written in thy face,
Thine error, though thou tell it not me,
But dread thee not to come into this place,
For this writing is nothing meant by thee,
Ne by none, but he Loves servaunt be,
For thou of Love have lost thy taste I guess,
As sick man has, of sweet and bitterness.
But natheles, although thou be dull,
That thou can not do, yet may thou see,
For many a man that may not stand a pull,
Yet likes it him at the wrestlyng for to be,
And demeth yet, whether he do bet, or he,
And if thou had connyng for tendite,
I shall thee show matter of to write.
And with yt my hand in his he took anon,
Of which I comfort caught, and went in fast,
But Lord so I was glad, and well begone,
For over all, where I mine iyen cast,
Were trees clad with leaves, yt aie shall last
Each in his kind, with color fresh and grene,
As Emeraude, that joy it was to seen.
The bilder Oak, and eke the hardy Asshe,
The pillar Elm, the coffer unto caraine,
The Box pipe tree, Holme to whips lasshe,
The sailing Fur, y^ Cipres death to plain,
The shooter Ewe, the Aspe for shaftes plain,
The Olive of peace, and eke the dronken vine,
The victor Palm, the Laurer to divine.
A gardein saw I, full of blosomed bowis,
Upon a River, in a grene Mede,
There as sweetness evermore enough is,
With flowers white, blewe, yelowe, and red,
And cold Well streams, nothing deed,
That swommen full of small fishes light,
With finnes read, and scales silver bright.
On every bough the birds heard I sing,
With voice of Angel, in her armonie,
That busied hem, her birds forth to bring,
The little pretty Conies to her play began hie,
And further all about I began epsy,
The dredful Roe, ye Buck, the Heart, and Hind,
Squirrels, and beasts small, of gentle kind.
Of instruments of stringes in accord,
Heard I so play, a ravishing swetnesse,
That God, that maker is of all and Lord,
Ne heard never better, as I guess,
Therewith a wind, unneth it might be less,
Made in the leaves grene a noise soft,
Accordant to the fowls song on loft.
The air of the place so attempre was,
That never was there greuance of hot ne cold
There was eke every wholesome spice and gras,
Ne no man may there wax sick ne old,
Yet was there more joy a thousand fold,
Than I can tell or ever could or might,
There is ever clear day, and never night.
Under a tree, beside a well I sey
Cupide our Lord, his arrows forge and file,
And at his feet his bow already lay,
And well his daughter tempred all the while
The heddes in the well, with her wile
She couched hem after, as they should serve
Some to slay, and some to wound and carve.
Tho was I ware of pleasance anon right,
And of array, lust, beauty, and courtesy,
And of the craft, that can has the might
To done by force, a wight to done folly:
Disfigured was she, I will not lie,
And by himself, under an Oak I guess,
Saw I delight, that stood with gentleness.
Then saw I beauty, with a nice attire,
And youth, full of game and jolitee,
Fool hardiness, flattery, and desire,
Messagerie, mede, and other three,
Her names shall not here be told for me,
And upon pillars great of Jasper long,
I saw a temple of Brass ifounded strong.
And about the temple daunced always
Women inow, of which some there were
Fair of hemself, and some of hem were gay,
In kirtils all disheueled went they there,
That was their office ever, fro year to year,
And on the temple, saw I white and fair,
Of Doves sitting many a thousand pair.
And before the temple door full soberly,
Dame peace sat, a curtain in her hand,
And her beside wonder discretly,
Dame Patience, sitting there I fond,
With face pale, upon an hill of sonde,
And alther next, within and without,
Behest and Art, and of her folk a rout.
Within the temple, of sighs hot as fire,
I heard a swough, that began about ren,
Which sighs were engendered with desire,
That made every heart for to bren
Of new flambe, and well espied I then,
That all the cause of sorrows, that they dry,
Come of the bitter Goddess Ialousie.
The God Priapus, saw I as I went
Within the temple, in souerain place stond,
In soch array, as when the Ass him shent
With cry by night, and with scepter in hond,
Full busily men began assay and fond,
Upon his hedde to set of sondrie hew,
Garlandes full of fresh flowers new.
And in a privy corner, in disport
Found I Venus, and her porter Richesse,
That was full noble, and hauten of her port,
Dark was that place, but after lightness
I saw a lite, uneaths it might be less,
And on a bed of gold she lay to rest,
Till that the hot Sun began to West.
Her gilte heeres, with a gold threde
I bound were, vntressed as she lay,
And naked from the breast unto the head,
Men might her see, and sothly for to say,
The remnaunt, covered well to my pay,
Right with a little kerchefe of Valence,
There was no thicker clothe of defense.
The place gave a thousand savors soote,
And Bacchus God of Wine sat her beside,
And Ceres next, that does of hunger boot,
And as I said, a mids lay Cupide,
To whom on knees, the young folks cride
To be their help, but thus I let her lie,
And farther in the temple I began epsy.
That in dispite of Diane the chaste,
Full many a bow ibroke hing on the wall,
Of maidens, soch as gone her times waste
In her service: and painted over all,
Of many a story, of which I touch shall
A few, as of Calixte, and Athalant,
And many a maid, of which ye name I want.
Semyramus, Candace, and Hercules,
Biblis, Dido, Tis^e, and Piramus,
Tristram, I soude, Paris, and Achilles,
Helaine, Cleopatre, and Troilus,
Sylla, and eke the mother of Romulus,
All these were painted on that other side,
And all her love, and in what plite they did.
When I was commen again into the place
That I of spoke, that was so soote and grene,
Forth walked I tho, my seluen to solace,
Tho was I ware, where there sat a Queen,
That as of light, the Summer sun shene
Passes the Sterre, right so over measure,
She fairer was than any creature.
And in a laund, upon an hill of flowers,
Was set this noble Goddess Nature,
Of branches were her halles and her boures
I wrought, after her craft and her measure,
Ne there nas foul, yt comes of engendure,
That there ne were pressed, in her presence,
To take her dome, and give her audience.
For this was on saint Valentines day,
When every foul comes to chese her make,
Of every kind, that men think may,
And that so huge a noise began they make,
That earth, sea, and tree, and every lake,
So full was, that uneath there was space
For me to stand, to full was all the place.
And right as Alaine, in the plaint of kind,
Deuiseth Nature, of such araie and face,
In soche array, men might her there find.
This noble Empress full of all grace,
Bad every foul take her own place,
As they were wont always, fro year to year,
On saint Valentines day, standen there.
That is to say, the fowls of rauine
Were highest set, and then the fowls small,
That eaten, as that Nature would incline,
As worm or thing, of which I tell no tale,
But water foul sat lowest in the dale,
And fowls that lives by seed sat on y^ grene,
And that so many, that wonder was to seen.
There might men the royal Egle find,
That with his sharp look perseth the son,
And other Egles of a lower kind,
Of which that clerks well deuisen con,
There was the tyrant with his feathers don,
And grene, I mean the goshauke yt does pine
To birds, for his outrageous rauine.
The gentle faucon, yt with his fete distreineth
The kings hand, the hardy Sperhauke eke,
The Quales foe, the Merlion that peineth
Himself full often the Lark for to seek,
There was the Dove, with her iyen meke,
The jelous Swan, against his death yt sings,
The Oul eke, that of death the bode brings.
The Crane, ye Geant, with his tromps soune,
The theif the Chough, and ye chattring Pie,
The scorning Iaie, the Eles foe the Heroune,
The false Lapwing, full of treachery,
The Stare, that the counsel can bewrie,
The tame Ruddocke, and the coward Kite,
The Cock, that horiloge is of thropes lite.
The Sparow Venus son, and the Nightingale
That cleapeth forth the fresh leaves new,
The Swalow, murdrer of the Bees small,
That maken honey of flowers fresh of hew,
The wedded Turtell, with his heart true,
The Pecocke, with his angel feathers bright,
The Fesaunt, scorner of the Cock by night.
The waker Gose, the Cuckowe ever unkind,
The Popingeie, full of delicasie,
The Drake, stroier of his own kind,
The Stroke, wreker of aduoutrie,
The hot Cormeraunt, full of glotonie,
The Rauin and the Crow, with her voice of care,
The Trostell old, and the Frostie feldfare.
What should I say, of fouls of every kind,
That in this world have feathers and stature,
Men might in that place assembled find,
Before that noble Goddess of Nature,
And each of them did his busy cure,
Benignely to chese, or for to take
By her accord, his formell or his make.
But to the poinct, Nature held on her hond,
A formell Egle, of shape the gentillest,
That ever she among her works fond,
The most benign, and eke the goodliest,
In her was every virtue, at his rest
So farforth, that Nature her self had bliss,
To look on her, and often her beeke to kiss.
Nature, the vicare of the almighty Lord,
That hot, cold, heuie, light, moist, and dry,
Has knit, by even number of accord,
In easy voice, began to speak and say,
Fowls take heed of my sentence I pray,
And for your own ease, in fordring of your need,
As fast as I may speak, I will me speed.
Ye know well, how on S. Valentines day,
By my statute, and through my governance,
Ye do chese your makes, and after fly away
With hem, as I prick you with pleasaunce,
But nathelesse, as by rightful ordinance,
May I not let, for all this world to win,
But he that most worthiest is, shall begin.
The tercell Egle, as ye know full well,
The foul royal, above you all in degree,
The wise and worthy, the secret true as stele,
The which I have formed, as ye may see,
In every part, as it best likes me,
It needs not his shape you to devise,
He shall first chese, and speaken in his gise.
And after him, by order shall ye chese,
After your kind, euerich as you likes,
And as your hap is, shall ye win or lose,
But which of you, that love most entriketh,
God send him her, that sorest for him siketh:
And therewithal, the Tercell began she call,
And said, my son the choice is to thee fall.
But nathelesse, in this condition
Must be the choice, of eueriche that is here,
That she agree to his election,
Who so he be, that should been her fere,
This is our usage always, fro year to year,
And who so may at this time have his grace,
Inblisfull time he came into this place.
With head inclined, and with full humble chere,
This roial Tercell spoke, and tarried naught,
Unto my sovereign Lady, and not my fere,
I chose and chese, with will, heart, and thought,
The Formell on your hand, so well iwrought,
Whose I am all, and ever will her serve,
Do what her lust, to do me live or sterue.
Besechyng her of mercy, and of grace,
As she that is my Lady souerain,
Or let me die here present in this place,
For certes long may I not live in pain,
For in my heart is coruen every vain,
Having regard only to my troth,
My dear heart, have on my woe some routh.
And if I be found to her untrue,
Disobeisaunt, or wilful negligent,
Auauntour, or in process love a new,
I pray to you this be my judgment,
That with these fowls I be all to rent,
That ilke day that she me ever find
To her untrue, or in my gilte unkind.
And since that none loves her so well as I,
Although she never of love me beher,
Then ought she be mine through her mercy,
For other bond can I none on her knet:
For well nor woe never shall I let
To serve her, how far so that she wend,
Say what you list my tale is at an end.
Right as the fresh red Rose new,
Against the Summer Sun colored is,
Right so for shame all waxen began the hew
Of this Formell, when she heard all this,
Neither she answerde well, ne said amiss,
So sore abashed was she, till that Nature
Said, daughter dread you not, I you assure.
Another Tercell Egle spoke anon,
Of lower kind, and said that should not be,
I love her better than ye do, by saint John,
Or at the least I love her as well as ye,
And longer have served her in my degree,
And if she should have loved for long loving,
To me alone had be the guerdoning.
I dare eke say, if she me find false,
Unkind, jangler, or rebel in any wise,
Or jelous, do me hang by the half,
And but I bear me in her seruise
As well as my wit can me suffice,
Fro poinct to poinct, her honor for to save,
Take she my life, and all the good I have.
The third Tercell Egle answerde tho,
Now sirs, ye see the little leaser here,
For every foul cries out to be ago
Forth with his make, or with his Lady dear*
And eke nature her self ne will not here
For tarying her, not half that I would sey,
And but I speak, I must for sorrow dey.
Of long service auaunt I me nothing,
But as possible is me to die to day,
For woe, as he that has be sanguishing
This twenty winter, and well it happen may,
A man may serve better, and more to pay,
In half a year, although it were no more,
Than some man does, that has served full yore.
I ne say not this by me, for I ne can
Do no service that may my lady please,
But I dare say, I am her trewest man,
As to my dome, and fainest would her please:
At short words, till that death me cease,
I will be hers, whether I wake or wink,
And true in all that heart may bethink.
Of al my life since that day I was borne,
So gentle plee in love or other thing,
Ne herd never no man me beforne,
Who so that had leiser and conning,
For to rehearse their chere, and their speaking,
And from the morrow began this spech last,
Till downward went the sun wonder fast.
The noise of fowls for to be deliverd,
So loud rang, Have don and let us wend,
That well weend I, y^ wood had al to shiverd:
Come off they cried, alas, ye will us shend,
When shall your cursed pleding have an end,
* How should a Judge either party leave,
For ye or nay, without any preue?
The goos, the duck, and the cuckoo also,
Socried keke, keke, cuckoo, queke queke hie,
Through mine ears the noise went tho.
The goos said then all this nys worth a fly,
But I can shape hereof a remedy,
And will say my verdite, fair and swithe,
For water foul, whosoever be wroth or blithe.
And I for worm foul, said the fool cuckoo now,
For I will of mine own authorite,
For common speed, take on me the charge
For to deliver us, it is great charity.
Ye may abide a while, yet perde,
(Quoth. the turtel) if it be your will,
A wight may speak, it were as good be still.
I am a sede foul, one the unworthiest,
That wore I well, and leest of coming,
But better is that a wights tongue rest,
Than entremete him of such doing
Of which he neither read can nor sing,
And who so it does, full foul himself acloyeth,
* For office vncommitted, often annoyeth.
Nature, which that always had an ear,
To murmr of the lewdenesse behind,
With facond voice said, hold your tongues there,
And I shall soon, I hope, a counsel find,
You for to deliver, and fro this noise unbind:
I charge of every flock ye shall one call,
To say the verdite of you fowls all.
Assented were to this conclusion,
The birds all: and fowls of ravine
Have chosen first by plain election,
The Tercelet, of the faucon to define
All her sencence, and as him lust to termine,
And to Nature him they did present,
And she accepts him with glad enrent.
The tercelet said then in this manner,
Full hard it were to preve it by reason,
Who loves best this gentle Formell here,
For everich has such replicatioun,
That by skils may none be brought adoun,
I cannot see that arguments avail,
Then seems it there must be battasle.
All ready (quoth. these Eagle tercels tho:)
Nay sirs (quoth. he) if that I durst it say,
Ye do me wrong, my tale is not ydo:
For sirs, takes not a grief I pray,
It may not be as ye would, in this way,
Ours is the voice, y^ have the charge in hand,
And to the Judges dome ye must stand.
And therefore peace I say, as to my wit,
Me would think, how that the worthiest
Of knighthood, and lengest had used it,
Most of estate, of blood the gentillest,
Were fitting for her, if that her lest,
And of these three, she wot her self I trow
Which that he be, for it is light to know.
The water fowls have their heads laid
Togider, and of short avisement,
When everiche had his verdite said,
They said soothly all by one assent,
How that the goos, with the facond gent,
That so desires to pronounce our need,
Shall tell her tale, and praid to God her speed.
And for these water fowls tho began
The Goose to speak, and in her cakeling,
She said, peace now, take keep every man,
And harken which a reason I shall forth bring,
My wit is sharp, I love no tarrying,
I say I read him, tho he were my brother,
* But she will love him, let him love another.
Lo here a parfite reason of a goose
(Quoth. the sperhauke) never mote she thee,
Lo such a thing it is to have a tongue lose:
Now parde fool, yet were it better for thee
Have held thy peace, than showed thy nicete,
It lies not in his wit, nor in his will,
* But sooth is said, a fool cannot be still.
The laughter arose of gentill fowls all,
And right anon the seed fowls chosen had
The turtle true, and began her to hem call,
And prayed her to say the sooth sad
Of this matter, and asked what she rad?
And she answered, that plainly her intent
She would show, and soothly what she meant.
Nay, God forbede a lover should change,
The Turtle said (and wext for shame all red)
Though that his lady evermore be strange,
Yet let him serve her always, till he be deed,
Forsooth, I praise not the gooses reed,
For tho she died, I would none other make,
I will be hers, till that the death me take.
Well yhourded (quoth. the duck) by my hat,
That men should love always causeless,
Who can a reason find, or wit in that,
Daunceth he merry that is mirthlesse,
Who should recke of that is retchlesse,
Ye queke yet, quoth. the duck, full well and fair,
There be mo sterres in the sky than a pair.
Now fie churl, quoth. the gentle Tercelet,
Out of the dunghill came that word aright,
Thou can not see which thing is well beset,
Thou farest by love as Dwles do by light,
The day hem blinds, full well they see by night,
Thy kind is of so low wretchedness,
That what love is, thou can not se nor gess.
Tho began y^ cuckoo put him forth in preace,
For foul that eats worm, and said bliue:
So I, quoth. he, may have my make in peace,
I retch not how long that ye strive,
Let each of hem be soleine all her live,
This is my read, sens they may not accord,
This short sesson needs not record.
Ye, have the glutton filde his paunch,
Then are we well, said the Emerlon,
Thou murdrer of y^ heysugge on the branch
That brought thee forth, thou ruful glutton,
Live thou solein, worms corruption,
For no force is of lack of thy nature,
Go, lewd be thou while the world may dure.
Now peace, quoth. Nature, I command here,
For I have heard all your opinion,
And in effect yet be we never the nere,
But finally, this is my conclusion,
That she her self shall have her election
Of whom her list, who so be wroth or blithe,
Him that she cheseth, he shall her have as swithe.
For fith it may not here discussed be
Who loves her best, as said the Tercelet,
Then woll I done this favor to her, that she
Shall have right him, on whom her heart is set,
And he her, y^ his heart has on her knet,
This judge I nature, for I may not lie
To none estate, I have none other eye.
But as for counsel, for to choose a make,
If I were reason, then would I
Counsel you, the royal Tercell take,
As said the Tercelet, full skilfully,
As for the gentillest, and most worthy,
Which I have wroght so well to my plesaunce
That to you it ought ben a suffisaunce.
With dredeful voice y^ Formel her answered,
My rightful lady, goddess of Nature,
Sooth is, that I am ever under your yerd,
As is everich other creature,
And must be yours while my life may dure,
And therefore grant me my first boon,
And mine intent, you woll I say right soon.
I grant it you, quoth. she, and right anon
This formel Eagle spoke in this degree:
Almighty queen, unto this year be done
I ask respite for to avisen me,
And after that to have my choice all free,
This all and some, that I would speak and sey,
Ye get no more, although ye do me dey.
I woll not seruen Venus ne Cupide,
Forsooth as yet, by no manner way.
Now sens it may none other ways betide
(Quoth. Nature) here is no more to say,
Then would I that these fowls were away,
Each with his make, for tarying longer here,
And said hem thus, as ye shall after here.
To you speak I, ye Tercelets (quoth. Nature)
Beth of good heart, and serves all three,
A year is not so long to endure,
And each of you pain him in his degree,
For to do well, for God wot quit is she
Fro you this year, what after fo befall,
This entremes is dressed fro you all.
And when this werk brought was to an end,
To every foul Nature yave his make,
By even accord, and on her way they wend,
And lord the bliss and joy that they make,
For each of hem began other in his wings take,
And with her necks each began other wind,
Thanking always the noble goddess of kind.
But first were chosen fowls for to sing,
As year by year was always her vsaunce,
To sing a roundel at her departing,
To do Nature honor and pleasaunce,
The note I trow maked was in France,
The words were such, as ye may here find,
The next verse, as I now have in mind.
Qui bien aim tard oublye.
Now welcome summer, with thy suns soft,
That have this winter weathers overshake,
Saint Valentine, thou art full high on loft,
Which driuest away the long nights blake,
Thus singen small fowls for thy sake,
Well have they cause for to gladen often,
Sens each of hem recovered has his make,
Full blisful may they sing when they awake.
And with the shouting when her song was do,
That the fowls made at her flight away,
I woke, and other books took me to
To read upon, and yet I read always,
I hope ywis to read so some day,
That I shall mete something for to fare
The bet, and thus to read I nill not spare.
Explicit.
The Flower of Courtesy.
Made by John Lidgate.
In this Book is set forth the rare virtues of a certain Lady. Made by John
Lidgate, as some think, in the behalf of some Gentlewoman in the Court.

IN Feuerier, when the frosty Moon
Was horned, full of Phoebus fiery light,
And y^ she began to reyse her streams soon,
Saint Valentine, upon the blisful night
Of duty, when glad is every wight,
And fowls chese, to void her old sorrow,
Eueriche his make upon the next morrow.
The same time I heard a lark sing
Full lustely, again the morrow gray,
Awake ye lovers out of your slumbring
This glad morrow, in all the haste ye may,
Some observaunce does unto this day,
Your choice again of heart to renew
In confirming for ever to be true.
And ye that be of chosing at your large
This lusty day, by custom of nature,
Take upon you the blisful holy charge,
To serve love, while your life may dure,
With heart, body, and all your busy cure,
For evermore, as Venus and Cipride
For you disposes, and the god Cupide.
For joy owe we plainly to obey
Unto this lords mighty ordinance,
And merciless rather for to dey,
Than ever in you be founden variaunce,
And though your life be meddled with greuaunce
And at your heart closet be your wound,
Bethe always one, there as ye are bound.
That when I had heard and listed long
With devout heart the lusty melody
Of this heavenly comfortable song,
So agreeable, as by ermonie,
I rose anon, and fast began me hie
Toward a grove, and the way take,
Fowls to seen, euerich choose his make.
And yet I was full thrusty in languishing,
Mine ague was so fervent in his hete,
When Aurora for drery complaining
Can distill her crystal tears wete
Upon the soil, with silver dew so sweet,
For she durst for shame not appear
Under the light of Phoebus beams clear.
And so for anguish of my pains kene,
And for constraint of my sighs sore,
I set me down under a laurer grene
Full pitously, and always more and more,
As I beheld into the holts hoar,
I began complain mine inward deadly smert,
That aye so sore crampish at mine heart.
And while that I in my drery pain
Sat, and beheld about on every tree,
The fowls sit always twain and twain,
Then thought I thus, alas what may this be,
That every foul has his liberte
Freely to choose after his desire
Eueriche his make, thus fro year to year.
The sely Wren, the Tytemose also,
The little Redbrest have free election
To flyen yferre, and together go
Where as hem list, about enuiron,
As they of kind have inclination,
And as Nature, empress and guide
Of every thing, list to provide.
But man alone, alas the hard stound,
Full cruelly, by kinds of ordinance
Constrained is, and by statute bound
And debarred from all such pleasaunce.
What meneth this, what is this purveiaunce
Of God above, again all right of kind,
Without cause so narrow man to bind.
Thus may I seen and plain, alas
My woeful hour, and my disauenture,
That dulfully stond in the same caas,
So far behind from all health and cure,
My wound abides like a sursanure,
For me fortune so felly list dispose,
My harm is hid, that I dare not disclose.
For I my heart have set in such a place,
Where I am never likely for to speed,
So far I am hindered from her grace,
That save danger, I have none other mede:
And thus alas, I not who shall me read,
Ne for mine help shape remedy,
For male bouche, and for false envy.
The which twain aye s^ondeth in my wey
Maliciously, and false suspection
Is very cause also that I dey,
Ginning and root of my destruction,
So that I feel in conclusion,
With her trains that they woll me shend,
Of my labor that death more make an end.
Yet or I die, with heart, will, and thought,
To god of love this auow I make,
As I best can, how dear that it be bought,
Where so it be that I sleep or wake,
While Boreas does the leaves shake,
As I have hight, plainly till I sterue,
For well or woe, that I shall her serve.
And for her sake now this holy time,
Saint Valentine, somewhat shall I write,
Although so be that I can not rhyme,
Nor curiously by no craft endite,
Yet lever I have, that she put the wite
In vnconning, than in negligence,
Whatever I say of her excellence.
Whatever I say is of dutee
In soothfastnesse, and no presumption,
This I ensure to you that shall it see,
That it is all under correction,
What I rehearse in commendation
Of her, that I shall to you as blive,
So as I can, her virtues here discrive.
Right by example, as the summer sun
Passes the sterre, with his beams shene,
And Lucifer among the skies dunne
A morrow shows, to void nights tene,
So verily, withouten any wene,
My Lady passes, who so takes head,
All tho alive, to speak of womanhede,
And as the Ruby has the sovereignty
Of rich stones, and the regaly,
And the rose of sweetness and beauty
Of fresh flowers, without any lie,
Right so in sooth, with her goodly eye,
She passes all in bounty and fairness,
Of manner eke, and of gentleness.
For she is both the fairest and the best,
To reken all, in very soothfastnesse,
For every virtue is in her at rest:
And furthermore, to speak of steadfastness,
She is the root, and of seemelinesse
The very mirror, and of governaunce,
To all example, withouten variaunce.
Of port benign, and wonder glad of there,
Having evermore her true advertence
Always to reason, so that her desire
Is brideled aye by wit and providence,
Thereto of wit, and of high prudence,
She is the well, aye devoid of pride,
That unto virtue her selven is the guide.
And over this, in her dalliaunce,
Lowly she is, discreet, and wise,
And goodly glad, by attemperaunce,
That every wight, of high and low degree,
Are glad in heart with her for to be,
So that shortly, if I shall not lie,
She named is, the Flower of Courtesy.
And there to speak of feminity,
The least mannish in comparison,
Goodly abashed, having aye pity
Of hem that been in tribulation,
For she alone is consolation
To all that arne in mischief and in need,
To comfort hem of her womanhede.
And aye in virtue is her busy charge,
Sad and demure, and but of words few,
Dredefull also of rongues that been large,
Eschowing aye hem, that listen to hew
Above her head, her words for to show,
Dishonestly to speak of any wight
She deadly hates, of hem to have a sight.
The heart of whom so honest is ahd clean,
And her intent so faithful and entere,
That she ne may for all the world sustene,
To suffer her ears any word to here
Of friend nor foe, neither far ne nere,
Amiss resowning y^ hinder should his name,
And if she do, she wexeth red for shame.
So truly in meaning she is set
Without changing, or any doubleness,
For bounty and beauty are together knet
In her person, under faithfulness.
For void she is of newfanglenesse,
In heart aye one, for ever to persever
There she is set, and never to dissever.
I am too rude, her virtues everychone
Cunningly to discrive and write,
For well ye wore color have I none,
Like her discretion, craftily to endite,
For what I say, all it is too lite,
Wherefore to you, thus I me excuse,
That I acquainted am not with no muse.
By Rhetoric my style to govern,
In her preise and commendation,
I am too blind so highly to discern,
Of her goodness to make description
Save thus I say in conclusion,
If that I shall shortly commend,
In her is naught that nature can amend.
For good she is, like to Polixene,
And in fairness to the queen Helaine,
Steadfast of heart, as was Dorigene,
And wifely troth, if I shall nar feign,
In constaunce eke and faith she may attain
To Cleopatra, and thereto as setrone,
As was of Troy the white Antigone.
As Hester meke, like Judith of prudence,
Kind as Alceste, or Marcia Catoun,
And to Grisilde like in patience,
And Ariadne of discretioun,
And to Lucrece, that was of Rome town,
She may be likened as for honest,
And for her faith unto Penelope,
To fair Phillis, and to Hipsiphile,
For innocence, and for womanhede,
For seemlinesse unto Canace,
And over this, to speak of goodlyhede,
She passes all that I can of read,
For word and deed, that she naught ne fall,
Accord in virtue, and her works all.
For though that Dido, with wit sage,
Was in her time steadfast to Enee,
Of hastiness yet she did outrage,
And so for Jason did also Medee,
But my Lady is so avisee,
That bounty and beauty both in her demaine,
She makes bounty always sovereign.
This is too mean, bounty goth before,
Lad by prudence, and has the soverainte,
And beauty follows, ruled by her sore,
That she ne fend her in no degree,
So that in one, this goodly fresh free
Surmounting all, withouten any were,
Is good and fair in one person yfere.
And though that I for very ignorance
Ne may discrive her virtues by and by,
Yet on this day for a remembrance,
Only supported under her mercy,
With quaking hond I shall full humbly
To her highness, my rudeness for to quite,
A little ballade here beneath endite.
Ever as I can surprise in mine heart
Always with fear, betwixt dread and shame,
Least out of lose any word astert
In this mytre, to make it seem lame,
Chaucer is dead, that had such a name
Of fair making, that without wene
Fairest in our tongue, as the Laurer grene.
We may assay for to countrefete
His gay style, but it woll not be,
The well is dry, with the licour sweet,
Both of Clye, and of Caliope,
And first of all I woll excuse me
To her that is ground of goodlihede,
And thus I say until her womanhede.
Ballade simple.
WIth all my might, and my bestentent,
With all y^ faith yt mighty God of kind
Me yave, since he me soul and knowing sent,
I chese, and to this bond ever I me bind
To love you best, while I have life and mind,
Thus heard I fowls in the dawning,
Upon the day of saint Valentine sing.
Yet chese I at ye beginning, in this intent
To love you, though I no mercy find,
And if you list I died, I would assent,
As ever twinne I quick of this line,
Suffiseth me to seen your feathers ynde,
Thus heard I fowls in the morning
Upon the day of saint Valentine sing.
And over this, mine hearts lust to bent
In honor only of the wood bind,
Holly I yeve, never to repent,
In joy or woe, where so that I wind,
Tofore Cupide, with his eyes blind,
The fowls all when Titan did spring,
With devout heart me thought I heard sing.
Lenuoye.
Princess of beauty, to you I represent
This simyle dity, rude as in making,
Of heart and will, faithful in mine intent,
Like as this day fowls heard I sing.
Here ends the Flower of Courtesy, and hereafter follows, How Pity is
dead, and buried in a gentle heart.
PIty that I have sought so yore ago,
With heart sore, and full of busy pain,
That in this world was never wight so woe
Without death, and if I shall not feign,
My purpose was, pity to complain
Upon the cruelty and tyranny
Of love, that for my troth does me dye.
And that I by length of certain years
Had ever in one sought a time to speak,
To Pity ran I, all bispreint with tears,
To prayen her on Cruelty me awreake,
But or I might with any word out break,
Or tell her any of my pains smert,
I found her dead, and buried in an heart.
Adowne I fell, when I saw the hearse,
Dead as a stone, while that y^ swoone me last,
But up I rose with color full diverse,
And pitously on her mine eyes I cast,
And nearer the corse I began preasen fast,
And for the soul I shope me for to pray,
I was but lorne, there was no more to say.
Thus am I slain, since that Pity is dead,
Alas that day that ever it should fall,
What manner man dare now hold up his head
To whom shall now any sorrowful heart call,
Now Cruelty has cast to slay us all
In idle hope, folk redelesse of pain,
Since she is dead, to whom shall we complain.
But yet increases me this wonder new,
That no wight wore that she is dead but I,
So many men as in her time her knew,
And yet she died so suddenly,
For I have sought her ever full busily,
Since I had first wit or mind,
But she was dead, ere I coud her find.
About her hearse there slooden lustely,
Withouten any mo, as thought me,
Bounty, perfitely well armed and richely,
And fresh Beauty, Lust, and Iolite,
Assured manner, Youth and Honest,
Wisdom, Estate, Dread, and Governaunce,
Confedred both by bond and alliance.
A complaint had I written in my hond,
To have put to Pity, as a bill,
But I there all this company fond,
That rather would all my cause spill,
Than do me help: I held my plaint still,
For to those folk withouten fail,
Without pity, there may no bill avail.
Then leave all virtues, save only pity,
Keeping the corse, as ye have heard me saine,
Confedred by hond until Cruelty,
And be assented when I shall be slain,
And I have put my complaint up again,
For to my foes my bill I dare not show
The effect, which says thus in words few.
Humblest of heart, highest of reverence,
Benign flower, croune of virtues all,
Shows unto your royal excellence
Your servant, if I durst me so call,
His mortal harm, in which he is ifall,
And naught all only for his woeful fare,
But for your renome, as he shall declare.
It stands thus, y^ your contrary cruelty
Allied is against your regallie,
Under color of womanly beauty,
(For men should not know her tyranny)
With Bounty, Gentillesse, and Courtesy,
And has deprived you of your place,
That is hie beauty, appertenaunt to your grace.
For kindly, by your heritage right,
Ye be annexed ever unto bounty,
And verily ye ought to do your might
To help troth in his adversity:
Ye be also the croune of beauty,
And certes, if ye want in these twain,
The world is lore, there is no more to saine.
Eke what avails manner and gentillesse
Without you, benign creature?
Shall cruelty be your gouernesse,
Alas, what heart may it long endure?
Wherefore but ye rather take cure
To break that perilous alliance,
Ye sleen hem that been in your obeysaunce.
And further, if ye suffer this,
Your renome is fordo in a throw,
There shall no man were what pity is,
Alas, that ever your renome is fall so low,
Ye be also fro your heritage ithrow
By cruelty, that occupies your place,
And we dispaired that seeken your grace.
Have mercy on me thou Herenus, Queen,
That you have sought so tenderly and sore,
Let some stream of light on me be seen,
That love and dread you ever longer y^ more,
For soothly to saine, I bear so sore,
And though I be not conning for to plain,
For Gods love have mercy on my pain.
My pain is this, that what so I desire,
That have I not, ne nothing like thereto,
And ever sets desire mine heart on fire,
Eke on that other side where that I go,
What manner thing y^ may increase my woe,
That have I ready unsought every where,
Me lacks but my death, and then my bear.
What needs to show percell of my pain,
Since every woe, that heart may bethink,
I suffer, and yet I dare not to you plain,
For well I wore, though I wake or wink,
Ye recke not whether I flete or sink,
And nathelesse yet my troth I shall sustain
Unto my death, and that shall well be seen.
This is to saine, I will be yours ever,
Though ye me slay by cruelty your fo,
Algate my spirit shall never disceuer
Fro your service, for any pain or woe,
Since ye be yet dead, alas that it is so,
Thus for your death I may weep and plain
With heart sore, and full of busy pain.
La belle Dame sans Mercy.
M. Aleyn, Secretary to the King of France, framed this Dialogue between a
Gentleman and a Gentlewoman, who finding no mercy at her hand, dies for sorrow.
HAlse in a dream, not fully well awaked,
The golden sleep me wrapped under his wing,
Yet not for thy, I rose, and well nigh naked,
All suddenly my self remembering
Of a matter, leaving all other thing,
Which I must do withouten more delay
For hem, which I durst not disobay.
My charge was this, to translate by and by,
(All thing forgive, as part of my penance)
A book, called La bell dame sans mercy,
Which Master Aleine made of remembrance,
Chief secretary with the king of France,
And hereupon a while I stood musing,
And in my self greatly imagining,
What wise I should perform the said process,
Considering by good aduisement
My vnconning, and my great simpleness,
And ayenward, the strait commandment
Which that I had, and thus in mine intent
I was vexed and turned up and down,
And yet at last, as in conclusioun,
I cast my clothes on, and went my way,
This forsaid charge having in remembrance,
Till I came to a lusty green vallay
Full of flowers, to see a great pleasaunce,
And so boldly, with their benign suffraunce
Which read this book, touching this matere,
Thus I began, if it please you to here.
NOt long ago, riding an easy paas,
I fell in thought of joy full desperate,
With great disease and pain, so that I was
Of all lovers the most unfortunate,
Since by his dart, most cruel full of hate,
The death has take my Lady and maistresse,
And left me sole thus discomfite and mate,
Sore languishing, and in way of distress.
Then said I thus, it falls me to cesse,
Either to rhyme, or dities for to make,
And I surely to make a full promise
To laugh no more, but weep in clothes blake,
My joifull time (alas) now does it slake,
For in my self I feel no manner of ease,
Let it be written, such fortune (as I take)
Which neither me nor none other does please
If it were so, my will or mine intent
Constrained were a joyful thing to write,
My pen coud never know what it meant,
To speak thereof my tongue has no delight,
Tho with my mouth I laugh much or lite,
Mine eien should make a countenance untrue,
My heart also would have thereof dispite,
The weeping tears have so large issue.
These sick lovers I leave that to hem longs,
Which lead their life in hope of allegiance,
That is to say, to make Ballades and songs,
Every of hem as they feel their greuaunce,
For she that was my joy and my pleasaunce,
Whose soul I pray God of his mercy save,
She has my will, mine hearts ordinance,
Which sieth here within this tomb ygraue.
Fro this time forth, time is to hold my pees,
It wearieth me this matter for to trete,
Let other lovers put hemselfe in prees,
Their season is, my time is now forgete,
Fortune by strength the forcer has vnshete,
Wherein was sperde all my worldly richesse,
And all the goods which that I have get
In my best time of youth and lustiness.
Love has me kept under his governance,
If I misdid, God grant me forgiveness,
If I did well, yet felt I no pleasance,
It caused neither joy nor heaviness,
For when she died, that was my maistresse,
My welfare then made the same purchase,
The death has shet my bonds of witness,
Which for nothingmine heart shall never pase.
In this great thought, sore troubled in mind,
Alone thus rode I all the morrow tide,
Till at the last it happed me to find
The place, wherein I cast me to abide,
When that I had no further for to ride,
And as I went, my lodging to puruay,
Right soon I heard, a little me beside,
In a garden, where minstrels began to play.
With that anon I went me backer more,
My self and I, me thought we were inow,
But twain, y^ were my friends here before,
Had me espied, and yet I wore not how,
They came for me, awayward I me drow,
Somewhat by force, somewhat by her request,
That in no wise I could my self rescow,
But needs I must come in and see the feast.
At my coming, the Ladies euerychone
Bad me welcome God wore right gentilly,
And made me ^here, every one by one,
A great deal better than I was worthy,
And of their grace showed me great courtesy,
With good disport, because I should not mourn:
That day I bode still in their company,
Which was to me a gracious sojourne.
The bords were spread in right little space,
The Ladies sat each as hem seemed best,
There were no deadly servants in the place,
But chosen men, right of the goodliest,
And some there were, perauenture most freshest,
That saw their Judges full demure,
Without semblaunt, either to most or lest,
Notwithstanding they had hem under cure.
Among all other, one I began espy,
Which in great thought full often came and went,
As one that had been ravished utterly,
In his language not greatly dilligent,
His countenance he kept with great turment,
But his desire far passed his reason,
For ever his eye went after his intent,
Full many a time, when it was no season.
To make chere, sore himself he pained,
And outwardly he fained great gladness,
To sing also, by force he was constrained,
For no pleasaunce, but very shamefastness,
For the complaint of his most heaviness,
Came to his voice, always without request,
Like as the soune of birds does express,
When they sing loud in frithe or in forest.
Other there were, that served in the hall,
But none like him, as after mine advise,
For he was pale, and somewhat lean withal,
His speech also trembled in fearful wise,
And ever alone, but when he did seruise,
All black he ware, and no devise but plain,
Me thought by him, as my wit could suffice,
His heart was nothing in his own demain.
To feast hem all, he did his diligence,
And well he coud, right as it seemed me,
But evermore, when he was in presence,
His chere was done, it nolde none other be,
His Schoolemaister had such authorite,
That all the while he bode still in the place,
Speak coud he not, but upon her beauty
He looked still, with a right pitous face.
With that his head he turned at the last
For to behold the Ladies euerichone,
But ever in one he set his eye steadfast
On her, which his thought was most upon,
For of his eyes the shot I knew anon,
Which fearful was, with right humble requests,
Then to my self I said, by God alone,
Such one was I, or that I saw these jests.
Out of the prease he went full easily
To make stable his heavy countenance,
And wot ye well, he sighed wonderly
For his sorrows and woeful remembrance,
Then in himself he made his ordinance,
And forthwithall came to bring in the mess,
But for to judge his most woeful penuance,
God wot it was a pitous entremesse.
After dinner anon they hem auanced
To dance above the folk euerichone,
And forthwithall, this heavy man he danced,
Sometime with twain, and sometime with one,
Unto hem all his chere was after one,
Now here, now there, as fell by adventure,
But ever among he drew to her alone
Which he most dread of living creature.
To mine advise good was his purueiance,
When he her chose to his mai^resse alone,
If that her heart were set to his pleasance,
As much as was her beauteous person,
* For who so ever sets his trust upon
The report of the eyes, withouten more,
He might be dead, and graven under stone,
Or ever he should his hearts ease restore.
In her failed nothing that I coud guess,
One wise nor other, privy nor apert,
A garrison she was of all goodlinesse,
To make a frontier for a iouers heart,
Right young and fresh, a woman full covert,
Assured well of port, and eke of chere,
Well at her ease withouten woe or smert,
All underneath the standerd of dangere.
To see the feast, it wearied me full sore,
For heavy joy does sore the heart travail:
Out of the prease I me withdrow therefore,
And set me down alone behind a traile,
Full of leaves, to see a great marvel,
With green wreaths ybounden wonderly,
The leaves were so thick withouten fail,
That throughout no man might me espy.
To this Lady he came full courtesly,
When he thought time to dance with her a trace,
Set in an herber, made full pleasantly,
They rested hem fro thens but a little space,
Nigh hem were none of a certain compace,
But only they, as far as I coud see,
Save the traile, there I had chose my place,
There was no more between hem two and me.
I heard the lover sighing wonder sore,
For aye the more the sorer it him sought,
His inward pain he coud not keep in store,
Nor for to speak, so hardy was he naught,
His leech was here, the greater was his
He mused sore to conquer his desire, thought,
* For no man may to more penance be brought
Than in his heat to bring him to ye fire.
The heart began to swell within his chest,
So sore strained for anguish and for pain,
That all to pieces almost it to breast,
When both at ones so sore it did constrain,
Desire was bold, but shame it began refrain,
That one was large, the other was full close,
No little charge was laid on him certain,
To keep such werre, and have so many fose.
Full oftentimes to speak himself he pained,
But shamefastness and dread said ever nay,
Yet at the last, so sore he was constrained,
When he full long had put it in delay,
To his Lady, right thus then began he say,
With dredeful voice, weeping, half in a rage,
For me was purueyed an unhappy day,
When I first had a sight of your visage.
I suffer pain God wot, full hot brenning,
To cause my death, all for my true seruise,
And I see well ye recke thereof nothing,
Nor take no heed of it in no kind wise,
But when I speak after my best advise,
Ye set it at naught, but make thereof a game,
And though I sewe, so great an enterprise,
It peireth not your worship nor your fame.
Alas, what should it be to you prejudice,
If that a man do love you faithfully
To your worship, eschewing every vice,
So am I yours, and will be verily,
I challenge naught of right, and reason why,
For I am hole submit unto your service,
Right as you list it be, right so will I,
To bind my self, where I was in fraunchise.
L'amant. Though it be so, that I cannot deserve
To have your grace, but always live in dread,
Yet suffer me you for to love and serve,
Withouten maugre of your most goodlyhede,
Both faith and troth I give your womanhede,
And my service without any calling,
Love has me bound without wage or mede
To be your man, and leave all other thing.

La dame. When this lady had heardall this language,
She gave answer full soft and demurely,
Without changing of color or courage,
Nothing in have, but measurably.
Me thinks sir, your thought is great folly,
Purpose ye naught your labor for to cease,
For thinks not, whiles ye live and I,
In this matter to set your heart in pease.

L'amant. There may none make the peace, but only ye,
Which are the ground and cause of all this war,
For with your eyes the letters written be,
By which I am defied and put a far,
Your pleasant look, my very lodestarre,
Was made heraud of thilke same defiaunce,
Which utterly behight me for to bar
My faithful trust, and all mine affiaunce.

La dame. * To live in woe, he has great fantasy,
And of his heart also slipper hold,
That only for beholding of an eye,
Cannot abide in peace, as reason would:
Other or me, if ye list ye may behold,
Our eien are made to look, whyshold we spare,
I take no keep neither of young ne old,
* Who feels smart, I counsel him beware.

L'amant. If it be so, one hurt another sore,
In his defaut that feleth the greuaunce,
Of very right, a man may do no more,
Yet reason would it were in remembrance,
And since fortune only by her chance
Has caused me to suffer all this pain
By your beauty, with all the circumstaunce,
Why list ye have me in so great disdain.

La dame. To your person ne have I no disdain,
Nor never had truly, ne naught will have,
Nor right great love, nor hatred in certain,
Nor your counsel to know, so God me save,
If such love be in your mind igraue,
That little thing may do you displesaunce
You to beguile, or make you for to rave,
I will not cause no such encombraunce.

L'amant. What ever it be yt me has thus purchased,
Wening has not deceived me certain,
But fervent love so sore has me ichased,
That I unware am casten in your chain,
And since so it is, as fortune lift ordain,
All my welfare is in your hands fall
In eschewing of more mischeeuous pain,
* Who soonest dies, his care is least of all.

La dame. This sickness is right easy to endure,
But few people it causes for to die,
But what they mean, I know it very sure,
Of more comfort, to draw the remedy,
Such be there now plaining full pitously,
That feel God wore not alther greatest pain,
And if so be love hurt so grievously,
* Lest harm it were one sorrowful than twain.

L'amant. Alas Madame, if that it might you please,
Much better it were by way of gentilnesse,
Of one sorry, to make twain well at ease,
Than him to destroy that lives in distress,
For my desire is neither more nor less,
But my service to do for your pleasaunce,
In eschewing all manner doubleness,
* To make two joys in steed of one greuance.

La dame. Of love I seek neither pleasaunce, nor ease,
Nor have therein no great affiaunce,
Though ye be sick, it does me nothing please,
Also I take no heed of your pleasaunce,
Chese who so will her herts to advance,
Free am I now, and free will I endure,
To be ruled by man's governance
For earthly good, Nay, that I you ensure.

L'amant. Love, which that joy and sorrow does depart,
Has set the Ladies out of all seruage,
And largely does grant hem for her part,
Lordship and rule of every manner of age,
The poor servant naught has of advantage,
But what he may get only by purchesse,
* And he that ones to love does his homage,
Full oftentimes, dear bought is the richesse.

La dame. Ladies be not so simple, thus I mean,
So dull of wit, so sotted in folly,
That for words, which said be of the spleen,
In fair language painted full pleasauntly,
Which ye and mo hold schools of daily,
To make hem all great wonders to suppose,
But soon they can away their heads wrie,
And to fair speech lightly their ears close,

L'amant. There is no man that jangleth busily,
And sets his heart and all his mind therefore,
That by reason may plain so pitously,
As he that has much heaviness in store:
Whose head is hole, and says that it is sore,
His fained chere is hard to keep in mew,
But thought, which is unfeigned evermore,
* The works preueth as the words show.

La dame. Love is subtle, and has a great await,
Sharp in working, in gabbing great plesance,
And can him venge of such as by deceit
Would feel and know his secret governance,
And makes hem to obey his ordinance,
By cherefull ways, as in hem is supposed,
But when they fall into repentance,
Then in a rage her counsel is disclosed.

L'amant. Since for as much as God and eke nature
Has auaunced love to so high degree,
Much sharp is the point, thus am I sure,
Yet greeueth more the faut where ever it be,
* Who has no cold, of heat has no deinte,
The one for that other, asked is express,
And of pleasaunce knows none certainete,
But it be one, in thought and heaviness.

La dame. As for pleasaunce, it is not always one,
That you think sweet, I think it bitter pain,
Ye may not me constrain, nor yet right none,
After your lust to love, that is but vain,
To challenge love by right, was never seine,
But heart assent before bond and promise,
* For strength and force may not attain
A will that stands enfeoffed in franchise.

L'amant. Right fair lady, God more I never please,
If I seek other right in this case,
But for to show you plainly my disease,
And your mercy to abide, and eke your grace,
If I purpose your honor to deface,
Or ever did, God and fortune me shend,
And that I never unrightfully purchase
One only joy unto my lives end.

La dame. Ye and other, that swear such oaths fast,
And so condemn, and cursen to an df to,
Full sikerly ye wene your oaths last
No longer than the words ben ago,
And God and eke his saints laugh also,
In such swearing there is no steadfastness,
And these wretches y^ have full trust thereto,
After they weep and wailen in distress.

L'amant. He has no courage of a man truly,
That seecheth pleasaunce, worship to despise,
Nor to be called forth, is not worthy
The earth to touch, the air in no kind wise,
A trusty heart, a mouth without feintise,
Thus by the strength of every manner name,
And who that lays his faith for little prise,
He leseth both his worship and his fame.

La dame. A cursed heart, a mouth that is curteise,
Full well ye wot they be not according,
Yet fained chere right sone may hem apeise,
Where of malice is set all her working,
Full false semblant they bear, and true seming,
Her name, her fame, her tongues but fained,
Worship in hem is put in forgetting,
Naught repented, nor in no wise complained.

L'amant. Who thinks ill, no good may him befall,
God of his grace grant each man his desert,
But for his love, among your thoughts all,
As think upon my woeful sorrows smart,
For of my pain, whether your tender heart
Of sweet pity be not therewith agreued,
And of your grace, to me were discouart,
That by your mean soon should I be releued.

La dame. A lightsome heart, a folly of pleasance,
Are much better, the less while they abide,
They make you think, and bring you in a trance,
But that sickness will soon be remedide,
Respite your thought, and put all this aside,
Full good disport werieth me all day,
To help nor hurt, my will is not aplide,
Who troweth me not, I let him pass away.

L'amant. Who has a bird, a faucon, or a hound,
That follows him for love in every place,
He cherishes him, and keeps him full so^nd,
Out of his sight he will not him enchace,
And I that set my wits in this case
On you alone, withouten any change,
Am put under, much farther out of grace,
And less set by, than other that be strange.

La dame. Though I make chere to every man about,
For my worship, and for mine own fraunchise,
To you I nill do so withouten doubt,
In eschewing all manner prejudise,
For wot ye well, love is so little wise,
And in bileue so lightly will be brought,
That he takes all at his own devise,
Of thing God wot, yt serves him of naught.

L'amant. If I by love and by my true seruise
Lose y^ good chere that strangers have always,
Whereof shall serve my troth in any wise,
Less than to him y^ comes and goes all day,
Which holds of you nothing, y^ is no nay,
Also in you is lost, as to my seeming,
All courtesy, which of reason will say,
* That love for love were lawful desiring.

La dame. * Courtesy is alied wonder nere
To worship, which him loves tenderly,
And he will not be bound for no praiere,
Nor for no gifts I say you verily,
But his good chere depart full largely,
Where him likes, as his conceit will fall:
Guerdon constrained, a gift done thankfully,
These twain can never accord, nor never shall.

L'amant. As for guerdon, I seek none in this case,
For that desert to me it is too hie,
Wherefore I ask your pardon and your grace,
Since me behooves death, or your mercy,
To give the good where it wants truly,
That were reason, and a courteise manner,
And to your own much better were worthy,
Than to strangers, to show hem lovely chere.

La dame. What call ye good, feign would I y^ I wist,
That pleases one, another smerteth sore,
But of his own, too large is he that list
Give much, and lose his good name therefore,
* One should not make a grant, little ne more,
But the request were right well according:
If worship be not kept and set before,
All that is left, is but a little thing.

L'amant. Into this world was founden never none,
Nor under heaven creature ibore,
Nor never shall, save only your person,
To whom your worship touches half so sore,
But me which have no season less ne more
Of youth ne age, but still in your service,
I have no eyes, no wit, nor mouth in store,
But all be given to the same office.

La dame. A full great charge has he withouten fail,
That his worship keeps in sikernesse,
But in danger he sets his trauail,
That feffeth it with others business,
To him that longs honor and noblesse,
Upon none other should not be await,
* For of his own so much has he the less,
That of other much follows the conceit.

L'amant. Your eyes has set the print, which y^ I feel
Within my heart, that where so ever I go,
If I do thing that souneth unto well,
Needs must it come from you, and fro no more,
Fortune will this, that I for well or woe
My life endure, your mercy abiding,
And very right will, that I think also
Of your worship, above all other thing.

La dame. To your worship see well, for that is need,
That ye spend not your season all in vain,
As touching mine, I read you take no head,
By your folly to put your self in pain,
To overcome is good, and to restrain
An heart, which is deceived follily,
* For worse it is to break than bow certain,
Better bow, than to fall suddenly.

L'amant. Now fair lady, think, since it first began,
That love has set mine heart under his cure,
It never might, ne truly I ne can
None other serve, while I shall here endure,
In most free wise thereof I make you sure,
Which may not be withdraw, this is no nay,
I must abide all manner adventure,
For I may neither put to nor take away.

La dame. * I hold it for no gift in soothfastnesse,
That one offers, where it is forsake,
For such a gift is abandoning express,
That with worship again may not be take,
He has an heart full fell, that list to make
A gift lightly, that put is to refuse,
But he is wise, that such conceit will slake,
So that him need neither to study ne muse.

L'amant. He should not muse, y^ has his service spent
On her which is a Lady honorable,
And if I spend my time to that intent,
Yet at the least, I am not reprouable
Of fained heart, to think I am unable,
Or I mistook, when I made this request,
By which love has of enterprise notable
So many herts gotten by conquest.

La dame. If that ye list do after my counsel,
Seeche a fairer, and of more higher fame,
Which in service of love will you prevail
After your thought, according to the same,
* He hurts both his worship and his name,
That follily for twain himself will trouble,
* And he also leseth his after game,
That surely cannot set his points double.

L'amant. This your counsel, by ought that I can see,
Is better said than done, to mine advise,
Though I believe it not, forgive it me,
Mine heart is such, so hole without feintise,
That I ne may give credence in no wise
To thing which is not souning unto truth,
Other counsel I see be but fantasise,
Save of your grace to show pity and ruth.

La dame. * I hold him wise that works no folly,
And when him list can leave and part therefro,
But in conning he is to learn truly,
That would himself conduit, and cannot so.
* And he that will not after counsel do,
His suit he puts into disperaunce,
And all the good that should fall him to,
Is lost and dead, clean out of remembrance.

L'amant. Yet woll I show this matter faithfully
Whiles I live, what ever be my chance,
And if it hap that in my truth I dye,
Then death shall do me no displeasaunce,
But when that I, by your hard suffraunce,
Shall dye so true, and with so great a pain,
Yet shall it do me much the less grevaunce,
Than for to live a false lover certain.

La dame. Of me get ye right naught, this is no fable,
I will to you be neither hard nor streit,
And right will not no man customable,
To think ye should be sure of my conceit,
Who seecheth sorrow, his be the receipt,
Other counsel can I not feel nor see,
Nor for to learn, I cast me not to await,
Who will thereof, let him assay for me.

L'amant. Ones must it be assayed, that is no nay
With such as be of reputation,
And of true love the right honor to pay
Of free hearts gotten by due ransom,
For free will holds this opinion,
That it is great dutesse and discomfort,
To keep a heart in so strait a prison,
That has but one body for his disport.

La dame. I know so many causes marvelous,
That I must need of reason think certain,
That such aventure is wonder perilous,
And yet well more, y^ coming back again,
Good or worship, thereof is seldom seen,
Where I ne will make any such array,
* As for to find a pleasaunce, but barraine,
When it shall cost so dear the first assay.

L'amant. Ye have no cause to doubt of this matter,
Nor you to meue with no such fantasy,
To put me far all out as a stranger,
For your goodness can think and well advise,
That I have made aprise in every wise,
By which my truth shows open evidence,
My long abiding, and my true service,
May well be known by plain experience.

La dame. Of very right he may be called true,
And so must he be take in every place,
That can discern, and let as he ne knew,
And keep the good, if he it may purchase:
* For who y^ prays, or swereth in any case,
Right well ye wot, in y^ no troth is preved,
Soch has there ben, and are, that getten grace,
And lose it sone, when they have it acheved.

L'amant. If truth me cause, by virtue soverain,
To show good love, and always find contrary,
And cherish y^, which steeth me with the pain,
This is to me a lovely adversary,
When yt pity, which long on sleep does ^ary,
Has set the fine of all my hevinesse,
Yet her comfort to me most necessary,
Shall set my will more sure in stablenesse.

La dame. The woeful wight, with may he think or say,
The contrary of all joy and gladness,
A sick body, his thought is always
From him that felen no sore nor sickness,
Thus hurtes been of diverse business,
Which love has put to great hindraunce,
And truth also, put in forgetfulness,
When they full sore begin to sigh askaunce.

L'amant. Now God defend, but he be harmless,
Of all worship or good that may befall,
That to werst tourneth by his lewdness,
A gift of grace, or any thing at all,
That his Lady vouchsafe upon him call,
Or cherishes him in honorable wise,
In that defaute, what ever he be that fall,
Deserves more than death to suffer twice.

La dame. There is no judge yset on soch trespace,
By which of right love may recovered be,
One curses fast, another does manace,
Yet dies none, as far as I can see,
But keep her course always in one degree,
And ever more her labor does increase,
To bring Ladies by their great subteltee,
For others gilte, in sorrow and disease.

L'amant. All be it so, one does so great offense,
And is not dedde, nor put to no justice,
Right well I wot him gayneth no defense,
But he must end in full mischevous wise,
And all ever said, God will him despise,
For falshed is full of cursednesse,
That his worship may never have enterprise
Where it reigns, and has the wilfulness.

La dame. Of yt have they no great fere now adaise,
Soch as will say and maintain it thereto,
That steadfast truth is nothing for to praise,
In hem that keep it long in well or woe,
Their busy herts passen to and fro,
They be so well reclaimed to the lure,
So well learned hem to withhold also,
And al to change, when love should best endure.

L'amant. When one has set his heart in stable wise,
In such a place, as is both good and true,
He should not flit, but do forth his service,
Always withouten change of any new,
As soon as love begins to remewe,
All pleasaunce gothe anon in little space,
As for my party that shall I eschew,
While the soul abides in his place.

La dame. To love truly, there as it ought of right,
Ye may not be mistaken doubtless,
But ye be foul disceived in your sight,
By light understanding, as I guess,
Yet may ye well repele your business,
And to reason have some attendaunce,
Much better than to abide by folly simpleness,
The feeble soccour of disperaunce.

L'amant. Reason, counsel, wisdom and good advise,
Been under love arested everichone,
To which I can accord in every wise,
For they been not rebel, but still as a stone,
Their will and mine be meddled all in one,
And therewith bounden with so strong a chain,
That as in hem, departing shall be none,
But pity break the mighty bond atwaine.

La dame. Ye love not your self, what ever ye be,
That in love stand subject in every place,
And of your woe, if ye have no pitee,
Others pitee bileve you not to purchase,
But be fully assured, as in this case,
I am always under one ordinance,
To have better trust not after grace,
And all that leveth, take to your pleasaunce.

L'amant. I have my hope so sure and so steadfast,
That such a Lady should not lack pity,
But now alas, it is shyt up so fast,
That danger shows on me his cruelty,
And if she see the virtue fail in me,
Of true service, though she do fail also,
No wonder were, but this is my surete,
I must suffer, which way that ever it go.

La dame. Leave this purpose, I read you for y^ best,
For the longer ye keep, it is in vain,
The less ye get, as of your hertes rest,
And to rejoice it shall you never attain,
When ye abide good hope to make you feign,
Ye shall be found asotted in dotage,
And in the end, ye shall know for certain,
Hope shall pay the wretches for her wage,

L'amant. Ye say as falls most for your pleasaunce,
And your power is great, all this I see,
But hope shall never out of my remembrance
By which I feel so great adversitee,
* For when nature has set in you plentee
Of all goodness, by virtue and by grace,
He never assembled hem, as seemed me,
To put pity out of his dwelling place.

La dame. Pity of right ought to be reasonable,
And to no wight do no great disavauntage,
There as is need, it should be profitable,
And to the pitous showing no damage,
* If a Lady will do so great outrage,
To show pity and cause her own debate,
Of soch pity comes dispitous rage,
And of soch love, also right deadly hate.

L'amant. To comfort hem that live all comfortless,
That is no harm, but comfort to your name,
But ye that have a heart of soch duresse,
And a fair Lady, I must affirm the same,
If I durst say, ye win all this defame,
By cruelty, which sits you full ill,
But if pity, which may all this attain,
In your high heart may rest and tarry still.

La dame. What ever he be that says he loves me,
And paraventure I leve well it be so,
Ought he be wroth, or should I blamed be,
Though I did not as he would have me do,
If I meddled with soch or other more,
It might be called pity merciless,
And afterward if I should live in woe.
Then to repent, it were to late I guess.

L'amant. O marble heart, and yet more hard parde,
Which mercy may not perce for no labor,
More strong to bow than is a mighty tree,
What avails you to show so great rigor,
Pleases it you more to see me die this hour,
Before your iyen, for your disport and play,
Than for to show some comfort and soccour,
To respite death, which chaseth me always.

La dame. Of your disease, ye may have allegeaunce,
And as for mine, I let it over slake,
Also ye shall not dye for my pleasaunce,
Nor for your heal, I can no surety make,
I will not hurt my self for others sake,
Weep they, laugh they, or sing they, I warrant,
For this matter, so will I undertake,
That none of hem shall make thereof avaunt.

L'amant. I can not skill of love by God alone,
I have more cause to weep in your presence,
And well ye wot, avauntour am I none,
For certainly, I love better silence,
One should not love by his hertes credence,
But he were sure to keep it secretly
* For a vauntour is of no reverence,
When that his tongue is his most enemy.

La dame. Male bouch in court, has great commaundment,
Each man studieth to say the worst he may,
These false lovers, in this time now present,
They serve best to jangle as a Iay,
The most secret iwis, yet some men say,
How he mistrusted is in some partise,
Wherefore to ladies with so men speak or say,
It should be bileved in no wise.

L'amant. Of good and ill shall be, and is always,
The world is soch, the earth is not all plain,
They that he good, y^ proof shewth every day
And otherwise great villony certain:
* It is no reason, though one his tongue distain
With cursed speech, to do himself a shame,
That soch refuce should wrongfully remain
Upon the good renomed in their fame.

La dame. Soch as be naught, when they here tidings new,
That each trespass shall lightly have pardon,
They that pursuen to be good and true,
Will not set by none ill disposition,
To continue in every good condition,
They are the first that fallen in damage,
And full freely the hertes habandon,
To little faith, with soft and fair language.

L'amant. Now know I well of very certaintee,
If one do truly, yet shall he be shent,
Since all manner of Justice and pitee
Is banished out of a Ladies intent,
I cannot see but all is at one stent,
The good, the ill, the vice, and eke the virtue,
Soch as be good, soch have the punishment,
For the trespace of hem that live untrue.

La dame. I have no power you to do greuaunce,
Nor to punish none other creature,
But to eschew the more encombraunce,
To keep us from you all, I hold it sure,
False semblaunce, has a face full demure,
Lightly to catch these Ladies in a wait,
Wherefore we must, if we will here endure,
Make right good watch, lo this is my conceit.

L'amant. Since that of grace, a goodly word not one
May now be had, but always kept in store,
I appeal to God, for he may hear my moan
Of the duresse, which greueth me so sore,
And of pitee, I complain furthermore,
Which he forgate, in all his ordinance,
Or else my life to have ended before,
Which so sone am put out of remembrance.

La dame. My heart nor I, have done you no forfeit,
By which ye should complain in any kind,
Nothing hurts you, but your own conceit,
Be judge your self, for so ye shall it find,
Thus always let this sink in your mind,
That your desire shall never recovered be,
Ye noye me sore, in wasting all this wind,
For I have said enough, as seems me.

L'amant. This woeful man rose up in all his pain,
And so departed with weping countenance,
His woeful heart almost to brast in twain,
Full like to dye, walking forth in a trance,
And said death come forth, thy self auaunce,
Or that mine heart forget his property,
And make shorter all this woeful penance,
Of my poor life full of adversity.
Fro thens he went, but whither wist I naught,
Nor to what part he drew in soothfastnesse,
But he no more was in his Ladies thought,
For to the dance anon she began her dress,
And afterward, one told me thus express,
He rent his here, for anguish and for pain,
And in himself took so great heaviness,
That he was dedde within a day or twain.

Lenuoy.
THe true lovers thus I beseech you all,
Soch adventures fly hem in every wise,
And as people defamed ye hem call,
For they truly do you great prejudice,
His castles strong stuffed with ordinance,
For they have had long time by their office,
The whole country of love in obeysaunce.
And ye Ladies, or what estate ye be,
Of whom worship has choice his dwelling place,
For Gods love do no such cruelty,
Nor in no wise ne foul not the trace
Of her that here is named rightwisely,
Which by reason me seems in this case,
May be called, La belle dame sans Mercy.
Go little Book, God send thee good passage,
Chese well thy way, be simple of manner,
Look thy clothing be like thy pilgremage,
And specially let this be thy prayere,
Unto hem all that thee will read or here,
Where thou art wrong, after her help to call,
Thee to correct in any part or all.
Pray hem also with thine humble service,
Thy boldness to pardon in this case,
For else thou art not able in no wise
To make thy self appear in any place,
And furthermore beseech hem of her grace,
By her favor and supportacion,
To take in gree this rude translation.
The which God wot stands full destitute
Of eloquence, of meter, and colors,
Like as a beast naked without refute,
Upon a plain to abide all manner showers,
I can no more but ask of hem socours,
At whose request thou were made in this wise
Commanding me with body and service.
Right thus I make an end of this prosses,
Besechyng him, that all has in balaunce,
That no true man be vexed causeless,
As this man was, which is of remembrance,
And all that done her faithful observaunce,
And in her troth purpose him to endure,
I pray God send hem better adventure.
Explicit.
Of Queen Annelida and false Arcite.
Arcite a Theban Knight, forsakes Queen Annelida, who loved him entirely, and
takes a new Lady: whereupon Annelida makes this great complaint.
O Thou fires God of arms Mars the read,
That in thy Frosty Country called Thrace,
Within thy grisly Temples full of dread,
Honored art as patron of that place,
With the Bellona Pallas full of grace,
Be present, and my song continue and gie,
At my beginning thus to thee I cry.
For it full deep is sonken in mind,
With pitous heart in English to endite,
This old story, in Latin which I find,
Of Queen Annelida and false Arcite,
That elde, which all can frete and bite,
And it has freten many a noble story,
Has nigh devoured out of our memory.
Be favorable eke thou Polimnia
On Pernaso that has thy sisters glade,
By Elicon, not far from Cirsa,
Singest with voice memorial in the shade,
Under the Laurer, which that may not fade,
And do that I my ship to haven win,
First follow I Stace, and after him Corinne.
Jamque domos patrias Cithiae-post aspera gentis,
Praelia laurigeo subeuntem Thesea curru,
Laetifici plausus missusque ad sidera vulgi, etc.
When Theseus with wars long and great,
The aspre folk of Cithe had overcome,
The Laurer crowned in his chair gold beat,
Home to his country houses is ycome,
For which the people blisful all and some,
So criden, that to the Sterres it went,
And him to honouren did all her intent.
Before this Duke in sign of victory,
The Trompes come, and in his baner large,
The Image of Mars, and in token of glory,
Men might see of treasure many a charge,
Many a bright helm, and many a spear and targe,
Many a fresh knight, and many a blisful rout,
On horse and on foot, in all the field about.
Ipolita his wife, the hardy Queen
Of Cithia, that he conquered had,
With Emely her young suster shene,
Fair in a chair of gold he with him lad,
That all ye ground about her chair she sprad
With brightness of beauty in her face,
Fulfilled of largess and of grace.
With his triumph and laurer crowned thus,
In all the flower of Fortunes yeuing,
Let I this noble prince Theseus,
Toward Athenes in his way riding,
And fond I woll in shortly to bring,
The slye way of that I began to write,
Of Queen Annelida and false Arcite.
Mars that through his furious course of ire,
The old wrath of Juno to fulfill,
Has set the peoples hertes both on fire
Of Thebes and Greece, and euerich other to kill
With bloody speres, rested never still,
But throng now here now there among hem both,
That euerich other slew, so were they wroth.
For when Amphiorax and Tideus,
Ipomedon, and Partinope also
Were dedde, and slain proud Campaneus,
And when the wretched Thebans brethren two,
Were slain, and King Adrastus home ago,
So desolate stood Thebes and so bare,
That no wight could remedy his care.
And when the old Creon began espy,
How yt the blood royal was brought adown,
He held the City by his tyranny,
And did the gentiles of that regioun
To been his friends, and dwell in the town,
So what for love of him, and what for awe,
The noble folk were to the town ydrawe.
Among all these, Annelida the queen
Of Ermony was in that town dwelling,
That fairer was than the Son sheene,
Throughout ye world so began her name spring,
That her to see had every wight liking,
For as of troth is there none her liche,
Of all the women in this world rich.
Young was this queen, of twenty year old,
Of middle stature, and of soch fairness,
That nature had a joy her to behold,
And for to speaken of her steadfastness,
She passed has Penelope and Lucresse,
And shortly if she may ben comprehended,
In her might nothing been amended.
This Theban knight eke sothe to sain,
Was young, and thereto withal a lusty knight,
But he was double in love, and nothing plain,
And subtle in that craft over any wight,
And with his conning wan this Lady bright:
For so ferforth he began her troth assure,
That she him trusts over any creature.
What should I sain, she loves Arcite so
That when that he was absent any throw,
Anon her thought her heart brast atwo,
For in her sight to her he bare him low,
So that she wend have all his heart yknow,
But he was false, it nas but feigned chere,
As needs not soche craft men to lere.
But nevertheless full mikell business
Had he, er that he might his Lady win,
And swore he would dien for distress,
Or from his wit he said he would twinne:
Alas the while, for it was routh and sin,
That she upon his sorrows would rue,
* But nothing thinks the false as does the true.
Her fredome found Arcite in soch manner,
That all was his, that she has, much or lite,
Ne to no creature made she cheer,
Further than it liked to Arcite,
There was no lack, with which he might her wite,
She was so ferforth yeuen him to please,
That all that liked him did her ease.
There nas to her no manner letter sent,
That touched love, from any manner wight,
That she ne showed him, or it was brent,
So plain she was, and did her full might,
That she nyl hide nothing from her knight,
Lest he of any untruth her vpbreyde,
Without bode his heart she obeyed.
And eke he made him ialous over her,
That what that any man had to her said,
Anon he would praien her to swear
What was y^ word, or make him yuell apaid,
Then wend she out of her wit have braid,
But all was but slight and flattery,
Without love he fained jelousie.
And all this took she so debonairly,
That al his will, her thought it skilful thing
And ever the longer she loved him tenderly,
And did him honor as he were a king,
Her heart was to him wedded with a ring,
For so ferforth upon troth is her intent,
That where he goth, her heart with him went.
When she shall eat, on him is so her thought,
That well uneath of meat took she keep,
And when she was to her rest brought,
On him she thought always till that she sleep,
When he was absent, privily does she weep,
Thus lives fair Annelida the queen,
For false Arcite, that did her all this tene.
This false Arcite, of his newfanglenesse,
For she to him so lowly was and true,
Took less deintee for her steadfastness,
And saw another Lady proud and new,
And right anon he clad him in her hew,
Wot I not whether in white, reed, or grene,
And falsed fair Annelida the queen.
But nevertheless, great wonder was it none
Though he were false, for it is y^ kind of man,
Since Lamech was, that is so long agone,
To be in love as false as ever he can,
He was the first father that began
To loven two, and was in bigamye.
And he found tents first, but if men lie.
This false Arcite, somewhat must he feign,
When he was false, to coueren his tratoury
Right as an horse, yt can both bite and plain,
For he bare her in hand of treachery,
And swore he could her doubleness espy,
And all was falsenesse that she to him meant,
Thus swore this thief, and forth his way he went.
Alas what heart might endure it,
For routhe or woe, her sorrow for to tell,
Or what man has the conning or the wit,
Or with man might within the chamber dwell,
If I to him rehersen shall the hell
That suffers fair Annelida the queen,
For false Arcite, that did all this tene.
She wepeth, waileth, and swouneth pitously,
To ground deed she falls as a stone
Crampisheth her limbs crokedly,
She speaks as her wit were all agone,
Other color than ashen has she none,
Ne none other word speaks she much or lite,
But mercy cruel heart mine Arcite.
And thus endures, til that she was so mate
That she ne has foot, on which she may sustene,
But forth languishyng ever in this estate,
Of which Arcite has neither routh ne tene,
His heart was else where new and grene,
That on her woe, ne deineth him not to think,
Him recketh never whether she flete or sink.
* This new Lady holds him so narowe,
Up by the bridel, at the staves end.
That every word he dred it as an arowe,
Her danger made him both bow and bend,
And as her lust, made him turn or wend,
For she ne granted him in her living,
No grace, why that he has to sing,
But drove him forth, uneath list her know
That he was servant unto her Ladyship,
But lest he were proud, she held him low,
Thus serves he, without meat or sip,
She sent him now to land, and now to ship,
And for she yaue him danger all his fill,
Therefore she had him at her own will.
Ensample of this, ye thrifty women all,
Take heed of Annelida and false Arcite,
That for her list him her dear heart call,
And was so meke, therefore he loved her lite,
* The kind of man's heart is to delight
On thing that strange is, also God me save,
For what they may not get, y^ would they have.
Now turn we to Annelida again,
That pyneth day by day in languishing,
But when she saw that her ne gate no geyn,
Upon a day sorowfully weeping,
She cast her for to make a complainyng,
And with her own hand she began it write,
And sent it to her Theban knight Arcite.
The complaint of Annelida to false Arcite.
So their led with ye point of remembrance,
The sword of sorrow, whette with false pleasaunce,
Mine heart bare of bliss, and black of hew
That turned is to quaking all my dance,
My sewerty in a waped countenance,
Sens it avayleth naught to ben true:
For who so true is, it shall her rue,
That serves love, and does her observaunce
Always to one, and changes for no new.
I wot my self as well as any wight,
For I loved one, with all mine heart and might
More than my self an hundred thousand since,
And called him my hertes life, my knight,
And was all his, as far as it was right,
And when y^ he was glad, than was I blithe,
And his disease was my death as swithe,
And he again, his troth has me plight,
For evermore his Lady me to kithe.
Now is he false alas, and causeles,
And of my woe he is so routhles,
That with a word him list not ones daine
To bring again my sorrowful heart in pees,
For he is caught up in another lees,
Right as him list, he laugheth at my pain,
And I ne can mine heart not ^estraine
For to love him yet always ueuertheles,
And of all this I not to whom to plain.
And should I plain, alas the hard stound,
Unto my foe, that yaue mine heart a wound,
And yet desires that mine harm be more,
Now certes ferther woll I never found
None other help, my sores for to sound,
My desteny has shaped so full yore,
I woll none other medecin ne lore,
I woll ben aye there I was ones bound,
That I have said, be said for evermore.
Alas, where is become your gentilnesse,
Your words full of pleasance and humblesse,
Your obseruaunce in so low manner,
Your awayting, and your besinesse,
On me that ye called your maistresse,
Your sovereign lady in this world here?
Alas, is there neither word ne chere,
Ye vouchsafe upon mine heuinesse?
Alas your love, I bye it all to dear.
Now certes sweet, though that ye
Thus causeless the cause be,
Of my deedly aduersite,
Your manly reason ought it to respite,
To slay your friend, and namely me,
That never yet in no degree
Offended you, as wissy he
That all wot, of woe my soul quite.
But for I was so plain, Arcite,
In all my works much and lite,
And was so besie you to delight,
Mine honor save, meke, kind, and fre,
Therefore ye put in me this wite:
Alas, ye retche not a mite,
Though that the sword of sorrow bite
My woeful heart, through your cruelty.
My sweet so, why do ye so for shame,
And think ye that furthered be your name,
To love a new, and ben vntrewaye,
And put you in slander now and blame,
And do to me adversity and grame,
That love you most, God thou wost always,
Yet turn again, and yet be plain some day,
And than shall this y^ now is mis, ben game,
And all foryeue, while I live may.
Lo heart mine, all this is for to saine,
As whether shall I pray or else plain,
Which is the way to done you to be true,
For either mote I have you in my chain,
Or with the death ye mote depart us twain,
There bethe none other mean ways new,
For God so wisely on my soul rewe,
As verily ye slain me with the pain,
That mow ye see unfeigned on mine hew.
For thus ferforth have I my death sought,
My self I murder with my privy thought,
For sorrow and routh of your unkindness,
I weep, I wayle, I fast, all helps naught,
I void joy that is to speak of aught,
I void company, I fly gladness,
Who may auaunt her better of heuineffe,
Than I? and to this plite have ye me brought,
Without gilte, me needs no witness.
And should I pray, and weiuen womanhede,
Nay rather death, than do so foul a deed,
And ask mercy and giltlesse, what need,
And if I plain what life I led,
You recketh not, that know I out of dread,
And if I unto you mine oaths bid,
For mine excuse, a scorn shall be my mede,
* Your chere floureth, but it woll not sede,
Full long agon I might have taken head.
For though I had you to morrow again,
* I might as well hold April from rain,
As hold you to maken steadfast,
Almighty God, of troth the souerayn,
Where is ye troth of man, who has it slain,
* She that hem loves, shall hem find as fast,
As in a tempest is a rotten mast,
Is that a tame be, that is aye feign
To run away, when he is lest aghast.
Now mercy sweet, if I missay,
Have I aught said out of the way,
I not, my wit is all away,
I fare as does the song of chantepleure,
For now I plain, and now I pley,
I am so mased that I dey,
Arcite has borne away the key
Of all my world, and my good adventure.
For in this world there is no creature,
Walking in more discomfiture,
Than I, ne more sorrow endure,
For if I sleep a furlonge way or twey,
Then thinks me that your figure
Before me stante clad in asure,
Efte to profre a new assure,
For to ben true, and mercy me to prey.
The long night, this wonder sight ydrie,
That on the day for such affray I die,
And of all this right naught ywis ye retche,
Ne neuermore mine eyes to ben dry,
And to your routh, and to your troth I cry,
But well away, to far been they to fetch,
Thus holds me my desteny a wretch,
But me to read out of this dread or gye,
Ne may my wit (so weak is it) not stretch.
Then end I thus, since I may do no more,
I give it up for now and evermore,
For I shall never efte putten in balaunce
My sikernesse, ne learn of love the lore,
But as the swan, I have herd say full yore,
Against his death woll sing in his penance,
So sing I here the destiny and chance,
How that Arcite, Annelida so sore
Has thrilled with ye point of remembrance.
When that Annelida this woeful queen,
Has of her hand written in this wise,
With face deed, betwixt pale and green,
She fell a swoune, and sith she began to rise,
And unto Mars au owes sacrifise
Within the temple, with a sorrowful chere,
That shapen was, as ye may plainly here.
Explicit.
The Assembly of Ladies.
A Gentlewoman dreameth that she sees a great number of Ladies put up their
Bills of Complaint before a Judge, who promises to relieve their Grievances.
IN Septembre at the falling of the lefe,
The fresh season was altogider done,
And of the corn was gathered the shefe,
In a gardine about twain after noone,
There were ladies walking, as was her wone
Four in nombre, as to my mind does fall,
And I the fifth, the simplest of hem all.
Of gentilwomen fair there were also,
Disporting hem, euerich after her gise,
In cross alies walking by two and two,
And some alone, after her fantasy,
Thus occupied we were in diverse wise,
And yet in troth we were not all alone,
There were knights and squires many one.
Whereof I served, one of hem asked me,
I said again, as it fell in my thought,
To walk about the mase in certainte,
As a woman that nothing rought,
He asked me again whom that I sought,
And of my color, why I was so pale,
Forsooth (quoth. I) and thereby lithe a tale.
That must me wete (quoth. he) and that anon,
Tell on, let see, and make no tarying.
Abide (quoth. I) ye ben a hasty one,
I let you wete it is no litel thing,
But for because ye have a great longing,
In your desire, this process for to here,
I shall you tell the plain of this matere.
It happed thus, that in an after noone,
My felawship and I by one assent,
When all other besinesses were done,
To pass our time, in to this mase we went,
And took our ways, each after our intent,
Some went inward, and went they had gone out,
Some stood in the mid, and looked all about.
And soth to say, some were full far behind,
And right anon as ferforth as the best,
Other there were so mased in her mind,
Always were good for hem host Eest and West,
Thus went they forth, and had but little rest,
And some her courage did hem sore assail,
For very wrath, they did step over the raise.
And as they sought hem self to and fro,
I gate my self a little auantage,
All forweried, I might no further go,
Though I had won right great for my viage,
So came I forth into a strait passage,
Which brought me to an herber fair and grene,
Made with benches full crafty and clean.
That as me thought, there might no creature
Devise a better, by dew proporcioun,
Safe it was closed well I you ensure,
With masonry, of compace enuiroun,
Full secretly with stairs going down,
In mids the place, with turning whele certain,
And upon that a pot of Margelaine.
With Margarets growing in ordinance,
To show hem self, as folk went to and fro,
That to behold it was a great pleasance,
And how they were accompanied with mo,
Ne momblisnesse and sonenesse also,
The pour penses were not disloged there,
Ne God wot her place was every where.
The flore and bench was paued fair and smoth,
With stones square, of many diverse hew,
So well joined, that for to say the soth,
All seemed one, that none other knew,
And underneath the stremes new and new,
As silver bright, springing in such a wise,
That whence it came, ye coud it not devise.
A little while was I all alone,
Beholding well this delectable place,
My felawship were coming euerychone,
So must we needs abide for a space,
Remembering of many diverse case,
Of time passed, with sighs deep,
I set me down, and there I fell aslepe.
And as I slept, me thought there came to me,
A gentill woman, metely of stature,
Of great worship she seemed for to be,
Atyred well, not high but by measure,
Her countenance full sad and demure,
Her colors blewe, all that she had upon,
There came no mo but her self alone.
Her gown well was embraudred certainly,
With stones after her own devise,
In her purfill, her word by and by,
Bien and loyalement as I coud devise.
Then praid I her in any manner wise,
That of her name I might have remembrance,
She said she was called Perseverance.
So furthermore to speak was I bold,
Where she dwelled, I prayed her for to say,
And she again full curtessy me told,
My dwelling is, and has be many a day,
With a lady: what lady I you pray?
Of great estate, thus warn I you (quoth. she)
What call ye her? Her name is Loyalte.
In what office stand ye, or in what degree,
(Quoth. I to her) that would I wete right feign,
I am (quoth. she) unworthy though I be,
Of her chamber her husher in certain,
This rod I bear, as for a token plain,
Like as ye know the rule in soch service,
Apertaining is to the same office.
She charged me by her commandment,
To warn you, and your felawes euerichone,
That ye should come there as she is present,
For a counsel, which shall be now anon,
Or seven days be commen and gone,
And furthermore, she bad that I should say,
Excuse there might be none, nor delay.
Another thing was not forget behind,
Which in no wise I would but ye knew,
Remember well, and bear it in your mind,
All your felawes and ye must come in blew,
Eueriliche able, your matters for to sew:
With more, which I pray you think upon,
Your words on your selves euerychon.
And be not abashed in no manner wise,
As many ben, in soch an high presence,
Make your request, as ye can best devise,
And she gladly woll give you audience,
There is no grefe, nor no manner offense,
Wherein ye feel that your heart is displeased,
But with her help, right sone ye shall be eased.
I am right glad (quoth. I) ye tell me this,
But there is none of us yt knows ye way,
As of your way (quoth. she) you shall not mis,
Ye shall have to gide you day by day,
Of my felawes, I cannot better say,
Soch one as shall tell you the way full right,
And Diligence this gentilwoman hight.
A woman of right famous governance,
And well cherished, I tell you in certain,
Her felawship shall do you great pleasaunce,
Her port is soch, her manners true and plain,
She with glad chere would do her besie pain,
To bring you there, now farwell I have done,
Abide said I, ye may not go so sone.
Why so (quoth. she) and I have far to go,
To give warning in many diverse place,
To your felawes, and so to other mo,
And well ye wot I have but litell space.
Now? yet (quoth. I) ye must tell me this case,
If we shall any men unto us call?
Not one (quoth. she) may come amongs you all.
Not one? then said I, eigh Benedicite,
What have I done, I pray you tell me that,
Now by my life, I trow but well (quoth. she)
But ever I can bilieue there is somewhat,
And for to say you troth more can I not,
In questions I may nothing be to large,
I meddle no further than my charge.
Then thus (quoth. I) do me to understand,
What place is there this lady is dwelling,
Forsooth (quoth. she) and one sought all this land,
Fairer is none, though it were for a king,
Devised well, and that in every thing,
The toures hie full pleasant shall ye find,
With phanes fresh, turning with every wind.
The chambres and parlers of a sort, (thought,
With baie windows, goodly as may be
As for daunsing, and other wise disport,
The galeries right well ywrought,
That well I wot, if ye were thider brought,
And take good head thereof in every wise,
Ye woll it think a very paradise.
What hight ye place (quoth. I) now say me that?
Pleasant regard (quoth. she) to tell you plain.
Of very troth (quoth. I) and wot ye what,
It may right well be called so certain:
But furthermore this would I wit right sain,
What I should do as soon as I come there,
And after whom I may best enquere?
A gentilwoman, a porter of the yate,
There shall ye find, her name is Countenance,
If ye so hap ye come early or late,
Of her were good to have some acquaintance,
She can you tell how ye shall you auance.
And how to come to her ladies presence,
To her words I read ye give credence.
Now it is time I part you fro,
For in good faith I have great business.
I wot right well (quoth. I) that it is so,
And I thank you of your great gentilnesse,
Your comfort has yeuen me hardiness,
That now I shall be bold withouten fail,
To do after your advice and good counsel.
Thus parted she, and I left all alone.
With that I saw (as I beheld aside)
A woman come, a very goodly one,
And forth withal as I had her aspide,
Me thought anon it should be the gide:
And of her name anon I did enquere,
Full womanly she yaue me this answer:
I am (quoth. she) a simple creature,
Sent from the court, my name is Diligence,
As soon as I might come I you ensure,
I tarried not after I had license,
And now that I am come to your presence,
Look what service I can do or may,
Command me, I can no further say.
I thanked her, and prayed her to come nere,
Because I would see how she was araid,
Her gown was blew dressed in good manner,
With her devise, her word also that said,
Tant que je puis and I was well apaid,
And then wist I withouten any more,
It was full true that I had herd before.
Though we took now before a little space,
It were full good (quoth. she) as I coud guess,
How far (quoth. I) have we unto the place?
A days journey (quoth. she) but littel less,
Wherefore I read that we outward dress,
For I suppose our felawship is past,
And for nothing I would not we were the last.
Then departed we at ye springing of ye day,
And forth we went soft and easy pace,
Till at the last we were on our journey,
So far outward, that we might see ye place,
Now let us rest, quoth. I, a littel space,
And say we as devoutly as we can,
A Pater Noster for saint Julian.
With all my heart I assent with good will,
Much better shall we speed, when we have done,
Then tarried we, and said it every dyl,
And when the day was past far after none
We saw a place, and thider came we sone,
Which round about was closed with a wall,
Seeming to me full like an hospital.
There found I one had brought al mine array,
(A gentil woman of mine acquaintance)
I have marvel, quoth. I, what manner way
Ye had knowledge of all this ordenaunce,
Yes yes, quoth. she, I herd Perseueraunce,
How she warned her felawes euerichone,
And what array ye should have upon.
Now for my love, quoth. I, this I you pray,
Since ye have take upon you all the pain,
That ye would help me on with mine array,
For wit ye well, I would be gone right feign.
All this prayer needs not certain,
Quoth. she, again, come off and hie you sone,
And ye shall see anon it shall be done.
But this I dout me greatly, wot ye what,
That my felawes be passed by and gone:
I warn you, quoth. she, that are they not,
For here they shall assemble euerichone,
Notwithstanding I counsel you anon,
Make you ready, and tarry you no more,
It is no harm though ye be there before.
So then I dressed me in mine array,
And asked her whether it were well or no,
It is right well, quoth. she, unto my pay,
Ye need not care to what place ever ye go.
And whiles that she and I debated so,
Came Diligence and saw me all in blew,
Sister, quoth. she, right well broke ye your new.
Discrecion, Purueiour.
Then went we forth and met at adventure,
A young woman, an officer seeming,
What is your name, quoth. I, good creature,
Discrecion, quoth. she, without lesing,
And where, quoth. I, is your most abiding,
I have, quoth. she, this office of purchase,
Chief purueiour that longs to this place.
Acquaintance, Herbyger.
Fair love, quoth. I, in all your ordenaunce,
What is her name that is the herbigere,
Forsooth, quoth. she, her name is Acquaintance,
A woman of right gracious manner,
Then thus, quoth. I, with strangers have ye here,
But few, quoth. she, of high degree ne low,
Ye be the first, as ferforth as I know.
Countenance, Porter.
Thus with tales we came straight to ye yate,
This young woman departed was and gone,
Came Diligence and knocked fast thereat,
Who is without, quoth. Countenance, anon,
Truly, quoth. I, fair sister here is one:
Which one, quoth. she, and therewithal she lough,
I Diligence, ye know me well enough.
Then opened she the gate, and in we go,
With words fair she said full gentilly,
Ye are welcome ywis, are ye no mo?
Not one, quoth. she, save this woman and I,
Now then, quoth. she, I pray you hertely,
Take my chamber for a while to rest,
Till your felawes come, I hold it best.
I thanked her, and forth we go euerichone,
Till her chamber without words mo,
Came Diligence and took her leave anon,
Where ever ye list, quoth. I, now may ye go,
And I thank you right hertely also,
Of your labor, for which God do you mede,
I can no more, but Jesus be your speed.
Then Countenance asked me anon,
Your felawship, where be they, quoth. she,
Forsooth, quoth. I, they be coming euerichone,
But where they are I know no certainte,
Without I may hem at this window se,
Here will I stand awaiting ever among,
For well I wot they will not be long.
Thus as I stood musing full busily,
I thought to take good head of her array,
Her gown was blewe, this wot I verily,
Of good facion, and furred well with gray,
Upon her sleue her word this is no nay,
Which said thus, as my pen can endite,
A moy, que je voy, written with letters white.
Then forth withal she came straight to me,
Your words, quoth. she, fain would I yt I knew,
Forsooth, quoth. I, ye shall well know and see,
And for my word I have none, this is true,
It is enough that my clothing be blew,
As here before I had commandment,
And so to do, I am right well content.
Largess, Steward.
But tell me this I pray you hertely,
The steward here, say me with is her name?
She hight Largess I say you surely,
A fair lady and of right noble fame,
When ye her see ye will report the same,
And under her to bid you welcome all,
There is Belchier, marshal of the hall.
Now all this while that ye here fary still,
Your own matters ye may well have in mind,
But tell me this, have ye brought any bill?
Ye ye, quoth. I, and else I were behind,
Where is there one tell me that I may find,
To whom yt I may show my matters plain?
Surely (quoth. she) unto the chamberlain.
Remembrance chamberlain.
The chamberlain (quoth. I) say ye true,
Ye verily (said she) by mine advise,
Be not aferde, unto her lowly sewe,
It shall be done (quoth. I) as ye devise,
But ye must know her name in any wise,
Trewly (quoth. she) to show you in substance,
Withouten faining her name is Remembrance.
The Secretary she may not yet be forget,
For she does right much in every thing,
Wherefore I read, when ye have wtther ymet,
Your matere hole tell her without faining,
Ye shall her find full good and full loving,
Tell me her name (quoth. I.) of gentleness,
By my good sothe (quoth. she) Avisenesse.
That, quoth. I, for her is passing good,
For every bill and sedule she must see,
Now good, quoth. I, come stand there as I stood,
My felawes be coming yonder they be,
Is it a yape, or say ye soth, quoth. she?
In yape, nay nay, I say you for certain,
Se how they come together twain and twain.
Ye say full sothe, quoth. she, that is no nay,
I see coming a goodly company,
They ben soch folk, quoth. I, dare I say,
That list to love think it verily,
And for my love I pray you faithfully,
At any time, when they upon me call,
That ye wol be good friend to hem all.
Of my friendship, quoth. she, they shall not miss,
And for their ease to put thereto my pain.
God yield it you, quoth. I, but take you this,
How shall we know who is ye chamberlain,
That shall ye well know by her word certain.
What is her word sister, I pray you say,
( Plus ne pourroye) thus writes she always.
Thus as we stood togider she and I,
Even at the yate my felawes were echone,
So met I hem (as me thought was goodly)
And badde hem welcome all by one and one,
Then came forth Countenance anon,
Full hertely, fair sisters all, quoth. she,
Ye be right welcome into this country.
I counsel you to take a litel rest
In my chamber, if it be your pleasaunce,
When ye be there, me think it for the best,
That I go in, and call Perseveraunce,
Because she is of your acquaintance,
And she also will tell you every thing,
How ye shall be ruled of your coming.
My felawes all and I, by one advise
Were well agreed, to do like as she said,
Then we began to dress us in our gise,
That folk should say we were not unpurueid,
And good wagers among us there we laid,
Which of us was atired most goodlest,
And of us all which should be praised best,
The porter came and brought Perseverance,
She welcomed us in curteise manner,
Think ye not long, quoth. she, of your attendance,
I will go speak unto the Herbigere,
That she purvey for your lodging here,
Then will I go unto the Chamberlain,
To speak for you, and come anon again.
And when she departed was and gone,
We saw folks coming without the wall,
So great people yt nombre could we none,
Ladies they were, and gentelwomen all,
Clothed in blewe echone her word withal,
But for to know her word or her devise,
They came so thick, yt I ne might in no wise.
With that anon came in Perseverance,
And where I stood, she came straight to me,
Ye ben, quoth. she, of mine old acquaintance,
You to enquere the bolder would I be,
What word they bear each after her degree,
I you pray tell it me in secret wise,
And I shall keep it close on warrantise.
We ben five Ladies, quoth. I, all in fere,
And gentlewomen four in company,
When they begin to open her mattere,
Then shall ye know her words by and by,
But as for me I have none verily,
And so I told Countenance here before,
All mine array is blewe, what needs more.
Now then, quoth. she, I woll go again,
That ye may have knowledge with ye should do,
In soth, quoth. I, if ye would take the pain,
Ye did right much for us, if ye do so
The rather speed, the sooner may we go,
Great cost always there is in tarying,
And long to sewe it is a weary thing.
Then parted she, and came again anon,
Ye must, quoth. she, come to y^ chamberlain,
We be now ready, quoth. I, everychone,
To follow you, when ever ye list certain,
We have none eloquence to tell you plain,
Beseeching you we may be so excused,
Our true meaning, that it be not refused.
Then went we forth after Perseverance,
To see the prees it was a wonder case,
There for to pass it was great combrance,
The people stood so thick in every place.
Now stand ye still, quoth. she, a littel space,
And for your ease somewhat I shall assay,
If I can make you any better way.
And forth she goes, among hem everychone
Making a way, yt we might thorough pass
More at our ease, and when she had so done,
She beckend us to come, where as she was,
So after her we followed more and las,
She brought us straight unto ye chamberlain,
There left she us, and then she went again.
We salued her as reason would it so,
Full humble beseching her great goodness,
In our matters that we had for to do,
That she would be good lady and maistresse.
Ye be welcome (quoth. she) in sothfastnesse,
And see what I can do, you for to please,
I am ready, that may be to your ease.
We followed her unto the chamber door,
Sisters (quoth. she) come ye in after me.
But wete ye well, there was a paued flore,
The goodliest, that any wight might see,
And furthermore about then looked we,
On each corner, and upon every wall,
Which was made of Burel and Cristall.
Wherein was graven of stories many one,
First how Phillis, of womanly pite,
Died piteously for love of Demophone,
Next after was the story of Tisbe,
How she slew her self under a tree,
Yet saw I more, how in a right pitous caas,
For Antony was slain Cleopatras.
That other side was Hawes the shene,
Full untrewly disceiued in her baine.
There was also Annelida the queen,
Upon Arcite how sore she did complain,
All these stories were graued there certain,
And many mo than I rehearse you here,
It were too long to tell you all in fere.
And because the walls shone so bright,
With fine umple they were al over sprad,
To the intent folk should not hurt her sight,
And through it the stories might be rad,
Then further more I went, as I was lad,
And there I saw without any fail,
A chair set, with full rich apparaile.
And five stages, it was set fro the ground,
Of Cassidony full curiously wrought,
With four pomelles of gold, and very round,
Set with saphirs, as good as could be thought
That wot ye what, if it were through sought,
As I suppose, fro this country to Inde,
Another soch it were right hard to find.
For wete ye well, I was right nere that,
So as I durst, beholding by and by,
Above there was a rich cloth of estate,
Wrought with the needle full straungely,
Her word thereon, and thus it said truly,
I endure to tell you in words few,
With great letters, the better I hem knew.
Thus as we stood, a door opened anon,
A gentilwoman, semely of stature,
Bering a mace, came out her self alone,
Sothly me thought a goodly creature,
She speak nothing to loud, I you ensure,
Nor hastily, but with goodly warning,
Make rome (quoth. she) my lady is coming.
With that anon I saw Perseveraunce,
How she held up the tapet in her hand,
I saw also right in goodly ordinance,
This great Lady within the tapet stand,
Coming outward, I wol ye understand,
And after her a noble company,
I could not tell the nombre sikerly.
Of their names I would nothing enquere,
Further than soch as we would sewe unto,
Save a Lady which was the chauncellere,
Attemperaunce sothly her name was so,
For us needs with her have much to do
In our matters, and always more and more,
And so forth to tell you furthermore,
Of this Lady her beauty to discrive,
My conning is to simple verily,
For never yet the days of my live
So inly fair I have seen none truly,
In her estate assured utterly,
There wanted naught, I dare well assure,
That longed to a goodly creature.
And furthermore, to speak of her array,
I shall tell you the manner of her gown,
Of cloth of gold, full rich it is no nay,
The color blew, of right goodly fashioun,
In taberde wise, the sleves hanging adoun,
And what purfill* there was, and in what wise,
So as I can, I shall it you devise.
After a sort, the collar and the vent
Like as Armine is made in purfeling,
With great pearls full fine and orient,
They were couched all after one worching,
With diamonds in steed of powdering,
The sleeves and purfell of assise,
They were made like in every wise.
About her neck a sort of fair rubies
In white flowers of right fine enamaile,
Upon her head set in the fairest wise
A cercle of great balais of entaile,
That in earnest to speak without fail,
For young and old, and every manner age,
It was a world to looken on her visage.
Thus coming forth to sit in her estate,
In her presence we kneeled down everychone,
Presenting our bills, and ye wot what,
Full humbly she took hem by one and one,
When we had done, then came they all anon,
And did the same each after her manner,
Kneeling at ones, and rising all in fere.
And when this was don, and she set in her place,
The chamberlain she did unto her call,
And she goodly coming unto her apace,
Of her intent knowing nothing at all,
Void back the prease (quoth. she) up to the wall,
Make large room, but look ye do not tarry,
And take these bills to the secretary.
The chamberlain did her commaundment,
And came again, as she was bid to do,
The secretary there being present,
The bills were delivered her also,
Not only ours, but many other mo,
Then the Lady with good advise again,
Anon withal called her chamberlain.
We woll (quoth. she) the first thing that ye do,
The secretary ye do make come anon
With her bills, and thus we will also,
In our presence she read hem everychone,
That we may take good advise thereon
Of the Ladies that been of onr counsel,
Look this be done withouten any fail.
When the chamberlain wist of her intent,
Anon she did the secretary call,
Let your bills (quoth. she) be here present,
My Lady it will: Madame (quoth. she) I shall,
And in presence she will ye hem call,
With good will I am ready (quoth. she)
At her pleasure, when she commands me.
And upon that was made an ordinance,
They that came first, her bills should be red,
Full gentilly then said Perseveraunce,
Reason it will they were soonest sped,
Anon withal, upon a tapet spread
The secretary laid hem down echone,
Our bills first she read one by one.
The first Lady bearing in her devise,
Sans que jamays, thus wrote she on her bill,
Complaining sore, and in full pitous wise
Of promise made, with faithful heart and will,
And so broken against all manner skill
Without desert, always on her party
In this matter desiring a remedy.
Her next following, her word was in this wise
Un sans changer, and thus she did complain,
Though she had guerdoned for her service,
Yet nothing like as she that took the pain,
Wherefore she coud in no wise her restrain,
But in this case sue until her presence,
As reason would, to have recompense.
So furthermore, to speak of other twain,
One of hem wrote after her fantasy,
Onques puis lever, and for to tell you plain,
Her complaint was full pitous verily,
For as she said: there was great reason why,
As I can remember this matere,
I shall you tell the process all in fere.
Her bill was made complaining in her gise,
That of her joy her comfort and gladness
Was no surety, for in no manner wise
She said therein no point of stablenesse,
Now ill, now well, out of all sikernesse,
Full humbly desiring of her high grace,
Soon to show her remedy in this case.
Her fellaw made her bill, and thus she said,
In plaining wise there as she loved best,
Whether she were wroth or well apaid,
She might not see when she woll fainest,
And wroth she was in very earnest
To tell her word, as ferforth as I wot,
Entierement vostre, right thus she wrote,
And upon that she made a great request,
With heart and will, and all that might be done,
As until her that might redress it best,
For in her mind there might she find it soon
The remedy of that which was her boon,
Rehearsing that she had said before,
Beseeching her it might be so no more.
And in like wise as they had done before,
The gentlewomen of our company
Put her bills, and for to tell you more,
One of hem wrote ( C'est sans dire) verily,
And her matere hole to specify,
Within her bill she put it in writing,
And what it said, ye shall have knowing.
It said God wot, and that full pitously,
Like as she was disposed in her heart,
No misfortune that she took grevously,
All one to her was the joy and smert,
Sometime no thank for all her good desert,
Other comfort she wanted none coming,
And so used, it grieved her nothing.
Desiring her, and lowly beseeching
That she would for seek a better way,
As she that had been her days living
Steadfast and true, and will be always.
Of her felaw somewhat I shall you say,
Whose bill was red next forth withal,
And what it meant rehearsen you I shall.
En Dieu est, she wrote in her devise,
And thus she said withouten fail,
Her troth might be take in no wise,
Like as she thout, wherefore she had mervaile,
For troth sometime was wont to take avail
In every matere, but all that is ago,
The more pity that it is suffered so.
Much more there was, whereof she should complain,
But she thought it too great encombraunce,
So much to write, and therefore in certain,
In God and her she put all her affiaunce,
As in her word is made a remembrance,
Beseeching her, that she would in this case
Show unto her the favor of her grace.
The third she wrote, rehersing her grevaunce,
Ye, wot ye what, a pitous thing to here,
For as me thought she felt great displesaunce,
One might right well perceive it by her chere,
And no wonder, it sat her passing nere,
Yet loath she was to put it in writing,
But need woll have course in every thing.
Soyes ensure, this was her word certain,
And thus she wrote in a little space,
There she loved, her labor was in vain,
For he was set all in another place,
Full humbly desiring in that case
Some good comfort her sorrow to appease,
That she might live more at hearts ease.
The fourth surely me thought she liked well,
As in her port, and in her behaving,
And bien moneste, as far as I coud feel,
That was her word till her well belonging,
Wherefore to her she prayed above all thing,
Full heartely to say you in substance,
That she would send her good continuance.
Ye have rehearsed me these bills all,
But now let see somewhat of your intent,
It may so hap, paraventure ye shall,
Now I pray you while I am here present,
Ye shall have knowledge parde what I meant,
But this I say in troth, and make no fable,
The case it self is inly lamentable.
And well I wot ye woll think the same,
Like as I say, when ye have heard my bill,
Now good tell on, I here you by saint Iame,
Abide a while, it is not yet my will,
Yet must ye wete by reason and by skill,
Since ye have knowledge of yt was don before,
And thus it is said without words more.
Nothing so lefe as death to come to me,
For final end of my sorrows and pain,
What should I more desire as seem ye,
And ye knew all aforne it for certain,
I wot ye would, and for to tell you plain
Without her help, that has all thing in cure,
I cannat think that it may long endure.
As for my troth, it has be proved well,
To say the sooth, I can say no more,
Of full long time, and suffered euerydele
In patience, and keep it all in store
Of her goodness, beseeching her therefore,
That I might have my thank in such wise,
As my desert serves of justise.
When these bills were rad euerychone,
The ladies took a good aduisement,
And hem to answer by one and one,
She thought it was too much, in her intent,
Wherefore she yaue hem commandment,
In her presence to come both one and all,
To give hem her answer in general.
What did she then, suppose ye verily?
She spoke her self, and said in this manner:
We have well seen your bills by and by,
And some of hem pitous for to here,
We woll therefore ye know all this in fere,
Within short time, our court of parliment
Here shall be hold in our pallais present.
And in all this, wherein you find you grieved,
There shall ye find an open remedy,
In such wise as ye shall be relieved
Of all that ye rehearse here, thoroughly:
As for the date ye shall know verily,
That ye may have a space in your coming,
For Diligence shall it tell you by writing.
We thanked her in our most humble wise,
Our felawship each one by one assent
Submitting us lowly till her seruise,
For as we thought, we had our trauail spent
In such wise as we held us content,
Then each of us took other by the sleue,
And forthwithall, as we should take our leave,
All suddenly the water sprang anon
In my visage, and therewithal I woke,
Where am I now, thought I, all this is gone,
All mased, and up I began to look,
With that anon I went and made this book,
Thus simply rehearsing the substance,
Because it should not be out of remembrance.
Now verily your dream is passing good,
And worthy to be had in remembrance,
For though I stand here as long as I stood,
It should to me be none encombraunce,
I took therein so inly great pleasaunce.
But tell me now with ye the book do call,
For I must wete: With right good will ye shall.
As for this book, to say you very right,
Of the name to tell you in certainte,
L'assemble de dames, thus it hight,
How think ye, that name is good parde,
Now go farewell, for they call after me
My felawes all, and I must after sone,
Read well my dreme, for now my tale is done.
The Conclusions of the Astrolabie.
This Book (written to his Son in the year of our Lord 1391, and in the 14th of
King Richard 2.) stands so good at this day, especially for the Horizon of
Oxford, as in the opinion of the Learned, it cannot be amended.
LIttle Lowis my son, I perceive well by certain evidences, thine ability
to learn sciences, touching numbers and proportions, and also well consider I
thy busy prayer in especial to learn the Treatise of the Astrolabie. Then
for as much as a Philosopher says, he wrapeth him in his friend, that
condiscendeth to the rightful prayers of his friend: Therefore I have given
thee a sufficient Astrolabie for our orizont, compouned after the latitude of
Oxenford: Upon the which, by mediation of this little Treatise, I purpose to
teach thee a certain number of conclusions pertaining to this same instrument.
I say a certain of conclusions, for three causes, the first cause is this:
Trust well, that all the conclusions that have be founden, or else possibly
might be found in so noble an instrument as is the Astrolabie, ben unknown
perfitly to any mortal man in this region, as I suppose. Another cause is
this, that soothly in any carts of the Astrolabie that I have yseene, there ben
some conclusions, that woll not in all things perform her behests: and some
of hem been too hard to thy tender age of ten year to conceive. This Treatise
divided in five parts, will I show the wonder light rules and naked words in
English, for Latin ne can thou not yet but small, my little son. But
nevertheless, suffiseth to thee these true conclusions in English, as well as
suffiseth to this noble clerks, Greeks, these same conclusions in Greek, and
to the Arabines in Arabike, and to Jews in Hebrewe, and to the Latin folk in
Latin: which Latin folk had hem first out of other diverse languages, and writ
hem in her own tongue, that is to saine, in Latin.

And God wot that in all these languages, and in many mo, have these
conclusions been sufficiently learned and taught, and yet by diverse rules, *
Right as diverse paths leaden diverse folk the right way to Rome.

Now woll I pray meekely every person discreet, that redeth or hears this
little Treatise, to have my rude ententing excused, and my superfluity of
words, for two causes: The first cause is, for that curious enditing, and hard
sentences, is full heavy at ones for such a child to learn: And the second
cause is this, that sothly, me seems better to written unto a child twice a
good sentence, than he foryete it once. And Lowis, if it so be that I show thee
in my lith English, as true conclusions touching this matter, and not only as
true, but as many and subtle conclusions, as ben yshewed in Latin, in any
common Treatise of the Astrolabie, conne me the more thank, and pray God save
the king, that is lord of this language, and all that him faith bears, and
obeys, eueriche in his degree, the more and the less. But considers well,
that I ne usurp not to have founden this work of my labor or of mine engine:
I nam but a leaud compilatour of the labor of old Astrologiens, and have it
translated in mine English, only for thy doctrine: and with this sword shall I
sleen envy.

The first Party.
THe first party of this Treatise shall rehearse the figures, and the members
of thine Astrolabie, because that thou shall have the greater knowing of thine
own instrument.

The second Party.
THe second party shall teach thee to werken the very practike of the foresaid
conclusions, as far forth, and also narrow, as may be showed in so small an
instrument portatife about. For well wot every Astrologien, that smallest
fractions ne woll not be showed in so small an instrument, as in subtle
tables, calculed for a cause.

The third Party.
THe third party shall contain diverse tables of longitudes and latitudes of
sterres, fix in the Astrolabie. And tables of the declinations of the Sun, and
tables of the longitude of cities and towns: and tables, as well for the
gouernation of the clock, as for to find the altitude meridian, and many
another notable conclusion, after the kalenders of the reverent clerks, Friar
John Some, and Friar N. Lenne.

The fourth Party.
THe fourth party shall be a theorike, to declare the meaning of the celestial
bodies, with the causes, the which the fourth party in special shall show in a
table of the very meuing of the moon, from one to one, every day and every
sign, after thine almanacke. Upon the which table, there follows a canon,
sufficient to teach, as well in manner of working in the same conclusions, as
to know in our Horizont, with which degree of Zodiake the moon arises in any
latitude, and the arising in any plannet after his latitude fro the eclipticke
line.

The fifth Party.
THe fifth party shall been an introductorie, after the statutes of our doctors,
on which, thou may learn a great part of the general rules of theorike in
Astrology. In which fifth party, thou shall find tables of equacions of houses,
after the latitude of Oxenford, and tables of dignities of plannets, and other
notefull things, if God vouchsafe, and his mother the maiden, mo than I behete.

The Ring.
THy Astrolabie has a ringe to putten on thy thombe, on thy right hand, in
taking of the height of things. And take keep, from hence forward I woll
clepe the height of heavy thing that is take by the rule, the altitude,
withouten mo words.

The Turet.
THis ring ronneth in a manner of a turet, fastened to the mother of thine
Astrolabie, in a room or space, that it distroubeleth not the instrument to
hangen after his right centure. The mother of thine Astrolabie, is thickest by
the brinkes, that is, the utmost ring with degrees: and all the middle within
the ring, shall be thinner, to receive the plates for diverse clymates, and
also for the rethe, that is shape in manner of a net, or else after the web of
a loppe.

The Mother.
THe mother of thine Astrolabie, is the thickest plate, pierced with a large
hole, that receives in her womb the thin plates, compowned of diverse
clymates, and thy rethe shapen in manner of a net, or of a web of a loppe.

Of the four Lines.
THis mother is divided on the back half with a line, that comes discending
fro the ring down to the netherest bordure, the which line, fro the foresaid
ring unto the center of the large hole amidde, is cleaped the South line, or
else the line Meridionall: and the remenaunt of this line, down to the bordure,
is cleaped the North line, or all the line of the Midnight.

Of four Lines, East, West, North, and South.
OVerthwart this foresaid long line, there crosses him another line of the
same length, fro East to West, of the which line, from a little cross in the
bordure, unto the centure of the large hole, is cleaped the East line, or else
the line Oriental: and the remenaunt of the line, fro the foresaid Oriental
unto the bordure, is ycleaped the West line, or the line Occidentall.

Now have thou here the four quarters of thine Astrolabie, divided after the
four principal plages or quarters of the firmament.

Which is the right side, and which is the left.
THe East side of the Astrolabie is cleaped the right side, and the West side
is cleaped the left side. Foryet not this little Lowis. Put the ringe of thine
Astrolabie upon the thombe of thy right hand, and then woll his right side be
toward thy left side, and his left side woll be toward thy right side. Take
this rule general, as well on the back, as on the womb side. Upon the end
of this East line (as I first said) is ymarked a little cross, where as
evermore generally is considered the entering of the East degree, in the which
the Sun arises.

The degrees fro the East line to the South.
FRo the little cross, up to the end of the Meridionall line, under the ring
shall thou find the bordure, divided with xc. degrees, and by that same
proportion is every quarter of thine Astrolabie divided, over the which
degrees, there been numbers of Augrime, that deuiden thilke same degrees fro
five to five, as shows by long strikes between, of the which, by long
strikes, the space between contains a mile way, and every degree of thilke
bordure contains four minutes, that is to say, four minutes of an hour.

Of the twelve Signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, and the others.
UNder the compass of thilke degrees been written the names of the twelve
signs, as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. And the nombers of the degrees
of the signs been written in Augrime above, and with long divisions, from five
to five, deuideth from the time that the sign enters unto the last end. But
understand well, that these degrees of signs been eueriche of hem considered
of forty minutes, and every minute of forty seconds, and so forth into small
fractions infinite, as says Alcabucius. And therefore know well, that a degree
of the bordure contains four minutes, and a degree of a sign contains
forty minutes, and have this in mind.

The Cercle of the Days.
NExt this follows the cercle of the days, that been figured in manner of
the degrees, that conteinen in number three hundred threescore and five,
divided also with long strikes, from five to five, and the numbers of Augrime
written under the cercle.

The Cercle of the twelve Months.
NExt the cercle of days, follows the cercle of the twelve names of the
months, that is to say, Ianuarius, Februarius, Marcius, April, Maius, Iunius,
Julius, August, September, October, November, December.

The names of these Months taken her names, some for properties, and some by
statutes of Emperors, and some by other Lords of Rome. Eke of these Months, as
liked to Julius Caesar, and Caesar Augustus, some were ycompouned of diverse
nombers of days, as Iulie and August. Then has Ianuarius xxxi. days,
Februarius xxviii. Marcius xxxi. April xxx. Maius xxxi. Iunius xxx. Julius
xxxi. August xxxi. September xxx. October xxxi. November xxx. December xxxi.
Nathelesse, although that Julius Caesar took two days out of Feuerere, and put
hem in his Month of July, and Augustus Caesar cleped the Month of August after
his name, and ordained it of xxxi. days: yet trust well, that the Sun
dwells therefore never the more, ne the less, in one sign than in another.

The Names of the holy days.
THen follows the names of the holy days in the Calendar, and next hem the
letters, A. B. C. on which they fallen.

The Scale of the Astrolabie.
NExt the foresaid cercle of the A. B. C. under the cross line is marked the
scale, in manner of two squires, or else in manner of ledders, that serves by
his xxii. points, and his divisions of full many a subtell conclusion of this
foresaid scale: For the cross line unto the very angle, is cleaped Umbra
recta, or else Umbra extensa, and the nether party Umbra versa.

The Rule.
THen have thou a broad rule, that has on every end a square plate, parted
with certain holes, some more, and some less, to receiuen the stremes of the
Sun by day, and eke by mediation of thine eye, to know the altitude of the
sterres by night.

The Pin, which is imagined to be Pole artike, and the Horse.
THen is there a large pin, in manner of an exiltre, that goes through the
hole that halt the tables of the climathes in the reeth, in the womb of the
mother, through which pin there goes a little wedge, the which is cleped the
Horse, that straineth all these parts together. This foresaid great pin, in
manner of an exiltre, is imagined to be the Pole artike in thine Astrolabie.

For lines on the Womb side.
THe womb side of thine Astrolabie is also divided with a long cross in four
quarters, from the Cast to West, and from the South to North, from right side
to left side, as is the backside.

The degrees of the Womb side.
THe border of which womb side is divided fro the point of the East line unto
the point of the South line, under the ring, in 90 degrees, and by the same
proportion is every quarter divided, as is the backeside, that amounts to 360
degrees. And understand well, that the degrees of this border, been aunswering
and consenting to the degrees of Equinoctial, that is divided in the same
number, as every other cercle is in the high heaven.

This border is divided also with 23 letters, and a small cross above the
South line, that shows the 24 hours equals of the clock. And I have said,
five of these degrees maken a mile way, and three mile way maken an hour, and
every degree of this border contains 4 minutes, and every minute 40 seconds.
Now have I told thee twice, and for the more declaration.

Of the principal Cercles.
THe plate under the reete, is discriued with three Cercles, of which, the
least is cleaped the Cercle of Cancer, because that the head of Cancer tourneth
evermore concentrike upon the same Cercle. In this half of Cancer is the
greatest declination Northward of the Sun, and therefore is he ycleped
Solsticium of Summer, which declination, after the Ptholome, is 23 degrees, and
50 minutes, as well in Cancer, as in Capricorn. This sign of Cancer is cleped
the Tropic of Summer, of Tropos, that is to saine, ayenward. The middle cercle
in wideness of this three, is cleaped the cercle Equinoctial, upon which
tourneth evermore the heads of Aries and Libra. And understand well, that
evermore this cercle Equinoctial tourneth justly fro very East to very West,
as I have showed in the sphere solid. This same cercle is cleaped also the
wayer of the day: For when the Sun is in the head of Aries and Libra, then
been days and nights like of length in all the world, and therefore been these
two signs called Equinoctis. And all that moves within these heads of Aries
and Libra, is ycalled Northward: and all that moves without these heads, his
meuing is cleped Southward: as for the Equinoctial, take keep of the
latitudes, North and South, and forget it not: by this cercle Equinoctial,
been considered the 24 hours of the clock. For evermore, the arising of 15
degrees of the Equinoctial, makes an hour equal of the clock. This
Equinoctial is cleped the mid way of the first meuing, or else of the Sun.
And note, that the first meuing is cleped meuing of the first mouable of the
eighth Sphere, which meuing is fro East to West, and again into East. Also it
is cleped girdle of the first meuing; For it departs the first meuable, that
is to sain, the sphere in two like parties, even distant fro the Poles of this
world. The widest of these three cercles principal, is cleped the cercle of
Capricorn, and tourneth evermore concentrike upon the same cercle. In the head
of this foresaid Capricorn is the greatest declination Southward of the Sun:
and therefore it is cleped Solsticium of Winter. This sign of Capricorn is
also cleped the Tropic of Winter. For then begins the Sun to come again to
us ward.

Of the Almicanteras, the signet, and what is thine Orizont.
UPon this foresaid plate been compassed certain cercles, that highten
almicanteras: of which some of hem seemen parfit cercles, and some seemen
imparfit. The centure that stands amidst the narrowest cercle, is cleped the
signet. And the netherest cercle, that deuideth the two emisperies, that is the
party of the heaven above the earth, and the party beneath. These almicanteras
been compouned by two and two, all be it so, that on diverse Astrolabies, some
almicanteras been divided by one, and some by two, and some by three, after the
quantity of the Astrolabie. This foresaid signet is imagined to be the very
point over the croune of thy head, and also this signet is the very pole of the
orizont in every region.

What been thine Azimutes.
FRom this signet (as it seems) there commen crooked strikes, like to the
claws of a loppe, or else like to the work of a woman's call, in keruing
overthwart the almicanteras, and these same strikes or divisions been cleped
Azimutes, and they deuiden the Orizonts on thine Astrolaby in 24 divisions. And
these Azimutes serve to know the costs of the firmament, and to other
conclusions, as for to know the signet of the Sun, and of every Sterre.

Of the Twelve Hours of the Planets.
NExt these Azimutes, under the cercle of Cancer, been the twelve divisions
embolite, much like to the shape of the Azimutes, that shown the spaces of the
hours of Planets.

Thy Reete, or else thy Zodiake.
THy Reete of thine Astrolabye, which is thy Zodiake, shapen in manner of a
net, or of a lop web, after the old description, which thou may turn
up and down as thy self likes, contains certain number of Sterres fire,
with her longitudes and latitudes determinate, if so be that the maker have not
erred. The names of the Sterres ben written in the margin of thy Reete, there
they sit, of the which Sterres, the small point is cleaped the Centure. And
understand, that all the Sterres sitting within the Zodiake of thine
Astrolaby, ben cleped Sterres of the North, for they arisen by the North-east
line, and all the remenaunt fixed out of the Zodiake, ben ycleped Sterres of
the South, but I say not that they arisen all by the South-east line, witness
of Aldeberan, and also Algomisa.

Generally understand this rule, that thilke sterres that been cleaped sterres
of the North, arisen rather than the degree of her longitude, and all the
sterres of the South arisen after the degree of her longitude, that is to
said, sterres in thine Astrolaby.

The measure of longitude of sterres, ytaken in the line ecliptic of heaven,
under the which line, when the Sun and the Moon been line right, else in the
superficie of this line, then is the eclipse of the Sun or of the Moon, as I
shall declare, and eke the cause why: but soothly, the ecliptic line of the
Zodiake, is the vtterest bordure of the Zodiake, there thy degrees ben marked.
The Zodiake of thy Astrolabye is shapen as a Compass, which that contains a
large bread, as after the quantity of thy Astrolaby, in ensample, that the
Zodiake of heaven is imagined to be a superficies, containing the latitude of
twelve signs, whereas all the remenaunt of the cercles in heaven ben imagined
very lines, without any latitude, amiddes the celestial Zodiake is imagined a
line, which that is cleped the Eclipticke line, under the which line is
evermore the way of the Sun. Thus ben there six degrees of the Zodiake on
that one side of the line, and six degrees on that other. The Zodiake is
divided in twelve principal divisions, that departen the twelve signs, and for
the straitness of thine Astrolabye, then is every small division in a sign
yparted by two degrees and two, I mean degrees containing sixty Minutes, and
this foresaid heauenish Zodiake is cleaped the circle of the Signs, or the
circle of beasts. For Zodiake in language of Greek, souneth beasts in Latin
tongue, and in the Zodiake been the twelve Signs, that have names of beasts,
because when the Sun enters in any of the Signs, he takes the property of
such beasts, or else for that the sterres that been there, ben fixed, been
disposed in sign of beasts, or shape like beasts, or else when Planets ben
under the Signs, they transmue us by her influence, operations and effects,
like to operations of beasts. And understand also, that when any hot Planet
comes into an hot Sign, then enters his heat, and if a Planet be cold,
then amenuseth his coldness, because of the hot Sign. And by this conclusion
may thou taken ensample in all Signs, be they moist or dry, moveable or
fix, reckening the quality of the Planets, as I first said. And euerich of
these twelve Signs has respect to a certain parcel of the Body of a man, and
has it in governance: as Aries has thine head, and Taurus thy neck and thy
throat, Gemini thine arm holes and thine arms, and so forth, as shall be showed
more plainly in the fifth party of this Treatise. The Zodiake, the which is
party of the eight Sphere, ouerkerueth the equinoctial, and he ouerkerueth him
again in even parts, and that one half declineth Southward, and that other
Northward, as plainly declares the Treatise of the Sphere.

The Labell.
THen have thou a Labell, that is shapen like a Rule, save that it is strait,
and has no plates on either end, but with the small point of the foresaid
labell shall thou calcule the equacions in the bordure of thine Astrolaby, as
by thine almury.

The Almury, the denticle of Capricorn, or else the calculere.
THine Almury is cleped the denticle of Capricorn, or else the calculere, this
same almury set fix in the head of Capricorn, and it serves of many a
necessary conclusion in equacion of things, as shall be showed.

Here begins the Conclusions of thine Astrolaby, to find the degree in the
which the Sun is day by day, after his course about.
Reckon and know which is the day of the Month, and lay thy rule upon the same
day, and then woll the very point of thy rule verily sitten on the bordure,
upon the degree of the Sun. Ensample as thus. In the year of our Lord 1391,
the twelfth day of March at midday, I would know the degree of the Sun, I
sought in the back half of mine Astrolaby, and found the circle of the days,
the which I knew by the names of the Months, written under the same Circle: Tho
laid I my Rule over the foresaid day, and found the point of my Rule in the
border, upon the first degree of Aries, a little within the degree: and thus
knew I this conclusion.

Another day I would know the degree of my Sun, and this was at Midday in
the xiii. day of December, I found the day of the month in manner as I said:
tho laid I my Rule upon the foresaid xiii. day, and found the point of my Rule
upon the first degree of Capricorn, a little within the degree, and then had I
of this conclusion the very experience.

To know the altitude of the Sun, either of celestial bodies.
PVT the ring of thine Astrolabye upon thy right thombe, and turn thy left
side again the light of the Sun, and remeve thy Rule up and down, till the
stream of the Sun shine through both holes of the Rule: look then how many
degrees this Rule is areised fro the little cross upon the East line, and take
there the altitude of thy sun: and in this same wise may thou know by
night the altitude of the Moon, or of the bright sterres. This Chapter is so
general ever in one, that there needs no more declaration, but forget it not.

To know the degree of the Sun, and of thy Zodiake, by the days in the backside
of thine Astrolabie.
THen if thou will wete the reckening, to know which is the day in thy Calendar
of the month that thou art in, lay thine Astrolabie, that is to say, the
allidatha, upon the day in the Calendar of thine Astrolabie, and he shall show
thee thy degree of ye Sun.

To know every time of the day, by light of the Sun, and every time of the
night by the Stars fix, and eke to know by night or by day the degree of the
Sign that ascends on the East Orizont, which is cleped commonly ascendent.
TAke the altitude of the Sun when thee list, as I have said, and set the
degree of the Sun (in^case that it be before the middle of the day) among
thine almicanteras, on the Easte-side of thine Astrolabie: and if it be after
the middle of the day, set the degree of the Sun upon the West Side. Take this
manner of setting for a general rule ones for ever.

And when thou have yset the degree of the Sun upon as many almicanteras of
height, as was the Sun, taken by thy rule, lay over thy Labell upon the
degree of the Sun, and then woll the point of the Labell sitten in the
bordure, upon the very tide of the day. Ensample of this.

The year of our Lord, a thousand three hundred ninety and one, the twelfth
day of March, I would know the tide of the day, I took y^ altitude of my
Sun, and found that it was 25 degrees, and 30 Minutes of height of the
bordure in the backside, tho turned I mine Astrolabye, and because it was
before midday, I turned my reete, and set the degree of the Sun, yt is to
say, the first degree of Aries in the right side of mine Astrolabie, upon the
25 degree, and 30 minutes of heyght, among my almicanteras: Tho laid I my
Labell upon the degree of my Sun, and found the point of my Labell in the
bordure, on the capital letter, yt is cleped an X. Tho reckened I all the
capital letters, fro ye line of Midnight, unto the foresaid letter X. and
found it was nine of the Clock of the day. Tho looked I over my East Orizont,
and found there the twelve degree of Geminius ascending, which that I took for
mine ascendent, and in this wise had I the experience for evermore in which
manner I should know the tide of the day, and eke mine ascendent. Tho would I
wete that same night following the hour of the night, and wrought in this
wise: among an heap of Sterres, it lyked me to take the altitude of the fair
white Sterre that is cleped the Alhabor, and found her sitting on the West Side
of ye line of Midday, eighteen degrees of height, taken by my Rule on the
backside. Tho set I y^ Centure of this Alhabor upon eighteen degrees, among my
almicanteras, upon the West Side, because that he was found upon the
West Side: tho laid I my Labell over the degree of the Sun, that was descended
under the West Orizont, and reckened all the letters capitals, fro the line of
Midday unto ye point of my Labell in the bordure, and found yt it was after
noon, passed seven of the clock, the space of eleven degrees. Tho looked I
down upon my East Orizont, and found there twenty degrees of Libra ascending,
whom I took for mine ascendent, and thus learned ones for ever to know in
which manner I should come to the hour of the night, and to mine ascendent, as
verily as may be taken by so small an instrument. But nathelesse, this rule in
general will I warn thee for ever: ne make thou never none ascendent at noone
of the day. Take a just ascendent of thine Astrolabie, and have set justly a
cloak, when any celestial body, by the which thou wenest govern thilke
things, been nigh the South line, for trust well, when the Sun is near ye
Meridionall line, the degree of the Sun remains so long concentrike upon
thine almicanteras that soothly thou shall err fro the just ascendent. The
same conclusion say I, by my centure of my Sterre fix by the night: and
moreover, by experience I wot well, that fro our Orizont, fro enleven of the
clock, unto one, in taking of the just ascendent, in a portatife Astrolabie,
it is too hard to know, I mean from eleven of the clock before noon, till one
of the clock next following: and for the more declaration, lo here thy figure
next after this rule that follows.

To know the degree of the Sun in thy Zodiake, by the days, in the backside of
thine Astrolabie.
THen thou wolt weten, to reckon and know which is the day of the month yt thou
art in, and lay ye rule of thy Astrolabie, that is to say, the allidatha, upon
the day, in the Calendar of thine Astrolabie, and he shall show thee thy
degree of the Sun.

Special declaration of the Ascendent.
THe ascendent soothly is as well in all nativities, as in questions, and as in
elections of times is a thing which yt these Astrologians greatly observen,
wherefore me seems convenient, sens I speak of the ascendent, to make of it a
special declaration. The ascendent soothly, to take it at the largest, is
thilke degree that ascends at any of these foresaid times, on the East
Orizon: and therefore, if that any Planet ascend at thilke same time in ye
foresaid same, gree of his longitude, men say that thilke Planet is in
Horoscopo, but soothly, the house of that ascendent, that is to say, the first
house, or y^ East angle, is a thing more broad and large, for after the
statutes of Astrologiens, what celestial body, that is five degrees above
thilke degree that ascends on the Orizont, or within that number, that is to
saine, nere the degree that ascends, yet reckon they thilke Planet in the
ascendent, and what Planet that is under thilke degree, that ascends the
space of fifteen degrees, yet sain they, that Planet is like to him, that is
the hour of the ascendent. But soothly, if he pass the bounds of the foresaid
spaces, above or beneath, they said, y^ thilke Planet is falling fro the
Ascendent, yet said these Astrologiens, that the Ascendent, and eke the Lord
of the Ascendent, may be shapen for to be fortunate, or unfortunate, as thus: A
fortunate Asecendent clepen they, when that no wicked Planet of Saturn or
Mars, or else the tail of the Dragon, is in the house of the Ascendent, ne that
no wicked Plannet have no aspect of enmity upon the Ascendent: But they woll
cast, yt they have fortunate Planet in her Ascendent, and yet in his felicity,
and then say they that it is well. Furthermore, they said, that Fortune of an
Ascendent, is the contrary of these foresaid things. The Lord of the Ascendent,
said they, yt he is fortunate, when he is in good place for the Ascendent, and
eke the Lord of the Ascendent is in an angle, or in a succedent, where he is in
his dignity, and comforted with friendly aspectes received, and eke that he may
seen y^ Ascendent not retrograde, ne combust, ne joined with no shrewe in the
same sign, ne that he be not in his discention, ne reigned with no Planet in
his discentious, ne have upon him none aspect unfortunate, and then they said
that he is well.

Nathelesse, these been observaunces of judicial matter, and rites of Painims,
in which my spirit has no faith, ne knowinge of her Horoscopum, for they
said, that every sign is departed in three even parts, by 10 degrees, and the
ilke portion they cleapen a face. And although a Plannet have a latitude fro
the Ecliptike, yet sain some folk, so that y^ Planet arise in that same sign,
with any degree of the foresaid face, in which his longitude is reckened. And
yet is the Planet in Horoscopo, be in nativities or in election

To know the very equacion of the degrees of the Sun, if it so be that it fall
betwixt two almicanteras.
FOr as much as the almicanteras of thine Astrolaby ben compowned by two and
two, whereas some almicanteras in some Astrolabies be compouned by one, or else
by two, it is necessary to thy learning, to teach thee first to know, and
wriche with thine instrument: wherefore, when that the degree of the Sun
falls between two almicanteras, or else, if thine almicanteras ben graven
with over great a point of a Compace, for both these things may cause error,
as well in knowing of the tide of the day, as of the very ascendent. Thou must
werken in this wise: set the degree of the Sun upon the higher almicanteras,
as of both. And wait well where thy almury touches the bordure, and set there a
prick of ynke, set adoune again the degree of the Sun upon the nether
almicanteras, or both, and set there another prick: remeve then thy almury in
y^ bordure, even amiddes both pricks, and this woll leaden justly the degree
of the Sun, to sit between both ye almicanteras in his right place. Lay then
the labell on the degree of the Sun and find in the bordure the very tide of
the day, or of the night. And also verily shall thou find upon thy East orizont
thine ascendent.

To know the spring of the dawning, and the end of the evening, the which been
cleaped the two coepusculis.
SEt the nadyre of thy Sun upon 18 degrees of height among thine almicanteras
on the West Side, and lay thy labell on the degree of the Sun, and then shall
the point of the labell show the spring of the day: also set the nadire of the
Sun upon the 18 degrees of height among thine almicanteras on the East Side,
and lay over thy labell upon the degree of the Sun and with the point of thy
labell find in ye bordure the end of thine evening, that is very night. The
nadire of ye Son is thilke degree that is opposite to y^ degree of the Sun
in the 320. sign, as thus. Every degree of Aries, by order, is nadire to every
degree of Libra by order, and Taurus to Scorpion, Gemini to Sagitarius, Cancer
to Capricorn, Leo to Aquary, Virgo to Pisces. And if any degree in thy Zodiake
be derke, his nadire shall declare him.

To know the Arch of the Day, that some folk callen the Day artificial, fro the
Sun rising, till it go down.
Set the degree of the Sun upon thine East orizont, and lay thy labell on
the degree of the Sun, and at the point of thy labell in the bordure set a
prick; turn then thy reete about, till the degree of the Sun sit upon the West
orizont, and lay the labell upon the same degree of the Sun, and at the point
of the labell set another prick. Reckon then the quantity of time in the
bordure betwixt both pricks, and take there thine arche of the day: the
remenaunt of the bordure under the orizont, is the arch of the night. Thus
may thou reckon both arches of every portion where that thou likest, and by
this manner of werkyng may thou see how long that any sterre fix dwells
above the earth, fro the time that he rises, till he go to rest. But the day
naturel, that is to said, 24 hours, is the revolution of the Equinoctial,
with as much party of the Zodiake, as the Sun of his proper moving passes
in the mean while.

To turn the hours inequals, and the hours equals.
TO know the number of the degrees in the hours inequals, and depart hem by 15,
and take there thine hours equals.

To know the quantity of the day vulgar, that is to say, fro spring of the day
unto the very Night.
KNow thy quantity of thine coepusculis, as I have it taught in the chapter
before, and add hem to the arche of the day artificial, and take there thy
space of all the hole day vulgar unto the very night. In the same manner
may thou work to know the vulgar night.

To know the Hours inequals by Day.
UNderstand well, that these hours inequals ben cleaped hours of the planets:
and understond well, that sometime been they longer by day than they be by
night, and sometime contrary. But understand thou well, that evermore generally
the hours inequale of the day, with the hours inequale of the night,
conteyneth 30 degrees of the bordure, the which bordure is evermore answering
to the degrees of the equinoctial, wherefore depart the arche of the day
artificial in 12, and take there the quantity of the hour inequale by day and
if thou abate the quantity of the hour inequale by day, out of 360 degrees,
thou shall the remenant that leaves, perform the hour inequale by night.

To know the quantity of hours equales.
THe quantities of hours equales, that is to said, the hours of the clock
ben departed by 15 degrees already in the bordure of thy Astrolabie, as well by
night as by day, generally for evermore. What needs any more declaration:
wherefore when thee list to know how many hours of the clock been passed, or
any part of any of these hours ben to commen, fro such a time to such a time,
by day or by night, know the degree of thy Sun, and lay thy label on it:
then turn thy reete about jointly with thy label, and with the point of it
reckon in the border, fro the Sun arysing, into the same place there thou
desire by day as by night. This conclusion woll I declare in the fourth party
of the last chapter of this treatise, so openly, that there shall lack no
word that needs declaration.

Special declaration of the Hours of the Planets.
UNderstand well, that evermore, fro the arising of the Sun, till it go to
rest, the nadire of the Sun shall show the hour of the plannet, and fro that
time forward, all the night, till the Sun arise, then shall the very degree of
the Sun show the hour of the planet. Ensample as thus. The 13. day of March
fell upon a saturday parauenture, and at the arising of the Sun I found the
second degree of Aries sitting upon mine East orizont, all be it was but
little. Then found I the second degree of Libra nadire of my Sun, discending
on my West orizont, upon which West orizont, every day generally at the Sun
arising, enters the hour of any plannet, under the foresaid West orizont,
after the which planet, the day bears his name, and ends in the next strike
of the planet, under the foresaid West orizont: and ever as the Sun clymbeth
upper and upper, so goes his nadire downer and downer, and eching fro such
strikes the hours of plannets by order, as they sitten in heaven. The first
hour inequale of every saturday, is Saturn, and the second to Jupiter, the
third to Mars, the fourth to the Sun, the fifth to Venus, the sixth to
Mercurius, the seventh to the Moon, and then again the eight to Saturn, the
ninth to Jupiter, the tenth to Mars, the eleueuth to the Sun, the twelfth to
Venus. And now is my Sun gone to rest, as for that saturday, then shows the
very degree of the Sun the hour of Mercury, entering under my west orizont at
even. And next him succeeds the Moon, and so forth by order, planet after
planet, in hour after hour all the night long, till the Sun arise. Now rises
the Sun the sunday by the morrow, and the nadyre of the Sun upon the West
orizont, shows me the entering of the hour of the foresaid Sun. And in this
manner succeeds planet under planet, fro Saturn unto the Moon, and fro the
Moon up again to Saturn, hour after hour generally, and thus know I this
conclusion.

To know with which degree of the Zodiac any Star fix in thine Astrolabie,
arises upon the East Orizont, although the Orizont be in another Sign.
SEt the centure of the sterre upon the East orizont, and look what degree of
any sign that sits upon the same orizont at the same time: and understand
well, that with the same degree arises the same sterre. And this maruailous
arising with a strong degree in another sign, is because that the latitude of
the sterre fix is either North or South fro the Equinoctial. But soothly, the
latitudes of planets been commonly yreckened fro the ecliptike, because that
none of hem declineth but few degrees out fro the bread of the Zodiake. And
take good keep of this chapter of arising of celestial bodies, for there
trusts well, that neither moon neither sterre in our ambolife orizont, that
arises with the same degree of his longitude, save in one case, and that is
when they have no longitude fro the eclipticke line. But nevertheless,
sometime is euerich of these planets under the same line.

To know the declination of any Degree in the Zodiac, fro the equinoctial
Circle.
SEt the degree of any sign upon the line Meridionall, and reckon his altitude
in the almicanteras, fro the East orizont up to the same degree set in the
foresaid line, and set there a prick: Turn up then thy reere, and set the
head of Aries or Libra in the same Meridionall line, and set there another
prick. And when that this is done, consider the altitudes of hem both: for
soothly, the difference of thilke altitude, is the declination of thilke degree
fro the Equinoctial. And if it so be, that thilke degree be Northward fro the
Equinoctial, then is his declination North, and if it be Southward, then it is
South.

To know for what latitude in any Region the Almicanteras in my Tables been
compouned.
Reckon how many degrees of almicanteras in the Meridionall line, be from the
cercle equinoctial, unto the signet, or else from the Pole artike unto the
North orizont, and for so great a latitude, or so small a latitude, is the
table compouned.

To know the latitude of the Sun, in the midst of the day, that is cleped the
altitude Meridian.
SEt the degree of thy Sun upon the line Meridionall, and reckon how many
degrees of almicanteras been betwixe thine East orizont and the degree of thy
Sun, and take there thine altitude meridian, that is to said, the highest
degree of the Sun, as for that day. So may thou know in the same line the
highest line that any star fire climbeth by night, this is to said, that when
any star fire is passed the line meridionall, then begins it to descend, and
so does the Sun.

To know the degree of the Sun, by the Reet, for a manner coryosyte.
SEek busily with thy rule the highest of the Sun in the midst of the day,
turn then thine Astrolabie, and with a prick of ynke mark the number of the
same altitude in the line meridionall. Turn then thy reet about, till thou
find a degree of thy Zodiake according with the prick, this is to said,
sitting on the prick, and in sooth thou shall find but two degrees in all the
Zodiake, of that condition. And yet thilke two degrees been in diverse signs.
Then may thou lightly, by the season of the year, know the sign in which is
the Sun.

To know which day is like to other in length throughout the year.
LOok which degrees been ylike from the heeds of Cancer and Capricorn, and look
when the Sun is in any of thilke degrees, then been the days like of length,
that is to saine, that as long is that day in that month, as was soch a day in
soch a month, there varieth but littell. Also if thou take two days naturelles
in the year, ylike far from either points of the Equinoctial, in the opposite
parties, then as long is the day artificial on that one day as on that other,
and eke the contrary.

This Chapter is a manner declaration to Conclusions that follows.
UNderstand well, that thy Zodiake is departed into half cercles, from the head
of Capricorn unto the head of Cancer, and ayenward from the head of Cancer unto
the head of Capricorn. The head of Capricorn is the lowest point, where as the
Sun goes in Winter, and the head of Cancer is the highest point, in which the
Sun goes in Summer. And therefore understand well, that any two degrees that
been ylike far from any of these two heads, trust well that thilk two degrees
been like declination, be it Southward or Northward, and the days of hem been
like of length, and the nights also, and shadows ylike, and the altitudes ylike
at midday for ever.

To know the very degree of any manner Star strange after his latitude, though
he be indeterminate in thy Astrolabie, soothly to the truth thus he shall be
known.
TAke the altitude of thy Sterre, when he is on the East side of the line
meridional, as nigh as thou may guess, and take the ascendent anon right by
some manner sterre fix, which thou know, and forget not the altitude of the
first sterre ne thine ascendent. And when that this is done, aspie diligently
when this same first sterre passes any thing to the South westward, and catch
him anon right in the same nombre of the altitude on the West side of this
line meridional, as he was caught on the East side, and take a new ascendent
anon right by some manner fix, the which that thou know, and forget not
this second ascendent. And when this is done, reckon then how many degrees been
betwixt the first ascendent, and the second ascendent, and reckon well the
middle degree betwixt both ascendents, and set thilk middle degree upon thine
East orizont, and then look what degree sit upon the line meridional, and take
there the very degree of the Ecliptike, in which the sterre stands for the
time. For in the Ecliptike is the longitude of a celestial body, reckened even
fro the half of the head of Aries, unto the end of Pisces, and his latitude is
reckened after the quantite of his declination North or South, toward the poles
of this work. As thus, if it be of the Sun or any fix sterre, reckon his
latitude or his declinacion fro the equinoctial cercle, and if it be of a
planet, reckon then the quantite of his latitude from the ecliptike line, all
be it so that from the equinoctial, may the declinacion or the latitude of any
body celestial be reckened, after the sight North or South, and after the
quantite of his declinacion. And yet so may the latitude or the declinacion of
any body celestial, save only of the Sun, after his sight North or South. And
after the quantite of his declinacion be reckened from the ecliptike line, fro
which line all Planets sometime decline, North or South, save only the
foresaid Sun.

To know the degrees of Longitudes of fix Stars, after that they been
determinate in thine Astrolabie, if it so be that they been truly set.
SEt the center of the sterre upon the line meridional, and take keep of thy
Zodiake, and look what degree of any sign sit upon the same line meridional
at the same time, and there the degree in which the sterre stands, and with
the same degree comes the same sterre unto the same line from the orizont.

To know in special the Latitude of our Center, I mean after the altitude of
Oxenford, and the height of our Pole.
UNderstand well, that as far is the head of Aries or Libra in the
equinoctial, from our orizont, as is the synet from the pole artike, and as hye
as the pole artike from the orizont, as the equinoctial is far from the
synet: I preue it thus by the latitude of Oxenford; understand well that the
height of our pole artike from our North orizont is 51 degrees, and 50 minutes,
then is the synet from the pole artike 38 degrees, and 10 minutes, then is the
equinoctial from our synet 51 degrees, and 50 minutes, then is our South
orizont from our equinoctial 38 degrees, and 10 minutes. Understand well this
reckening also, forget not that the synet is 90 degrees of height from the
orizont, and our equinoctial is 90 degrees from our pole artike. Also this
short rule is sothe, that the latitude of any planet in a region, is the
distaunce from the synet unto the equinoctial.

To prove the Latitude of any place in a Region, by the proof of the height of
the Pole artike in that same place.
IN some winters night, when the firmament is clear and thick sterred, wait a
time till that every sterre fix sit line right perpendiculer over the pole
artike, and clepe that sterre A. and wait another sterre that sit line right
under A. and under the pole, and clepe that sterre F. and understand well that
F. is not considred but only to declare that A. that sit ever on the pole.
Take then anon right the altitude of A. from the orizont, and forget it not,
let A. and F. go farewell till against the dawning a great while, and come then
again, and abide till that A. is even under the pole under F. for sothely then
will F. sit over the pole, take then eftsoon the altitude of A. from the
orizont, and note as well the second altitude as the first altitude. And when
that this is done, reckon how many degrees that the first altitude A. exceeded
his altitude, and take half the ilke portion that is exceeded, and add it to
his second altitude, and take there the eleuacion of the pole, and eke the
altitude of thy region. For these two been of one nombre, that is to saine, as
many degrees as thy pole is eleuat, so much is the latitude of thy region.
Ensample as thus, Parauenture the altitude of A. in the evening is 92 degrees
of height, then will the second altitude or the dawning be 21. that is to
saine, less than 92. that was his first altitude at even. Take then the half
of 92. and add to it 21. that was his second altitude, and then have thou the
height of the pole and the latitude of thy region. But understand well to preue
this conclusion, and many another fair conclusion, thou may have a plomet
hanging on a line higher than thy head on a perch, and that line mote hang
even perpendiculer betwixt the pole and thine eye, and then shall thou see if
A. sit even over the pole and over F. at even. And also if F. sit even over the
pole and over A. at day.

Another Conclusion to prove the height of the Pole artike from the Orizont.
TAke any sterre fix that ever descends under the orizont in thilke region,
and consider his highest altitude and his lowest altitude from the orizont, and
make a nombre of these altitudes: take then and abate half that nombre, and
take there the eleuacion of the pole artike in that same region, and for the
more declaracion, etc.

Another Conclusion to prove the Latitude of a Region that ye been in.
UNderstand well that the latitude of any place in a region, is verily the
space betwixe the sign of hem that dwellen there, and the equinoctial cercle,
North or South, taking the measure in the meridionall line, as shows in the
almicanteras of thine Astrolabie, and thilke space is as much as the pole
artike is hye in the same place from the orizont. And then is the depression of
the pole artentike beneath the orizont, the same quantite of space, neither
more ne less. Then if thou desire to know this latitude of the region, take
the altitude of the Sun in the middle of the day, when the Sun is in the head
of Aries or of Libra, for then moves the Sun in the line equinoctial, and
abate the nombre of that same Suns altitude out of 90 degrees, and then is the
remnaunt of the nombre that leueth the altitude of the region, as thus: I
suppose that the Sun is thilke day at noone 38 degrees of height, abate then 38
degrees out of 90. so leueth there 52. then is 52 degrees the latitude: I say
not this but for ensample, for well I wot the latitude of Oxenford is certain
minutes less. Now if it so be that thee thinks too long a tarying to abide
till that the Sun be in the head of Aries or of Libra, then wait when the Sun
is in any other degree of the Zodiake, and consider the degree of this
declinacion be Northward from the equinoctial, abate then from the Suns
altitude at noone the nombre of his declinacion, and then have thou the highest
of the heads of Aries and Libra, as thus: My Sun parauenture is in the 10.
degree of Leo almost 56 of height at noone, and his declinacion is almost 18
degrees Northward from the equinoctial, abate then thilke 18 degrees of
declinacion out of the altitude at noone, then leueth 38 degrees, lo there the
head of Aries or Libra, and thine equinoctial in that region. Also if it so be
that the suns declinacion be Southward from the equinoctial, add then thilke
declinacion to the altitude of the Sun at noone, and take there the heads of
Aries and Libra and thine equinoctial, abate then the height of the
equinoctial out of 90 degrees, and then leueth there 38 degrees, that is the
distaunce of the region from the equinoctial of any sterre fix that thou
know, and take the nether elongacion lengthing from the same equinoctial
line, and work after the manner aforesaid.

Declaration of the ascension of Signs, as well in the Circle direct, as in
oblique.
THe excellency of the sphere solid amongs other noble conclusions, shows
manifest the diverse ascencions of signs in diverse places, as well in right
cercles as in embolyfe cercle. These auctours written that thilke sign is
cleped of right ascencion, with which the more part of the cercle equinoctial
and the less part of the Zodiake ascends, and thilke sign ascends
embolyfe, with which the less of the Zodiake equinoctial, and the more part
of the Zodiake ascends, and ever mo the arche of the day and the arche of the
night is there ylike long, and the Sun twice every year passing through the
signet of her head, and two summers and two winters in a year have these
foresaid people, and the almicanteras in her Astrolabie been straight as a
line, so has showed in this figure. The vtilities to know the ascencions of
signs in the right cercle is this: Trust well that by mediacions of thilke
ascencions, these Astrologiens by her tables and her instruments known verily
the ascencion of every degree and minute in all the Zodiake, in the embolyfe
cercle, as shall be showed. And note that this foresaid right orizont that is
cleped orizont rectum, deuideth the equinoctial into right angles, and
embolyfe orizont, whereas the Pole is enhanced upon the orizont, overcomes
the equinoctial embolyfe angles.

This is the Conclusion to know the ascensions of Signs in the right Circle,
that is, Circulus directus.
SEt the head of what sign thee list to know the ascending on the right
cercle, upon the line meridionall, and wait where thine almury touches the
bordure, and set there a prick, turn then thy reet westward till the end of
the foresaid sign set upon the meridionall line, and eftsoon wait where thine
almury touches the bordure, and set there another prick. Reckon then the
nombers of degrees in the bordure betwixe both pricks, and take then the
ascencion of the sign in the right cercle, and thus may thou work with
every portion of the Zodiake.

To know the ascensions of Signs in the embolyfe Circle in every Region, I
mean, in circulo obliquo.
SEt the head of the signs, which as thee list to know his ascencion upon the
East orizont, and wait where thine almury touches the bordure, and set there a
prick, tourn then thy reet upward till the end of the same sign, set upon the
East orizont, and wait eftsoon where as thine almury touches the bordure, and
set there another prick, reckon then the number of the degrees in the bordure
betwixe both pricks, and take there the ascencion of the sign in the embolyfe
cercle. And understand well that all the signs in the Zodiake, from the head
of Aries unto the end of Virgo, been cleped signs of the North from the
equinoctial, and these signs arisen betwixe the very East and the very North
in our orizont generally for ever: and all the signs from the head of Libra
unto the end of Pisces, been cleped signs of the South fro the equinoctial,
and these signs arisen evermore betwixe the very East and the very South in our
orizont, also every sign betwixe the head of Capricorn unto the end of Gemini,
arises in our orizont in less than two hours equals, and these same signs
from the head of Capricorn unto the end of Gemini, been called tortuous signs
or crooked signs, for they risen embolyfe in our orizont, and these crooked
signs been obedient to the signs that been of the right ascencion. These signs
of right ascencion been fro the head of Cancer unto the head of Sagitary, and
these signs arisen more upright than does the other, and therefore they been
called Soueraign signs, and every of hem arises in more space than in two
hours, of which signs Gemini obeys to Cancer, and Taurus to Leo, and Aries to
Virgo, Pisces to Libra, Aquarius to Scorpio, and Capricorn to Sagitary, and
thus evermore two signs that been like far from the head of Capricorn, obeys
euerich of hem to other.

To know justly the four Quarters of the World, as East, West, South, and North.
TAke the altitude of thy Sun when thou list, and note well the quarter of the
world in which the Sun is from the time by the asymutes, turn then thine
Astrolabie, and set the degree of the Sun in the almicanteras of his altitude,
on thilke side that the Sun stands, as is in manner of taking of hours, and
lay thy labell on the degree of the Sun, and reckon how many degrees of the
Sun, been between the line meridionall and the point of thy labell, and note
well the nombres. Tourn then again thine Astrolabie, and set the point of thy
great rule there thou take thine altitudes, upon as many degrees in his
bordure from his meridional, as was the point of thy labell from the line
meridionall, on the womb side. Take then thine Astrolabie with both hands sadly
and slyly, and let the Sun shine through both holes of thy rule, and slyly in
thilke shining lay thine Astrolabie couch adown even upon a plain ground, and
then will the meridionall line of thine Astrolabie be even South, and the East
line will lie even East, and the West line West, and the North line North, so
that thou work softly and auisely in the couching, and thou have thus the four
quarters of the firmament, etc.

To know the altitude of Planets from the way of the Sun, whether they been
North or South from the way aforesaid.
LOok when a Planet is on the line meridional, if that her altitude be of the
same height, that is the degree of the Sun for that day, and then is the Planet
in the very way of the Sun, and has no latitude. And if the altitude of the
Planet be higher than the degree of the Sun, then is the Planet North from the
way of the sign South, a quantite of latitude as shows by thine almicanteras,
and if the altitude be less than the degree of the Sun, then is the Planet
South from the way of the Sun, soch a quantite of latitude as shows by thine
almicanteras: This is to saine, from the way of the Sun in every place of the
Zodiake, for on the morrow the Sun will be in another degree.

For to know the Signet for the arising of the Sun, this is to fain, the party
of the Orizont in which the Sun arises.
THou must first consider that the Sun arises not in the very East signet,
sometime by North East, and sometime by South East, sothly the Sun arises
evermore in the very East in our orizont, but if he be in the head of Aries or
Libra. Now is thine orizont departed into 24 parties of thy minutes, in
significacion of 24 parts of the world, though it be so, that shipmen reckon
all that parties in 32. Then is there no more, but wait in the which minute
that the Sun enters at his arising, and take there the signet of the rising of
the Sun.

The manner of division of thine Astrolabie, is thus enjoined, as in this case.
FIrst, it is divided in four places principally, with the line that comes
fro the East to the West, and then with another line, that goes fro the South
to the North: then is it divided in small parties of minutes, as East and East
by South, where that is the first minute above the East line, and so forth fro
party to party, till that thou come again to the East line. Thus thou might
understand the signet of every sterre, in which party he arises.

To know in which party of the Firmament is the Conjunction.
COnsider the time of the conjunction by the Calendar, as thus: how many hours
that the conjunction is fro midday of the day before, as shows the Canon of
the Calendar. Reckon then that number in the bordure of thine Astrolabie, as
thou were wont to do in knowing of the hours of the day, or of the night, and
lay thy labell over the degree of the Sun, then will the point of the labell
sit upon the hour of the conjunction. Look then in which minute the degree of
the Sun sits, and in that party of the firmament is the conjunction.

To know the Signet of the altitude of the Sun.
THis is no more to say, but any time of the day take the altitude of the Sun,
and by the minutes in which he ascends thou might see in which party of the
Firmament he is, and in the same wise might thou see by night of any sterre,
wheder he sit East, West, or South, or any part betwixe, after the name of the
minutes in which the sterres stands.

To know sothly the longitude of the Moon, or any Planet that has no Latitude,
from the time of the Ecliptike Line.
TAke the altitude of the Moon and reken thine altitude up, among thine
almicanteras, on which side that the moon stands, and set there a prick.
Take then anon right upon the Moons side the altitude of every sterre fix
that thou know, and set his cercle upon his altitude among thine
almicanteras there the Sterre is founden, wait then of which degree the
zodiake is, to which the prick of the altitude of the Moon, and there take the
degree in which the Moon stands. This conclusion is very soth, of the
Stars in thine Astrolaby, and stands after the troth. Some treatise of the
Astrolaby makes none excepcion, whether the Moon have altitude or none, nor
whether side of the Moon the altitude of the Sterre be found. And note if the
Moon show her self by day, then thou may woorche the same conclusion by
the Sun, as well as by the star fix.

This is the werching of the Conclusions to know whether any Planet be direct
or retrograde.
TAke the altitude of any Sterre, that is cleped a Planete, and note it well,
anon right take the altitude of some sterre fix that thou know, and note
it well also, and come again the third or the fourth night next following, for
then thou shall perceive well the meuyng of the Planete whether he meue forward
or backward, and wait well then when the sterre fix is in this same altitude
that she was when thou took her first altitude of the foresaid Planet, and
note it well, for trust well, if so be that the Planet be in the right side of
the meridional line, so that his second altitude be less than the first
altitude was, then is the Planet direct, and if he be in the West side in that
condition, then is he retrograde, and if so be that this Planet be in the East
side, when his altitude is take, so that the second altitude be more than his
first altitude, then is he retrograde, and if he be in the West side of the
line meridional, then is he direct, but the contrary moving of these parties,
is the course of the Moon, for sothly the moon moves the contrary fro either
Planets, in her ecliptike line, but in none other manner.

The conclusion of equacions of Houses after the Astrolaby.
SEt the beginning of the degree that ascends upon the end of the viii. hour
inequall, then will the line of the second house sit upon the line of midnight,
remeue then the degree that ascends, and set him upon the end of the x. hour
inequale, then will the beginning of the iii. house sit upon the Midnight
line, bring up again the same degree that ascends first, and set him upon
the East Orizont, and then will the beginning of the iiii. house sit upon the
Midnight line. Take then the nadere of the degree, that ascends first, and
set him upon the end of the ii. hour inequale, and then will the beginning of
the v. house sit upon the Midnight line. Take then the nadere of the ascendent,
and set him upon the end of the iiii. hour inequal, and then will the beginning
of the vi. house sit upon the Midnight line. The beginning of the vii. house is
nadere of the ascendent, and the beginning of the viii. house is nadere of the
second, and the beginning of the ninth house is nadere of the third, and the
beginning of the tenth house is nadere of the iiii. and the beginning of the
eleventh house is nadere of the fifth, and the beginning of the xii house is
nadere of the sixth house.

Another manner of equacions of Houses, by the Astrolaby.
TAke thine ascendent, and then thou have the four angles, for well thou
wotest, that the opposite is of thine ascent, that is to say, the beginning of
the seventh house sit upon the West Orizont, and the beginning of the tenth
house upon the line meridional, and his opposite upon the line of Midnight,
then lay thy labell upon the degree that ascends, and reken then fro the
point of thy labell all the degrees in the bordure, till that thou come to the
Meridional line, and depart all thilk degrees into three even parts, and take
there the even porcions of three other houses, for to lay thy labell over every
of these three parties, and then thou might see by the labell in the zodiake
the beginning of these three houses fro the ascendent, that is to say, the
twelve next above the ascendent, and then the eleventh house and the tenth
house upon the Meridional line, as I first said, the same wise werche fro thy
ascendent down to the line of Midnight, and thus thou have three houses, that
is to say, the beginning of the second, the third, and the fourth house: then
is the nadire of these three houses, the beginning of these three houses that
follows.

To find the line Meridional, to dwell fix in any certain place.
TAke a round plate of metal, for warpyng the border the better, and make there
upon a just compace a little within the bordure, and lay this round plate upon
an even ground, or some even stone, or on an even stock fit in thy ground, and
lay it even by a rule in y^ center of y^ compace, stick an even pin or a
wire upright, the smaller the better, and set thy pin or thy wire, by a
plomme rules end upright even, and let this pin be no longer than a quarter
of thy diameter of the compace fro ye line, and wait busily about ten or
eleven of the clock, when y^ sun shows, when the shadow of the pin
enters any thing within the cercle of the compace one here bread, and make
there a prick with ynke: abide then still waiting on the sun after one of the
clock, til y^ the shadow of the pin or of the wire pass any thing out of the
cercle or compace, be it never so little, and set there a prick. Take then a
compace and measure even the middle, betwixt both pricks, and set there a
prick: Take then a Rule and draw a strike even fro the pin unto the middle
prick, and take there the line Meridonall for evermore, as in y^ same place.
And if thou draw a cross ouerthwarte the compace, justly over yc line
Meridionall, then haste thou East and West, and perconsequens the oppositife,
that is South and North.

Description of the Meridional line, and of the longitudes and latitudes of
cities and towns, as well as of climates.
THis line Meridional, is but a manner description of a line imagined, that
passes upon the poles of ye world and by the signet of our hedde: and it is
cleaped the signet, for in what place that any man is at any time of the year,
when the Sun by meuyng of the Firmament comes to his Meridionall place,
then is it the very Midday, that we cleape Noone: and therefore it is cleaped
the line of Midday. Then take heed that evermore of two Citees, or of two
Towns, of which the one approaches nerer the East, than does the other Town,
trust well that thilk two Tounes have diverse Meridians. Take keep also, that
the arche of the Equinoctial, that is contained and bounded between the two
Meridians, is cleaped the Longitude of the town. And if it so be yt two Tounes
have Meridian like, or one Meridian, then is the distaunce of hem both like
far: and in this manner they change not her Meridian, but sothly they change
her Almicanteras, for the haunsing of the Pole, and the distaunce of the Sun.
The Longitude of a climate may be cleaped the space of ye earth, fro the
beginning of the first climate, unto the last end of the same climate, even
direct against the Pole artike, thus say some auctours. And some clerks say,
that if men cleap the Latitude of a Center y^ arch Meridian, yt is contained or
intercept, betwixe the signet and the Equinoctial, then they say, that the
distaunce fro the Equinoctial unto the end of the climate, even against the
Pole artike, is the Longitude of the climate for South.

To know with what degree of the Zodiac, that any Planet ascends on the
Orizont, where his Latitude be North or South.
KNow by thine Almanac the degree of the Ecliptike of any sign, in which that
the Planet is rekened for to be, and that is cleaped the degree of his
Longitude. And know also the degree of his Latitude fro the ecliptike, North
or South, and by these ensamples following in especial, thou may wirche
with every sign of the Zodiake. The Longitude peraventure of Venus, or of
another Planet was of Capricorn, and the Latitude of hem Northward degrees fro
the ecliptike line, then took I a subtle compass, and cleaped the one point of
my compace A. and that other F. then took I the point of A. and set it in the
ecliptike line, and my Zodiake in the degree of the Longitude of heddes, that
is to say, in the head of Capricorn, and then set I the point of F. upward in
the same sign, because that the Altitude was North upon y^ Latitude of Venus,
that is to say, in the degree fro the heed of Capricorn, and thus have I the
degrees betwixe my two pricks: then laid I down softly my compace, and set
the degree of the Longitude upon the Orizont, then took I and waxed my labell,
in manner of a pair of tables, to receive distinctly the prick of my compace,
then took I this forsaid labell, and laid it fix over the degree of my
Longitude, then took I up my compace, and the point of A. in the wax of my
labell, as I coud guess, over the ecliptike line, in the end of yc Longitude, I
set the point over endlong on y^ labell, upon the space of the Latitude inward,
and on the Zodiake, yt is to say, Northward fro the ecliptike: then laid I
down my compace, and looked well in the way upon the ecliptike of A. and F.
then turned I my reete, till that the prick of F. sat upon the Orizont, then
saw I well, that the body of Venus in her Latitude of degrees septentrionals,
ascends in the end of the degree fro yt heed of Capricorn. And note that in
this manner thou might werch with any latitude septentrional in all signs:
but sothly the latitude Meridional of a planet in Capricorn may not be take,
because of the little space betwixe the ecliptike, and the bordure of y^
Astrolabie, and sikerly in all other signs it may be take. Also the degree
peraventure of Jupiter or of any other Planet was in the first degree of Pisces
in longitude, and his latitude was degrees Meridionall. Then took I the point
of A. and set it in y^ first degree of Pisces on the ecliptike, then set I ye
point dounward of F. in yt same sign, because that the latitude was South
degrees, yt is to say, fro the heed of Pisces, and thus have I degrees betwixt
both pricks. Then set I the degree of the longitude upon the Orizont, then
took I my labell, and laid him fix upon y^ degree of longitude, then set I y^
point of A. on my labell even over the ecliptike line, in y^ end of the degree
of y^ longitude, and I set y^ point of F. endlong on my labell, the space of
degrees of y^ latitude outward fro the Zodiake, that is to say, Southward fro
the Ecliptike toward the bordure, and then turned I my reete till the point of
F. sat upon the Orizont, then saw I well yt the body of Jupiter, in his
latitude of degrees Meridionall, ascends with the degree of Pisces in
horescopo. And in this manner thou may wyrch with any Latitude, as I said
first, save in Capricorn. And thou will ply this craft with the arising of the
Moon, look thou reken well the course of hour by hour, for she dwells in
a degree of her Longitude but a little while, as thou woste well: but
nevertheless, if thou legen well her very meuing by the tables, or alter her
course hour by hour, thou shall do well enough.

Vmbra recta.
IF thou will wirche with Vmbra recta, if thou might come to the base of the
Toure, in this manner shall thou wirche: take the altitude of the Toure with
both holes, so that the rule lie even on a point. Ensample, as thus: I see him
through the point of four, then mete I the space betwixe me and the Toure, and
I find it twenty foot, then behold I how four is to twelve, and I find it is
the third part of twelve, Right so the space betwixe thee and the Toure is the
third part of the altitude of the Toure: then thrice twenty foot is the highest
of the toure, with the addition of thine own body fro thine eye. If the Rule
fall on five, then is five times twelve the highest of the toure.

Vmbra versae.
IF thou may not come to the base of the toure, and thou fix him through
the number of one, set there a prick at thy foot, then go nere the Toure, and
see him through at the point of two, and set there an other prick, and then
behold how one has him to twelve, and thou shall find that he has him twelve
sithes, then behold how two have him to xii, and thou shall find it six
sithes, and therefore the space betwixe two pricks, is six times thine
altitude. And note that at the first altitude of one, thou set a prick,
and afterward when thou see him through at two, there thou set a prick,
then thou find between, 80 foot, then thou shall find that ten is the
eight part of 80, then is a foot the altitude of the Toure, but if it fall
upon another point, as thus: It falls on six at the second taking it, when
it falls on four, then shall thou find that six is the second part of
twelve, and four is the third part of twelve by the third part, that is to
say, the space betwixe two pricks, twice the height of the Toure, and if the
difference were three, then would it be three times the height, Et sic de
singulis. An other manner werchyng by Vmbra recta. If thou may not come by
the base of the Toure, wirche in this wise: Set thy rule upon one, till thou
see the Altitude, and set at thy foot a prick, and then set thy rule upon
two, and so do in the same manner: then look what is the difference betwixe one
and two, and thou shall find that it is one: then measure the space betwixe the
two pricks and that is the twelfth part of the altitude of the Toure, and so
of all other.

Vmbra recta.
IF thy Rule fall upon the eight point, on the right shadow, then make the
figure of eight, then look how much space of yt feet is betwixe thee and the
Tour, and multiply that by twelve, and when thou haste multiplied it by the
same number, then devide it by the number of eight, and keep the residue, and
add thereto thy height unto thine iye, to y^ residue, and that shall be the
very height of the Toure. And thus may thou worche on the same side, from one
to twelve, etc.

Vmbra recta.
ANother manner of working upon the same side. Look upon what point thy rule
falls, when thou see the top of the Toure, through the two holes, and then
mete the space from thy foot to the base of the Toure, and right as the number
of the point, has himself to twelve, right so ye mesure betwixt thee and the
Toure, has himself to ye height of the same Toure. Ensample as thus: I set
case thy rule fall upon eight then is eight two third parts of twelve, so is
the space two third parts of the Toure.

Vmbra versa.
TO know the height by the points of Vmbra versa. If thy rule fall upon 3. when
thou see the top of the Toure, set a prick there thy foot stands, and go
nere till thou may see the same top, at the point of iiii. and set there
another prick: then mete how many foot is betwixe the two pricks, and the
height up to thine iye, and that shall be the height of the Toure. And note,
that iii. is the fowerth part of xii. and iiii. is the third part of xii. Now
passes iiii. the number of iii. by distaunce of 1. therefore the same space
with thy height to thine eye, is the height of the Toure. And if it were so
that there were two or three distaunce in the nombers, so should the measure
betwixe the pricks be twice or thrice the height of the Toure.

Vmbra recta.
TO know y^ height if thou may not come to y^ base of y^ thing, set thy rule
upon with point thou will, so y^ thou may see y^ top of ye thing through the
two holes, and make a mark there as thy foot stands, and go nere or
ferther, till thou may see it through another point, and make there another
mark, and look with difference is betwixe the two points in the scale, and
right as that difference has him to xii. right so the spaces betwix y^ two
marks has him to the height of the thing. Ensample. I set the case, that thou
see it through the point of iiii. and after at the point of iii. Now passes
the number of iiii. the number of iii. the distaunce of one, and right as this
difference of one, has himself to twelve, right so the measure betwixe both
the marks, has him to the height of the same thing, putting thereto the
height of thy self to thine eye. And thus may thou work from one to twelve.

Vmbra versa.
FErthermore, if thou will know in Vmbra versa, by the craft of Vmbra recta, I
suppose to take thine altitude at the point of four, and make a mark, and
then thou go nere, till thou haste it at the point of three, and make
there another mark, then must thou divide 144 by four, the number yt comes
thereof shall be 36, and after divide 144 by three, and the number yt comes
thereof is 48, then look what difference is betwixe 36 and 48, and yt shall
thou find 12, and right as 12 has him to 12, so the space betwixe ye two
pricks has him to the altitude of the thing.

Here ends the conclusions of the Astrolabie.
The Complaint of the Black Knight.
The heavy Complaint of a Knight, for that he cannot win his Ladies grace.
IN May, when Flora ye fresh lusty Queen,
The soil has cladde in grene, red, and whight,
And Phoebus began to shede his stremes shene,
Amidde the Bulle, with all y^ beams bright,
And Lucifer, to chase away the night,
Again the morrow our Orizont has take,
To bid all lovers out of her sleep awake.
And hertes heavy for to recomfort,
From drerihed, of heavy night sorrow,
Nature bad hem rise, and hem disport,
Again the goodly glad gray morrow,
And hope also, with saint Johan to borow,
Bad in dispite of Danger and Despair,
For to take the wholesome lusty air.
And with a sigh I began for to abreide
Out of my stomber, and suddenly up starte,
As he (alas) that nigh for sorrow deide,
My sickness sat aye so nigh my heart,
But for to find soccour of my smart,
Or at the least some release of my peine,
That me so sore halte in every vein.
I rose anon, and thought I would gone
Into the wodde, to hear the birds sing,
When that the misty vapor was agone,
And clear and fair was the morning,
The dew also like silver in shining
Upon the leaves, as any Baume sweet,
Till fiery Titan with his persant hete
Had dried up the lusty licour new,
Upon the herbs in the grene mede,
And that the flowers of many diverse hew,
Upon her stalks gone for to sprede,
And for to splay out her leves in bread
Again the Sun, gold burned in his spear,
That down to hem cast his beams clear.
And by a river forth I began costey,
Of water clear, as birell or cristall,
Till at the last I found a little wey,
Toward a Park, enclosed with a wall,
In compace round, and by a gate small,
Who so that would, freely might gone
Into this park, walled with grene stone.
And in I went to hear the birds song,
Which on the branches, both in plain and vale,
So loud sang, that all the wood rong,
Like as it should shiver in pieces small,
And as me thought, that the Nightingale
With so great might, her voice began our wrest
Right as her heart for love would breast.
The soil was plain, smoth, and wonder soft,
All oversprad with tapettes that Nature
Had made her self: covered eke aloft
With bows green, the flowers for to cure,
That in her beauty they may long endure
From all assaut of Phoebus fervent fere,
Which in his sphere so hot shone and clear.
The air attempre, and the smothe wind
Of Zepherus, among the blosomes white,
So wholesome was, and so nourishing by kind,
That small buddes, and round blosomes lite,
In manner began of her brethe delight,
To yeve us hope there fruit shall take
Against Autumpne ready for to shake.
I saw the Daphene closed under rind,
Green Laurer, and the wholesome Pine,
The Mirre also that wepeth ever of kind,
The Cedres hye, upright as a line,
The Filbert eke, that low does incline
Her bows grene, to the earth adoun,
Unto her knight called Demophoun.
There saw I eke the fresh Hauthorne
In white Motley, that so swote does smell,
Ash, Fur, and Oak, with many a young Acorn,
And many a tree mo than I can tell,
And me beforne I saw a little well,
That had his course, as I began behold,
Under an hill, with quick stremes cold.
The gravel gold, the water pure as glass,
The banks round, the well environyng,
And soft as Velvet the young grass
That thereupon lustely came springyng,
The sure of trees about compassyng,
Her shadow cast, closing the well round,
And all the herbs growing on the ground.
The water was wholesome, and so virtuous,
Through might of herbs growyng beside,
Not like the well where as Narcisus
I slain was, through vengeance of Cupide,
Where so covertly he did hide
The graiue of death upon each brinke,
That death mote follow, who y^ ever drink.
Ne like the pit of the Pegace,
Under Pernaso, where Poets slept,
Nor like the well of pure chastity,
Which that Diane with her Nymphs kept,
When she naked into the water lepte,
That slow Acteon with her hondes fell,
Only for he came so nigh the well.
But this well that I here of rehearse,
So wholesome was, that it would aswage,
Bollen hertes, and the venim pearce,
Of pensifehed, with all the cruel rage,
And over more refresh the visage
Of hem that were in any werinesse,
Of great labor, or fallen in distress.
And I that had through danger and disdain
So dry a thrust, thought I would assay
To taste a draught of this Well or twain,
My bitter langour if it might alay,
And on the bank anon down I lay,
And with mine head unto y^ Well I raught,
And of the water drank I a good draught.
Whereof me thought I was refreshed well,
Of the brennyng that sat so nigh my heart,
That verily anon I began to feel
An huge part released of my smart,
And therewithal anon up I start,
And thought I would walk and see more,
Forth in the park, and in the holtes hoar.
And through a laund as I yede a pace,
And began about fast to behold,
I found anon a delectable place,
That was belet with trees young and old,
Whoss names here for me shall not be told,
Amidde of which stood an herber green,
That benched was, with colors new and clean.
This herber was full of flowers gende,
Into the which, as I behold began,
Betwixt an Hulfeere and a Woodbende,
As I was ware, I saw where lay a man
In black, and white color pale and wan,
And wonder deadly also of his hew,
Of hurtes grene, and fresh wounds new.
And overmore distrayned with sickness
Beside all this he was full grevoussy,
For upon him he had an hoar access,
That day by day him shook full pitously,
So that for constrayning of his malady,
And hertely woe, thus lying all alone,
It was a death for to hear him groan.
Whereof astonished, my foot I began withdraw,
Greatly wondering what it might be,
That he so lay and had no felaw,
Ne that I coud no wight with him see,
Whereof I had routhe, and eke pite,
And began anon, so softly as I could,
Among the bushes prively me to shroude.
If that I might in any wise aspy,
What was the cause of his deedly woe,
Or why that he so pitously began cry
On his fortune, and on ure also,
With all my might I laid an ear to,
Every word to mark what he said,
Out of his swough among as he abraid.
Bur first, if I should make mention
Of his person, and plainly him discrive,
He was in sothe, without excepcion,
To speak of manhood, one the best on llve,
There may no man again troth strive,
For of his time, and of his age also,
He proved was, there men should have ado.
For one of ye best thereto of bread and length
So well ymade by good proporcion,
If he had be in his deliver strength,
But thought and sickness were occasion
That he thus lay in lamentacion,
Gruffe on the ground, in place desolate,
Sole by himself, awhaped and amate.
And for me seems that it is fitting
His words all to put in remembrance,
To me that heard all his complaining,
And all the ground of his woeful chance,
If there withal I may you do pleasaunce,
I woll to you so as I can anon,
Like as he said, rehearce everichone.
But who shall help me now to complain,
Or who shall now my style gy or led,
O Niobe, let now thy teeres rain
In to my pen, and help eke in need,
Thou woeful Myrre yt felest my heart blede
Of pitous woe, and mine hand eke quake,
When that I write, for this man's sake.
* For unto woe accords complaining,
And doleful chere unto heaviness,
To sorrow also, sighing and weping,
And pitous mourning unto drerinesse,
* And who that shall write of distress,
In party needs to know feelingly,
Cause and root of all soch malady.
But I alas, that am of wit but dull,
And have no knowing of soch matere,
For to discrive, and write at the full
The woeful complaint, which yt ye shall here,
But even like as does a skriuenere,
That can no more what that he shall write,
But as his master beside does endite.
Right so fare I, that of no sentement,
Say right naught in conclusion,
But as I herd when I was present,
This man complain, with a pitous soun,
For even like without addicioun,
Or disencrease, either more or less,
For to rehearse anon I woll me dress.
And if that any now be in this place,
That feel in love brenning of fervence,
Or hindered were to his ladies grace,
With false tongues, that with pestilence
Slay true men, that never did offense
In word nor deed, ne in her intent,
If any soch be here now present,
Let him of routh lay to audience,
With doleful chere, and sobre countenance,
To here this man, by full hye sentence,
His mortal woe, and his perturbaunce,
Complaining, now lying in a trance,
With looks vpcast, and rufull chere,
Theffect of which was as ye shall here.
The thought oppressed with inward sighs sore,
The painful life, the body languishing,
The woeful ghost, the heart rent and tore,
The pitous chere pale in complaining,
The deedly face, like ashes in shining,
The salt tears that from mine eyes fall,
Percel declare ground of my pains all.
Whose heart is ground to blede in heuinesse,
The thought receipt of woe, and of complaint,
The breast is chest of dole and drerinesse,
The body eke so feeble and so faint,
With hot and cold mine axes is so maint,
That now I chiuer, for default of heat,
And hot as glede, now suddenly I sweat.
Now hot as fire, now cold as ashes deed,
Now hot for cold, now cold for heat again,
Now cold as yse, now as coals reed
For heat I brenne, and thus betwixe twain,
I possed am, and all forecast in pain,
So that my heat plainly as I feel,
Of grievous cold is cause every dele.
This is the cold of inward hie disdayn,
Cold of dispite, and cold of cruel hate,
This is the cold yt ever does his besie pain,
Against troth to fight and debate,
This is the cold that the fire abate
Of true meaning, alas the hard while,
This is the cold that woll me begile.
For ever the better that in troth I meant,
With all my might faithfully to serve,
With heart and all to be diligent,
The less thank, alas I can deserve:
Thus for my troth danger both me sterue,
For one that should my death of mercy let,
Has made dispite new his sword to whet
Against me, and his grows to file,
To take vengeance of wilful cruelte,
And tongues false through her slightly wile,
Han gone a werre that will not stinted be,
And false envy, wrath and enuite,
Have conspired against all right and law,
Of her malice, that troth shall be slaw.
And male bouch, began first the tale tell,
To sclaunder troth of indignacion,
And false report so loud range the bell,
That misbeleefe and false suspecion
Have troth brought to his dampnacion,
So that alas, wrong fully he dies,
And falsenesse now his place occupies,
And entered is in to trouthes land,
And has thereof the full possession,
O rightful God that first the troth fond,
How may thou suffer soch oppression,
That falsheed should have jurisdiction
In trouthes right to slay him gyltles,
In his fraunchise he may not live in pees.
Falsely accused, and of his fone forjudged,
Without answer, while he was absent,
He damned was, and may not be excused,
For cruelte sat in judgment,
Of hastiness without aduisement,
And badde Disdain do execute anon,
His judgment in presence of his fone.
Attorney may none admitted been
To excuse troth, ne a word to speak,
To faith or oath the judge list not seen,
There is no gain, but he will be wreke:
O Lord of troth to thee I call and clepe,
How may thou see thus in thy presence,
Without mercy murdered innocence.
Now God that art of troth sovereign,
And see how I lie for troth bound,
So sore knit in loves fyrie chain,
Even at y^ death through gyrte with many a wound,
That likely are never for to sound,
And for my troutham dampened to the death,
And not abide, but draw along the breath.
Consider and see in thine eternal right,
How that mine heart professed whilom was,
For to be true with all my full might,
Only to one the which now alas,
Of volunte without any trespass,
My accusours has taken unto grace,
And cherishes hem, my death to purchase.
What means this? what is this wonder ure?
Of purueyaunce if I shall it call,
Of god of love, that false hem so assure,
And true alas, down of the whele ben fall,
And yet in sothe this is the worst of all,
That falshed wrongfully of troth has y^ name,
And troth a yenward of falshed bears the blame.
This blind chance, this stormy adventure,
In love has most his experience,
* For who y^ does with troth most his cure,
Shall for his mede find most offense,
That serves love with all his diligence:
* For who can feign under lowlyhede,
Ne fails not to find grace and speed.
For I loved one, full long since agone,
With all mine heart, body and full might,
And to be deed my heart can not gone
From his heste, but hold that he has hight,
Though I be banished out of her sight,
And by her mouth dampened that I shall dey,
Unto my hest, yet I will ever obey.
For ever since that the world began,
Who so list look, and in story read,
He shall aye find that the true man
Was put abacke, whereas the falshede
Yfurthered was: for love takes none head
To slay the true, and has of hem no charge,
Where as the false goes freely at her large.
I take record of Palamydes,
The true man, the noble worthy knight,
That ever loved, and of his pain no relees,
Notwithstanding his manhood and his might,
Love unto him did full great unright,
For aye the bet he did in cheualrie,
The more he was hindered by envy.
And aye the better he did in every place,
Through his knighthood and busy pain,
The ferder was he from his ladies grace,
For to her mercy might he never attain,
And to his death he coud it not refrain,
For no daungere, but aye obey and serve,
As he best could, plainly till he sterue.
What was the fine also of Hercules,
For all his conquest and his worthiness,
That was of strength alone peerles,
For like as books of him list express,
He set pillars through his hye prowess,
Away at Gades, for to signify
That no man might him pass in cheualrie.
The which pillars far beyond Inde,
Be set of gold, for a remembrance:
And for all that was he set behind,
With hem that love list feebly auaunce,
For him set last upon a dance,
Against whom help may no strife,
For all his troth he lost his life.
Phoebus also for all his pleasant light,
When that he went here in earth low,
Unto the heart with Venus sight,
Ywounded was, through Cupides bow,
And yet his lady list him not to know,
Though for her love his heart did blede,
She let him go, and took of him no head.
What shall I say of young Piramus?
Of true Tristram, for all his hye renown,
Of Achilles, or of Antonius,
Of Arcite, or of him Palomoune,
What was the end of her passioune,
But after sorrow death, and then her grave,
Lo here the guerdon that these lovers have.
But false Jason with his doubleness,
That was untrue at Colkos to Medee,
And Theseus, root of unkindness,
And with these two eke the false Enee.
Lo thus the false aye in one degree,
Had in love her lust and all her will,
And save falsehood, there was none other skill.
Of Thebes eke the false Arcite,
And Demophon eke for his sloth,
They had her lust and all that might delight,
For all her falsehood and great untruth:
Thus ever love alas, and that is routh,
His false lieges forthereth what he may,
And sleeth the true ungoodly day by day.
For true Adon was slain with the bore,
Amidde the forest in the grene shade,
For Venus love he felt all the sore,
But Vulcanus with her no mercy made,
The foul chorle had many nights glade,
Where Mars her knight and her man,
To find mercy comfort none he can.
Also the young fresh Ipomedes,
So lustly free as of his courage,
That for to serve with all his heart he ches,
Athalant so fair of her visage,
But love alas quite him so his wage
With cruel danger plainly at the last,
That with the death guerd^nlesse he past.
Lo here the fine of loves service,
Lo how that love can his servant quite,
Lo how he can his faithful men despise,
To slay the true men, and false to respite,
Lo how he does the sword of sorrow bite
In herts, soch as most his lust obey,
To save the false and do the true dey.
For faith nor oath, word, ne assurance,
True meaning, awaite, or business,
Still port, ne faithful attendaunce,
Manhood ne might in arms worthiness,
Pursuit of worship nor hie prowess,
In strange land riding ne travail,
Full litell or naught in love does avail.
Peril of death, nor in see ne land,
Hunger ne thrust, sorrow ne sickness,
Ne great emprises for to take in hand,
Sheding of blood, ne manfull hardiness,
Ne often wounding at sautes by distress,
Nor in parting of life nor death also,
All is for naught, love takes no heed thereto
But lesings with her flattery,
Through her falshede, and with her doubleness,
With tales new, and many fained lie,
By false semblaunt and counterseit humblesse,
Under color depaint with steadfastness,
With fraud covered under a pit^us face,
Accept be now rathest unto grace.
And can himself now best magnify
With fained port and presumption,
They haunce her cause with false surquidrie,
Under meaning of double entention,
To think one in her opinion,
And say another, to set himself aloft,
And hinder troth, as it is scene full often.
The which thing I buy now all too dear,
Thanked be Venus, and the god Enpide,
As it is seen by mine oppressed cheer,
And by his arrows that sticken in my side,
That save death I nothing abide
Fro day to day, alas the hard while,
When ever his dart that him list to file,
My woeful heart for to riue atwo,
For faut of mercy, and lack of pite
Of her that causes all my pain and woe,
And list not ones of grace for to see
Unto my troth through her cruelte,
And most of all I me complain,
That she has joy to laugh at my pain.
And wilfully has my death sworn,
All guiltless, and wot no cause why,
Save for the troth that I had aforne
To her alone to serve faithfully,
O god of love, unto thee I cry,
And to thy blind double deite,
Of this great wrong I complain me.
And unto thy stormy wilful variaunce,
Iment with change and great unstableness,
Now up, now down, so renning is thy chance,
That thee to trust may be no sikernesse,
I wite it nothing but thy doubleness,
* And who that is an archer, and is blend,
Marketh nothing, but shoots by wend.
And for that he has no discretion,
Without advise he let his arrow go,
For lack of sight, and also of reason,
In his shooting it happeth often so,
To hurt his friend rather than his fo,
So does this god with his sharp flone,
The true sleeth, and lets the false gone.
And of his wounding this is the worst of all,
When he hurt does to so cruel wretch,
And makes the lick for to cry and call
Unto his so for to be his leche,
* And hard it is for a man to seche
Upon the point of death in jeoperdie,
Unto his foe to find a remedy.
Thus fares it now even by me,
That to my foe that gave my heart a wound,
Mote ask grace, mercy, and pite,
And namely there where none may be found,
For now my sore my leche will confound,
And god of kind so has set mine ure,
My lives foe to have my wound in cure.
Alas the while now that I was borne,
Or that I ever saw the bright son,
For now I see that full long aforne,
Or I was borne, my desteny was sponne
By Parcas sisterne, to slay me if they conne,
For they my death shopen or my shert,
Only for troth, I may it not astert.
The mighty goddess also of Nature,
That under God has the governance
Of worldly things committed to her cure,
Disposed have through her wise purueiance,
To give my lady so much suffisaunce
Of all virtues, and therewithal puruide,
To murder troth, has take danger to gide.
For bounte, beauty, shape, and seemelihede,
Prudence, wit, passingly fairness,
Benign port, glad chere, with lowlihede,
Of womanhede right plenteous largeness,
Nature did in her fully empress,
When she her wrought, and alther last disdain,
To hinder troth, she made her chamberlain.
When mistrust also, and false suspection,
With misbeleue she made for to be
Chief of counsel to this conclusion,
For to exile troth, and eke pite,
Out of her court to make mercy flee,
So that dispite now holds forth her rein,
Through hasty bileue of tales that men feign.
And thus I am for my troth alas
Murdered and slain, with words sharp and kene,
Guiltless God wot of all trespass,
And lie and blede upon this cold grene,
Now mercy sweet, mercy my lives queen,
And to your grace of mercy yet I prey,
In your service that your man may dey.
But if so be that I shall die algate,
And that I shall none other mercy have,
Yet of my death let this been the date,
That by your will I was brought to my grave,
Or hastily, if that you list me save,
My sharp wounds that ache so and blede,
Of mercy charm, and also of womanhede.
For other charm plainly is there none,
But only mercy, to help in this case,
For though my wounds bleed ever in one,
My life, my death, stands in your grace,
And though my guilt be nothing, alas,
I ask mercy in all my best intent,
Ready to die, if that ye assent.
For there against shall I never strive
In word ne work, plainly I ne may,
For lever I have than to be alive
To die soothly, and it be to her pay,
Ye though it be this same day,
Or when that ever her list to devise,
Suffiseth me to die in your seruise.
And God, y^ know y^ thought of every wight
Right as it is, in every thing thou may see,
Yet ere I die, with all my full might,
Lowly I pray to grant unto me,
That ye goodly, fair, fresh, and free,
Which only slay me for defaut of routh,
Or that I die, ye may know my troth.
For that in sooth suffices me,
And she it know in every circumstaunce,
And after I am well paid that she
If that her list of death to do vengeance
Unto me, that am under her lygeaunce,
It sit me not her doom to disobey,
But at her lust wilfully to dey,
Without grutching or rebellion
In will or word, holy I assent,
Or any manner contradiction,
Fully to be at her commandment,
And if I die, in my testament
My heart I send, and my spirit also,
Whatsoever she list with hem to do.
And alderlast to her womanhede,
And to her mercy me I recommaund,
That lie now here betwixe hope and dread,
Abiding plainly what she list command,
For utterly this nis no demand
Welcome to me while me lasts breath,
Right at her choice, where it be life or death.
In this matter more what might I saine,
Since in her hand, and in her will is all,
But life and death, my joy, and all my pain,
And finally my hest hold I shall,
Till my spirit by desteny fatal,
When that her list fro my body wend,
Have here my troth, and thus I make an end.
And with that word he began sigh as sore,
Like as his heart riue would atwaine,
And held his peace, and spoke no word more,
But for to see his woe and mortal pain,
The tears gonne fro mine eyes rain
Full pitously, for very inward roth,
That I him saw, so long wishing for troth.
And all this while my self I kept close
Among the bows, and my self gonne hide,
Till at the last the woeful man arose,
And to a lodge went there beside,
Where all the May his custom was tabide,
Sole to complain of his pains kene,
From year to year, under the bows grene.
And for because that it drew to the night,
And that the sun his arc diurnal
Ypassed was, so that his persaunt light,
His bright beams and his streams all
Were in the waves of the water fall,
Under the bordure of our occian,
His chair of gold, his course so swiftly ran:
And while the twilight and the rows read
Of Phoebus light were deaurat alite,
A pen I took, and began me fast speed
The woeful plaint of this man to write,
Word by word, as he did endite,
Like as I heard, and coud hem tho report,
I have here set, your hertes to disport.
If ought be miss, lay the wite on me,
For I am worthy for to bear the blame,
If any thing miss reported be,
To make this ditie for to seem lame,
Through mine unconning, but for to sain y^ same,
Like as this manne his complaint did express,
I ask mercy and forgiveness.
And as I wrote, me thought I saw aferre,
Far in the West lustely appear
Esperus the goodly bright sterre,
So glad, so fair, so persaunt eke of chere,
I mean Venus with her beams clear,
That heavy hertes only to releue,
Is wont of custom for to show at eve.
And I as fast fell adown on my knee,
And even thus to her began I to prey:
O lady Venus so fair upon to see,
Let not this man for his troth dey,
For that joy thou had when thou ley
With Mars thy knight, when Vulcanus fond,
And with a chain unvisible you bond
Togider both tway in the same while,
That all the court above celestial,
At your shame began laugh and smile:
Ah, fair lady welly fond at all,
Comfort to careful, O goddess immartall,
Be helping now, and do thy diligence,
To let the streams of thine influence
Descend down, in forthering of y^ troth,
Namely of hem that lie in sorrow bound,
Show now thy mit, and on her woe have routh,
Ere false danger slay hem and confound:
And specially let thy might be found,
For to so cover what so that thou may
The true man that in the herber lay.
And all true forther for his sake,
O glad sterre, O lady Venus mine,
And cause his lady him to grace take,
Her heart of stele to mercy so incline,
Ere that thy bemes go up to decline,
And ere that thou now go fro us adoun,
For that love thou had to Adoun.
And when she was gone to her rest,
I rose anon, and home to bed went,
For weary, me thought it for the best,
Praying thus in all my best intent,
That all true, that be with danger shent,
With mercy may in release of her pain,
Recured be, ere May come este again.
And for that I ne may no longer wake,
Farewell ye lovers all that be true,
Praying to God, and thus my leave I take,
That ere the sun to morrow be risen new,
And ere he have again rosen hew,
That each of you may have such a grace,
His own lady in arms to embrace.
I mean thus, in all honesty,
Without more ye may togider speak
What so ye list at good liberty,
That each may to other her heart break,
On Ielousies only to be wreke,
That has so long of his malice and envy
Werred Troth with his tyranny.
Lenuoye.
Princess, pleases it to your benignity
This little ditie to have in mind,
Of womanhede also for to see,
Your man may your mercy find,
And pity eke, that long has be behind,
Let him again be provoked to grace,
For by my troth it is against kind,
False Danger to occupy his place.
Go little quaire unto my lives queen
And my very hearts sovereign,
And be right glad for she shall thee seen,
Such is thy grace, but I alas in pain
Am left behind, and not to whom to plain,
For mercy, ruth, grace, and eke pite
Exiled be, that I may not attain,
Recure to find of mine adversite.
Explicit.
A Praise of Women.
Although thee list of women evil to speak,
And sain of hem worse than they deserve,
I pray to God y^ her necks to break,
Or on some evil death mote tho janglers sterve
For every man were holden hem to serve,
And do hem worship, honor, and servise,
In every manner that they best coud devise.
For we ought first to think on with manner
They bring us forth, and with pain they endure
First in our birth, and since fro year to year
How busely they done their busy cure,
To keep us fro every misaventure
In our youth when we have no might
Our self to keep, neither by day nor night.
Alas, how may we say on hem but well,
Of whom we were fostred and ybore,
And ben all our succor, and ever true as stele,
And for our sake full often they suffer sore,
* Without women were all our joy lore,
Wherefore we ought all women to obey
In all goodness, I can no more say.
This is well known, and has been or this,
That women ben cause of all lightness,
Of knighthood, norture, eschuing all mallis,
Increase of worship, and of all worthiness,
Thereto curteis and meke, and ground of all goodness,
Glad and merry, and true in every wise
That any gentill heart can think or devise.
And though any would trust to your untruth,
And to your fair words would aught assent,
In good faith me thinks it were great ruth,
That other women should for her gilt be shent,
That never knew, ne wist nout of her intent,
Ne list not to hear the fair words ye write,
Which ye you pain fro day to day tendite.
But who may beware of your tales untrue,
That ye so busily paint and endite,
For ye will swear that ye never knew,
Ne saw the woman, neither much ne lite,
Save only her, to whom ye had delight,
As for to serve of all that ever ye sey,
And for her love must ye needs dey.
Then will ye swear y^ ye knew never before
What love was, ne his dreadful observaunce,
But now ye feel that he can wound sore,
Wherefore ye put you into her governaunce,
Whom love has ordeind you to serve and do plesance
With al your mit your little lives space
Which ends soon, but if she do you grace.
And then to bed will he soon draw,
And soon sick ye will you then feign,
And swear fast your Lady has you slaw,
And brought you suddenly inso high a pain
yt fro your death may no man you restrain,
With a dangerous look of her eyes two,
That to your death must ye needs go.
Thus will ye morn, thus will ye sigh sore,
As though your heart anon in two would breast,
And swear fast that ye may live no more,
Mine own Lady, that might if ye lest
Bring mine heart somedele into rest,
As if you list mercy on me to have,
Thus your untruth will ever mercy crave.
Thus woll ye plain, tho ye nothing smert,
These innocent creatures for to beguile,
And swear to hem, so wounded is your heart
For her love, that ye may live no while.
Scarsly so long as one might go a mile,
So hieth death to bring you to an end,
But if your soverain Lady list you to amend.
And if for routh she comfort you in any wise
For pity of your false oaths sere,
So y^ innocent weneth yt it be as you devise,
And weneth your heart be as she may here,
Thus for to comfort and somewhat do you chere.
Then woll these janglers deem of her full ill,
And saine that ye have her fully at your will.
Lo how ready her tongues been, and pressed
To speak harm of women causeless,
Alas, why might ye not as well say the best,
As for to deem hem thus guiltless,
In your heart iwis there is no gentilnesse,
That of your own gilt list thus women fame,
Now by my troth, me think ye be too blame.
* For of women comes this worldly well,
Wherefore we out to worship hem evermore,
And though it mishap one, we ought for to hele,
For it is all through our false lore,
That day and night we pain us evermore
With many an oath, these women to beguile
With false tales, and many a wicked wile.
* And if falshede should be reckened and told
In women, iwis full troth were,
Not as in men, by a thousand fold,
Fro all vices iwis they stand clear,
In any thing that I could of hear,
But if enticing of these men it make,
That hem to flatteren connen never slake.
* I would fain wete where ever ye coud here,
Without men's tising, with women did amiss,
Forther ye may get hem, ye lie fro year to year
And many a gabbing ye make to hem iwis,
For I could never hear, ne known ere this,
Where ever ye coud find-in any place,
That ever women besought you of grace.
There ye you pain, with all your full might,
With all your heart, and all your business,
To pleasen hem both by day and night,
Praying hem of her grace and gentilnesse,
To have pity upon your great distress,
And yt they would on your pain have routh,
And slay you not, sens ye mean but troth.
Thus may ye see that they ben faultlesse,
And innocent to all your works sly,
And all your crafts that touch falsenesse,
They know hem not, ne may hem not epsy,
So swear ye, that ye must needs die,
But if they would of her womanhead
Upon you rue, ere that ye be dead.
And then your lady, and your herts queen
Ye call hem, and therewith ye sighe sore,
And say, my lady I trow that it be seen
In what plite that I have lived full yore,
But now I hope that ye woll no more
In these pains suffer me for to dwell,
For all goodness twis ye be the well.
Lo which a painted process can ye make,
These harmless creatures for to beguile,
And when they sleep, ye pain you to wake,
And to bethink you on many a wicked wile,
But ye shall see the day that ye shall curse the while
That ye so busily did your intent
Hem to beguile, that falshed never meant.
For this ye know well, though I would lie,
In women is all troth and steadfastness,
For in good faith I never of hem sie
But much worship, bounty, and gentilnesse,
Right coming, fair, and full of meekness,
Good and glad, and lowly I you ensure,
Is this goodly angellike creature.
And if it hap a man be in disease,
She does her business, and her full pain
With all her might, him to comfort and please
If fro his disease she might him restrain,
In word ne deed ywis she woll not feign,
But with all her might she does her business
To bring him out of his heaviness.
Lo what gentillesse these women have,
If we could know it for our rudeness,
How busy they be us to keep and save,
Both in heal, and also in sickness,
And always right sorry for our distress,
In every manner, thus show they routh,
That in hem is all goodness and troth.
And since we find in hem gentilnesse and troth,
Worship, bounty, and kindness evermore,
Let never this gentillesse through your sloth
In her kind troth be aught forlore
That in women is, and has been full yore,
* For in reverence of the heavens queen,
We ought to worship all women yt been.
For of all creatures yt ever were get and borne,
This wot ye well a woman was y^ best,
By her was recovered y^ bliss y^ we had lorne,
And through y^ woman shall we come to rest,
And ben ysaued, if that our self lest,
Wherefore me thinks, if y^ we had grace,
We oughten honor women in every place.
Therefore I read, that to our lives end,
Fro this time forth, while yt we have space,
That we have trespaced, pursue to amend,
Praying our Lady well of all grace
To bring us unto that blisful place,
There as she and good women shall be in fere
In heaven above, among the angels clear.
Explicit.
The House of Fame.
In this Book is showed how the Deeds of all Men and Women, be they good or
bad, and carried by Report to Posterity.
GOd turn us every dream to good,
For it is wonder thing by the Rood
To my wit, what causes sweuens
On the morrow, or on euens,
And why the effect follows of some,
And of some it shall never come,
Why that it is an auision,
And why this is a revelation,
Why this a dream, why that a sweuen,
And not to every man liche even,
Why this a fantome, why that Oracles,
I not: but who so of these miracles
The causes know bet than I,
Define he, for I certainly
Ne ran hem not, ne never think
To busy my wit for to swinke
To know of her significations
The gendres, ne distinctions
Of the times of hem, ne the causes,
Or why this is more than that is,
Or give folks complexions,
Make hem dream of reflections,
Or else thus, as other saine,
For the great feebleness of her brain,
By abstinence, or by sickness,
Prison, strife, or great distress,
Or else by disordinaunce,
Or natural accustomaunce,
That some men be too curious
In study, or Melancolius,
Or thus, so inly full of dread,
That no man may him bote read,
Or else that devotion
Of some, and contemplation.
Causen such dreams often,
Or that the cruel life vnsoft
Of hem that loves leden,
Often hopen much or dreden,
That purely her impressions
Causen hem to have visions,
Or if spirits han the might
To make folk to dream on night,
Or if the soul of proper kind,
Be so perfect as men find,
That it wot what is to come,
And that he warns all and some
Of eueriche of her auentures,
By auisions, or by figures,
But that our flesh has no might
To understand it aright,
For it is warned too derkely,
But why the cause is, not wot I,
Well worth of this thing clerks,
That treaten of that, and of other works,
For I of none opinion
Nill as now make mention,
But only that the holy Rood
Turn us every dream to good,
For never since I was borne,
Ne no man else me beforne,
Met I trow steadfastly
So wonderful a dream as I.
The tenth day now of December,
The which, as I can remember,
I woll you tellen euerydele,
But at my beginning trusts well,
I woll make invocation,
With a devout special devotion
Unto the god of sleep anon,
That dwells in a cave of stone,
Upon a stream that comes fro Let,
That is a flood of hell vnswete,
Beside a Fulke, that men clepe Cimerie,
There sleeps aye this God vnmerie,
With his slepie thousand sonnis,
That always to sleep her won is,
And to this God that I of read,
Pray I, that he woll me speed,
My sweuen for to tell aright,
If every dream stand in his might,
And he that mouer is of all
That is and was, and ever shall,
So give hem joy that it here,
Or all that they dream to year,
And for to stand all in grace
That hem were leuest for to stond,
And shield hem from poverty and shond,
And from every unhappy and disease,
And send hem that may hem please,
That takes well and scorneth naught,
Ne it misdeme in her thought,
Through malicious entention,
And who so through presumption,
Or hate, or scorn, or through envy,
Dispite, or yape, or fellonie,
Misdeme it, pray I Jesus good,
Dream he barefoot, or dream he shood,
That every harm that any man
Has had since the world began,
Befall him thereof, or he sterue,
And grant that he may it deserve.
Lo, with right such a conclusion,
As had of his auision
Cresus, that was king of Lide,
That high upon a gibbet did,
This prayer shall he have of me,
I am not bette in charity.
NOw harken, as I have you said,
What that I met or I abrayd,
Of December the tenth day,
When it was night, to sleep I lay,
Right as I was wont to done,
And fell asleep wonder sone,
As he that was weary forgo,
On pilgrimage miles two
To the corpse of saint Leonard,
To maken lithe, that erst was hard.
But as I slept, me met I was
Within a temple ymade of glass,
In which there were mo Images
Of gold, standing in sundry stages,
In mo rich Tabernacles,
And with perre mo pinacles,
And mo curious portraitures,
And queint manner of figures
Of gold work, then I saw ever.
But certainly I nist never
Where that it was, but well wist I,
It was of Venus redely
This temple, for in portreiture,
I saw a non right her figure
Naked fleeting in a see,
And also on her head parde,
Her rose garland white and red,
And her comb to kembe her head,
Her doves, and Dan Cupido,
Her blind son, and Vulcano,
That in his face was full brown.
But as I romed up and down,
I found that on the wall there was
Thus written on a table of bras.
I woll now sing if that I can,
The arms, and also the man,
That first came through his destiny
Fugitife fro Troy the country,
Into Itaile, with full much pine,
Unto the stronds of Lauine,
And tho began the story anon,
As I shall tellen you echone.
First saw I the destruction
Of Troy, through the Greek Sinon,
With his false untrue forswearings,
And with his chere and his lesings
Made a horse, brought into Troy,
By which Troyans lost all her joy.
And after this was graued, alas,
How Ilions castle assailed was
And won, and king Priamus slain,
And Polites his son certain,
Dispitously of Dan Pirrus.
And next that saw I how Venus
When that she saw the castle brend,
Down from heaven she began descend,
And bad her son Eneas to flee,
And how he fled, and how that he
Escaped was from all the prees,
And took his father, old Anchises,
And bare him on his back away,
Crying alas and welaway,
The which Anchises in his hand
Bare tho the gods of the land,
Thilke that vnbrenned were.
Then saw I next all in fere,
How Crusa, Dan Eneas wife,
Whom that he loved all his life,
And her young son Iulo,
And eke Ascanius also,
Fledden eke with drerie chere,
That it was pity for to here,
And in a Forest as they went,
At a tourning of a went,
How Crusa was ylost, alas,
That read not I, how that it was,
How he her sought, and how her ghost
Bad him fly the Greeks host,
And said he must into Itaile,
As was his destiny, sauns fail,
That it was pity for to hear,
When her spirit began appear
The words that she to him said,
And for to keep her son him prayed.
There saw I graven eke how he,
His father eke, and his meine,
With his ships began to sail
Toward the country of Itaile,
As straight as they mighten go.
There saw I eke the cruel Juno,
That art Dan Jupiters wife,
That have yhated all thy life
All the Troyan blood,
Ren and cry as thou were wood
On Eolus, the god of Winds,
To blown out of all kinds
So loud, that he should drench
Lord, Lady, groom, and wench
Of all the Troyans nation,
Without any of her salvation.
There saw I such tempest arise,
That every heart might agrise,
To see it painted on the wall.
There saw I eke graven withal
Venus, how ye my Lady dear,
Weeping with full woeful chere,
Praying Jupiter on hie
To save and keep that navy
Of that Troyan Eneas,
Since that he her son was.
There saw I Jove's Venus kiss,
And granted was of the tempest lisse.
There saw I how the tempest stent,
And how with all pipe he went,
And p^iuely took a riuage
Into the country of Carthage,
And on the morrow how that he,
And a Knight that height Achate,
Metten with Venus that day,
Going in a queint array,
As she had be an hunter esse,
With wind blowing upon her tresse,
And how Eneas began to plain,
When he knew her, of his pain,
And how his Ships dreint were,
Or else ylost, he nist where,
How she began him comfort tho,
And bad him to Cartage go,
And there he should his folk find,
That in the sea were left behind,
And shortly of this thing to pace,
She made Eneas so in grace
Of Dido, Queen of that country,
That shortly for to tellen, she
Became his love, and let him do
All that wedding longs to,
What should I speak it more quaint,
Or pain me my words to paint,
To speak of love, it woll not be,
I cannot of that faculte,
And eke to tellen of the manner
How they first acquainted were,
It were a long process to tell,
And over long for you to dwell.
There saw I grave, how Eneas
Told to Dido every caas,
That him was tidde upon the sea.
And est graven was how that she
Made of him shortly at a word,
Her life, her love, her lust, her lord,
And did to him all reverence,
And laid on him all the dispense,
That any woman might do,
Wening it had all be so,
As he her swore, and hereby demed
That he was good, for he such seemed.
* Alas, what harm does appearance,
When it is false in existence,
For he to her a traitor was,
Wherefore she slow her self alas.
* Lo, how a woman does amiss,
To love him that unknown is,
For by Christ lo thus it fares,
* It is not all gold that glareth,
For also brouke I well mine head,
There may be under goodlihead
Covered many a shreud vice,
Therefore be no wight so nice,
To take a love only for chere,
Or speech, or for friendly manner,
For this shall every woman find,
That some man of his pure kind
Woll shown outward the fairest,
Till he have caught that what him lest,
And then woll he causes find,
And swear how she is unkind,
Or false, or privy, or double was,
All this say I by Eneas
And Dido, and her nice lest,
That loved all to soon a guest,
Wherefore I woll say o proverb,
* That he that fully knows the herb,
May safely lay it to his eye,
Withouten dread this is no lie.
But let us speak of Eneas,
How he betrayed her, alas,
And left her full unkindly.
So when she saw all utterly,
That he would her of troth fail,
And wenden from her into Itaile,
She began to wring her hands two.
Alas (quoth. she) that me is woe,
Alas, is every man thus true,
That every year woll have a new,
If it so long time endure,
Or else three parauenture,
And thus of one he woll have fame
In magnifying of his own name,
Another for friendship says he,
And yet there shall the third be,
That is taken for delight,
Lo, or else for singular profit,
In such words began complain
Dido of her great pain,
As me met dreaming readily,
None other author allege woll I.
Alas (quoth. she) my sweet heart,
Have pity on my sorrows smart,
And slay me not, go not away.
O woeful Dido, welaway
(Quoth. she) unto her self tho.
O Eneas what woll ye do,
O that your love ne your bond,
That ye swore with your right hond,
Ne my cruel death (quoth. she)
May hold you still here with me.
O, have ye of my death no pite,
Iwis mine own dear heart ye
Know full well that never yet,
As far as ever I had wit,
Agilt you in thought ne in deed.
O, have ye men such goodlihede
In speech, and never a dele of troth,
Alas that ever had routh
Any woman on a false man.
Now I see well, and tell can,
We wretched women can no art,
For certain, for the more part,
Thus we been served euerichone,
How sore that ye men can groan,
Anon as we have you received,
Certainly we been deceived,
For though your love lest a season,
Wait upon the conclusion,
And eke how ye determine,
And for the more part define,
O welaway that I was borne,
For through you my name is lorne,
And mine acts read and song
Over all this land in every tongue.
O wicked fame, for there nis
Nothing so swift lo as she is,
O sooth is every thing is wist,
Though it be couerde with the mist,
Eke though I might duren ever,
That I have done recover I never,
That it ne shall be said, alas,
I shamed was through Eneas,
And that I shall thus judged be.
Lo right as she has done, now she
Woll done estsoones hardely,
Thus say the people privily,
But that is done nis not to done,
But all her complaint ne her moan
Certain auailed her not a stre,
And when she wist soothly he
Was forth into his ship agone,
She into chamber went anon,
And called on her suster Anne,
And began her to complain than,
And said, that she cause was,
That she first loved him alas,
And first counseled her thereto,
But what, when this was said and do,
She roft her seluen to the heart,
And deide through the wounds smart,
But all the manner how she deide,
And all the words how she seide,
Who so to know it has purpose,
Read Virgile in Eneidos,
Or the Pistels of Ouide,
What that she wrote or that she did,
And nere it too long to endite,
By God I would it here write,
But welaway, the harm and routh
That has betide for such untruth,
As men may often in books read,
And all day seen it yet in deed,
That for to thinken it tene is.
Lo Demophon, Duke of Athenis,
How he forswore him falsely,
And traied Phillis wickedly,
That kings daughter was of Thrace,
And falsely began his term pace,
And when she wist that he was false,
She hong her self right by the half,
For he had done her such untruth,
Lo, was not this a woe and routh.
Eke look how false and recheles
Was to Briseida Achilles,
And Paris to Oenone,
And Jason to Hipsiphile,
And eft Jason to Medea,
And Hercules to Dianira,
For he left her for Iolee,
That made him take his death parde.
How false was eke Theseus,
That as the story tells us,
How he betrayed Adriane,
The devil be his souls bane,
For had he laughed or yloured,
He must have been all devoured,
If Adriane ne had be,
And for she had of him pite,
She made him fro the death escape,
And he made her a full false jape,
For after this within a while,
He left her sleeping in an Isle,
Desert alone right in the sea,
And stale away, and let her be,
And took her suster Phedra tho
With him, and began to ship go,
And yet he had sworn to here,
On all that ever he could swear,
That so she saved him his life,
He would taken her to his wife,
For she desired nothing else,
In certain, as the book us tells.
But for to excuse this Eneas
Fulliche of all his great trespass,
The book says sauns fail,
The gods bad him go to Itaile,
And leaven Affrickes regioun,
And fair Dido and her town,
Tho saw I grave how to Itaile
Dan Eneas began for to sail,
And how the tempest all began,
And how he lost his steresman,
Which that the stern, or he took keep,
Smote over the board as he sleep.
And also saugh I how Sibile
And Eneas beside an Isle,
To hell went for to see
His father Anchises the free,
And how he there found Palimurus,
And also Dido, and Deiphebus,
And eueriche tourment eke in hell
Saw he, which long is for to tell,
Which pains who so list to know,
He must read many a row
In Vergile or in Claudian,
Or Daunt, that it tellen can.
Tho saw I eke all the ariuaile
That Eneas had made in Itaile,
And with king Latin his treat,
And all the battles that he
Was at himself, and his knights,
Or he had all iwonne his rights,
And how he Turnus reft his life,
And wan Lauina to his wife,
And all the marvelous signals
Of the gods celestials,
How maugre Juno, Eneas
For all her slight and her compass
Acheued all his adventure,
For Jupiter took on him cure,
At the prayer of Venus,
Which I pray always save us,
And us aye of our sorrows light.
When I had seen all this sight
In this noble temple thus,
Hey Lord, thought I, that made us,
Yet saw I never such noblesse
Of Images, nor such richesse,
As I see graven in this church,
But naught wot I who did hem worch,
Ne where I am, ne in what country,
But now will I out gone and see
Right at the wicket if I can
Seen ought where stering any man,
That may me tellen where I am.
When I out of the door came,
I fast about me beheld,
Then saw I but a large field,
As far as ever I might see,
Without town, house, or tree,
Or bush, or grass, or eared land,
For all the field was but of sand,
As small as men may see at eye
In the desert of Lybye,
Ne no manner creature,
That is yformed by nature,
Ne saw I, me to read or wisse:
O Christ, thought I, that are in bliss,
From fanton and illusion
Me save, and with devotion
Mine eyes to the heaven I cast,
Tho was I ware lo at the last,
That fast by the sun on hye,
As kenne might I with mine eye,
Me thought I saw an Egle sore,
But that it seemed much more,
Than I had any Egle yseine,
This is as sooth as death certain,
It was of gold, and shone so bright,
That never saw men such a sight,
But if the heaven had ywonne
All new of God another son,
So shone the Egles feathers bright,
And somewhat downward began it light.
Explicit liber primus.
NOw hearken every manner man,
That English understand can,
And lists of my dream to here,
For now at erst shall ye lere
So sely and so dredefull a vision,
That I say neither Scipion,
Ne king Nabugodonosore,
Pharao, Turnus, ne Alcanore,
Ne metten such a dream as this,
Now fair blisfull, O Cipris,
So be my favor at this time,
That ye me tendite and rhyme
Helps, that in Pernaso dwell,
Beside Elicon the clear well.
O thought, that wrote all that I met,
And in the tresorie it set
Of my brain, now shall men see
If any virtue in thee be,
To tell all my dream aright,
Now kithe thy engine and thy might.
This Egle of which I have you told,
That with feathers shone all of gold,
Which that so high began to sore,
I began behold more and more,
To seen her beauty and the wonder,
But never was that dent of thunder,
Ne that thing that men call sendre,
That smite sometime a toure to poudre,
And in his swift coming brend,
That so swithe began downward descend,
As this foul when it beheld,
That I a room was in the field,
And with his grim paws strong,
Within his sharp nails long,
Me fleyng at a swappe he hent,
And with his sours again up went,
Me carrying in his claws stark,
As lightly as I had been a lark,
How high, I cannot tellen you,
For I came up, I nist never how,
For so astonished and asweued
Was every virtue in me heued,
What with his sours and my dread,
That all my feeling began to dead,
For why, it was a great affray.
Thus I long in his claws lay,
Till at last he to me spoke
In man's voice, and said awake,
And be not aghast so for shame,
And called me tho by my name,
And for I should better abraid,
Me to awake, thus he said,
Right in the same voice and steuin,
That uses one that I can neuin,
And with that voice, sooth to saine,
My mind came to me again,
For it was goodly said to me,
So nas it never wont to be,
And herewithal I began to stere,
As he me in his feet bear,
Till that he felt that I had heat,
And felt eke tho mine heart beat,
And tho began he me to disport,
And with gentle words me comfort,
And said twice, saint Mary,
Thou art a noyous thing to carry,
And nothing needs it parde,
For also wise God help me,
As thou no harm shall have of this,
And this case that betiddeth thee is,
Is for thy lore and for thy prow,
Let see, dare thou look yet now,
Be full ensured boldly,
I am thy friend, and therewith I
Began for to wonder in my mind.
O God, quoth. I, that made all kind,
Shall I none otherwise die,
Whether Jove will me stellifie,
Or what thing may this signify,
I am neither Enocke, ne Helie,
Ne Romulus, ne Ganimede,
That were bore up as men read,
To heaven with dan Jupiter,
And made the gods buteler,
Lo, this was tho my fantasy,
But he that bare began aspie,
That I so thought and said this,
Thou deemest of thy self amiss,
For Jove is not thereabout,
I dare thee put full out of doubt
To make of thee yet a sterre,
But ere I bear thee much far,
I will the tell what I am,
And whider thou shall, and why I came,
To do this, so that thou take
Good heart, and not for fear quake.
Gladly, quoth. I, now well, quoth. he:
First, I that in my feet have the,
Of whom thou have fear and wonder,
I am dwelling with the god of thonder,
Which men callen Jupiter,
That does me flien full often fer
To do all his commandment,
And for this cause he has me sent
To thee: Herke now by thy troth,
Certain he has of thee routh,
That thou have so truly
Long served ententifely
His blind new Cupido,
And fair Venus also,
Without guerdon ever yet,
And nathelesse have set thy wit,
Although in thy head full little is,
To make books, songs, and dities
In rhyme, or else in Cadence,
As thou best can in reverence
Of love, and of his servant eke,
That have his service sought aad seek,
And painest thee to praise his art,
Although thou had never part,
Wherefore also God me bless,
Iouis halt it great humblesse,
And virtue eke, that thou will make
A might full often thine head to ache,
In thy study so thou writest,
And evermore of love enditest,
In honor of him and praisings,
And in his folks furtherings,
And in her matter all deuisest,
And not him ne his folk dispisest,
Although thou may go in the dance
Of hem, that him list not auaunce,
Wherefore as I said ywis,
Jupiter considreth well this,
And also beausire, of other things,
That is, thou haste no tidings
Of loves folk, if they be glade,
Ne of nothing else that God made,
And not only fro far country,
That no tidings commen to thee,
Not of thy very neighbors,
That dwellen almost at thy doors,
Thou hear neither that ne this,
For when thy labor all done is,
And have made all thy reckenings
In stead of rest and of new things,
Thou go home to thine house anon,
And also dombe as a stone,
Thou sit at another book,
Till fully dased is thy look,
And live thus as an Hermit,
Although thine abstinence is lite,
And therefore Iouis through his grace
Will that I bear thee to a place,
Which that hight the house of Fame,
And to do the sport and game
In some recompensation
Of thy labor and devotion
That thou have had, lo causeless,
To god Cupido the rechelesse,
And thus this God through his merit
Will with some manner thing thee quite,
So that thou will be of good chere,
For trust well that thou shall here,
When we ben commen there as I say,
Mo wonder things dare I lay,
And of loves folk mo tidings,
Both soothsawes and lesings,
And mo loves new begone,
And long served till love is won,
And mo lovers casuelly,
That been betide, no man wot why,
But as a blind man starteth an Hare,
And more jolite and welfare,
While they find love of stele,
As think men, and over all well,
Mo discords, and mo iealousies,
Mo murmures, and mo nouelries,
And also mo dissimulations,
And eke fained reparations,
And mo berdes in two hours
Without rasour or sisours
Ymade, than grains be of sands,
And eke mo holding in mo hands,
And also mo renouelaunces
Of old forseten aqueintaunces,
Mo love days, and mo accords
Than on instruments ben cords,
And eke of love mo exchaunges,
Than ever corn were in graunges,
Uneath may thou trowen this,
Quoth. he, no so help me God as wis
Quoth. I, Now why, quoth. he, for it
Were impossible to my wit,
Though Fame had all the pries
In all a realm and all aspies,
How that yet he should hear all this,
Or they espien: O yes, yes,
Quoth. he, to me, that can I preue
By reason, worthy for to leave,
So that thou give thine aduertence
To understand my sentence.
First shall thou here where she dwells,
Right so as thine own book tells,
Her palais stands as I shall say
Right even amiddes of the way
Between heaven, earth, and see,
That whatsoever in all these three
Is spoken in prive or apert,
The way thereto is so ouert,
And stant eke in so just a place,
That every sown mote to it pace,
Or what so comes from any tongue,
Be rowned, red, or song,
Or spoken in suertie or dread,
Certain it mote thider need.
Now hearken well, for why I will
Tellen thee a proper skill,
And a worthy demonstration
In mine imagination.
Geffray, thou wotest well this,
That every kindly thing that is,
Has a kindly stead there he
May best in it conserved be,
Unto which place every thing,
Through his kindly enclining,
Meueth for to come to,
When that it is away therefro,
As thus. Lo how thou may al day see,
Take any thing that heavy be,
As stone or lead, or thing of weight,
And bear it never so hie on height,
Let go thine hand, it falls down,
Right so say. I by fire or sown
Or smoke, or other things light,
Always they seek upward on height,
Light things up, and downward charge,
While euerich of hem be at large,
And for this cause thou may well see,
That every river unto the sea
Inclined is to go by kind,
And by these skilles, as I find,
Have fishes dwelling in flood and see,
And trees eke on the earth be,
Thus every thing by his reason
Has his own proper mansion,
To which he seeks to repair,
There as it should not appaire.
Lo, this sentence is known couth
Of every Philosophers mouth,
As Aristotle and dan Platone,
And other clerks many one,
And to confirm my reasoun,
Thou wost well that speech is soun,
Or else no man might it here,
Now herke what I woll thee lere.
Sown is not but air ybroken,
And every speech that is spoken,
Loud or prive, foul or fair,
In his substance is but air,
For as flame is but lighted smoke,
Right so is sown air ybroke,
But this may be in many wise,
Of which I will thee devise,
As sown comes of pipe or harp,
For when a pipe is blown sharp,
The air is twist with violence,
And rent: Lo, this is my sentence
Eke, when men harp strings smite,
Wheder it be much or lite,
Lo, with the stroke the air it breketh,
And right so breaks it when men speaks,
Thus wost thou well what thing is speech,
Now henceforth I will thee teach,
How euerich speech, voice, or soun,
Through his multiplicatioun,
Though it were piped of a mouse,
Mote needs come to Fames house,
I prove it thus, take heed now
By experience, for if that thou
Threw in a water now a stone,
Well wost thou it will make anon
A little roundell as a cercle,
Parauenture as broad as a couercle,
And right anon thou shall see well,
That whele cercle will cause another whele,
And that the third, and so forth brother,
Every cercle causing other,
Broader than himself was,
And thus from roundell to compass,
Each about other going,
Causes of others stering,
And multiplying euermo,
Till it be so far go
That it at both brinkes be,
Although thou may it not see
Above, yet gothe it always under,
Though thou think it a great wonder,
And who so says of troth I vary,
Bid him prove the contrary,
And right thus every word iwis,
That loud or privy yspoken is,
Moves first an air about,
And of his moving out of dout
Another air anon is moved,
As I have of the water proved,
That every cercle causes other,
Right so of air my leave brother,
Euerich air in other stereth
More and more, and speech up bears,
Or voice or noise, word or soun,
Aye through multiplicatioun,
Till it be at the house of Fame,
Take it in earnest or in game,
Now have I told, if thou have mind,
How speech or sown, of pure kind
Inclined is upward to meue,
This may thou feel well by preue,
And that same stead iwis,
That every thing inclined to is,
Has his kindliche stead,
That shows it without dread,
That kindly the mansioun
Of euerich speech of every soun,
Be it either foul or fair,
Has his kind place in air,
And since that every thing iwis
Out of his kind place iwis,
Moves thider for to go,
If it away be therefro,
As I have before proved thee,
It shows every soune parde,
Moves kindly to pace,
As up into his kind place,
And this place of which I tell,
There as Fame list to dwell,
Is set amiddes of these three,
Heaven, earth, and eke the sea,
As most conseruatife the soun,
Then is this the conclusion,
That every speech of every man,
As I thee tell first began,
Moves up on height to pace
Kindly to Fames place.
Tell me this now faithfully,
Have I not proved thus simply,
Without any subtelte
Of speech, or great prolixite,
Of terms of Philosophy,
Of figures of Poetry,
Or colors of Rhetorike,
Perde it ought thee to like,
For hard language, and hard matere
Is incombrous for to here
At ones, wost thou not well this?
And I answered and said yes.
Ah ah, quoth. he, lo so I can,
Leudly unto a lewd man
Speak, and show him such skilles,
That he may shake hem by the bills,
So palpable they shoulden be,
But tell me this now pray I thee,
How thinks thee my conclusioun?
A good persuasion,
Quoth. I, it is, and like to be,
Right so as thou have proved me,
By God, quoth. he, and as I leave,
Thou shall have it or it be eve,
Of every word of this sentence,
A proof by experience,
And with thine ears hearen well,
Top and tail, and eueridell,
That every word that spoken is,
Comes into Fames house ywis,
As I have said, what will thou more,
And with this word upper to sore,
He began and said by saint Iame,
Now will we speak all of game.
How farest thou now, quoth. he, to me,
Well, quoth. I, now see, quoth. he,
By thy troth yond adowne,
Where that thou know any town,
Or house, or any other thing,
And when thou have of ought knowing,
Look that thou warn me,
And I anon shall tell thee,
How far that thou art now therefro.
And I adowne began to loken tho,
And beheld fields and plains,
Now hills, and now mountains,
Now valeis, and now forests,
And now unneth great beests,
Now rivers, now citees,
Now towns, now great trees,
Now ships sailing in the sea.
But thus soon in a while he,
Was flowen fro the ground so hye,
That all the world as to mine eye,
No more seemed than a prick,
Or else was the air so thick
That I might it not discern:
With that he spoke to me so yerne,
And said: See thou any token,
Or ought that in this world of spoken?
I said nay, no wonder is,
Quoth. he, for never half so hye as this,
Nas Alexander of Macedon
King, Ne of Rome dan Scipion,
That saw in dream at point devise,
Heaven and earth, helf and paradise,
Ne eke the wretch Dedalus,
Ne his child nice Icharus,
That flewe so hie, that the hete
His wyngs molte, and he fell wete
In midde the sea, and there he dreint,
For whom was made a great complaint.
Now turn upward, quoth. he, thy face,
And behold this large place,
This air, but look that thou ne be
Adrad of hem that thou shall see,
For in this regioun certain,
Dwells many a citezeine,
Of which speaks dan Plato,
These ben the eyrishe beests lo,
And tho saw I all the menie,
Both gone and also fly.
Lo, quoth. he, cast up thine eye,
See yonder lo, the Galaxie,
The which men clepe the milky way,
For it is white: And some parfay
Callen it watling street,
That ones was brent with the hete,
When the Suns son the read,
That hight Pheton, would led
Algate his fathers cart, and gie.
The cart horse began well aspie,
That he coud no governance,
And began for to leap and praunce,
And bear him up, and now down,
Till he saw the Scorpioun,
Which that in heaven a sign is yet,
And he for fere lost his wit
Of that, and let the reins gone
Of his horse, and they anon
Soon up to mount, and down discende
Till both air and earth brende,
Till Jupiter lo, at the last
Him slew, and fro the carte cast.
Lo, is it not a great mischaunce,
To let a fool have governance
Of things that he can not demaine?
And with this word sothe for to saine,
He began always upper to sore,
And gladded me then more and more,
So faithfully to me spoke he.
Tho began I to look under me,
And beheld the eyrish beests,
Clouds, mistes, and tempests,
Snowes, hayles, raynes, and winds,
And thengendring in her kinds,
All the way through which I came;
O God, quoth. I, that made Adame,
Much is thy might and nobles.
And tho thought I upon Boece,
That writes a thought may fly so hie,
With feathers of Philosophy
To passen euerich Element,
And when he has so far ywent,
Then may be seen behind his back,
Cloud, and earth, and all yt I of spoke.
Tho began I wexe in a were,
And said, I wot well I am here,
But whether in body or in ghost,
I not ywis, but God thou woost,
For more clear entendement,
Nas me never yet ysent,
And then thought I on Marcian,
And eke of Anticlaudian,
That sothe was her descripcion
Of all the heavens region,
As far as that I saw the preve,
And therefore I can hem leave.
With that the Egle began to cry,
Let be, quoth. he, thy fantasy,
Will thou learn of sterres ought?
Nay certainly, quoth. I, right naught.
And why, quoth. he? for I am old:
Or else would I thee have told,
Quoth. he, the sterres names lo,
And all the heavens signs to,
And which they be. No force, quoth. I.
Yes parde, quoth. he, wost thou why,
For when thou redest poetry,
How the gods can stellify
Bird, fish, or him, or her,
As the Rauin and other,
Or Ariones harp fine,
Cassor, Polexe, or Delphine,
Or Athalantes daughters seven,
How all these are set in heaven,
For though thou have hem often in hand,
Yet nost thou not where they stand.
No force, quoth. I, it is no need,
As well I leave so God me speed,
Hem that written of this matere,
As though I knew her places here,
And eke they semen here so bright,
It should shenden all my sight,
To look on hem: that may well be,
Quoth. he, and so forth hare he me
A while, and tho he began to cry,
(That never herd I thing so hie)
Hold up thine heed, for all is well,
Saint Julian lo, bonue hostell,
See here the house of Fame lo,
May thou not here that I do?
What, quoth. I?, the great sown
Quoth. he, that rombleth up and down
In Fames house full of tidings,
Both of fair speech and chidings,
And of false and sothe compouned,
Harken well it is not rowned.
Herest thou not the great swough?
Yes perde, quoth. I, well enough,
And what sown is it like, quoth. he?
Peter, like the beating of the sea,
Quoth. I, against the roches halow,
When tempests done her ships swalow,
And that a man stand out of doubt,
A mile thens, and here it route.
Or else like the humbling
After the clappe of a thuisoring,
When Iouis has the air ybete,
But it does me for fear sweet,
Nay, dread thee not thereof, quoth. he,
It is nothing that will byten thee,
Thou shall have no harm truly,
And with that word both he and I
As nigh the place arrived were,
As men might cast with a spear,
I niste how, but in a street
He set me fair on my feet,
And said, walk forth a pace
And tell thine adventure and case,
That thou shall find in fames place.
Now, quoth. I, while we have space
To speak, or that I go fro thee,
For the love of God tell me,
In sothe, that I will of thee lere,
If this noise that I here
Be as I have herd thee tell,
Of folk that done in earth dwell,
And comes here in the same wise,
As I thee herd or this devise,
And that here lives body nis
In all that house that yonder is,
That makes all this loud fare.
No, quoth. he, by saint Clare,
And also wisse God read me,
But o thing I will warn thee,
Of the which thou will have wonder.
Lo, to the house of Fame yonder,
Thou woste how comes every speech,
It needs not the efte to reach,
But understand now right well this,
When any speech ycomen is,
Up to the palais anon right,
It wexeth like the same wight,
Which that the word in earth spoke,
Be he clothed in reed or blake,
And has so very his likeness,
And spoke the word that thou will guess,
That it the same body be,
Man or woman, he or she.
And is not this a wonder thing,
Yes, quoth. I tho, by heaven king,
And with this word farewell, quoth. he,
And here will I abide thee,
And God of heaven send thee grace,
Some good to learn in this place,
And I of him took leave anon,
And began forth to the palace gone.
Explicit liber secundus.
GOd of Science and of light,
Apollo through thy great might,
This littell last book now thou gie,
Now that I will for maistrie,
Here art potenciall be shewde,
But for the rhyme is light and lewd,
Yet make it somewhat agreeable,
Though some verse fail in a syllable,
And that I do no diligence,
To show craft, but sentence,
And if divine virtue thou Will help me to show now,
That in my heed ymarked is,
Lo, that is for to meanen this,
The house of Fame for to discriue,
Thou shall see me go as bliue
Unto the next laurer I see,
And kiss it, for it is thy tree,
Now enter in my breast anon.
When I was from the Egle gone,
I began behold upon this place,
And certain or I further pass,
I woll you all the shappe devise,
Of house and city, and all the wise,
How I began to this place approach,
That stood upon so hie a roch,
Hyer stands none in Spain,
But up I clambe with much pain,
And though to climb grieved me,
Yet I ententife was to see,
And for to poren wondre low,
If I could any wise yknow
What manner stone this roche was,
For it was like a limed glass,
But that it shone full more clear,
But of what congeled matere
It was, I niste redely,
But at the last espied I,
And found that it was euerydele,
A roche of yse and not of stele,
Thought I by saint Thomas of Kent,
This were a feeble foundement,
To builden on a place hie,
He ought him little to glorify,
That hereon bilte, God so me save.
Tho saw I all the hall ygraue
With famous folks names feel,
That had been in much well,
And her fames wide yblow,
But well uneath might I know
Any letters for to read
Her names by, for out of dread,
They weren almost of thawed so,
That of the letters one or two
Were molte away of every name,
So vnfamous was wexe her fame,
But men say, what may ever last.
Tho began I in mine heart cast,
That they were molte away for heat,
And not away with storms beat,
For on that other side I sey,
Of this hill, that Northward ley,
How it was written full of names,
Of folk that had before great fames,
Of old time, and yet they were
As fresh as men had written hem there
The self day, or that hour
That I on hem began to pour,
But well I wiste what it made,
It was conserved with the shade,
All the writing that I sie,
Of a Castle that so stood on hie,
And stood eke in so cold a place,
That heat might it not deface.
Tho began I on this hill to gone,
And found on the coppe a wone,
That all the men that been on live,
Ne han the conning to discriue
The beauty of that ilke place,
Ne coud cast no compace,
Soch another for to make,
That might of beauty be his make,
Ne so wonderly ^^rought,
That it astonieth yet my thought,
And makes all my wit to swinke
On this Castle for to think,
So that the great beauty,
The cast, craft, and curiosity,
Ne can I not to you devise,
My wit ne may me not suffice,
But nathelesse all the substance
I have yet in my remembrance,
For why me thought by saint Gile,
All was of stone of Berile,
Both the Castle and the Toure,
And eke the hall, and every boure,
Without pieces or joynings,
But many subtell compassings,
As babeuries and pinnacles,
Imageries and tabernacles,
I saw, and full eke of windows,
As flakes fallen in great Snowes,
And eke in each of the pinnacles
Weren sundry habitacles,
In which stooden all withouten,
Full the castle all abouten,
Of all manner of Min^^rales,
And Iestours, that tellen tales
Both of weeping and of game,
And of all that longs unto Fame,
There heard I play on an Harp,
That souned both well and sharp,
Him Orpheus full craftily,
And on this side fast by
Sat the Harper Orion,
And Gacides Chirion,
And other Harpers many one,
And the Briton Glaskirion,
And small Harpers with her glees,
Sat under hem in diverse sees,
And gone on hem upward to gape,
And counterfeited hem as an Ape,
Or as craft counterfeit kind.
Tho saw I standen hem behind,
A far from hem, all by hemselue,
Many a thousand times twelve,
That made loud Minstralcies
In Cornmuse and Shalmies,
And many another pipe,
That craftily began to pipe,
Both in Douced and in Read,
That been at feasts with the bread,
And many a Floite and litling horn,
And pipes made of green Corn,
As have these little heard gromes,
That keepen beasts in the Bromes.
There saw I then dan Citherus,
And of Athenes dan Proserus,
And Mercia that lost her skin,
Both in face, body, and chinne,
For that she would enuien lo,
To pipen bette than Apollo.
There saw I eke famous old and young,
Pipers of all the Dutch tongue,
To learn love daunces, springs,
Reyes, and the strange things.
Tho saw I in another place,
Standing in a large space
Of hem that maken bloody soun,
In trumpe beme, and Clarioun,
For in fight and bloodsheddings
Is used gladly clarionings.
There heard I trumpe, Messenus,
Of whom that speaks Vergilius.
There heard I Ioab trumpe also,
Theodomas, and other mo,
And all that used clarion,
In Casteloigne and Aragon,
That in her times famous were,
To learnen saw I trumpen there.
There saw I sit in other sees,
Playing upon other sundry glees,
Which that I cannot neuen,
Mo than Sterres ben in heaven,
Of which I nill as now not rhyme,
For ease of you, and loss of time:
* For time ylost, this know ye,
By no way may recovered be.
There saw I p^aying Iogelours,
Magiciens, and Tragetours,
And Phetonisses, Charmeresses,
Old Witches, Sorceresses,
That vsen Exorsisations,
And eke Subfumigations,
And clerks eke, which conne well
All this Magic naturell,
That craftily do her entents,
To maken in certain ascendents,
Images lo, through which Magike,
To maken a man ben hole or sike.
There saw I the queen Medea,
And Circes eke, and Caliophia.
There saw I Hermes Ballenus,
Limote, and eke Simon Magus.
There saw I, and knew by name,
That by such art done men have fame.
There saw I Coll Tragetour
Upon a table of Sicamour
Play an uncouth thing to tell,
I saw him carry a wind Mell
Under a Walnote shale.
What should I make longer tale,
Of all the people that I sey,
I could not tell till Domisdey.
When I had all this folk behold,
And found me loose and not hold,
And I amused a long while
Upon this wall of Berile,
That shone lighter than a glass,
And made well more than it was,
As kind thing of fame is,
And then anon after this,
I began forth romen till I fond
The castle yate on my right hond,
Which so well coruen was,
That never such another nas,
And yet it was by adventure
Ywrought by great and subtle cure;
It needs not you more to tellen,
To make you too long dwellen,
Of these yates florishings,
Ne of compaces, ne of karuings,
Ne how the hacking in Masonries,
As corbets, and Imageries,
But Lord so fair it was to show,
For it was all with gold behewe,
But in I went, and that anon
There met I crying many one,
A larges a larges, hold up well
God save the Lady of this pell,
Our own gentill Lady Fame,
And hem that willen to have a name
Of us, thus heard I crien all,
And fast commen out of the hall,
And shoke nobles and starlings,
And crowned were as kings,
With crowns wrought full of Losinges,
And many ribans, and many fringes
Were on her clothes truly.
Tho at the last espied I,
That Purseuauntes and Heraudes,
That crien rich folks lauds,
It weren, all and every man
Of hem, as I you tell can
Had on him throw a vesture,
Which men clepe a coat armure,
Embroudred wonderly rich,
As though they were not yliche,
But naught will I, so mote I thrive,
Be about to discriue
All these arms that there weren,
That they thus on her coats weren,
For to me were impossible,
Men might make of hem a bible,
Twenty foot thick as I trow,
For certain who so coud know,
Might there all the arms seen,
Of famous folk that had been
In Affrike, Europe, and Asie,
Since first began cheualrie.
Lo, how should I now tell all this,
Ne of the hall eke what need is,
To tellen you that every wall
Of it, and rofe and flore with all,
Was plated half a foot thick
Of gold, and that nas not wicke,
But for to prove in all wise,
As fine as ducket in Venise,
Of which to lite all in my pouche is,
And they were set as thick of ouches
Fine, of the finest stones fair,
That men reden in the Lapidaire,
Or as Grasses grown in a Mede,
But it were all to long to read
The names, and therefore I pace,
But in this lusty and rich place,
That Fames hall called was,
Full much prees of folk there nas,
Ne crouding, for to much prees,
But all on hie above a dees,
Satte in a see Imperial,
That made was of Rubie royal,
Which that a Carbuncle is ycalled,
I saw perpetually ystalled,
A feminine creature,
That never formed by nature
Was soch another thing I say:
For alther first, soth to say,
Me thought that she was so lite,
That the length of a cubite,
Was longer than she seemed be,
But thus soon in a while she,
Her self tho wonderly straight,
That with her feet she therthe reight,
And with her hedde she touched heaven,
There as shines the Sterres seven,
And thereto yet, as to my wit,
I saw a great wonder yet,
Upon her iyen to behold,
But certainly I hem never told,
For as feel iyen had she,
As feathers upon fowls be,
Or weren on the beasts four,
That Gods trone can honor,
As writes John in the Apocalips,
Her here that was owndie and crips,
As burned gold it shone to see.
And sothe to tellen also she,
Had also feel up standing ears,
And tongues, as on beast been hears,
And on her feet woxen saw I,
Partriche wings redily.
But Lord the perrie and the richesse,
I saw sitting on the Goddess,
And the heavenly melody,
Of songs full of armonie,
I heard about her trone ysong,
That all the palais wall rong,
So song the mighty Muse she,
That cleped is Caliope,
And her seven sisterne eke,
That in her faces seemen meke,
And evermore eternally,
They song of Fame tho heard I,
Heried be thou and thy name,
Gods of renoun and of Fame.
Tho was I ware at the last,
As I mine iyen began up cast,
That this ilke noble Queen,
On her shoulders began sustene
Both the arms and the name
Of tho that had large Fame,
Alisander, and Hercules,
That with a sherte his life did lose,
And thus found I sitting this Goddess,
In noble honor and richesse,
Of which I stinte a while now,
Other thing to tellen you.
Tho saw I stand on the other side,
Straight down to the doors wide,
From the dees many a pillere
Of metal, that shone not full clear,
But though they were of no richesse,
Yet were they made for great noblesse,
And in hem great sentence,
And folk of hie and digne reverence,
Of which to tell will I fond.
Upon a pillar saw I stand,
Alder first there I sie,
Upon a pillar stand on hie,
That was of Led and of Iron fine,
Him of the sect Saturnine,
The Ebraike Josephus the old,
That of Jews gestes told,
And he bare on his shulders hie,
The fame up of the Jury,
And by him stoden other seven,
Wise and worthy for to neuen,
To helpen him bear up the charge,
It was so heavy and so large,
And for they written of battayles,
As well as of other maruayles,
Therefore was lo, this pillere,
Of which I you tell here,
Of Lead and Iron both iwis,
For Iron Martes metal is,
Which that God is of battle,
And the Lead withouten fail,
Is lo, the metal of Saturn,
That has full large whele to turn,
To stand forth on either row
Of hem, which I could know,
Though I by order hem not tell,
To make you to long to dwell.
These, of which I began read,
There saw I stand out of dread,
Upon an Iron pillar strong,
That painted was all endlong,
With Tigres blood in every place,
The Tholason that height Stace,
That bare of Thebes up the name,
Upon his shoulders, and the fame
Also of cruel Achilles,
And by him stood withouten lees,
Full wonder hie upon a pillar
Of Iron, he the great Omer,
And with him Dares and Titus
Before, and eke he Lollius,
And Guido eke the Colempnis,
And English Galfride eke iwis,
And each of these as I have joy,
Was busy to hear up Troy,
So heavy thereof was the fame,
That for to bear it was no game,
But yet I began full well epsy,
Between hem was a little envy,
One said that Omer made lies,
Feyning in his Poetries,
And was to the Greeks favorable,
Therefore held he it but fable.
Tho saw I stand on a pillere,
That was of Tinned Iron clear,
The Latin Poet Virgile,
That has bore up a long while
The fame of Pius Eneas.
And next him on a pillar was,
Of Copper, Venus clerk, Duide,
That has sown wondrous wide
The great god of loves fame,
And there he bare up well his name,
Upon this pillar also hie,
As I might see it with mine iye:
For why this hall whereof I read,
Was woxe on height, length, and bread,
Well more by a thousand deal,
Then it was erst, that saw I weal.
Tho saw I on a pillar by,
Of Iron wrought full sternely,
The great Poet dan Lucan,
That on his shoulders bare up than,
As hie as that I might see,
The fame of Julius, and Pompee,
And by him stoden all these clerks,
That write of Romes mighty works,
That if I would her names tell,
All to long must I dwell.
And next him on a pillar stood,
Of Sulphur, liche as he were wood,
Dan Claudian, sothe for to tell,
That bare up all the fame of hell,
Of Pluto, and of Proserpine,
That Queen is of the derke pine,
What should I more tell of this,
The hall was all full iwis,
Of hem that written old jestes,
As been on trees Rokes nestes,
But it a full confuse mattere
Were all these jestes for to here,
That they of write, and how they hight.
But while that I beheld this sight,
I herd a noise approchen bliue,
That fares as Bees done in an hiue,
Against her time of out flying,
Right soch a manner murmuring,
For all the world it seemed me.
Tho began I look about and see,
That there come entering into the hall,
A right great company withal,
And that of sundry regions,
Of all kind of conditions,
That dwell in earth under the Moon,
Poor and rich, and all so soon
As they were come into the hall,
They began on knees down to fall,
Before this ilke noble Queen,
And said, grant us Lady sheene,
Each of us of thy grace a bone,
And some of hem she granted sone,
And some she warned well and fair,
And some she granted the contraire
Of her asking utterly:
But this I say you truly,
What her grace was, I nist,
For of these folk full well I wist,
They had good fame each deserved,
Although they were diversely served,
Right as her sister dame Fortune
Is wont to serve in commune.
Now harken how she began to pay
Hem that began her of grace pray,
And yet lo, all this company
Saiden soth, and not a lie.
Madame, said they, we be
Folk that here besechen thee,
That thou grant us now good fame,
And let our works have good name,
In full recompensacioun
Of good work, give us good renoun.
I warn it you (quoth. she) anon,
Ye get of me good fame none,
By God, and therefore go your way.
Alas (quoth. they) and welaway,
Tell us what your cause may be.
For me list it not (quoth. she)
No wight shall speak of you iwis,
Good ne harm, ne that ne this.
And with that word she began to call
Her messenger that was in hall,
And bad that he should fast gone,
Upon pain to be blind anon,
For Eolus the god of Wind,
In Trace there ye shall him find,
And bid him bring his clarioun,
That is full diverse of his soun,
And it is cleped clear Laud,
With which he wont is to heraude
Hem that me list ypraised be:
And also bid him how that he
Bring eke his other clarioun,
That height Sclaunder in every town,
With which he wont is to diffame
Hem that me list, and do hem shame.
This messenger began fast to gone,
And found where in a cave of stone,
In a country that height Trace,
This Eolus with hard grace,
Held the Winds in distress,
And began hem under him to press,
That they gone as the Beres rore,
He bound and pressed hem so sore.
This messenger began fast cry,
Rise up (quoth. he) and fast thee hie,
Till thou at my Lady be,
And take thy clarious eke with thee,
And speed thee fast: and he anon,
Took to one that hight Tritone,
His clarions to bearen tho,
And let a certain wind go,
That blewe so hidously and hie,
That it ne left not a sky
In all the Welken long and broad.
This Eolus no where and broad,
Till he was come to Fames feet,
And eke the man that Triton heete,
And there he stood as still as stone,
And herewithall there came anon
Another huge company
Of good folk and began to cry,
Lady, grant us now good Fame,
And let our works have that name,
Now in honor of gentilnesse,
And also God your soul bless,
For we han well deserved it,
Therefore is right that we be quit.
As thrive I (quoth. she) ye shall fail,
Good works shall you not avail,
To have of me good Fame as now,
But wot ye what, I grant you,
That ye shall have a shrewd name,
And wicked loos and worse fame,
Though ye good loos have well deserved,
Now goes your way for you been served:
And thou Dan Eolus (quoth. she)
Take forth thy trumpe anon let see,
That is ycleped Sclaunder light,
And blow her loos, that every wight
Speak of hem harm and shreudnesse,
Instead of good and worthiness,
For thou shall trumpe all the contraire,
Of that they have done well and fair.
Alas thought I, what auentures
Have these sorry creatures,
That they among all the pres,
Should thus be shamed giltles?
But what, it must needs be.
What did this Eolus, but he
Took out his black trumpe of bras,
That fouler than the Devil was,
And began this trompe for to blow,
As all the world should overthrow,
Throughout every regioun,
Went this foul trumpes soun,
As swifte as a pellet out of a gonne,
When fire is in the powder run,
And soch a smoke began out wend,
Out of the foul trumpes end,
Black, blue, grenishe, swartish, read,
As does where that men melte led,
Lo, all on hie from the tewell,
And thereto one thing saw I well,
That the ferther that it ran,
The greater wexen it began,
As does the river from a well,
And it stanke as the pit of hell,
Alas, thus was her shame yrong,
And giltlesse on every tongue.
Tho came the third company,
And gone up to the dees to hie,
And down on knees they fell anon,
And saiden, we been euerichone
Folk that han full truly
Deserved fame rightfully,
And prayed you it might be know,
Right as it is and forth blow.
I grant (quoth. she) for now me list
That your good works shall be wist,
And yet ye shall have better loos,
Right in dispite of all your foos,
Than worthy is, and that anon:
Let now (quoth. she) thy trumpe gone,
Thou Eolus that is so black,
And out thine other trumpe take
That hight Laud, and blow it so
That through the world her fame go,
All easily and not too fast,
That it be known at the last.
Full gladly Lady mine he said,
And out his trumpe of gold he braied
Anon, and set it to his mouth,
And blewe it East, West, and South,
And North, as loud as any thonder,
That every wight has of it wonder,
So broad it ran or that it stent,
And certes all the breath that went
Out of his trumpes mouth smelde,
As men a pot full of baume held
Among a basket full of roses,
This favor did he to her loses.
And right with this I began epsy,
There came the fowerth company,
But certain they were wonder few,
And gonne to standen on a rewe,
And saiden, certes Lady bright,
We have done well with all our might,
But we ne keep to have fame,
Hide our works and our name,
For Gods love, for certes we
Have surely done it for bountee,
And for no manner other thing.
I grant you all your asking,
(Quoth. she) let your works be dedde.
With that about I turned my hedde,
And saw anon the fifth rout
That to this Lady began lout,
And down on knees anon to fall,
And to her tho besoughten all,
To hiden her good works eke,
And said, they give not a leke
For no fame, ne soch renoun,
For they for contemplacioun,
And Gods love had it wrought,
Ne of fame would they naught.
What (quoth. she) and be ye wood,
And wene ye for to do good,
And for to have of that no fame,
Have ye dispite to have my name,
Nay ye shall lien euerichone:
Blow thy trumpe and that anon,
(Quoth. she) thou Eolus I hot,
And ring these folks works by note,
That all the world may of it hear:
And he began blow her loos so clear,
In his golden clarioun,
Through the world went the soun,
Also kindly and eke so soft,
That their fame was blow aloft.
Tho came the sixth company,
And began fast to Fame cry,
Right verily in this manner,
They saiden, mercy Lady dear,
To tell certain as it is,
We have done neither that ne this,
But idell all our life has be,
But nathelesse yet pray we,
That we may have as good a fame,
And great renome and known name,
As they that have do noble jestes,
And acheued all her questes,
As well of love as other thing,
All was us never broche ne ring,
Ne else what fro women sent,
Ne ones in her heart yment,
To maken us only friendly chere,
But might temen us on bear,
Yet let us to the people seem
Soch as the world may of us deem,
That women louen us for wood,
It shall do us as much good,
And to our heart as much avail,
The counterpeise, ease, and travail,
As we had won with labor,
For that is dear bought honor,
At regard of our great ease:
And yet ye must us more please,
Let us be hold eke thereto,
Worthy, wise, and good also,
And rich, and happy unto love.
For Gods love that sits above,
Though we may not the body have
Of women, yet so god me save,
Let men glewe on us the name,
Suffiseth that we have the fame.
I grant (quoth. she) by my troth,
Now Eolius withouten sloth,
Take out thy trumpe of gold (quoth. she)
And blow as they have asked me,
That every man wene hem at ease,
Though they go in full badde lease,
This Eolus-gan it so blow,
That through the world it was i know.
Tho came the seventh route anon,
And fill on knees euerichone,
And said, Lady grant us soon,
The same thing, the same boon,
That this next folk have done.
Fie on you (quoth. she) euerichone,
Ye mastie swine, ye idle wretches,
Full of rotten slow tetches,
What false thieves where ye would,
Been famed good, and nothing nold
Deserve why, ne never thought,
Men rather you to hangen ought,
* For ye be like the slepie Cat,
That would have fish: but wost thou what?
He woll nothing weate his claws,
Evil thrifte come to your jaws,
And on mine, if I it grant,
Or do favor you to auaunt.
Then Eolus, thou king of Thrace,
Go blow this folk a sorry grace,
Quoth. she, anon, and wost thou how,
As I shall tell thee right now,
Say these ben they that would honor
Have, and do no kins labor,
Ne do no good, and yet have laud,
And that men wend that belle I saude,
Ne could hem not of love werne,
And yet she that grint at querne,
Is all too good to ease her heart.
This Eolus anon up sterte,
And with his black clarioun
He began to blasen out a soun,
As loud as belleth wind in hell,
And eke therewith sothe to tell,
This sown was so full of iapes,
As ever mowes were in apes,
And that went all the world about,
That every wight began on hem shout,
And for to laugh as they were wood,
Soch game found they in her hood.
Tho came another company,
That had ydone the treachery,
The harm and great wickedness,
That any heart couden guess,
And prayed her to have good fame,
And that she nolde do hem no shame,
But give hem loos and good renoun,
And do it blow in clarioun.
Nay wis, quoth. she, it were a vice,
Al b^ there in me no justice,
Me^st not to do it now,
Ne this I nill grant it you.
Tho came there leaping in a rout,
And began clappen all about,
Every man upon the crown
That all the hall began to sown,
And said, lady lefe and dear,
We ben soch folks as ye may here,
To tell all the tale aright,
We hen shrewes every wight,
And have delight in wickedness,
As good folk have in goodness,
And joy to been known shrewes,
And full vice and wicked thewes,
Wherefore we pray you on a row,
That our fame be soch yknow,
In all things right as it is.
I grant it you, quoth. she, ywis,
But what art thou that say this tale,
That wearest on thy hose a pale,
And on thy tippet soch a bell?
Madame, quoth. he, sothe to tell,
I am that ilke shrewe iwis
That brent the temple of Isidis
In Athenes, lo that city.
And wherefore did thou so, quoth. she?
By my troth, quoth. he, madame,
I would feign have had a name,
As other folk had in the town,
Although they were of great renown
For her virtue and her thewes,
Thought I, as great fame have shrewes:
(Though it be naught) for shrewdness,
As good folk have for goodness,
And sithen I may not have that one,
That other nyll I not forgone,
As for to get a fame here,
The temple set I all on fire.
Now done our loos be blow swithe,
As wisely be thou ever blithe.
Gladly, quoth. she, thou Eolus,
Heress thou not what they prayen us,
Madame yes, full well, quoth. he,
And I will trumpen it parde:
And took his black trumpe fast,
And began to puffen and to blast,
Till it was at the worlds end.
With that I began about wend,
For one that stood right at my back,
Me thought full goodly to me spoke,
And said, friend what is thy name?
Art thou come hider to have fame?
Nay forsothe friend, quoth. I,
I come not hither, grant mercy,
For no soch cause by my heed,
Suffiseth me as I were deed,
That no wight have my name in hand
I wot my self best how I stand,
For what I dry or what I think,
I woll my self all it drink,
Certain for the more part,
As ferforth as I can mine art.
What do thou here then (quoth. he?)
(Quoth. I) that woll I tell thee,
The cause why I stand here,
Some new tidings for to lere,
Some new thing, I not what,
Tidings either this or that,
Of love, or such things glade,
For certainly he that me made
To come hyder, said to me
I should both hear and see,
In this place wonde^ things,
But these be no soch tidings
As I meant of: No (quoth. he)
And I answerde no parde,
For well I wot ever yet,
Since that first I had wit,
That some folk han desired fame,
Diversely, and loos and name,
But certainly I nist how,
Ne where that fame dwelled or now,
Ne eke of her descripcion,
Ne also her condition,
Ne the order of her dome,
Knew I not till I hider come.
Why then be lo these tidings,
That thou now hither brings,
That thou have herd (quoth. he) to me,
But now no force for well I see
What thou desire for to lere,
Come forth and stand no longer here,
And I woll thee without dread,
Into soch another place led,
There thou shall here many one.
Tho began I forth with him gone,
Out of the castle sothe to sey.
Tho saw I stand in a valey,
Under the castle fast by,
An house, that domus Dedali,
That Laborintus ycleped is,
Nas made so wonderly ywis,
Ne half so queintly ywrought,
And euermo, as swift as thought,
This queint house about went,
That neuermo it still stent,
And there came out so great a noise,
That had it stand upon Dyse,
Men might have heard it easily
To Rome, I trow sikerly,
And the noise which that I herd,
For all the world right so it ferde,
As does the routing of the stone,
That fro thengin is letyn gone.
And all this house of which I read,
Was made of twigges, salow, read,
And green eke, and some were white,
Such as men to the cages twhite,
Or maken of these paniers,
Or else hutches or dossers,
That for the swough and for the twigges,
This house was also full of gigges,
And also full eke of chickinges,
And of many other werkings,
And eke this house has of entrees
As many as leaves ben on trees,
In summer when they been green,
And on the rofe yet men may seen
A thousand holes, and well mo,
To letten the sown out go,
And by day in every tide
Been all the doors open wide,
And by night each one unshet,
Ne porter is there none to let
No manner tidings in to pace,
Ne never rest is in that place,
That it nis filled full of tidings,
Either loud or of whisperings,
And ever all the houses angles,
Is full of rownings and of iangles,
Of werres, of peace, of marriages,
Of restes, and of labor, of viages,
Of abode, of death, and of life,
Of love, of hate, accord, of strife,
Of loss, of lore, and of winnings,
Of heal, of sickness, or of lesings,
Of fair wether, and eke of tempests,
Of qualme, of folk, and of beests,
Of diverse transmutacions,
Of estates and eke of regions,
Of trust, of dread, of iasousie,
Of wit, of winning, of folly,
Of plenty, and of great famine,
Of chepe, derth, and of ruin,
Of good or misgouernement,
Of fire, and of diverse accident.
And lo, this house of which I write,
Syker be ye it nas not lite,
For it was sixty mile of length,
Al was the timber of no strength,
Yet it is founded to endure,
While that it lift to adventure,
That is the mother of tidings,
As the sea of wells and springs,
And it was shapen like a cage.
Certes (quoth. I) in all mine age,
Ne saw I soch an house as this,
And as I wondered me ywis,
Upon this house tho ware was I,
How mine Egle fast by,
Was perched hie upon a stone,
And I began straight to him gone,
And said thus, I pray thee
That thou a while abide me
For gods love, and let me seen
What wonders in that place been,
For yet paraunter I may lere
Some good therein, or somewhat here,
That lefe me were, or that I went.
Peter that is now mine intent,
(Quoth. he to me) therefore I dwell,
But certain one thing I thee tell,
That but I bring thee therein,
Ne shall thou never conne the gin,
To come into it out of doubt,
So fast it whirleth lo about,
But since that Jove's of his grace,
As I have said will the solace,
Finally with these things
Uncouth sighs and tidings,
To pass with thine euinesse,
Soch routh has he of thy distress,
That thou suffredest debonairly,
And woste they seluen utterly,
Desperate of all bliss,
Since that fortune has made a miss,
The sweet of all thine hertes rest,
Languish and eke in point to breast,
But he through his mighty melite,
Will do thee ease, al be it lite,
And gave in express commandment,
To which I am obedient,
To fo^ther thee with all my might,
And wish and teach thee aright,
Where thou may most tidings here,
Thou shall here many one lere.
With this word he right anon,
Hent me up between his tone,
And at a window in me brought,
That in this house was as me thought,
And therewithal me thought it stent,
And nothing it about went,
And me set in the floor adoun
But such a great congregacioun
Of folk as I saw rome about,
Some within and some without,
Nas never seen, ne shall be efte
That certes in this world nis left,
So many formed by nature,
Ne need so many a creature,
That well uneath in that place
Had I a foot bread of space,
And every wight that I saw there,
Rowned euerich in others cere,
A new tiding privily,
Or else he told it all openly
Right thus, and said: Nost not thou
That is betidde, lo right now.
Not (quoth. he) tell me what,
And then he told him this and that,
And swore thereto that it was soth,
Thus has he said, and thus he does,
And this shall be, and thus herd I say,
That shall be found that dare I lay:
That all the folk that is on live,
Ne have the conning to discriue,
Tho things that I herd there,
What a loud, and what in eere,
But all the wonder most was this,
When one had herd a thing ywis,
He came straight to another wight
And began him tellen anon right,
The same that him was told
Or it a forlong way was old,
And began somewhat for to each
To this tiding in his speech,
More than ever it spoken was,
And not so sone departed nas
Tho fro him that he ne met
With the third, and erhe set
Any stound he told him alse,
Where the tidings sothe or false,
Yet would he tell it natheles,
And evermore with mo encrees,
Then it was erst: thus north and south,
Went every tiding fro mouth to mouth,
And that increasing euermo,
As fire is wont to quicken and go
From a sparcle sprongen amiss,
Till a city brent up is.
And when that was full up sprung,
And waxen more on every tongue
Than ever it was, and went anon
Up to a window out to gone,
Or but it might out there pass,
It began out crepe at some creuasse,
And flewe forth fast for the nones.
And sometime I saw there at ones,
A leasing and a sad sothe saw,
That gonnen of adventure draw,
Out at a window for to pace,
And when they metten in that place,
They were achecked both two,
And neither of them might out go,
For each other they gonne so croude
Till each of hem began crien loud,
Let me gone first, nay but let me,
And here I woll ensuren thee,
With vows that thou wolt do so,
That I shall never fro thee go,
But be thine own sworn brother,
We woll meddle us each in other,
That no man be he never so wroth,
Shall have one two, but both
At ones, as beside his leave,
Come we a morrow or on eve,
But we cryde or still yrowned:
Thus saw I salfe and soth compowned,
Togider fly for o tiding,
Thus out at holes gonne wring,
Every ridyng straight to Fame,
And she began give each his name,
After her disposicion,
And give hem eke duracion,
Some to wexe and wane soon,
As does the fair white moon,
And let hem gonne, there might I seen
Winged wonders fast flien,
Twenty thousand in a route,
As Eolus hem blewe about,
And lord this house in all times
Was full of shipmen and pilgrims,
With scrippes brette full of leasings,
Entermelled with tidings,
And eke alone by hem selue.
O many thousand times twelve
Saw I eke of these paadoners,
Currours, and eke messaungers,
With boxes crommed full of lies
As ever vessel was with lies.
And as I alther fastest went
About, and did all mine intent,
Me for to playen and for to lere,
And eke a tiding for to here,
That I had herd of some country
That shall not now be told for me,
For it no need is redely
Folk can sing it bet than I,
For all mote out late or rathe,
All the sheues in the fathe.
I herd a great noise withal
In a corner of the hall,
There men of love tidings told
And I began thitherward behold,
For I saw renning every wight,
As fast as that they hadden might,
And everich cride what thing is that,
And some said I not never what,
And when they were all on a hepe,
Tho behind gonne up lepe,
And clamben up on other fast
And up the noise on highen cast,
And treden fast on others heles
And stamp as men done after eles.
At the last I saw a man,
Which that I naught ne can,
But he seemed for to be
A man of great auctorite.
And therewithal I abraide
Out of my sleep half afraid,
Remembering well what I had seen
And how hie and far I had been
In my ghost, and had great wonder
Of that the god of thonder
Had let me known, and began to write
Like as ye have herd me endite,
Wherefore to study and read always,
I purpose to do day by day.
Thus in dreaming and in game,
Ends this litell book of Fame.
Here ends the book of Fame.
The Prologue of the Testament of Love.
MAny men there been, that with eres openly sprad, so much swalowen the
deliciousness of iestes and of ryme, by queint knitting colors, that of the
goodness or of the badnesse of the sentence, take they little head or else none.

Sothely dull wit and a thoughtful soul so sore have mined and graffed in my
spirits, that soch craft of enditing woll not been of my acquaintance. And
for rude words and boistous percen the heart of the herer to the intest point,
and planten there the sentence of things, so that with littel help it is able
to spring. This book that nothing has of the great flood of wit, ne of
semeliche colors, is doluen with rude words and boistous, and so draw
togider to maken the catchers thereof ben the more ready to hent sentence.

Some men there been that painten with colors rich, and some with verse, as
with red ink, and some with coals and chalk: And yet is there good matter to
y^ leude people of thilke chalkie purtreyture, as hem thinks for the time,
and afterward the sight of the better colors yeuen to hem more joye for the
first lewdness. So soothly this leude clowdy occupation is not to praise, but
by the lewd, for commenly leude lewdness commends. Eke it shall give sight,
that other precious things shall be the more in reverence. In Latin and French
has many sovereign wits had great delight to endite, and have many noble things
fulfilde, but certes there been some that speaken their poisie matter in French,
of which speech the French men have as good a fantasy as we have in hearing of
French men's English. And many terms there ben in English, which unneth we
English men connen declare the knowledging: How should then a french man borne
such terms conne iumpere in his matter, but as the Iay chatereth English,
right so truly the understanding of English men wol not stretch to the privy
terms in French, what so ever we bosten of strange langage. Let then Clerks
enditen in Latin, for they have the property of science, and the knowing in
that faculty: and let Frenchmen in their French also enditen their queint
terms, for it is kindly to their mouths, and let us show our fantasies in
such words as we learneden of our dames tongue. And although this book be
little thank worthy for the lewdness in travail, yet such writings exciten
men to thilk things that been necessary: for every man thereby may as by a
perpetual mirror seen the vices or virtues of other, in which thing lightly
may be conceived to escheue perils, and necessaries to catch after, as
auentures have fallen to other people or persons. * Certes, the soueraignst
thing of desire and most creature reasonable, have or else should have full
appetite to their perfection: unreasonable beasts mowen not, since reason has
in hem no working: Then reasonable that woll not, is comparisoned to
unreasonable, and made like hem. Forsooth the most sovereign and final
perfection of man, is in knowing of a sooth, withouten any intent deceiuable,
and in love of one very God, that is inchaungeable, that is, to know and love
his creator.

Now principally, the mean to bring in knowledging and loving his creator,
is y^ consideration of things made by ye creator, where through be thilke
things that been made, understanding here to our wits, arne the unseen
priueties of God, made to us sightfull and knowing in our contemplation and
understonding. These things then forsooth much bringen us to ye full
knowledging sooth, and to yt parfite love of the maker of heavenly things. Lo
David faith: thou have delited me in making: as who says, to have delight in
the tune how God has lent me in consideration of thy making. Whereof Aristotle
in the book de Animalibus, says to naturel Philosophers: * It is a great
liking in love of knowing their creator: and also in knowing of causes, in
kindly things considered. Forsooth the forms of kindly things, and the
shape, a great kindly love me should have to the werkemen that hem made. * The
craft of a werkeman is showed in the work. Herefore truly the Philosophers
with a lively study many noble things, right precious and worthy to memory
written, and by a great sweet and travail to us leften of causes the
properties in natures of things, to which therefore Philosophers it was more
joy, more lyking, more hearty lust in kindly virtues and matters of reason,
the perfection by busy study to know, than to have had all the treasour, all
the richesse, all the vainglory that the passed Emperors, Princes, or Kings
hadden. Therefore the names of hem in the book of perpetual memory, in virtue
and peace arne written: and in ye contrary, that is to said, in Styxe, the
foul pit of hell, arne thilke pressed that such goodness hated. And because
this book shall be of love, and the prime causes of stering in that doing with
passions and diseases for wanting of desire, I will that this book be cleaped
the Testament of Love.

But now thou Reader, who is thilke that will not in scorn laugh, to hear a
dwarf or else half a man, say he will rend out the swerd of Hercules hands:
And also he should set Hercules gades a mile yet ferther, and over that he
had power and strength to pull up the spear that Alisander the noble might
never wagge.

And that passing all thing to been master of France by might, there as ye
noble gracious Edward the third for all his great prowess in victories ne
might all yet conquer.

Certes, I wot well there shall be made more scorn and iape of me, that I so
unworthely clothed all together in ye cloudie cloud of vnconning, will putten
me in prees to speak of love, or else of ye causes in yt matter, sithen all the
greatest clerks han had enough to done, and as who laith, gathered up clean
toforne hem, and with their sharp sithes of conning all mowen, and made there
of great rekes and noble, full of all plenties to feed me and many another. *
Envy forsooth commends naught his reason, that he has in haine, be it never
so trusty. And although these noble reapers, as good workmen, and worthy their
hire, han all draw and bound up in y^ sheues, and made many shockes, yet have I
ensample to gader the small crumbs, and fullin my wallet of tho that fallen from
the bourde among the small hounds, notwithstanding the travail of the
almoigner, yt has draw up in y^ cloth all ye remissailes, as trenchours, and
the relief to bear to the alms. Yet also have I leave of yt noble husband
Boece, although I be a stranger of conning to come after his doctrine, and
these great work men, and gleane my handfuls of y^ shedding after their hands,
and if me fail ought of my full, to increase my portion with yt I shall draw
by priuities out of shockes: a slye servant in his own help is often much
commended, knowing of troth in causes of things, was more hardier in the first
seechers, and so says Aristotle, and lighter in us that han followed after.
For their passing study han freshed our wits, and our understanding han
excited, in consideration of troth, by sharpness of their reasons. Utterly
these things be no dreams ne yapes, to throw to hogs, it is lifelyche
meat for children of troth, and as they me betiden when I pilgrimaged out of
my kithe in Winter, when y^ weather out of measure was boistous, and the wild
wind Boreas, as his kind asks, with drying colds, maked y^ wawes of the
Decian sea so to arise unkindly over y^ commune banks, that it was in point
to spill all the earth.

Thus ends the Prologue, and hereafter follows the first book of the
Testament of Love.
The Testament of Love.
This book is an Imitation of Boethius de Consolatione Philosophiae; in the
first part whereof, Love (by way of Legacy) does bequeath to all them which
follow her lore, the knowledge of Truth from Error, whereby they may rightly
judge of the Causes of cross Fortune, and such Adversities as befall them,
whether in their Suits of Love, or otherwise, and so in the end obtain their
wished Desires. In this second part she reaches the Knowledge of one very God
our Creator, as also the State of Grace, and the State of Glory; all the which
good things are figured by a Margarite Pearl. Chaucer did compile this book as
a Comfort to himself after great Griefs conceived for some rash Attempts of the
Commons, with whom he had joined, and thereby was in fear to lose the Favor of
his best Friends; and also therein to set end to all his Writing, being
commanded by Venus (as appears by Gower in the end of his eighth Book,
entitled Confessio Amantis) so to do, as one that was Venus's Clerk, even as
Gower had made his Confessio Amantis his last Work, and shrift of his former
Offenses.
ALas Fortune alas, I that sometime in delicious hours was wont to enjoy
blisfull stoundes, am now drive by unhappy heaviness to bewail my sundry
evils in tene. Truly I leave, in mine heart is writ of perdurable letters all
the ententions of lamentation that now been ynempned: for any manner disease
outward in sobbyng manner, she weth sorrowful yexing from within. Thus from my
comfort I ginne to spill, since she that should me sollace, is far fro my
presence. Certes, her absence is to me an hell, my steruyng death thus in woe it
myneth, that endelesse care is throughout mine heart clenched, bliss of my
joy, that often me murthed is turned into gall, to think on thing that may not
at my will in arms me hent. Mirth is changed into tene, when swinke is there
continually, that rest was wont to soiourne and have dwelling place. Thus
witless thoughtfull, sightlesse looking, I endure my pennaunce in this dark
prison, caitisned fro friendship and acquaintance, and forsaken of all that
any word dare speak. Strange has by way of intrusion made his home there me
should be, if reason were heard as he should. Never the later, yet heartely
lady, precious Margarite, have mind on thy servant, and think on his
disease, how lightlesse he lives, sith the beams brennende in love of thine
eyes arne so bewet, that worlds and cloud atweene us twey, wol not suffer my
thoughts of hem to be enlumined. Think that one virtue of a Margarite precious
is amongs many other the sorrowful to comfort yet will of that me sorrowful to
comfort, is my lust to have naught else at this time, deed ne death, ne no
manner trauyle has no power mine heart so much to fade, as should to hear of
a twinkling in your disease. Ah, God forbede that, but yet let me dey, let me
sterue withouten any measure of pennaunce, rather than mine heartily thinking
comfort in ought were diseased. What may my service aueile in absence of her,
that my service should accept? is this not endless sorrow to think? Yes, yes,
God wot, mine heart breaks nigh asunder: how should the ground without
kindly noriture* bringen forth any fruits? How should a ship withouten a
stern in the great sea be governed? How should I withouten my bliss, my
heart, my desire, my joy, my goodness endure in this contrarious prison, yt
think every hour in the day an hundred Winter? Well may now Eve said to me
Adam, In sorrow fallen from wealth, driven art thou out of Paradise, with
sweat thy sustenaunce to beswinke. Deep in this pining pit, with woe I ligge
ystocked, with chains linked of care and of tene. It is so high from thence I
lie, and of the common earth, there ne is cable in no land maked, that might
stretch to me, to draw me into bliss, ne steyers to steye on is none, so yt
without recover endless, here to endure I wot well I purueide. O, where art
thou now friendship, that sometime with laughande chere, made both face and
countenance to me wards? Truly now art thou went out of town, but ever me
thinks, he wears his old clothes, and that the soul, in the which the life
of friendship was in, is drawn out from his other Spirits. Now then farewell
friendship, and farewell felawes, me thinks ye all han taken your ^eaue: no
force of you all at ones.

But lady of love, ye wot what I mean, yet think on thy servant, that for
thy love spilleth, all things have I forsake, to follow, en thine hestes:
reward me with a thought, though ye do naught else. Remembrance of love lithe
so sore under my breast, yt other thought comes not in my mind, but gladness
to think on your goodness, and your merry cheer, friends and sorrow, to
think on your wretch and your danger, from which Christ me save. My great joy
it is to have in meditations the bounties, the virtues, the nobley in you
printed: sorrow and hell commen at ones, to suppose that I be veined. Thus with
care, sorrow, and tene am I shapt, meyne end with death to make. Now good
goodly think on this.

O wretched fool that I am fallen into so low, the heat of my brenning tene
has me all defaced: how should ye Lady set prise on so foul filth? My
conning is thin, my wit is exiled, like to a fool naturell am I
comparisoned. Truly lady, but your mercy the more were, I wot well all my
labor were in idle: your mercy then passes right.

God grant yt proposition to be verified in me, so y^ by trust of good hope I
mow come to the haven of ease, and since it is impossible, the colors of your
qualities to change: and forsooth I wot well, wemme ne spotte may not abide,
there so noble virtue haboundeth, so that the defacing to you is verily
imaginable, as countenance of goodness, with encresing virtue, is so in you
knit to abide by necessary manner, yet if the rivers might fall, which is
against kind, I wot well mine heart, ne should therefore naught flit, by ye
least point of Geometry, so sadly is it fonded, yt away from your service in
love, may he not depart, O love, when shall I been pleased? O charity, when
shall I been leased? O good goodly, when shall y^ dice turn? O full of
virtue, do y^ chance of comfort upward to fall. O love, when wolt thou think
on thy servant? I can no more, but here outcast of al welfare, abide y^ day of
my death, or else to see y^ sight that might all my welling sorrows void, and
of y^ flood make an ebb. These diseases mowen well by duresse of sorrow make my
life to unbodie, and so for to die: but certes, ye Lady in a full perfection
of love, been so knitte with my soul, that death may not thilke knotte
unbinde ne depart, so that ye and my saul together, as endelesse, in bliss
should dwell, and there shall my soul at the full been eased, that he may have
your presence, to show the intent of his desires: Ah dear God, that shall be a
great joy. Now yearthly Goddess, take regard of thy servant, though I be
feeble, for thou art wont to praise them better, that would conserve in love,
all be he full meaner than Kings or Princes, that woll not have that virtue in
mind. Now precious Margarite, that with thy noble virtue, hall drawn me into
love first, me wenyng thereof to have bliss, as Galle and Aloes are so much
sprung, that savor of sweetness may I not atast. Alas that your benign eyes,
in which that mercy seems to have all his noriture, nill by no way turn
the clearenesse of mercy to me wards. Alas, that your brennande virtues,
shinyng among all folk, and enluminyng all other people, by haboundance of
increasing, shows to me but smoke, and no light. These things to think in
mine heart, makes every day weepyng in mine eyes to run. These liggen on
my back so sore, that importable burden me seems on me back to be charged,
it makes me backward to meue, when my steps by common course even forth
pretend: These things also on right side and left, have me so enuolued with
care, that wanuehope of help is throughout me run truly, and leave that
graceless is my Fortune, which that ever shows it me wards by a cloudye
disease, all ready to make storms of rene, and the blisfull side halt still
awayward, and woll it not suffer to me wards to turn: no force, yet woll I
not been conquered.

O, alas that your nobley, so much among all other creatures, commended by
flowyng streme, by all manner virtues, but there been wonderful, I not which
that let the flood to come into my soul, wherefore purely mated with sorrow
through sought, my self I cry on your goodness, to have pity on this
captife, that in the inrest degree of sorrow and disease is left, and without
your goodly will, from any help and recovery. These sorrows may I not
sustain, but if my forrowe should be told, and to you wards showed,
although much space is between us twain, yet me thinks, that by such
joleinyng words, my disease ginneth ebb. Truly me thinks, that the sown
of my lamentations weepyng, is right now flow into your presence, and there
cries after mercy and grace, to which thing me seems, thee lift none
answer to give, but with a deinous cheer ye commanded it to avoid, but God
forbid that any word should of you spring, to have so little ruth. Parde,
pity and mercy in every Margarite is closed by kind, amongs many other
virtues, by qualities of comfort, but comfort is to me right naught worth,
withouten mercy and pity of you alone, which things hastily God me grant
for his mercy.

REhearsing these things and many other, without time or moment of rest, me
seemed for anguish of disease, that all together I was ravished, I cannot tell
how, but holly all my passions and feelings weten lost, as it seemed for the
time, and suddenly a manner of dread light in me all at ones, naught such
fear as folk have of an enemy, that were mighty, and would hem grieve, or
dooen hem disease: for I trow this is well know to many persons, that
otherwhile if a man be in his Sovereigns presence, a manner of feardnesse
creeps in his heart, not for harm, but of goodly subjection: namely, as
men readen that Angels been aferde of our Savior in heaven. And parde,
there ne is ne may no passion of disease be, but it is to mean, that Angels
been adradde, not by fiends of dread, sithen they been perfitely blissed, as
affection of wonderfulnesse, and by service of obedience: such ferde also han
these lovers in presence of their loves, and subjects aforne their Soueraines:
right so with ferdnesse mine heart was caught. And I suddenly astonished, there
entered into the place there I was lodged, a lady, the seem liche and most
goodly to my sight that ever toforne appeared to any creature, and truly in the
blustering of her look she yaue gladness and comfort suddenly to all my wits,
and right so she does to every wight that comes in her presence. And for
she was so goodly (as me thought) mine heart began somdeale to be enbolded, and
wext a little hardye to speak, but yet with a quaking-voice, as I durst, I
salued her, and enquired what she was, and why she so worthy to sight, dained
to enter into so foul a dungeon, and namely a prison, without leave of my
keepers. For certes, although the virtue of deeds of mercy stretchen to visiten
the poor prisoners, and hem after that faculties been had to comfort, me seemed
that I was so far fallen into misery and wretched hid caitifenesse, that me
should no precious thing neigh: and also tha^ for my sorrow every wight should
been heavy, and wish my recovery. But when this lady had somedeale
apperceiued, as well by my words, as by my chere, what thought busied me
within, with a good womanly countenance she said these words: O my norie, we
nest thou that my manner be to foryet my friends or my servant? Nay (quoth. she)
it is my full intent to visit and comfort all my friendships and allies, as
well in time of perturbation, as of most property of bliss, in me shall
unkindness never be founden. And also sithen I have so few especial true
now in these days, wherefore I may well at more leisar come to hem that me
deseruen, and if my coming may in any thing auail, wete well I woll come often.

Now good lady (quoth. I) that art so fair on to look, ryning honey be thy
words, bliss of paradise arne thy lookings, joy and comfort are thy mouings,
What is thy name? How is it that in you is so mokell werking virtues enpight,
as me seems, and in none other creature, that ever saw I with mine eyes? My
disciple (quoth. she) me wondereth of thy words, and on thee, that for a little
disease have foryetten my name. Wost thou not well that I am Love, that first
thee brought to thy service? O good Lady (quoth. I) is this worship to thee, or to
thine excellence, for to come into so foul a place? Parde sometime tho I was
in prosperity, and with foreign goods enuolued, I had mokell to done to draw
thee to mine hostell, and yet many wernings thou made, ere thou lift fully to
grant, thine home to make at my dwelling place: and now thou come goodly by
thine own vise, to comfort me with words, and so there through I ginne
remember on passed gladness. Truly lady, I ne wot whether I shall say welcome
or none, sithen thy coming woll as much do me tene and sorrow, as gladness
and mirth: see why. For that me comfort to think on passed gladness, that
me anoyeth eft to be in doing: thus thy coming both gladdeth and teneth, and
that is cause of much sorrow: lo lady, how then I am comforted by your
coming: and with that I began in tears is distill, and tenderly weep. Now
certes (quoth. Love) I see well (and that me overthinketh) that wit in thee
fails, and art in point to dote. Truly (quoth. I) that have ye maked, and that
ever will I rue. Wotest thou not well (quoth. she) that every shepherd ought by
reason to seek his sperkeland sheep that arne ron into wilderness, among
bushes and perils, and hem to their pasture again bring, and take of hem privy
busy cure and keepping? And tho the unconning Sheep scattered, would been
lost, renning to wilderness, and to deserts draw, or else woulden put himself
to the swallowing Wolf, yet shall the shepherd, by business and travail, so
put him forth, that he shall not let him be lost by no way. * A good shepherd
puts rather his life to be lost for his sheep.

But for thou shall not wene me, being of werse condition, truly for everiche
of my folk, and for all tho that to me ward be knit in any condition, I woll
rather die than suffer hem through error to been spilt. For me list, and it me
likes, of all mine a Shepherdess to be cleaped. Wost thou not well, I failed
never wight, but he me refused, and would negligently go with unkindnesse? And
yet parde, have I many such help and releved, and they have often me beguiled,
but ever at the end it descended in their own necks. Have thou not radde how
kind I was to Paris, Priamus son of Troy? How Jason me falsed for all his false
behest? How Sesars sonke, I left it for no tene, till he was troned in my
bliss for his service. What (quoth. she) most of all, maked I not a love day
between God and mankind, and chese a maid to be nompere to put the quarrel at
end? Lo, how I have travailed to have thank on all sides, and yet list me not
to rest, and I might find on whom I should werche. But truly, mine own
disciple, because I have thee found at all assayes in thy will to be ready mine
hestes to have followed, and have ben true to that Margarite Pearl that ones I
thee showed, and she always ayenward has made but dangerous cheer, I am come
in proper person to put thee out of errors, and make thee glad by ways of
reason, so that sorrow ne disease shall no more hereafter thee amaistrie.
Wherethrough I hope, thou shall lightly come to the grace that thou long have
desired of thilke Jewel. Have thou not heard many ensamples, how I have
comforted and releeved the scholars of my lore? Who has worthied Kings in the
field? Who has honored Ladies in hour, by a perpetual mirror of their truth
in my service? Who has caused worthy folk to void vice and shame? Who has
hold cities and realms in prosperity? If thee lift cleape again thine old
remembrance, thou coudest every point of this declare in especial, and say
that I thy maistres have be cause, causing these things, and many mo other.

Now iwis madame (quoth. I) all these things I know well my self, and that thine
excellence passes the understanding of us beasts, and that no man's wit
yearthly may comprehend thy virtues. Well then (quoth. she) for I see thee in
disease and sorrow, I wot well thou art one of mine nories, I may not suffer
thee so to make sorrow, thine own self to shend: but I my self come to be thy
fere, thine heavy charge to make to seem the less, for woe is him that is
alone: * And to the sorry to been moned by a sorrowful wight, it is great
gladness. Right so with my sick friends I am sick, and with sorry, I cannot
else but sorrow make, till when I have hem releeved, in such wise, that
gladness in a manner of counterpaising shall restore as mokell in joy, as the
passed heaviness beforn did in tene. And also quoth. she) when any of my
servaunts been alone in solitary place, I have yet ever busied me to be with
hem, in comfort of their hearts, and taught hem to make songs of plaint and of
bliss, and to enditen letters of Rhethorike in queint understandings, and to
bethink hem in what wise they might best their Ladies in good service please,
and also to learn manner in countenance, in words, and in bearing, and to ben
meek and lowly to every wight, his name and fame to increase, and to give great
yefts and large, that his renome may springen: but thee thereof have I excused,
for thy loss and great costages, wherethrough thou art needy, arne nothing to
me unknowen, but I hope to God sometime it shall been amended, as thus, as I
said. In norture have I taught all mine, and in courtesy made hem expert
their Ladies hearts to win, and if any would endeynous, or proud, or be
envious, or of wretches acquaintance, hasteliche have such voided out of my
school: for all vices truly I hate: virtues and worthiness in all my power I
auaunce.

Ah worthy creature (quoth. I) and by just cause, the name of goddess dignely ye
mow beat: in thee lithe the grace through which any creature in this world
has any goodness, truly all manner of bliss and preciousnesse in virtue out
of thee springen, and wellen, as brooks and rivers procceden from their
springs: and like as all waters by kind drawn to the sea, so all kindly
things threst^^, by full appetite of desire, to draw after thy steps, and
to thy presence approach, as to their kindly perfection: how dare then beasts
in this world aught forfete against thy Divine purueighaunce? Also lady ye
known all the privy thoughts, in hearts no counsel may been hid from
your knowing. Wherefore I wate well Lady, that ye know your self, that I in
my conscience am, and have been willing to your service, all coud I never do
as I should, yet forsooth feigned I never to love otherwise than was in mine
heart: and if I coud have made cheer to one, and ythought another, as many
other done all day before mine eyes, I trow it would not me have veiled. Certes
(quoth. she) had thou so done, I would not now have thee here visited. Ye wete
well Lady eke (quoth. I) that I have not played raket, Nettle in, Docke out, and
with the Weathercocke waved, and truly there ye me set, by accord of my
conscience I would not fly, till ye and reason by apert strength maden mine
heart to turn.

In good faith (quoth. she) I have know thee ever of tho conditions, and sithen
thou would (in as much as in thee was) a made me privy of thy counsel,
and judge of thy conscience, though I forsook it in tho days, till I saw
better my time, would never God yt I should now fail, but ever I woll be
ready, witnessing thy sooth, in what place that ever I shall, against all tho
that woll the contrary sustain: and for as much as to me is naught unknown,
ne hid of thy privy heart, but all have thou tho things made to me open at
the full, that has caused my coming into this prison, to void the webbes of
thine eyes, to make thee clearly to see the errors thou have been in: and
because that men been of diverse conditions, some adradde to say a sooth, and
some for a sooth anon ready to fight, and also y^ I may nor my self been in
place, to withsay thilke men that of thee speaken otherwise than the sooth, I
woll and charge thee, in virtue of obedience that thou to me dwest, to written
me words, and set hem in writings, that they mow as my witnessing been noted
among the people. For books written neither dreden ne shamen, ne strive conne,
but only shown the intent of y^ w^^ter, and yeve remembrance to the hearer:
and if any woll in thy presence say any thing to tho writers, look boldly
trust on Mars to answer at the full. For certes, I shall him inform of all
the troth in thy love, with thy conscience, so that of his help thou shall
not vary at thy need. I trow the strongest and the best y^ may be found, woll
not transvers thy words, whereof then would thou dread.

GReatly was I tho gladded of these words, and as who says, wexen somedele
light in heart, both for the authority of witness, and also for sikernesse of
help of the foresaid beheste, and said: Truly Lady now am I well gladded
through comfort of your words, be it now liking unto your nobly, to show
which folk diffame your servants, since your service ought above all other
things to been commended. Yet (quoth. she) I see well thy soul is not all out
of the amassed cloud: thee were better to hear thing, that thee might light out
of thine heavy charge, and after knowing of thine own help, then to stir
sweet words, and such reasons to hear: for in a thoughtfull soul (and
namely such one as thou art) wol not yet such things sinken. Come of therefore,
and let me seen thy heavy charge, that I may the lightlier for thy comfort
purveigh.

Now certes Lady (quoth. I) y^ most comfort I might have, were utterly to w^te me
be sure in heart of that Margarite I serve, and so I think to done with all
mights, while my life dureth. Then (quoth she) may thou thereafter, in such wise
that mispleasaunce ne enter? In good faith (quoth. I) there shall no mispleasance
be caused through trespace on my side. And I do thee to weten (quoth. she) I set
never yet person to serve in no place (but if he caused y^ contrary in
defaults and trespaces) that he ne sped of his service. Mine own yearthly
lady (quod I tho) and yet remember to your worthiness, how long sithen, by
many revolving of years, in time when October his leave ginneth take, and
November shows him to sight, when Bernes been full of goods, as is the Qutte
on every halke, and then good land tillers ginneth shape for y^ earth, with
great travayle to bring forth more Corn to man's sustenaunce against the next
years following. In such time of plenty, he that has an home, and is wise,
list not to wander mar vailes to seech, but he be constrained or excited: of
the loathe thing is done by excitation of other man's opinion, which woulden
feign have mine abiding, take in heart of lust to travayle, and see the windyng
of the earth, in that time of Winter, by woods that large streets weren in,
by small paths, that Swine and Hogs hadden made, as lanes with ladels, there
maste to seech, I walked thinking alone, a wonder great while, and the great
beasts that the wood haunten and adorneth all manner forests, and herds gone
too wisd: then ere I was ware, I neighed to a sea bank, and for ferde of the
beasts, shipcraft I cride: for lady I trow ye wete well your self, nothing is
werse than the beasts, that should^n been tame, if they catch her wisdnesse;
and ginne again wax ramage: Thus forsooth was I aferde, and to Ship me hied.
Then were there ynow to lach mine hands, and draw me to Ship, of which many
I kn^we well the names. Sight was the first, Lust was another, Thought was y^
third, and Will eke was there a Master: these broughten me within boorde of
this Ship of travail. So when the sail was sprad, and this Ship began to
move, the Wind and Water began for to rise, and ouerthwartly to tourn the
Welkin, the wawes seemden as they kissed together, but often under color of
kissing, is mokell old hate privily closed and kept. The storm so strangely,
and in a devouring manner, began so fast us assail, that I supposed the date of
my death should have made there his ginning, now up, now down, now under the
wawe, and now abouen, was my Ship a great while. And so by mokell duresse of
weathers, and of storms, and with great auowing pilgrimages, I was driven to
an Isle, where utterly I wend first to have be rescowed, but truly at the first
beginning, it seemed me so perilous, the haven to catch, that but through
grace I had been comforted, of life I was full despaired. Truly Lady, if ye
remember aright of all manner things, your self came hastily to seen us sea
driven, and to weten what we weren: but first ye were deignous of cheer, after
which ye gone better alight, and ever as me thought ye lived in great dread of
disease, it seemed so by your cheer. And when I was certified of your name, y^
longer I looked on you, y^ more I you goodly dradde, and ever mine heart on you
opened the more, and so in a little time my Ship was out of mind. But Lady as
ye me lad, I was ware both of beasts and of fishes, a great number thronging
togider: among which a Muskle in a blew shell had enclosed a Margarite Pearl,
the most precious and best that ever toforne came in my sight, and ye tolden
your self, that ilke jewel in his kind was so good and so virtuous, that her
better should I never find, all sought I thereafter to the worlds end, and
with yt I held my peace a great while: and ever sithen I have me bethought on
the man, that sought the precious Margarites, and when he had founden one to
his liking, he sold all his good to buy that jewel: Iwis, thought I, and yet so
I think, now have I founden the jewel that mine heart desires, whereto should
I seeche further, truly now wol I stint, and on this Margarite I set me for
ever. Now than also, sithen I wist well it was your will, that I should to such
a service me take, and so to desire that thing of which I never have bliss,
there lives none, but he has disease: your might then, that brought me to
such service, that to me is cause of sorrow and of joy, I wonder of your word
that ye saine, to bringen men into joy, and parde ye wot well, that default ne
trespace may not reasonable been put to me wards, as fer as my conscience
knows: but of my disease me list now a while to speak, and to enform you in
what manner of bliss ye have me throng. For truly I wene, that all gladness,
all joy, and all mirth is beshet under lock, and the key throw in such place,
thet it may not be found: my brenning, who has, altered al my hew. When I
should sleep, I wallow and I think, and me disport. Thus combred, I seem
that all folk had me mased. Also lady mine, desire has long dured, some
speaking to have, or else at y^ least, have been enmoised with sight: and for
wanting of these things, my mouth would, and he durst, plein right sore, sithen
evils for my goodness arn manyfold to me holden. I wonder Lady truly, save
evermore your reverence, how ye mow for shame such things suffer on your
servant, to be so multiplied: wherefore kneelyng with a low heart, I pray you
to rue on his caytife, that of nothing now may serve. Good Lady, if you list
now your help to me show, that am of your pryuiest servants, at all assays in
this time, and under your wings of protection. No help to me wards is shapen,
how shall then strangers in any wise after succor look, when I that am so
pryuie, yet of help I do fail? Further may I not, but thus in this prisone
abide: what bonds and chains me holden, Lady ye see well your self? A
reniant foriudged has not half the care. But thus sighyng and sobbyng I wail
here alone, and nere it for comfort of your presence, right here would I
sterue. And yet a little am I gladded, that so goodly such grace, and none
hap have I hent, graciouslye to find the precious Margarite, that all other
left, men should buy, if they should therefore sell all her substance. Woe
is me, that so many let games, and purpose breakers, been maked wayters, such
prisoners as I am, evermore to ouerlooke and to hinder, and for such lettours,
it is hard any such jewel to win. Is this lady an honor to thy deity? Me
thinks by right, such people should have no maystry, ne been ouerlookers
over none of thy servants. * Truly were it leful unto you, to all the gods
would I plain, that ye rule your Divine purueighaunce among your servants,
nothing as ye should. Also Lady, my moeble is insuffisaunte to counteruayle
the price of this jewel, or else to make the eschaunge: eke no wight is worthy
such pearls to wear, but Kings or Princes, or else their peers: This jewel for
virtue, would adorn and make fair all a realm, the nobley of virtue is so
much, that her goodness over all is commended. Who is it that would not wail,
but he might such riches have at his will, the virtue thereof out of this
prison may me deliver, and naught else. And if I be not therethorowe helped, I
see my self withouten recovery: although I might hence void, yet would I not, I
would abide the day that desteny has me ordained, which I suppose is without
amendment, so sore is mine heart bounden, that I may thinken none other. Thus
straight (Lady has sir Danger laced me in stocks, I leave it be not your will:
and for I see you taken so little heed, as me thinks, and woll not maken by
your might the virtue in mercy of the Margarite, on me for to stretch, so as ye
mow well, in case that you list: my bliss and my mirth arn field, sickness
and sorrow been always ready, the cope of tene is wound about all my body, that
standing is me best, uneath may I ligge for pure miseasie sorrow, and yet all
this is little enough to be the earnest silver in forward of this bargain, for
treble fold, so mokell must I suffer, er time come of mine ease. * For he is
worthy no wealth, that may no woe suffer. And certes, I am heavy to think on
these things, but who shall give me water enough to drink, least mine eyes dry
for renning streams of tears? Who shall waylen with me mine own happy
heaviness? Who shall counsel me now in my liking tene, and in my goodly
harse? I not. For ever the more I brenne, the more I coveit: the more that I
sorrow, the more thirst I in gladness. Who shall then give me a contrarious
drink, to staunch the thurst of my blisfull bitterness? Lo thus I bren and I
drench, I shiuer and sweat, to this reuersed yuell was never yet ordained
salve, forsooth all leches ben vnconning, save the Margarite alone, any such
remedy to puruey.

And with these words I brast out to weep, that every tear of mine eyes for
greatness seemed they boren out the ball of my sight, and that all the water
had been outronne. Then thought me, that love began a little too heavy for
miscomfort of my cheer, and began soberly and in easy manner speak, well auising
what she said. * Commonly the wise speaken easily and soft for many skils: One
is, their words are the better believed, and also in easy speaking, auisement
men may catch, what to put forth, and what to holden in. And also the
authority of easy words is the more, and eke they yeuen the more
understanding to other intention of the matter. Right so this Lady easily and
in a soft manner began say these words.

Marvel (quoth. she) great it is, that by no manner of semblaunt, as far as I
can epsy, thou list not to have any recour, but ever thou playnest and
sorrowest, and ways of remedy for foolish wilfulness thee list not to seech:
but enquire of thy next friends, that is thine inwit, and me that have been thy
maistresse, and the recour and fine of thy disease, for of disease is gladness
and joy, with a full vessel so helded, that it quenches the feeling of the
first tenes. But thou that were wont not only these things remember in thine
heart, but also fools thereof to enfourmen, in adnulling of their errors, and
in destroying of their derk opinions, and in comfort of their sear thoughts:
now can thou not been comfort of thine own soul, in thinking of these things.
O where have thou be so long commensall, that have so mikell eaten of the
potages of foryetfulnesse, and dronken so of ignorance, that the old souking,
which thou had of me, arne a maistred and lorne fro all manner of knowing?
O this is a worthy person to help other, that cannot counsel himself. And
with these words for pure and strong shame I wox all reed.

And she then seeing me so astonished by diverse stounds, suddenly (which thing
kind hates) began deliciously me comfort with sugared words, putting me in full
hope, that I should y^ Margarite getten, if I followed her hests, and began with
a fair cloth to wipen the tears that hingen on my cheeks: and then said I in
this wise. Now well of wisdom and of all wealth, withouten thee may nothing ben
learned, thou bear the keys of all privy things. In vain trauail men to
catch any stedship, but if ye lady first the lock vnshet, ye lady learn us the
ways and the bypaths to heaven: ye lady maken all the heavenly bodies goodly
and benignely to done her course, that gouernen us beasts here on earth. Ye
armen your servant against all debates, with imperciable harneis, ye setten in
her herts insuperable blood of hardness, ye leaden hem to the parfit good. Yet
all thing desires, ye werne no man of help, that well done your lore, grant me
now a little of your grace, all my sorrows to cease. Mine own servant (quoth. she)
truly thou sit nie mine heart, and thy bad chere began sorely me grieve: but
among thy plaining words, me thought thou alledgest things to be letting of
thine helping, and thy grace to hinder, wherethrough me thinks that wanhope
is crope through thine heart: God forbid that nice unthrifty thought should
come in thy mind thy wits to trouble, sithen every thing in coming is
contingent, wherefore make no more thy proposition by an impossible. But now I
pray thee rehearse me again tho things, that thy mistrust causen, and thilk
things I think by reason to distroyen, and put full hope in thine heart. What
understand thou there (quoth. she) by that thou saidest, many let games are
thine ouerlookers? And also by that thy moeble is insuffisaunt? I not what thou
thereof meanest.

Truly (quoth. I) by the first, I say that janglers evermore arn speaking rather
of evil than of good, for every age of man rather enclineth to wickedness,
than any goodness to advance. Also false words springen so wide, by the
stering of false lying tongues, that fame als swiftly flies to her ears, and
faith many wicked tales, and as soon shall falsenesse ben leued, as troth, for
all his great sothnesse. Now by that other (quoth. I) me thinks thilk jewel so
precious, that to no such wretch as I am, would virtue thereof extend, and also
I am too feeble in worldly joys, any such jewel to countreuail. For such people
that worldly joys han at her will, been set at the highest degree, and most in
reverence ben accepted, for false wening makes felicity therein to be
supposed: but such caitiues as I am evermore ben hindered. Certes (quoth. she) take
good heed, and I shall by reason to thee shown, that all these things mow not
let thy purpose, by the least point that any wight could prick.

REmembrest not (quoth. she) ensample is one of the strongest manner, as for to
preue a man's purpose. Then if I now by ensample enduce thee to any
proposition, is it not proved by strength? Yes forsooth, quoth. I. Well, quoth. she,
raddest thou never how Paris of Troy and Helaine loved togider, and yet had
they not entrecommuned of speech? Also Acrisius shete Dane his daughter in a
toure, for suertie that no wight should of her have no maistrie in my service,
and yet Jupiter by signs, without any speech, had all his purpose against her
fathers will. And many such mo have been knitte in troth, and yet spoke they
never togider, for that is a thing enclosed under secretnesse of priuitie, why
twey persons entremellen herts after a sight. The power in knowing of such
things so preuen shall not all utterly be yeuen to you beasts, for many things
in such precious matters, been reserved to judgment of divine purueyaunce, for
among living people, by man's consideration mowen they not be determined.
Wherefore I say, all the envye, all y^ iangling, that welnie people upon my
servant maken efte, is rather cause of esploite, than of any hindering. Why
then quoth. I, suffer ye such wrong, and moun when ye list, lightly all such yuels
abate? me seeineth to you it is a great vnworship. O, quoth. she, hold now thy
peace, I have founden too many that han been to me unkind, y^ truly I woll
suffer every wight in that wise to have disease, and who that continue to the
end well and truly, hem woll I helpen, and as for one of mine into bliss to
wend, as martial doing in Greece. Who was ycrowned, by GOD not the strongest,
but he that rathest come and lengest abode and continued in the journey, and
spared not to travail as long as the play lest. But thilke persons that
proffered him now to my service therein, is a while, and anon voydeth, and
ready to another, and of now one he thinks, and now another, and into water
enters, and anon respireth, such one list me not into parfite bliss of my
service bring. * A tree often set in diverse places, woll not by kind endure to
bring forth fruits. Look now I pray thee, how mine old servants of time
passed continued in her service, and follow thou after their steps, and then
might thou not fail, in case thou worche in this wise. Certes, quoth. I, it is
nothing liche, this world to time passed, eke this country has one manner,
and another country has another. And so may not a man always put to his eye,
the salve that he healed with his heel: For this is sooth, betwyxe two
things lyche, often diversity is required. Now, quoth. she, that is soothe,
diversity of nation, diversity of law, as was maked by many reasons, for
that diversity comes in by the contrarious malice of wicked people, that han
envious hearts against other. But truly my law to my servants ever has
been in general, which may not fail: for right as man's law, that is
ordained by many determinations, may not be known for good or badde, till
assay of the people han proved it, and to what end it draws, and then it
shows the necessity thereof, or else the impossibility: right so ye law of
my servant so well has been proved in general, that hitherto has it not
failed. Wist thou not well, that all the law of kind is my law, and by God
ordained and establyshed to dure by kind reasoun: wherefore all law, by
man's wit purveied, ought to be vnderput to law of kind, which yet has be
commune to every kindly creature, that my statutes and my laws that been
kyndely, arne general to all peoples. * Old doyngs, and by many turnings of
years used, and with the peoples manner proved, mowen not so lightly been
defaced, but new doings contrariaunts such old, often causen diseases, and
breaken many purposes. Yet say I not therefore, that again new mischeef, men
should not ordain a new remedy, but always look it contrary not y^ old, no
ferther than the malice stretches. Then follows it, y^ old doings in love
han ben universal, as for most exploit for thee used: Wherefore I would not yet
that of my laws nothing be annulled.

But then to thy purpose, such iangelers and lookers, and wayters of games, if
they think in ought they mow dear, yet love well always, and set hem at naught,
and let thy port been low in every wights presence, and ready in thine heart
to maintain that thou have begone, and a little thee feign with meekness in
words, and thus with slight shall thou surmount and dequace the yuel in their
herts. * And wisdom yet is to seem fly otherwhyle there a man woll fight.
Thus with such things the tongues of evil shall been stilled: else fully to
grant thy full meaning, forsooth ever was and ever it shall be, that mine
enemies been aferde to trust to any fighting: and therefore have thou no
cowards heart in my service, no more than sometime thou had in y^ contrary,
for if thou dread such ianglers thy voyage to make: understand well, That he y^
dreadeth any rain to sow his corns, he shall have thin bernes: also he that
is afearde of his clothes, let him dance naked: Who nothing undertakes, and
namely in my service, nothing atcheueth: After great storms y^ weather is
often merry and smooth. * After much clattering, there is mokell rowning: thus
after iangling words comes huisht, peace, and be still. O good lady, quoth. I
then, see now how seven year passed, and more, have I graffed and groubed a
vine, and with all the ways that I could, I sought to a feed me of y^ grape,
but fruit have I none found. Also I have this seven year served Laban to a
wedded Rachel his daughter, but blear eyed Lia is brought to my bed, which
always engendereth my tene, and is full of children in tribulation and in care:
and although the clippynges and kissyngs of Rachell should seem to me sweet,
yet is she so barraine, yt gladness ne joy by no way wol spring, so yt I may
weep with Rachell, I may not been counsayled with sollace, sithen issue of mine
heartely desire is failed. Now then I pray that to me sone freedom and grace in
this eight year, this eyghteth mow to me both by kynreste and masseday after
these seven work days of travail, to follow the christen law: and what
ever ye do else, that thilke Margarite be holden so lady in your pryuye
chamber, that she in this case to none other person be committed. Look then,
quoth. she, in this case to none other person be committed: Look then, quoth. she,
thou persevere in my service, in which I have thee grounded, yt thilke scorn in
thy enemies mow thus on thy person be not soothed: lo this man began to
edify, but for his foundement is bad, to the end may he it not bring. For
meekness in countenance, with a manly heart in deeds and in long continuance,
is the conisance of my livery, to all my retinue delivered. What wenest thou yt
me list advance such persons as louen ye first sittings at feasts, ye highest
stoles in churches, and in hall, loutings of peoples in markets and fairs,
unsteadfast to bide in one place any while together, wening his own wit more
excellent than other, scorning all manner device but his own? Nay, nay, God
wot, these shall nothing parten of my bliss. Truly my manner heretoforne
has been, worship with my bliss, * Lions in the field, and Lambs in
chamber, Eagles at assaute, and Maidens in hall, Foxes in counsel, still in
their deeds, and their protection is granted ready to been a bridge, and their
banner is ar^ered like Wolves in the field. Thus by these ways shull men been
auaunced: ensample of David, yt from keeping of sheep was drawn up into the
order of kingly governance, and Jupiter from a bulle to been Europes fere,
and Julius Caesar from the lowest degree in Rome to be master of all earthly
princes, and Eneas from hell to be King of the country, there Rome is now
stonding. And so to thee I say thy grace by bering thereafter, may set thee in
such plight, that no iangling may grieve the least tucke of thy hems, that all
their iangles is naught to count at a cresse in thy disadvantage.

EVer, quoth. she, has the people in this world desired to have had great name
in worthiness, and hated foul to bear any fame, and that is one of the
objections thou alledgest to be again thine hertely desire. Ye forsooth, quoth. I,
and that so commonly the people woll lie and bring about such enfame. Now,
quod she, if men with leasinges put on the enfame, wenest thy self thereby
been enpeired? y^ wening is wrong, see why, for as much as they lain thy Merit
increases, and make thee ben more worthy to hem that known of thee the sooth,
by what thing thou art apeired, that in so mokell thou art increased of thy
beloved friends: and soothly, a wound of thy friend to the less harm, yea sir,
and better than a false kissing in deceiuable glosing of thine enemy, above
that then to be well with thy friend, makes such enfame, Ergo thou art
increased and not apeired. Lady, quoth. I, sometime yet if a man be in disease, ye
estimation of the envious people ne looks nothing to deserts of men, ne to ye
merits of their doings, but only to the adventure of fortune, and thereafter
they yeuen their sentence. And some looken the voluntary will in his heart, and
thereafter tells his judgment, not taking heed to reason ne to the quality
of the doing, as thus: if a man be rich and fulfild with worldly welefulnesse,
some commenden it, and saine it is so lent by just cause, and he yt has
adversity, they saine he is weaked, and has deserved thilke annoy. The
contrary of these things some men holden also, and saine that to yt rich,
prosperity is purveied unto his confusion: and upon this matter, many
authorities of many and great witted clearkes they allegen. And some mensayne,
though all good estimation forsaken folk yt han aduersitye, yet is it merit
and increase of his bliss: so that these purposes arne so wonderful in
understanding, that truly for mine adversity, now I not how the sentence of ye
indifferent people will iudgen my fame. Therefore, quoth. she, if any wight should
give a true sentence on such matters, ye cause of the disease may thou see
well, understand thereupon after what end it draws, yt is to said, good or
bad, so ought it to have his fame, or by goodness enfame by badnesse: For
every reasonable person, and namely of a wise man, his wit ought not without
reason toforne heard, suddenly in a matter to judge. After ye saws of the
wise, thou shall not judge ne deem toforne thou know. Lady, quoth. I, ye remember
well, that in most laud and praising of certain saints in holy church, is to
rehearsen their conversation from bad into good, and that is so rehearsed, as by
a perpetual mirror of remembrance in worshipping of tho saints, and good
ensample to other misdoers in amendment. How turned the Roman Zedeories fro the
Romans, to be with Hannibal against his kind nation: And afterward him seeming
the Romans to be at ye next degree of confusion, turned to his old allies, by
whose wit after was Hannibal discomfited. Wherefore to inform you lady, the
manner, why I mean, see now now in my youth I was draw to be assentaunt, and in
my mights helpyng to certain coniurations, and other great matters of ruling
of citezins, and thilke things been my drawers in, and excitours to tho
matters werne so painted and colored, that at the prime face me seemed then
noble and glorious to all ye people: I then wening mikell merit, have deserved
in furthering and maintenance of tho things, busied and labored with all my
diligence, in werkyng of thilke matters to the end. And truly lady, to tell you
ye sooth, me rought little of any hate of the mighty Senators in thilke city,
ne of communes malice, for two skilles: One was, I had comfort to ben in such
plite, that both profit were to me and to my friends: Another was, for common
profit in communalty, is not but peace and tranquillity, with just governance
proceden from thilke profit, sithen by counsel of mine inwit, me thought the
first painted things, malice and evil meaning, withouten any good avaylyng
to any people, and of tyranny purposed: and so for pure sorrow and of my
meddling, and bad infame that I was in run, tho tears lashed out of mine
eyes, were thus away wash, than the vnderhyd malice and the rancour of
purposing envy, fornecaste and ymagined, in destruction of mokel people showed
so openly, that had I been blind, with mine hands all the circumstaunce I
might well have feeled.

Now then tho persons that such things have cast to redress, for wrath of my
first meddling, shopen me to dwell in this pynande prison, till Lachases my
threade no longer would twyne. And ever I was sought, if me list to have grace
of my life, and freeness of that prison, I should openly confess how peace
might been enduced to enden all y^ first rancours. It was fully supposed my
knowing to be full in tho matters. Then Lady I thought that every man, that by
any way of right, rightfully done, may help any commune help to been saved,
which thing to keep above all things I am hold to maintain, and namely in
destroying of a wrong, al should I therethrough enpeach mine own fere, if he
were guilty, and to do misdeed assentaunt. And master ne friend may naught
avayle to the soul of him that in falsenesse deyeth, and also that I nere
desired wrath of the people, ne indignation of the worthy, for nothing that
ever I wrought or did, in any doings my self else, but in y^ mayntenaunce of
these foresaid errors, and in hidyng of the privities thereof. And that all
the peoples hearts holdyng on the errors side, weren blind, and of elde so
far forth beguiled, yt debate and strife they maintained, and in destruction
on that other side, by which cause, the peace, that most in communalties
should be desired, was in point to be broken and annulled. Also the city of
London, that is to me so dear and sweet, in which I was forth grown, and more
kindly love have I to y^ place, than to any other in earth, as every kindly
creature has full appetite to that place of his kindly engendrure, and to
wilne rest and peace in that steed to abide: thilke peace should thus there
have been broken, which of all wise is commended and desired. * For know thing
it is, all men that desiren to commen to y^ parfit peace everlasting, must y^
peace by God commended, both maintain and keep. This peace by angels voice was
confirmed, our God entering in this world: This, as for his testament, he left
to all his friends, when he returned to the place from whence he came: This
his Apostle admonesteth to holden, without which man parfitely may have none
insight. Also this God by his coming made not peace alone between heavenly and
earthly bodies, but also among us on earth, so he peace confirmed, that in one
heed of love one body we should perfourm. Also I remember me well, how the
name of Athens was rather after the GOD of peace than of battle, showing that
peace most is necessary to Communalties and Cities. I then so stered by all
these ways toforne nempned, declared certain points in this wise. First that
thilke persons that hadden me drawn to their purposes, and me not witting the
privy intent of their meaning, drawn also the feeble witted people, that have
none insight of gubernatife prudence, to clamure and to cry on matters that
they stirred, and under points for commune auantage, they embolded the passife
to take in the actives doing, and also stirred innocents of conning to cry
after things, which (quoth. they) may not stand but we ben executours of tho
matters, and authority of execution by common election to us be delivered, and
that must enter by strength of your maintenance, for we out of such degree
put, oppression of these old hinderers shall again surmounten and putten you in
such subjection, that in endless woe ye shull complain. The governments (quoth.
they) of your city, left in the hands of torcencious citizens, shall bring in
pestilence and destruction to you good men, and therefore let us have y^
commune administration to abate such yuels. Also (quoth. they) * It is worthy the
good to commend, and thy guilty deserts to chastise. There been citizens many
for ferd of execution that shall be done, for extortions by hem committed, been
evermore against these purposes, and all other good meanings. Never the latter,
Lady, truly the meaning under these words, was fully to have appeached the
mighty Senators which hadden heavy heart for the misgovernaunce that they seen.
And so Lady, when it fell that free election, by great clamor of much people
for great disease of misgovernaunce so fervently stooden in her election, yt
they hem submitted to every manner face, rather than have suffered the manner
and the rule of the hated governors, notwithstanding that in the contrary
helden much commune meiny that have no consideration, but only to voluntary
lusts withouten reason. But then thilke governor so forsaken, fayning to scorn
his undoing, for misrule in his time, shope to have let thilke election, and
have made a new himself to have been chosen, and under that mokell rore have
arered. These things Lady known among the Princes, and made open to the
people, draws in amendment, that every degree shall ben ordained to stand
there as he should, and that of errors coming hereafter, men may lightly toforn
hand puruay remedy in this wise, peace and rest to be furthered and hold. Of
the which things Lady, thilk persons broughten in answer toforne their most
sovereign judge, not coarted by paining dures openly knowledgeden, and asked
thereof grace, so that apertly it preveth my words been sooth, without forging
of leasings.

But now it greueth me to remember these diverse sentences, in jangling of these
sheepie people: certes, me thinks they oughten to maken joy that a sooth may
be know. For my troth and my conscience been witness to me both, that this
knowing soothe have I said, for no harm ne malice of tho persons, but only for
troth of my sacrament in my liegeaunce, by which I was charged on my Kings
behalf. But see ye not now Lady, how the fellonous thoughts of this people, and
couins of wicked men, conspiren again my soothfast troth. See ye not every
wight that to these erroneous opinions were assentaunt, and helps to the noise,
and knewen all these things better than I my seluen, apparailen to finden new
friends, and cleapen me false, and studien how they mowen in her mouths werse
plite nempne? O God, what may this be, that thilk folk which that in time of my
maintenance, and when my might avails to stretch to the foresaid matters, tho
me commended, and yaue me name of troth, in so manifold manners, that it was
nigh in every wights ear, there as any of thilk people weren: and on the other
side, thilk company sometime passed, yeuing me name of bad loos. Now both tho
peoples turned the good into bad, and bad into good, which thing is wonder,
that they knowing me saying but soth, arn now tempted to reply her old
praisings, and known me well in all doings to ben true, and sain openly that I
false have said many things. And they alleged nothing me to been false or
untrue, save thilk matter knowledged by the parties hemself: and God wot other
matter is none. Ye also Lady know these things for true, I auaunt not in
praising of my self, thereby should I lose the precious secre of my conscience.
But ye see well that false opinion of the people for my troth, in telling out
of false conspired matters, and after the judgment of these Clerks I should not
hide the sooth of no manner person, master ne other, wherefore I would not
dread, were it put in the consideracion of true and of wise. And for comers
hereafter shullen fully out of denwere, all the soth know of these things in
act, but as they wern, I have put it in Scripture, in perpetuell remembrance of
true meaning. For truly Lady me seems that I ought to bear the name of
troth, that for the love of rightwisenesse have thus me submitten: But now
then the false fame which that Clerks sain flies as fast as does the fame of
troth, shall so wide sprede, till it be brought to the jewel that I of mean,
and so shall I been hindered withouten any measure of troth.

THen began Love sadly me behold, and said in a changed voice, lower than she
had spoken in a time. Fain would I (quoth. she) that thou were helped, but have
thou said any thing, which thou might not prouen? Pardee (quoth. I) the persons
every thing as I have said, han knowleged hemself. Yea (quoth. she) but what if
they hadden naied, how would thou have maintained it? Soothly (quoth. I) it is
well wist both amongst the greatest, and other of the Realm, that I proffered my
body so largely in to proving of tho things, that Mars should have judged
thend: but for sothnesse of my words they durst not to thilk judge trust. Now
certes (quoth. she) above all fames in this world, the name of marciall doings
most pleasen to Ladies of my lore, but sithen thou were ready, and thine
adversaries in thy presence refused thilk doing, thy fame ought to be so born,
as if in deed it had take to the end. And therefore every wight that any drop
of reason has, and hears of the infame, for these things has this answer to
say: trewly thou saidest, for thine adversaries thy words affirmed. And if thou
had lied, yet are they discomfited, the prise leaned on thy side, so that
fame shall hold down infame, he shall bring upon none half. What greueth thee
thine enemy to sain their own shame, as thus: We arn discomfited and yet our
quarrel is true. Shall not the loos of thy friends, ayenward dequace thilk
enfame, and say they granted a sooth without a stroke or fighting. Many men in
battle been discomfited and overcome in a rightful quarrel, that is gods
privy judgment in heaven: but yet although the party be yolden, he may with
words say his quarrel is true, and to yield him in the contrary for dread of
death, he is compelled, and he that granted and no stroke has feled, he may
not creep away in this wise by none excusacion. Indifferent folk will say, ye
who is true, who is false himself knowledgeth tho things. Thus in every side
fame shows to thee good and no bad. But yet (quoth. I) some will say I ne should
for no death have discovered my maistresse, and so by unkindness they woll knet
infame to pursue me about: thus enemies of will in manifold manner woll sech
privy serpentines queintises, to quench and distroy by venime of many
businesses, the light of troth, to make herts to murmour against my person, to
have me in hain, withouten any cause. Now (quoth. she) hear me a few words, and
thou shall fully been answered, I trow. Me thinks (quoth. she) right now by thy
words that Sacrament of swearing, that is to say, charging by Oath, was one of
the causes to make thee discover the malicious imaginacions tofore nempned:
every oath by knitting of copulation, must have these laws, that is, true
judgment and rightwisenesse, in which thing, if any of these lack, the oath is
iturned into the name of perjury: then to make a true serment, must needs these
things follow, for often times a man to say soothe, but judgment and justice
follow, he is forsworn: ensample of Herodes for holding of his serment, was
dampened.

Also to say troth rightfullithe, but in judgment, other while is forboden, by
that all sothes be not to saine. Therefore in judgment in troth and
rightwisenesses, is every creature bounden upon pain of perjury full knowing
to make, though it were of his own person, for dread of sin, after that word
better is it to die than live false: and al would perverted people, false
report make in unkindness, in y^ intent thy fame to reise, when light of truth
in these matters is forth sprongen, and openly published among commons, then
shall not soch dark enfame dare appear for pure shame of his falsnesse, as some
men there been that their own enfame, can none otherwise void or else excuse,
but by hindering of other men's fame, which that by none other cause cleapen
other men's false, but for with their own falsnesse, mowen they not been
avaunsed: or else by false sclaundring words, other men shendin their own true
sclaunder, to make seem the less, for if soch men woulden their iyen of their
conscience reuoluen, shoulden seen the same sentence they legen on other,
spring out of their sides, with so many branches, it were impossible to number:
to which therefore may it be said in that thing, this man thou demest, therein
thy self thou condempnest. But (quoth. she) understand not by these words, that
thou wene me say thee, to be worthy sclander, for any matter tofore written,
truly I would witness the contrary, but I say that the beams of sclaundring
words may not been done away, till the day of dome. For how should it not yet
amongs so great plenty of people, been many shrews, sithen when no mo but eight
persons, in Noes ship were closed, yet one was a shrew, and scorned his father.
These things (quoth. she) I trow, shown that false fame is not to dread, ne of
wise persons to accept, and namely not of thy Margarite, whose wisdom
hereafter I think to declare, wherefore I wot well soch thing shall not her
astert, then of unkindness, thine oath has thee excused at the full. But now
if thou would not grieve, me list a few things to show. Say on (quoth. I) what ye
wol, I trow ye mean but troth, and my profit in time coming. Truly (quoth. she)
that is soth, so thou con well keep these words, and in the inrest secret
chamber of thine heart, so fast hem close, that they never flitt, then shall
thou find hem auailing. Look now what people have thou served, which of hem all
in time of thine exile ever thee refreshed, by the value of the least coigned
plate that walks in money. Who was sorry, or made any ruth for thy disease? If
they hadden getten their purpose of thy mi^aventure, set they not an haw. Lo
when thou were enprisoned, how fast they hied in help of thy deliverance. I
wene of thy death, they give but lite: They looked after no thing, but after
their own lusts. And if thou list say the sothe, all that meinie that in this
brigge thee broughten, lokeden rather after thine helps, than thee to have
releued.

Owen not yet some of hem money for his commons? Paidest not thou for some of
her dispences, till they were turned out of Seland? Who yaue thee ever ought,
for any riding thou made? Yet pardie, some of hem tooken money for thy
Chamber, and put tho pens in his pourse, vnweting of the renter.

Lo, for which a company thou medlest, that neither thee, ne them self mighten
help of unkindness, now they bear the name, that thou supposest of hem for to
have. What might thou more have done, than thou did, but if thou would
in a false quarrel, have been a stinking martire? I wene thou fleddest as long
as thou might, their priuitie to conceal, which thing thou helest longer then
thou should. And thilk that ought thee money, no penny would pay, they wend
thy return had been an impossible. How might thou better have hem proved, but
thus in thy needy diseases? Now have thou ensample, for whom thou shall meddle:
truly this lore is worth many goods.

Often began love to stern me these words, think on my speech, for truly
hereafter, * it woll do thee liking, and how so ever thou see fortune shape her
whele to turn, this meditacion by no way reuolue. For certes, Fortune shows
her fairest, when she thinks to beguile. And as me thought here toforne, thou
saidest thy loos in love, for thy rightwisenesse ought to be raised, should be
allowed in time coming: thou might in love so thee have, that loos and fame
shull so been raised, that to thy friends comfort, and sorrow to thine enemies,
endless shull endure.

But if thou were that one Sheep amongs the hundred, were lost in desert, and
out of the way had erred, and now to the flock art restored, the Shepeheard
has in thee no joy, and thou again to the Forest tourn. But that right as the
sorrow and anguish was great, in time of thine out way going, right so joy and
gladness shall be doubled, to seen thee converted, and not as Lothes wife again
looking, but hoole counsel with the Sheep following, and with them grass and
herbs gader. Never the later (quoth. she) I say not these things for no wantrust
that I have, in supposing of thee otherwise than I should: for truly I wot
well, that now thou art set in soche a purpose, out of which thee list not to
part: But I say it, for many men there ben that to knowing of other men's doings
setten all their cure, and lightly desiren the bad to clatter, rather than the
good, and have no will their own manner to amend. They also hate of old
rancour lightly haven, and there that soch thing abides, suddenly in their
mouths proceeds the haboundance of the heart, and words as stones, stones out
throw. Wherefore my counsel is evermore, openly and apertly, in what place
thou sit, counterplete therrours and meanings, in as far as thou hem wistest
false, and leave for no wight, to make hem be know in every bodies ear: and be
always patient, and use Jacobs words, what so ever men of thee clappen, I shall
sustain my Ladies wrath, which I have deserved, so long as my Margarite has
rightwised my cause. And certes (quoth. she) I witness my self, if thou thus
converted, sorrowest in good meaning in thine heart, wolt from all vanity
parfitely depart, in consolacion of al good pleasaunce of that Margarite, which
that thou desire after will of thine heart, in a manner of a mothers pity,
shul fully accept thee into grace. For right as thou rentest clothes in open
sight, so openly to sow hem at his worship, withouten reproof commended: Also,
right as thou were ensample of much fold error, right so thou must be ensample
of manifold correction, so good favor to forgoing all error destroying,
causes diligent love with many plaited praysings to follow, and then shall all
the first errors make the following worships to seem hugely increased, black
and white set togider, every for other more seems, and so does every things
contrary in kind. But infame that goes always tofore, and praising worship by
any cause following after, makes to rise thilk honor, in double of wealth,
and that quenches the spot of the first enfame. Why wenest I say these things,
in hindering of thy name? Nay nay God wot, but for pure increasing worship, thy
rightwisenesse to commend, and thy troth to seem the more. Woste not well thy
self, that thou inform of making, passes not Adam that eat of the apple.
Thou passes not the steadfastness of Noe, y^ eating of the grape became
drunk. Thou passes not the chastity of Loathe, that lay by his daughter. Eke
the nobly of Abraham, whom God reproved by his pride. Also David's meekness,
which for a woman made Vry be slaw. What also Hector of Troy, in whom no defaut
might be found: yet is he reproved that he ne had with manhood not suffered the
war begone, ne Paris to have went into Greece, by whom began all the sorrow: for *
truly him lacks no venime of privy consenting, which y^ openly leaves a
wrong to withsay. Lo eke an old proverb, among many other. * He that is still,
seems as he granted.

Now by these ensamples, thou might fully understand, that these things been
writ to your learning, and in rightwisenes of tho persons, as thus: To every
wight his default committed, made goodness afterward done be the more in
reverence, and in open showing, for ensample is it not song in holy church? Lo
how necessary was Adams sin, David the king gat Solomon the king, of her that
was Vries wife. Truly for reproof is none of these things writ: Right so tho
I rehearse thy before deed, I repreue thee never the more, ne for no villainy of
thee are they rehearsed, but for worship, so thou continue well hereafter: and
for profit of thy self, I read thou on hem think.

Then said I right thus: Lady of unity and accord, envy and wrath lurken
there thou come in place, ye weten well your selue and so done many other,
y^ while I administered the office of common doing, as in ruling of y^
establishments amongs y^ people, I defouled never my conscience for no manner
deed, but ever by wit and by counsel of the wisest, the matters weren drawn
to their right ends. And thus truly for you Lady, I have desired soch cure,
and certes in your service was I not idle, as far as soch doing of my cure
stretches. That is a thing (quoth. she) yt may draw many hertes of noble, and
voice of common into glory, and fame is not but wretched and fickle.

Alas, that mankind coueteth in so lewd a wise, to be rewarded of any good
deed, since glory of Fame in this world, is not but hindering of glory in time
coming. And certes, quoth. she, yet at y^ hardest such fame into heaven is not
the earth but a center to the cercle of heaven. A prick is wonderful little in
respect of all the cercle, and yet in all this prick may no name be born in
manner of persing, for many obstacles, as waters and wilderness, and strange
languages, and not only names of men ben stilled and holden out of knowledging
by these obstacles, but also cities and realms of prosperity ben let to be
know, and their reason hindered, so that they mow not ben perfitely in men's
proper understanding. How should then the name of a singular Londenoys pass
the glorious name of London, which by many it is commended, and by many it is
lacked, and in many mo places in earth not known, then known: for in many
countrees little is London in knowing, or in speech, and yet among one manner
of people may not soch fame in goodness come, for as many as praisen commonly
as many lacken. Fie then on soch manner fame, sleep and suffer him that knows
priuity of hertes, to deal soch fame in thilke place, there nothing against a
soth shall neither speak, ne dare appear, by attorney, ne by other manner. How
many great named, and many great in worthiness losed, han be tofore this time,
yt now out of memory are slidden, and cleanly forgetten, for defaute of
writings, and yet scriptures for great elde so been defased, that no
perpetualty may in hem been judged. But if thou wolt make comparison to ever,
with joy may thou have in yearthly name it is a fair likeness, a pees or one
grain of Wheat, to a thousand ships full of corn charged. What number is
between the one and the other, and yet mow both they be nombred, and end in
recknyng have. But truly all that may be nombred, is nothing to reckon, as to
thilke that may not be nombred, for often things ended is made comparison, as one
little, an other great, but in things to have an end, and an other no end, soch
comparisoun may not be founden. Wherefore in heaven to been losed, with God
has none end, but endless endures, and thou can nothing done aright, but
thou desire the rumor thereof be healed, and in every wightes ear, and that
dureth but a prick, in respect of the other. And so thou seek reward of
folks, small words, and of vain praysings. Truly therein thou lesest the
guerdon of virtue, and lesest the greatest valor of conscience, and unhap thy
renome everlasting. * Therefore boldly renome of fame of the earth should be
hated, and fame after death should be desired, of werks of virtue asks
guerdoning, and the soul causes all virtue. Then y^ soul delivered out of
prison of earth, is most worthy soch guerdone among to have in the everlasting
fame, and not the body, that causes all man's yuils.

OF tway things art thou answered, as me thinks (quoth. Love) and if any thing
be in doubt in thy soul, show it forth thine ignorance to clear, and leave it
for no shame. Certes (quoth. I) there ne is no body in this world, that aught
could say by reason, against any of your skils, as I leave: and by my wit now
feel I well that evil speakers, or bearers of enfame, may little grieve or let
my purpose, but rather by soche thing my quarrel to be forthered. Yea (quoth. she)
and it is proved also, that the like jewel in my keeping shall not there
through be stered, of the lest moment that might be imagined. That is soth (quoth.
I.) Well (quoth. she) then leueth there, to declare that thy insuffisaunce is no
manner letting, as thus: for that she is so worthy, thou should not climb
so high, for thy moebles and thine estate arne voided, thou think fallen in
soch misery, that gladness of thy pursuit woll not on thee descend. Certes
(quoth. I) that is soth: right soch thought is in mine heart, for commonly it is
spoken, and for an old Proverb it is ledged: * He that heweth to hie, with
chips he may lose his sight. Wherefore I have been about in all that ever I
might, to study ways of remedy, by one side or by an other. Now (quoth. she) God
forbede, ere thou seek any other doings but soch as I have learned thee in our
resting whiles, and such herbs as been planted in our Gardens. Thou shall
well understand, that above man, is but one God alone. How (quoth. I) han men to
forne this time, trusted in writs and chauntements, and in helps of Spirits,
that dwellen in the air, and thereby they han getten their desires, where as
first for all his manly power he daunced behind.

O (quoth. she) fie on soch matters, for truly that is sacrilege, and that shall
have no sort with any of my servants, in mine eyes shall soch thing not be
looked after. How often is it commanded by these passed wise, yt to one God
shall men serve, and not two Gods. And who that list to have mine helps, shall
ask none help of foul Spirits. Alas, is not man maked semblable to God? Woste
thou not well, that all virtue of liueliche werking by Gods purueighance, is
vnderput to reasonable creature in yerth, is not every thing a thishalf God?
made buxom to man's contemplacion, understanding in heaven and in earth, and in
hell. Has not man being with stones, soul of wexing with trees and herbs.

Has he not soul of feling with beasts, fishes, and fouls, and he has soul
of reason and understanding with Angels, so yt in him is knit all manner of
livings, by a reasonable proporcion. Also man is made of all y^ four Elements.
All uniuersity is rekened in him alone: he has under god principality above al
things. Now is his soul here, now a thousand mile hence, now far, now nigh,
now high, now low, as far in a moment, as in mountenance of ten Winter, and
all this is in man's governance and disposicion. Then shows it, that men been
lich unto gods, and children of most height. * But now sithen al things
vnderput to y^ will of reasonable creatures, God forbid any man to win that
Lordship, and ask help of any thing lower than himself, and then namely of
foul things innominable.

Now then, why should thou wene to love to high, sithen nothing is thee
above, but God alone. Truly I wot well, that the ilk jewel is in a manner, even
in line of degree, there thou art thy selue, and naught above, save thus: Angel
upon Angel, Man upon Man, and Devil upon Devil, han a manner of Souerainty, and
that shall cease at y^ day of Dome: and so I say, though thou be put to serve
thilk jewel during thy life, yet is that no seruage of vnderputting, but a
manner of travailing pleasance, to conquer and get that thou have not.

I set now the hardest in my service now thou deydest for sorrow of wanting in
thy desires: Truly all heavenly bodies, with one voice shul come and make
melody in thy coming, and say welcome our fere, and worthy to enter into
Jupiters joy, for thou with might have overcome death, thou would never flit
out of thy service, and we all shul now pray to the gods, row by row, to make
thilke Margarite, that no routh had in this person, but unkindly without
comfort let thee dye, shall beset her self in soch wise, that in earth for
part of vengeance, shall she no joy have in loves service: and when she is
dedde, then shall her soul been brought up into thy presence, and whider thou will chese, thilke soul shall been committed. Or else after thy death, anon
all the foresaid heavenly bodies by one accord, shall be nommen from thilke
perle, all the virtues that first her were taken, for she has hem forfeyted,
by y^ on thee my servant, in thy live she would not suffer to worche all
virtues, withdrawn by might of the high bodies: Why then should thou wene
so any more. And if thee list to look upon the law of kind, and with order,
which to me was ordained, soothly none age, none ouertourning time, but
hitherto had no time ne power, to change the wedding, ne that knotte to
unbind of two hertes, through one assent in my presence, together accorden to
enduren till death hem depart. What trowest thou every idiot wot the meaning
and the privy intent of these things? They wene forsooth that soche accord may
not be, but y^ Rose of maidenhede be plucked, do way do way, they know nothing
of this: * For consent of two hertes alone, makes the fastening of ye knot,
neither law of kind, ne man's Low determines, neither y^ age, ne the quality of
persons, but only accord between thilke tway. And truly, after time that such
accord, by their consent in heart, is ensealed and put in my tresory, amongs
my privy things, then ginneth the name of spousaile: and although they breken
forward both, yet soch matter ensealed, is kept in remembrance for ever. And
see now that spouses have the name anon after accord, though the Rose be not
take. The Angel bad Joseph take Mary his spouse, and to Egypt wend: Lo she
was cleped spouse, and yet toforne ne after, neither of hem both meant, no
fleshly lust know, wherefore y^ words of troth accorden, y^ my servants
shoulden forsake both father and mother, and be adherand to his spouse, and
they two in unity of one flesh, shoulden accord, And this wise two that werne
first, in a little manner disaccordaunt, higher that one, and lower that other,
been made euenliche in gree to stand.

But now to inform thee, y^ ye been liche Gods, these Clerks sain, and in
determinacion shown, that three things haven the names of Gods been cleped,
y^ is to saine, Man, Devil, and Images, but yet is there but one God, of whom
all goodness, all grace, and all virtue comes, and he is loving and true,
and everlasting, and prime cause of al being things: but men been gods,
loving and true, but not everlasting, and that this by adoption, of the
everlasting God. Devils been gods, stirring by a manner of living, but
neither been they true, ne everlasting, and their name of godlihed, they han by
usurpation, as the Prophet says: Al Gods of Gentiles, that is to say,
Painims, are Devils. But Images been Gods by nuncupacion, and they been
neither living, ne true, ne everlasting: After these words they clepen Gods,
Images, wrought with men's hands.

But now reasonable creature, that by adoption alone, art to y^ great god
everlasting, and thereby thou art good cleped: let thy fathers manners so enter
thy wits, yt thou might follow, in as much as longs to thee, thy fathers
worship, so that in nothing, thy kind from his will decline, ne from his nobley
poverty. In thus wise if thou werche, thou art above all other things, save Ood
alone, and to say no more thine heart, to serve in too hie a place.

FVlly have I now declared, thine estate to be good, so thou follow thereafter,
and that the objection first by thee alleged, in worthiness of thy Margarite,
shall not thee let, as it shall further thee, and increase thee: it is now to
declare, the last objection in nothing may grieve. Yes certes (quoth. I) both
grieve, and let must it needs, the contrary may not been proved, and see now
why. While I was glorious in worldly welfulnesse, and had soch goods in
wealth, as maken men rich, tho was I draw into compaignies that loos, prise,
and name yeuen: Tho loureden blasours, tho curreiden glosours, tho welcomeden
flatteres, tho worshipped thilke, that now deinen not to look. Every wight in
soch yearthly weal habundaunt, is hold noble, precious, benign, and wise, to
do with he shall, in any degree that men him set, all be it that the soth be in
yt contrary of all tho things: But he that can, ne never so well in him
behave, and has virtue habundant, in manifold manners, and be not wealthed with
soch yearthly goods, is hold for a fool, and said his wit is but sotted. Lo
how false for ever is hold true. Lo how true is cleaped false, for wanting of
goods. Also Lady, dignitees of office maken men mikell commended, as thus: he
is so good, were he out, his pere should men not find. Truly I trow of some
soche that are so praised, were they out ones, an other should make him so be
know, he should of no wise no more been looked after: but only fools well I
wot, desiren soch new things. Wherefore I wonder that thilke governor, out of
whom alone the causes proceden, that governs all things, which that has
ordained this world, in works of the kindly bodies so be governed, not with
unsteadfast or happious thing, but with rules of reason, which shown the course
of certain things: why suffers he such sliding chaunges, that misturnen soch
noble things as been we men, that arne a fair persel of the earth, and holden
the vpperest degree under GOD, of benign things, as ye saiden right now your
self, should never man have been set in so worthy a place, but if his degree
were ordained noble. Alas, thou that knittest the purueighaunce of all things,
why look thou not to amenden these defaults: I see shrewes that han wicked
manners, siten in chairs of domes, Lambs to punishen, there Woolues should been
punished. Lo, virtue shined naturelly, for poverty lurketh, and is hid under
cloud: but the Moon false forsworn, as I know my self, for aver and yeftes
has usurped, to shine by day light, with peynture of other men's praysings: and
truly thilke forged light foully should fade, were the troth away of colors
feyned. Thus is night turned into day, and day into night, Winter into Summer,
and Summer into Winter, not in deed but in miscleapyng of foolish people.

Now (quoth. she) what wenest thou of these things? How felest thou in thine heart,
by what governaunce that this comes about?

Certes (quoth. I) that wot I never, but if it be, that Fortune has grant from
abode to lead the end of men as her likes. Ah now I see (quoth. she) the intent
of thy meaning: Lo, because thy worldly goods, been fullich dispent, thou
berafte out of dignity of office, in which thou made thy gathering of thilke
goods, and yet did in that office, by counsel of wise, any thing were
ended: and true were unto hem, whose profit thou should look, and see
now many, that in the ilke Heruest made of thee mokell, and now for glosing of
other, deyneth thee naught to forther, but enhaunsen falls shrewes, by
witnessing of truth: These things greeveth thine heart, to seen thy self thus
abated, and then frailty of mankind ne sets but little, by the lesers of soch
rechesse, have he never so much virtue, and so thou wenest of thy Jewel, to
run in dispite, and not been accepted into grace: All this shall thee nothing
hinder. Now (quoth. she) first thou woste well, thou lostest nothing that ever
might thou challenge for thine own: When nature brought thee forth, come
thou not naked out of thy mothers womb? Thou had no richesse, and when thou
shalt enter into the end of every fleshly body, what shall thou have with
thee then? So every richesse thou haste in time of thy living nis but leant,
thou might therein challenge no property. And see now, every thing that is a
man's own, he may do therewith what him likes, to give or to keep: but richesse
thou playnest from thee lost, if thy might had stretched so ferforth, feign
thou wouldes have hem kept, multiplied with mo other: and so against thy will
been they departed from thee, wherefore they were never thine. And if thou
laudest and joyest any wight, for he is stuffed with soche manner richesse, thou
art in that believe beguiled, for thou wenest thilk joy to be selinesse, or else
ease, and he that has lost soche haps, to been unseily. Ye forsooth (quoth. I.)
Well (quoth. she) then woll I prove that unsely, in that wise is to praise, and so
the the other is the contrary to be lacked. How so (quoth. I?) For unsely (quoth. she)
begileth not, but shows the intent of her working. Et e contra. Selinesse
begileth, for in prosperity, she makes a jape in blindness, that is, she
windeth him to make sorrow when she withdraws. Wolte thou not (quoth. she) praise
him better, that shows to thee his heart, tho it be with bitande words, and
dispitous than him that gloseth, and thinks in their absence, to do thee many
harms. Certes (quoth. I) the one is to commend, and the other to lack and
despise. A ha (quoth. she) right so ease while he lasts, gloseth and flattereth,
and lightly voideth when she most pleasantly shows, and ever in her absence,
she is about to dothee tene and sorrow in heart: But unsely all be it with
betande chere, shows what she is, and so does not that other, wherefore
unsely does not beguile. Selinesse disceiveth: unsely put away doubt. That one
makes men blind, that other opens their iyen, in showing of wretchedness.
The one is full of dread, to lose that is not his own: That other is sober, and
makes men discharged of mokel heaviness in burden: The one draws a man
from very good, the other haleth him to virtue, by the hooks of thoughts. And
wenest thou not, that thy disease has done thee mokell more to win, than
ever yet thou lostest, and more than ever the contrary made thee win? Is not
a great good to thy thinking, for to know y^ hearts of thy soothfast friends?
Parde they been proved to the full, and the true have discevered from the
false. Truly at the going of thilke brotell joye, there yede no more away,
than the ilke that was not thine proper: He was never from y^ lightly departed,
thine own good therefore leaves it still with thee. Now good (quoth. she) for how
much would thou sometime have bought, this very knowing of thy friend, from
the flattering flies that they glosed, when thou thought thy self sely? But
thou y^ plainest of loss in richesse, haste founden y^ most dear worthy thing:
that thou cleapest vnsely, has made the much thing to winnen. And also for
conclusioun of all, * He is friend that now leaves not his heart from thine
helps. And if that Margarite denies now not to suffer her virtues shine to
thee wards, with spreading beams, as far or farther than if thou were sely
in worldly joy: Trewly I say not else but she is some deal to blame.

Ah, peace (quoth. I) and speak no more of this, mine heart breaks now thou
touchest any soche words. A well (quoth. she) then let us singen, thou herest no
more of these things at this time.

Thus ends the first book of the Testament of Love, and hereafter follows
the second.
VEry wealth may not be founden in all this world, and that is well seen: Lo
how in my most comfort, as I wend and most supposed to have had full
answer of my contrary thoughts, suddenly it was vanished. And all the
works of man faren in the same wise, when folk wenen best her intent for to
have, and wills to perform, anon changing of the lift side to the right
halve, torneth it so clean into another kind, that never shall it come to the
first plite in doing.

O this wrongful steering so soon, otherwised out of knowing but for my
purpose was at my beginning, and so dureth yet, if God of his grace time woll
me grant, I think to perform this work, as I have begone in love, after as
my thin wit, with inspiracicion of him that hildeth all grace woll suffer.
Grecuously God wotte have I suffered a great throw, that the Romayn Emperor,
which in unity of love should accord and every with other, in cause of other to
auance, and namely since this Empire to be corrected of so many sects in
heresy, of faith, of service, of rule in loves religion. Trewly all were it
but to shend erroneous opinions, I may it no longer suffer: For many men there
been that sain love to been in gravel and sand, that with Sea ebbing and
flowing woweth, as riches that suddenly wanisheth. And some sain that love
should be in windy blasts, that stoundmele tournerh as a phane, and glory of
renome, which after lusts of the variant people is areysed or stilled. Many
also we^en that in the Sun and the Moon, and other Sters, love should been
founden, for among all other Planets most souerainly they shinen, as dignities
in reverence of estates rather than good han, and occupien. Full many also
there been that in oaks and in huge posts supposen love to been grounded, as in
strength and in might, which mowen not helpen their own wretchedness, when
they gin to fall. But soch diversity of sects against the rightful bileue of
love, these errors ^een forth spread, that loves servants in the true rule and
steadfast faith, in no place darn appear: Thus irrecuparable joy is went, and
annoy endless is entered. For no man aright deproueth soch errors, but
comfirmen their words, and sain that bad is noble good, and goodness is bad, to
which folk the Prophet bids, woe without end.

Also many tongues of great false teachings in guiling manner, principally in my
times, not only with words, but also with arms, loves servant and profess
in his religion of true rule, pursewen to confounden and to distroien. And for
as much as holy Fathers, that our Christen faith aproued and strengthed to the
Jews, as to men reasonable, and of divinity learned, proved thilk faith with
reasons, and with aucthoritees of the old Testament, and of the new, her
pertinacy to distroy: But to Paynims, that for beests and hounds were hold, to
put hem out of their error, was miracles of God showed. These things were
figured by coming of thangell to the sheepherds, and by the sterre to Painims
kings, as who says: Angel reasonable, to reasonable creature, and sterre of
miracle to people bestiall not learned, wern sent to enform. But I lovers clerk
in all my conning and with all my mights, trewly I have no soch grace in virtue
of miracles, ne for no discomfite falsehedes suffiseth not auctorities alone,
sithen that such heretics and maintainors of falsities. Wherefore I wot well
sithen that they been men, and reason is approved in hem, the clowd of error
has her reason bewond probable reasons, which that catchend wit rightfully may
not with sit. But my trauayling study. I have ordained hem, with that
auctority misglosed by man's reason, to grant shall be enduced.

Now ginneth my pen to quake, to thinken on the sentences of the envious
people, which always been ready, both rider and goer to skorn and to jape this
lewd book and me for rancor and hate in their hearts they shullen so despise,
that although my book be lewd, yet shall it been more lewd holden, and by
wicked words in many manner apaired. Certes me thinks the sown of their bad
speech, right now is full both mine ears. O good precious Margarite, mine
heart should weep, if I wist ye token head of soch manner speech, but trewly I
wot well in that your wisdom shall not astert. For of God maker of kind
witness I took, that for none envy ne iuell have I draw this matter togider,
but only for goodness to maintain, and errors in falsetes to distroy. Wherefore
(as I said) with reason I think, thilke foresaid errors to distroy and dequace.
These reasons and soch other, if they enduce men in loves service, true to
believe of parfite bliss, yet to full faith in credence of desert, fully mow
they not suffice, sithen faith has no merit of mede, when man's reason shows
experience in doing. For utterly no reason the parfite bliss of love by no way
may make to be comprehended. Lo what is a persell of lovers joy, parfite
science in good service, of their desire to comprehend in bodily doing, the
liking of the soul, not as by a glass to have contemplacion of time coming,
but thilk first imagined and thought, after face to face in beholding: what
heart, what reason, what understanding can make his heaven to be feeled and
know without assay of doing? Certes none. Sithen then of love comes soch
fruit in bliss, and love in himself is the most among other virtues, as Clerks
sain: The seed of soch springing in all places, in all countries, in all worlds
should been sow.

But o well away, thilk seed is forsake, and mowen not been suffered the land
tillers to set a werk, without meddling of cockle, bad wedes which sometime
stonken has caught the name of love among ydiotes and bad meaning people.
Never the latter, yet how so it be that men cleap thilk King preciousest in
kind, with many eke names, that other things, that the foul yeuen the ilke
noble name, it shows well that in a manner men have great liking in
wurshipping thilke name, wherefore this work have I writ, and to the titled of
loves name, I have it auowed in a manner of sacrifice, that where ever it be
rad, it mow in merit by the excellence of thilk name the more wex in authority
and wurship of taking in head, and to what intent it was ordained, the in
feeres mowen been moved. Euerything to whom is ow and occasion done as for his
end. Aristotle supposes that the acts of every thing been in a manner his
final cause. A final cause is nobler, or else even as noble as thilk thing
that is finally to thilk end, wherefore accion of thing everlasting is deemed
to be eternal, and not temporal, sithen it is his final cause: Right so the
acts of my book love, and love is noble, wherefore though my book be lewd, the
cause with which I am stered, and for whom I ought it done, noble forsooth been
both. But because that in conning I am young, and can yet but creep, this lewd
A, b, c, have I set into learning, for I can not passen the telling of three as
yet: and if God will in short time, I shall amend this lewdness in joining of
syllables, which thing for dullness of wit I may not in three letters declare.
For trewly I say the goodness of my Margarite pearl would give matter
enditing to many Clerks: Certes her mercy is more to me swetter than any
livings, wherefore my lips mowen not suffice in speaking of her full laud and
worship as they should. But who is that in knowing of the orders of Heaven, and
puts his reasons in the earth: I forsooth may not with blere eyes, the
shining Sun of virtue in bright whele of this Margarite behold, therefore as
yet I may her not discriue in virtue as I would. In time coming in another
treatise through gods grace, this Sun, cleerenesse of virtue to be know, and
how she enlumineth all this day, I think to declare.

IN this mean while this comfortable lady began sing a wounder matter of enditing
in Latin, but trewly the noble colors in Rhetorike, wise knit were so
craftily, that my conning woll not stretche to remember, but the sentence I
trow somedele have I in mind. Certes they were wonder sweet of sown, and
they were touched all in lamentacion wise, and by no werbelles of mirth: Lo
thus began she sing in Latin, as I may constrew it in our English tongue.

Alas that these heavenly bodies their light and course shown, as nature yaue
hem in commandment at the ginning of the first age, but these things in free
choice of reason han none understanding: but man that ought to pass all thing
of doing, of right course in kind, overwhelmed soothnesse by wrongful title,
and has drawn the Sterre of envy to gone by his side, that the ciypes of me
that should be his shinand Sun, so often is sey, that it wened thilk error through
hem come in, should been mine own default. Trewely therefore I have me
withdraw, and made my dwelling out of land in an isle by my self, in the Occian
closed, and yet sayn there many they have me harberowed, but God wot they
faylen. These things me greuen to think, and namely on paised gladness, that
in this world was wont me disport of high and low, and now it is failed: they
that wolden maistries me have in thilk stounds, in heaven on high above Saturns
sphere, in seasonable time were they lodged, but now come queint counsailours
that in no house woll suffer me sojourn, whereof is pitee: And yet sain some
that they me have in celler with wine shet, in garnere there corn is laid,
covered with wheat, in sack sowed with woll, in purse with money fast knit,
among pans mouled in a wiche, in press among clothes laid, with rich pelure
araied, in stable among horse and other beasts, as hogs, sheep, and nete, and
in other manner wise. But thou maker of light (in winking of thine eye the sun
is queint) wost right well that I in true name was never thus herberowed.
Sometime toforn the sun in the seventh party was smiten, I bare both cross and
mitre, to give it where I would. With me the Pope went a foot, and I tho was
worshipped of al holy church, kings baden me their crowns holden. * The law was
set as it should: to fore the judge as well the poor durst show his grefe as the
rich, for all his money. I defended tho tailages, and was ready for the poor to
pay. I made great feasts in my time, and noble songs, and married damsels of
gentill feture, withouten gold or other richesse. Poor Clerks for wit of
school, I set in churches, and made soch persons to preach: and tho was service
in holy churches honest and devout, in pleasaunce both of God and of the
people. But now the lewd for simony is auaunted, and shendeth all holy church.*
Now is steward for his achates, now is courtior for his debates, now is
eschetour for his wrongs, now is losel for his songs, personer and prouendre
alone, with which many thrifty should increase. And yet is this shrew bebind, *
Free heart is forsake, and losengeour is take. Lo it accords, for such there
been that voluntary lusts haunten in court with ribaudry, That till midnight
and more woll play and wake, but in the Church at matins he is behind, for
evil disposicion of his stomach: therefore he should eat bean bred, and so did
his sire, his estate therewith to strengthen. His alter is broke, and low lithe
in point to gone to y^ earth, but his horse must been easy and hie to hear
him over great waters. His chalice poor, but he has rich cups. No towayl but a
sheet, there God shall been handled: and on his meat board there shall been
board clothes and towelles many pair. At mass serves but a clergion: five
squiers in hall. Poor chauncel, open holes in every side: beds of silk with
tapites going all about his chamber. Poor mass book and lewd chapelain, and
broken Surplice with many an hole: good hounds and many, to hunt after Heart and
Hare, to feed in their feests. Of poor men have they great care, for they ever
crave, and nothing offren, they wolden have hem doluen. But among legystres
there dare I not come, my doing they sain maken hem needy, they ne would for
nothing have me in town, for then were tort and forth naught worth an haw
about, and pleasen no men, but thilk grievous and torcious been in might and in
doing: these things toforn said mow well if men list ryme, trewly they accord
nothing. And for as much as all things by me shulden of right ben governed, I
am sorry to see y^ governance fails, as thus: To seen small and low govern the
hie, and bodies above. Certes that polisie is naught, it is forbode by them
that of governance treaten and enformen. * And right as beastly wit should been
subject to reason, so earthly power in it self, the lower should been subject
to the hier.

What is worth thy body but it be governed with thy soul? right so litel or
naught is worth earthly power, but if regnatife prudence in heeds govern the
small, to which heeds the small owen to obey, and suffer in their governance. But
soueraignesse ayenward should think in this wise; I am servant of these
creatures to me delivered: not Lord, but defendor: not Master, but enformer:
not possessor, but in possession, and to hem lich a tree, in which sparows
shullen stelen, her birds to nourish and forth bring under suerty against all
reueinous fouls and beasts, and not to be tyrant themself. And then the small in
rest and quiet, by the heeds well disposed, owen for their souerains health and
prosperity to pray, and in other doings, in maintenance thereof perform,
withouten other administracion in rule of any manner governance. And they wit
have in hem, and grace to come to soch things, yet should they cease till their
heeds them cleaped, although profit and pleasance should follow. But trewly
other governance ne other meddling ought they not to claim, ne the heeds on hem
to put. Trewly amongs cosinage dare I not come, but if richesse be my mean,
soothly she and other bodily goods makes nigh cosinage, there never
propinquite ne aliance in live was, ne should have be, nere it for her meddling
manners, wherefore kindly am I not there leged. Pouert of kindred is behind,
richesse suffers him to pass: truly he says he come never of Iaphets
children: whereof I am sorry that Iaphets children for pouert, in no lineage ben
rekened, and Cains children for riches be maked Iaphets heirs. Alas this is a
wonder change bitween tho two Noes children, sithen that of Iaphets offspring
comden knights, and of Cain descended the line of seruage to his brothers
children. Lo how gentilesse and seruage, as cosins, both descended out of two
brethern of one body:* Wherefore I say in soothnes, that gentilesse in kinrede
maken not gentil lineage in succession, without desert of a man's own self. Where
is now the line of Alisaundrie the noble, or else of Hector of Troy? Who is
descended of right blood of line fro king Artour? Parde sir Perdicas, whom that
king Alisandre made to been his heir in Greece, was of no kings blood, his dame
was a tombistere: of what kindred been the Gentiles in our days:* I trow therefore
if any good be in gentilesse, it is only that it seems a manner of necessite
be input to gentilmen, that they shoulden not varien fro y^ virtues of their
ancesters. Certes all manner lineage of men ben even lich in birth, for one
father, maker of all goodness, informed hem all, and all mortal folk of one seed
are greyned. Whereto auant men of her lineage, in cosinage, or in eld fathers.
Look now the ginning, and to God maker of man's person, there is no clerk ne no
worthy in gentilesse: and he that norisheth his corare with vices and
unreasonable lusts, and leaves the kind course, to which end him brought forth
his birth, trewly he is vngentil, and among clerks may not been nempned. And
therefore he y^ woll been gentil, he mote daunten his flesh fro vices y^ causen
vngentilnes, and leave also reigns of wicked lusts, * and draw to him virtue,
that in all places gentilnes gentilmen makes. And so speak I in feminine
gendre in general, of tho persons at the reverence of one, whom every wight
honors, for her bounty and her noblenes ymade her to God so dear, that his
mother she became, and she me has had so great in worship, y^ I nill for
nothing in open declare that in any thing against her sect may so wene: for all
virtue and all worthiness of plesaunce in hem haboundeth. And although I would
any thing speak, truly I can not, I may find in yuell of hem no manner matter.

RIght with these words she stint of that lamentable melody, and I began with a
lively heart to pray, if that it were liking unto her noble grace, she would
her deyn to declare me the matter that first was begone, in which she left,
and stinte to speak beforne she ganne to singe.

O (quoth. she) this is no new thing to me to seen you men desiren after matter,
which your self caused to void.

Ah good Lady (quoth. I) in whom victory of strength is proved above all other
thing, after the judgment of Esdram, whose lordship all lignes: Who is that
right as Emperor hem commands, whether thilke been not women, in whose
likeness to me ye aperen. For right as man halte the principalite of all thing
under his being, in the masculine gender, and no more genders been there but
masculine, and feminine, all the remnant been no genders but of grace, in
faculty of Grammar. Right so in the feminine, the women holden the vpperest
degree of all things, under thilk gender contained. Who brings forth kings,
which that been lords of see and of earth, and all peoples of women been born:
they nourish hem that raffen vines, they maken men comfort in their glad
cheres. Her sorrow is death to man's heart. * Without women the being of men
were impossible. They con with their sweetness the cruel heart ravish, and make
it meek, buxome, and benign, without violence meuing. In beauty of their eyes,
or else of other manner fetures is all men's desires, ye more than in Gold,
Precious stones, either any richesse. And in this degree Lady your self many
hearts of men have so bounden, that parfit bliss in womankind to been men
wenen, and in nothing else. Also Lady, the goodness, the virtue of women, by
property of discretion, is so well known, by littelnesse of malice, that
desire to a good asker by no way con they warn: and ye then that woll not pass
the kind werching of your sects by general discrecion, I wot well is woll so
incline to my prayer, that grace of my request shall fully been granted. Certes
(quoth. she) thus for the more part fares all mankind to pray, and to cry after
woman's grace, and fain many fantasies to make herts to incline to your desires:
and when these sely women freely of their kind beleuen your words, and wenen
all be Gospel the promise of your behests, then grant they to you their herts,
and full fillen your lusts, where through their liberty in maistership that
they toforn had, is thralled, and so maked Sovereign and to be praid, that
first was servant, and voice of prayer used. Anon as filled is your lust, many
of you be so true, that littel head take ye of soch kindness, but with
traisoun anon ye think hem beguile, and set light of that thing which first ye
maked to you wonders dear: so what thing to women it is to love any wight ere
she him well know, and have him proved in many half, for every glittering thing
is not gold, and under color of fair speech many vices may be hid and
concealed. Therefore I read no wight to trust on you too rathe, men's chere and
her speech right guileful is full often, wherefore without good assay it is not
worth on many on you to trust: truly it is right kindly to every man y^
thinks women betray, and shown outward all goodness, till he have his will
performed. Lo the bird is beguiled with y^ merry voice of the foulers whistell.
When a woman is closed in your net, then woll ye causes finden, and bear
unkindness her on hand, or falsety upon her put, your own malicious traison
with soch thing to excuse. Lo then han women none other wreche in vengeance,
but blober and weep till hem list stint, and sorily her mishap complain, and is
put into wening y^ all men been so untrue. How often have men changed her loves
in a litel while, or else for failing their will in their places hem set? for
friendship shall be one, and fame with another him list for to have, and a third
for delight, or else were he lost both in pack and in clothes: is this fair? nay
God wot. I may not tell by thousand parts, y^ wrongs in treachery of soch false
people, for make they never so good a bond, all set ye at a mite when your heart
tourneth: and they that wenen for sorrow of you dey, y^ pite of your false heart
is flow out of town. * Alas therefore, y^ ever any woman would take any wight in
her grace, till she know at y^ full on whom she might at all assays trust.
Women con no more craft in queint knowing, to understand y^ false disceiuable
conjectments of man's beguilings. Lo how it fares, though ye men gronen and
crien, certes it is but disceit, and y^ preueth well by thends in your werking.
How many women have been lorn, and with shame foul shent by long lasting time,
which through men's gile have been disceiued? ever their fame shall dure, and
their deeds rad and song in many londs, that they han done recoueren shall they
never, but always been deemed lightly, in such plite again should they fall, of
which slanders and tenes ye false men and wicked been the very causes, on you
by right ought these shames and these reproues all holy descend. Thus arn ye
all nigh untrue, for all your fair speech your heart is full fickel. What cause
han ye women to despise? better fruit than they been, ne sweter spices to your
behoue, mow ye not find, as far as worldly bodies stretchen. Look to their
forming at the making of their persons by God in joy of Paradise, for goodness
of man's propre body were they maked, after the saws of the Bible, rehearsing
Gods words in this wise: It is good to mankind that we make to him an helper.
Lo in paradise for your help was this tree graffed, out of which all lineage of
man discendeth: if a man be noble fruit, of noble fruit it is sprongen: the
bliss of Paradise to men's sorry herts, yet in this tree abides. O noble helps
been these trees, and gentil jewel to ben worshipped of every good creature: *
He that hem anoieth, does his own shame, it is a comfortable perl against al
tenes. Every company is mirthed by their present being. Truly I wist never
virtue, but a woman were thereof y^ root. What is heaven y^ worse, tho Sarazins
on it lien? Is your faith untrue, tho renogates maken thereon leasings. If y^
fire does any wight bren, blame his own wit that put himself so far in y^ heat.
Is not fire gentillest, and most element comfortable amongs all other? fire is
cheef werker in forthering sustenance to mankind, shall fire been blamed, for
it brend a fool naturally, by his own stultie wit in stering? Ah wicked fools,
for your proper malice, and shrewdness of your self, ye blame and despise the
precious thing of your kind, and which things among other most ye desiren.
Trewly Nero and his children been shrews, y^ dispisen so their dames. The
wickedness and giling of men, in disclaundring of thilke that most has hem
gladded and pleased, were impossible to write or to nempne. Never the later yet
I say, he that knows a way, may it lightly pass: eke an herb proved may
safely to smertande sores be laid: so I say in him that is proved is nothing
soch evils to guess. But these things have I rehearsed to warn you women all at
ones, that to lightly without good assay ye assenten not to man's speech. The
Sun in the day light, is to known from the Moon that shines in y^ night. Now
to thee thy self (quoth. she) as I have often said, I know well thine heart, thou art
none of all the tofore nempned people, for I know well the continuance of thy
service, y^ never sithen I set thee a werk, might thy Margarite for pleasance,
freendship, ne fairehede of none other be in point moved from thine heart,
wherefore into mine household hastily I woll that thou enter, and all the
parfite priuite of my werking make it be know in thy understanding, as one of
my privy familiers. Thou desire (quoth. she) fain to hear of tho things there I
left. Ye forsooth (quoth. I) that were to me a great bliss. Now (quoth. she) for
thou shall not wene that woman's conditions for fair spech, such thing belongs.

THou shall (quoth. she) understand first among all other things, that all the
cure of my service, to me in the parfite bliss in doing, is desired in every
man's heart, be he never so much a wretch, but every man trauaileth by diverse
study, and seek thilke bliss by diverse ways, but all the ends are knitte in
selinesse of desire in the parfite bliss, that is soch joy, when men it have
gotten, there lives no thing more to been coueited: But how y^ desire of soch
perfection in my service be kindly set in lovers herts, yet her erroneous
opinions misturn it by falsenesse of wening. And although men's understanding be
misturned, to know which should been the way unto my person, and whither it
abides: yet wot they there is a love in every wight, weneth by that thing
that he coueiteth most, he should come to thilk love, and that is parfite
bliss of my servants, but then full bliss may not be, and there lack any
thing of that bliss in any side. Eke it follows then, that he that must have
full bliss, lack no bliss in love on no side.

Therefore Lady (quoth. I tho) thilk bliss I have desired, and sothe to forne
this my self by ways of riches, of dignite, of power, and of renome, wening me
in tho thrages had been thilk bliss, but against the here it tourneth. When I
supposed best thilke bliss have get and come to the full purpose of your
service, suddenly was I hindered, and thrown so fer abacke, that me thinks an
impossible to come there I left. I woll well (quoth. she) and therefore have thou
failed, for thou wentest not by the hie way, a littel misgoing in the ginning,
causes mikell error in the end, wherefore of thilk bliss thou failedst, for
having of richesse, ne none of the other things thou nempnedst, mowen not make
soch parfite bliss in love, as I shall show. Therefore they be not worthy to
thilke bliss, and yet somewhat must been cause and way to thilk bliss: Ergo,
there is some soch thing, and some way, but it is littel in usage, and that is
not openly iknow. But what felest in thine heart of the service, in which by me
thou art entered: wenest aught thy self, yet be in the hie way to my bliss? I
shall so show it to thee, thou shall not con say the contrary.

Good Lady (quoth. I) although I suppose it in my heart, yet would I hear thine words,
how ye meanen in this matter? (quoth. she) that I shall with my good will. The
ilke bliss desired, somedeal ye known, although it be not perfitely, for kindly
entencion leads you thereto, but in three manner livings, is all such ways
showed. Every wight in this world to have this bliss, one of the ilk three
ways of lives must proceed, which after opinions of great Clerks, arn by names
cleaped, beastiallich, reasonablich, in virtuous: Manlich is worldlich,
beastialich is lusts and delitable, nothing restrained by bridle of reason: all
that joyeth and yeueth gladness to the heart, and it be against reason, is
likened to bestiall living, which thing follows lusts and delites, wherefore
in such thing may not that precious bliss, that is master of all virtues,
abide. Your fathers toforne you have cleaped such lusty livings, after the
flesh, passions of desire, which are innominable tofore God and man both. Then
after determination of such wise, we accorden, that such passions of desire
shull not ben nempned, but holden for absolute from all other livings and
prouings, and so lives into livings, manlich and reasonable, to declare the
matters begone. But to make thee fully have understanding in manlich livings,
which is holden worldlich in these things, so that ignorance be made no letter.
I woll (quoth. she) nempn these foresaid ways by names and conclusions.

First riches, dignity, renome, and power, shull in this work be cleaped bodily
goods, for in hem has been a great throw, man's trust of silliness in love, as
in riches suffisance to have maintained y^ was begone by worldly cattle in
dignity, honor, and reverence of hem that wern vnderput, by maistry thereby to
obey. In renome glory of peoples praising, after lusts in their heart without
heed taking to quality and manner of doing, and in power, by troth of
Lordships mainteinance, thing to proceed forth in doing. In all which things a
long time, man's couetise in commune has been greatly grounded, to come to y^
bliss of my service, but truly they were beguiled, and for the principal must
needs fail, and in helping mow not auail. See why for hold him not poor
that is needy? Yes parde (quoth. I.) And him for dishonored, that much folk dein
not to reverence. That is sooth (quoth. I.) And what him that his mights failen,
and mow not helpen. Certes (quoth. I) me seems of all men he should be holden a
wretch. And wenest not (quoth she) that he that is little in renome, but rather is
out of the praisings, of mo men than a few be not in shame? Forsooth (quoth. I) it
is shame and villainy to him that coueiteth renome, that more folk not praise
in name, than praise. Sooth (quoth. she) thou say sooth, but all these things
are followed of such manner doing, and wenden in riches suffisaunce, in power
might, in dignity worship, and in renome glory, wherefore they descended into
deceiuable wening, and in that service deceit is followed. And thus in
general, thou and all such other that so worchen, failen of my bliss, that ye
long han desired, wherefore truly in life of reason is the high way to this
bliss, as I think more openly to declare hereafter. Never the latter, yet in a
little to comfort thy heart, in showing of with way thou art entered thy self, and
that thy Margarite may know thee set in the high way, I woll enform thee in
this wise. Thou have failed of thy first purpose, because thou wentest wrong,
and leftest the high way on thy right side, as thus, thou lookedst on worldly
living, and that thing thee beguiled, and lightly therefore as a little assay
thou songedst, but when I turned thy purpose, and showed thee a part of the
high way, tho thou abode therein, and no death ne ferdnesse of none enemy might
thee out of thilke way reave, but ever one in thine heart, to come to thilk
bliss, when thou were arrested, and first time emprisoned, thou were loath to
change thy way, for in thy heart thou wendest to have been there thou
should, and for I had ruth to seen thee miscarried, and wist well thine
ablenes my service to further and increase, I come my self without other mean
to visit thy person, in comfort of thy heart: and parde in my coming thou were
greatly gladded, after which time, no disease, no care, no tene might move me
out of thy heart. And yet I am glad and greatly enpited, How continually thou
had me in mind, with good auisement of thy conscience, when thy king and
his princes, by huge words and great, looked after variance in thy speech, and
ever thou were ready for my sake, in pleasaunce of that Margarite pearl, and
many mo other, thy body to oblige into Marces doing, if any contraried thy
saws, steadfast way makes steadfast heart, with good hope in the end. Truly I
woll that thou it well know, for I see thee so set, and not changing heart
had in my service, and I made thou had grace of thy king, in
foryeuenesse of mikell misdeed: to the gracious king art thou mikell holden, of
whose grace and goodness, sometime hereafter I think to enform, when I show
the ground, where as moral virtue grows. Who brought thee to werk? Who
brought this grace about? Who made thy heart hardy? Truly it was I, for had
thou of me failed, then of this purpose had never taken in this wise. And
therefore I say, thou might well trust to come to thy bliss, sithen thy
ginning has been heard, but ever graciously after thy hearts desire has
proceeded. Silver fined with many heats, men known for true, and safely men may
trust in thee always in werking. This diseases has proved, what way hence
forward thou think to hold. Now in good faith Lady (quoth. I tho) I am now in,
me seems it is the high way and the right. Yea forsooth (quoth. she) and now I
woll disprove thy first ways, by which many men wenen to get thilk bliss. But
for as much as every heart yt has caught full love, is tied with queint
knittings, thou shall understand, that love, and thilke foresaid bliss, toforn
declared, in this proouings, shall hot the knot in the heart. Well (quoth. I)
this impossession I woll well understand. Now also (quoth. she) for the knot in
the heart must ben from one to another, and I know thy desire: I woll thou
understand these matters, to been said of thy self, in disproouing of thy first
service, and in strengthening of thilk that thou have undertake to thy
Margarite pearl. A Godds half (quoth. I) right well I feel, that all this case is
possible and true, and therefore I admitted all together. Understood well
(quoth. she) these terms, and look no contradiction thou grant. If God woll (quoth.
I) of all these things woll I not fail, and if I grant contradiction, I should
grant an impossible, and that were a foul inconvenience, fro which things Lady
iwis hereafter I think me to keep.

WEll (quoth. she) thou know that every thing is a cause, wherethrough any
thing has being, that is cleaped caused: then if riches causen knotte in
heart, thilke riches arne cause of the ilke precious thing being: But after the
sentence of Aristotle, * Every cause is more in dignity, than his thing caused,
wherethrough it follows, riches to ben more in dignity than thilke knot, but
richesse arn kindly naughty, bad, and needy, and the ilke knot is thing kindly,
good, most praised, and desired: Ergo thing naughty, badde, and needy, in
kindly understanding, is more worthy, than thing kindly, good, most desired and
praised: The consequence is false, needs the antecedent mote been of the same
condition. But that richesses been badde, naughty, and needy, that woll I
prove, wherefore they mow cause no such thing, that is so glorious and good: *
The more richesse thou have, the more need have thou of help, hem to keep. Ergo
thou need in richesse, which need thou should not have, if thou hem
want. Then must riches been needy, that in their having maken thee needy to
helps, in surety thy richesse to keepen, wherethrough follows richesse to
been needy. Every thing causing evils, is bad and naughty: but riches in one
causen misease, in another they mowen not euenly stretchen all about. Whereof
comes plee, debate, theft, begilings, but riches to win, which things been
bad, and by richesse arn caused: ergo the ilk richesse been badde, which
badnesse and need been knit into riches, by a manner of kindly property, and
every cause, and caused accorden: so that it follows the ilk richesse, to
have the same accordaunce, with badnesse and need, that their cause asks.
Also every thing has his being by his cause, then if the cause be destroyed,
y^ being of caused is vanished: And so if richesse causen love, and richesse
weren destroyed, the love should vanish, but the ilke knot and it be true, may
not vanish for no going of no richesse: Ergo richesse is no cause of the knot.
And many men, as I said, setten the cause of the knot in richesse, the ilke
knitten the richesse, and nothing the evil: the ilke persons, what ever they
been, wenen that richesse is most worthy to be had, and that make they the
cause* and so wene they thilke riches be better than the person. Commonly
such asken rather after the quantity, than after the quality, and such wenen
as well by hemselfe, as by other, that conjunction of his life and of his soul
is no more precious, but in as mikell as he has of richesse. Alas, how may he
holden such things precious or noble, that neither han life ne soul, ne
ordinance of werching limbs: such richesse been more worthy, when they been
in gathering, in departing ginneth his love of other men's praising. And
avarice gathering, makes be hated, and needy to many out helps: and when
leueth the possession of such goods, and they ginne vanish, then enters
sorrow and tene in their herts. O bad and strait been thilke, that at their
departing makes men tenefull and sorry, and in the gathering of hem make men
needy: Much folk at ones mowen not together much thereof have.* A good guest
gladdeth his host, and all his meiny, but he is a bad guest, that makes his
host needy, and to be afeard of his ^uests going. Certes (quoth. I) me wondereth
therefore, that the common opinion is thus: he is worth no more, than that he
has in ca^tell. O (quoth. she) look thou be not of that opinion, for if gold or
money, or other manner of riches shinen in thy sight, whose is that? Not thine:
and tho they have a little beauty, they be nothing in comparison of our kind,
and therefore ye should not set your worthiness in thing lower than your
self: for the richesse, the fairness, the worthiness of thilke goods, if
there be any such preciousnesse in hem, are not thine, thou made hem so
never, from other they come to thee, and to other they shull from thee:
wherefore embracest thou other wights goods, as tho they were thine? Kind has
draw hem by hemself. It is sooth the goods of the earth been ordained in your
food and nourishing, but if thou wolt hold thee apayed with that suffices to
thy kind, thou shall not be in danger of no such riches. * To kind suffices
little thing, who that takes heed.* And if thou wolt algates with superfluity
of riches be athroted, thou shall hastelich be annoyed, or else evil at ease.
And fairness of fields, ne of habitations, ne multitude of meiny may not be
rekened as riches, that are thine own, for if they be bad, it is great
sclaunder and villainy to the occupier, and if they be good or fair, the matter
of the workman that hem made, is to praise. How should otherwise bounty be
counted for thine, the ilke goodness and fairness be proper to tho things
hemself, then if they be not thine, sorrow not when they wend, ne glad thee not
in pomp and in pride, when thou hem have, for their bounty and their beauties,
comes out of their own kind, and not of thine own person: as fair been they in
their not having, as when thou have hem, they be not fair, for thou have hem,
but thou have getten hem for the fairness of themself. And there the valance
of men is deemed in riches outforth, wenen me to have no proper good in
themself, but seech it in strange things. Truly the condition of good wening is
in thee mistourned, to wene your nobleness be not in your self, but in the
goods and beauty of other things. Parde the beasts that han but feeling souls,
have suffisaunce in their own self: and ye that been like to God, seken
increase of suffisance, from so excellent a kind, of so low things, ye do great
wrong to him, yt you made sords over all yearthly things, and ye put your
worthiness under the number of the feet, of lower things and foul, when ye
judge thilke riches to be your worthiness, then put ye your self by
estimation, under thilk foul things, and then leave ye the knowing of your self*
so be ye viler than any domb beast, that comes of shreud vice. Right so thilk
persons that louen none evil, for dear worthiness of the person, but for
strange goods, and says the adornment in the knot lies in such thing, his
error is perilous and shreud, and he wrieth much venime, with much wealth,
and that knot may not be good, when he has it getten. Certes, thus has riches
with flickering light annoied many: and often when there is a throw out shrew,
he comes all the gold, all the precious stones that mowen be founden to have
in his bandon, he weneth no wight be worthy to have such things but he alone.
How many have thou know now in late time, that in their riches, supposed
suffisance have followed, and now it is all failed. Ye lady quoth. I that is for
miss meddling, and other wise governed thilk riches, than they should. Yea
(quoth. she tho) had not the flood greatly areised, and throw to hemward both
gravel and sand, he had made no meddling. And right as sea yeueth flood, so
draws sea ebb, and pulls again under wawe, all the first out throw, but if
good piles of noble governance in Love, in well meaning manner, been sadly
grounded, to which hold thilk grauel, as for a while, that again lightly mow
not it tourn: and if the piles ben true, the grauel and sand wol abide. And
certes, full warning in love shall thou never through hem get ne cover, that
lightly with an ebb ere thou beware, it will again meue.

* In riches many men have had tenes and diseases, w ch they should not have
had, if thereof they had failed. Through which now declared, partly it is
showed, that for riches should the knot in heart, neither been caused in one,
ne in other: truly knot may been knit, and I trow more steadfast in love, though
richesse failed, and else in richesse is the knot, and not in heart. And then
such a knot is false, when the sea ebbeth and withdraws the gravel, that
such richesse voydeth, thilke knotte woll unknit. Wherefore no trust, no way,
no cause, no parfite being is in richesse, of no such knotte, therefore
another way must we have.

Honor in dignity is wened to yeuen ^ full knotte. Ye certes (quoth. I) and of
that opinion ben many, for they said, dignity, with honor, and reverence,
causen herts to encheinen, and so abled to knit together, for the excellence in
souerainty of such degrees.

Now (quoth. she) if dignity, honor, and reverence, causen thilke knot in heart,
this knot is good and profitable. For every cause of a cause, is cause of thing
caused: Then thus, good things and profitable, ben by dignity, honor, and
reverence caused. Ergo they accorden, and dignities been good with reuerences
and honor, but contraries mowen not accorden: wherefore by reason there should
no dignity, no reverence, none honor accord with shrews, but that is false:
They have been cause to shrewes, in many shreuduesse, for with hem they
accorden. Ergo from beginning, to argue ayenward, till it come to the last
conclusion, they are not cause of the knot. Lo all day at eye arne shrewes not
in reverence, in honor, and in dignity? Yes forsooth, rather than the good.
Then follows it, y^ shrewes rather than good, shul ben cause of this knot.
But of this contrary, of all lovers is believe, and for a soth openly
determined to hold.

Now (quoth. I) feign would I hear, how such dignities accorden with shrewes.

O (quoth. she) that woll I show in manyfolde wise. Ye wene (quoth. she) that
dignities of office here in your City, is as the Sun, it shines bright
withouten any cloud: which thing, when they commen in y^ hands of malicious
tyraunts, there comes much harm, and more greuaunce thereof, than of y^
wild fire, though it brende all a street. Certes, in dignity of office, y^
werks of y^ occupier shown the malice and the badnesse in the person, with
shrewes they maken manifold harms, and much people shamen. How often han
rancours, for malice of y^ governor should been maintained? Has not then
such dignities caused debate, rumors, and evils? Yes God wot, by such things
have been trusted to, make men's understanding incline to many queint things.
Thou wotest well what I mean. Ye (quoth. I) therefore as dignity such thing in
tene ywrought, so ayenwarde the substance in dignity changed, relied to bring
again good plite in doing. Do way, do way (quoth. she) if it so betide, but y^ is
selde y^ such dignity is betake in a good man's governance. What thing is to
reckon in y^ dignities goodness? Parde the bounty and goodness is hers, that
vsen it in good governance, and therefore comes it, that honor and
reverence should been done into dignity, because of increasing virtue in y^
occupyer, and not to the ruler, because of soueraignety in dignity. Sithen
dignity may no virtue cause, who is worthy worship for such goodness? Not
dignity, but person, that makes goodness in dignity to shine. This is
wonder thing (quoth. I) for me thinks, as the person in dignity is worthy
honor for goodness, so tho a person for hadnesse, maugre has deserved, yet
the dignity le^eth to be commended. Let be (quoth. she) thou errest right foul,
dignity with hadnesse, is helper to perform the fello^ us doing: parde were it
kindly good, or any property of kindly virtue, hadden in hemselfe, shrewes
should hem never have, with hem should they never accord. Water and fire that
been contrarious, mowen not togider been assembled, kind woll not suffer such
contraries to join. And sithen at eye by experience in doing, we seen y^
shrewes have hem more often than good men, siker may thou be, that kindly
good in such things is not appropred. Parde were they kindly good, as well one
as other shoulden euenlich in virtue of governance ben worth: but one fails
in goodness, another does the contrary, and so it shows kindly goodness,
in dignity not be grounded. And this same reason (quoth. she) may be made in
general, on all y^ bodily goods, for they commen often to throw out shrewes.
After this he is strong, y^ has might to have great burdens, and he is light
and swift, that has sovereignty in ronning to pass other: right so he is a
shrew, on whom shreude things and bad han most werching. And right as
Philosophy makes Philosophiers, and my service makes lovers: right so if
dignities weren good or virtuous, they should maken shrewes good, and turn
her malice, and make hem be virtuous, but that do they not, as it is proved,
but causen rancour and debate: Ergo they be not good, but utterly bad. Had Nero
never been Emperor, should never his dame have be slain, to maken open the
priuity of his engendrure. Herodes for his dignity slew many children. The
dignity of king John would have destroyed all England. Therefore mokell
wisdom and goodness both needs in a person, the malice in dignity, s^ily
to bridle, and with a good bitte of areste to withdraw, in case it would
praunce otherwise than it should: truly ye give to dignities wrongful names
in your cleping. They should hete not dignity, but monster of badnesse, and
mainteiner of shrewes. Parde, shine the Sun never so bright, and it bring
forth no heat, ne seasonably the herbs out bring of the earth, but suffer
frosts and cold, and thearth barraine to ligge, by time of his compass in
circuit about, ye would wonder and dispreise that Sun. It the Moon be at
full, and shows no light, but dark and dim to your sight appears, and
make destruction of the waters, woll ye not suppose it be under cloud, or in
clips? And that some privy thing, unknown to your wits, is cause of such
contrarious doing? Then if clerks, y^ han full insight and knowing of such
impediments, enform you of the sooth, very idiots ye been, but if ye yeuen
credence to thilk clerks words. And yet it does me te^e, to seen many wretches
rejoycen in such many Planets. Truly little con they on Philosophy, or else on
my lore, that any desire haven such lighting Planets, in that wise any more to
show. Good Lady, (quoth. I) tell ye me how ye mean in these things. Lo (quoth. she)
the dignities of your city, Sun and Moon, nothing in kind show their
shining as they should. For the Sun made no brenning heat in love, but fresed
envy in men's hearts, for feeblenes of shining heat: and the Moon was about
under an old cloud, the livings by waters to destroy. Lady (quoth I) it is
supposed they had shined as they should. Ye (quoth. she) but now it is proved at
the full, their beauty in kindly shining failed: wherefore dignity of
himseluen, has no beauty in fairness, ne drives not away vices, but
increases, and so be they no cause of the knot. Now see in good truth, hold ye
not such sons worthy of no reverence and dignities, worthy of no worship,
that makes men to do the more harms? I not (quoth I.) No (quoth. she) and thou see a
wise good man, for his goodness and wisenesse wolt thou not do him worship?
Thereof he is worthy. That is good skill (quoth. I) it is due to such, both
reverence and worship to have. Then (quoth. she) a shrew for his shreudnesse,
although he be put forth toforne other for ferde, yet is he worthy for shreudnesse
to be vnworshipped: of reverence no part is he worthy to have, to contrarious
doing belongs, and that is good skill. For right as he besmiteth the
dignities, thilk same thing ayenward him smites, or else should smite. And over
this thou wost well (quoth. she) that fire in every place heateth where it be, and
water makes wet: Why? For kindly werking is so yput in hem to do such things:
for every kindly in werking shows his kind. But though a wight had been Mayor
of your city many Winter together, and come in a strange place, there he were
not known, he should for his dignity have no reverence. Then neither worship ne
reverence is kindly proper in no dignity, sithen they shoulden done their kind
in such doing, if any were. And if reverence ne worship kindly be not set in
dignities, and they more therein been showed than goodness, for that in
dignity is showed, but it proves, that goodness kindly in hem is not
grounded. Iwis neither worship ne reverence, ne goodness in dignity, done none
office of kind, for they have none such property in nature of doing, but by
false opinion of the people. Lo, how sometime, thilk that in your City wern in
dignity noble, if thou list hem nempne, they been now ouertourned, both in
worship, in name, and in reverence, wherefore such dignities have no kindly
^er^hing of worship, and of reverence, he that has no worthynesse on it self.
Now it rises, and now it vanishes, after the variaunt opinion in false
hearts of unstable people.

Wherefore, if thou desire y^ knot of this jewel, or else if thou would
suppose she should set the knot on thee for such manner of dignity, then thou
wenest beauty or goodness of the ilk somewhat increases the goodness or
virtue in the body: but dignity of hemself ben not good, ne yeuen reverence ne
worship by their own kind, how should they then give to any other a thing that
by no way mow they have hemself? It is seen in dignity of the Emperor, and of
many mo other, that they mow not of hemselue keep their worship, ne their
reverence, that in a little while it is now up, and now down, by unsteadfast
hearts of the people. What bounty mow they give, that with cloud lightly
leaves his shining? Certes, to the occupier is mokell apeired, sithen such
doing does villainy to him that may it not maintain, wherefore thilk way to the
knot is crooked: and if any desire to come to the knot, he must leave this way
on his left side, or else shall he never come there.

Avails aught (quoth. she) power of might, in maintenance of worthy, to come
to this knot. Parde (quoth. I) ye, for herts ben ravished from such manner things.
Certes (quoth. she) though a fools heart is with thing ravished, yet therefore
is no general cause of the powers, ne of a siker parfite heart, to be looked
after. Was not Nero the most shrew, one of thilk that men read, and yet had he
power to make Senators, Justices, and Princes of many lands? Was not that great
power? Yes certes (quoth. I.) Well (quoth. she) yet might he not help himself out of
disease, when he began fall. How many ensamples can thou remember of kings,
great and noble, and huge power holden, and yet they might not keep hemselue
from wretchedness. How wretched was king Henry Curtmantill ere he died? He had
not so much as to cover with his members: and yet was he one of the greatest
kings of all the Normands offspring, and most possession had. O, a noble thing
and clear is power, that is not founden mighty to keep himself.

Now truly, a great fool is he, that for such thing would set the knot in thine
heart. Also power of realms is not thilk greatest power, amongs the worldly
powers reckened? And if such powers han wretchedness in hemself, it follows
other powers of feebler condition to been wretched, and then that wretchedness
should ben cause of such a knot. But every wight that has reason, wot well
that wretchedness by no way may been cause of none such knot, wherefore such
power is no cause. That powers have wretchedness in hemself, may right lightly
been preued.

If power lack on any side, on that side is no power, but no power is
wretchedness: for all be it so, y^ power of emperors or kings, or else of their
realms (which is the power of the Prince) stretchen wide and broad, yet besides
is there mokel folk, of which he has no commandment ne lordship, and there
as lacks his power, his nonpower enters, where under springs y^ makes hem
wretches. No power is wretchedness, and nothing else: but in this manner has
kings more portion of wretchedness, than of power. Truly such powers been
vnmighty, forever they ben in dread, how thilke power from lesing may be kept
of sorrow, so dread sorrily pricks ever in their herts: Little is that power,
which cares and feardeth it self to maintain. Vnmighty is y^ wretchedness,
which is entered by y^ feardfull wening of the wretch himself: and knot ymaked
by wretchedness, is between wretches, and wretches all thing bewaylen:
wherefore the knotte should be bewailed, and there is no such parfite bliss
that we supposed at the ginning. Ergo power in nothing, should cause such
knottes. Wretchedness is a kyndely property in such power, as by way of dread,
which they mow not eschew, ne by no way live in sikernesse. For thou wost well
(quoth. she) he is naught mighty, that would done that he may not done ne
perform. Therefore (quoth. I) these kings and lords that han suffisaunte at the
full, of men and other things, mowen well ben holden nughty: their
commandments been done, it is never more denied. Fool (quoth. she) or he wot
himself mighty, or wot it not: * For he is naught mighty, yt is blind of his
might, and wot it not. That is footh (quoth. I) Then if he wot it, he must needs
been adradde to lesen it. He that wot of his might, is in doubt that he mote
needs lose, and so leads him dread to been vnmighty. And if he retch not to
le^e, little is y^ worth, that of the lesing reason retcheth nothing: and if it
were mighty in power or in strength, the leasing should ben withset, and when
it comes to y^ leasing, he may it not withsitte. Ergo thilke might is lewd
and naughty. Such mights arne ylike to posts and pillars that upright stonden,
and great might han to bear many charges, and if they croke on any side,
little thing makes hem overthrow. This is a good ensample (quoth. I) to pillars
and posts y^ I have seen ouerthrowed my self, and hadden they ben vnderput
with any helps, they had not so lightly fall. Then hold thou him mighty,
that has many men armed, and many servant, and ever he is adradde of hem in
his heart, and for he gasteth hem sometime, he mote the more fear have. *
Commonly he that other agasteth, other in him ayenward werchen the same: and
thus warnished mote he be, and of warnish y^ hour dread: Little is that might,
and right leaude, who so takes heed. Then seems it (quoth. I) that such
famulers about kings and great lords, shul great might have. Although a sipher
in augrim have no might in signification of it selue, yet he yeueth power in
signification to other, and these clepe I the helps to a post, to keep him
from falling. Certes (quoth. she) thilke skils been ^eaud. Why? but if the shores
been well grounded, the helps shullen sliden and suffer the charge to fall,
her might little avails. And so me thinks (quoth. I) y^ a post alone stondyng
upright upon a basse, may longer in great burden endure, than crooked pillars
for all their helps, and her ground he not siker. That is sooth (quoth. she) for
as y^ blind in bearing of the lame ginne stomble, both should fall, right so
such pillars so enuironned with helps in failing of y^ ground, fails all
togider: how often then such famulers in their most pride of prosperity ben
suddenly ^uerthrown? Thou have know many in a moment so far overthrow, that
recover might they never, when y^ heaviness of such falling comes by case of
fortune, they mow it not eschew: and might and power, if there were any, should
of strength such things void and weiue, and so it is not. Lo then which things
is this power, y^ tho men han it they ben aghast, and in no time of full having
be they siker: and if they would weyue dread, as they mow not, little is in
worthiness. Fie therefore on so noughty thing any knot to cause. Lo in
adversity, thilke been his foes that glosed and seemed friends in wealth, thus
arne his familiers his foes and his enemies: * And nothing is werse ne more
mighty for to annoy, than is a familier enemy, and these things may they not
weiue, so truly their might is not worth a cresse. And over all thing, he that
may not withdraw the bridle of his fleshlye lusts and his wretched
complaints (now think on thy self) truly he is not mighty: I can seen no
way that lithe to the knot. Thilke people then y^ setten their hearts upon such
mights and powers, often ben beguiled. Parde he is not mighty, y^ may do any
thing, that another may done him the selue, and that men have as reat power
over him, as he over other. A justice y^ deemeth men, ayenward has been often
deemed. Buserus slew his guests, and he was slain of Hercules his guest.
Hugest betraished many men, and of Collo was be betrayed. * He y^ with swerd
smites, with swerd shall be smitten. Then began I to studien a while on these
things, and made a countenance with my hand in manner to been huisht. Now let
seen (quoth. she) me thinks somewhat there is within thy soul, that troubles
thy understanding, say on what it is. (Quoth. I tho) me thinks that although a
man by power have such might over me, as I have over other, that disprooueth
no might in my person, but yet may I have power and might never the later. See
now (quoth. she) thine own lewdness: He is mighty that may without
wretchedness, and he is vnmighty that may it not withsitte: but then he that
might over thee, and he woll put on the wretchedness, thou might it not
withsitte. Ergo thou see thy self what follows. But now (quoth. she) would
thou not scorn and thou see a fly han power to done harm to another fly, and
thilke have no might ne ayenturning himself to defend. Yes certes (quoth. I) Who
is a frayler thing (quoth. she) than the fleshly body of a man, over which have
oftentime flies, and yet less thing than a fly mokell might in greuaunce and
annoying, withouten any withsitting, for all thi^^e man's mights. And sithen
thou see thine fleshly body in kindly power fail, how should then the
accident of a thing been in more surety of being then substantial: wherefore
thilke things that we cleape power, is but accident to the fleshly body, and so
they may not have that surety in might, which wants in the substantial body.
Why there is no way to the knot, that looks aright after the high way as he
should.

Verily it is proved, that richesse, dignity, and power, been not true way to
the knot, but as rathe by such things the knot to be unbound: Wherefore on
these things I read no wight trust, to get any good knot. But what should we
say of renome in the peoples mouths, should that been any cause, what supposest
thou in thine heart?

Certes (quoth. I) yes I trow, for your slye reasons I dare not safely it say.
Then (quoth. she) woll I prove, that shrewes as rathe shull ben in the knot as the
good, and that were against kind. Feign (quoth. I) would I that hear, me thinks
wonder how renome should as well knit a shrewe as a good person: renome in
every degree has auaunced, yet wist I never the contrary: should then renoume
accord with a shrewe? It may not sink in my stomach till I hear more. Now
(quoth. she) have I not said always, that shrewes shull not have the knot. What
needs (quoth. I) to rehearse that any more, I wot well every wight by kindly
reason, shrewes in knitting woll eschew. Then (quoth. she) the good ought thilke
knot to have. How else (quoth. I.) It were great harm (quoth. she) that the good were
weiued and put out of espoire of the knot, if he it desired. O (quoth. I) alas, on
such thing to think, I wene that heaven weepeth to see such wrongs here been
suffered on earth: the good ought it to have, and no wight else. The goodness
(quoth. she) of a person may not been know outfoorth, but by renome of the
knowers, wherefore he must be renomed of goodness to come to the knot. So must
it be (quoth. I) or else all lost that we carpen. Soothly (quoth. she) that were great
harm, but if a good man might have his desires in service of thilke knot, and
a shrewe to be weined, and they been not known in general but by lacking and
praising and in renome, and so by the consequence it follows, a shrew been
praised and knit, and a good to be forsake and unknit. Ah (quoth. I tho) have ye
lady ben here abouten, yet would I see by grace of our arguments better
declared, how good and bad do accorden by lacking and praising, me thinks it
against kind. Nay (quoth. she) and that shalt thou see as yerne: these elements
han contrarious qualities in kind, by which they mow not accord no more than
good and bad: and in qualities they accord, * So that contraries by quality
accorden by quality. Is not earth dry, and water that is next and between the
earth, is wete, dry and wete ben contrary, and mowen not accord, and yet this
discordaunce is bound to accord by clouds, for both elements ben cold. Right
so the air that is next the water, is wete, and eke it is hot. This air by
his heat contrarieth water that is cold, but thilke contrariously is oned by
moisture, for both be they moist. Also the fire that is next the earth, and
it encloseth all about, is dry, wherethrough it contrarieth air that is wete:
and in he^e they accord, for both they been hot. Thus by these accordaunces,
discordaunts been joined, and in a manner of accordaunce they accorden by
connection, that is knitting togider: of that accord comes a manner of
melody, that is right noble. Right so good and bad arne contrary in doings, by
lacking and praising: good is both lacked and praised of some, and badde is
both lacked and praised of some: wherefore they contrariously accord both by
lacking and praising. Then follows it, though good be never so mokell
praised, owes more to ben knit than the bad: or else bad for the renome that he
has, must be taken as well as the good, and that owes not. No forsooth (quoth.
I.) Well (quoth. she) then is renome no way to y^ knot: lo fool (quoth. she) how
clerks written of such glory of renoume. * O glory, glory, thou art none other
thing to thousands of folk, but a great sweller of ears. Many one has had
full great renome by false opinion of variaunt people: And what is fouler than
folk wrongfully to been praised, or by malice of y^ people guiltless
lacked? Needs shame follows thereof to hem y^ with wrong prayseth, and also
to the deserts praised, and villainy and reproof of him that disclaundreth.

Good child (quoth. she) what echeth such renome to the conscience of a wise man,
y^ looks and measures his goodness, not by sleuelesse words of the people,
but by soothfastnesse of conscience: by God nothing. And if it be fair a man's
name be eched by much folks praising, and fouler thing y^ mo folk not
praysen. I said to thee a little here beforn, that no folk in strange
countries naught praysen, such renoume may not commen to their ears, because
of unknowing, and other obstacles, as I said: Wherefore more folk not
praysen, and that is right foul to him y^ renome desires, to wete less folk
praysen, than renome enhaunce. * I trow the thank of a people is naught worth,
in remembrance to take, ne it proceeds of no wise judgment, never is it
steadfast perdurable: It is vein and sleyng, with wind wastes and increases.
Truly such glory ought to be hated. If gentillesse be a clear thing, renome
and glory to enhaunce, as in reckening of thy lineage, than is gentillesse of
thy kin, for why it seems that gentillesse of thy kin, is but praising
and renome yt come of thine auncestres deserts, and if so be that praising and
renome of their deserts, make their clear gentilesse, then mote they needs been
gentil for their gentle deeds, and not thou: for of thy self comes not such
manner gentillesse, praising of thy deserts. * Then gentillesse of thine
auncesters, that foreign is to thee, makes thee not gentle, but ungentle and
reproved, and if thou continuest not their gentillesse. * And therefore a wise
man ones said: Better is it thy kin to ben by thee gentled, than thou to
glorify of thy kins gentillesse, and have no desert thereof thy self.

How passing is ye beauty of fleshly bodies? More flittyng than mouable flours
of Summer. And if thine eyes weren as good as the Linx, yt may seen through many
stone walls, and both fair and foul in their entrails, of no manner hew
should appear to thy sight, yt were a foul sight. Then is fairness by
feeblesse of eyes, but of no kind, wherefore thilke should be no way to the
knot: When thilke is went, the knot wendeth after. Lo now at all proves, none
of all these things mow parfitly ben in understanding, to been way to the
during bliss of the knot. But now to conclusion of these matters, herkeneth
these words. Very summer is know from ye winter: in shorter course draws the
days of December, than in ye month of June: The springs of May faden and
followen in October. These things be not vnbounden from their old kind, they
have not lost her work of their proper estate. Men of voluntarious will withsit
yt heuens governs. Other things suffren things patiently to werche: * Man in
with estate he be, yet would he ben changed. Thus by queint things bliss is
desired, and the fruit that comes of these springs, nis but anguis and
bitter, although it be a while sweet, it may not be withhold, hastily they
depart: * Thus all day fails things yt fools wend. Right thus have thou
failed in thy first wening. He yt thinks to sail, and draw after the course
of that star, de Polo Antartico, shall he never come Northward to ye contrary
sterre of Polus Articus: of which things if thou take keep, thy first outwaye
going, prison and exile may be cleaped. The ground falsed underneath, and so
haste thou failed. No wight I wene blames him that stinteth in misgoyng, and
seecheth ready way of his bliss. Now me thinks (quoth. she) that it suffices
in my showing the ways: by dignity, richesse, renome, and power, if thou look
clearly, arne no ways to the knot.

EVery argument lady (quoth. I tho) that ye han maked in these fore nempned
matters, me thinks hem in my full wit conceived, shall I no more, if God
will, in the contrary be beguyled: But feign would I, and it were your will,
bliss of the knot to me were declared, I might feel the better how my heart
might assent to pursue the end in service, as he has begone. O (quoth. she) there
is a melody in heaven, which clerks cleapen armony, but that is not in breaking
of voice, but it is a manner sweet thing of kindly werching, that causes joy
out of number to reckon, and that is joined by reason and by wisdom, in a
quantity of proportion of knitting. God made all thing in reason and in wit
of proportion of melody, we mow not suffice to show. It is written by great
clerks and wise, yt in earthly things lightly by study and by travail, yt
knowing may be getten: but of such heavenly melody, mokell travail woll bring
out in knowing right little. Sweetness of this paradise has you ravished, it
seems ye slepten, rested from all other diseases, so kindly is your hearts
therein ygrounded. * Bliss of two hearts in full love knitte, may not aright
been imagined: ever is their contemplation in full of thoughty study to
pleasaunce, matter in brynging comfort eueriche to other. And therefore of
earthly things, mokell matter lightly comes in your learning. Knowledge of
understanding that is nigh after ye, but not so nigh ye couetise of knitting
in your hearts: * More soueraign desire has every wight in little hearing of
heavenly conning, than of mokell material purposes in earth. Right so it is
in property of my servant, yt they ben more affyched in stering of little
thing in his desire, than of mokell other matter, less in his conscience. This
bliss is a manner of sown delicious, in a queint voice touched, and no dinne
of notes: there is none impression of breaking labor. I can it not otherwise
nempne, for wanting of privy words, but paradise terrestre, full of delicious
melody, withouten travail in sown perpetuel service in full joy coveited to
endure. Only kind makes hearts in understanding so to sleep, that otherwise
may it not been nempned, ne in other manner names for likyng sweetness can I
not it declare, all sugar and honey, all minstralcy and melody been but soot
and gall in comparison, by no manner proportion to reckon, in respect of this
blisful joy. This armony, this melody, this perdurable joy may not be in doing,
but between heavens and elements, or twey kindly hearts, full knit in troth of
naturell understanding, withouten wening and deceit, as heavens and planets,
which things continually for kindly accordaunces, foryeteth al contrarious
meuings, that into passyue diseases may sown, evermore it thristeth after more
werking. These things in proportion be so well joined, that it undoes all
thing, which into badnesse by any way may be accounted. Certes (quoth. I) this is
a thing precious and noble. Alas, that falsenesse ever or wantrust should ever
be maintained, this joy to void. Alas y^ ever any wretch should through wrath or
envy, jangling dare make, to shoue this melody so far aback, y^ openly dare it
not been used: truly wretches been fulfilled with envy and wrath, and no wight
else. Flebring and tales in such wretches dare appear openly in every wights
ear, with full mouth so charged, mokell malice moved many innocents to shend,
God would their soul therewith were strangeled. Lo, troth in this bliss is
hid, and over al under covert him hides: He dare not come a place for waiting
of shrewes. Commonly badness, goodness amaistereth with my self and my soul
this joy would I buy, if y^ goodness were as much as y^ nobly in melody. O (quoth.
she) with goodness may be accounted more in this material world, truly none, y^
shall thou understand. Is not every thing good y^ is contrariaunt and
destroying evil? How else (quoth. I.) Envy, wrath, and falsenesse been general
(quoth. she) and yt wot every man being in his right mind, y^ knot y^ which we
have in this bless, is contrariaunt, and distroyeth such manner evils. * Ergo
it is good, with has caused any wight to do any good deed? Find me any good, but
if this knot be the chief cause: Needs mote it be good, that causes so many
good deeds. * Every cause is more, and worthier than thing caused, and in that
mores possession, all things less been compted. As the king is more than his
people, and has in possession all his realm after: Right so y^ knot is more
than all other goods, thou might reckon all things less, and that to him
longs owes into his mores causes of worship and of will do turn, it is else
rebel, and out of his mores defendyng to void. Right so of every goodness
into the knot and into the cause of his worship owes to turn. And truly,
every thing y^ has being, profitably is good, but nothing has to been more
profitably than this knot: Kings it maintayneth, and hem their powers to
maintain: It makes miss to been amended, with good governance in doing: It
closes herts so togider, y^ rancour is outthresten: Who yt it lengest keeps,
lengest is gladded. I trow (quoth. I) heretics, and miss meaning people hence
forward woll maintain this knotte, for therethrough shull they been maintained,
and utterly woll turn, and leave their old evil understanding, and knit this
goodness, and profer so fer in service yt name of servant might they have.
Their jangles shall cease, me thinks hem lacks matter now to allege.
Certes (quoth. Love) if they of good will thus turned as thou say woollen truly
perform, yet shull they be abled party of this bliss to have: and they wol
not, yet shull my servaunts that werr well sustain in mine help of maintenance
to the end. And they for their good travail shullen in reward so been meded,
y^ endless joy, body and soul togider, in this shullen abiden, there is ever
action of bliss withouten possible corruption, there is action perpetuell in
work without travail, there is everlasting passyfe withouten any of labor:
continuell plite without ceasing coveited to endure. No tongue may tell, ne
heart may think the least point of this bliss. God bring me thider (quoth. I
then.) Continues well (quoth. she) to the end, and thou might not fail then, for
though thou speed not here, yet shall the passion of thy martired life been
written, and radde toforne the great Jupiter, yt God is of routh, an high in
the hollownesse of heaven, there he sit in his trone, and ever thou shall
forward been holden among all these heuins for a knight, that might with no
pennaunce been discomfited. He is a very martyr, that liuingly going, is gnawn
to the bones. Certes (quoth. I) these been good words of comfort, a little mine
heart is rejoiced in a merry wise. Ye (quoth. she) and he y^ is in heaven feels
more joy, than when he first heard thereof speak. So it is (quoth. I) but wist I
the sooth, that after disease comfort would follow with bliss, so as ye have
often declared, I would well suffer this passion with y^ better cheer, but my
thoughtful sorrow is endless, to think how I am cast out of a welfare, and yet
daineth not this evil none heart none heed to meward throw, which things would
greatly me by ways of comfort disport, to weten in my self a little with
other me been ymoned: and my sorrows peisen not in her ballaunce ye weight of a
pease: Slinges of her danger so heavily peisen, they draw my causes so high,
yt in her eyes they semen but lite and right little.

O, for (quoth. she) heaven with skies, that foul clouds maken, and dark wethers,
with great tempests and huge, makes the merry days with soft shining sons.
Also the year withdraws flowers, and beauty of herbs and of earth. The
same years makes springes and jolity in Vere so to renouel with painted
colors, that earth seemed as gay as heaven. Sees that blasteth, and with wawes
throws ships of which y^ living creatures for great peril of hem dreden:
right so the same sees makes smooth waters and golden sailing, and comfort
hem, with noble haven that first were so ferde. Have thou not (quoth. she) learned
in thy youth, * That Jupiter has in his wardrobe both garments of joy and of
sorrow? What wost thou how soon he woll turn of thee that garment of care, and
clothe thee in bliss? Parde it is not far fro thee. Lo an old proverb
alleged by many wise: * When bale is greatest, then is bote a nie bore. *
Whereof will thou dismay? Hope well, and serve well, and that shall thee save,
with thy good bileue. Ye, ye (quoth. I) yet see I not by reason how this bliss is
coming, I wot it is contingent, it may fall another. O (quoth. she) I have
mokell to done to clear thine understanding, and void these errors out of thy
mind, I woll prove it by reason thy woe may not always enduren. Every thing
kindly (quoth she) is governed and ruled by ye heavenly bodies, which haven full
werching here on earth, and after course of these bodies, all course of your
doings here been governed and ruled by kind. Thou wost well by course of
planets all your days proceeden, and to euerich of singular hours be
enterchaunged stoundmele about, by submitted worching naturally to suffer, of
which chaunges comes these transitory times, that makes reuoluing of your
years thus stoundmele, every has full might of worching, till all seven han
had her course about. Of which worchings and possession of hours, ye days of y^
week have take her names, after denomination in these seven planets. Lo your
sunday ginneth at y^ first hour after noon on y^ saturday, in which hour is
then the sun in full might of worching, of whom sunday takes his name. Next
him follows Venus, and after Mercurius, and then the Moon, so then Saturnus,
after whom Iouis, and then Mars, and again then the Sun, and so forth be
xxiiii. hours togider, in which hour, ginning in the ii. day stant the Moon,
as master for y^ time to rule, of whom Monday takes his name, and this course
follows of all other days generally in doing. This course of nature of these
bodies changing, stinten at a certain term, limited by their first kind, and
of hem all governments in this elemented world proceden, as in springs,
constellations, engendrures, and all y^ followen kind and reason, wherefore the
course that follows sorrow and joye, kindly moten enterchaungen their
times, so that always one well as always one woe may not endure. Thus see thou
apertly thy sorrow into well mote been changed, wherefore in such case to better
side evermore incline thou should. * Truly next the end of sorrow anon
enters joy, by manner of necessity, it woll ne may none other betide, and so
thy contigence is disproued: if thou hold this opinion any more, thy wit is
right lewd. Wherefore in full conclusion of all this, thilk Margarit thou
desire, has been to thee dear in thy heart, and for her have thou suffered
many thoughtfull diseases, hereafter shall be cause of mokell mirth and joy,
and look how glad can thou been, and cease all thy passed heaviness with
manifold joys: and then woll I as blithely here thee speaken thy mirths in
joy, as I now have yheard thy sorrows and thy complaints. And if I mow in
aught thy joy increase, by my troth on my side shall not be leaued for no
manner travail, y^ I with all my mights right blithely woll help, and ever
been ready you both to please. And then thanked I that lady with all goodly
manner yt I worthily coud, and truly I was greatly rejoiced in mine heart of
her fair behests, and proffered me to be slaw in all yt she me would ordain
while my life lested.

ME thinks (quoth. I) that ye have right well declared, that way to the knot
should not been in none of these disproovyng things, and now order of our
purpose this asks, that ye should me show if any way be thither, and which
thilke way should been, so that openly may be sey the very high way in full
confusion of these other things.

Thou shall (quoth she) understand, that one of three lives (as I first said)
every creature of mankind is sprongen, and so forth proceeds. These lives
been through names departed in threee manner of kinds, as bestiallich, manlich,
and reasonabliche, of which two been used by fleshly body, and the third by his
soul. Bestial among reasonables is forboden in every law and every seet, both
in Christen and other, for every wight dispiseth hem y^ lives by lusts and
delites, as him that is thrall and bounden servaunt to things right foul,
such been compted werse than men, he shall not in their degree been reckened,
ne for such one allowed. Heriticks saine they chosen life bestiall, that
voluptuously liuen, so that (as I first said to thee) in manly and reasonable
liuyngs, our matter was to declare but manlye life in lyving after flesh, or
else fleshly ways to chese, may not bliss in this knot be conquered, as by
reason it is proved. Wherefore by reasonable life he must needs it have since a
way is to this knot, but not by the first tway lives, wherefore needs mote it
been to the third: and for to live in flesh, but not after flesh, is more
reasonablich than manlych rekened by clerks. Therefore how this way comes
in, I woll it blithly declare.

See now (quoth. she) that these bodily goods of manlich livings, yeelden
sorrowfully stounds and smertand hours. Who so well remember him to their ends,
in their worchings they ben thoughtfull and sorry. Right as a be y^ has had
his honey, anon at his flight begins to sting: So thilke bodily goods at
the last mote away, and then sting they at her going, wherethrough enters and
clean voideth all bliss of this knot.

Forsooth (quoth. I.) me thinks I am well served, in showing of these words.
Although I had little in respect among other great and worthy, yet had I a fair
parcel, as me thought for y^ time, in forthering of my sustenaunce, which while
it dured, I thought me having mokell honey to mine estate. I had richesse
sufficiauntly to weiue need, I had dignity to be reverenced in worship. Power
me thought that I had to keep fro mine enemies, and me seemed to shine in glory
of renome, as manhood asks in mean, for no wight in mine administration, coud
none evils ne treachery by soth cause on me put. Lady, your selue weten well, y^
of tho confederacies, maked by my sovereigns, I nas but a servant, and yet
mokell mean folk woll fullye against reason thilke matters maintain, in which
maintenance glorien themself, and as often ye haven said, thereof ought
nothing in evil to be laid to me wards, sithen as repentant I am turned, and
no more I think, neither tho things ne none such other to sustene, but utterly
destroy without meddling manner, in all my mights. How am I now cast out of all
sweetness of bliss, and mischeeuously stongen my passed joye? Sorrowfully
must I bewail, and live as a wretch. Every of tho joys is turned into his
contrary: for richesse, now have I pouertye, for dignity now am I enprisoned,
in steed of power, wretchedness I suffer, and for glory of renome I am now
despised, and foulich hated: thus has farne fortune, that suddenly am I
overthrown, and out of all wealth dispoyled. Truly me thinks this way in
entree is right hard, God grant me better grace ere it be all passed, y^ other
way lady, me thought right sweet. Now certes (quoth. Love) me list for to chide.
What aileth thy dark dullness? Woll it not in clerenesse been sharped. Have I
not by many reasons to thee showed, such bodily goods failen to give bless,
their might so far fo^th woll not stretch? Shame (quoth. she it is to say) thou
lie in thy words. Thou ne have wist but right few, that these bodily goods
had all at ones, commonly they dwellen not together. * He that plenty has in
riches, of his kin is ashamed: another of lineage right noble and well know, but
poverty him handeleth, he were lever unknow. Another has these, but renome of
peoples praising may he not have, over all he is hated, and defamed of things
right foul. Another is fair and semely, but dignity him fails: and he yt
has dignity, is crooked or lame, or else misshapen, and foully despised. Thus
partable these goods dwellen, commonly in one household been they but ^ilde. Lo
how wretched is your trust, on thing y^ woll not accord. Me thinks thou
clepest thilke plite thou were in, selinesse of fortune, and thou say for
that y^ silinesse is departed, thou art a wretch. Then follows this upon thy
words, every soul reasonable of man way not dye, and if death ends selinesse,
and makes wretches, as needs of fortune makes it an end. Then souls after
death of the body, in wretchedness should lyuen. But we know many that han
getten the bliss of heaven after their death. How then may this life maken men
blisful, y^ when it passes, it yeueth no wretchedness, and many times bliss,
if in this life he con live as he should. And wolt thou account with Fortune,
that now at the first she has done thee tene and sorrow: if thou look to the
manner of all glad things and sorrowful, thou may not nay it, that yet, and
namely now, thou stand in noble plite in a good ginning, with good forth
going hereafter. And if thou wene to be a wretch, for such wealth is passed,
why then art thou not well fortunate, for badde things and anguis wretchedness
ben passed? Art thou now come first into the hostry of this life, or else y^
both of this world, art thou now a sudden guest into this wretched exile?
Wenest there be any thing in this earth stable? Is not thy first arrest
passed, yt brought thee in mortal sorrow? Ben these not mortal things agone,
with ignorance of beastiall wit, and haste received reason in knowing of
virtue? What comfort is in thy heart? The knowing sikerly in my service be
grounded. And wost thou not well, as I said, that death makes end of all
fortune? What then, stand thou in noble plite, little heed or recking to
take, if thou let fortune pass ding, or else that she fly when she list, now
by thy live. Parde a man has nothing so lefe as his life, and for to hold
that, he does all his cure and dilligent travail. Then say I thou art blisful
and fortunate selie, if thou know thy goods, yt thou have yet be loved, which
nothing may doubt, yt they ne ben more worthy than thy life? What is that (quoth.
I) Good contemplation (quoth. she) of well doing in virtue, in time coming, both
in plesaunce of me, and of thy Margarite pearl: hastily thine heart in full
bliss, with her shall be eased. Therefore dismay thee not, fortune in hate
grievously against thy bodily person, ne yet to great tempest has she not sent
to thee, sithen the holding cables and ankers of thy life holden by knitting so
fast, yt thou discomfort thee naught of time that is now, ne despair thee not
of time to come, but yeuen thee comfort in hope of well doing, and of getting
again the double of thy lesing, with increasing love of thy Margarite pearl
thereto. For this hiderto thou have had all her full danger, and so thou might
amend all yt is miss, and all defaultes yt sometime thou did, and that now
in all thy time, to y^ ilke Margarite in full service of my lore, thine heart
has continued, wherefore she ought much y^ rather incline fro her dangerous
seat. These things ben yet knit, by y^ holding anchor in thy live, and holden
mote they: To God I pray all these things at full been performed. For while
this anchor holds, I hope thou shall safely escape, and while thy true meaning
service about bring, in dispite of all false meaners, y^ thee of new haten, for
this true service, thou art now entered.

CErtes (quoth. I) among things I asked a question, which was the way to the knot.
Truly lady, how so it be, I tempt you with questions and answers, in speaking
of my first service, I am now in full purpose in the prick of the heart, that
thilk service was an enprisonment, and always bad and naughty, in no manner to
be desired. Ne y^ in getting of y^ knot may it nothing avail. A wise gentill
heart looks after virtue, and none other bodily joys alone. And because
toforne this, in tho ways I was set, I wot well my self I have erred, and of
the bliss failed, and so out of my way hugely have I ron. Certes (quoth. she) yt
is sooth, and there thou have miswent, eschew yt path from hence forward I
read. Wonder I truly, why the mortal folk of this world seech these ways
outforth, and it is priued in your self. Lo how ye ben confounded with error
and folly. The knowing of very cause and way, is goodness and virtue. Is there
any thing to thee more precious than thy self? Thou shall have in thy power, y^
thou would never lose, and that in no way may be taken fro thee, and thilke
thing is y^ is cause of this knot. And if death mow it not reave, more than an
yearthly creture, thilk thing then abides with thy self soul. And so our
conclusion, to make such a knot thus getten, abides with this thing, and with
the soul, as long as they last. * A soul dies never, virtue and goodness
evermore with the soul endures, and this knot is perfect bliss. Then this
soul in this bliss, endless shall enduren. Thus shull herts of a true knot
been eased: thus shull their souls been pleased: thus perpetually in joy shul
they sing. In good truth (quoth. I) here is a good beginning, give us more of this
way. (Quoth. she) I said to thee not long sithen, that reasonable life was one of
three things, and it was proved to the soul. Every soul of reason, has two
things of steryng life, one in virtue, and another in y^ bodily workyng: * And
when the soul is the master over the body, then is a man master of
himself: and a man to be a master over himself, lives in virtue, and in
goodness, and as reason of virtue teaches. So the soul and the body worching
virtue togider, liuen reasonable life, which clearkes clepen felicity in
living, and therein is y^ hie way to this knot. These old Philosophers, that
hadden no knowing of Divine grace of kindly reason alone, wenden that of pure
nature, without any help of grace, me might have ishoned the other livings,
reasonably have I lived: and for I think hereafter, if GOD woll (and I have
space) thilke grace after my leude knowing declare: I leave it as at this time.
But (as I said) he that out forth looks after the ways of this knot,
conning with which he should know the way in forth, sleeps for the time,
wherefore he that woll this way know, must leave the looking after false ways
out forth, and open the iyen of his conscience, and unclose his heart. See
not he y^ has trust in y^ bodily life, is so busy bodily wounds to anoint,
in keeping from smert (for all out may they not be healed) yt of wounds in his
true understanding, he takes no heed, the knowing even forth sleeps so
hard, but anon as in knowing awake, then ginneth the privy medicines, for
healing of his true intent, inwards lightly heals conscience, if it be well
handled. Then must needs these ways come out of y^ soul by steryng life of
the body, and else may no man come to perfect bliss of this knot: and thus by
this way he shall come to the knot, and to the perfect silinesse y^ he wend
have had in bodily goods outfoorth? Ye (quoth. I) shall he have both knot, riches,
power, dignity, and renome in this manner way? Ye (quoth. she) yt shall I show
thee. * Is he no rich yt has suffisance, and has the power that no man may
amaistrien? Is not great dignity to have worship and reverence? And has he
not glory of renome, whose name perpetual is during, and out of number in
comparacion? These be things that men wenen to getten out forth (quoth. I.) Ye
(quoth. she) they that loken after a thing y^ naught is, thereof in all ne in
party, long mow they gapen after: that is soth (quoth. I) therefore (quoth. she)
they yt sechen gold in green trees, and wene to gader precious stones among
vines, and lain her nets in mountains to fish, and thinken to hunt in
deep Seas after Heart and Hind, and sechen in earth thilke things that
surmounteth Heaven. What may I of hem say? But foolish ignorance, misledeth
wandryng wretches by uncouth ways, that shullen be forleten, and makes hem
blind fro the right pathe of true way, yt should been used. Therefore in
general error in mankind, departs thilke goods by miss seching, which he
should have hole, and he sought by reason. Thus goes he beguiled of that he
sought, in his hode men have blow a iape. Now (quoth. I) if a man be virtuous,
and all in virtue lives, how has he all these things? That shall I prouen
(quoth. she) What power has any man, to let an other of living in virtue? For
prisonment or any other disease, he take it patiently, discomfiteth he not, the
tiraunt over his soul, no power may have? then has yt man so tourmented soche
power, yt he nill be discomfite, ne overcome may he not been, sithen patience
in his soul ouercometh, and as not ouercommen. Soch thing that may not be a
maistred, he has need to nothing, for he has suffisaunce inow to help
himself. And thilke thing that thus has power and suffisaunce, and no tiraunt
may it reave, and has dignity to set at naught all things, here it is a
great dignity that death may a maistry. Wherefore thilke power suffisaunce so
enclosed with dignity, by all reason renome must have. This is thilk riches
with suffisaunce ye should look after: this is thilke worshipful dignity ye
should coueit: this is thilke power of might, in which ye should trust: this is
thilke renome of glory, y^ endless endures, and all nis but substance in
virtuous living. Certes (quoth. I) all this is sothe, and so I see well y^ virtue
with full gripe, encloseth all these things. Wherefore in sooth I may say, by
my troth virtue of my Margarite, brought me first into your service, to have
knitting with that jewel, not sudden longynges ne folks small words, but
only our conversation togider: and then I seeing thentent of her true meaning,
with flourishing virtue of Patience, yt she used nothing in evil, to quite y^
wicked leasings, that false tongues often in her have laid. I have sey it my
self, goodly foryeuenesse has sprung out of her heart, unity and accord above
all other things, she desires in a good meek manner, and suffers many wicked
tales.

Truly Lady, to you it were a great worship, that soch things by due
chastisement were amended. Ye (quoth. she) I have thee excused, all soch things as
yet mow not be redressed: thy Margarites virtue I commend well the more, that
patiently soche annoies suffers. David king was meek, and suffered mokell
hate, and many evil speeches: no dispite ne shame that his enemies him deden,
might not move patience out of his heart, but ever in one plite mercy he used.
Wherefore GOD himself took reward to the things, and thereon soch punishment
let fall. Truly by reason it ought be ensample of dread, to all manner peoples
mirth. A man vengeable in wrath, no governance in punishment ought to have. *
Plato had a cause his servant to scourge, and yet cleped he his neighbor, to
perform the doing himself would not, least wrath had him a maistred, and so
might he have laid on to much: evermore grounded virtue shows the intent fro
within. And truly I wot well for her goodness and virtue, thou have desired my
service, to her pleasant well the more, and thy self thereto fully have
proffered. Good Lady (quoth. I) is virtue the hie way to this knot, that long we
have ihandled? Ye forsooth (quoth. she) and without virtue, goodly this knot may
not be gotten. Ah now I see (quoth. I) how virtue in me fails, and I as a sere
tree, without burioning or fruit always welk, and so I stond in despair of this
noble knot, for virtue in me has no manner working. A wide where about have I
traveiled. Peace (quoth. she) of thy first way thy trauail is in idel, and as
touching the second way, I see well thy meaning. Thou would conclude me if
thou coudest, because I brought thee to service, and every of my servants I
help to come to this bliss, as I said here beforn: and thou saidest thy self,
thou might not be helped as thou wenest, because y^ virtue in thee fails.
And this bliss perfitly without virtue, may not be gotten, thou wenest of these
words, contradiccion to follow. Parde at the hardest I have no servant, but he
be virtuous in deed and thought, I brought thee in my service, yet art thou not
my servant: but I say, thou might so werch in virtue hereafter, that then shall
thou be my servant, and as for my servant accounted. * For habit makes no
Monk, ne wearing of guilt spurs, makes no Knight. Never the later, in comfort
of thine heart, yet woll I otherwise answer. Certes Lady (quoth. I tho) so ye must
needs, or else I had nigh caught soch a cordiacle for sorrow, I wot it well I
should it never have recovered. And therefore now I pray to enform me in this,
or else I hold me without recovery. I may not long eudure, till this lesson be
learned, and of this mischief the remedy known. Now (quoth. she) be not wroth, *
For there is no man on live, that may come to a precious thing, long coveited,
but he sometime suffer tenefull diseases, and wenest thy self to been vnlich to
all other? That may not been: * And with the more sorrow that a thing is
getten, the more he has joy, the ilk thing afterward to keep, as it fares by
children in Schole, that for learning arn beaten, when their lesson they
foryetten, commonly after a good disciplining with a yerde, they keep right
well doctrine of their Schole.

RIght with these words, on this Lady I threw up mine iyen, to see her
countenance and her cheer, and she apperceiuing this fantasy in mine heart,
began her semblaunt goodly on me cast, and said in this wise.

It is well know, both to Reason and Experience in doing, every active
woorcheth on his passive, and when they been together, active and passive, been
icleaped by these Philosophers, if fire be in place, chafing thing able to be
chafed or heat, and the ilk things been set in soche a distaunce, that the
one may werche, the other shall suffer. The ilk Margarite thou desire, is
full of virtue, and able to be active in goodness: But every herb shows his
virtue, outfoorth from within, the Sun yeueth light, that things may be sey.

Every fire heateth the like thing that it neighed, and it be able to be heat,
virtue of this Margarit outforth wrethe, and nothing is more able to suffer
woorching, or work catch of the actife, but passife of the same actife, and
no passife to virtues of this Margarite, but thee in all my donet can I find,
so that her virtue must needs on thee werche, in what place ever thou be,
within distaunce of her worthiness, as her very passife thou art closed: but
virtue may thee nothing profit, but thy desire be performed, and all thy
sorrows ceased. Ergo through werching of her virtue, thou shall easily been
helped, and driven out of all care, and welcome to this long by thee desired.

Lady (quoth. I) this is a good lesson, in ginning of my joy: But wete ye well
forsooth, though I suppose she have much virtue, I would my spousale were
proved, and then may I live out of doubt, and rejoice me greatly, in thinking
of tho virtues so showed. I heard thee say (quoth. she) at my beginning, when I
received thee first for to ferue, yt thy jewel, thilk Margarite thou desire,
was closed in a musk, with a blew shell. Ye forsooth (quoth. I) so I said, and so
it is Well (quoth. she) every thing kindly, shows it self, this jewel closed in
a blew shell, excellence of colors, shows virtue from within, * and so every
wight should rather look to the proper virtue of things, than to his foreign
goods. If a thing be engendered of good matter, commonly, and for the more part
it follows, after the congelement virtue of the first matter, and it be not
corrupt with vices, to proceed with increase of good virtues: Eke right so it
fares of bad. * Truly great excellence in virtue of lineage, for the more part
discendeth by kind to the succession in virtues to follow. Wherefore I say, the
colors of every Margarite, shows from within the finenesse in virtue.

Kindly heaven, when merry weather is a lofte, appears in man's iye of color
in Blewe, steadfastness in peace, betokening within and without: Margarite is
engendered by heavenly Dew, and shows in it self, by finenesse of color,
whether the engendrure, were maked on morrow or on eve: thus says kind of this
perle. This precious Margarite that thou seruest, shows it self descended by
nobley of virtue, from this heauenlich dew, nourished and congeled in
meekness, that mother is of all virtues, and by werks that men seen withouten
the signification of the colors, been showed mercy and pity in the heart, with
peace to all other, and all this is iclosed in a Muskle, who so readily these
virtues loken. All thing that has soul, is reduced into good by mean things,
as thus: Into GOD manne is reduced by souls reasonable, and so forth beasts,
or bodies that mow not mouen, after place been reduced into man, by beasts meue
that mouen from place to place: so that thilke bodies that han feeling souls,
and move not from places, holden the lowest degree of soling things in
feeling, and soche been reduced into man by means. So it follows, the Muskle
as mother of all virtues, halt the place of meekness, to his lowest degree
discendeth down of heaven, and there by a manner of virgin engendrure, arn
these Margarites engendered, and afterward congeled. Made not meekness so low
the hie heaven, to enclose and catch out thereof so noble a dew, that after
congelement a Margarite, with endless virtue and everlasting joy, was with
full vessel of grace yeuen to every creature, that goodly would it receive.
Certes (quoth. I) these things been right noble, I have ere this heard the same
saws. Then (quoth. she) thou wost well these things been sothe? Ye foresothe (quoth.
I) at the full. Now (quoth. she) that this Margarite is full of virtue, it is well
proved, wherefore some grace, some mercy among other virtues, I wot right well
on thee shall descend? Ye (quoth. I) yet would I have better declared virtues in
this Margarite, kindly to been grounded. That shall I show thee (quoth. she) (and
thou would it learn? Learn, quoth. I, what needs soche words: were ye not
well Lady your self, that all my cure, all my diligence, and all my might, have
turned by your counsel, in pleasaunce of that perle, all my thought and all
my study, with your help desires, in worship thilke Jewel, to increase all my
trauail, and all my business in your service, this Margarite to glad in
somhalue: me were lever her honor, her pleasaunce, and her good cheer, through
me for to be maintained and kept, and I of soch thing in her liking to be
cause, than all the wealth of bodily goods ye could reeken. And would never
GOD, but I put my self in great jeopardy of all that I would, that is now no
more but my life alone, rather then I should suffer thilk jewel in any poinct
been blemished, as far as I may suffer, and with my might stretch. Soch thing
(quoth. she) may mokell further thy grace, and thee in my service auance. But now
(quoth. Love) will thou grant me thilke Margarite to been good? O good good (quoth.
I) why tempt ye me and tene with soch manner speech: I would grant that, though
I should anon die, and by my troth fight in the quarrel, if any wight would
counterplead. It is so much the lighter (quoth. Love) to prove our intent. Ye (quoth.
I) but yet would I hear, how ye would prove, that she were good by reasonable
skill, that it mow not been denied, for although I know, and so does many
other, manifold goodness and virtue in this Margarite been Printed, yet some
men there been, that no goodness speaken: and where ever your words been
heard, and your reasons been showed, soch evil speakers Lady, by aucthority of
your excellence, shullen been stopped and ashamed. And more, they that han none
acquaintance in her person, yet mow they know her virtues, and been the more
informed in what wise they mow set their herts, when hem list into your service
any entree make, for truly all this to begin, I wot well my self, that thilk
jewel is so precious a pearl as a womanly woman in her kind, in whom of
goodness, of virtue, and also of answering, shape of limbs, and fetures so
well in all poincts according, nothing fails: I leave that kind her made with
great study, for kind in her person nothing has foryet, and yt is well seen.
In every good wights heart, she has grace of commending, and of virtuous
praising. Alas that ever kind made her deadly, save only in that I wot well,
that Nature in forming of her, in nothing has erred.

CErtes (quoth. Love) thou have well begone, and I ask thee this question: Is not
in general every thing good? I not (quoth. I) No (quoth. she) save not GOD every
thing that he made, and wern right good. Then is wonder (quoth. I) how evil
things commen a place, sithen that all things weren right good. Thus (quoth. she)
I woll declare: eueriche quality, and every accion, and every thing that has
any manner of being, it is of GOD, and GOD it made, of whom is all goodness,
and all being, of him is no badnesse: * Badde to be is naught: Good to be is
somewhat, and therefore good and being, is one in understanding. How may this
be (quoth. I) for often han shrews me assailed, and mokell badnesse therein have I
founden, and so me seems bad, to be somewhat in kind. Thou shall (quoth. she)
understand that soch manner of badnesse, which is used to purify wrong doers is
somewhat, and GOD it made, and being has, and that is good: * Other badnesse
no being has utterly, it is in the negative of somewhat, and that is naught,
and nothing being. The parties essenciall of being, arne said in double wise,
as that it is, and these parties ben found in every creature, for all thing a
this half the first being, is being through participation, taking party of
being, so that every creature is difference, between being, and of him through
whom it is and his own being: right as every good is a manner of being, so is it
good through being, for it is naught other to be: and every thing though it be
good, it is not of himself good, but it is good by that, it is ordinable to the
great goodness. This duality after Clerks determission, is founden in every
creature, be it never so single of onhed. Ye (quoth. I) but there as it is isaid,
that God saw every thing of his making, and were right good, as your self said
to me, not long time sithen: I ask whether every creature is isaid good,
through goodness unformed, either else formed, and afterward if it be accept
utterly good? I shall say thee (quoth. she) these great passed Clerks, han divided
good, into good being alone, and that is nothing but good, for nothing is good
in that wise, but God: Also in good by participacion, and that is icleaped
good, for far fette, and representative of goodly goodness. * And after this
manifold good is said, that is to say, good in kind, and good in gendre, and
good of grace, and good of joy.

Of good in kind, Augustine says, all that been, been good: but peraunter thou
would wete, whether of hemself it be good, or else of an others goodness,
for naturell goodness of every substance, is nothing else than his
substaunciall being, which is icleaped goodness, after comparison that he has
to his first goodness, so as it is inductatife, by means into the first
goodness. Boece shows this thing at the full, that this name good, is in
general name in kind, as it is comparisoned generally to his principal end,
which is God, knot of all goodness. Every creature cries GOD us made, and so
they han full appetite to thilk God by affection, soch as to him belongs: and
in this wise all things been good, of the great God, which is good alone. This
wonder thing (quoth. I) how ye have by many reasons proved, my first way to be
error and misgoing, and cause of badnesse and feeble meaning, in y^ ground ye
alleged to be rooted: whence is it, that soch badnesse has springes, sithen
all things thus in general been good, and badnesse has no being, as ye have
declared: I wene if all things been good, I might then with the first way, in
that good have ended, and so by goodness have commen to bliss in your service
desired. All thing (quoth. she) is good by being in participacion, out of the
first goodness, which goodness is corrupt by badnesse, and bad meaning
manners: GOD has in good things, that they been good by being, and not in
evil, for there is absence of rightful Love, for badnesse is nothing only but
evil will of the vser, and through guilts of y^ doer, wherefore at the ginning
of the world, every thing by himself was good, and in universal they wern
right good. An iye or a hand is fairer and better in a body, set in his
kindly place, than from y^ body disceuered. Every thing in his kindly place
being kindly, good does werch, and out of y^ place voided, it dissolueth and is
defouled him selue. Our noble GOD in gliterand wise by armony this world
ordained, as in purtreitures, storied with colors meddled, in which black and
other dark colors, commenden the golden, and the Assured painture, every put
in kindly place, one beside an other, more for other glittereth: right so
little fair, makes right fair, more glorious: and right so of goodness, and
of other things in virtue. Wherefore other bad, and not so good pearls as this
Margarite, that we han of this matter, yeuen by the air little goodness, and
little virtue, right mokell goodness, and virtue in thy Margarite to been
proved, in shining wise to be found and showed. How should ever goodness of
peace have been know, but if vnpeace sometime reign, and mokell evil wroth?
How should mercy been proved, and no trespass were, by due justification to be
punished? Therefore grace and goodness of a wight is found, the sorrowful herts
in good meaning to endure, been comforted, unite, and accord between herts knit
in joy to abide.

What wenest thou I rejoice, or else account him among my servants, that
pleases Pallas, in undoing of Mercury, all be it that to Pallas he be knitte
by title of Law, not according to the reasonable conscience: and Mercury in
doing, have grace to been suffered: or else him that weneth the Moon, for
fairness of the eve Sterre. Lo, otherwhile by nights light of the Moon, greatly
comfort in dark thoughts and blind. Understanding of love, yeueth great
gladness: Who so list no bileue, when a sooth tale is showed, adieu and adieu
bliss, his name is entered. Wise folk and worthy in gentillesse, both of virtue
and of living, yeuen full credence in soothnesse of love with a good heart,
there as good evidence or experience in doing, shows not the contrary. Thus
might thou have full prefe in thy Margarites goodness, by commendment of
other jewels badnesse, and iuelnesse in doing. Stoundmele diseases yeueth
several hours in joy.

Now by my troth (quoth. I) this is well declared, that my Margarite is good, for
sithen other been good, and she passes many other in goodness and virtue,
wherethrough by manner necessary she must be good: and goodness of this Margarite
is nothing else but virtue, wherefore she is virtuous, and if there failed any
virtue in any side, there were lack of virtue: bad nothing else is ne may be,
but lack and want of good and goodness, and so should she have that same lack,
that is to sain bad, and that may not be, for she is good, and that is good me
thinks all good: and so by consequence me seems virtuous, and no lack of
virtue to have. But the Sun is not know but he shine, ne virtues herbs but
they have her kind werchyng, ne virtue but it stretch in goodness or profit to
another, is no virtue. Then by all ways of reason, sithen mercy and pity ben
most commended among other virtues, and they might never been showed
refreshment of help and of comfort, but now at my most need, and that is the
kind werking of these virtues: trewly I wene I shall not vary from these helps.

Fire, and if he give none heat, for fire is not deemed. The Sun but he
shine, for sun is not accounted. Water, but it wete, y^ name shall been
changed. Virtue but it werch, of goodness does it fail, and in to his contrary
ye name shall be reversed, and these been impossible: wherefore the
contradictory that is necessary, needs must I leave. Certes (quoth. she) in thy
person and out of thy mouth these words lien well to been said, and in thine
understanding to be leued, as in intent of this Margarite alone: and here now
my spech in conclusion of these words.

IN these things (quoth. she) that me list now to show openly, shall be found
the matter of thy sickness, and what shall been the medecin that may he thy
sorrows, list and comfort, as well thee as all other that amiss have erred,
and out of the way walked, so that any drop of good will in amendment been
dwelled in their hearts. Proverbs of Solomon openly teaches, how sometime an
innocent walked by the way in blindness of a dark night, whom met a woman
(if it be lefelly to say) as a strumpet arrayed, redily purueyed in turning of
thoughts with vein janglings, and of rest impacient by dissimulacion of my
terms, saying in this wise: come and be we dronken of our sweet pappes, use we
coueitous collinges. And thus drawn was this innocent, as an Ox to the
larder. Lady (quoth. I) to me this is a queint thing to understand: I pray you of
this parable declare me the intent. This innocente (quoth. she) is a scholar
learning of my lore, in seching of my bliss, in which thing the day of his
thought turning enclineth in to eve, and the Son of very light failing,
makes dark night in his conning. Thus in darkness of many douts he walks,
and for blindenes of understanding, he ne wot in with way he is in: forsooth soch
one may lightly been begiled. To whom came love fained, not clothed of my
livery, but unlawful lusty habit, with soft spech and merry, and with fair
honied words heretics and mis meaning people, skleren and wimplen their
errors. Austen witnesses of an heretic that in his first beginning, he was a
man right expert in reasons, and sweet in his words, and y^ works miscorden.
Thus fares feigned love in her first werchinges: thou know these things for
true, thou have hem proved by experience. Sometime in doing to thine own
person, in which thing thou have found matter of mokell disease. Was not fained
love redily purueyed, thy wits to catch and turn thy good thoughts? trewly
she has wounded the conscience of many, with flourishing of mokell jangling
words: and good worth thanked I it for no gloss, I am glad of my Prudence thou
have so manly her veined. To me art thou much holden, y^ in thy kind course of
good meaning I return thy mind: I trow ne had I showed thee thy Margarite,
thou had never returned. Of first in good parfite joy was ever feigned love
impacient, as the water of Syloe, which evermore flows with stilness and
privy noise till it come nygh the brink, and then ginneth it so out of measure
to bolne, with nouelleries of chaungyng storms, that in course of every
rennyng, it is in point to spill all his circuit of banks. Thus feigned love
privily at the fullest of his flowyng, new storms debate to arayse. And all be
it y^ Mercurius often with hole understanding, known soch perilous matters,
yet Veneriens so lusty been and so leude in their wits, y^ in soch things right
litell or naught done they feel, and written and cryen to their fellows: here is
bliss, here is joy, and thus in to one same error, mokel folk they drawn.
Come they said, and be we dronken of our pappes, y^ been fallas and lying
gloss of which mow they not souke milk of health, but deadly venym and
poison, corruption of sorrow. * Milk of fallas, is venym of disceite: Milk of
lying gloss is venym of corrupcion. Lo what thing comes out of these pappes:
use we coueited collinges, desire we and meddle we false words with sote, and
sote with false, truly this is y^ sorinesse of feigned love, needs of these
surfets, sickness must follow. * Thus as an Ox to thy langoryng death were
thou drawn, y^ sote of the smoke has thee all defased. Ever ye deeper thou
sometime wadest, y^ sooner thou it found: if it had thee killed it had be
littell wonder. But on y^ other side, my true servants not faynen ne disceyue
conne, soothly their doing is open, my foundement endures, be ye burden never
so great, ever in one it lasts: it yeueth life and blisfull goodness in the
last ends, though the ginnings been sharp. Thus of two contraries, contrary
ben the effects. And so thilke Margarite thou seruest, shall seen thee by her
service, out of perilous tribulacion delivered, because of her service in to
new disease fallen, by hope of amendment in the last end, with joy to be
gladded, wherefore of kind pure, her mercy with grace of good help, shall she
grant, and else I shall her so strain, that with pity shall she ben amaistred.
Remember in thine heart how horrible sometime to thine Margarite thou
trespassest, and in a great wise against her thou forfeitest: cleape again thy
mind, and know thine own guiltes. What goodness, what thine own guiltes. What
goodness, what bounty, with mokell followyng pity found thou in that time?
Were thou not goodly accepted in to grace? By my plucking, was she to
foryeuenesse inclined. And after I her stired to draw thee to house, and yet
wendest thou utterly for ever have been refused. But well thou woste, sithen yt
I in soche sharp disease might so greatly avail, with think in thy wit? How
far may my wit stretch? And thou lach not on thy side I woll make the knotte:
Certes in thy good bering I woll accord with the Psauter. I have found David
in my service true, and with holy oil of peace and of rest long by him
desired, utterly he shall be anointed. Trust well to me, and I woll thee not
fail. The lening of the first way with good heart of continuance, yt I see in
the grounded, this purpose to parfourme, draws my by manner of constrayning,
that needs must I been thine helper: although mirthe a while be tarried, it
shall come at soch season, that thy thought shall been joyed: and would never
GOD, sithen thine heart to my reasons arne assented, and openly haste confessed
thine amiss going, and now criest after mercy, but if mercy followed: thy
bliss shall been ready ywis, thou ne wost how sone.

Now be a good child I read. The kind of virtues in thy Margarite rehearsed,
by strength of me in thy person shull werch. Comfort thee in this, for thou
may not miscary. And these words said, she straight her on length and rested
a while.

Thus ends the second book, and hereafter follows the third book.
OF nombre sain these clerks that it is naturell some of discrete things, as
in telling one, two, three, and so forth: but among all nombres three is
determined for most certain. Wherefore in nombre certain this work of my besie
leudenes, I think to end and parfourme.

Ensample by this world in three times is divided: Of which y^ first is cleped
Dematian, that is to say, going out of true way: and all that tho dieden, in
hell were thy punished for a man's sin, till grace and mercy fet hem thence,
and there ended the first time. The second time lasts from the coming of
merciable grace, until the end of transitory time, in which is showed y^ true
way in fordoing of y^ badde, and that is ycleped time of grace: and that thing
is not yeuen by desert of yelding, one benefit for another, but only through
goodness of ye yeuer of grace in thilke time. Who so can well understand, is
shapen to be saved in souled bliss. The third time shall gin when transitory
things of worlds han made their end, and that shall been in joy, glory, and
red both body and soul, that well han deserved in the time of grace. And thus
in y^ heaven together shull they dwell perpetuelly, without any ymaginatife
yuel in any halue. These times are figured by tho three days that our God was
closed in earth, and in the third arose, showing our resurrection to joy and
bliss, of tho yt it deseruen, by his merciable grace. So this leude book in
three matters accordaunt to tho times, lightely by a good inseer may been
understand, as in y^ first error of miss going is showed with sorrowful
pine, punished is cried after mercy. In the second is grace in good way proved,
which is failing without desert, thilk first miss amending in correction of
tho errors and even way to bring with comfort of welfare, in to amendment
wexing. And in the third joye and bliss, granted to him that well can deserve
it, and has savor of understanding in the time of grace. Thus in joye of my
third book shall the matter be till it end. But special cause I have in my
heart to make this process of a Margarit pearl, that is so precious a gem,
with clear and littell of which stones or Jewel, the tongues of us English
people tourneth the right names, and clepeth hem Margery pearls: thus varieth
our speech from many other langages. For trewly Latin, French, and many mo
other langages clepeth hem Margery peerles, the name Margarites or Margarit
perls: wherefore in that denominacion I woll me accord to other men's tongues, in
that name cleping. These clerks that treaten of kinds, and studien out the
property there of things, said the Margarit is a littel white pearl,
throughout holow and round, and virtuous, and on the sea sides in the more
Britain, in muskle shells, of y^ heavenly dew ye best been engendered: in which
by experience ben found three fair virtues. One is, it yeueth comfort to the
feling spirits in bodily persons of reason. Another is good, it is profitable
health against passions of sorry men's hearts. And the third it is needful and
noble in staunching of blood, there else too much would out ren. To which perle
and virtues me list to liken at this time Philosophy, with her three speces,
that is, naturel, and moral, and reasonable: of which things hears what saine
these great Clerks. Philosophy is knowing of deuinely and manly things joined
with study of good living, and this stante in two things, that is, conning and
opinion: conning, is when a thing by certain reason is conceived: but
wretches, and fools, and lewd men, many will conceive a thing and maintain it
as for a sothe, though reason be in the contrary, wherefore conning is a
stranger. Opinion is while a thing (...) in non certain, and hid from men's
very knowledging, and by no parfite reason fully declared, as thus: if the
son be so mokel as men wenen, or else if it be more then ye earth. For in
soothnesse y^ certain quantity of that Planet is unknown to erthly dwellers,
and yet by opinion of some men, it is holden for more than middle earth. The
first spece of Philosophy is naturel, which in kindly things treaten, and
shows causes of heaven, and strength of kindly course: as by Arsmetrike,
Geometry, Music, and by Astronomy, techeth ways and course of Heavens, of
Planetes, and of Sterres about Heaven and Earth, and other Elements. The second
spece is moral, which in order of living manners techeth, and by reason proves
virtues of soul most worthy in our living, which been Prudence, Justice,
Temperaunce, and Strength. Prudence is goodly wisdom in knowing of things:
Strength voideth all adversities aliche even. Temperaunce distroyeth bestiall
living with easy bearyng. And Justice rightfully judges, and judging,
departs to every wight that is his own. The third spece tourneth in to reason
of understanding, al things to be said sothe and discussed, and that in two
things is divided: one is Art, another is Rhetorique, in which two all laws of
man's reason been grounded or else maintained. And for this book is all of
Love, and thereafter bears his name, and Philosophy and law must hereto
accorden by their clergial discripcions: as Philosophy for love of wisdom is
declared: Law for maintaynaunce of peace is holden: and these with love must
needs accorden, therefore of hem in this place have I touched. Order of homely
things and honest manner of living in virtue, with rightful judgment in
causes, and profitable administracion in communalties of Realms and Cities, by
euenhede profitably to rain, not by singular auantage, ne by privy envy, ne by
solein purpose in couetise of worship or of goods, ben disposed in open rule
showed, by Love, Philosophy, and law, and yet love toforne all other. Wherefore
as susterne in unity they accorden and one end y^ is peace and rest, they
causen nourishyng, and in the joy mainteynen to endure. Now then, as I have
declared, my book accords with description of three things, and the Margarite
in virtue is likened to Philosophy, with y^ three speces. In which matters ever
twey been accordant with bodily reason, and the third with the soul: But in
conclusion of my book and of this Margarit pearl, in knittyng togider law by
three sundry manners shall be lykened, yt is to say, Law, Right, and Custom,
which I woll declare: all that is law, comes of Gods ordinance by kindly
worchyng: and thilke things ordained by man's wits arne icleped right, which
is ordained by many manners and in constitution written: But custom is a thing
y^ is a^cepted for right or for law, there as law and right faylen, and there
is no difference, whether it come of Scripture or of reason. Wherefore it
shows that law is kindly governaunce: right comes out of man's probable
reason: and custom is of commen usage by length of time used, and custom not
write is usage, and if it be writ constitution it is iwritten and ycleped:
But law of kind is commen to every nation, as conjunction of man and woman in
love, succession of children in heritaunce, restitucion of thing by strength
taken or leant, and this law among all other halte the soueraynest gree in
wurship, which law began at y^ beginning of reasonable creature, it varied
yet never for no changing of time: cause forsooth in ordainyng of Law, was to
constrain men's hardines in to peace, and withdrawing his yuell will, and
turning malice into goodness, and y^ innocence sikerly withouten teneful anoy
among shrews, safely might inhabit by protection of safe conduct, so that
shrewes harm for harm by bridle of feardenesse shoulden restrayn. But forsothe
in kindly law nothing is commended, but soche as Gods will has confirmed, ne
nothing denied but contraryoustie of Gods will in Heaven: eke then all laws or
custom, or else constitution by usage, or writing, yt contrarien law of kind,
utterly been repugnant and adversary to our gods will of Heaven. Trewly law of
kind for gods own lusty will is verily to mayntaine, under which law (and
unworthy) both profess and reguler arn obediencer and bounden to this Margarit
pearl, as by knot of loves statutes and stablishment in kind, which y^ goodly
may not ben withsetten. Lo under this bond am I constrained to abide, and man
under living law ruled, by yt law owes after deserts to been rewarded by
pain or by mede, but if mercy weiue the pain: so than be part, reasonfully
may be sey, that mercy both right and law passes, thentent of all these
matters, is the lest clear understanding, to weten at the end of this third
book full knowing through Gods grace, I think to make neuerthelater, yet if
these things han a good and a sleght inseer which that can souke honey of the
hard stone, oil of y^ dry rock, may lightly feel nobly of matter in my leude
imaginacion closed.

But for my book shall be of joy (as I said) and I so far set fro thilke
place, fro whens gladness should come, my cord is to short to let my boket
ought to catch of y^ water, and few men be abouten my cord to each, and many in
full purpose been ready it shorter to make, and to enclose thenter, y^ my boket
of joy nothing should catch, but empty return, my careful sorrows to
increase, and if I die for pain, y^ were gladness at their hearts. Good Lord
send me water in to the cop of these Mountains, and I shall drink thereof my
thrustes to stanch: and sey these be comfortable wells in to health of goodness
of my savior am I helped. And yet I say more, the house of joy to me is not
opened. How dare my sorrowful ghost then in any matter of gladness thynken to
trete? for ever sobbings and complaints be ready refrete in his meditacions, as
werbles in manyfold stoundes coming about I not than. And therefore what manner
of joy could endite, but yet at door shall I knock, if y^ key of David would ye
lock unshyt and he bring me in, which that childrens tongues both opens and
closes. Whose spirit, where he well worcheth, departing goodly as him likes.
Now to Gods laud and reverence, profit of ye readers, amendment of manners of
ye herers, increasing of worship among loves servant, releuing of my heart in
to grace of my jewel, and friendship pleasance of this pearl, I am stered in
this making, and for nothing else: and if any good thing to men's likyng in this
scripture be found, thanketh ye master of grace which y^ of that good and all
other is author, and principal doer. And if any thing be insufficient or else
mislikyng, with y^ that y^ lewdness of mine unable conning, for body in disease
annoyeth the understanding in soul. A disesely habitation leteth the wits many
things, and namely in sorrow. The custom never the later of love, be long time
of service in terms I think to pursue, which been lively to give
understanding in other things. But now to inform thee of this Margarites
goodness, I may her not half praise. Wherefore not she for my book, but this
book for her is worthy to be commended, tho my book be leude: right as things
not for places, but places for things ought to be desired and praised.

NOw (quoth. Love) truly thy words I have well understand. Certes me thinks hem
right good, and me wondreth why thou so lightly passest in the law. Sothly (quoth.
I) my wit is leude and I am right blind and that matter deep, how should I then
have waded, lightly might I have drenched and spilt there my self. Yea (quoth.
she) I shall help thee to swim. * For right as law punishes brekers of
precepts, and the contrary doers of ye written constitucions: right so ayenward,
law rewards and yeueth mede to hem that law strengthen. By one law this rebel
is punished, and this innocent is mede, ye shrew is emprisoned, and this
rightful is corowned. The same law that joyneth by wedlock without forsaking,
y^ same law yeueth libel of departicion because of deuorse, both deemed and
declared. Ye ye (quoth. I) I find in no law to mede and reward in goodness, the
gilty of deserts. Fool (quoth. she) gilty converted in your law, mykel merit
deserves. Also Pauly of Rome was corowned, yt by him y^ mainteiners of Pompeus
weren known and distroyed: and yet toforn was this Paulin chief of Pompeus
counsel. This law in Rome has yet his name of mesuring in mede, ye bewraying
of y^ conspiracy, ordained by tho senators ye death. Julius Caesar is accounted
into Catons rightwisnesse, for ever in troth florisheth his name among ye
knowers of reason. Perdicas was crowned in y^ heritage of Alexander the great,
for telling of a privy hate y^ king Porrus to Alexander had. Wherefore every
wight by reason of law after his rightwisenes apertly his mede may challenge:
and so thou y^ maintainest law of kind, and therefore disease have suffered in
y^ law, reward is worthy to be rewarded and ordained, and apertly thy mede
might thou challenge. Certes (quoth. I) this have I well learned, and ever
henceforward I shall draw me thereafter in one head of will to abide this law,
both maintain and keep, and so hope I best enter in to your grace, well
deserving in o worship of a wight, without needful compulsion ought medefully
to be rewarded. Truly (quoth. Love) that is soth, and tho by constitucion good
service in to profit and advantage stretch, utterly many men it demen to have
more desert of mede, then good will not compelled. Se now (quoth. I) how may men
holden of this the contrary. And with is good service? Of you would I here this
question declared. I shall say thee (quoth. she) in a few words, reasonable
workings in plesaunce and profit of thy sovereign. How should I this perform
(quoth. I.) Right well (quoth. she) and here me now a litell. It is hardly (quoth. she)
to understand, that right as matter by due ouerchaungings follows his
perfection and his form: right so every man by rightful werkings ought to
follow y^ lefull desires in his heart, and see toforne to with end he deserves,
for many times he y^ looks not after thendes, but utterly thereof is unknown,
befalls often many yuels to done, wherethrough er he be ware shamefully he is
confounded, the end thereof neden to be before looked to every desire of such
foresight, in good service three things specially needs to be rulers in his
works. First y^ he do good, next yt he do by his election in his own heart, and
the third, that he do godly withouten any surquedry in thoughts. That your
works shulden be good in service, or in any other acts, authorites many may be
alleged, never the latter, by reason thus may it be showed. All your works be
cleped second and mouen in virtue of ye first wercher, which in good works
wrought you to proceed, and right so your werks mouen in to virtue of y^ last
end, and right in y^ first working were not, no man should in y^ second werch.
Right so but ye feled to with end, and sen their goodness closed, ye should no
more retch with ye wrought but ye ginning began with good, and there shall it ceafe
in the last end, if it be well considred. Wherefore y^ middle, if other ways it
draw then accordaunt to thends, there stinteth the course of good, and another
manner course enters, and so it is a party by him selue, and every part be not
accordaunt to his all, is foul and ought to be eschewed, wherefore every thing
y^ is wrought and be not good, is not accordaunt to thendes of his all hole, it
is foul, and ought to be withdraw. * Thus the persons that neither done good ne
harm, shamen foul their making: Wherefore without working of good acts in
good service, may no man been accepted. * Trewlye thlike that han might to do
good, and done it not, the crown of worship shall be take from hem, and with
shame shul they be anulled. And so to make one work accordaunt with his ends,
every good servant by reason of consequence must do good needs. Certes it
suffiseth not alone to do good but goodly withal follows, y^ thank of goodness
else in naught he deserves: For right as all your being, come from the greatest
good, in whom all goodness is closed. Right so your ends been direct to y^ same
good. * Aristotel determines y^ end and good been one, and conuertible in
understanding, and he y^ in will does away good, and he y^ looks not to thend
looks not to good, but he y^ does good and does not goodly, draws away thy
direction of the end, not goodly, must needs be bad. Lo bad is nothing else, but
absence or negative of good, as darkness is absence or negative of light. Then
he that does goodly directs thilke good into thend of badde. So must thing
not good follow, eke badnes to such folk often follows. Thus contrariaunt
workers of thend that is good, been worthy y^ contrary of thend that is good to
have. How (quoth. I) may any good deed be done, but if goodly it help. Yes (quoth.
Love) the Devil does many good deeds, but goodly he leueth behind, for even
badly and in desceiuable wise he works. Wherefore y^ contrary of thend him
follows. And do he never so many good deeds, because goodly is away, his
goodness is not rekened. Lo then tho a man do good, but he do good, but he do
goodly thend in goodness wol not follow, and thus in good service both good
deed and goodly done, musten join togider, and that it be done with free
choice in heart: and else deserves he not the merit in goods, that woll I
prove. For if thou do any thing good by chance or by hap, in what thing art
thou thereof worthy to be commended? for nothing by reason of that, turns in
to thy praising ne lacking. Lo thilke thing done by hap by thy will is not
caused, and thereby should I thank or lack deserve: and sithen y^ fails,
thend which y^ well should reward, must needs fail. Clerks saine, no man but
willing is blessed, a good deed y^ he has done is not done of free choice
willing, without which blissednes may not follow. Ergo nether thank of
goodness ne service in that is contrary of y^ good end, so then to good
service longs good deed goodly done, through free choice in heart. Truly (quoth.
I) this have I well understand. Well (quoth. she) every thing thus done sufficient
by law that is cleped Justice, after reward claim. For law and Justice was
ordained in this wise, soch deserts in goodness after quantite in doing, by mede
to reward, and of necessite of soch Justice, y^ is to say, rightwisenes was
free choice in deserving of well or of evil granted to reasonable creatures.
Every man has free arbitrament to chose good or iuell to perform. Now (quoth. I)
tho if I by my good will deserve this Margarit pearl, and am thereto
compelled, and have free choice to do with me likes: She is then holden as me
thinks to reward thentent of my good will. Gods forbode else (quoth. Love) no
wight meneth otherwise I trow, free will of good heart after mede deserves.
Has every man (quoth. I) fre choice by necessary manner of will in every of his
doings, y^ him likes by Gods proper purueyaunce, I would see yt well declared
to my lewd understanding, for necessary and necessite ben words of mokel
intencion, closing (as to say) so mote it be needs, and otherwise may it not
betide. This shall thou learn (quoth. she) so thou take heed in my spech. If it
were not in man's own liberte of free will to do good or bad, but to y^ one tied
by bond of Gods preordinaunce: Then do he never so well it were by needful
compulcion of thilk bond and not by free choice, whereby nothing he desires,
and do he never so yuell it were not man for to wite, but onelich to him that
soch thing ordained hem to don. Wherefore he ne ought for bad be punished, ne
for no good deed be rewarded, but of necessite of rightwisnes was therefore
free choice of arbitrament, put in man's proper disposition: truly if it were
otherwise, it contraried Gods charity, y^ badness and goodness, rewards after
desert of pain, or of mede. Me thinks this wonder (quoth. I) for God by
necessity forwote all things coming, and so mote it needs be: and thilk things
yt ben done, be our free choice comen nothing of necessity, but only by will:
how may this stand togider? and so me thinks truly, y^ free choice fully
repugneth Gods forweting. Truly lady, me seems they mow not stand together.

THen began love nigh me near, and with a noble countenance of visage and
limbs, dressed her nighe my sittyng place. Take forth (quoth. she) thy pen, and
redily write these words, for if God woll, I shall hem so inform to thee, that
thy leudness, which I have understand in y^ matter, shall openly be clered, and
thy sight in full loking therein amended. First, if thou think y^ Gods
prescience, repugne liberty of arbetrie of arbitrament, it is impossible y^
they should accord in onehed of soth to understanding. Ye (quoth. I) forsooth so I
it conceive. Well (quoth. she) if thilke impossible were away, the repugnaunce
that seems to be therein, were utterly removed. Show me thabsence of yt
impossibility (quoth. I.) So (quoth. she) I shall. Now I suppose that they mow
stand together, prescience of God, whom follows necessity of things coming,
and liberty of arbitrament, through which thou beleeuest many things, to be
without necessity. Both these proporcions be soothe (quoth. I) and well mow stand
togider, wherefore this case as possible I admit. Truly (quoth. she) and this
case is impossible. How so (quoth. I.) For hereof (quoth. she) follows and wexeth
an other impossible. Prove me that (quoth. I.) That I shall (quoth. she) for
something is coming without necessity, and God wot that toforne, for all
thing coming he before wot, and that he beforne wot of necessity is coming:
as he beforne wot, be the case by necessary manner then, or else through
necessity, is something to be without necessity, and whiderto every wight that
has good understanding, is seen these things to be repugnaunt. Prescience of
GOD, which that follows necessity, and liberty of arbitrament, fro which is
removed necessity, for truly it is necessary, that God have forweting of thing,
withouten any necessity coming. Ye (quoth. I) but yet remeue ye not away fro mine
understanding, the necessity following Gods before weting, as thus. GOD beforn
wot me in service of Love, to be bounden to this Margarite pearl, and
therefore by necessity, thus to love am I bound, and if I not had loved,
through necessity had I been kept from all love deeds. Certes (quoth. Love)
because this matter is good and necessary to declare, I think herein well to
abide, and not lightly to pass. Thou shall not (quoth. she) say all only God
beforn wot me to be a lover, or no lover, but thus: GOD beforn wot me to be a
lover, without necessity. And so it follows, whither thou love, or not love,
every of hem is and shall be. But now thou see the impossibility of y^ case,
and the possibility of thilk that thou wendest had been impossible, wherefore
the repugnance is adnulled. Ye (quoth. I) and yet do ye not away the strength of
necessity, when it is said, though necessity it is me in love to abide, or not
to love without necessity, for God beforn wot it. This manner of necessity
forsooth, seems to some men into coaccion, that is to sain, constraining, or
else prohibicion that is defending, wherefore necessity is me to love of will. I
understand me to be constrained, by some privy strength, to ye will of loving,
and if no love to be defended from the will of loving, and so through necessity
me seems to love, for I love, or else not to love, if I not love, wherethrough
neither thank ne maugre, in tho things may I deserve.

Now (quoth. she) thou shall well understand that often we sain thing, through
necessity, to be that by no strength, to be neither is coacted, ne constrained,
and through necessity not to be, that with no defending is removed, for we sain,
it is through necessity, GOD to be immortal naught dedlich, and it is necessity,
GOD to be rightful, but not that any strength of violent manner constrains
him to be immortal, or defends him to be vnrightful, for nothing may make him
dedly or vnrightful. Right so if I say, through necessity is thee to be a lover
or else none, only through will, as GOD beforn wete: it is not to understand,
that any thing defends or forbit thee thy will, which shall not be, or else
constrains it to be, which shall be: that same thing forsooth God before wot,
which he beforne sees, any thing commend of only will, that will neither is
constrained ne defended through any other thing. And so through liberty of
arbitrament it is do, that is done of will. And truly my good child, if these
things be well understand, I wene that none inconvenient shall thou find,
between Gods forweting, and liberty of arbitrament, wherefore, I wot well
they may stand togider. Also farthermore, who that understanding of Prescience,
properlich considers, through the same wise, that any thing be before wist, is
said for to be coming, it is pronounced, there is nothing toforne wist, but
thing coming, fore wetting is but of troth, doubt may not be wist: wherefore,
when I sey, that God toforn wot any thing, through necessity is thilke thing to
be coming, all is one if I sey, if it shall be, but this necessity neither
constrains, ne defends any thing to be, or not to be. Therefore soothly if
love is put to be, it is said of necessity to be, or else for it is put not to
be, it is affirmed not to be of necessity: not for that necessity constrains
or defends, love to be, or not to be. For when I say, if love shall be of
necessity, it shall be, here follows necessity. The thing toforn put, it is
as much to say, as if it were thus pronounced: yt thing shall be: none other
thing signifies this necessity, but only thus, that shall be, may not togider
be, and not be. Euenlich also it is sooth, love was, and is, and shall be, not
of necessity, and need is to have be all that was, and needful is to be all
that is, and coming to all that shall be: and it is not y^ same to say, love to
be passed, and love passed to be passed, or love present to be present, and
love to be present; or else love to be coming, and love coming to be coming:
* diversity in setting of words, makes diversity in understanding, although in
the same sentence they accorden of signification, right as it is not all one:
love sweet to be sweet, and love to be sweet: for much love is bitter, and
sorrowful ere hearts been eased, and yet it gladdeth thilke sorrowful heart on
soch love to think. Forsooth (quoth. I) otherwhile I have had mokell bliss in
heart of love, that stoundmele has me sorily annoied: and certes lady for I see
my self thus knit, with this Margarite pearl, as by bond of your service, and
of no liberty of will, my heart will now not accord this service to love: I can
deemin in my self none otherwise, but through necessity am I constrained in
this service to abide. But alas then, if I through needful compulsion, maugre
me be withhold, little thank for all my great trauail have I then deserved. Now
(quoth. this lady) I say as I said: Me likes this matter to declare at the full,
and why: For many men have had diverse fantasies and reasons, both on one side
thereof, and in the other. Of which right soon I trow, if thou will understand,
thou shall con give the sentence, to the party more probable by reason, and in
sooth knowing, by that I have of this matter maked an end. Certes (quoth. I) of
these things, long have I had great lust to be learned, for yet I wene, Gods
will and his prescience accords with my service, in loving of this precious
Margarite pearl. After whom ever in my heart, with thursting desire wete I do
bren, vnwasting I langour and fade, and the day of my desteny, in death or in
joy I vnbide, but yet in the end I am comforted be my supposail in bliss, and
in joy to determine after my desires. That thing (quoth. Love) hastily to thee
neigh, God grant of his grace and mercy, and this shall be my prayer, till thou
be likened in heart at thine own will. But now to enform thee in this matter
(quoth. this Lady) thou wost where I left, that was love to be sweet, and love
sweet to be sweet, is not all one for to say: For a tree is not always by
necessity white, sometime ere it were white it might have be not white: and
after time it is white, it may be not white: but a white tree evermore needful
is to be white: for neither toforn ne after it was white, might it be togider
white and not white. Also love by necessity is not present, as now in thee, for
ere it were present, it might have be, that it should now not have be, and yet
it may be, y^ it shall not be present: but thy love present, which to her
Margarite thee has bound, needful is to be present. Truly some doing of
action, not by necessity, is coming far toforn it be, it may be that it shall
not be coming: thing forsooth coming, needful is to be coming, for it may not
be that coming shall not be coming. And right as I have said of present and
of future times, the same sentence in soothnesse is of the preterit, that is to
say, time passed, for thing passed, must needs be passed, and ere it were it
might have not be, wherefore it should not have passed. Right so when love
coming is said of love that is to come, needful is to be that is said, for
thing coming never, is not coming, and so often the same thing, we sain of the
same, as when we sain every man is a man, or every lover is a lover, so must it
be needs, in no way may he be man, and no man together. And if it be not by
necessity, that is to say, needful all thing coming to be coming, then some
thing coming is not coming, and that is impossible, right as these terms
needful, necessity and necessary, betoken and signifying needs to be, and it
may not otherwise be. Right these terms impossible signifies, that thing is
not, and by no way may it be then through pert necessity, al thing coming is
coming, but that is by necessity, follows with nothing to be constrained. Lo
when that coming is said of thing, not always thing through necessity is, although
it be coming. For if I say to morrow, love is coming in this Margarites heart,
not therefore through necessity shall thilk love be, yet it may be yt it shall
not be, although it were coming. Never the later, sometime it is sooth, that some
thing be of necessity, that is said to come: and if I say to morrow by coming
the rising of y^ Sun. If therefore with necessity I pronounce coming of thing
to come, in this manner love to morn coming in thine Margarite, to thee ward by
necessity is coming, or else the risinge of the Sun to morn coming through
necessity, is coming. Love soothly, which may not be of necessity alone
following, through necessity coming it is made certain. For future of future is
said, that is to saine, coming of coming is said: as if to morrow coming, is
through necessity coming it is. Arising of the Sun through two necessities in
coming, it is to understand, that one is to forgoing necessity, which makes
thing to be, therefore it shall be, for needful is that it be. Another is
following necessity, which nothing constrains to be, and so by necessity it
is to come, why: for it is to come.

Now then, when we saine, that God beforne wot thing coming needful, is to be
coming, yet therefore make we not in certain, evermore thing to be through
necessity coming. Soothly thing coming may not be, not coming by no way, for
it is the same sentence of understanding: as if we say thus, If God beforn wot
any thing, needful is that to be coming. But yet therefore follows not the
prescience of God, thing through necessity to be coming: for although God toforn
wot all things coming, yet not therefore he beforn wot every thing coming
through necessity. Some things he beforne wot, coming of free will, out of
reasonable creature. Certes (quoth. I) these terms, need and necessity, have a
queint manner of understanding, they woulden dullen many men's wits. Therefore
(quoth. she) I woll hem openly declare, and more clearly than I have toforne, ere
I depart hence. Here of this matter (quoth. she) thou shall understand, that right
as it is not needful God to wiln y^ he will, no more in many things is not
needful a man to wiln that he woll. And ever right as needful is to be, what
that God woll, right so to be it is needful, that man woll in tho things which
that God has put into man's subjection of willing: as if a man woll love, that
he love: and if he ne woll love, that he love not: and of such other things in
man's disposition. For why: now then, that God woll, may not be, when he woll
the will of man through no necessity to be constrained, or else defended for to
wiln, and he woll the effect to follow the will, then is it needful will of man
to be free, and also to be y^ he woll. In this manner it is sooth, that through
necessity is man's work in loving, that he woll do, although he woll it not with
necessity. (Quoth. I then) how stant it in love of thilk will, sithen men louen
willing of free choice in heart. Wherefore if it be through necessity, I pray
you Lady of an answer this question to assoil. I woll (quoth. she) answer thee
bliuely: right as men will not through necessity, right so is not love of will
through necessity, ne through necessity wrought thilk same will, for if he would
it not with good will, it should not have been wrought, although y^ he does it is
needful to be done. But if a man do sin, it is nothing else but to will, yt he
should not: right so sin of will is not to be manner necssary done, no more
than will is necessary. Never y^ later, this is sooth, if a man woll sin, it is
necessary him to sin, but though thilk necessity, nothing is constrained ne
defended in the will, right so thilk thing that free will woll and may, and not
may, not wiln, and needful is that to wilne he may not wilne, but thilke to
wilne needful is, for impossible to him it is one thing, and the same to wiln,
he may not wiln, but thilk to wiln needful is: for impossible to him it is one
thing and the same to wiln, and not to wiln.

The work forsooth of will, to whom it is give, that it be that he has in
will, and that he woll not, voluntary of spontany it is, for by spontany will
it is do, that is to say, with good will, not constrained: then by will not
constrained, it is constrained to be, and that is it may not together be. If
this necessity makes liberty of will, which that aforn they weren, they might
have been eschued and shunned: God then, which that knows all truth, and
nothing but truth, all these things, as they arn spontany, or necessary sight,
and as he sees, so they ben: and so with these things well considered, it is
open at the full, that without all manner repugnance, God beforn wot all
manner things ben done by free will, which aforn they weren, might have been
never they should be, and yet been they through a manner necessity, from free
will discendeth.

Hereby may (quoth. she) lightly ben know, that not all things to be is of
necessity, though God have hem in his prescience, for some things to be, is of
liberty of will: and to make thee to have full knowing of Gods beforne weting,
hear me (quoth. she) what I shall say. Blithly lady (quoth. I) me list this matter
entirely to understand. Thou shall (quoth. she) understand, yt in heaven is Gods
being, although he be over all by power, yet there is abiding of divine person,
in which heaven is everlasting presence, withouten any mouable time there, fool
have I not said toforn this, as time hurts, right so ayenward, time heals
and rewards: * and a tree often failed, is hold more in deinty, when it fruit
forth brings.

A Merchant that for ones lesing in the Sea, no more to adventure thinks, he
shall never with adventure come to richess: so often must men on the Oak smite,
till the happy dent have entered, which with the Oaks own sway makes it to come
all at ones. So often falls the lethy water on the hard rock, till it have
through pierced it. The even draught of the Wier drawer makes the wier to ben
even, and supple werching, and if he stinted in his draught, the wier breaks
asunder. Every tree well springs, when it is well grounded, and not often
removed. What shall this fruit be (quoth. I) now it ginneth ripe? Grace (quoth. she)
in parfite joy to endure, and therewith thou begone. Grace (quoth. I) me thinks,
I should have a reward for my long trauail? I shall tell thee (quoth. she)
retribution of thy good wills, to have of thy Margarite pearl, it bears not
the name of mede, but only of good grace, and that comes not of thy desert,
but of thy Margarites goodness and virtue alone. (Quod I) should all my long
trauail have no reward, but through grace, and sometime your seluen said,
rightwiseness euenlich rewards to quite one benefit for another. That is
sooth (quoth. Love) ever as I said, as to him that does good, which to done, he
were neither holden, ne yet constrained. That is sooth (quoth. I.) Truly (quoth. she)
all that ever thou do, thine Margarite pearl, of will, of love, and of
reason, thou owe to done it, yet is it nothing else but yielding of thy debt,
in quiting of thy grace, which she thee lent, when ye first met. I wene (quoth. I)
right little grace to me she delivered. Certes it was hard grace, it has nigh
me astrangled. That it was good grace, I wot well thou will it grant, ere
thou depart hence. If any man give to another wight, to whom that he ought not,
and which that of himself nothing may have, a garment or a coat, tho he wear
the coat, or else thilk clothing, it is not to put to him that was naked, the
cause of his clothing, but only to him that was yeuer of the garment. Wherefore
I say, thou y^ were naked of love, and of thy self none have might, it is not
to put to thine own person, sithen thy love came through thy Margarite pearl,
Ergo she was yeuer of the love, although thou it use, and there sent she thee
grace, thy service to begin. She is worthy the thank of this grace, for she was
the yeuer.

All the thoughts, busy doings, and pleasaunce in thy might, and in thy words,
that thou can devise, been but right little, in quiting of thy debt: had she
not been, such thing had not been studied. So all these matters kindly drawn
homeward to this Margarite pearl, for from thence were they borrowed, all is
holly hers, to wit, the love that thou hauest, and thus quitest thou thy debt,
in that thou steadfastly seruest. And keep well that love, I thee read, that of
her thou have borrowed, and use it in her service, thy debt to quite, and then
art thou able right soon to have grace, wherefore after mede, in none halue
may thou look.

Thus thy ginning and ending is but grace alone, and in thy good deserving, thy
debt thou acquitest: without grace is nothing worth, whatsoever thou werch.
Thank thy Margarite of her great grace, that hitherto thee has guided, and
pray her of continuance forth in thy werks hereafter, and that for no mishap
thy grace ouerthwartly tourn. Grace, glory, and joy, is coming through good
folks deserts, and by getting of grace, therein shullen end. And what is more
glory, or more joy than wisdom, and love in parfite charity, which God has
granted to all tho that well can deserve. And with that, this Lady all at ones
start into mine heart: here woll I onbide (quoth. she) for ever, and never woll I
gone hence, and I woll keep thee from meddling, while me list here onbide: thine
entremeting manners into steadfastness shullen be changed.

SOberliche tho threw I up mine eyes, and hugely tho was I astonished of this
sudden adventure, and feign would I have learned how virtues shoulden been
known, in which things I hope to God hereafter she shall me enformen, and
namely sithen her resting place is now so nigh at my will: and anon all these
things that this lady said, I remembered me by my self, and reuolued the lives
of mine understanding wits.

Tho found I fully all these matters perfitely there written, how miss rule by
fained love both realms and cities has governed a great throw. How lightly me
might the faults espy, how rules in love should been used, how sometime with
fained love foul I was beguiled, how I should love have know, and how I shall
in love with my service proceed.

Also furthermore, I found of perdurable letters, wonderly there graven, these
matters, which I shall nempne. Certes, none age, ne other thing in earth, may
the least syllable of this is no point deface, but clearly as the sun in mine
understanding soul they shinen. This may never out of my mind, how I may not my
love keep, but through willing in heart: wiln to love may I not, but I loving
have. Love have I none, but through grace of this Margarite perl. It is no
manner doubt, that will woll not love, but for it is loving, as will woll not
rightfully, but for it is rightful it selue. Also will is not loving, for he
woll love, but he woll love, for he is loving: it is all one to will to be
loving, and louings in possession to have. Right so will woll not love, for of
love has he no party, and yet I deny not loving, will wiln more love to have,
which that he has not, when he would more than he has, but I say he may no
love wiln, if he no love have, through which thilk love he should wiln: but to
have this loving will, may no man of himself, but only through grace toforn
going: right so may no man it keep, but by grace following. Consider now every
man aright, and let sen if that any wight of himself mow this loving well get,
and he thereof first nothing have: for if it should of himself spring, either
it must be willing or not willing. Willing by himself may he it not have,
sithen him fails y^ matter that should it forth bring, the matter him
fails: why? He may thereof have no knowing, till when grace put it in his
heart. Thus willing by himself, may he it not have, and not willing may he it
not have. Parde every conceit of every reasonable creature, otherwise will not
grant: will in affirmatife with not willing by no way mow accord. And although
this loving woll come in mine heart by freeness of arbitrament, as in this book
fully is showed, yet owe I not therefore as much allow my free will, as grace of
that Margarite, to me leaned, for neither might I without grace toforn going,
and afterward following, thilk grace get ne keep, and lose shall I it never,
but if free will it make, as in willing otherwise than grace has me granted.
For right as when any person takes, willing to be sober, and throws that
away, willing to be dronk, or else takes will of drinking out of measure: which
thing anon, as it is done, makes through his own guilt by free will, y^
leseth his grace. In which thing therefore, upon the nobley of grace I mote
trusten, and my busy cure set thilke grace to keep, that my free will
otherwise than by reason it should werch, cause not my grace to void: for thus
must I both look to free will and to grace. For right as naturel usage in
engendering of children may not ben without father, ne also but with the
mother, for neither father ne mother in begetting may it lack: right so grace
and free will accorden, and without hem both may not loving, will in no party
been getten. But yet is not free will, in getting of that thing, so mokell
thank worthy as is grace, ne in the keeping thereof so much thank deserves, and
yet in getting and keeping both done they accord. Truly oftentime grace, free
will helps in fordoing of contrary things, y^ to willing love not accorden,
and strength will adversities to withsit, wherefore all together to grace owes
to been accepted, that my willing deserves: Free will to loving in this wise
is accorded. I remember me well, how all this book (who so heed takes)
considers all things, to werchings of mankind euenly accords, as in
tourning of this word love into troth, or else rightwisenesse, whether y^ it
like. For what thing that falls to man, in helping of free arbitrament, thilk
rightwisenesse to take, or else to keep, through which a man shall be saved, of
which thing all this book mention has maked, in every point thereof, grace
owes to be thanked.

Wherefore I say, every wight having this rightwisenesse, rightful is, and yet
therefore I feel not in my conscience, that to all rightful is behoten y^
bliss everlasting, but to hem that been rightful, withouten any
vnrightfulnesse. Some man after some degree may rightfully ben accounted, as
chaste men in living, and yet been they janglers, and full of envy pressed: to
hem shall this bliss never ben delivered. For right as very bliss is without
all manner need, right so to no man shall it be yeuen, but to the rightful, void
from all manner vnrightfulnesse found, so no man to her bliss shall been
followed, but he be rightful, and with vnrightfulnesse not bound, and in that
degree fully be know. This rightfulnesse in as much as in himself is, of none
evil it is cause, and of all manner goodness truly it is mother. This helps
the spirit to withsit the leude lusts of fleshly liking: this strengtheth and
mainteineth ye law of kind, and if that otherwhile me weneth harm of this
precious thing to follow, there through is nothing the cause, of somewhat else
comes it about, who so takes heed. By rightfulnesse forsooth werne many
holy Saints, good savor in sweetness to God almighty, but that to some
folks they weren savor of death, into deadly end, that come not of the saints
rightwisenesse, but of other wicked men's badnesse has proceeded. Truly thilke
will, which that the Lady of Love me learned, affection of will to nempne,
which is in willing of profitable things, evil is not, but when to fleshly
lusts it consents, against reason of soul: but that this thing more clearly
be understand, it is for to know whence and how thilke will is so vicious and
so ready evil deeds to perform.

Grace at the ginning ordained thilke will in goodness, ever to have endured,
and never to badnesse have assented: men should not believe, that God thilk
will maked to be vicious. Our first father, as Adam and Eve, for vicious
appetites, and vicious will to such appetites consenting, been not one thing in
kind, other thing is done for the other. And how this will first into man first
assented, I hold it profitable to show: but if the first condition of
reasonable creature woll be considered and apertly looked, lightly the cause of
such will may been showed. Intention of God was, that rightfully and blessed
should reasonable nature ben maked, himself for to keep, but neither blisfull
ne rightful might it not be, withouten will in them both. Will of
rightfulnesse is thilk same rightfulnesse, as heretoforn is showed: but will of
bliss is not thilk bliss, for every manne has not thilke bliss, in whom the
will thereof is abiding. In this bliss, after every understanding, is
suffisaunce of couenable commodities, without any manner need, whether it be
bliss of Angels, or else thilk, that grace first in Paradise suffered Adam to
have. For although Angels bliss be more than Adams was in Paradise, yet may it
not be denied, that Adam in Paradise ne had suffisaunce of bliss: for right as
great heart is without all manner of coldness, and yet may another heart more
heat have, right so nothing defended Adam in Paradise to been blissed, without
all manner need.

Although Angels bliss be much more, forsooth it follows not, lass than
another to have therefore him needs, but for to want a thing, which that
behooves to been had, that may need been cleaped, and that was not in Adam, at
the first ginning: God and the Margarite weten what I mean. Forsooth where as
is need, there is wretchedness: God without cause toforn going, made not
reasonable creature wretched, for him to understand and love, had he first
maked. God made therefore man blissed, without all manner indigence, together
and at ones took reasonable creatures bliss, and of will of blissedness, and
will of rightfulness, which is rightfulness it selue, and liberty of
arbitrament, that is free will, with which thilke rightfulness may he keep and
lose. So and in that wise ordained thilke two, that will, which that instrument
is cleaped, as heretoforn mention is maked, should use thilk rightfulnesse, by
teaching of his soul to good manner of governance, in thought and in words,
and that it should use the bliss in obedient manner, withouten any
incommodity. Bliss forsooth into man's profit, and rightwisenesse into his
worship, God delivered at ones: but rightfulnes so was yeven, that man might it
lose, which if he not lost had not, but continuelly have it kept, he should
have deserved the advancement into the fellowship of Angels, in which thing, if
he that lost, never by himself forward should he it mow ayenward recover: and
as well the bliss that he was in, as Angels bliss, that to himwards was
coming, should be nome at ones, and he deprived of them both. And thus fill
man unto likeness of unreasonable beasts, and with hem to corruption and
vnlusts appetites was he under thrown, but yet will of bliss dwells, that
by indigence of good, which that he lost through great wretchedness, by right
should he ben punished. And thus for he weiued rightfulnes, lost has he his
bliss: but fail of his desire in his own commodity may he not, and were
commodities to his reasonable nature, which he has lost may he not have. To
false lusts, which been bestial appetites, he is turned: folly of vnconning
has him beguiled, in wening that thilk been the commodities that owen to ben
desired. This affection of will by liberty of arbitrament, is enduced to wiln
thus thing that he should not, and so is will not maked evil, but vnrightful,
by absence of rightfulnes, which thing by reason ever should he have. And
freenes of arbitrament may he not wiln, when he it not haueth, for while he it
had, thilke help it not to keep: so that without grace may it not ben
recovered. Will of commodity, in as much as unrightful it is maked, by willing
of evil lusts, willing of goodness may he not wiln, for will of instrument to
affection of will, is thralled, sithen that other thing may not it wiln, for
will of instrument to affection desires, and yet been both they will cleaped:
for that instrument woll, through affection it wilneth, and affection desires
thilk thing, whereto instrument him leads. And so free will to unlusty
affection full servant is maked, for vnrightfulnes may he not relieve, and
without rightfulnes full freedom may it never have. For kindly liberty of
arbitrament without it, vein and idle is forsooth. Wherefore yet I say, as
often have I said y^ same, * When instrument of will lost has rightfulnes, in
no manner but by grace may he again retourn rightfulnesse to wiln. For sithen
nothing but rightfulnesse alone should he wiln, what y^ ever he wilneth without
rightfulnesse, unrightfully he it wilneth. These then vnrightful appetites and
unthrifty lusts which the flies desires, in as mokel as they ben in kind, ben
they not bad, but they ben ^nrightf^l and bad, for they ben in reasonable
creature, where as they being in no way should been suffered. In unreasonable
beasts neither ben they evil, ne unrightful, for there is their kind being.

Known may it well ben now, of these things toforne declared, that man has
not always thilke rightfulnesse, which by duty of right evermore haven he
should, and by no way by himself may he it get ne keep, and after he it
has, if he it lose, recover shall he it never, without especial grace:
wherefore the commune sentence of the people in opinion, that every thing after
destiny is ruled, false and wicked is to believe: For tho predestination be as
well of good as of bad, sithen that it is said God hadnest made, which he never
ne wrought, but for he suffers hem to be maked, as that he hardeth when he
naught missayeth, or led into temptation, when he not delivers, wherefore it
is none inconvenient, if in that manner be said, God toforn have destenied both
bad, and her bad werks, when hem ne their evil deeds neither amendeth, ne
thereto hem grace leveth. But speciallich predestination of goodness, alone is
said by these great clerks, for in him God does that they been, and that is
goodness they werchen. But the negatife hereof in badnesse is holden, as y^
lady of love has me learned, who so aright in this book looks. And utterly
it is to weren, that predestination properly in God may not been demed, no more
than befornweting. For in the chapitre of Gods befornweting, as love me
rehearsed, all these matters apertly may been founden. * All things to God ben
now together and in presence during. Truly presence and predestination in
nothing disaccorden, wherefore as I was learned, how Gods before weting and
free choice of will mow stonden together, me thinks the same reason me
leads, that destiny and free will accorden, so that neither of hem both to
other in nothing contrarieth. And reasonablich may it not been deemed, as often
as any thing falls free will werching, as if a man another man wrongfully
annoyeth, wherefore he him sleeth, that it be constrained to that end, as mokel
folk cries and says: Lo, as it was destenied of God toforn know, so it is
through necessity fall, and otherwise might it not betide. Truly neither he
that the wrong wrought, ne he that himself venged, none of thilk things through
necessity wrought: for if that with free will there had it not willed, neither
had wrought that he performed: and so utterly grace that free will in goodness
brings and keepet^ and fro badnes it tourneth, in all thing most thank
deserves. This grace makes sentence in virtue to abide, wherefore in body and
in soul of full plenty of conning, after their good deserving in the
everlasting joy, after y^ day of dome shull they endless dwell, and they shull
ben learned, that in kingdom with so mokell affect of love and of grace, y^ the
least joy shall of the greatest in glory rejoice and been gladded, as if he the
same joy had. What wonder since God is the greatest love, and thee ne ought to
look things with reasoning to prove, and so is instrument of will, will: and
yet varieth he from effect and using both. Affection of will also for will is
cleaped, but it varieth from instrument in this manner wise, by that name, lich
when it comes into mind, anon right it is in willing desired, and the
negatife thereof with willing may not accord: this is closed in heart, though
usage and instrument sleep. This sleeps, when instrument and us waken: and of
such manner affection truly, some man has more, and some man less. Certes,
true lovers wenen ever thereof too little to have. False lovers in little wenen
have right mokel. Lo instrument of will in false and true both euenlich is
proportioned, but affection is more in some place than in some, because of
goodness that follows, and that I think hereafter to declare. Use of this
instrument is will, but it takes his name, when wilned thing is in doing. But
utterly grace to catch in thy bliss, desired to been rewarded. Thou must have
then affection of will at y^ full, and use when his time asks, wisely to been
governed. Soothly my disciple, without fervent affection of will may no man been
saved: this affection of good service in good love, may not been grounded,
without fervent desire to the thing in will coueited. But he that never
retcheth to have, or not to have, affection of will in that has no resting
place. Why? for when thing comes to mind, and it be not taken in heed to
commin or not come, therefore in that place affection fails: and for thilk
affection is so little, through which in goodness he should come to his grace,
the littlenes will it not suffer to a^ail by no way into his helps: Certes grace
and reason thilk affection follows. This affection with reason knit, dureth
in euerich true heart, and evermore is increasing, no feardnesse, no strength
may it remove, while truth in heart abides. Soothly when falshede ginneth
enter, truth draws away grace and joy both, but then thilk falshed that truth
has thus voided, has unknit the bond of under standing reason, between will
and the heart. And who so that bond vndoth, and vnknitteth will to be in other
purpose than to the first accord, knitteth him with contrary of reason, and
that is vnreason. Lo then, will and vnreason brings a man from the bliss of
grace, which thing of pure kind, every man ought to shun and to eschew, and to
the knot of will and reason confirm. Me thinks (quoth. she) by thy studient
looks, thou wenest in these words me to contrarien from other sayings
heretoforn in other place, as when thou were sometime in affection of will, to
things that now han brought thee in disease, which I have thee counseled to
void, and thine heart discover, and there I made thy will to ben changed, which
now thou wenest I argue to withhold and to keep. Shortly I say, that reuers in
these words may not ben found: for though dronkennes be forboden, men shul not
always ben drinkelesse. I trow right for thou thy will out of reason should not
tourn, thy will in one reason should not unbind, I say thy will in thy first
purpose with unreason was closed: Construe forth of the remnaunt what thee good
likes. Truly that will and reason should be knit together, was free will of
reason, after time thine heart is assentaunt to them both, thou might not
change, but if thou from rule of reason vary, in which variaunce to come to
thilke bliss desired, contrariously thou werchest: and nothing may know will
and reason but love alone. Then if thou void love, then weuest the bond that
knitteth, and so needs or else right lightly, that other gonne a sundry,
wherefore thou see apertly, yt love holds this knot, and amaistreth hem to
be bound. These things, as a ring, in circuit of wreth ben knit in thy soul
without departing. Ah let be, let be (quoth. I) it needs not of this no
rehersail to make, my soul is yet in parfit blyss, in thinking of yt knot.

NOw truly lady, I have my ground well understand, but what thing is thilke
spire yt into a tree should wexe: Expoune me yt thing, what ye thereof mean.
That shall I (quoth. she) blithly, and take good heed to ye words I thee read.
Continuance in thy good service, by long process of time in full hope
abiding, without any change to wilne in thine heart: this is ye spire, which if
it be well kept and governed, shall so hugely spring, till the fruit of grace is
plenteously out sprongen: For although thy will be good, yet may not therefore
thilk bliss desired, hastily on thee discenden, it must abide his sesonable
time. And so by process of growing, with thy good travail, it shall into more
and more wex, till it be found so mighty, that winds of evil speech, ne scorns
of envy make not the trauail overthrow, ne frosts of mistrust, ne hailes of
jelousie right little might have in harming of such springs. Every young settling
lightly with small storms is apeired, but when it is woxen somdele in
greatness, then han great blastes and weathers but little might, any
disauantage to hem for to werch. Mine own sovereign lady (quoth. I) and wealth of
mine heart, and it were liking unto your noble grace, therethrough not to be
displeased, I suppose ye erren, now ye maken jelousie envy, and distourbour to
hem yt ben your servant. I have learned often toforn this time, yt in every
lovers heart great plenty of jelousies greeues ben sow, wherefore me thinks ye
ne ought in no manner account thilk thing among these other welked winers and
venomous serpents, as envy, mistrust, and evil speech. O fool (quoth. she)
mistrust with folly, with evil will meddled, engenders ye welked padde. Truly if
they were destroyed, jelousie undone were for ever, and yet some manner of
jelousie I wot well is ever ready in all the hearts of my true servant, as
thus: to be jealous over himself, least he be cause of his own disease. This
jealousy in full thought ever should be kept for ferdnesse to lose his love by
miskeping through his own doing in leudnes, or else thus: Least she that thou
seruest so fervently, is beset there her better likes, yt of all thy good
service she counts not a cresse. These jealousies in heart for acceptable
qualities ben deemed: these oughten every true lover by kindly evermore haven
in his mind, till fully yt grace and bliss of my service be on him descended
at will. And he yt then jelousie catches, or else by wening of his own foolish
wilfulness mistrusteth, truly with fantasy of venime he is foul beguiled.
Evil will has grounded thilk matter of sorrow in his lewd soul, and yet not for
then to every wight should me not trust, ne every wight should me not trust, ne
every wightfully misbeleeue ye mean of these things owen to be used. * Soothly,
withouten causeful evidence, mistrust in jealousy should not be wened in no
wise person commonly, such lewd wickedness should me not find. * He yt is wise,
and with evil will not be acomered, can abide well his time, til grace and bliss
of his service following have him so mokel eased, as his abiding tofore hand
has him diseased. Certes lady (quoth. I tho) of nothing me wondreth, sithen thilk
bliss so precious is and kindly good and well is, and worthy in kind, when it
is meddled with love and reason, as ye toforn have declared. Why, anon as hie
one is sprung, why springs not ye the other? and anon as ye one comes, why
receives not ye other? For every thing yt is out of his kindly place, by full
appetite, ever comes thiderward kindly to draw, and his kindly being thereto
him constrains. And ye kindly stead of this bliss, is in such will meddled to
vnbide, and needs in yt it should have his kindly being. Wherefore me thinks
anon as yt will to be showed, and kind him profereth, thilk bliss should him hie
thilk will to receive, or else kind of goodness worchen not in hem as they should.
Lo, be the sun never so far, ever it has his kind werching in earth: great
weight on hye on loft carried, stinteth never till it come to this resting
place. Waters to ye seaward ever ben they drawing: thing yt is light, blithely
will not sink, but ever ascends, and upward draws. Thus kind in every thing
his kindly course and his being place shows: Wherefore be kind on this good
will, anon as it were sprung, this bliss should thereon descend, her kind
would they dwelleden togider, and so have ye said your self. Certes (quoth. she)
thine heart sits wonder sore this bliss for to have, thine heart is sore
agreeued yt it tarrieth so long, and if thou durstest, as me thinks by thine
words, this bliss would thou blame. But yet I say, thilke bliss is kindly
good, and his kindly place in ye will to vnbide. Never ye later, there coming
togider after kinds ordinance not suddenly may betide, it must abide time, as
kind yeueth him leave, for if a man, as this will meddled gone him show, and
thilke bliss in have followed, so lightly coming should lightly cause going,
long time of thrusting causes drink to be the more delicious when it is
atasted. How is it (quoth. I then) that so many blisses see I all day at mine eye,
in the first moment of a sight with such will accord. Yea, and yet other while
with will assenteth, singularly by himself there reason fails, trauail was
none, service had no time. This is a queint manner thing, how such doing
comes about. O (quoth. she) that is thus, the earth kindly after seasons and
times of the year, brings forth innumerable herbs and trees both profitable
and other, but such as men might leave tho they were naught in nourishing to
man's kind seruen, or else such as tournen soon unto men's confusion, in ease
that thereof they atast, commen forth out of the earth by their own kind,
withouten any man's cure or any business in traueil: and thilk herbs y^ to men's
liuelode necessarily seruen without, which goodly in this life creatures mowen
not enduren, and most ben nourishen to mankind, without great trauail, great
tilth, and long abiding time, commen not out of the earth, and it with seed
toforn ordained such herbs to make spring and forth grow. Right so the parfit
bliss, y^ we have in meaning of during time to abide, may not come so lightly,
but with great traueile and right busy tilth, and yet good seed to be sow, for
often the crop fails of bad seed, be it never so well traueiled. And thilk
bliss thou spoke of so lightly in coming, truly is not necessary ne abiding:
and but it the better be stamped, and the venomous jeuse out wrongen, it is
likely to enpoysonen all tho that thereof tasten. Certes, right bitter been the
herbs that shown first the year of her own kind. Well the more is the harvest,
that yeeldest many grains, tho long and sore it has been travailed. What
would thou demen, if a man would give three quarters of nobles of gold, that
were a precious gift? Ye certes (quoth. I.) And what (quoth. she) three quarters full
of pearls? Certes (quoth. I) that were a rich gift. And what (quoth. she) of as
mokell azure? (Quoth. I) a precious gift at full. Were not (quoth. she) a noble gift
of all these at ones? In good faith (quoth. I) for wanting of English, naming of
so noble a word, I cannot for preciousnesse give it a name: Rightfully (quoth.
she) have thou deemed, and yet love knit in virtue, passes al y^ gold in this
earth. Good will accordant to reason, with no manner property may be
counteruailed, all the azure in the world is not to account in respect of
reason, love that with good will and reason accords, with none earthly riches
may not ben amended. This yeft have thou yeuen I know it my self, and thy
Margarite thilke gift has received, in which thing to reward she has her self
bound. But thy gift, as I said, by no manner riches may be amended, wherefore
with thing that may not be amended, thou shall of thy Margarites rightwisenesse
be rewarded. Right suffered yet never, but every good deed sometime to be yold.
All would thy Margarite with no reward thee quite. Right that never more dies,
thy mede in merit woll puruey. Certes, such sudden bliss as thou first
nempnest, right will hem reward, as the well is worthy, and tho at thine eye it
seems the reward the desert to pass, right can after send such bitterness
euenly it to reward: so the sudden bliss by always of reason in great
goodness may not be accounted, but bliss long, both long it abides, and
endless it woll last. See why thy will is endless, for if thou lovedst ever, thy
will is ever there tabide, and never more to change: even head of reward must
ben done by right: then must needs thy grace and this bliss endless in joy to
vnbide. Euenlich disease asks euenlich joy, which hastly thou shall have. A
(quoth. I) it suffices not then alone good will, be it never so well with reason
meddled, but if it be in good service long travailed. And so through service
should men come to the joy, and this me thinks should be the wexing tree, of
which ye first meued.

VEry troth (quoth. she) have thou now conceived of these things in thine heart,
hastily shall thou be able very joye and parfite bliss to receive. And now I
wot well thou desire to know the manner of branches, that out of the tree
should spring. Thereof lady (quoth. I) heartely I you pray: For then leave I woll,
that right soon after I shall ataste of the fruit that I so long have
desired. Thou haste heard (quoth. she) in with wise this tree toforn this have I
declared, as in ground and in stock of wexing. First ye ground should be thy
free will full in thine heart, and the stock (as I said) should be continuance
in good service, by long time in trauail, till it were in greatness right well
woxen. And when this tree such greatness has caught, as I have rehearsed, y^
branches then yt ye fruit should forth bring, speech must they be needs in
voice of prayer, in complaining wise used. Out alas (quoth. I tha) he is
sorrowfully wounded, that hides his speech, and spares his complaints to
make, what shall I speak that care: but pain even like to hell, sore has me
assailed, and so ferforth in pain me throng, that I leave my tree is ser, and
never shall it fruit forth bring.* Certes, he is greatly eased, that dare his
preuy moan discover to a true fellow, that conning has and might, wherethrough
his pleint in any thing may be amended. And mokel more is he joied, y^ with
heart of hardines dare complain to his lady, what cares that he suffers, by
hope of mercy with grace to be auanced. Truly I say for me, since I came this
Margarite to serve, durst I never me discover of no manner disease, and well
the later has mine heart hardied such things to done, for the great bounties
and worthy refreshments that she of her grace goodly, without any desert on my
halue often has me rekened, and nere her goodness the more with grace and with
mercy meddled, which passen all deserts, travels, and seruings, that I in any
degree might endite, I would wene I should be without recover in getting of
this bliss for ever. Thus have I stilled my disease, thus have I covered my
care, y^ I bren in sorrowful annoy, as gledes and coals wasten a fire under
dead ashen. Well the hoter is the fire, that with ashen is ouerlein: right long
this woe have I suffered. Lo (quoth. Love) how thou farest: me thinks the palsy
evil has acomered thy wits, as fast as thou highest forward, anon suddenly
backward thou mouest. Shall not yet all thy lewdness out of thy brains? Dull
ben thy skilful understandings, thy will has thy wit so amaistred. Wost thou
not well (quoth. she) but every tree in his seasonable time of bourioning, show
his blomes fro within, in sign of with fruit should out of him spring, else ye
fruit for yt year men halt delivered, be ye ground never so good. And tho the
stock be mighty at ye full, and the branches seer, and no burions show, and
Farewell the gardener, he may pipe with an yuy leaf, his fruit is failed.
Wherefore thy branches must burionen in presence of thy lady, if thou desire any
fruit of thy ladies grace, but beware of thy life, that thou no woe delay use,
as in asking of things y^ stretchen into shame, for then might thou not speed
by no way y^ I can espy. * Virtue woll not suffer villanye out of himself to
spring. Thy words may not be queint, ne of subtel manner understanding. Freel
witted people supposen in such poesies to be beguiled, in open understanding
must every word be used. * Voice wthout clear understanding of sentence, says
Aristotle, right naught printeth in heart. Thy words then to abide in heart, and
clean in full sentence of true mening, platly must thou show, and ever be
obedient her hests and her wills to perform, and be thou set in such a wit to
wete by a look evermore with she means. And he y^ list not to speak, but stilly
his disease suffer, with wonder is it tho he never come to his bliss? * Who y^
trauaileth vnwist, and coueiteth thing unknow, vnweting he shall be quited, and
with unknow thing rewarded. Good lady (quoth. I then) it has often be seen, that
weathers and storms so hugely have fall in burioning time, and by pert duresse
han beaten off the springs so clean, wherethrough y^ fruit of thilk year has
failed. It is a great grace when burions han good wethers, their fruits forth
to bring. Alas then after such storms how hard is it to avoid, till eft wedring
and years han maked her circuit course all about, ere any fruit be able to be
tasted, he is shent for shame, y^ foul is rebuked of his speech. He that is in
fire brenning, sore smarteth for disease, Him thinks full long er y^ water
come y^ should y^ fire quench. * While men gone after a leche, the body is
buried. Lo how seemly this fruit wexeth, me thinks y^ of tho fruits may no
man atast, for pure bitterness in favor. In this wise both fruit and y^ tree
wasten away togider, tho mokell busy occupation have be spent to bring it so
fer forth y^ it was able to spring. A little speech has maked, that all this
labor is in idle. I not (quoth. she) whereof it serves thy question to assoil, me
thinks thee now duller in wits, than when I with thee first met, although a
man be leaud, commonly for a fool he is not demed, but if he no good woll
learn: sots and fools let lightly out of mind the good that men teaches hem. I
said therefore thy stock must be strong, and in greatness well herted, the tree
is full feeble, that at the first dent fails: and although fruit fails one
year or two, yet shall such a season come one time or other, that shall bring
out fruit that is nothing preterit, ne passed there is nothing future ne
coming, but all things togider in yt place been present everlasting without any
meuing, wherefore to God all thing is as now: and though a thing be not in
kindly nature of things as yet, and if it should be hereafter, yet evermore we
shull say God it makes be time present, and now for no future ne preterit in
him may be found. Wherefore his weting and his before weting, is all one in
understanding. Then if weting and before weting of God puts in necessity to
all things which he wot or before wot ne thing after eternity, or else after
any time he woll or does of liberty, but all of necessity, which thing if thou
wene it be against reason, not through necessity, to be or not to be, all thing
y^ God wot or before wot, to be or not to be, and yet nothing defends any
thing to be wist, or to be before wist of him in our wills or our doings to be
done, or else coming to be for free arbitrament. When thou have these
declarations well understand, then shall thou find it reasonable at prove, and
yt many things be not through necessity, but through liberty of will, save
necessity of free will, as I tofore said: and as me thinks all utterly
declared. Me thinks lady (quoth. I) so I should you not displease, and evermore
your reverence to keep, yt these things contrarien in any understanding, for ye
sain sometime is through liberty of will, and also through necessity: of this
have I yet no savor, without better declaration. What wonder (quoth. she) is
there in these things, sithen all day thou shall see at thine eye, in many
things receiuen in hemself reuers, through diverse reasons, as thus. I pray thee
quoth. she) which things ben more reuers than commen and gone: For if I bid thee
come to me, and thou come, after when I bid thee go, and thou go, thou
reuersest fro thy first coming. That is soth (quoth. I:) And yet (quoth. she) in thy
first alone by diverse reason was full reuersing to understand. As how (quoth. I)
That shall I show thee (quoth. she) by ensample of things yt have kindly moving.
Is there any thing yt meueth more kindly than does y^ heuens eye, which I clepe
the Sun. Soothly (quoth. I) me seems it most kindly to move. Thou say soth (quoth.
she.) Then if thou look to the Sun, in what part he be under heaven, evermore
be heigheth him in moving fro thilk place, and heigheth meuing toward thilk
same place, to thilk place from which he goth, he heigheth coming, and without
any ceasing to y^ place he heigheth, from which he is changed and withdraw.
But now in these things, after diversity of reason, reuers in one thing may be
sey without repugnaunce. Wherefore in ye same wise, without any repugnaunce by
my reasons tofore maked, all is one to believe, somethyng to be through
necessity coming, for it is coming, and yet with no necessity constrained to
be coming, but with necessity y^ comes out of free will, as I have said. Tho
list me a little to speak, and began stint my pen of my writing, and said in this
wise. Truly lady, as me thinks, I can allege authorities great y^
contrarien your sayings. Job says of man's person, Thou have put his term,
which thou might not pass. Then say I ye no man may short ne length y^ day,
ordained of his doing, although sometime to us it seems some man to do a thing of
free will, wherethrough his death he henteth. Nay forsooth (quoth. she) it is
nothing against my saying, for God is not beguiled, ne he sees nothing wheder
it shall come of liberty or else of necessity, yet it is said to be ordained at
God immouable, which at man, or it be done, may be changed. Such thing also
is, y^ Poul ye Apostle says of hem y^ toforne werne purposed to be Saints, as
thus, which that God before wist, and has predestined, conformes of images of
his son that he should been y^ first begeten, y^ is to say, here amongs many
brethren, and whom he has predestined, him he has cleaped, and whom he has
cleaped, hem he has justified, and whom he has justified, hem he has
magnified. This purpose, after which they been cleped Saints, or holy in y^
everlasting present, where is neither time passed, ne time coming, but ever it
is only present, and now as mokell a moment, as seven thousand Winter, and so
ayenward, withouten any meuing, is nothing liche temporel presence, for thing
y^ there is ever present. Yet emongs you men, ere it be in your presence, it is
moouable through liberty of arbitrament. And right as in y^ everlasting
present, no manner thing was, ne shall be, but only is, and now here in your
temporell time somethyng was, and is, and shall be, but moving stounds, and in
this is no manner repugnaunce. Right so in the everlasting presence, nothing may
be changed: and in your temporell time, otherwhile it is proved mouable by
liberty of will, or it be do, withouten any inconvenience thereof to follow. In
your temporell time is no such presence, as in y^ other, for your present is
done, when passed and to come ginnen enter, which times here amongs you,
euerich easily follows other, but y^ present everlasting dureth in one head,
withouten any imaginable changing, and ever is present and now. Truly the
course of y^ planets, and ouerwhelmings of y^ Sun in days and nights, with a
new ginning of his circuit after it is ended, yt is to sayn, one year to follow
another. These maken your transitory times, with changing of lives, and
mutation of people. But right as your temporell presence coueiteth every place,
and all things in every of your times be contained, and as now both sey and
wist to Gods very knowing. Then (quoth. I) me wondreth why Poule spoke these
words, by voice of signification in time passed, that God his saints before
wist, has predestined, has cleaped, has justified, and has magnified: me
thinks he should have said tho words in time present, and that had been more
accordaunt to ye everlasting present, than to have spoke in preterit voice of
passed understanding. O (quoth. Love) by these words I see well thou have little
understanding of y^ everlasting presence, or else of my before spoken words, for
never a thing of tho thou have nempned, was tofore other, or after other, but
all at ons euenlich, at ye God ben, and all togider in the everlasting present,
be now to understanding, the eternal presence, as I said, has enclose togider
in one, all times, in which close and one all things, y^ been in diverse times,
and in diverse places temporell, without posteriority or priority, been closed
therein perpetuell now, and maked to dwell in present sight. But there thou
say yt Poule should have spoke thilke foresaid sentence be time present, and
y^ most should have been accordant to ye everlasting presence, why gabbest thee
to thy words? Soothly I say Poule moved y^ words, by signification of time
passed, to show fully y^ thilke words were not put for temporell signification,
for all thilk time were not thilke Saints temporallich borne, which that Poule
pronounced, GOD have tofore know, and have cleaped them magnified, wherthrough
it may well be know, y^ Poul used tho words of passed signification, for need
and lack of a word in man's bodily speech, betokening the everlasting presence.
And therefore word is most semelich in likeness to everlasting presence, he took
his sentence for things, yt here beforne ben passed, utterly be immouable,
ilike to y^ everlasting presence. As thilke that been, there never mow not
been present, so things of time passed, ne mow in no wise not been passed: but
all things in you temporal, presence y^ passen in a little while, shullen been
not present. So then in that it is more similitude to the everlasting presence,
signification of time passed, than of time temporal present, and so more in
accordaunce. In this manner what thing of these that been done through free
arbitrament, or else as necessary, holy writ pronounces, after eternity he
speaks, in which presence is everlasting sooth, and nothing but soth
immouable, that after time, in which naught always been your wills and your acts,
and right as while they be not, it is not needful hem to be: so often it is not
needful, y^ sometime they should be. As how (quoth. I) for yet must I be learned by
some ensample. Of love (quoth. she) woll I now ensample make, sithen I know the
head knot in y^ yelke. Lo, sometime thou writest no art, ne art then in no will
to write, and right as while thou writest not, or else wolt not write, it is not
needful thee to write, or else wilne to write.

And for to make thee know utterly, that things been otherwise in the
everlasting presence, than in temporal time: see now my good child, for
something is in the everlasting presence, than in temporal time, it was not in
eternite time, in eterne presence shall it not be. Then no reason defends, y^
something ne may be in time temporel moving, that in etern is immouable.
Forsooth it is no more contrary ne reuers, for to be mouable in time temporell,
and mouable in eternity, than not to be in any time, and to be always in
eternity, and have to be, or else to come in time temporell, and not have be, ne
naught coming to be in eternity. Yet never the latter, I say not same thing to
be never in time temporell, y^ ever is eternity, but all only in some time not
to be. For I say not thy love to morn in no time to be, but to day alone I
deny ne it to be, and yet never the later, it is always in eternity.

Also (quoth. I) it seems to me, y^ coming thing, or else passed, here in your
temporal time to be, in eternity ever now, and present owes not to be demed,
and yet follows not thilke thing, that was, or else shall be, in no manner
thereto been passed, or else coming: then utterly shull we deny, for there
without reasing, it is in his present manner. O (quoth. she) mine own disciple,
now ginnest thou able to have the name of my servant, Thy wit is clered, away
is now error of cloud in vnconning, away is blindness of love, away is
thoughtfull study of meddling manners, hastly shall thou enter into the joy of
me, that am thine own maistres.

Thou have (quoth. she) in a few words well and clearly concluded mokell of my
matter. And right as there is no reuers, ne contrariousty in tho things, right
so withouten any repugnance it is said some thing to be mouable in time
temporell, and for it be, that in eternity dwells immouable, not before it be,
or after y^ it is, but without cessing, for right naught is there after time,
y^ same is there everlasting, y^ temporallich sometime nis, and toforne it be,
it may not be, as I have said. Now sothly (quoth. I) this have I well understand,
so y^ now me thinks, that prescience of God, and free arbitrament, withouten
any repugnaunce accorden, and that makes the strength of eternity, which
encloseth by presence, during all times, and all things that been, han been,
and shull been in any time.

I would now (quoth. I) a little understand, sithen y^ all thing thus beforne
wot, whether thilke weting be of tho things, or else thilke things to been of
Gods weting, and so of God nothing is: and if every thing be through Gods
weting, and thereof take his being, then should GOD be maker and author of bad
werks, and so he should not rightfully punish evil doings of mankind. (Quoth.
Love) I shall tell thee this lesson to learn, mine own true servant, the
noble Phylosophical Poet, in English, which evermore him busieth and
trauaileth right sore, my name to increase, wherefore all that willen me good,
owe to do him worship and reverence both, truly his better ne his pere, in
school of my rules coud I never find: He (quoth. she) in a treatise that he made
of my servant Troylus, has this matter touched, and at the full this question
assoiled. Certainly his noble sayings can I not amend: in goodness of gentle
manliche speech, without any manner of nicety of flarieres imagination, in wit
and in good reason of sentence, he passes all other makers. In the book of
Troylus, the answer to thy question may thou learn, never y^ later, yet may
lightly thine understanding somedele been learned, if thou have knowing of
these toforne said things, with that thou have understanding, of two the last
chapiters of this second book, that is to say, good to be some thing, and bad
to want all manner being, for bad is nothing else, but absence of good, and y^
God in good makes that good deeds been good, in evil he makes that they ben
but naught, y^ they been bad: for to nothing is badnesse to be. I have (quoth. I
tho) enough knowing therein, me needs of other things to hear, that is to
say, how I shall come to my bliss so long desired.

IN this matter toforne declared (quoth. Love) I have well showed, that every man
has free arbitrament of things in his power to do or undo what him likes.
Out of this ground must come the Spire, that by process of time shall in
greatness sprede to have branches and blossoms, of waxing fruit in grace, of
which the taste and the savor is endless bliss in joy ever to onbide.

Now Lady (quoth. I) that tree to set, feign would I learn. So thou shall (quoth.
she) ere thou depart hence. The first thing, thou must set thy work on ground
siker and good, accordaunt to thy springs. For if thou desire grapes, thou
go not to the Hasell, ne for to tetchen Roses, thou sekest not on Oaks: and
if thou shall have Honey soukles, thou leauest the fruit of y^ sour Dock.
Wherefore if thou desire this blyss in parfite joy, thou must set thy purpose
there virtue follows, and not to look after the bodily goods, as I said when
thou were writing in thy second book. And for thou have set thy self in so
noble a place, and utterly lowed in thine heart the misgoyng of thy first
purpose, this setteles is y^ easier to spryng, and the more lighter thy soul in
grace to be lissed. And truly, thy desire, that is to say, thy will, algates
mote ben steadfast in this matter, without any chaungyng, for if it be steadfast,
no man may it void. Yes parde (quoth. I) my will may been turned by friends, and
disease of manace, and threatening in lesing of my life, and of my limbs, and
in many other wise, that now comes not to mind. * And also it mote often been
out of thought: For no remembrance may hold one thing continuelly in heart, be
it never so lusty desired. Now see (quoth. she) thou thy will shall follow, thy
free will to be grounded, continuelly to abide: It is thy free will y^ thou
love and have loved, and yet shall louen this Margarite pearl, and in thy
will thou think to hold it. Then is thy will knitte in love, not to change
for no new lust beside: This will teaches thine heart from all manner varying.
But then, although thou be threatened in death, or else in other wise, yet is it
in thine arbitrament to choose, thy love to void, or else to hold: and thilk
arbitrament is in a manner a judgment, between desire and thy heart. And if
thou deem to love, thy good will fails, then art thou worthy no bliss, that
good will should deserve: and if thou choose continuance in thy good service,
then thy good will abides, needs bliss following of thy good will, must come
by strength of thilke judgment: for thy first will, that taught thine heart to
abide, and halt it from the eschange, with thy reason is accorded. Truly this
manner of will thus shall abide, impossible it were to turn, if thy heart be
true, and if every man dilligently the meanyngs of his will consider, he shall
well understand, that good will knitte with reason, but in a false heart never
is voided: for power and might of keepyng this good will, is through liberty of
arbitrament in heart, but good will to keep may not fail. Eke then if it fail,
it shows it self, that good will in keeping is not there. And thus false
will, that puts out the good, anon constrains the heart to accord in
loving of thy good will, and this accordaunce between false will and thine
heart, in falsity been likened together. Yet a little woll I say thee in good
will, thy good wills to raise and strength. Take heed to me (quoth. she) how thy
wills thou shall understand. Right as ye han in your body diverse members, and
five sundry wits, euerich apart to his own doing, which things as
instruments ye vsen, as your hands apart to handle, feet to go, tongue to
speak, eye to see: right so the soul has in him certain steryngs and
strengths, which he uses as instruments to his certain doyngs. Reason is in
the soul, which he uses things to know and to prove, and will, which he
uses to wilne: And yet is neither will ne reason all the soul, but eueryche
of hem is a thing by himself in the soul. And right as euerich has thus
singular instruments by hemselfe, they han as well diverse aptes, and diverse
manner vsings, and thilke aptes mowen in will been cleaped affections.
Affection is an instrument of willing in his appetites. Wherefore mokell folk
saine, if a reasonable creatures soul any thing fervently wilneth, affectuously
he wilneth, and thus may will by term of equiuocas, in three ways been
understand: one is instrument of wylling, another is affection of this
instrument, and the third is use, that sets it a work. Instrument of
willing is the ilke strength of the soul, which thee constrains to wilne,
right as reason is instrument of reasons, which ye vsen when ye looken.
Affection of this instrument is a thing, by which ye be draw desirously any
thing to wilne in coueitous manner, all be it for y^ time out of your mind: as
if it come in your thought thilke thing to remember, anon ye ben willing thilke
to done, or else to have. And thus is instrument will, and affection is will
also, to wilne thing as I said? as for to wilne health, when will nothing
thereon thinks: for anon as it comes to memory, it is in will, and so is
affection to wilne sleep, when it is out of mind, but anon as it is
remembered, will wilneth sleep, when his time comes of the doing. For
affection of will never accords to sickness, ne always to wake. Right so in a
true lovers affection of willing instrument, is to wiln truth in his service,
and this affection always abides, although he be sleping, or threatened, or else
not thereon thinkyng, but anon as it comes to mind, anon he is steadfast in
y^ will to abide. Use of this instrument forsooth is another thing by himself,
and that have ye not, but when ye be doing, in willed thing by affect or
instrument of will, purposed or desired, and this manner of usage in my
service, wisely needs to be ruled, from waiters with envy closed, from
speakers full of jangeling words, from proud folk and hautaine that lambs
and innocents both scornen and dispisen. Thus in doing varieth the acts of
willing euerich from other, and yet ben they cleped will, and the name of will
utterly owen they to have, as instrument of will is will, when ye turn into
purpose of any thing to done, be it to sit or to stand, or any such thing else.
This instrument may been had, although affect and usage be left out of doing,
right as ye have sight and reason, and yet always use ye greatest wisdom, in
hem shall he be, and they in GOD. Now then, when all false folk be ashamed,
which wenen all bestialty and yerthly thing be sweeter and better to the body,
than heavenly is to the soul: this is the grace and y^ fruit y^ I long have
desired, it does me good the savor to smell. Christ now to thee I cry of
mercy and of grace, and grant of thy goodness to every manner reader, full
understanding in this lewd pamphlet to have, and let no man wene other cause in
this work, than is verily y^ sooth: for envy is ever ready all innocents to
shend, wherefore I would y^ good speech envy evermore hinder. But no man wene
this work be sufficiently maked, for Gods work passes man's, no man's wit to
parfite work may by no way puruay the end: how should I then, so leaude, aught
wene of perfection any end to get? Never the later, grace, glory, and laud, I
yield and put with worshipful reverence, to the soothfast God in three, with
unity closed, which that the heavy langour of my sickness has turned into
myrthe of health to recover: for right as I was sorrowed, through the glotton
cloud of manyfolde sickly sorrow, so mirth again coming, health has me gladded
and greatly comforted. I beseech and pray therefore, and I cry on Gods great
pite, and on his mokell mercy, that this present scourges of my flesh mow make
medicine and leech craft of my inner man's health, so that my passed trespass and
tenes through weepyng of mine eyes been wash, and I voided from all manner
disease, and no more to weep hereafter, I now be kept through Gods grace: so
that Gods hand, which merciablye me has scourged, hereafter in good plite
from thence merciably me keep and defend. In this book be many priuye things
wimpled and fold, uneath shul leaud men the plites unwind, wherefore I pray
to the Holy ghost, he lene of his oyntmentes men's wits to clear: and for
Gods love no man wonder, why or how this question cum to my mind, for my grate
lusty desire was of this lady to been informed, my lewdness to amend.
Certes I know not other men's wits, what I should ask, or in answer what I
should say, I am so leude my self, that mokell more learning yet me behooves. I
have made therefore as I could, but not sufficiently as I would, and as matter
yaue me sentence, for my dull wit is hindered, by stepmother of foryetyng, and
with cloud of uncunning, that stops the light of my Margarite pearl,
wherefore it may not shine on me as it should. I desire not only a good reader,
but also I coueite and pray a good book amender, in correction of words and of
sentence: and only this mede I coueit for my travail, that every inseer and
hearer of this lewd fautasie, devout horisons and prayers, to God the dread
judge yelden, and praien for me, in that wise that in his dome, my sins mow
been released and foryeuen: he that prays for other, for himself trauayleth.
Also I pray that every man parfitely mow know, through what intencion of heart
this treatise have I draw. How was it the sightful Manna in desert, to children
of Israel was spirituel meat: bodily also it was, for men's bodies it
nourished: And yet never the later, Christ it signified. Right so a jewel
betokens a gemine: and that is a stone virtuous or else a pearl. Margarite a
woman betokens grace, learning, or wisdom of God, or else holy Church. If
bread through virtue is made holy flesh, what is that our God says? * It is
the spirit that yeueth life, the flesh of nothing it profits. Flesh is
fleshly understanding: Flesh without grace and love, naught is worth. * The
letter sleeth, the spirit yeueth lifelich understanding. Charity is love, and
love is charity, God grant us all therein to be frended. And thus the
Testament of Love is ended.

Here ends the Testament of Love.
The Lamentation of Mary Magdalen.
This Treatise is taken out of S. Origin, wherein Mary Magdalen lamenteth the
Cruel Death of her Savior Christ.

PLonged in the wawe of mortal distress,
Alas for woe, to whom shall I complain,
Or who shall deuoid this great heuinesse,
Fro me woeful Mary, woeful Magdalen,
My lord is gone, alas who wrought this tein
This sudden chance perseth my heart so deep,
That nothing can I do, but wail and weep.
My lord is gone y^ here in grave was laid,
After his great passion and death cruel,
Who has him thus again betrayed?
Or what man here about can me tell
Where he is become, the Prince of Israel,
Jesus of Nazareth, my ghostly succor,
My parfite love and hope of all honor.
What creature has him hence carried?
Or how might this so suddenly befall?
I would I had here with him tarried,
And so should I have had my purpose all,
I bought ointments full precious and royal,
Wherewith I hoped his corpse to anointed,
But he thus gone, my mind is dispointed.
While I therefore advertise and behold,
This pitous chance here in my presence,
Full little marvel though my heart be cold,
Considring lo, my Lords absence
Alas that I so full of negligence
Sold be found, because I come so late,
All men may say I am unfortunate.
Cause of my sorrow you may understand
(Quia tulerunt Dominum meum)
An other is, that I ne may fond,
I wot nere, Ubi posuerunt eum,
Thus I must bewail, Dolorem meum,
With hearty weping, I can no better deserve
Till death approach my heart for to kerue.
My heart oppressed with sudden adventure,
By fervent anguish is be wrapped so,
That long this life I may not endure,
Soch is my pain, soch is my mortal woe,
Nevertheless to what party shall I go,
In hope to find mine own Turtill true,
My lives joy, my souerain Lord Jesus.
Since all my joy that I call his presence,
Is thus removed, now I am full of moan,
Alas the while I made no providence,
For this mishap, wherefore I sigh and groan,
Succor to find to what place might I gone,
Fain I would to some man my heart break,
I not to whom I may complain or speak.
Alone here I stand, full sorry and full sad,
Which hoped to have seen my lord and king,
Small cause have I to be merry or glad,
Remembryng his bitterfull departing,
In this world is no creature living
That was to me so good and gracious,
His love also than gold more precious.
Full sore I sigh, without comfort again,
There is no cure to my salvation,
His brenning love my heart so does constrain,
Alas here is a woeful permutacion,
Whereof I find no joy nor consolacion,
Therefore my pain all only to confess,
With death I fear woll end my heaviness.
This woe and anguish is intolerable,
If I bide here life can I not sustain,
If I go hence my pains be incurable,
Where him to find, I know no place certain,
And thus I not of these things twain,
Which I may take and which I may refuse,
My heart is wounded hereon to think or muse.
A while I shall stand in this mournyng,
In hope if any vision would appear,
That of my love might tell some good tidyng,
Which into joy might change my weeping chere,
I trust in his grace and his mercy dear,
But at the least though I therewith me kill,
I shall not spare to wail and weep my fill.
And if that I die in soch adventure,
I can no more but welcome as my chance,
My bones shall rest here in this sepulture,
My life, my death, is at his ordinance,
It shall be told in everlasting remembrance,
Thus to depart is to me no shame,
And also thereof I am nothing to blame.
Hope against me has her course ytake,
There is no more, but thus shall I die,
I see right well my Lord has me forsake,
But in my conceit, cause know I none why,
Though he be far hence and nothing nigh,
Yet my woeful heart after him does seek,
And causes tears to ren down my cheek.
Thinkyng alas I have lost his presence,
Which in this world was all my sustenance,
I cry and call with herty diligence,
But there is no wight gives attendance,
Me to certify of mine enquirance,
Wherefore I will to all this world be wray
How that my Lord is slain and borne away.
Though I mourn it is no great wonder,
Sith he is all my joy in special,
And now I think we be so far asonder,
That him to see I fear never I shall,
It helps no more after him to call,
Ne after him to enquire in any cost,
Alas how is he thus gone and lost?
The Jews I think full of misery,
Set in malice, by their busy cure,
With force and might with gileful treachery,
Has entermined my Lords sepulture,
And borne away that precious figure,
Leaving of it nothing, if they have done so,
Marred I am, alas what shall I do.
With their vengeance insaciable,
Now have they him entreated so,
That to report it is to lamentable,
They beat his body from top to the toe,
Never man was borne that felt soch woe,
They wounded him alas with all greuance,
The blood down reiled in most habundance.
The bloody rows stremed down over all,
They him assailed so maliciously
With their scourges and strokes bestiall,
They spared not but smote incessantly,
To satisfy their malice, they were full busy,
They spit in his face they smote here and there,
He groned full sore, and sweat many a tere.
They crouned him with thorns sharp and kene,
The veins rent, the blood ran down apace,
With blood overcome with both his iyen,
And bolne with strokes was his blessed face,
They him entreated as men without grace,
They kneeled to him, and made many a scorn,
Like hell hounds they have him all to torn.
Upon a mighty cross in length and bread,
These turmentors showed their cursednesse,
They nailed him without pity or dread,
His precious blood brast out in largeness,
They strained him along as men merciless,
The very jointes all, to mine appearance,
Riued asonder for their great violence.
All this I beholding with mine iyen twain,
Stood there beside with rufull attendaunce,
And ever me thought he being in that pain,
Looked on me with deadly countenance,
As he had said in his special remembrance,
Farwell Magdalen depart must I needs hens,
My heart is Tanquam cera liquescens.
Which rufull sight when I began behold,
Out of my wit I almost destraught,
Tare my here, my hands wrang and fold,
And of y^ sight my heart drank soch a draught,
That many a fall swouning there I caught,
I bruised my body falling on the ground,
Whereof I feel many a grievous wound.
Then these wretches full of al frowardness,
Gave him to drink Eisel tempred with gall,
Alas, that poison full of bitterness,
My loves chere caused then to appall,
And yet thereof might he not drink at all,
But spoke these words as him thought best,
Father of heaven, Consummatum est.
Then kneeled I down in pains outrage,
Clipping y^ cross within mine arms twain,
His blood distilled down on my visage,
My clothes eke the drops did distain,
To have died for him I would full fain,
But what should it avail if I did so,
Since he is, Suspensus in patibulo.
Thus my Lord full dear was all disguised
With blood, pain, and wounds many one,
His veins brast, his joints all to riued,
Partyng asonder the flesh fro the bone,
But I saw he hing not there alone,
For Cum inquis deputatus est,
Not like a man, but like a leprous be.
A blind knight men called Longias,
With a spear aproched unto my souerain,
Launsing his side full pitously alas,
That his precious heart he claue in twain,
The purple blood eke fro the herts vain,
Down railed right fast in most rufull wise,
With crystal water brought out of Paradise.
When I beheld this woeful passion,
I wot not how by sudden adventure,
My heart was peersed with very compassion,
That in me remained no life of nature,
Strokes of death I felt without measure,
My deaths wound I caught with woe oppressed,
And brought to point as my heart should breast.
The wound, heart, and blood of my darling,
Shall never slide fro my memorial,
The bitter pains also of tourmenting,
Within my soul be graven principal,
The spear alas that was so sharp withal,
So thrilled my heart as to my felyng,
That body and soul were at departing.
As soon as I might I releued up again,
My breath I could not very well restore,
Felyng my self drowned in so great pain,
Both body and soul me thought were al to tore,
Violent falls grieved me right sore,
I wept, I bledde, and with my self I fared,
As one that for his life nothing had cared.
I lokyng up to that rufull Roode,
Saw first the visage pale of that figure,
But so pitous a sight spotted with blood,
Saw never yet no living creature,
So it exceeded the bounds of measure,
That man's mind with all his wits five,
Is nothing able that pain for to discriue.
Then began I there mine arms to unbrace,
Up liftyng my hands full mourningly,
I sighed and sore sobbed in that place,
Both heaven and earth might have herd me cry,
Weping, and said alas incessauntly,
Ah my sweet heart, my ghostly paramour,
Alas I may not thy body socour.
O blessed lord, how fierce and how cruel
These cursed wights now has thee slain,
Keruing alas thy body eueridell,
Wound within wound, full bitter is thy pain,
Now would that I might to thee attain,
To nail my body fast unto thy tree,
So that of this pain thou might go free.
I can not report ne make no rehersaile
Of my demening with the circumstaunce,
But well I wot the spear with every nail
Thirled my soul by inward resemblaunce,
Which never shall out of my remembrance,
During my life it woll cause me to wail
As often as I remember that bataile.
Ah ye Jews, worse than dogs rabiate,
What m^ued you thus cruelly him to array,
He never displeased you nor caused debate,
Your love and true herts he coueyted aye,
He preched, he teched, he showed y^ right way,
Wherefore ye like tyrants wood and wayward,
Now have him thus slain for his reward.
Ye ought to have remembered one thing special,
His favor, his grace, and his magnificence,
He was your prince borne and Lord over all,
How be it ye took him in small reverence,
He was full meke in suffering your offense,
Nevertheless ye devoured him with one assent,
As hungry wolfs does y^ lamb innocent.
Where was your pite, o people merciless,
Arming your self with falsheed and treason,
On my lord ye have showed your woodnesse,
Like no men, but beestes without reason,
Your malice he suffered all for the season,
Your pain woll come think it not to slack,
* Man without mercy of mercy shall lack.
O ye traitors and maintainers of madness,
Unto your folly I ascribe all my pain,
Ye have me deprived of joy and gladness,
So dealing with my Lord and sovereign,
Nothing should I need thus to complain,
If he had lived in peace and tranquillite,
Whom ye have slain through your iniquite.
Farewell your nobleness y^ sometime did rain,
Farewell your worship, glory, and fame,
Hereafter to live in hate and disdain,
Marvel ye not for your trespace and blame,
Unto shame is turned all your good name,
Upon you now woll wonder every nation,
As people of most vile reputation.
These wicked wretches, these hounds of hell,
As I have told plain here in this sentence,
Were not content my dear love thus to quel,
But yet they must embesile his presence,
As I perceive by covert violence
They have him conveyed to my displeasure,
For here is lafte but naked sepulture.
Wherefore of troth and rightful judgment,
That their malice again may be acquitted,
After my verdite and auisement,
Of false murdre they shall be endited,
Of theft also which shall not be respited,
And in all have they shall be hanged and draw,
I woll my self plede this cause in the law.
Alas if I with true attendaunce,
Had still abidden with my lords corse,
And kept it still with true perseueraunce,
Then had not befall this woeful deuorse,
But as for my pain welcome and no force,
This shall be my song where so ever I go,
* Departing is ground of all my woe.
I see right well now in my pains smart,
There is no wound of so grievous dolor,
As is the wound of my careful heart,
Since I have lost thus my paramour,
All sweetness is turned into sour,
Mirth to my heart nothing may convey,
But he that bears thereof both look and key.
The joy excellent of blissed paradise,
May me alas in no wise comfort,
Song of angel nothing may me suffice,
As in min heart now to make disporte,
Al I refuse but that I might resort
Unto my love the well of goodliheed,
For whose longing I trow I shall be deed.
Of painful labor and tourment corporal,
I make thereof none exception,
Pains of hell I wol pass over all,
My love to find in mine affection,
So great to him is my delectacion,
A thousand times martred would I be,
His blessed body ones if I might see.
About this world so large in all compass,
I shall not spare to run my life during,
My feet also shall not rest in one place,
Til of my love I may hear some tiding,
For whose absence my hands now I wring,
To think on him cease shall never my mind,
O gentil Jesus where shall I thee find.
Jerusalem I wol search place fro place,
Sion, the vale of Iosaphat also,
And if I find him not in all this space,
By mount Oliuet to Bethany wol I go,
These ways wol I wander and many mo,
Nazareth, Bethleem, Mountana, Jude,
No travail shall me pain him for to see.
His blessed face if I might see and find,
Search I would every cost and country,
The fardest part of Egypt or hot Inde,
Should be to me but a little journey,
How is he thus gone or taken away,
If I knew the full troth and certente,
Yet from this care released might I be.
Into wilderness I think best to go,
Since I can no more tidings of him here,
There may I my life led to and fro,
There may I dwell, and to no man apere,
To town ne village woll I come nere,
Alone in woods, in rocks, and in caves deep,
I may at mine own will both wail and weep.
Mine eyes twain withouten variaunce
Shall never cease, I promise faithfully
There to weep with great abundance,
Bitter tears renning incessauntly,
The which tears meddled full petously,
With the very blood ever shall run also,
Expressing in mine heart the grievous woe.
Worldly fode and sustenaunce I desire none,
Such living as I find soch woll I take,
Roots that grown on the craggy stone,
Shall me suffice with water of the lake,
Then thus may I say for my lords sake,
Fuerunt mihi lachrymae meae
In Deserto Panes, Die ac Nocte.
My body to clothe it makes no force,
A mourning mantel shall be sufficient,
The grievous wounds of his pirous corse,
Shall be to me a full royal garnement,
He departed thus I am best content,
His cross with nails and scourges withal,
Shall be my thought and pain special.
Thus wol I live as I have here told,
If I may any long time endure,
But I fere death is over me so bold,
That of my purpose I can not be sure,
My pains increase without measure,
* For of long life who can lay any reason,
All thing is mortal and has but a season.
I sigh full sore and it is far yfet,
Mine heart I feel now bledeth inwardly,
The blody tears I may in no wise let,
Since of my pain I find no remedy,
I thank God of all if I now die,
His will performed I hold me content,
My soul let him have that has it me lent.
For longer to endure it is intolerable,
My woeful heart is inflamed so huge,
That no sorrow to mine is comparable,
Since of my mind I find no refuge,
Yet I him require as rightful judge,
To deuoide fro me the inward sorrow,
Lest I live not to the next morrow.
Within mine heart is impressed full sore,
His royal form, his shape, his semelines,
His port, his chere, his goodness evermore,
His noble person with all gentilnes,
He is the well of all part fitnes,
The very redemer of all mankind,
Him love I best with heart, soul, and mind.
In his absence my pains full bitter be,
Right well I may it feel now inwardly,
No wonder is though they hurt or slay me,
They cause me to cry so rufully,
Mine heart oppressed is so wonderfully,
Only for him which so is bright of blee,
Alas I trow I shall him never see.
My joy is translate full far in exile,
My mirth is changed into pains cold,
My life I think endures but a while,
Anguish and pain is that I behold,
Wherefore my hands thus I wring and fold,
Into his grave I look, I call, I pray,
Death remains, and life is borne away.
Now must I walk and wander here and there,
God wot to what parts I shall me dress,
With quaking heart, weepyng many a tere,
To seek out my love and all my sweetness,
I would he wist what mortal heuines
About mine heart renews more and more,
Then would he not keep pite long in store.
Without him I may not long endure,
His love so sore works within my breast,
And ever I weep before this sepulture,
Sighing full sore as mine heart should breast,
During my life I shall obtain no rest,
But mourn and weep where that ever I go,
Making complaint of al my mortal woe.
Fast I cry but there is no audience,
My coming hider was him for to please,
My soul oppressed is here with his absence,
Alas he list not to set mine heart in ease,
Wherefore to pain my self with all disease,
I shall not spare till he take me to grace,
Or else I shall sterue here in this place.
Ones if I might with him speak,
It were al my joy, with parfite pleasaunce,
So that I might to him my heart break,
I should anon deuoid al my greuaunce,
For he is the bliss of very recreaunce,
But now alas I can nothing do so,
For in steed of joy naught have I but woe.
His noble corse within mine hearts rote,
Deep is graued which shall never slake,
Now is he gone to what place I ne wot,
I mourn, I weep, and al is for his sake,
Since he is past, here a vow I make,
With heartily promise, and thereto I me bind,
Never to cease till I may him find.
Unto his mother I think for to go,
Of her happily some comfort may I take,
But one thing yet me fears and no mo,
If I any mention of him make,
Of my words she would trimble and quake,
And who coud her blame she having but one,
* The son borne away, y^ mother wol moan.
Sorrows many has she suffered trewly,
Since that she first conceived him and bare,
And seven things there be most specially,
That drowneth her heart in sorrow and care,
Yet lo, in no wise may they compare,
With this one now, the which if she knew,
She would her pains euerichone renew.
Great was her sorrow by men's saying,
When in the temple Simeon Iustus,
Showing to her, these words prophesiyng,
Tuam Animam pertransibit Gladius,
Also when Herod that tyrant furious,
Her child pursued in every place,
For his life went neither mercy ne grace.
She mourned when she knew him gone,
Full long she sought or she him found again,
When he went to death his cross him upon,
It was to her sight a rewful pain,
When he hong thereon, between thieves twain
And the spear unto his heart thrust right,
She swouned, and to the ground there pight.
When deed and bloody in her lap lay
His blessed body, both hands and fete all tore,
She cried out and said, now well away,
Thus araide was never man before,
When have was made his body to be bore
Unto his sepulture, here to remain,
Uneaths for woe she could her sustain.
These sorrows seven, like swerds every one,
His mothers heart wounded fro side to side,
But if she knew her son thus gone,
Out of this world she should with death ride,
For care she could no longer here abide,
Having no more joy nor consolacioun,
Than I here standing in this stacioun.
Wherefore her to see I dare not presume,
Fro her presence I wol my self refrain,
Yet had I lever to die and consume,
Than his mother should have any more pain,
Nevertheless her son I would see full fain,
His presence was very joy and sweetness,
His absence is but sorrow and heaviness.
There is no more, since I may him not mete,
Whom I desire above all other thing,
Need I must take the sour with the sweet,
For of his noble corse I here no tiding,
Full often I cry, and my hands wring,
Mine heart alas relenteth all in pain,
Which will brast both senew and vain.
* Alas how unhappy was this woeful hour,
Wherein is thus mispended my service,
For mine intent and eke my true labor,
To none effect may come in any wise,
Alas I think if he do me despise,
And list not take my simple obseruaunce,
There is no more, but death is my finaunce.
I have him called, Sed non respondet mihi,
Wherefore my mirth is turned to mourning
O dear Lord Quid mali feci tibi,
That me to comfort I find no erthly thing,
Alas, have compassion of my crying,
If fro me, Faciem tuam abscondis,
There is no more, but Consumere me vis.
Within mine heart is grounded thy figure,
That all this worlds horrible tourment,
May it not aswage, it is so without measure,
It is so brenning, it is so fervent,
Remember Lord I have bin diligent,
Ever thee to please only and no mo,
Mine heart is with thee where so ever I go.
Therefore my dear darling, Trahe me post te,
And let me not stand thus desolate,
Quia non est, qui consoletur me,
Mine heart for thee is disconsolate,
My pains also nothing me moderate,
Now if it list thee to speak with me alive,
Come in have, for my heart asonder will riue.
To thee I profer lo my poor service,
Thee for to please after mine own intent,
I offer here, as in devout sacrifice,
My box replete with precious ointment,
Mine eyes twain, weeping sufficient,
Mine heart with anguish fulfilled is alas,
My soul eke ready for love about to pas.
Naught else have I thee to please or pay,
For if mine heart were gold or precious stone,
It should be thine without any delay,
With hertely chere thou should have it anon,
Why suffrest thou me then to stand alone,
Thou have I trow my weeping in disdain,
Or else thou know not what is my pain.
If thou withdraw thy noble daliaunce,
For ought that ever I displeased thee,
Thou know right well it is but ignorance,
And of no knowledge for certainte,
If I have offended Lord forgive it me,
Glad I am for to make full repentance,
Of all thing that has bin to thy greuaunce:
Mine heart alas swells within my breast
So sore oppressed with anguish and with pain,
That all to pieces forsooth it woll breast,
But if I see thy blessed corse again,
For life ne death I can not me refrain,
If thou make delay thou may be sure
Mine heart woll leap into this sepulture.
Alas my lord, why farest thou thus with me,
My tribulation yet have in mind,
Where is thy mercy? where is thy pite?
Which ever I trusted in thee to find,
Sometime thou were to me both good and kind,
Let it please thee my prayer to accept,
Which with tears I have here bewept.
On me thou ought to have very routh,
Since for thee is all this mourning,
For since I to thee yplighted first my troth,
I never varied with discording,
That know thou best, my own darling,
Why constrainest thou me thus to wail?
My woe forsooth can thee nothing avail.
I have endured without variaunce,
Right as thou know, thy lover just and true,
With heart and thought aye at thine ordinance,
Like to the sapphire always in one hew,
I never changed thee for no new,
Why withdrawest thou my presence,
Since all my thought is for thine absence,
With heart intier, sweet Lord I cry to thee,
Incline thine ears to my petition,
And come, Voliciter exaudi me,
Remember mine herts dispositioun,
It may not endure in this conditioun,
Therefore out of these pains, Libera me,
And where thou art, Pone me juxta te.
Let me behold, O Jesus thy blissed face,
Thy fair glorious angellike visage,
Bow thine ears to my complaint, alas,
For to convey me out of this rage,
Alas my lord, take fro me this dommage,
And to my desire for mercy condescend,
For none but thou may my greuance amend.
Now yet good Lord, I thee beseech and pray,
As thou raised my brother Lazarous
From death to life, the fourth day
Came again in body and soul precious:
As great a thing may thou show unto us,
Of thy self, by power of thy godhead,
As thou did of him, lying in grave dead.
Mine heart is wounded with thy charity,
It brenneth, it flameth incessauntly,
Come my dear Lord, Ad adjuvandum me,
Now be not long, my pain to multiply,
Least in the mean time I depart and die:
In thy grace I put both hope and confidence,
To do as it pleases thy high magnificence.
Floods of death, and tribulatioun,
Into my soul I feel entered full deep,
Alas that here is no consolatioun,
Ever I wail, ever I mourn and weep,
And sorowhath wounded mine heart full deep,
O dear love, no marvel though I die,
Sagittae tuae infixae sunt mihi.
Wandering in this place, as in wilderness,
No comfort have I, ne yet assurance,
Desolate of joy, replete with faintness,
No answer receiving of mine enquiraunce,
Mine heart also grieved with displeasaunce,
Wherefore I may say, O Deus, Deus,
Non est dolor sicut dolor meus.
Mine heart expresses, Quod dilexi multum,
I may not endure though I would feign,
For now Solum superest Sepulchrum,
I know it right well by my huge pain,
Thus for love I may not life sustain,
But O God, I muse what ayleth thee,
Quod sic repent praecipitas me.
Alas, I see it wol none otherwise be,
Now must I take my leave for evermore,
This bitter pain has almost discomfite me,
My loves corse I can in no wise restore,
Alas to this woe that ever I was bore,
Here at this tomb now must I die and starve,
Death is about my heart for to carue.
My testament I woll begin to make,
To God the father my soul I commend,
To Jesus my love, that died for my sake,
My heart and all both I give and send,
In whose love my life makes end,
My body also, to this monument,
I here bequeath both box and ointment.
Of all my wills, lo now I make the last,
Right in this place, within this sepulture.
I woll be buried when I am dead and past,
And upon my grave I woll have this scripture:
Here within rests a ghostly creature,
Christ's true lover, Mary Magdalaine,
Whose heart for love brake in pieces twain.
Ye virtuous women, tender of nature,
Full of pity and of compassion,
Resort I pray you unto my sepulture,
To sing my dirige with great devotion,
Show your charity in this condition,
Sing with pity, and let your herts weep,
Remembering I am dead and laid to sleep.
Then when ye begin to part me fro,
And ended have your mourning observance,
Remember wheresoever that ye go,
Always to search and make due enqueraunce
After my love, mine herts sustenaunce,
In every town and in every village,
If ye may here of this noble image.
And if it hap by any grace at last,
That ye my true love find in any cost,
Say that his Magdaleine is dead and past,
For his pure love has yielded up the ghost,
Say that of all thing I loved him most,
And that I might not this death eschew,
May pains so sore did ever renew,
And in token of love perpetual,
When I am buried in this place present
Take out mine heart, the very root and al,
And close it within this box of ointment,
To my dear love make thereof a present,
Kneeling down with words lamentable,
Do your message, speak fair and tretable.
Say that to him my self I commend
A thousand times, with heart so free,
This poor token say to him I send,
Pleases his goodness to take it in gree,
It is his own of right, it is his fee
Which he asked, when he said long before,
* Give me thy heart, and I desire no more.
Adue my Lord, my love so fair of face,
Adue my turtle dove, so fresh of hew,
Adue my mirth, adue all my sollace,
Adue alas my savior Lord Jesus,
Adue the gentillest that ever I knew.
Adue my most excellent paramour,
Fairer than rose, sweeter than lilly flour.
Adue my hope of all pleasure eternal,
My life, my wealth, and my prosperity,
Mine heart of gold, my perle oriental,
Mine adamant of perfect charity,
My chief refuge, and my felicity,
My comfort, and all my recreatioun,
Farewell my perpetual saluatioun.
Farewell mine Emperor Celestial,
Most beautiful prince of all mankind,
Adue my lord, of heart most liberal,
Farewell my sweetest, both soul and mind,
So loving a spouse shall I never find,
Adue my sovereign, and very gentilman,
Farewell dear heart, as hertely as I can.
Thy words eloquent flowing in sweetness,
Shall no more alas my mind recomfort,
Wherefore my life must end in bitterness,
For in this world shall I never resort
To thee, which was mine heavenly disport,
I see alas it woll none other be,
Now farewell the ground of all dignity.
Adue the fairest that ever was bore,
Alas I may not see your blessed face,
Now welaway that I shall see no more
Thy blessed visage, so replete with grace,
Wherein is printed my perfect sollace,
Adue mine hertes root and all for ever,
Now farewell, I must from thee disceuer.
My soul for anguish is now full thursty,
I faint right sore for heaviness,
My lord, my spouse, Cur me dereliquisti?
Since I for thee suffer all this distress,
What causes thee to seem thus merciless,
Since it thee pleases of me to make an end,
( In Manus tuas) my spirit I commend.
Finis.
The Prologue to the Remedy of LOVE.
SEeing the manifold inconvenience
Falling by unbridled prosperity,
Which is not tempred with mortal prudence,
Nothing more wealthy than youths freeltie,
Moved I am, both of right and equity,
To youths well somewhat to write
Whereby he may himself safecondite.
First I note, as thing most noyous
Unto youth a grievous malady,
Among us called love encombrous,
Vexing young people straungelie,
Often by force causes hem to die,
Age is eke turmented by love,
Bineath the girdle, and not above.
Wherefore this werk, which is right laborous
For age me need not in hond to take,
To youth me owes to be obsequious,
Now I begin thus to work for his sake,
Which may the feruence of love aslake
To the lover, as a mitigatiue,
To him that is none a preservative.
That mighty lord which me governs,
Youth I mean, measure if I pace
In every matter which him concerns,
First, as is behouefull, I woll ask grace,
And forthwithall in this same place,
Ere I begin, I woll kneel and sa
These few words, and him of help pray.
Flouring youth, which have advantage
In strength of body, in lust and beauty,
Also a precelling have above age
In many a singular commodite,
Howbeit, one thing he has beyond thee,
To thy most profit and greatest avail,
Which should the conduit, I mean sad counsel.
And yet good lord, of a presumption,
I nill deprave thy might and deity,
I live but under thy protection,
I am thy subject, I wear thy liuerie,
For thou art ground of my prosperity,
And freshest flower of all my garland,
My singular aid, as I well understand.
But as he that owes his lord best seruise,
And entire faith, his honor to support,
Right so I speak, and in none other wise,
I knowledge my self one of the least sort
Of thy seruannts, to our elders comfort,
Draw sad counsel to thee if thou list,
Thee and thy power, who may then resist.
Fie on age, under words few,
And his erroneous opinion,
What spekest of him, which says most untrue,
All youth to be of ill dispositioun,
Dampneth us all without exceptioun,
And for a colerable advantage,
He says in him rests counsel sage.
Well may sad counsel in him rest,
But yet his deeds ben far therefro,
He may say with our parish priest,
* Do as I say, but not as I do,
For I my self know one or two,
Well stricken in age, for neighbourhed
Woll to their neighbors wives bed.
He will in presence of the young man
Her clippe and kiss, ye and down lay,
To bleare his eye, thus he says than,
* O suffer ye old Morel to play,
Now have I done that I can or may,
Thus he says her husband to queme,
That he nor no man should not misdeme.
In word nor deed needs him not be coy,
It is impossible that he do amiss,
If the young man speak, anon he says boy,
To rebuke age, beseems thee not iwis,
Thus his old face aye his warrant is,
All is in him slight and subtiltee,
And far from reason I tell thee.
And shortly age is not above me,
Age is impotent, and of no resistance,
Age unwieldy may not fight nor flee,
What were age, without my defense
(Sad counsel say thou gives him assistence)
Reason is freshest where that I am,
Wherefore in thy saying thou art to blame.
Since reason to me is rather accompanied
Than unto age, whith is the opinion
Of every wise man not to be denied,
And since sad counsel proceeds of reason,
Sad counsel in me has his cheef mansion,
This is no nay, but what is the end
Of this thy suasion, what do entend.
Age to compare unto thine excellence,
I nill presume him so to dignifie,
Ye be not egall, howbeit experience
Him auauntageth, for she most certainly,
Him teaches what thing to him is contrary,
And often to foresee it, and warely eschew
Which thou never assaidest yet nor knew.
* Experience makes a man most certain
Of any thing yearthly, and of necessite,
Sad counsel requires certainty plain,
So far to move thus whereto need we
But to my purpose, as thou command me,
Shortly mine intent is thus, and none other,
Under thy license to counsel my brother.
How should thou give any counsel so young.
Lacking experience unto thine own speech,
I report me, I wot well as for thy tongue
Will serve thee right well, but then for to teach,
I doubt me lest that thy wit woll not reach,
Youth and experience thou say be not convert,
How should thou then teach well inexpert.
* Scripture witnesses, yt God will often shitte
Fro the hie witted man, and show it to y^ child,
To him I mean that of his own wit
Presumes not, but is debonaire and mild,
By counsel I entend virtue for to bild,
Which of mine elders part have I borrowed,
And part of Experience, which I have sorowed.
Well then, if it be as thou let fare,
Show forth thy doctrine, be not aghast,
I woll thee support, look thou not spare,
Maugre age, though he frete or gnast,
To ask age counsel herein, were but wast,
Boldly begin, go forth to the process,
Fear not since thou art of such surenesse.
Grant mercy lord, since it thee does like
To license me, now I woll dare boldly
Assail my purpose, with scriptures autentike,
My work woll I ground, underset, and fortefie,
Aspire my beginning, O thou wood fury,
Alecto, with thy susters, and in especial
To the mother of jealousy Juno I call.
Explicit Prologus.
The Remedy of Love.
This Book, drawn for the most part out of the Proverbs of Solomon, is a
warning to take heed of the deceitful company of Women.

THis work who so shall see or read,
Of any incongruitie do me not impeche,
Ordinately behooves me first to proceed
In deduction thereof, in manner as the leche
His patients sickness owes first for to seche,
The which known, medicin he should apply,
And shortly as he can, then shape a remedy.
Right so by counsel, willing thee to exhort,
O young man prosperous, which does abound
In thy flowers of lust belongs on thee sort,
Me first to consider what is root and ground
Of thy mischief, which is plainly found,
Woman farced with fraud and deceit,
To thy confusion most allectiue bait.
Fly the miswoman, least she thee deceive,
Thus says Solomon, which taut was fully
The falshed of women in his days to conceive,
The lips of a strumpet ben sweeter than honey,
Her throat he says soupled with oil of flatery,
Howbeit, the end and effect of all
Bitterer is than any wormwood or gall.
Fly the miswoman, loving thy life,
Ware the strangers bland eloquence,
Strange I call her that is not thy wife,
Of her beauty have no concupiscence,
Her countenance pretending benevolence,
* Beware her signs, and eye so amiable,
Hold is for ferme, they ben deceiuable.
Lo an ensample what women be
In their signs and countenance shortly,
I woll show thee how lovers three
Loved one woman right entirely,
Each of them knew others malady,
Wherefore was all their daily labor,
Who coud approach next in her favor.
At sundry seasons, as fortune requires,
Severally they came to see her welfare,
But ones it happened, love them so fireth,
To see their Lady they all would not spare,
Of others coming none of them were ware,
Till all they met, whereas they in place
Of her Lady saw the desired face.
To supper set, full smally they eat,
Full sober and demure in countenance,
For there tarried none of hem for any meat,
But on his Lady to give attendaunce,
And in secret wise some signifiaunce
Of love to have, which perceiving she,
Fetely executed thus her properte.
In due season, as she always espied
Every thing to execute conveniently,
Her one lover first friendly she eied,
The second she offered the cup courtesly,
The third she gave token secretly,
Underneath the board she trade on his foot,
Through his entrails tikled the heart root.
By your leave, might I here ask a question
Of you my masters, that selve loves trace,
To you likely belongs the solution,
Which of these three stood now in grace?
Clearly to answer ye would ask long space,
The matter is doubtful and opinable,
To acertaine you I woll my self enable.
Of the foresaid three my self was one,
No man can answer it better than I,
Hertely of us beloved was there none,
* But Wattes pack we bare all by and by,
Which at last I my self began aspie,
In time as me thought then I left y^ dance,
O thoughtfull heart, great is thy greuaunce.
Hence fro me hence, that me for to endite
Halpe aye here before, O ye muses nine,
Whilom ye were wont to be mine and and light,
My pen to direct, my brain to illumine,
No longer alas may I sewe your doctrine,
The fresh lusty metres, that I wont to make
Have been here before, I utterly forsake.
Come hither thou Hermes, and ye furies all,
Which fer ben under us, nigh y^ nether pole,
Where Pluto reigns, O king infernal,
Send out thine arpies, send anguish and dole,
Misery and woe, leave ye me not sole,
Of right be present must pain and eke turment,
The pale death beseems not to be absent.
To me now I call all this loathsome sort,
My pains tencrease, my sorows to augment,
For worthy I am to be bare of all comfort,
Thus since I have consumed and misspent
Not only my days, but my 5 fold talent,
That my lord committed me, I cannot recompense
I may not too derely abie my negligence.
By the path of penance yet woll I reuert
To the well of grace, mercy there to fetch,
* Despisest not God the meek contrite heart
Of the cock crow, alas y^ I would not retch,
And yet it is not late in the second wetch,
Mercy shall I purchase by incessaunt crying,
The mercies of our lord ever shall I sing.
But well may thou wail wicked woman,
That thou should deceive thus any innocent
And in recompense of my sin, so as I can,
To al men wol I make and leave this monument,
In showing part of thy falshed is mine intent,
For all were too much, I cannot well I wot,
The cause shows plainly he yt thus wrote.
* If all ye earth were parchment scribable,
Speedy for the hand, and all manner wood
Were hewed and proportioned to pens able,
All water ink, in damme or in flood,
Every man being a parfit Scribe and good,
The cursednesse yet and deceit of women
Coud not he showed by the mean of pen.
I fly all odious resemblaunces,
The devils brond call women I might,
Whereby man is encensed to mischaunces,
Or a stinking rose that fair is in sight,
Or deadly empoyson, like y^ sugar white,
* Which by his sweetness causes man to taste,
And suddenly sleeth and brings him to his last.
It is not my manner to use such language,
But this my doctrine, as I may lawfully,
I woll holly ground with authority sage,
Willing both wisdom, and virtue edify,
* Wine and women into apostasy,
Cause wisemen to fall, what is that to say,
Of wisdom cause them to forget the way.
Wherefore the wiseman does thee advise,
In whose words can be found no leasing,
With the stranger to sit in no wise,
Which is not thy wife, fall not in clipping
With her, but beware eke of her kissing,
Keep with her in wine no altercation,
Least that thine heart fall by inclination.
May a man think hide and safe lay
Fire in his bosom, without empairement,
And brenning of his clothes? or whider he may
Walk on hot coals, his feet not brent?
As who says nay, and whereby is meant
This foresaid proverb and similitude,
But that thou rid thee plainly to denude.
From the flatterers forgetting her gide,
The gide of her youth, I mean shamefastnes,
Which should cause her maidenhead to abide,
Her gods behest eke she full recheles,
Not retching, commits it to forgetfulness,
* Neither God ne shame in her having place,
Needs must such a woman lack grace.
And all that neigh her in way of sin
To turn, of grace shall lack the influence,
The paths of life no more to come in,
Wherefore first friend thee with Sapience,
Remembering God, and after with Prudence,
To thine own weal that they thee keep,
Unto thine heart least her words creep.
In his book where I take my most ground,
And in his proverbs, sage Solomon
Tells a tale, which is plainly found
In the fifth chapter, whider in deed don,
Or meekely feined to our instruction,
Let clerks determine, but this am I sure,
Much like thing I have had in ure.
At my window says he I looked out,
Fair young people, where I saw many,
Among hem all, as I looked about,
To a young man fortuned I lent mine eye,
Estraunged from his mind it was likely,
By the street at a corner nigh his own house,
He went about with eye right curious.
When that the day his light began withdraw,
And the night approached in the twilight,
How a woman came and met him I saw,
Talking with him under shade of the night,
Now blessed be God (quoth. she) of his might,
Which has fulfilled mine hearts desire,
Assaked my pains, which were hot as fire.
And yet mine author, as it is skill,
To follow, I must tell her arrayment,
She was full nice, souls like to spill,
As nice in countenance yet as in garment,
For jangling she was of rest impatient,
Wandering still, in no place she stood,
But restless now, and now out she yode.
Now in the house, now in the street,
Now at a corner she stands in await,
Incessauntly busy her pray for to get,
To bring to the lure whom she does lait.
Now where I left, unto my matter strait
I woll turn again, how she him met,
Sweetly kissed, and friendly hem grette.
With words of courtesy many and diverse,
Right as in part I have before told,
Now as I can, I purpose to rehearse,
How she flattering said with visage bold,
I have made vows and offerings manifold
For thy sake, O mine heart, O my love dear,
This day I thank God all performed were.
Therefore I came out, and made thus astart,
Very desirous your welfare to see,
Now I have seen you, pleased is mine heart,
In faith shall none have my love but ye,
As true as I am to you, be to me,
I pray you hertely dear heart come home,
No man should be to me so welcome.
And in good faith, the sooth for to say,
Your coming to me ran in my thought,
Herke in your ear, my bed fresh and gay,
I have behanged with tapettes new bought,
From Egypt, and from far countries brought,
Steined with many a lusty fresh hue,
Exceeding gold or Jasper in value.
My chamber is strowed with mirre and insence,
With sote savoring aloes, and with sinamome,
Breathing an Aromatike redolence,
Surmounting Olibane, in any man's dome,
Ye shall between my breasts rest if ye come,
Let us have our desired halsing,
For we may safe be till in the morning.
Mine husband is not at home, he is went
Forth in his journey, a far way hence,
A bag with money he has with him hent,
As him thought needful for his expense,
Unto my word give faith and credence,
Now is the Moon young, and of light dull,
Ere he come home, it woll be at the full.
Thus craftily has she him besette
With her lime rods, panter, and snare,
The selie soul caught in her net,
Of her sugared mouth alas nothing ware,
Thus is he left graceless and bare
Of help, comfort, and ghostly succor,
And furthermore, as says mine author.
As a beast led to his death, does pant,
This young man follows her in that stound,
And as a wanton Lamb full ignorant,
How he is pulled and drawn to be bound,
Unto the time he has his deaths wound,
And like a bird that hastes to the grin,
Not knowing the peril of his life therein.
Now gentle son, says Solomon, take heed
My words in thy breast keep and make fast,
Let her not thy mind in her ways mislede,
Be not deceived, lose not thy taste,
Many has she wounded, many down cast,
Many strong by her has lost their breath,
Her ways, ways of hell leading to death.
And in this little narration precedent,
The woman's manifold gilt I attend,
The young man alas how she has shent,
Deceived her husband, her own next friend,
In these both, her God she does offend,
To break her spousail, to her is of no weight,
Furdermore to show woman's craft and slight.
A woman at her door sat on a stall,
To see folk pass by streets of the cite,
With eye and countenance eke she began call,
If there be any pretty one come nere to me,
Come hither ye piggesnye, ye little babe,
At last she said to a young man hartlesse,
Of her deceit unware and defencelesse:
* Much sweeter she says, and more acceptable
Is drink, when it is stolen privily,
Tha when it is taken in form auowable:
Bread hid and gotten jeoperdously,
Must needs be sweet, and semblably,
* Venison stolen is aye the sweeter,
The ferther the narrower fet the better.
And whom this woman (says Salom.) festes,
The young man woteth not whom she does feed,
Of the dark deepnesse of hell ben her ghests,
Beware young man therefore I thee read,
And how be it chiefly for thy good speed,
This werk to compile I have take in charge,
I must of pity my charity enlarge.
With the selie man which is thus begiled,
Her husband I mean, I woll weep and wail
His painful infortune, whereby reviled
Causeless he is, never to conuaile,
Every man young and old woll him assail
With words of occasion, with the loath name,
And alas good soul, he nothing to blame.
But she that coud so ill do and would,
Hers be the blame for her demerite,
And leave that opprobrous name cokold,
To aproper to him as in dispite,
Ransake yet we would if we might,
Of this word the true Ortographie,
The very descent and Ethimologie.
The well and ground of the first inuencion,
To know the ortographie we must derive,
Which is coke and cold, in composicion,
By reason, as nigh as I can contriue,
Then how it is written we know beliue,
But yet lo, by what reason and ground,
Was it of these two words compound.
As of one cause to give very judgment,
Themilogie let us first behold:
Each letter an hole word does represent,
As C, put for cold, and O, for old,
K, is for knave, thus diverse men hold,
The first part of this name we have found,
Let us ethimologise the second.
As the first finder meant I am sure,
C, for calot, for of, we have O,
L, for leude, O, for demeanure,
The craft of the enuentour ye may see lo,
How one name signifies persons two,
A cold old knave, cokold himself wening,
And eke a calot of leude demeaning.
The second cause of thimposicion,
Of this foresaid name of jealousy,
To be jelouse is greatest occasion
To be cokold, that men can aspie,
And though the passion be very fiery,
And of continuell feruence and heete,
The pacient aye suffers cold on his feet.
And who that is jelous, and aye in a dread,
Is full of Melancholy and gallie ire,
His wives nose (if she miss trede,)
He woll cut off, ye and conspire
His death who that woll her desire:
Which she perceiving brasteth his gall,
And anon his great woodnesse does fall.
As soon as she has knit him that knot,
Now is he tame that was so ramagious,
Mekely sits he down and takes his lot,
Laid been now his looks so furious,
And he but late as a cock bataylous,
Hot in his quarrel, to avenge him bold,
Now is he called both coke and cold.
This saying, to all courtesy dissonant,
Which seems that it of malice grew,
In this rude treatise I woll not plant,
As parcel thereof, but only to show,
The opinion of the talcatife shrewe,
* Which in ill saying is ever merry,
No man as I thereof so werie.
But I as parcel of this my book,
Woll graffe in some sad counsel whereby,
The wedded man, if he daigne to look
In it, the better shall mow him gie,
And provide for his said infortunie,
Which as I have said, with him complain
I woll, as partener of his great pain.
As most expedient to his weal,
I would all jelousie were abject,
If he be jelous, that he it conceal,
And in his labor be circumspect,
To know her ways if they seem suspect,
* And not for to break, for one word broken,
She woll not miss but she woll be wroken.
* Forbid her not, that thou noldest have don,
For look what thing she is forbod,
To that of all things she is most prone,
Namely if it be ill and no good,
Till it be executed she is nigh wood,
Soch is a woman, and soch is her feat,
* Her craft by craft, labor to defeat.
If thou hereafter, now a single man,
Should be jelous if thou had a wife,
Wedde not but if thou can trust woman,
For else should led a careful life,
That thou most lothest should be full rife,
Yet I nill gainesay Matrimony,
* But Melius est nubere quam uri.
That is to say, better is in Wedlock,
A wife to take, as the church does kenne,
Than to been under the fleshes yoke,
In fleshly lust always for to brenne.
But as I said, for all jelous men,
* So they live chaste, I hold it less ill,
That they wedde not, than them self spill.
The single man which is yet to wedde,
And not the wedded man, thus I read,
To warn him now he is too far spedde,
It is too late him to forbedde,
But let him take as for his own need,
Soch counsel as is him before told,
These words following eke to behold.
Thy water to keep the wiseman does teach,
That thou in no wise let it have issue,
At a narow rifte, way it woll seach,
And semblably the woman untrue,
To give her free walk in all wise eschew,
* If she at large, not at thine hand walk,
She woll thee shame, thou shall it not balke.
Wedded or single, thus says the wiseman,
* Her that both day and night evermore,
Lithe in thy bosom, wife or yet lemman,
Love not to hot, least thou repent sore,
Least she thee bring into some ill lore,
Thy wife not to love yet I nill support,
But that thou dote not, thus I thee exhort.
Lo if thou love her, love eke thine honesty,
Be she not idell, for what woll betide,
* If she sit idell, of very necessity,
Her mind woll search far and eke wide,
Namely if she be not accompanide,
How accompanied, not with young men,
But with maidens I mean or women.
Maiden servants be right convenient,
In house to help to do her service,
In whom she may use her commandment,
In the season at her own device:
To teach hem good, give her thine advice,
To make them huswiues, thus business
May yet refrain her from idleness.
But bide not her that thou wolt have do,
Of thine intent that might be letting,
But craftily encourage her thereto
By other means, as by commending,
And not too much, but duly menging
Both praise and blame, and in thy reason
First praise wisely the place and season.
Of faithful will, and heart full tender,
One thing I call into remembrance
Again which, though my wit be slender,
After my power and suffisaunce,
I purpose to make a purueyaunce,
Since women of nature been unchangeable,
Freale, not ware, also disceiuable.
Be it that thy wife be excellently good,
That none be better of disposicion,
In process of time she might turn her mood,
By some miss livers instigacion,
* Diverse men to thilke occupacion,
Aplien daily, mind and eke heart,
From her goodness women to pervert.
If thou aspie any suspect person,
Draw to thy wife, beware in all wise
To him nor her of thy suspeccion
Break not one word, though thine heart agrise,
* Kindle no fire, no smoke woll arise,
Though he be of a corrupt intent,
She perauenture is not of assent.
Explicit.
The Complaint of Mars and Venus.
GLadeth ye lovers in the morrow graie,
Lo Venus risen among you Rows read,
And flowers fresh honor ye this day,
For when y^ sun vprist then would they sprede,
But ye lovers that lie in any dread,
Flies least wicked tongues you aspie,
Lo yonde the Sun, the candell of jelousie.
With tears blew, and with a wounded heart
Takes your leave, and with saint John to borow
Apeseth somewhat of your pains smert,
Time comes eft, yt cessen shall your sorrow,
* The glad night is worth an heavy morrow,
Saint Valentine, a foul thus heard I sing,
Upon thy day, or Sun began up spring.
Yet sang this foul, I read you all awake,
And ye that have not chosen in humble wise,
Without repenting cheseth your make,
Yet at the least, renoueleth your service:
And ye that have full chosen as I devise,
Confermeth it perpetually to dure,
And patiently takes your adventure.
And for the worship of this high feast,
Yet woll I my briddes wise sing,
The sentence of the complaint at the least,
That woeful Mars made at the departing
Fro fresh Venus in a morowning,
When Phoebus with his fiery torches read,
Ransaked has every lover in his dread.
Whilome the three heavens lord above,
As well by heauenlich reuolucion,
As by desert has won Venus his love,
And she has take him in subjection,
And as a maistresse taught him his lesson,
Commanding him never in her service,
He were so bold no lover to despise.
For she forbade him jealousy at all,
And cruelty, and boste, and tyranny,
She made him at her lust so humble and tall,
That when she dained to cast on him her iye,
He took in patience to live or die,
And thus she bridleth him in her manner,
With nothing, but with scorning of her chere.
Who reigns now in bliss but Venus,
That has this worthy knight in governance
Who sings now but Mars y^ serves thus,
The fair Venus, causer of pleasaunce,
He bint him to perpetuel obeysaunce,
And she binte her to love him for ever,
But so be that his trespace it disceuer.
Thus be they kint, and reignen as in heaven,
By loking most, as it fell on a tide,
That by her both assent was set a steven,
That Mars shall enter as fast as he may glide,
In to her next palais to abide,
Walking his course till she had him ytake,
And he prayed her to have her for his sake.
Then said he thus, mine herts lady sweet,
Ye know well my mischief in that place,
For sikerly till that I with you meet,
My life stante there in adventure and grace,
But when I see the beauty of your face,
There is no dread of death may do me smert,
For all your lusts is ease to mine heart,
She has so great compassion of her knight,
That dwells in solitude till she come,
For it stood so, that ilke time no wight,
Counseled him, ne said to him welcome,
That nigh her wit for sorrow was overcome
Wherefore she spedded as fast in her way,
Almost in one day as he did in tway.
The great joy that was betwix hem two,
When they be met, there may no tongue tell,
There is no more but unto bed they go,
And thus in joy and bliss I let hem dwell,
This worthy Mars yt is of knighthood well,
The flower of fairness happeth in his arms,
And Venus kisseth Mars the God of arms.
Soiourned has this Mars, of which I read
In chamber amidde the palais privily,
A certain time, till him fell a dread,
Through Phoebus yt was commen hastily,
Within the palais yates sturdely,
With torch in hond, of which yt stremes bright
On Venus chamber, knockeden full light.
The chamber there as lay this fresh queen,
Depainted was with white boles great,
And by the light she knew that shon so shene,
That Phoebus came to bren hem with his hete
This silly Venus ny dreint in tears wete,
Enbraseth Mars, and said alas I die,
The torch is come, y^ all this world wol wrie.
Up sterte Mars, him list not to sleep,
When he his lady herd so complain,
But for his nature was not for to weep,
Instede of tears from his eyes twain,
The fiery sparcles sprongen out for pain,
And hente his hauberke that lay him beside,
Fly would he naught, ne might himself hide.
He throws on his helm of huge weight,
And girt him with his sword, and in his hand
His mighty spear, as he was wont to feight,
He shoketh so, that it almost to wonde,
Full heavy was he to walken over land,
He may not hold with Venus company,
But had her fly least Phoebus her espy.
O woeful Mars alas, what may thou sain
That in the palais of thy disturbaunce,
Art left behind in peril to be slain,
And yet there to is double thy penance,
For she that has thine heart in governance,
Is passed half the stremes of thine eyes,
That thou nere swift, well may thou weep and crien.
Now flies Nenus in to Ciclinius tour,
With void corse, for fear of Phoebus light,
Alas and there has she no socour,
For she ne found ne sey no manner wight,
And eke as there she had but littel might,
Wherefore her selven for to hide and save,
Within the gate she fled in to a cave.
Dark was this cave, and smoking as the hell
Not but two paas within the yate it stood,
A naturel day in dark I let her dwell,
Now wol I speak of Mars furious and wood,
For sorrow he would have seen his heart blood,
Since yt he might have done her no company,
He ne rought not a mite for to die.
So feeble he wext for hete and for his woe,
That nigh he swelt, he might uneath endure
He passes but a sterre in days two,
But nevertheless, for all his hevy armure,
He follows her that is his lives cure,
For whose departing he took greater ire,
Than for all his brenning in the fire.
After he walks softly a paas,
Complaining that it pity was to here,
He said, O lady bright Venus alas,
That ever so wide a compass is my sphere,
Alas, when shall I mete you heart dear,
This twelve days of April I endure,
Through ielous Phoebus this misauenture.
Now God help sely Venus alone,
But as God would it happed for to be,
That while y^ weping Venus made her moan
Ciclinius riding in his chyuanche,
Fro Venus Valanus might this palais see,
And Venus he salueth, and makes chere,
And her receives as his friend full dear,
Mars dwells forth in his aduersite,
Complaining ever in her departing,
And with his complaint was remembers me,
And therefore in this lusty morowning,
As I best can, I wol it saine and sing,
And after that I woll my leave take,
And God give every wight joy of his make.
The Complaint of Mars.
THe order of complaint requires skilfully,
That if a wight shall plain pitously,
There mote be cause wherefore yt men plain,
Or men may deem he plaineth folily,
And causeles, alas that am not I,
Wherefore the ground and cause of al my pain,
So as my troubled wit may it attain,
I wol rehearse, not for to have redress,
But to declare my ground of heuinesse.
The first time alas, that I was wrought,
And for certain effects hider brought,
By him that lorded each intelligence,
I yaue my true service and my thought,
For euermo, how dear I have it bought,
To her that is of so great excellence,
That what wight yt shows first her offense,
When she is wroth and takes of him no cure,
He may not long in joy of love endure.
This is no fained matter that I tell,
My lady is the very sours and well
Of beauty, lust, fredome, and gentilnesse,
Of rich array, how dear men it sell,
Of all disport in which me friendly dwell,
Of love and play, and of benign humblesse,
Of sown of instruments of al sweetness,
And thereto so well fortuned and thewed,
That through yeworld her goodness is showed.
What wonder is then though that I be set
My service on soch one that may me knet
To well or woe, since it lithe in her might,
Therefore mine heart for ever I to her hette,
Ne trewly for my death shall I not let,
To ben her trewest servant and her knight,
I flatter not, that may wete every wight,
For this day in her service shall I dye,
But grace be, I see her never with eye.
To whom shall I plain of my distress,
Who may me help, who may my heart redress?
Shall I complain unto my lady free,
Nay certes, for she has soch heaviness,
For fear and eke for woe, that as I guess,
In littel time it would her bane be,
But were she safe, it were no force of me,
Alas that ever lovers more endure,
For love so many perilous adventure.
For though so be that lovers be as true,
As any metal that is forged new,
In many a case hem tideth often sorrow,
Sometime her ladies woll not on hem rewe,
Sometime if that jealousy it knew,
They might lightly lay her heed to borow,
Sometime envious folk with tongs horow,
Deprauen hem alas, whom may they please,
But he befalse, no lover has his ease.
But what avails soch a long sermonun,
Of auentures of love up and down,
I wol return and speaken of my pain,
The point is this of my distructioun,
My right lady, my saluacioun,
Is in affray, and not to whom to plain,
O heart sweet, O lady sovereign,
For your disease I ought well swoun and swelt,
Though I none other harm ne dread felt.
To what fine made the God that sit so hie,
Beneth him love other company,
And straineth folk to love mauger her heed,
And then her joy for aught I can epsy,
Ne lasts not the twinkling of an eye,
And some have never joy till they be deed,
What means this, what is this mistiheed,
Whereto constrains he his folk so fast,
Thing to desire but it should last.
And though he made a lover love a thing,
And makes it seem steadfast and during,
Yet puts he in it soch misauenture,
That rest nis there in his yeuing.
And that is wonder that so just a king,
Does such hardness to his creature,
Thus whether love break or else dure,
Algates he that has with love to done,
Has after woe, then changed is the Moon.
It seems he has to lovers enmite,
And like a fisher, as men may all day se,
Baited his angle hoke with some pleasance,
Til many a fish is wood till that he be
Ceased therewith, and then at erst has he
All his desire, and therewith all mischaunce,
And though the line break he has penance,
For with that hoke he wounded is so sore,
That he his wages has for evermore.
The broche of Thebes was of soch kind,
So full of rubies and of stones of Inde,
That every wight that set on it an eye,
He wend anon to worth out of his mind,
So sore the beauty would his heart bind,
Till he it had, him thought he must die,
And when that it was his then should he dry,
Soch woe for dread aye while that he it had,
That welnigh for the fear he should mad.
And when it was fro his possession,
Then had he double woe and passion,
That he so fair a jewel has forgo,
But yet this broche, as in conclusion,
Was not the cause of his confusion,
But he that wrought it enfortuned it so,
That every wight that had it should have woe,
And therefore in the worcher was the vice,
And in the coueitour that was so nice.
So fares it by lovers, and by me,
For though my lady have so great beauty,
That I was mad till I had get her grace,
She was not cause of mine aduersite,
But he that wrought her, as mote I thee,
That put soch a beauty in her face,
That made me coueiten and purchase
Mine own death, him wite I, that I die,
And mine vnwit that ever I clambe so hie,
But to you hardy knights of renown,
Since that ye be of my devistowne,
Al be I not worthy to so great a name,
Yet saine these clerks I am your patron,
Therefore ye ought have some compassion
Of my disease, and take it not a game,
The proudest of you may be made full tame,
Wherefore I pray you of your gentilesse,
That ye complain for mine heaviness.
And ye my ladies that be true and stable,
By way of kind ye ought to ben able,
To have pite of folk that been in pain,
Now have ye cause to cloth you in sable,
Since that your empres the honorable,
Is desolate, well ought you to plain,
Now should your holy tears fall and rain,
Alas your honor and your empress,
Nigh deed for dread, ne can her not cheuice.
Complains eke ye lovers all in fere,
For her that with unfeigned humble chere,
Was ever ready to do you socour,
Complains her yt ever has be you dear,
Complains beauty, freedom, and manner,
Complains her that ends your labor,
Complains thilke ensample of al honor,
That never did but gentilnesse,
Kytheth therefore in her some kindness.
The Complaint of Venus.
THere nis so high comfort to my pleasance,
When that I am in any heaviness,
As to have ^ayser of remembrance,
Upon the manhood and the worthiness,
Upon the troth, and on the steadfastness,
Of him whose I am al while I may dure,
There ought to blame me no creature,
For every wight praises his gentillesse.
In him is bounte, wisdom, and governance,
Well more than any man's wit can guess,
For grace has would so ferforth him auance,
That of knighthood he his parsite richesse,
Honor honors him for his noblesse,
Thereto so well has fourmed him nature,
That I am his forever I him ensure,
For every wight praises his gentillesse.
And not withstanding all his suffisaunce,
His gentil heart is of so great humblesse,
To me in word, in work, and in countenance,
And me to serve is all his besinesse,
That I am set in very sikernesse,
Thus ought I bliss well mine auentour,
Since that him list me sernen and honor,
For every wight praises his gentillesse.
Now certes, love, it is right couenable
That men full dear abie thy noble things,
As wake a bed, and fasten at the table,
Weping to laugh and sing in complainings,
And down to cast visage and lookings,
Often to change visage and countenance,
Play in sleeping, and dremen at the dance,
All the reuers of any glad feeling.
Jealousy he hanged by a cable,
She would al know through her espying,
There does no wight nothing so reasonable,
That al nis harm in her imagining,
Thus dear about is love in yeuing,
Which often he yeueth without ordinance,
As sorrow enough, and little of plesaunce,
All the reuers of any glad feeling.
A little time his yeft is greable,
But full accombrous is the using,
For subtel jealousy the disceiuable,
Full often time causes distourbing,
Thus ben we ever in dread and suffering,
In no certain, we languishen in penance,
And have well often many an hard mischance,
All the reuers of any glad feling.
But certes love, I say not in soch wise,
That for to escape out of your ^ace I meant,
For I so long have been in your service,
That for to let of will I never assent,
No force though jealousy me tourment,
Suffiseth me to see him when I may,
And therefore certes to my ending day,
To love him best, shall me never repent.
And certes love, when I me well advise,
Of any estate yt man may represent,
Then have ye made me through your franchise
Thief the best that ever in earth went,
Now love well heart, and look thou never stent,
And let the jealous put it in assay,
That for no pain woll I not say nay,
To love him best, shall I never repent.
Heart to thee it ought enough suffice,
That love so high a grace to you sent,
To chose the worthies in all wi^e,
And most agreeable unto mine intent,
Seek no ferther, neither way ne went,
Since ye have suffisaunce unto my pay,
Thus wol I end this complaining or this lay,
To love him best shall I never repent.
Lenuoy.
Princes receives this complaining in gree,
Unto your excellent benignite,
Direct after my litel suffisaunce,
For elde, that in my spirit dulleth me,
Has of enditing all the subtelte
Welnigh berafte out of my remembrance:
And eke to me it is a great penance,
Since rhyme in English has soch scarcite,
To follow word by word the curiosite
Of Gransonflour, of hem y^ make in France.
Explicit.
The Letter of Cupid.
This Letter was made by Thomas Occleve of the Office of the privy Seal,
Chaucers Scholar; and was by him termed, A Treatise of the Conversation of Men
and Women in the little Island of Albion; which got him such hatred among the
Gentlewomen of the Court, that he was enforced to recant in that Book of his,
called Planctas proprius.

Cupid, unto whose commandment,
The gentill kinrede of gods on hie,
And people infernal been obedient,
And all mortal folk seruen busely,
Of the goddess son Cythera only,
To all tho that to our deite,
Been subjects, hertely greeting send we.
In general we woll that ye know,
That ladies of honor and of reverence,
And other gentilwomen haven sow
Soch seed of complaint in our audience,
Of men that do hem outrage and offense,
That it our ears grieueth for to here,
So pitous is theffect of this matere,
Passing all lands, on the litell isle
That cleped is Albion, they most complain,
They say that there is crop and rote of guile,
So con tho men dissimule and feign,
With standing dropes in her eyes twain,
When that hertes feels no distress,
To blinden women with her doubleness,
Her words spoken be so sighingly,
With so pitous chere and countenance,
That every wight that means trewly,
Deemeth they in heart have such greuaunce,
They say so importable is her penance,
That but her lady lust to show hem grace,
They right anon must steruen in the place.
Ah lady mine, they say, I you ensure,
As does me grace, and I shall ever be
(While that my life may last and endure)
To you as humble and low in each degree,
As possible is, and keep all things as secre,
Right as your self list that I do,
And else mine heart mote brast in two.
* Full hard it is to know a man's heart,
For outward may no man the troth deem,
When word out of mouth may none sterte,
But it by reason seemed every wight to queme,
So it is said of heart as it would seem,
O faithful woman full of innocence,
Thou art disceiued by false appearance.
By process moves often woman's pite,
Wening all thing were as these men sey,
They grant hem grace of her benignite,
For that men should not for her sake dey,
And with good heart set hem in the wey
Of blisfull love, keep it if they conne,
And thus otherwhile women bethe ywonne.
And when this man y^ pan has by y^ stele,
And fully is in his possessioun,
With y^ woman keeps he no more to dele,
After if he may find in the town
Any woman his blind affectioun
Unto bestow, yuel mote he preue,
A man for all his oaths is hard to believe.
* And for that every false man has a make,
As unto every wight is light to know,
When this traitor this woman has forsake,
He fast spedeth him unto his fellow,
Til he be there his heart is on a low,
His false disceit may him not suffice,
But of his traison tells all the wise.
Is this a fair auaunt, is this honor,
A man himself accuse thus and diffame,
Is it good to confess himself a traitor?
And bring a woman to sclandrous name,
And tell how he her body has do shame?
No worship may he thus to him conquer,
But great disclaunder unto him and her.
To her nay, yet was it no reprefe,
For all for virtue was that she wrought,
But he that brewed has all this mischefe,
That spoke so fair, and fas^y inward thought,
His be the sclaunder, as it by reason ought,
And unto her thank perpetuell,
That in soch a need help can so well.
Although through men's slight and subtilty,
A sely simple and innocent woman
Betrayed is, no wonder since the city
Of Troy, as the s^orie tell can,
Betrayed was through the disceit of man,
And set on fire, and all down overthrow,
And finally destroyed as men know.
Betray not men cities great, and kings,
What wight is it that can shape remedy
Against these falsely purposed things,
Who can by craft soch crafts espy
But man, whose wit is ever ready taply
To thing that sowning is to falshede?
Women bethe ware of false men I read.
And farthermore have these men in usage,
That where they not likely been to speed,
Soch as they ben, with a double visage,
They procuren for to pursewe her need,
He prays him in his cause to proceed,
And largely guerdoneth he his travail,
Litel wot women how men hem assail.
Another wretch unto his fellow says,
Thou fishest fair, she that thee has fired
Is false inconstaunt, and has no faith,
She for the rode of folk is so desired,
And as an horse fro day to day she is hired,
That when thou twinnest fro her company,
Comes another, and blered is thine eye.
Now prick on fast, and ride thy journey
While thou art there, for she behind thy back
So liberal is, she woll nothing withsey,
But smattly of another take a smack,
Thus fare these women all the pack,
* Who so hem trusts hanged mote he be,
Ever they desire change and nolveltee.
Whereof proceeds this, but of envy?
For he himself her ne win may,
He speaks her reprefe and villainy,
As man's blabbing tongue is wont always,
Thus diverse men full often make assay
For to distourbe folk in sundry wise,
For they may not obtain her emprise.
Many one eke would for no good,
That has in love his time spent and used,
Men wish that his lady his asking withstood,
Ere that he were of her plainly refused,
Or waste and vain all that he had mused,
Wherefore he can none other remedy,
But on his lady shaperh him to ly.
Cvery woman he says is light to get,
Can none say nay, if she be well ysought,
Who so may leiser have with her to trete,
Of his purpose shall he fail naught,
But he on madness be so deep brought,
That he shende all with open homelynesse,
That loven women, they doten as I guess.
To slander women thus what may profit,
To gentillesse namely, that hem arm should
In defense of women, and hem delight,
As that the order of gentillesse would,
If that a man list gentill to be hold,
* He must all eschew y^ thereto is contrary,
A sclaundrous tongue is his great adversary.
A foul vice is, of tongue to be light,
For who so much clappeth gabbeth often,
The tongue of man so swift is and so wight,
That when it is reised up on loft,
Reason is showed so slowly and soft
That it him never overtake may,
Lord so these men been trusty in assay.
Albeit that men find one woman nice,
Inconstaunt, rechlesse, and variable,
Deignous, proud, fulfilled of malice,
Without faith, or love, and disceivable,
Sly, queint, false, in all untrust coulpable,
Wicked, feirse, or full of cruelte,
Yet follows it not that soch all women be.
When y^ high God angels fourmed had,
Among hem all were there none
That founden was malicious and bad?
Yet all men wot there were many one
That for her pride fill fro heven anon,
Should men for thy yeve al angels proud name
Nay, he that thee susteineth is to blame.
Of twelve Apostles, one a traitor was,
The remnant yet good were and true:
So if it hap men find percaas,
O woman false, soch, good is to eschew,
And deem not yt they all therefore be untrue,
* I see well men's own falsenesse,
Hem causes women to trust the less.
O every man ought have an heart tender
Unto a woman, and deem her honorable,
Where his shape be thick or slendre,
Or he be good or badde, it is no fable:
Every wight wot, that wit has reasonable,
That of a woman he descended is,
Then is it shame of her to speak amiss.
A wicked tree good fruit may none forth bring,
For soch the fruit is as is the tree,
Take heed of whom thou took thy beginning,
Let thy mother be mirror unto thee,
Honor her, if thou wolte honored be,
Despise her then not in no manner,
Lest that thereby thy wickedness appear.
An old proverb said is in English,
* That bird or foul is full dishonest,
What that he be, and hold full churlish,
That uses to defoule his own nest:
Men to say well of women it is the best,
And naught to despise hem ne deprave,
If they woll her honor keep or save.
The ladies ever complain hem on clerks,
That they have made books of her diffame,
In which they despise women and her werks,
And speak of hem great reprofe and shame,
And causeless yeve hem a wicked name,
Thus they despised be on every side,
Disclaundred and blown on full wide.
Tho sorry books maken mention
How women betraide in especial,
Adam, David, Sampson, and Solomon,
And many one mo, who may rehearse hem all,
The treason that they have do and shall,
The world her malice may not comprehend,
As clerks saine, for it has none end.
Ouide in his book called Remedy
Of love, great reprofe of women writes,
Wherein I trow he did great folly,
And every wight yt in soch case him deliteth,
A clerks custom is when he enditeth,
Of women, be it prose, time, or verse,
Say they be wicked, all know he the reuers.
And y^ book scholars learned in her childhede,
For they of women beware should in age,
And to love hem ever be in dread,
Since to disceiue is set all her courage,
They say, of perel men should cast thauauntage,
Namely of soch as men have in bewrapped,
For many a man by women has mishapped.
No charge is what so these clerks saine,
Of all her writing I do no cure,
All her labor and travail is in vain,
For between me and my lady nature,
Shall not be suffered, while y^ world may dure
Thus these clerks by her cruel tyranny,
On selie women kithen her maistry.
Whilom for many of hem were in my cheine
Tied, and now for vnwedly age,
And unlust, may not to love atteine,
And saine now that love is but very dotage,
Thus for they hemselfe lacken courage,
They folk excite by her wicked sawes,
For to rebel against me, and my laws.
But mauger hem that blame women most
Such is the force of mine impression,
That suddenly I can fell her boste,
And all her wrong imagination,
It shall not be in her election,
The foulest ^lutte in all the town to refuse,
If that me lust, for all that they con muse.
But her in heart as brenningly desire,
As though she were a duchess or a queen,
So can I folks hertes set on sire,
And as me list send hem joy or teene,
They that to women be whet so kene,
My sharp persing strokes how they smite,
Shul feel and know, how they kerue and bite.
Parde this clerk, this subtle Ouide,
And many another disceiued have be,
Of women, as it is know full wide,
What no men more, and that is great deinty,
So excellent a clerk as was he,
And other mo that couden full well preach,
Betrapped were, for aught yt they coud teach.
And trusts well that it is no marvel,
For women known plainly her intent,
They wist how softly they coud assail
Hem, and what falshede they in heart mente,
And thus they clerks in her danger hente,
* With o venime another is destroyed,
And thus these clerks often were anoied.
These ladies, ne these gentiles nevertheless,
Were none of tho that wrought in this wise,
But soch as were vertulesse,
They quitten thus these old clerks wise,
To clerks less ought suffice,
Then to dispraue women generally,
For worship shull they none get thereby.
If that these men, that lovers hem pretend,
To women were faithful, good, and true,
And dredde hem to disceiue, or to offend,
Women to love hem would not eschew,
* But every day has man an heart new,
It on one abide can no while,
What forse is it such a wight to beguile.
Men bear eke women upon hond,
That lightly and without any pain
They wonen be, they can no wight withstond,
That his disease list to hem complain,
They be so freele, they may hem not refrain,
But who so likes hem, may lightly have,
So be her hertes easy into grave.
To master Johan de Moon, as I suppose
Then it was a leude occupacioun,
In making of the Romante of the rose,
So many a sigh imaginacioun,
And perilies for to rollen up and down,
The long process, so many a slight cautell,
For to disceiue a sely damsel.
Naught can I say, ne my wit comprehend,
That art pain, and subtilty should sail,
For to conquer, and sone make an end,
When men a feeble place shall assail,
And sone also to vanquish a battle,
Of which no wight may make resistance,
Ne heart has none to make any defense.
Then mote follow of necessitee,
Since art asks so great engine and pain,
A woman to disceiue what so she be,
Of constaunce be they not so baraine,
As that some of these clerks saine,
But they be as women ought to be,
Sad, constant, and fulfilled of pitee.
How friendly was Medea to Jason,
In conquering of the Flece of gold,
How falsely quit he her true affection,
By whom victory he gate as he would,
How may this man for shame be so bold
To falsen her, that fro his death and shame
Him kept, and gate him so great prise and name.
Of Troy also the traitor Eneas,
The faithless wretch, how he him forswore
To Dido, that queen of Cartage was,
That him releued of his smertes sore,
What gentillesse might she have do more,
Then she with heart unfeigned to him kidde,
And what mischief to her thereof after betidde.
In my legend of natures may men find,
Who so likes therein for to read,
That oath ne behest may man bind,
Of reprouable shame have they no dread,
In man's heart troth has no stead,
The soil is naught, there may no troth grow,
To women namely it is not unknow.
Clerks saine also there is no malice,
Unto woman's wicked crabbidnesse,
O woman, how shall thou thy self cheuice,
Since men of thee soch harm witness,
Beth ware women of her sikelnesse,
Keep thine own, what men clappe or crake,
And some of hem shall smart I undertake.
Malice of women what is it to dread,
They slay no man, destroy no citees,
Ne oppress folk, ne ouerlede,
Betray Empires, Realms, or Duchees,
Ne bireuen men her lands ne her mees,
Enpoison folk, ne houses set on fire,
Ne false contracts make for no hire.
Trust, parfite love, entire charitee,
Fervent will, and entalented courage,
All thewes good, as sits well to be,
Have women ever of custom and usage,
And well they conne man's ire assuage,
With soft words, discrete and benign,
What they be inward, they show outward by sign.
Woman's heart unto no cruelty
Inclined is, but they be charitable,
Pitous, devout, full of humility,
Shame fast, debonaire, and amiable,
Dredefull, and of words measurable,
What women these have not parauenture,
Follows not the way of her nature.
Men saine our first mother nathelesse
Made all mankind lose his libertee,
And naked it of joy doubtless,
For Gods heste disobeyed she,
When she presumed to taste of the tree
That God forbad that she eat thereof should,
And ne had the devil be, no more she would.
The envious swelling, that y^ fend our foe,
Had unto man in heart for his wealth,
Sent a serpent, and made her for to go
To disceiue Eve: and thus was man's wealth
Birafte him by the fend in a stealth,
The woman not knowing of that disceipt,
God wot full far was it from her conceit.
Wherefore I say, this good woman Eve,
Our father Adam disceiued naught,
There may no man for disceipt it preue,
Properly, but that she in heart and thought,
Had it compassed first or she it wrought,
And for soch was not her impression,
Men may it call no disceipt of her, by reason.
Ne no wight disceiueth, but he purpose
The fend this disceipt cast, and nothing she:
Then is it wrong to deem or suppose,
That of his harm she should the cause be,
Wit the fend, and his be the maugre,
And excused have her innocence,
Save only that she brake obedience.
And touching this, full few men there be,
Uneaths any dare I safely say,
Fro day to day, as men may all day see,
But that the heste of God they disobay,
Have this in mind sirs I you pray,
If that ye be discrete and reasonable,
Ye woll her hold the more excusable.
And where men say, in man is steadfastness,
And woman is of her courage unstable:
Who may of Adam bear soch a witness?
Tells me this, was he not chaungeable?
They both weren in o case semblable,
Save willing the fend disceiued Eve,
And so did she not Adam, by your leave.
Yet was this sin happy to mankind,
The fend disceiued was for all his slight,
For aught he coud him in his sleights wind:
For his trespace, came fro heaven on height
God, to discharge man of his weight,
Flesh and blood took of a virgin,
And suffered death, him to deliver of pine.
And God, to whom there may nothing hid be,
If he in woman known had soch malice,
As men record of hem in generalte,
Of our Lady of life reperatrice,
Nolde have be borne, but that she of vice
Was void, and full of virtue well he wist,
Endowed, of her to be borne him list.
Her heaped virtue has soch excellence,
That all to lean is man's faculte
To declare it, and therefore in suspense,
Her due praising put needs must be,
But thus I say, verily that she
Next God, best friend is that to man longs,
The key of mercy by her girdle hongeth.
And of mercy has every man soch need,
That resing that, farewell the joy of man,
And of her power now takes right good heed
She mercy may well, and purchase can,
Displeases her not, honors that woman,
And other women all for her sake,
And but ye do, your sorrow shall awake.
In any book also where can ye find,
That of the works of death or of life
Of Jesus, spelleth or makes any mind,
That women him forsook, for woe or strife?
Where was there any wight so ententife
About him, as woman? proved none,
The Apostles him forsoken euerichone.
Women forsook him not, for all the faith
Of holy church in woman left only,
This is no lees, for thus holy writ says,
Look and ye shall so find it hardely:
And therefore I may well preue thereby,
* That in woman reigns stable constaunce,
And in men is the change of variaunce.
Thou precious gem of martirs, Margarite,
That of thy blood dredest none effusion,
Thou lover true, thou maiden mansuete,
Thou constant woman in thy passion,
Overcame the fendes temptacion,
And many a wight converted thy doctrine
Unto the faith of holy God thou virgin.
But understands this, I only commend her naught
By encheson of her virginity,
Trusts it came never in my thought,
For ever werre I against chastity,
And ever shall, but lo this meveth me,
Her loving heart, and constant to her lay,
Drive out of remembrance I ne may.
Now holds this for ferme, and for no ly,
That this true and just commendacion
Of women, tell I for no flattery,
Ne because of pride or elacion,
But only lo, for this entencion,
To yeve hem courage of perse veraunce
In virtue, and her honor to avaunce.
* The more virtue, the less is the pride,
Virtue so digne is and so noble in kind,
That vice and he woll not in fere abide,
He puts vices clean out of his mind,
He flies fro hem, he leaves hem behind,
O woman that of virtue art hostresse,
Great is thy honor and thy worthiness.
Then woll I thus conclude and define,
We you command our ministers echone,
That ready ye be our hestes to incline,
That of these false men our rebel fone,
Ye do punishment and that anon,
Void hem our court, and banish hem for ever,
So that therein more come they never.
Fulfilled be it, ceasing all delay,
Look there be none excusacion,
Written in the lusty month of May,
In our paleis where many a million
Of lovers true have habitation,
The year of grace joyful and jocond,
A thousand four hundred and second.
Explicit.
A Ballade in Commendation of our Lady.
A Thousand stories coud I mo rehearce
Of old Poets, touching this matere
How that Cupide the hertes began so pearce,
Of his servauntes setting hem in fere,
Lo here the fine of therrour and the fere,
Lo here of love the guerdon and greuaunce,
That ever with woe her servant do auaunce.
Wherefore now plainly I wol my style dress
Of one to speak, at need that woll not fail,
Alas for dole I ne can ne may express
Her passing prise, and that is no mervaile,
O wind of grace, now blow unto my sail,
O auriate licour of Cleo for to write,
My pen euspire of that I woll endite.
Alas, unworthy I am and unable
To love soch one, all women surmounting,
But she be benign to me and merciable,
That is of pity the well and eke the spring,
Wherefore of her in laud and in praising,
So as I can, supported by her grace,
Right thus I say, kneeling tofore her face.
O sterre of sterres with thy streams clear,
Sterre of the sea, to shipmen light and gide,
O lusty living most pleasant to appear,
Whose bright beams y^ clouds may not hide,
O way of life to them that go or ride,
Haven after tempest surest up to riue,
On me have mercy for thy joys five.
O rightful rule, O bote of holiness,
And lightsome line of pity for to plain,
Original beginning of grace and all goodness,
And cleanest conduit of virtue most souerain
Mother of Mercy, our trouble to restrain,
Chamber and closet clennest of chastity,
And named her brough of the deity.
O closet garden all void of weeds wicke,
Cristallin well, of clerenesse clear consigned,
Fructified olive of oiles, fair and thick,
And redolent Cedre most dear worthy digned
Remember on sinners yt to thee be assigned,
Or wicked fendes her wrath on hem wreche,
Lantern of light thou her lives leche.
Paradise of pleasaunce, gladsome to al good,
Benign braunchelet of the Pine tree,
Vinary enuermailed, refresher of our blood,
Licour again al langour, y^ palled may not be,
Blisful blomy blosome, biding in bountee,
Thy mantel of mercy on our misery sprede,
And er woe awake wrap us under thy wede.
O rody rosier, flouring without spine,
Fountain all filthlesse, as byrel current clear,
Some drop of thy graceful dew to us propine,
O light without nebule, shining in thy sphere,
Medicine to mischeues, pucel without pere,
Flame down y^ doleful light of thine influence,
Remembering thy servants for thy magnificence.
Of all christen protectrice and tutele,
Return of exiled put in the proscripcion,
To hem yt erren in the pathe of her sequel,
To weary forwandred, tent and pauilion,
To faint and to fresh the pausacion,
Unto vnresty, both rest and remedy,
Fruitful to all tho that in her affie.
To hem that rennen thou art itenerary,
O blisfull brauy to knights of thy war,
To weary werkmen she is diourne denary,
Mede unto mariners that have sailed far,
Laureate croune streming as a star,
To hem yt put hem in palastre for thy sake,
Course of her conquest, thou white as any lake.
O mirth of martyrs, sweter than Sitole,
Of Confessors also richest donatife,
Unto virgins eternal Lauriole,
Before all women having prerogarife,
Mother and maid, both widow and wife,
Of all the world is none but thou alone,
Now since thou may, be succor to my moan.
O trusty turtle truefastest of all true,
O curteyse columbe, replete of all meekness,
O Nightingale with thy notes new,
O Popiniay pured with all clennesse,
O laueroke of love, singing with sweetness,
Phoebus awaiting till on thy breast he light,
Under thy wing at domesday us dight.
O ruby rubified in the passion
Of thy son, us have among in mind,
O steadfast diametre of duracion,
That few feres any time might thou find,
For none to his was founden half so kind,
O hardy heart, O loving creature,
What was it but love y^ made thee so endure.
Semely saphre, deep loupe and blew ewage,
Stable as the loupe ewage of pitee,
This is to say the freshest of visage,
Thou love unchaunged hem y^ seruen thee,
And if offense or varying in hem be,
Thou art ay ready upon her woe to rue,
And hem receiuest with heart full true.
O goodly gladded when that Gabriell
With joy thee grette, y^ may not be nombred,
Or half the bliss who could write or tell,
When the holy ghost to thee was obumbred,
Wherthrough fends were biterly encombred,
O wemlesse maid embelished in his birth,
That man and angel thereof hadden mirth.
Lo here the blosme and the budde of glory,
Of which the prophet so long spoke beforne,
Lo here the fame that was in memory
Of Esaias, so long or she was borne,
Lo here of David the delicious corn,
Lo here the ground of life in to build,
Becoming man our ransom for to yield.
O glorious viole and vite inuiolate,
O fiery Titan, persing with thy bemes,
Whose virtuous britnes was in breast vibrat
That all the world embelished with y^ leams,
Conseruatrice of kings, dukes, and realms,
Of Isaies seed sweet Sunamite,
Mesure my mourning mine own Margarite.
O soueraignest sought out of Sion,
Cockle with gold dew from above berained,
Dew bush vnbrent firelesse fire set on,
Flaming with feruence not with heat pained,
During daisie that no weather stained,
Fleece vndefouled of Gentilest Gedion,
And fructifying fairest the yerd of Aaron.
The mighty arch, probatise pis^ine,
Laughing aurore, and of peace olive,
Columpne and base, up bearing from abym,
Why nere I conning here to discriue,
Chosen of Joseph, whom he took to wiue,
Unknowing him, childing by miracle,
And of our manly figure the tabernacle.
I have none English convenient and digne,
Mine hearts heal lady thee with to honor,
Iuory clean, therefore I will resign
Into thine hand, till thou list soccour,
To help my making both flourish and flour,
Then should I show in love how I brend.
In songs making, thy name to commend.
For if I coud before thine excellence
Singen in love I would what I feel,
And ever standen Lady in thy presence,
To show in open how I love you well,
And since although your heart be made of stele,
To you withouten any disceueraunce,
J'ay on vous toute ma fiance.
Where might I love ever better beset,
Than in this Lilly liking to behold
That lace of love, the bond so well thou knit,
That I may see thee or mine heart cold,
And or I pass out of my days old,
Tofore singing evermore utterly,
Your eyes two wol slay me suddenly.
For love I langour, blissed be soch sickness,
Since it is for you my hertily suffisaunce,
I can not else say in my distress,
So fair one has mine heart in governance,
And after that I begin on esperaunce,
With feeble entune, though it thine heart perce,
Yet for thy sake this letter I do reherce.
God wot on music I can not, but I guess
Alas why so, that I might say or sing,
So love I you mine own souerain maistresse,
And ever shall without departing,
Mirror of beauty, for you out should I ring
In remembrance eke of your eyes clear,
Thus fer from you my souerain Lady dear.
So would God your love would me s^o,
Since for your sake I sing day by day,
Heart why nilt thou break atwo,
Since with my lady dwell I ne may,
Thus many a roundell and many a virelay,
In fresh English, when I me laiser find,
I do record, on you to have mind.
Now lady mine, since I you love and dread,
And you unchanged ever find in o degree,
Whose grace ne may fly fro your womanhede,
Disdaineth not for to remember on me,
Mine heart bleedeth for I may not you see,
And since ye wot my meaning desirous,
Plores pour moy s'il vous plaist amoureus.
What marvel is though I in pain be,
I am departed from you my sovereign,
Fortune alas, don't vient la destenie,
That in no wise I can ne may attain
To see the beauty of your eyes twain,
Wherefore I say, for tristesse does me grame,
Tant me fait mal departir de ma dame.
Why nere my wissing brought to such esploit,
That I might say for joy of your presence,
Or a mon coeur ce quae voulloit,
Or a mon coeur, the highest excellence
That ever had wight, and since mine aduertence
Is in you, reweth on my pains smert,
I am so sore wounded to the heart.
To live well merry two lovers were yfere,
So may I say withouten any blame,
If any man too wild were,
I coud him teach for to be tame,
Let him go love, and see where it be game,
For I am bridled unto soberness,
For her that is of women cheef princess.
But ever when thought my heart should enbrace,
Then unto me is best remedy,
When I look on your goodly fresh face,
So merry a mirror coud I never espy,
And if I coud, I would it magnify,
For never none was so fair ifound,
To reken hem all, and also Rosamound.
And finally, with mouth and will present
Of double eye without repentance,
Mine heart I give you Lady in this intent,
That ye shall holly thereof have governance,
Taking my leave with herts obeysaunce,
( Salve regina) singing last of all,
To be our help when we to thee call.
All our love is but idleness,
Save your love alone, who might thereto attain,
Who so woll have a name of gentillesse,
I coun^^^le him in love that he not feign,
Thou sweet Lady, refute in every pain,
Whose mercy most to me avails,
To gie by grace, when that fortune fails.
Naught may be told withouten any fable,
Your high renome, your womanly beauty,
Your governance to all worship able,
Puts every heart in ease in his degree,
O violet, O flower desiree,
Since I am for you so amerous,
Estreignes moy de coeur joyeus.
With fervent heart my breast has brost on fire,
L'ardant espoer en mon coeur point est mort,
D'auoir l'amour de celle que je desire,
I mean you sweet most pleasant of port,
Et je say bien que ce n'est pas mon tort,
That for you sing, so as I may for moan
For your departing, alone I live alone.
Though I might, I would none other chese,
In your service I would been founden sad,
Therefore I love no labor that ye lose,
When in longing forest ye be stadde,
Look up you lovers, and be right glad
Against saint Valentines day,
For I have chese that never forsake I may.
Explicit.
John Gower unto the Noble King Henry the Fourth.
O Noble worthy King Henry the ferthe,
In whom the glad fortune is befall,
The people to govern here upon earth,
God has thee chosen in comfort of us all,
The worship of this land, which was down fall,
Now stant upright through grace of thy goodness,
Which every man is hold for to bless.
The high God of his justice alone,
The right which longs to thy regaly,
Declared has to stand in thy person,
* And more than God may no man justify,
Thy title is know upon thine auncestrie,
The lands folk has eke thy right affirmed,
So stant thy reign, of God and man confirmed.
There is no man may say in otherwise,
That God himself ne has y^ right declared,
Whereof the land is bound to thy service,
Which for defaut of help has long cared,
But now there is no man's heart spared,
To love and serve, and worch thy pleasaunce,
And all this is through Gods purueiaunce.
* In all thing which is of God begone,
There follows grace, if it be well governed,
Thus tellen they which old books conne,
Whereof my lord I wot well thou art learned,
* Ask of thy God, so shall thou not be warned
Of no request, which is reasonable,
For God unto the good is favorable.
King Solomon, which had at his asking,
Of God what thing him was leuest crave,
He chase wisdom unto governing
Of Gods folk, the which he would save,
And as he chase, it fill him for to have,
For through his wit while yt his reign last,
He gate him peace and rest into his last.
But Alexander, as tells his story,
Unto the God besought in other way,
Of all the world to win the victory,
So that under his swerd it might obey,
In war he had all that he would pray,
The mighty God behight him that behest
The world wanne, and had it of conquest.
But though it fill at thilke time so
That Alexander his asking has atcheued,
This sinful world was all Painem tho,
Was none which has y^ high God believed,
* No wonder was though thilk world was grieved,
Though a tirant his purpose might win,
All was vengeance and infortune of sin.
But now the faith of Christ is come a place
Among the princes in this earth here,
It sit hem well to do pity and grace,
But yet it must be tempored in manner,
For they finden cause in the mattere
Upon the point, what afterward betide,
The law of right shall not be laid aside.
So may a king of war the voyage
Ordain and take, as he thereto is hold,
To claim and ask his rightful heritage
In all places where it is withhold,
But otherwise if God himself would,
Affirm love and peace between the kings,
* Peace is y^ best above all earthly things.
* Good is to eschew war, and nathelees,
A king may make war upon his right,
For of battle the final end is pees,
Thus stant the law, that a worthy knight
Upon his troth may go to the fight,
But if so were that he might chese,
Better is y^ peace, of which may no man lose.
To stere peace ought euerich on live,
First for to set his liege lord in rest,
And eke these other men that they ne strive,
For so this land may stand at best,
* What king that would be the worthiest,
The more he might our deadly war cease,
The more he should his worthiness increase.
* Peace is the chief of all the worlds wealth,
And to the heaven it leads eke the way,
Peace is of soul and life the man's health,
Of pestilence, and does the war away,
My liege lord take heed of that I say,
If war may be left, take peace on hand,
Which may not be without gods sand.
With peace stant every creature in rest,
Without peace there may no life be glad,
Above all other good peace is the best,
Peace has himself when werre is al bestad,
The peace is safe, the war is ever drad,
Peace is of all charity the kay,
Which has the life and soul for to way.
My liege lord, if that thee list to seech
The soth ensamples with the war has wrought
Thou shall well here of wise men's speech,
That deadly war turns into naught,
For if these old books be well ysought,
There mit thou se what thing y^ war has do,
Both of conquest and conqueror also.
For vain honor, or for the worlds good,
They that whilome the strong wars made,
Where be they now, bethink well in thy mood,
* The day is gone, the night is derke and fade,
Her cruelty which made hem then glade,
They sorrowen now, and yet have naut y^ more
The blood is shad, which no man mayrestore.
The war is mother of the wrongs all,
It sleeth the priest in holy church at mass,
Forlith the maid, and does her flour to fall,
The war makes the great city less,
And does the law his rules ouerpasse,
There is nothing whereof mischeef may grow,
Which is not caused of the war I trow.
* The war brings in poverty at his heels,
Whereof the commen people is sore grieved,
The war has set his cart on thilk wheles,
Where that fortune may not be believed:
For when men wene best to have atcheued,
Full often it is all new to begin,
The war has nothing siker, tho he win.
For thy, my worthy prince in Christ's halue,
As for a part, whose faith thou have be guide,
Ley to this old sore a new save,
And do the war away, what so betide,
Purchase peace and set it by thy side,
And suffer not thy people be devoured,
So shall thy name ever after stand honored.
If any man be now, or ever was,
Again the peace thy preuy counsailour,
Let God be of thy counsel in this caas,
And put away the cruel warrior,
* For God which is of man the creator,
He would not men slough his creature,
Without cause of deadly forfaiture.
* Where needs most, behooves most to look,
My lord, how so thy wars be without,
Of time passed, who that heed took,
Good were at home to see right well about,
* For evermore, the worst is for to dout,
But if thou might parfite peace attain,
There should be no cause for to plain.
About a king good counsel is to preise,
Above all other things most vailable,
But yet a king within himself shall peise,
And seen the things that be reasonable,
And there upon he shall his wits stable,
Among the men to set peace in euin,
For love of him which is y^ king of heuin.
* A, well is him that shed never blood,
But if it were in cause of rightwisenesse,
For if a king the peril understood,
What is to slay the people, then I guess,
The deadly wars and the heaviness,
Whereof peace distourbed is full often,
Should at some time cease and were soft.
O king, fulfilled of grace and knighthode,
Remember upon this point for Christ's sake,
If peace be proffered unto thy manhood,
Thine honor save, let it not be forsake,
Though thou y^ wars dare well undertake,
After reason yet temper thy courage,
For like to peace there is none advantage.
My worthy lord, think well how so befall
Of thilke lore, as holy books saine,
* Christ is the head, and we be members all,
As well the subject as the sovereign,
So sit it well, that charity be plain,
Which unto God himself most accords,
So as the lore of Christ's word records.
In the old law or Christ himself was bore,
Among the ten commandments I read,
How that manslaughter should be forbore,
Such was the will that time of the godhede,
But afterward when Christ took his manhede
Peace was y^ first thing he let do cry
Against the worlds rancour and envy.
And or Christ went out of this earth here,
And stighed to heuin, he made his testament,
Where he bequeath to his disciples there,
And yaue his peace, which is y^ foundement
Of charity, without whose assent
The worlds peace may never well be tried,
Ne love kept, ne law justified.
The Jews with y^ painims hadden werre,
But they among hemself stood ever in peace,
Why should then our peace stand out of err,
Which Christ has chose unto his own encrese,
For Christ is more than was Moses,
And Christ has set the parfite of the law,
The which should in no wise be withdraw.
* To give us peace, was cause why Christ did,
Without peace, may nothing stond auailed,
But now a man may see on every side
How Christ's faith is every day assailed,
With painims destroyed and so batailed,
That for defaut of help and of defense,
Uneath has Christ his due reverence.
The right faith to keep of holy church,
The first point is named of knighthode,
And every man is hold for to worch
Upon the point that stant to his manhood:
But now alas, the fame is spread so broad,
That every man this thing complains,
And yet is there no man that help ordains.
The worlds cause is waited over all,
There be the wars ready to the full,
But Christ's own cause in special,
There ben the swerds and the spears dull,
And with the sentence of the Popes bull,
As for to done the folk pain obey,
The church is turned all another way.
It is wonder above any man's wit,
Without war how Christ's faith was won,
And we that be upon this earth yet,
Ne keep it not as it was first begone,
To every creature under the son
Christ bad himself that we should preach,
And to the folk his Euangely teach.
* More light it is to keep than to make,
But that we founden made tofore hond,
We keep not, but let it lightly slake,
The peace of Christ has al to broke his bond,
We rest our self, and suffren every land
To slay each other, as thing undefended,
So stant the war, and peace is not amended.
But though the head of holy church above
Ne do not all his hole business,
Among the people to set peace and love,
These kings oughten of her rightwisenesse
Her own cause among hemselfe redress,
* Tho Peter's ship as now has lost his stere,
It lithe in hem the barge for to stere.
If holy church after the duty
Of Christ's word ne be not all auised
To make peace, accord, and unity
Among the kings that be now devised,
Yet natheles the law stant assised
Of man's wit to be so reasonable,
Without that to stand himself stable.
Of holy church we ben children all,
And every child is hold for to bow
Unto the mother, how that ever it fall,
Or else he must reason disallow,
And for that cause a knight shall first auow
The right of holy church to defend,
That no man shall the privilege offend.
Thus were it good to set all in euin
The worlds princes and the prelates both,
For love of him which is the king of heuin,
And if men should algate wexen wroth,
The sarazins, which unto Christ ben loath,
Let men be armed against hem to fight,
So may the knight his deed of arms right.
Upon iii. points stant Christ's peace oppressed,
First holy church in her self divided,
Which ought of reason first to be redressed,
But yet so high a cause is not decided,
And thus when humble patience is prided,
The remenaunt which that they should rule,
No wonder is though it stand out of rule.
* Of that the head is sick, the limbs aken,
These reigns that to Christ's peace belongen,
For worlds good these deadly wars maken,
Which helpelesse, as in balaunce hongen,
The head above hem has not vnderfongen
To set peace, but every man sleeth other,
And in this wise has charity no brother.
The two defauts that bringen in the third,
Of miscreants that seen how we debate,
Between the two, they fallen in amid,
Where now all day they find an open gate,
Lo, thus the deadly war stant algate,
But ever I hope of king Henry's grace,
That he it is which shall the peace embrace.
My worthy noble prince and king anoint,
Whom God has of his grace so preserved,
Behold and see the world upon this point,
As for thy part, that Christ's peace be served,
So shall thy high mede be deserved,
To him which all shall quite at last,
* For this life here may no while last.
See Alexander, Hector, and Julius,
See Machabeus, David, and Iosue,
See Charlemaiue, Godefray, and Arthus,
Fulfilled of war and of mortality,
Her fame abitte, but all is vanity,
For death, which has the wars under foot,
Has made an end, of which there is no boot.
So many a man the soth wete and know,
That peace is good for every king to have,
* The fortune of the war is ever unknow,
But where peace is, there is y^ marches save,
That now is up, to morrow is under grave,
* The mighty God has all grace in hand,
Without him men may not long stand.
At the tennes to win or lose a chase,
May no life wete or that the ball be run,
* Al stant in God, with thing men shall purchase,
The end is in him or that it be begone,
* Men saine the woll when it is well sponne,
Does that the cloth is strong and profitable,
And else it may never be durable.
The worlds chances upon adventure
Ben ever set, but thilke chance of pees
Is so behouely to the creature,
That is above all other peerlees,
But it may not beget nathelees
Among the men to last any while,
But where the heart is plain without guile.
The peace is as it were a sacrament
Tofore the God, and shall with words plain,
Without any double entendement
Be treated, for the troth cannot feign,
* But if the men within himself ben vain,
The substance of the peace may not be true,
But every day it changes upon new.
But who that is of charity parfite,
He voideth all sleights far away,
And set his word upon the same plite,
Where that his heart has found a siker way,
And thus when conscience is truly way,
And that these ben handled with the wise,
It shall abide, and stand in all wise.
The Apostle says, * There may no life be good
Which is not grounded upon charity,
For charity ne shed never blood,
So has the war as there no property,
For thilke virtue which is said pity,
With charity so ferforth is acquainted,
That in her may no false semblant be painted.
Cassodore, whose writing is authorized,
Says: * Where that pity reigns, is grace,
Through which y^ peace has al his wealth assised,
So that of war he dredeth no manace,
Where pity dwells in the same place,
There may no deadly cruelty sojourne,
Whereof that mercy should his way turn.
To see what pity forthwith mercy does,
The cronique is at Rome in thilke empire
Of Constantine, which is a tale sooth,
When him was lever his own death desire,
Than do the young children to martire,
Of cruelty he left the quarele,
Pity he wrought, and pity was his hele.
For thilke man's pity which he deed,
God was pitous, and made him hole at all,
Siluester came, and in the same stead
Yaue him baptism first in special,
Which did away the sin original,
And all his lepre it has so purified,
That his pity for ever is magnified.
Pity was cause why this Emperor
Was hole in body and in soul both,
And Rome also was set in thilke honor
Of Christ's faith, so that they leave or loath,
Which hadden be with Christ tofore wroth,
Received were unto Christ's lore,
Thus shall pity be praised evermore.
My worthy liege lord, Henry by name,
Which England have to govern and right,
Men ought well thy pity to proclaim,
Which openliche in all the worlds sight
Is showed, with the help of God almight,
To give us peace, which long has be debated,
Whereof thy prise shall never be abated.
My lord, in whom has ever yet be found
Pity, without spot of violence,
Keep thilke peace always within bound,
Which God has planted in thy conscience,
So shall the cronique of thy patience
Among the saints be taken into memory
To the legend of perdurable glory.
And to thine earthly prise, so as I can,
Which every man is hold to commend,
I Gower, which am all thy liege man,
This letter unto thine excellence I send,
As I which ever unto my lives end
Woll pray for the state of thy person,
In worship of thy scepter and thy throne.
Not only to my king, of peace I write,
But to these other princes Christen all,
That each of hem his own heart endite,
And sease the war or more mischief fall,
Set eke the rightful Pope upon his stall,
Keep charity, and draw pity to hand,
Maintain law, and so the peace shall stand.
Explicit carmen de pacis commendatione, quod ad laudem and memoriam seremssimi
principis domini regis Henrici Quarti, suus humilis orator Johannes Gower
composuit.
Electus Christi, pie rex Henrici fuisti
Qui been venisti, cum propria regna petisti
Tu mala vicistique bonis bona restituisti
Et populo tristi, nova gaudia contribuisti
Est mihi spes lata, quod adhuc per te renovata
Succedent fata, veteri probitare beata
Est tibi nam grata, gratia sponte data.
Henrici quarti, primus regni fuit annus
Quo mihi defecit visus ad acta mea,
Omnia tempus habent finem natura ministrat
Quem virtute sua frangere nemo potest,
Ultra posse nihil quamvis mihi velle remansit
Amplius ut scribam non mihi posse manet,
Dum potui scripsi, sed nunc quia curva senectus,
Turbavit sensus scripta relinquo scholis,
Scribat qui veniet post me discretior alter.
Ammodo namque manus and mea penna silent,
Hoc tamen in fine verborum queso meorum,
Prospera quod statuat regna futura Deus.
Explicit.
A Saying of Dan John.
THere be four things that makes man fool,
Honor first puts him in outrage,
And alder next, solitary and soole,
The second is unweldy crooked age,
Women also bring men in dotage,
And mighty wine in many diverse wise
Distempren folk which been holden wise.
Yet of the same.
THere ben four things causing great folly,
Honor first, and unwieldy age,
Women and wine I dare eke specify,
Make wise men fallen in dotage,
Wherefore by counsel of Philosophers sage,
In great honor learn this of me,
With thine estate have humilite.
Balade de bon consail.
IF it befall that God thee list visit
With any tourment or adversite,
Thank first the lord, and thy self to quite,
Upon suffraunce and humilite
Found thou thy quarrel, what ever that it be:
Make thy defense, and thou shall have no loss,
The remembrance of Christ and of his cross.
Explicit.
Of the Cuckoo and the Nightingale.
Chaucer dreameth that he hears the Cuckoo and the Nightingale contend for
excellency in singing.

* THE God of love and benedicite,
How mighty and how great a lord is he,
For he can make of low herts hy,
And of high low, and like for to die,
And hard herts he can maken free.
He can make within a little stound
Of sick folk hole, fresh, and sound,
And of hole he can make seek,
He can bind and vnbinden eke
That he woll have bounden or unbound.
To tell his might my wit may not suffice,
For he can make of wise folk full nice,
For he may do all that he woll device,
And lithy folk to destroyen vice,
And proud herts he can make agrise.
Shortly all that ever he woll he may,
Against him dare no wight say nay,
For he can glad and greve whom him likes,
And who that he woll, he lougheth or siketh,
And most his might he shedeth ever in May.
For every true gentle heart free,
That with him is or thinks for to be,
Again May now shall have some stering,
Or to joy or else to some mourning,
In no season so much, as thinks me.
For when they may here the birds sing,
And see the flowers and the leaves spring,
That brings into her remembrance
A manner ease, meddled with grevaunce,
And lusty thoughts full of great longing.
And of that longing comes hevinesse,
And thereof grows of great sickness,
And for lack of that that they desire,
And thus in May ben herts set on fire,
So that they brennen forth in great distress.
I speak this of feeling truly,
If I be old and unlusty,
Yet I have felt of the sickness through May
Both hot and cold, and axes every day,
How sore ywis there wot no wight but I.
I am so shaken with the fevers white,
Of all this May sleep I but a lite,
And also it is not like to me,
That any heart should sleepy be,
In whom that love his fiery dart woll smite.
But as I lay this other night waking,
I thought how lovers had a tokening,
And among hem it was a commune tale,
That it were good to here the Nightingale,
Rather than the lewd Cuckoo sing.
And then I thought anon as it was day,
I would go some where to assay
If that I might a Nightingale here,
For yet had I none heard of all that year,
And it was tho the third night of May.
And anon as I the day aspide,
No longer would I in my bed abide,
But unto a wood that was fast by,
I went forth alone boldly,
And held the way down by a brook side.
Till I came to a laund of white and green,
So fair one had I never in been,
The ground was green, ypoudred with daisie
The flowers and the greues like hy,
All green and white, was nothing else seen.
There sat I down among y^ fair flours,
And saw the birds trip out of her bours,
There as they rested hem all the night,
They were so joyful of the days light,
They began of May for to done hours.
They coud that service all by rote,
There was many a lovely note,
Some song loud as they had plained,
And some in other manner voice yfained,
And some all out with the full throat.
They proyned hem, and made hem right gay,
And daunceden and lepten on the spray,
And evermore two and two in fere,
Right so as they had chosen hem to year
In Feuerere upon saint Valentines day.
And the river that I sat upon,
It made such a noise as it ron,
Accordaunt with the birds armony,
Me thought it was the best melody
That might ben yheard of any mon.
And for delight, I wot never how
I fell in such a slomber and a swow,
Not all asleep, ne fully waking,
And in that swow me thought I heard sing
The sorry bird the leaud cuckoo.
And that was on a tree right fast by,
But who was then evil apaid but I:
Now God (quoth. I) that died on the crois,
Give sorrow on thee, and on thy leaud vois,
Full little joy have I now of thy cry.
And as I with the cuckoo thus began chide,
I heard in the next bush beside
A nightingale so lustely sing,
That with her clear voice she made ring
Through all the green wood wide.
Ah, good nightingale (quoth. I then)
A little have thou ben too song hen,
For here has been the leaud cuckoo,
And songen songs rather than have thou,
I pray to God evil fire her bren.
But now I woll you tell a wonder thing,
As long as I lay in that swouning,
Me thought I wist what the birds meant,
And what they said, and what was her intent,
And of her speech I had good knowing.
There heard I the nightingale say,
Now good cuckoo go somewhere away,
And let us that can singen dwellen here,
For every wight escheueth thee to here,
Thy songs be so elenge in good fay.
What (quoth. she) what may thee aylen now,
It thinks me, I sing as well as thou,
For my song is both true and plain,
And though I cannot crakell so in vain,
As thou do in thy throat, I wot never how.
And every wight may understand me,
But nightingale so may they not done thee,
For thou have many a nice queint cry,
I have thee heard saine, ocy, ocy,
How might I know what that should be?
Ah fool (quoth. she) wost thou not what it is,
When that I say, ocy, ocy, ywis,
Then mean I that I would wonder feign,
That all they were shamefully yslaine,
That meanen ought again love amiss.
And also I would that all tho were deed,
That think not in love her life to lead,
For who so y^ wol not the God of love serve,
I dare well say he is worthy to sterue,
And for that skill, ocy, ocy, I grede.
Eye (quoth. the cuckoo) this is a queint law,
That every wight shall love or be to draw,
But I forsake all such company,
For mine intent is not for to die,
Ne never while I live on loves yoke to draw.
* For lovers ben the folk that been on live,
That most disease have, and most vnthriue,
And most endure sorrow, woe, and care,
And least feelen of welfare,
What needs it against troth to strive.
What (quoth. she) thou art out of thy mind,
How might thou in thy churlenesse find
To speak of loves servant in this wise,
For in this world is none so good seruise
To every wight that gentle is of kind.
For thereof truly comes all goodness,
All honor, and all gentleness,
Worship, ease, and all hearts lust,
Parfite joy, and full assured trust,
Iolitie, pleasaunce, and freshness,
Lowlyhead, largess, and courtesy,
Semelyhead, and true company,
Dread of shame for to done amiss:
* For he that truly loves servant is,
Were lother be shamed than to die.
And that this is sooth that I sey,
In that believe I will live and dey,
And cuckoo so I read that thou do ywis:
Then (quoth. he) let me never have bliss,
If ever I unto that counsel obey.
Nightingale thou speak wonder fair,
But for all that is the sooth contraire,
* For love is in young folk but rage,
And in old folk a great dotage,
Who most it uses, most shall enpaire.
* For thereof comes disease and heuinesse,
So sorrow and care, and many a great sickness,
Despite, debate, anger, and envy,
Deprauing, shame, untrust, and jelousie,
Pride, mischief, poverty, and woodnesse.
* Loving is an office of despair,
And one thing is therein that is not fair,
For who that gets of love a little bliss,
But if he be always therewith ywis,
He may full soon of age have his hair.
And Nightingale therefore hold thee ny,
For leave me well, for all thy queint cry,
If thou be far or long fro thy make,
Thou shall be as other that been forsake,
And then thou shall hoten as do I.
Fie (quoth. she) on thy name and on thee,
The god of Love ne let thee never ythee,
For thou art worse a thousandfold than wood,
* For many one is full worthy and full good,
That had be naught ne had love ybee.
* For evermore love his servants amendeth,
And from all evil taches hem defends,
And makes hem to brenne right in a fire,
In troth and in worshipful desire,
And when him likes, joy enough hem sends.
Thou Nightingale he said, be still,
* For love has no reason, but it is will,
For often time untrue folk he eases,
And true folk so bitterly he displeases,
That for defaut of courage he let hem spill.
Then took I of the Nightingale keep,
How she cast a sigh out of her deep,
And said, alas that ever I was bore,
I can for tene not say one word more,
And right with y^ word she brast out to weep.
Alas (quoth. she) my heart woll to break,
To hearen thus this leaud bird speak
Of love, and of his worshipful seruise,
Now God of love thou help me in some wise,
That I may on this Cuckoo been awreake.
Me thought then he stert up anon,
And glad was I that he was agone,
And evermore the Cuckoo as he flay,
Said farewell, farewell Popingay,
As though he had scorned me alone.
And then came the Nightingale to me,
And said, friend forsooth I thank thee,
That thou have liked me to rescow,
And one auow to love make I now,
That all this May I woll thy singer be.
I thanked her, and was right well apaied:
Ye (quoth. she) and be thou not dismayed,
Tho thou have herd y^ Cuckoo erst than me,
For if I live, it shall amended be
The next May, if I be not affraied.
And one thing I woll read thee also,
Ne leave thou not y^ Cuckoo, ne his loves so,
For all that he has said is strong leasing:
Nay (quoth. I) thereto shall nothing me bring,
For love and it has do me much woe.
Ye, use (quoth. she) this medicine
Every day this May or thou dine,
Go look upon the fresh Daisie,
And though thou be for woe in point to die,
That shall full greatly ^essen thee of thy pine.
And look always that thou be good and true,
And I woll sing one of the songs new
For love of thee, as loud as I may cry:
And then she began this song full hie,
I shrew all hem that been of love untrue.
And when she had song it to the end,
Now farewell (quoth. she) for I mote wend,
And god of love, that can right well, and may,
As much joy send thee this day,
As any yet lover he ever send.
Thus takes y^ Nightingale her leave of me,
I pray to God always with her be,
And joy of love he send her evermore,
And shilde us fro the Cuckoo and his lore,
For there is not so false a bird as he.
Forth she flew the gentle Nightingale
To all the birds that were in that dale,
And gate hem all into a place in fere,
And besoughten hem that they would here
Her disease, and thus began her tale.
The Cuckoo, well it is not for to hide
How the Cuckoo and I fast have chide,
Ever sithen it was day light,
I pray you all that ye do me right
On that foul false unkind bridde.
Then spoke o bird for all, by one assent,
This matter asks good auisement,
For we been birds here in fere,
And sooth it is, the Cuckoo is not here,
And therefore we woll have a parliment.
And thereat shall the Egle be our Lord,
And other peers that been of record,
And the Cuckoo shall be after sent,
There shall be give the judgment,
Or else we shall finally make accord.
And this shall be without nay
The morrow after saint Valentines day,
Under a Maple that is fair and grene,
Before the chamber window of the queen,
At Woodstocke upon the grene lay.
She thanked hem, and then her leave took,
And into an Hauthorne by that broke,
And there she sat and song upon that tree,
Term of life love has withhold me,
So loud that I with that song awoke.
Explicit.
O Lewd book with thy foul rudeness,
Since thou haste neither beauty ne eloquence,
Who has thee caused or give thee hardiness
For to appear in my Ladies presence,
I am full siker thou know her benevolence,
Full agreeable to all her abying,
For of all good she is the best living.
Alas that thou ne had worthiness,
To show to her some pleasant sentence,
Since that she has through her gentillesse
Accepted the servant to her digne reverence,
O, me repents that I ne had science
And leiser als, to make thee more flourishing,
For of all good she is the best living.
Beseech her meekely with all lowliness,
Though I be far from her in absence,
To think on my troth to her and steadfastness,
And to abridge of my sorrows the violence,
Which caused is, whereof knows your sapience,
She like among to notify me her liking
For of all good she is the best living.
Lenuoye.
A Vrore of gladness, and day of lustiness,
Lucern a night with heavenly influence
Illumined, root of beauty and goodness,
Suspires which I effunde in silence,
Of grace I beseech allege let your writing,
Now of all good, since ye be best living.
Explicit.
Scogan unto the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kings House.
In the written Copies the Title hereof is thus: Here follows a moral Ballad
to the Prince, the Duke of Clarence, the Duke of Bedford, the Duke of
Gloucester, the Kings Sons; by Henry Scogan, at a Supper among the Merchants in
the Vintry at London, in the House of Lewis John.

MY noble sons and eke my lords dear,
I your father called unworthily,
Send unto you this little Treatise here,
Written with mine own hand full rudely,
Although it be that I not reverently
Have written to your estates, I you pray
Mine vnconning takes benignely
For Gods sake, and harken what I say.
I complain me sore when I remember me
The sudden age that is upon me fall,
But more I complain my misspent juuentute
The which is impossible again for to call,
But certainly the most complaint of all,
Is to think, that I have be so nice,
That I ne would virtues to me call
In all my youth, but vices aye cherice.
Of which I ask mercy of the Lord,
That art almighty God in majesty,
Beseking to make so even accord
Betwixt thee and my soul, that vanity,
Worldly lust, ne blind prosperity,
Have no lordship over my flesh so frele,
Thou Lord of rest and parfite unity,
Put fro me vice, and keep my soul hele.
And give me might while I have life and space,
Me to confirm fully to thy pleasaunce,
Show to me the abundaunce of thy grace,
And in good werks grant me perseueraunce,
Of all my youth forget the ignorance,
Give me good will to serve thee ay to queme,
Set all my life after thine ordinance,
And able me to mercy or thou deem.
My lords dear, why I this complaint write
To you, whom I love most entirely,
Is for to warn you as I can endite,
* That time lost in youth folily,
Greueth a wight bodily and ghostly,
I mean him that to lust and vice entend,
Wherefore lords I pray you specially,
Your youth in virtue shapeth to dispend.
* Plant the root of youth in such a wise,
That in virtue your growing be always,
Look always goodness be in your exercise,
That shall you mighty make at each assay,
The fiend to withstand at each affray,
Passes wisely this perilous pilgrimage,
Think on this word, and work it every day,
That shall you give a parfite floured age.
Takes also head how y^ these noble clerks
Written in her books of great saprence,
Saying that faith is ded withouten works,
And right so is estate with negligence
Of virtue, and therefore with diligence
* Shapeth of virtue so to plant the root,
That ye thereof have full experience
To worship of your life and souls boot.
* Takes also head, that lordship ne estate
Without virtue may not long endure,
Thinks eke how vices and virtue at debate
Have been and shall while the world may dure,
And ever the vicious by adventure
Is overthrow, and thinks evermore
That God is Lord of all virtue, and figure
Of all goodness, and therefore follow his lore.
My master Chaucer, God his soul save,
That in his language was so curious,
He said that ye father which is dead and grave,
Biqueth nothing his virtue with his house
Unto his children, and therefore labourous
Ought ye be, beseeking God of grace
To give you might for to be virtuous,
Through whichye mit have part of his place.
* Here may ye see that virtuous noblesse
Comes not to you by way of auncestry,
But it comes by lefull business
Of honest life, and not by slogardry,
Wherefore in youth I read you edisie
The house of virtue in such a manner,
That in your age may you keep and gie
Fro the tempest of worlds wawes here.
* Thinks how betwixe virtue and estate
There is a parfite blessed Marriage,
Virtue is cause of peace, vice of debate
In man's soul, the which be full of courage,
Cherishes then virtue, vices to outrage,
Drives hem away, let hem have no wonning
In your souls, leseth not the heritage
Which God has give to virtuous living.
* Take heed also how men of poor degree
Through virtue have beset in great honor,
And ever have lived in great prosperity
Through cherishing of virtuous labor,
Thinks also how many a governor
Called to estate, has be set full low
Through misusing of right and of error,
And therefore I cousaile you virtue to know
Thus by your ancesters ye may nothing claim,
As that my master Chaucer says express,
But temporal thing, that men may hurt or maime,
Then is God stock of virtuous noblesse,
And since that he is lord of blessedness,
And made us all, and for us all deide,
Follows him in virtue with full business,
And of this thing herke how my master seide.
The first stock, father of gentilnesse,
What man that claims gentill for to be,
Must follow his trace, and all his wits dress,
Virtue to look, and vices for to fly,
For unto virtue longs dignity,
And not the reuers safely dare I deem,
All wear the mitre, corowne, or Diadem.
The first stock was full of rightwisenesse,
True of his word, sobre, pitous, and free,
Clean of his ghost, and loved business
Against the vice of sloth in honesty,
And but his heir love virtue, as did he,
He is not gentill though he rich seem,
All wear he mitre, croune, or Diadem.
Vice may be an heir to old richesse,
* But there may no man, all men may see,
Biqueth his heir his virtuous noblesse,
That is appropried unto no degree,
But to the first father of Majesty,
That makes his heirs hem that can him queme,
All wear he mitre, croune, or Diadem.
Lo, hear this noble Poet of Britain
How lightly in virtuous sentence
The loss on youth of virtue can complain,
Therefore I pray you with your diligence,
For your profit and Gods reverence,
Tempereth fully virtue in your mind,
That when ye come to your judges presence,
Ye be not vertulesse then behind.
Many lords have a manner now adays,
Though one show him a virtuous mattere,
Her fervent youth is of so false alayes,
That of that art they have no joy to here,
But as a ship that is without a stere,
Drives up and down without governance,
Wening that calm would last year by year,
Right so fare they for very ignorance.
* For very shame know they not by reason,
That after an ebb there comes a flood full rage,
In ye same wise when youth passes his season
Comes crooked and unweldy palied age,
And sone after comen the Kalends of dotage,
And if y^ her youth have no virtue provided,
All men woll say fie on her vassalage,
Thus has her sloth fro worship hem divided.
Boecius the clerk, as men may read and see,
Says in his book of Consolation,
What man des^reth of Vine or tree,
Plenteous fruit in reaping season,
Must ever eschew to do oppression
Unto the root, while it is young and grene,
Thus may ye see well by that inclusion,
* That youth vertulesse does much tene.
* Now sees there against how virtuous nobleness,
Rooted in youth with good perseueraunce,
Drives away all vices and wretchedness,
As slogardry, riot, and distaunce,
Sees eke how virtue causes suffisaunce,
Sees eke how virtue voideth all vice,
And who so has virtue, has all habundaunce
Of well, as far as reason can devise.
Take heed of Tullius Hostilius,
That fro pouert came to high degree
Through virtue, redeth eke of Julius
The conqueror, how poor a man was he,
Yet through his virtue and humility,
Of many country had he in governance,
Thus virtue brings a man to great degree,
Each wight that lust to do him entendaunce.
Read here against now of Nero vertulees,
Takes heed also of proud Balthasare,
They hated virtue, equity, and pees,
And look how Antiochus fill fro his chare,
That he his skin and bones all to tare,
Look what mischance they had for her vices,
Who so woll not by these signs beware,
I dare well say unfortunate and nice is.
I can no more now say, but hereby may ye see,
How virtue causes parfite sikernesse,
And vices exilen all prosperity,
The best is each man to chose as I guess,
Does as you list, I me excuse express,
I would be right sorry if that ye mischese,
God confirm you in virtuous noblesse,
So that through negligence ye not it lose.
Explicit.
* SOmetime the world so steadfast was and stable,
That man's word was an obligatioun,
And now it is so false and deceivable,
That word and deed as in conclusioun
Is nothing like, for turned is up so down
All the world, through mede and fikelnesse,
That all is lost for lack of steadfastness.
What makes the world to be so variable
But lust, that men have in dissension,
* For among us a man is hold unable,
But if he can by some collusion
Do his neighbor wrong and oppression:
What causes this but wilful wretchedness,
That all is lost for lack of steadfastness.
* Troth is put down, reason is hold fable,
Virtue has now no domination,
Pity is exiled, no man is merciable,
Through couetise is blent discretion,
The world has made a permutation,
Fro right to wrong, fro troth to fikelnesse,
That all is lost for lack of steadfastness.
Lenvoye.
Prince desire to be honorable,
Cherish thy folk, and hate extortion,
Suffer nothing that may be reprouable
To thine estate, done in thy region,
Show forth the yerd of castigation,
Dread God, do law, love troth and worthiness,
And wed thy folk again to steadfastness.
Explicit.
Good Counsel of Chaucer.
FLY fro the prease, and dwell with soothfastnesse,
* Suffice unto thy good though it be small,
* For horde has hate, and climbing tikelnesse,
Prease has envy, and well is blent over all,
* Savor no more than thee behoue shall,
Read well thy self y^ other folk can read,
And troth thee shall deliver, it is no dread.
* Pain thee not each crooked to redress
In trust of her that tourneth as a ball,
* Great rest stands in little business,
Beware also to spurn again a nall,
Strive not as does a crocke with a wall,
* Deem thy self that demest others deed,
And troth thee shall deliver it is no dread.
* That thee is sent receive in buxomnesse,
The wrestling of this world asks a fall,
Here is no home, here is but wilderness,
Forth pilgrim, forth beast out of thy stall,
* Look up on high, and thank God of all,
* Weiue thy lusts, and let thy ghost thee led,
And troth thee shall deliver, it is no dread.
Explicit.
A Ballade of the Village without Painting.
Plaintiff to Fortune.
THis wretched worlds transmutation,
As well and woe, now poor, and now honor,
Without order or due discretion,
Governed is by Fortunes error,
But nathelesse the lack of her favor
Ne may not do me sing, though that I die,
L'ay tout pardu, mon temps and labor.
For finally fortune I defy.
Yet is me left the sight of my reasoun,
To know friend fro foe in thy mirror,
So much has yet thy tourning up and down
Ytaught me to known in an hou^r,
But truly no force of thy reddour
To him that over himself has maistre,
* My suffisaunce shall be my succor,
For finally fortune I defy.
O Socrates thou steadfast champion,
She might never be thy turmentour,
Thou never dredest her oppression,
Ne in her chere found thou no favor,
Thou knew the deceit of her color,
And that her most worship is for to lie,
I know her eke a false dissimulour,
For finally fortune I defy.
The answer of Fortune.
* No man is wretched, but himself it wene,
Ne that has in himself suffisaunce,
Why say thou then I am to thee so kene,
That have thy self out of my governance?
Say thus, grant mercy of thine habundance
that thou have lent or this, thou shall not strive,
What wost thou yet how I thee woll auance,
And eke thou have thy best friend alive.
I have thee taught division between
Friend of effect, and friend of countenance,
Thee needs not the gall of an Hine,
That cures eyes dark for her pennaunce
Now see thou clear that were in ignorance,
* Yet holt thine anchor, and yet thou maistarriue
There bounty bears y^ key of my substance,
And eke thou have thy best friend alive.
How many have I refused to sustene,
Since I have thee fostred in thy pleasaunce,
Wolt thou then make a statute on thy queen,
That I shall be aye at thine ordinance,
Thou born art in my reign of variaunce,
About the whele with other must thou drive,
My lore is bet, then wicke is thy greuaunce,
And eke thou have thy best friend alive.
The answer to Fortune.
Thy lore I dampne, it is adversity,
My friend may thou not reave blind goddess,
That I thy friends know, I thank it thee,
* Take hem again, let hem go lie a press,
The niggardes in keeping her richesse,
Pronoslike is, thou wolt her toure assail,
* Wicke appetite comes aye before sickness,
In general this rule may not fail.
Fortune.
Thou pinchest at my mutability,
For I thee lent a drop of my richesse,
And now me likes to withdraw me,
Why should thou my royalty oppress,
The sea may ebb and flow more and less,
The welken has might to shine, rain, and hail,
Right so must I kithe my brotilnesse,
In general this rule may not fail.
The Plaintiff.
Lo, the execution of the majesty,
That all purueigheth of his rightwisenesse,
That same thing fortune clepen ye,
Ye blind beasts full of lewdness,
* The heaven has property of sikernesse,
This world has ever restless travail,
The last day is end of mine entresse,
In general this rule may not fail.
Thenuoye of Fortune.
Princes I pray you of your gentilnesse
Let not this man and me thus cry and plain,
And I shall quite you this business,
And if ye list releue him of his pain,
Pray ye his best friend of his noblesse,
That to some better state he may attain.
Lenuoy.
TO broken been the statutes hie in heaven,
That create were eternally tendure,
Sith that I see the bright Gods seven,
Mow weep and wail, and passion endure,
As may in earth a mortal creature:
Alas, fro whens may this thing proceed,
Of which error I die almost for dread.
By word eterne whilom was it shape,
That fro the fifth cercle in no manner,
Ne might of tears down escape,
But now so weepeth Venus in her sphere,
That with her tears she wol drench us here,
Alas Scogan this is for thine offense,
Thou causest this deluge of pestilence.
Have thou not said in blaspheme of y^ goddis,
Through pride, or through thy great rekelnes,
Such things as in the law of love forbode is,
That for thy lady saw not thy distress,
Therefore thou yaue her up at Mighelmesse?
Alas Scogan of old folk ne young,
Was never erst Scogan blamed for his tongue.
Thou drew in scorn Cupide eke to record,
Of thilke rebel word that thou have spoken,
For which he woll no longer be thy Lord,
And Scogan, though his bow be not broken,
He woll not with his arowes be ywroken
On thee ne me, ne none of our figure,
We shall of him have neither hurt ne cure.
Now certes friend I dread of thine vnhape,
Lest for thy gilte the wreche of love proceed
On all hem that been hoar and round of shape,
That be so likely folk to speed,
Then we shall of our labor have our mede,
But well I wot thou wolt answer and say,
* Lo old Grisell list to run and play.
Nay Scogan say not so, for I me excuse,
God help me so, in no rhyme doubtless,
Ne think I never of sleep wake my muse,
That rusteth in my sheath still in pees,
While I was young I put her forth in prees,
But all shall pass that men prose or time,
Take every man his turn as for his time.
* Scogan thou knelest at ye stremes hedde
Of grace, of all honor, and of worthiness,
In the end of which I am dull as dedde,
Forgotten in solitary wilderness,
Yet Scogan think on Tullius kindness,
Mind thy friend there it may fructify,
Farewell, and look thou never eft love defy.
Explicit.
* GO forth King, rule thee by Sapience,
Bishop be able to minister doctrine,
Lord to true counsel give audience,
Womanhode to chastity ever incline,
Knight let thy deeds worship determine,
Be righteous Judge in saving thy name,
Rich do almose, lest thou lose bliss with shame.
* People obey your king and the law,
Age be ruled by good religion,
True servant be dredful and keep thee under aw,
And thou poor, fie on presumpcion,
Inobedience to youth is utter destruction,
Remember you how God has set you lo,
And do your part as ye be ordained to.
Th. Occleve to his empty Purse.
TO you my purse and to none other wight
Complain I, for ye be my Lady dear,
I am sorry now that ye be light,
For certes ye now make me heavy chere,
Me were as lefe laid upon a bear,
For which unto your mercy thus I cry,
Be heavy again or else mote I die.
Now vouchsafe this day or it be night,
That I of you the blissful sown may here,
Or see your color like the sun bright,
That of yelowness had never pere,
Ye be my life, ye be my hertes stere,
Queen of comfort and of good company,
Be heavy again, or else mote I die.
Now purse that art to me my lives light,
And savior, as down in this world here,
Out of this town help me by your might,
Since that you woll not be my treasure,
* For I am shave as nere as any friar,
But I pray unto your courtesy,
Be heavy again, or else mote I die.
Explicit.
Occleve unto the King.
O Conqueror of Brutes Albion,
Which that by line and free election
Been very king, this to you I send,
And ye that may all harms amend,
Have mind upon my supplicacion.
Explicit.
A Ballad of good counsel, translated out of Latin verses into English by Dan
John Lidgate, cleped the Monk of Bury.
COnsider well every circumstaunce,
Of what estate ever thou be,
Rich, strong, or mighty of puissance,
Prudent or wise, discrete or besie,
The dome of folks in soch thou may not fly,
* What ever thou do trust well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
For in thy port or in apparaile,
If thou be cladde and honestly be saine,
Anon the people of malice woll not fail,
Without advice or reason for to sain,
That thine array is made or wrought in vain.
Suffer hem speak, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue wol always deem amiss.
Thou will to kings be equipolent,
With great lords evin and peregall,
And if thou be torn, all to rent,
Then woll they say, and jangle over all,
Thou art a slougarde that never thrive shall,
Suffer hem speak, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
* If it befall that thou take a wife,
They woll falsely say in their intent,
Thou art likely ever to live in strife,
Void of all rest, without aledgment,
Wifes ben maistres, this is their judgment,
Suffren all their spech, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
* If thou be fair and excellent of beauty,
Yet woll they say that thou art amourous,
If thou be foul and ugly on to see,
They woll affirm that thou art vicious,
The people of language is so dispitous,
Suffer all their spech, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
If so be that of parfitenesse,
Thou have vowed to live in chastitee,
Then woll folk, of thy person express,
Thou art impotent tengendre in thy degree,
And thus where thou be chaste or des^avy,
Suffer hem speak, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
If thou be fat other corpolent,
Then wol they sain thou art a great gloton,
A devourer, or else vinolent,
If thou be lean or megre of fashion,
Call thee a nigard in their opinion,
Suffer them speak, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
If thou be rich, some woll yeve thee laud,
And say it comes of prudent governaunce,
And some wol saine it comes of fraud,
Other by sleight, or false chevisaunce,
To sain the worst, folk have so great pleasaunce,
What suffer hem say, and trust right wei this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
If thou be sad or sobre of countenance,
Men woll sain thou think some treason,
And if thou be glad of daliaunce,
Men woll deem it desolution,
And call fair speech adulacion,
Yet let hem speak, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue wol always deem amiss.
Who that is holy by perfection,
Men of malice woll clip him ypocrite,
And who is merry of clean entention,
Men sain in riot he does him delight,
Some mourn in black, some love in clothes white,
Suffer men speak, and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
Honest array men deem it pomp and pride,
And who goes poor, men call him a waster,
And who goes still men mark him on ye side,
Seine that he is a spy or agiler:
Who wastes not, men sain he has treasour,
Whereof conclude and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue will always deem amiss.
Who speaks much men clepeth him prudent,
Who that debateth, men saine yt he is hardy,
And who says litel with great sentement,
Some folk yet wol wite him of folly,
Troth is put down, and up goth flattery,
And who yt list plainly know the cause of this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
For though a man were as pacient,
As was David throw his humilite,
Or with Solomon in wisdom as prudent,
Or in knighthode egall with Iosue,
Or manly proved, as Judas Machabe,
Yet for all that, trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
And though a man had the prowess
Of worthy Hector, Troys Champioun,
The love of Troylus, or the kindness,
Or of Caesar the famous high renoun,
With all Alexaunders dominacioun,
Yet for all that trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
Or though a man of high or low degree,
Of Tullius had the sugared eloquence,
Or of Seneca the moralitee,
Or of Caton forsight and providence,
The conquest of Charles, Artures magnificence,
Yet for all that trust right well this,
A wicked tongue woll always deem amiss.
Touching of women, ye parfit Innocence
Though that they had, of Hester ye nobleness,
Or of Gresilde, the humble patience,
Or of Judith, the preuid stablenesse,
Or Polixcenes virginal clennesse,
Yet dare I seiue, and trust right well this,
* Some wicked tongue would deem of them amiss.
The wifely troth of Penelope
Though they it had in her possession,
Helenes beauty, the kindness of Medee,
The love unfeigned of Martia Caton,
Or Alcestes true affection,
Yet dare I saine and trust right well this,
A wicked tongue wol always deem amiss.
Than sooth it is that no man may eschew
The swerd of tongues, but it will kerve and bite,
Full hard it is a man for to remew,
Out of their danger him for to aquite,
* Woe to the tongues that hemselfe delight,
To hinder or slander, and set their study in this,
And their pleasaunces to deem always amiss.
Most noble princes, cherishers of virtue,
Remembers you of high discretion,
* The first virtue most pleasing to Jesus,
(By the writing and sentence of Caton)
Is a good tongue in his opinion,
Chastise the reverse of wisdom do this,
Voideth your hearing from al y^ deem amiss.
A Ballad in the Praise and Commendation of Master Geffery Chaucer, for his
golden Eloquence.
Master Geffray Chaucer, that now lithe in grave,
The noble Rhetoricion, and Poet of great Britain,
That worthy was y^ laurer of Poetry to have
For this his labor, and the palm to attain,
Which first made to distill, and rein,
The gold dew dropes, of spech and eloquence,
Into English tongue, through his excellence.
Explicit.
Here follows certain Works of Geffrey Chaucer, annexed to the Impressions
printed in the Years 1561, and 1602. All collected and adjoined to his former
Works by John Stowe.
A Ballad made by Chaucer, teaching what is gentilness, or whom is worthy to be
called gentill.

THE first stock Father of gentilnes,
What man desires gentil for to be,
Must follow his trace, and all his wits dreis,
Virtue to love, and vices for to flee,
For unto virtue longs dignitee,
And not the revers falsely dare I deem,
All wear he miter, crown or diadem.
This first stock was full of rightwisnes,
True of his word, sober, pitous and free,
Clean of his ghost and loved besineffe,
Against the vice of sloth in honest,
* And but his air love virtue as did he,
He is not gentill though he rich seem,
All wear he miter, crown or diadem.
* Vicesse may well be heir to old richesse,
But there may no man, as men may well see,
Byquethe his air his virtues nobleness,
That is appropried unto no degree,
But to the first father in majestee,
That makes his eyres them that him queme
All wear he miter, crown or diadem.
Explicit.
A Proverb against Covetise and Negligence.
WHat shall these clothes manifold
Lo this hot summers day,
* After great heat comes cold,
No man cast his pilch away,
Of all this world the large compass
It will not in mine arms twain,
Who so mokel woll enbrace,
Litel thereof he shall distraine.
Explicit.
A Ballad which Chaucer made against Women unconstant.
MAdame, for your new fangleness,
Many a servaunt have you put out of your grace,
I take my leave of your unstedfastness,
For well I wot, while ye to live have space,
Ye cannot love full half year in a place,
* To new things your lust is ever kene,
Instead of blew, thus may ye wear all grene.
Right as a mirror y^ nothing may enpresse,
But lightly as it comes, so mote it pass,
So fares your love, your works bear witness
There is no faith may your heart enbrace,
But as a wedercocke, that turns his face
With every wind, ye fare, and that is seen,
Instead of blew, thus may ye wear all grene.
Ye might be shrined, for your brothilnes,
Better then Dalyda, Cresseide, or Candace,
For ever in changing stondeth your sikernes,
That catch may no wight, from your heart a race,
If ye lose one, ye can well twein purchase
* Al light for somar, ye wot well with I meene,
Instead of blew, thus may ye wear all grene.
Explicit.
Here follows a Ballad which Chaucer made in the Praise, or rather Dispraise,
of Women, for their Doubleness.
THis world is full of variaunce,
In every thing who takes head
That faith and trust, and all constance,
Exiled been this is no dread,
And save only in womanhede,
I can see no sekerness,
But for all that, yet as I read,
Beware always of doubleness.
* Also that fresh somer flowers,
White and read, blewe and green,
Been suddenly, with winter shoures,
Made feinte and fade, without wene:
That trust is none as ye may seen,
In no thing, nor no stedfastness,
Except in women, thus I meene,
Yet aye beware of doubleness.
The crooked Moan, this is no tale,
Some while yshene and bright of hew,
And after that full derke and pale,
And every month changes new,
That who the very soth knew,
* All things is bilt on brotleness,
Save that women aye be true,
Yet aye beware of doubleness.
The lusty fresh summers day,
And Phoebus with his beams clear,
Toward night they draw away
And none longer list appear,
* That in this present life now here,
Nothing abides in his faireness,
Save women aye be found intere,
And deuoide of doubleness.
The sea eke, with his stern wawes,
Each day flows new again,
And by concours of his laws
The ebb flows in certain:
* After great drought, there comes a rain,
That farewell here all stabelness,
Save that women be hole and plain,
Yet aye beware of doubleness.
* Fortunes whele goes round about,
A thousand times, day and night,
Whose course stands ever in doubt,
For to transmew, she is so light,
For which aduerteth in your sight,
The untrust of worldy fikelness,
Save women, which of kindly right,
Ne has no teache of doubleness.
What man may the wind restrain,
Or hold a snake by the tail,
Or a slipper ele constrain,
That it will void, without fail,
Or who can drive so a nail,
To make sure new fongleness,
* Save women that can gie their sail,
To row their boot with doubleness.
At every haven they can ariue,
Where as they wot is good passage,
Of innocence they can not strive,
With wawes nor no rocks rage,
So happy is their lodemanage,
With needle and stone their course to dress,
* That Solomon was not so sage,
To find in them no doubleness.
Therefore who so them accuse,
Of any double entencion,
To speak, rowne, other to muse,
To pinch at their condition,
All is but false collusion,
I dare rightwell the sothe express,
They have no better protection,
But shroud them under doubleness.
* So well fortuned is their chance,
The dice to turn up so down,
With sise and sincke they can auaunce,
And then by reuolucion,
They set a fell conclusion,
Of ^ombes, as in soothfastness,
Though clerks make mention,
Their kind is fret with doubleness.
Sampson had experience,
That women were full true yfound,
When Dalyda of innocence,
With sheeres began his here to round,
To speak also of Rosamound,
And Cleopatris faithfulness,
The stories plainly will confound,
Men that apeche their doubleness.
Single thing ne is not praised,
Nor of old is of no renoun,
In balaunce when they be peised,
For lack of weight they be bore down,
And for this cause of just reason.
These women all of rightwiseness,
Of choice and free election,
Most love eschaunge and doubleness.
Lenuoye.
O Ye women which been inclined,
By influence of your nature,
To been as pure as gold yfined,
In your truth for to endure,
Arm your self in strong armure,
Least men assail your sikerness,
Set on your breast your self to assure,
A mighty shield of doubleness.
Explicit.
This Work following was compiled by Chaucer, and it is called the Craft of
Lovers.
MOral is a similitude who list their balades sewe,
The craft of Loves curious arguments,
For some been false and some been founden true,
And some been double of entendements,
Thus lovers with their moral documents,
And eloquent langage they can examplifie,
The craft of love what it does signify.
Who list unto this balades have inspection,
Think that loves lordships excellent,
Is remedy for disease and correction,
To woeful heart and body impotent,
Suppose the maker that he be negligent
In his compilyng hold him excusable,
Because his spirits be sorry and lamentable.
Most soverain lady surmounting your noblenes,
O intenuate Ienipre and daisie delicious
My trust, mine health, my cordial foundres,
O Medicine sanatife to sores langorous,
O comfortable creature of lovers amorous,
O excellent herber of lovely countenance,
Ye regester my love in your remembrance.
Certes sir your painted eloquence,
So gay, so fresh and eke so talcatife,
It does transcend the wit of dame Prudence,
For to declare your thought or to discrive,
So gloriously glad langage ye contrive,
Of your conceit, your thought, and your intent,
I will beware for dread or I be stent.
O rubicunde Rose, and white as the lilly,
O clarified Crystal of worldly portraiture,
O Courfin figure resplendent with glory,
O Gem of beauty, o Carboncle shining pure,
Your fairnes excedeth y^ craft of dame nature
Most womanly behaving your lovely countenauuce,
Ye regester my love in your remembrance.
What avails sir your proclamacion,
Of curious talking, not touching to sadness,
It is but wind, flattering, and adulacion,
Imesurable thought of worldly wildnes,
Which is chief cause of ghostly feebleness,
Your will, your thought, your double entendement,
* I will beware of dread, or I be shent.
My wit, my thought, and mine invencion,
Is for to please you my lady soverain,
And for your love throw many a region
I would be exiled, so that ye would not disdain
To have pity on me when I complain,
In well and woe to suffer perturbaunce,
So that ye woll have me in remembrance.
What is your will plainly ye do express,
That makes this curious supplicacion,
Say on sir on hertly tenderness,
Beth well advised of vain delectacion,
* At your beginning think on y^ terminacion,
Pass not your bounds be not too negligent,
And ever beware for dread or ye be shent.
Your goodly behaving your beauty and countenance
Makes me incline to do you reverence,
Your lovely loking your glorious governance
Overcomes my spirits my wit and my prudence
Some drop of grace, of your magnificence,
Unto your servaunt ye show attendaunce,
And regester my love in your remembrance.
O comberous thought of man's fragility,
O fervent will of lusts furious,
O cruel courage causing adversity,
Of women's corrupcion and eke contrarious,
* Remember man that change is perilous,
To break ye virginity of virgins innocent,
Wherefore beware wankind or thou be shent.
My peine is preuy, impossible to deserne
My lamentable thoughts by casting mourning,
O general Judge Jesus sitting superne,
Graciously convert ye love of my sweet thing,
O amiable lady gracious and beninge,
I put me wholly in your governance,
Exile me not out of your remembrance.
Me seems by langage ye be some protestate
Or else some curious gloser disceuable,
What is your name mekely I make regrate,
Or of what science or craft commendable,
I am a lady excellent, and honorable,
* He must be gay y^ should be to mine intent,
Wherefore I will be ware or I be shent.
Lord God this is a sharp examinacion,
Of her that is most in my memory,
Unto you lady I make certificacion,
My name is true love of carnal desidery,
Of man's copulacion the very exemplary,
Which am one of your servant of pleasaunce,
I must be chief called to remembrance.
I have sought true love of years great process,
Yet found I never love but for a season,
* Some men be diverse and know no gentilnes,
And some lack both wisdom and reason,
In some men is trust, in some men is treason,
Wherefore I will conclude my auisement,
And ever beware for dread that I be shent.
The rectour Tullius so gay of eloquence,
And Ovide yt shows the craft of love expres,
With habundaunce of Salomons prudence,
And pulcritude of Absalons fairness,
And I were possessed with Jobs great richesse
Manly as Sampson my person to auance,
Yet should I submit me in your remembrance.
Now sir if that it pleases your nobleness
To give aduertence to my question,
What thing is pleasure of sweetness,
And is most bitter in final successon?
Or what thing gives man occasion
In tender age for to be concupiscent?
Resolve this question or dread sir ye be shent.
My sovereign lady, Ouide in his writing
* Says that desire of worldly concupiscence
As for a time is sweet in his worching,
And in his end he causes great offense:
Notwithstanding my lady dame Prudence,
Green flowring age, a manly countenance
Causes ladies to have it in remembrance.
Your goodly answer so notable in substance,
Would cause the heart of womanhede convert
Unto delight of natural pleasaunce:
But of one thing I would feign be expert,
Why men's langage wol procure and transuert
The will of women and virgins innocent?
Wherefore I am aferd or I be shent.
Let never the love of true love be losed,
(My sovereign lady) in no manner wise,
In your confidence my words I have closed,
My amiable love to you I do promise,
* So that ye knit the knot of exercise,
Both lock and key ye have in governance,
Emprint my love in your remembrance.
O very trust and I were certefied,
The plain entention of your hertes cordial,
Me seems in bliss then were I glorified,
Unto your pleasure I would be at your call,
But ever I fear of chances casual,
Of fraud, disceipt, and langage insolent,
Then were I sure maidenhed should be shent.
There was never tresour of terrestrial riches,
Nor precious stones rekened innumerable,
To be of comparison unto your high goodness,
Above all creatures to me most amiable,
Trust not ye contrary I was never disceuable,
* Keep well true love, forge no dissemblance,
And graciously take me to your remembrance.
Me seems by feiture of womanly properte,
Ye should be trusty and true of promis,
I find in you no false duplicite,
Wherefore true love ye have my here I wis,
And evermore shall endure so have I blis,
The federasie made with good auisement,
God grant grace that nether of us be shent.
When Phoebus fresh was in chare splendent,
In the month of May erly in a morning,
I hard two lovers profer this argument,
In the year of our Lord a M. by rekening,
CCCXL. and VIII. year following,
O potent princess conserve true lovers all,
And grant them thy region and bliss celestial.
Explicit the craft of lovers.
A Ballad.
OF their nature they greatly them delight,
With holy face feined for the nones,
* In saintwary their friends to visit,
More for relics than for saints bones,
Though they be closed under precious stones,
To get them pardon like their old vsages,
* To kiss no shrines but lusty quike Images.
When maidens are wedded and household have take,
All their humility is exiled away,
And the cruel hertes begins to awake,
They do all the besie cure yt they can or may,
To vex their household masters y^ soth for to say
Wherefore ye young men I read you for thy,
* Beware always, the blind eats many a fly.
Of this matter I dare make no longer relacion,
For in default of sleep my spirits wexen faint
In my study I have had so long an habitacion
That my body and my ghost are grievously attaint
And therefore of this process I make no longer
But whether y^ blind eat flesh or fish complaint
* I pray God keep the fly out of my dish.
Now I make an end, and lay me down to rest,
For I know by experience verament,
If maidens and wives knew and wist,
Who made the matter he should be shent,
Wherefore I pray God omnipotent,
Him save and keep both night and day,
Written in the lusty season of May.
Explicit.
The Ten Commandments of Love.
CErtes far extends yet my reason,
This matter as it should be, to discriue,
But I trust your grace will in this season,
Consider how with conning that I strive,
For in his favor coud I never arrive,
Eloquence this Ballad has in great despite,
The maker lacks manner to endite.
Of Loves commandments x. is the number,
As afterward shall rudely be rehearsed,
And lovers in no wise depart asunder,
Where as they be observed and redressed,
Danger and unkindness been oppressed,
And that is commanded this to make,
Is your own all other to forsake.
Faith.
Faith is the first and principally to tell,
Very love requires soch credence,
That each believe other as true as y^ Gospel,
Without adulacion or flattering audience,
In true meaning and trusty confidence,
* Paint not your conning with color ne fable,
For then your love must needs be unstable.
Entencion.
In the second to treat of Entencion,
Your lover to please do your busy cure,
For as min author Romance makes mention,
Without intent your love may not endure,
* As women will thereof I am right sure,
Endeavor with heart, will, and thought,
To please him only y^ her love has sought.
Discrecion.
* In your dealing ever be discrete,
Set not your love there as it shall be losed,
Advertise in your mind whether he be mete,
That unto him your heart may be disclosed,
And after as you find him then disposed,
Point by discretion your hour, time, and place,
Conveniently meting with arms to embrace.
Patience.
Of these commandments, the iv. is patience,
* Tho by irous courage your lover be meued,
With soft words and humble obedience,
His wrath may sone be swaged and releued,
And thus his love obtained and acheued,
Will in you root with greater diligence,
Because of your meke and womanly patience.
Secretnesse.
Secretly behave you in your werks,
In showing countenance or meuing of your iye,
Though soch behauor to some folk be derke,
He that has loved will it soon aspie,
Thus your self your counsel may descrie,
* Make privy to your deling as few as ye may
For iii. may keep a counsel if twain be away.
Prudence.
* Let prudence be governor of your bridel reine,
Set not your love in so fervent wise,
But that in goodly have ye may refreine,
If your lover list you to despise,
* Romaunce mine auctour would you this advise,
To slack your love, for if ye do not so,
That wanton lust will turn you into woe.
Perseueraunce.
* Stablish your love in so steadfast wise,
If that ye think your lover will be true,
As entirely as you can devise,
Love him only and refuse all new,
Then shall not your worship change his hew,
For certes masteres then is he to blame,
But if that he will quite you with the same.
Pity.
* Be piteous to him as womanhod requires
That for your love endures pains smart,
Whom so sore your pleasant look enfireth,
That printed is your beauty in his heart,
And wounded lies without knife or dart,
There let your pity spread without restraint,
For lack of pity, let not your servant faint.
Measure.
Take mesure in your talking, be not outrage
For this rehearses Romance de la Rose,
* A man endued with plenteous langage,
Often time is denied his purpose,
Take measure in langage, wisdom in gross,
* For mesure as right well proved is by reason
Things unseasonable sets in season.
Mercy.
Soch danger exile him utterly,
Over all mercy to occupy his place,
To piteous complaints your ears apply,
And receive your servant in grace,
To him that bound is in loves lace,
Show favor lady and be not merciless,
Least ye be called a common murderess.
Lenuoye.
When ye unto this balade have inspection,
In my making hold me excusable,
It is submitted unto your correction,
Consider that my conning is disable,
To write to you the figure vniable,
All deuoide of conning and experience,
Manner of inditing, reason and eloquence.
Trust it well the maker your own,
You to obey while his life may endure,
To do you service as a man unknown,
No guerdone desiring of yearthly treasure,
But if it might accord with your pleasure,
For true service him to auaunce,
And call him into your remembrance.
Explicit the Ten Commandments of Love.
The Nine Ladies worthy.
Queen Sinope.
PRofulgent in preciousnesse, O Sinope queen,
Of all feminine bearing the scepter and regaly,
Subduing the large country of Armenia as it was seen,
Maugre their mights thou brought them to apply,
Thine honor to increase, thy power to magnify,
O renomed Hercules with all thy pompous boste,
This Princes took the prisoner and put to flight thine host.
Lady Ipolite.
Yet Hercules wexed red for shame, when I spoke of Ipolite,
Chief patrons and captain of ye people of sinope,
Which with amorous there and coragious mit,
Smote thee to ground for all thy cruelty,
Wherefore ye dukeship of Diomedes and dignity,
Unto her great land and glory perpetual,
Attributed is with triumph Laureall.
Lady Deifile.
The noble triumph of this Lady Deifile,
In releue and succor of ye great duke of Athenes,
She chastised and brought into perpetual exile,
The aureat citezeins of mighty Thebes,
The strong brazen pillars there had no reles,
But she with her sister Argia them did down cast,
And with furious fire y^ city brent at last
Lady Teuca.
O pulchrior sole in beauty full lucident,
Of all femine most formous flour,
In Italy reigning with great cheualry right fervent,
Chastised ye Romans as maieres and conqueror
O lady Teuca much was thy glory and honor,
Yet much more was to comend thy benignite
In thy parfite living and virginal chastity.
Queen Pantasile.
Oye Trogeans for this noblequene Pantasile
Sorrow her mortality with dolorous compassion
Her love was to you so pregnant and fertile,
That against ye proud Greeks made defension
With her victorious handwas al her affection
To lash y^ Greks to ground was her herts joy,
To revenge y^ coward death of Hector of Troy
Queen Thamiris.
O thou rigorous queen Thamiris invincible,
Upon y^ strong and hideous people of citees reining,
Which by thy power and wits sensible
Thou tokest in battle Cyrus the great king
Of Perce and Mede, his head of in blood lying,
Thou badest him drink y^ blood had thursted,
And xxii. M. of his host there were distressed.
Lady Lampedo.
The famous trump of gold forged so bright,
Has blown so up the fame and glory enuiron,
Of this lady Lampedo with her sister Marthesi
That al ye land of Feminie, Europe, and Epheson
Be yelden and applied lowly to her subjection,
Many an high toure she raised, and built toures long
perpetuelly to last with huge walls strong.
Queen Semiramys.
Lo here Semiramys queen of great Babylon,
Most generous gem and flower of lovely favor,
Whose excellent power fro Mede unto septentrion
Flourished in her regallyas a mighty conqueror
Subdued al Barbary: and zorast y^ king of honor
she slew in Ethiop, and conquered Armony in Inde
In which non entered but Alexander and she as I find.
Lady Menalip.
Also the lady Menalip thy sister dear,
Whose marcial power no man coud withstand,
Through the world was not found her pere,
The famous duke Thesus she had in hand,
She chastised him and all his land,
The proud Greeks mightily she did assail,
Over came and vanquished them in battle.
Explicit the Ballades of the nine Worthies of Ladies.
ALone walking
In thought plaining
And sore sighing
All desolate.
Me remembering
Of my living
My death wishing
Both early and late.
Unfortunate
Is so my fate
That wot ye what
Out of measure
My life I hate:
Thus desperate
In such poor estate
Do I endure.
Of other cure
Am I not sure,
Thus to endure
Is hard certain.
Such is my ure
I you ensure,
What creature
May have more pain.
My truth so plain
Is take in vain
And great disdain
In remembrance.
Yet I full feign
Would me complain
Me to abstain
From this penance.
But in substance
None allegeaunce
Of my greuaunce
Can I not find.
Right so my chance
With displesaunce
Does me auaunce.
And thus an end.
Explicit.
A Ballad.
IN the season of Feuerere when it was full cold,
Frost, and Snow, Hail, Rain, has dominacion,
With changeable elements, and winds manifold,
Which has ground, flour, and herb, under jurisdiction,
For a time to dispose after their correction,
And yet April with his pleasant shours,
Dissolueth y^ snow, and brings forth his flours.
Of whose inuencion ye lovers may be glad,
For they bring in the Kalends of May,
And ye with countenance demure, meke and sad,
Owe for to worship, the lusty flowers always,
And in especial one is called see of the day,
The Daisee, a flower white and read,
And in French called La bele Margarete.
O commendable flower and most in mind,
O flower so gracious of excellence,
O amiable Margarite exalted of native kind,
Unto whom I must resort with all my diligence
With heart, will, and thout, with most lowly obedience
Ey to be your servant, and ye my regent,
For life ne death never to repent.
Of this process now forth will I proceed,
Which happeth me with great disdain,
As for the time thereof I take lest heed,
For unto me was brought the sore pain,
Therefore my cause was the more to complain,
Yet unto me my greuaunce was the less,
That I was so nigh my lady and maistresse.
There where she was present in this place,
I having in heart great aduersitee,
Except only the fortune and good grace
Of her, whose I am, the which relieved me,
And my great dures vnlased has she,
And brought me out of the fearful greuance,
If it were her ease, it were to me pleasance.
As for the woe which I did endure,
It was to me a very pleasant pain,
Seeing it was for that fair creature,
Which is my Lady and souerain,
In whose presence to rest I would be fain,
So that I wist it were her pleasure,
For she is from all distaunce my protector.
Though unto me dredful were the chance,
No manner of gentilnes owes me to blame:
For I had lever suffer of death the penance,
Than sheshuld for me have dishonor or shame,
Or in any wise lose a drop of her good name,
So wisely God for his endless mercy,
Grant every true love, to have joy of his lady.
Explicit.
A Ballad.
O Merciful and O merciable,
King of Kings, and father of pitee,
Whose might and mercy is incomperable,
O Prince eterne, O mighty Lord say we,
To whom mercy is given of property,
On thy servant that lies in prison bound,
Have thou mercy or that his heart be wound.
And y^ thou will grant to him thy prisoner,
Free liberty, and lose him out of pain,
All his desires and all his heavy chere,
To all gladness they were restored again,
Thy high vengeance, why should thou not refrain
And show mercy, since he is penitent,
Now help him lord, and let him not be shent.
But since it is so, there is a trespass done,
Unto Mercy let yield the trespassour,
It is her office to redress it sone,
For trespass to mercy is a mirror,
And like as the sweet, has the price by ^our,
* So by trespass, mercy has all her might,
Without trespass, mercy has lack of light.
* What should Phisike do but if sikenes were,
What needs salve, but if there were sore,
What needs drink, where thirst has no power
What should mercy do, but trespass go before,
But trespass be, mercy woll be little store,
Without trespass never execucion,
May mercy have ne chief perfection.
The cause at this time of my writing,
And touching mercy to whom I make moan,
Is for fear lest my sovereign and sweting,
I mean her that louerlier is none,
With me is displeased for causes more then one,
What causes they be y^ knows God and she,
But so do not I alas it forthinketh me.
What see she in me, what defaut or offense,
What have I do that she on me disdain,
How might I do come to her presence,
To tell my complaint whereof I were fain,
I dread to look, to speak, or to complain,
To her that has my heart every deal,
So help me God I would al thing were weal.
For in this case came I never or now,
* In loves dance so far to hold the trace,
For with mine ease, escape I ne mow
Out of this danger except her good grace,
For though my countenance be merry in her face,
As seems to her by word or by chere,
Yet her good grace sits mine heart full nere.
And if y^ my sovereign have any marvel,
Why I to her now and before have wrote,
She may well think it is no great travail
To him that is in love brought so hot:
It is a simple tree yt falls with one stroke,
That mean I, though y^ my souerain toforn,
Me has denied, yet grace may come to morn.
But maistres for the good will that I have you ought,
And evermore shall as long as my life dureth,
Pity your servant and keep him in your thout
And give him some comfort or medicin, and cures
His fervent ague, that increases y^ renueth,
So grievous ben his pains and his sighs sore,
That without your mercy, his days be all forlore.
Go little bill, go forth and hie thee fast,
And recommand me, and excuse me as thou can,
For very feebleness thus am I at the last,
My pen is woren, my hew is pale and wan,
My iyen been sonken, disfigured like no man,
Till death his dart, that causes for to smart,
My corpse have consumed, then farwell sweet heart.
O daughter of Phoebus in virtuous appearance,
My love elect in my remembrance,
My careful heart distreined cause of absence,
Till ye my Emprise me release my greuance,
Upon you is set my life and mine attendance,
Without recure I wis until
Ye grant true heart to have his will.
Thus my dear sweting in a trance I do lie,
And shall til sum drops of pity from you spring,
I mean your mercy that lies my heart me,
That me may rejoice, and cause me for to sing
These terms of love, lo I have won the ring,
My goodly mastres. Thus of his good grace
God grant her blis in heaven to have a place.
Explicit.
Here follows how Mercury with Pallas, Venus, and Minerva, appeared to Paris
of Troy, he sleeping by a Fountain.
Pallas loquitur ad Parisum de Troiae.
Son of Priamus gentil Paris of Troie,
Wake of thy sleep, behold us Godds three,
We have brought to thee increase of joye,
To thy discrecion reporting our beauty,
Take here this Apple and well devise thee,
Which of us is fairest in thy sight,
And give thou it, we pray thee gentil knight.
Pallas loquitur primo.
If so be thou give it unto me Parise,
This shall I give unto thy worthiness,
Honor, conquest, nobley, lose and prise,
Victory, courage, force, and hardiness,
Good adventure, and famous manliness,
For that Apple all this give I to thee,
Consider this Parise, and give it unto me.
Venus loquitur ad Parisum.
Nay give it me and this shall I you give,
Glad aspect with favor and fairness,
And love of ladies also while that ye live,
Famous stature, and Princely seemelinesse,
According to your native gentilnesse,
Understand this gift well I you advise,
And give it me hardly Parise.
Minerva loquitur ad Parisum.
Ye ye Paris take heed unto me,
Thou art a Prince borne by descent,
And for to rule thy royal dignity,
I shall thee give first intendement,
Discretion, prudence in right judgment,
Which in a Prince, is thing most couenable,
Give it me I am to have it able.
Explicit.
A Ballad pleasant.
I Have a Lady where so she be,
That seldom is she sovereign of my thought,
On whose beauty when I behold and see,
Remembering me how well she is wrought,
I thank fortune y^ to her grace me brought,
So fair is she but nothing angelike,
Her beauty is to none other like.
For hardly and she were made of brass,
Face and all, she has enough fairness,
Her eyes been holow and green as any grass,
And Rauinish yelow is her sounitresse,
Thereto she has of every comeliness
Such quantity given her by nature,
That with the least she is of her stature.
And as a bolt her brows been ybent,
And betill browed she is also withal,
And of her wit as simple and innocent,
As is a child that can no good at all,
She is not thick, her stature is but small,
Her fingers been little, and nothing long,
Her skin is smooth as any Oxes tongue.
Thereto she is so wise in daliaunce,
And beset her words so womanly,
That her to hear it does me displeasaunce,
For that she says, is said so conningly,
That when there be no mo than she and I,
I had lever she were of talking still,
Then that she should so goodly speech spill.
And sloth none shall ye have in her entresse,
So diligent is she and vertulesse,
And so busy aye all good to undress,
That as a she Ape she is harmless,
And as an Harnet meke and pitilesse,
With that she is so wise and circumspect,
That prudence none her folly can infect.
Is it not joy that such one of her age,
Within the bounds of so great tenderness,
Should in her work be so sad and sage,
That of the wedding saw all the noblesse
Of queen Jane, and was tho as I guess,
But of the age of years ten and five,
I trow there are not many such alive.
For as Jesus my sinful soul save,
There nis creature in all this world living,
Like unto her that I would gladly have,
So pleases mine heart yt goodly sweet thing,
Whose soul in have unto his bliss bring,
That first her formed to be a creature,
For were she well, of me I did no cure.
Explicit the discriuing of a fair Lady.
Another Ballad.
O Mossie Quince hanging by your stalk,
The which no man dare pluck away nor take,
Of all the folk that pass forth by or walk,
Your flowers fresh be fallen away and shake:
I am right sorry maistresse for your sake,
Ye seem a thing that all men have forgotten,
Ye be so ripe, ye wa^e almost rotten.
Your ugly cheer deinous and froward,
Your green eyes frowning, and not glad,
Your chekes enbolned like a mellow C^stard,
Color of Orange, your breasts Satournad,
Gilt upon warrantise, the color will not fade,
Bawsin buttocked, bellied like a tonn,
* Men cry S. Barbary at the losing of your gonn.
My lovely lewd maistres take consideration,
I am so sorrowful there as ye be absent,
The flour of ye barkfat, y^ foulest of all y^ nation,
To love you but a little is mine intent,
The swert has yswent you, y^ smoke has you shent,
I trow ye have been laid upon some kell to dry,
You do me so much worship there as ye be present,
Of all women I love you best a m. times fie.
Explicit.
A Ballad, warning men to beware of deceitful women.
* Look well about ye that lovers be,
Let not your lusts lead you to do^age,
* Be not enamoured on all things that ye see,
Sampson the fort, and Solomon the sage
Deceived were for all their great courage,
Men deem it right that they see with e^e,
* Beware therefore, ye blind eats many a fly.
I mean of women for all their cheres queint,
Trust them not too much, their truth is but geason,
The fairest outward well can they paint,
Their steadfastness endures but a season,
For they fain frendlines, and worchen treason,
And for they are chaungeable naturally,
Beware therefore, the blind eats many a fly.
What wight on live trusseth on their cheres,
Shall have at last his guerdon and his mede,
For women can shave nearer than rasors or sheres,
* Al is not gold y^ shines, men take heed
Their gall is hid under a sugared wede,
It is full queint their fantasy to aspie,
Beware therefore, the blind eats many a fly.
Though all the world do his busy cure
To make women stand in stablenesse,
It would not be, it is against nature,
The world is do when they lack doublenes,
For they can laugh and love not, this is expres,
To trust on them it is but fantasy,
Beware therefore, the blind eats many a fly.
Women of kind has conditions three,
The first is, they be full of disceit,
To spinne also is their property,
And women have a wonder full conceit,
For they can weep often, and all is a sleit,
And ever when they list, the tear is in the eye,
Beware therefore, the blind eats many a fly.
* In sooth to say, though all the earth so wanne
Were parchment smooth, white, and scribabell,
And the great sea, that called is the Ociane,
Were turned into ink blacker than Sabell,
Every stick a pen, each man a scriuener abell,
Not coud they write woman's treachery,
Beware therefore, the blind eats many a fly.
Explicit.
These Verses next following were compiled by Geffrey Chaucer, and in the
written Copies follow at the end of the Complaint of Pity.
THe long nights, when every creature
Should have their rest in somewhat as by kind,
Or else ne may their life not long endure:
It falls most into my woeful mind,
How I so far have brought my self behind,
That safe the death there may nothing me lisse,
So dispaired I am from all kin bliss.
This same thought me lasts till y^ morrow,
And from the morrow forth till it be eve,
There needs me no care for to borrow,
For both I have good laiser and good leave,
There is no wight that will my woe bireue,
To weep enough, and wailen all my fill:
The sore spark of my pein now does me spill.
It Is love that has me set in such a place,
That my desire will never fulfill:
For neither Pity, Mercy, neither Grace
Can I not find, yet from my sorrowful heart,
For to be deed, I can it not arace,
The more I love, the more she does me smart,
Through which I see without remedy,
That from the death I may no wise astart.
Now sothly what she hight I woll rehearse,
Her name is Bounty, set in womanhede,
Sadness in youth, and Beauty pridelesse,
And Plesaunce, under Governance and Dread:
Her surname is eke fair Ruthelesse,
The Wise eknit unto good Adventure,
That for I love her, she sleeth me guiltless,
Her love I best, and shall while I may dure.
Bet then my self a hundred thousand dele,
Than all this worlds riches or creature:
Now has not love me bestowed well,
To love there I never shall have part,
Alas right thus, is turned me the wheel:
Thus am I slain with loves furious dart,
I can but love her best my swetest so,
Love has me taught no more of all his art,
But serve always, and stinten for no woe.
In my true careful heart there is
So much woe and so little bliss,
That woe is me that ever I was bore,
For all that thing which I desire, I miss,
And all that ever I would not I wisse,
That find I ready to me evermore:
And of all this I not to whom me plain,
For she that might me out of this bring,
Ne recheth naught whether I weep or sing,
So little ruth has she upon my pain.
Alas, when sleeping time is, lo then I wake,
When I should dance, for fere lo then I quake:
This heavy life I led lo for your sake,
Though ye thereof in no wise heed do take,
Mine herts lady, and hole my lives queen,
For truly durst I say, as that I feel,
Me seems that your sweet heart of stele
Is whetted now against me to kene.
My dear heart, and best beloved fo,
Why likes you to do me all this woe,
What have I done, that greueth you, or said,
But for I serve and love you and no mo,
And whilst I live I will ever do so:
And therefore sweet, ne bethe not evil apaid,
For so good and so fair as ye be,
It were right great wonder but if ye had
Of all servant both of good and bad,
And best worthy of all them I am he.
But nevertheless, my right lady sweet,
Though that I be vnkonning and unmeet
To serve as I coud best aye your highness,
Yet is there none fairer, that would I hete,
Than I, to do you ease or else beat,
What so I wist that were to your highness,
And had I might as good as I have will,
Then should ye feel where it were so or none:
For in this world living then is there none
That fainer would your herts will fulfill.
For both I love and eke dread you so sore,
And algates mote and have done you full yore,
That better loved is none ne never shall:
And yet I would beseech you of no more,
But leueth well, and be not wroth therefore,
And let me serve you forth, lo this is all,
For I am naught so hardy ne so wood,
For to desire that ye should louen me,
For well I wot alas that may not be,
I am so little worthy and ye so good,
For ye be one the worthiest on live,
And I the most unlikely for to thrive.
Yet for all this, weteth ye right well,
That ye ne should me from your service drive,
That I ne will aye with all my wits five
Serve you truly, what woe so that I feel,
For I am set so hic upon your wheel,
That though ye never will upon me rue,
I must you love, and been ever as true,
As any man can or may on live.
But the more that I love you goodly free,
The less find I that ye love me,
Alas when shall that hard wit amend,
Where is now all your womanly pite,
Your gentleness and your debonairte,
Will ye nothing thereof upon me spend,
And so hole sweet as I am yours all,
And so great will as I have you to serve,
Now certes, and ye let me thus sterue,
Yet have ye won thereon but small.
For at my knowing I do naught why,
And thus I will beseech you heartely,
That ever ye find whiles ye live
A truer servant to you than am I,
Leueth then, and sleeth me hardely,
And I my death to you will all forgive,
And if ye find no truer verily,
Woll ye suffer then that I thus spill,
And for no manner gilt but my good will,
As good were then untrue as true to be.
Explicit.
A Ballad, declaring that Women's chastity Does much excel all treasure worldly.
IN womanhede as auctours do all write,
Most thing commended is their honesty,
Thing most slanderous their nobles to atwite,
As when women of hasty fraelty,
Ex^eeden the bonds, of wifely chastity,
For what avails lineage or royal blood,
When of their living the report is not good.
The holy bed defoyled of marriage,
For ones defoiled may not recovered be,
The vice goes forth, and the froward language
By many a realm, and many a great cite,
* Sclaunder has a custom, and that is great
True or falls, by a contrarious soune,
Ones areised it goes not lightly down.
For when a lechour by force or by maistry,
Defouled has of virgins the cleanesse,
Widows oppressed, and lie in aduoutry,
Assailed wives that stood in stablenesse,
Who may then their slaundrous harm redress,
When their good name is hurt by such report,
* For fame lost ones, can never have his resort.
A thief may rob a man of his richesse,
And by some mean make restitucion,
And some man may disherite and oppress
A poor man from his possession,
And after make again satisfaction,
* But no man may restore in no degree,
A maid robbed of her virginite.
A man may also beat a castle down,
And built it after more fresh to the sight,
Exile a man out of his regioun,
And him revoke whether it be wrong or right,
* But no man has the power ne the might
For to restore the palais virginal
Of chastity when broken is the wall.
Men may also putten out of service,
And officers remeue out of their place,
And at a day when fortune list devise,
They may again restored be to grace,
* But there nis time, another set down, ne space,
Nor never in story, neither rad ne saine,
That maidenhed lost, recovered was again.
For which all men should have a conscience
To rewen in their heart, and repent sore,
And have remorse of such a great offense,
To ravish thing, which they may not restore:
For it is said, and has be said full yore,
* The emeraud green, of parfite chastity,
Stole ones away, may not recovered be.
And hard it is to ravish a treasour,
Which of nature is not recuparable:
Lordship may not, of King nor Emperor,
Reform a thing which is not reformable:
* Rust of defame is inseparable,
* And maidenhede once lost of new or yore,
No man of live may it again restore.
The Romans old thorough their patience
Suffered tyraunts in their tyrannies
On their cities to do great violence,
The people to oppress, with their robberies:
But to do punish, they set great espies,
On false auouterers; as it is well couth,
Which widows ravish, and maidens in their youth.
Explicit.
The Court of Love.
This Book is an imitation of the Romaunt of the Rose, showing that all are
subject to love, what impediments soever to the contrary: containing also those
twenty Statutes which are to be observed in the Court of Love.
WIth timorous heart, and trembling hand of dread,
Of cunning naked, bare of eloquence,
Unto the flower of port in womanhede
I write, as he that none intelligence
Of metres has, ne flowers of sentence:
Saufe that me list my writing to convey,
In that I can to please her high nobley.
The blosomes fresh of Tullius gardein soot
Present they not, my matter for to born:
Poemes of Virgil taken here no root,
Ne craft of Galfride, may not here sojourn:
Why nam I cunning? O well may I mourn
For lack of science, that I cannat write
Unto the princes of my life aright.
No terms digne unto her excellence,
So is she sprung of noble stirpe and high:
A world of honor and of reverence
There is in her, this will I testify,
Caliope thou suster wise and sly,
And thou Minerua, guide me with thy grace,
That language rude, my matter not deface.
Thy sugar dropes sweet of Helicon
Distill in me, thou gentle muse I pray,
And thee Melpomene I call anon,
Of ignorance the mist to chase away:
And give me grace so for to write and say,
That she my lady of her worthiness
Accept in gree this little short treatesse,
That is entitled thus, The Court of Love:
And ye that been Metriciens me excuse,
I you beseech for Venus sake above,
For what I mean in this, ye need not muse:
And if so be my lady it refuse
For lack of ornate speech, I would be woe,
That I presume to her to written so.
But my intent and all my busy cure
Is for to write this treatesse, as I can,
Unto my lady, stable, true, and sure,
Faithful and kind, since first that she began
Me to accept in service as her man:
To her be all the pleasure of this book,
That when her like she may it read and look.
WHen I was young, at eighteen year of age,
Lusty and light, desirous of pleasaunce,
Approaching on full sad and ripe courage,
Love arted me to do my obseruaunce
To his estate, and done him obeisaunce,
Commanding me y^ Court of Love to see,
Alite beside the mount of Citharee.
There Citherea goddess was and queen:
Honored highly for her majeste,
And eke her son, the mighty God I wene,
Cupide the blind, that for his dignite
A M. lovers worship on their kne,
There was I bid in pain of death to pere,
By Mercury the winged messengere.
So then I went by strange and fer countrees,
Enquiring aye what coast had to it drew
The Court of Love: and thiderward as bees,
At last I see the people began pursue:
And me thought some wight was there yt knew
Where that y^ court was holden far or nie,
And after them full fast I began me hie.
Anon as I them ouertooke, I said:
Heile friends, whither purpose ye to wend?
Forsooth (quoth. often) that answered liche a maid,
To Loves Court now go we gentle friend.
Where is that place (quoth. I) my fellow hend?
At Citheron, sir said he, without dout,
The king of Love and all his noble rout
Dwells within a castle rially.
So then apace I journed forth among,
And as he said, so fond I there truly:
For I beheld the toures high and strong,
And high pinacles, large of hight and long,
With plate of gold bespred on every side,
And precious stones, y^ stone work for to hide.
No Sapphire in Inde, no Rube rich of price,
There lacked then, nor Emeraud so grene,
Bales Turks, ne thing to my device,
That may the castle maken for to shene:
All was as bright as sterres in Winter been,
And Phoebus shone to make his peace ageine,
For trespass done to high estates tweine.
Venus and Mars, the god and goddess clear,
When he them found in arms cheined fast,
Venus was then full sad of heart and chere:
But Phoebus beams straight as is the mast,
Upon the castle ginneth he to cast,
To please the lady, princes of that place,
In sign he looks after loves grace.
For there nis God in heaven or hell ywis,
But he has been right soget unto love:
Jove, Pluto, or whatsoever he is,
Ne creature in earth, or yet above,
Of these the reuers may no wight approve:
But furthermore, the castle to descrie,
Yet saw I never none so large and hie.
For unto heaven it stretches, I suppose,
Within and out depeinted wonderly,
With many a thousand daisie read as rose,
And white also, this saw I verily:
But who tho daisies might do signify,
Can I not tell, safe that the queen's flower,
Alceste it was that kept there her sojoure:
Which under Venus lady was and queen,
And Admete king and sovereign of that place,
To whom obeyed the ladies good ninetene,
With many a thousand other bright of face:
And young men feel came forth with lusty pace,
And aged eke, their homage to dispose,
But what they were, I coud not well disclose.
Yet nere and nere forth in I began me dress
Into an hall of noble apparaile,
With arras spread, and cloth of gold I guess,
And other silk of esyer avail:
Under the cloth of their estate sauns fail
The king and queen there sat as I beheld:
It passed joy of Helise the field.
There saints have their coming and resort,
To seen the king so rially beseine
In purple clad, and eke the queen in sort,
And on their heads saw I crowns tweine,
With stones fret, so that it was no pain,
Withouten meat and drink to stand and see
The kings honor and the rialtee.
And for to treat of states with the king,
That been of council cheef, and with the queen:
The king had Danger nere to him standing,
The queen of love, Disdain, and that was seen:
For by the faith I shall to God, I wene
Was never stranger none in her degree,
Than was the queen in casting of her eye.
And as I stood perceiving her apart,
And eke the beams shining of her eyes,
Me thought they weren shapen lich a dart,
Sharp and persing, and small and straight of line:
And all her hair it shone as gold so fine,
Dishiuil crispe, down hanging at her back
A yard in length: and soothly then I spoke.
O bright regina, who made thee so fair?
Who made thy color vermelet and white?
Where wonneth y^ God, how far above ye air?
Great was his craft, and great was his delight.
Now marvel I nothing that ye do hight
The queen of love, and occupy the place
Of Cithare: now sweet lady thy grace.
In mewet spoke I so, that naught astart
By no condition word, that might be hard:
But in my inward thought I began aduert,
And often I said my wit is dull and hard:
For with her beauty, thus God wot I ferde,
As does the man yrauished with sight,
When I beheld her cristall eyes so bright:
No respect having what was best to done,
Till right anon beholding here and there,
I spied a friend of mine, and that full sone,
A gentlewoman was the chamberere
Unto the queen, that hot as ye shall here,
Philobone, that loved all her life:
When she me sey, she led me forth as blife:
And me demanded how and in what wise
I thither come, and what my errand was?
To seen the Court (quoth. I) and all the guise,
And eke to sue for pardon and for grace,
And mercy ask for all my great trespass,
That I none erst come to the court of love:
Foryeue me this, ye gods all above.
That is well said (quoth. Philobone) indede:
But were ye not assomoned to appear
By Mercurius, for that is all my dread:
Yes gentill feire (quoth. I) now am I here,
Ye yet what tho though that be true my dear:
Of your free will ye should have come unsent,
For ye did not, I deem ye will be shent.
For ye that reign in youth and lustiness,
Pampired with ease, and jalous in your age,
Your duty is, as far as I can guess,
To loves court to dressen your viage,
As soon as nature makes you so sage,
* That ye may know a woman from a swan,
Or when your foot is grown half a span.
But since that ye by wilful negligence
This xviii. year has kept your self at large,
The greater is your trespass and offense,
And in your neck you mote bear all y^ charge:
For better were ye ben withouten barge
Amidde the sea in tempest and in rain,
Then biden here, receiving woe and pain
That ordained is for such as them absent
Fro loves court by years long and feel.
I ley my life ye shall full soon repent,
For love will r^iue your color, lust, and hele:
Eke ye must bait on many an heavy mele:
No force ywis: I stirred you long agone
To draw to court (quoth. little) Philobone.
Ye shall well see how rough and angry face
The king of Love will show, when ye him se:
By mine advise kneel down and ask him grace,
Eschewing peril and aduersite,
For well I wot it woll none other be,
Comfort is none, ne counsel to your ease,
Why will ye then the king of Love displease?
O mercy God (quoth. iche) I me repent,
Caitife and wretch in heart, in will and thought,
And after this shall be mine hole intent
To serve and please, how dear yt love be bought:
Yet since I have mine own penance ysought,
With humble sprite shall I it receive,
Though that ye king of Love my life bereiue.
And though that fervent loves qualite
In me did never wortch truly: yet I
With all obeisaunce and humilite,
And benign heart shall serve him till I die:
And he that lord of might is great and hie,
Right as him list me chastise and correct,
And punish me with trespace thus infect.
These words said, she caught me by the lap,
And led me forth in till a temple round,
Both large and wide: and as my blessed hap
And good adventure was, right soon I found
A tabernacle reised from the ground,
Where Venus sat, and Cupide by her side,
Yet half for dread I can my visage hide.
And eft again I looked and beheld,
Seeing full sundry people in the place,
And mister folk, and some that might not weld
Their lims well, me thought a wonder case,
The temple shone with windows all of glass,
Bright as the day, with many a fair image,
And there I see the fresh queen of Cartage
Dido, that brent her beauty for the love
Of false Eneas, and the weimenting
Of her Annelida, true as Turtle dove,
To Arcite falls: and there was in peinting
Of many a prince, and many a doughty king,
Whose martirdom was showed about y^ walls
And how that feel for love had suffered falls.
But sore I was abashed and astonished
Of all tho folk that there were in that tide,
And then I asked where they had wonned:
In diverse courts (quoth. she) here beside,
In sundry clothing mantill wise full wide
They were arraied, and did their sacrifise
Unto the God, and goddess in their guise.
Lo yonder folk (quoth. she) y^ kneel in blew,
They wear the color aye and ever shall,
In sign they were and ever will be true
Withouten change: and soothly yonder all
That been in black, and mourning cry and call
Unto the gods, for their loves been,
Some sick, some deed, some all to sharp and kene.
Yea then (quoth. I) with done these priests here,
Nonnes and Hermites, Freres, and all tho,
That sit in white, in russet, and in grene:
Forsooth (quoth. she) they waylen of their woe.
O mercy Lord, may they so come and go
Freely to court, and have such liberty?
Yea men of each condition and degree,
And women eke: For truly there is none
Exception made, ne never was ne may:
This court is open and free for euerichone,
The king of love he will not say them nay:
He takes all in poor or rich array,
That meekely sew unto his excellence
With all their heart and all their reverence.
And walking thus about with Philobone
I see where come a messengere in hie
Straight from the king, which let command anon,
Throughout the court to make an ho and cry:
All new come folk abide, and wot ye why,
The kings lust is for to seen you sone:
Come nere let see, his will mote need be done.
Then began I me present tofore the king,
Trembling for fere with visage pale of hew,
And many a lover with me was kneeling,
Abashed sore, till unto the time they knew
The sentence give of his intent full true:
And at the last the king has me behold
With stern visage, and seid, what does this old
Thus far ystope in years, come so late
Unto the court? forsooth, my liege (quoth. I)
An hundred time I have been at the gate
Before this time, yet coud I never epsy
Of mine acqueintaunce any in mine eye:
And shame fastness away me began to chase,
But now I me submit unto your grace.
Well, all is pardoned with condition
That thou be true from henceforth to thy might
And seruen love in thine entention,
Swear this, and then as far as it is right,
thou shall have grace here in thy queen's sight.
Yes by y^ faith I owe to your croun, I swear,
Though death therefore me thir^th with his spear.
And when y^ king hod seen us euerychone,
He let command an Officer in hie
To take our faith, and show us one by one
The statutes of the court full busily:
Anon the book was leid before their eye,
To read and see what thing we must observe
In Loves Court, till that we die and sterue.
ANd for that I was lettred, there I red
The statutes hole of Loves Court and hall:
The first statute that on the book was spread,
Was to be true in thought and deeds all
Unto the king of Love the lord ryall,
And to the queen as faithful and as kind,
As I coud think with heart, will and mind.
The Second statute secretly to keep
Council of love, not blowing every where
All that I know, and let it sink and flete,
It may not sown in every wights ere:
Exiling slander aye for dread and fere,
And to my lady which I love and serve,
Be true and kind her grace for to deserve.
The Third statute was clearly writ also,
Withouten change to live and die the same,
None other love to take for well ne woe,
For blind delight, for ernest nor for game:
Without repent for laughing or for grame,
To biden still in full perseueraunce,
All this was hole the kings ordinance.
The Fourth statute to purchase ever to here,
And stirren folk to love, and beten fire
On Venus auter, here about and there,
And preach to them of love and hot desire,
And tell how love will quiten well their hire:
This must be kept, and loath me to displease:
If love be wroth, pass: for there by is ease.
The Fifth statute, not to be dangerous,
If that a thought would reave me of my sleep:
Nor of a sight to be over squemous,
And so verily this statute was to keep,
To turn and wallow in my bed and weep,
When that my lady of her cruelty
Would from her heart exilen all pity.
The Sixth statute, it was for me to use,
Alone to wander, void of company,
And on my ladies beauty for to muse,
And to think it no force to live or die,
And eft again to think the remedy,
How to her grace I might anon attain,
And tell my woe unto my sovereign.
The Seventh statute, was to be patient,
Whether my lady joyful were or wroth,
For words glad or heavy, diligent,
Wheder that she me helden lefe or loath:
And hereupon I put was to mine oath,
Her for to serve, and lowly to obey,
In showing her my chere ye xx. since aday.
The Eight statute to my remembrance,
Was to speaken and pray my lady dear,
With hourly labor and great entendaunce,
Me for to love with all her heart entere,
And me desire and make me joyful chere,
Right as she is surmouning every fair,
Of beauty well and gentle debonaire.
The Ninth statute, with letters writ of gold,
This was the sentence how that I and all,
Should ever dread to be to ouerbold
Her to displease, and truly so I shall,
But ben content for thing that may fall,
And meekely take her chastisement, and yerd,
And to offend her ever ben aferd.
The Tenth statute, was egally to discern,
Between the lady and thine ability,
And think thy self art never like to yerne,
By right her mercy nor her equity,
But of her grace and womanly pity:
For though thy self be noble in thy strene,
A thousand fold more noble is thy queen.
Thy lives lady, and thy sovereign,
That has thine heart al hole in governance,
Thou may no wise it taken to disdain,
To put thee humbly at her ordinance,
And give her free the reine of her Plesaunce,
* For liberty is thing that women look,
And truly else the matter is a crook.
The xi. statute, thy signs for to know
With eye and finger, and with smiles soft,
And low to couch, and always for to show,
For dread of spies, for to winken often:
And secretly to bring up a sigh aloft,
* But still beware of overmuch resort,
For that parauenture spilleth all thy sport.
The xii. statute remember to observe:
For all the pain thou have for love and woe,
All is too lite her mercy to deserve,
Thou musten think, whereuer thou ride or go:
And mortal wounds suffer thou also,
All for her sake, and think it well besette
Upon thy love, for it may not be bette.
The xiii. statute, whylome is to think,
What thing may best thy lady like and please,
And in thine herts bottom let it sink:
Some thing devise, and take for it thine ease,
And send it her, that may her heart appease:
Some heart, or ring, or letter, or device,
Or precious stone, but spare not for no price.
The xiiii. statute eke thou shall assay,
Formely to keep the most part of thy life:
Wish yt thy Lady in thine arms lay,
And nightly dreme, thou have thy nights herts wife,
Sweetly in arms, strayning her as blife:
And when thou see it is but fantasy,
See that thou sing not over merely.
* For too much joy has often a woeful end,
It longs eke this statute for to hold,
To deem thy lady evermore thy friend,
And think thy self in no wise a cokold.
In every thing she does but as she should:
* Construe the best, believe no tales new,
For many a lie is told, y^ seems full true.
But think that she, so bounteous and fair,
Coud not be false: imagine this algate,
And think y^ tongues wicked would her appair,
Sclandering her name and worshipful estate,
And lovers true to setten at debate:
And though thou see a faut right at thine eye,
Excuse it bliue, and gloss it pretily.
The xv. statute, use to swear and stare,
And counterfeit a lesing hardely,
To save thy ladies honor every where,
And put thy self for her to fight boldly:
Say she is good, virtuous, and ghostly,
Clear of intent, and heart, yea, thought and will,
And argue not for reason ne for skill.
Again thy ladies pleasure ne intent:
For love will not be countrepleted indede:
* Say as she says, then shall thou not be shent,
The Crow is white, ye truly so I read:
And aye with thing that she thee will forbede,
Eschew all that, and give her soueraintee,
Her appetite follow in all degree.
The xvi. statute keep it if thou may,
* Seven since at night thy lady for to please,
And seven at midnight, seven at morrow day,
And drink a caudle early for thine ease.
Do this, and keep thine head from all disease,
And win the garland here of lovers all,
That ever came in court, or ever shall.
Full few, think I, this statute hold and keep:
But truly this my reason gives me feel,
That some lovers should rather fall asleep,
Than take on hand to please so often and well.
There lay none oath to this statute adele,
But keep who might, as gave him his courage
Now get this garland lusty folk of age:
Now win who may ye lusty folk of youth,
This garland fresh, of flowers red and white,
Purple and blew, and colors fell uncouth,
And I shall croune him king of all delight,
In all the court there was not to my sight
A lover true, that he ne was adrede,
When he express has heard the statute read.
The xvii. statute, when age approaches on,
And lust is laid, and all the fire is queint,
As freshly then thou shall begin to fonne
And dote in love, and all her image paint
In thy remembrance, till thou begin to faint,
As in the first season thine heart began:
And her desire, though thou ne may ne can.
Perform thy living actuell, and lust,
Regester this in thine remembrance: rust,
Eke when thou may not keep thy thing from
Yet speak and talk of pleasant daliaunce,
For yt shall make thine heart rejoice and dance,
* And when thou may no more y^ game assay,
The statute bid thee pray for them that may.
The xviii. statute, holy to commend,
To please thy lady, is that thou eschew
With sluttishnesse thy self for to offend,
Be jollife, fresh, and fete, with things new,
Courtly with manner, this is all thy due,
* Gentill of port, and loving cleanliness,
This is the thing, that likes thy maistresse.
And not to wander liche a dulled Ass,
Ragged and torn, disguised in array,
Ribaud in speech, or out of measure pass,
Thy bound exceeding, think on this always:
* For women been of tender hearts aye,
And lightly set their pleasure in a place,
When they misthinke, they lightly let it pass.
The xix. statute, meat and drink forgete:
Each other day, see that thou fast for love,
* For in the court, they live withouten mete,
Save such as comes from Venus all above,
They take none head, in pain of great reprove
Of meat and drink, for that is all in vain,
Only they live by sight of their sovereign.
The xx. statute, last of euerychone,
Enroll it in thine herts priuitee:
To wring and wail, to turn, and sigh and groan,
When that thy lady absent is from thee,
And eke renew the words all that she
Between you twain has said, and all the chere
That thee has made, thy lives lady dear.
And see thine heart in quiet, ne in rest
Sojourne, till time thou seen thy Lady eft,
But where she won, by south, or east, or west,
With all thy force, now see it be not left:
Be diligent, till time thy life be reft,
In that thou may, thy lady for to see,
This statute was of old antiquitee.
An officer of high authority,
Cleped Rigor, made us to swear anon:
He nas corrupt with partiality,
Favor, prayer, ne gold that clearly shone:
Ye shall (quoth. he) now sweren here echone,
Young and old, to keep in that they may
The statutes truly, all after this day.
O God thought I, hard is to make this oath:
But to my power shall I them observe,
In all this world nas matter half so loath
To swear for all: for though my body sterue,
I have no might them hole to observe.
But harken now, the case how it befell,
After my oath was made, the troth to tell,
I turned leaves, looking on this book,
Where other statutes were of women shene,
And right forthwith Rigor on me began look
Full angerly, and said unto the queen
I traitor was, and charged me let been,
There may no man (quoth. he) the starute know,
That long to women, hie degree ne low.
In secret wise they kepten been full close,
They soune echone to liberty, my friend,
Pleasant they be, and to their own purpose,
There wot no wight of them, but God and fiend,
Ne naught shall wit, unto the worlds end.
The queen has give me charge in pain to die
Never to read ne seen them with mine eye.
* For men shall not so nere of counsel been
With womanhood, ne known of her guise,
Ne with they think, ne of their wit then give,
I me report to Solomon the wise,
And mighty Sampson, which beguiled thrice
With Dalida was, he wot that in a throw,
There may no man statute of women know.
* For it perauenture may right so befall,
That they be bound by nature to deceive,
And spinne, and weep, and sugre strew on gall,
The heart of man to ravish and to reiue,
And whet their tongue as sharp as sword or gleue,
It may betide, this is their ordinance,
So must they lowly done their obseruaunce,
And keep the statute yeuen them of kind,
Of such as love has give hem in their life.
* Men may not wete why turns every wind,
Nor waxen wise, nor been inquisitife
To know secret of maid, widow, or wife,
For theytheir statutes have to them reserved,
And never man to know them has deserved.
Now dress you forth, the God of love you guide
(Quoth. Rigor then) and seek the temple bright
Of Cithera, goddess here beside,
Beseech her by influence and might
Of all her virtue, you to teach aright,
How for to serve your ladies, and to please
Ye that been sped, and set your heart in ease.
And ye that been unpurveyed, pray her eke
Comfort you soon with grace and destiny,
That ye may set your heart there ye may like,
In such a place, that it to love may be
Honor and worship, and felicity
To you for aye, now goes by one assent.
Grant mercy sir (quoth. we) and forth we went,
Devoutly soft and easy pace to see
Venus the goddess Image all of gold:
And there we found a thousand on their knee,
Some fresh and fair, some deadly to behold,
In sundry Mantils new, and some were old,
Some painted were with flames red as fire,
Outward to show their inward hot desire.
With doleful chere, full fell in their complaint,
Cried Lady Venus, rue upon our sore,
Receive our bills, with tears all bedreint,
We may not weep, there is no more in store
But woe and pain, us fretteth more and more:
Thou blisseful Planet, lovers sterre so shene,
Have routh on us, that sigh and careful been.
And punish Lady, grievously we pray,
The false untrue, with counterfeit pleasaunce:
That made their oath, be true to live or dey,
With chere assured, and with countenance:
And falsely now they footen loves dance,
Barraine of routh, untrue of that they said,
Now that their lust and pleasure is alaied.
Yet eft again a thousand million
Rejoicing love, leading their life in bliss,
They said Venus, redress of all division,
Goddess eternell, thy name Ihired is:
By loves bond is knit all thing iwis,
Beast unto beast, the earth to water wan,
Bird unto bird, and woman unto man.
This is the life of joy that we been in,
Resembling life of heavenly paradise,
* Love is exiler aye of vice and sin,
Love makes herts lusty to devise,
Honor and grace, have they in every wise,
That been to loves law obedient,
Love makes folk benign and diligent,
* Aye stering them to dread vice and shame:
In their degree, it makes them honorable,
And sweet it is of love to bear the name,
So that his love be faithful, true, and stable:
Love pruneth him, to semen amiable,
Love has no faut, there it is erercised,
But sole with them yt have all love despised.
Honor to thee celestial and clear
Goddess of Love, and to thy celsitude,
That yeuest us light so fer down from thy spear,
Piercing our hearts with thy pulcritude,
Comparison none of similitude
May to thy grace be made in no degree,
That have us set with Love in unity.
Great cause have we to praise thy name and thee,
For thorough thee we live in joy and bliss.
Blessed be thou, most sovereign to see,
Thy holy court of gladness may not miss:
* A thousand since we may rejoice in this,
That we ben thine with heart and all yfere,
Enflamed with thy grace, and heavenly fere.
Musing of tho that spaken in this wise,
I me bethought in my remembrance
Mine orizon right goodly to devise,
And pleasauntly with herts obeisaunce,
Beseech the goddess voiden my greuaunce,
For I loved eke, saufe yt I wist not where,
Yet down I set and said as ye shall here.
Fairest of all, that ever were or be,
Licour and light, to pensife creature,
Mine hole affiaunce, and my lady free,
My goddess bright, my fortune and my ure,
I give and yield my heart to thee full sure,
Humbly beseeching lady of thy grace
Me to bestow now in some blessed place.
And here I vow me, faithful, true, and kind,
Without offense of mutabilitie,
Humbly to serve, while I have wit and mind,
Mine hole affiaunce, and my lady free,
In thilke place, there ye me sign to be:
And since this thing of new is give me aye
To love and serve, needly must I obey.
Be merciable with thy fire of grace,
And fix mine heart, there beauty is and routh:
For hot I love, determine in no place,
Saufe only this, by God and by my troth
Troubled I was, with slumber, sleep, and sloth
This other night, and in a visioun
I see a woman romen up and down,
Of mean stature, and semely to behold,
Lusty and fresh, demure of countenance,
Young and well shape, with hair shone as gold,
With eyes as cristal, ferced with pleasaunce,
And she began stir mine heart a lite to dance:
But suddenly she vanish began right there,
Thus I may say, I love and wot not where.
For what she is, ne her dwelling I not,
And yet I feel that love distreineth me:
Might iche her know, her would I feign God wot
Serve and obey with all benignity,
And if that other be my destiny,
So that no wise I shall her never see,
Then grant me her that best may liken me.
With glad rejoice to live in parfite hele,
Deuoid of wrath, repent or variaunce:
And able me to do that may be well
Unto my lady, with herts hie pleasaunce:
And mighty gods through thy purueiaunce
My wit, my thought, my lust and love so guide,
That to thine honor I may me provide
To set mine heart in place there I may like,
And gladly serve with all affection,
Great is the pain, which at mine heart does stick,
Till I be sped by thine election:
Help Lady goddess, that possession
I might of her have, that in all my life
I clepen shall my queen, and hearts wife.
And in the court of Love to dwell for aye
My will it is, and done thee Sacrifice:
Daily with Diane eke to fight and fraye,
And holden werre, as might will me suffice:
That goddess chaste, I keepen in no wise
To serve, a Fig for all her chastity,
Her law is for Religiousity.
And thus began finish prayer, laud, and preice,
Which that I you to Venus on my knee,
And in mine heart to ponder and to piece,
I began anon her Image fresh beauty:
Heile to that figure sweet, and heile to thee
Cupide (quoth. I) and rose and yede my wey,
And in the temple as I yede, I sey
A shrine surmounting, all in stones rich,
Of which y^ force was pleasaunce to mine ey,
With Diamond or Sapphire, never liche
I have none seen, ne wrought so wonderly:
So when I met with Philobone in hie,
I began demand, who is this sepulture,
Forsooth (quoth. she) a tender creature
Is shrined there, and Pity is her name,
She saw an Egle wreke him on a fly,
And pluck his wing, and eke him in his game,
And tender heart of that has made her die:
Eke she would weep and mourn right pitously
To seen a lover si^ffer great distress,
In all the court nas none, as I do guess,
That coud a lover half so well avail,
Ne of his woe the torment or the rage
Asken, for he was sure withouten fail,
That of his greef she coud the heat assuage.
In steed of Pity, speedeth hot courage
The matters all of court, now she is dead,
I me report in this to womanhead.
For weil and weep, and cry, and speak, and pray,
Women would not have pity on thy plaint,
Ne by that mean, to ease thine heart convey,
But thee receiuen for their own talent:
And say that Pity causes thee in consent
Of reuth to take thy service and thy pain,
In that thou may, to please thy sovereign.
But this is counsel, keep it secretly,
(Quoth. she) I nolde for all the world about,
The queen of Love it wist, and wite ye why,
For if by me this matter springen out,
In court no longer should I out of dout
Dwellen, but shame in all my life endry,
Now keep it close (quoth. she) this hardely.
Well, all is well, now shall ye seen she said
The fairest lady under Sun that is:
Come on with me, demean you lich a maid,
With shamefast dread, for ye shall speak ywis
With her that is the mirror joy and bliss:
But somewhat strange and sad of her demean
She is, beware your countenance be seen
Nor over light, ne rechelesse, ne too bold,
Ne malapert, ne renning with your tongue,
For she will you obeisen and behold,
And you demand why ye were hence so long
Out of this court, without resort among:
And Rosiall her name is hot aright,
Whose heart as yet is yeuen to no wight.
And ye also been, as I understand,
With love but light auanced, by your word,
Might ye by hap your freedom maken bond,
And fall in grace with her, and well accord,
Well might ye thank ye God of Love and lord,
For she that ye saw in your dream appear,
To love such one, what are they then the nere.
Yet wot ye what, as my remembrance
Me yeueth now, ye feign where that ye say,
That ye with love had never acquaintance,
Save in your dream rit late this other day:
Why yes parde, my life that durst I lay,
That ye were caught upon an heath, when I
Saw you complain, and sigh full pitously.
Within an herber, and a gardein fair
Where flowers grow, and herbs virtuous,
Of which the savor sweet was and the air,
There were your self full hot and amorous:
Iwis ye been too nice and dangerous,
I would ye now repent, and love some new,
Nay by my troth, I said I never knew
The goodly wight, whose I shall be for aye:
Guide me the lord, that love has made and me.
But forth we went into a chamber gay,
There was Rosiall, womanly to see,
Whose streams, sotell piercing of her eye,
Mine heart began thrill for beauty in the stound,
Alas (quoth. I) who has me give this wound.
And then I dread to speak, till at the last
I great the lady reverently and well,
When that my sigh was gone and ouerpast,
Then down on keens full humbly began I knele,
Beseeching her my fervent woe to kele,
For there I took full purpose in my mind
Unto her grace, my painful heart to bind.
For if I shall all fully her discriue,
Her head was round, by compass of nature,
Her hair as gold, she passed all on live,
And Lilly forehed had this creature,
With liueliche brows, flawe of color pure,
Between ye which was mean disceueraunce
From every brow, to show a due distaunce.
Her nose directed straight, and even as line,
With form and shape thereto convenient,
In which the gods milk white path does shine,
And eke her eyes ben bright and orient,
As is the Smaragde, unto my judgment,
Or yet these sterres heavenly small and bright,
Her visage is of lovely read and white.
Her mouth is short, and shit in little space,
Flaming somedeale, not over read I mean,
With pregnant lips, and thick to kiss percace,
* For lips thin not fat, but ever lene,
They serve of naut, they be not worth a bean,
For if the basse been full, there is delight,
Maximian truly thus does he write.
But to my purpose, I say white as snow
Been all her teeth, and in order they stond
Of one stature, and eke her breath I trow
Surmounteth all odours that ever I found
In sweetness, and her body, face, and hond
Been sharply slender, so that from the head
Unto the foot, all is but womanhead.
I hold my peace, of other things hid,
Here shall my soul, and not my tongue bewray,
But how she was arraied, if ye me bid,
That shall I well discover you and say,
A bend of gold and silk, full fresh and gay,
With her intresse, broudered full well,
Right smoothly kept, and shining euerydele.
About her neck a flower of fresh devise,
With Rubies set, that lusty were to seen,
And she in goun was light and summer wise,
Shapen full well, the color was of grene,
With aureat sent about her sides clean,
With diverse stones, precious and rich,
Thus was she rayed, yet saw I never her lich.
For if that Jove had but this lady seine,
Tho Calixto ne yet Alemenia,
They never hadden in his arms leine,
Ne he had loved the fair Eurosa,
Ye ne yet Dane ne Antiopa,
For all their beauty stood in Rosiall,
She seemed lich a thing celestial.
In bounty, favor, port, and seemelinesse,
Pleasant of figure, mirror of delight,
Gracious to seen, and root of all gentilnesse,
With angel visage, iusty read and white:
There was not lack, saufe danger had alite
This goodly fresh in rule and governance,
And somdele strange she was for her pleasaunce.
And truly sone I took my leave and went,
When she had me enquired what I was,
For more and more impressen began the dent
Of loves dart, while I beheld her face,
And eft again I come to seeken grace,
And up I put my bill, with sentence clear,
That follows after, read and ye shall here.
O ye fresh, of beauty the root,
That nature has formed so well and made
Princes and queen, and ye yt may do boot
Of all my langour with your words glad,
Ye wounded me, ye made me woe bestad,
Of grace redress my mortal grief, as ye
Of all my harm the very causer be.
Now am I caught, and unware suddenly
With persaunt streams of your eye so clear,
Subject to been, and seruen you mekely,
And all your man, iwis my lady dear,
Abiding grace, of which I you require,
That merciless ye cause me not to sterue,
But guerdon me, liche as I may deserve.
For by my troth, all the days of my breath
I am and will be your in will and heart,
Patient and meek, for you to suffer death
If it require, now rue upon my smart,
And this I swear, I never shall out start
From loves court for none adversity,
So ye would rue on my distress and me.
My desteny, my fate, and hour I bliss,
That have me set to been obedient
Only to you, the flower of all iwis,
I trust to Venus never to repent,
For ever ready, glad, and diligent,
Ye shall me find in service to your grace,
Till death my life out of my body race.
Humble unto your excellence so digne,
Enforcing aye my wits and delight
To serve and please with glad heart and benign,
And been as Troylus Troyes knight,
Or Antonie for Cleopatre bright,
And never you me thinks to renay,
This shall I keep unto mine ending day.
Enprint my speech in your memorial
Sadly my princes, salve of all my sore,
And think, y^ for I would becommen thrall,
And been your own, as I have said before,
Ye must of pity cherish more and more
Your man, and tender after his desert,
And give him courage for to been expert.
For where y^ one has set his heart on fire,
And finds neither refute ne pleasaunce,
Ne word of comfort, death will quite his hire,
Alas that there is none allegeaunce
* Of all their woe, alas the great greuaunce
To love vnloued, but ye my lady dear,
In other wise may govern this matere.
Truly gramercy friend of your good will,
And of your profer in your humble wise,
But for your service, take and keep it still,
And where ye say, I ought you well to cherise,
And of your grief the remedy devise,
I know not why: I nam acquainted well
With you, ne wot not sothly where ye dwell.
In art of love I write, and songs make,
That may be song in honor of the king
And queen of Love, and then I undertake,
He that is sad, shall then tull merry sing,
And dangerous not ben in every thing
Beseech I you, but seen my will and read,
And let your answer put me out of dread.
What is your name, rehearse it here I pray,
Of whence and where, of what condition
That ye been of, let see come off and say,
Feign would I know your disposition
Ye have put on your old entention,
But what ye mean, to serve me I ne wot,
Saufe that ye say ye love me wonder hot.
My name, alas, my heart why makes thou strange,
Philogenet I called am fer and nere,
Of Cambrige clerk, y^ never think to change
Fro you y^ with your heavenly stremes clear
Ravish mine heart and ghost, and all infere,
Since at the first I write my bill for grace,
Me think I see some mercy in your face.
And with I mean, by gods y^ al has wrought,
My bill now makes small mention,
That ye been lady in mine inward thought
Of all mine heart withouten offencion,
That I best love, and since I begone
To draw to court, lo then what might I say,
I yield me here unto your nobley.
And if that I offend, or wilfully
By pomp of heart your precept disobay,
Or done again your will unskilfully,
Or greuen you for earnest or for play,
Correct ye me right sharply then I pray,
As it is seen unto your womanhede,
And rue on me, or else I nam but deed.
Nay God forbede to fesse you so with grace,
And for a word of sugared eloquence,
To have compassion in so little space,
Then were it time yt some of us were hens,
Ye shall not find in me such insolence:
* Eye what is this, may ye not suffer sight,
How may ye look upon the candle light?
That clerer is and hotter than mine eye,
And yet ye said the beams perse and frete,
How shall ye then the candle light endrie,
For well wot ye, that has the sharper hete,
And there ye bid me, you correct and beat,
If ye offend, nay that may not be done,
There come but few, yt speden here so sone.
* Withdraw your eye, withdraw from presens eke:
Hurt not your self, through folly with a look,
I would be sorry so to make you sick,
A woman should beware eke whom she took:
Ye beth a clerk, go serchen well my book,
If any women ben so light to win,
Nay bide a while, tho ye were all my kin.
So sone ye may not win mine heart in truth,
The guise of court will seen your steadfastness:
And as you done to have upon you reuth,
Your own desert, and lowly gentilnesse,
That will reward you joy for heaviness,
And tho ye waxen pale, and grene and deed,
Ye must it use a while withouten dread,
And it accept and grutchen in no wise,
But where as ye me heartely desire
To lene to love, me think ye be not wise,
Cease of your language, cease I you require,
For he that has this twenty year ben here,
May not obtain, then marvel I that ye
Be now so bold of love to treat with me.
Ah mercy heart, my lady and my love,
My rightwise princess and my lives guide,
Now may I plain to Venus all above,
That ruthlesse ye me gave this wound so wide:
What have I done, why may it not betide,
That for my troth I may received be?
Alas then, your danger and your cruelte.
* In woeful hour I got was, welaway,
In woeful hour fostred and ifedde,
In woeful hour iborne, that I ne may
My supplication sweetly have I spedde,
The frosty grave and cold must be my bed,
Without ye list your grace and mercy show,
Death with his axe so fast on me does hew.
So great disease and in so littell while,
So littel joy that felt I never yet,
And at my woe Fortune ginneth to smile,
That never erst I felt so hard a fit:
Confounden ben my spirits and my wit,
Till that my lady take me to her cure,
Which I love best of erthly creature.
But that I like, that may I not come by,
Of that I plain, that have I habondaunce,
Sorrow and thought they sit me wonder nie,
Me is withhold that might be my pleasance:
Yet turn again my worldly suffisaunce,
O lady bright, and saufe your faithful true,
And or I die yet ones upon me rewe.
With that I fell in sound and deed as stone,
With color slain and wanne as asshe pale,
And by the hand she caught me up anon.
* Arise (quoth. she) what have ye dronken dwale,
Why slepen ye it is no nitertale:
Now mercy sweet (quoth. I) iwis affraied:
What thing (quoth. she) has made you so dismayed.
Now wot I well that ye a lover be,
Your hew is witness in this thing, she said:
If ye were secret, ye might know (quoth. she)
Curteise and kind, all this should be alaid:
And now mine heart, all that I have missaid,
I shall amend and set your heart in ease.
That word it is (quoth. I) that does me please.
But this I charge, yt ye the stents keep,
And break them not for sloth nor ignorance.
With that she began to smile and laughen deep,
Iwis (quoth. I) I will do your pleasaunce:
The xvi. statute does me great greuaunce,
But ye must that releasse or modifie.
I grant (quoth. she) and so I will truly.
And softly then her color began appear,
As Rose so red throughout her visage all,
Wherefore me think it is according here,
That she of right be cleped Rosiall:
Thus have I won with words great and small
Some goodly word of her, that I love best,
And trust she shall yet set mine heart in rest.
GOth on, she said to Philobone, and take
This man with you, and led him all about
Within the court, and show him for my sake
What lovers dwell within, and all the rout
Of officers him show, for he is out of dout
A stranger yet: come on (quoth. Philobone)
Philogenet with me now must ye gone.
And stalkyng soft with easy pace, I saw,
About the king stonden all enuiron,
Attendaunce, Diligence, and their fellow
Fortherer, Asperaunce, and many one,
Dred to offend, there stood, and not alone,
For there was eke the cruel aduersair,
The lovers foe that cleped is Despair.
Which unto me spoke angrely and fell,
And said, my lady me disseiue ne shall:
Trowest thou (quoth. she) that all yt she did tell,
Is true, nay nay, but under honey gall,
Thy birth and hers they be nothing egall:
Cast of thine heart, for all her words white,
For in good faith she loves thee but alite.
And eke remember thine habilite,
May not compare with her, this well thou wot:
Ye then came Hope and said, my friend let be,
Believe him not: Despair he ginneth dote,
Alas (quoth. I) here is both cold and hot:
The one me bids love, the toder nay,
Thus wot I not what me is best to say.
But well wot I, my lady granted me,
Truly to be my wounds remedy,
Her gentilnesse may not infected be
With doubleness, thus trust I till I die,
So cast I to void dispaires company,
And taken hope to council and to friend.
Yea keep that well (quoth. Philobone) in mind.
And there beside within a bay window,
Stod one in grene full large of bread and length,
His beard as black as feathers of the Crow,
His name was lust of wonder might and strength,
And with Delight to argue there he think'th,
For this was all his opinion,
That love was sin: and so he has begone
To reason fast, and ledge authority:
* Nay (quoth. Delight) love is a virtue clear,
And from the soul his progress holds he:
Blind apetite of lust does often stere,
And y^ is sin: for reason lacks there,
* For thou do think thy neighbors wife to win:
Yet think it well that love may not be sin.
For God, and seint, they love right verily,
Void of all sin and vise this know I well,
* Affection of flesh is sin truly,
But verray love is virtue as I feel,
For love may thy freill desire ackele:
For verray love is love, withouten sin:
Now stint (quoth. Lust) thou spekest not worth a pin.
And there I left them in their arguing,
Roming ferther in the castle wide,
And in a corner Lier stood talking,
Of lesings fast, with Flatery there beside,
* He said that woman wear attire of pride,
And men were found of nature variaunt,
And could be false and shown beaw semblaunt.
Than flatery bespake and said, ywis
See so she goth on patens fair and fete,
It does right well: what pretty man is this,
That rometh here, now truly drink ne mete
Need I not have, mine heart for joy does beat
Him to behold, so is he goodly fresh:
It seems for love his heart is tender and nesh.
This is the court of lusty folk and glad,
And well becomes their abite and array,
O why be some so sorry and so sad,
Complaining thus in black and white and gray,
Freres they ben, and Monks in good fay:
Alas for routh great dole it is to seen,
To see them thus bewail and sorry been.
See how they cry and wring their hands white,
For they so sone went to religion,
And eke the Nonnes with veil and wimple plight,
Their thought is, they ben in confusion:
Alas they sain we fain perfection,
In clothes wide and lack our liberty,
But all the sin mote on our friends be.
For Venus wot, we would as feign as ye,
That been attyred here and welbesene,
Desiren man and soue in our degree,
Ferm and faithful right as would the queen:
Our friends wick in tender youth and grene,
Against our will made us religious,
That is the cause we mourn and wa^len thus.
Then said the Monk and Freres in the tide,
Well may we curse our Abbes and our place,
Our statutes sharp to sing in copes wide,
Chastely to keep us out of loves grace,
And never to feel comfort ne solace:
Yet suffer we the heat of loves fire,
And after that some other happily we desire.
O Fortune cursed, why now and wherefore
Have thou, they said, berafte us liberty,
Sith nature yaue us instrument in store,
And appetite to love and lovers be?
Why mote we suffer soch aduersite,
Diane to serve, and Venus to refuse,
Full often sith this matters does us muse?
We serve and honor sore against our will,
Of chastity the gods and the queen,
Us leefer were with Venus biden still,
And have reward for love and soget been
Unto these women courtly, fresh, and shene,
Fortune we curse thy wheel of variance,
There we were well thou reuist our plesance.
Thus leave I them with voice of plaint and care,
In raging woe crying full petously,
And as I yede full naked and full bare,
Some I behold looking dispitously,
On poverty that dedly cast their eye,
And welaway they cried, and were not feign,
For they ne might their glad desire attain.
For lack of richesse worldly and good,
They banne and curse, and weep, and sain alas,
That poverty has us hent yt whilom stood
At herts ease, and free and in good case,
But now we dare not show our self in place,
Ne us embold to dwell in company,
There as our heart would love right faithfully.
And yet againward shriked every Nonne,
The pange of love so straineth them to cry:
Now woe the time (quoth. they) that we be boun
This hateful order nise will done us die,
We sighe and sobbe, and bleden inwardly,
Freting our self with thought and hard complaint,
That nie for love we waxen wood and faint.
And as I stood beholding here and there,
I was ware of a sort full languishing,
Savage and wild, of loking and of chere,
Their mantelles and their clothes ey tering,
And often they were of nature complaining,
For they their members lacked, foo^ and hand,
With visage wry, and blind I understand.
They lacked shape, and beauty to prefer
Themself in love: and said that God and kind,
Has forged them to worshippen the sterre,
Venus the bright, and leften all behind,
His other works clean and out of mind:
For other have their full shape and beauty,
And we (quoth. they) been in deformity.
And nie to them there was a company,
That have the susters waried and missaide,
I mean the three of fatal destiny,
That be our workers: suddenly abraide
Out began they cry as they had been affraide,
We curse (quoth. they) that ever has nature,
Iformed us this woeful life to endure.
And there eke was contrite and began repent,
Confessing hole the wound that Cithere
Has with the darte of hot desire him sent,
And how that he to love must subject be,
Then held he all his skornes vanity,
And said that lovers held a blisful life,
Young men and old, and widow, maid and wife.
Bereue me goddess (quoth. he) of thy might
My skornes all and skoffes, that I have
No power for to moken any wight,
That in thy service dwell: for I did rave:
This know I well right now so god me save,
And I shall be the chief post of thy faith,
And love uphold, the reuers who so says.
Dissemble stood not far from him in troth,
With party mantil party hode and hose,
And said he had upon his lady routh,
And thus he wound him in, and began to gloss
Of his intent full double I suppose,
In all the world he said he loved her well,
But ay me thought he loved her nere a dele.
Eke shamfastnesse was there as I took head,
That blushed read, and durst not ben aknow
She lover was, for thereof had she dread,
She stood and hing her visage down allow,
But such a sight it was to seen I trow,
As of these roses rody on their stalk,
There coud no wight her spy to speak or talk.
In loves art so began she to abashe,
Ne durst not utter al her preuity:
Many a stripe and many a grievous lashe
She gauen to them that wolden lovers be,
And hindered sore the simple cominalty,
That in no wise durst grace and mercy crave,
For were not she they need but ask and have.
Where if they now aprochein for to speak,
Then shamefastness returns them again:
They think, if we our secrets counsel break,
Our ladies will have scorn on us certain,
And perauenture thinken great disdein:
Thus shame fastness may bringe^ in dispeire,
When she is deed the toder will be heir.
Come forth a Vaunter, now I ring thy bell,
I spied him sone, to God I make a vow,
He looked black as fendes does in hell,
The first (quoth. he) that ever I did wowe,
Within a word she come, I wotte not how,
So that in arms was my lady free,
And so has been a thousand mo than she.
In England, Britain, Spain, and Picardy,
Artois, and France, and up in hie Holand,
In Burgoine, Naples, and Italy,
Nauerne, and Greece, and up in Hethen land
Was never woman yet that would withstond,
To ben at commandment when I would,
I lacked neither silver, coigne, ne gold.
And there I met with this estate and that,
And here I broched her, and her I trow:
Lo there goes one of mine, and wotte ye what?
You fresh attired have I laid full low,
And soch one yonder eke right well I know:
I kept the statute when we lay ifere,
And yet yon same has made me right good chere.
Thus has a Vaunter blown every where,
All that he knows, and more a thousand fold
His auncestry of kin was to lier,
For first he makes promise for to hold
His ladies council, and it not unfold,
* Wherefore y^ secret when he does vnshitte,
Then lies he, that all the world may wit.
For falsing so his promise and behest,
I wounder sore he has such fantasy,
He lacks wit I trow or is a beast,
That can no bet himself with reason gie,
By mine advise, love shall be contrary
To his avail, and him eke dishonor,
So that in court he shall no more sojour.
Take heed (quoth. she) this little Philobone,
Where envy rocketh in the corner yond,
And sits dirke, and ye shall see anon
His lean body, fading both face and hond,
Himself he fretteth, as I understand,
Witness of Ovid Methamorphosose,
The lovers fo he is, I will not gloss.
* For where a lover thinks him promote,
Envy will grutch, repining at his well,
It swells sore about his herts rote,
That in no wise he cannot live in hele,
And if the faithful to his lady stele,
* Envy will noise and ring it round about,
And sey much worse than done is out of dout.
And privy thought rejoysing of himself,
Stood not far thence in abite marvelous,
Yon is (thought I) some spirit or some elfe,
His subtle Image is so curious:
How is (quoth. I) that he is shaded thus
With yonder cloth, I not of what color?
And nere I went and began to lere and pore.
And framed him a question full hard,
What is (quoth. I) the thing thou love best,
Or what is bote unto thy pains hard,
Me think thou live here in great unrest,
Thou wandrest aye from south to east and west,
And east to north as far as I can see,
There is no place in Court may holden thee.
Whom followest thou where is thy hertiset,
But my demand asoile I thee require,
Me thought (quoth. he) no creature may let
Me to ben here, and where as I desire:
For where as absence has done out y^ fire,
My merry thought it kindeleth yet again,
That bodily me think with my sovereign.
I stand and speak, and laugh, and kiss, and halse:
So that my thought comfort me full often,
I think god wot, though al y^ world be false,
I will be true, I think also how soft
My lady is in speech, and this on loft
Brings min heart with joy and great gladness,
This privy thought alayeth mine heaviness.
And with I think or where to be, no man
In all this earth can tell Iwis but I:
And eke there nis no swalow swift, ne swan
So wight of wing, ne half so yerne can fly,
For I can been and that right suddenly,
In heaven, in hell, in Paradise, and here,
And with my lady when I will desire.
I am of counsel, far and wide I wot,
With lord and lady, and their preuitie
I wotte it all, and be it cold or hot,
They shall not speak without license of me,
I mine in soch as seasonable be,
For first the thing is thought within yt heart,
Er any word out from the mouth astart.
And with y^ word Thought bad farewell and yede:
Eke forth went I to seen the courts guise,
And at the door came in so God me speed,
Twenty courteours of age and of assise,
Liche high, and broad, and as I me advise,
The golden love, and leden love they hight,
The tone was sad, the toder glad and light.
Yes draw your heart with all your force and might,
To lustiness and benas ye have seid,
And think that I no drope of favor hight,
Ne never had unto your desire obeid,
Till suddenly me thought me was affraied,
To seen you ware so deed of countenance,
And pite bade me done you some pleasaunce.
Out of her shrine she rose from death to live,
And in mine care full privily she spoke,
Does not your servant hens away to drive,
Rosial (quoth. she) and then mine heart it drake,
For tenderich: and where I found much lack,
In your person, then I my self bethought,
And said, this is the man mine heart has sought.
Gramercy Pity, might I but suffice,
To give due laud unto thy shrine of gold,
God wotte I would: for since y^ thou did rise
From death to live for me, I am behold,
To thanken you a thousand times told,
And eke my lady Rosial the shene,
Which has in comfort set mine heart iwene.
And here I make mine protestacion,
And depely swear as mine power to been
Faithful, deuoide of variacion,
And her forbear in anger or in tene,
And serviceable to my worlds queen,
With all my reason and intelligence,
To done her honor high and reverence.
I had not spoke so sone the word, but she,
My souerain, did thank me hertely,
And said abide ye shall dwell still with me,
Till season come of May, for then truly,
The king of love and all his company,
Shall hold his feste full rially and well,
And there I bode till that the season fell.
ON May day when y^ lark began to rise,
To Matens went the lusty Nightingale,
Within a temple shapen Hauthorn wise,
He might not sleep in all the nightertale,
But Domine labia began he cry and gale,
My lips open lord of love I cry,
And let my mouth thy preising now bewry.
The Egle sang Venite bodies all,
And let us joy to love that is our health,
And to the deske anon they began to fall,
And who came late he preced in by stealth:
Then said ye Faucon our own herts wealth,
Domine Dominus noster I wot,
Ye be the God y^ done us brenne thus hot.
Coeli enarrant said the Popingay,
Your might is told in heaven and firmament,
And then came in y^ gold finch fresh and gay,
And said this Psalm with hertily glad intent
Domini est terra, This laten intent,
The God of love has yerth in governance:
And then ye Wren began scippen and to dance.
Jube Domino O Lord of love, I pray
Command me well this lesson for to read,
This legende is of all that woulden dey
Marters for love, God yet the souls speed:
And to thee Venus sing we out of dread,
By influence of all thy virtue great,
Besechyng thee to keep us in our heat.
The second lesson Robin Redebrest sang,
Hail to the god and gods of our lay,
And to the lectorn amorously he sprung,
Hail now (quoth. eke) O fresh season of May,
Our month glad that singen on the spray,
Hail to the flowers, read, and white, and blewe,
Which by their virtue makes our lust new.
The third lesson the Turtil dove took up,
And thereat lough the Mauis in a scorn,
He said, O God, as mote I dine or suppe,
This folish Dove will give us al an horn,
There ben right here a M. better borne,
To read this lesson, which as well as he,
And eke as hot, can love in all degree.
The Turtil dove said, welcome, welcome May,
Gladsom and light to lovers that been true:
I thank thee lord of love that does puruey,
For me to read this lesson al of dew,
For in good soth of courage I pursue,
To serve my make till death us must depart,
And then Tu autem sang he all apart.
Te deum amoris sang the Thrustel cock,
Tuball himself the first Musician,
With key of armony could not on lock,
So sweet tewne as that the Thrustel can:
The lord of love we praysen (quoth. he) than,
And so done all the fowls great and lite,
Honor we May, in falls lovers dispite.
Dominus regnauit said the Pecocke there,
The lord of love that mighty prince iwis,
He is received here and every where:
Now Iubilate sing: what means this
Said then the Linet? welcome lord of bliss:
Out stert the Owl with Benedicite,
What means all this merry fare (quoth. he.)
Laudate sang the Lark with voice full shril,
And eke the Kight O admirabile,
This quere will through mine ears pers and thril,
But what, welcome this May season (quoth. he)
And honor to the lord of love mote be,
That has this feste so solemn and so hie,
Amen said al, and so said eke the Pie.
And forth the Cockow began proceed anon,
With Benedictus thanking God in have,
That in this May would visit them echon,
And gladden them all while the feast shall last:
And therewithal a laughter out he brast,
I thank it God that I should end the song,
And all the Service which has been so long.
Thus sang they all the service of the fest,
And that was done right erly to my dome,
And forth goth all y^ court both most and lest,
To fetch y^ flowers fresh, and branch and blome,
And namely Hauthorn brought both page and grome
With fresh garlants party blew and white,
And then rejoysen in their great delight.
Eke each at other threw the flowers bright,
The Primerose, the Violete, and the gold,
So then as I beheld the royal fight,
My lady began me suddenly behold,
And with a true love plited many a fold:
She smote me through y^ very heart as bliue,
And Venus yet I thank I am alive.
Explicit.
Chaucer's DREAM, never Printed before the Year 1597. That which heretofore
has gone under the name of his Dream, is the Book of the Duchess: or the
Death of Blanch, Duchess of Lancaster.
This Dream, devised by Chaucer, seems to be a covert report of the Marriage
of John of Gaunt the King's Son, with Blanch the Daughter of Henry Duke of
Lancaster, who, after long love, (during the time whereof the Poet feigneth
them to be dead) were in the end by consent of Friends happily Married: figured
by a Bird bringing in her Bill an Herb which restored them to life again. Here
also is showed Chaucer's match with a certain Gentlewoman, who, although she
was a Stranger, was notwithstanding so well liked and loved of the Lady Blanch
and her Lord, as Chaucer himself also was, that gladly they concluded a
Marriage between them.
WHen Flora the queen of pleasaunce,
Had whole achieued thobeysaunce
Of the fresh and new season,
Through out every region,
And with her mantle whole covert
That winter made had discouert,
Of adventure without light,
In May I lay upon a night
Alone, and on my lady thought,
And how the Lord that her wrought,
Couth well entayle in Imagery
And showed had great maistry,
When he in so little space
Made such a body and a face,
So great beauty with swich features
More than in other creatures.
And in my thoughts as I lay
In a lodge out of the way,
Beside a well in a forest,
Where after hunting I took rest,
Nature and kind so in me wrought,
That half on sleep they me brought,
And began to dream to my thinking,
With mind of knowliche like making,
For what I dreamed as me thought
I saw it, and I slept naught,
Wherefore is yet my full believe,
That some good spirit that eve,
By mean of some curious port,
Bare me, where I saw pain and sport,
But whether it were I woke or slept,
Well wot I of, I lough and wept,
Wherefore I woll in remembrance,
Put whole the pain, and the pleasaunce,
Which was to me axen and hele,
Would God ye wist it every dele,
Or at the least, ye might o night
Of such another have a sight,
Although it were to you a pain,
Yet on the morrow ye would be feign,
And wish it might long dure,
Then might ye say ye had good cure,
For he that dreams, and wenes he see,
Much the better yet may he
Wit what, and of whom, and where,
And eke the less it woll hindere,
To think I see this with mine eene,
Iwis this may not dream kene,
But sign or signifiaunce,
Of hasty thing souning pleasaunce,
For on this wise upon a night,
As ye have heard without light,
Not all wakyng, ne full on sleep
About such hour as lovers weep.
And cry after their ladies grace,
Befell me this wonder case,
Which ye shall hear and all the wise,
So wholly as I can devise,
In plain English evil written,
For sleep writer well ye witten,
Excused is, though he do mis,
More than one that waking is,
Wherefore here of your gentilnesse,
I you require my boistousnesse
Ye let pass, as thing rude
And hears what I woll conclude,
And of the endityng takes no heed,
Ne of the terms so God you speed,
But let all pass as nothing were,
For thus befell, as you shall here.
Within an isle me thought I was,
Where wall, and yate was all of glass,
And so was closed round about,
That leauelesse none come in ne out,
Uncouth and strange to behold,
For every yate of fine gold,
A thousand fanes, aie turning,
Entuned had, and briddes singing,
Diverse, and on each fane a pair,
With open mouth again thaire,
And of a suit were all the toures,
Subtily coruen after flowers,
Of uncouth colors during aye,
That never been none seen in May,
With many a small turret hie,
But man on live could I non sie,
Ne creatures, save ladies play,
Which were such of their array,
That as me thought of goodlihead,
They passeden all, and womanhead,
For to behold them dance and sing,
It seemed like none earthly thing,
Such was their uncouth countinaunce,
In every play of right vsaunce,
And of one age euerichone,
They seemed all save only one,
Which had of years suffisaunce,
For she might neither sing ne dance,
But yet her countenance was so glad,
As she so few years had had,
As any lady that was there
And as little it did her dear,
Of lustines to laugh and tale
As she had full stuffed a male
Of disports and new plays:
Fair had she been in her days,
And maistresse seemed well to be,
Of all that lusty company,
And so she might I you ensure
For one the conningest creature
She was, and so said euerichone,
That ever her knew, there failed none,
For she was sober, and well auised,
And from every fault disguised,
And nothing used but faith and truth,
That she nas young it was great ruth,
For every where and in each place,
She governed her, that in grace
She stood always with poor and rich,
That at a word was none her liche,
Ne half so able maistres to be,
To such a lusty company.
Befell me so, when I auised
Had, the isle that me suffised,
And whole the state every where,
That in that lusty isle was there,
Which was more wonder to devise,
Than the Ioieux paradise,
I dare well say, for flower ne tree,
Ne thing wherein pleasaunce might be,
There failed none, for every wight,
Had they desired, day and night,
Riches, heal, beauty, and ease,
With every thing that them might please,
Think and have, it cost no more,
In such a country there before,
Had I not been ne heard tell,
That lives creature might dwell.
And when I had thus all about,
The isle auised throughout,
The state, and how they were arrayed,
In my heart I wexe well paid,
And in my self I me assured,
That in my body I was well vred,
Since I might have such a grace,
To see the ladies and the place,
Which were so fair I you ensure,
That to my dome though that nature,
Would ever strive and do her pain,
She should not con ne mowattaine,
The least feature to amend,
Though she would all her conning spend,
That to beauty might avail,
It were but pain and lost travail,
Such part in their nativity,
Was them alarged of beauty,
And eke they had a thing notable,
Unto their death, ay durable,
And was, that their beauty should dure,
Which was never seen in creature,
Save only there (as I trow)
It has not be wist ne know,
Wherefore I praise with their conning,
That during beauty, rich thing,
Had they been of their lives certain,
They had been quite of every pain,
And when I wend thus all have seen,
The state, the riches, that might been,
That me thought impossible were,
To see one thing more than was there,
That to beauty or glad conning,
Serve or avail might any thing.
All suddenly as I there stood,
This lady that couth so much good,
Unto me came with smiling chere,
And said Benedicite, this year
Saw I never man here but you,
Tell me how ye come hider now?
And your name, and where ye dwell?
And whom ye seek eke mote ye tell,
And how ye come be to this place,
The soth well told may cause you grace,
And else ye mote prisoner be,
Unto the ladies here, and me,
That have the governance of this isle:
And with that word she began to smile,
And so did all the lusty rout
Of ladies that stood her about.
Madame (quoth. I) this night past,
Lodged I was and slept fast,
In a forest beside a well,
And now am here, how should I tell,
VVot I not, by whose ordinance,
But only fortunes purueiance,
Which puts many as I guess,
To travail, pain, and business,
And lettes nothing for their truth,
But some sleeth eke, and that is ruth,
Wherefore I doubt her brittilnes,
Her variance and vnsteadfastnes,
So that I am as yet afraid,
And of my being here amaid,
For wonder thing seems me,
Thus many fresh ladies to see,
So fair, so cunning, and so young,
And no man dwelling them among:
Not I not how I hider come,
Madame (quoth. I) this all and some,
What should I feign a long process
To you that seem such a princess,
What please you command or say,
Here I am you to obey,
To my power, and all fulfill,
And prisoner bide at your will,
Till you duly informed be,
Of every thing ye ask me.
This lady there right well apaid,
Me by the hand took, and said,
Welcome prisoner aduenturus,
Right glad am I ye have said thus,
And for ye doubt me to displease,
I will assay to do you ease:
And with that word, ye anon,
She, and the ladies euerichon
Assembled, and to counsel went,
And after that soon for me sent,
And to me said on this manner,
Word for word, as ye shall here.
To see you here us think marvel,
And how without bote or sail,
By any subtilty or wyle,
Ye get have enter in this isle,
But not for that, yet shall ye see,
That we gentill women be,
Loath to displease any wight,
Notwithstanding our great right,
And for ye shall well understand
The old custom of this land,
Which has continued many year,
Ye shall well wete that with us here
Ye may not bide, for causes twain,
Which we be purposed you to saine.
The One is this, our ordinance,
Which is of long continuance,
Woll not, sothly we you tell,
That no man here among us dwell,
Wherefore ye mote needs return,
In no wise may you here sojourne.
The Other is eke, that our Queen
Out of the Realm, as ye may seen,
Is, and may be to us a charge,
If we let you go here at large,
For which cause the more we doubt,
To do a fault while she is out,
Or suffer that may be noysaunce,
Again our old accustomaunce.
And when I had these causes twain
Heard, O God what a pain
All suddenly about mine heart,
There came at ones and how smart,
In creeping soft as who should steal,
Or do me rob of all mine heal,
And made me in my thought so fraid,
That in courage I stood dismayed.
And standing thus, as was my grace,
A Lady came more than apace,
With huge prease her about,
And told how the Queen without
Was arrived and would come in,
Well were they that thider might twin,
They hied so they would not abide,
The bridling their horse to ride,
By five, by six, by two, by three,
There was not one abode with me,
The queen to meet euerichone,
They went, and bode with me not one,
And I after a soft pase,
Imagining how to purchase
Grace of the Queen, there to bide,
Till good fortune some happy guide
Me send might, that would me bring
Where I was borne to my wonning,
For way ne foot knew I none,
Ne witherward I nist to gone,
For all was sea about the isle,
No wonder though me list not smile,
Seeing the case uncouth and strange,
And so in like a perilous change,
Imagining thus walking alone,
I saw the Ladies euerichone,
So that I might somewhat offer,
Sone after that I drew me nere,
And tho I was ware of the Queen,
And how the Ladies on their kneene,
With joyous words, gladly advised,
Her welcomed so that it suffised,
Though she princes hole had be,
Of all environed is with see:
And thus auising, with chere sad,
All suddenly I was glad,
That greater joy as mote I thrive,
I trow had never man on live,
Than I tho, ne heart more light,
When of my Lady I had sight,
Which with the queen come was there,
And in one clothing both they were,
A knight also there well beseene,
I saw that come was with the queen,
Of whom the Ladies of that isle
Had huge wonder long while,
Till at the last right soberly,
The queen her self full cunningly,
With soft words in good wise,
Said to the Ladies young and nise,
My sisters how it has befall,
I trow ye know it one and all,
That of long time here have I been,
Within this isle biding as queen,
Living at ease, that never wight
More parfit joy have ne might,
And to you been of governance,
Such as you found in whole pleasance,
In every thing as ye know,
After our custom and our low,
Which how they first found were,
I trow ye wot all the manner,
And who queen is of this isle,
As I have been long while,
Each seven years not of usage,
Visit the heavenly armitage,
Which on a rock so high stonds,
In strange sea out from all londs,
That to make the pilgrimage
Is called a long perilous viage,
For if the wind be not good friend,
The journey dures to the end
Of him that it undertakes,
Of twenty thousand one not scapes,
Upon which Rock growth a tree,
That certain years bears apples three,
Which three apples who may have,
Been from all displeasaunce save,
That in the seven year may fall,
This wot you well one and all,
For the first apple and the bext,
Which growth unto you next,
Has three virtues notable,
And keeps youth aie durable,
Beauty and look, ever in one,
And is the best in euerichone.
The second apple red and grene,
Only with looks of your yene,
You nourishes in pleasaunce,
Better than Partidge or Fesaunce,
And feeds every lives wight
Pleasantly with the sight.
The third apple of the three,
Which grows lowest on the tree,
Who it bears may not fail
That to his pleasaunce may avail,
So your pleasure and beauty rich,
Your during youth ever liche,
Your truth, your cunning, and your weal,
Has aye floured, and your good heal,
Without sickness or displeasaunce,
Or thing that to you was noysaunce,
So that you have as goddesses,
Lived above all princesses:
Now is befall as ye may see,
To gather these said apples three,
I have not failed again the day,
Thitherward to take the way,
Wening to speed as I had often,
But when I come, I find aloft
My sister which that here stands,
Having those apples in her hands,
Auising them and nothing said,
But looked as she were well paid:
And as I stood her to behold,
Thinking how my joys were cold,
Since I those apples have ne might,
Even with that so came this knight,
And in his arms of me aware,
Me took, and to his ship me bare,
And said, though him I never had seen,
Yet had I long his lady been,
Wherefore I should with him wend,
And he would to his lives end
My servant be, and began to sing
As one that had won a rich thing,
Tho were my spirits fro me gone,
So suddenly euerichone,
That in me appeared but death,
For I felt neither life ne breath,
Ne good ne harm none I knew,
The sudden pain me was so new,
That had not the hasty grace be
Of this lady, that fro the tree
Of her gentilnesse so hied
Me to comfort, I had died,
And of her three apples, one
In mine hand there put anon,
Which brought again mind and breath,
And me recovered from the death,
Wherefore to her so am I hold,
That for her all things do I would,
For she was lech of all my smart,
And from great pain so quite mine heart,
And as God wot, Right as ye hear,
Me to comfort with friendly cheer,
She did her prowess and her might,
And truly eke so did this knight,
In that he couth, and often said,
That of my woe he was ill paid,
And cursed the ship that them there brought,
The mast, the master that it wrought,
And as each thing mote have an end,
My sister here your brother friend,
Con with her words so womanly
This knight entreat, and conningly,
For mine honor and his also,
And said that with her we should go
Both in her ship, where she was brought,
Which was so wonderfully wrought,
So clean, so rich, and so araid,
That we were both content and paid,
And me to comfort and to please,
And mine heart to put at ease,
She took great pain in little while,
And thus has brought us to this isle,
As ye may see, wherefore echone,
I pray you thank her one and one,
As heartily as ye can devise,
Or imagine in any wise,
At once there tho men might seen
A world of Ladies fall on kneen
Before my Lady that there about
Was left none standing in the rout,
But altogether they went at ones
To kneel, they spared not for the stones,
Ne for estate, ne for their blood,
Well showed there they couth much good,
For to my Lady they made such feast,
With such words, that the least,
So friendly and so faithfully
Said was, and so cunningly,
That wonder was seeing their youth,
To here the language they couth,
And wholly how they governed were,
In thanking of my Lady there,
And said by will and maundement,
They were at her commandment,
Which was to me as great a joy,
As winning of the town of Troy
Was to the hardy Greeks strong,
When they it wan with slege long,
To see my Lady in such a place,
So received as she was,
And when they talked had a while
Of this and that, and of the isle,
My lady, and the ladies there,
Altogether as they were,
The Queen her self began to play,
And to the aged lady say:
Now seems you not good it were,
Since we be altogether here,
To ordain and devise the best,
To set this knight and me at rest,
For woman is a feeble wight,
To rere a war against a knight,
And since he here is in this place,
At my lift, danger, or grace,
It were to me great vi^^any,
To d^ him any tyranny,
But feign I would, now will ye here,
In his own country that he were,
And I in peace, and he at ease,
This were a way us both to please,
If it might be, I you beseech,
With him hereof you fall in speech.
This lady tho began to smile,
Auising her a little while,
And with glad chere she said anon,
Madam I will unto him gone,
And with him speak, and of him feel
What he desires every dele:
And soberly this lady tho,
Her self and other ladies two
She took with her, and with sad chere,
Said to the knight on this manner,
Sir, the princes of this isle,
Whom for your pleasance many mile,
Ye sought have, as I understand,
Till at the last ye have her fond,
Me sent has here, and ladies twain,
To hear all thing that ye saine,
And for what cause ye have her sought,
Feign would she wot, and whole your thout,
And why you do her all this woe,
And for what cause you be her so,
And why of every wight unware,
By force ye to your ship her bare,
That she so nigh was agone,
That mind ne speech had she none,
But as a painful creature,
Dying, abode her adventure,
That her to see endure that pain,
Here weell say unto you plain,
Right on your self ye did amiss,
Seeing how she a princes is.
This knight the which cowth his good,
Right of his truth meued his blood,
That pale he woxe as any lead,
And looked as he would be dead,
Blood was there none in another cheke,
Worldlesse he was and seemed sick,
And so it proved well he was,
For without moving any paas,
All suddenly as thing dying,
He fell at once down sowning,
That for his woe, this lady fraid,
Unto the queen her hyed and said,
Comes on anon as have you bliss,
But ye be wise, thing is amiss,
This knight is dead or will be soon,
Lo where he lies in a swoone,
Without word, or answering
To that I have said, any thing:
Wherefore I doubt, that the blame,
Might be hindering to your name,
Which floured has so many year,
So long, that for nothing here,
I would in no wise he dyed,
Wherefore good were that ye hyed,
His life to save at the least,
And after that his woe be ceast,
Command him void, or dwell,
For in no wise dare I more mell
Of thing wherein such peril is,
As like is now to fall of this.
This queen right tho full of great fear,
With all the ladies present there,
Unto the knight came where he lay,
And made a Lady to him say:
Lo here the queen, awake for shame,
What will you do, is this good game?
Why lie you here, what is your mind?
Now is well seen your wit is blind,
To see so many Ladies here,
And ye to make none other chere,
But as ye set them all at naught,
Arise, for his love that you bought:
But what she said, a word not one
He spoke, ne answer gave her none.
The Queen of very pity tho,
Her worship, and his like also,
To save there she did her pain,
And quoke for fear, and began to saine:
For woe alas what shall I do,
What shall I say this man unto,
If he die here, lost is my name,
Now shall I play this perilous game?
If any thing be here amiss,
It shall be said, it rigor is,
Whereby my name impair might,
And like to die eke is this knight:
And with that word her band she laid
Upon his breast, and to him said,
Awake my knight, lo it am I
That to you speak, now tell me why
Ye fare thus, and this pain endure,
Seeing ye be in country sure,
Among such friends that would you heal,
Your hearts ease eke and your weal,
And if I wist what you might ease,
Or know the thing that you might please,
I you ensure it should not fail,
That to your heal you might avail:
Wherefore with all my heart I pray
Ye rise, and let us talk and play,
And see how many Ladies here,
Be comen for to make good chere.
All was for naught, for still as stone
He lay, and word spoke none,
Long while was or he might braid,
And of all that the Queen had said,
He wist no word but at the last,
Mercy twice he cried fast,
That pity was his voice to hear,
Or to behold his painful cheer,
Which was not fained well was to sein,
Both by his visage and his eyn,
Which on the queen at once he cast,
And sighed as he would to brast,
And after that he shright so,
That wonder was to see his woe,
For since that pain was first named,
Was never more woeful pain attained,
For with voice dead he began to plain,
And to himself these words saine,
I woeful wight full of malure,
Am worse than dead, and yet dure,
Maugre any pain or death,
Against my will I fell my breath:
Why nam I dead since I ne serve,
And since my Lady will me sterue,
Where art thou death art thou aghast,
Well shall we meet yet at the last,
Though thou thee hide it is for naught,
For where thou dwelst thou shall be sought,
Maugre thy subtle double face,
Here will I die right in this place,
To thy dishonor and mine ease,
Thy manner is no wight to please,
What needs thee since I thee seche,
So thee to hide my pain to each,
And well wost thou I will not live,
Who would me all this world here give,
For I have with my cowardice,
Lost joy, and heal, and my seruise,
And made my sovereign Lady so,
That while she lives I trow my fo
She will be ever to her end,
Thus have I neither joy ne friend,
Wot I not whether have or sloth,
Has caused this now by my troth,
For at the hermitage full hie,
When I her saw first with mine iye,
I hied till I was aloft,
And made my pace small and soft,
Till in mine arms I had her fast,
And to my ship bare at the last,
Whereof she was displeased so,
That endless there seemed her woe,
And I thereof had so great fere,
That me repent that I come there,
Which have I trow began her displease,
And is the cause of my disease:
And with that word he began to cry,
Now death, death, twy or thry,
And motred wot I not what of sloth.
And even with that the Queen of routh,
Him in her arms took and said,
Now mine own knight be not evil apaid,
That I a lady to you sent,
To have knowledge of your intent,
For in good faith I meant but well,
And would ye wist it every dele,
Nor will not do to you ywis,
And with that word she began him kiss,
And prayed him rise, and said she would
His welfare by her truth, and told
Him how she was for his disease
Right sorry, and feign would him please,
His life to save: these words tho,
She said to him and many mo,
In comforting for from the pain,
She would he were delivered feign,
The knight tho up cast his even,
And when he saw it was the queen,
That to him had these words said,
Right in his woe he began to braid,
And him up dresses for to knele,
The queen aussing wonder well:
But as he rose he overthrew,
Wherefore the queen, yet eft anew
Him in her arms anon took,
And pitiously began on him look,
But for all that nothing she said,
Ne spoke not like she were well paid,
Ne no chere made, nor sad, ne light,
But all in one to every wight,
There was seen, conning, with estate,
In her without noise or debate,
For save only a look piteous,
Of womanhead vndispiteous,
That she showed in countenance,
For seemed her heart from obeisance,
And not for that she did her reine,
Him to recure from the peine,
And his heart to put at large,
For her intent was to his barge
Him to bring against the eve,
With certain ladies and take leave,
And pray him of his gentilnesse,
To suffer her thenceforth in peace,
As other Princes had before,
And from thence forth for evermore,
She would him worship in all wise,
That gentilnesse might devise,
And pain her wholly to fulfill,
In honor, his pleasure and will.
And during thus this knights woe,
Present the queen and other mo,
My lady and many another wight,
Ten thousand ships at a sight,
I saw come over the wawy flood,
With sail and ore, that as I s^ood
Them to behold, I began marvel,
From whom might come so many a sail,
For since the time that I was bore,
Such a navy there before,
Had I not seen, ne so arrayed,
That for the sight my heart played
To and fro within my breast,
For joy, long was or it would rest,
For there was sails full of flowers,
After castles with huge toures,
Seeming full of arms bright,
That wonder lusty was the sight,
With large tops, and mastes long,
Richly depeint and rear among,
At certain times began repair
Small birds down from thaire,
And on the ships bounds about,
Sat and song with voice full out,
Ballades and Lays right joyously,
As they cowth in their harmony,
That you to write that I there see,
Mine excuse is it may not be,
For why, the matter were to long
To name the birds and write their song,
Whereof anon the ridings there
Unto the queen soon brought were,
With many alas, and many a doubt,
Showing the ships there without,
Tho began the aged lady weep,
And said alas our joy on sleep
Soon shall be brought, ye long or night,
For we discried been by this knight,
For certes it may none other be,
But he is of yond company,
And they be come him here to seche,
And with that word her failed speech,
Without remedy we be destroid,
Full often said all, and began conclude,
Holy at once at the last,
That best was, shit their yates fast,
And arm them all in good langage,
As they had done of old usage,
And of fair words make their shot,
This was their counsel and the knot,
And other purpose took they none,
But armed thus forth they gone
Toward the walls of the isle,
But or they come there long while,
They met the great lord of boue,
That called is the god of Love,
That them auised with such chere,
Right as he with them angry were,
Auailed them not their walls of glass,
This mighty lord let not to pass,
The shutting of their yates fast,
All they had ordained was but wast,
For when his ships had found land,
This lord anon with bow in hand,
Into this isle with huge prease,
Hied fast and would not cease,
Till he came there the knight lay,
Of Queen ne lady by the way,
Took he no heed but forth past,
And yet all followed at the last,
And when he came where lay the knight,
Well showed he, he had great might,
And forth the Queen called anon,
And all the ladies euerichone,
And to them said, is not thus routh,
To see my servant for his troth,
Thus lean, thus sick, and in this pain,
And wot not unto whom to plain,
Save only one without mo,
Which might him heal and is his fo,
And with that word, his heavy brow
He showed the Queen and looked row,
This mighty lord forth tho anon,
With o look her faults echone
He can her show in little speech,
Commanding her to be his leech,
Withouten more shortly to say
He thought the Queen soon should obey,
And in his hond he shoke his bow,
And said right soon he would be know,
And for she had so long refused
His service, and his laws not used,
He let her wit that he was wroth,
And bent his bow and forth he goth
A pace or two, and even there
A large draught, up to his ear
He drew, and with an arrow ground
Sharp and new, the Queen a wound
He gave, that piersed unto the heart,
Which afterward full sore began smart,
And was not whole of many year,
And even with that be of good cheer,
My knight, quoth. he, I will thee hele,
And thee restore to parfite well,
And for each pain thou have endured,
To have two joys thou art cured,
And forth he past by the rout,
With sober cheer walking about,
And what he said I thought to hear,
Well wist he which his servant were,
And as he passed anon he fond
My lady and her took by the hond,
And made her chere as a Gods,
And of beauty called her princes,
Of bounty eke gave her the name,
And said there was nothing blame
In her, but she was virtuous,
Saving she would no pity use,
Which was the cause that he her sought,
To put that far out of her thought,
And since she had whole richesse
Of womanhead, and friendlinesse,
He said it was nothing fitting,
To void pity his own legging,
And began her preach and with her play,
And of her beauty told her aie,
And said she was a creature,
Of whom the name should endure,
And in books full of pleasaunce
Be put for ever in remembrance,
And as me thought more friendly
Unto my lady, and goodlely
He spoke, than any that was there,
And for the appuls, I trow it were,
That she had in possession,
Wherefore long in procession,
Many a pace arm under other,
He welke, and so did with none other,
But what he would command or say,
Forthwith needs all must obey,
And what he desired at the lest,
Of my lady, was by request,
And when they long together had been,
He brought my lady to the Queen,
And to her said, so God you speed,
Show grace, consent, that is need,
My lady tho full conningly,
Right well auised, and womanly
Down began to kneel upon the flowers,
Which April nourished had with shoures,
And to this mighty lord began say,
That pleases you, I woll obey,
And me restrain from other thought,
As ye woll all thing shall be wrought,
And with that word kneeling she quoke,
That mighty lord in arms her took,
And said you have a servant one,
That truer living is there none,
Wherefore good were, seeing his troth,
That on his pains ye had routh,
And purpose you to hear his speech,
Fully auised him to leech,
For of one thing ye may be sure,
He will be yours, while he may dure,
And with that word right on his game
Me thought he lough, and told my name,
Which was to me marvel, and fere,
That what to do I nist there,
Ne whether was me bet or none,
There to abide, or thus to gone,
For well wend I my lady would
Imagen, or deem, that I had told
My counsel whole, or made complaint
Unto that lord, that mighty saint,
So verily, each thing unsought,
He said as he had known my thought,
And told my troth and mine unease,
Bet than I couth have for mine ease,
Though I had studied all a weke,
Well wist that lord that I was seek,
And would be leched wonder feign,
No man me blame, mine was the pain:
And when this lord had all said,
And long with my lady played,
She began to smile with spirit glade,
This was the answer that she made,
Which put me there in double peine,
That what to do, ne what to seine
Wist I not, ne what was the best,
Far was my heart then fro his rest,
For as I thought, that smiling sign
Was token, that the heart incline
Would to requests reasonable,
Because smiling is favorable
To every thing that shall thrive,
So thought I tho anon bliue,
That wordlesse answer in no town
Was taken for obligatioun,
Ne called surety in no wise,
Amongst them that called been wise.
Thus was I in a joyous dout,
Sure and vnsurest of that rout,
Right as mine heart thought it were,
So more or less wexe my fere,
That if one thought made it well,
Another shent it every dele,
Till at the last I couth no more,
But purposed as I did before,
To serve truly my lives space,
Awaiting ever the year of grace,
Which may fall yet or I sterue,
If it please her that I serve,
And served have, and woll do ever,
For thing is none, that me is lever,
Than her service, whose presence
Mine heaven is whole, and her absence
An hell, full of diverse pains,
Which to the death full often me strains,
Thus in my thoughts, as I stood,
That uneath felt I harm ne good,
I saw the Queen a little paas
Come where this mighty lord was,
And kneeled down in presence there
Of all the ladies that there were,
With sober countenance auised,
In few words that well suffised,
And to this lord anon present
A bill, wherein whole her intent
Was written, and how she besought,
As he knew every will and thought,
That of his godhead and his grace
He would forgive all old trespace,
And vndispleased be of time past,
For she would ever be steadfast,
And in his service to the death
Use every thought while she had breath,
And sight and wept, and said no more,
Within was written all the sore:
At which bill the lord began smyle,
And said he would within that isle
Be lord and sire, both east and west,
And called it there his new conquest,
And in great council took the Queen,
Long were the tales them between,
And over her bill he read thrice,
And wonder gladly began devise
Her features fair, and her visage,
And bad good thrift on that Image,
And said he trowed her compleint
Should after cause her be corseint,
And in his sleeue he put the bill,
Was there none that knew his will,
And forth he walk apace about,
Beholding all the lusty rout,
Half in a thought with smiling chere,
Till at the last, as ye shall here,
He turned unto the Queen ageine,
And said to morn, here in this pleine,
I woll ye be, and all yours,
That purposed ben to wear flours,
Or of my lusty color use,
It may not be to you excuse,
Ne none of yours in no wise,
That able be to my seruise,
For as I said have here before,
I will be lord for evermore
Of you, and of this isle, and all,
And of all yours, that have shall
Joy, peace, ease, or in pleasaunce
Your lives use without noysaunce;
Here will I in state be seen,
And turned his visage to the Queen,
And you give knowledge of my will,
And a full answer of your bill,
Was there no nay, ne words none,
But very obeisaunt seemed echone,
Queen and other that were there,
Well seemed it they had great fere,
And there took lodging every night,
Was none departed of that night,
And some to read old Romances,
Them occupied for their pleasances,
Some to make verelaies, and lays,
And some to other diverse plays:
And I to me a Romance took,
And as I reading was the book,
Me thought the sphere had so run,
That it was rising of the Sun,
And such a prees into the piaine
Assemble gone, that with great pain
One might for other go ne stand,
Ne none take other by the hand,
VVithouten they distourbed were,
So huge and great the prees was there.
And after that within two hours,
This mighty lord all in flowers
Of diverse colors many a pair,
In his estate up in the air,
Well two fathom, as his hight,
He set him there in all their sight,
And for the Queen and for the Knight,
And for my lady, and every wight,
In have he sent, so that never one
Was there absent, but come echone:
And when they thus assembled were,
As ye have heard me say you here,
Without more tarrying on hight,
There to be seen of every wight,
Up stood among the prees above
A counsayler, servant of love,
Which seemed well, of great estate,
And showed there, how no debate
Owe ne goodly might be used
In gentilnesse, and be excused,
Wherefore he said, his lords will,
Was every wight there should be still,
And in pees, and one accord,
And thus commanded at a word,
And can his tongue to swiche language
Turn, that yet in all mine age
Heard I never so conningly
Man speak, ne half so faithfully,
For every thing he said there,
Seemed as it insealed were,
Or approved for very true:
Swiche was his cunning language new,
And well according to his chere,
That where I be, me think I here
Him yet always, when I mine one
In any place may be alone:
First con he of the lusty isle
All thastate in little while
Rehearse, and wholly every thing,
That caused there his lords coming,
And every well and every woe,
And for what cause each thing was so,
Well showed he there in easy speech,
And how the sick had need of leech:
And that whole was, and in grace,
He told plainly why each thing was,
And at the last he con conclude,
Voided every language rude,
And said, that prince, that mighty lord,
Or his departing, would accord
All the parties there present,
And was the fine of his intent,
Witness his presence in your sight,
Which sits among you in his might:
And kneeled down withouten more,
And not o word spoke he more.
Tho began this mighty lord him dress,
With cheer auised, to do largess,
And said unto this knight and me,
Ye shall to joy restored be,
And for ye have been true ye twain,
I grant you here for every pain
A thousand joys every week,
And look ye be no longer seek,
And both your ladies, lo hem here,
Take each his own, beeth of good chere,
Your happy day is new begun,
Since it was rising of the sun,
And to all other in this place,
I grant wholly to stand in grace,
That serves truly, without sloth,
And to auaunced be by troth.
Tho can this knight, and I down kneel,
VVening to do wonder well,
Seeing O Lord your great mrrcy,
Us has enriched, so openly,
That we deserve may never more,
The least part, but evermore
With soul and body truly serve
You and yours till we sterue.
And to their Ladies there they stood,
This knight that couth so mikel good,
Went in have, and I also,
Joyous, and glad were we tho,
And also rich in every thought,
As he that all has and ought naught,
And them besought in humble wise,
Us taccept to their service,
And show us of their friendly cheares,
Which in their treasure many years
They kept had, us to great pain,
And told how their servants twain,
Were and would be, and so had ever,
And to the death change would we never,
Ne do offense, ne think like ill,
But fill their ordinance and will:
And made our oaths fresh new,
Our old service to renew,
And wholly theirs for evermore,
We there become, what might we more,
And well awaiting, that in sloth,
We made ne fault, ne in our troth,
Ne thought not do, I you ensure,
With our will, where we may dure.
This season past, again an eve,
This Lord of the Queen took leave,
And said he would hastily return,
And at good leisure there sojourne,
Both for his honor, and for his ease,
Commanding fast, the knight to please,
And gave his statutes in papers,
And ordent diverse officers,
And forth to ship the same night
He went, and soon was out of sight.
And on the morrow when the air
Attempred was, and wonder fair,
Early at rising of the sun,
After the night away was run,
Playing us on the riuage,
My Lady spoke of her voyage,
And said she made small journies,
And held her in strange countries,
And forthwith to the Queen went,
And showed her wholly her intent,
And took her leave with cheer weeping,
That pity was to see that parting:
For to the Queen it was a pain,
As to a Martyr new yssaine,
That for her woe, and she so tender,
Yet I weep often when I remember,
She offered there to resign,
To my Lady eight times or nine,
Thastate, the isle, shortly to tell,
If it might please her there to dwell,
And said, for ever her lineage,
Should to my Lady do homage,
And hers be hole withouten more,
Ye, and all theirs for evermore:
Nay God forbid, my Lady often,
With many conning word and soft,
Said, that ever such thing should been,
That I consent should, that a Queen
Of your estate, and so well named,
In any wise should be attamed:
But would be feign with all my heart,
What so befell, or how me smert,
To do thing that you might please,
In any wise, or be your ease,
And kissed there, and bad good night,
For which leave wept many a wight,
There might men here my Lady praised,
And such a name of her araised,
What of cunning and friendlinesse,
What of beauty with gentilnesse,
What of glad and friendly cheare^^,
That she used in all her years,
That wonder was here every wight
To say well, how they did their might,
And with a prees upon the morrow,
To ship her brought, and what a sorrow
They made, when she should under sail,
That and ye wist, ye would marvel.
Forth goes the ship, out goes the fond,
And I as wood man vnbond,
For doubt to be behind there,
Into the sea withouten fere,
Anon I ran, till with a waw,
All suddenly I was ouerthraw,
And with the water to and fro,
Backward and forward travailed so,
That mind and breath, nigh was gone,
For good ne harm knew I none,
Til at the last with hooks tweine,
Men of the ship with mikel peine,
To save my life, did such travail,
That and ye wist ye would marvel,
And in the ship me drew on hie,
And saiden all that I would die,
And laid me long down by the mast,
And of their clothes on me cast,
And there I made my testament,
And wist my self not what I meant,
But when I said had what I would,
And to the mast my woe all told,
And taken my leave of every wight,
And closed mine eyes, and lost my sight,
Auised to die, without more speech,
Or any remedy to seech
Of grace new, as was great need:
My lady of my pain took heed;
And her bethought how that for troth
To see me die it were great routh,
And to me came in sober wise,
And softly said, I pray you rise,
Come on with me, let be this fare,
All shall be well, have ye no care,
I will obey ye and fulfill
Holy in all that lords will,
That you and me not long ago,
After his list commanded so,
That there again no resistance
May be without great offense,
And therefore now what I say,
I am and will be friendly aye,
Rise up behold this advantage,
I grant you inheritage,
Peaceably without strive,
During the days of your live,
And of her apples in my sleue
One she put, and took her leave
In words few and said good hele,
He that all made you send and well,
Wherewith my pains all at ones
Took such leave, that all my bones,
For the new durense pleasaunce,
So as they couth, desired to dance,
And I as whole as any wight,
Up rose with joyous heart and light,
Hole and vnsicke, right well at ease,
And all forget had my disease,
And to my lady where she played,
I went anon, and to her said:
He that all joies persons to please
First ordained with parfite ease,
And every pleasure can depart,
Send you madame, as large a part,
And of his goods such plenty,
As he has done you of beauty,
With hele and all that may be thought;
He send you all as he all wrought:
Madame (quoth I) your servant true,
Have I ben long, and yet will new,
Without change or repentance,
In any wise or variaunce,
And so will do as thrive I ever,
For thing is none that me is lever
Than you to please, how ever I fare,
Mine hearts lady and my welfare,
My life, mine hele, my lech also,
Of every thing that does me woe,
My help at need, and my surete
Of every joy that longs to me,
My succors whole in all wise,
That may be thought or man devise,
Your grace Madame such have I found,
Now in my need that I am bound
To you for ever so Christ me save,
For heal and live of you I have,
Wherefore is reasoun I you serve,
With due obeisaunce till I sterue,
And dead and quick be ever yours,
Late, early, and at all hours,
Tho came my lady small alite,
And in plain english con consite
In words few, whole her intent
She showed me there, and how she meant
To meward in every wise,
Wholly she came at their devise,
Without process or long travel,
Charging me to keep counsel,
As I would to her grace attain,
Of which commandment I was feign.
Wherefore I pass over at this time,
For counsel cords not well in rhyme,
And eke the oath that I have swore,
To break, me were better vnbore,
Why for untrue for evermore
I should be hold, that neuermore
Of me in place should be report
Thing that avail might, or comfort
To mewards in any wise,
Andech wight would me despise
In that they couth, and me repreeue,
Which were a thing sore for to grieve,
Wherefore hereof more mention
Make I not now ne long sermon,
But shortly thus I me excuse,
To rhyme a council I refuse.
Sailing thus two days or three,
My lady toward her country,
Over the waves high and green,
Which were large and deep between,
Upon a time me called and said,
That of my hele she was well paid,
And of the Queen and of the isle,
She talked with me long while,
And of all that she there had seen,
And of the state, and of the queen,
And of the ladies name by name,
Two hours or mo, this was her game,
Till at the last the wind began rise,
And blew so fast, and in such wise,
The ship that every wight can say,
Madame er eve he of this day,
And God tofore, ye shall be there,
As ye would fainest that ye were,
And doubt not within six hours,
Ye shall be there, as all is yours,
At which words she began to smile,
And said that was no long while,
That they her set and up she rose,
And all about the ship she gose,
And made good cheer to every wight,
Till of the land she had a sight,
Of which sight glad God it wot,
She was abashed and aboot,
And forth goes shortly you to tell,
Where she accustomed was to dwell,
And received was as good right,
With joyous cheer and hearts light,
And as a glad new adventure,
Pleasant to every creature,
With which landing tho I woke,
And found my chamber full of smoke,
My cheeks eke unto the ears,
And all my body weat with tears,
And all so feeble and in such wise,
I was, that uneath might I rise,
So fare travailed and so faint,
That neither knew I kirk ne saint,
Ne what was what, ne who was who,
Ne auised, what way I would go,
But by a venturous grace,
I rise and walked, sought pace and pace,
Till I a winding staire found,
And held the vice aye in my hond,
And upward softly so began creep,
Till I came where I thought to sleep
More at mine ease, and out of preace,
At my good leisure, and in peace,
Till somewhat I recomfort were
Of the travel and great fear
That I endured had before,
This was my thought without more,
And as a wight witless and faint,
Without more, in a chamber paint
Full of stories old and diverse,
More than I can now rehearse,
Unto a bed full soberly,
So as I might full sothly,
Pace after other, and nothing said,
Till at the last down I me laid,
And as my mind would give me leave,
All that I dreamed had that eve,
Before all I can rehearse,
Right as a child at school his verse
Does after that he thinks to thrive,
Right so did I for all my live,
I thought to have in remembrance,
Both the pain and the pleasaunce,
The dream whole, as it me befell,
Which was as ye here me tell,
Thus in my thoughts as I lay,
That happy or unhappy day,
Wot I not so have I blame,
Of the two, which is the name:
Befell me so, that there a thought,
By process new on sleep me brought,
And me governed so in a while,
That again within the isle,
Me thought I was, whereof the knight,
And of the ladies I had a sight,
And were assembled on a green,
Knight and lady, with the queen,
At which assembly there was said,
How they all content and paid,
Were wholly as in that thing,
That the knight there should be king,
And they would all for sure witness
Wedded be both more and less,
In remembrance without more,
Thus they consent for evermore,
And was concluded that the knight
Depart should the same night,
And forthwith there took his voyage,
To journey for his marriage,
And return with such an host,
That wedded might be least and most,
This was concluded, written and sealed,
That it might not be repealed
In no wise but aie be firm,
And all should be within a term,
Without more excusation,
Both feast and coronation,
This knight which had thereof the charge,
Anon into a little barge,
Brought was late against an eve,
Where of all he took his leave,
Which barge was as a man's thought,
After his pleasure to him brought,
The Queen her self accustomed aye
In the same barge to play,
It needs neither mast ne rother,
I have not heard of such another,
No master for the governance,
Hie sailed by thought and pleasaunce,
Without labor East and West,
All was one, calm, or tempest,
And I went with at his request,
And was the first prayed to the fest.
When he came in his country,
And passed had the wauy see,
In an haven deep and large
He left his rich and noble barge,
And to the court shortly to tell,
He went, where he wont was to dwell,
And was received as good right,
As heir, and for a worthy knight,
With all the states of the land,
Which came anon at his first sond,
With glad spirits full of troth,
Loath to do fault or with a sloth,
Attaint be in any wise,
Their riches was their old seruise,
Which ever true had be fond,
Since first inhabit was the land,
And so received there her King,
That forgotten was no thing,
That owe to be done ne might please,
Ne their sovereign Lord do ease,
And with them so shortly to say,
As they of custom had done aye,
For seven year past was and more,
The father, the old wise and hoar
King of the land took his leave
Of all his barons on an eve,
And told them how his days past
Were all, and comen was the last,
And hertily prayed hem to remember
His son, which young was and tender,
That borne was their prince to be,
If he return to that country
Might, by adventure or grace,
Within any time or space,
And to be true and friendly aye,
As they to him had been always:
Thus he them prayed, without more,
And took his leave for evermore.
Known was, how tender in age,
This young prince a great viage
Uncouth and straung, honors to seche,
Took in hond with little speech,
Which was to seek a princes,
That he desired more than riches,
For her great name that floured so,
That in that time there was no mo
Of her estate, ne so well named,
For borne was none that ever her blamed:
Of which princes somewhat before,
Here have I spoke, and some will more.
So thus befell as ye shall hear,
Unto their lord they made such cheer,
That joy was there to be present
To see their troth and how they meant,
So very glad they were each one,
That them among there was no one,
That desired more riches,
Than for their Lord such a princes,
That they might please, and that were fair,
For fast desired they an heir,
And said great surety were ywis.
And as they were speaking of this,
The prince himself him auised,
And in plain English vndisguised,
Them showed hole his journey,
And of their counsel began them prey,
And told how he ensured was,
And how his day he might not pass,
Without diffame and great blame,
And to him for ever shame,
And of their counsel and auise,
There he prayth them once or twice,
And that they would, within ten days,
Auise and ordain him such ways,
So that it were no displeasaunce,
Ne to this Realm over great grieuaunce,
And that he have might to his feast,
Sixty thousand at the least,
For his intent within short while
Was to return unto his isle
That he came fro, and keep his day,
For nothing would he be away.
To counsel tho the Lords anon,
Into a chamber euerychone,
Together went, them to devise,
How they might best and in what wise,
Puruey for their Lords pleasaunce,
And the Realms continuance
Of honor, which in it before
Had continued evermore,
So at the last they found the ways,
How within the next ten days,
All might with pain and diligence
Be done, and cast what the dispense
Might draw, and in conclusion,
Made for each thing provision.
When this was done, wholly tofore
The prince, the lords all before
Come, and showed what they had done,
And how they couth by no reason
Find, that within the ten days
He might depart by no ways,
But would be fifteen at the least,
Or he return might to his feast:
And showed him every reason why
It might not be so hastily,
As he desired, ne his day
He might not keep by no way,
For diverse causes wonder great:
Which when he heard, in such an heat
He fell, for sorrow and was seek,
Still in his bed whole that weke,
And nigh the the other for the shame,
And for the doubt, and for the blame
That might on him be aret,
And often upon his breast he her,
And said alas, mine honor for aye,
Have I here lost clean this day,
Dead would I be, alas my name
Shall aye he more henceforth in shame,
And I dishonored and repreued,
And never more shall be believed:
And made swich sorrow, that in troth,
Him to behold it was great routh:
And so endured the days fiftene,
Till that the Lords on an even
Him come, and told they ready were,
And showed in few words there,
How and what wise they had purueyd
For his estate, and to him said,
That twenty thousand knights of name,
And forty thousand without blame,
All come of noble ligine,
Togider in a compane,
Were lodged on a rivers side,
Him and his pleasure there tabide,
The prince tho for joy up rose,
And where they lodged were, he goes
Without more that same night,
And these his supper made to right,
And with them bode till it was dey,
And forthwith to take his journey,
Leuing the straight, holding the large,
Till he came to his noble barge,
And when this prince, this lusty knight
With his people in arms bright,
Was comen where he thought to pas,
And knew well none abiding was
Behind, but all were there present,
Forthwith anon all his intent
He told them there, and made his cries
Through his often that day twice,
Commanding every lives wight,
There being present in his sight,
To be the morrow on the riuage,
Where he begin would his viage.
The morrow come, the cry was kept,
Few was there that night that slept,
But trussed and purueied for the morrow,
For fault of ships was all their sorrow,
For save the barge, and other two,
Of ships there saw I no mo:
Thus in their douths as they stood,
Waxing the sea, coming the flood,
Was cried to ship go every wight,
Then was but hie, that hie might,
And to the barge me thought echone
They went, without was left not one,
Horse, male, trusse, ne bagage,
Salad, spear, guard brace, ne page,
But was lodged and room enough,
At which shipping me thought I lough,
And began to marvel in my thought,
How ever such a ship was wrought,
For what people that can increase,
Ne never so thick might be the prease,
But all had room at their will,
There was not one was lodged ill,
For as I trow, my self the last
Was one, and lodged by the mast,
And where I looked I saw such rome,
As all were lodged in a town.
Forth goth the ship, said was the creed,
And on their knees for their good speed,
Down kneeled every wight a while,
And prayed fast that to the isle
They might come in safety,
The prince and all the company,
With worship and without blame,
Or disclaunder of his name,
Of the promise he should return,
Within the time he did sojourne,
In his land biding his host,
This was their prayer least and most,
To keep the day it might not been,
That he appointed had with the queen,
To return without sloth,
And so assured had his troth,
For which fault this prince, this knight,
During the time slept not a night,
Such was his woe and his disease,
For doubt he should the queen displease,
Forth goes the ship with such speed,
Right as the prince for his great need
Desire would after his thought,
Till it unto the isle him brought,
Where in have upon the sand,
He and his people took the land,
With herts glad, and chere light,
Weening to be in heaven that night:
But or they passed a while,
Entering in toward that isle,
All clad in black with chere piteous,
A lady which never dispiteous
Had be in all her life tofore,
With sorry chere, and heart to tore,
Unto this prince where he began ride,
Come and said, abide, abide,
And have no have, but fast return,
No reason is ye here sojourne,
For your untruth has us discried,
VVo worth the time we us allied
With you, that are so soon untrue,
Alas the day that we you knew,
Alas the time that ye were bore,
For all this land by you is lore,
Accursed be he you hider brought,
For all your joy is turned to naught,
Your acquaintance we may complain,
Which is the cause of all our pain.
Alas madame quoth tho this knight,
And with that from his horse he light,
With color pale, and cheeks lene,
Alas what is this for to mean,
What have ye said, why be ye wroth,
You to displease I would be loath,
Know ye not well the promise
I made have to your princess,
Which to perform is mine intent,
So mote I speed as I have meant,
And as I am her very true,
Without change or thought new,
And also fully her seruand,
As creature or man liuand
May be to lady or princess,
For she mine heaven, and whole richesse
Is, and the lady of mine heal,
My worlds joy and all my weal,
What may this be, whence coms this speech,
Tell me Madame I you beseech,
For fith the first of my living,
Was I so fearful of nothing,
As I am now to hear you speak,
For doubt I feel mine heart break:
Say on madame, tell me your will,
The remnaunt is it good or ill,
Alas (quoth. she) that ye were bore,
For, for your love this land is lore,
The queen is dead and that is ruth,
For sorrow of your great untruth,
Of two parts of the lusty rout,
Of ladies that were there about,
That wont were to talk and play,
Now are dead and clean away,
And under earth taken lodging new,
Alas that ever ye were untrue,
For when the time ye set was past,
The queen to counsel sone in have,
What was to do, and said great blame,
Your acquaintance cause would and shame,
And the ladies of their auise
Prayed, for need was to be wise,
In eschewing tales and songs,
That by them make would ill tongs,
And sey they were lightly conquest,
And prayed to a poor feast,
And foul had their worship weiued,
When so unwisely they conceived,
Their rich treasour, and their heal,
Their famous name, and their weal,
To put in such an adventure,
Of which the sclaunder ever dure
Was like, without help of appele,
Wherefore they need had of counsele,
For every wight of them would say,
Their closed isle an open way
Was become to every wight,
And well appreued by a knight,
Which he alas without paysaunce,
Had soon acheued thobeisaunce:
All this was moved at counsel thrice,
And concluded daily twice,
That bet was die without blame,
Than lose the riches of their name,
Wherefore the deaths acquaintance
They chese, and left have their pleasaunce,
For doubt to live as repreued,
In that they you so soon believed,
And made their oaths with one accord,
That eat, ne drink, ne speak word,
They should never, but ever weping
Bide in a place without parting,
And use their days in penance,
Without desire of allegeaunce,
Of which the truth anon con preue,
For why the queen forth with her leave
Took at them all that were present,
Of her defauts fully repent,
And died there withouten more,
Thus are we lost for evermore,
What should I more hereof rehearse,
Comen within come see her hearse,
Where ye shall see the piteous sight,
That ever yet was shown to knight,
For ye shall see ladies stond,
Each with a great rod in bond,
Clad in black with visage white,
Ready each other for to smite,
If any be that will not weep,
Or who that makes countenance to sleep,
They be so bet, that all so blew
They be as cloth that died is new,
Such is their parfite repentance,
And thus they keep their ordinance,
And will do ever to the death*
While them endures any breath.
This knight tho in arms twain,
This lady took and began her saine,
Alas my birth, woe worth my life,
And even with that he drew a knife,
And through gown, doublet, and shert,
He made the blood come from his heart,
And set him down upon the green,
And full repent closed his eene,
And save that ones he drew his breath,
Without more thus he took his death,
For which cause the lusty host,
Which in a battle on the coast,
At once for sorrow such a cry
Began rere, through the company,
That to the heaven heard was the sown,
And under therth als fer adowne,
That wild beasts for the fear,
So suddenly afraid were,
That for the doubt, while they might dure,
They ran as of their lives unsure,
From the woods unto the plain,
And from the valleys the high mountain
They sought, and ran as beasts blind,
That clean forgotten had their kind.
This woe not ceased, to counsel went
These Lords, and for that lady sent,
And of auise what was to done,
They her besought she say would sone,
Weeping full sore all clad in blake,
This lady softly to them spoke,
And said, my lords by my troth,
This mischief it is of your flouth,
And if ye had that judge would right,
A prince that were a very knight,
Ye that been of astate echone,
Die for his fault should one and one,
And if he hold had the promise,
And done that longs to gentilnesse,
And fulfilled the princes behest,
This hasty farm had been a feast,
And now is unrecoverable,
And us a slander aye durable,
Wherefore I say as of counsel,
In me is none that may avail,
But if ye list for remembrance,
Puruey and make such ordinance,
That the queen that was so meke,
With all her women deed or seek,
Might in your land a chapel have,
With some remembrance of her grave,
Showing her end with the pity,
In some notable old city,
Nigh unto an high way,
Where every wight might for her pray,
And for all hers that have been true,
And even with that she changed hew,
And twice wished, after the death,
And sight, and thus passed her breath.
Then said the Lords of the host,
And so conclude least and most,
That they would ever in houses of thacke,
Their lives lead, and wear but black,
And forsake all their pleasaunces,
And turn all joy to penaunces,
And bear the dead prince to the barge,
And named them should have the charge,
And to the hearse where lay the queen,
The remnaunt went and down on kneen,
Holding their honds on high gone cry,
Mercy, mercy, euerish thrie,
And cursed the time that ever sloth
Should have such masterdome of troth,
And to the barge a long mile,
They hare her forth, and in a while
All the Ladies one and one,
By companies were brought echone,
And past the sea and took the land,
And in new herses on a sand,
Put and brought were all anon,
Unto a City closed with stone,
Where it had been used aye
The kings of the land to lay,
After they reigned in honors,
And writ was which were conquerours,
In an abbey of Nuns which were blake,
Which accustomed were to wake,
And of usage rise each a night,
To pray for every lives wight,
And so befell as in the guise,
Ordeint and said was the seruise,
Of the prince and of the queen,
So devoutly as might been,
And after that about the herses,
Many orisons and verses,
Without note full softely,
Said were and that full heartily,
That all the night till it was day
The people in the Church con pray,
Unto the holy Trinity,
Of those souls to have pity.
And when the night past and run
Was, and the new day begone,
The young morrow with rays red,
Which from the Sun over all con spread,
Atempered clear was and fair,
And made a time of wholesome air,
Befell a wonder case and strange,
Among the people and began change
Soon the word and every woo,
Unto a joy, and some to two:
A bird all fedred blew and green,
With bright rays like gold between,
As small thread over every joint,
All full of color strange and coint,
Uncouth, and wonderful to sight,
Upon the queens hearse con light,
And song full low and softely,
Three songs in her harmony,
Vnletted of every wight,
Till at the last an aged knight,
Which seemed a man in great thought,
Like as he set all thing at naught,
With visage and ein all forwept,
And pale, as man long vnslept,
By the herses as he stood,
With hasty hondling of his hood,
Unto a prince that by him past,
Made the bridde somewhat aghast,
Wherefore she rose and left her song,
And depart from us among,
And spread her wings for to pass
By the place he entered was,
And in his have shortly to tell,
Him hurt, that backward down he fell,
From a window richly peint,
With lives of many diverse seint,
And bet his wings and bled fast,
And of the hurt thus died and past,
And lay there well an hour and more,
Till at the last of briddes a score,
Come and sembled at the place
Where the window broken was,
And made swiche wamentacioun,
That pity was to hear the soun,
And the warbles of their throtes,
And the complaint of their notes,
Which from joy clean was reuersed,
And of them one the glass soon persed,
And in his beke of colors nine,
An herb he brought flourelesse all grene,
Full of small leaves and plain,
Swart and long with many a vain,
And where his fellow lay thus deed,
This herb down laid by his head,
And dressed it full softily,
And hong his head and stood thereby,
Which herb in less than half an hour,
Began over all knit, and after flower
Full out and wexe ripe the seed,
And right as one another feed
Would, in his beak he took the grain,
And in his fellows beak certain
It put, and thus within the third
Up stood, and pruned him the bird,
Which dead had be in all our sight,
And both together forth their flight
Took, singing from us, and their leave,
Was none disturb hem would ne grieve,
And when they parted were, and gone
Thabbesse the seeds soon echone
Gadred had, and in her hand
The herb she took, well auisand
The leaf, the seed, the stalk, the flower,
And said it had a good savor,
And was no common herb to find,
And well approved of uncouth kind,
And than other more virtuous,
Who so have it might for to use
In his need, flower, leaf, or grain,
Of their heal might be certain:
And laid it down upon the hearse
Where lay the queen, and began rehearse,
Echone to other that they had seen,
And taling thus the sede wex green,
And on the dry hearse began spring,
Which me thought a wondrous thing,
And after that flower and new seed,
Of which the people all took heed,
And said, it was some great miracle,
Or medicine fine more than triacle,
And were well done there to assay,
If it might ease in any way,
The corses, which with torch light,
They waked had there all that night,
Soon did the lords there consent,
And all the people thereto content,
With easy words and little fare,
And made the queens visage bare,
Which showed was to all about,
Wherefore in swoone fell whole the rout,
And were so sorry most and least,
That long of weping they not ceast,
For of their lord the remembrance,
Unto them was such displeasaunce,
That for to live they called a pain,
So were they very true and plain,
And after this the good abbess,
Of the grain began these and dress,
Three, with her fingers clean and small,
And in the queens mouth by tale,
One after other full easily,
She put and full conningly,
Which showed soon such virtue,
That preued was the medicine true,
For with a smiling countenance
The Queen vprose, and of vsaunce,
As she was wont to every wight,
She made good cheer, for which sight,
The people kneeling on the stones,
Thought they in heaven were soul and bones:
And to the prince where he lay,
They went to make the same assay,
And when the Queen it understood,
And how the medicine was good,
She prayed she might have the grains,
To releue him from the pains
Which she and he had both endured,
And to him went and so him cured,
That within a little space,
Lusty and fresh on live he was,
And in good hele, and hole of speech,
And lough, and said gramercy leech,
For which the joy throughout the town,
So great was that the bells sown
Afraied the people, a journay,
About the city every way,
And come and asked cause and why
They rongen were so stately?
And after that the queen, thabbesse
Made diligence or they would cesse,
Such, that of ladies soon a rout,
Sewing the queen was all about,
And called by name echone and told,
Was none forgetten young ne old,
There might men see joys new,
When the medicine fine and true,
Thus restored had every wight,
So well the queen as the knight,
Unto perfect joy and hele,
That fleting they were in such well
As folk that would in no wise,
Desire more perfect paradise.
And thus when passed was the sorrow,
With mikle joy soon on the morrow,
The king, the queen, and every lord,
With all the Ladies by one accord,
A general assembly
Great cry through the country,
The which after as their intent
Was turned to a Parliament,
Where was ordained and auised,
Every thing and devised,
That please might, to most and least,
And there concluded was the feast,
Within the isle to be hold
With full consent of young and old,
In the same wise as before,
As thing should be withouten more,
And shipped and thither went
And into strange Realms sent,
To kings, queens, and duchesses,
To diverse princes and princesses,
Of their lineage and can pray,
That it might like them at that day
Of marriage, for their sport,
Come see the isle, and them disport,
Where should be jousts and turnaies,
And arms done in other ways,
Signifying over all the day
After April within May,
And was auised that ladies tweine,
Of good estate and well beseine,
With certain knights and squiers,
And of the queens officers,
In manner of an embassade,
With certain letters closed and made,
Should take the barge and depart,
And seek my lady every part,
Till they her found for any thing,
Both charged have queen and king,
And as their lady and maistres,
Her to beseke of gentilnes,
At the day there for to been,
And often her recommaund the queen,
And prays for all loves to have,
For but she come all woll be wast,
And the feast, a business
Without joy or lustiness:
And took them tokens and good speed
Praid God send, after their need.
Forth went the ladies and the knights,
And were out fourteen days and nights,
And brought my lady in their barge,
And had well sped and done their charge:
Whereof the queen so heartily glad
Was, that in soth such joy she had,
When the ship approached land,
That she my lady on the sond
Met, and in arms so constrain,
That wonder was behold them twain,
Which to my dome during twelve hours,
Neither for heat ne watery shoures,
Departed not no company,
Saving themself but none them by,
But gave them laysour at their ease,
To rehearse joy and disease,
After the pleasure and courages,
Of their young and tender ages:
And after, with many a knight,
Brought were, where as for that night
They parted not, for to pleasaunce,
Content, was heart and countenance,
Both of the queen, and my maistresse,
This was that night their business:
And on the morrow with huge rout,
This prince of lords him about,
Come and to my Lady said,
That of her coming glad and well apaid
He was, and full commingly
Her thanked and full heartily,
And lough and smiled, and said ywis,
That was in doubt, in safety is:
And commanded do diligence,
And spare for neither gold ne spence,
But make ready, for on the morrow,
Wedded with saint John to borow,
He would be, withouten more,
And let them wite this lose and more.
The morrow come, and the service
Of marriage in such a wise
Said was, that with more honor,
Was never prince ne conqueror
Wedde, ne with such company,
Of gentilnesse in chiualry,
Ne of Ladies so great routs
Ne so beseen as all abouts
They were there, I certify
You on my life withouten lie.
And the feast hold was in tentis,
As to tell you mine intent is,
In a rome a large plain
Under a wood in a champaine,
Betwixt a river and a well,
Where never had abbay, ne sell
Ben, ne kirk, house, ne village,
In time of any man's age:
And dured three months the feast,
In one estate and never ceast,
From early the rising of the son,
Till the day spent was and yronne,
In justing, dancing, and lustiness,
And all that sowned to gentilnesse.
And as me thought the second morrow,
When ended was all old sorrow,
And in surety every wight
Had with his lady slept a night,
The Prince, the Queen, and all the rest,
Unto my lady made request,
And her besought often and prayed,
To mewards to be well apaied,
And consider mine old troth,
And on my pains have routh,
And me accept to her seruise,
In such form and in such wise,
That we both might be as one,
Thus prayed the Queen, and euerichone:
And for there should be no nay,
They stint justing all a day,
To pray my lady and requere,
Be content and out of fere,
And with good heart make friendly cheer,
And said it was a happy year:
At which she smiled and said ywis,
I trow well he my servant is,
And would my welfare as I trist,
So would I his, and would he wist
How and I knew that his troth
Continue would without sloth,
And be such as ye here report,
Restraining both courage and sport,
I couth consent at your request,
To be named of your fest,
And do after your vsaunce,
In obeying your pleasaunce,
At your request this I consent,
To please you in your intent,
And eke the sovereign above,
Commanded has me for to love,
And before other him prefer,
Against which Prince may be no were,
For his power over all reigns,
That other would for naught him paineth,
And since his will and yours is one,
Contrary in me shall be none,
Tho (as me thought) the promise
Of marriage before the mese,
Desired was of every wight,
To be made the same night,
To put away all manner douts
Of every wight thereabouts,
And so was do, and on the morrow,
When every thought and every sorrow
Dislodged was out of mine heart,
With every woe and every smert,
Unto a tent Prince and Princes,
Me thought, brought me and my maistres,
And said we were at full age
There to conclude our marriage,
With ladies, knights, and squiers,
And a great host of ministers,
With instruments and sounes diverse,
That long were here to rehearse,
Which tent was church perochiall,
Ordaint was in especial,
For the feast and for the sacre,
Where archbishop, and archdiacre
Song full out the seruise,
After the custom and the guise,
And the churches ordinance,
And after that to dine and dance
Brought were we, and to diverse plays,
And for our speed each with prays,
And merry was most and least,
And said amended was the feast,
And were right glad lady and lord,
Of the marriage and thaccord,
And wished us hearts pleasaunce,
Joy, hele, and continuance,
And to the minstrils made request,
That in increasing of the fest,
They would touch their cords,
And with some new joyeux accords,
Move the people to gladness,
And praiden of all gentilnesse,
Each to pain them for the day,
To show his cunning and his play,
Tho began sownes marvelous,
Entuned with accords joyous,
Round about all the tents,
With thousands of instruments,
That every wight to dance them pained,
To be merry was none that fained,
Which sown me troubled in my sleep,
That fro my bed forth I lepe,
VVening to be at the feast,
But when I woke all was seast,
For there nas lady ne creature,
Save on the walls old portraiture
Of horsemen, hawks, and hounds,
And hurt dear full of wounds,
Some like bitten, some hurt with shot,
And as my dream seemed that was not,
And when I wake, and knew the troth,
And ye had seen of very routh,
I trow ye would have wept a weke,
For never man yet half so seek,
I went escaped with the life,
And was for fault that sword ne knife
I find ne might my life tabridge,
De thing that kerued, ne had edge,
Wherewith I might my woeful pains
Have voided with bleeding of my vains,
Lo here my bliss, lo here my pain,
Which to my lady I do complain,
And grace and mercy her require,
To end my woe and busy fear,
And me accept to her seruise,
After her service in such auise,
That of my dream the substance
Might turn once to cognisaunce,
And cognisaunce to very preue,
By full consent, and good leave,
Or else without more I pray,
That this night, or it be day,
I mote unto my dream return,
And sleeping so forth aie sojourne
About the isle of pleasaunce,
Under my ladies obeisaunce,
In her service, and in such wise,
As it please her may to devise,
And grace ones to be accept,
Like as I dreamed when I slept,
And dure a thousand year and ten,
In her good will, Amen, Amen.
Fairest of fair, and goodliest on live,
All my secret to you I plain, and shriue,
Requiring grace and of complaint,
To be healed or martyred as a saint,
For by my troth I swear, and by this book,
Ye may both heal, and slay me with a look.
Go forth mine own true heart innocent,
And with humblesse, do thine obseruaunce,
And to thy lady on thy knees present
Thy service new, and think how great pleasance
It is to live under thobeisance
Of her that may with her looks soft
Give thee the bliss that thou desire often.
Be diligent, awake, obey, and dread,
And not too wild of thy countenance,
But meek and glad, and thy nature feed,
To do each thing yt may her pleasance,
When thou shall sleep, have aie in remembrance
Thimage of her which may with looks soft
Give thee the bliss that thou desire often.
And if so be that thou her name find
Written in book, or else upon wall,
Look that thou as servant true and kind,
Thine obeisaunce as she were therewithal,
Faining in love is breeding of a fall
From the grace of her, whose looks soft
May give the bliss that thou desire often.
Ye that this Ballade read shall,
I pray you keep you from the fall.
The Flower and the Leaf.
A Gentlewoman out of an Arbor in a Grove, sees a great company of Knights and
Ladies in a Dance upon the green Grass: the which being ended, they all kneel
down, and do honor to the Daisie, some to the Flower, and some to the Leaf.
Afterward this Gentlewoman learneth by one of these Ladies the meaning hereof,
which is this: They which honor the Flower, a thing fading with every blast,
are such as look after Beauty and worldly Pleasure. But they that honor the
Leaf, which abides with the Root, notwithstanding the Frosts and Winter
storms, are they which follow Virtue and during Qualities, without regard of
worldly Respects.
WHen that Phoebus his chair of gold so hie
Had whirled up the sterry sky aloft,
And in the Boole was entered certainly,
When shoures sweet of rain descended often,
Causing the ground feel times and often,
Up for to give many an wholesome air,
And every plain was clothed fair
With new green, and makes small flowers
To springen here and there in field and in mede,
So very good and wholesome be the shoures,
That it renueth that was old and deed,
In winter time, and out of every sede
Springs the herb, so that every wight
Of this season wexeth glad and light.
And I so glad of the season sweet,
Was happed thus upon a certain night,
As I lay in my bed, sleep full unmeet
Was unto me, but why that I ne might
Rest, I ne wist, for there nas earthly wight
As I suppose had more hearts ease
Than I, for I and sickness nor disease.
Wherefore I meruail greatly of my self,
That I so long withouten sleep lay,
And up I rose three hours after twelfe,
About the springing of the day,
And on I put my gear and mine array,
And to a pleasant grove I began pass,
Long or the bright son up risen was.
In which were Oaks great, straight as a line,
Under the which the grass so fresh of hew,
Was newly sprung, and an eight foot or nine
Every tree well fro his fellow grew,
With branches broad, lade with leaves new,
That sprongen out again the sun shene,
Some very red, and some a glad light grene.
Which as me thought was right a pleasant sight,
And eke the briddes song for to here,
Would have rejoiced any earthly wight,
And I that couth not yet in no manner
Hear the Nightingale of all the year,
Full busily herkened with heart and with ear,
If I her voice perceive coud any where.
And at the last a path of little bread
I found, that greatly had not used be,
For it forgrowne was with grass and weed,
That well uneath a wight might it se:
Thought I this path some whider goth parde,
And so I followed, till it me brought
To right a pleasant herber well ywrought,
That benched was, and with turfes new
Freshly turued, whereof the grene gras,
So small, so thick, so short, so fresh of hew,
That most like unto green well wot I it was,
The hegge also that yede in compass,
And closed in all the green herbere,
With sicamour was set and eglatere.
Wrethen in fere so well and cunningly,
That every branch and leaf grew by mesure,
Plain as a board, of an height by and by,
I see never thing I you ensure,
So well done, for he that took the cure
It to make ytrow, did all his peine
To make it pass all tho that men have seine.
And shapen was this herber roof and all
As a pretty parlour, and also
The hegge as thick as a castle wall,
That who that list without to stond or go,
Though he would all day prien to and fro,
He should not see if there were any wight
Within or no, but one within well might
Perceive all tho that yeden there without
In the field that was on every side
Covered with corn and grass, y^ out of doubt,
Though one would seek all the world wide,
So rich a field coud not be espide
On no coast, as of the quantity,
For of all good thing there was plenty.
And I that all this pleasant sight sie,
Thought suddenly I felt so sweet an air
Of the eglentere, that certainly
There is no heart I deem in such despair,
Ne with thoughts froward and contraire,
So ouerlaid, but it should soon have bote,
If it had ones felt this savor sote.
And as I stood and cast aside mine eye,
I was ware of the fairest Meddle tree
That ever yet in all my life I sie,
As full of blossoms as it might be,
Therein a goldfinch leaping pretile
Fro bough to bough, and as him list he eet
Here and there of buds and flowers sweet.
And to the herber side was joining
This fair tree, of which I have you told,
And at the last the brid began to sing,
When he had eaten what he eat would,
So passing sweetly, that by manifold
It was more pleasant than I coud devise,
And when his song was ended in this wise,
The Nightingale with so merry a note
Answered him, that all the wood rong
So suddenly, that as it were a sote,
I stood astonished, so was I with the song
Through ravished, that till late and long,
I ne wist in what place I was, ne where,
And again me thought she song even by mine ere.
Wherefore I waited about busily
On every side, if I her might see,
And at the last I began full well aspie
Where she sat in a fresh grene laurer tree,
On the further side even right by me,
That gave so passing a delicious smell,
According to the eglentere full well.
Whereof I had so inly great pleasure,
That as me thought I surely ravished was
Into Paradise, where my desire
Was for to be, and no ferther pass
As for that day, and on the sote grass
I sat me down, for as for mine intent,
The birds song was more convenient,
And more pleasant to me by manifold,
Than meat or drink, or any other thing,
Thereto the herber was so fresh and cold,
The wholesome favors eke so comforting,
That as I demed, since the beginning
Of the world was never seen or than
So pleasant a ground of none earthly man.
And as I sat the birds harkening thus,
Me thought that I heard voices suddenly,
The most sweetest and most delicious
That ever any wight I trow truly
Heard in their life, for the armony
And sweet accord was in so good music,
That the voice to Angels most was like.
At the last out of a grove even by,
That was right goodly and pleasant to sight,
I sie where there came singing lustily
A world of ladies, but to tell aright
Their great beauty, it lies not in my might,
Ne their array, nevertheless I shall
Tell you a part, though I speak not of all.
The surcotes white of velvet well sitting,
They were in clad, and the semes echone,
As it were a manner garnishing,
Was set with Emerauds one and one,
By and by, but many a rich stone
Was set on the purfles out of dout
Of colors, sleues, and trains round about.
As great pearls round and orient,
Diamonds fine and rubies red,
And many another stone, of which I went
The names now, and euerich on her head
A rich fret of gold, which without dread
Was full of stately rich stones set,
And every lady had a chapelet
On her head of fresh and green,
So well wrought, and so meruellously,
That it was a noble sight to seen,
Some of laurer, and some full pleasantly
Had chapelets of woodbind, and sadly
Some of Agnus castus were also
Chapelets fresh, but there were many of tho
That daunced and eke song full soberly,
But all they yede in manner of compace,
But one there yede in mid the company,
Soole by her self, but all followed the pace
That she kept, whose heavenly figured face
So pleasant was, and her well shape person,
That of beauty she past hem euerichone.
And more richly beseene by manifold
She was also in every manner thing,
On her head full pleasant to behold,
A crown of gold rich for any King,
A branch of Agnus castus eke bearing
In her hand, and to my sight truly,
She lady was of the company.
And she began a roundell lustely,
That Suse le foil, de vert moy, men call,
Seen and mon ioly cuer en dormy,
And then the company answered all,
With voice sweet entuned, and so small,
That me thought it the sweetest melody
That ever I heard in my life soothly.
And thus they came dancing and singing
Into the midst of the mede echone,
Before the herber where I was sitting,
And God wot me thought I was well bigone,
For then I might auise hem one by one,
Who fairest was, who coud best dance or sing,
Or who most womanly was in all thing.
They had not daunced but a little throw,
When that I heard not far off suddenly,
So great a noise of thundering trumps blow,
As though it should have departed the sky,
And after that within a while I sie,
From ye same grove where ye ladies come out,
Of men of arms coming such a rout,
As all the men on earth had been assembled
In that place, well horsed for the nones,
Stering so fast, that all the earth trembled:
But for to speak of riches and stones,
And men and horse I trow the large wones,
Of Pretir John ne all his tresory,
Might not uneath have boght ye tenth party.
Of their array who so list hear more,
I shall rehearse so as I can alite:
Out of the grove that I spoke of before,
I sie come first all in their clokes white,
A company that ware for their delight,
Chapelets fresh of oaks seriall,
Newly sprung, and trumpets they were all.
On every trumpe hanging a broad banere
Of fine Tartarium were full richely beat,
Every trumpet his lords arms here
About their necks with great pearls sete,
Collers broad for cost they would not let,
As it would seem for their schochones echone,
Were set about with many a precious stone.
Their horse harneis was all white also,
And after them next in one company,
Came kings of arms and no mo
In clokes of white cloth of gold richly,
Chapelets of green on their heads on hie,
The crowns yt they on their scochones bear,
Were set with pearl, ruby, and saphere.
And eke great Diamonds many one,
But all their horse harneis and other gear
Was in a suit according euerychone,
As ye have heard ye foresaid trumpets were,
And by seeming they were nothing to lere,
And there guiding, they did so manerly,
And after hem came a great company
Of herauds and purseuaunts eke,
Arrayed in clothes of white velvet,
And hardily they were no thing to seek,
How they on hem should the harneis set,
And every man had on a chapelet
Scochones and eke horse harneis indede,
They had in suit of hem that before hem yede.
Next after hem came in armor bright
All save their heads, seemly knights nine,
And every claspe and nail as to my sight
Of their harneis, were of red gold fine,
With cloth of gold, and furred with ermine
Were the trappors of their stedes strong,
Wide and large, that to the ground did hong.
And every bosse of bridle and paitrell
That they had, was worth as I would wene,
A thousand pound, and on their heads well
Dressed were crowns of laurer grene,
The best made that ever I had seen,
And every knight had after him riding
Three henshmen on him awaiting.
Of which every on a short tron^houn
His lords helm bare, so richly dight,
That the worst was worth the ransoun
Of a king, the second a shield bright
Bare at his neck, the thread bare upright
A mighty spear, full sharp ground and kene,
And every child ware of leaves grene
A fresh chapelet upon his hairs bright,
And clokes white of fine velvet they were,
Their steeds trapped and raied right
Without difference as their lords were,
And after hem on many a fresh corsere,
There came of armed knights such a rout,
That they besprad the large field about.
And all they ware after their degrees
Chaplets new made of laurer grene,
Some of oak, and some of other trees,
Some in their honds bare boughs shene,
Some of laurer, and some of oaks kene,
Some of hauthorne, and some of woodbind,
And many mo which I had not in mind.
And so they came their horses freshly stering
With bloody sownes of her trompes loud,
There sie I many an uncouth disguising
In the array of these knights proud,
And at the last as euenly as they coud,
They took their places in mids of the mede,
And every knight turned his horse head
To his fellow, and lightly laid a spear
In the rest, and so justes began
On every part about here and there,
Some brake his spear, some drew down horse and man,
About the field astray the steeds ran,
And to behold their rule and governance,
I you ensure it was a great pleasaunce.
And so the justs last an hour and more,
But tho that crowned were in laurer grene,
Wan the prise, their dints were so sore,
That there was none against hem might sustene,
And the justing all was left off clean,
And fro their horse the ninth alight anon,
And so did all the remnant euerichone.
And forth they yede togider twain and twain,
That to behold it was a worthy sight
Toward the ladies on the green plain,
That song and daunced as I said now right:
The ladies as soon as they goodly might,
They brake of both the song and dance,
And yede to meet hem with full glad semblance.
And every lady took full womanly
By the hond a knight, and forth they yede
Unto a fair laurer that stood fast by,
With leaves lade the boughs of great bread,
And to my dome there never was indede
Man, that had seen half so fair a tree,
For underneath there might it well have be
An hundred persons at their own plesance
Shadowed fro the heat of Phoebus bright,
So that they should have felt no greuance
Of rain ne hail that hem hurt might,
The savor eke rejoice would any wight,
That had be sick or melancolius,
It was so very good and virtuous.
And with great reverence they enclining low
To the tree so soot and fair of hew,
And after that within a little throw
They began to sing and dance of new,
Some song of love, some plaining of untrue,
Enuironning the tree that stood upright,
And ever yede a lady and a knight.
And at the last I cast mine eye aside,
And was wax of a lusty company
That came roming out of the field wide,
Hond in hond a knight and a lady,
The ladies all in surcotes, that richely
Purfiled were with many a rich stone,
And every knight of green ware mantles on.
Embrouded well so as the surcotes were,
And euerich had a chapelet on her head,
Which did right well upon the shining here,
Made of goodly flowers white and red,
The knights eke that they in hond led
In suit of hem ware chapelets euerychone,
And before hem went minstrels many one.
As Harpes, Pipes, Lutes, and Sautry
All in green, and on their heads bare
Of diverse flowers made full craftily
All in a suit goodly chapelets they ware,
And so dancing into the mede they fare,
In mid the which they found a tuft that was
All ouersprad with flowers in compass.
Whereto they inclined euerychone
With great reverence, and that full humbly,
And at the last there began anon
A lady for to sing right womanly
A Bargaret in praising the daisie,
For as me thought among her notes sweet,
She said Si douset and la Margarete.
Then they all answered her in fere,
So passingly well, and so pleasauntly,
That it was a blisful noise to here,
But I not it happed suddenly,
As about noone the son so fervently
Wax hot, that the pretty tender flowers
Had lost the beauty of her fresh colors.
For shronke with heat, the ladies eke to brent,
yt they ne wist where they hem might bestow,
The knights swelt for lack of shade nie shent,
And after that within a little throw,
The wind began so sturdily to blow,
That down goes all the flowers euerichone,
So that in all the mede there laft not one, leaves,
Save such as succored were among the
Fro every storm that might hem assail,
Growing under hedges and thick greues,
And after that there came a storm of hail,
And rain in fere, so that withouten fail,
The ladies ne the knights nade o thread
Dry on them, so dropping was her weed.
And when ye storm was clean passed away,
Tho in white that stood under the tree,
They felt nothing of the great affray,
That they in green without had in ybe,
To them they yede for routh and pite,
Them to comfort after their great disease,
So feign they were the helpless for to ease.
Then I was ware how one of hem in grene
Had on a crown rich and well sitting,
Wherefore I demed well she was a Queen,
And tho in green on her were awaiting,
The ladies then in white that were coming
Toward them, and the knights in fere
Began to comfort hem, and make hem chere.
The Queen in white, that was of great beauty,
Took by the hond the queen yt was in grene,
And said, suster, I have right great pity
Of your annoy, and of the troublous tene,
Wherein ye and your company have been
So long alas, and if that it you please
To go with me, I shall do you the ease,
In all the pleasure that I can or may,
Whereof the the other humbly as she might,
Thanked her, for in right ill array
She was with storm and heat I you behight,
And every lady then anon right
That were in white, one of them took in grene
By the hond, which when ye knights had seen,
In likewise each of them took a knight
Clad in green, and forth with hem they fare,
To an hegge, where they anon right
To make their justs they would not spare
Boughs to hew down, and eke trees square,
Wherewith they made hem stately fires great,
To dry their clothes y^ were wringing weat.
And after that of herbs that there grew,
They made for blisters of ye sun brenning,
Very good and wholesome ointments new,
Where yt they yede the sick fast anointing,
And after that they yede about gadering
Pleasant salades which they made hem eat,
For to refresh their great unkindly heat.
The lady of the Leaf then began to pray
Her of the Flower (for so to my seeming
They should be as by their array)
To soupe with her, and eke for any thing,
That she should with her all her people bring:
And she again in right goodly manner,
Thanketh her of her most friendly cheer,
Saying plainly that she would obey
With all her heart all her commandment,
And then anon without longer delay
The lady of the Leaf has one ysent
For a palfray, after her intent,
Arrayed well and fair in harneis of gold,
For nothing lacked, that to him long should.
And after that to all her company
She made to puruey horse and every thing
That they needed, and then full lustily,
Even by the herber where I was sitting
They passed all so pleasantly s^nging,
That it would have comforted any wight,
But then I sie a passing wonder sight.
For then the nightingale, that all the day
Had in the laurer sete, and did her might
The whole service to sing longing to May,
All suddenly began to take her flight,
And to the lady of the Leaf forthright
She flew, and set her on her hond softly,
Which was a thing I marueled of greatly.
The goldfinch eke, that fro the meddle tree
Was fled for heat into the bushes cold,
Unto the Lady of the Flower began flee,
And on her hond he set him as he would,
And pleasauntly his wings began to fold,
And for to sing they pained hem both as sore,
As they had do of all the day before.
And so these ladies rode forth a great pace,
And all the rout of knights eke in fere,
And I that had seen all this wonder case,
Thought I would assay in some manner,
To know fully the troth of this matere,
And what they were that rode so pleasantly,
And when they were the herber passed by,
I dressed me forth, and happed to mete anon
Right a fair Lady I you ensure,
And she come riding by her self alone,
All in white, with semblance full demure:
I saluted her, and bad her good adventure
Might her befall, as I coud most humbly,
And she answered, my daughter gramercy.
Madame (quoth. I) if that I durst enquere
Of you I would feign of that company
Wit what they be that past by this arbere,
And she again answered right friendly:
My fair daughter, all tho y^ passed here by
In white clothing, be servant euerichone
Unto the Leaf, and I my self am one.
See ye not her that crowned is (quoth. she)
All in white? Madame (quoth. I) yes:
That is Diane, goddess of chastity,
And for because that she a maiden is,
In her hond the branch she bears this,
That Agnus castus men call properly,
And all the ladies in her company
Which ye se of that herb chaplets wear,
Be such as han kept always her maidenheed:
And all they that of laurer chaplets bear,
Be such as hardy were and manly indeed,
Victorious name which never may be deed,
And all they were so worthy of their hond,
In her time that none might hem withstond.
And tho that wear chaplets on their head
Of fresh woodbind, be such as never were
To love untrue in word, thought, ne deed,
But aye steadfast, ne for pleasance ne fere,
Though that they should their herts all to tere,
Would never flit but ever were steadfast,
Till that their lives there asunder brast.
Now fair madame (quoth. I) yet I would pray,
Your ladyship if that it might be,
That I might know by some manner way,
Since that it has liked your beauty,
The troth of these Ladies for to tell me,
What that these knights be in rich armor,
And what tho be in grene and wear the flour?
And why that some did reverence to ye tree,
And some unto the plot of flowers fair:
With right good will my fair doghter (quoth. she)
Since your desire is good and debonaire,
Tho nine crowned be very exemplaire,
Of all honor longing to chiualry,
And those certain be called the nine worthy.
Which ye may see riding all before,
That in her time did many a noble deed,
And for their worthiness full often have bore
The crown of Laurer leaves on their head,
As ye may in your old books read,
And how that he that was a conqueror,
Had by laurer always his most honor.
And tho that bear bows in their hond
Of the precious laurer so notable,
Be such as were I woll ye understand,
Noble knights of the round table,
And eke the douseperis honorable,
Which they bear in sign of victory,
It is witness of their deeds mightily.
Eke there be knights old of the Garter,
That in her time did right worthily,
And the honor they did to the laurer,
Is for by they have their laud wholly,
Their triumph eke, and marshall glory,
Which unto them is more parfit richesse,
Than any wight imagine can or guess.
For one leaf given of that noble tree
To any wight that has done worthily,
And it be done so as it ought to be,
Is more honor than any thing earthly,
Witness of Rome that founder was truly
Of all knighthood and deeds marvelous,
Record I take of Titus Liuius.
And as for her that crowned is in green,
It is Flora, of these flowers goddess,
And all that here on her awaiting been,
It are such that loved idleness,
And not delight of no business,
But for to hunt and hawk, and pley in medes,
And many other such idle deeds.
And for the great delight and pleasaunce
They have to the Flower, and so reverently
They unto it do such obeisaunce,
As ye may see, now fair Madame (quoth. I)
If I durst ask what is the cause and why,
That knights have the sign of honor,
Rather by the Leaf than the Flour.
Soothly daughter (quoth. she) this is the troth,
For knights ever should be perseuering,
To seek honor without feintise or sloth,
Fro well to better in all manner thing,
In sign of which with leaves aye lasting,
They be rewarded after their degree,
Whose lusty green May, may not appaired be.
But aie keeping their beauty fresh and green,
For there nis storm that may hem deface,
Hail nor snow, wind nor frosts kene,
Wherefore they have this property and grace,
And for the Flower within a little space
Woll be lost, so simple of nature
They be, that they no greeuance may endure.
And every storm will blow them soon away,
Ne they last not but for a season,
That is the cause, the very troth to say,
That they may not by no way of reason
Be put to no such occupation,
Madame (quoth. I) with all mine whole seruise,
I thank you now in my most humble wise.
For now I am acertained thoroughly
Of every thing I desired to know,
I am right glad that I have said soothly
Ought to your pleasure if ye will me trow.
(Quoth. she again) but to whom do ye owe
Your service, and which will ye honor,
Tell me I pray, this year, ye Leaf or ye Flour.
Madame (quoth. I) though I least worthy,
Unto the Leaf I owe mine obseruaunce:
That is (quoth. she) right well done certainly,
And I pray God to honor you auaunce,
And keep you fro the wicked remembrance
Of male bouch, and all his cruelty,
And all that good and well conditioned be.
For here may I no longer now abide,
I must follow the great company
That ye may see yonder before you ride,
And forth as I couth most humbly,
I took my leave of her as she began hie,
After them as fast as ever she might,
And I drow homeward, for it was nigh night
And put all that I had seen in writing
Under support of them that lust it to read.
O little book, thou art so vnconning,
How dare thou put thy self in prees for dread,
It is wonder that thou wexest not read,
Since yt thou wost full lite who shall behold
Thy rude language, full boistously unfold.
Explicit.
Chaucers A. B. C. called La Priere de nostre Dame.
Chaucer's A. B. C. called La Priere de nostre Dame: made, as some say, at the
request of Blanch, Duchess of Lancaster, as a Prayer for her private use,
being a Woman in her Religion very devout.
A
ALmighty and all merciable Queen,
To whom all this world flees for succor,
To have release of sin, of sorrow, of tene,
Glorious Virgin of all flouris flour,
To thee I flee confounded in error,
Help and relieve almighty debonaire,
Have mercy of mine perilous langour,
Venquist me has my cruel aduersaire.
B
Bounty so fix has in my heart his tent,
That well I wot thou will my succor be,
Thou can not warn that with good intent,
Axith thine help, thine heart is aye so free:
Thou art largess of plain felicite,
Haven and refute of quiet and of rest,
Lo how that Theuis seven chasen me,
Help Lady bright, or that mine ship to breast.
C
Comfort is none, but in you Lady dear,
For lo mine sin and mine confusioun,
Which ought not in thine presence for to apere,
Han taken on me a grievous actioun,
Of very right and disperatioun,
And as by right they mighten well sustene,
That I were worthy mine damnatioun,
Nere mercy of you blisful Queen.
D
Dout is there none, Queen of misericord,
That thou nart cause of grace and mercy here,
God vouchedsafe through thee with us to accord:
For certis, Christ is blisful modir dear,
Were now the bow bent in swiche manner,
As it was first of justice and of ire,
The rightful God would of no mercy here:
But through thee han we grace as we desire.
E
Ever has mine hope of refute in thee be:
For here beforne full often in many a wise,
Unto mercy have thou received me,
But mercy Lady at the great assise,
When we shall come before the high Iustise,
So little freut shall then in me ben found,
That but thou or that day correct me,
Of very right mine werk will me confound.
F
Flying, I flee for succor to thine tent,
Me for to hide fro tempest full of dread,
Beseking you, that ye you not absent,
Though I be wick: O help yet at this need,
All have I been a beast in wit and deed,
Yet Lady thou me close in with thine own grace,
Thine enemy and mine, lady take heed,
Unto mine death in point is me to chase.
G
Gracious maid and modir, which that never
Were bitter nor in earth nor in see,
But full of sweetness and of mercy ever,
Help that mine fader be not wroth with me:
Speak thou, for I ne dare him not see,
So have I done in earth, alas the while,
That certes but if thou mine succor be,
To sink eterne he will mine ghost exile.
H
He vouchedefafe, tell him, as was his will,
Become a man as for our alliance,
And with his blood he wrote that blisfull bill
Upon the cross as general acquetaunce,
To every penitent in full criaunce:
And therefore Lady bright, thou for us prey,
Then shall thou stent all his greeuaunce,
And maken our foe to failen of his prey.
I
I wot well thou will been our succor,
Thou art so full of bounty in certain,
For when a soul falls in error,
Thine pity goes, and haleth him again,
Then make thou his peace which his souerain,
And bring him out of the crooked street:
Who so thee loves, shall not love in vain,
That shall he find, as he the life shall let.
K
Kalenderis enlumined been they,
That in this world been lighted with thine name,
And who so goith with thee the right wey,
Him that not dread in soul to been lame,
Now Queen of comfort, since thou art ye same,
To whom I seech for my medicine:
Let not mine fo no more mine woundentame,
Mine hele into thine hond all I resine.
L
Lady, thine sorrow can I not portrey
Under y^ cross, ne his grievous pennaunce:
But for your bothis peine, I you prey,
Let not our alder fo make his bostaunce,
That he has in his lestis with mischaunce,
Convict that, ye both han bought so dear:
As I said erst, thou ground of substance,
Continue on us thine pitous eyes clear.
M
Moses that saw the bosh of flambis read
Brenning, of which then never a sticke-brend,
Was sign of thine vnwemmed maidenhede,
Thou art the bosh, on which there can descend
The Holyghost, which that Moses weend
Had been on fire: and this was in figure.
Now Lady from the fire us defend,
Which that in hell eternally shall dure.
N
Noble princess, that never had pere,
Certes if any comfort in us be,
That comes of thee, Christis mother dear,
We han none other melody ne glee,
Us to rejoice in our aduersite,
Ne aduocat none, that will and dare so prey
For us, and that for as little hire as ye,
That helpen for an Auemary or twey.
O
O very light of eyes tho been blind,
O very lust of labor and distress,
O treasorere of bounty to mankind,
The whom God chese to mother for humblesse,
From his ancelle he made thee maistresse
Of heaven and earth, our bill up to bid,
This world awaiteth ever on thine goodness,
For thou ne failedest never wight at need.
P
Purpose I have sometime for to enquere,
Wherefore and why the holy ghost thee sought,
When Gabrielis voice come to thine ere,
He not to werre us swich a wonder wrought,
But for to save us, that sithen bought:
Then needs us no weapon us to save,
But only there we did not as us ought,
Do penitence, and mercy ask and have.
Q
Queen of comfort, right when I me bethink,
That I agilt have both him and thee,
And that mine soul is worthy for to sink:
Alas I caitife, wheder shall I flee,
Who shall unto thine son mine mean be?
Who but thine self, that art of pity well,
Thou have more routh on our adversity,
Than in this world might any tongue tell.
R
Redress me mother, and eke me chastise,
For certainly my faders chastising
Ne dare I not abiden in no wise,
So hideous is his full reckening,
Mother of whom our joy began to spring,
Be ye mine judge, and eke my souls leech,
For ever in you is pity abounding,
To each that of pity will you beseech.
S
Sooth is, he ne grants no pity
Without thee: for God of his goodness
Forgiueth none, but it like unto thee:
He has thee made ^icaire and maistresse
Of all this world, and eke gouerneresse
Of heaven: and represseth his justise
After thine will: and therefore in witness
He has thee crowned in so royal wise.
T
Temple devout, there God chese his wonning,
For which these misbeleeued deprived been,
To you mine soul penitent I bring,
Receive me, for I can no ferther fleen.
With thornis venomous, heaven Queen,
For which the earth accursed was full sore,
I am so wounded, as ye may well seen,
That I am lost almost, it smert so sore.
V
Virgin that art so noble of apparaile,
That leadest us into the high toure
Of Paradise, thou me wish and counsel,
How I may have thy grace and thy succor:
All have I been in filth and in error,
Lady on that country thou me adjourne,
That cleaped is thine bench of fresh flour,
There as that mercy ever shall sojourne.
X
Xpen thine son that in this world alight
Upon a cross to suffer his passioun,
And suffered eke that Longeus his heart pight,
And made his heart blood run adoun,
And all this was for my saluatioun:
And I to him am falls and eke unkind,
And yet he will not mine dompnatioun:
This thank I you, succor of all mankind.
Y
Ysaac was figure of his death certain,
That so far forth his fader would obey,
That him ne rought nothing for to be slain:
Right so thy son list a lamb to dey:
Now Lady full of mercy I you prey,
Since he his mercy sured me so large,
Be ye not scant, for all we sing or say,
That ye been fro vengeance aye our targe.
Z
Zachary you clepith the open well,
That wished sinful soul out of his guilt,
Therefore this lesson out I will to tell,
That nere thine tender heart, we were spilt.
Now Lady bright, since thou can and wilt
Been to the seed of Adam merciable,
Bring us to that paleis that is built
To penitentis, that been to mercy able.
Explicit.
Jack Upland.
In this Treatise is set forth the blind ignorance and variable Discord of the
Church^men, how rude and unskilful they were in Matters and Principles of our
Christian Institution. This is thought to be that Creed which the Pelican
speaks of in the Plowmans Tale, in these Words: Of Freers I have told before,
In a making of a Creed,
And yet I could tell worse and more,
But men would werrien it to read.

Jack Vpland make my moan to very God, and to all true in Christ, that
antichrist and his disciples (by color of holiness) walking and deceiving
Christ's Church by many false figures, wherethrough (by antichrist and his) many
virtues been transposed to vices.

But the felliest folk that ever Antichrist found, been last brought into the
church, and in a wonder wise, for they been of diverse sects of antichrist,
sown of diverse countries and kindredes. And all men known well, that they be
not obedient to bishops, ne legemen to kings: neither they tellen, ne sown,
weden, ne reapen wood, corn, ne grass, neither nothing that man should help;
but only themselves their lives to sustein. And these men han all manner power
of God, as they sein, in heaven and in earth, to sell heaven and hell to whom
that hem likes, and these wretches weet never where to been themselves.

And therefore (freer) if thine order and rules been grounded on Goddis law,
tell thou me Jack Vpland, that I ask of thee, and if thou be or think to be
on Christ's side, keep thy paciens.

SAnt Paul teaches, That all our deeds should be do in charity, and else it
is naught worth, but displeasing to God and harm to our own souls. And for
that freers challenge to be greatest clerks of the church, and next following
Christ in living: men should for charity ask them some questions, and pray
them to ground their answers in reason and holy writ, for else their answer
would naught be worth, be it flourished never so fair, and as me think men
might skilfully ask thus of a freer.

1 Freer, how many orders be in earth, and which is the perfectest order? Of
what order art thou? Who made thine order? What is thy rule? Is there any
perfecter rule than Christ himself made? If Christ's rule be most perfect, why
rulest thou thee not thereafter? Without more, why shall a freer be more
punished if he break the rule that his patron made, than if he break the hests
that God himself made?

2 Approoueth Christ any more religions than one, That S. James speaks of? If
he approves no more, why have thou left his rule, and take another? Why is a
freer apostata that leueth his order, and takes another sect, since there is
but one religion of Christ?

3 Why be ye wedded faster to your habits than a man is to his wife? For a man
may leave his wife for a year or two, as many men done: and if you leave your
habit a quarter of a year, ye should be holden apostataes.

4 Makes your habit you men of religion or no? If it do, then ever as it
wears, your religion wears, and after that your habit is better, your
religion is better, and when ye have liggen it beside, then lig ye your
religion beside you, and been apostataes: why buy ye you so precious clothes,
since no man seeks such, but for vain glory, as S. Gregory says.

What betokens your great hood, your scaplerie, your knotted girdle, and your
wide cope?

5 Why use ye all one color, more than other christian men do? What betokens
that ye been clothed all in one manner clothing?

If ye say it betokens love and charity, certes then ye be often hypocrites,
when any of you hates another, and in that that ye wol be said holy by your
clothing.

Why may not a freer wear clothing of another sect of freers, since holiness
stondeth not in the cloths?

6 Why hold ye silence in one house more than another, since men ought over all
to speak the good and leave the evil?

Why eat you flesh in one house more than in another, if your rule and your
order be perfect, and the patron that made it?

7 Why get ye your dispensations to have it more easy? Certes, either it
seems that ye be imperfect, or he that made it, so hard, that ye may not hold
it. And siker, if ye hold not the rule of your patrons, ye be not then her
freers, and so ye lie upon your selves.

8 Why make you as deed men, when ye be professed, and yet ye be not deed, but
more quick beggars than you were before? and it seems evil a deed man to go
about and beg.

9 Why will ye not suffer your nouises hear your councels in your chapter
house, ere that they have been professed, if your councels been true, and after
Gods law?

10 Why make ye you so costly houses to dwell in? since Christ did not so, and
deed men should have but graves, as falls it to deed men, and yet ye have
more courts than many lords of England: for ye now wenden through the realm,
and each night will lig in your own courts, and so mow but right few lords do.

11 Why heir you to ferme your limitors, giving therefore each year a certain
rent, and will not suffer one in another limitation, right as ye were your
selves lords of countries?

Why be ye not under your bishops visitations, and seegemen to our king?

Why ask ye no letters of bretherheads of other men's prayers, as ye desire
that other men should ask letters of you?

If your letters be good, why grant ye them not generally to all manner of men
for the more charity?

12 Mow ye make any man more perfect brether for your prayers, than God has
by our believe? by our baptism and his own grant? if ye mow, certes then ye
be above God.

Why make ye men believe that your golden trentall sung of you, to take
therefore ten shillings, or at least five shillings, woll bring souls out of
hell, or out of purgatory? if this be sooth, certes ye might bring all souls
out of pain, and that woll ye naught, and then ye be out of charity.

13 Why make ye men believe, that he that is buried in your habit, shall never
come in hell, and ye weet not of your self whether ye shall to hell or no? and
if this were sooth, ye should sell your high houses to make many habites for to
save many men's souls.

14 Why steal ye men's children for to make hem of your sect, since that theft is
against Gods hests, and since your sect is not perfect? ye know not whether the
rule that ye bind him to, be best for him or worst.

15 Why vnderneme ye not your brethren for their trespass after the law of the
Gospel, since that vnderneming is the best that may be? but ye put them in
prison often, when they do after Gods law, and by S. Augustines rule: If any do
amiss, and would not amend him, ye should put him from you.

16 Why coueit ye shrift, and burying of other men's parishens, and none other
sacrament that falls to christian folk?

Why busy ye not to hear to shrift of poor folk, as well as of rich lords
and ladies, since they mow have more plenty of shrift fathers than poor folk
mow?

Why say ye not the gospel in houses of bedred men, as ye do in rich men's, that
mow go to church and hear the gospel?

Why covet you not to bury poor folk among you? since that they been most holy,
(as ye saine that ye been for your poverty?)

17 Why will ye not be at her diriges as ye have been at rich men's? since God
praises hem more than he does other men.

What is thy prayer worth? since thou will take therefore, for all chapmen ye
need to be most wise for dread of simony.

What cause have thou, that thou will not preach the gospel, as God says that
thou should? since it is the best lore and also our believe.

Why be ye evil apaid that secular priests should preach the gospel? since
God himself has bodden hem.

18 Why hate ye the gospel to be preached, since ye be so much hold thereto?
for ye win more by year with In principio, than with all the rules that ever
your patrones made, and in this minstrels been better than ye, for they
contrarien not to the mirths that they maken, but ye contrarien the gospel
both in word and deed.

19 Freer, when thou receiuest a penny for to say a mass, whether sellest thou
Gods body for that penny, or thy prayer, or else thy travel? if thou say thou
wolt not travel for to say the mass, but for the penny, that certes if this be
sooth, then thou love too little meed for thy soul: and if thou sellest Gods
body, other thy prayer, then it is very simony, and art become a chapman worse
than Judas, that sold it for thirty pence.

20 Why writest thou her names in thy tables that yeueth thee money? since God
knows all thing: for it seems by thy writing, that God would not reward him,
but thou writest in thy tables, God would else forgotten it.

Why bear thou God in hand and slanderest him that he begged for his meat?
since he was Lord over all, for then had he been unwise to have begged, and have
no need thereto.

Freer, after what law rulest thou thee? where find thou in Gods law that
thou should thus beg?

21 What manner men needs for to beg?

For whom owes such men to beg?

Why beggest thou so for thy brethren?

If thou say, for they have need, then thou do it for the more perfection,
or else for the least, or else for the mean. If it be the most perfection of
all, then should all thy brethren do so, and then no man needed to beg but for
himself, for so should no man beg but him needed. And if it be the least
perfection, why love thou then other men more than thy self? For so thou art
not well in charity, since thou should seek the more perfection after thy
power, living thy self most after God. And thus leaving that imperfection, thou
should not so beg for them. And if it is a good mean thus to beg as thou
do, then should no man do so, but they been in this good mean, and yet such a
mean granted to you may never be grounded on Gods law, for then both lerid and
leaud that been in mean degree of this world, should go about and beg as ye do.
And if all should do so, certes well nigh all the world should go about and beg
as ye done, and so should there be ten beggars against one yeuer.

Why procurest thou men to give thee their alms, and say it is so needful,
and thou will not thy self win thee that meed?

22 Why will thou not beg for poor bedred men, that been poorer than any of
your sect, that liggen and mow not go about to help himselfes, since we be all
brethren in God, and that bretherhed passes any other that ye or any man could
make, and where most need were, there were most perfection, either else ye hold
them not your pure brethren, but worse, but then ye be imperfect in your
begging?

Why make ye so many masters among you, since it is against the teaching of
Christ and his Apostles?

23 Whose been all your rich courts that ye han, and all your rich jewels?
since ye seen that ye han naught ne in proper ne in common. If ye saine they
been the Popes, why gather ye then of poor men and lords so much out of the
kings hand to make your pope rich? And since ye sain that it is great perfection
to have naught in proper be in common, why be ye so fast about to make the
pope, that is your father, rich, and put on him imperfection? sithen ye saine
that your goods been all his, and he should by reason be the most perfect man,
it seems openlich that ye been cursed children so to slander your father, and
make him imperfect. And if ye saine that the goods be yours, then do ye against
your rule; and if it be not against your rule, then might ye have both plough
and cart, and labor as other good men done, and not so to beg by losengery,
and idle as ye done. If ye say that it is more perfection to beg, than to
travel or to worch with your hand, why preach ye not openly, and teach all men
to do so? since it is the best and most perfect life to ye help of their souls,
as ye make children to beg ye might have been rich heirs.

Why make ye not your feasts to poor men, and yeueth hem yefts, as ye done to
the rich? since poor men han more need than the rich?

What betokens that ye go tweine and tweine together? if ye be out of
charity, ye accord not in soul.

Why beg ye and take salaries thereto more than other priests? since he that most
takes, most charge has.

24 Why hold ye not S. Francis rule and his testament? since Francis says, that
God showed him this living and this rule: and certes if it were Gods will, the
Pope might not fordo it: or else Francis was a lier, that said in this wise.
And but this testament that he made, accord with Gods will, or else erred: he is
a lier that were out of charity: and as the law says, he is accursed that
lets the rightful last will of a dead man. And this testament is the last
will of Francis that is a dead man, it seems therefore that all his freers
been cursed.

25 Why will ye not touch no coined money with the cross, ne with the kings
head, as ye done other jewels both of gold and silver? certes if ye despise the
cross or the kings head, then ye be worthy to be despised of God and the king:
and since ye will receive money in your hearts, and not with your hands, and it
seems that ye hold more holiness in your hands than in your hearts, and
then be false to God.

26 Why have ye exempt you from our kings laws, and visiting of our bishops
more than other christen men that liuen in this realm, if ye be not guilty of
traitorie to our realm, or trespassers to your bishops? But ye will have the
kings laws for the trespass do to you, and ye will have power of other
bishops more than other priests, and also have leave to prison your brethren as
lords in your courts more than other folks han that been the kings leegemen.

27 Why shall some sect of you freers pay each a year a certain to her
general prouincial or minister, or else to her souereines: but if he steal a
certain number of children (as some men saine) and certes if this ben sooth,
then ye be constreined upon certain pain to do theft against Gods
commandment, Non furtum facies.

28 Why be ye so hardy to grant by letters of fraternity to men and women,
that they shall have part and merit of all your good deeds, and ye weten never
whether God be apayed with your deeds because of your sin? Also ye witten
never whether that man or woman be in state to be saved or damned, then shall
he have no merit in heaven for his own deeds ne for none other man's. And all
were it so, that he should have part of your good deeds: yet should he have no
more than God would give him after that he were worthy, and so much shall each
man have of Gods yeft without your limitation. But if ye will say that ye been
Gods fellows, and that he may not do without your assent, then be ye
blasphemers to God.

29 What betokens that ye have ordained, that when such one as ye have made
your brother or sister, and has a letter of your seal, that letter might be
brought in your holy chapter, and there be rad, or else ye will not pray for
him. And but ye willen pray especially for all other that were not made your
brethren or sistren, then were ye not in right charity, for that ought to be
commen, and namely in ghostly things.

30 Freer, what charity is this, to ouercharge the people by mighty begging,
under color of preaching or praying, or masses singing? Since holy write
bids not thus, but even the contrary: for all such ghostly deeds should be
done freely, as God yeueth them freely?

31 Freer, what charity is this, to beguile children or they commen to
discretion, and bind hem to your orders, ye ben not grounded in Gods law,
against her friends will? Sithen by this folly been many apostataes, both in
will and deed, and many been apostataes in her will during all her life, that
would gladly be discharged, if they wist how, and so many ben apostataes, that
shoulden in other states have been true men.

32 Freer, what charity is this, to make so many freers in every country to
the charge of the people? since parsons and vicars alone, ye secular priests
alone, ye monks and cannons alone, with bishops above them, were enough to the
church to do ye priests office. And to add more than enough, is a foul
error, and great charge to the people, and this openly against Gods will, that
ordained all things to be done in weight, number, and measure. And Christ
himself was apaied with twelve apostles and a few disciples, to preach and do
priests office to all the whole world, then was it better do than is now at
this time by a thousand dele. And right so as four fingers with a thombe in a
man's hand, helps a man to worch, and double number of fingers in one hand
should let him more, and so the more number that there were passing the measure
of Gods ordinance, the more were a man let to worch: right so (as it
seems) it is of these new orders that been added to the church, without ground
of holy write and Gods ordinance.

33 Freer, what charity is this, to the people to lie, and say that ye follow
Christ in poverty more than other men done? and yet in curious and costly
housing, and fine and precious clothing, and delicious and liking feeding, and
in treasure and jewels, and rich ornaments, freers passen lords and other rich
worldly men, and soonest they should bring her cause about (be it never so
costly) though Gods law be put aback.

34 Freer, what charity is this, to gather up the books of holy write, and put
hem in tresorie, and so emprison them from secular priests and curats, and by
this cautel let hem to preach the gospel freely to the people without worldly
meed, and also to defame good priests of heresy, and lien on hem openly for to
let hem to show Gods law by the holy gospel to the christian people?

35 Freer, what charity is this, to feign so much holiness in your bodily
clothing (that ye clepe your habit) that many blind fools desiren to die
therein more than in another? and also that a freer that leueth his habit late
founden of men, may not be assoiled till he take again, but is apostata as ye
saine, and cursed of God and man both? The freer believes truth, and patience,
chastity, meekness and sobriety, yet for the more part of his life he may soon
be assoiled of his prior, and if he bring home to his house much good by the
year (be it never so falsely begged and pilled of the poor and needy people
in countries about) he shall behold a noble freer, O Lord whether this be
charity?

36 Freer, what charity is this, to prease upon a rich man, and to entice him
to be buried among you from his parish church, and to such rich men give
letters of fraternity confirmed by your general seal, and thereby to bear him
in hand that he shall have part of all your masses, mattens, preachings,
fastings, wakings, and all other good deeds done by your brethren of your order
(both whilst he lives, and after that he is dead) and yet he witten never
whether your deeds be acceptable to God, ne whether that man that has that
letter be able by good living to receive any part of your deeds, and yet a
poor man (that ye wite well or supposen in certain to have no good of) ye ne
given to such letters, though he be a better man to God than such a rich man:
nevertheless, this poor man does not retch thereof. For as men supposen, such
letters and many other that freers behoten to men, be full false deceits of
freers, out of all reason, and Gods law and Christian men's faith.

37 Freer, what charity is this, to be confessors of lords and ladies, and to
other mighty men, and not amend hem in her living? but rather as it seems, to
be the bolder to pill her poor tenants and to live in lechery, and there to
dwell in your office of confessor for winning of worldly goods, and to be hold
great by color of such ghostly offices? this seems rather pride of freeres,
than charity of God.

38 Freer, what charity is this, to sain that who so lives after your order,
lives most perfectly, and next follows the state of Apostles in poverty and
penance, and yet the wisest and greatest clerks of you wend or send, or procure
to the court of Rome to be made cardinals or bishops of the popes chaplens, and
to be assoiled of the vow of poverty and obedience to your ministers, in the
which (as ye sain) stands most perfection and merit of your orders, and thus
ye faren as Pharisees that sain one and do an other to the contrary.

Why name ye more the patron of your order in your Confiteor when ye begin
mass, than other Saints, Apostles, or Martyrs, that holy church hold more
glorious than hem, and clepe hem your patrons and your auowries?

Freer, whether was S. Francis in making of his rule that he set thine order
in, a fool and a liar, or else wise and true? If ye sain that he was not a
fool, but wise: ne a liar, but true: why show you contrary by your doing, when
by your suggestion to the Pope ye said, that your rule that Francis made was so
hard, that ye mow not live to hold it without declaration and dispensation of
the pope, and so by your deed? Ne let your patron a fool that made a rule so
hard that no man may well keep, and eke your deed proves him a liar, where
he says in his rule, that he took and learned it of the Holy Ghost. For how
might ye for shame pray the pope undo that the holy Ghost bit, as when ye
prayed him to dispense with the hardness of your order?

Freer, which of the four orders of friars is best to a man that knows not
which is the best, but would feign enter into the best, and none other? If thou
say that thine is the best, then say thou that none of the other is as
good as thine, and in this each freer in the three other orders wool say that
thou lie, for in the self-same manner each other freer wool say that his order
is best. And thus to each of the four orders bin the other three contrary in
this point: in the which if any say sooth, that is one alone, for there may but
one be the best of four. So follows it, that if each of these orders answered
to this question as thou do, three were false, and but one true, and yet no
man should wite who that were. And thus it seems, that the most part of
freers bin or should be liars in this point, and they should answer thereto.
If you say that another order of the freers is better than thine, or as good;
why took ye not rather thereto as to the better, when thou might have chose
at the beginning? And eke why should thou be an apostata to leave thine order
and take thee to that is better, and so why go thou not from thine order
into that?

Freer, is there any perfecter rule of religion than Christ Godds son gave in
his gospel to his brethren? Or than that religion that S. James in his epistle
makes mention of? If you say yes, then put thou on Christ (that is the
wisdom of God the father) vnkunning, vnpower, or evil will: for then he
could not make his rule so good as an other did his. And so he had be
vnkunning, that he might not so make his rule so good as an other man might,
and so were he vnmighty, and not God, as he would not make his rule so perfect
as an other did his, and so he had bin evil willed, namely to himself.

For if he might and could, and would have made a rule perfect without default,
and did not, he was not Gods son almighty. For if any other rule be
perfecter, than Christ's, then must Christ's rule lack of that perfection by
as much as the other weren more perfecter, and so were default, and Christ had
failed in making of his rule: but to put any default or failing in God, is
blasphemy. If thou say that Christ's rule, and that religion which S. James
makes mention of, is perfectest; why hold thou not thilke rule without
more? And why clepest thou the rather of S. Francis or S. Dominiks rule or
religion or order, than of Christ's rule or Christ's order?

Freer, can thou any default or assign in Christ's rule of the gospel (with
the which he taught all men likerly to be saved) if they kept it to her ending?
If thou say it was too hard, then say thou Christ lied; for he said of his
rule: My yoke is soft, and my burden light. If thou say Christ's rule was too
light, that may be assigned for no default, for the better it may be kept. If
thou say that there is no default in Christ's rule of the Gospel, since
Christ himself says it is light and easy: what need was it to patrons of
freers to add more thereto? and so to make an harder religion to save freers,
than was the religion of Christ's apostles and his disciples helden and were
saved by. But if they woulden that her freers saten above the apostles in
heaven for the harder religion that they keepen here, so would they sitten in
heaven above Christ himself, for their more and strict observations, then so
should they be better than Christ himself with mischance.

Go now forth and fraine your clerks, and ground ye you in Gods law, and gif
Jack an answer, and when ye han assoiled me that I have said sadly in truth, I
shall soil thee of thine orders, and save thee to heaven.

If freers kun not or mow not excuse hem of these questions asked of hem, it
seems that they be horrible gilty against God, and her even christian; for
which gilts and defaults it were worthy that the order that they call their
order were fordone. And it is wonder that men sustain hem or suffer her live
in such manner. For holy write bids that thou do well to the meek, and give
not to the wicked, but forbed to give hem bread, least they be made thereby
mightier through you.

Chaucer's Words unto his own Scrivener.
ADam Scriuener if ever it thee befall,
Boece or Troiles for to write new,
Under thy long locks thou may have the scall,
But after my making thou write more true,
So often a day I mote thy work renew,
It to correct and eke to rub and scrape,
And all is through thy negligence and rape.
Et sic est finis.
Thus Ends the Works of Geffrey Chaucer.
THE Story of THEBES, Compiled by John Lidgate, Monk of Bury.
The Prologue to the Story of THEBES.
WHen bright Phoebus passed was the Ram
Midde of April, and into the Bull came,
And Saturn old, with his frosty face,
In Virgin taken had his place,
Melancolike, and slough of motion,
And was also in the opposition
Of Lucina the Moon, moist and pale,
That many shoure fro heaven made avail,
When Aurora was in the morrow read,
And Jupiter in the Crabs hedde
Has take his paleis and his mansion,
The lusty time, and joly fresh season,
When that Flora the noble mighty queen
The so^le has clad in new tender green,
With her flowers craftily meint,
Branch and bough with red and white depeint,
Fleeting the Baume on hills and on vales,
The time in sooth, when Canterbury tales,
Complet and told at many a sundry stage
Of estates in the pilgrimage,
Eueriche man like to his degree,
Some of disport, some of morality,
Some of knighthood, love, and gentillesse,
And some also of parfite holiness,
And some also, in sooth of ribaudry,
To make laughter in the company,
Each admitted, for none would other grieve,
Like as the Cook, the Miller, and the Reave,
Aquite hemselfe, shortly to conclude
Boistously in her terms rude,
When they hadden well dronken of the boll,
And eke also with his pilled noll,
The Pardoner beardlesse all his chin,
Glasie eyes, and face of Cherubin,
Telling a tale, to anger with the Friar,
As openly the story can you lere
Word by word, with every circumstance,
Echone ywrit, and put in remembrance,
By him that was, if I shall not feign,
Flower of Poets, throughout all Bretaine,
Which soothly had most of excellence
In Rhetorike, and in eloquence,
Read his making, who list the troth find,
Which never shall appallen in my mind,
But always fresh been in mine memory,
To whom be you prise, honor, and glory
Of well seeing, first in our language,
Cheef Registrer in this pilgrimage,
All that was told, foryeting naught at all,
Feined tales, nor thing historiall,
With many Proverbs diverse and uncouth,
By rehearsaile of his sugared mouth,
Of each thing keeping in substance
The sentence hole, without variaunce,
Voiding the chafe, soothly for to saine,
Enlumining the true piked greine,
By crafty writing of his sawes sweet,
Fro the time that they did mete.
First the Pilgrims soothly euerychone,
At Tabarde assembled one by one,
And fro Southwerke, soothly for to sey,
To Canterbury riding on her wey,
Telling a tale, as I rehearse can,
Liche as the host assigned every man,
None so hardy, his bidding disobey,
And thus while that the pilgrims ley
At Canterbury, well lodged one and all,
I not in sooth what I may it call,
Hap or Fortune, in conclusioun,
That me befell, to enter into the town,
The holy saint plainly to visit,
After my sickness vows to acquit,
In a Cope of black, and not of grene,
On a palfray, slender, long, and lene,
With rusty bridle, made not for the sale,
My man toforne, with a void male,
That of Fortune took mine Inn anon,
Where y^ pilgrims were lodged euerychone,
The same time her governor the host,
Stonding in hall, full of wind and bost,
Liche to a man wonder stern and fers,
Which spoke to me, and said anon dan Pers,
Dan Dominike, dan Godfray, or Clement,
Ye be welcome newly into Kent,
Though your bridle have another boos ne bell,
Beseeching you, that ye will tell
First of your name, and what country,
Without more, shortly that ye be,
That look so pale, all deuoid of blood,
Upon your head a wonder thredbare hood,
Well arrayed for to ride late?
I answered, my name was Lidgate,
Monk of Bury, nie fifty year of age,
Come to this town to do my pilgrimage,
As I have hight, I have thereof no shame.
Dan John (quoth. he well brouke ye your name,
Though ye be sole, beeth right glad and light,
Praying you to soupe with us this night,
And ye shall have made at your deuis
A great pudding, or a round hagis,
A franche moile, a tanse, or a froise,
To been a Monk, slender is your coise,
Ye have been sick, I dare mine head assure,
Or let feed in a faint pasture,
Lift up your head, be glad, take no sorrow,
And ye should home ride with us to morrow,
I say, when ye rested have your fill,
After supper sleep will done none ill,
Wrap well your head clothes round about,
Strong nottie ale will make you to rout,
Take a pillow, that ye lie not low,
If need be, spare not to blow,
To hold wind, by mine opinion,
Will engender Colles passion,
And make men to greuen on her rops,
When they have filled her maws and her crops,
But toward night eat some Fennel read,
Annis, Commin, or Coriander sede,
And like as I power have and might,
I charge you rise not at midnight,
Though it so be the Moon shine clear,
I will my self be your Orlogere
To morrow early when I see my time,
For we will forth parcel before prime,
Accompany parde shall do you good,
What look up Monk, for by Cocks blood
Thou shall be merry, who so that say nay,
For to morrow anon as it is day,
And that it ginne in the East to daw,
Thou shall be bound to a new law,
At going out of Canterbury town,
And lien aside thy professioun,
Thou shall not chese, nor thy self withdraw,
If any mirth be found in thy maw,
Like the custom of this company,
For none so proud, that dare me deny,
Knight nor knave, Chanon, Priest, ne Nonne
To tell a tale plainly as they conne,
When I assign, and see time oportune,
And for that we our purpose woll contune,
We will homeward the same custom use,
And thou shall not plainly thee excuse:
Be now well ware, study well to night,
But for all this, be of heart light,
Thy wit shall be the sharper and the bet.
And we anon were to supper set,
And served well unto our pleasance,
And soon after by good governance,
Unto bed goes every manner wight,
And toward morrow, as soon as it was light,
Every pilgrim, both bet and wors,
As bad our host, took anon his horse,
When the Sun rose in the East full clear,
Fully in purpose to come to dinere
Unto Ospring, and break there our fast.
And when we werne fro Canterbury past,
Naught the space of a bow draught,
Our host in have has my bridle raught,
And to me said, as it were in game,
Come forth dan John, by your christen name,
And let us make some manner mirth or play,
* Shete your ports a twenty devil way,
Is no disport so to patere and say,
It woll make your lips wonder dray,
Tell some tale, and make thereof a jape,
For by my Rouncie thou shall it not escape,
But preach not of none holiness,
Ginne some tale of mirth or of gladness,
And nodde not with thine heavy beck,
Tell us some thing that draws to effect,
Only of joy make no longer let.
And when I saw it would be no bet,
I obeyed unto his bidding,
So as the law me bound in all thing,
And as I coud, with a pale cheer,
My tale I began anon, as ye shall hear.
Finitur Prologus de Thebes. Et sequitur quoque pars prima libri.
Here begins the History of the Destruction of the City of THEBES.
SIrs (quoth. I) since of your courtesy
I entered am into your company,
And admitted a tale for to tell,
By him that has power to compel,
I mean our host, governor and guide
Of you echone riding here beside:
Though that my wit barrain be and dull,
I will rehearse a story wonderful,
Touching the siege and destruction
Of worthy Thebes, the mighty royal town,
Built and begone of old antiquity,
Upon the time of worthy Iosue,
By diligence of king Amphion,
Chief cause first of his foundation,
For which his fame, which never shall away,
In honor floureth yet unto this day,
And in story remembered is and preised,
But how the walls were on height reised,
It is wonder and marvel for to here,
But if you list, I shall you platly lere
The manner hole, platly in sentence,
Under support of your patience,
As write mine author, and Bochas both two,
Read her books, and ye shall find it so,
How this king, this prudent Amphion,
With his sweetness and melodious soun,
The city built, that whylome was so strong,
By Armonie of his sweet song,
And virtue only of the werbles sharp
That he made in Mercuries Harp,
Of which the strengs were not touched soft,
Whereby the walls reised were aloft,
Without craft of any man's hand,
Full yore ago, midde of Greeks land,
Which is a thing of Poets told,
Never yseine another of young nor old,
But as Bocchas list to specify,
Clear expouning this dark Poesy,
Since Mercury, god of eloquence,
Yafe by the might of heavenly influence,
Unto this King, at his Nativite,
Through glad aspects, that he should be
Most excellent, by craft of Rhetorike,
That in this world was none to him like,
Which signifies, to hem that been prudent,
The Musical, the lusty instrument,
I mean the harp most melodious,
Yove to this King by Mercurious,
And his song, this author can you teach,
Was nothing but the crafty speech
Of this King, ycalled Amphion,
Whereby he made the Countries environ
To have such lust in his words sweet,
That were so pleasant, favorable, and meet
In her ears, that shortly there was none
Disobeisaunt with the King to gone,
Wheresoever that him list to assign:
His chere, his port was eft so benign,
That through his stering and exhortatioun
With him they went first to build this town,
And forsook each man his country,
By one assent to make this city
Royal and rich, that liche was none,
And thus the walls, made of lime and stone,
Were reised first by singing of this king,
Liche as Poets feine in her writing,
Passing rich, and royal of entaile,
Here may ye see how much may avail
The goodlihede, and the lowliness of a king,
And specially in cheer and in speaking
To his lieges, and to bearen him fair
In his apport, and show him debonaire,
And not to been to strange ne solein,
In countenance outward, ne disdein,
Which causes often, who that can advert,
Great hatred in the peoples heart,
And thereupon prively woll rowne,
When a Prince does upon hem frown,
Shortly deem for all his excellence,
Among hemselfe out of his presence,
Everiche conclude liche his fantasy,
And thus full often gendred is envy
In folks hearts, of soleinte and pride,
For such as list not ones to look aside,
To reward hem when they low loute,
* And again kind it is out of doubt,
That any head, by record of the wise,
Should the foot of disdain despise,
Which bears him up, who so can take heed,
And susteineth in his most need,
As his pillar, and his supportaile:
* For finally, ne were the pooraile
Her bearer up, and supportation,
Farewell Lordship and domination,
Throughout the Land, of every high estate:
Wherefore me seems, more is fortunate
Of Mercury, the soote sugared Harp,
Than Mars swerd whetted kene and sharp,
More accepted, with aspects good,
Than is this God, with his looks wood:
What the goodlihead of a Prince avails, to win the hearts of his People.
* For humble speech, with glad countenance
May a Prince soothly advance,
Among his people hearts for to win
Of inward love, which will not twin,
Than gold, richesse, pride, or tyranny,
Other disdain, danger, or surquedy,
For of lords, clerks can report,
But that love her crown do support,
The fine is not, in conclusion,
I take record of King Amphion,
Example good of King Amphion.
That built Thebes, by his eloquence,
More than of pride, or of violence,
Noble and rich, that like was no where none,
And thus the walls made of lime and stone,
Were reised first by singing of this king,
Like as Poets feinen in her writing.
How, after the opinion of some Authors, King Cadmus built first the city of
Thebes.
But soothly yet, some expositours
Grounding hem upon old authors,
Saine, that Cadmus, the famous old man,
Full long before the city first began,
And the ground of building set,
And the bounds by compass out met,
With thongs out kerue of a Bulls side,
Which enuiron, stretch might wide,
To get in land a full large space,
VVhereupon to build a dwelling place
How the Country of Boece took first its name of a Bulls skin, and after called
Thebes. And how King Cadmus was exiled out of Thebes, by Prowess of King
Amphion.
And called was the soil thus getten in,
VVhylome Boece, of the Bulls skin,
The name after into Thebes turned:
But Cadmus has not there long sojourned,
Like in story as it is compiled,
For shortly, he fro thence was exiled,
Never after for to dwell in the town,
By the knighthood of this Amphioun,
Which up perfourmeth, rich for the nones,
The city Thebes, of mighty square stones,
As I you told a lite heretoforne,
And Cadmus thus his kingdom has lorne,
Scepter and crown, and his power royal,
Now have I told unto you ground of all,
That ye well know by information
Clearly the pith and the exposition
Of this matter, as clerks can you tell,
It were but vain longer for to dwell,
To tarry you on this mattere,
Since my tale, which that ye shall here
Upon our way, will last a long while;
The space in sooth as I suppose of vii. mile:
And now ye know first how Amphion
Built and began this city and this town,
Reigning there long after, as I read.
Of him no more, for I will proceed
To my purpose, that I first began,
Not telling here how the line ran
How the Line of Amphion by descent was conveyed to King Laius.
Fro king to king, by succession,
Conveying down by the stock of Amphion
Seriously by line all the descent:
But leave all this, plainly of intent
To tell forth, in books as I read,
How Laius by process began succeed
Here begins the Story of King Laius, and Iocasta his Wife.
TO bear ye Crown in this mighty land,
Holding the scepter of Thebes in his hand,
Manly and wise during all his life,
And Iocasta called was his wife:
Full womanly the story says certain
For a time, though she were barraine,
Till Laius in full humble wise,
To have a child, did sacrifice
First to Apollo in his chair so bright,
And Jupiter, that has so great a might,
Beseeching hem with devout reverence,
To grant only through her influence,
That his request executed may be,
And specially to goddesses three,
He besought Pallas, and Juno,
And Diane, for to help also,
That he be not defrauded of his boon:
And his prayer accepted was full soon,
That finally through his rites old,
Even like as his heart would,
The Queen Iocasta has anon conceived,
Which when the King fully has perceived,
He made in haste, him list not to abide,
Through his kingdom Messengers ride
Fro coast to coast, the story can devise,
For Divinours and Philosophers wise,
For such as were famous Phisiciens,
And well expert Astronomiens,
To come in have unto his presence,
To find out shortly in sentence
By craft only of calculation,
The child's fate and disposition,
How the Astronomiens and Philosophers of Thebes calcled out the fate of
Edippus.
And thereupon to give a judgment,
The root I take, at the ascendent
Truly sought out by minute and degree,
The self hour of his natiuite
Not foryet, the heavenly mansions,
Clearly searched by small fractions,
First by seconds, terces, and eke quartes,
On Augrime stones, and on white carts
Ipriued out by diligent labor,
In tables correct, deuoid of all error,
Justly sought, and found out of both two,
The years collect, and expanse also,
Considred eke by good inspection,
Every hour, and constellation,
And each aspect and look eke diverse,
Which were good, and which also peruers,
Where they were toward, or at debate,
Happy, wilful, or iufortunate:
The cursed Constellation and Disposition of the Heaven at the Nativity of
Edippus.
And finally, in conclusion
They found Saturn in the Scorpion,
Heavy chered melancolike and loath,
And wood Mars furious and wroth,
Holding his scepter in the Capricorn,
The same hour when this child was borne,
Venus direct, and contrarious,
And depressed in Mercurious house,
That the dome and judgment final
Of these clerks to speak in special
By fatal sort, that may not be withdraw
That with his swerd his father shall be slaw,
How the fate of Edippus disposed, that he should slay his own Father.
There may no man help it ne excuse,
On which thing the king began sore muse,
And cast he would on that other side
Again her dome for himself provide
Shape away, and remedy toforne,
Bidding the queen, when the child were borne,
Without mercy or moderly pite
That he be dead it may none other be,
And in all have, like as he has sent,
She obeyed his commandment
With woeful heart, and pitous look,
And face pale, her young son she took,
Tender and grene both of flesh and bones,
To certain men ordained for the nones,
Fro point to point in all manner thing,
To execute the bidding of the king,
They durst not delay it, nor abide,
But to a forest that stood there beside,
They tooken her way, and fast began him speed,
The kings will to perform indeed,
Having thereof passing heaviness?
But when that they beheld the fairness
Of the child, and excellent beauty,
In her heart they had great pity,
And plainly cast, among hem was no strife,
That the child should have his life,
And anon high upon a tree,
In place that no man might it see,
They heng him up, the story can reherce,
But first his feet they began through perce,
And on bows tender, tough, and small,
They knitte him up shortly this is no tale,
Him to preserve from beasts wild and rage,
And after that they tooken her voyage
Toward Thebes, in all the have they may:
But of fortune, thilke same day
With her hounds searching up and down,
The hunts went of king Polibon
Through the forest, began for to find
Some aforne, and some come behind,
And began search and seek wonder sore
Among the hills, and the holts hoar,
And as they rengen the trenches by and by,
They heard a noise, and a pitous cry
How the hunts of King Polibon found the child in the forest, and presented
him unto the King.
Of this child, honging on a tree:
And all at ones drough hem for to see,
And left not, till they have him found,
And took him down, and his feet unbound,
And bare him home unto Polibon,
King of Archadie the famous region:
And when that he the child first can see,
Of his wounds he had great pitee
To behold his tender feet so blede,
And called him Edippus, as I read,
Which is to saine platly, this is no fage,
Bored the feet, as in that language.
And first the king in his royal hall
Made his men a norice for to call,
This young child to foster and to keep
With her milk, that he might ne weep,
And his Leeches he charged eke also,
Till he were whole, her deuoir for to do,
Fully in purpose, for this child was feire,
After his day to maken him his heir,
For cause only, who so takes heed,
Son had he none, by line to succeed,
And that he had a wife or none,
I find it not, and therefore I let it gone,
But by process of days and of years,
This Edippus, among his playing fears,
Was in port passing full of pride,
That none with him might in peace abide,
In heart he was so inly surquidous,
Melancolike and contrarious,
Full of despite, and of high disdain,
That no wight durst shortly him withsaine,
Till on a day, he began with one debate,
To whom he had specially great hate,
Which of rancour, and of hasty tene,
As he that might his pride not sustene,
Began upon him cruelly to braid,
And unto him felly thus he said:
Whereto (quoth. he) art thou so proud of port,
Contraire also ever in any disport,
Froward and fell, lasting ever in one,
As thou were lord of us euerichone,
And presumest fully in werking,
Like as thou were son unto the King,
And descended of his royal blood?
But whether so thou be wroth or wood,
Thou art nothing, if thee list take heed,
Appertaining unto his kinrede,
But in a forest founden and unknow
When thou were young, therefore bear thee low,
And utterly remember thee if thee list,
Thy birth and blood are both two untwist,
This is the fine shortly of my tale,
Wherewith Edippus began to wexe pale,
And change also cheer and countenance,
And began apeint in his remembrance
Word by word, and forgot right naught,
And felly mused on this, and above thought,
And cast he would, without more tarrying,
The troth enquire of Polibon the King:
And when he saw oportune space,
And the King in a secret place,
He him be sought lowly on his knee,
To his request benignely to see.
The request of Edippus unto the King Polibon.
And that he would plainly, and not spare,
Of his birth the true ground declare,
And make him sure of this thing anon,
If he were his very son or none?
And Polibon only of gentillesse,
When he beheld the great heaviness
Of Edippus, and the woeful pain,
He began dissimule, and in a manner feign,
Liche as he had been verily his heir:
But more and more he falls in dispeire,
And down again on knees began fall,
Him conjuring by the Gods all,
To tell troth and nothing to hide,
Affirming eke, he will not abide
Longer with him, but riden and enquere,
Till time he may the very sooth lere
In any part of hap or of fortune,
And for that he was so importune
In his desire, the King without abode
Curiously told him how it stood.
The Answer of the King unto Edippus.
In a forest first how he was found
Upon a tree, by the feet ybound,
And how he cast in conclusion
To make him King of that region
After his day, shortly for to tell,
But Edippus would no longer dwell,
But took leave, and in have began ride
To a temple fast there beside
Of Apollo, in story as is told,
Whose statute stood in a chair of gold
On wheels four, burned bright and shene,
And within a spirit full unclean
By fraud only, and falls illusion,
Answer yafe to every question,
Bringing the people in full great error,
Such as to him did false honor,
By rites used in the old dawes,
After the custom of Paganims laws,
And Edippus with full humble chiere
To Apollo made his priere,
Beseeching him on his knees low
By some sign, that he might know
Through evidence, shortly comprehended
Of what kindred that he was descended?
And when Edippus by great devotion
Finished had fully his orison,
The fiend anon, within invisible,
With a voice dredefull and horrible,
Bad him in have take his voyage
Toward Thebes, where of his lineage
He hearen shall, and he certified:
And on his way anon he has him hied
By hasty journey, so is his horse constrained
Day by day, till he has attained
Unto a castle, Pilotes ycalled,
Rich and strong, and well above ywalled,
Adjacent by site of the country
And apertinent to Thebes the city,
King Laius being there present,
For to hold a manner of turnement,
With his knights young and courageous,
And other folk, that were desirous
To preue hemselfe, shortly for to tell,
Who that by force other might excel,
Or get a name, through his prowess,
Euerich of hem did his business
On horseback, and eke on foot,
All be that some found it full vnsoot,
Rather a play of war than of peace:
Where Edippus put himself in preace,
As he that was aie ready to debate,
Enforcing him to enter in at gate,
Maugre all tho that him would let,
And in the preace, of adventure, he met
How Edippus slough his Father by ignorance, at the Castle of Pilotes.
King Laius, and cruelly him slough,
Though the story tells not hough,
Ne no wight can of all the company,
By no sign, it verily aspy
By whose hond the King was slaw,
For Edippus began him in have withdraw,
And kept him coy of entencioun,
Great was the noise and pitous soun
In the castle, for slaughter of the king,
Dole and complaint, sorrow, and weeping.
* But for they saw that heaviness and thought,
Against death avails lite or naught,
They ordain with rites full royal,
For the feast called Funeral,
And eke the custom of the days old,
The corpse they brent into ashes cold,
And in a vessel round made as a ball,
They closed him in gold and metal,
And after that did her busy cure,
In Thebes to make a Sepulture,
And richly, hem list no longer let,
The ashes they did enclose and shet,
Of this matter there is no more to sayen,
But to Edippus I will return again,
Which him enhasteth aie from day to day,
Toward Thebes, in all that ever he may,
Brenning in heart as whote as any fire,
The fine to know of his fatal desire,
But for that he failed of a guide,
Out of his way went fer aside,
Through a wild and a wast country,
By a mountain that stood upon the sea.
How Edippus passed by the hill where the Monster lay, that was called Sphinx.
Where that Monsters, of many diverse kind
Were conversant, in story as I find,
Among which soothly there was one,
So inly cruel that no man durst gone,
For dread of death forth by that passage,
This Monster was so mortal in his rage,
Which had also by description,
Body and foot, of a fierce Lion,
And like a maid, in soth, was head and face,
The destruction of the foul Monster.
Fell of his look and cruel to manace,
And odious of countenance and sight,
And as I read Sphinx that Monster hight,
Worse than Tigre, Dragon, or Serpent,
And I suppose by Enchauntement,
He was ordained on the hill tabide,
To slay all tho that passeden beside,
And specially, all that did fail
To expoune his misty deuinaile,
His problem eke, in words plain and bare,
Without auise fully to declare:
Or with the life he might not escape,
This is very sooth plainly and no jape:
And if that he by declaration,
Yaue thereupon clear exposicion,
He should in have, there was none other mean,
Slaen this Monster for all his cruel tene,
There may of mercy be none other grant.
But of all this Edippus ignorant,
This dreadful hill, stonding on a roch,
Or he was ware, full nigh began approach,
More perilous platly than he wend:
And suddenly the Monster began descend,
To stoppen his way and letten his passage,
Thus abreding with a fell courage
The words of the foul Monster.
Said, I have in heart inly great disport,
That fortune has brought thee to my fort,
To make a preefe if thou may endure
The fatal end of this adventure,
Set at a fine, soothly, by days old:
And by and by all the case him told,
Charging him to be well ware and wise,
Get the palm and bear away the prise,
Touching this thing set atweene us tweine,
Of life or death, which we shall dreine,
And this Monster, with a dispitous cheer,
His problem began thus as ye shull hear.
The Problem that Sphinx put to Edippus.
There is a beast merueilous to see,
The which in sooth at his natiuitee
Is of his might so tender and so grene,
That he may himself not sustene
Upon his feet, though he had it sworn,
But if that he be of his mother borne,
And afterward by process of age,
On four feet he makes his passage,
And then upon three if I shall not feign,
And alder last he goes upright on twain,
Diverse of port and wonderful of cheares,
Till by length of many sundry years,
Naturally he goes again on three,
And sithen on four, it may none other be,
And finally this is the troth plein,
He recouereth kindly ayein,
To the matter which that he came fro,
Lo here my problem is all ido,
Muse hereupon without war or strife,
It to declare, or else lose thy life.
And when Edippus can this thing aduert,
Well assured in his manly heart,
Began in his heart, search up and down,
And of prudence cast in his reasoun
By great auise, what thing this may be,
Seeing also, that he may not flee,
And how there was counsel non ne read,
To tell troth or else to be deed,
And by full good deliberacion,
Thus he answered, in conclusion:
Thou Sphinx (quoth. he) false and fraudolent,
Thou foul Monstre, thou dragon, thou serpent,
That on this hill like as I conceive,
Lie in wait folks to deceive,
But trust well for all thy sleghty wit,
Thy false fraud shall anon be quitt,
Me list not to whispre neither roune,
But thy problem I shall anon expoune,
So openly, thou shall not go therefro,
Lo this it is take good heed thereto:
How Edippus expounded the Problem that Sphinx put to him.
Thilke beast thou spoke of here toforne,
Is every man in this world iborne,
Which may not go his limbs be so soft,
But as his mother bears him aloft
In her arms, when he does cry, or weep:
And after that he ginneth for to creep
On four feet, in his tender youth,
By experience as it is often couth,
Aforne irekened his hands both two:
And by process thou may consider also,
With his two feet for all thy fell tene,
He has a staff himself to sustain,
And then he goes shortly upon three,
And alderlast, as it must needs be,
Voidyng his staff he walks upon tweine,
Till it so be through age he attain
That lust of youth wasted be and spent,
Then in his hand he takes a potent,
And on three feet thus he goes again,
I dare affirm thou may it not withsein.
And sone after through his unwieldy might,
By influence of natures right,
And by experience as every man may know,
Like a child on four he crepeth low,
* And for he may here no while sojourne,
To earth again he must in have return,
Which he came fro, he may it not remew,
For in this world no man may eschew,
This very sothe shortly and no doubt,
When the whele of kind comes about,
And naturally has his course ironne,
By circuit as does the shere son,
That man, and child, of high and low estate,
It gains not to make more debate,
His time isette that he must fine,
When Atropos, of malice does untwine
His lives thread, by Cloto first compouned.
Lo here thy problem is expouned,
Af every metyng as I took on hand,
To the law that thou must needs stand,
And in all haste of mine honds deie,
For of reason thou can it not withseie.
And this Sphinx awaped and amate,
Stood all dismayed and disconsolate,
With chere down cast heavy as any led,
And Edippus anon smote of the hedde
Of this fend stinking and vnswete,
And the country set holly in quiet,
Whereby he has soch a price won,
That his fame in every coast is run,
Through al y^ land y^ this monstre was slaw:
And line right to Thebes he began draw,
Well received for his worthiness,
For his manhood and his prowess,
And for they seigh he was a seemly knight,
Well favored in every man's sight,
And saw also Thebes, the mighty town,
Not only they but all the regioun
Were destitute of a governor,
Again her foon having no succor,
Hem to defend, but the Queen alone,
Among hemselfe making full great moan,
For there was none as books specify,
The Scepter and croune to occupy,
For which the Lords all by one assent,
Within the town set a parliament,
Shortly concluding if it might been,
Prudently to treat with the Queen,
Namely they that held hem self most sage,
To condescend by way of marriage,
She to be joined to this manly knight,
Passing prudent and famous eke of might,
Most holle man, as they can discern,
The worthy city to keep and govern:
And through counsel of the lords all,
To their desire plainly she is fall,
And accorded without more tarying,
That of Thebes, Edippus shall be king,
By full assent was none that said nay,
And time set, ayein a certain day,
Among hem self, and finally devised,
The wedding was in Thebes solemnized,
Full rially, that needs must vnthriue,
Only for he, his mother took to wiue,
Vnwist of both he was of her blood,
And ignorant shortly how it stood,
That he toforne had his father slaw,
For which this wedding was against the law,
* And tofore God is neither fair ne good,
Nor acceptable blood to touch blood,
Which cause has be of great confusion
In many a land, and many a region,
Ground and root of unhap and mischaunce,
The fine concluding always with vengeance,
As men have sein by clear experience,
And holy writ records in sentence,
How Herod falsely in his life,
By violence took his brothers wife,
For she was fair, and pleasant to his sight,
And kept her still by force through his might,
Although to her title had he non,
And for her sake the holy man saint John
For his troth in prison lost his hedde,
Wherefore I read every man take heed,
Whether so he be Lord, Prince, or King,
That he beware to eschew soch wedding,
Ere y^ the sword of vengeance him manace,
Lest he lose hap, fortune, and grace,
Taking ensample in all manner thing,
Of Edippus, in Thebes crouned king,
All be that he wrought of ignorance,
Full derke and blind of his woeful chance,
And if vnwist, that he of innocence,
As ye have herd fell in soch offense,
For which he was punished and brought low,
What are they worthy that her error know,
And from the knot list not to abstain,
Of such spousaile to God and man unclean,
I can not sem ne more thereof devise,
Demeth your self that prudent been, and wise,
And eke Edippus, haueth among in mind,
Of whom the wedding like as ye may find,
Unhappy was and passing odious,
Unfortunate, and eke ungracious,
I am werie more thereof to write,
The hateful process also to endite,
I pass over fully of intent,
For Imeneus was not there present,
Nor Lucina list not there to shine,
Ne there was none of the Muses nine,
But one accord to maken melody,
For there song not by heavenly armony,
Neither Clio, nor Caliope,
None of the sustren in number thrice three,
As they did when Philolaie,
Ascended up high above the sky,
To be wedded, this Lady virtuous,
Unto her Lord the God Mercurius,
And as Matrician, inamed de Copelle,
In his book of wedding can you tell,
There concluding in his marriage,
The Poet, that whilom was so sage,
That this Lady called Sapience,
Iwedded was unto Eloquence,
As it sat well by heavenly purueiaunce,
Hem to be joined by knot of alliance,
But both two soothly of intent,
At wedding in Thebes were absent,
That caused after great adversity,
For final end of that solempnity,
Was sorrow and woe, and destruction,
Utter ruin of this royal town,
There may no man help it ne succor,
For a time in joy though they flower.
The Names of the People, being at the Wedding of the King Edippus, and of
Jocasta the Queen.
But at his wedding plainly for to tell,
Was Cerberus, chief porter of hell,
And Herebus, fader to Hatred,
Was there present with his holle kindred,
His wife also with her brows black,
And her daughters, sorrow for to make,
Hidously chered and ugly for to see,
Megera, and Thesiphonee,
Alecto eke, with Labor and Envy,
Dread, Fraud, and false Tretcherie,
Treason, Pouert, Indigence and Need,
And cruel death in his rent wede,
Wretchedness, Compleint, and eke Rage,
Fearful, Pale, Dronkenesse, crooked Age,
Cruel Mars, and many a Tigre wood,
Brenning Ire, and unkind blood,
Fraternall hate deep set in the root,
Saufe only Death, that there nas no boot,
Assured oaths at fine Untrue,
All these folk were at weddyng new,
To make the town desolate and bare,
As the story after shall declare:
But aie in Thebes, with his walls strong,
Edippus reigns many a day and long,
And as mine aucthor write in words plain,
By Iocasta he had sons twain,
Ethiocles, and also Polimite,
And in books as sundry clerks write,
Daughters two, full goodly on to see,
Of which that one hight Antigonee,
And that other called was Imein,
Of her beauty, inly souerein.
Edippus aie deuoid of war and strife,
With Iocasta led a merry life,
Till fortune of her iniquity
Had envy of his prosperity,
For when he shone most rich in his renoun,
From her whele she plunged him adoun,
Out of his joy into sodein woe,
As she is wont frowardly to do,
And namely hem that setten her affiaunce
Of heartily trust in her variaunce:
For when the king passing of great might,
Sat with the queen upon a certain night,
Casuelly, when his folk echone,
Out of chamber sodeinly were gone,
Ere he was ware Iocasta began behold
The carectes of his wounds old,
Upon his feet, emprented wonder deep,
Tournyng her face breast out for to weep,
So secrely, he might it not epsy,
And she anon fell into a fantasy,
Aie on this thing musing more and more,
And in her bed began to sighen sore,
And when the king conceiueth her distress,
He began enquere of her heaviness,
Fully the cause and thoccasion,
For he will wite in conclusion
What her eileth, and why she fared so.
My Lord (quoth. she) without words mo,
Percell cause of this sodein rage,
Is for that I in my tender age,
Had a Lord inamed Laius,
King of this town, a man right virtuous,
By whom I had a son right wonder feire,
Likely to been his successor and heir,
But because his Diuinours told
At his birth sothly that he should,
If he had life, by fatal destinee,
Slaen his fader it might none other be:
For which the king his fate to eschew,
Bad men in have as him thought due,
To slay the child, and have thereof no roth,
And I anon bad without sloth,
To certain men up pein of judgment,
To execute the commandment
Of the king as I yaue hem in charge,
And forth they gone to a forest large,
Adjacent unto this country,
Persing his feet, and heng him on a tree,
Not performyng thexecution,
On him they had such compassion,
Left him there, and resorted home again,
Being in doubt and uncertain,
At their repeire as they tolden all,
Of this child what afterward is befall,
Saufe they said huntes had him found,
Which ladden him forth and his feet unbound,
But to what coast they coud not declare:
Which percel is of mine evil fare,
Ground and cause of mine heavy chere,
Considered eke the wounds that appear
Upon your feet, and wot not what they mean:
And o thing aie is at mine heart green,
My Lord alas but of new date,
King Laius slain was but late,
At a Castle nigh this country,
Upon your coming into this city,
All this yweied and rekened into one,
Makes mine heart as heavy as a stone,
So that I can counsel none ne red,
And with that word the king lift up his head,
And abreid with sharp sighs smert,
And all this thing by order can aduert,
Curiously by good auisement,
And by signs clear and evident,
Conceiueth well and sore began repent,
It was himself that Iocasta meant:
And when the king sigh in manners pleine,
By her Gods she began him constreine
To show out the cause of his affray
And it expoune and make no delay,
Croppe and root shortly why that he
Entered first into that country,
From whens he came, and from what region,
But he her put in delusion,
As he had done it for the nones,
Till at last he brast out at ones,
Unto the Queen, and began a process make,
First how he was in the forest take,
Wounded the feet, and so forth every thing,
Of his cherishing with Polibon the king,
And holle the cause why he him forsook,
And in what wise he the way took
Toward Thebes as Apollo bad,
And of fortune how that he was lad
Where that Sphinx kept the Mounteine,
And how that he also slow in certain
King Laius at Castle gate,
Toward night when it was full late,
And how to Thebes that he began him speed,
To find out the stock of his kinrede,
Which unto him began wexe couth,
For by process of his green youth,
He found out well by rekening of his life,
That she was both his mother, and his wife:
So that all night and suyng on the morrow,
Between hem two began a new sorrow,
Which unto me were pitous for to tell,
For thereupon yif I should dwell,
A long space it would you occupy,
But ye may read in a Tragedy
Tragediae Senecae de Egypto Reg. Thebax.
Of Moral Senek fully his ending,
His dooll, his mischief, and his compleining,
How with sorrow, and unwieldy age,
This Edippus fell in dotage,
Lost his wit and his worldly delight,
And how his sons had him in despite,
And of disdain took of him no keep,
And eke books saine, his iyen out he weep,
And as mine aucthour likes to devise,
As his sons rebuke him and despise,
Upon a day in a certain place,
Out of his hedde, his iyen he began race,
And cast at hem, he can no other boot,
And of malice they trade him under foot,
Fully deuoid both of love and dread,
And when Edippus for mischief was thus ded
Within a pit made in the earth low,
Of cruelty his sons began him throw,
Worse then Serpent, or any Tigre wood,
* But of cursed stock comes unkind blood,
As in story ye may read heretoforne,
Although the Rose grow out of the thorn.
Thus of Edippus when he was blind and old,
The wretched end I have you plainly told.
* For which shortly to man and child I read,
To be well ware and take heed,
Of kindly right and of conscience,
To do honor and due renerence
How every Man ought of Duty, to do Reverence to his Father and Mother, or else
there will fall Vengeance.
To father and mother of what estate they be,
Or certain else they shull never thee:
For who that is not to hem debonaire,
In speech, in port, for to treat hem fair,
Hem to obey, in honesty and dread,
And hem to cherish of what they have need,
I dare affirm excepting none estate,
That he shall first be unfortunate
In all his work both on Sea and land,
And of what thing that he take in hond,
For the time froward to him and contraire,
Wast of his goods plainly and appaire,
Find plenty of conteke, war, and strife,
Unhappy end and shortness of life,
And graceless of what he has to do,
Hatred of God, and man also:
Therefore no man be thereof recheles,
But make your mirror of Ethiocles,
And his brother called Polimite,
Which in soch things greatly were to wite,
As ye shall here of hem how it fill,
And when we been descended down this hill,
As I passed here the low veil,
I shall begin the remnaunt of my tale.
Explicit prima pars istius Codialli.
Immediate sequitur secunda pars ejusdem.
PAssed y^ Thrope of Broughton on the blee,
By my Calendar I began anon to see,
Through the Sun, that full clear began shine,
Of the clock that it drew to nine,
And saw also as silver dropes shene,
Of the dew like perles on the grene,
Vapoured up into the air aloft,
When Zepherus with his blowing soft,
The weder made lusty, smooth, and fair,
And right attempre was the wholesome air:
The same hour all the holle route
Of the pilgrims riding round about,
In my tale when I began proceed,
Rehearsing forth as it was in deed,
When Edippus buried was and grave,
How his sons the kingdom for to have,
How the Sons of Edippus, debated for the Crown.
Among hemselfe by full mortal hate,
For the croune, gonne for to debate,
Which of hem justly shall succeed,
And the Scepter of the town possede,
Auerting naught, neither to right ne wrong,
But each of hem to make his party strong,
And his querele proudly to sustain,
From whose herts was deuoided clean,
Of brotherhood the faithful aliaunce,
False couetise so made hem at distaunce,
Fully werching into destruction,
And ruin of this noble town,
So hot brent of hatred and envy,
Of both two through pompous surquedy,
That neither would pleinly in a poinct,
Other forbear, they stood in soch disjoinct,
Like as they had of birth been foreins:
Till of the town the noble citezeins,
Knights, Barons, with many a worthy lord,
Shope a way to make hem of accord,
And to set hem in quiet and in pees:
But for his part this Ethiocles,
Allege began, that he was first borne,
For which he ought of reason go toforne
In the city, to be crouned king,
Since by law there was no letting,
For unto him longs the heritage
By descent, and by title of age.
The controversy of the two Brethren.
But Polimite of full high disdain,
All openly began reply again,
And for his part said in especial,
Reason was none that he should have all,
Both Regaly and dominatioun,
And the lordship wholly of the town,
And he right naught out of the city,
But live in sile and in poverty,
Concluding without fere or dread,
Rather than it suffer, he would be deed,
And thus alas, through her envious strife,
At end euerich lost his life,
At great mischief as ye shall after here,
But thilke time the Lords all in fere,
Full besily did her diligence,
By great auise, and full high prudence,
To set hem in quiet and in rest,
Counsailyng hem plainly for the best,
To leave her strife, of wisdom and of reason,
And condescend to some conclusion,
Which to both might most avail.
And finally through her gouernaile
The common Union between these two Brethren.
The Lords all, tho being present,
Have hem brought to been of one assent,
Of one heart, as brother unto brother,
Euerich of hem to reign after other,
Year by year as it comes about,
So that the town shall absent him out,
Fully that year and himself gie,
By his manhood and his chivalry,
Haunt himself, in deeds Marciall,
While his brother in his See riall,
Holds his Scepter the city to govern:
And when the year his course has run yerne,
And is come out, he shall have repeire,
To reign in Thebes like as Lord and heir,
There to receive fully his dignitee,
While that other voideth the city,
Patiently taking his adventure,
Till he again his honor may recure,
Thus enterchange, every year they shall,
That one ascends that other has a fall,
They must obey of heart and take it well,
Like as that one resorteth of the well,
For this was holle the composicion
Between the brethren, and conuencion
Fully knit up by great auisement,
Tofore the Gods by oath of Sacrament,
Never after to grutche ne to vary,
But accomplish shortly, and not tarry,
Like as thaccord, enrolled in the town,
From poinct to poinct, made mencioun.
But alder first by reason of his age,
Ethiocles had the auantage,
To reign aforne, and wear the croune,
Polimite him hasting out of town,
During that year it may none other be,
Whiles his brother satte in his rialte,
Full richely upon Fortunes whele.
And rode him forth armed bright in steel.
This Polimite sothly as I read,
Himself alone on a riall stead,
Without guide all the long day,
Being aferde to keep the high way,
In his heart having suspecion,
To his brother, of malice and treason,
Lest he pursue through falls and unkind blood,
To have him dedde for couetise of good,
That he alone might have possessioun,
During his life fully of the town:
For which in have, having no felaw,
Polimite aside began him withdraw,
By a forest joining to the Sea,
Knowing right naught the site of y^ country,
Full of hills and of high Mounteines,
Craggie Roches, and but few pleines,
Wondre dreadful and loathsome of passage,
And therewithal full of beasts rage,
Holding his way of heart nothing light,
Mate and weary, till it draws to night,
And all the day beholding enuiron,
He neither saw Castle, Toure, ne Town,
The which thing greueth him full sore,
And suddenly the sea began to rore,
Wind and tempest hidiously tarise,
The rain down beat in full grisly wise,
That many a beast thereof was adrad,
And nigh for fere began to wexe madd,
As it sempte by the woeful sownes
Of Tigres, Beres, Bores, and Liones,
Which for refute, hem self for to save,
Euerich in have, draws unto his Cave,
But Polymite, in this tempest huge,
Alas the while, finds no refuge,
Ne him to shrowde saw nowhere no succor,
Till it was passed almost midnight hour
A large space, that the sterres clear,
The clouds voided, in heaven did appear,
So that this knight out of the Forest large,
Began approach, into the land of Arge.
How Polimite first came into the Land of Arge.
Seeing a palaice mighty of building,
Of which Adrastus, called was the king,
A lusty man, rich, and wondre sage,
And yronne was somdel into age,
Borne of the Isle that called is Chifon,
And sometime Son of the king Cholon,
And for his wit in story as is couth,
He chosen was in his tender youth,
Of Arge to be crouned king,
Thief of all Greece, be record of writing,
Not by descente nor succession,
And but alonely of free election,
He held of Arge, the Scepter in his hand,
As most worthy of all Greeks land,
Loved and drade, for wisdom and Justice:
And as the story plainly can devise,
This worthy king had daughters two,
Passing fair, and right good also,
It were to long, her beauty to descriue.
Argiue and Deiphile, the daughters tweine of King Adrastus.
And the eldest called was Argiue,
Deiphile ynamed the second:
And Adrastus, like as it is found,
This worthy king had son none,
To succeed after he be gone,
For which he was during all his life
Triste in heart add passingly pensife,
But holy his trust and his hope stood,
By alliance of some worthy blood,
Brought in by mean of his daughters twein,
That he shall be relessed of his peine,
Through recomfort of some high Marriage,
And sothly yet full often in his courage,
He troubled was by occasion
Of a sweuene and of a vision,
The Dream of King Adrastus of a wild Boar and a fers Lion.
Showed to him upon a certain night,
For as him thought, his inward sight,
While he slept, by clear inspection,
A wild Boore and a fers Lion,
Possede shul, these bestes in her rage,
His daughters two by bond of Marriage,
In short time within a certain day:
Which brought his heart in full great affray.
* But thing in soth that destine has shape,
Here in this world full hard it is tescape,
And marvelous a man to eschew his fate.
And Polimite of whom I spoke late,
With the tempest beat, and all bereined,
By grate only the City has atteined,
Where Adrastus full stately of degree,
Thilke time held his royal see,
The troubled might, merke and obscure,
Has brought this knight only by adventure
Through the City enclosed with a wall,
Unto the palaice chief and principal,
Where as the king in his chamber aloft,
Lay in his bed and slept wonder soft,
Eke al his folk had her chambres take,
Like as Fortune parauenture had shape,
The self time because it was so late,
And casuely the porter at the gate,
As it had by right for the nones,
And in a porch built of square stones,
Full mightily enarched enuiroun,
Where the domes and ples of the town
Were executed, and laws of the king,
And there this knight without more tarying,
Weary and mate, from his stead alight,
Hanging the reine in all the have he might,
Upon his arm, sure him for to keep,
And leid him down and began anon to sleep,
As him seemed that time for the best:
And while that he lay thus for to rest,
Of adventure there came a knight riding,
One of the worthiest of the world living,
Curteis, lowly, and right virtuous,
As says mine Auctour, called Tideus,
Virous in arms and manly in werking,
Of his birth Son unto the king
Of Callidoine, a land of great renoun,
As he alas, out of that regioun
Exiled was, for he his brother slow,
As the stage of Thebes writ the manner how,
Al be that he to him no malice meant:
For on a day as they on hunting went,
In a forest for heart and for hind,
So as he stood under a great lind,
And casuely let his Arow slip,
He slough his brother called Menelippe,
Through mortal sort his hand was begiled,
For which he was banished and exiled,
As the law narow set his charge:
As for this caas he came first to Arge,
Into the porch where Polimite did sleep,
Of adventure ere he took any keep,
The same night hidously besein,
With the tempest of thondre and of rein,
And felt also anoy and great damage,
Through the forest holding his passage,
As Polimite had do toforne,
In perrell often likely to be lorne,
With bestes rage set on every side,
Till of grace without any guide,
He rode through Arge the great mighty town,
Streght unto the palaice, and to the chief dongeon,
Like as I told, where Polimite lay,
And at his coming made a great affray,
For he was blind through derkenesse of the night,
And him to guie he ne fond no light,
When he came in, of priket ne of torche,
Till he unawarely entered in to the porche,
And would have take there his herbergage:
But Polimite sterte up in a rage,
Suddenly awaked as I read,
With the nying of his proud stead,
And first of all when that he beheld,
A knight armed, and on his breast a sheld,
And began the manner of this ray aduerte,
Of very ire upon his horse he sterte,
And cruelly began Tideus enquere,
Whens he come, and what he did there,
And bad in have his answer to devise.
And Tideus in full humble wise,
Answered again of verray gentillesse,
And said, in soth of high distress
Of the tempest and the derke night,
He driven was, like an errant knight,
Of need only and great necessity,
And him constrained of great adversity,
To take lodging where so that he might,
And in that Court therefore he alight,
Without more thinking none outrage,
Ne to no wight meaning no damage.
Then Polimite of malice, and of pride,
Told him shortly he should not abide,
Ne lodge there, though he had it sworn,
For I (quoth. he) took it up beforne,
And will it keep during all this night,
I sey thee platly maugre all thy might.
(Quoth. Tideus) then, it is no courtesy,
Me to deuoid but rather villenie,
Yef ye take heed that seem a gentil knight,
And as I suppose ye have no title of right,
To this lodging by way of heritage,
More than have I, for all your fell rage,
And parde yet it shall be no disease,
Till to morrow though ye do me ease,
Of gentillesse only with your leave,
To suffer me it shall but litel grieve,
But aye the more Tideus spoke fair,
Polimite was froward and contraire,
And shortly says, it geineth not to strive,
That of force he shall deuoid bliue,
Or utterly atwene hem both two,
This thing to try he must have do.
And Tideus seeing no better mean,
Full like a knight in steel armed clean,
Without abode fast began him speed,
Wondre lively for to stride his stead,
And thus these knights pompous and elate,
For litel cause fellen at debate.
How Tideus and Polimite striuen for her Lodging.
And as they run togider on horseback,
Either on other first his spear brake,
And after that full surquedous of pride,
With sharp swerdes they togider ride,
Full irously these mighty Champions,
In her fury, like Tygres or Lions,
As they hurtel, that all the palaice shook,
And king Adrastus out of his sleep wooke,
And made in have his Chambreleins call,
And through y^ Court his worthy knights al,
Commanding hem to descend and see,
And report what it might be,
This wonderful noice in his Court by night,
And when he seigh two strange knights fight,
In plates thick, and bright maile,
Without Judge, they had great marvel,
And were dismayed of this uncouth thing,
And as they found told to the king,
And Adrastus for darkness of the night,
From his chamber with many torches light,
Into the Court is descended down,
All his meine stonding enuiron,
Of these knights having great wondre,
And of manhood he put hem first asondre,
Hem commanding like a gentill king,
To leven her strife and cessen off fighting,
And entered in with a knightly look,
And first from hem her swerdes both he took,
Affirming eke as to his fantasy,
It was a rage and a great folly,
So wilfully her lives jeopart,
Withouten Judge her quarrel to depart,
And specially in the derke night,
When neither might of other have sight,
Charging hem up peine of her life,
To disseuere and stinten of her strife.
And tho Tideus in all the have he might,
Full humbly from his steed alight,
And right mekely with chere and countenance,
Put him holly in the governance
Of Adrastus, in all manner thing,
And Polimite eke made no tarying,
To high him also, and would not withsey
The kings bidding, lowly to obey,
So as him ought with due reverence:
And as they stood both in his presence,
He began enquere first of her estate,
The cause also why they were at debate,
Of her Countrees sothly, and her age,
And asked hem eke touching her lineage,
By descent of what stock they were born?
And Tideus, his answer yaue beforn,
Told plainly and made no lesing,
How he was son unto the King,
Of Calcidoine, and rightful heir thereto,
And of his exile the cause he told also,
As ye have herd in the story rad.
And Polimite with chere and face sad,
Unto the king touching his Country,
Said he was borne in Thebes the City,
And Iocaste the great famous queen,
His mother was without any wene,
But of his father whilom king and lord,
For very shame he spoke never a word,
Only, for yif I shall not feine,
His fader was, and brother, both tweine,
The which in soth he was full loath to tell,
And eke the king would him not compel,
Of gentillesse, but bad without blame,
Of his birth for to have no shame,
For holly the caas he knew every dele,
Touching his kin he knew y^ ground fulwele,
Like as it was by full clear report:
Enforcing him for to do comfort,
With all his might, and all besie peine,
This manly king, to these knights tweine,
And to hem said, before him as they stood,
He wist well that of full worthy blood
They were descended, touching her kindred,
And made in have his officers led,
The strange knights being at debate,
Through his palaice, to chamber of estate,
Each by himself for to take his ease,
And every thing in soth y^ might hem please,
Was offered hem like her estates,
And when they were disarmed of her plates,
Cushens, Greues, and her Sabatons,
Her Harneis voided, and her Habergeons,
Two mantels unto hem were brought,
Frette with perle, and rich stones wrought,
Of cloth of gold and Violet crimsin,
Full richely ^urred with Ermin,
To lap hem in ayens the cold morrow,
After the rage of her nights sorrow,
To take her rest till the son arise,
And when the king in full prudent wise,
First of al he was not rekeles,
The knights herts for to set in pees,
That ever after I dare (...) it well,
Each was to other true as any stele,
During her life both in word and deed,
Under a knotte bound of brotherhede.
And Adrastus the worthy king famous,
A feast made rich and plenteous,
To these knights, himself thereat present,
And after mete full goodly he has sent,
This noble king, for his daughters dear,
Of gentillesse for to make chere,
To the knights come fro so far:
And like in soth as Lucifer the sterre,
Gladeth the morrow at his vprising,
So the ladies at her in coming,
With the stremes of her eyes clear,
Goodly apport and womanly manner,
Countenances, and excellent fairness,
To all the Court broughten in gladness,
For the freshness of her heavenly cheres,
So agreeable was unto the straungeres,
At her entree, that in especial,
Hem thought it like a thing celestial,
Enhasting hem in full knightly wise,
Against hem goodly to arise,
And as they met with humble countenance,
Full conningly did her obseruaunce,
Hem conueying in to her sitting place,
But sothely I have leiser none ne space,
To rehearse and put in remembrance,
Holly the manner of her daliaunce,
It were to long for you to abide,
But well I wot that the god Cupide,
By influence of his mighty hond,
And the feruence of his fiery brond,
Her meeting first fortuned has so well,
That his arowes of gold, and not of stele,
Yperced han the knights herts tweine,
Through the breast with such a lusty peine,
That there abode sharp, as spear, or lance,
Deep yficched the point of remembrance,
Which may not lightly rased be away,
And thus in joy they drive forth the day,
In pley and revel for the knights sake,
And toward night they her chamber take,
At ^ue time as her fader bad,
And on her weie the knights hem lad,
Reverently up by many a staire,
Taking leave began anon repair
To her lodging in full stately a Toure,
Assigned to hem by the herbeiour,
And after ipices plenty, and the wine
In cups great, wrought of gold full fine,
Without tarying, to bed straight they gone,
Touching her rest wheder they sleep or non,
Demeth ye lovers, that in such manner thing,
By experience have fully knowledging,
For it is not declared in my book,
But as I find, the king all night wooke,
Thoughtfull in heart the story specifies,
Musing sore and full of fantasies,
First aduerting the great worthiness
Of these knights and the semelinesse,
Her lusty youth, her force, and her manhood,
And how they were come of roial blood,
And this he began to reuolue about,
And in his heart having a manner of doubt,
Atwene two hanging in a balance,
Wheder he should make an aliance
Atween his daughters and the knights tweine,
For one thing ay his heart began constreine,
The remembrance of his auision,
Of which aforne made is amencion,
Touching the Lion, and the wild Bore,
It needs not to rehearse it no more,
Casting always in his fantasy,
What it might clearly signify,
This dark dream, that was hid and close.
But on the morrow Adrastus up arose,
And to the Temple the right way he took,
And began pray devoutly on his book,
To the gods of his dreme to specify,
And they him bid homward for to hie,
And to behold in the knights sheeldes,
The fell beasts painted in the fields,
Which shall to him be clear inspection,
Full plainly making declaracion
Of his dreme which he had on the night:
And Adrastus enhasted him full right,
In her sheelds wisely to behold,
Where that he saw, as the gods told,
In the sheelds hanging upon hooks,
The beasts rage with her mortal crookes,
And to purpos like as write Bochas,
Polimite full streite enbraced was,
In the hide of a fierce Lioun,
And Tideus above his Habergeoun,
A gipoun had, hidous sharp and hoor,
Wrought of the bristels of a wild Boore,
The which beasts as the story leres,
Were wrought and beat upon her baneres,
Displaide broad when they should fight,
Wherefore the king when he had a sight,
At his repair in heart was full glad,
And with a face full demure and sad,
With his lords that he about him had,
To the temple he the knights lad,
And when they had with all circumstaunces,
Of Rites old done her obseruaunces,
Home to the Court they return ayein,
And in hall, rich, and well besein,
This worthy king of heart liberal,
Made a feast, solemn and riall,
Which in deintees surely did excel,
But it were vein every course to tell,
Her strange sewes and other soteltees,
Ne how they sat like her degrees,
For lack of time I let ouerslide.
And after meat, Adrastus took aside
The knights two, and like a prudent man,
In secree wise thus his tale he began.
How Adrastus spoke to the Knights in secret touching the marriage of his
Daughters.
Sirs (quoth. he) I ne doubt it naught,
That it is fresh and grene ay in your thought,
How that first by gods ordinance,
And after next through fates purueiance,
And by werking of fortunes hond,
How ye were brought in to this land,
Both tweine, but now this last night,
Of whose coming I am full glad and light,
First in my self shortly to express,
When I consider and see the likelinesse
Of your persons with the circumstaunces,
And holle the manner of your gouernaunces,
Seeing full well whereto should I feign,
Ye been likely hereafter to atteigne
To great estate and habundance of good,
Through your birth and your rial blood,
Ye may not fail but ye have wrong,
For ye are both manly and right strong:
And for to set your hertes more at rest,
My purpose is I hope for the best,
So that in you be no variance,
To make a knot as be alliance,
Atwene you and my daughters two,
If your herts accord well thereto,
And for I am fully in despeire,
To succeed for to have an heir,
Therefore ye shall have possession,
During my life of half my region,
Forth with in hond, and all after my day,
There is no man that thereto shall say nay,
And sothly after when that I am grave,
Each of you shall his part have
Of this kingdom as I have provided,
This is to say, it shall be divided
Atwene you two euerich to be crouned,
Your properties be equite compouned,
So egaly, in every man's sight,
That each of you enjoy shall his right,
And in your wit ye shall the land amend,
And of manhood knightly it defend,
Ayens our enemies and our mortal foon,
And for the days passed been and goon,
Of my desires and my lusty youth,
I am full set for to make it couth,
That ye shall have like mine opinioun,
The governance of all this Regioun.
To this intent me seems for the best,
Ye to govern and I to live in rest,
Fully to follow the lust of my desires,
Hunte, and hawk, in woods and rivers,
When so ever I have thereto pleasance,
And for to have none other attendance
Unto nothing but to mine ease,
For which shortly yif it agree and please,
That I have said to you that been so wise,
And be according unto your auise,
Delayeth not but in words plein,
That you seems give answer again.
And when Adrastus had his tale fined,
Tideus with head full low inclined,
As he that was a very gentill knight,
With his power and his full might,
Full humbly thanked the king,
Touching his profre and so high a thing,
And for his party said he would assent,
Fully of heart never to repent,
To all that ever the king has said:
And Polimite was also appaid,
In the story as it is comprehended,
On every part fully is holle descended,
The kings will to fulfill in deed,
From point to point and there upon proceed,
Whether so that ever they win or lose,
And Tideus made his brother chese,
Of gentilnesse and of courtesy,
Which that was most to his fantasy,
Of the Sisters for to have to wiue,
And he in soth chosen has Argiue,
Which eldest was full womanly to se,
And Tideus took Deiphile,
Of her beauty most sovereign excellent.
Adrastus throughout his land has sent,
For his lords, and his Baronage,
To be present at the marriage
Of the knights, and make no letting,
And they each one come at his bidding,
In goodly wise, meke and full benign,
Ayein the day that he did assign,
And thidre come full many a lusty knight,
Full well besein, and many a lady bright,
From every cost and many a fresh squier,
The story seith and many a communer,
To behold the great rialte,
And the manner of this solempnite,
But to tell all the circumstaunces
Of just, revel, and the diverse daunces,
The feasts rich, and the yeftes great,
The peinfull sighs and the fervent heat
Of loves folk, brenning as the glede,
And devise of many a solein wede,
The touches stole, and the amorous lokes,
By sotell craft leide out lines and hokes,
The Ielous folk to traien and begile,
In their awaites with many a sundry wile,
All this in soth descriuen I ne can,
But well I, the new fame ran
This mean while with some swift passage,
Unto the Thebes, of this marriage,
And be report true and not fained,
Tho when thereof the ears has attained,
Mine Auctour writ of Ethiocles,
Touching the honor, and the great encres
Of Polimite highly magnified,
And that he newly was allied
With Adrastus in the land of Arge,
The which thing he greatly began to charge,
Dreading inly, that this Marriage
Shall after time turn to his damage,
Sore musing, and casting up and down
The great power and the high renoun
Of Adrastus, the which of Greeks land
Had all the power soget to his hond,
Least that he for Polimites sake,
Would upon him a new war make,
But if that he like the conuentioun,
At time set deliver up the town
To his brother, by bond of oath sworn,
And by covenant assured here toforne,
If ye remember, late as I you told,
Which he was in purpose for to hold,
But for his best, cast him for to vary,
And thereupon list no longer tarry,
Liche his desires to shape remedies,
And first he sent for his next allies,
In whom he had his most affiaunce,
For his lords that had governance
Of his kingdom, to come to him anon,
And when they weren present euerichon,
He said plainly wening for the best,
That his heart shall never be in rest,
But in sorrow and in a manner of dread,
Till his brother utterly be dead,
That he in Thebes in his royal sete
Might alone reign in quiet,
He meant himself, shortly and none other,
Vnpertourbed of Polimite his brother,
And at his counsel diverse of intent,
I find written three folks were present,
Some in soth that faithful were and true,
And some also that can change of new,
And other eke that between tweine,
Covertly could under color feine.
Commendation of Troth.
* THE first seid, above all thing,
Troth should long unto a king,
Of his word not be variable,
But plein and hool, as a contre stable.
How Troth is preferred in the Book of Esdre aforne Kings, Women, and Wine.
For troth first without any wene,
Is chief pillar that may a king sustain
In joy and honor for to lead his life,
For troth sometime had a prerogatife,
As of Esdre, the book can specify,
Record I take of prudent Neemie,
That worthy kings for all her great pride,
Wine, and women, been eke set aside,
With all power and dominacion,
Having reward in comparison
To trouths might, and trouths worthiness,
For as Esdre pleinly both express,
Who so takes head in the same place,
The influence sothly and the grace,
Of troth alone this old Neemie
Gat him license to reedifie
The walls new of Jerusalem,
Which is treasure chief of every Realm,
* For Solomon write, how y^ things tweine,
Troth, and mercy, linked in a cheine
Troth and Mercy preserven a King from all Adversity.
Preserve a king, like to his decree,
From al mischief and al aduersitee:
Alas therefore that any doubleness,
Variaunce, or else vnsikernesse,
Change nor doubleness should not be in a King.
Change of word or mutabilite,
Fraud or disceite, or instabilite,
Should in a king have domination,
To causen after his destruction.
Of kings redeth the story down by row,
And sees how many have been ouertrowe
Through her falshod, from fortunes whele,
For unto God, it pleases never adele
A king to be double of intent,
For it may hap that the world is went,
Full often since, by sleight of her werking,
But thus the truth God sees in every thing,
Right as it is, for there may be no cloud
Toforne his sight, troth for to shroude,
It may be clipsed and derked by deceit,
By false engine ligging in aweite,
As a serpent for to undermine,
But at last it will clearly shine,
Who y^ says nay, and show his bright beams,
For it in soth of kingdoms and of realms,
Is bearer up and conservatrice,
From al mischief and sothfast mediatrice,
To God above who so list to se,
To keep a king in prosperity,
On every side as I afferme dar,
For which ye kings and lords beeth well war,
Your behests justly for to hold,
And thinks how Thebes, with his walls old,
Destroyed was platly this is no les,
For the doubleness of Ethiocles,
That with his people sore after bought,
Only for that he not by conseil wrought,
Of hem that were both true and wise,
Him list not work by her auise,
But left troth, and set his fantasy
To be governed by false flattery,
The Counsel of false Flatterers.
That bad him think how he was a knight,
And to hold of force more than of right,
During his life the lordship of the town,
And not to lose his possession,
For no bond nor hestes made toforn,
* But let his brother blow in an horn
Where that him list, or pipe in a read:
This was the counseil platly and the read
Of soch as list not to say the soth,
But falsely flatre, with her words smoth.
And when they had holle her tale fined,
Ethiocles fully is inclined,
Whosoever thereat laugh or weep,
Like her counseil, possession to keep,
Who that says nay, or grutcheth there ayein,
Him to contraire, him thought was but vein.
How the year was come out that Ethiocles reigned in Thebes.
But in this while that the sheene son,
The xii. signs round about had run,
Since Ethiocles by just rekening,
In Thebes was crouned lord and king,
Holding the Scepter and the Diadem,
That by reason as it would seem,
The time was full complete and the space
Of covenant he should void his place,
And Polimite eke his journey make
Toward Thebes possession to take,
Of due title but he had wrong,
Which thought in soth, the year was wondre long:
Of his exile or that it come about
And for he had in heart a manner of doubt,
Least in his brother were falsehed found,
To acquit himself like as he was bound,
To Adrastus he began declare his heart,
Beseching him this matter to aduert,
And thereupon to give counsel sone,
Touching his right what was best to done,
Whether it were best to go or to abide,
Or like a knight, manly to ride
Himself alone and make no message,
For to challenge his rightful heritage,
Within Thebes either by pees or strife,
And thereupon to jeoperd his life,
Thus was he set, for all his fers brother:
But Adrastus sothly thought another
Bet was to send, than himself to gone,
Lest he were trapped among his mortal fone,
Having his brother suspect in this caas,
That by fraud or by some fallas,
He would work his destructioun,
If he were hardy to enter into the town,
For which he had him prudently take heed,
Fully concluding how it were more speed
That some other be to Thebes sent,
To perceive fully thentent
Of Ethiocles inward by some sign,
And if that he his crown will resign,
For thilke year like as he made his oath,
And when he knew how his purpose goth,
Thereupon to werken and proceed,
And thus Adrastus wisely began him read.
How Tideus took upon him to do the message of Polimite his Brother.
And while they treat upon this mattere,
Tideus with a manly chere,
Said utterly for his brothers sake,
This message he would undertake,
With whole themprise of thenbassiate,
Were it welefull or unfortunate,
He will not spare whatsoever betide.
But Adrastus, on that other side,
And Polimite in conclusion,
Were contraire to that opinion,
And said soothly as hem thought right,
Since that he was so well a proved knight,
And descended of so worthy blood,
That they nold for none yearthly good,
For all Thebes with the regalty,
Put his body in such jeopardy:
But all this thing avails him right naught,
For he will forth, how dear that it be bought,
Taking leave first of all the estates,
And armed him in maile, and sure plates,
And shope him forth upon his journie,
Who made then sorrow, but Deiphile.
The sorrow of Deiphile, when Tideus went toward Thebes the City.
With bitter tears dewed all her face,
Full often sithes, swouning in the place,
Trist and mourning in her black wede:
And when she saw that he took his stead,
So inwardly increased began her moan,
Seeing her lord so riding forth alone
Upon his way, this worthy Tideus:
And in all have, the story tells us,
He speedeth him so, making no delays,
That in the space of few days
The high toures of Thebes he began see,
And entered is into that city,
Wisely enquiring where the pallaice stood,
And like a knight thider straight he rode,
Marked full well in many a man's sight,
Like Mars himself, in steel armed bright,
Till he attained has the chief dongeon,
Where as the king held his mansion,
And through the palaice with a knightly look,
Into the hall the right way he took,
From his stead, when he light adoun,
Not aferde, but hardy as Lioun,
Where as the king, with lords a great rout,
In the hall sitting round about,
He entered in, most manfull of courage,
To execute the fine of his message,
And as him thought, convenient and due,
Full cunningly he began the king salve,
Requiring him of kingly excellence,
In goodly wise to give him audience,
And not disdain, neither in port ne chere,
Since he was come as a messangere
From Polimite his own brother dear,
Ginning his tale thus as ye shall here.
How wisely and how knightly Tideus did his message.
QVod he, unto your worthiness
My purpose is breefly to express
The effect holly, as in sentement,
Of the message, why that I am sent,
It were long process to make,
But of my mattere the very ground to take,
In eschuing of prolixity,
And void away all superfluity,
Since your self best ought to understand
The cause fully, that we have on hond,
And eke conceive the intent of my meaning,
Of rightwisenesse longing to a king:
First considered, if that ye take heed,
When Edippus the old king was deed,
How that your self, and your brother bliue,
For the crown contagiously began strive,
As mortal foen, by full great hatrede,
Which of you two should first succeed,
Till that ye were by means reconciled,
Ye to reign, and he to been exiled
Out of this town for a years space,
And then ayeine resort into his place,
To reign as king, and ye to voiden out,
So as your tourn by process comes about,
Eueriche of you patiently tendure
Thentrechaunging of his adventure,
Who were put out, or stood in his estate,
Thereupon to make no debate,
Liche the covenant and conuentioun,
Enrolled up by lords of the town,
Which of reason may not be denied,
Sithen ye have a year occupied:
The request that Tideus made in the name of Polimite, under the title of
Convention.
Polimite requires you of right,
To acquit you as a true knight,
In eschuing of mortal war and strife,
Since ye had a prerogatife,
As eldest brother, for to reign aforne,
And thinks how that ye arne sworn
Your oath to keep, and make no tarrying,
Holly aduerting, liche a prudent king,
* That troth is more in comparison,
Than all the treasour of your region,
More acceptable unto God and man,
Than all the richesse that ye reken can,
Wherefore in have, and let there be no sloth,
Quiteth your self justely in your troth
Unto your brother, avoiding this city,
And let him reign in his royal see,
The crown of Thebes a year to occupy,
Then will all Greece praise and magnify
Your high renoun, and may say none other,
But ye acquit you justly to your brother:
This whole theffect of all that I will sain,
Answer expectant what ye will send ayain.
When Tideus had told his tale,
Ethiocles triste and wonder pale,
His conceit first in manner has refreined,
Dissimuling under color feined,
Showing a chere in manner debonaire,
To his intent wonderly contraire,
Inward in heart wood and furious,
Tourning his face toward Tideus,
He began abreid and at last out spoke,
And even thus unto him he spoke.
The Answer of King Ethiocles.
I have great marvel (quoth. he) in my thought,
Of the message which that thou have brought,
That my brother, as thou have expouned,
Desires so in Thebes to be crowned,
Having regard to the abundaunce,
The great plenty, and the suffisaunce,
That he has now with the king of Arge,
That me seems he should little charge
To have Lordship or dominioun
In the bounds of this little town,
Since he reigns so freshly in his flours,
Surmounting all his predecessors,
By new increase, through fortunes might:
Wherefore in heart I am right glad and light,
Fully trusting, if I had need,
To his help, that without dread,
Like a brother, that I should him find
To me ward faithful, true, and kind,
Supposing plainly evermore,
Of this reign he set but little store,
Nor casts him not for so short a while,
As for a year his brother to exile,
To live in pouerry, and in great distress,
He will not suffer it of his high noblesse,
It were no token of no brother head,
But a sign rather of hatrede,
To interrupt my possession
Of this little poor Region.
All that he spoke, who so coud aduert,
Of very scorn rooted in his heart,
As hem seempt, the story can you teach,
By the surplus soothly of his speech,
He might no longer him restreine,
But plainly said, as between us tweine,
I mean thus, Polimite and me,
There is no bond nor surete,
Ne faith ymade, that may him avail,
As he claims, to give the gouernaile
Of this city, neither year ne day,
For I shall let him, soothly if I may,
That he shall not by title of his bond,
Enjoy in Thebes half a foot of land,
Let him keep that he has won,
For I purpose, as I have begone,
To reign in Thebes henceforth all my live,
Maugre all hem that thereayen strive,
And in despite of his friends all,
Or the counsel that him list to call,
Let him be sure, and know this right well,
His manacing I dread never a dele,
And sikerly, as to my devise,
It shows well that thou art not wise,
But suppressed with a manner of rage,
To take on thee this surquedous message,
And presumest to do so high offense,
So boldly to speak in my presence,
But all in fere, avail shall right naught,
For the tithings that thou have brought
Shall unto him be disencreace,
He better were to have been in peace,
Than of folly and presumption,
Against me to seech occasion,
For I live, and thereto here mine hond,
As I said erst, he wins here no land,
While the wall of this town may stond,
For plainly I do thee to understand,
That they shull first be beat down full low,
And all the toures to the earth ythrow,
Ere he in Thebes have any thing ado,
Lo here is all, return and say him so.
When Tideus saw the fervent ire
Of the king, with anger set on fire,
Full of despite, and of Melancholy,
Conceiving eke the great fellonie
In his apport, like as he were wood,
This worthy knight a little while stood
Sad and demure, ere he would ought seine,
But at last thus he said ayeine.
The knightly Answer that Tideus yaue ayeine to the King.
Certes (quoth. he) I conceive of new,
About thee thy counsel is untrue,
I dare it saine, and vow it at best,
Ne thou art not faithful of thy behest,
Stable of thy word yt thou have said toforne,
But deceiuable, and falsely eke forsworn,
And eke perjurate of thine assured oath:
But whether so be that thou be lefe or wroth,
I say thee shortly, hold it for no fage,
All this shall turn unto thy damage,
Trist it well, and in full cruel wise
All Greeks land shall upon thee arise,
To be avenged, and manly to redress
The great untruth and the high falsenesse
Which y^ thou have again thy brother wrought,
It shall full dear after this be bought,
And verily indeed, as thou shall lere,
King Adrastus will meddle in this matere,
And all the Lords about him enuiron,
That bounden be to his subjection,
Princes, Dukes, and many a noble Knight,
In susteining of thy brothers right,
Shall on a day with spear and with shield
Against thee be gadred in a field,
Knightly to preue all by one assent,
That thou art falls, and double of intent,
Of thy promise atteint, and eke outrayed,
And leave me well, it shall not be delayed,
But in all have execute in deed:
* Like thy desert, thou shall have thy meede,
For God above, and his rightwisenesse,
Such open wrong shall in have redress,
And of his might all such collusion
Reform ayeine, and all extortion,
* For this the fine, Falsehood shall not veil,
Against troth in field to holden battle,
Wrong is crooked, both halt and lame,
And here anon in my brothers name,
As I that am his next allie,
At his querele, shortly I defy,
Fully auised, with all mine hole intent,
And ye Lords, that been here present,
I you require of your worthiness,
To say troth, and bear witness
When time comes, and justly to record,
How your king falsely began discord
From his hest, of false variaunce,
And think on, how ye of faith and ligeaunce
Are bound echone, ye may not go therefro,
For to obey and serve both two
This next year, now anon following,
As to your lord, and to your true king
Polimite, though he be now absent,
By just accord made in Parliament,
At your devise, which sitten here a row,
Engrossed was up, as it is well know,
And enrolled only for witness
In your Registers to void all falsenesse,
That none of you vary may of new
From that I say, but if he be vnt^ew,
For which I read your self to acquit,
Let no time longer lie in respite,
But at ones, without more tarrying,
Of manly force fet home your king,
Maugre your fone, like as ye are bound,
And let in you no sloth be found
To put him justly in possession,
This is my counsel in conclusion.
How manly Tideus departed from the King.
When Tideus had his message said,
Like to the charge that was on him said,
As he that list no longer there sojourne,
Fro the king he began his face turn,
Not astonished, nor in his heart aferde,
But full proudely laid hond on his sword,
And in dispite, who was lefe or loath,
A stern pace through the hall he goth
Through the court, and manly took his stead,
And out of Thebes fast began him speed,
Enhasting him, till he was at large,
And sped him forth toward the land of Arge.
Thus leave I him riding forth a while,
Whiles that I return ayeine my style
Unto the king, which in the hall stood
Among his lords, furious and wood,
And his heart wroth, and evil apaied
Of the words that Tideus had said,
Specially having remembrance
On the proud dispitous defiance,
Whiles that he fat in his royal See,
Upon which he would avenged be
Full cruelly, what that ever befall,
And in his ire he began to him call
Chief Constable of his Chivalry,
Charging him fast for to hie,
With all the worthy chose of his household,
Such as he knew most manfull and bold,
In all have Tideus for to sue,
Tofore or he out of his land remue,
Up peine of life, and lesing of her head,
Without mercy anon that he be dead.
How falsely Ethiocles laid an Ambushment in the way to have slain Tideus in
his repair.
And of knights fifty were in number,
Mine author says, unawarely him to comber,
Armed echone in maile and thick stele,
And therewithal yhorsed wonder well,
At o posterne forth they gonne to ride,
By a gein path, that lay out aside,
Secretly, that no man hem aspy,
Only of treason, and of felony,
They have hem forth all the long day
Of cruel malice, for to stop his way,
Through a forest, all of one assent,
Full covertly for tolay a bushment
Under an hill at a strait passage,
To fallen on him at more advantage,
The same way that Tideus began draw,
At thilke mount where y^ Sphinx was slaw,
He nothing ware in his opinion,
Of the compassed conspiration,
But innocent, like a gentle knight,
Rode aye forth, till it drow to night,
Sole by himself without company,
Having no man him to wise or gie,
But at last, lifting up his head,
Toward eve he began to take heed,
Mid of his way, right as any line,
Thought he saw against the Moon shine
Shields fresh, and plates burned bright,
The which enuiron, cast a great light,
Imagining in his fantasy,
There was treason or conspiracy
Wrought by y^ king, his journey for to let,
And of all that he nothing set,
But well assured in his manly heart,
List not ones aside to divert,
But kept his way, his shield upon his breast,
And cast his spear manly in the rest:
How worthy Tideus outrayed fifty Knights, lying in await for to slaen him.
And the first platly that he met,
Through the body proudly he him smette,
That he fell dead, chief master of hem all,
And then at ones they upon him fall,
On every paas, by compass enuiron,
But Tideus through his high renoun,
His bloody sword let about him glide,
He sleeth and kills upon every side,
In his ire and his mortal tene,
That meruell it was how he might so sustene
Against hem all, on every half beset,
But his sword was so sharp whet,
That his fomen found it full vnsoot,
But he alas was made light on foot,
By force grounded in full great distress,
But of knighthood and of high prowess
Up he rose, maugre all his fone,
And as they came, he slough hem one by one,
Like a Lion rampant in his rage,
And on this hill he found a narrow passage,
Which that he took, of full high prudence,
And liche a Bore stonding at his defense,
As his fomen proudely him assail,
Upon the plein her blood he made to rail,
All enuiron, that the soil wax read,
Now here, now there, as they fellen dedde,
That here lay one, and there lay two or three,
So merciless in his crueltee
Thilke day he was upon hem found,
And at ones his enemy did confound,
Where as he stood, this mighty champion,
Beside he saw with water turned down,
An huge stone, large, round and square,
And suddenly ere that they were ware,
As it had lien there for the nones,
Upon his foen he rolled it at ones,
That ten of hem wenten unto wrack,
And the remenaunt amassed, drew abacke,
For one by one they went to mischaunce:
Thus finally he brought to outrance
Hem euerychone, Tideus as bliue,
That none but one left of hem alive,
Himself yhurt and ywounded kene,
Through his harneis bleeding on the grene,
The Theban knights in compass round about,
In the valley slain all the whole rout,
Which pitously again the Moon gape,
For none of hem shortly might escape,
But dead echone, as they have deserved,
Save one except, the which was reserved
By Tideus, of this entention
To the king to make relation,
How his knights have on her journey sped,
Euerich of hem his life left for a wed,
And at meeting how they have hem borne,
To tellen all, he assured was and sworn
To Tideus, full lowly on his knee,
By which ensample openly ye may see,
How Truth with little Multitude has ever in the fine, Victory of Falsehood.
Ayens troth falsehood has no might,
Figh on querels, not grounded upon right,
Without which may be no victory,
For every man have this in memory,
That great power shortly to conclude,
Plenty of good, or great multitude,
Slight or engine, force or felony,
Arne too feeble to hold a champarty
Against troth, who that list take heed,
For at end falsehood may not speed
Tendure long, ye shall find it thus,
Record I take of worthy Tideus,
That arted his hond through troths excellence,
Fifty knights slough in his defense,
But one except, as I late told,
Sworn and assured, with his hand uphold,
The king tenforme how they were atteint:
And Tideus of bleeding was wonder feint,
Mate and weary, and in great distress,
And ouerlayd of very feebleness,
But as he might tho himself sustene,
He took his horse stonding on the grene,
Worthed up, and forth he began to ride
An easy paas, with his wounds wide,
And soothly yet, in his opinion,
He was always aferde of treason,
But anguishous, and full of busy peine,
He rode him forth, till he did atteine
Into the bounds of Ligurgus land,
A worthy king, and manly of his hond,
How Tideus all to wounded, came into Ligurgus land.
And he full pale only for lack of blood,
Tideus saw where a Castle stood,
Strong and mighty, built upon a roche,
Toward which fast he began approach,
Conueighed thider by clearenesse of the stone,
That by night, ayens the Moon shone,
On high toures, with crestes Marciall,
And joining almost to the wall,
Was a gardein, little out beside,
Into which Tideus began to ride
Of adventure, by a gate small,
And there he found, for to reken all,
A lusty Erber, unto his devise,
Sweet and fresh, like a Paradise,
Very heavenly of inspectioun,
And first of all he alight adoun,
The goodly place when that he beheld,
And from his neck he voided has his sheld,
Drew the bridle from his horse head,
Let him go, and took no manner head,
Through the garden that enclosed was,
Him to pasture on the soot gras,
And Tideus more heavy than is Led,
Upon the herbs green, white, and read,
As him thought that time for the best,
He laid him down for to take his rest,
Of weariness, desirous to sleep,
And none await his body for to keep,
And with dreams grudged ever among,
There he lay till the Lark song
With notes new, high up in the air,
The glad morrow rody and right fair,
Phoebus also casting up his beams,
The high hills gilt with his streams,
The silver dew upon the herbs round,
There Tideus lay upon the cold ground,
At vprist of the shene Sun,
And stoundmeale his green wounds run
Round about, that the soil depeint
Was of the green with the red meint.
How Ligurgus Daughter found Tideus sleeping in the Herber, all forwounded.
And every morrow, for holesomnes of air,
Ligurgus daughter did make her repair
Of custom aye among the flowers new
In the garden, of many a diverse hew,
Such joy had she for to take heed,
On her stalks for to seen hem sprede,
In the alures walking to and fro:
And when she had a little while go,
Her self alone casting up her sight,
She beheld where an armed knight
Lay to rest him on the herbs cold,
And him beside she began eke behold
His mighty stead walking here and there,
And she anon fell in a manner fere,
Specially when she saw the blood
Sprad on the green, about there she stood,
But at last she caught hardiness,
And womanly began her for to dress
Toward the knight, having a manner dread,
And great doubt least that he were deed:
And of her will soothly this was chief,
That she thought for to make a priefe,
How that it stood of this man full often,
And forth she goes, and touches him soft,
Where as he lay, with her honds small:
And with a face deadly bleike and pale,
Liche as a man adawed in a swough,
He up stert, and his sword drought,
Not fully out, but put it up ayeine,
Anon as he has the Lady seine,
Beseeching her only of her grace,
To have pity on his trespace,
And rue on him of her womanhede,
For of a fray he was fall in dread,
Least he had been assailed of new
Of the Thebanes, preued full untrue,
For dread of which he was so rechlees,
Full humbly him yielding to the pees,
Trist in himself, y^ he passed had his bounds.
And when that she saw his mortal wounds,
She had routh, of very gentillesse,
Of his disease and his distress,
And had he should be nothing dismayed,
Nor in heart sorrifull nor affraied,
Discomfort him in no manner thing,
For I (quoth. she) am daughter to the king
Called Ligurge, which greatly me delight
Every morrow this garden to visit,
It is to me so passingly disport,
Wherefore (quoth. she) beth of good comfort:
How womanly the Lady acquit her to Tideus in his Disease.
For no wight here touching your voyage,
Shall hinder you, ne do you no damage,
And if ye list of all your adventure
The plain troth unto me discure,
I will in sooth do my business,
To reform your grievous heaviness
With all my might, and whole my diligence,
That I hope of your great offense,
Ye shall have help in your aduersite,
And as ferreforth as it lies in me,
Trusts right well, ye shall no faut find:
And when he saw that she was so kind,
So womanly, so goodly and benign
In all her port by many a diverse sign,
He unto her by order will not spare,
His auentures fully to declare
In Thebes first touching his message,
And at hill of the woody rage,
Of his wounds and of his hurts sore,
It were but vain to rehearse it more,
By and by he told it euerydele,
The which in sooth she liked never adele,
But had routh and compassion
Of his mischief, wrought by false treason,
Riding in have, that he should her sue,
And womanly, as her thought due,
To a chamber she led him up aloft,
Full well beseine, there in a bed right soft,
Richly abouten apparrailed,
With cloth of gold all the flower irailed
Of the same, both in length and bread,
And first this Lady, of her womanhede,
Her women did bid, as goodly as they can,
To be attendant unto this wounded man,
And when he was unarmed to his shert,
She made first wash his wounds smert,
How Tideus was refreshed in the Castle of the Lady.
And search hem well with diverse instruments,
And made fette sundry ointments,
And Leeches eke, the best she coud find,
Full craftily to staunch him and to bind:
And every thing that may done him ease,
To suage his peine, or his woe tapease,
Was in the Court and in the Castle sought,
And by her bidding to her chamber wrought,
And for his sake, she has after sent
For such deinties as were convenient,
Most nutritife by Phisickes lore,
Hem that were seek or wounded, to restore,
Making her women eke to taken keep,
And await on him on nights when he sleep,
And be well ware that nothing astart,
That was or might be lusty to his heart.
And with all this, she prayed him abide,
Till he were strong and mighty for to ride,
In the Castle to play him and disport,
And at leiser home ayeine resort,
When he might by welde him at his large,
But all for naught he will home to Arge,
Took his leave on the next day,
Without abode to have him on his way,
Lowly thanking unto her goodness,
Of her freedom and bounteous largess,
So womanly, that her list take heed,
Him to refresh in his great need,
Behoting her with all his full might,
He would be her servant and her true knight
While he lives, of what she will him charge,
And forth he rode till he come to Arge,
How Tideus repeired is home to Arge.
In full great have, and would no where dwell,
But what should I rehearse, either tell
Of his repair, the coasts or the pleines,
The great roches, or the high mounteines,
Or all the manner of his home coming,
Of the meeting, nor the welcomming,
Nor the joy that Adrastus made,
Nor how his suster or his wife were glade,
Nor how that they, whereto should I write,
Enbraced him in her arms white,
Nor the gadering about him, or the prees,
Nor the sorrow that Polimites
Made in himself, to see him sore wounded,
His grievous hurts, his sores eke unsounded,
His deadly look, and his face pale,
Of all this to ginne a new tale,
It were in sooth a manner idleness,
Nor how himself in order did express,
First how that he in Thebes has him borne,
Ne how the king falsely was forsworn,
Nor of thawait nor treason that he set,
When fifty knights on the way him met,
As ye have heard all the manner how,
Without which my tale is long ynow:
But Adrastus made men to seach
In every coast for many a diverse Leach,
To come in have, and make no tarrying
Upon a peine, by bidding of the king
To done her craft, that he were recured,
And of his force in every part assured.
And they echone so her cunning show,
That in space of a days few
He was all whole made of his sickness,
There was tho joy, and then was there gladness,
Throughout the court, and through al y^ town,
For every man has such opinioun
In Tideus, for his gentillesse,
For his manhood, and his lowliness,
That he was hold the most famous knight,
And best beloved in every man's sight,
Throughout Greece in every region.
But now must I make a digression,
To tell shortly, as in sentement,
Of thilke knight that Tideus has sent
Into Thebes, only to declare
Of the great mischief and the evil fare,
Unto the king, how it is befall,
The open troth of his knights all,
How Tideus has slain hem euerychone,
That save himself, there escaped none,
Which was reserved from sheding of his blood,
The king to tell plainly how it stood:
And when he had rehearsed every point,
Ethiocles stood in such disjoynt,
How Ethiocles sore was astonished, when he heard the death of his Knights.
Of hateful ire he wext nigh wood,
And in his teene and in his fell mood,
Of cruel malice to the knight he spoke,
And felly seid, that it was for lack
Only of manhood, and through her cowardice,
That they were flaine in so mortal wise,
And hanged be he high by the neck,
That of your death or of your slaughter reck,
Or you compleine, either one or all,
Of the mischief that is you befall,
I do no force that none of you astert,
But sigh upon your false coward heart,
That o knight has through his renoun
Brought you all to confusioun,
Full graceless and full unhappy to:
Nay (quoth. this knight) it is nothing so.
It is thine unhap plainly, and not ours,
That so many worthy warriors,
Which all her life never had shame,
Except this querele, taken in thy name,
That grounded was, and rooted on falsenesse,
This was cause in very soothnesse,
Of our unhap, I wot well, and none other,
With thine untruth done unto thy brother,
And that thou were so openly forsworn,
And percell cause, why that we were lorne,
Was falls breaking of thine assured oath.
And tho the king, mad almost for wroth,
In purpose was for to slay this knight,
Only for he said, unto him right,
The which alas, both at eve and morrow,
Suppressed was with a deadly sorrow,
Renning aye in his remembrance,
With the pitous and unhappy chance
Of the great mischief and misauenture,
Touching the death and discomfiture
Of his fieres, and of himself also,
That the shamefast importable woe
So was on him, with such a mortal strife,
That he was weary of his own life,
Hent he has a swerd, and aside stert,
And roue himself even to the heart,
The king himself being tho present:
And the rumor and the noise is went
Through Thebes, of the wood rage,
By such as weren joined by lineage
To the knights, slain at hill,
That all at ones of one heart and will,
They would have arisen throughout y^ City,
Upon the king avenged for to be,
Which of her death was chief occasioun:
But the Barons and Lords of the town
Full busy were this rumor and disease,
Of high prudence, to stint and appease,
In quiet every thing to set:
And after that, the bodies home they fette
Of the knights, like as ye have herd
Before yslaine, with the bloody swerd
Of Tideus, full sharp whet and ground,
And in the field, so as they hem found,
Only of love, and of affectioun,
Solemnly they brought hem to the town,
And like the manner of the rites old,
They were first brent into ashes cold,
And each one yburied, like to his degree,
Lo here the kalends of aduersite,
Sorrow upon sorrow, and destruction,
First of the king, and all the region,
For lack only, like as I you told,
That behests truly were not hold:
The first ground and root of this ruin,
As the story clearly shall determine,
And my tale hereafter shall you lere,
If that you list the remnaunt for to here.
Finitur Pars secunda, sequitur Pars tertia.
O Cruel Mars, full of Melancoly,
And of thy kind, hot, combust, and dry,
As the sparkles shown from so far,
By the streams of the red sterre,
In thy Sphere as it about goth,
What was cause that thou were so wroth
With hem of Thebes, through whose fervent ire
The City brent, and was set on fire,
As books old well rehearse conne,
Of cruel hate, rooted and begone,
And engendered, the story makes mind,
Only of blood corrupt and unkind,
By infection, called original,
Causing a strife dredefull and mortal,
Of which the mischeef through al Greece ran,
And King Adrastus alderfirst began,
Which has him cast a conquest for to make
Upon Thebes, for Polimites sake,
In knightly wise there to preue his might,
Of full intent to recure his right.
And first of all he set a Parliament,
And has his letters and messengers sent
Through Greece, to many sundry Kings,
Hem to enhast, and make no lettings,
And round about, as made is mention,
He sent also to many a region
For Princes, Dukes, Earls, and Barons,
To taken up in cities and in tounes,
And to chesen out the most likeliest,
And such as weren preued for the best,
As of manhood, and send hem up each one,
And in her hond receive her pay anon,
With Adrastus to Thebes for to ride,
And tho lords that with him abide
The great purveyaunce of King Adrastus toward the City of Thebes.
In household still, have her leave take
To riden home, her return to make
In her countries, as they were of degree,
To sustene hem, to take up meine,
And to make hem strong with knights and squeres,
With speres, bows, and arbalasteres,
In all the have possible that they may,
And to return in her best array,
At term set, full manly to be seine
Toforne Arge moustren in a pleine:
The Kings and Princes that come to Adrastus.
And as I read full worthy of degree,
Thider come first Prothonolope,
The which was by record of writing,
Of Archade, son unto the king,
And full prudent found in war and pees:
There came also the king Gilmichenes,
As I find, full famous of renoun,
Thider come eke the king Ipomedoun:
And passing all of knighthood and of name,
And excelling by worthiness of fame
The noble king, called Campaneus,
Came eke to Arge, the story tells thus,
Proved full well, and had riden fer:
And thider come the king Meleager,
King Genor eke, that held his royal see,
Mine author says, in the land of Greece:
King Locris, and king Pirrus,
And eke the king called Tortolonus,
And renouned in many a region,
There come the king called Palenon,
Often assayed, and found a manly knight,
That with him brought in steel armed bright,
Full many worthy out of his country,
And Tideus most knightly for to see,
That noble man, that worthy werriour,
As he that was of worthiness the flour,
Master and Mirror by prowes of his hond,
Has sent also into the mighty land
Of Calcedoine, of which he was heir,
That is his kingdom, both rich and feire,
Charging his counsel and officers also,
In all the have that it may be do,
To seeken out the best werriours
Of famous knights and proved souldeours
Through al ye land, and leid on hem this charge
Without abode for to come to Arge:
And they obey full lowly his bidding,
Enhasting hem, and made no letting,
But sped hem fast upon her journey.
And from Thebes the mighty strong city,
Came down knights, with many another man,
Maugre the king, to help what they can,
Considred first his falsehood and treason,
Ymeued only of troth and of reason,
Polimites, as they were sworn of yore,
To his Crown justly him restore:
And when they were at large out of the town,
Unto Arge they be descended down,
And like her oath, and her assurance,
As they were bound only of ligeance,
To him they come in full lowly wise,
Lowly to done what him list devise.
And when he had her troth full conceived,
He has to grace goodly hem received,
Assigning hem her place amid the host,
Assembled there, from many a diverse coast:
That finally, in this company
Ygadred was the flower of Cheualry,
Ychosen out of all Greeks land,
The most knightly and manfull of her hond,
That as I trow, since the world began,
There was not seen so many a manly man,
So well horsed with spear and with shield,
Togider sembled soothly in a field:
There men might see many strange guises
Of arming new, and uncouth devises,
Every man after his fantasy,
That if I should in order specify,
Every piece longing to armure,
And thereupon do my busy cure,
It were in sooth almost a days work,
And the terms also been so derke,
To rehearse hem clearly, and to rhyme,
I pass over for lack of time,
And tell I will forth of her lodging,
How Adrastus the noble worthy king,
Has every lord like to his degree,
Received well within the city,
And there they had like to her pleasaunce,
Of what needs fulsome habundance,
For men and horse plenty of vitaile,
Commanding that nothing ne fail,
That all these noble worthy werriours,
Both high and low and poor soldiers,
Yserued were of what they have need,
For Adrastus presently took heed,
That it avails a King to pay his People truly her fond.
Full lich a King, touching her term day,
That they toforne were served to her pay,
He was so free he list nothing restrain,
And no man had cause to complain
For hunger, thrust, ne for indigence,
But all thing ready was unto her presence:
And in a Prince it is full great repriefe,
To suffer his people live at mischief,
It is full heavy and grievous in her thought,
If he habound and they have right naught,
He may not both possede body and heart,
He to be rich and seen his people smart,
He may the body, of power well constrain,
But her heart has a full long rain,
Maugre his might, to louen at her large,
* There may no King, on hearts set a charge,
Ne hem coarten from her libertee,
Men saine full often how that thought is free,
For which each prince, Lord and governor,
And specially each conqueror,
Let him beware for all his high noblesse,
That bounty, free dome, plenty, and largess,
By one accord, that they his bridle led,
Least of his people, when he has most need,
He be defrauded, when he is but alone,
Then is too late for to make his moan,
But in his Court let him first devise
To exile Scarcehead and Couetise,
Then is likely with freedom if he ginne
Love of his people evermore to win,
To reign long in honor and contune,
Aye to increase by favor of Fortune,
And his enemies manly to oppress,
* For love is more than great richesse.
How love avails more to a King, than Gold or Riches.
Gold fails often, but love will abide,
For life or death by a lords side,
And the treasour shortly of a king
Stondeth in love above all thing,
Farewell lordship both morrow and eve,
Specially when love takes his leave,
And who so list it Mirror for to make
Of knightly freedom, let him ensample take
Of Adrastus, the manly king famous,
So liberal and so bounteous
Unto his people at all times found,
Which made him strong, his fomen to confound,
And love only, his enemies to werrey,
All Greece made his bidding to obey,
Of one accord to knightly by his side,
All at ones to Thebes for to ride,
For tauenge, since they were so strong,
The great injury and importable wrong
Unto his son, and to his next allie,
As ye to forne have heard me specify.
But whiles Greeks rest a time in pees,
I will resort unto Ethiocles,
Which in Thebes warely has espied,
By his friends as he was certified
Of the Greeks wholly the ordinance,
Her purpose eke, and her purueyaunce,
And thereof had in heart a manner dread,
And first he took his counsel and his read
How Ethiocles made him strong against the coming of the Greeks.
Of the Lords and Barons of the town,
And of the wisest of his regioun,
How he might maken resistance,
Manly to stonden at defense,
To be so strong that there were no dout:
And in the countries adjacent about,
And eke also in foreign regions
He has withhold all the champions,
And thereupon he sent out his espies,
And his friends, and his next allies,
And all the worthy dwelling enuiroun,
Young, fresh, and lusty, he gadred to the town,
Maskewed his walls and his toures,
And stuffed hem with manly souldeours,
Round about he set many gonnes,
Great and small, and some large as tonnes,
In his hasty passing fervent heat,
He spent his treasour, and yaue yefts great
Unto knights, and worthy men of name,
* And evermore to increase his fame,
He yaue to lords jewels manyfold,
Clothes of Velvet, Damask, and of gold,
To get him hearts, soothly as I read,
To help him now in his great need,
And prudently purueyed him toforne
Of flesh, of fish, of wine, and of corn,
Set his Captains early and late
With full great stuff stonding at every gate,
And made also by werkemen that were true,
Barbicans and Bulwerkes strong and new,
Barreres, cheines and ditches wonder deep,
Making his auow the city for to keep,
While he lives, despite of all his fone,
And by his gods of metal and of stone,
Full often he swore both of heart and thought,
That it shall first full dear ben ybought,
And many a man, with polax, swerd, and knife,
Before this town shall first lose his life,
And there shall eke many sides blede,
Ere that his brother possibly possede
The town in pees, like as Greeks wene:
But at end the troth it shall be seen,
Let him beware, and well toforne provide
For Adrastus on that other side
For his party was not negligent,
But on a day held his parliament,
All his lords sitting enuiron,
To drive shorteley a pleine conclusion,
And up tapoint the fine of her intent,
But some thought it full expedient,
Ere they proceed, to work by thauise
Of one that was full prudent and wise,
And circumspect in his works all,
A worthy Bishop into age fall,
And called was soothly by his name
Amphiorax, of whom the great fame,
How the Bishop Amphiorax was sent for to come unto the Greeks.
Through all the lands, both East and South,
Among the Greeks passingly was couth,
A man in sooth of old antiquity,
And most accept of authority,
First by reason of his high estate,
And eke he was so fortunate,
And in his works was also secre
With the gods, knowing her priuite,
By grant of whom, as books specify,
He had a spirit of true prophecy,
And coud aforne full openly divine
Things begone, how they should fine,
And eke by craft of calculation
Give a doom of every question,
And had in Magike great experience,
And find coud by heavenly influence,
And by meuing of the high sterres,
A final doom of conteke and of werres.
The Prophecy of Amphiorax the Bishop.
And wist well, as his gods told,
That if Greeks forth her journey hold,
It turn shall platly, this is no fage,
To great mischief and great damage
Of hem echone, and in especial,
The most blood, right of the blood royal
Through all Greece, it may not be withdraw
In this voyage shortly shall be slaw,
And of him, why the Greeks went,
Who that ever wept him or bemente,
This is the fine, and may not be succored,
Of the earth he should be devoured
Quick as he was, he knew it in certain,
And for he saw there nas none other gain
To save his life, nor no bette defense,
Than utterly to withdraw his presence,
Praying his wife for him to provide,
If he were sought, that she should him hide,
And womanly for to keep him close,
And of troth conceiling his purpose,
For all his trust, touching his greuaunce,
Was full set in her purueyaunce,
I hope to God, that he there not dread
Of no deceit, in her womanhede,
She was so true, as women been echone,
And also close and muet as a stone,
That she ne would, as the mill stood,
Discuren him for no worlds good.
But finally, the Greeks of intent,
In all his dread have for this Bishop sent,
How the Wife of Amphiorax, of conscience to save her Oath, discured her
Husband.
And soughten so long, ere they might him find,
For cause his wife was to him so kind,
That so surely has locked up his corpse,
But for she had a manner remors
In her self, greuing her conscience,
Dreding to fall in great offense,
Least her soul were in peril lorne,
When she by oath compelled was and sworn,
They requiring, if she coud tell
Where her lord the Bishop should dwell,
Which to discure, her heart was full loath,
Till time she began remember on her oath,
And coud a troth of custom not deny,
And had also great conscience to lie,
Wonder heavy, with a sorrifull face,
Maugre her lust, taught hem to the place
Where as he was shitte up in a toure,
All alone, having no succor,
They fell on him, ere that he was ware,
And set him up in a full rich chare.
* A fool he was to jeoparde his life,
For to discure his counsel to his wife,
And yet she was full sorry for his sake,
And specially when she saw him take:
* But I hope that her heaviness
Began tassuage full soon by process
In short time, when that he was gone,
* There is no tempest may lest ever in one:
But this Bishop by very force and might
Unto Greeks conveyed was full right,
This hoar gray in his chair sitting,
And they full glad weren of his coming,
Having a trist and full opinion,
Through the cause and occasion
Of his wisdom and his sapience,
And by virtue of his high prescience,
They should eschew all adversity
Possible to fall as in her journey,
And as the story fully has devised,
Full circumspect, and right well auised,
He has pronounced in the parliament,
Tofore the Lords, and the President,
His clear conceit in very sikernesse,
Not entriked with no doubleness,
Her dismal days, and her fatal hours,
Her auentures, and her sharp shoures,
The froward sort, and unhappy stounds,
The complaint of her deadly wounds,
The woeful wrath and the contrariosty
Of fell Mars, and his cruelty,
And how by mean of his gray mood
There shall be shed all the worthy blood
Of the Greeks, it may not been eschued,
If her purpose be execute and sued,
There is no more, this shall be the fine,
The high noblesse shall draw to decline
Of Greeks blood, in mischief, sorrow, and woe,
And with all this, I my self also,
As my fate has before disposed,
Deep in the ground I shall be enclosed
And locked up in the derke vale
Of cruel death: lo this was the tale
That the Bishop to Adrastus told,
Him counsailing his purpose to withhold,
In escheuing of more mischief and sorrow,
For all his gods he took to borrow,
If the Thebans and the Greeks meet,
The fine thereof shall be so unsweet,
That all Greece after shall it rue,
Warning hem, if they the mischief knew
That shall follow, which no man may let,
They would abstain a siege for to set
Unto Thebes, and her purpose leave.
With whose words y^ lords began hem grieve,
And therein had but full small delight,
And euerich of heartely high despite,
They abreide, and se^d he was untrue,
And a contreuer of prophecies new,
And eke also, for all his long berd,
An old dotard, a coward, and aferd,
And of rancour gonne to defy
Both his calcling and his Astronomy,
And shortly said, they took thereof none head,
Ne will no thing govern hem by his read.
This was the clamor and noise in every coast
Of high and low, throughout all the host,
And specially of the poor soldiers,
And of lords reigning in her flours,
And of the estates effectuelly I mean,
Which of age were but tender and grene,
That have not had of Marces influence
Of the werre great experience.
* Here if ye list ye may consider and see,
Of coueiting, great aduersitee,
How that youth no peril cast aforne,
Till he in mischief suddenly be lorne,
There as age provides every thing,
Ere he begin to casten the ending.
How Age and Youth been of diverse Opinions.
* Youth is governed by a large reine,
To stert forth, and can him not refreine,
But of head set on all at ones,
As he that hurteleth against hard stones,
Broseth himself, and unawarely perbraketh:
But Age expert, nothing undertakes,
But he toforne by good discretion
Make a due examination
How it will turn either to bad or good:
But youth, as fast as stirred is the blood,
Takes emprises of hasty wilfulness,
Joy at ginning, the end is wretchedness.
The old prudent in all his governance,
Full long aforne makes purueyaunce:
But youth alas by counseil will not work,
For which full often he stumbleth in the derke.
Thus selde is seen, the troth to termine,
That age and youth draw by o line,
And where that folly has domination,
Wisdom is put in subjection:
How that Wisdom without Supportation avails little or naught.
Like as this bishop with all his high prudence,
For cause he might have none audience,
All his wisdom and his prophecy
Of the Greeks was holden but folly,
For though Plato, and wise Socrates,
Moral Seneke, and Diogenes,
Albumaser, and prudent Theolonee,
And Tullius, that had soueraintee
Whylome in Rome, as of eloquence,
Though all these, shortly in sentence,
Were alive, most cunning and expert,
And no man list her counsel to aduert,
Nor of her sawes for to taken heed,
What might avail, and it come to need:
* For where as prudence can find no succor,
And providence has no favor,
Farewell wisdom, and farewell discretion,
For lack only of supportation.
For vnsupported with his locks hoar,
Amphiorax sighen began full sore,
With head inclined, and many an heavy thought,
When y^ he saw his counsel s^ood for naught:
For utterly, the Greeks, as I told,
Have fully cast her journey for to yhold,
Made hem ready, and gonne for to hostey
Toward Thebes, the city for to werrey,
And in Greece will no longer tarry,
And forth with hem Amphiorax they carry,
Set in his chair with a doleful heart,
When he wist he might not astert
Of his fate the disposition,
And hosteying into the region
Of Ligurge, Greeks can approach
A sundry land, with many a craggy roche,
But all the way soothly that they gone,
For horse ne man water was there none,
So dry were the valleys and the pleines,
For all that year they had had no reins,
But full great drought, as made is mention,
And all the land searching enuiron,
The great Mischief that the Greeks had for default of Water.
They another found Well ne Riuere,
Hem to refresh, nor water that was clear,
That they alas no refute ne conne,
So importable was the shene Son,
So hot on hem, in foulds where they ley,
That for mischief men and horse they dey,
Gaping full dry upward into the South,
And some putten her swerdes in her mouth,
And spear heads, in story as it is told,
Tassuage her thurst with the iron cold,
And of his life full many one despeired,
In this mischief is home ageine repeired:
Till on a day worthy Tideus,
And with him eke the king Campaneus
Of purpose rode throughout the country,
If they might any water see,
From coast to coast, both far and nere,
Till of fortune they entered an herbere,
With trees shadowed fro the sun shene,
Full of flowers, and of herbs grene,
Wonder wholesome of sight and air,
Therein a lady, that passingly was fair,
Sitting as tho under a Laurer tree,
And in her arms a little child had she,
Full gracious of look and of visage,
And was also wonder tender of age,
Son of the king, borne to succeed,
Called Ligurgus, in story as we read,
Whose hearts joy, and worldly eke disport,
All his mirth eke, pleasance, and comfort,
Was in this child of excellent fairness:
And this lady, mirror of semelinesse,
All suddenly, as she cast up her sight,
Upon his stead saw an armed knight,
Greatly abashed, began her anon remue,
But Tideus began after fast to sue:
How Tideus complained to the Lady in the Herber for Water.
And said suster, beth nothing dismayed
In your self, displeased, nor affraied,
For we are come only to this place,
You to beseech of mercy and of grace,
Us to succor in our great need,
Declaring you how it stand indeed:
Here fast by, almost at hond,
The worthiest of all Greeks land,
Kings, Princes, be lodged in the field,
And many other with polax and with shield,
Which in mischeef, peril, and great dread,
For want of water, are likely to be deed,
For there was none of high ne low degree,
In all our host, now passed days three,
That drank alas, I except none estate,
Our fate is so unfortunate,
Praying you of womanly pitee,
Benignely and graciously to see,
How of Greece all the cheualry
Of her lives stonds in ieopardy,
That ye would of womanhood tell,
If ye know any river, spring, or well,
Specially now in our care,
Of gentillesse unto us declare,
Lo here is all, if ye lust to hear,
That I will seine, mine own suster dear.
And when this lady, inly virtuous,
The complaint heard of worthy Tideus,
Of very pity changes chere and hew,
And in her heart upon his woe began rue,
And full goodly, seeing his distress,
Said unto him in all his heaviness.
How the Lady courteously taught Tideus to the Well.
Certes (quoth. she) if I were at large,
Touching this child, which I have in charge,
I should in have of all that does you grieve,
To my power help you and releue,
Only of routh, and of compassion,
And leave all other occupation,
Convey you, and be your true guide,
To a river, but little here beside,
But I dare not so much me assure,
This little child to put in adventure,
I am so fearful from it to depart,
But for your sake yet I shall do part
My life, my death, of true affection,
To provide for your salvation:
Took the child, and leid it in her lap,
And richely in clothes began it wrap,
And couched it among the herbs sote,
And leid about many an wholesome rote,
And flowers eke, both blew and read,
And supprised with a manner of dread,
With Tideus forth anon she went,
As she in troth, that no treason meant,
And on her wey would never dwell,
Till she him brought to a right fair well,
And to a river of water full habound,
But who was glad, and who was tho jocound
But Tideus, seeing the river,
Which in all have sent his messanger
To Adrastus, and had him not abide,
But down descend to the river side,
With all his host, licour for to have
At this river, her lives for to save.
And they enhasted hem, making none abode,
All at ones to the River rode,
For to drink, they had so great lust
Of appetite, for to staunch her thurst,
And some drank, and found it did hem good,
And some were so fervent and so wood
Upon the water, that in sikernesse,
Through indiscreet and hasty greediness,
Out of measure the water so they drink,
That they fell dead even upon the brinke,
And some naked into the River run,
Only for heat of the Summer Sun,
To bathen hem, the water was so cold,
And some also, as I have you told,
I mean tho that prudent were and wise,
The water drank in measurable wise,
That of the thurst they have before endured,
They were refreshed fully, and recured:
And Greeks then, of high and low degree,
For her profit, and her commoditee,
Compass the river, Christalin of sight,
Of one accord they her tents pight,
To rest hem there in reles of here peine,
Only the space of a day or tweine.
And whiles Greeks upon the river lay,
This Tideus upon the same day,
Full knightly has done his diligence,
This young lady with great reverence,
To Adrastus goodly to present,
At whose coming the king himself went,
Again her, she falling down on knees,
All thestates tho present and degrees,
Of Greeks land absent was not one,
And in his arms took her up anon,
Thanking her of her besinesse,
Of her labor, and her kindness,
Behoting her like as he was hold,
If any thing pleinly that she would,
That he may don she should it ready find,
And also Greeks all, the story makes mind,
Of thestates being tho present,
Thanked her with all her holle intent,
For the freshing done to many a Greek,
And for her part they behight her eke,
With her bodies and goods both two,
What her list command hem for to do,
To be ready partly and not fail.
And here my Auctour makes rehersaile,
That this lady so fair upon to se,
Of whom the name was Isiphile,
To Adrastus told as ye may read,
Lineally, the stock of her kinrede,
Sometime how she a kings daughter was,
Rehersing to him all the hal^e caas,
First how that she out of her country went,
Shortly for she wol not assent,
To execute a conspiracion,
Made by the woman of that region,
A thing contrary agein all right,
That each of hem upon a certain night,
By one accord shall warely take keep,
Fader, brother, and husbands in her sleep,
With knives sharp, and rasours kene,
Kitte her thortes in that mortal rene:
Unto this fi^e ^s Bochas tell can,
In all that land be not found a man,
But slain echoue, to this conclusion,
That women might have dominacion,
In that kingdom, and reign at liberte,
And on no parties interrupted be.
But for this lady passing debonaire,
To this matere was froward and contraire,
Kept her fader that he was not slawe,
But from the death preserved and withdraw,
For which alas she fled Country,
And of a Pirat taken in the Sea,
To king Ligurgus brought in all her dred,
And for her troth and her womanhed,
To her be took his young child to keep,
Which in the herber she left alone to sleep,
When Tideus she brought to the well.
And by ^ason, some books tell,
That this lady had sons two,
When that he, and Hercules also,
Toward Colchos, by her country came,
For raccomplish the conquest of the Kam,
But who that list by and by to see,
The story holle of Isophilee,
Her fadres name of which also I write,
Though some sein, he named was Thorite,
And some books Vermos eke him call,
But to know the auentures all,
Of this lady Isophile the fair,
So faithful aye and inly debonaire,
Look on the book that John Bachas made,
Whilom of women with Rhetoriques glade,
And direct by full sovereign style,
To fair Jane, the Queen of Cesile,
Read there the R^brike of Isophile,
Of her troth and of her bounte,
Full craftly compiled for her sake.
And when that she her leave has take
Of Adrastus, homeward in her wey,
Tideus began her to convey,
To the Gardein till she is repeyred.
But now alas my matere is despeired,
Of all joy, and of all wilfulness,
And destitute of all mirth and gladness,
For now of w^ begin the sharp hours,
For this lady has found among the flowers,
How the Child was slain of a foul Serpent in the Herber.
Her litel Child turned up the face,
Slain of a Serpent in the self place,
Her tail hurled with scales silver shene,
The venim was so persing and so kene,
So mortal eke the perilous violence,
Caused alas through her long absence,
She was to slow homeward for to hie:
But now can she, but weep, wail, and cry,
Now can she naught but sigh and compleine,
And woefully wring her honds tweine,
Dedly of look, pale of face and chere,
And began to rende her gilt tresses clear,
And often sith began to say alas,
I woeful wretch unhappy in this caas,
What shall I do or whider shall I turn,
For this the fine if I here sojourne,
I wot right well, I may it not escape,
The piteous fa^e that is for me shape,
Soccour is there none, ne none other read,
Liche to my desert but that I mote be deed,
For through my sloth and my negligence,
I have alas done to great offense,
That my guilte, I may it not excuse,
Shall to the king of treason me accuse,
Through my offense and sloth both two,
His son is ded and his heir also,
Which he loved more than al his good,
For treasour none so nigh his heart stood,
Nor was so deep grave in his courage,
That he is likely to fallen in a rage,
When it is so mine odious offense,
Reported be unto his audience,
So importable shall be his heaviness,
And well wot I in verray sothfastneise,
That when y^ queen has this thing aspied,
To mine excute it may not be denied,
I doubt it not there geineth no pite,
Without respite she will avenged be,
On me alas as I have deserved,
That from the death I may not be preserved,
Another by bill nor by supplication,
For the rage of my transgression,
Requires death, and none other mede.
And thus alas she quaking in her dread,
None other help ne remedy can,
But dreint in sorrow to the Greeks she ran,
Of hertely woo, face, and chere distreined,
And her cheeks with weping albereined,
In hie affray distraught and furious,
Tofore al thoste she came to Tideus,
Fell on knees and began her compleint make,
And told pleinly that for the Greeks sake,
She must be ded, and shortly in substance,
Rehersing him, y^ ground of her greuaunce,
First how by trains of a false serpent,
The child was flaine when she was absent:
And when that he her mischief understood,
In what disjoint and peril that she stood,
Unto her full knightly he behight,
To help and further all that ever he might,
Her pitious woo to stinten and appease.
And for to find unto her disease,
Hasty comfort, he went a full great paas
To Adrastus and told him all the caas,
Of this unhappy woeful adventure,
Beseeching him to done his besy cure,
As he was bound of equite and right,
And eke advertise and to have a sight
How she quitte her to Greeks here toforne,
That they were likely to have been lorne,
The succor void of her womanhede,
For which he must of knighthood take heed,
To remedien this unhappy thing.
And Adrastus like a worthy king,
Taquite himself, the story makes mind,
To this lady will not be found unkind,
Neither for cost ne for no travail,
But besy was in all that might avail,
To her succor considred all things,
And by thauife of all the worthy kings,
Of Greeks land they ben accorded thus,
Princes, Dukes, and with hem Tideus,
To hold her way, and all at ones ride,
To Ligurgus dwelling there beside,
Of one intent if they may purchase,
In any wise for to get grace,
For this lady called Isophilee,
They would assay if it might be.
And to his palaice full roially built of stone,
The worthy Greeks came riding euerichone,
Every lord full freshly on his stead,
And Ligurgus example of manlyhede,
Anon as he knew of her coming,
Tacquite himself like a gentill king,
Agein hem went to mete hem on the way,
Full well besein and in good array,
Receiving hem with a full knightly chere,
And to Adrastus, said as ye shall here:
Cousin (quoth. he) and began him to embrace,
Ye be welcome to your own place,
Thanking hertely to your high noblesse,
That so goodly of your gentillesse,
Toward me ye list you to acquit,
Your self this day your Cousin to visit,
In this castle to take your lodging,
That never yet I was so glad of thing,
In all my life, and thereto here my troth,
And evermore there shall be no sloth,
That the chambres and the large toures,
Shall be delivered to your herberioures,
That every lord as he is of degree,
Unto his lodging assigned shall be,
Your officers let hem self devise,
If the housing largely may suffice,
To you and yours, stretchen and atteine,
That none estate have cause to compleine,
And all your host lodged here beside,
Which ententifely upon you abide,
Let hem fet by my auctority,
Vitaile enough here in my city,
And all that may hem succor or save,
And at o word all that ever I have
Is full and holle at your commandment.
How Adrastus and all the states of Greeks preiden Ligurgus for the life of
Isophile.
(Quoth. Adrastus) that is not our intent,
Nor no part cause of our coming,
For we be come all for another thing,
A certain gift of you to requere,
Benignely if ye list to here,
Which may Greeks passingly avail,
Of our request if we do not fail,
Which we dare not openly express,
Withouten that ye will of your gentillesse,
Your grant affirm, conferme, and ratify,
Then were we bold it to specify.
(quoth. Ligurgus) what thing ever it be,
Not excepted but only things three,
The first is this, it touch not my life,
My young son pleinly, nor my wife,
Take all my good and what ye list pro^ide,
Of my treasour, and set these thing aside,
All the surplus I count not a mite.
Then Adrastus astomed was a lite,
When Ligurgus in conclusion,
Of his son made exception.
And whiles they treat thus in fere,
There came forth one with a woeful chere,
Of face and look, pale, and nothing red,
And loud cries, the kings son is ded,
Alas the while that whilom was so feire,
After Ligurgus borne to ben his heir,
The which alas has yolden up the breath
Of a Serpent stong unto the death,
And with his wound new fresh and green,
In the herber lies that pity is to seen,
And has so lien almost all this day.
But when Ligurgus heard this affray,
And wist his child was dead and had no mo,
Little wonder though that he was woe,
For suddenly the importable smart
Ran anon and hent him by the heart,
The sorrow that King Ligurgus made for the death of his Child, and the
lamentation of the Queen.
That for constreint of his deadly peine,
Throughout he felt coruen every vein,
The rage began mine on him so deep,
That he could not but sobbe, sigh, and weep,
And with the noise and lamentacioun,
The Queen distraught is descended down,
And when she knew the ground of all this sorrow,
It needed her no tears for to borow,
But twenty time upon a row,
Aswound she fell to the earth low,
And stoundmell for this mischaunce,
Still as a stone she lies in a trance,
But when the child into court was brought
Tofore Ligurgus, alas I wite him naught,
Upon the corpse with a mortal face
He fell atones, and began it to embrace,
Sore to grispe, and agein up sert:
Then when Adrastus this thing can aduert,
Of kingly routh and compassioun,
From his eyes the tears fell adoun,
Eke Kings, Dukes, that about stood,
Only of pity that is in gentill blood,
No power had the tears to restreine,
That on her cheeks down began to reine:
But all a day would not suffice,
All her sorrows in order to devise,
First of the king, and the queen also,
To tellen al I should never have do,
Not in the space almost of an hour.
But when the storms and the teary shoure
Of her weping was somewhat ouergone,
The litel Corpse was graven under stone,
And Adrastus in the same tide,
Ligurgus took a litel out a side,
And full wisely with his prudent spech,
The Queen present, began him for to tech,
That so to sorrow, avail may right naught,
To murdre himself with his own thought,
* Ayeinst death may be no recure,
Though in woe perpetually endure,
Al helps not when the soul is go,
And our life here, thus takes heed thereto,
Is but an exile and a pilgrimage,
Full of turment and of bitter rage,
Liche See renning to and fro,
Suing an Ebb when the flood is do,
Litel space abiding at full,
Of whose sojourne the Pope yeueth no bull,
For king is none, Duke, ne Emperor,
That may him shroud against his fatal shour,
Of cruel death when him list manace,
To mark a man with his mortal mace,
Then geineth not to his salvation,
Neither franchise, ne protection,
And littel or naught may helpen in this caas,
Sauf^ondir either supersedeas,
For in this world who so looks aright,
Is none so great of power nor of might,
None so rich, shortly nor so bold,
That he must die either young or old,
And who in youth passes his passage,
He escaped is all the wood rage,
All sorrow, all trouble of this present life,
Replenished with conteke war and strife,
Which selde or never stondeth in surete:
Wherefore best is, as it seems me,
No man grutch, but of high prudence,
The sonde of God he takes in patience,
And ye that been so wise and manly to,
Your self to drown in torment and in woe,
For loss of thing, and ye list to see,
That in no wise may recured be,
Is great folly and vndiscretioun.
And thus Adrastus has conveyed down
The substance whole of that he would say,
Till that he found a ti^ for to pray
Conuement for Isophilee,
Beseching him for to have pite,
Of that she has offended his highness,
Not wilfully but of reckelesnesse,
First that he would his domes so divide,
Mercy prefer and set right aside,
At request and prayer of hem all,
Of this unhap and mischief that is fall,
By hasty rigor not to do vengeance,
But think aforne in his purueyaunce,
* Who to wretches does mercy in her dread,
Shall mercy find when he has most need:
And since he has power might and space,
Let him take this lady into his grace,
For lack of routh that she not thus die.
But tho the Queen began again reply,
How the Queen will algate have the Serpent dead.
And platly said as in this matere:
Avails neither request, nor prayere,
Pite, mercy, nor remission,
But if it be by this condition,
That the Serpent, cause of all sorrow,
Through his labor lay his head to borow:
This is final and utter recompense,
To find grace for her great offense,
Or else shortly, shede blood for blood.
And when Greeks her answer understood,
Of one actord in her best wise,
Took on hem this auenturous emprise,
For love only of Isophile,
And gone to ride enuiron the contre,
By hills, valeis, roches, and caves,
In diches dark, and in old graves,
By every cost serching up and down,
Till at last full famous of renoun,
The worthy knight Parthonolope,
Was the first that happed for to se
This hidous Serpent by a River side,
Great and horrible, stern and full of pride,
Under a Roch by a bank low,
And in all have he bent a sturdy bow,
And therein set an Arowe filed kene,
And through the body spotted blew and grene,
How Parthonolope slew the Serpent.
Full mightily he made it for to glide,
And hent out a sword hanging by his side,
Smote of his head and anon it hent,
And therwithal began the Queen present,
Wherethrough parcel she began tasswage:
And thus of prowess and of high courage,
This manly man, this Parthonolope,
Has reconciled fair Isophile,
Unto grace fully of the Queen,
Her Ire voided and her old tene,
And by Adrastus mediacion,
King Ligurgus granted a pardon
To this lady, from all danger fre,
She was restored to her liberte,
In his palaice al her life to dwell,
Though John Bochas the contrary tell:
For this auctour affirms out of dread,
That when the child was by y^ serpent deed,
She durst not for her great offense,
Never after come in presence
Of Ligurgus, but of entention,
Fled anon out of that region,
At heart she took the childs death so sore:
What fell of her, find I can no more,
Than ye have herd aforne me specify.
And the kingdom, but if books lie,
Nota, de Ligurgo Rege Traceae.
Of Licurgus, called was Trace.
And as I read, in an other place,
He was the same mighty Champion,
To Athenes that came with Palamon
Against his Brother that called was Arcite,
Yled in his chair with iiii. Bolles white,
Upon his head a wreth of gold full fine.
And I find eke how Bachus god of wine,
Baccus, Deus Vini.
With this king was whilom at debate,
Only for he, pompous and elate,
Destruction did to his vines,
And for he first set alay on wines,
Meint with water, when they were too strong:
And this Bacchus for the great wrong,
Brake his lims, and dreint him in the sea:
Of Ligurgus, ye get no more of me,
But the troth if ye list verify,
Read of gods the Genealogy.
Nota, de duodecim arboribus in libra Bochacii de genealogia Deorum.
Lineally her kindred by degrees,
Ybranched out upon xii. trees,
Made by Bocchas, Decertaldo called,
Among poets in Itaile stalled,
Next Fraunceis Petrarke suing in certain.
Now unto Greeks I will return agein,
To tell forth shortly if I con,
Of her journey, that they have begone.
Here Adrastus has his leave take
Of Ligurgus with his brows blake,
And departing with seint Ihon to borow,
Made his wards on the next morrow
So well besein, so mighty and so strong,
Wondre early when the lark song,
With a trompet warned every man,
To be ready in all the have they can,
For to remue and no letting make:
And so they have the right wey take
Toward Thebes the Greeks euerichone,
That such a nombre gadred into one,
Of worthy knights, never aforn was sein,
When they in feere were moustred in a plein,
And they ne stint by none occasioun,
Till they be comen even before the town,
And pight her tents prowdely as I read,
Under the walls in a grene Mede,
And when the Thebans were besette about,
The manly knights would have priked out,
And have scarmished in her hasty pride,
With her fomen ou that other side,
But by bidding of Ethiocles,
All thilke night they kept hemselfe in pees,
Because only that it was so late,
With great wait set at every gate,
Men of arms all the night walking
On the walls, by bidding of the king,
Lest there were train, or treason,
And on the toures, and in the chief dongeon,
He set men to make mortal sownes,
With brazen horns, and loud Clariounes,
Of full intent the watches for to keep,
In his ward that no man ne sleep.
And Greeks proudly all the long night,
Kindled fires and made full great light,
Set up lodging upon every side,
Like as they should ever there abide,
Compass the town, there was no void space,
But all be set her fomen to manace,
And whiles they tofore the cite ley,
On every coast they sent out to forreie,
The Forrey that the Greeks made in the Country about Thebes.
Bren towns, Thropes, and vilages,
With great rauing, making her pilages,
Spoil and rob, and brought home vitaile,
And all manner sorts of bestaile,
Sheep and Nete, in her cruel rage,
With hounds slain all that was savage,
Heart and Hind, both Bucke and Do,
The black Bear, and the wild To,
The fat Swine, and the tusky Bore,
Carrying all home for the Greeks store,
Wheat and wine, for her auantage,
Hay, and Otes, foddre and forage.
With the Kalendes, as hem thought due,
The Greeks began the Thebans salve,
Ministering hem occasions fell,
The siege set, shortly for to tell,
Of full intent in her hateful pride,
For life or death thereupon tabide,
Who so ever thereat be agreued,
Till they fully her purpos have acheued,
There may thereof be made no reles.
And of all this full ware Ethiocles,
Began in party greatly to merueile,
When he saw the great apparaile
Of the Greeks the City round about,
And in himself had a manner dout,
Now at point, what was best to do,
For thilke time it stood with him so,
That to some abiding in the town,
He had in heart a great suspecion,
Lest toward him that they were unstable,
And to his Brother in party favorable.
The variaunce in Thebes among hemselfe.
For in the cite there was variaunce,
That unto him was a great mischance:
For in his need shortly he ne wist
Upon whom that he might trist,
For they were not all of one intent,
Wherefore he has for his counseil sent,
All his lords, and the old Queen,
Soch as he dempte that were pure and clean,
Holle of one heart and not variable,
Of old expert and alwey found stable,
Requering hem because they were wise,
All openly to tellen her auise,
Where it were better pleinly in her sight,
With his brother to treaten, or to fight?
And some gave a full blunt sentence,
Which had of werre none experience,
Said it was best and not ben aferde,
To try his right manly with the sword:
And some also that were more prudent,
Spoke unto him by good auisement,
And list not spare but her conceit told,
How it was best his covenant to hold,
And to perform his hest made toforn
To his Brother, lich as he was sworn,
So y^ his word, the wors make him to speed,
* Be not found variant from the deed,
For none hatred rancour ne pride:
And tho the Queen took him out aside,
The words of the worthy Queen Jocasta unto Ethiocles.
Told him pleinly, it was full unfitting,
Soch doubleness to finden in a king:
And said him eke, although he were strong,
Unto his Brother he did wrong,
As all the town will record in deed,
And bear witness if it come to need:
Wherefore let us shape an other mean,
In this mattere while that it is grene,
Ere this querele, thus gone of volunte,
Turn in the fine to more aduersite,
For if it be darreyned by battle,
Who trusts most may full lightly fail,
* And it is folly by short auisement,
To put a strife in Martes judgment:
For hard it is when a judge is wood,
To treat aforne him without loss of blood:
And if we put our matter holle in Mart,
Which with his swerd his laws does coarte,
Then may it hap, where ye be glad or wroth,
Thou and thy Brother shull repent both,
And many another that is here present,
Of your trespass that been very innocent,
And many a thousand percas shall complein,
For the debate only of you tweine,
And for your strife shall find full vnswote,
And for thou art ginner, ground and rote
Of this injury and this great unright,
To the gods, that hereof han a sight,
Thou shall accounts and a rekning make,
For all tho that perishen for thy sake.
And now the cause driven is so far,
Sodeinly pees either hasty werre,
Mot follow anon for the fatal chance,
Of life and death depends in balaunce,
And thou ne may by no craft restreine,
That upon one, platly of you tweine,
The sort mote fall ilke as it does tourn,
Who so ever thereat either laugh or mourn,
And thou art driven so narow to the stake,
That thou may not mo delays make,
But fight or treat this is the utter fine,
By none engine thou can it not decline,
* An hasty caas, as folk sain that been wise,
Redress requereth by full short auise,
For to trete long now avails naught,
For to the point sothly thou art brought,
Either to keep thy possessioun,
Or in all have deuoid out of this town,
Where thou therewith be wroth or well appaid,
Now note well all that I have said,
And by my counsel wisely condescend,
Wrong wrought of old newly to amend,
The time is come it may be none other,
Wherefore in have treat with thy brother,
And again him make no resistance,
But to thy lords fully give credence,
By whose Counseill ^ithe they be so sage,
Let Polimite enjoy his heritage,
And that shall turn most to thine auaill,
Loo here is holle the fine of our Counsel.
The Treaty that Ethiocles sent unto his Brother.
And shortly tho for ire wroth,
Though he hereto froward was and loath,
According is, hearing all the prees,
If he algate shall treat for a pees,
It must be by this condition,
That he will have the dominacion,
First in chief to himself reserved,
As him thought he had it well deserved,
And save to him holle the souereintee,
And under him in Thebes the city,
He to grant with a right good chere,
Polimite the reign for a year,
Then tauoide and not resort agein,
For more to claim was all but in vein,
This would he done only for her sake,
And otherwise he will none end make
With Greeks, what fortune ever befall.
And finally among his lords all,
There nas not one of high or low estate,
That would gone on this Ambassiat,
Out of the town ne for bet ne wors,
Till Iocasta made sadle her horse,
And cast her self to gone on this treat,
To make an end if it would be:
And this was done the morrow right by time,
Upon the hour when it drew to prime,
And with her went, here young daughters tweine,
Antigone, and the fair Imeine,
Of her meine full many one about,
At gate she was conveyed out,
And of purpose she made first her went,
On horseback to King Adrastus tent,
He and his lords being all in fere,
And they receive her with a right glad chere,
Showing her, like to her degree,
On every half full great humanite,
Polimitie rising from his place,
And humbly his mother began embraee,
Kissed her, and then Antigone,
And eke Imeine, excellent of beauty,
And for that they passingly were fair,
Great was the pres, concours, and repair
Of the ladies for to have a sight:
And Iocasta proceeds anon right,
To Adrastus the matere to propose,
And began to him openly to disclose
The intent and will of Ethiocles,
And by what mean he desires pees,
To him reserve, as she began specify,
The honor whole, and the regalie,
With scepter and crown, from him not divided,
But whole to him, as he has provided,
And Polimite by this conditioun,
Under him to reign in the town,
As a soget by suffrance of his Brother.
But the Greeks thoughten all another,
The knightly Answer of worthy Tideus.
And specially worthy Tideus,
Pleiuly affirming it should not be thus,
For he will have no conditions,
But set aside all excepcions,
Nothing reserve as in special,
But hole the lordship regally and all,
Be Polimites it fully to possede,
In Thebes crouned verily in deed,
And rightful king put in possession,
Like the couenaunts and convencion,
Ymade of old assured and ensealed,
That shall not now, of new be repealed,
But stable and holle in his strength stond,
And let him platly so understand,
And first that he deuoid him out of town,
And deliuere the Scepter and the croune
To his Brother, and make thereof no more,
And shortly else it shall be bought full sore,
Or this matere brought be to an end,
For Greeks be there none, that shul hens wend,
Er that our right that is us denied,
With life and death, darreined be and tried,
We will not erst from this town remewe,
And if him list all this thing eschew,
And all mischief stinten and appese,
To either part he may do great ese,
Thus I mean for his advantage,
Deliver up hool the true heritage,
To his brother for heir to endure,
And Greeks shall fully him assure,
By what bond that him list devise,
The year complete in our best wise,
To him deliver again possession,
Without strife or contradicion,
And to this fine justly hold us to,
And if it fall that he will not so,
Let him not wait but only after werre,
The hour is come we will it not defer,
Lo here is all, and thus ye may report
To him ayein when that ye resort,
From which appointment we cast us not to vary,
And yet to him Amphiorax y^ contrary
Full pleinly said in conclusion,
This fine shall cause a destruction,
Of hem echone if it forth proceed,
To be performed and execute in deed:
But thilke time for all his eloquence,
He had in soth but litell audience,
For whether so he meant good or ill,
King Adrastus bad him to be still.
And tho Iocasta, as wisdom did her tech,
Humble of her port with full soft spech,
Began sech means in her fantasy,
If she might the ire modifie
Of the Greeks, to make hem to incline,
In any wise her rancour for to fine,
She did her devour, and her besie cure,
But then befell a wonder adventure,
Cause and ground of great confusioun,
Greeks perturbing and eke the town,
And it to tell I may not assert,
For which a while my style I mote aduert,
Of a tame Tygre dwelling in Thebes.
And shortly tell by descriptioun
Of a Tygre, dwelling in the town,
Which from a kingdom, besiden adjacent,
Out of Egypt was to Thebes sent,
Which beast, by record of scripture,
Is most swift as of his nature,
And of kind also most savage,
And most cruel when he is in his rage,
And as clerks maken mention,
He of body resembles the Lion,
And like a greyhound the mosell and the head,
And of eyes as any fire red,
Eke of his skin, written as I find,
Like a Panther, conversant in Inde,
With all manner hues and colors,
And is full often deceived with Mirrours,
By fraud of huntes and false appearance,
Showed in glass withouten existence,
When his kindeles are by sleights take,
And he destreined, may no rescus make:
And like a lamb was this Tigre tame,
Against kind, mine Auctour writ the same,
And this beast merueilous to see,
Was sent to Imeine and Antigone,
That unto hem did great comfort,
And coud pley and make good disport,
Like a whelpe that is but young of age,
And to no wight did no damage,
No more in soth than does a litell hound,
And it was worth many an hundred pound,
Unto the king for ay in his greuaunce,
There was nothing y^ did him more plesaunce
That for no tresour it might not be bought,
For when that he was pensife or in thought,
It put him out of his heaviness:
And thilke time the story does express,
That Iocaste treated for a pees,
This tame Tigre in party rekeles,
Out at gates in sight of many a man,
In to the field wildly out ran,
And casuelly renning to and fro,
In and out as does the tame To,
Greeks weening that were young of age,
That this Tigre had be savage,
And cruelly besetting all the place,
Round about began him to enchace,
Till he was ded and slain in the field:
The slaughter of whom when y^ they beheld,
The proud Thebans which on y^ walls stood,
They ran down furious and wood,
Wening he be slain of despite,
Taking her horse without more respite,
Fully purposed with Greeks for to fight,
The Tigres death tauenge if they might,
And forth they rode without gouernaile,
And full proudly Greeks gone assail,
And of hatred and full high desdain,
Fellen on hem that han the Tigre slein,
And cruelly quitten hem her mede,
That many a Greek in the grene mede,
By the force and the great might,
Of her fomen, lay slain in this fight,
The Tigres death so sore they abought,
So mortally Thebans on hem wrought,
That all the host in the field ligging,
Was astonished of this sodein thing.
And in this wise of rancour rekeles,
Out of Thebes rode Ethiocles,
And with him eke the worthy king Tremour,
Of his hond a noble werriour,
That made Greeks to forsake her place,
And to her tents began hem to enchace,
And midde the field as they togider met,
On horseback, with speres sharply whette,
Of very hate and envious pride,
Full many one was dead on either side:
The which thing when Tideus espieth,
Wood as a Lion to horseback he hieth,
As he that was never a deal aferd,
But ran an hem and met^e hem in the berd,
And maugre hem in his cruelty,
He made hem flee home to her city,
Hem pursuing of full deadly hate,
That many one lay slain at gate,
Gaping upright with her wounds wide,
That utterly they durst not abide,
Tofore the swerd of Tideus,
He was on hem so passing furious,
So many Thebans he rofe to the heart,
That when Iocasta the slaughter can aduert,
Polimite she prey began full fair,
To make Greeks home again repair,
And that they woulden stint to assail,
For thilke time, and ceassen her battle.
At whose request plainly and preire,
And at reverence of his mother dear,
Polimite her heart to comfort,
Greeks made home ayein resort,
And Tideus to stinten of his chase,
And they of Thebes hasting a great pace,
Full trist and heavy ben entered in to the town:
And for the Tigre in conclusioun,
As ye have herd, first began the strife,
But many a Theban that day lost his life,
And recureles has yeuen up the breath,
Of thauenging of the Tigers death.
And all this while duly as she ought,
The Queen Iocasta humbly besought,
King Adrastus holly of his grace,
Some mean wey wisely to purchase,
To make a pees between the brethren twein,
And the tretee so prudently ordein,
On either part that no blood be shad:
And thus Adrastus auised and right sad,
For Greeks party answer yaue anon,
That other end shortly gate she non,
Lich as the lords fully ben auised,
Than Tideus to forn has devised.
And when she saw it may none other be,
She leave took and home to the cite
She is repaired, having to her guide,
Polimite riding by her side,
And Tideus led Antigone,
And of Archade, Protonolope
The worthy king, did his belie peine
To be attendant upon fair Imeine,
Whose heart she has to her service lured,
And he ayein has portreied and figured
Mid of his breast, which lightly may not pass,
Holly the fetures of her treshly face,
Him thought she was so fair a creature,
And though that he durst him not discure,
Yet in his heart as ferforth as he can,
He has aluowed to be her true man,
Vnwist to her plainly and unknow
How he was marked with Cupides bow,
With his arrow suddenly werreied,
And to the yares the Ladies conveyed,
Been entered in, for it drew to eve,
Greeks of hem taking tho her leave,
Though some of hem were loath to depart,
Yet of wisdom they durst not (...)
Under a conduct to enter into the town,
Lest it turned to her confusioun,
Though some books the contraire sain,
But mine aucthour is plain there again,
And affermeth in this opinion,
That Tideus of high discrecion,
Of wilfulness nor of no folly,
Ne would as tho put in jeopardy,
Neither himself ne none of his feres,
And the Ladies with her heavenly cheres,
Angelike of look and countenance,
Liche as it is put in remembrance,
At her entering from Greeks into the town,
Polimite of great affectioun,
The queen besought, yt thilke night not fine
For tassay if she might incline
Ethiocles of conscience and right,
To keep covenant, as he has behight
Full yore agone, with surplusage,
Lest the contraire come to damage,
First of himself and many another mo,
And thus from Thebes the Greeks ben ago
To her Tents and rest hem all that night,
And Lucina the Moon shone full bright
Within Thebes on the deep dongeon,
When Iocasta made relacion
Unto the king and told him all the gise,
How that Greeks utterly despise
His profer made by false conclusion,
Only except the conuencion,
Of old engrossed by great purueiance,
Which is enrolled and put in remembrance,
Upon which they finally will rest,
Him counsailing her thought for the best,
To conform him to that he was bound,
Lest in the fine falsnesse him confound,
But all her counsel he set it at no price,
He dempt himself, so prudent and so wise,
For he was wilful, and he was indurate,
And in his heart of malice obstinate,
And utterly auised in his thought,
Within Thebes his brother get right noght.
And in his error thus I let him dwell,
And of the Greeks forth I will you tell,
Which all that night kept hem self close,
And on the morrow when Titan up arose,
They armed hem, and began hem ready make,
And of assent have the field itake,
With the Thebans, y^ day without doubt
For to fighten if they issue out,
And Adrastus in full thrifty wise,
In the field his wards can devise,
As he that was of all deceipts ware,
And richly armed in his chair,
Amphiorax, came with his meinee,
Full renoumed of antiquitee,
And well expert because he was old.
And while that Greeks, as I have you told,
Were besiest her wards to ordeine,
Mid of the feld befell a case sodeine,
Full unhappy, loathsome and odible,
For lich a thing that were invisible,
This old bishop with horse and chare certain,
Disapered and no more was sein,
Only of fate which no man can repel,
The earth opened and he fell down to hell.
How the Bishop Amphiorax fell down into Hell.
With all his folk that upon him abode,
And suddenly the ground that he on rode,
Clased ayein and gidre shette,
That never after the Greeks with him met,
And thus the Devil for his old outrages,
Liche his desert paid him his wages,
For he full low is descended down
Into the derke and black regioun,
Where that Pluto is crouned and istalled,
With his queen Proserpine icalled,
With whom this bishop has made his mansion
Perpetuelly as for his guerdon,
* Lo here the meede of Idolatry,
Of rites old and false Maumetry,
Lo what availen incantacions,
Of exorcismes and conjurisons,
What stood instead his Nigromancy,
Calculation or Astronomy,
What veiled him the heavenly mansions,
Diverse aspects or constellacions,
* The end is not but sorrow and mischance,
Of hem that setten her utter affiance
In soch works supersticious,
Or trist on hem he is ungracious,
Record I take shortly for to tell,
Of this bishop sonken down to hell:
Whose woeful end, down in every cost,
Such a rumor has made in the host,
That the noise of this uncouth thing,
Is ironne and come unto the king,
How this vengeance is unawarely fall,
And he anon made a Trompet call,
All his people out of the field again,
And euerichone assembled upon a plain,
For the king and also round him about,
Euerich man of his life in doubt,
Full pitiously began to sorrow and loure,
Least that y^ ground hem al would devour,
And swelwen hem in his derke cave,
And they ne conne no recure hem to save,
For neither force nor manhood does avail
In such mischief the value of a maile,
For he that wisest and could most,
To search and seek throughout the host,
Amphiorax, when he least wend,
To hell is sonken, and coud him not defend,
To him the time unknown and vnwist,
In whom whylome was all the Greeks trist,
Her whole comfort, and whole affiaunce,
But all at ones for this sudden chance,
And this mischief, they began hem to dispeire,
Home to Greece that they will repeire.
This was the purpose of hem euerichone,
And on the walls of Thebes lay her fone,
Rejoysing hem, of this unhappy ure,
Sowning thereby greatly to recure:
And on her toures as they loken out,
They on Greeks enuiously began to shout,
And of despite and great enmitee,
Bad hem fools gone home to her country,
Since they han lost her comfort and succor,
Her false Prophet and her Diuinour,
Wherthrough her party greatly is empeired
And in this wise the Greeks despeired,
Dempte plainly by tokens evident,
This case was fall by some Enchantment,
By Witchcraft, and by Sorcery,
Again which may be no remedy,
Trusty defense help ne succor.
And when Adrastus herd this clamor,
He besie was again this perturbance,
To provide some manner cheuisance,
And to him calls soch counsel as he wist,
For life or death that he might trist,
Requiring hem but in words few,
In this mischief her motion to show,
And declare by good auisement,
What to Greeks were most expedient,
To remedien and make no delay,
The uncouth noise, and the great affray,
That Greeks made with clamor importune,
And now, and now, ever in one contune,
And they that were most manly and wise,
Shortly said it were a cowardice,
The high emprise that they have undertake,
For dred of death so suddenly to forsake,
It were to hem perpetuelly a shame,
And after hindering to the Greeks name,
And better it were to every warreour,
Manly to die with worship and honor,
Than like a coward with the life endure:
* For ones shamed, hard is to recure
His name ayein, of what estate he be,
And since that Greeks of old antiquitee,
As of knighthood who so list take heed,
Been so famous and so worthy of deed,
If now of new the shining of her fame,
Eclipsed were with any spot of blame,
It were a thing uncouth for to here,
Of whose renoun the beams yet been clear,
Through all the world where that they have pased,
And be not yet derked ne defaced,
By no report, neither on sea nor land,
Thing to forsake that they took on hond,
And by ensample of onr progenitors,
That sometime were so manly conquerours,
Tofore that we into Greece wend:
Of thing begone let us make an end,
And part not nor severe from this town,
Till it be brought to destruction,
Walls, toures, and crestes enbattailed,
And for war strongly apparailed,
Be first down beat, that nothing be sein,
But all togider with the earth plein,
Below laid er that we resort,
That afterward men may of us report,
That we began, we knightly have acheued,
Upon our fone, with worship vnrepreued.
This was the counsel shortly and thauise,
Of the Greeks that manly were and wise,
That never before marked were with blame,
And specially such as dred shame,
And fully cast, what fortune ever ride,
On her purpose to the end abide,
That on no part her honor not appall:
And to this counsel, Greeks one and all,
Be condescended and after best read,
Instead of him that was so late dedde,
Amphiorax, buried deep in hell,
That coud whilom to the Greeks tell
Of things hid, how it should fine aforne,
In steed of whom now they have him lorne,
They casten hem wisely to purchase
Some prudent man to occupy his place,
That in soch thing might hem most avail,
Through mystery of his diuinaile,
By craft of sort, or of Prophecy,
If any such they couden out epsy:
Among hem all her purpose to attain,
As I find they have chosen twain,
How the Greeks chosen a new Divinour in steed of Amphiorax.
Most renowned of hem euerichone,
And Menalippus called was that one,
And Tredimus eke that other hight,
And for he had most favor in her sight,
This Tredimus was chosen and preferred,
And in her choice Greeks have not erred,
For whilome he learned his emprise
Of his Master, Amphiorax the wise,
And was disciple under his doctrine,
And of intent that he shall termine
Unto Greeks things that shall fall,
As a Bishop mitred in his stall,
They done for him many an uncouth wise
In the temple, to Gods Sacrifice:
And thus confirmed and stabled in his See,
A few days stood in his degree,
After her Master, with full great honor,
Of Greeks chose to be successor.
And all this time in story as it is told,
Full great mischief, of hunger, thurst, and cold,
And of Thebans as they issue out,
Lay many one slain in the rout,
On either part of fortune as they met,
Her mortal swerds, were so sharp whette,
And Tideus among hem of the town,
From day to day plaieth the Lion,
So cruelly, where so that he rode,
That Theban non aforne his face abode,
He made of hem through his high renoun,
So great slaughter and occisioun,
That as the death from his swerd they fled,
For who came next laid his life to wedde,
He quit himself so like a manly knight,
That where he went he put hem to the flight,
And maugre hem, in his crueltee,
He drove hem home into her city,
Hem pursuing proudly to the gate,
That unto him they bear so dedly hate,
That they hem cast by sleight or some engine,
To bring him unawarely unto his fine,
And lay awaite for him day and night:
But alas this noble manly knight,
How pitiously this worthy Tideus was slain with a quarrel.
Upon a day as he began hem chase,
And mortally made hem lose her place,
And sued hem almost to the town,
That cause was of his destructioun:
For one alas that on the walls stood,
Which all that day upon him abode,
With a quarrel sharp heded for his sake,
Marked him with a bow of brake,
So cruelly making none a rest,
Till it was passed both back and breast,
Where through alas there was none other read
Ne Lechcraft that he mote be deed,
There may thereof be maked no delays,
And yet he was holden in his days,
The best knight and most manly man,
As mine aucthour well rehearse can,
But for all that was there no defense,
Against the stroke of deaths violence.
But Bocchas write ere he were fully dedde,
He was by Greeks presented with the hedde
Of him that yaue his last fatal wound,
And he was called like as it is found,
Menalippus, I can none other tell,
But thilke day Thebans wax so fell,
Upon Greeks, that under her city,
The manly king Parthonope,
Yslaine was euene before the gates,
And there also armed bright in plates,
The famous king called Ipomedon,
The same day as made is mention,
On horseback manly as he faught,
At bridge, even upon the draught,
Beset with preace, casuelly was drouned:
And thus fortune has on Greeks frowned,
On every side thilke unhappy day,
But all the manner tellen I ne may,
Of her fighting nor her slaughter in soth,
More to declare than mine aucthour does.
But thilke day, I find as ye may seen,
When Phoebus was passed Meridene,
And from y^ South, Westward can him draw,
His guilt tresses to bathen in the wawe,
The Thebanking fell Ethiocles,
Root and unrest and causer of vnpees,
The slaughter of Greeks, when y^ he beheld,
Armed in steel he came out into the feld,
Full desirous in that sudden heat,
Polimite in the field to mete,
Singulerly with him to have a do,
For in this world he hated no man so,
He sat so nigh printed in his heart,
Whose coming out his brother began aduerte,
Upon his steed in the opposite,
And had againward also great delight
To meten him if fortune will assent,
Thenuious fire so her herts brent,
Which hate was cancred of unkind blood,
And like two Tigres in her rage wood,
With speres sharp ground for the nones,
So as they ran and met both at ones,
Polimite through plate, maile, and shield,
Rofe him throghout and smote him into y^ field,
But when he saw the stremes of his blood,
Rail about in manner of a flood,
All suddenly of compassioun,
From his coursour he light adoune.
How each of the Theban Brethren slough other, even tofore the City.
And brotherly with a pitous face,
To save his life began him to unbrace,
And from his wound of new affection,
Full besie was to pull out the trunchon,
Of love only handling him right soft:
But out alas, while he lay aloft,
Full iriously Ethiocles the fell,
Of all this sorrow very course and well,
With a dagger, in all his peines smart,
His brother rofe unawarely to the heart,
Which all her life had be so wroth,
And thus the Thebans were islaw both,
At entree even before the town
But Greeks tho been availed down,
In the field the worthy knights all,
In Thebes land as such thing shall,
The cry arose when her king was dedde,
And to the gates, armed foot and hedde,
Out of ye town came many a proud Theban,
And some of hem upon the walls ran,
And began to shoute that pitee was to here,
And they without of her life in werre,
Without comfort or consolatioun,
Dispeired run home to the town,
And Greeks followen after at back,
That many one, that day goes to wrack,
And as her fomen proudly hem assail,
Full many Greeks, both through plate and maile,
Was shette throughout, preasing at walls,
And beaten off with great round bals,
That here lay one, and another yonder,
And the noise more hideous than thonder,
Of gunneshot, and of Arblates eke,
So loud out rong, y^ many a worthy Greek
There lost his life, they were on hem so fell,
And at gates shortly for to tell,
As Greeks preasen to enter the city,
They of Thebes in her cruelty
With hem met, full furious and wood,
And mortally, as they again hem stood,
Men might see speres shiver asonder,
That to behold it was a very wonder,
How they foine with daggers and with swerds,
Through the viser aiming at berds,
Persing also through the round mailes,
Rent out pieces of her auentailes,
That naught avails, the mighty Gesseran,
Through neck and breast, that the speres ran,
Her weapons were so sharp ground and whet
In their armor, that they were not let,
For there lay one trodden under foot,
And yonder one perced to the heart root,
Here lies one dead, and there another lame,
This was the play and the mortal game
Atweene Thebans and the Greeks proud,
That the swoughs and the cries loud
Of hem that lay and yolden up the ghost,
Was heard full far about in many a cost.
How all the royal blood both of Greeks side, and on the City side, islain were
upon o day.
And at gates and saillyng of the wall
Is^aine was all the blood royal,
Both of the town, and of the Greeks land,
And all the worthy knights of her hand,
And of Lords, if I shall not feine,
On Greeks side alive were but tweine,
King Adrastus, and Campaneus,
That day to hem was so ungracious.
And for Titan Westred was so low,
That no man might vnneths other know,
Of the town they shitte her gates fast,
With barrers round ymade for to last,
In which no wight kerue may ne hew,
And Adrastus with a Greeks few
Repeired is home to his tent,
And all that night he wasted has and spent
For his unhap in sorrow complaining,
And they in Thebes the next day suing
Her deuoire did, and her busy cure,
To ordeine and make a sepulture
For her King, yssaine in the field,
And offer up his banner and his shield,
His helm, his sword, and also his penon,
Therein of gold ybeaten a Dragon,
High in the temple, that men might seen,
And Iocasta the unfortunate Queen
Her sons death sore began complain:
And also eke her young daughters tweine,
Both Imeine and Antigoine
Crien and weep, that pity was to see,
But to her sorrows there was no refute,
And thus the city bare and destitute,
Having no wight to govern hem ne guy,
For dead and slain was all her cheualry,
And no wight left almost in the town,
To reign on hem by successioun:
But for they saw, and tooken head,
Without this, that they had an head,
In the city they may not dure long:
* For though it so be, y^ commons be strong
With multitude, and have no gouernaile
Of an head, full lite it may avail,
Therefore they have unto her succor
Ichosen hem a new governor,
How Creon the old tyrant ychosen was to be King of Thebes.
An old tyrant, that called was Creon,
Full acceptable to hem euerychone,
And crowned him, without more letting,
To reign in Thebes, and to been her king,
Although he had no title by descent,
But by free choice made in Parliament,
And thereto him like, as it is found,
By her ligeaunce of new they were bound
For to be true while the city stood
To him only, with body and with good,
Thus they were sworn, and sured euerichone,
And he againward to save hem fro her fone,
And hem defend with all his full might,
And maintain hem in all manner right:
This was the accord, as in sentement.
And in this while has Adrastus sent
From the siege of Thebes the city
A wounded knight home to his country,
Through all Greece plainly to declare
All the slaughter and the evil fare
Of which Greeks, right as it is fall,
And how that he has lost his Lords all,
At more mischief than any man can mouth:
And when this thing was in Greece couth,
First to Argiue, and to Deiphile,
And to the Ladies eke in the country,
And of Provinces abouten adjacent,
They came down all by one assent,
Worthy Queen's, and with hem Duchesses,
And other eke, that called were Countesses.
How all the Ladies of Graece arrayed hem toward Thebes.
And all the ladies and women of degree
Been assembled in Arge the city,
Like as I read, and all in clothes blake,
That to behold the sorrow that they make
It were a death to any man alive:
And if I should by and by discriue
Her tender weeping, and her woeful souns,
Her complaints and lamentatiouns,
Her often swouning, with faces dead and pale,
Thereof I might make a new tale,
Almost a day you to occupy,
And as mine author does clearly certify,
Throughout all Greece, from all regiouns,
Out of cities and royal touns
Came all the ladies and women of estate,
Full heavy cheared, and disconsolate
To this assembly, toforne as I you told,
In purpose fully her journey for to hold
Toward Thebes, they sorrowful creatures,
There to bewail her woeful auentures,
Tacquite hemselfe of troth and womanhead
To her Lords, which in field lay dead,
And as the story likes to declare,
All this journey they went on foot bare,
Like as they had gone on pilgrimage,
In token of mourning, barbed the visage,
Wimpled echone in burnet weeds,
Not in chaires, drawn forth with steeds,
Nor on palfreies, black neither white,
Like as mine author likes to endite,
To holden her way, but barefoot forth they went,
So faithfully euerychone they meant,
Through heaviness, defaced of her hue,
And as I find, they weren all true,
Now was not that a wonder for to see
So many true out of o country,
At ones gadered in a company,
And faithful all, books cannot lie,
Both in her port, and inward in mening,
Unto my dome it was an uncouth thing,
Among a thousand women, or tweine,
Not to find one that coud in heart feine,
It was a marvel, not often seen toforne,
* For selde in fields grows any corn,
But if some weed spring up there among,
Men allay Wines when they be too strong,
But her troth was meint with none allaies,
They were so true found at all assaies,
And they ne stint upon her journey,
Till that they come there they would be,
Where Adraitus, written as I find,
Lay in his tent, all of color Inde,
And greatly meruailed, when that he beheld
The number of hem, spread through al y^ field,
Clad all in black, and barefoot euerychone,
Out of his tent he dressed him anon,
Upon his hand the King Campaneus,
Full trist in heart, and face right pitous,
Again the women forth they went in fere,
And to behold the woeful heavy chere,
The doleful cries also when they met,
The sorrowful sighs in her breasts shet,
The tears new distilling on her faces,
And so swouning in many sundry places,
When they her Lords alive not ne found,
But in y^ field, through girt with many a wound
Lay straught upright, plainly to endite,
With deadly eyes turned up the white,
Who made sorrow, or felt her heart riue
For her Lord, but the fair Argiue,
Who can now weep, but Deiphilee,
Tideus for she ne might see,
Whose constreints were so fell and kene,
That Adrastus might not sustain,
To behold the Ladies so compleine,
Wishing his heart coruen were in tweine.
How the old cursed Creon will not suffer the bodies neither to be brent nor
buried.
And yet alas both even and morrow,
O thing there was that doubled all her sorrow
That old Creon fader of felony,
Ne would suffer through his tyranny,
The dead bodies be buried neither brent,
But with beasts and hounds to be rent,
He made hem all upon an heap be laid,
Whereof the women thrist and evil apaid,
For very dole as it was no wonder,
Her herts felt almost riue asunder,
And as my master Chaucer list to endite,
All clad in black with her wimples white,
With great honor, and due reverence,
In the Temple of the goddess Clemence,
They bode the space of a fourthnight,
Till Theseus the noble worthy knight,
Duke of Athenes, with his cheualry,
Repaired home out of Feminy,
And with him led, full fair upon to seen,
Through his manhood Ipolita the Queen,
And her sister called Emely:
And when these women first began espy
The worthy Duke, as he came riding,
King Adrastus hem all conueying,
The women brought unto his presence,
Which him besought to give hem audience,
And all at ones swouning in the place,
Full humbly besoughten him of grace,
To rue on hem, her harms to redress:
But if ye list to see the gentillesse
Of Theseus, and how he has him borne,
If ye remember, as ye have heard toforne
Well rehearsed, at Depford in the vale,
In the beginning of the knights tale.
How the final destruction of Thebes is compendiously rehearsed in the Knights
tale.
First how that he when he herd hem speak,
For very routh he felt his heart break,
And her sorrows when he began aduart,
From his courser down anon he start,
Hem comforting in full good intent,
And in his arms he hem all up hent,
The Knights tale rehearsen euerydele,
From point to point, if ye look it well,
And how this Duke, without more abode,
The same day toward Thebes rode,
Full like in sooth a worthy conqueror,
And in his coast of cheualry the flour:
And finally to speaken of this thing,
With old Creon, that was of Thebes king,
How y^ he faught, and slough him like a knight,
And all his host put unto the flight,
Yet as some authors make mentioun,
Or Theseus entered into the town,
The women first with pekois and with malles,
With great labor beat down the walls,
And in her writing, also as they saine,
Campaneus was in the walls slain,
With cast of stones he was so ouerlade,
For whom Adrastus such a sorrow made,
That no man may release him of his pain,
And Iocasta, with her daughters twain,
Full wilfully oppressed of her cheres,
To Athenes were sent as prisoners,
What fell of hem, more can I not saine,
But Theseus, mine author write certain,
Out of the field, ere he from Thebes went,
He beat it down, and the houses brent,
The people slough, for all her crying loud,
He made her walls and her toures proud,
Round about, even upon a row,
With the soil to be said full low,
That naught was left but the soil bare,
And to the women, in release of her care,
How that Duke Theseus delivered to the Ladies the Bodies of their Lords.
The bodies of her Lords that were slain,
This worthy Duke restored has again,
But what should I any longer dwell,
The old rites by and by to tell,
Nor the obsequies in order to devise,
Nor declare the manner and the guise,
How the bodies were to ashes brent,
Nor of the gommes in the flaume spent,
To make the air sweeter of reles,
Of Frankencence, Mirre, and Aloes,
Nor how the women round about stood,
Some with milk, and some also with blood,
And some of hem with vrnes made of gold,
When the ashes fully were made cold,
To enclose hem of great affection,
And bear hem home unto her region,
And how that other, full deadly of her look,
For love only, of the bones took,
Hem to keep for a remembrance,
That to rehearse every obseruaunce
That was done in the fires bright,
The wake plays during all the night,
Nor of the wrestling, telling point by point,
Of hem that were naked and anoint,
How eueriche other lugge can and shake,
Ne how the women have her leave take
Of Theseus, with full great humblesse,
Thanking him of his high worthiness,
That him list upon her woe to rue,
And how that he, his freedom to renew,
With the women of his high largess
Iparted has eke, of his richesse,
And how this Duke Theseus hem forsook,
And to Athenes the right way took,
With Laurer crowned in sign of victory,
And the palm of conquest and of glory,
Did his honor duly unto Mart,
And how the women wept when they part
How King Adrastus, with the Ladies, repaired home again to Arge.
With King Adrastus, home ayein to Arge,
To tellen all, it were too great a charge:
And eke also, as ye shall understand,
At ginning I took no more on hand,
By my promise, in conclusion,
But to rehearse the destruction
Of mighty Thebes, and no more,
And thus Adrastus with his locks hoar,
Still abode in Arge his city
Unto his end, ye get no more of me,
Sauf as mine author likes to compile,
After that he lived but a while,
For he was old ere the siege began,
And thought and sorrow so upon him ran,
The which in sooth shorted has his days,
And time set, Death makes no delays,
And all his joy passed was and gone,
For of his lords alive was not one,
But slain at Thebes, ye known all the caas,
And when this King in Arge buried was
Full royally with great solemnitee,
It was accounted in books ye may see,
Four hundred year tofore the foundation of Rome was the City of Thebes
destroyed.
CCCC. year, as made is mention,
Tofore the building and foundation
Of great Rome, so royal and so large,
When the Ladies departed from Arge
To her countries, full trist and desolate,
Lo here the fine of conteke and debate,
Lo here the might of Mars y^ froward sterre,
Lo what it is to begin a werre,
How it concludes, ensample ye may see,
First of y^ Greeks, and since of the Thebans cite,
For either part has matter to complain,
And in her strife ye may see things twain.
How all the worthy Blood of Greece destroyed was at siege, and the City
brought to naught, to final loss of both parties.
The worthy blood of all Greece spilt,
And Thebes eke of Amphion first built,
Without recure brought to ruin,
And with the soil made plain as any line,
To wilderness turned, and deserte,
And Greeks eke fall into pouerte,
Both of her men, and also of her good,
For finally all the gentill blood
Was shed out there, her wounds were so wide,
To loss final unto either side,
For in the war is none exception
Of high estate, ne low condition,
But as fate and fortune both in fere,
List to dispose with her double chere,
Bellona goddess is of battle.
And Bellona y^ goddess in her chare
* Aforn provides: Wherefore every man beware
Vnauised war to begin,
For no man wot who shall lose or win,
And hard it is when either part leseth,
And doubtless neither of hem cheseth,
That they must in all such mortal rage,
Maugre her lust, feelen great damage,
It may not be by man's might restreined,
And war in sooth was never ordained
But for sinful folks to chastise,
And as the Bible truly can devise,
How that War first began in Heaven, by the high Pride and Surquedy of Lucifer.
High in heaven, of pride and surquedy,
Lucifer fader of Envy,
The old Serpent the Leuiathan,
Was the first that ever war began,
When Michael, the heavenly champion,
With his feres venquished the Dragon,
And to hell cast him down full low,
The which Serpent has the Coccle sow,
Through all earth, of envy and debate,
* That vnneths is there none estate,
Without strife can live in charitee,
For every man of high and low degree,
Enuieth now that other should thrive:
And ground and cause, why that men so strive,
Is couetise, and false Ambition,
That eueriche would have domination
Over other, and trede him underfoot,
Which of all sorrow ginning is and root,
And Christ records, read, look, and ye may se,
For lack of love with mischeef there shall be:
Surget gens contra gentem. Luc. xxi.
For o people, as he does devise,
Against another of hate shall arise:
And after tells what divisions
There shall be between regions,
Eueriche busy other to oppress,
And all such strife, as he bears witness,
Kalends been, I take his word to borrow,
And a ginning of mischief and of sorrow,
Men have it found by experience:
But the venim and the violence
Of strife, of war, of conteke and of debate,
That makes londs bare and desolate,
Shall be proscript, and voided out of place,
And Martes swerdes shall no more manace,
Nor his spear, grievous to sustene,
Shall now no more whetted be so kene,
For he no more shall his hauberke shake,
But love and peace shall in hearts awake,
And Charity, both in length and bread,
Of new shall her bright beams spread
Through grace only in diverse nations,
For to reform atweene Regions
Peace and quiet, concord, and unity,
And that is both one, two, and three,
Eke three in one, and sovereign lord of pees,
Which in this exile, for our sake chees
For love only our troubles to termine,
For to be borne of a pure virgin,
And let us pray to him that is most good,
That for mankind shadde his heart blood,
Through beseeching of that heavenly queen,
Wife and mother, and maiden clean,
To send us peace in this life here present,
And of our sins perfect amendment,
And joy eternal, when we hence wend,
And of my tale thus I make an end.
Here now ends, as ye may see, The Destruction of Thebes the City.
The Old and Obscure Words in Chaucer explained,
whereof either by Nature or Derivation, Some are Arabic, Noted with a. Some
Greek, Noted with g. Some Latin, Noted with l. Some Italian, Noted with i.
Some French, Noted with f. Some Dutch, Noted with d. Some Dialects within this
our Country of Britain are many of them derived from the Saxon Tongue, Noted
with b.


The rest are explained by way of Analogy.

Annotations also upon several Words and Places.

ABandon, f. liberty. abandon, f. give over. abandoning, f. rejectment. abawed,
b. daunted, abashed. abet, b. setting on. abedge, b. abye. abying, b. state.
abit, b. abides, dwells. abidst, b. suffered. abode, received. abode, b.
tarrying. abrayde, b. arose, recovered. abrayde, b. brake off, up-start.
abreding, upbraiding. ablusions, l. cleansings. abyme, l. from below. acale, d.
cold. access, b. ague. accidie, l. wanhope. accoy, f. assuage. acoyed, f.
pampered, made quiet. achecked, b. stayed. acheked, b. choked. ackele, b. cool.
acloyeth, b. overchargeth. acroke, b. awry. acquit, f. match, to dispatch.
adassed, b. abashed. adawed, b. awaked. adjacent, l. adjoining. aduertence, l.
audience: also mind, or thought. aduert, l. mark. adventaile, f. coat of
Armor. afare, f. a noise, a business. afyne, f. fined. affi, f. have trust.
affray, b. fear, stir, assault. affrey, f. sturdinesse, also fear.
agasteth, b. skarreth. agiler, f. a marker of men. agilted, b. offended. agilt,
b. committed, offended. agree, to please, to content. agredge, f. aggravate, to
gather together. agrise, b. afraid. agrisen, b. afeard. agrise, b. faint,
terrify, greeve. agriseth, b. begins to quake. agramed, d. greeved. agrose,
b. was greeved, daunted. agroted, d. cloyed, made big, swelled. agrutched,
abridged. aiust, b. remove. alayes, b. ways; also temperance. * Alnath. Alnath
is a fixed Star in the horns of. Aries, from whence the first mansion of the
Moon takes his name, and is called Alnath. alledgement, i. ease. alleged, i.
diminished. Alderan, a. a Star in the Neck of the Lion. algate, b.
notwithstanding, ever, forsooth, even now, altogether. alcali, a. Nightshade,
salt wort. * Algezer, Algezira, a City in Spain, near the streights of
Gibralter. als, d. also: as well. alestake, d. Maypole. Almagist, a. a work of
Astronomy, written by Ptolomie. alembic, a. a stillitorie. alures, f. walks,
alleyes. algomisa, a. (Canis minor) the less dog star. alder, b. all alone,
only, chief. alhabor, a. (Canis major) the greater dog star. alswa, d. also.
ally, f. b. kin. alien, f, allie. Alisandre, Alexandria in Egypt, now called
Scanderia. almurie, a. the denticle of Capricorn. algrim, a. (algebra.) The
art of figurate numbers. alterate, l. changed. Almicanteras, a. the name of
the Circles, which are imagined to pass through every degree of the Meridian
parallei to the Horizon, up to the Zenith. alose, l. commend. aldebaran, a.
(oculus Tauri) the Bulls eye. aledge, i. ease. almanake, a. g. a Month, a
Calendar. all a boon, b. made request. allegiance, i. ease. Allidatha, a. the
Index of the Astrolabe. allaundes, f. greyhounds. Amadriades, g. Nymphs, that
live and dye with the Trees. Amalgamyng, using a mixture of quicksilver and
metals. amate, d. daunted. ametised, f. quenched. amenused, f. diminished.
amorets, lovers favors. amortised, l. killed. Amphibologies, g. forms of
speaking, wherein one Sentence has contrary senses. ancelle, l. an handmaid.
anigate, occasion. anhowve, b. hoover. Anelace, (Prolog.) a falchion or
wood-knife. Which I gather out of Matthew Paris, page 535, where he writes
thus; Quorum unus videns occiduam partem dorsi (of Richard Earl Marshal, then
fighting for his life in Ireland) minus armis communitam, peroussit eum in
posteriora (loricam sublevando) cum quodam genere cul^elli, quod vulgariter
Anelacitus nuncupatur, and laetaliter vulnerabat eum cultellum usque ad
manubrium immergendo; which Annelace was worn about the girdlesteed of the
Body, as was the pouch or purse: For thus, page 542. writes the same Matthew
Paris; Inter quos Petrus de Rivalis primus in causam vocatus apparuit coram
rege in habitu clericali, cum ^onsura, and lata corona, analaceo tamen alumbali
dependente, etc. anney, b. annoy. annueller, f. secular. anoy, forethink.
antiphoner, g. a certain service book. anhowue, to hover. anticlaudianus, a
certain book written by one Alanus de Insulis. antem, g. a song. appale, b.
decay. appayre, b. decay. apparel, f. prepare. apaled, unpleasant. appeteth,
l. desires. append, l. belong. apoplexy, g. dead palsy. apposen, i. demand,
object. aprentise, f. skill. aprise, b. adventure, or show. aquiler, f.
needle-case. arace, f. to deface. arblasters, f. Cross-bows. arrest, f.
durance, quietness, stay, an assault, also he that tarieth still. aretteth,
aret, impute, lays blame. areest, f. quietness. arrest, f. standers,
remainers. aretted, b. accounted. arere, f. behind. Argonauticon, g. A book
written by Apollonius Rhodius Alexandrinus, wherein he speaks of Jason, and
of them which went with him to Colchos to fetch the golden Fleece. argoile, f.
clay. arret, i. to charge. ariet, the sign Aries. arite, arest, stay. arist, b.
arose. arc diurne, l. day. arc, f. compass, bow. armipotent, l. mighty in
arms. armonie, g. music. arsnecke, i. Zanderacha, Orpin made of red Ceruse
burned. arten, l. restrain. arted, l. forced. arted, l. constrained. ascaunces,
as who should say, as though. asterte, let pass. assise, f. order. asks, d.
ashes. astert, b. escaped, passed. aspect, l. face, or look. Asterlagour, g. an
Astrolabe. * Astronomy, He that will be a Physician according to Homers
Prescription, (...), that is, equivalent to any, ought to be skilful in
Astronomy, and Magic natural. For if by Astronomy he be not able to judge in
what state the Heavens stood, and what their Aspects were, when his patient
sickened: and by Magic natural to calculate his Nativity, thereby to know
which of the heavenly bodies ruled most in his birth, he shall hardly, or but
by chance, conjecture to what end his Sickness will sort. aswith, b. forthwith.
asure, f. blew. asckance, b. as if, aside. ashate, f. buying. assised, sure,
asseth, assent. asweued, b. amassed. asterten, b. escape. assoile, b. answer,
declare. as, how. as wis, b. as verily. attaint, f. tried. atamed, b. set on
brooch. atterly, b. earnestly. attoure, b. toward, also attire. attoure, f.
attire for women. at erst, b. in earnest. * Athalanta, was daughter to Gaeneus,
who contending in running with them which did woe her, was at the last overcome
hy Hippomenes, who cast three golden Apples in her way, which stayed her in
taking of them up, and so she was overcome. athroted, d. choked. atwin, b.
asunder. attempre, f. moderate. attenes, b. at ones. attwite, b. to make blame
worthy, to upbraid. * Athalus, That Athalus Asiaticus was the first Inventor of
the Chess, Johannes Sarisburiensis in his Policraticon, lib. 1. chap. 5. does
witness, from whence (no doubt) Chaucer had it, as he had many things else,
being a work full of variety and skill, and therefore justly commended by J.
Lipsius. There it may appear, that Athalus invented the game called Abacus, the
which word, as it has diverse significations, so it is taken for Latrunculorum
lusus, that is, the Chess play, as out of Macrobius and others may be proved.
aureat, l. golden. aumener, b. cubbard. aurore, l. morning. augrim stones, a.
pibbles to cast account withal. auntreth, b. makes adventure. austrine, l.
froward. autentike, f. of authority. aumer, Amber. autremite, f. another
attire. auale, f. go down. auailed, assaulted. avail, f. send down. auaunt, f.
a brag, forward, apace, set forward. auaunt, f. forward, apace. auenant, f.
agreeable, comely. aver, i. bribery, richess. awayte, watch, circumspection.
awayte, d. watch by way: awayts, ( insidiae) b. ambushments. awayte, b.
tarrying, watching, pending, secrecy. awarde, b. judgment: awhaped, b. amassed,
daunted. awhere, desire. awrecketh, b. revengeth. axes, b. the ague. ay, egg.
ayle, b. ever. Azimutes, a. great circles meeting in the Zenith, and passing
all the degrees of the Horison.
B.
Bandon, d. company, sect, custody. bargenet, A song or sonnet. bargaret, A
kind of dance. barme, b. lap. bawsin, big, some say it is a Badger or Gray.
baggingly, ( tumide) disdainfully. baronage, f. lords. base, g. the foundation
or ground of any thing. balais of entayle, f. precious stones engraved.
baudrie, b. bravery. barmecloth, ( limas) b. an Apron or safeguard. bath, b.
both. bale, b. sorrow. barbicans, b. watch Tours, in the Saxon Tongue, borough
kennings. baudricke, f. furniture, a sword girdle. barkefat, b. Tanners tub.
baselards, ( si^ae) swords, daggers. balke, d. escape, fault. baude, d. brave,
bold, lusty. barbe, f. a mask or visard. battelled, made with battlements.
bay, b. stake. balefull, b. sorrowful. babeuries, f. Antiquets. bane, b.
destruction. bandon, i. company, sect. baggingli, ( tumidae) b. swellingly,
disdainfully. bailli, f. government. baggeth, disdaineth. bayne, f. a bath.
beausir, f. fair sir. belchier, f. good countenance. beed, continued. bearing,
b. behavior. bemes, Trumpets. beat, b. make, also abate, placed, also to help.
beten, b. made. bedeth, b. offers. behote, b. promise. beshet, d. shut up.
benimmeth, d. bereaveth. beknew, learned out. behight, b. promised. belchose,
f. fair choice. berne, b. bear, convey. bid, b. put, offer. bessegeden, d.
besieged. beat, b. help. behoteth, promises. bid, dwelled, continued.
bewared, b. spent. bewrien, b. to bewray. belle, f. good. be, f. a beast.
bell Isaude, f. well spoken. behete, behight, b. promised. benison, f. b.
blessing. bendes, f. bands. bey, b. obey. bent, b. a steep place. betressed,
deceived. bewrowned, b. spoken in the ear. besien, b. trouble. bewri, b.
declare. bend, b. a muffler or cale. beten, f. to make a band, to kindle.
beliue, b. anon. besey, b. become. bears, b. behaveth. belomie, f. fair or
good friend. bey, b. buy. behete, b. promise. Belmari, Taken to be that Country
in Barbary, called by Vassens, Benamarin. Besant, g. A Greekish Coin called
Bizantium, as William Malmesbury says, because it was the Coin of
Constantinople, sometime called Bizantium. berne, b. to carry. beset, set
packing. bewrecke, b. revenged. behew, b. gilded. beck, f. b. bill, beak.
belt, b. girdle. betren, b. sprinkled; also winding about. betrassed, b.
deceived, betrayed. beat, abate. bette, d. better, quickly. benes, b. bones.
bemeint, b. lamented, bemoned. beyet, b. begotten. bismar, f. (bizarre)
fantastical strangeness. birell, i. fine glass, also a kind of precious stone.
Bialacoile, f. fair welcoming. bid, d. pray. bit, b. bad, commanded. bineme, d.
bereave. bint, b. bound. bigin, bigot, f. superstitious hypocrite, or
hypocritical woman. bittor, b. a certain water-foul. bidding, abiding. biker,
b. a fray. bigami, g. twice married. blankemanger, f. custard. blew Euage, (
cyanaeus) of blew color. blithe, d. merry. bliue, b. quickly, gladly. blin, b.
cease. blasons, f. praises. blanch, f. white. blandish, l. sooth up. blande, l.
flattering. blankers, f. white. black buried, Hell. bleine, b. a bile. blent,
d. stayed, turned back, also blind. blee, b. sight, hew, favor, look. blend,
b. blind, to make blind. bleue, dleuen, tarry, abide. blinke, b. looking aside.
blo, b. blew. blondren, d. toil, bluster. bode, b. message or news. bode, d.
tidings; also, could, was able. bodeth, b. shows. boistous, f. halting; also
plain, rude, great. bounty, f. goodness. bosche, l. a bush. boure, b. house.
boune, f. b. good. borne, to burnish. bolne, b. to swell. bottom, f. bud.
boun, b. ready. boot, b. help. bourd, d. a trencher, b. a table. bordels, f.
brothelhouses. boot of bale, b. ease of sorrow. board, bourd, b. jest. borace,
i. soldar. bowne, b. ready. bolne, b. swelled. bole, a Bull. borrow, a pledge, a
surety. borrell, d. plain, rude. bout, b. without. bote, b. did bite. borrell,
f. attire on the head. bowke, b. the body, or belly, or the Stomach. bone, b.
request. * Bourd begone, Prologues. This Knight being often among the Knights of
the Dutch Order, called Ordo Teutonicus, in Prussia, was for his Worthiness
placed by them at the Table, before any of what Nation soever. If any desire to
know the Profession of these Knights called Teutonici, it was thus: They having
their dwelling at Jerusalem, were bound to entertain Pilgrims, and at Occasions
to serve in War against the Saracens. They were apparelled in white, and upon
their uppermost Garment did wear a black Cross. And for that this Order was
first begun by a certain rich Almaigne, none were received into the same, save
only Gentlemen of the Dutch Nation. After Jerusalem was last taken by the
Saracens, Anno 1184. these Knights retired to Tolemaida; and that being taken,
into Germany, their own Country. And when as there also the People of Prussia
used Incu^sions upon their Confines, they went unto Frederick the Second, then
Emperor, Anno 1220. who granted them leave to make Wars upon them, and to turn
the spoil to the maintenance of their Order. After this Conquest of Prussia,
these Knights grew rich, and builded there many Temples and Places of Residence
for Bishops, who also were enjoined to wear the Habit of the Order. Chaucer
will have his Knight of such Fame, that he was both known and honored of this
Order. braudri, b. graven work. braying, f. b. sounding. brawnes, b. sinews,
muskles. brake, steel. braket, b. a drink made of water and honey. braui, l.
reward. brat b. a rag. braide, b. arose, awaked, took, brake out. brast, b.
break. brayde, b. a burnt, strange fare. bread, b. breadth. bread, a bride.
bredgen, b. abridge. bren, b. branne. bread, abroad. brecke, ( ruptura) d. a
bruise, a breach. breme, b. (ferociter) fiercely. bretfull, b. top full. brige,
breach. brike, b. astrait, or narrow. bronde, d. fury, fire. broke, b. enjoy,
to like. broken, b. brook. brocking, b. throbbing. brotell, b. brickle.
brocage, b. means, spokesmen. browded, b. embroidred. browke, b. to enjoy.
burnets, f. hoods, attire for the head. bugle, b. black horn. bumbeth, b.
sounds. but, except. burled, armed. burdon, b. a deep base. burned, b.
brightly filed, burnished. burell, f. fine glass, a precious stone. burdon, f.
a staff. burly brand, b. a great sword. burned, burnished. burnet, f. woollen.
buxioning, f. budding. buxum, b. dutiful. buxumnesse, b. lowliness. byddeth, d.
prays. byg, b. build. by rue, b. in order. bywoxen, b. made senceless,
overwept.
C.
* Caere Inda, Some think it should be Caere Lud, that is, the City of Lud,
called London. caleweyes, Calure, as Salmon, or other red Fish. canceline, f.
chamlet. camysed, f. flat nosed. cankedore, i. woeful case. call, d. (pulchrum)
bravery. callot, b. a lewd woman. canell, d. a Sinnamon tree. carects, g.
marks, prints. cardiacle, g. wringing at the heart. canon, g. a rule.
caitisned, l. chained. cadence, l. proof. cassidoni, g. a stone growing in
Aethiopia, which shines like Fire. Ex Lib. de Natura Rerum. capell, b. an
horse. caroll, f. a song or dance. calsening, f. bringing any metal into
powder. catapuce, g. spurge. cameline, f. chamlet. calked, l. cast. * Ceruse,
White Lead, the Composition whereof is thus: Fossa fiat in Terra: claudatur
circumquaque muro paruo: demum accipiantur laminae plumbeae oblongae formae
quadrangulae, and projiciantur ex circumfuso super foveam: postmodum
projiciatur in fovea acetum forte, bullietque projectum super superficiem
terrae, and vapor inde resolutus inficiet plumbum: post spacium vero vinus diei
vel amplius rade ab illis laminis, quod illis adhaeret, and illud desicca ad
Solemn, and erit Cerusa. certres, i. undoubtful signs: centure, g. the point in
the midst of a circle. censing, b. casting the smoke, Frankincense. celerer, d.
butler. cell, d. a study. chasteleine, f. a gentlewoman of a great house.
chaunters, f. singers. chaffer, d. goods, wares. chauntepleure, f. that weepeth
and sings together. chapelet, f. a garland. charters, f. writings. chaffare,
d. buying and selling. chalons, f. blankets, coverings. champartie, f.
maintaining a quarrel. chapter, b. chief Rulers in Abbeys. charge, hurt, harm.
chekelaton, b. a stuff of Checker-work, made of Cloth of Gold. cheuisance, f.
merchandise, devise, a bargain. chees, b. choose. chevice, f. redeem; also to
effect. cheorte, f. love, jealousy, pity. chest, ( subjectum) receptable.
cheue, d. thrive. chest, ( opprobrium) slander. cheuesayle, f. a gorget.
chert, f. love. cherisaunce, b. comfort. cherts, f. merry folks. cheuesayle, f.
a gorget. chike, a chekin. chincheri, f. nigardliness. chiuer, b. to shake.
Christopher, l. a picture of a Man, carrying a Child on his shoulders over a
River. chinch, f. nigardly. chirking, b. a noise, making a noise. chirking, (
stridens) crashing. chite, b. chiteth. chilandri, f. a goldfinch. chiuancie, f.
chivalry, riding. churliche, b. plain, homely. churl, b. slave. church Reues,
b. Churchwardens. chymbe, d. the uttermost part of a barrel. citrination,
perfect digestion, or the color proving the Philosophers stone. citrine, f.
yellow. citriall, i. a gitterne, or dulcimer, called Sambuca. cierges, f. Wax
Candles, Lamps. clarions, d. trumpets. cleape, b. call. clare, clari, b. wine
and honey mingled ( Vinum rubedum) d. red wine. clepen, b. call. clergion, g. a
clark. clenched, b. fastened. cleuis, b. clifts, rocks. clergicall, g. learned.
climb, b. found. clip, clippeth, d. embraces, kisseth. climate, g. a portion
of the Firmament between South and North, varying in one day half an hours
space. clicket, b. an Instrument of Iron to lift up a latch. clotlefe, (
personata) b. the great Burleaf. clomben, d. ascended. clum, a note of silence.
cockney, b. a wisard, disard, fool. controue, f. devise. controuer, f. deviser.
* Constellation, the motion or inward working of the stars or heavenly
elements, upon our earthly bodies. couercle, f. a cover, a lid. contemplance,
l. private study. * Collect, Expans, years, and Roots, are terms belonging to
the Tolitane Tables, and so be his Centres, his Arguments, Proportionels, etc.
Face and Term be dignities belonging to the Planets. costei, d. to walk.
convaile, recover. compere, f. d. gossip. commensall, f. a table companion.
convention, l. a bargain. corare, f. overcome. costrell, b. a wine-pot.
controuer, f. deviser. courtepie, d. a short gawberdine, or upper Garment.
corrumpeth, i. stinketh, putrifieth. couth, b. known perfectly. cogge, a
cogbote. columbine, l. dove-like. cordewane, f. dry leather. conteke, f.
strife. costage, d. charge, cost. corigeth, l. corrects. corven, d. taken,
carved. couched, f. interlaied, underlaied. covent, b. a number of thirteen
Friars. con, d. know, be able. coitu, l. copulation. confecture, l. a medicine.
coy, coyen, f. to quiet, to flatter, also secret, dainty, nice. cop, d. f. top.
conisance, f. knowledge. covine, b. deceit. connen, d. can. coagulate, l.
curdled, joined. colfox, b. a black or fearful Fox. corare, i. overcome.
controue, f. to feign, to devise. combust, l. burnt, scorched. coins, f.
quinches. coynt, f. strange. counterpleted, b. controuled. corosiue, l. eating,
wasting. commoning, l. part taking. coupe gorge, f. cut throat. corbets, f. d.
places in walls, where Images stand. cornmuse, l. Music on Cornets. couenable,
f. convenient. coulpe, l. fault. coure, b. kneel, stoop. commaunce, f.
community. coilons, f. stones. coyse, b. joliness, niceness. coart, l. enforce.
courfine, f. fine heart. compinable, f. fit for company. cope, f. a cloak.
crampisheth, crampesh, d. gnaweth. crallit, b. engraven. creanseth, f. deals
on credit. creance, f. faith or trust. crepusculis, l. crepuscles, or dawning.
cresse, f. a rush. crispe, l. curled. Croiseri, b. they for whom Christ
suffered upon the Cross. crocke, crucke, f. d. a cup, or stean, an earthen pot.
crouched, b. blessed. crone, b. an old prating Woman. crop, f. top. crouch, i.
cross, bless. crowdest, d. thrustest. crosselet, f. a melting pot. crockes, d.
locks of hair. croupe, f. buttock. crull, d. curled. curreidew, b. curry
favor. cure bulli, f. tanned leather: eucurbite, l. a kind of long necked
Glass. * Curfew, William the Conqueror in the first year of his reign,
commanded, That in every Town and Village a Bell should be rung every night at
eight of the Clock, and that all People should then put forth their Fire and
Candle, and go to Bed. The ringing of this Bell was called in the French Tongue
Curfew, that is, Cover Fire. culpons, parts, or streiks; heaps. culleth, b.
pulls, enforces.
D.
* Dan Burnell, Nigellus Wireker, Monk of Canterbury, a Man of great Reading
and Judgment, as Leland writes of him, was not afraid to write of the faults
of Curates, and the mis-spending of Church Goods; even to William Longshampe,
Bishop of Ely, and Lord Chancellor of England, a Man of all Men under the Sun
most malicious. He did write in Verse to the foresaid William, a Book, under
the Title of Brunellus, called Speculum stultorum; And this is it which Chaucer
calls here, Burnell the Ass. He lived, Anno 1200. in the Days of King John.
dawes, b. days, time. daweth, b. springs, begins. daren, darreigne, b.
attempt, challenge. daw, b. wax day. dare, b. stare. daffe, b. dasterd. dagges,
( fractura) latchets cut of leather. dagon, ( fractura) a piece or remnant.
dagged, b. slitted. dates, b. accounts. dayned, f. vouchsafed. defayted,
decayed, senceless. dear, b. hurt, grieve. deluge, l. a flood. deviant, l. far
off, wandering. definished, l. proved. desiderie, l. lust. debonairely, f.
meekly. deis, b. a seat. debonaire, f. gentle, humble. deaurat, l. shining.
denwere, b. doubt. destrer, f. horse of Arms. de pardeux, f. by God. debate, f.
to fight. derne, ( dirus) earnest, careful, secret. deintie, desire. decoped,
d. peaked. demean, f. behave. deficate, l. deified. deiden, died. deem,
condemn. deep lowpe, ( transparens) giving thorough light. deslaui, d.
lecherous, servile, beastly. dey, dead; also (...), a dairy woman. demaine, f.
toll, custom, possession, also to rule. demoniake, g. possessed of a Devil.
demin, b. Judge. dely, b. small. deuoire, f. labor, endeavor, duty. dent, b.
stroke. demean, f. complain, behave. delue, d. digg, ditch. deignous, f.
disdainful. deuinals, l. wisards. defended, d. forbad, forbidden. dequace, b.
dash. dexe, a desk. defouled, shamed. defense, f. charge, forbidding.
determinate, l. limited. dispaired, b. discouraged. dissentori, a kind of
still. digne, l. worthy, mete; also lyth, gentle, yielding, also to vouchsafe.
diuinistre, l. a divine. dike, b. ditch. diapred, f. diversified. diuinaile, (
Aenigma) g. a riddle. dight, b. made ready, handled, used; also to cover.
distance, l. discord, danger. dispended, l. wasted. dim, b. obscure. disheuild,
f. barehairred. dite, b. a treatise. disconsolate, l. without comfort. dismal,
l. (dies malus) unluckey. dispone, l. dispose. disparage, f. disgrace.
distreineth, effects. disceuer, spend. distraineth, vexes. diameter, g. a
line dividing any figure into two equal parts. disease, b. vexation. disapered,
l. vanished. discure, b. show. diuerseth, l. turns. disioint, b. jeopardy.
dissoned, l. dissonant. docked, b. cut off. done hours, b. do servise to God.
doleth, l. grieveth. douced, a pipe made of box, sounding most sweetly.
domesman, b. Jugde. doughtie, b. stout. dortoure, f. dormitorium, a sleeping
place. domed, b. judged. dormant, l. unremoved. doced, f. a sweet Instrument.
dole, b. sorrow. doluen, d. buried. donet, l. a book so called. dowtremere, f.
fair wearing. dowle, b. deal. dow, b. give. dretching, delay. dreri, b. heavy,
sorrowful. dretch, to stay, to hinder, to tarry, to dream. draftie, d. irksom,
filthy. drerines, b. sorrow. drenched, b. overcome, drowned. drerinesse, b.
heart-grief. dreint, b. drowned. dray, drey, dry. dri, drien, b. to suffer.
droui, d. filthy. drugge, b. toil. drurie, modesty, sobriety, comeliness.
drough, b. drew. drenching, taking in. drunkelew, d. given to drink, drunken. *
Dulcarnon, is a proportion in Euclid, lib. 1. Theorem. 33. propos. 47. which
was found out by Pythagoras after an whole years study, and much beating of his
Brain: In thankfulness whereof, he sacrificed an Ox to the Gods; which
Sacrifice he called Dulcarnon. Alexander Neckam an ancient Writer, in his Book
De Naturis Rerum, compoundeth this word of Dulia, and Caro, and will have
Dulcarnon to be quasi sacrificium Carnis. Chaucer aptly applies it to Creseide
in this place; showing that she was as much amazed how to answer Troilus, as
Pythagoras was wearied to bring his desire to effect. duresse, f. hardness.
dwale, ( solanum soporiferum) d. nightshade, provoking sleep. dwined, d. dried,
consumed.
E.
Ebracke, Hebrew. ebracke, Jews. ecclesiast, g. a churchman. ecliptike line, g.
the circumference of the circle, wherein the Sun finisheth his yearly motion.
echen, each, b. increase, draw out. echeth, b. helps. eft, b. again, soon.
effunde, l. utter. effated, f. sorted, defaced. eftris, efters, entries, ways,
galleries. egment, b. procurement. eigteth mow, d. may grant. elate, l. stout.
elenge, b. strange. ele, help. eldeth, b. makes old. elth, eld, old age.
eluish, b. wicked, froward. empaired, much grieved. emplede, f. sue. embolfe
cercle, g. the oblique circle. embosed, hanged out his tongue with weariness.
emforth, after, according. emispere, g. half the compass of the visible heaven.
emplaster, f. set out, paint. emprise, f. enterprise; also fashion, order.
enbolned, b. swelled. enchafeth, ( flagrat) burns. Eneidos, g. a work written
by Virgil, of the travels of Aeneas. endry, b. endure. engined, d. racked.
enhansed, f. exalted. enhauncen, lift up, raise. engine, f. wit, devise.
engluting, f. stopping. enbibing, l. sucking. enewed, renewed. enmoised, f.
comforted. encontrewayle, f. prevent, to meet. encheson, f. cause, occasion.
enchafed, f. heated. enpited, delited. enlangored, f. languishing. ensise, b.
quality, fashion, order. entreteden, d. handle. entalenten, f. move, stir up.
entaile, f. graved work. entremete, f. deal, meddle. entermined, l. undermined.
entered, l. buried. entalented, f. ingrafted. enteched, f. defiled. entetched,
f. qualified, spotted. entame, touch, handle. entailed, f. carved. entriketh,
b. entrappeth. entriked, deceived; also mingled. enteched, f. qualified, or
spotted. entremes, f. intermingled. enuelopt, f. wrapped. enuiron, f. round,
round about. equinoctial, l. when the nights and days be all of one length.
ernes, b. promise. erke, b. weary, loathing. erne, greatly. ernefull, b.
sorrowful. * Eros, g. Whereas some Copies have Hereos, some Hernes, and some
such like counterfeit word, whereof can be given no reason; I have set down
Eros, i. Cupid: as most agreeing in my Opinion with the matter; which I gather
thus: Lucian, in his second Dialogue brings in Cupid teaching Jupiter how to
becomeamiable, and in him, how lovers may be made acceptable to their ladies;
not by weeping, watching, and fasting, nor by furious melancholic fits, but by
comely behavior. The words in the Greek, are thus much in Latin: Si voles
amabilis esse neque concutias Aegida, neque fulmen geras: sed suavissimum
teipsum exhibe: and vestem sum purpuream, crepidas subliga auratas: ad tibiam
and ad Timpana composito gressu incede, and videbis quod plures te sequentur,
quam Bacchum Maenades. So that the lovers of Eros, that is, Cupids Servants, do
carry themselves comely in all their Passions, and their Maladies are such as
show no open distemperature of body or mind. which mediocrity this Arcite was
far from keeping. And whereas some will have us read Heroes, i. Noblemen; I
cannot dislike their Opinion, for it may fitly stand with the sense of the
place. err, f. way. erst, b. earnest. escrite, f. a writing. esperance, f.
hope. esploit, perfection. espiritueles, l. heavenly. essoine, f. delay. eth,
b. easy. etymologise, g. to show the true interpretation of a word. euin, b.
equal. euin, b. upright. exiteth, l. moves. exorcismes, g. adjurations.
expleiten, f. make show, counterfeit. eyth, b. easle. ey, an egg.
F.
Fast, wedded. fare, f. gone. falding, a kind of course cloth. fare, fair.
fay, f. truth. fast frets, full fraughteth. farce, f. paint. fage, a fable.
fare, b. cheer. farden, b. fared. famulers, l. helpers. falsed, l. deceived.
fallas, l. deceit. fame, defame, slander. fassed, l. stuffed. faitors, i.
deceivers, flatterers. fay, l. truly, also fidelity. fairy, b. a goodly sight,
the place where Hobgolins and Fairies dwell. fantom, f. fancy, vain vision.
falke, b. people, folk. faw, b. glad, joyful. fare, f. to go, also a stir.
faunes, g. rustical gods. falsen, f. deceive. fantom, f. vain vision. facond,
i. speech. fendli, b. ugly. fern year, February. fetise, b. handsome.
ferthing, b. a thin scale. fermerere, an overseer of cattle. feel, many, also
feling. ferd, b. fared. fermases, g. medicines. * Fenne, Avicen divides his
Canons into partitions, which he calls Fens. ferth, b. the fourth.
fermentation, l. giving Life to the Philosophers stone. feled, known. fers, the
queen in Chess-play. feture, f. handsomness. fend, b. devil. fern, b. long
time. feestlych, d. pleasant. fendish, b. divelish. ferly, b. strange. ferd, b.
fared. felloun, f. deadly, cruel. feel, b. knowledge. fethered, b. shaked his
wings. fesse, b. indue. feel, find. feel homages, f. faithful subjection.
fell, b. the skin. feast, b. mirth, joy. fere, b. a companion. ferth, b. the
fourth. fete, b. fine. fine, l. cease. finance, f. end. flaming, red. flash of
flames, sheaf of Arrows. flaw, yellow. flay, did fly. flebring, b. flattering,
slander. fleten, b. abound. flemer, b. expeller. flone, an arrow. flemed, b.
daunted. fleming, conquest. flid, b. fly. flite, flight, b. chide. * Floreine,
A Coin of the value of 3 s. 4 d. or thereabouts, and such were called Florenes
de Scuto. Others there were called Florenes Regales, contained within the price
of 2 s. 10 d. q. flo, an arrow. flode, abounded, floreth, l. florisheth.
floiting, f. d. whistling. fonden, labor. fond, make, contend, to labor;
also to make a fool. fonge, b. take. fonne, b. fool: also to be foolish.
fonnes, devises. fone, fine, l. make an end. fother, b. a Wain-load of twenty
hundred weight. forstraught, b. daseled. fore, gone. forfraught, beset. forrei,
f. to provide horse meat. forage, f. fodder, course meat. forcer, f. copher or
chest. forward, course, condition, promise. forwined, d. dried up. fordo,
overthrown. for thy, b. therefore. forpined, consumed. forleten, forlete,
forsake, broken off. forloine, rechase, terms of hunting. forleien, d. wander.
fordo, b. kill. forleten, foryetten, let pass, neglected, forlorn. fortuna
mayor, l. Jupiter. forgist, forgiving. forth, theft. forwelked, ( marcidus) d.
dried up. forlaine, forsaken. fort, l. strong. forleteth, gives over. forlyth,
spoileth. forsongen, b. weary with singing. forge, f. work. foreyne, b. a
Jaques. formel, his make. forfare, b. forlorn. fore, fared, gone. foredid,
killed. foryede, b. overwent. fordo, undone, lost. fone, b. enemies. foison, f.
plenty. foiterers, f. vagabonds. foothot, b. forthwith. fowlefaile, b. err
greatly. folili, f. rashly. fomen, b. enemies. fongeth, takes use. fownd,
framed. foiles, f. leaves. frape, b. a company, a rabble. frained, restrained,
also asked. fret, b. a circle. freneth, makes strange noise. fret, f. fraught.
friend, fremd, b. strange. freelti, b. frail. froy, from you. franks, f. french
crowns. freten, b. devour. franchise, f. freedom. freel, b. frail. freteth, f.
rubbeth, chafeth. fret, f. turn, fraught. frouncen, d. f. wrinckling. fremed,
b. wild, strange. fret full, set full. frened, b. strange. frounce, f. a
wrincle. froise, ( frixura) f. a Pancake, or Tansey. frounklesse, f. plain.
fryth, b. a wood. fullich, fully. fulke, an hollow place. furiall, f. cruel.
fusible, l. that may be molten. fuir, i. fury. fie, defy. fined, l. ended.
fish, the sign Pisces. fire leuin, b. lightning.
G.
Gabbing, b. lying. gadling, b. straggling. garnison, f. preparation. Garnade,
Garnata in Spain. garrison, f. a defense. gable, the fore front of an House.
galoch, f. a kind of shoe. gaytere berries, ( virga sanguinea) prickwood.
gastnes, b. terror. gargoning, f. strange speaking. gab, b. prate or lie. *
Ganilion, which betrayed the Army of the Christians, under Charlemain, to the
Saracens, and was therefore torn in pieces with four Horses. galaxi, ( lactea
via) g. a tract of ^stars called Watling-street. gale, b. yawle. gale, b.
flout, also cha^e. galpeth, b. belcheth. gallard, f. lusty, frollick. garrison,
f. to defend. * Gawyn, This Gawyn was Sisters Son to Arthur the great, King of
the Britains, a most famous man in War, and in all manner of Civility; As in
the Acts of the Britains we may read. In the year 1082. in a Province of
Wales, called Rose, was his Scpulchre found, and his Body, affirmed by many, to
have been of the length of fourteen foot. galliens, Galens works. gate,
occasion. gaudi, b. brave. gawreth, b. stareth. gawre, b. stare. gawde, b. a
trifle. geri, gerifull, mutable, also cruel. gend, f. seemly. gere, b. jest,
frenzy. gergon, b. chattering, prating. geomancie, g. conjuration by circles
in the earth. gent, f. d. comely, proper. gesseran, a brestplate. giplere, f. a
bag or pouch. gippon, a doublet, or light coat. gigges, b. drabs. girde, b.
strike. gigging, sounding. gigges, ( garrulitas) babbling. gite, a gown.
gisarme, gasa, a certain weapon. gipe, a coat full of pleits. gigges, bablings.
giglotlyke, b. strumper like. gladly, commonly. glapeth, b. glistereth. glede,
b. fire, embers, flame, sparkles, ashes. gle, b. melody. glent, b. glanced,
cast. gleire, b. white. glase, b. to gloss. gleden, d. gone, slidden. gledes,
imbers, also flames. gleue, b. a spear. glitteren, b. glister, shine.
glitering, b. shining. glode, b. ascended. glowed, b. stared. glombe, b. frown.
gloten, covering. gloss, persuade. gloss, b. flatter, also the exposition of a
dark speech. glede, b. puttock. glowden, d. shined. glittren, b. shine. gnarre,
b. an hard knot, as in wood; a short thick grub. gnast, gnash. gnew, b. gnawed.
gnosse, i. fool, chuffe, miser. gods son, b. that God sends. gods half, b.
on Gods side. gorget, f. a throat. gore, ( lacinia) a pleat or fold.
golyerdies, f. ravenously mouthed. gowreth, b. stareth. gonfennon, f. a little
flag. gonge, b. Jaques. gossomor, b. things that fly in the Air in Summer time
like Copwebs. Goodmes, f. good time, or mood. gourde, b. a bottel, made of a
gourd. golit, d. throat. gotysh, i. sottish. gore, an arbor under a gourd.
goodlihead, gay show. grame, i. sorrow, mishap, d. anger. graythed, devised.
grapenel, an Instrument with many hooks. graspeth, b. catches fast. gratch, b.
apparel. graven, d. buried. grant mercy, f. I thank you. grave, bury. graieth,
b. to make trim. great see ( Mar maggiore) anciently Pontus Euxinus. greece, f.
gray, gray amise of Russie Squirrels. greith, b. remove. great, b. weep.
grenehed, rashness. gre, f. good part. grith, b. agreement. greues, b. trees,
boughs, leaves, grass. great, b. saluted. greyned, made. grede, b. cried. grint,
b. grinded. grispe, d. gripe. grisely, b. abhominably, ghastly, fearfully.
grill, b. could. grofly, b. flat on the ground. groine, b. a froward look.
growbed, b. dug. gruffe, groufe, b. grovelling: gruell, b. pottage. guerdon,
f. reward. guerdonlesse, f. unrewarded. guerring, i. brawling. gullet, d. a
throat. gye, b. guide. gyre, b. trance.
H
* Harrolds, whereas in some books it is, my King of Harrolds shall thou be; it
is now corrected thus (my King of Harlots shall thou be.) For so it is in the
French Moralization of Molinet, 149. where he is called Roi des Ribaulds, which
is the King of Harlots, or wicked Persons: an Office of great account in times
past, and yet used in the Court of France. Of this office speaks Johannes
Tillius in his second book De rebus Gallicis, under the title De Praefecto
praetorio Regis. But more hereof when time shall serve in M. F. Thin^ Comment.
halse, d. a neck. hasard, d. dising. haw, a yard, black, have. halse, b.
charge. hair, hair-cloth. hayes, f. hedges. haketon, f. a Jacket without
sleves. hawberke, f. a gorget. halpe, b. helped. halke, ( angulus) b. corner,
herne, valley. haubergion, ( lorica) f. a coat of male. hate, b. benamed.
habit, l. plite. harlotrise, b. bawdry. halt, b. held purpose. hauten, comely.
haried, b. pulled. hayne, f. hatred. hafe, lifted. hace, b. has. han, b. have.
hawbacke, b. return. hardely, b. stoutly, also verily. hackeney, d. a trotting
horse. hameled, d. cut off, abated. halow, hollow. halsing, b. embrasing.
harrow, ( apagesis) away, away, fie, fie. happeth, b. covers embraseth.
hauselines, ( faemoralia) breches. hat, b. was called. hallowes, b. Saint.
haulues, d. parts. hawtently, b. solemnly. halt, held, holds, judges.
haunten, b. use. haunce, set out. hanceled, cut off. halt, b. performs,
holds. halteth, ( trahit) draws. hauoire, f. possession. henten, hent, b.
catch. hele, heyle, b. health. hethen, b. mockery. hewn, hewed, b. colored.
hecled, wrapped. herbigage, f. lodging. held, account, accounted. hereid, b.
praised, honored. hewed, b. colored. hew, hewis, b. colors, welfare, beauty.
hestes, b. wills, promise, commandments. heyne, b. to labourer, drudge,
heaven, b. to shove, to lift. hewmond, new made. healed, b. covered, heard.
heroner, a special long winged Hawk. hent, b. catched. herborow, d. lodging.
heriyng, b. praise. herawdes, b. furious parts in a play. here and houne, hare
and hound. helmed, b. defended. heal, hele, b. hold, cover. here and hace, b.
hoarse and harsh. healed, heard. helded, b. holden down. herieth, b. praises.
helest, did hold. hend, b. gentle. hernia, g. the disease called bursting.
hot, hete, heten, d. vow, promise. * Heisugge, The Heisugge, called Curruca,
is a little Bird in whose nest the Cuckoo lays her-Eggs, and when they be
hatched, and grown to some bigness, they eat the Bird that bred them. hew,
welfare. herden, did hear. heaven, b. rise up. hem, them. heth, b. brabes or
such like. her, their. hete, d. was named. henters, b. catchers. height, b.
were named. heepe, b. help. heraud, d. proclaim, set forth. hew, to hover.
henten, b. to catch. hemisphere, g. half the compass of the visible Heaven.
highest, makes have. hight, b. promised. hierdesse, b. herdwoman. hith, b.
make have. highten, b. promise. hip, b. the red berry on the brier. hidous, f.
b. great. hite, hete, hot, d. is called. hild, b. powered. hidiously, b.
fiercely, fearfully. holt, holden. hoten, b. called. horologe, g. a clock. hot
the knot, make fast. hoppen, d. leap. howten, b. hallow. howgates, how. hoar,
b. white. holoure, b. horemonger. hostei, to lay siege. homicide, g. murderer.
hoten, b. make an unpleasant noise. hopesteres, ( gubernaculum tenentes)
pilots. horde, b. heap. howselin, b. receive the Sacrament. homager, f.
subject. howuer, an hoverer. hold, withheld. houed, b. tarried. hoker, b.
stoutness, frowardness. horrow, ( squalidus) beastly, base, slanderous. houe,
b. lifted up, to hover, also a show. horoscope, g. the ascendent of ones
Nativity. hough, how. hostell, f. a town house. hot, b. promise, bid.
hostilements, necessaries. hold, beholden. holtes hoar, b. woods white. holt,
d. a grove. hoting, d. promising. hurleth, f. falls, makes a noise. * Hugh
of Lincoln, In the 20th year of Henry the Third, eighteen Jews were brought to
London from Lincoln, and hanged for crucifying a Child of eight years old;
which was this Hugh, whereof Chaucer speaks, as may be proved out of Matthew
Paris, and Walsingham. hurleth, ( obstrepit) f. makes a noise. hurtell,
skirmish: hurtlest, carries, throws. hurtlen, b. thrust. hulstred, b.
hidden. hurtelen, b. provoke. humling, b. sounding. hyldeth, yields. hyne, b.
a hiend or husbandman. hyerd, heardman, Governor. hyerds, b. guides.
I.
Iape, Jest, a Word by abuse grown odious, and therefore by a certain curious
Gentlewoman scraped out in her Chaucer; whereupon her serving man writes
thus: My Mistress cannot be content,
To take a Jest as Chaucer meant,
But using still a Woman's fashion,
Allows it in the last Translation:
She cannot with a word dispense,
Although I know she loves the sense.
For such an use the World has got
That words are sins, but deeds are not.
iambeux, f. armor for the legs. jane, half pence of Janua, or Galy half
pence. iapedst, b. jested. iangleresses, b. brablers. ibet, stamped. ibete, set
forth. icond, b. learned. ich, b. my self. ido, b. undone, spoiled. idolaster,
g. idolatour. iet, b. devise. iewry, the Jews street or sinagogue. iewise,
reward by revenge, also a gibber. ifete, b. effect. ifere, b. together.
ificched, f. fixed. ifounded, b. sunk. ifretten, d. devoured. igourd, fly.
igrauen, d. buried. ihight, b. called, accounted. ihired, honored. ikend, b.
known. ilimed, taken. ilke, b. same. illusion, l. deceit. imasked, f. covered.
imeint, b. mingled. imped, b. grafted. impetren, l. entreat. incantations, i.
charms. in a threw, b. quickly. innerest, f. inward. indulgence, l. pardon.
ingot, the mass or wedge of gold after it is molten, as also the trough wherein
it is molten. intermete, f. meddle. incubus, l. the night mare. indigence, l.
want. intremes, f. middle servise, intermingled. intresse, lining. i not, I
know not. intermeting, changing. inome, d. taken. interual, l. distance of
time. iniquitance, l. disquiet. induration, l. making hard. inde, f. azure
color. in hie, in have. ithe, b. thrive. itwight, b. drawn. ineched, put in.
inomen, d. obtained. inhild, b. infuse. iombre, b. join, jumble. ionglerie, d.
juggling. iordans, b. double urinals. ioleming, d. joyful. iossa, turn. ioyeux,
f. joyful. ipriued, searched. ipulled, smoothed. irayled, covered, spread. ise,
beheld. isped, ( expeditus) dispatched. ishad, b. scattered. isperi, g. Orizon.
ishet, b. shut. ispended, l. considered. ishone, set forth. iswent, b. swinged.
* Justinian, In the eleventh Book of the Code, De mendicantibus validis; where
it is enacted, that if any shall beg, having no cause either by need, or maim,
the same shall be examined and searched; and who so shall find him to
counterfeit, and proves the same, Dominium ejus consequetur: and says
Bartoll. He shall be punished, Ad arbitrium Judicis. iuuentute, l. youth.
iupart, b. adventure. iubeli, l. joy, gladness for freedom. iub, b. bottel.
iudicum, l. book of Judges. iwri, iwrien, hidden. iwri, covered, hanged.
iwimpled, d. mufled, hooded.
K.
Calendar, chief, first. kalends, preamble. keiked, kiken, b. stared. keinard,
micher, hedg-creeper. keep, b. care. * Kenelme, This Kenelmus king of the
Mercians was innocently slain by his Sister Quendrida, whereby he obtained his
Name of a Martyr. In the same place, for Mereturick we now read Mercenrick,
which is the Kingdom of Mercia, as the Etymology of the word does teach. For
Rik in the Saxon Tongue signifies a Kingdom, and Mercen, the marches or bounds
of a country. So that Mercenrick is regnum Mercia, whereof both Kenulph and
Kenelme were Kings. kele, b. to cool. kest, b. cast. kepen, b. to care. kembe,
d. deck. kemeling, a Brewers vessel. kernels, holes or corners in battelments.
kerueth, greveth. ken, d. teach, know. kers, ( nasturtium) d. waterdresses.
keuer, b. recover. kene, b. sharp. kend, b. made me know. * Kichell, A Cake
which Horrace calls Libum: Vtque sacerdotis fugitibus liba recuso: and with
us it is called a Gods Kichell, because Godfathers and Godmothers used commonly
to give one of them to their Godchildren, when they asked blessing. kith, b.
acquaintance. kinrest, quiet rest. kithen, b. show. kinds, kindels, ( faetus)
b. young ones. kirked, b. turned upward. kith, b. make known, show,
acknowledge. kid, b. known, made known. kitheth, b. shows. kin, b. kind.
knarri, b. stubby. kned, knit. knittest, setlest. knockeden, d. did knock.
knopped, d. tied, laced. kon, b. can. koueren, f. to hide.
L.
Lake, fine cloth like lawn. largess, i. liberality. lachesse, f. leysines.
latered, l. laysie, loitring. laas, ( laqueus) d. net or gin^ laud, l. praise.
langorous, f. pining: lack, dispraise. laft, lest off, enclosed. lack, d.
offense: also lie, to dispraise. lay, a song. lauen, b. draw empty. lauds, i.
morning servise. languerth, i. languisheth. latonne, f. copper. lacert, i.
sinew. layuers, ( corrigiae) thongs. lay, b. law. laund, b. a plain between
trees. lauender, i. f. laundress. laued, b. drew. lath, b. a barn. laften,
forsook. less, less. lach, f. lasie. larson, f. robbery. lacking, dispraising.
lacken, extenuate, dispraise. Lettow, Lituania, part of Sarmatia, joining to
Polonia. Leyes, taken to be Levissa, upon the Continent not far from Rhodes.
lestis, temptations, lusts, pleasures. ley, a song. lees, leasing, also lost,
release. lewd, b. ignorant. leave, beleve, live, releeve, grant, dear. iet,
let, b. leave forsake, leden, language. lene, b. lend. leueth, bears. lever,
better. lech, b. a surgeon. leave, b. dear. let, b. left off, to leave. lends,
( lumbi) d. loins. lettrure, f. book learning. ledge, d. lay. lessel, (
umbraculum) bush or hovel. lele, right, lawful. leite, light. legends, l.
tales. lere, d. to teach. lever, lefe, d. wont. dear, willing, rather. leueth,
remains. legisters, i. lawyers. leged, resident. let, b. deemed, made show,
showed. lease, praise. letting, leaving. leueth, relieveth, also takes leave.
lemes, b. flames, light. lectorne, a desk. legging, d. lodging. letest fare, b.
make show. leuesell, a bush. lere, complexion, color, skin. letargi, g. a
drousie disease causing forgetfulness. lest, lust. * Litarge, f. white lead;
The Composition whereof, as I find it in an old written book, is thus:
Accipiter plumbum, and funditur in olla, and projiciuntur interius testae
alterius ollae, and postea moveatur olla fortiori manu, quousque commisceantur
testae and plumbum, praeterea projiciatur illud totum, and illud est
litargirum: hoc modo preparatur plumbum ad plumbaciones ollarum. ligne aloes, a
bitter kind of wood out of India and Arabia. licand, b. in good plite.
limitation, i. circuit. liard, b. nimble. lich, lech, b. like. limaile, i. dust
that comes of filing. light, to make light. lith, lies. lisse, f. end, limit,
border. lisse, lees, release. lisse, b. ease. ligne, f. line. lith, ( membrum)
a lim. lifthalfe, b. left side. lith, lies, also plain. liege, lege, f.
lawful, true. lignes, likes, yields. litherly, b. slothful. liggen, b. lie.
liart, b. gentle, lithe, smooth. liuen, b. believe. lithi, lethy, b. soft
gentle. lissed, f. bounded. lisse, to have less, to wax less. lieges, f.
subjects. lithe, b. to ease. lorrell, ( lurco) devourer. lombes, lambs. loos,
lose, f. praise, also order. lossell, d. crafty fellow. louedaies,
arbitrements. loppe, b. a spider. lodemanage, skill of Navigation by stone and
needle. lollar, b. a breaker of fasting days. louke, a fellow receiver. lorco,
a devourer, a gulligut. Loi, Dunstan, Julian, Runian, and what they were, may
be known in the Legend, Festival, and Votaries. louting, b. kneeling,
honoring. longen, belong. lore, b. learning, knowledge. lorne, b. lost.
losenger, f. flatterer or lier. londles, b. runnagates. loute, b. to bow or
bend. lozenge, f. square. losengeri, f. flattery. loteby, companion, or love.
loath, b. lothed. losenges, f. square figures. lore, b. lost. loode, led.
losenge, f. square. lostheld, accounted lost. lodesmen, b. guides. lore, (
ratio) regard, doctrine. low, fire, flame: also to allow, or like. lordeth,
rules. lucerne, l. candel. lugge, b. pull. lushbrough, a base Coin in the days
of Edward the Third.
M.
* Magic, He means this Physician was skilful in Astrology, and could make
his election of fortunate hours, wherein to minister his Potions to his
Patient; and likewise that he was practiced in Magic natural, as in making of
Sigils or Characters stamped in Metal in their due times, fitted to that sign
that governed that part of the Body, wherein the Malady was; as the stamp of
Aries for the disease in the Head, and of Leo for the Reins, etc. Hereof he
speaks in the third Book of Fame. And Clerks eke which conne well
All this Magic naturell,
That craftily do her entents,
To maken in certain ascendents
Images lo, through which Magic
They make a man be whole and sick.
* Martes mark, A Skar or Cut which the Children born in his Regiment have,
and that in some part of their face: but this good Wife of Bath will needs have
two; one for the Character of her principal Planet, and the other, etc.
maintenance, threatening. masteling, shining. mazeline, a mazer. manace, f.
threaten. malady, desease. make his beard, deceive him. malles, b. hammers,
betils. maumetri, b. worship of false Gods. martirdom, torment. maskewed,
fensed, fortified. makeles, b. matchless. mate, d. daunted, tame, mad, pined,
consumed. maugre, f. despite. martereth, i. dies. mark of Adam, mankind.
malison, b. a curse. malleable, b. abiding the hammer. marris, b. a fen.
mailes, d. round rings. magonell, an instrument to cast stones. malt, b.
melted. mansuete, l. gentle. maumet, mahumet, b. a toil, babble, idol. mannish,
( virago) b. stout. mauis, f. a bushel. make it, hinder it. maint, mingled.
malt, melted. matire, f. matter. mani, g. madness. masday, b. holy day:
maysondew, f. an hospital. malure, f. mischance. malebouch, f. wicked mouth. *
Mercury crude, l. Quicksilver; for the killing whereof I read thus; Argentum
vivum extinguitur cum forti admixtione salivae hominis, donec dispereat, and
dico, quod si projeceris super ipsum aquam fluentem, si redierit ad primam
dispositionem, non est extinctum: cum vere non redierit, been est extinctum.
Ipsum autem argentum vivum terra est. * Meritot, b. A sport used by Children by
swinging themselves in bell-ropes, or such like, till they be giddy. In Latin
it is called Oscillum, and is thus described by an old Writer: Oscillum est
genus ludi, scilicet cum funis dependitur de trabe, in quo pueri and puellae
sedentes impelluntur huc and illuc. metamorphoseos, g. a work written by Ovid
of the Transmutation of things. merke, b. dark. meke, b. be gentle. mete, mote,
b. must, might. medes, b. to boot. mede, b. reward, help. mesell, f. leper or
lazerman. meint, b. mingled. met, dreamed. meridionall, l. of the South. mede,
( hydromeli) d. honey and water sodden together. messagri, f. diligence in
doing a message. mendicants, l. Beggars. mees, b. Meddows. mew, secret. mest,
b. most. mete, deal, yield. methe, a kind of sweet drink. metten, dream.
melite, power. megre, f. b. lean. * Minoresse, the right reading is moueresse,
as we have now printed it; that is, a stirrer of debate: for so it is in the
French Verses in the oldest written Copies. Sembla byen estre moueresse.
ministralcie, any instrument of Music, or Music it self. miscreants, f.
Infidels. misqueame, b. displease. missat, b. became not. mistaken, misused.
misfill, miscarried. mirror, f. a glass. mistere, f. occupation, manner,
fashion, service, strange thing: also need. mineth, l. threatens. mistihede,
darkness, mystery. mitches, f. manchets. misericorde, l. compassion. minge, b.
mingle. mine, b. to entend: also to dig. misbode, wrong. minotaure, g. a
monster, half a bull, and half a man. * Moses and King Solomon, Out of Josephus
and Petrus Comestor magister historiarum, qui claruit, Anno 1260. moyson, f.
ripeness. monest, l. admonish. mouch, b. to take up all. mourdant, i. the
tongue of a buckle. mokell, mikell, b. much. mortresse, a meat made of boiled
hens, crummed bread, yolks of eggs, and saffron, all boiled together. mokell,
d. stature, making, bigness. modefie, l. moderate. mountaunce, quantity.
mollock, b. earth, dung. mowen, ( posse) be able. mormall, a canker: moniours,
f. coiners. moeble, f. housholdstuff. mow, mon, b. might. mosell, mouth, snout.
mowlen, b. wax mould. moten, d. must do. moile, a dish made of marrow and
grated bread. mortar, f. a lamp. mote, d. must go. molles, kistrels.
momblishnes, d. talk. mue, moved. muet, f. silent. muckre, b. hoard up. musard,
f. lingerer. mynting, laboring.
N.
Nadir, a. the point opposite to Zenith, or the point under the Horizon right
under our feet. nakoners, i. (crotalum) cimbals. nas, was not. nart, art not.
and, had not. nale, b. the alehouse. narcotise, d. stupefactive, making
senseless. not wilne, not desire. nam, am not. name, d. took. nere, were not.
need, needs, b. business. neighen, neigh, b. touch, to draw near. nest, b.
next. neuen, neuin, b. name, named. nerfe, i. sinew, gristle. nedely, of
necessity. nesh, b. tender. nere, until, were it not. nempt, b. named, name,
tell. need, needed. nerthes, herdmen. needs cost, of necessity. neders, adders.
nice, nise, b. foolish. nicete, folly, curiosity. niterall, saltpeter. nigh, b.
almost. nighen, draw near. nist, knew not. nil, will not. nigon, nigeon, f.
dolt, niggard. nigges, b. niggards. nigh, near, to draw near. nightspell, b. a
prayer against the night mare. nightertale, by night. nymphs, g. maidens of
the sea. nowell, signifies Deus nobiscum: and is taken for Christmas, and 20.
or 30. days next before. nortelri, nurture. nore, f. comfort, nourishing. note,
a Saint called Neotes. nones, b. condition, purpose. nori, i. nurse. nost,
know. nome, taken, nummed. nowth, now. note, business.
O.
Obey, abide. obseruaunce, l. honor. obstacles, l. letts. occision, l.
murder. occisier, l. murderer. octogami, g. eight times married. odible, l.
hateful. offitorie, l. a song or lesson in the time of offering. oftsithes, b.
sundry times. of plat then edge, of ease then grief. offrend, f. d. offering.
onde, ( halitus) b. breath: also fury. on hie, apace. oned, united. onis, once.
on knew, d. one knee. on press, adowne. openheed, bare-headed. orde, l. point.
ordainor, d. governor. oratorie, l. a Temple, a Chapel. orisons, f. d.
Prayers. * Ordall, Ordalia is a trial of chastity, and other things by going
over hot burning cultures of iron barefooted, as did Emma, and Gunegond the
Wife of Henry the fifteenth, Emperor of Romans, as writes Cra^tius in his
Chronicles of Almaine. This Ordall was used among the Saxons, and since the
Conquest among the Normans: but in the time of King John it was taken away by
the Court of Rome: And afterward in England by the authority of Henry the
third. ordered, b. having taken orders of priesthood. (Orders four.) The four
orders of Friars were these: 1 Friars Minors or gray friars, Franciscans. 2
Friars preachers or blackfriars, Dominicanes. 3 Friars Carmelites, or white
friars. 4 Friars Augustines. * Orfrayes, Aurifrisium, frisled cloth of gold,
made and used in England both before and since the Conquest, worn both by the
Clergy, and the Kings themselves, as may appear out of Matthew Paris, where he
speaks of the Ornaments sent by the Abbots of England to the Pope: And also
by a Record in the Tower, where the King commands the Templers to deliver
such Jewels, garments, and ornaments as they had of the Kings in keeping. Among
the which he names Dalmaticum velatum de Orefreis: that is, a Damask garment
guarded with Orfrayes. orisont, g. the part of the firmament to us seen.
oriental, bright, beautiful. oriental, i. bright. orpiment, the herb Orpin.
orloge, f. g. a dial. ouch, b. a boss or button of gold: also a wedge of gold.
ouerfret, spread. overthrowing, have. outraie, depart, run. outrance,
destruction. out take, except. owhere, any where. ownding, f. garding like
waves. owndy, f. waving. owls, b. hooks, pinsars.
P.
* Palmers, A Pilgrim and a Palmer did differ thus: The Pilgrim had some
dwelling place, the Palmer had none: the Pilgrim traveled to some certain
place, the Palmer to all and not to any one: the Pilgrim might go at his own
charge, the Palmer must profess wilful poverty: the Pilgrim might give over his
profession, the Palmer must be constant until he had obtained the Palm; that
is, victory over his ghostly enemies, and life by death. * Pasiphae, wife of
Minos king of Creet, who having kept company with a bull, but rather as Festus
says, with a man called Taurus, brought forth Minotaurus, who was half a man
and half a bull. palladium, g. the image of Pallas in Troy. pale, f. a spangle:
also a robe of state. palastere, g. a combat. pay, b. robe. pain mane, f.
white bread. paling, cutting in pains. pace, b. appease. (Palathi) Palathia in
Anatolia. papelard, f. hypocrite. pankers, f. toyls to take deer. parage, f.
parentage. patere, b. prate. partner, by parts. pan, b. brain. panter, f. a
pitfall. pad, b. a bundel. parfay, f. verily. paynem, b. heathenish. paramors,
f. lovers, pleasures. pardieux, f. verily. paplardi, f. hypocrisy. paraments,
Robes of state, or the place where they are kept. par, for. pauade ( pugio) a
dagger or baslard. penon, f. a long streamer. perse, f. sky color. pens
feel, many pence. pensell, d. a piece. perionet, a young pear tree. perry, f.
precious stones, bravery with precious stones. pekois, a pickaxe. perturben, f.
disturb. perriwrigh, embroidered with pearl. permagall, equal. peregrine, f.
strange. peri, d. a pear tree. perpendicular, l. down right. * Peruise, f. A
bar: and here it is understood of the conference called the Peruis amongst the
young Counselors, Pleaders, Attorneys, or Students of the Law, such as at this
day might resemble the course in the houses of Court, or Chancery called
mootes, and bolts: wherein the form of pleading and arguing a case is
exercised: For so does Fortescue in his 51. chapter of his Book, commending
those laws, prove, when he says: that after the Judges were risen at 11 of the
clock from hearing of causes at Westminster, Placitantes tunc se divertunt ad
pervisum, and alibi consulentes cum servientibus ad legem and aliis
conciliariis suis. percell, f. partly. pert, l. manifest. perre, f. a monument
erected for remembrance. peraunter, b. perchance. peregall, equal. pepire, (
philtrum) i. Pharmacum amatorium, a drink causing love. pel, d. house, cell.
pease, stay. pensell, d. banner. penible, f. painful. physiologus, g. any
writer of natural Philosophy. pine, d. pity, sorrow, desire, pain, toil: also a
pit. pight, b. cast. pine, to rack, to pain: pinent, a pined creature: pined,
pained. piment, ( pigmentum) a drink of wine and honey. pilloure, f. a pillar, (
columna.) pike, b. peep. pight, b. propped, struck, settled. pirate, a drink
made of pears. pithonesse, g. a witch. plumtuous, fruitful. plumage, f.
feathers. plat, b. flat. plagues, l. parts. plain, b. to play, or sport.
plenere, l. fully. plat then edge, ease then sorrow. platly, f. plainly.
plight, f. turned, catched. pounced, cut: also pressed. porpheri, f. a marble
mingled with red. possed, b. tossed. potent, f. a staff. portray, f. draw.
popere, a bodkin. possede, l. succeed. post, i. power. pomell, f. round.
poliue, f. a pulley: posteme, ( struma) f. botch or wenn. porthose, a service
book so called. pointell, f. a writing pin. power, b. stare, look. power, d.
poor estate. powdered, embroidered. powder merchant, Alephanginae species:
powders whereof ginger bread is made. poked, b. jogged. pole artike, g. a star
called the North Pole. poinant, f. sharp. popelot, d. puppet or youngwench.
porraile, base, beggarly. pomely grise, f. dapple-gray. polite, l. ^loquent.
pose, suppose. preueth, reproves. pregnant, i. full, thick. prime, l. nine of
the clock. precious, i. fine, curious, of account. preuid, f. hardy. press, d.
subjection. prefect, l. a magistrate. prefer, l. excel. preue, a proof.
presen, tread on. prill and poiten, goore and strike. prickesoure, a rank
rider. pray, request. pry, f. pray. priket, a small wax-candle. prien, b. look.
probatine pistant, l. g. the sheeps pool. processions, l. perambulations about
the fields in the gang week. pronosticke, g. foretelling. predication, l.
preaching. problem, g. an hard question or riddle. prow, f. profit, power,
honor. propheme, g. a preface. Pruce, Prussi^, a Country by Almaine and
Russie. pruce, of Prussia. Puella and Rubeus, The names of two figures in
Geomancy, representing two Constellations in heaven. Puella signifies Mars
retrograde, and R^^beus Mars direct. pugnant, l. pricking. purveiance, f.
providence. purfled, guarded, fringed. pullayle, f. wild-fowl, poultry. purfill,
guard, or fringe. puruay, f. provide. purprise, f. enclosure, device. pusell, f.
^amfel. pulchrit^de, l. beauty. putre, ^ whoredom.
Q.
Quacke, b. daunt. quappe, b. quail, shake, stir. quaint gyres, b. strange
fits. qualme, b. calmness. qualme, b. grief. quad, d bad. quarrels,
arrow-heads. queem, quemen, b. please. quent, b. quenched, strange. querele, i.
quarrel, complaint. quell, d. destroy, dash. quentise, curiosity. querror, f.
stone-digger. quinible, a treble. quistron, f. beggar.
R.
Raa, b. a Roe. takestele, b. the rake-handle. tabiat, i. mad. rade vore,
tapestry, loomework. rackell, d. hasty, to be hasty. racine, f. root. rank, b.
hoarse. rath, b. quickly. raught, went, reached. ravished, f. taken, overcome,
carried. raffles, f. rifling. rathest, b. soonest. rape, d. have. ramagious, f.
wild. rape, l. quickly; also haste. ramage, f. wild. rauishing, f. a swift
sway. raft, b. rent. ragounces,, a kind of precious stone. raskayle, b. trash.
ravish, f. to rob. rauenish, black. rayled, b. ran. rays, songs, rondels.
recreant, f. out of hope, untrusty. redowbting, praising, setting forth.
renomie, f. good name, fame. rest, rose. reight, b. reached. retrograde, l.
that goes backward. renouelences, f. renewings. reniant, f. revolter. redeth,
b. advises. red, b. the meaning. reuesten, f. to apparel. remuable, f.
mutable, ready. reave, f. spoil, rob. renegate, a Christian turned Turk. renkes,
b. ranks. resagor, ratsbane. rekelnesse, d. rashness. reins, fine cloth, of
the place where it is made. redelesse, b. helpless. renouell, f. renew. rehete,
b. promise. recketh, b. cares. refreide, f. refrain: renable, ( mobilis) b.
ready quick. rescous of our lay, defense of our Law. rear, ( rarus) divided.
regrate, f. lamentation, sorrowful suit. rue, b. take pity. rebecke, an old
trot. reme, take away, deny. rethe, l. a net. read, b. to advise. replication,
l. reply, gainsaying. renouelen, f. newly return. reave, b. pull away. revel,
b. sport. recke, b. d. care. reuerse, f. contrary. refrete, f. full. redouting,
setting forth. rejoice, enjoy. renged, f. compassed. recreance, i. comfort.
regali, i. princely power. repair, issue, consequent. recure, b. recover.
refrain, a stop. reign, i. kingdom. remord, f. give remorse. read, d. help,
advise, speech, art* also to advise. refrroiden, f. cool, cease. releyes and
lymers, f. standers at advantage with darts to kill the deer. realte, i.
royalty. recreandise, f. infidelity, wanhope. ren, b. pull, get. recreance, f.
beyond credit. refuit, i. help. reign, l. kingdom. remew, f. remove. redowre,
f. turning, doubling. reketh, b. smoaketh. retch, b. care. reuerberation, l. a
striking back. ribaude, ( leno) i. a bawd. ribyb, f. an old bawd. ribands, d.
borders. ribaned, guarded. rife, d. rifel. riddeled, checkred. ribibble, rebeck,
f. a gittern, or fiddle. rining, b. dropping. rimpled, ( rugatus) d. wrinkled.
rise, f. beauty. riue, b. rend. riuen, d. thrust. riueling, turning in and out.
reignous, f. ruinous. roket, a linen garment. romer, b. wider. romed, b.
walked. rone, b. rained. ronn, cease. roch, f. a rock. roile, b. d. range.
romant, a brief history. * Rosamond. This Rosamond the fair Daughter of Walter
Lord Clifford, was forced to be Concubine unto Henry the Second, who builded
for her at Woodstock an house with a Labyrinth under the ground, much whereof
at this day is to be seen: as also a goodly Bath or Well, called to this day
Rosamonds Well. In the end she was poisoned by Queen Elianor, some write, and
being dead, was buried at Godstow in an House of Nuns besides Oxford. Not long
since, her Grave was dug, where some of her bones were found, and her teeth
so white, (as the dwellers there report) that the Beholders did much wonder at
them. rosary, a book so called. rosere, f. a roseplat. routhlesse, b. pitiless.
row, b. angerly. roue, b. did rend. roune, b. to tell in the ear, to whisper.
rowme, b. walking. roine, f. a skar. rosial, l. red. rowned, b. d. spoken
softly. rows, b. streiks. roundell, d. a kind of song. roggeth, joggeth.
ronges, d. the sides of a ladder. rouken, d. lie snort. rowning, b. talking
secretly, silence. roth, ruth, b. pity. row, d. rough. rowketh, b. lies.
rought, b. cared. rote, d. course. row, d. ugly, bloodily. rote, an instrument
of Music usual in Wales. rownsy, rownceuall, f. a great Jade. * Rubric, In
the Canon Law the Arguments of every Chapter was written with red Letters,
which was called the Rubric, and the Text with black. rubicunde, l. red.
rubifying, d. making red. rucking, d. lying snorting. rud, b. complexion. ruell
bone, f. of the French word Riole, that is, diversely colored: an Antistaecon
in many words derived from another Language; as, in Law from Loy; and Roy from
Rex. ru, b. lament. ruse, b. praise.
S.
Sarge, f. saycloth. salew, f. honor. sand, sending. saylors, f. dancers. sat
me sore, touched me near. saturnade, swart, black. saw, b. speech. sat, became.
salow, b. white. sawsefleame, red faced. sare, b. sore. sarlinish, a kind of
Silk like Sarcenet. sawes, b. sayings, words. (Satali) A City in Anatolia,
called sometime Atalia. sanguine, i. red. saleweth, f. saluteth. samet, f.
Satin. sabatons, soldiers boots. sance, f. without. save, d. sage. sautri, b.
an instrument like to an harp, but far more pleasant. sarpiesis, sachels,
packs, or fardels. S. John to borrow, with good speed. saine alse, seen also.
sanatine, l. healing. saut, b. assault. sange, d. a song. saintwarie, ( Asylum)
a Priviledge-place. * Scholars hall, or University-Hall, founded by the
Chancellor and Masters of the University, Anno 1326. but since united to the
foundation of the Lady Elizabeth de Burgo, Countess of Clare, and called
Clare-hall. schall, shall. scathlike, b. harmful. scrippe, a wallet.
schoolelay, exhibition. scriuenish, subtly. scantilone, a measure. scarceheed
want. sciled, closed. scorning, changing. sees, b. seats. settels, grafts.
setrone, bright, clear. sey, saw, seen. sewis, b. follow. seculer, l. a
layman, worldly. senge, d. burn. seker, d. in like sort. secre, f. secret.
seld, b. seldom. seinde, b. scorch. sele, f. seal. sey, seen. septentrion, l.
the North. segge, d. say. semicope, l. a short cloak. sere, b. diverse.
septentrional, l. belonging to the North. seignory, f. power. senten, seut.
sendall, a thin stuff like cypress. selinesse, felicity. sew, sown. sempt, b.
seemed. seint, f. a girdle. semblable, b. like. sewing, placed. serment, f. an
oath. sewen, sow. sentement, f. l. ones own device: also sense, feeling. set,
f. becomes. sew, b. follow. sequedri, i. presumption. senged, b. scorched.
sementing, fastening together. seemed, thought. sewes, b. broths. sete, did sit.
sered, pockets, burned clouts. sely, happy, also wonderful. seker, verily. sey,
seen, saw. * Shildes, Shields, in French called Escus, are French crowns,
wherein this Merchant did deal by return. shene, shining bright. shullen, b.
shall. shenden, d. blame, to spoil, to mar. shede, depart. shewres, b. brunts.
sheriff, Reve, or Governor of the Shire. shendeth, b. hurts. shaw, a shadow,
a tuft of trees. shepen, b. simple, fearful. shetten, b. closed. shond, b.
harm. shild, b. defend. shode, d. head, bush of hair. shoder, d. shoulder.
shemering, d. glimmering. shoue, put. shete, b. shoot. shepens, sheep-coots.
shore, d. a cleft. shift, bestow. shad, fell. shent, d. harmed, troubled.
shright, b. crying out. shent, b. d. infected. showfe, b. put off. sib, b. d. a
kin. since, b. by and by; also, time. sitole, the sweet music of the Dulcimer,
called Sambuca. * Sign of the Lion, For then is Saturn in his Detriment, and in
opposition to his own house. sie, sighe, seigh, b. saw. sike, sigh, also sick.
sie, b. to see, to fall sideling. sigh, saugh, b. faw. sikerer, b. certainer,
truer. sitwell, is meet. sithnesse, seeing that. simphony, g. music. sikerly,
b. truly. sider, a drink made of apples. sike, a sigh. signals, l. tokens.
sile, banishment. sin, b. since. siker, d. sure I. sit, b. fitteth. since,
after. sithen, b. after. skaffant, an engine of war. skinketh, powers out.
skils, expositions. skath, b. harm. skillful, reasonable. skleren, cover.
skale, b. scab. skorchlith, scorcheth. skarmoch, d. skirmish. skere, b. fray.
sleite, b. slight, craft. slough, b. ditch. slittered, b. cut. slider, (
labilis) d. slippery. sliding, faint. sleueles, b. vain. sli, b. a subtle
fellow, wise. slough, forslow. slow, b. a sluggard. sliuer, b. a parcel. sio,
b. kill. slough, b. killed. slite, b. rent, tere. sligh, b. coming. slew, slew.
slaked, d. persed, loosed. slouthlich, slovenish. smart, quick. smert, grieved.
smete, b. smitten. smoterlich, d. snoutfair, or painted. snewed, did snow.
sownen, b. sound. soken, b. trade, dealing. sourd, f. rise, spring. sowned, b.
ordained. sowke, b. spend, draw out. sowled, b. inspired. solein, l. only.
sonnish, bright. souple, f. gentle, pliable. sotell, d. subtle. soigne, f.
care, diligence. soother, b. truer. sophismes, g. subtilties. son or wete,
dry or wet. sooth, b. truth. sond, sand. soote, d. sweet. solstitium, l. the
stay of the sun, when he cannot go either higher or lower. sorry, d. easy,
soi^, feeble. sours, f. spring. soft, quietly. sown, b. speech, sound. soiour,
f. dwelling, settling. soiourne, a journey, a tarrying, also to tarry. sowth
sawes, b. true speeches. sowpen, b. sup. sowgh, b. sound. sonenesse, f. noise.
sound, to heal, to be healed. soukle, d. wretched, poor. sow and plite, b. seal
and fould. soget, subget, subject. sonitresse, hair shining as the sun. sond,
b. will, mind, pleasure, commandment. sort, l. chance. spinge, i. sprinkle,
intrude. splendent, l. bright. spray, sprig, or bow. speris, b. asks. sperme,
g. seed. sped, handled; also hasted. speces, l. parts. spiritueles, l. heavenly
graces. spedefull, ( efficax) earnest. spannew, b. very new. sperid, b. asked.
sperd, b. shut up. splay, to spread. springowlds, b. young men. sperkell,
wandering. sparch, ( bipennis) d. a double axe. spell, b. a tale, word. sphere,
g. a figure in all parts equally round. spanishing, d. full breadth. spense, d.
a buttery. sparth, a spear. squames, i. stales. squire, a carpenters rule.
squireth, waits. Storke, This bird breeds in the chimney tops of houses,
and, as it is written of him, if the man or the wife commit adultery, he
presently forsakes the place. And as Aristotle says, If his female play
false, he will, if he can, kill her; or else utterly forsake her. Therefore
Chaucer calls him the wreker of adultery. stopen, stowped. stripe, strene, l.
kindred. sterelich, d. earnestly. stondmeale, a little after, small, little.
stad, b. combred. steds, d. places. stownd, b. suddenly. stole, i. a tipper.
stenten, b. way. statu, i. picture. stout, d. stood. stound, b. d. time,
course, moment. stern, b. stiff, stout. stot, a young horse. stoure, b.
skirmish. stith, b. an anvil. stere, b. make a motion. stele, d. an handle.
stedship, d. staiedness. stremeden, d. gushed out. stark stoures, b. sharp
assaults. stead, b. a gelding. stere, stern. sire, b. a straw. stamin, l. hemp.
stered, b. dealt withal. stere, to make. stighed, d. ascended. strond, (
tractus) d. bank, a coast, or region. staulketh, b. walks, strideth. steven,
b. sound, time, meeting. stew, b. a small pond for fish. steven, b. sound, also
time. stall, d. set. stead, d. place. struck, b. to pass, to stride. stemed, b.
gave out hear, or redness. stern, to lay down. strepe, rob, strip. stownd ill,
bad case. stownds, b. sorrows, dumps: also courses. steire, a stern. stark,
b. stiff. stereles, b. without stern. straught, ( extentus) b. stretched.
sturte, strangle, scuffle. stames, ( subergmen) l. warpe. subalter, and sept,
the Streits between Spain and Barbary. sued, f. followed. surplus, d. remnant.
surquidri, f. presumption. surpires, l. sighs, sobs. suckney, a white attire
like a Rocher. superne, l. above. suspires, l. sighs. subliming, l. ascending.
supprised, f. overcome. surquidous, l. presumptuous. surcote, a Gown with a
Hood of the same. sursanure, ( quasi sur sum sanatum) a sore festred inward,
and whole without. sublimatory, a kind of still. superficie, l. the overmost
part of any thing. supplien, f. make entreaty. supporaile, upholder.
superlatife, l. highest. swyre, b. neck. swich, b. such. sweuen, a dream.
swinker, a labourer. sawtry, f. dancing, instrumental music, or the
instrument. swilke, b. such. swolow, b. gulf. switch, b. quickly. swain, b. a
servant. swow, a sleep. swelt, b. sowned. swert, d. sun-burned, black. swough,
b. sound. swith, b. swift, swiftly. swa, b. also, so. swelwen, b. devour.
swonken, b. labored. swoll, b. swelled. swegh ( impetus) b. force. swelt, b.
die. sykes, sighs. syker, b. assurance, steady. sykerd, d. allied. sye, b. to
fall. sith, b. afterward, times.
T.
Tabard, d. A Jacket or sleeveless Coat, worn in times past by Noblemen in the
Wars, but now only by Heralds, and is called their Coat of Arms in service. It
was the sign of an Inn in Southwark by London, within the which was the Lodging
of the Abbot of Hyde by Winchester. This was the Hostelry where Chaucer and the
other Pilgrims met together, and with Henry Baily their Host, accorded about
the manner of their Journey to Canterbury. And whereas through time it had been
much decayed, it was then by Mr. J. Preston, with the Abbots house thereto
adjoined, newly repaired, and with convenient Rooms much increased, for the
Receipt of many Guests. It is now the Sign of the Talbot. tapinage, f.
secrecy, slilyness. tailages,, toll, customs. tapes, b. strings. Taurs, and
Mars therein, Taurus being properly Venus house, under the which Sign this
woman was born, Mars then ruling in the same, prognosticateth great
Incontinency. tackle, b. feather, arrow. taas, f. d. an heap. taboure, a drum.
talages, payments. talagiers, tole-gatherers. tapite, d. tapestry. taling, d.
telling tales. tacoy, to pluck to, or draw. tabouren, d. sound. targe, l. a
target. tatch, tetch, b. craft. tatterwags, b. rags, jaggs. tale, rayl. taken,
b. take. talent, f. i. desire. tassed, b. tasselled. tassey, to aslay. testes,
certain devices to try gold and silver. testeres, f. skulls, sallets. tene, b.
sorrow. testify, f. wild brained. teme, an Ingot of metal. teme, g. a text.
termine, l. to end. terrestre, f. l. earthly. temen, lay, or bind. temps, f. l.
time. tell no store, take no regard. tetch, b. a trick, a stain, frowardness.
tenhaunce, set out. tewell, b. chimney. tercelet, d. Falco masculus. textuele,
textele, l. skillful in the text. thrages, busy matters. Theophrast, In his
Book De Frugalitate, else in his Treatise De Loquacitate mulierum. therout,
without. threke, thrust. thirled, pierced. thence, catch, find, yet. thanks,
acts, enterprises, labor, reward. thewes, qualities. then, thence. thilke,
same. threpe, b. affirm. their, there: also needs. thirled, ( jugulavit)
strangled. thacked, b. beat, smote. thringing, thrusting, clustering together.
throw, a short time. thriueth, b. springs. tho, those, although. thascry,
outcry. thorruke, an heap. thrilled, killed. thrope, d. a village. thankheeld,
thank-worthy. theke, such. throw, anger, haste. threst, oppress. three mot, the
blast of an horn. then, although. thonke held, d. bestow labor or liking.
thopposite, l. overagainst. tholed, b. suffered. thauentaile, coat of male.
thringe, d. thrust. thedom, b. thriving. theich, plain, smooth. thore, before.
threte, curse, threaten. timbesters, plaiers on sounding Instruments. tid, b.
happened, befallen. tiflers, triflers. tite, b. befalls. tilleth, b. ploweth.
tiren, tear, rent, tides, b. happens. tissu, f. a lace. told, took care, made
account. tout, b. hole. * Tortuous, Tortuous the signs are, which are called
Obliquae ascendentia: that is, all from Capricorn to Cancer. So he calls the
Ascendent unfortunate, because it is one of those signs, and had at the same
time the Lord of that sign in his fall, which is in the Sign contrary to his
exaltation. toteth, b. looks: tone, b. claws. * Tolitane tables, Alphonsus
tables to calculate the motion of the Planets for the meridian of Taledo.
towell, tail. torcencions, using extortion. toder, b. the other. tomblesters,
tumblers. told no tale, took no care. tole, f. clout, toy. tournet, f. a tower.
tort, i. extortion. torrets, rings, or the fastening of dogs Collars. totti, b.
dizzie. totoler, prater. Tramissene, a City in Barbary, in the Province
sometime called Mauritania Tingitana, or Caesariensis, as has Melanghton.
traue, b. a trevis to snoo a wild horse in. trate, trot, old drab. transcend,
l. pass, exceed. trepeget, an Instrument to cast stones. trowen, to trust.
trice, pull. trist, ( meta) a mark. tressed, broided up. trentall, thirty
masses. tresse, ( funiculus) d. the broiding up of the hair. tretis, straight.
trauers, f. overthwart, a curtain. trip, b. a piece. true, truce. trausmew, i.
change. trill, b. d. to turn, to drop. trenchant, f. bending: also sharp.
trayle, f. an arbor. trist, l. b. sad: also to believe. trai^rie, f. treason.
tregetor, a iugler. troce, d. wreath or with. tresses, hair, braids of hair.
truandise, d. idleness. trete, handle. trects, straight. treget, deceit.
trophe, i. victory. tulsurelike, f. tilekill-like. tull, lure, allure. twittel,
b. a knife. twin, b. depart; also separate. twiereth, sings. twy, d. two.
twynned, b. parted. twight, b. pulled. twyn, to take away, to depart, to turn.
twifold, d. double. twitten, b. carved out. twist, (ramus) b. a bow. twist, b.
pinch, hold. twy, t^^y, d. two.
V.
Valerie and Theophrast, Some will have us read Valery and his Paraphrast. This
Valery wrote a Book De non ducenda uxore, with a Paraphrase upon it, which I
have seen in the Study of Mr. Allen of Oxford, (a man of as rare Learning, as
he is stored with rare Books.) His Name was Gualterus Maape, Archdeacon of
Oxford, in the days of King Henry the Second, but changed his Name, because he
would not have the Author known, and termed it Valerius ad Rusinum. But yet
there was one called Valerius, who wrote a Book of the same Argument, printed
among St. Jerome's Works. And likewise one called Theophrastus Eresius, who
among many things did write a Book, wherein he reasons, whether it be
convenient for a wise man to marry. Johannes Sarisburiensis, in his
Policraticon has translated some things in this Book out of Greek and Latin,
as may appear, lib. 8. cap. 11. De molestiis and oneribus Conjugiorum: out of
which Chapter, Cha^cer has taken much for this Argument, as may be seen in the
Merchants Tale: but more in the Wife of Bath's Prologue, where between 30 and
40 Verses are translated from thence. And if the whole Work at this day were by
some sufficient Scholar translated, it would deserve as much commendation as
many Books, which learned men, not without great commendation, have heretofore
translated. valence, i. cloth of Valencia in Spain. vapoured, l. ascended.
vasselage, f. service, subjection. van, f. a fan. vauesoure, f. a Lord.
Vernacle, a cloth or napkin, wherein was the figure of Christ's Face. vernage,
i. sweet wine to be drank in Winter. vent, forepart. verge, f. a garden.
vermell, vermayle, f. red. ventosing, f. cupping. veiued, weved, put away.
verre, f. glass. vechons, Hedghogs. vecke, i. an old woman. veneri, l. hunting.
Vigils. It was the manner in times past, upon festival Evens, called Vigiliae,
for Parishioners to meet in their Church-houses, or Churchyards, and there to
have a drinking fit for the time. Here they used to end many quarrels between
Neighbor and Neighbor. Hither came the Wives in comely manner, and they which
were of the better sort had their Mantles carried with them, as well for show,
as to keep them from cold at the Table. These Mantles also many did use in the
Church at morrow masses and other times. via Appia, l. an Highway or Causey
from Rome to Campaigne. vinari enuermayled, f. vineyard made red. virelay, a
kind of song. vite, l. a vine. vinolent, l. drunk, smelling of wine. visage it,
f. face it out. viended, f. having plenty of flesh meat. vmple, b. fine lawn.
uncouth, b. strange. vnselines, misfortune. vnderneme, excommunicate. vnpliten,
b. make plain. vnwrie, uncover. vnderne, b. afternoon. uneath, b. scarce.
unberd, laid open. vnwist, b. unknown. vnyolden, b. not yielding. vndernome,
felt. underspore, b. put under. unset steven, b. unappointed time. unsounded,
unhealen. vndermeles, b. afternoons. vnsely, unhappy. vnderfonge, take in hand.
vnsperd, b. unlocked. vomes, f. foming. volunde, i. will. voluper, a kercher.
volage, f. unconstant. voundstone, free stone. volatili, i. wild fowl. volage,
l. pleasure. vpswale, ( intumescebat) started, swelled up. vpplight, b. taken
up. vphap, b. overcover. vrne, l. an earthen pot. ure, b. hap, chance, use.
vrnes, l. pitchers. vttrance, f. extremity.
W.
Wastel bread, (libellus) fine Cymnel. wangs, b. (molares) great teeth.
waltring, b. wallowing. waymenting, b. lamenting. waren, d. afflict. waget,
warchet color. warri, d. to make war. warn, assure. waiue, b. to turn fro.
wait, b. mark. wardcorse, an overseer. wones, d. dwellings. waiued, removed.
wanger, d. a male, or bouget. warren, d. grant, defend. Wades bote. Concerning
Wade and his Boat, called Guingelot; as also his strange Exploits in the same.
Because the matter is long and fabulous, I pass it over. Warriangles, be a kind
of birds full of noise, and very ravenous, preying upon others, which when they
have taken, they use to hang upon a thorn or prick, and tear them in pieces,
and devour them. And the common Opinion is, That the thorn whereupon they thus
fasten them and eat them, is afterward poisonsome. In Staffordshire and
Shropshire the Name is common. warned, denied. wawes, b. waves. wate, b. know.
warbles, werbles, notes of music. walthsome, d. loathsome. waped, daunted.
warenstored, defended. warnestore, fortify. wantrust, b. mistrust. warish,
save, deliver. warished, eased, delivered. ware, b. mark thou. wayled, b.
changed, old. warison, reward. way, to guide. werds, guides. well, to spring.
wenen wisely, b. thinks verily. welken, b. the sky. wexen, wish. welden, to
move. were, b. a doubt, a mase, also a place where Fishers lay their nets to
take fish. wetten, b. know. werch, b. work. works, b. acheth. wenden, b.
think. weldy, b. nimble. wene, a doubt, also wened. western, to draw west.
werre, werry, b. curse, also destroy. werne, deny. wex, increase. wend, b.
thought, think, by guess, werried, d. banished, confounded. werth, deserving.
wilnest, art willing. wene, b. thought, doubt. wemlesse, b. blameless. welmeth,
d. rises. went, ( via) a way, a walk, a doubt. west, set at west. welkneth, d.
dries, faints. wede, b. apparel. welt, b. ruled. welked, d. withered. wed,
d. pledge, gage. westreth, sets at west. werriest, b. curfest. wendest, b.
go. wete, b. knows. weld, b. hold, govern. weiue, b. forsake, reject.
welked wyners, d. withered vine branches. wenden, b. think, knew. werne, b.
forbid, put aside. wernings, denials. welde, b. to rule, also to find. welked,
d. withered. welefull, b. wealthy. whilke, b. which. whele, round. Wine Ape,
Vinum Apianum: that makes one in such taking, that he cannot with a straw hit
a broad fan: the cause is, for that after the drinking thereof unmeasurably,
one thing seems two to the eyes, as says Juvenal: Geminis exurgit mensa
lucernis. And Horace, Saltat Milonius, ut semel icto accessit fervor capiti,
numerusque lucernis. wist, b. known. wisse, b. show, make known: also wish, d.
direct in truth. wisse, know, instruct. wile, b. deceit. witest, b. blamest.
wis, b. verily. werred, oppressed. wight, b. weight; also swift. wisshe, d.
washed. wisse, wise, to advise; also to wish. wight, b. swift, strong. wight,
d. weight. wilneth, desires. wissy, verily. wicke, bad, stinking, noisome;
also counterfeit. wiche, an ark or chest. winsing, b. stirring. wisse, save
themselves. wit, b. know. wite, d. white. wlate, d. loath, hate. woneden, d.
dwell. wost, d. know. woned, b. wont, used; also dwelled. woddeth, b. waxes
mad. wone, won, store, plenty, remedy. wonning, d. dwelling. worth up, ascend.
wone, store. wodshaw, woodside or shadow. wond, turn back. wonnen, b.
conquered. wood, b. mad. wonneth, d. dwells. werker, wreker, d. (ultor)
revenger. won, remedy, also wont. wound, bended together. worth, b. mounted.
wrien, covered, change. wrath him, anger him. writheth, casts off. wrenches,
b. traps. wryeth, gets. wrathed, moved to anger. wroth, sorrowful. wrale, b.
bestow in brawling. wrecke, shipwreck. wro, grief, anger. wreken, d. revenge.
wrekery, d. revenge. wroth, disagreeing. wrawnes, b. frowardness. wrigh,
covered. wreme, to compass about. wrake, b. revenge. wright, b. a carpenter.
wrech, d. revenge, wrath. wrene, wrine, cover. wry, to cover, to stir. wyerds,
destinies. wyuer, a kind of serpent much like to a dragon. wythsit, withstand.
wyshen, wash. wymple, d. a kercher. wythsay, b. deny. wynt, windeth, draws.
wynder, d. to cover, or trim. wit, b. blame. wyntred, wringled. wind, go.
win, d. to complain.
Y.
Yalt, b. goes. yare, b. ready. yate, b. gate. yaue, regarded. ybet, b. made.
ycast, left. yclenched, cross-barred, covered. ycoruen, cut. ycrased, broken.
ydo, stayed. Ye know what I mean. An Aposiopesis often used by Chaucer; as
that which he is said to have written with his Diamond sometime in
glass-windows, expounded by his man Wat; which was thus: A married man, and
yet, quoth. Chaucer. A merry man, quoth. Wa^. He is a knave that wrote me that, quoth.
Chaucer. yerne, b. quickly; also loud, earnestly. yede, yeden, b. went.
yfrounced, f. frowning. yfretten, devoured. yfere, b. together. yeats, b.
gates. yelpe, b. prate, talk. yedding, ( jurgandi) of brawling, (some say) of
gadding up and down (others) of loud singing. yerning, b. profit. yerd, b.
rod, or plague: also government. yerne, b. to desire, also to take grief, to
deserve. yellow goulds, marigolds. yetten, lay up, gotten. yexing, b. sobbing.
yfter this, even as. yhed, on hie. yhold, accounted. yif, and if. isle, (
inanis) d. empty. ymeint, b. mingled. ynde, black. you, gave, given. yode, b.
went. yolden, b. yielded. yore, b. before, long, long ago. ypocras, Hipocrates
Works. yqueint, b. quenched. yreken, b. raked. yren, displeasure, destrustion.
ysaine, seen. ythee, b. thrive. ywrien, b. covered.
Z.
Zenith, a. the point of the Firmament, directly over ones Head, wheresoever he
be. Zephirus, g. the West wind. Zodiake, g. a Circle in Heaven, wherein are the
twelve signs.
So much of the Latin in Chaucer translated, as is not by himself Englished
AMOR vincit omnia, Love conquereth all things. A question Juris, A question of
the Law. Alma redemptoris Matter, O Mother of our Savior. Ad adjuvandum me, To
help me. Associat profugum Tideus, etc. The Arguments of the twelve Books of
Statius. The first does show, that Tideus and Polimite are combined in
Friendship. In the second Tideus's Message is taught, and the Treacheries
disclosed. The third does speak of Harmonia, and of Amphiaraus, who hid
himself. The fourth sets out the Battles of the seven Kings. The fifth
notes out the outrage of the Women of Lemnos, touches the Adder, and the
Death of Archemorus. In the sixth, the games are declared. In the seventh,
Amphiaraus the wise man is no more seen. In the eighth, Tideus, the stay of the
Greeks, is slain. In the ninth, Hippomedon and Parthenope die. In the tenth
Capan^us in scaling the Walls is slain. In the eleventh, Etteocles and Polynice
kill one another. The twelfth sets out, Adrastus their hard case bewailing,
and Thebes burning. Benedicite, Praise ye. Benedictus, Blessed. Cor meum
eructavit, My heart has belched out. Consummatum est, It is finished. Cum
iniquis deputatus est, He was reckoned among the wicked. Consumere me vis? Will thou destroy me? Cur me dereliquisti? Why have thou forsaken me? Coeli enarram,
The Heavens declare. Corpus Domini, The Lords Body. De septem peccatis
mortalibus, Of the seven deadly Sins. De Invidia, Of Envy. De Ira, Of Anger. De
Accidia, Of Accidy. De Avaritia, Of Covetousness. De Luxuria, Of Letchery.
Dolorum meum, My Grief. Domine Laba, etc. O Lord open my Lips. Domine Dominus
noster, O Lord our God. Domine est Terra, The Earth is the Lords. Dominus
regnavit, The Lord is King. Explicit secunda pars poenitentiae, and sequitur
pars tertia. Fuerunt mihi Lachrimae me in Desert^ Panes Die ac nocte, My Tears
were my Bread in the Wilderness Day and Night. Faciem tuam abscondis, Do thou
hide thy Face. Jesus Nazarenus, Jesus of Nazareth. Iras^imini and: nolite
peccare, Be angry, but sin not. In nomine Jesu, In the Name of Jesus. In manus
^uas, Into thy hands. Jube Domine, Command Lord. Jubilate, Rejoice. Ignotum per
ignotius, One Obscurity, by a more Obscurity. Libera me, Save me. Laudate,
Praise ye. Mulier est Hominis Confusio, A Woman is Man's Destruction. Non est
Dolor sicut Dolor meus, There is no Grief like to mine. Non est aliud Nomen sub
Coelo, etc. There is no other Name under Heaven. O admirabile, O wonderful. O
Deus, Deus meus, O God, my God. Pone me juxta te, Set me by thee. Qui Gladio
percutit, He that strikes with the Sword. Quia tulerunt Dominum meum, Because
they have taken away my Lord. Quid mali feci tibi? What harm have I done thee?
Quia non est, qui consoletur me, Because there is none to comfort me. Quod
dilexi multum, Because I love much. Quod sic repent praecipitas me, That thou
do so suddenly cast me down. Radix omnium malorum est Cupiditas,
Covetousness is the root of all evil. Remedium contra Peccatum acidiae, An help
against the sin of wanhope. Remedium contra Peccatum Avaritiae, An help against
the Sin of Covetousness. Remedium contra Peccatum Luxuriae, An help against the
Sin of Lechery. Sanctus Deus, Holy God. Sanctissimus, Most holy. Sequitur de
Gula, Concerning Gluttony. Sequitur secunda pars Poenitentiae, Here follows
the second part of Repentance. Suspensus in Patibulo, Hung upon the Cross. Sed
non respondes mihi, But thou do not answer me. Sagittae tuae infixae sunt
mihi, Thy Arrows have pierced me sore. Solum superest Sepulchrum, There only
remains a Grave. Tanquam Cera liquescens, Like melting Wax. Tuam animam
pertransibit Gladius, The Sword shall pierce thy Soul. Trahe me post te, Draw
me after thee. Tu autem, And thou. Te Deum amoris, Thee the God of Love. Turpe
lucrum, Filthy Gain: Vbi posuerunt eum? Where have they laid him? Velociter
exaudi me, Speedily hear me. Venite, Come ye.
The French in Chaucer translated.
A Moi, qui voy, To me which see. Bien moneste, Well admonished. Bien and
loialement, Well and dutifully. C'est sans dire, etc. It is without saying,
etc. Don vient la destiny, From whom comes destiny. En diu est, In God is.
Entierement vostre, Yours wholly. Estreignes moy de coeur joyeux, Strain me
with a joyful heart. Et je scay bien, que ce n'est pas mon tort, And I know
well that it is not my hurt. Jay tout perdu mon temps, and mon labeur, I have
altogether lost my Time and Labor. Jay en vous toute ma fiance, I repose all
my trust in you. Je vouldray, I will. Je vous die, I say to you. Je vous die sans
doubt, I say to you without doubt. La belle dame sans mercy, The fair Lady
without mercy. L'ardant espoir en mon coeur point est mort, d'avoir l'amour de
celle, que je desire, The earnest hope within my heart is not dead, to have the
love of her whom I desire. Meulx un, One best in heart. Onques puis lever, I
can never rise. Or a mon coeur, Now to my Heart. Or a mon coeur ce qui vouloy,
Now to my Heart that which I would. Pleures pour moy, s'il vou plaist amoreux,
Weep for me if you please, lovely Lady. Plus ne pourroy, I can do no more. Qui
est la, Who is there? Qui bien aim, tard oublie, He that loves well is slow
to forget. Sans ose je dire, Without, shall I be bold to say. Sans que jamais,
etc. Without ever, etc. Sans ose je, ou diray? But dare I, or shall I say? Si
douce est la marguerite, So sweet is the daisie. son and mon joly coeur
endormi, Her lively Heart and mine fallen asleep. Soyes asseure, Be ye assured.
S^s la feville devers moy, Upon the Leaf toward me. Tant que je puis, As much
as I can. Tant me fait mal departir de ma dame, It grieveth me so much to
depart from my Lady. Un sans changer, One without changing.
The Authors cited by G. Chaucer in his Works, by Name declared.
ALhazen, an Arabian, wrote seven Books of Perspectives. Arnoldus de nova
villa, did write the Book called Rosarium Philosophorum. Anselmus, Bishop of
Canterbury, a great Writer in Divinity, 1061. Agathon, a Philosopher of Samos,
did write Histories. Augustine, that famous Doctor and Bishop, wrote more Books
than ever did any in the Church of the Latins. Avicen, a Physician of Sevil,
wrote a multitude of Books. Averroys, a Physician of Corduba, floruit, 1149.
Albumasar, alias Japhar, a great Astrologian, wrote of sundry things in that
Art. Aesopus, a Philosopher born in Phrygia in the days of Croesus, King of
Lydia, to whom he dedicated the Fables which he wrote. Aristotle, a famous
Philosopher, Scholar to Plato, and Master to King Alexander. He was 345 years
before Christ. Ambrose, the worthy Bishop of Millain, in the year of our Lord,
373. Alcabutius, a Writer in Astronomy; as of the Conjunction of the Planets,
etc. Alanus, among other things wrote a Book De Planctu Naturae.
B.
Bocatius, born at Florence in Italy, set out many things in his own Tongue,
claruit, 1375. Bernardus de Gordonio, a Frenchman born, Reader of Physic at
Mount Pelier. Bernardus Abbas Clarevallensis, a Burgonian, and a singular
Divine, set forth many things, 1140. Basilius Magnus, Bishop of Caesarea, 367.
C.
Cato, a learned man among the Romans, before the Incarnation, 182. Corinna, a
Theban Woman, and a Lyrike Poet; she wrote 50 Books and Epigrams; as Suidas and
Pausanias report. Claudianus, born in Alexandria in Egypt, among many things
wrote a Book of the stealing away of Proserpina. Crisippus did write a Book
against the pleasure of the Body. Constantine the Monk did translate and write
many things in Physic, and among other, Lib. de coitu, quibus modis augeatur
and diminuatur.
D.
Dantes Aligeras, an Italian, and born in Florence, lived, 1341. Dares Phrigius
did write the Trojan War in Greek, where he himself was a Soldier. Ditis
Historicus did write a Book of the Trojan War, found in a certain Sepulcher.
Damascenus Presbiter did write many things in the Greek Tongue. Dioscorides, a
worshipful Knight of Egypt, wrote in Greek, of the natures of diverse Herbs: He
lived under Cleopatra and Antonius.
E.
Aesculapius did write a Book of the original, cause, and descriptions of
Diseases.
F.
Franciscus Petrarcha, an Italian born, did write when Chaucer was a young man,
floruit, 1374.
G.
Gatisden and Gilbertin, Englishmen born, and writers in Physic. Guido de
Columna, a Sicilian, did write of the Trojan War, 1287. Galfride Vinesause, was
a Norman by his Parents, but born in England: he did write in his Book
entitled de artificio loquendi, by way of Example of Mourning, under the
Rhetorical figure of Apostrophe, a complaint for the Death of Richard the
First, who was slain with an Arrow at the Siege of the Castle of Chalne in
Normandy, and lived in the time of King John, An. Dom. 1210 Galenus, a most
singular Physician, did write a multitude of Books, 160. Gregorius Magnus did
write much in Divinity, claruit, An. 369. Galfridus Monumethensis, an
Englishman born, translated into our Tongue the History of England, floruit,
1152.
H.
Homerus, the chiefest of all Poets, wrote in the Greek Tongue two works, the
one called his Ilias, and the other his Odyssea. Helowis, Maximinian, Livian,
Aurora, Zansis, and diverse others alleged by Chaucer, have none or few of
their works extant. Haly wrote a Book of the Compositions of Medicines.
Hieronimus Stridonensis did write among other things, a defense of Virginity,
in two Books, against Jovinian. Hippocrates Cous, a most ancient Physician, and
Prince of all others, lived in the days of Artaxerxes. Hermes, an Egyptian,
Disciple to Plato, did write of many strange things.
I.
Josephus wrote in Greek the Battle and Destruction of the Jews. He was after
the Incarnation seventy six years. Johannes Damascenus, a Writer in Physic,
1158. Innocentius Papa, born in Company, wrote a Book of the happy state of
Mankind. Juvenalis, a Poet, which wrote Satyrs. Justinian, an Emperor of Rome,
who caused to be written the Books of the Laws, called the Digests,
Institutions, and the Code, containing the Decrees of the Emperors. He was
after the Incarnation five hundred and seventy years.
L.
Lollius, an Italian Historiographer, born in the City of Vrbine. Lucanus, a
famous Poet, that wrote the Battle between Caesar and Pompey.
M.
Macrobius Aurellius wrote a Commentary on Scipio's Dream. Marcus Aurelius
Cassiodorus, a Monk, among many things wrote of the state of the Soul.
Marcianus Capella did write of the Liberal Sciences: and also of the marriage
of Philologi and Mercury.
O.
Ovidius, a famous Latin Poet and Orator, advanced to be Senator of Rome: He
lived when Christ was conversant on Earth.
P.
Petrus Alfonsus, a Jew, turned to the Faith, before called Moses, was baptized
by King Alphonsus, and bare his Name: he did write many Books, 1100. Pamphilus
Presbiter, Kinsman to Eusebius, after much pains in writing, suffered Martyrdom
in Caesaria, under the Persecution of Maximinus. Papinius Statius, a
Neapolitan, wrote of the Destruction of Thebes. He lived under Domitian.
Ptolemeus lived in the Time of Anthony the Emperor: he wrote diverse works, and
restored out of Darkness the Mathematical Sciences. Pithagoras, an excellent
Philosopher of Samos, at whose Wisdom Plato did wonder. He was before the
Incarnation 522 years. Petrus Cassiodorus, an Italian, a Noble man, and
learned, did write to the Church of England, and persuaded them to cast off
their Obedience to the Roman Bishops, and to beware of their Tyranny, 1302.
R.
Rasis, an Arabian Physician. Rufus, a Physician of Ephesus in the time of
Trajan the Emperor.
S.
Statius, a noble Poet, which wrote twelve Books of the Theban War. Senior
Zadith did write a Book of Alchimy, Gesner. Seneca, a Spaniard, born in
Corduba, a singular Philosopher, did write many things; he lived in the time of
Nero, by whom he was put to Death. Serapion, an Arabian, did write of the
Composition of Medicines. Suetonius wrote the Lives of the Roman Emperors.
Strode, a man of great Learning, Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, 1380.
T.
Tertullian did write a Book of the attire of Women. Titus Livius, the most
excellent Writer of the Romans History. Tho. Bradwarden was Bishop of
Canterbury, who did write a Book De causa Dei, contra Pelagianos, and dedicated
it to the Society of Merton College in Oxford. He did write many other Books,
one of the Trinity, one of Predestination, one of all Sciences, one of the
Principles of Geometry; also a book of the Reward of them which shall be saved,
and another called the Sum of Divinity. He flourished in the year of Grace,
1270. Trotula set forth a book of the cure of Diseases in and after Childbirth.
Theophrastus Eresius, Disciple to Aristotle, writing a great number of Books,
has one De frugalitate. Tullius, a Senator of Rome, Father of Eloquence, and
pure Fountain of the Latin Tongue. He flourished about forty years before
Christ's Incarnation.
V.
Valerius Maximus, wrote to Tiberius Caesar a Book of the memorable deeds and
sayings of worthy Men. Virgilius, the most famous Poet of Mantua, whose Life
Petrus Crinitus has set down at large in Lib. 3. de Poetis Latinis. Vitellio
did write ten books of Perspectives.
W.
William S. Aymour, a Frenchman, did write a Commentary on the Apocalipse, much
inveighing against the Pope: and was therefore banished, and his Books burned.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHilst this Work was just finishing, we happened to meet with a Manuscript,
wherein we found the Conclusion of the Cook's Tale, and also of the Squires
Tale, (which in the Printed Books are said to be lost, or never finished by the
Author,) but coming so late to our hands, they could not be inserted in their
proper places, therefore the Reader is desired to add them, as here directed.

Immediately after what you find of the Cooks Tale, add this:
What through himself and his felaw y^ fought,
Unto a mischief both they were brought,
The tone ydamned to prison perpetually,
The the other to death, for he couth not of clergy,
And therefore young men learn while ye may,
That with many diverse thoughts beth pricked all the day,
Remember you what mischief comes of misgovernaunce,
Thus mow ye learn worschip and come to substance:
Think how grace and governaunce has brought aboune
Many a poor man'ys Son chief state of the Town.
Ever rule thee after the best man of name,
And God may grace thee to come to y^ same.
Immediately after these words, at the end of the Squires Tale,
Apollo whirleth up his chare so hie,
Until the God Mercurius house he fly.
Let this be added,
But I here now maken a knotte,
To the time it come next to my lotte,
For here ben felawes behind, an hepe truly,
That wolden talk full besily,
And have here sport as well as I,
And the day passes certainly,
So on this mattere I may no longer dwell,
But stint my clack, and let the other tell,
Therefore often takes now good head
Who shall next tell, and late him speed.
FINIS.

