THE Divine Institution OF Congregational Churches, Ministry and Ordinances,
[As has bin Professed by those of that Persuasion] Asserted and Proved from the
WORD of GOD.

Hebrews 8.5, 6. Moses was admonished of God saying, see that thou make all
things according to the Pattern showed thee in the Mount: But he [i. e. Christ]
has obtained a more excellent Ministry, etc. Hebrews 3.5, 6. Moses verily was
faithful in all his [i. e. God's] House as a Servant, etc. but Christ as a Son
over his own House, whose House are we. Ezekiel. 43.11. If they be ashamed of all
that they have done, show them the form of the House, and the fashion thereof,
and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and all the forms thereof [i. e. of the Ordinances] and all the Laws
thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form
thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them. By Isaac Chauncy, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Nathanael Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden Hall
Street, over against St. Mary Ax, 1697.

TO THE READER.
ALL True Religion wherein Man can have any access unto God, with acceptance,
must be revealed to him by God; For tho Humane Reason, and the remaining innate
Light in Fallen Man, may show him that there is a God, and but one God (as it
has done to some of the Heathen Philosophers) And that this God is to be
served and worshipped by the Intelligent Creatures which he has made, from his
Right over them by Creation and Providence; and also from the Impression of
some Moral Principles yet abiding, Romans 1.20. and 2.14, 15. And so far Natural
Religion has gone of it self, by the conduct of the natural light of Reason
and Conscience only; Yet never any farther, and rarely so far; such is the lost
and deplorable state of Fallen Man. But for any Man to pretend to know what God
is in his Essence and Subsistence; and how this God will be worshipped without
Divine Revelation, or beyond, or otherwise than he has revealed is the highest
and most irrational Presumption in the World that vain Man who would be wise,
can be Guilty of: For if Adam in Eden before the Fall, notwithstanding all the
perfection of his Creation, must have a divine Revelation over and above, to
direct his right behavior there, in his duty of obedience unto God: How much
more is such Revelation needful to him and his Apostate Race since the Fall?
Let them that deny the necessity of Revelation to the knowledge of what God is,
and how he should be worshipped aright for his Glory, and Man's Eternal
Welfare, if they own the Scriptures to be the Word of God (which many such do
not, therefore not to be Disputed with as Christians, but as Heathens and
Infidels) but read the Scriptures seriously, and for the present a few places
here noted (only consider them well) Job 11.6, 7, 8, 9, 12. Isa. 55.8, 9. Deuteronomy.
29.29. Romans 1.21.22, 23. chapter 11.33, 34. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12, 14, 16. and chapter
3.18.19, 20.

Tho most that profess themselves Christians dare not explicitly deny the
truth of what is above asserted; yet many of them do practically and
interpretatively deny it, by measuring the deep things of God, and the Mind of
the Spirit, not by it self, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, but by
their own carnal, shallow and fallacious reasonings and imaginations, as also
by taking up such ways of Worship which he never ordained; built wholly, or for
the most part, upon Humane Authority, Laws, Tradition, Interest, etc. but not
on Christ. Such has bin the abomination (since the working of the Mystery of
iniquity) which has made all true Religion desolate in the greatest part of
the World professing it, or pretending thereto.

Wherefore as to matter and manner of Divine Worship, the great thing
controverted in the World among the many Ways professed and practiced is, Who
can lay the best Claim to Divine Authority. And hence it is that We (pretending
also to the like claim) do here, not only declare what we hold in this weighty
Point, but make our Plea for the best Right to Divine Authority for the worship
of God in Congregational Churches: Which being the Sum and Design of the
ensuing Treatise, it is needless here to insist on.

And if this appear to be a just Plea, it might be enough to lay a sufficient
Obligation upon the Minds and Consciences of all such as fear God, out of true
Love and Loyalty to Jesus Christ to fall in immediately to a cheerful
compliance therewith, in observation of all things which he has commanded,
looking upon such a ponderous weight in the balance of the Sanctuary,
abundantly enough to weigh down all other opposite Arguments of a lower alloy,
arising from Prejudice, carnal Reason, or the Spirit of the World.

But because such carnal Reasonings, ly as stumbling blocks before many,
keeping them from a ready embracing the ways of God, it may not be amiss to
speak something briefly to some of the greatest Objections which are made
against the Divine Institutions here laid before the Reader in the following
Discourse.

1. Some are ready to accuse the Congregational Practice and Principles, As not
comporting with Civil States and Government, and so would render them odious to
Princes.

Answ. These are either deeply prejudiced against all the Ways of God, or speak
evil of such things which they know not: For, it is sufficiently known to be the
avowed Principle and Practice of such as are of the Congregational Persuasion,
That there is no Power but of God, and ordained by him, and that they ought to
be subject to Magistracy for Conscience sake, to pay Tribute, and give unto
Caesar the things that are Cesars. Their Lord and Master set himself for their
Example in this, and has left it, with his Precept upon Record, which they
dare not but obey.

2. Their Principles are diametrically opposite to the assuming or claiming a
Power over, or share in the Government of the Civil State, by virtue of any
Ecclesiastical Relation, Ministerial or other. What they lay claim to of Civil
Rights and Privileges is no more than what is equally due to them with other
Subjects.

3. As they are bound to believe by the Word of God, That they ought not to
subject their Consciences to Humane Will or Laws in spiritual things; so they
believe it belongs not to them to subordinate and subject Magistratick Power
and Laws to Church Censures, or require them to be Executioners thereof;
Christ's Government in his Churches being complete enough within its self to
answer all the spiritual ends and purposes thereof, for which it was Ordained,
without the instrumentality of any foreign coercive power whatsoever.

4. When Christ first instituted Churches, and for many Years after, they were
to be under Heathen Emperors; which showed (1.) That he did not Ordain such a
Constitution as was destructive to any Civil Government, even the worst. (2.)
That the Economy erected by Christ and his Apostles was sufficient to answer
all Intents and Purposes of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction without dependence upon
the States and Princes of the World for the execution thereof, and was fully
practical under any Civil Powers, who would but permit the Profession of
Christianity according to Men's Consciences.

2. If any Allege, That the Congregational Practice abridgeth the People of
their Liberty.

We answer 1. If by liberty be meant liberty to sin, this all Religions must
profess to restrain; that which does not, is not to be called Religion; and
this is no more than all Christian Magistrates ought to do. Besides, a liberty
to Sin is the most Diabolical Slavery in the World. 2. Our Way deprives Men of
no lawful Civil Liberties. 3. It does no more deprive Men of Spiritual
Liberties, than a Civil Corporation-Government deprives Men of Civil Liberties.
For 1. Both the one and the other have the most desirable Immunities and
Privileges granted by Charter in their respective kinds. 2. There are no
Members made by a coercive power, all voluntarily offer themselves. 3. There
are no Members admitted or cast out by an Arbitrary and Despotick Power, but
all is done by the consent of the Body Politic. 4. A Church is made a Prison
to none, but any one may depart to another orderly and regularly, when called
thereto. 5. As all Members are admitted, so all Ministerial Officers are chosen
by Consent and Agreement of the Body; none are imposed. 6. As all Trials of
offending Persons in a Civil Corporation are by the Neighborhood as to matter
of fact, so in a Spiritual Corporation all such Judicial Proceedings are in a
way of Trial first in the Church by the Brotherhood, upon whose Judgment of
Guilty or not Guilty, the Elder passes Sentence of Condemnation or Absolution.

3. If any object Strictness of the Terms of Admission. It is Answered 1. All
Virtuous Persons like those Societies best that stand upon the strictest Terms
of Admission, for they are likely to be purest. 2. Have not all Families,
Companies, Corporations their Terms of Admission which they will stand upon? Is
it not fit you should be qualified as the Society expects, and submit to the
Laws of the Society by express Agreement? Is it fit you should enjoy the
Immunities of a Family, or other Society, without a due qualification and
obligation? Without the first you are unmeet, without the latter ungovernable.
3. The Terms are reasonable, and as easy as possible for a Spiritual Society,
a household of Faith; as is made appear in the following Treatise. And whatever
slight Terms of Admittance you are for, whilst a non-Member; if you have the
true Grace of God in your heart, when you become a Member, you will not be
willing others should be so admitted, lest it should make such a foul House as
your self will not be able long to endure.

4. Some one will say or think, I am loath to come under the Observation,
Obligation and Charge of Church Membership: I hope I shall go to Heaven without
it, tho I would willingly have my Child baptized.

Ans. 1. Take this altogether, and it is a great question whether such an one
has Grace in his heart, or has any good grounds of Hope that he shall go to
Heaven: For it argues looseness of heart and life and Covetousness which is
Idolatry; yea, and plain Hypocrisy, that he would have his Child baptized,
merely for form and Reputation sake. For I would say to such an one, 1. Is not
one Seal of the Covenant of as much weight to a Believer as another? Will thou
baptize thy Child as thy duty, and neglect the other Seal for thy Worldly
Advantage, and so indulge thy self in Sin? By what right do thou claim
Baptism for thy Child? Is it by virtue of Abraham's Covenant? And do thou
openly profess it, and wilt not stipulate to the said Covenant? How art thou
such a Child of Abraham as the Blessing is come upon? surely not the Blessing
of Church Membership. Obj. But I hope my Infant has right to Baptism, tho I am
no Churchmember. Ans. He that himself is such, as that if he were un-baptized,
he has no right to Baptism, cannot plead right for his Child: But no
non-Member can plead right to any Seal, the Seals of the Covenant being given
to the Church, and not to the World; nor one Seal to the World, and the other
to the Church. Obj. But I am a Member of the Catholic Church by my Personal
Covenanting with God. Ans. 1. Who knows what thy private and secret actions be;
to verify the Truth of what thou say, the Church calls thee to Covenant with
God and them: If thou will partake of the Privileges of the Church, and if
thou have bin serious in Covenanting privately, thou will be as willing to
Covenant openly with God and his Church; for he that Covenants socially,
Covenants but personally, and he that Covenants with Christ, Covenants with him
socially, tho secretly, for he takes him as Head of the Mystical Body. So that
the Notion of Personal and Social Covenanting makes not a legal distinction,
having no sufficient dissentaniety of parts, they differing but ratione only,
and so are but diversa; not ratione and re, so as to be vera opposita. 2. Such
personal Covenanting as you intend, (if it be real) makes you but a Member of
the Mystical Body of Christ, not of any visible Church, which alone is the
subject of the Seals and other Ordinances. 3. The Proselytes publicly embraced
Abraham's Covenant, and joined to the Church thereby, under the Old Testament,
before they were circumcised, and under the New Testament before they were
baptized. For the first see Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. where the Stranger covenanted
publicly with the Lord and socially with that Church in the Land of Moab just
before they passed over Jordan, and were circumcised by Joshua, chapter 5.2, 3, 4.
For the latter see Acts 2.39, 41. Peter makes them that manifested their
Repentance, to stipulate publicly to Abraham's Covenant before they were
baptized; And as many as declared their glad receiving and embracing the
Promise for themselves and Seed were baptized; for they who did not explicitly
declare so much were not baptized, as appears by the Text.

In a Word, Do thou profess to be a Christian? to have received Christ by
Faith for righteousness, and life, and to live Godly in Christ Jesus? It is thy
Duty then to join thy self in Church Fellowship, and thou sinnest greatly
against God if thou do not: For 1. Church Membership is one of the great
parts of Abraham's Blessing, And will thou exclude thy self from any part of so
great a Gift? 2. Church Membership is a Spiritual Blessing that a Believer is
blessed withal in Christ Jesus, And shall not that be valued by thee? 3. A
Believer in Christ has right to Church Blessings, And will thou loose thy
Possession for want of Claim? 4. If thou art a true Believer, Christ is
precious to thee in all his Offices, in all his Relations; as Head of the Body,
Apostle and High Priest of thy Profession; Will thou not be of that Body
Politic to whom he is the Head? of that House over which he is Lord, that thou
may offer spiritual Sacrifices? 5. He has called thee out of the World, and
thou art bound to come out and be separate, and Covenant with God. 6. However
thou professest to be with Christ; in this thou art against him, and scatterest
abroad. 7. Have thou tasted that the Lord is gracious, and so art become a
living Stone? then thou art to come to Christ the chief Cornerstone in
Church Fellowship, to be built up a spiritual House, and united therein by
Joints and Bands, to be a fellow-Citizen of the Saints, and to help to fill up
a holy Political Temple for a Habitation of God by the Spirit. 8. Thou will
never grow kindly in Grace out of a Church; for that is God's Garden, his
Vineyard which he Plants, Prunes, Waters with Blessings continually on all the
means of Grace there. 9. What Fellowship can thou have in the World? What
communion has Christ with Belial, Light with Darkness, etc.? 10. Thou lie
open to multitude of Temptations; and no wonder if God suffers them to prevail.
11. Thou think thou gainest as to the World by not engaging in
Church Fellowship, and say it is not time to build God's House, but do thou
not carry out much and bring in little, and put what thou gettest into a Bag
with Holes? 12. To join to a Church of Christ is the highest way of glorifying
God visibly in the World. 13. Thou can never have that Communion with God out
of Church Fellowship as in. 14. Whilst thou professest Christ and continuest a
non-Member, thou art a scandal to thy Profession, and a means to harden the
wicked.

Now lastly, It may be expected that we give some Reasons of Publishing this
small Treatise. The Reasons are briefly these: 1. For the Honor and Interest
of the Lord Jesus Christ; which is the main End designed, and all the following
reasons are in subordination thereto. 2. Because it is time to build, and God in
his Providence plainly speaks it, in that he blows upon our outward things, and
blasts them daily, because we let the House of Godly waste. 3. To vindicate our
selves against our false Accusers, who render us such as have little regard to
the observation of whatever Christ commands. 4. Because most of the Writings of
the faithful Builders are out of Print, or not easily obtained. 5. Because many
good People that have a love to Christ, and desire to walk in obedience to all
God's Commandments, want due instruction in these Points. Hence it was
earnestly desired that we would Publish such a short Treatise, and we dare not
withhold the Truth in unrighteousness. 6. Because of the great degeneration and
declination of the life of Christianity, and steadfast and close walking of
Churches in all the parts of Gospel Order, that they may repent and do their
first works. 7. Not to impose on the Consciences of any, but to hold forth unto
them what light we have received from the Word of God, for the illumination of
the ignorant, the strengthening the weak, removing stumbling blocks from such
as are offended at us, and encouragement of all such as are willing and ready
to build. He that has Ears to hear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches: In which, Glory be to God by Jesus Christ throughout all Ages, World
without End, AMEN.

Errata: Page 2. line 7. r. Congregation was. p. 11. l. 22. r. social; p. 13.
l. 21. dele punctum, and for The r. the; p. 18. l. 6. a fi. for is, r. are; p.
20. l. 2. r. Catholicy; p. 38. l. 15. for any one, r. he; p. 41. l. 5. r.
themselves; p. 46. l. 17. r. discerned; p. 73. Margin. r. d Number. 8.10, 11.

THE Divine Institution OF Congregational Churches.
CHAP. I. Of a Church in General.
Of the meaning of the Word Church: A Meeting Place no Church: It Is a spiritual
Building, but it is God's, not Man's Building, such are not God's Churches, many
of which there are: Notes to discern true or false by: Christ the Head of a
true Church: A Church the Body of Christ: How Christ's Body is understood: What
a True Church is not made of: And what it is not: And what it is: What the
remote and next genus of a Church.

Sect. 1. THE Word Church or Kirk, is most likely to be descended of the Greek
words (...) contracted (...), signifying the House of God, 1 Timothy 3.15.
. And hence the best Notation of it, is by this Interpretation, That a Church
is domus dominica, or God's House, wherein he dwells by a more than usual
Presence in the World. Of old God chose a Material House to appear and manifest
himself in to his Church of Israel Jud. 18.31-20.26 2 Chro. 3.3 and 4.19. and
24.5.
, but as those Buildings were not the Church, but the Congregations were Act
7.38
: So in the New Testament days more especially, God's Church is not a House or
Building artificially made by Man, but another Building, Hebr. 9.11.
i. e. a spiritual Household Ephesians. 2.19
, or Building 1 Pet. 2.5.
.

. 2. Tho some think a Place of meeting ordinarily for the Worship of God in
Public, may, by a Metonimy, be called a Church in an improper sense; and
ignorant People from such Usage take such a Place to be so, yet it does appear
plainly, That there is no just grounds from Scripture to apply such a Trope to
an House for a Public Assembly. 1. Nothing is more evident by Scripture, than
that an Artificial Building is not a Church; for the Apostle Paul wrote his
Epistles to Churches, which could not be Dead-Walls, but to a People 1 Cor.
1.2. and 2 Ep. 1.1.
. 2. God purchased his Church with his Blood Act 20.28.
, which is a People, not Artificial Houses. 3. We are commanded to give no
offense to the Church of God 1 Cor. 10.32.
, which cannot be meant of a Meeting House, not capable of offense. 4. Paul
persecuted the Church of God 1 Cor. 15.9. Gal. 1.13.
, which could not be the Meeting Place, neither had the Church then any certain
Meeting Place. 5. There is no House or artificial Building in Scripture called
a Church.

. 3. By way of Similitude, and Metaphorically, a Church is called an House, a
Temple, or Building, or City, it being such in a spiritual sense 1 Pet. 2.5
Heb. 3.5, 6
, built of spiritual Materials, joined and framed together in due connection
and order Ephesians. 2.21
, bearing Analogy to the Temple of old, a Type of the Gospel Church ib. v. 22.
, and is called Gods House Heb. 10.21.
, because it is his Propriety Deuteronomy. 32.19.
, it is of his framing and building 1 Cor. 3.9. Heb. 3.4.6 and 9.11
, it is his chosen, purchased and peculiar inheritance in the World Deuteronomy. 14.2.
Ps. 132.13 Tit. 2.14. Psa. 135.4. 1 Pet. 2.9.
: God dwells and appears therein in a special and gracious manner 2 Cor. 6.16.
Ephesians. 2.22. Psalm. 87.2.
; it is called by his Name 2 Chro. 7.14.
, it is called the Church of the living God 1 Timothy 3.15.
; God is therein glorified Ephesians. 2.20 21.
.

. 4. Churches therefore are not of humane fabric or fashion; nor to suit the
carnal Minds and Interests of Men or States; Men's Laws cannot establish
Churches; they must be built after the Pattern which God has showed Exo.
26.30. Heb. 8.5.
; it is not Gods Church which Man builds, and is after his inventions Psa.
106.29.39. Matt. 15.6.
: God never gave Commission to the Pope, Ecclesiastic or Civil Powers to
institute Churches Isa. 1.12.13, 14. and 42.8. and 48.11.
; and as a Church is of God, so the whole form and fashion is of Gods teaching
only, Eze. 43.10.11.
.

. 5. Hence it is that the Spirit of God in his Word has witnessed against, and
renounced nothing more than false Churches; such especially (with all their
appurtenances of Ordinances, Officers and Worship) which have apostatized from,
and forsaken his own Pattern and Institution Eze. 43.8.
, and fashioned themselves by their Humane Inventions Psa. 106.29.
, to answer their own carnal Interests Hab. 1.26.
and corrupt Ends Isa. 1.12, 13.
Ecclesiastical Hos. 5.1.3.
or Civil 1 King 12.27.
, wherefore such always are charged with spiritual Whoredoms Hos. 5.3.
, and treated as Harlots Hos. 2.2.
, most especially the Catholic Visible, that Mother of Harlots, with all her
spurious brood of Subordinations, Hierarchical and Representative; two
especially are laid before us as the most notorious Harlots: That of
Jeroboam's, 2 Kings 17.21.22.
, and that of the Antichristian Apostasy 2 These. 4.7.
; by the latter the World is corrupted to this day, she sitting under the Name
of the Catholic visible Church with her Offspring, ruling over the Kingdoms of
the Western World as the Mother of Harlots Rev. 17.5.18.
, not only breeding, but nursing up all Idolatry, Superstition, Will Worship,
and all departure from the Pattern of Christ, which has bin and is by Papists
and un-illuminated or interested Protestants Rev. 18.2.3.
, Fathering all her spiritual Cheats (whereby both sorts are intoxicated) on
the Name of Christ, whence the Seven Women Esa. 4.1.
(Churches in the Prophetic Language) are said to lay hold on one Man, i. e.
the Lord Jesus Christ, desiring to be called by his Name, to take away the
reproach of spurious and adulterine Churches, but yet feed on their own
Institutions, and are clothed with their own righteousness.

. 6. Pretended Churches of Christ may be discerned to be true or false. 1. By
the foundation, whether on the Person, Nature, Offices, and Word of Christ 1
Pet. 2.4. Ephe. 2.20
. 2. By the visible matter, whether living Stones 1 Pet. 2.4.
. 3. By the Form, Fashion and Frame, according to the order of the Gospel Heb.
8.5.6. and 3.3. Mat. 28.20. Ezekiel. 43.11. Col. 2.5.
. Hence a Church is no Church of God, either of these being altogether wanting;
or is but a faulty and deficient Church, so far as its defective in these, as
to Faith or Order: Wherefore the more the Mystery of iniquity comes to be
discovered, and the true Woman, the Lambs Wife, comes out of her
Wilderness-State, we may expect that the Churches will come to an higher degree
of Purity and Order Isa. 1.25 Rev. 19.7, 8.
.

. 7. Wherefore to a true Church Christ is all and in all Ephesians. 1.22
, he being the Head in all respects, and has the Pre-eminence Col. 1.18, 19.
, being before all things, and above all things, the Head of Principalities, in
Dignity and Dominion, worshipped by Angels Heb. 1.6. Psa. 89.27
, higher than the Kings of the Earth. It has pleased the Father, that there
should be a special relation, and mutual Fullness between Christ and the Church,
Christ being so the Head of his Church as he is to none else, and as Christ
fills the Church, so the Church is the fullness of Christ 1 Cor. 12 12. Ephesians.
1.21, 22.
.

. 8. This Headship of Christ is diverse ways illustrated to us in Scripture by a
Natural Man's Head and Body Col. 1.18
, by a Family or Conjugal Head Ephesians. 5.23
, by a Root or Vegetable Head John 15.1. Romans 11.24
, by an Head of an artificial Building, the Head Cornerstone 1 Pet. 2.4.5.
, and hence it appears, That Christ is such a Head as represents the whole
Body, and transacts all things for it Isa. 42.6. Heb. 10.9, 10.
, That Christ is the vital Head of his Church, the Spring and Fountain from
whence all Life and Motion flows John 1.14.16. Col. 2.3.
. He is the Head Cornerstone, the strength and support of all the Building
Psa. 118.22.
. He is the Conjugal Head and Savior of the Body Ephesians. 5.15.
, of whom all the Family is named Ephesians. 3.25
. And lastly, Christ is set forth by these similitudes, and otherwise, unto to
us as a graciously ruling and governing Head unto his Church, set on this holy
Hill Psalm 2.
, the Throne of David Luke 1.32.
, he is the Political Head, the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Heb.
3.1
.

. 9. As Christ stands in relation to the Church as the Head, so the Church is
related to Christ as the Body Col. 1.18.24. Ephesians. 1.23.
, being in that respect, his fullness, Christ and his Church making one
Mystically 1 Cor. 12.12.
. The Body of Christ in Scripture is variously taken. 1. It is taken for the
substance of the Mystery of Christ, typified and shadowed forth by the
Ceremonial Law Col. 2.17
. 2. It is taken for the Humane Nature of Christ, wherein he lived and suffered
here Romans 7.4 Heb. 10.5.10.
. 3. It Is used for the Sacramental or Symbolick Body of Christ Luke 22.19.
. 4. It Is taken for a Church or People embodied or incorporated in Christ
Jesus, and is his Political Body Ephesians. 5.23 Col. 1.18.
. 5. It Is used in a proper sense for the very Body of Christ, separate and
distinct from his Soul Mat. 27.58.
. It is the fourth Acceptance that we are here concerned in.

. 10. A Church of God (as to the most general consideration) is the Body of
Christ in a Spiritual and Political acceptance of a Body Col. 1.24
. in which respect, it is compared to a Family, and City, and Candlestick. 1. It
is a Company congregated, not one or two, in the Body are many Members 1 Cor.
12 12. Rev. 1.20.
. 2. It Is a Company of Men, not of Angels, for Angels are no where called a
Church tho a Company Heb. 12.22.
, but they surround the Church Rev. 5.11
, and consort in their Adorations with the Church. The Angels were not Redeemed
by Christ's Blood, neither of the Nature of the Head, and therefore not the
Body of Christ, as the Church is Heb. 2.16
. 3. It Is a spiritual Company, in contra-distinction to humane and civil
Societies or Companies gathered together occasionally or statedly Act 19.39.
. 4. It Is separated from the World, all the World is not a Church; but it is
called and separated out of the World John 17.10. and 15.19. 2 Cor. 6.17.
; as Christ the Head is separate Heb. 7.26. 2 Pet. 2.20. Deuteronomy. 14.2. Titus 2.14.
, so must the Body be. 5. They are not a company of scattered Sheep, but
gathered into a Fold John 10.16.
. Stones not lying here and there, but brought into a building 1 Pet. 2.4.5.
. 6. They are embodied or incorporated with the Cornerstone, and to one
another, and as Members are knit to the Head and one another 2 These. 2.1. Ephesians.
4.16. Ps. 122 3. 1 These. 1 1.
. Hence Union to Christ the Head, and to one another, is essentially necessary
to the Church of God John 15
, to which Union is requisite cutting off from the old Stock and Implantation
into the new Romans 11.24.
; connection, knitting and coalition of Head and Members together, Members to
the Head, and they to one another Ephesians. 2.21
; and lastly an aptitude, order and fitness to each other, to complete the
whole in usefulness and comeliness, 1 Cor. 12 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 4.16. and 2.21.
.

. 11. Hence it plainly appears what a Church of God is in the general Nature
thereof:

It is a spiritual company of men, separated from the world 2 Cor. 6.17.
, congregated and incorporated in Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 12.12.
. Congregation is a Genus to Church, it is a spiritual Congregatiion, and there
is no Church but is so in some sense or other; the words in the Old and New
Testament always signify so, Cohel and Ecclesia: But Congregation seems to be
a remoter Genus than Corporation; for every Congregation is not incorporated,
neither is every incorporated Congregation a spiritual Body Acts 19.39.
, and therefore a Church; but every Church is a Congregation incorporated, by
the Union aforementioned, and it is for the end of him whose it is, viz. his
Glory, in communion with him, and of one Member with another.

CHAP. II. Of the Catholic Church.
A Church defined: A Spiritual Corporation how distinguished: Corporation what:
How belonging to Christ: What Persons a Church is made up of: How Membership
comes: Communion: Distribution of Church: The Catholic Church: Catholic
Union: Communion: Its not the Subject of Ordinances: No Catholic Visible
Church.

. 1. FROM what has bin said in the former Chapter, it appears that a Church is
thus defined, viz.

That it is a Spiritual Corporation or Body of Christ Ephesians. 1.23 Col. 1.24. 1
Pet. 2.9.
the Head, to which many select persons Tit. 2.14.
, separated from the World 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
are gathered 2 The. 2.1
, and united Ephesians. 5.23, 30.
; and accordingly fitly joined one to another chapter 4.16.
for holy Communion in the Lord 1 John 1.3.
.

. 2. Corporation, or a Political Body, is the next common Nature to a Church,
and not Congregation or Assembly; for Congregation is either occasional Act
19.39, 41.
, or fixed and stated by incorporation, and this either civil or spiritual; a
civil is nothing appertaining to our present concern, but the spiritual is; for
a Civil is that which belongs to a Secular or Republican State; but spiritual
is that that belongs to a Spiritual or Ecclesiastic State 1 Cor. 10 4. Gal.
6.1. Matthew. 7.6. 1 Cor. 7.32, 33.
; hence spiritual here is not confined to the sense of invisibility, but is
meant of that which is of a heavenly, sacred, and supernatural Nature 1 Cor.
15.40. Heb. 8.5. and 9.23. 1. Pet. 2.5.
; wherefore a spiritual Corporation, or Body Politic, is either mystical and
invisible, or visible, professed and manifest to the World.

. 3. A Corporation is a Community constituted by Law, or Charter granted by a
Supreme Power, whereby it is invested with Privileges, and a Governing Power,
regulated by, and subordinated to, the Honor and Interest of the said supreme
Power, such are Kingdoms, Cities, Households or Families, or any number of
persons bound together in any sociable Bond (is a Society of this Nature)
whether implicit or explicit; of these the Conjugal is the least, though the
first and most ancient, yea the most honorable of all Civil Societies, being
the Root from whence they spring, wherefore the Relation between Christ and his
Church is represented thus to us, by the Spirit of God in a most lively manner
Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
.

. 4. The Government, Liberties and Privileges of the Church are given, as by
Charter, to the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Father Psa. 2.6. Mat. 28.18 and chapter
2.6.
; the administration of which Power by him, is either internal and immediate by
his Spirit in the hearts of his People, and according to the measure of Grace
given to every one, and of the same nature in the whole Body Col. 3.15 Romans
8.9. 2 Cor. 3.8, 17. Gal. 5.16.18.25 1 Pet. 1.2.22.
of Christ Romans 12.3. 1 John 3.24.
, and is universal and invisible: or Christ administers more externally,
visibly and mediately in particular, visible Bodies Politic by his Word,
instituted Officers and Ordinances, for the sake and edifying of his Universal
Church Ephesians. 4.12.
.

. 5. Every Church of Christ is made of select Persons, and separated from the
World 1 Pet. 2.9 Tit. 2.14. 2 Cor. 6.16.17.
, either by Effectual Calling, and thereby become Members of the Mystical Body
of Christ Ephesians. 4.4. 1 Cor. 12.12.
, or by a visible Profession and Confederation, and thereby become Members of
the visible particular Churches 2 Cor. 7.13.
.

. 6. A People may be gathered together, yea to Christ, so as to hear him or his
Messengers Act 13.43 Matt. 13.2
, and not thereby become Members of the Body of Christ under any consideration:
But they must be so gathered to Christ the Head, as to come into the bond of
the Covenant Eze. 20.37. Col. 2.19. 1 Cor. 6.17.
, either by receiving Christ by Faith, and thereby restipulating personally to
the Covenant of Grace, and so joining to the Lord. Or it is when a Person does
upon his Profession, actually covenant with a particular Church; by the first
he becomes a Member of the Mystical Body Col. 3.11
, and by the second of a particular Congregation Act. 2.41
.

. 7. The end of Church-Union is Communion, which is with Christ the Head and
one another 1 John 1.3.
: This is in the Spirit Phil. 2.1.
, and belongs to the whole Catholic Body; or it is expressed by a visible
communion in the Ordinances administered in particular Bodies, and is the
Communion of particular Churches Act. 2.43. 1 Cor. 10.16.
.

. 8 According therefore to the Dispensation of the Fullness of Christ's Headship
Joh. 1.16 Ephesians. 1.19. and 3.7. Col. 1.19, 20.
internally and mystically by his Spirit John 14.26. and 16.13, 14, 15.
, or externally and ministerially, as the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession Heb. 3.1. and 8.6. and 10.1. and 12.23. Ephesians. 4.12.
. The Church and Body of Christ has its standing mystical and invisible, or
instituted and visible.

. 9. The Catholic Church is the Mystical Body of Christ made up of all saved
ones, Militant and Triumphant Heb. 12.23, 24. Ephesians. 3.15.
, united together in one Spirit 1 Cor. 6.17.
, for communion therein accordingly Phil. 2.1.
. Or, It is all the Company of saved ones, Militant and Triumphant, embodied in
Christ Jesus To. 12.5 1 Cor. 12.12.
. It is called the Mystical Body from that hidden standing which it has in
Christ Col. 3.3. 1 Pet. 3.4. Psalm. 83.3.
, every Member being undiscernably (as to Men) united to Christ and one another
1 Cor. 12 13. Ephesians. 4.3.
, and have communion in the Mystery of God, of the Father, and of Christ, they
all eat and drink the same spiritual Meat and Drink 1 Cor. 10 3, 4.
, whence, the matter, and form of this Body being not infallibly known to any
on Earth 2 Timothy 2.19.
, either the particular Members Militant or Triumphant, or their bond of Union,
or their Heavenly communion in the Spirit, this Church is fitly called the
Mystical Body of Christ, to distinguish it from all other considerations of a
Church; and hence it has these distinguishing Properties. 1. Invisibility as
to Men Heb. 12.22, 23.
. 2. Universality, as containing all saved ones on Earth, and in Heaven Ephesians.
1.10 and 3.15.
. 3. Perpetuity as to particular Members union and communion, their Names being
all written in Heaven Heb. 12.22, 23. Luke 10.20
.

. 10. The Catholic Union is that whereby a person being cut off from his
corrupt standing in the old Adam, To. 11.24
he is created, Ephesians. 2.10
and implanted in Christ Jesus To. 11.24
for righteousness and life 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 4.24.
, personally restipulating by Faith, to the Covenant of Grace made in Christ
Jesus Gal. 3.22 26.29.
, such an one becomes vitally Gal. 2.20
, conjugally and federally united to Christ the Head Ephesians. 4.23. and 5.23 Jer.
31.33 and 32.40. Romans 12.5.
, and therefore consequentially, and really is a Member of the whole Body of
Christ, and of every part being so united to the Head Ephesians. 1.23
.

. 11. Catholic Communion of Saints, is that which is also invisible Phil. 2.1
, and is not only of the Saints Militant one with another, but of the Militant
and Triumphant in one body Heb. 12.22, 23.
, and consists in a coparticipation of the fullness of the Grace of God in
Christ Joh. 1.16
, being all Elected, Redeemed, and Sanctified in him Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6.
, gradually here Phi. 3.13
, and perfectly conformed to him hereafter Heb. 12.23.
, all partakers of the same Spirit in the measure of each one 1 Cor. 12 4.11.
, blessed with the same spiritual Blessings for kind Ephesians. 1.3.
, growing up under the same means of Grace, for substance Ephesians. 4.15
. As likewise it consists in the exercise of the same Faith toward the Lord
Jesus Christ, and Love toward one another Ephesians. 6.23 2 Cor. 4.13. 1 John 4.7,
11, 12 2 Timothy 1 13 Coloss. 2.2
, with all the fruits of both, as the matter may require, whereby there is
always a mutual, Heart-Communion at least, between all the Saints on Earth Col.
1.4.
; and they are come to an actual Communion (as well as Union) with the
glorified Spirits of Just Men made Perfect Heb. 12.22, etc.
, according to their respective degrees of attainment To. 12.3.
more or less, whereby they arrive at last, in due season, to such a determined
degree of Sanctity, which is their prepared fitness and stature in Christ, for
the inheritance of the Saints in Light Col. 1.12 Ephesians. 4.13.
, being changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, by the Spirit of the
Lord 2 Cor. 3.18.
.

. 12. The Catholic Church, as such, is not the subject of Officers or
Ordinances, nor (it being not visible) can be, Christ never instituted any
Officers whose Power was of an universal extent, except the Apostles, and them
only in visible Churches, nor any Ordinances for a Catholic, visible
Communion, in which all the Saints living in the same Age were to assemble and
meet together 1 Cor. 11 20.
; for the visibility of a Church is always in some Assembly. But the Catholic
Church, tho it be not (as has been said) has many things peculiar to it,
wherein it has its pre-eminence above all visible Churches: In that, therein
the Administration of Grace, and Dispensation of the Rule and Government of
Christ is immediately by his Spirit 2 Cor. 3.3.8. Gal. 5.25. Ephesians. 3.16. Gal.
6.18. 2 Timothy 4.22 1 Pet. 1.2.22. 1 John 3.24.
. 2. In that there are many saved ones in this Church that were never Members
of any visible Church 1 Pet. 1.1
. 3. That all the saved ones of any visible Church, belong to this Church Rev.
13.8. Heb. 12.27
. 4. That the Institution of visible Churches and Ordinances is for the sake of
this Church Ephesians. 4.11 12.
. 5. All adult Persons that are admitted to Membership in a particular, visible
Church, ought to be such as are supposed by their Profession to be Members of
this Mystical Body 1 These. 1.1. 2 ep. 2.1 Col. 1.2.
. 6. That of all Churches this shall never be dissolved, or one person lost out
of it Mat. 16.18. Psalm 125.1. John 10.28, 29.
. 7. That as this Church is sometimes preserved and fed without instituted
Ministry and Ordinances, as the Jewish Church in Babylon, and the Gospel Church
in the spiritual, Babylonish Wilderness Rev. 12.6.
, so it shall be most Glorious without them, when it has arrived at its
perfect fullness Rev. 19.8, 9.
. 8. There is no false or superfluous Member in this Church, tho many in
others, some it may be in the best Ephesians. 5.27 Col. 1.21, 22. Rev. 14.4.
. 9. Death separates from other Churches, but not from this Romans 8.35, 38.
. 10. The Glorified Saints belong to this, and not to other Heb. 12.23.
.

. 13. The Catholic Church is but one only Ephesians. 4.4.5. 1 Cor. 12.12.
, and it cannot be visible as Catholic, for the greatest part are not seen by
us, being Saints in Heaven Ephesians. 1.10 and 3.15.
, Elect Infants, and many not known by Profession; and if Men apply Catholic
to the Professors of Christianity living at the same time upon the Earth, and
call them the Catholic, Visible Church; it is a mistaken Appellation, for they
are neither a Visible Church nor Catholic; Not a Visible Church, because, 1.
Christ has instituted none such. 2. They are never seen in coetu or in a
Congregation (as a Visible Church is) nor can be till the last Day Mat. 13.41.
. 3. Christ never gave Ordinances for such a Communion. 4. All these are not
under any visible bond of Confederation together, which is the form of a
Visible Church; Profession is no Bond, but a proper requisite only thereto. 5.
Christ never instituted such a Church Ministry, but what were set in a
particular Church, and exercised in such. The Apostles Christ's extraordinary
Ministers were first set in the Church at Jerusalem Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
, and were first Officers there, and tho their Commission reached to the
Planting and Governing other Churches that should succeed, yet they exercised
not their Ministry, or Apostolic Power, to any supposed Catholic Church
Visible, nor wrote to such, but gathered particular Churches out of the World,
and in them settled a distinct Ministry and Ordinances peculiar to each,
wherein they exercised their own power, as far as necessary, for their
Settlement and Edification. Again, there is no Catholic, Visible Church, for
1. If there be, there is two Catholic Churches, which is a contradiction, and
contrary to that Creed called the Apostles. 2. All visible Professors (if a
Church) cannot be Catholic, because they are not all the Members of Christ on
Earth, and they that profess (at large at least) are not Members of Christ;
many, if not most of them. 3. It is not a Catholic Church, because it is not a
Body-Corporate, in any visible manner, nor are capable of answering the ends of
such in Government, Order or Privileges. 4. If there be a Catholic, visible
Church, it is rational, there should be a Catholic, visible Pastor; and from
these Principles arose the Pope, and the Papal Jurisdiction, established
throughout the professing World.

In the first Ages after Christ, each particular Church called it self
Catholic, from the Profession of that Doctrine which was called the Catholic
Faith, because received by all the Churches. Afterward the Word Catholic was
applied to a supposed Universal Visible Church, and became not only serviceable
to the rising of the Mystery of Iniquity, but a great Foundation of the
Antichristian Fabric which was afterward built thereon, with all the
Ecclesiastical Tyranny, and Papal Superstitious Pomp imaginable. The
Protestants that have cast off the Universal Pastorship of one, and will not
endure a Catholic, single Pastor, do most of them retain the Notion of an
Universal Visible Church, as also of diverse Catholic Pastors, dividing that
Catholocy, which they will not allow the Pope, among themselves, each one
exercising the Office and Power of a Catholic visible Pastor, wherever he
comes, having bin ordained by a Presbytery of a Catholic Constitution, to a
Catholic Pastorship, to the Catholic Church.

To conclude, Our best Protestants, in opposition to the Papists, have still
denied the being of a Catholic, Visible Church, amongst whom was Famous Dr.
Whitaker, whose Arguments upon this Question against Duraeus are Quoted by Mr.
Hooker in his Survey, chapter 15. p. 265. Our Savoy Confession allows the Name, but
denies the Nature, Chapter 26.. 2. Institution of Churches,. 6. for it says, its
not entrusted with the Administration of any Ordinances, nor has any Officers
to Rule and Govern, as such; and what a kind of Visible Church is that, that is
neither the subject of Ordinances or Officers? Mr. Hooker says, Church is the
Genus of all particular Churches; but a Visible Church in the generical
consideration, can no more be found existing out of individual particular
Churches, than a Man can be found existing under the generical consideration of
Man, out of individual Men. But that a totum aggregatum of all Churches in this
World can be made, and be a visible Church, he denies upon Learned and
convincing Reasons, which will stand their Ground against all contradiction. To
whom, for brevity sake, we refer the Reader, where also he evinceth that
there is no Catholic Visible Church, considered as a totum Representativum, i.
e. as a Representative Church in all the Pastors; that there cannot be a
Catholic, Visible, Representative Church; and that there is no such thing as a
Representative Church of any kind, of greater or lesser extent.

. 14. What the Scripture speaks of a Church, is either of a Church in general,
and indefinitely belongs to any, or of a Church in Specie, either Catholic and
invisible, or particular and visible, but says nothing of a Catholic Visible.

CHAP. III. Of a Congregational Church in General.
Of Christ's Dispensation as Head: A visible Church defined: Revealed Worship
exercised first in Families; then in Instituted Churches: The Foundation of
visible Churches laid in Abraham's Covenant: Two parts thereof: The Church of
Israel: First Essential, then Organized: The difference between the Mosaical
and Gospel Economy: The Church of Israel Congregational.

. 1. THE Lord Jesus Christ exerts his Headship, not only by the more immediate
Administration of his Spirit 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. and 12.4. and 7.13. Ephesians. 4.3, 7.
, internally in the hearts of his People, whereby he constitutes his Mystical
and Catholic Body; but also as the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession
Heb. 3.1.2, 6.
, by external Means of Grace, Constituting and Ordaining particular, visible
Churches, and in them, Ministry and Ordinances, suited to the State and
respective Ages of the World Heb. 9.1.8.10. Deuteronomy. 29.1
, for the filling up, and edification of his Mystical Body Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
, and blesses such accordingly, to his great Glory, and good of his Chosen
Ephesians. 3.21 Ps. 106.45 Exo. 20.24 Deuteronomy. 4.8.
.

. 2. A Visible Church is a Particular Assembly of Professing Believers 1 Cor.
1.2
, visibly embodied in Christ 1 Cor. 12.27.
, for a stated and holy Communion Act 9.31.
in one place 1 Cor. 11 20.
, with God and one another, in all instituted Ordinances Act 2.42
, appertaining to themselves and their immediate seed Act. 2.39 Isa. 61.9 and
65.23. Ephesians. 6.4.
, for God's Glory in Christ Ephesians. 3.21
, and their mutual Edification 1 Cor. 14 5.12.26.
.

. 3. God's External Worship by Revealed Religion, was first celebrated in
Adam's Family Genesis 4.3, 4.
, and continued in the Families of the Faithful till the time of Abraham Heb.
11.5.7, 8.
, which by many are esteemed to have bin so many distinct Churches, and
accordingly distinguish particular Churches into Oeconomick or Family, and
Congregational. But others think, that tho God appointed to those Patriarchs a
solemn Family Worship, yet that a Church was not instituted till Abraham's
time, when the first Foundation of an Instituted Church was laid in the
Covenant that God made with, and Sealed to Abraham and his Seed Genesis 12.2. and
17.1, 2
, for before this Covenant, (tho God was Worshipped in Families,) there seems
not to have bin any Churches made up of diverse Families, and therefore not
Congregational, nor any Church Covenant, or Seals thereof: Hence he is said to
have received the Sign of Circumcision, the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith
which he had being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all that
believe both circumcised and uncircumcised To. 4.11.
, i. e. of Believers whose Church Covenant was Sealed by an Instituted Seal
appropriated thereto; or else how was Abraham said to be a Father to all that
should afterward believe, any more than Noah was, or Sem? and moreover, because
in this Covenant, Christ the Head of the Church was explicitly contained To.
4.13. Gal. 3.18, 19.
, who indeed, was promised as Heir of the World, through the Righteousness of
Faith, therefore the Apostle tells us, that the Promise of Christ, and all
Church Priviledges and Ordinances of his Institution, are sure not only to
Abraham's natural Seed, but to all who are of the Faith of Abraham, who is the
Father of all Professing Believers, and Covenanting with God for themselves and
Seed, by virtue of his receiving the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, which
he had in his uncircumcision To. 4.16.
, so that the stress of Abraham's Father-hood to the Faithful, is not laid upon
his Eminent Faith alone, but upon his receiving an Instituted Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith to himself and his Infant Seed Romans 4.11.16.
, and in this respect, as he is called the Father, so each Believer is his Seed
in Christ Gal. 3.26, 27, 28.
, receiving a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to himself and Seed, as Isaac
did Gal. 4.28
.

. 4. In Abraham's Covenant was contained the Promise and Blessing of Christ to
his Church, in all Ages, both in respect of its Mystical and Visible relation
to him as its Head Gal. 3.8, 9, 14. Ephesians. 1.3.
, and therefore the establishment of Church Membership was made in Abraham to
the professing covenanting-Believer un-alterably, as a substantial part of the
Blessing which was to come on the Gentiles, and not to be removed Gal. 3.14 15,
16, 17, 18. Heb. 12.27
. There were two things manifestly in Abraham's Covenant. 1. The substantial
and abiding part of that Covenant both to Jews and Gentiles, both internal and
Mystical, yea and external, as to a Church visible state, Membership and
Privileges, all which came upon the Gentiles Genesis 17.13, 19. Ephesians. 3.6. c. 1.3.
. 2. There was the peculiar and moveable part of Abraham's Covenant, which was
the increase of his Seed into a National Church Genesis 12.2 and 18.18.
, the growth and progress it should make through Bondage and Pilgrimage to an
external and Typical Rest Genesis 15.13, 14, 16, 18.
, with all worldly Plenty and Prosperity Josh. 5.6, 7. and 22.4. and 21.43
, and most especially, the form and manner of that Church-Worship, according as
was after established by God's Ordination and Institution Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8.31, 32.
to 37. Exo. 25.40
, for the time then being, till the coming of Christ Heb. 9.9, 10.
; Circumcision it self being a part of that moveable Fabric, begun in Abraham,
and perfected in Moses Act 7.8.32.37, 38. Heb. 3.2, 3 and 8.5. Gal. 5.3, 4.
; it was taken away with the other observances Heb. 8.5.8.13. and 9.9 Col.
2.11, 17.
; but a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith whereby Abraham became the Father of
all Believers Jews and Gentiles, was not taken away Romans 4.11 and 15.8.
, but was a great part of the Blessing that came on the believing Gentiles Gal.
3.9 14.
, viz. that the Professing, Covenanting-Believer should both he and his
Infant Seed, receive a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, as the great
Privilege of Church Membership belonging to both, as to Abraham and his, they
being his Seed by Faith as Isaac was To. 4.12, 16. Gal. 3.26, 27. and 4.28.
Col. 2.10, 11, 12. Acts 2.39. To. 15.8, 9. Isa. 61.9. chapter 65.9.
.

. 5. The Church of Israel before Moses, was Congregational, and in a visible
Covenant with God, and truly an essential Church Ex. 12.3 Number. 20.4 Ex. 12.40,
41. and 16.22. Act. 7.38.
, but not organized with a Ministry and Ordinances of God's Institution for a
due and orderly Worship of God till Moses Act 7.38.44, 45.
: which state and standing of that Church from Abraham to Moses, and partly in
its Wilderness condition, was a great Type of the Gospel Church in its
persecuted, bewildred and unsettled state, under its great Adversaries, wherein
it has been mostly fed by God, and preserved by him in its Mystical State and
standing, as was before hinted Rev. 12.6.13.
.

. 6. The Administration of the external Constitution by Christ in the Ministry
and Ordinances of the Church of Israel Acts 7.38
, was of a distinct form and manner, from the Church Administration, according
to the Gospel Economy, Ordinances and Order Heb. 9.1.9, 10, 11.
. For the Administration of the Ecclesiastical State and standing of that
Church, was faulty in respect of the Ordinance of Circumcision it self Acts
7.8. Gal. 5.3, 4. 2 Cor. 3.14
, and Mosaic Vail, drawn over Gospel Mysteries Heb. 8.6.
, the encouragement to Gods Service by temporal Promises, the Typical and Legal
Nature of the Sanctuary, Ministry Heb. 8.9 2 Cor. 3.9. Heb. 8.5.
and Ordinances called carnal Heb. 9.10 and 7.16.
, and worldly Heb. 9.1
, imperfect not reaching the Conscience chapter 9.11. and 10.1, 2. and 7.19.
, Moses the Mediator Gal. 3.20
thereof, and Aaronick Priesthood Heb. 7.11, 23.
, both typical of the true Mediator and 8.4, 5. and 3.1.
, and High Priest of our Profession: It was a faulty Covenant Heb. 8.7
, and called by the Apostle the Old Testament 2 Cor. 3.14.
, and is all done away as a shadow in the coming of Christ Ibid.
, and his bringing in to us a better, because clearer ground of Faith and Hope
Heb. 7.19.
, by spiritual Promises Ephesians. 1.3.
, and a more Heavenly Gospel Ministry and Ordinances Heb. 8.5 and 9.23.
, and is therefore called a New Covenant Heb. 8.8.
, the blessings whereof are Abraham's, now come on the Gentiles Gal. 3.14
, heavenly and spiritual in high places Ephesians. 2.6.
, much more Glorious, the Ministration of the Spirit, and not of the Letter 2
Cor. 3.6.
, the faithful Dispensation of the Son over his own House Heb. 3.2, 6.
, wherein he is more to be prized, and worthy of more honor than Moses a
servant could ever be capable of Ibid.
; Christ's being a more excellent Ministry in that he was a better Mediator of
a better Testament Heb. 8.6
, confirming and sealing it with his own Blood Heb. 9.16, 17.
, and now lives in the full execution of this last Will and Testament Heb.
8.25 Ephesians. 4.11
, and the glorious Witness thereof before God, Angels and Men Rev. 1.5, 18.
, standing now our High Priest, set down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on
High, a Minister of the Sanctuary, and true Tabernacle which God pitched and
not Man Heb. 8.1, 2.
.

. 7. The Constitution of the Church of Israel, tho it was National Exo. 19.6.
Genesis 35.11
, as being made up according to that part of the promise, peculiar to Abraham's
natural Seed, yet it was Congregational Exodus 12.6.47. Lev 4.13. 1 Kings 8.5,
14. 2 Chro. 6.3
, according to the other part of the Promise, not to be shaken or removed Heb.
12.28. Gal. 3.8.17, 29. Jer. 30.32, 37. and 33.26.
, because it was incorporated into one Church by a visible profession of, and
subjection to Abraham's Covenant Exo. 34.27.
, for such as were Infant-Church-Members received the Seal of the Righteousness
of faith, and when they became adult and stood not to this Profession, they
forfeited their Church Membership; and thus it was with Ismael and Esau Genesis
21.10, 12. Gal. 4.30.
, upon which both, with their Seed, fell off from the Church, tho the natural
Seed of Abraham and Isaac. Genesis 25.31.
And afterward, when the Seed of Israel grew up into a National Church, in all
their Apostacies they were charged with the breach of Abraham's Covenant Deuteronomy.
31 16. Ezekiel. 16.8. Jer. 11.10.
, or that made with their Fathers, which was the same, as therein going a
whoring from God, and forfeiting the Right of Church Membership, and becoming a
Loammi. Moreover, in all their great Reformations we find their returning to
the said Covenant, and often their public renewing and recognition thereof 2 Chronicles. 34.31. Psalm. 105.4, 5, etc. Ezra 10.3
. 2. It appears, in that all the House of Israel, as to their stated
Church-Worship, worshipped under one visible Pastor (in their State after Moses
his Settlement) one High Priest, and at one Altar, in one place Lev. 1.3. Deuteronomy.
12.14. and 14.23. and 16.2, 7.11, 15 16. Josh. 22.18, 23.
; and therefore the stated Church-Worship was attended in one Assembly,
Tabernacle or Temple, Thrice every Year, where the whole Congregation had
Communion in one and the same Worship, and acts of Worship Deuteronomy. 16.16.
. 3. This People were a separated People from all others in the World Lev.
20.24. Deuteronomy. 4.7, 34. cap. 7.6. and 14.2. Psa. 135.4
4. Jeroboam's Apostasy was condemned by God as an actual Rent and Schism from
the visible Church that statedly worshipped God at Jerusalem 1 King 11.30, 31.
. 5. The Synagogue-Worship was not the Church-Worship, neither was the daily
Sacrifice, or others, nor any holy Convocations belonging unto them, any more
than the mere reading of Moses and the Prophets, and Exposition thereof at most
sometimes Act 13.15.
. 6. All Church-Worship, of special communion, as offering Sacrifices
elsewhere, than at the place chosen by God for that purpose, was condemned;
witness the frequent complaint made against their High Places under the Reign,
even of their best Kings 1 King 22.43.
, till Hezekiah's time that destroyed them all 2 King 18.4.
.

. 8. That a Congregational Church is of Divine Institution, appears by these
Reasons.

1. Either a Congregational Church is of Divine Institution, or else God has
no instituted Church; for there is no other visible Church of God's Institution
spoken of in Scripture.

2. The Church of Israel was Congregational (as has bin proved) and none will
deny that to be of God's Institution.

3. The express Type of a Congregational Church under the Gospel was of God's
Institution, therefore the Antitype, or thing Typified much more Rev. 1.20 Heb.
8.5, 6 and 3.5, 6.
.

4. This Church is Prophesied of by the Prophets of old Isa. 56.5.6, 7. Eze.
43.11 Mal. 1.11, 12.
.

5. Christ and his Apostles planted such Churches, as appears throughout the
History of the Acts.

6. These Christ and his Apostles owned to be his truly instituted Churches,
not only by the Epistles wrote to them by the Apostles, but by those sent to
them by Christ himself Rev. 2. and 3.
.

CHAP. IV. Of a Gospel Visible, or Congregational Church.
Restipulation to Abraham 's Covenant double: A Gospel Visible Church defined:
A visible Church always particular, not Catholic: The Catholic not the Genus
of a particular Church, but a distinct Species of Church in general:
Corporation distinguished into its Species: The Political relation of a Church
to Christ: The immediate matter of a visible Church: What is the form of it:
Separation inseparable from it: The immediate Infant Seed Members by Covenant:
Communion the end of Church-Vnion.

. 1. HAVING showed what a Visible or Congregational Church is in general, when
the first Institution of it was, and where founded, viz. in Abraham's Covenant
of Circumcision; that for the substance of the said Covenant it was immutable,
both as to the Person, Natures, Offices, Ministry, Sacrifice and Exaltation of
Christ the Head, both Mystical and Political Gal. 3.8 cap. 4.26, 27.
; so as to the Body of Christ the Church in its Catholic Ephesians. 3.5, 6. Acts
15.7, 9.
or Visible relation to him Deuteronomy. 14.2. 1 Pet. 2.9.
, (setting aside only the difference of Oeconomies and the Administration
thereof, called the Old and New Testaments Heb. 8.6 and 9.15.
) it is the everlasting Covenant well ordered in all things and sure 2. Sam.
23.5. 2. Cor. 3.11
, to which as to the more mysterious and hidden part under the efficacious work
of the Spirit, every sincere-hearted Believer does restipulate when he becomes
an actual Member of the Mystical Body 2 Cor. 11 2, 3. Heb. 12 22
; and as to the more External, Visible and Political part, he does visibly
restipulate by confederation and embodying to Christ the Political Head Isa.
56.6, 7. and 44.5.
, and with a particular Congregation a Political Body of Christ.

. 2. The Ecclesiastical Blessings, as belonging to the visible State, Standing
and Privileges of a Congregational Church, unalterable under either
Dispensation, are these especially: First, Its Foederal Constitution Isa. 61.8,
9. Genesis 17.9, 10.
. Secondly, Its Divine Institution Ibid.
. Thirdly, The Nature of its Church Membership Romans 4.11, 12, 16. Gal. 3.27,
28, 29.
, and the professing Right thereto to the Believing Parent covenanting, and his
immediate Infant Seed in him Isa. 65.23. chap. 44.3. Gal. 4.28.
. Fourthly, The Seal of the Righteousness of Faith given to both Parent and
Seed. Fifthly, The Ministry of the Gospel, with all other Ordinances of
Christ's Institution, which each is capable of for spiritual advantage, in the
communion of the respective Members thereof Gal. 3.7, 8.
.

. 3. A Visible Church is a spiritual 1 Pet. 2.5.
Body Romans 12.4, 5.
of Believers 1 Cor. 1, 2
, with their immediate Seed Gal. 3.26, 27, 28. and 4.28.
, separate from the World 2 Cor. 6.17.
, and given up unto Christ and one another in a Public Covenant 2 Cor. 8.5.
Isa. 56.6, 7.
, for fellowship 1 John 1.3, 7. Phil. 1.5. 1 Cor. 11.20.
in all instituted Worship and Ordinances Mat. 28.20.
in one place 1 Cor. 14.23.
, to the Glory of God 1 Cor 10.31.
and their own Salvation Phil. 1.9, 11.
.

. 4. A visible Church is always particular Rev. 1.20 Col. 2.5.
, a Catholic being not visible as has bin showed: for a Visible Church is not
a Society gathered together and made up of all the select People in the world,
there is none such can be here; but its such as is limited to a People and
Place, and is the subject of the Ministry and Ordinances there 1 Cor. 11.20.
and 14.23. Act 2.41.
. And though it should be supposed that there is a Catholic, visible Church
(which cannot be granted) it is to be observed, that the Spirit of God, speaks
always of Churches in their respective places, as distinct Churches, each one
entire in it self 1 Cor. 1, 2 1 These. 1.1
; not one Epistle wrote to any under the Name of the Catholic visible Church,
nor to any Church or Congregation as part of it, but we read of writing to a
Church in such a place Revel. 3.1, etc. 1 Cor. 1.1.
; and diverse Churches in a place (as Country or Province) we find distinguished
by the places where they were, as Town, City in which they were Gal. 1.2 Rev.
1.4.
. Again, each particular Congregation had its proper Elders relating to it Act.
20.17. Phil. 1.1. Act 14.23
, and not to others, or to a Catholic visible. Lastly, the Church at
Jerusalem, the first Primitive was indeed the biggest and largest we read of,
but to make it any other than a particular Congregation, is as weak Divinity as
it is Logic, for it continued to Assemble together in one place Act 5.12
, and was called but one Church, and was not the Church that was visibly
Catholic, for it contained not the Churches of Samaria Act 9.31
and Antioch ib. 15.2, 3
, soon after gathered.

. 5. Wherefore the Subject defined by us, is a particular Church; not because
the Catholic is a Genus of it, but because the Catholic, and a Particular,
are two distinct Species of Church, by proper Adjuncts, e. gr. A particular
Church is visible here on Earth in coetu Act 5.12
, which the Catholic Church is not. It assembles in one place 1 Cor. 11.20.
, which the Catholic cannot here: It Is the subject of external Ordinances,
Officers and Discipline Phil. 1.1. 1 Cor. 5.4.
, which the Catholic is not: The Members are known by visible Profession and
confederation 2 Cor. 9.13.
, which the Members of the Catholic are not known by.

. 6. The next general Nature (as we have showed) to a Church is a Body Politic
or Corporation, for Body is thus distributed in Scripture Acceptance, it is
Natural or Political; Political is Civil or Spiritual; the Spiritual is a
Church, which is a spiritual Body Politic; and that is invisible and
Catholic, or visible and Particular. Here we are on a Particular Congregation,
which we say is a spiritual, visible Body Politic Romans 12.4, 5. 1 Co. 12.27
. That it is a Body in a Political sense is most manifest, for the Scripture
calling it so, it must be concluded, that it cannot be so in any rational
sense, but as it is a Body Corporate, not Civil but Spiritual; it being of
spiritual Matter 1 Cor. 3. 1 Gal. 6.1.
, spiritual Form 1 Pet. 2.5
, and for spiritual Ends 1 Cor. 12 3.3, 7.8. Ephesians. 5.19. 1 Pet. 2.5.9.
. Neither is it invisibly spiritual, for spiritual things are both visible and
invisible Col. 1.16 18. and 2.5. 1 Pet. 2.5.
, but its spiritual in opposition to civil. Hence the Church we are speaking of
is a visible spiritual Body-Politick, and as such having a special and peculiar
Relation to Christ the Political Head Heb. 3.1.6.
, wherein the special Glory and Excellency of this Church does ly.

. 7. The great Concern therefore of this Body, is its true Political Relation
to Christ, as the head thereof Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
, that it be by its visibility, at least, Christ's Corporation 1 Cor. 12.27.
. 1. By his Purchase Act. 20.28.
. 2. By his Charter and Institution, being founded upon his Doctrine, Rules and
Appointments Mat. 28.20.
. 3. That the Dispensation be Christ's, so that all things therein transacted
be in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ Col. 3.17
, and to God's Glory by him Ephesians. 3.21
. 4. That the Matter of this Church be visibly approved as Members of Christ's
Mystical Body, and so in Christ Jesus by Faith visibly at least Phil. 1.1 2
Cor. 6.15, 16.
. 5. That their association into one Body be by explicit Covenant first to
Christ the Head, and to one another as visible Members of Christ, supposed
faithful and Loyal to him Romans 15.6, 7. Isa. 56.7. 1 Pet. 5.9.
. 6. The great ends of it are, 1. A freedom in Christ Gal. 5.1.
, and the Spirit 2 Cor. 3.17.
, from all other Political Heads, as such (in this spiritual relation) and all
pretendedly Ecclesiastical 2 The. 2.4.
or Civil Isa. 26.13.
, or Pastoral compulsion, and Arbitrary Government within themselves 1 Pet.
5.3. 3 John 10.
. 2. The great enjoyment of the Presence and Blessing of Christ Rev. 3.1. Ephesians.
1.3.
. 3. Their communion in Christ with one another 1 Cor. 10 16.
, and thereby their edification in Grace 1 Cor. 14 26.
, and continued growth in Christ Ephesians. 4.15
, in the solemn and sacred use of all his holy Institutions and Appointments:
All which they look upon (not as Bondage) but their desirable Enjoyments and
Privileges granted to them by the Charter and Seal of the New Testament Ephesians.
1.3. Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 1.18, 19.
.

. 8. As it is and ought to appear a spiritual Body 1 Pet. 2.5
, and therefore visible; it must be made up of such Members as to the adult
part are Professors of their Mystical Relation to Christ Ephesians. 5.30.
; for the truest Believer cannot be known but by such Profession that must come
into visibility, before any one can have any approved Church Membership, or any
fair or plausible pretense to a right thereto Jam. 2.18. Act 11.23
.

2. Tho Professing Believers, with their immediate Infant Seed are the true and
fit Matter for a Visible Church Act 2.39
, yet is not their Profession the Visible Form of a Church: Stones may be good
and well squared for a Building, but do not give Form to any House 1 King 6, 7.
till they be visibly conjoined and knit together to a Cornerstone 1 Pet. 2.5
Ephesians. 2.21.
, therefore the Band must be visible in this Building of Christ; all the sitted
parts, as living Stones, freely coming to Christ the Cornerstone, and by
common consent uniting themselves to Christ and one another, to make a
spiritual House, a Habitation of God by his Spirit Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
, every one of which, being supposedly at least, united to Christ the Mystical
Head Ephesians. 4.15
, and so becoming living Stones, do now come to Christ by a second explicit
visible Union in a Political Body of his Romans 12.1, 4, 5.
, which can be no other than Confederation, whereby each one, with his
immediate Infant Seed, is given up unto Christ, and associated to the said
Members in one Corporation or Body Politic.

. 9. That explicit confederation gives form to a visible Church, appears
beyond all doubt, 1. From the nature of its being a Body Politic or
Corporation To. 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12 12, 13, 14, 27.
, for all Civil Corporations are in this manner made a Body. 2. Men may be very
honest and good Subjects under the King's Government, but not incorporated in
any distinct Body Corporate under the King. 3. They that are incorporated, are
bound by a promise of Fidelity to the King the Political Head, and by a promise
obliging to Membership with, and fidelity to that particular Body. 4. There is
no Person governable by any such Body Politic, that is not thus bound to it by
such confederations, for what has it to do with such as are without 1 Cor.
5.12.
? 5. It is not fit that any should partake of the granted Liberties and
Privileges of any particular Society, without becoming a fast Member thereof;
and how can any one that is at his choice whether he will or will not, be made
a fast Member thereof, without a declared mutual obligation between him and
such Society? As all these Reasons hold good, as well in a spiritual Body
Politic, as a Civil, and bear a great Analogy with the Natural Body of a Man
therein: So likewise it appears in the second place from the Word of God,
speaking of a Church as such a Body. 1. The first constitution of a
Congregational-Church in Abraham and his Seed, was by Covenant Genesis 17.2, 10.
, and so the great Reformations thereof afterward, were by renewing Abraham's
Covenant. 2. All the descriptions of a Visible Church by allusion to a Natural
Body To. 12.4, 5.
, to a House Ephesians. 2.21, 22. 1 Pet. 2.5
or Temple, hold forth such an explicit Band of parts together as well as the
whole to the Head, as parts of a Body or House are knit together, which nothing
can do in a Body Politic but a voluntary Confederation. 3. The expressions of
joining to the Lord, and adding to the Church Act. 2.47 and 5.13, 14.
. 4. Church-Covenanting under the Gospel is foretold Isa. 56.6 and 62.5.
. 5. The Apostle is express about it, when he treats purposely and directly of
the true matter of a Church, and foederal form of it 2 Cor. 6.15, 16, etc. Act.
11.23
. 6. Professed Subjection to the Gospel is explicit covenanting 2 Cor. 9.13.
, as also in that place speaking of giving up ones self to the Lord and one
another 2 Cor. 8.5.
.

. 10. Hence as it is a Covenanting Body, so a Body separate from the World
Heathenish and Antichristian 1 Cor. 10 19.20. Rev. 18.3 2 Cor. 6.16 17.
. A Church cannot be a peculiar and select People without separating from
communion in Church Ordinances with visible unbelievers, and from false Worship
of all kinds whatever 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. 1 Pet. 2.9.
.

. 11. The immediate Infant Seed of the Confederate-Believer, becomes given up
unto God, and receives Church Membership in and by the Parents Covenant 1 Cor.
7.14. Gal. 4.28. Romans 9.8.
; for such was the Constitution of the first Congregational-Church which
remains un-altered: for the righteousness of faith, and the Seal of the
righteousness of Faith remaining to Believers To. 4.11, 12.
, as the Gospel preached Gal. 3.8.
to Abraham was the Blessing that came on the Gentiles ibid. 14.
, it belongs to them to whom he was the Father, even in that respect Romans
4.11.16.
, and they are Heirs according to the Promise Gal. 3.29
, being the Children of God by Faith in Christ ib. v. 26. ib. v. 9.
, are blessed with faithful Abraham ib. v. 27
; yea as many as have bin baptized into Christ have put on Christ as Abraham
did, both in respect of the righteousness of Faith, and the Seal thereof To.
4.11, 12.
, the Privilege he has for himself and Seed in Covenant, and both Jew and
Greek, Male and Female, are all one (as to this respect) in Christ Jesus Gal.
3.28
. And being Abraham's Seed To. 4.16.
, yea his Children as Isaac was, they inherit the Blessing in the righteousness
of Faith and the Seal thereof, to themselves and Seed. But this Blessing as it
comes upon the Gentiles as fellowheirs of the same Promise made to Abraham Ephesians.
3.6.
, which neither the making or abrogation of Moses his Constitution did or
could disannul Gal. 3.17
, comes not on this or that Nation, or Race of any Family specified, as it was
upon Abraham's, but it comes only in the right of a confederating Believer Romans
9.6, 7, 8.
, and therefore on him and his immediate Seed only; for the Child of a Believer
when he comes to be adult, by his non-profession of Abraham's Faith, and
noncovenanting accordingly, his Membership cease, and his Seeds; and
therefore the Grandfather's Faith cannot give the Grandchild any right to the
seal of the righteousness of Faith; but the Infants Membership and Right to any
Church-Priviledge, as it must ly in the immediate Parent, so the unbelief of
the immediate Seed, cuts off from any right to that Seal.

. 12. The ends of Visible Church-Union are very great, viz. The constant and
frequent waiting and attending upon God in his Worship, and that by a People
assembling together for this end and purpose; with one Heart and Mind Acts
2.4.2. and 5.12.
, in one Place 1 Cor. 11 20.
, and therefore in communion with Christ the Head and 10.16, 17.
, and all the Members of the Body together 1 John 1.3.
, whereby each Member is nourished and edified, and grows up into Christ the
Head in all things Ephesians. 4.15
; the Ordidinances of communion the immediate ends of Visible Church-Union; The
steadfast abode therein Act 2.42
, the offering up spiritual Sacrifices unto God acceptable through Christ 1
Pet. 2.5
, and showing forth the Virtues of him that has called them out of Darkness
into his mavelous Light Ibid. v. 9
.

CHAP. V. Of Gathering a Gospel Visible Church.
Christ first in Gathering a Church: The Means of Grace by Conversion, and Good
Men exciting, Instruments: How a People thus moved come into a Body: How
Incorporated orderly, without confusion: What ordinary Christian Prudence is to
be used, and Questions put: An Essential Church a true Church as to being, but
not as to well-being: A Person excepted against to defer for that time.

. 1. AVisible Gospel Church is made by gathering diverse select Persons unto
Jesus Christ in a spiritual Body, and relation to him as their Political Head
Eze. 34.11, 12. 2 These. 2.1
, and it is Christ himself the great Shepherd that first gathers them, seeks
his Sheep, and brings them to his Fold and Pasture John 10.9.14, 16.
, perfecting them in every good Work to do his Will through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant Heb. 13.20, 21.
.

. 2. Christ, as he is our Peace Ephesians. 2.14
, so he comes and preaches Peace by the Ministry of the Everlasting Gospel
ib. v. 17.
, and accompanying it with his Spirit, blesses it to the turning Men from
Darkness to Light Act 26.18.
, working Faith and Love in Sinners Hearts 1 Timothy 1.14.
, whereby they come to embrace the Blessings of Abraham's Covenant, and profess
the same Act 15.11.
.

. 3. When God has called some thus through his Grace Gal. 1.15 Acts 2.40.
in any place, and they have tasted that the Lord is gracious 1 Pet. 2.3
, they begin to see and behold, how richly Christ's Glory and all the Mysteries
thereof are displayed in the Churches Ephesians. 3.9, 10.
his Golden Candlesticks Rev. 1.20. 1 Pet. 2.5.
, and therefore seek after all ways and means provided by Christ, for their
coming as lively Stones to Christ the Cornerstone Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
, and of becoming a spiritual House, or Habitation of God by his Spirit, that
they may offer unto God spiritual acceptable Sacrifices in and through Jesus
Christ, call upon, and encourage one another, saying, come let us go up to the
House of the Lord Isa. 2.3
. and he will teach us his ways; and some that are eminent in Faith and
Holiness excite and stir up others to their Duty, and claim of their
Privileges in Christ, as Barnabas did at Antioch Acts 11.23.
, when he saw the Grace of God in the new Converts, made through the Ministry
of the Disciples scattered by the Persecution from the Church at Jerusalem, he
exhorts them to cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart Ibid.
. i.e. by an explicit Church Covenant, for he saw as to the inward heart-work,
it was already done: Which they did accordingly, and became a Church by a
visible Constitution, and professed Subjection to the Gospel of Christ, in all
its holy Appointments, in which Church Paul and Barnabas Preached a whole Year
Acts 11.26.
, and to which Elders were Ordained ib. 14.23
.

. 4. Hence such a People thus moved by the Grace of God, and having by mutual
converse one with another in their Neighborhood and Society in some holy
Duties, speaking often solemnly and seriously among themselves of the things of
God and their Souls Mal. 3.16.
, discerning the Grace of God Act. 11.23.
, and love to the Lord Jesus Christ, his House and Members in each other, and
finding good and sufficient matter to build with 1 Pet. 2.5.
, counting the cost of their professed undertaking Luke 14.28.
, in the fear of God Acts 9.31
, strength of Christ, and assistance of the Spirit Ephesians. 3.16
, having frequently and solemnly waited upon God on this account together and
apart Col. 3.17 Phil. 4.6.
, as also advised with the neighboring Churches of Christ and Elders thereof
Prove. 11 14. 1 These. 1.6. and 2.14
, and finding their way made clear before them, by the footsteps of other
Flocks of that Nature Cant. 1.8
, they proceed with their Faces Zion-ward Jer. 50.5
, to the most solemn attending this great matter, in framing a Gospel-Temple
with Fasting and Prayer, and manage it in such a manner as becomes so sacred
and weighty a business, without any thing of confusion 1 Cor. 14 33, 40.
.

. 5. And therefore, that it may be so performed, something of ordinary
Christian-Prudence is necessary Prove. 13.16.
, under Christ's General Rules, that all things should be done in and about
Churches and God's Service without confusion 1 Cor. 14 33.
, and to edification ib. v. 26
. For which reason, on a solemn Day, set apart for this end, they ought in
Faith and dependence on him Heb. 12.28. James 1.6
, to depute one of their number, for that time at least, to go before the rest
in the concerns of that Day, and preside in matters of Order 1 Cor. 14.40.
, which being done, all of them, and each person, he or she (by her self, if
bashfulness hinder not, if it does, by delivering in Writing what should be
spoken) are to give an account of what God has done for each, and of the hope
they have, with meekness and reverence 1 Pet. 3.15.
, which when all have done, Two Questions are to be put by the said presiding
person:

1. Whether they be all and every one fully satisfied with each others declared
and professed grounds of Hope Phil. 2.2, 3, 4, 5.
, so far as to be willing cordially to receive one another in the Lord To.
15.7. and 16.2.
? Which being answered in the Affirmative by Suffrage, (or word of Mouth, which
is best in this Case:) The next Question ought to be,

2. Whether they all and every one do freely, solemnly and unanimously give up
themselves and their Seed to the Lord To. 12.1 Matt. 19.14, 15. Acts 2.39.
and join themselves to one another in Church Fellowship ib. 41, 42
, promising subjection to Christ their Political Head, in the Faith and Order
of the Gospel 2 Cor. 9.13.
, and to walk accordingly in discharge of their Duties to God and one another,
as becomes Church Members Col. 2.5, 6 Phil. 1.27.
, through the Grace of God helping and assisting, and accordingly give to each
other the right hand of fellowship 2 Cor. 4 15.
?

Which Question answered in the Affirmative, the said deputed person, does in
the Name of the Lord Jesus declare them a Church of Christ. As likewise the
Elders and Brethren of other Churches there present (as they ought to be, if
they can be had, to behold their Faith and Order Col. 2.5.
) should also declare that they own and acknowledge them a Church of Christ, to
their great satisfaction and rejoicing 2 These. 1.3, 4. 1 These. 2.13,
. Then lastly, to continue the Work of the Day with some Word of Exhortation,
and earnest Supplication, that God would be pleased to bless this Flock, and
cause it to grow, as also, that God would give them a faithful Pastor Jer. 3.15
Mat. 9.38.
, with other Ministerial Officers, giving thanks to God for this so hopeful a
beginning, and what he has graciously done for them Phil. 4.6.
.

. 6. A Church thus constituted is a true Church, and a Body of Christ; and tho
its not yet organized with Ministerial Officers, yet it wants nothing of the
Essence of a Church of Christ 1 Cor. 12 27. Rev. 1.20
, for if a Church cease not to be a Church when it has lost all its
Ministerial Officers, and reduced to this state, then this Church is an
essential Church. Besides, a Church must be before a Pastor can be, because
that Relation must arise out of the Church, and cannot arise from elsewhere, a
Church being a Corporation by Charter from Christ; but yet though it be a true
Church as to its Essence and Being, yet it is not complete as to its well-being
Titus 1.5
, in that it is not furnished with all its Privileges that Christ has
purchased and provided for it, having not due instruments for the
administration of all Ordinances, or execution of the Power committed to it, in
the most orderly and regular manner Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
.

. 7. Hence the first subject of the Keys is a Church essential; for its
empowered by Commission from Christ to choose its own Ministerial Officers Act.
14.23.
, and if they be one or more belonging to other Churches, or non-Members, they
can receive them Members Act 6.3.
. Likewise they can admit other Members that desire to join with them. Lastly,
it has power to admonish or reject any scandalous, or any offending Member,
and that before such a Church has Elders or Deacons 1 Cor. 5.7
. These are plain from the nature of a Body Corporate.

. 8. To conclude, If in the Gathering a Church any Person offering to join a
Member, be on any account excepted against, his admission ought to be deferred
for the present, and his Case to have a due hearing and consideration
afterward, and not to interrupt the further Proceedings of that day Phil.
2.2.3. Ephesians. 4.3.
.

CHAP. VI. Of the Extraordinary Ministers of the Churches.
Christ has provided for the well-being of his Churches: Ministers for the
Erection and Planting the First Churches: Gospel Constitution offered to the
Jews first: Extraordinary Ministers who: And what their Call, Qualifications,
Work: Apostles and Evangelists, how differing: The first Prophets and Teachers
no Ruling Officers: Extraordinary Ministers continue not, but are ceased.

. 1. THE Lord Jesus Christ the Great Shepherd 1 Pet. 5.4.
, the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, faithful in his own House Heb.
3.1, 2.
, does not only build it ibid. v. 3.
, but furnish it with all Means of Grace conducing to visible and spiritual
exercise of life and Godliness 2 Pet. 1.3.
; and having showed the form of his House to any People taken out from and
ashamed of the ways they walked in, in their former ignorance 1 Pet. 1.14, 15.
, separated and set them apart to the Lord in a spiritual Building Ephesians. 2.19 22.
, does likewise show them the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof,
and all the Forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the Laws
thereof, and writes it in their sight, that they may keep the whole Form
thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them, which is the Law of his
House Eze. 43.11, 12.
, whereby he has provided for the well-being of his Churches, in a fit and
suitable Ministry and Ordinances, which he gave and dispensed, chiefly at his
Exaltation Ephesians. 4.10, 11.
, and according to his Commission from his Father, has commanded them
diligently to observe Matt. 28.20.
.

. 2. And accordingly, at first he provided for his Churches such a Ministry as
should be best fitted to the Infant-state of his first Churches after his
Ascension Hos. 11.1, 3.
, both for the planting and watering of them 1 Cor. 3.6, 9.
; therefore Nominates and Ordains the first Ministers (as is usual in the like
case among Men) in his Charter by Name Mat. 10.2 chapter 28.20. Act. 1.2, 3, 13.
, giving them more than ordinary Power, and qualifying them with more than
ordinary Gifts and Graces of his Holy Spirit Mar. 16.17, 18. Act 2.4.
, whereby they had light and authority Act. 20.27.
to teach and put in practice the whole Mind and Will of Christ in planting,
governing and furnishing the Churches with their ordinary and appropriate
Ministry, which was to be stated and standing in them to the end of the World
Mat. 28.19, 20.
.

. 3. As the Gospel in its full Light, was first by Christ's Ordination to be
offered to the Jews Matt. 10.5, 6. Act 13.4, 6
, who (according to Moses) were bound to hear Christ, and prefer his Person and
Ministry before that of Moses Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act 7.37.
: So the Lord Jesus Christ himself and Apostles, made the first offer of a
Gospel-Constitution of Churches to them, Act 3.25, 26.
and placed a Gospel and powerful Ministry in that First and Famous Church at
Jerusalem 1 Cor. 12 28.
, which in its building, precious matter Is. 54.11 1 Pet. 2.5, 6.
, beautiful form, and most rich furniture, did so outshine and darken all the
Glory of their Worldly Sanctuary, and services appertaining thereto Heb. 9.1,
etc.
, that the whole Church Establishment by the Ceremonial Law of Moses, (the Vail
under which Gospel-Mysteries lay obscured 2 Cor. 3.14.
,) was manifestly removed and done away ibid. v. 13, 14.
, having not only bin first Nailed to the Cross of Christ Col. 2.14.
, but also by another Building Heb. 9.11.
, and Ministration Heb. 8.6
, come in the room thereof, of much more spiritual Glory and Luster ecclipsed;
insomuch that what Moses had made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory that excels 2 Cor. 3 10, 11.
. Hence the Church of the Jews, in regard of all its Mosaical Establishment in
its Veiled State, and as to its appurtenances appropriate to Abraham's Natural
Posterity in a National Church-Constitution, waxed old, decayed and vanished
away Heb. 8.13
, and the substantial part of Abraham's Covenant, in respect of the true Grace
and Government of the Promised Seed, appeared and remained glorious Gal. 3.17
and 4.26.28 30, 31.
.

4. These Extraordinary Ministers, were Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets and
Teachers, whom the Lord Jesus set in the first Gospel Church at Jerusalem 1
Cor. 12 28.
, and gave them to his Churches for a general good, but firstly to that Church
Ephesians. 4.10, 11.
where they first exercised their Ministry, Apostleship and Eldership. The
Apostles (so called by Christ's first Mission) were Twelve Matt. 10.2, etc.
, (one of which fell from his Apostleship Act 1.20
) these were Ordained by Christ himself, and had a double Mission, one to the
Jews only before Christ's death Mat. 10.6.
, whereby the Partition Wall was broken down Ephesians. 2.14
, and then to all Nations Jews and Gentiles Mat. 28.19.
, with a particular charge to go to the Jews first Acts 13.46.
. Upon the Fall of Judas, Matthias was chosen by the Church, and a Divine
Ordination by Lot chapter 1.26.
. Paul and Barnabas were additional Apostles chapter 14.14
, and sent (especially Paul) Apostles to the Gentiles To. 11.13
. They had an extraordinary Ordination by Christ's immediate Call and
Instigation of the Holy Ghost Acts 13.2. Ga. 1.12
. They were all of them such as had bin Eyewitnesses of the Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of the Lord Acts 1.21, 22, 23.
. Paul himself had seen Christ, but was converted and called to Apostleship
after his Ascension, therefore he says, he was born out of due time 1 Cor.
15.8, 9.
. They were divinely inspired, had a mavelous effusion of the Spirit upon
them Act. 2.12
, had the Gifts of Tongues, Healing, Interpretation and of miraculous Works
Mark 16 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 12.28.
. They had more than ordinary Graces and Gifts, mightily furnished to the Work
of the Ministry; and lastly, had the Care of all the Churches 2 Cor. 11.28.
.

. 5. The Evangelists were inspired Ministers of Christ to his Churches 2 Timothy
3.16. Acts 8.5.26. and 21.8
; Sub-Apostolick, Adjuvant to the Apostles in their Work, and much at their
direction 1 Timothy 1.3. and 2.15 2 ep. 2.2. Tit. 1.5.
. Some were Apostolic Evangelists, as Matthew and John, two of them; Called
Evangelists from their Evangelical Histories of Christ in their Gospels Matt.
1.1
. Mark and Luke were only Evangelists, none of the Twelve. Philip, Timothy,
Titus were only Evangelists, ordained Apostolically Acts 6.2. 2 Timothy 1.6. Titus
1.5.
, and employed and sent by the Apostles to places where they had Preached, and
to Churches already Planted, to Visit, Teach and Direct to the Election of
Officers, and see a supply of what was wanting, or prepare Matters for the
Apostles coming.

. 6. The Prophets and Teachers of the first stamp, seemed to have much of
Inspiration by the Holy Ghost Act 2.
, by the coming down thereof upon the Apostles and Brethren at Pentecost. It
appears not that they had any Office or governing Power in the Church, nor much
differing ib. 13.1.
: but being Brethren, full of the Holy Ghost, as the Deacons and Barnabas
before set apart ib. 6.3. and 11.24.
, were employed by the Apostles, or moved in themselves, to Preach the Gospel
wherever they came, for Conversion of the dark, unbelieving World ib. 11.19
. There were of later date Gifted Brethren by an ordinary Measure 1 Cor. 14 4,
5, 37. 1 The. 5.20
of Grace and Gifts, some for Edification within the Church, and some for
Propagation of the Gospel abroad, which may yet remain, the reason thereof
remaining.

. 7. These Extraordinary Ministers continue not in the Churches 1 Cor. 13 8.
, neither Apostles or Apostolic Men, to whom it was essential to be Ordained,
or immediately sent by Christ, and the Holy Ghost, as also extraordinarily
inspired and qualified. The Miraculous Gifts they were furnished with are
ceased Ibid.
. The Apostles were to be such as had seen the Lord on Earth Acts 1.21, 22.
; of such there is none now: They were charged with the Care of all the
Churches 2 Cor. 11 28.
, of such there is none now; one or more to whom Christ has committed the Care
of all the Churches, or of many indefinitely. Lastly, There Is not the same
Reason for such a Ministry now: The Doctrine of the Gospel having bin received
in the Nations of the Earth, the Canon of the Scripture filled; Churches have
bin planted and walked in by the Rules and Order of the Gospel. The Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles abundantly confirmed by diverse Signs following Heb.
2.3, 4.
, and since by the Profession, Practice and Sufferings of multitudes of
faithful Witnesses Heb. 12.1. Rev. 12.11
,

CHAP. VII. Of the Ordinary Ministers of a Church.
Christ has appointed a sufficient Ministry for the Churches, according to
their inward and outward concerns: What an Elder is: What sorts: The Pastoral
Charge what it contains: How discharged by one or more: A Teacher what: A
Ruling Elder what: A Deacon what: A Church is fully Organized with a Pastor and
Deacon.

. 1. CHRIST being Exalted to God's Right Hand, and sitting there an Apostle and
High Priest of good things to come Heb. 9.11.
, has made provision for the calling in of the Elect Acts 13.48.
, and his redeemed ones Rev. 5.9.
, building and furnishing his spiritual Temples and Habitations for God by the
Spirit Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
, not only by and under the Apostles Ministry, but also by a sufficiency of
Ministry and Ordinances in an ordinary and standing way and manner of
Dispensation to the end of the World Matt. 28.19, 20, 21
.

. 2. According to the great Concerns of a visible Church in this World, Christ
has wisely consulted the well-being of it Ephesians. 3.10
, in instituting and appointing the Ministers thereof Ephesians. 4.10, 11.
. As to the higher internal concerns, he has ordained Elders Acts 14.23. Phil.
1.1.
; and as to the more external, (no Church being able to subsist and keep up
Ordinances according to the instituted Nature of them, without a due care of
those concerns) he has ordained and appointed Deacons Acts 6.2, 3. Phil. 1.1.
.

. 3. An Elder is an ordinary Minister to the Church, chosen and ordained by it
to a Charge with Rule and Government 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 4.23.
, being a Person of Age or Gravity, judged to be duly qualified for it 1 Timothy
3.1, 2, etc.
. An Elder, Presbyter or Bishop, we may find to be taken in Scripture for one
and the same thing Acts 20, 17, 28.
, in relation to a Church of Christ, and are mostly taken indifferently for any
Ruling and Teaching Minister; as may be showed by Classick Authors in Civil
respects, and by Scripture Language. An Elder is an ordinary standing Minister
in a Church. The Apostles were Elders 1 Pet. 5.1.
, and executed Elders places, both in Teaching and Ruling wherever they came,
but all Elders were not Apostles, nor could they exert Apostolic Power, Elders
being Men of ordinary use in a Church of Christ, and must continue Acts 14.23.
. An Elder primarily signifies an old Man ib. 2.17.
, but applied to an Office of Eldership in Church or State, he is fitly called
a Presbyter or Alderman in our Language; i. e. Elderman. Such there were in the
Church and State of the Jews Exo. 12.21.
, and are in the Churches under the Gospel Act 14.23.
. A Bishop is an Overseer of a Charge, and may be without Rule: Among the
Grecians an Attick Magistrate, Clark of the Market, or Commissary of an Army
was called a Bishop; but the Scripture uses it for a Ministerial Charge,
Teaching and Ruling, one or both, Ruling at least.

. 4. The Elders of a Church, are Pastor, or Adjuvant in the Pastoral Charge
under Christ. The Pastor is an Elder of a visible and particular Church, Chosen
and Ordained to the Office of Feeding the Flock by the Word, Sacraments and
Government 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Ephesians. 4.11. Act. 20.38
. The Office, Charge and business of a Pastor is as a Shepherd to his Flock, to
Feed, Guide and Fold: So Christ is the great Pastor John 10 11, 16.
, and the first to the Gospel Church Mat. 26.26, 31.
. And as he is the Chief Pastor 1 Pet. 5.4
, so is he the great President and Example to all the Pastors of particular
Churches in all things wherein he is to be followed in the Exercise of their
Pastoral relation John 13.15.
; as also the Guidance of his Spirit, and Direction of his Word Mat. 28.20.
, with all his holy Institutions, are to be diligently observed, for to him it
is that they must give account Heb. 13.17.
of this their great Stewardship 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
.

. 5. The Ministerial Charge as to Administration of things of the most
spiritual Nature in a Visible Church, is contained in the Pastoral Relation,
and where God gives ability to perform it fully to the edification of the
Church, One may perform it duly 2 Cor. 12.19. Ephesians. 4.12.
. But in case of bodily infirmity, or greatness of the Congregation, if he is
not able through the first to bear the whole Work of Teaching and Exhorting, or
for the other reason, he is not able to go through the governing Work, Christ
has provided Helps and Assistance for him; a Teacher in his Teaching work, and
a ruling Elder to aid and assist in Ruling 1 Timothy 5.17.
.

. 6. He that is called and ordained of Christ by the Church to concur with the
Pastor in the Teaching Work, to the furthering the Churches Edification, is
called a Teacher, and waits on that Service, helping also in Ruling with the
Pastor Romans 12.7. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Tit. 1.9. 1 Pet.
4.10, 11.
.

. 7. He that is Called and Ordained of Christ by the Church to concur with the
Pastor in diligently rulling, is required to wait on that Work especially, for
the Edification of the Church, and is called a Ruling-Elder, and is Ordained in
the same manner with a Teaching-Elder 1 Timothy 3.1. Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17
.

. 8. He that ministers to the external concern of the Church, serving Tables
for the support of the Worship of God, and relief of the Poor, is a Deacon Acts
6.2. and 4.35. compared with chapter 6. Neh. 13.13
: there may be one or more, as the concerns of the Church are, and there may be
Women-helps, (in some Cases necessary) called Deaconesses Romans 16.1. and 12.8.
1 Timothy 5.9, 10.
. The Deacon's Charge is the true and faithful disposal of the Churches Stock
and Contributions, and to the Church they are accountable 1 Cor. 4.2 1 Timothy
3.8, 9, 10. 1 Pet. 4.10
.

. 9. A Church which has a Pastor and Deacon is fully Organized, the Church
requiring no more to Edification: The Pastoral Office containing in it all the
Teaching and Ruling Charge, and the Deacons all that concern the Care of the
Church as to Externals.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Call to a Church Ministry.
How a Church is regularly furnished by Call and Ordination: A Call immediate or
mediate: What each is: How a Church comes to a Call: And how made: The
consummation thereof no Ordination: A Person called being not a Member, ought
to be joined to the Church calling him, before Ordination: None can or ought to
be Ordained to the Catholic Visible Church.

. 1. A Church of Christ comes to be regularly furnished with a Ministry for its
Edification, by a due Call Heb. 5.4.
of such as are qualified thereto, and Ordination of them. A Church Calls, when
after waiting upon God for Directions Phil. 4.6 Mat. 9.38.
, and coming to be acquainted with the Grace and Ministerial Gifts of a person
or persons, which having tried 1 John 4.1 1 Timothy 3.10
, they are inclined to apprehend him or them suitable for them, the Church
gives him or them a solemn invitation to a Ministerial Charge.

. 2. A Call to a Ministerial Charge or Work, is either immediately by God
himself in a more than usual way or manner Gal. 1.1.12. 1 Timothy 1.1.
, or mediate by the Church of God; and every one that undertakes such holy
service must have one of these two Calls, or else God sends him not Romans 10.15.
: The immediate Call is when God does qualify and call a Person to a
Ministerial Service without the instrumentality of Men or Churches; and such
was the Call of the Prophets and Apostles, whose Call was their Ordination and
Infallible.

. 3. A Mediate Call is that which Christ makes by the instrumentality of a
Church walking after Christ's commands 1 Pet. 5.2 2 John 6.
, but is not infallible, but eventually may not answer the Churches end in
Calling, because the Person called may not be suitable, or for some reasons may
refuse to submit thereto. Hence God answers a Churches Call, by sending to them
a Person fit and willing, whereby it most times proves happy and successful
Jer. 3.15 Mat. 9.37, 38.
.

. 4. The Church having wisely and duly debated the whole matter, with all
secrecy, and keeping things within the Church, and asked counsel of God and
Neighbor Churches (so far as may be needful) and come to some result among
themselves, all, if possible agreeing without strife and murmuring Phil. 2.3,
8. 1 Pet. 3.8.
, or at least if any not so well satisfied, do consent to acquiesce in the mind
of the Church, the Call is agreed upon; but by such only who are actual
Members, not by Members of other Churches, that communicate upon recommendation
only.

. 5. The consummation of the said Call is made by the free acceptance of the
Person called 1 Pet. 5.2
; but such Call and Acceptance (though necessary as Preliminaries) do not
constitute a Person in a Ministerial Office, any more than a private Contract
does constitute Man and Wife, but Marriage by a Public Covenant before
sufficient Witness: So that the Person Called, is not constituted in Office
without Ordination, which is a Public and solemn setting him apart.

. 6. If the Person called be not a Member, where he is to take his
Church-Charge, he ought now, upon the said Call and Acceptance, to join as an
actual Member to the Church Act. 6.3. 1 Cor. 5.12
: For to constitute a non-Member in Office is contrary to all the Rules of any
Corporate Society.

. 7. A Person may not be Ordained a Pastor or Church Officer at large, or
before he be called to a particular Congregation: For relates and cor-relates
are co-essential to each other, and have reciprocal relative affections:
Ordination also is a solemn recognition of a Contract before made, which is
done in the Call: Moreover, to make a Pastor before a People call him, is to
make a Pastor to no body; and to Ordain a Pastor upon supposal some People will
choose him, makes him not only precarious, but null ipso facto; for being
Ordained upon a supposed futurition, makes his present Ordination void, not
being a capable subject till called to a Relation. And if it be said, Such an
one is Ordained Pastor to the Catholic visible Church. Then 1. Why did not
that Church call him? 2. Why may not Deacons be Ordained to the Catholic
visible Church? 3. If he be Ordained Pastor to the Catholic, how can he be
Pastor to a particular Church? unless he become a general and particular
Pastor, a double Pastor; which is absurd. 4. What power have a few Pastors or
Churches to Ordain any Man to be Pastor to the Catholic Church? as much power
as an incorporated People, or the Mayors of several Corporations meeting
together, have to appoint a common Mayor to all Corporations, or to make one
another so.

CHAP. IX. Of Ordination.
Of the meaning of the Word: How our Translators use the Word: Whether the
Imposition of Hands be peculiar to Church Ministers: Whether Teaching Elders
only can Ordain: Laying on of Hands, of Antiquity; and of what uses: Diverse
Opinions about it: Arguments Answered, 1, 2, 3, 4. Concluded that it is an
obsolete Rite, and Nine Arguments for it: How Ordination ought to be performed:
How a Deacon's: Ordination may be repeated: The Ordination of a mere Preaching
Minister to Conversion.

. 1. ORdination is an English Word (almost Latin, and coming of it) by which
our Translators render Words in both Originals of very diverse significations:
But their use of the Word may be reduced for the most part, to these two
General significations. 1. To the sense of pre-ordination of things, or
persons; and so Ordination is destination. 2. It Is taken for an actual
constitution of a thing or person, in a state or relation that either is
designed unto. 1. By enacting Isa. 30.33. Act. 13.38. and 10.42. Ephesians. 2.10 1
Pet. 1.20 Jer. 1.5.
Laws for this or that thing, or person, which is called an Ordinance 1 Cor.
7.17. Act. 16 14. Ps. 81.5. 1 Chro. 9.22. Gal. 3.19.
, and is a Conjugate to Ordination, because ordained; or 2. By constituting,
instating or enstalling a Person in a Charge or Office Mar. 3.14, Act 1.22. 2
Chr. 11.15. 2 King 23.5. Titus 1.5. Heb. 5.1. and 8.3.
, which is most properly Ordination in that sense, as we are here concerned in
it; being the public and solemn enstating or installing a person in an Office
or Charge committed to him, to which he was duly before called, and which he
has accepted.

. 2. But when Ordination (according to its usage in the Old or New Testament)
is applied unto Men, it signifies only the instating any one actually in a
Place or Charge that he is designed or called to. Again, in all the places,
where our Translators make such use of the Word, there is not the least mention
of Imposition of Hands, tho the Word rendered ordaining Act 14.23.
, signifies the lifting up of hands by way of Suffrage in Election of Officers.

. 3. It Is thought generally, that Imposition of Hands is only an honourary and
peculiar Ceremony to the Ordination of Teaching Elders, and sacred to them
alone: But if the said Imposition be a thing essential to Ordination as such,
it must belong to all Church-Ministers ordained; as to Ruling Elders and
Deacons: because likewise the greatest Plea that can be made for laying on of
Hands on ordinary Church-Ministers must be taken from the Ordination of Deacons
Acts 6.
, whereas indeed, we have not one instance of laying on of Hands on ordinary
Teaching Elders in the whole New Testament, tho we read of the ordaining them
Act 14.23.
.

. 4. Again, it is an Error commonly received, that Ordination (performed by that
supposed sacred Rite) is only to be administered by Teaching Elders, whether of
the same Church, or of other Churches, and is an authoritative act of such. But
this must needs be a great mistake upon all accounts; for the Elders of one
Church cannot perform an Authoritative Act in another, it being a great
Usurpation 1 Pet. 4.15.
; and the Elders of one Church having no power to Vote in another, which the
meanest Brother has, therefore how little power has a foreign Elder to ordain
or lay on hands in the said Church. If it appertain to Elders only, sure to the
Elders of that Church in which the Ordination is, and to those to whom
Authoritative Acts do belong, and not to the Elders of another Church and
Corporation, any more than the enstalling the Mayor of one Corporation
appertains to an Authoritative Act of the Mayor of another. But it may be truly
said, That Ordination of Elders is oftener in Churches that have no Elders at
all, than in such that want one, and that have others surviving; Who then must
Ordain a Pastor called to a Pastoral Charge, and lay Hands upon him? Ans. Who
should do it but the Church that called him Acts 14.23.
? Who should put him into his Charge but Christ by them? for it is Christ
invests any person with a Church Ministerial Office by the Church where he has
placed his Name Deu. 14.23. and 16.6.11.
, which is his Presence and Authority. He is the servant of Christ to his
Church, and is its Propriety, and therefore, as called, so to be Elected and
Installed by it. Obj. But may the Church, having no Elders, lay Hands on him?
Ans. Either the Church must do it, or it must not be done at all; and if it be
necessary to be done, the Church must do it, being an Authoritative Act:
Foreign Ministers have no power to do it: (it is so in Civil Corporations, every
Jurisdiction is distinct in it self:) The power is in the Church to lay on
Hands (if allowed as necessary) by some Brethren delegated and appointed
thereto, and it stands with the greatest reason, that they that have a lawful
right to Call and Choose, have the true Right of ordaining, and not they who
have no power to Choose or Call. Besides, while laying on of Hands was in use,
(extraordinary Gifts being indifferently bestowed, as God pleased) it was
performed indifferently by God's Appointment, as Ananias an eminent old
Christian Act. 9.14, 17.
, was sent to lay Hands on Saul; and likewise, the Prophets and Teachers in the
Church that was at Antioch (it appears not that they were Elders there) were
appointed by God to lay Hands on Paul and Barnabas, tho at another time Philip
an Evangelist could not lay Hands on them that were converted by his Ministry,
confirmed by his Miracles, and baptized by him; but he having not power to
convey the Gifts of the Holy Ghost by laying on of Hands, Peter and John came
to Samaria for that end and purpose Acts 8.15, 16, 17.
: Whence it appears, ( Philip being an Evangelist, and an extraordinary
Minister, having not the power of bestowing the Gifts of the Holy Ghost (tho he
had them, and wrought Miracles) and therefore did not lay on Hands, tho he
baptized) that this Ceremony was used according to the Dispensation (as God
pleased) of the Gift of bestowing the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, neither confined
by any Institution to Elders or Brethren; and therefore one or other laid on
Hands, as this Gift was by God bestowed 1 Cor. 12.7. to 11.
. And therefore it need not be any objection, That they that Ordain others by
laying on of Hands must be in the same Office, and superior to the person
ordained, and hence Brethren cannot ordain a Pastor. For we Reply, That the
Church is supreme to any or all the Ministers thereof, they being but
ministering Servants thereto; that (supposing laying on of Hands be Ordination)
the delegated Brethren that administer the Rite, do it in the Name of Christ,
and representing the Church, it is needless the Persons applying should be in
office themselves, superior as the Apostles, or equal as ordinary Elders, it is
enough, that they are empowered by Christ and his Church to this service at
this time. But the whole reason of this practice being ceased, the Rite it self
is also ceased, as abovesaid, for no extraordinary, nor ordinary Gifts are now
conveyed by laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, or of Brethren, neither
is the Person so enstalled, any better qualified for his place, either made
honester or abler by a spirit of Government, or any more furnished with Gifts
and Graces, any more than a secular Magistrate (Mayor or others) is by the
Ceremonies of his Instalment.

. 5. This Ceremony of laying on of Hands was of great Antiquity, and variously
applied, for quite contrary ends, according to the Case it was conjoined with
by Divine Command or Humane Usage. It was used in Prophetic Blessings Genesis
48.14.
, and it was used in solemn Exsecrations Lev. 24.14.
, and execution of high Criminals, in charging Sin on the Sacrifice Ib. 4.15.
and 6.21.
, in constituting Representatives of the People, and then the People laid hands
Numb. 8.12.
. After the coming of Christ, Mat. 19.10, 11.
Christ used it variously, he laid his Hands on the Head in Blessing: Both
Christ and his Apostles laid on Hands in Healing Mar. 6.5. chapter 16.18. Luke
13.13 Acts 28.8.
, and used it indifferently, that or Unction, as equivalent Rites Isa. 5.14
. It is also used both in the Old and New Testament Number. 27 23. 1 Timothy 4.14.
, as significant of the Conveyance of great and extraordinary Gifts to persons
that God would qualify to great Service, tho not in relation to any Office in
the Church Acts 8.18
, or at the enstalling eminent Leaders in Office to his People, showing God's
furnishing them with extraordinary qualifications of Grace, or Government at
least, and often both Acts 6.6. and 13.2, 3.
; Neither was this Rite, or that of Unction inseparably annexed to any of these
ends or uses under the Old or New Testament. Extraordinary Church Officers were
Ordained without them by Election Act 1.23 26. Matt. 10.5 Joh. 20.22
, and Extraordinary Gifts were conveyed, and Miracles wrought, both by Christ
and his Apostles, without the use of either Acts 2.1, etc.
, though we find not that this Ceremony was used in the New Testament by the
Apostles, or the next followers of them, but upon the account of furnishing the
subject on whom Hands were laid with extraordinary Gifts of the Goly Ghost 1 Timothy 4.14.
.

. 6. It is pleaded for the continuance of this Rite in Churches (by some very
irrationally) that its essential to Ordination of Gospel Ministers: By others,
not as Essential, so as the not having it makes it null, but as necessary to
the Authority and Honor of the Ministry: Others look upon it as indifferent,
doing neither good nor harm, and that Ordination is never the worse if it has
it not, nor never the better if it has it, but it is only harmlesly annexed.
Lastly, There are others think that it is obsolete, like the brazen Serpent in
Hezekiah's days, that had no healing virtue in it, a mere piece of Brass: Such
a thing now do many truly take Imposition of Hands to be. We shall insist upon
the proof of this last especially, which being done, all the other will fall of
their own accord, or by necessary consequence.

. 7. The Arguments used for the continuance of the use of the Rite of
Imposition of Hands in the Churches, are 1. The laying Hands on the Deaons by
the Apostles. Ans. All acts of the Apostles were not Presidential to others.
The Apostles laid their Hands on the Deacons, not so much as such, but as
Persons to be furnished with an Extraordinary Spirit, as appeared afterward by
two especially that were called forth to most Eminent Service for Christ, one,
viz. Stephen, to set his Seal to the Truth of Christ by his Blood, in giving
one of the most Eminent Testimonies thereto, living and dying, and the first
after Christ's Ascension Acts 7.
. The other, Philip, was an Eminent Evangelist, who Planted the Gospel and
Churches in Samaria, was brought miraculously to the Eunuch, and Preached
Christ unto him, who although he was searching the Scriptures, yet knew not
that the Messiah was come till Philip opened the Prophet Isaias to him Acts 8.
. They that insist on this Plea, ought to be as zealous for the formal
Ordination of Deacons by laying on of Hands, as for the laying on of Hands on
ordinary Pastors, and more; there being a seeming President for the first, but
none for the second.

. 8. It Is alleged, The Presbytery laid their Hands on Timothy 1 Timothy 4.14.
, and they say, The Presbytery was a Classis, or at least a Consistory of
ordinary Elders. Ans. 1. That Inference wants proof, for that they were not all
so is beyond Question; for the Apostle Paul was among them for one, or else
Timothy had Hands laid on him twice 2 Timothy 1.6.
. 2. The Apostles were Presbyters, and call themselves so 1 Pet. 5.1.
, and why might it not be a Presbytery of Apostles and Evangelists, seeing such
are mentioned by Name, and it belonged to them, and not to ordinary Pastors to
bestow the Gifts of the Holy Ghost by laying on of Hands? And 3. It appears
that Timothy received such a Gift by the laying on of Hands 1 Timothy 1.18.
. 4. He was not made an ordinary Pastor, but an Evangelist, the Ordination of
whom we find was by the Apostles. As Paul's Ordination was a separation to his
Apostleship to the Gentiles Acts 13.
.

. 9. It Is alleged, That Timothy is charged to lay Hands suddenly on no Man;
which seems to be meant of Ordination of ordinary Pastors.

Ans. If it be so meant, yet it proves not laying on of Hands by ordinary
Pastors, for Timothy was not such. It is not to be doubted, but the Gift that
Timothy received was such an extraordinary Gift as was bestowed then frequently
by laying on of Hands, and which Simon Magus would have purchased of Peter for
Money, That on whomsoever he should lay his Hands they should receive the Holy
Ghost Acts 8.18, 19.
. This Gift, or the Rite of Conveyance, the Apostles were wary of prostituting
to Men of corrupt Minds: And therefore the Apostle warns Timothy, not to apply
it rashly to any, for it is apparent the Apostles laid not their Hands on Simon
Magus, finding he had no truth of heart; but rejected him, and laid not Hands
upon him, though he had bin baptized.

. 10. Heb. 6.2. is pleaded, That Baptism and laying on of Hands were appointed
as standing Ordinances in Churches. Ans. This Text has bin much mistaken and
abused: But briefly, it is not to be understood as if Baptism it self, or laying
on of Hands were to be understood to be the Principles there meant; for indeed,
he speaks but of one Foundation 1 Cor. 3.11.
, the Doctrine of Christ, which is laid in Repentance and Faith, held forth in
Baptism, and confirmed by the Apostolic Signs following Christ's Ascension
Heb. 2.3.4. Mark 16.16.
, in those extraordinary Gifts conveyed by laying on of the Hands of the
Apostles, and Apostolic Men: Hence Beza says, he found in one Copy, That
Baptism and Laying on of Hands were enclosed by a Parenthesis: But if it be not
so it matters not much, for it is the Doctrine of Baptism and laying on of
Hands which are here spoken of, viz. The Foundation-Doctrine of Christ,
symbolically exhibited by the one, and miraculously, beyond all doubt,
confirmed by the other in Apostolic times.

. 11. We conclude concerning this high applauded Ceremony which the Papists
make Sacramental, and say it leaves an indelible Character, and some
Protestants adore little less, That we find upon the best Enquiry, and
strictest Scrutiny, That it is no continued Ordinance or Institution of Christ
in his Churches, And, That its an obsolete and ceased Ceremony, for these Heads
of Reasons only, for brevity sake following:

1. Because the End and Significancy of this Rite is ceased, therefore the Rite
it self; for a Rite that signifies nothing, is an empty Sign and vain, and we
ought not to do any thing in the Worship of God that is empty, insignificant
vain Col. 2.8. Matt. 15.9 Col. 3.20.
, and the doing whereof is Will Worship.

2. That Ceremony that none can by a due Authority apply, cannot be performed;
but none such are now, or can pretend thereto, there being no Apostles or
Apostolic Men, or such as can pretend to extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; much less to a Power or Commission to bestow them on others by any
Solemn Duty whatever; much less, by a Ceremony: Therefore such a Practice as is
a Pretense before Men, to that which we dare not profess plainly to in Words
before God, is but a mocking of God and Man Gal. 6.7. 2 Cor. 11.13.
.

3. We have showed that the Ceremony was never appropriate to the Ordaining of
any Ministers; for it was a common Ceremony used in other Cases, and to other
Persons: To the sick Mar. 16.18.
, to new Converts Act 8.17
, to those that were Members, and had Grace, but it was none of those Gifts
that were for Propagation and Confirmation of the Doctrine of Christ ib. 13.3.
. Many, yea most of the Apostles were Ordained without it Mat. 10.7, 8. and
28.19.
. No Ordinary Pastor Ordained with it, as we read of Acts 24.23.
: Where it was used, the Appliers of it were such as were inspired, or had
immediate Command from God for doing it; and there were many that never had
imposition of Hands themselves Acts 8.14, 17.
,

4. Ordination is no where called Laying on of Hands, nor Laying on of Hands,
Ordination, in the Old or New Testament.

5. There is the same Reason for the Ordaining Ruling Elders and Deacons by
Imposition of Hands, greater for the latter Acts 6.6.
, and will the Assertors of this Rite allow it to them? No, they appropriate it
to Teaching Elders only.

6. Our Translators do honestly own, that the Churches Solemn and Public
Election of Elders by Suffrage, is Ordination ib. 14.23
.

7. There is no more ground for continuance of this Rite, nor so much, as for
that of washing feet Joh. 13.5
, or laying on of hands, or anointing the sick James 5.14.
, but since the cessation of Miraculous Gifts, the anointing of the sick, and
Imposition of Hands, in all Cases, as a Rite, is ceased: That of washing feet
was only teaching to Christ's Disciples the duty of Humility and Self-Denial,
which they were after to follow him in as Ministers, not in the use of the
Ceremony it self John 13.13, 14, 15, 16.
; and there are but two Instituted Rites perpetuated to the Churches to the end
of the World, Baptism Mat. 28.19.
and the Lord's Supper 1 Cor. 11 26.
.

8. If it be used only to denote the Blessing of the Party Ordained, then
Imposition of Hands is a great Usurpation, and makes the Elders of one Church
superior to them of another, for the lesser is blessed of the greater, which
Superiority Christ never allowed Heb. 7.7 Mat. 23.11 Mar. 9.34. Luke 22.24, 26.
.

If it be said, It Is used to point out the Person ordained; it is childish and
frivolous, as if a Man could not be seen or known that comes upon so weighty
and Public an Undertaking, but they must point at him, and tell the People who
he is; as if the Churches Election, and his public Acceptance were not enough
to show the Man.

9. This Ceremony has bin abominably abused by Papists to Superstition and
Idolatry, and greatly idolized by Protestants 2 Kings 18.4.
, and always a Bone of Contention even in the more Reformed Churches 1 Timothy
1.6. Titus 3.9.
; a great offense and Stumbling Block to many: Therefore it is of great Concern
to the Churches for the promoting Peace and Truth, to throw it out altogether,
having no Ground or Warrant for the continuance of it.

. 12. It will be then enquired, In what manner a Church should Ordain its own
Ministers: The Way is plain and easy, if Men make it not hard, knowing, That
Ordination of any one to an Office, is no more than the Public and Solemn
Recognition of the Call, with his like Declaration of his Acceptance, whereby
he is enstated in, and enters upon his Function and Charge. Therefore this
Solemnization ought to be before competent Witnesses, i. e. Churches by
themselves, or Pastors and Messengers, and ought thus to be performed decently
to the Honor of Christ 1 Cor. 14 40.
, on a Day of Solemn Prayer set apart for this End by the Church Acts 14.23.
, the neighboring Churches acquainted therewith, and their Presence desired
beforehand on the said appointed Day; Either a Ruling Elder, or other (if there
be any) or a Delegated Brother, after first Application unto God by Prayer
Phil. 4.6. Ephesians. 6.18.
, puts this Question unto the Church, Whether they do freely choose A. B. to be
their Pastor, Teacher, Ruling Elder (as the Relation is to be, the Ordination
of all being alike) to be such an one to them; And whether they submit to him
in the Lord? To which Answer being made in the Affirmative, the Brethren only
holding up their Hands Ibid. 1 Timothy 2.12
, The Elected Elder declares his Acceptance in all Gravity and Humility 1 Pet.
5.2.3.
, etc. So is the Day filled up with suitable Exhortations and Supplications, by
the assistance of neighboring Pastors, and the Ordination is finished, and the
Pastor Ordained enters on his Office in the Conclusion of the Solemn Work of
that Day.

. 13. In the same manner a Deacon is ordained, differing only in some respects
of Public Solemnity, and that the words of the Question import him not to be a
Governing Minister.

. 14. A Church ought to have a due regard to the Person whom they Call and
Ordain a Pastor, or Teaching-Elder, that he be a Man sound in the Faith 2 Timothy
1.13.
, of good Report 1 Timothy 3.7. Tit. 1.6.
, no Novice 1 Timothy 3.6.
, of Exemplary Grace and Piety ib. 4.12. 1 Pet. 5.3.
, and approved Abilities to Teach 1 Timothy 3.2
, rightly divide the Word of God 2 Timothy 2.15.
, and defend the Truth Tit. 1.9.
.

. 15. The Conceit that Ordination may not be repeated is a Popish and vulgar
Error: For as Churches are no more Prisons to Ministers than People, and there
may be sufficient reason for the Pastor, Elder or Deacon to remove from one
Church to another; in such a Case a Man is to be Ordained again; and so if he
change to another Church afterward; for one Churches Ordination of a Man cannot
make him Pastor to another.

. 16. He that Preaches to a People for Conversion, needs no other Ordination
than the due Approbation and Mission of a Church of which he is a Member,
accompanied with their Solemn Prayers for a Blessing on his Ministry.

CHAP. X. Of Ordinances of General Communion.
Of the reason of the Word Ordinance: Christ's Offices shine forth in
Ordinances: The Church obliged to wait on Christ in them: Ordinances General or
Special: Which General: Public Preaching what: Public Prayers what: Praises
of the Church, and singing Psalms: Contribution: Observation of the Lord's Day:
Of Church Fasts.

. 1. HAVING showed what Christ's Ordination of Persons is, we come to show what
Christ's Ordination of things is; and it is, His Enacting diverse Ordinances 1
Cor. 11.2.
and Appointments for the Order and Government of his own House Heb. 3.6
: Hence his positive Laws of this kind, are called Ordinances, because Ordained
by him, or made by his Ordination Acts 16.4.
.

. 2. The Lord Jesus Christ exerts his Headship of our Profession, by his
Institution and Ordination of such Ordinances wherein his Offices may eminently
shine forth; in some, appearing as the Apostle of our Profession Heb. 3.1.
; in others as High Priest, i. e. Melchisedech, a Kingly High Priest. Ibid. and
chapter 7.16, 17.
In the Word Preached Ephesians. 2.17
; as our Apostolic Prophet Acts 3.22.
: In the Seals of the Covenant his Priestly Virtues and Excellencies are held
forth 1 Cor. 11 25, 26. Acts 2.38.
: In the Keys of Rule and Government his Kingly Office shines forth Rev. 3.7.
Zac. 6.13.
; And thus he is symbolically described in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks
the Churches Rev. 1.13 14, etc.
.

3. A Gospel Ordinance of Christ is some visible Means of Grace Acts 20.32.
Ephesians. 4.7, 8 Heb. 12.28
, Ordained by Christ as Head of our Profession He. 3.1.2
, wherein a Church of Christ, and all the Members thereof, are obliged to wait
on him, Socially or in Communion Acts 2.42 1 Cor. 10.16. Heb. 10.23, 25.
, for his Presence and Blessing 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 1.13. Ps. 132.15
in one place 1 Cor. 11 20. and 14.23.
.

. 4. Christ has appointed some Church Ordinances to be dispensed in a Public
and General way promiscuously, and some to be attended upon in a more peculiar
way of Communion, being appropriated to the Churches only. The Ordinances that
appertain to the General Public Communion of the Church, as well as to the
separate and retired, are, Preaching the Word Acts 11.26.
, Prayers Ephesians. 6.18.
, Praises Heb. 13.15.
, and Contributions Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 6.18. Heb. 13.16
.

. 5. The Public Preaching of the Word of God is, the Reading Neh. 8.8. Luke
4.16.
, Expounding Neh. 8.8 Acts 17.3. and 28.3.
, rightly dividing the Word of God 2 Timothy 2.15.
, to all spiritual Ends and Uses ib. 3.15.
, in order to the Edification of Believers Acts 20.32.
, and Conversion of Unbelievers Acts 26.18.
. Which Preaching ordinarily belongs to the Teaching Elders 1 Timothy 5.17.
, tho occasionally others may Exercise Gifts among them; as the Elders of other
Churches 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 2.4.
, or Brethren when Called thereto, who are able to speak to Edification,
Exhortation and Comfort, with submission to the Judgment of the Church: Which
speaking is the Prophesying which the Apostle speaks of 1 Cor. 14 23, 24, 30,
32.
.

. 6. Public Prayer is a Solemn Ordinance of Christ Heb. 12.28. Act. 20.36 Ephesians.
6.18.
, of general Concern 1 Timothy 2.9.
, wherein the Church does with one accord To. 15.30
, address to God for all Grace in the Name of Christ Heb. 4.16. 1 John 5.14.
Joh. 14.13
, and for a special Blessing on every Ordinance Ps. 133.3
, with Confession of Sin Psa. 32.5. Dan. 9.4.
, Thanksgiving Col. 4.2. Phil. 4.6.
, Deprecations Psa. 60.5 11.
, and Intercessions 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
, and here the Elders for the most part, go before the Church, as in Preaching
1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
, unless on occasion, an Elder of another Congregation, or any other Brother be
desired to assist, of whose Graces and Gifts the Congregation is willing to
taste 1 Cor. 14.3, 26. Act. 13.15
.

. 7. The Praises of the Church are conjoined with Supplications and Confessions
in public Prayers Phil. 4.6.
: But singularly expressed in an Ordinance appointed for that end and purpose,
viz. Singing of Psalms in the Church Mat. 26.30. Ps. 108.3.
, which Singing of Psalms, Hymns or Spiritual Songs Ephesians. 5.19 Col. 2.16. Romans
15.6.
(indicted by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures 2 Chr. 29, 30.
) is Christ's Institution, and ought to be practiced with one accord in and by
a Church, to the Praise and Glory of God, and to the Edification and
Instruction of the Church, and as the Case may require Isa. 12.1 and 42.10.
Psa. 95.12. Acts 16.25 Isa. 5.13.
; there being Psalms suitable to every Condition, some Didactical, some
Penitential, etc. all tending to the Laud and Praise of God: but care must be
had in suiting the Psalm, as to the Subject, Time, Occasion, or Congregation
that is to join together in that Ordinance, mixed or not: Some do scruple
Singing in a mixed Congregation, But it ought not to be scrupled:

1. Any more than the Churches Prayers, wherein also are Praises in such a
Congregation.

2. The Church ought not to forbear the praising God in Prayer or Singing
because of others that will join with them in Public Worship Ps. 108.3
.

3. They that are not to be excluded from Hearing the Word, and praying for a
Blessing upon it, ought not to be excluded from praising God for the Word of
his Grace; but Unbelievers are such as ought not, etc. Romans 10.17. 1 Cor.
14.25. Psa. 100.3. and 136.9.
for they may be converted by it for ought we know, if not, Why should any Man
be hindered from praising of God (which all Creatures do) in the Congregation.

4. Praying and Praising God are parts of Natural Worship Ps. 107.21, 22. Mat.
26.30
, though Espoused by Christ's Institution, and made a part of Church-Worship.

5. All good Angels and Creatures join in Consort with the Church in praising
God, yea and in giving Glory to the Lamb Rev. 5.12, 13, 14.
.

6. The Gentiles and all People are called upon to Laud and Praise God, and to
rejoice with his People Romans 15.9, 10, 11.
.

7. A Church is a Candlestick Re. 1.20.
, and a Pillar 1 Timothy 3.15.
, to hold forth unto the World matter of Prayer and Praises; therefore Men of
the World are not to be excluded from the Congregation.

8. God's common Mercies and Wonders wrought daily, call for such Praises Ps.
92.2. and 148.11, 12.
.

9. The Efficacy of the Gospel Converts the Unbeliever, and makes the Stranger
joyful in the House of Prayer: And should he be hindered from expressing his
joyfulness, by singing with the Congregation Isa. 56.7. and 24.16. and 35.10.
?

. 8. Contribution also is an Ordinance of Christ, founded in the Nature of a
Visible Body Politic, and instituted by Christ, whereby not only the actual
Members of a Church, but the Attenders on the Public Means of Grace there
dispensed, are obliged, according to ability, to cast into Christ's Treasury
Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 6.18. Mar. 12.43
(on the First day of the Week, and on other Solemn Days 1 Cor. 16 1, 2.
) for the Service of that Church in Maintenance of Ordinances 1 Cor. 9.9 1 Timothy
5.18.
, and Relief of poor Saints Romans 15.26, 27.
, and as far as may be, for the help and support of other Churches Ibid.
. Which Collections are to be made by the Deacons Acts 6.6.
, and brought to the Church Treasury under their Care and Trust, and to be
disposed of for the said Ends and Uses, as the Church shall direct, and to the
Church they are to give their account, and approve themselves to be faithful
Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 4.2.
.

. 9. It is not to be supposed that the Lord Jesus Christ would institute a
Worship in his Churches, and not appropriate some time unto the Public, and
Solemn Celebration thereof. Therefore we hold, That he has appointed a Weekly
Day to this End and Purpose; the seventh part of time being set apart by God
himself in the beginning, and it could be no other than the Seventh Day at
first, but afterward might be another. Likewise we hold, that the observation
of the Seventh Day is Jewish; for it was to them a shadow of things to come
Col. 2.16, 17.
, and the very reason of Institution to the Church of Israel alleged by Moses
shows the same Deuteronomy. 5.15.
; yea the very enjoined manner of Observation in forbearance of all necessary
labor by Man and Beast Exodus 20.
. And none can assert, That God requires such an Observation under the New
Testament. And lastly, Tho God gives a reason from Creation Rest Heb. 4.4, 5.
, yet Gods first hallowing it was before the Fall; and we find not that it was
observed by any of the Patriarchs before the Children of Israel came into the
Wilderness: Therefore, as the first Institution was upon account of Creation
Genesis 2.3.
, so the next was upon the account of Redemption Deu. 5.15
. Accordingly, Ex. 20.1
the Seventh Day was again instituted from their coming out of Egypt, a Type of
Christ's Redemption Lu. 1.68.
; We observe it in Remembrance of a true Redemption wrought for us 1 Pet. 1.18.
, by a Victory over Hell and Death in his Resurrection the third day, which was
the First Day of the Week 1 Cor. 15 3, 4. 1 The. 4.14 Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
, he lying in the Grave the whole Seventh Day, burying it with the whole Mosaic
Economy, the only Day wherein God could have no acceptable Worship in the
World, the Vail of the Temple Rent, and Christ in the Grave Mat. 27.51. Job
3.5, 6.
. The Reasons for Observation of the First Day of the Week (not as a Sabbath
Col. 2.16, 17.
) but the Lord's Day, are, 1. Then Christ finished Redemption, and Rose from
the Dead Mat. 28.1. Luke 24.1.
. 2. Then he appeared after his Resurrection to his Disciples assembled Joh.
20.19.
. 3. On this Day the Churches held their Solemn Assemblies for Preaching and
administering the Lords Supper, and Contributions Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.12.
. 4. On this Day John was in the Spirit, and it is called the Lord's Day Re.
1.10.
, because more peculiarly appropriated to his Service, as the Lord's Supper.

. 10. It is not in the Power of Churches to set apart any stated times Yearly
or Monthly to be observed; for that would be Superstition and Will Worship Gal.
4.10 Col. 16.17.
: But, Days of Fasting and Humiliation may be appointed by any Church of
Christ, according as weighty Reasons lead it thereunto Acts 14.23.
.

CHAP. XI. Of Ordinances of Special Communion.
Kinds of Ordinances of Special Communion: A Seal what it does; and signifies:
New Testament Seals but Two: What Baptism is: What the Lord's Supper is: What
is to be observed in its Administration.

. 1. HAVING showed what are Christ's Ordinances in a Visible Church of General
or more common Communion; we come in the next place to speak of Ordinances of
Special Communion, peculiar only to such as are Church Members; and these are
such Appointments of Christ as concern the Administration of the Seals, or such
as concern the Administration of the Keys.

. 2. A Seal of the Covenant under the New Testament is a visible and sensible
Ratification thereof, wherein Christ our High Priest does eminently show forth
unto us the glory of his Priestly Office, in making himself a Sacrifice for
Sin, bearing the Charge and Curse of Sin, satisfying God's Justice, reconciling
us to God, and procuring Eternal Salvation to us 1 Pet. 2.9. Heb. 9.26. Col.
1.21, 22. Heb. 9.12.
, who as such is the great Condition of the Covenant of Grace Isa. 42.6.
, i. e. of Abraham's Covenant To. 4.13. Gal. 3.17.
, whereby we have upon Profession, right to claim all Church Priviledges
Mystical and Visible, in the State of Grace, and that of Glory hereafter Gal.
3.9.28, 29.
. In all the Old Testament Seals, and in the New especially, Christ in the
Covenant of Grace is in a most lively manner represented, and showed forth in
the Church 1 Cor. 11 24, 25, 26. Col. 2.11, 12.
, as to Condition and Promises; he being not only the great Condition, but the
Yea and Amen of all the Promises 2 Cor. 1.20.
, which are therein Applied and Sealed at least Ministerially Genesis 17.7, 10.
Romans 4.11 12. Gal. 3.27.
.

. 3. The Seals of the New Testament are Two and no more, Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, which are the only Instituted Rites or Ceremonies in a Church that are
ordained by Christ to continue till he come Matt. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
. All Jewish Ceremonies are vanished as Shadows and abolished Heb. 8.5.13. 2
Cor. 3.14.
, as all Ceremonies attending the bestowing Miraculous Gifts are also ceased 1
Cor. 13.8.
, such as Imposition of Hands on well or sick, Unction, washing of Feet, this
being but a didactical Ceremony used by Christ to teach the Apostles Humility,
and not to Lord it over his Churches, and was never intended for a standing
Ordinance. And as none of these (which many are fond of, and even Idolize, some
one, and some another, and upon as good Grounds all, as any for each one) had
any Sanction for continuance, so their significancy ceasing, the Sign also
comes to naught.

. 4. Baptism is a Sign and Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, wherein Washing
with Water into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost Mat. 28.19.
, does represent and show forth, at least Ministerially, a Sinners washing from
his Sins in the Blood of Christ Rev. 1.6 Act 2.38.
, his New Birth and Renovation by the Spirit of Christ Titus 3.5
, and his Covenant Obligation to be the Lords Gal. 3.27, 28. eib. 3.9.26
. The Subjects of this Seal are all those who by Profession of Faith in Christ
ib. 3.9.26
, which is Abraham's Faith, are become Covenant-Members accordingly of a
Visible Church, and their immediate Infant Seed Act. 2.39
; they being blessed with faithful Abraham Gal. 3.7, 8, 14.
, and having all essential Church-Blessings come upon them: And therefore the
Blessing of Membership to the professing Body of Christ Romans 15.8, 9. chapter 4.11,
12
, and Gospel Church Privileges, as they belong to one or other respectively,
are Ministerially to be applied; of which Baptism is none of the least, being
the Ordinance of Christ, in which only a Believer can bring his Infant Seed to
Christ, and he cannot bring it to Christ out of an Ordinance; therefore it
being his Duty to bring it to Christ, it must be in this Ordinance, to be
blessed with Abraham's Blessing spiritually, as he and his Seed are
Ecclesiastically; the reason that Christ gives for his Command of bringing
Infants to him Matt. 19.14, 15. Mark 10.14, 16. Luke 18.16
is, That they are Church Members, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and it is
known that Christ means his visible Church in the days of the Gospel by the
Kingdom of Heaven; and he took them in his Arms, received them visibly; laid
his Hands upon them, which is more than for any Ministers to Baptize them; and
blessed them, And does Christ Bless with any Blessing besides the Blessing of
Abraham that comes on the Gentiles?

. 5. The Lord's Supper is a special Ordinance of Church Communion 1 Cor. 10.16.
, instituted and continued by Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 11 26.
, wherein by the Giving and Receiving the outward Elements of Bread and Wine
Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.23. Luke 22.19 1 Cor. 11.23.
, the Death, Satisfaction and Merits of Christ are in a lively manner showed
forth; and he who through Christ is a worthy Receiver, does spiritually and
really by Faith, partake of his Body and Blood, with all the high Benefits
thereof, and not Ministerially only, as he does who is only an outside
professed Member. It is called the Lord's Supper 1 Cor. 11 20.
, because it is of the Lord's Institution, and for this end, to show forth his
Death 1 Cor. 11 26.
, and because he first Celebrated it the Evening before his Death ib. v. 23.
.

. 6. This being instituted for so spiritual and solemn Ends and Purposes 1 Cor.
11 24, 25, 26, 27. Luke 22.19
, cannot be administered or attended upon for any other Purposes, such as to
qualify Men upon a secular account, without great Profanation thereof Mal.
1.11, 12. John 6.26, 27. Ex. 20.4, 7 Rev. 13.16, 17.
.

. 7. In the Administration of this Ordinance, these things according to the
Primitive Institution, seem necessary to be observed.

1. That it be administered to the whole Church met together 1 Cor. 11 20.
in one place, and not to particular Persons, or to the Church in distinct
parts, it being an Ordinance of Communion of a Body of Christ ib. 10.16
.

2. That it be not dispensed to Members that are not capable to discern the
Lord's Body, or to Examine themselves 1 Cor. 11 28, 29.
.

3. That each Element be distinctly blessed, and apart by it self, by calling
upon God in Christ for a Blessing 1 Cor. 11 24, 25.
.

4. That after Consecration, the Bread broken is to be delivered with the Words
of Distribution, directed to the whole Church Mat. 26.26, 27.
at once, and by them divided among themselves, and not carried up and down
from Party to Party, or from Seat to seat. After the pouring out the Wine and
blessing it, it ought to be dispensed with the words of distribution in like
manner to the whole Church Ibid.
, and not carried up and down as aforesaid, which practices came from the
Church of Rome, and not from Christ or his Apostles.

5. The Posture of Receiving is sitting Mat. 26.20.
, as Christ and his Disciples, not kneeling or standing, because its a Feast,
and signifies our eating and drinking Spiritually with joy and gladness, and
though Prayer accompany it, wherein may be Praying Gestures, as in other
Ordinances, yet Giving and Receiving here is a distinct Ordinance from Prayer.

6. The Pastor of the congregation, Mat. 26.26.
is to administer and not the Pastor of another, who has no administering Power
out of his own Congregation; neither has Christ ordained any Administrators
General to his Churches. For the Pastor also to take in a Partner in
Administration is Will Worship and Humane.

7. When the Elements are blessed by the Church, the People ought not to betake
themselves to their secret Prayers, as if the Table had not bin blessed
already; none does so at their ordinary Festivals.

. 8. Christ has not in either of these Seals precisely determined the quantity
of either Element to be made use of, neither what quantity of Bread and Wine
each should take; or how much Water should be used in Baptism; for our eating
and drinking in the Lord's Supper, is not to satisfy our natural Hunger and
Thirst 1 Cor. 11 21, 22.
; nor is the Washing with Water in Baptism, to put away the outward filth of
the flesh 1 Pet. 3.21.
. But our Savior having told us what is spiritually intended and signified, it
is sufficiently manifest, that so much of each Element in both Seals, as does
hold forth to us the thing signified, is enough, tho never so little; for
Christ has not brought his Churches in the New Testament under a Mosaic
Tutorship, so as to bind them up to such quantities and qualities of externals,
in manner as he did the Church of Old.

. 9. The Administration of the Seals belongs not to any but Teaching Elders,
being most appropriate to the Pastoral Office to feed the Flock in this
peculiar manner; for Christ when a Pastor on Earth administered it, and
therefore other Pastors whom he substitutes when ascended, ought to do it.
Hence no private Member may be occasionally called thereto by the Church; if
so, it renders Christ's Office needless and precarious. Nor no Pastor of
another Church may; for the Pastor to one Church is no Pastor to another; nay
he has no power to Vote, and therefore not so much as a private Brother to
Administer.

CHAP. XII. Of Admitting Church Members.
The Ends of the use of the Keys: What they are: How distinguished: The Key of
Knowledge: Of Government: How given to Peter: Elders for the due Management;
but primarily given to the Church: Women not to exert Ruling Power: The Church
with Elders uses the Keys Ministerially: Admittances ought to be with
Exactness; with the giving a reason of their Hope, and an account of their
Knowledge: Their Conversation to be enquired into: The Manner of Receiving in:
The Person received gives up his Children: He may not Desert: He ought to bring
his Children: Of Occasional Communion, and of receiving recommended or dismissed
Members.

. 1. HAVING spoken to the Seals of the New Covenant, we come to speak to the
other Ordinances of Special Communion, which concern the use of the Keys in all
matters of Church Government 1 Cor. 12, 28.
, they being Christ's, and committed by him to every Visible Congregation, to
be used according to his Rules and Directions in his Name 1 Cor. 5.4.
, and to his Glory, The great ends of which Dispensation of his Headship in
this kind, are the due increase of his Churches Isa. 9.7. Acts 2. ult.
, and their Peace Psa. 122.7. Heb. 7.2. Zach. 6.13. Joh. 20.21, 26. 1 Pet. 1.2.
and 5.14.
and Purity Rev. 2.1, 18. Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Isa. 5.2.
.

. 2. The Keys are the Power of Christ Isa. 22.22 Rev. 3.7.
which he has given to every particular Congregation to open and shut it self
by Mat. 16.19.
, and to do all things that belong thereunto in order unto the said ends, it
being Christ's House Heb. 3.6.
, holy Temple Ephesians. 2.21
, Garden Cant. 4.12.
, Vineyard Isa. 5.1.
, Walled in, Hedged and Enclosed.

. 3. The Keys of Christ are to be distinguished; they are his Keys of Hell and
Death; or his Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. of the Church: His Keys of
Hell and Death are the Power by Conquest which he has obtained over Sin,
Curse, Natural Death, and Satan himself Rev. 1.18. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. Mat.
28.20. Heb. 2.14.
. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 16.19.
are they that he manageth his Visible Churches by, and gives a power of
opening and shutting a Visible Church by. These Keys are that of Knowledge Luke
11.52.
, and that of Discipline Rev. 3.7.
.

. 4. The Key of Knowledge, is the Gospel Preached Lu. 11.52. Mat. 10.7. 2 Cor.
2 12 1 Cor. 16.9
, the Spirit of Christ working inwardly, to open the heart to receive it Acts
16.14.
; in this respect this seems to be one of the Keys which our Lord gave to
Peter, in that he had the Honor of turning the first Key of Conversion after
our Lord's Ascension, both to Jews Act. 2.41
and Gentiles Act. 10.34. and 11.8. Ephesians. 3, 4, 5, 6.
.

. 5. The other Key given unto Peter is of Government and Discipline Isa. 9.6.
, neither of which Keys were given unto him as to a single Person, or ruling
Head of the Visible Churches, neither that of Knowledge nor Government; but
unto the Church in him, tho unto him with the other Apostles, as the first
Managers thereof, their Names being put down in Christ's Charter granted to the
Churches Matt. 28 19.
, (as is usual in the Charters granted by Earthly Kings) yea a priority of time
seems to be given to Peter (as appears by the event) on both accounts, as to
the first Management; being the first Apostle that presided in Government Act.
1.15
, in taking in and excluding Church Members Act. 2.41. and chapter 5.1.
, as we see he was the first that opened (by his Doctrine) the Door unto Jews
and Gentiles, but in all this it appears, that he was but a Steward to Christ
and his Church; and that although the present management of them was in Peter
and the Apostles, yet it was the Church that was the subject of them Mat. 18.17.
.

. 6. Tho Christ has wisely provided for his Honor, and the well-being of his
Churches, in that he has set Elders in his Churches to manage the Keys in an
orderly and honourary manner 1 Cor. 12 28.
; yet he has committed the propriety of 'em (next to himself, and in his own
Name) unto the Church, whether Organized or Essential only, as to a spiritual
Body corporate, which he has endowed with this Privilege among others, of
having and keeping the Keys Romans 3.2 Acts 7.37, 38. Rev. 3.7.
; and it appears that the Church, as such, is the first subject of the Keys
under Christ, because 1. The End of them is to preserve the being of a Church,
as well as for its well-being, and therefore they must belong to it as soon as
the Church becomes essential 1 Cor. 5.7. and 12.28.
.

2. As soon as the Church becomes a Body Corporate in Christ, the whole Charter
for Privileges belongs to it, and therefore all that appertain to its
preservation, which cannot be without the power of the Keys 1 Cor. 7.17. and
12.26, 27.
.

3. Without the use of the Keys they cannot Organize themselves with Elders and
Deacons; for to let in any Person into Office must be by the use of them Acts
14.23.
.

4. A Church before it has Ministerial Officers, may admit Members, or reject
a Scandalous Member for its preservation, therefore has the use of the Keys;
for embodying into a Church does not so shut them up that none can either come
in to them, or be cast out, before they have chosen a Pastor Gal. 5.1. 2 Cor.
6.14, 15.
.

5. A Church that has Elders may be by Providence deprived of them; how can
they be re-supplied without the use of the Keys; especially if they call such
as are not of their Body? None can be an Officer in a Corporation, but he that
is incorporated first as a Member Acts 6.3. Romans 12.4.
.

6. In proceeding with an offending Member, the first degrees thereof are by
Members not in Ministerial Office Mat. 18.15.
.

7. Elders are but Stewards to Christ and his Church, for the due management of
the Keys they are entrusted with, and are accountable to Christ and his Church,
and are to use them with its consent in all Cases, not to make advantage by
them to Lord it over God's Heritage, by assuming an Arbitrary and Despotick
Power to themselves, exercising Dominion over the Church Members Faith, instead
of being helpers of their Joy 1 Pet. 5.3 2 Cor. 1.24 1 Cor. 4.1
.

8. Suppose an Elder (there being but one, Pastor or other) come to fall under
just cause of Censure, Who must use the Keys in deposing and censuring this
offending and incorrigible Elder, but the Body of the Church Col. 4.17 3 John 9.
?

. 7. By what has bin said, it clearly appears, the Keys of Government
primarily are placed in a Church as a Body Corporate; because the disposal of
the orderly Management of them to Officers, belongs to the Church under Christ,
and the use of them for their preservation, belongs to them before such
Ministerial Officers are Ordained by them; in that mean time, the power of the
Keys is exerted by the Church, by the hands of the Brethren; for tho each
Sister is a true Member of this Corporation, and accordingly, upon that ground
should Vote, yet Christ having made a particular Exception upon that account,
that Women may not speak or exercise Authority in the Church 1 Timothy 2.12. 1
Cor. 14.35.
, therefore whatever passes in the Church by the Majority of the Brethren is a
Church act, so that it be done in a Congregation, the Sisters present,
otherwise its no Church-Meeting 1 Cor. 14.23.
.

. 8. A Church Organized with Elders, uses the Keys Ministerially, exerting the
power of Christ committed to it in and by the Elders, going along with them in
an^ explicit consent to all things agreeable to the Order of the Gospel 1 Pet.
5.3
, which power is exercised in the admitting Persons into Church Fellowship, or
in debarring of Members from the Communion of the Church 3 John 10
, and in all matters that tend to the one or other.

. 9. They that are said to be coming into the Church, are either such as are
not actual Members to this Church, but Members of other Churches Romans 16.1
. Or else they are Non-Members to any Church 1 Cor. 5.12.
. And there are some Rules of Order to be observed before admitting, and some
in Admittance of such of each sort.

. 10. The Word of God requiring all exactness in Admitting Church Members,
least the Childrens Bread be cast to Dogs Mat. 7.6. and 15.26.
, and that the House of God be not made a Den of Thieves Mat. 21.13.
, and in order to the future Peace and Purity of the Church: The Elders, as
Stewards who ought to be found faithful 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
, when any one propounds him or her self to join in Fellowship, ought to make
impartial Enquiry into three things: 1. To ask the Reason of his Hope 1 Pet.
3.15.
. 2. What competency of knowledge in the Principal Doctrines of Faith and Order
1 Timothy 2 4, 5.
he has arrived at, so far at least, as to be fundamentally grounded therein,
to be able to discern the Lord's Body 1 Cor. 11 29.
. 3. Enquiry ought to be made whether his Conversation answer this Profession,
and adorn the Gospel Tit. 2.11 12, 13, 14.
.

. 11. A Person's giving a reason of his Faith and Hope, is his Declaring what
he has Experienced of the Grace of God upon his heart 1 Pet. 3.15. Psalm. 66.16.
, through the Means of Grace that he has sat under 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. Acts
2.41. and 26.17, 18.
, and the Operation of the Spirit John 16.8, 9.
; in the production of his Repentance unto Life, and Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ Heb. 6.1.
. which a true Believer is ready to give an account of 1 Pet. 3.15.
to any one that enquires of him seriously, especially to a Church of Christ,
which he applies himself unto, that is so highly concerned therein; for they
that are added to a Visible Church, ought to be such as are judged by their
Profession to be such as shall be saved Act 2. ult Romans 12.1 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.5
. the judgment of infallibility being peculiar to God Joh. 6.64. Deu. 29.29.
.

. 12. Without a Competency of Knowledge (for all have not the same degree) the
heart cannot be good Pro. 19.2
: therefore without some knowledge of God in his glorious Attributes; of the
Doctrine of the Trinity; the Person and Natures of Christ; the Nature of the
Law; of the Fall by Sin, and the Curse; Man's State by Nature in the Guilt and
Pollution of Sin, Original and Actual; and his miserable undone Estate thereby,
a Child of Wrath; The Nature of the Redemption wrought by Christ, in
Satisfaction to God's Justice; Reconciliation of Sinners to God, and Purchase
of Eternal Life for them; that our Sins were Imputed to Christ; and his
Righteousness alone to us unto Justification, received by Faith alone, etc.
Likewise, to know how these Mysteries of Life and Salvation are held forth to a
Believer in the Seals of the Covenant 1 Cor. 11.29.
. And the knowledge of these things is the more particularly to be enquired
after by the Elders of Churches, because many Professors build their Conversion
upon mere common Convictions, and only some general Notions of God and Christ,
when indeed they are very strangers unto, and ignorant of the Great Mysteries
of the Gospel and 15.34
. Yet such as these ought not to be discouraged, nor the smoking flax quenched
Isa. 42.3. Mat. 12.20
, but to be led on with gentle Instructions to a further knowledge of Divine
Truth Ephesians. 4.2.
, which if there be any beginnings of True Grace in the heart, they will with a
great and sincere spiritual Appetite receive, as newborn Babes 1 Pet. 2.2
; and the Church ought to be careful not to reject any that they judge have the
least degree of saving Grace wrought in them Romans 14.1
.

. 13. Such a Conversation is to be looked after as becomes the Gospel Phil.
1.27.
, which shows the Professors Faith by his works James 2 18.
, and blameless demeanor in the World, as the Grace of God that brings
Salvation teaches Titus 2.11, 12.
. The aforementioned Course is not often taken, and therefore there are so
many corrupt Members in Churches. Tho the exactest may be deceived 2 Timothy 3.5.
, yet the carelessness Eze. 34.7, 8, 10.
and carnal Minds of Churches, and their Elders ambition to increase their
Churches into great Numbers, for the external Pomp thereof, and for Wordly
Advantage, are the great prevailing causes of the Corruption and Apostasy of
Churches 1 Timothy 6, 5. 1 Pet. 5.2.
.

. 14. The Pastor or Elders thus receiving satisfaction, that the Person
offering himself, is a fit Stone for Christ's Building 1 Pet. 2.5
, he is in a Church-Meeting to be Propounded to the Church 1 Cor. 14 23.
, and a competent time allotted to the Church for converse with the said Person
Acts 9.26, 27.
, and enquiry after his Christian Deportment, that all the Members of the
Congregation may be satisfied in a Person whom they admit to so holy a
Communion with them; which time being expired, and nothing objected against the
said Person, the Elders bring him before the Church to give the Reasons of his
Hope, either by Word of Mouth or by Writing (if bashfulness hinder him or her
from speaking Romans 14.16, 19, 20. and 15.1, 2.
) which the Elder or Pastor reads; and if any Brother desire any further
Question should be asked, it ought not to be denied. The Person owning the
Declaration read, and no Objection made, the Elder puts the Question, Whether
the Church are satisfied in the Party propounded, and do consent to his
Admission Phil. 2.2.
? desiring them to answer in the Affirmative by their Suffrage in lifting up
their Hands; and then if any be otherwise minded, to speak or show their
disagreement by the same Sign: Which agreed, the Pastor or Elder does ask the
Party thus approved, Whether he does in the strength of Christ, yield professed
subjection to the Gospel 2 Cor. 9.14. Act 11.23.
, and promise to walk with that Church in the Communion of the Faith, and Order
thereof Col. 2.5.
, giving up himself and his Seed to the Lord and the Congregation To. 12.1. 2
Cor. 8.5.
, according to the Tenor of Abraham' s Covenant Romans 15.7, 8, 9.
, or words of a foederal obligation to Christ and the Church, to the same
purpose? Which he promises solemnly to do by the Help of God: Whereupon the
Elder does in the Name of Christ, receive him into Church Fellowship, promising
on the behalf of the Church and himself, To watch over him in the Lord Heb.
13.17.
, and discharge toward him those incumbent Duties which may promote his
edification in the ways of God 2 Cor. 1.24, and chapter 10.8 8.
. Or Words to that purpose.

. 15. A Person thus joined to a Congregation, is joined to and become a Member
of a spiritual Corporation 1 Cor. 12 27. Isa. 56.3. Acts 5.36. Romans 12.5.
, to the whole Body, not to the Pastor or Elder only (as some ignorant People
think, and therefore run away when the Pastor or Elder disgusts them, or dies)
but are by Covenant united to the Church, and are not Discharged while that
lasts, without the Church's leave, tho all the Officers die. Moreover, he is
now obliged by his Covenant Relation, to attend ordinarily upon the Ministry
and Ordinances administered in that Church Act 2.42 Heb. 10.25
, and seek the Prosperity thereof; for if a joined Member to one Church
ordinarily attend the Ministry of another, upon pretense of better Edification,
or upon any other pretense. He 1. Hereby condemns his own Choice Gal. 2.18
. 2. He cannot expect better Edification where God has not placed him 1 Cor.
7.24. Psalm. 92.13
. 3. If he cannot Edify at Home, he should ask his Dismission, and not feed
abroad every day. 4. There is ordinarily some Corruption lies under that Plea.
5. It is a living in continual breach of a solemn Covenant. 6. It is quite
contrary to the Primitive Practices. 7. It destroys the end of Churches, which
is, that Brethren should walk together in Unity, Unanimity and Fellowship Ps.
133.1
. 8. It discourageth and breaks the hearts of faithful Pastors and Elders. 9.
It is a Practice that Christ will not bless, because it so directly strikes at
his Glory in his Churches. 10. The Apostle makes such Deserters to be in the
Highway to Apostasy Heb. 10.25, 26.
. 11. God is most glorified in every ones keeping his own Vineyard, and not
others.

. 16. As a Churchmember has covenanted to walk in Communion of all Ordinances
with hat Congregation to which he is joined, and has given up his Children
with himself to the Lord; so he is obliged to perform his Promise Jos. 24.15.
, in bringing his Infant Seed to Christ, in the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith Romans 4.11. Mark 10.13.
, and in after educating and bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord Ephesians. 6.4. Josh. 4.6.22.
, as to Domestic Instruction. And lastly, to bring them to the Means of Grace
in the Church where he had given up himself and them to the Lord at his
Admission Ps. 147.13 and 115.13, 14. and 128.1, 3, 5, 6.
.

. 17. As they that be non-Members are admitted Members of a Visible Church; so
they that are Members of one Congregation are sometimes received to the
Communion of another, either occasionally and transiently, by virtue of
Communion of Churches, for a time, by Recommendation; or they are received into
full Communion, and become actual Members, which is by Dismission To. 16.1. 2
Cor. 3.1.
. But the Pastor may not admit a Member of another Church to occasional
Communion at the Lord's Supper, without acquainting the Church therewith, and
having their consent.

. 18. A Church is not bound to admit all to their Communion that claim, by
virtue of Membership to another Church; for if any one of the Congregation
excepts against such an one that offers himself, they ought first to hear the
Grounds of Exception against the Party himself, or against the Church from
whence he came, notwithstanding any Commendation that he brings 1 Cor. 10 31. 2
Cor. 6.3
: And if any one brings a Dismission without a Commendation, the thing it self
carries in it grounds of suspicion, that he is an offending Brother, and
therefore not suddenly to be admitted, till further Enquiry be made.

. 19. If the Churchmember offering himself, was of a late Church now scattered
and dissolved, such an one well known, may be admitted to occasional Communion,
but cannot be dismissed to them; therefore if he desire to be admitted into
full Communion, he must be admitted as a Non-Member.

. 20. Sometimes it is so, that a Church denies to give a Dismission when asked;
if so, the Church to which he desires to be dismissed (his complaint being made
to it) ought to send Messengers to that Church, desiring satisfactory reasons
for the said Refusal; and if it plainly appear that it be from a perverse
Spirit, and no just Reason given, but that the said Brother be detained to his
manifest wrong and injury, and Christ having not made Churches Prisons, such an
one may be received as a Non-Member 2 Cor. 1.24.
.

. 21. A Churchmember dismissed with Commendation, against whom there is no
particular exception, nor against the Church from whence he is sent, has his
Dismission read before the Church, and is received by Suffrage, according to
the tenor of the Covenant he made with the other Church from whence he came;
and if any desire that he should declare the Reason of his Hope, he should be
ready to do it 1 Pet. 3.15.
.

CHAP. XIII. Of Church Members Departure from Communion.
A distinct Use of the Keys belongs to every Church: A Member may not depart at
his own pleasure: A Members Translation from Church to Church, by
Recommendation and Dismission: A Church may deny Dismission in some Cases: What
is to be done when unreasonably denied: The Keys in tendency to Exclusion:
Excommunication direct or indirect: Direct what: Reasons for Direct ought to be
great: When matter of Fact is notorious and scandalous how: When ^ffences a^^
private, how: Admonition what: What degrees of it: Of Absolution:
Excommunication indirect: Of Suspension.

. 1. AS the Keys are used in admitting Persons to Communion, so in their
departure from the Communion of a particular Church. And it is either in
matters relating to the translating a Member from one Church to another, or in
such matters as tend to his Exclusion from all Church Communion. This and the
former use of the Keys necessarily depend on the Nature of a particular
Congregation: For if there be but one Catholic Visible Church, and all other
Congregations but so many parts; it cannot ly in the power of any part to make
one a Member or no Member of the whole; the whole of any Corporation being not
at the disposition of any minor part: But here every particular Church being a
whole House Acts 15.22. 1 Cor. 14, 23. To. 16.23.
, a distinct Body Politic; there can be no regular Admission of Members, or
departure of any from Communion, no not from one Church to another, without a
Church act both of the one and the other, in the use of the Keys.

. 2. A Member therefore of a Visible Church may not at his own pleasure depart
from the Communion of the Church to which he is joined, to non-Communion with
any Church, nor to the Communion of another Church, without the leave of that
Church whereof he is a Member Gal. 5.13 1 Pet. 2.16
: For 1. A Church is a Corporation Privileged with Rules of Admittance and
Demittance, which are to be observed Romans 12.4, 5.
. 2. Such Departure is rude and dishonorable to any stated Society 1 Cor. 15
33. and 14.40. Phi. 2.3
. 3. If Members have this liberty, Why not Ministerial Officers also John 10
10, 17.
? 4. Such Departure is fatal and destructive to a Church; for the same liberty
one may take, all may take ib. 6.67.
. 5. It Is Covenant breaking; for every Church Member Covenants to the contrary
Isa. 44.5.
. 6. It tends to destroy totally the Relation between the Elders and the People
Mat. 9.36
. 7. It Is a Member's Usurpation of, and stealing the Keys Amos 6.13. 2 Sa. 19.3
. 8. It Is Schism in the highest degree. 9. There is as much reason for coming
in at pleasure, as going out at pleasure Rev. 3.7. Mat. 7.12.
, 10. 1 Cor. 11 18. 1 Cor. 12.25.
It Is a High Contempt of Christ and his Government Jude 19.
. 11. It Is a grieving-offence to some, and a sinning-Offence unto others Romans
16 17.
. 12. It breaks the staff of Beauty, and the staff of Bonds Zach. 11.10, 14.
. 13. It tends to Anarchy: And what Communion has Christ with Belial Mal. 1.6
1 These. 4.8. Luke 10.16 2 Cor. 6.16
? 14. It destroys what a Man has formerly built Ga. 2.18
. 15 It exposes the Churches and ways of Christ to the highest Scorn and
Contempt 2 Pet. 2.2
. 16. Such a Deserter is a felo de se, and does Disfranchise and Excommunicate
himself Hos. 13.9
.

. 3. The Translation of a Member of a Church is, when he goes from the
Communion of one Church to the Communion of another occasionally, or in order
to abide. He goes Occasionally only, when he obtains a Recommendation, being a
Testimonial under the hand of the Pastor or other Elders, that he is a Member
of such a Church, walks as becomes the Gospel, and is not under any Censure or
Dealing for any Offense. This falls short of a dismission; for 1. It needs not
any Vote of the Church, it being a Testimonial. 2. It needs not be directed to
any particular Church, but to all it may concern. 3. There Is no transferring of
Church Membership. 4. Such takes place only when a Churchmember is called for
a Season only by Providence to communicate with another Church. 5. In Case
there be no Elders in the Church, a Testimonial under the Hands of some of the
Brethren may be sufficient Acts 18.27. 2 Cor. 3.1
.

. 4. A Dismission, or Letter of Dismission is that which is wrote from one
Church to another, by the hand of the Elders (or in case there is none, by some
Brethren) by the consent, and in the Name of the Church; wherein the Member
asking the said Dismission and obtaining it, is discharged from his original
Relation to that Church, and is transferred to the constant Communion, Watch
and Care of the other Church to which he is dismissed Romans 16.1, 2.
. And in such a Dismission these things are to be observed from the Nature of
the thing it self. 1. That the said Brother dismissed be not under the Censure
or Dealing of the Church dismissing him. 2. That the Letter of Dismission may
be either with or without Commendation, as the Case may require, or the
carriage of the said Member has bin, tho he has not bin under the Dealing of
the Church for any censurable action: Many a good Man proving an ill
Churchmember (as such an one may be an ill Husband) not carrying himself
orderly and duly in his Relation. 3. That a Dismission be granted, either upon
good Reason alleged by him, or upon his peremptory insisting upon it, for the
Peace of the Church. 4. A Churchmember is not to be dismissed at large, to
join to what Church he pleases; for 1. This is to dismiss him to himself, and
not to a Church, the Church to which he is dismissed being not specified. 2. To
discharge him from the Watch and Care of one Church, and not to transfer him to
the Communion of another, is the putting him out of all Church Communion, and
therefore an interpretative Excommunication 1 Cor. 5.13.
. 3. A Church may not dismiss a Member to them that it has no Church Communion
with, and therefore not to the wide World Joh. 15.19. and 17.21. 2 Cor. 6.14,
15.
. 4. As a Church is to watch over a Brother while he walks with it, so their
Watch and Care ought to be extended to him when he departs, to see him lodged
in safe hands He. 13.17
. 5. To dismiss a Brother to his own pleasure, or to the wide World, is to
expose him to Temptation; and accordingly many so dismissed have cast off all
Church-Watch, and joined to none at all To. 14.13
. 6. No other Church can duly receive a Brother so dismissed, but as a
Non-Member to any Church 1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
. 7. It argues no small disregard to the Order of the Gospel, to grant such a
Dismission, and likewise it becomes a great Reproach to the Church and Elders
Heb. 8.5, 6. and 3.3.
.

. 5. A Church may in some Cases deny a Dismission asked. As 1. When the said
Brother is under Church Dealing. 2. When he desires only a Dismission at large
to the World. 3. When he asks a Dismission to a False or Heretical Church: But
if he ask a Dismission to a Church of the same Order, and give no satisfactory
reason for it, and yet remains Peremptory in such Demand, the Church ought not
to refuse the granting of it; for so to do, is 1. To keep a Man forcibly, and
to make the Church a Prison 2 Cor. 1.24.
. 2. It is to Lord it over God's Heritage 1 Pet. 5.3
. 3. It is to lay a Stumbling Block in his way, and to tempt him to rend
himself off schismatically from the Church To. 14.13
. 4. It Is to destroy his Edification, for he cannot edify by Means he is
forceably kept under Ephesians. 4.16 Romans 15.2.
. 5. It Is contrary to Christ's Golden Rule Mat. 7.12
. 6. It may prove dangerous to the whole Church, proving a Root of bitterness
that may infect many Heb. 12.15.
.

. 6. Some Churches, or pretended at least, that walk by their own Wills rather
than by any of Christ's Rules, will never grant a Dismission regularly to any.
In such Cases a Regular Church is necessitated to take such Discharges of
Members as an Irregular Church will give. And if upon the use of all due means
they will grant none, the Churchmember so refused may join himself upon the
terms of a non-Member, and so be admitted by the more Regular Church.

. 7. The management of the Keys in such Cases as have a tendency to exclusion
from all Church Communion, are such as look that way by reason of the falls and
offenses of Church Members; and so comprehend all due means that are to be used
for the Recovery of such as are fallen Gal. 6.1.
, and that are to be taken in case of incorrigibleness.

. 8. Excommunication is by the use of the Keys in a Judicial Proceeding of the
Church in the Name of Christ, whereby a Person is excluded and cast out of
Communion in all the Special Ordinances thereof John 9. 22, 34. and 12.42. 1
Cor. 5.1.
.

. 9. Excommunication may be considered as direct, or more indirect. Direct is
the sentence of the Church in the Name of Christ, for the casting out of an
impenitent or notorious Sinner from Communion of the Church Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor.
5.4.
; which is always to be understood of the Special Ordinances, for Publicans and
Sinners are not excluded from the Ordinances of general Communion, such as
Preaching and Praying; and Excommunication puts a Person but into the condition
of Publicans and Sinners in respect of Ordinances.

. 10. A Church ought not upon every slight occasion to proceed unto
Excommunication of a Brother, but upon the account of Matters of great weight,
wherein the Honor of Christ, the Purity of Ordinances, and the Soul of the
Offender are concerned; and such offenses do either call for immediate
proceeding to this Sentence, or for a more gradual and mediate proceeding
thereto Jude 22, 23.
.

. 11. When the matter of fact is most notorious and scandalous, past all
Dispute and publicly known 1 Timothy 1.20. and 5.24. 1 Cor. 5.4.
, then the Church is called immediately to proceed unto Censure
(notwithstanding any present signs of Conviction and Remorse) for the necessary
Vindication of the Glory of God, the Church, and their Holy Profession, and to
manifest their just indignation against such wickedness 2 Cor. 7.11.
. So as it were to snatch the Sinner as a firebrand out of the fire, waiting
for a wellgrounded and tried evidence of his unfeigned Repentance under the
Censure; the first and great End whereof is the Sinners Salvation, not his
Destruction 2 Cor. 2.6 7, 8. 2 Cor. 10.8. 1 Cor. 5.5
.

. 12. In case of Sins not so notorious, and more privately committed, the
Churches proceeding must be more gradual, by all endeavors in the spirit of
meekness, to restore such an one to Repentance Matt. 18 15, 16, 17
, which being obtained, there is no occasion for further proceeding as to
Censure.

. 13. And here Admonition is of great use, which is an holy, tender and wise
Endeavor to convince the offending Party of matter of fact, and of the sin of
it, with the aggravating circumstances attending, as also to lead him to his
Duty thereupon, charging it upon his Conscience in the sight of God, with due
application of the Word of God which concerns his condition. And this belongs
not to the Elders, in the first and second degrees of proceeding in this Case;
but to all private Members in their places, as matters may concern them, and
are known unto them more or less 1 These. 5.12. Romans 15.14 2 These. 5.14. Gal.
6.1. 2 Timothy 9.25 Heb. 12.15
.

. 14. There are three degrees of Admonition Matt. 18
, first by a single Brother or Sister that is first acquainted with the Sin
committed. The second is upon the non-Repentance of the offending Party;
whereupon the first Admonisher takes to him one or two more, and admonishes
the offender the second time, which Admonition taking no effect, the Church is
to be acquainted with the offense: And the Church by the Elders gives a third
Admonition, which if the Sinner receives not, but continues impenitent, the
Church proceeds to Censure Ibid. v. 15, 16, 17.
, unless the Church see reason to wait longer. And it follows from hence.

1. That every Church Member tho of private capacity only, has somewhat to do
in his place, as well as the Elders Heb. 12.15.
.

2. That in case of private offenses, it is preposterous to publish them, or
acquaint the Elders therewith, before the two lower degrees of Admonition are
duly proceeded in, and not heard by the Offender.

3. That when Matters come to the Elders Ears, all private proceedings cease,
and all things are to be laid before the Church.

4. When matters come before the Church, the Offender rejecting the first and
second Public Admonition at most, is to be judged incorrigible Titus 3.10, 11.
.

. 15. This great Censure is to be proceeded to in this manner; the Question is
put by an Elder, Whether the Church adjudge the person offending (all due means
having bin used according to the Rules of Christ) to be guilty of matter of
fact as charged, and remain incorrigible? Which being answered in the
Affirmative, the Judgment is fallen into the Pastor's or Elder's hand, as after
the Verdict of a Jury, into the hands of the Judge; and accordingly he goes on
to pass Sentence, as the Duty of his place requires. And first with much
Solemnity, after he has laid open the Sin, with several aggravations, he shows
likewise the Awful Nature of this great Censure, and the main End thereof, for
the Salvation, and not the Destruction of the Sinner, and accordingly calls
upon God for his gracious Presence and Blessing upon this Sacred Ordinance,
that the great end thereof may be obtained, still expressing the deep sense the
Church has of the Fall of this Brother, with great Humiliation of the Church,
with remorse for the Sin thus committed and persisted in.

Lastly, In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ before the Congregation (whether
the offending Brother be present or withdrawn) the Elder cuts off and secludes
such an one (by Name) from the Union and Communion of the Church, declaring the
said Exclusion carries in it the sense of our Savior, See Mat. 18.17, etc. 1
Cor. 5.4, 5, 6. 2 These. 3.14. 1 Timothy 1.10.
in saying He shall be as an Heathen Man and a Publican, and the full sense of
the Apostle's Charge to the Corinthians, to deliver up such an one to Satan,
etc. Which is no more than the putting him out of Communion of the Church the
Kingdom of Heaven, into the World the Kingdom of Satan, for the humbling and
breaking of him in the sight and sense of his sins, which is all that is meant
by the destruction of the flesh.

. 16 A Member thus judicially cast out, may through the Grace of God blessing
this Ordinance, be brought to a great sight of his Sin and remorse for it, with
great longing desires to return to the Communion of the Church again. In this
Case, Christ's Keys are to be used to open the Door, and receive the excluded
Party into the Church again: For after a full proof of the truth of the
Sinner's Repentance, he is brought by the Elders to make his Public and Solemn
Manifestation of his deep Remorse, etc. Which acknowledgment being received by
the Church, with satisfaction and tender compassion toward him, he is by an
Elder absolved from the aforesaid Censure, See Mat. 16.19. and 18.18.
and readmitted into full Communion, with the great joy of the Congregation,
and Expressions of thankfulness unto God, Thus he that was bound is now loosed.

. 17. Besides this direct way of proceeding against an offending Member, there
is another much of the like nature, which we call indirect, because the Church
puts not the Party out of its Communion before the Party has secluded himself,
and not by any regular way; but indirectly and contrary to all Rules of Order:
For it is when a Churchmember, by reason of some offense taken at the Church,
or some Member thereof not discharging his own Duty, withdraws himself, and
separates from the Communion of the Church. A Person having thus Excommunicated
himself, as it were, the Church ought to consider what is their Duty, and
though a particular Member (or more) has usurped to himself the power of the
Keys, See Romans 16.17. 2 These. 3.6
the Church ought not to acquiesce therein; but maintain that Power which
Christ has committed to it; and tho it cannot hinder the inordinateness of a
Brother's unruly Passions, and ungovernable Temper, when God leaves him to it,
but that he will run away from the Church, rend himself off, breaking all Order
and Covenant Obligations, in opposition to all fraternal endeavors to stay him
in the place that Christ has set him in; the Church is bound to show and
assert the power of Christ which he has entrusted it with, and judicially shut
the Door and turn the Key upon so sinful and disorderly a Departer from them,
declaring that he having sinfully departed from the Communion of that
Congregation, he is no longer under its Care and Watch, and is not to return to
the Communion of the Church as before, till he has given satisfaction to the
Church.

. 18. Some speak much of and practice a Censure of Suspension, when an
offending Brother is forbid by the Church to come to its Communion in the
Lord's Supper, till it appear whether he be guilty or no of the Sin charged on
him.

Our Lord Jesus Christ has given no such Rule to Churches to walk by: For till
a Brother is fully Convict before the Church, the Church has no power to
deprive him of any Church Priviledges that belong to him by reason of his
Membership, and while the Church is in the way of its Duty, it is not guilty of
the Sin of a particular Member. Hence Brethren sin greatly in withdrawing from
a Church's Communion, because a Brother (or more) lies under the charge of
some Sin which they have not yet convinced him of before the Church, either for
the matter or Nature of the thing; till both which is done in the Judgment of
the Church, he is not Convict, nor can be excluded from Ordinances; but being
Convict and incorrigible, he is fully ripe for the Censure of Excommunication,
and there is no room for Suspension; therefore Suspension before Conviction is
unjust, and Suspension after is needless, and comes short of Christ's
Institution. But if to gratify some (through weakness startled at the presence
of a suspected, un-convict Person at the Lord's Supper, who is under the
Church's dealing in order to Conviction) the suspected Brother will forbear
Communion, it is to be looked on as an act of his own, but no Censure of the
Church.

CHAP. XIV. Of Communion of Churches.
That there is Communion between Churches: Some things incommunicable in
Churches: Some communicable, and what: Wherein Communion of Churches consists:
In Cases of Difficulties and Differences, what is to be done.

. 1. VIsible Communion is of Members in particular in a Visible Church, a Body
Politic or Corporate, which we have spoken unto. It remains that something be
spoken of the Communion of those Bodies, viz. Churches, between whom there is a
Visible Communion. And it is such a common participation of visible Privileges
of the Means of Grace in the instituted Ordinances of Christ, and a mutual
Communication of benefits, as occasion may serve, as is between coordinate
Bodies Politic, without infringement of their particular and appropriate
Privileges limited to, and bounded within themselves only.

. 2. The Privileges of a particular Church are to be considered in Communion
of Churches, as incommunicable, and as communicable. They that are
incommunicable are such as one Church cannot hand over to, or communicate to
another, without breaking the Charter, and overthrowing their own Constitution;
and they are such as these,

1. A Church chooses its own Elders and Deacons, but cannot choose either for
another Church.

2. Such Ministerial Officers being chosen, the relation stands firm between
them in the Church which chose them, and they are not Elders or Deacons to
another Church; the Pastor and Deacon to the Church at Coloss are not Pastor
and Deacon to the Church of Ephesus.

3. The doing of any Act which is inseparably distinguishing to that Office
Relation in the execution thereof, cannot be communicated or carried from
Church to Church. As for Example, the Administration of Seals, or use of the
Keys are such acts; therefore a Minister to one Church cannot dispense them in
another, because they are performed by virtue of his Office, that is limited to
one Church; nor can he transfer his relation, or the proper Adjuncts thereof.

4. There is also a peculiar Corporation-Relation and Privilege that a Brother
has in the Church of which he is a Member, and can have neither in any other,
where he is not an actual Member: as Membership in stated Fellowship under the
Watch and Government of the said Church; this he has no where else: Likewise,
he can Vote and give his Suffrage in any Church acts, which he cannot do
elsewhere. Wherefore one Church cannot have Communion with another in choosing
or ordaining Elders or Deacons, any further than to look on and be
Eyewitnesses of what they do; nor in admitting or casting out of Members.

5. There can be no Communion by way of mixing or conjoining powers (as there
cannot be of transferring;) any more than the Corporation of Bristol and
Gloucester can mix and conjoin their Juridical Power.

. 3. But there are some things wherein Communion of Churches according to the
Nature of them does consist; as in Natural Bodies there are things and actions
wherein they can communicate to each other, so far as is consistent with their
Nature to commix or conjoin; but there are some things wherein its impossible
they should, as in Sensation, or in the use of the Senses, we may hear, see,
taste, etc. with one another, but cannot transfer our Hearing, Tasting,
Smelling or Seeing to one another. So in Bodies Politic, there are some things
we can enjoy or participate of together, and can communicate to each other; but
there are others that we cannot. So it is in the Communion of Churches.

1. We may benefit by each others Gifts and Graces, the exercise whereof are
separable from any particular Relation that any one has to a Church. Such
things belong to general Communion, as to Expound, Preach and Pray, etc. These
the Pastor of one Congregation may exercise in another, without any
consideration of his Pastoral Relation, only as one that is Gifted for such
Services to common advantage.

2. There is Communion in counsel and advice; and such there was between the
Church of Jerusalem and that at Antioch Acts 15.
.

3. There is Communion between Churches in giving and in receiving Phil. 4.15.
.

4. There is Communion in respect of Members, so as one may recommend or
dismiss Members to another, but this cannot be in Officers; one Church cannot
dismiss an Elder or Deacon, as such, to another. Whatever Office a Man bears in
a Church (it is so in all Civil Corporations) he cannot be dismissed with his
Office, but only as to his Membership. The Mayor of Gloucester may be
transferred to Bristol, and taken in a common Member, but cannot be transferred
as Mayor to the Mayoralty of Bristol, no not for one Sessions, Day or Hour.

5. They may communicate with each other as to fraternal Entertainments in
spiritual Feasts, so far as to give each other the right hand of Fellowship, as
to the Members of true Churches of Christ; and hence the Members of one Church,
as occasion is, do partake in Ordinances with another, so far as
Office-Relation is not concerned. So the Member of one Congregation partakes in
the Lord's Supper with another; or brings his Child to be there baptized where
the Pastor is administering in his proper Place and Relation. But the Pastor
cannot come and administer either Seal in a Congregation to which he has no
Pastoral Relation, nor can be owned in any Pastoral act there. The Pastor
himself may receive in a Neighboring Church, as a Brother of another
Congregation, but not as a Pastor; much less can he administer there as a
Pastor. It Is one thing to communicate as a private Member, and another thing to
dispense as a Ministerial Officer. A Member of the Corporation of one City, yea
the Mayor himself, may be received with much welcome as an approved Member of a
Neighboring Corporation at Festival Entertainments, but must not sit on the
Bench there to do any act of Office, out of his Place, and out of his Power,
whether the Mayor or chief Magistrate be alive or dead. So whether the Pastor
of a Church be alive or dead, the Pastor to another Church has nothing to do
there as a Pastor.

. 4. In Cases of Difficulties and Differences arising in Churches, many
Churches holding Communion together, may by their Elders and Messengers meet
together to consult and advise about the said Matters, and report to the
respective Churches. Howbeit these Assemblies, as such, are not trusted with
any coercive Power or Jurisdiction over the Churches, to impose their
determinations on them or their Officers. Besides these occasional Assemblies
and Councils, there are not instituted by Christ any stated Synods in a fixed
Combination of Churches or Officers in lesser or greater Assemblies; nor are
there any Synods appointed by Christ by way of Subordination to one another.

CHAP. XV. Of Maintenance of Ministers.
Christ appointed the Support of Ordinances and Ministry: That Ministers are to
be maintained, proved from Christ's Mission of the Disciples; And by the
Doctrine of the Apostle Paul.

. 1. CHRIST Jesus in his infinite Wisdom having instituted Churches, and
external Ministers and Ordinances in those Churches, has also appointed such
outward ways and means for the support thereof, as is necessarily conducible to
his Honor and Interest in his established Worship in the World; and therefore
has ordained Churches should minister of their Temporals to the upholding and
maintaining of Spirituals, both Ordinances and Ministry.

. 2. The Subject which we shall chiefly speak to now with much brevity is, To
prove that those Ministers who labor in the Word and Doctrine ought to be
maintained in a competent manner by the Churches or People that partake of
their labors, so far at least as they are able. And it appears:

. 3.1. In that Christ when he Ordained and sent forth his first Preachers of
the Gospel, charge them not to go forth at their own Charges, both the
Seventy Luke 10.3, 4, 5.
, and the Twelve Mat. 10.10. Luke 9.1, 3, 4.
, to make no Provision for themselves, either Food, Raiment or Money, but into
whatever House they went, there to stay, Eating Drinking and Lodging; and if
they were not welcome and freely entertained, they were to shake off the dust
of their feet against them in detestation of them; and he gives them likewise
to understand, that he sent them not about as Common Beggars, but that there
was Moral Justice in it that they should be maintained by the People to whom
they Preached, for the Workman is worthy of his Meat Mat. 10.10.
; nay, he tells them how dangerous it shall be to those that refuse them to
save their Charges, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom, etc. Ibid. v. 14, 15.
.

. 4.2. The Apostle Paul insists much upon it as a Duty, that he saw the
Churches were backward enough to in his day, and would be more afterward. For

He Argues from the Law of Nature and common Justice, Thou shall not muzzle the
Ox, etc 1 Timothy 5.18.
. It Is an unnatural thing to starve the laboring Ox, and not suffer him to
take now and then a Mouthful of the Corn he treads out: Again, he argues from
common Justice: The Day Labourer by the Rules of Commutative Justice, is to
have his Hire: Again, he argues from the less to the greater, Does God take
care for the poor dumb Oxen 1 Cor. 9.9.
, and does he not take care for his laboring Ministers? And he tells us this
was the Moral sense of Moses his Law, not to muzzle the Ox, etc Deuteronomy. 25.4. 1
Cor. 9, 10.
. Again, he argues from the reasonable expectation of all laborers in worldly
Affairs; he instanceth in the Soldier, that goes not a Warfare at his own
Charges; The Planter of a Vineyard expects Fruit thereof; The Shepherd that
feeds the Flock expects to eat of the Milk; and the Plowman and Thresher 1 Cor.
9.7, 10.
. If all these reasonably expect outward subsistence from their labors, Why
should not he that labors in the Word and Doctrine? Again, the Apostle argues
by way of comparison of Temporal and Spiritual things together, showing that
spiritual things are much more worth than carnal; And hence says, If we sow to
you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things 1 Cor.
9.11. Romans 15.27
? Again, he removes an Objection that they would be apt to make from his own
Example, and says, That although he took nothing of them for some special
reasons, yet he assured them that he had power to do it as well as others 1
Cor. 9.4, 5.
, implying that other Apostles did take Maintenance. He Argues also from the
practice under the Law by God's Appointment, That they which did minister about
Holy Things, lived on the Temple and Altar, and that God has not taken less
care of his Ministers about Holy Things in the days of the Gospel, but has
made Maintenance of Ministers an Ordinance; He has Ordained, That they that
Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel Ibid. v. 13, 14.
.

You will say, Where did Christ Ordain it? It is enough if we be told so by an
Inspired Man, but it is easy to see that he Ordained so at his first Mission
of Gospel-Preachers, the Twelve and the Seventy. Obj. Paul took nothing of the
Corinthians. Ans. He tells us why, Upon the account of the Corinthians and
False Teachers, That he would not be cut off from his Triumph upon this
account, to stop their Mouths; but yet he says he robbed other Churches, ( i.
e. he took more of them than otherwise he would have done, even what he should
have had of the Corinthians) taking Wages of them to do the Corinthians service
2 Cor. 11.8.
.

. 5. It may be Enquired, In what Proportion the Maintenance of a Minister ought
to be? The Apostle calls it Wages, and therefore it is the sense of our Savior
and the Apostle too, That it should be a comfortable Provision for themselves
and Families, according to that Way and Degree of Living which the generality
of sober People have to whom they Preach, the Apostle telling us, Let him that
is taught in the Word communicate to him that teaches in all good things Gal.
6.6.
.

Obj. But it may be said, How much of all good things? I will give little
enough.

Ans. The Apostle in the context says enough to stop Men's Mouths here Ibid. v,
4.
, Let every Man prove his own Work, etc. immediately after the Text mentioned
Ib. v. 7.8.
. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, etc.

Object. You will say, It seems to be a low and Mean Thing for a Preacher of
the Gospel to take Maintenance.

Ans. Is any Ordinance of Christ low and Mean? Does he Ordain Low and Mean
Things? And why did Christ himself take Maintenance, rather than provide for
himself Miraculously Luke 8.3
? Much more might be said; but this will be enough to any one that has any
deference for the Authority of the Scriptures.

FINIS.

