THE RETRACTATION OF Mr. Charles Chancy formerly Minister of Ware in
HARFORDSHIRE.

Wherein is proved the unlawfulness and danger of Railing in Altars or
Communion Tables, Written with his own hand before his going to New England, in
the year, 1637.

Published by his own direction for the satisfaction of all such who either
are, or justly might be offended with his scandalous submission, made before
the High Commission Court Feb. 11. Anno, 1635.

London, Printed 1641.

Courteous Reader,
IT was wont to be received as a true saying, De minimis non curat lex, the
Law cares not for small matters; which indeed is true of men's laws, for they
are intended only to punish greater offenses, such as do violate public
peace and overthrow societies: but divine Law proceeds to the very least iota
and apex, and punishes our failing in any one point or circumstance. James 2.
10. Yea, if we shall observe the Devils wiles and methods, we shall find that
the Devil seldom assaults any Christian enlightened, with great sins, such as
waste the conscience and all the World cries shame of at the first dash, but
he begins insensibly with lesser sins, to make way for greater, he tries the
spirits of men first with slighter temptations, he makes them first to swallow
gnats, to make way for Camells afterward, till they put no difference between
sin and sin, but grow to be past feeling, and to commit all manner of
uncleanes with greedines. And most true is that of our Savior, Luke 16. 10.
He that is faithful in the least, is faithful also in much, he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust also in much: he that willingly takes liberty
to himself to adventure upon the least violation of Gods righteous Law, will
without all doubt upon a greater temptation, make bold with any daring sin.

The consideration whereof has made me to weigh a little the railing about
the Communion Table, so violently pressed and strictly enjoined over all the
Land in these latter times: For indeed in common estimation this seems to be
a very small matter, and very many wonder why any Christian should make any
scruple of it, or trouble himself about it in these times, wherein gross
idolatry and image worship is openly practiced, the morality of the Lords day
is contradicted and profaned, and many newfangled complements, and merely
humane, that I say not diabolical inventions in Gods worship are urged and
imposed. But all these have been happily opposed, and witnessed against by
others, both godly, judicious, and learned, whereas the rail about the
Communion Table is slighted and waved of all sorts, that notwithstanding do
greatly scruple those, and stumble at those greater stu^bling blocks. But let
Christians wisely consider with what eagerness this addition of rails has bin
enforced, and Communicants every where pressed to receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper at the rail, and no where else. Indeed what I speak in this kind
is out of woeful experience, for I have suffered my self heavy things, wasted
my estate two whole years together in the high Commission Court, and at the
last was sentenced to be suspended from my Ministry, to bear the charges of
the suit commenced by Sir Thomas Fanshaw of Ware Park and Master Isaacke
Craven the present Vicar of Ware against me, for some words spoken by me
against the rail there set up (though but in a private house) yea I was
censured also to make a recantation and base submission in the Court for the
words spoken by me, and the Lord has been pleased to leave me, to try me, to
know what was in my heart, and I have basely and wickedly yielded to their
impositions; I will not plead the greatness of my temptations by which I have
been overcome, but do humbly crave pardon of God and man (whosoever have been
offended by me) and upon the Lords opening of mine eyes, and raising me up, yea
and sanctifying this my great fall, I have thought it my duty, to enquire into
this mystery of iniquity, to rake this dunghill, and to lay open to the view of
the World the wickedness enclosed in, and couched under this innovation of the
rail, desiring the LORD that my fall may be sanctified both to my self, to
heal that and other sins in me, and to others, that they may not stumble at
the same stumbling block of iniquity; so I shall leave what is here said to thy
serious consideration, and thy self to the simplicity that is in Jesus Christ.

A wel-wisher to thy Soul, Charles Chauncy.

A Short Treatise to discover the mischief of railing about the Communion
Table, and the evil consequents thereof.
THe first Argument to prove Railes about the Communion Table to be dangerous
and unlawful.

That which is an Ornament or ingredient to make up an high Altar is unlawful
and abominable and to be abhorred by Christians.

But a rail about the Communion Table is an Ornament or ingredient to make up
an high Altar.

Therefore a Rail about the Communion table is unlawful, etc.

The Major or the first proposition may be proved by all those learned writings
that have been published to show the unlawfulness of high Altars, amongst
which that set forth by the B. of Lincoln has great strength in it. But let
me add moreover that place Heb. 13. 10. to evince the same, the words are
these, We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat that serve at the
Tabernacle; from which place these two arguments may be framed.

1 Christians are to have but one Altar (1. Christ) therefore they must not
have any more Altars besides him.

Master Mede, as in this whole argument has written a collation most unworthy
of his worth and learning, so in expounding of this place of the Apostle Page
15. where he makes this exception, I know (says he) what you will be ready to
except, namely that by the Altar here named is meant Christ, which I (quoth he)
for my part would willingly admit, so that it be understood with this caution,
Christ as he is to be eaten in the Eucharist, for the Apostle speaks here of an
Altar to be eaten of, which is not the material instrument or seat, but the
Sacrifices used thereupon.

In which words he would not have Christ simply considered, but Christ as
eaten in the Eucharist to be the Christians Altar. Contra, First take what he
grants, if Christ as eaten in the Eucharist only be our Altar, then have we
no Altars of wood or Stone, for that Christ is but one, but the other altars
are innumerable, the Apostle acknowledges but one only altar among Christians.
Secondly, let us compare ver. 15 with the tenth. By him therefore let us offer
the sacrifice of praise to God continually; whence I reason thus.

That Christ by whom our Sacrifices of praise are continually to be offered, is
the Altar there meant by the Apostle.

But that Christ, is Christ simply understood without reference to the
Sacrament, etc. ergo.

As it was by Gods appointment among the Jews, that no sacrifice could be
accepted, but that which was offered up upon the Altar of burnt offering, so no
Sacrifice (be it of thanksgiving, or prayer, or whatsoever other service) can
ever please God unless it be offered up by Christ. But now will Master Mede
say, either that we must never offer up the sacrifice of thanksgiving to God
but at the Eucharist; or that we can continually offer up our sacrifices by
Christ, as eaten in the Eucharist? must we always receive the Sacrament, when
we offer up our praises unto God? or do we receive the Sacrament continually,
i. daily? for the daily sacrifice among the Jews was called the continual
sacrifice; but it is very observable, that the Apostle says (by him, not upon
it) let us offer, etc. intending plainly the person of our Lord and Savior,
and not an Altar of Wood or Stone; and it is strange that he should being this
place to prove Altars lawful in the times of the N. T. which is most express
against it.

Secondly, there is an other argument in the same place, i. They have no right
to partake of that Altar, (1: Christ) that serve at the Tabernacle; who are
they that serve at the tabernacle, but the Priests and sacrificers under the
Law? or such as bring in Jewish ceremonies in the time of the Gospel, (as some
of the Hebrews that the Apostles wrote unto, did) so the meaning of the place
must be this; They that bring in or observe Jewish ceremonies in the times of
the Gospel, have no part or interest in Christ, they have no right unto him:
but they that set up Altars in the times of the new Testament, do plainly
bring in Jewish ceremonies; therefore such have no fellowship with Jesus
Christ; for surely they have no right to him, and none has any communion with
him, but they to whom God the Father has given right unto him; and this agrees
with that place, Gal. 5. 2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing, and Jewish Altars are every whit
as dangerous as Circumcision.

For the further illustrating of this argument, it will not be altogether
unprofitable to consider the ground of the Apostle, which was this, That there
was to be by Gods own appointment but one Altar only for sacrifice amongst the
Jews (which one Altar the Apostle in that place makes a clear type of Christ)
Levit. 1. Deuteronomy. 12. 13. 14. hence it was that when the Reubenites and Gadites,
and half tribe of Manasseth had erected an other Altar by the bank of Jordan
the residue of the 12. tribes thought that offense to be so exceedingly
displeasing unto God that Josh. 22. it is called a turning away from following
the Lord, yea rebellion against the Lord, and to be compared with the iniquity
of Peor, and for which they thought that God would be wroth with the whole
congregation, yea, they intended to pursue the sin with open hostility, and
to fight against them in battle for it. And though they were mistaken touching
the end and scope of that Altar of witness (it being set up only for a civil
monument, and not for sacrifice) yet thus much is warranted by the Zeal of the
nine Tribes and half, and the answer also and apology of the other Tribes,
that there must be but one Altar for sacrifice amongst the people of God; and
that (says the Apostle) is only Christ amongst Christians. Thus also 2. Kings
13. when as Jeroboam had set up a new Altar, the Lord himself did oppose it by
a special message, seconded by a special miracle, forbidding the Prophet
either to return the same way, or to eat bread in that place, thereby implying
that they were not worthy of any Communion. To the same purpose the prophet
Hoseah rebukes the degenerate Israelites Chapter 1. saying, because Ephraim has
made many Altars to sin, therefore Altars shall be unto him to sin, i. either
they shall be given up to their idol Altars, or else that this shall be a
most heinous and provoking sin: and that we might know the rise and ground of
this sin, it is added in the next words, I have written to them the great
things of the law, and they have accounted them strange things, as if he should
say, It is not strange that they should fall to set up Altars, that swerve from
the only rule of worship, the word of God.

All which proves that the Apostle to the Heb. alludes to the Commandment of
God in the law, that because there was but one Altar of burnt offering in the
Law, so there is but one Altar among Christians, that is Christ, who is both
the Priest, and Sacrifice, and Altar alone; and more especially the Altar did
typifie his Deity, which only made the sacrifice meritorious, for the altar did
sanctify the gift Mat. 18. 19. Now what could sanctify Christ's Sacrifice, but
his Deity? which is also cleared, Heb. 9. 14. where Christ is said, in
reference to this type of the Altar, to have offered up himself by his
eternal spirit without spot to God, where by the eternal spirit, we must
understand the Godhead of Christ.

But see the practice of these times, they will have Priests not Ministers,
Altars not Communion Tables, Sacrifices not Sacraments: they will bow, and
cringe to and before their Altars, yea, they will nor endure any man to enquire
after what manner Christ is in the Sacrament, whether by way of
consubstantiation, or transubstantiation, or in a spiritual manner, yea, they
will have Tapers, and Books never used, empty Basins and Challices there, what
is this but the Mass it self, for here is all the furniture of it. Thus far
for the proving of the first proposition.

The Assumption or the second proposition, (that a Rail about the Communion
Table is one of the ingredients to make up an high Altar, or a Popish Altar)
may be proved.

First, by Ecclesiastical history, railes about the Lords Table, whether of
wood or stone were never commanded to be set up, but since the erecting of
Altars, and the idol of the Mass, and Transubstantiation was adored; and
after Antichrist was in his Pontificalibus. I might allege out of Binius
diverse acts of popish Councels to this purpose, especially it was strictly
enjoined in one of the Counsels of Megara, which was (as may appear by all
the acts of it) a most Antichristian conventicle, but I have not now the books
by me, whosoever will may consult with the Author.

Secondly, it may appear by all the Cathedral churches, in which only high
Altars have been continued since times of Reformation, all which also have
been railed in, and all the Communicants made to receive kneeling at the rails,
and no where else; from whence now since the Altar-worship has spread (by the
diligence of popish Prelates) and tables have been turned into Altars, the
railing of them also has been universally enjoined in the like manner.

Thirdly the same appeared evidently to be the intent of the A. B. and the
rest of the commissioners (when our cause was handled before them) they did
generally construe our opposing of the railes to be an opposition of the
Altars, the A. B. professing it to be the place of some more especial presence
of the Lord, and therefore to be railed in; Doctor Worrall that hideous
Apostate alleged that old proverb to prove Altars, amieus usque. ad aras,
confounding ignorantly aras and altaria, (...) and ara (as Master Mede could
well inform him) being used of heathen altars only, and such as are set up to
heathenish Gods, (...) and Altar spoken of such Altars as were appointed for
the worship of the true God under the Law; but I suppose this aspiring
Diatrephes would rather have aram (i an heathenish Altar) or haram a hogstye to
worship at, so that thereby he may climb up to a Bishopric, and nourish his
swinish lusts, then to embrace the pure worship of God (which sometimes he
professed) with peace to his conscience, and a well grounded expectation of
eternal glory.

Objection, But it will be said, what were there not cancelli before the
invention of Altars? were they not anciently set up in the primitive Churches?
Answer. This indeed was alleged by the Archbishop, in his censure of us, for
the proof of the antiquity of railes; but if his state business would have
permitted him to have searched Linwoods Constitutions, there he might have
learned the true meaning of Cancelli, that it signifies partitionem quae
s^parat chorum a navi ecclesiae, that is the partition betwixt the body of the
Church and the quire, which is commonly called the Chancel upon that occasion,
but what is this to the rail? only we may observe that the Archbishops
constitutions as well as of the Popes do vary exceedingly.

By all this it may appear how extremely they are befooled and deluded which
account to Table to be Altars but such as stand Dresserwise at the East end of
the Chancell, for if the Table be railed in, and has the Altar furniture, and
Altar worship, what can be required else to the essence of an Altar? and thus
much shall suffice for the first argument.

The second argument against railing about of the Lords TABLE.
Whatsoever is appointed and erected to uphold false worship, or will worship,
or idolatrous Worship, is abominable and not to be endured in Christian
assemblies.

But railes about Communion Tables are appointed and erected to uphold false,
idolatrous, and will worship, Therefore, etc.

The Proof of the fo^mer Proposition.

Every means of false worship is forbidden by the same Commandment that
prohibus false worship it self, (for every precept that forbids any sin,
forbids also all the means and occasions of it.)

But whatsoever is appointed and erected to uphold false worship, is a direct
means of false worship, Therefore, etc,

The proof of the assumption or the second Proposition of the prosyllogisme.

That which is appointed only as a means to uphold and to discover kneeling at
the Sacram^nt is appointed and erected only to uphold false or will worship.

This proof is built upon this ground, that kneeling at the receiving of the
Sacrament is a false, idolatrous, and will worship; for the proof whereof I
shall not say much, because that others have done it sufficiently to those that
will receive sound and wholesome Doctrine. But for present satisfaction take
these few things.

To leave the imitable example of Christ and his Apostles, and to follow the
practice of idolaters, is a false worship, an idolatrous worship, a
willworship.

But to kneel at the Sacrament is to leave the imitable example of Christ and
his Apostles, and to follow the practice of idolaters, etc.

The proof of the proposition is manifest Ephe. 5. 1. 1. Cor. 11. 1. where the
same subject is handled, that we have in hand.

Now that kneeling is a leaving of the example of Christ it is evident Mat. 26.
20. whose example always binds as long as it is constant, and not varying, as
it is in the particular case.

Ob. But our Savior Christ and his Apostles, neither sat, nor stood, but lay
down rather; for so the word in the Original is said to signify. Answer,
The word signifies to sit down and is so ordinarily translated Luke 24. 30.
Mat. 14. 13. It was indeed a sitting after the Jewish manner at meals, which
was a sitting with a kind of leaning down upon the arm; which kind of
gesture or mixed sitting being peculiar to the Church of the Jews, sitting
without leaning is justly received in reformed Churches.

Ob. But some say, that sitting at the Sacrament was an occasional gesture by
reason of the Passover joined with the institution of the Sacrament, and
therefore Christians are no more bound to it, then they are to other
occasional circumstances, as that it was then received at supper, yea, in a
private house, by men and not by women, etc.

Answ. It Is true indeed, that those were all occasional, but the same cannot be
said of sitting at the Sacrament, for it is evident, that after the Passover
was ended, Ioh. 13. 4. our Savior rose up from it, and afterward sat down
again to institute and administer his last Supper, so that this gesture was not
taken up by occasion of the Passover, but it was a gesture purposely appointed
by him, which I may also further prove by this argument.

If sitting at the Sacrament has a Sacramenmentall signification, then that
gesture was not taken up by occasion of the Passover, but is unchangeable and
purposely instituted by our Lord and Savior.

But sitting at the receiving of the Sacrament has a Sacramental
signification, etc.

This may be clearly proved by the words of Christ himself, Luke 22. 27. etc.
where immediately after the institution of the Lords Supper, our Savior
interprets this to be the meaning of sitting at the receiving of it, that it
signifies the familiar communion and fellowship that believers have with him
here in Grace, and shall have with him hereafter in the Kingdom of Heaven: as
in all Feasts, which Princes and great Potentates do make and invite us to, if
they shall admit us to sit down with them at the same Table, they testify a
great deal of friendship, familiarity and near society with us; and this is
taught us not only by Musculus, Rainolds, and John Alasco, but even by the
Papists themselves, even Thomas Aquinas part. 3. quaest. 60. art. 3. says that
the Lords Supper is not only a sign to remember his Passion already past, or a
demonstration of the present benefit, but also that it prefigures our aeternall
glory.

Now to proceed to the second branch of the former proposition, that kneeling
at the receiving of the Sacrament is an imitation of the practice of Idolaters.

This may be proved by testimonies, Kneeling was not used for many hundred
years after Christ and the Apostles time, for it was brought in for the
worship of the breaden God, Beza epistol. 8. Peter Martyr in his Epistle ad
Dominos Polonos. Paraeus de symbol. Euchar. lib. 1. 11. and it is evident by
Ecclesiastical Stories, so that the Formalists and Patrons of kneeling at the
Sacrament cannot find or bring forth so much as one writer before the 1000
year after Christ: yea, it is clear that it was the brood of Real bodily
presence, having Honorius the third for the Father, Anno 1220. Pope Innocent
the third for the Grandfather, who in the time of King Henry the third,
endeavored to establish it by fire and faggot, Anno 1215. for he seconded Pope
Gregory the seventh, who Anno 1037, advanced the opinion of the Real presence.

Add to this the blasphemy of that plea that is used by the Patrons of
kneeling in the defense of it, when as they say that it is the more reverend
gesture of receiving: then belike that used by Christ and his Apostles was not
so reverend, or the Prelates and their creatures in Kneeling are more reverend
then Christ and his Apostles: and is not this horrid blasphemy?

Thus much also for the second Argument. The third Argument.
That which is an occasion or invitation to idolatrous bowing and cringing to
Altars, is idolatrous, and to be abhorred.

But the rail is an occasion to Idolatrous bowing and cringing to Altars, etc.

The proof of the former proposition. It may appear by this, because that
bowing toward or before the Altar is Idolatrous.

First, because to worship electively toward or before any creature or
invention of man without warrant from God is idolatrous: for I demand else why
may we not as well worship electively toward or before a Crucifix or Popish
Image as before or toward an Altar? the Papists will say, that they are not
such Sots as to terminate their worship upon a stock or a stone, no more then
our Altar worshippers do upon a piece of wood, or a Joyners frame; and can we
think that when the Israelites kissed the Calves, and worshipped the Altars at
Dan and Bethel, that they chiefly intended the Images and Altars in that
worship, or terminated their worship upon them? nay but, says Jeroboam, this
is thy God oh Israel, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, he means,
that these did but represent the true God that is worshipped at Jerusalem, and
he it is that I would have you to bow unto, though you bow before his Image,
and so Aaron said of his Calfe, Exodus 32. and yet that is called an Idol, Acts
7. 41.

Ob. But did not God command to bow and to fall down in worship toward the
Temple? Did not David say, And in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
Temple? and why may not Christians worship an Altar, as well as the Jews
worshipped toward the Temple? Answer, The Jews had a warrant from God to
worship him toward the Temple, and the holy of holies, but we have none in
this case; for have we any such Temple now as the Jews? It is evident that the
Temple at Jerusalem was one of the greatest types of Christ in all the book
of God, Joh. 2. 19. For did not the fullness of the Godhead dwell in him
bodily, Col. 2. 9. i. in a glorious manner, as Gods glory did of old in the
Temple, and that typical signification was the ground of all their adoration
toward the Temple: but now the body is come these shadows, are vanished away,
Col. 2. 16. and to bring in such shadows now, is a flat denial of Christ.

Secondly this is most wicked of all the rest, when as bowing is practiced at
such times when as the Sacrament is not administered; for Christ being equally
present at both Sacraments, and also present in the ordinance of preaching in a
special manner, why should we not as well bow to the Font, or to the pulpit,
as to the supposed Altar?

Shall we say as that great Arch-Prelate said at the sentence of Master
Burton, etc. Christ said of the one only hoc est verbum meum, but of the other
he said, hoc est corpus meum; but does not this stink of Popish
transubstantiation? had his holiness forgotten, or never read that of AVSTINE,
accedit verbum ad elementum and fit Sacramentum? Or is not hoc est corpus meum,
verbum meum? has not the Sacrament all his fealing virtue from the Word? how
was that great miracle wrought upon him (which has been confidently reported
as from his mouth) that when he was Bishop of London, and fallen into a
dangerous sickness, he was raised out of it merely by the receiving of the
Sacrament? Was it by the mere virtue of the Bread and Wine, or the outward
elements? (but this might have been had in a Tavern, and Vintners might turn
Physicians, if this were all) or was it by any virtue of the word of
institution or promise annexed to the Sacrament? if it was, why does he not
ascribe as much or more to the word then to the Sacrament? nay, why did not his
Highness make that Chamber-table at which that Sacrament was consecrated and
administered an high Altar too? Does he still perform that homage and
obeisance to that Table, whenever he sees it? or does his successor in the
same Sea do the like? Nay, will it not follow hence that whenever any private
Communion is celebrated in a corner, (as in case of sickness is enjoined in
the book of common Prayer) that such Tables are ever after holy Tables and
Altars, to which Gods special presence is tied in a special manner, and
toward which all the Family and others are bound always to adore, and to
prostrate themselves: or if they think this to be superstitious, let them tell
us their just reason, why such Tables should be so adored in Churches, and not
also in private Chambers? where the cause is the same, why is not the effect
the same?

Thirdly, Our Church accounts the elements to be in use but common Bread and
Wine after the Sacrament is ended, and leaves them to the Minister to use at
his pleasure; why then should the Table have more reverence then the
consecrated elements have when the supper is ended, so as to reverence the one
and not the other? Why but does not the Scripture say that the Altar does
consecrate the gift and sacrifice, and not on the contrary the sacrifice the
Altar? Therefore the Altar is rather to be adored, then the sacrifice, or the
outward elements? But such popish spirits in these days say the contrary, that
their sacrifice sanctifies their altar, and Christ being really present in the
sacrifice this makes their altar to be so holy and so worshipful ever after,
that it makes it worthy to be bowed unto: therefore the sacrifice or outward
elements should much rather be adored after the Sacrament then the Communion
Table: thus they are contrary to themselves, but I shall conclude this with the
saying of our Lord and Savior, Mat. 24. 23. 26. When they shall say unto you,
lo here is Christ, or there is Christ, (as they say of the Altar, and Mass,
and Sacrifice) go not forth unto them; let not any that fears God, or loves
his own soul, step out of doors to see the Masse-Christ, or to altar-Christ,
much less to bow down to him. Thus far of the Proposition.

Now for the assumption, that a rail about the Communion table (or supposed
Altar) is an occasion or invitation to idolatrous bowing is clear by daily
experience; the more that Communion Tables are dect and adored and sequestered
from the rest of the Church, the more the opinion of inherent holiness in the
Table is nourished, and so much the more persons superstitiously addicted will
show unwarrantable reverence to the Table, yea let me tell you what I have
seen my self, at the consecration of Sir Thomas Fanshawes Chapel in Ware
parrish, being Minister of the place, I was commanded by the Bishop to be
present by all means, being there I saw the Bishop himself, Sir Thomas and
diverse others, that bowed to, or at the least toward the Table being railed
in, before that any Sacrament was administered at it. Was it not a worshipful
joyner, that made such a worshipful Table, yea, that such great personages
should do such obeisance unto? surely the adoring and railing in of the Table
was a special invitation to this adoration, which otherwise they will not do
to a common table in a Parlor or a joyners shop, no nor a table in a Church not
railed in. Thus much of the third argument.

The fourth Argument.
That which makes a Jewish sanctuary or Sanctum Sanctorum, in the times of the
new Testament, is utterly unlawful, and to be abhorred by Christians.

But the setting up of Railes about the Communion Tables makes an other Jewish
Sanctuary, Therefore, etc.

The Major or the former proposition proved.
There are diverse reasons in the Epistle to the Heb. against the Jewish
Sanctuary, take for an instance chap. 9. 1. -- 11. etc. where first that
Sanctuary is called a wordly Sanctuary; so it is in respect of the times of the
new testament, especially in respect of that heavenly Sanctuary provided for
us: it is for worldly, sensual, and carnal hearts to set up such a Sanctuary
now. Secondly, verse 8. 9. the first Tabernacle was a figure for the time then
present, a figure of things revealed in the Gospel, and a mere type and
shadow, but now the body being come, the shadows vanish away; again it
served only for the time then present, i. the times under the Law, whilst the
Leviticall priesthood lasted, and therefore now has no further use in the
Churches of Christ. Thirdly, verse 10. they were carnal ordinances imposed
only till the times of reformation, i. till the coming of Christ, as it is
expounded, ver. 11. in a word, when the veil of the Temple rent from the top
to the bottom, the Jewish Sanctuary ceased, and what will any man now dare to
sow up the veil again, by making a new Sanctuary? or is not this to deny the
death and passion of Jesus Christ? Fourthly, how is that to be meant, Romans 3.
25. Whom God set forth to be the propitiation for our sins? the word signifies
a mercy-seat. The Jewish mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies was always shut up,
and none of the people might enter into it: but Christ is such a mercy-seat as
is set forth openly to Ministers and people, that all sorts may lawfully and
freely repair unto; which was one of the greatest mercies that ever God
bestowed upon his people, for so indeed Christ is called the gift of God, Ioh.
4. 10. there is no other gift of God to be compared with this. But what a
cursed sacrilege is this to lock up the mercy-seat again? yea, so to lock it
up, as that neither Ministers, nor People shall enter in: for truly so they do
in effect by their railing about of the Communion Table, the people are
excluded out, it is an Holy of Holies to them (as M^ster Mede would have it,
(...), ut a multitudinis accessu prohiberentur, that common people might not
come at it) but do the Priests (as they are well called that set up new
sacrifices) enter in themselves? truly they are locked up within the railes, and
go to their supposed Altar; but they that serve at the Tabernacle (as was said
before) have nothing to do with the Altar Jesus Christ; so that as our Savior
charged the Scribes, and Pharise, and Lawyers, Mat. 23. 13. Luke 11. 52. You
have taken away the key of knowledge, you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, and neither enter in your selves, nor suffer those that would to
enter in; as they dealt with the written word, so deal our Prelates both about
the written word and the word incarnate too, they keep away the word faithfully
preached from the people, and will neither preach it themselves, nor suffer
others that would to preach it, or hear it, they keep away Jesus Christ (the
true Altar) at least in his simplicity as Paul speaks, 2. Cor. 11. 2. and will
neither partake of Christ themselves, nor suffer others to partake of him: They
are like dogs sleeping in a manger, that will neither eat oats themselves,
nor suffer the horses to eat them that would. Thus far of the former
Proposition.

The proof of the Assumption or second Proposition.
This proposition may be cleared by the description of the Jewish Sanctuary,
given to us in the Scripture, for what is the Jewish Sanctuary, but a most holy
place, where Gods glorious presence especially dwells, whither it was not
lawful for any to go but only for the Priest, ordinarily once a year, and
upon some extraordinary occasions: and does not the railed Table infer all
this? that it is the holy of holy place, where God is more especially present
then in any other part of the Church, or upon the whole earth besides? is it
not the place whither the Priest only and not the people may enter? they must
stand (or kneel rather) as the people at the foot of Mount Sinai, and none may
go within the rail or range without great profanation, and all this too,
when the Priests do enter, it is mainly once a year at Easter: and then
forsooth some of the Priests are so devout, that they make Religion of it, to
put off their shoos from off their feet before they enter within the rails; for
say they did not God command Moses so to do in the like case, saying, put off
thy shoes from off thy feet, etc. The Sacrament is appointed indeed for
Christians communion with Christ, and among themselves, yea, and the people
have as much right to draw near to Christ, as the Ministers have, Heb. 10. 22.
and therefore to draw near to the Table too: but the Priests would seem to be
holier then all the rest, and the people, if they will have communion among
themselves they may, but the Priest is in his Closet and Cloister by himself,
and must have no communion with lay or carnal people, nor they with him; and
what is this (I pray you) but another Jewish Sanctuary? Thus far of the
fourth Argument.

The fifth Argument.
Taken from the vain pleas that are made in the defense of rails, which are
especially three, the first whereof and maine is the pretense of uniformity and
order, that all the Communicants may come up to the rail, and receive the
Sacrament alike kneeling; the second, least that the Communion Table should be
annoyed with boys, or dogs, or telling of money, or laying of hats upon the
Table; the third is, that they make for the Ministers ease, it being
troublesome to him, to go with the Elements from seat to seat, to distribute
them to all the Communicants.

The vanity and sin of the first plea and pretense of uniformitie.
That which unavoidably occasions disorder, unity and uniformity in sin, it
wickedly pretended for Church order and uniformity in Gods worship.

The setting up of rails about the Communion Table, and enforcing the
Communicants to receive kneeling at them, unavoidably occasions disorder,
unity and uniformitie in sin, Therefore, etc.

The major or first proposition is grounded upon that place, 1 Cor. 14. ult.
That all things in the Churches of God should be done decently and in order,
which place is ignorantly alleged by Formalists in the defense of Ceremonies,
for the Apostle, Ver. 37. tells the Corinthians, that the things that he wrote
unto them were the Commandments of God: he does not leave it to the
Corinthians, or any other Church, to invent what they please themselves for
order or decency, but he does strictly bind them to the commandments of
God, and he charges them, that even the things commanded by God should be done
decently and in order, now the commandment of a Magistrate, or any
Church Governors, does not make a thing to be decent and orderly because they
command it (for then if they command the worshipping of Images, or Crucifixes,
or whatsoever else though never so wicked, shall presently be decent and
orderly by virtue of their commandment) for that is orderly which God accounts
orderly, and which is according to the rule of order, and that is decent, not
that man accounts so, (for that which is decent and highly esteemed amongst men
is an abomination in the sight of God) but that is decent, that God accounts
decent, and which is according to the rule of decency, which is not the will
of any man upon earth, but the revealed will of God alone; but here we see that
whatsoever occasions disorder is contrary to the Apostles rule: Again ver. 26
of the same Chapter there is an other rule, Let all things be done to
edification; now that which breeds unity and uniformity in sin, does not edify
but destroy, and make men like unto Devils, for they have such an unity and
uniformity, their Kingdom is not divided among themselves; see also Exodus 23.
2.

The assumption or second proposition has been proved already in the former
Reasons, for surely that which breeds uniformity in Jewish and Popish
superstition is uniformity in sin and cursed deformity, such is uniformitie in
kneeling at the Sacrament.

But I add for further proof of the assumption, That which breeds scandal and
offense to all sorts of Christians especially weak and tender consciences,
breeds rather disorder then order.

The setting up of railes about the Communion table, and the enforcing all the
Communicants to receive at them, breeds scandal, etc.

For the proof of the proposition, see Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. the whole Chapters
are spent in this, That scandals are carefully to be avoided in the Church, 1
Cor. 10. 32. Give no offense to the Jews or Gentiles, or to the Churches of
God. Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 43. art. 2. Scandalum activum semper est peccatum in eo
qui scandalizat, vel quia ipsum opus quod facit est peccatum, vel etiam si
habeat speciem peccati, dimittendum est semper proximi, charitatem, ex qua
unusquisque tenetur saluti proximi providere, and sic qui non dimitti contra
charitatem agit, i. An active scandal is always a sin in him that gives
offense, either because that the work that he does is a sin, or also if it
has a show of sin, it is always to be omitted for the love of our neighbor,
by which every one is bound to provide for the salvation of his neighbor, and
so he that does not omit that which is scandalous sins against charity, and
this agrees very well with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Such as give
offense to their brethren, walk not charitably: and it is a shame for us that
Papists should be more charitable in their judgment, and tender over the
consciences of poor Christians then we are. Yet it is a received definition of
a scandal among the Schoolmen, that it is dictum aut factum minus rectum
praebens occasionem ruinae, now though an action be not evil of it self, yet
if it has an appearance of evil, it is less right then it ought to be,
because it is done inordinately, and is an occasion of sin, and falling to
another.

Now for the second proposition, that the enforcing to receive at a rail cause
offense to Christians experience sufficiently proves, there being but few
Congregations in this Kingdom, where some have not been offended and
scandalized by the rail, and this new injunction of receiving at a rail.

Two things only are replied in this case. First, that this is a scandal taken
not given, and therefore in such cases not to be omitted for such a kind of
offense, as our Savior himself regarded not the offense of the Pharisees, when
the Disciples told him, Mat. 15. 12. Know thou not that the Pharisees were
offended after they heard this saying, our Savior answered and said, Verse 14.
Let them alone, they are blind leaders of the blind, etc.

Secondly, they say that Magistrates are offended likewise by the refusal of,
and not conforming to the ceremonies, as well as weak Christians are offended
by the practice of them, and whether of these, think you, in this case is to
be most regarded, a Magistrate or a weak Christian?

To the first of these I answer, that though it were granted that the offense
here specified is taken only and not given, yet even passive offenses are many
times to be avoided, as namely, when the things are not necessary (as the
preaching of the truth by our Savior was, at which the Pharisees were
offended) though they be otherwise commendable; the brazen Serpent was a
Monument set up of Moses by divine institution and appointment, yet Hezechias
brake it in pieces and called it Nechustan, or a piece of Brass, because it
was not a necessary monument, and now the People stumbled at it, though there
was no just occasion of offense given to them; so Gideons Ephod was only a
monument of a great victory, that God had wrought for him, yet the Israelites
went a whoring after it, and abused it to idolatry, after the death of Gideon,
and it became a snare to his house Jud. 8. 27. yea it is a common principle of
nature, that we must hurt no man, and therefore we must do nothing whereby any
man may be hurt, or grieved, or wounded, this was signified by those judicial
laws Deuteronomy. 22. when the Israelites were commanded to make battelments upon the
tops of their houses, lest they should bring the guilt of blood upon them, and
Exodus 21. 33. he that diggs a pit and covers it not, if an Ox, or an Ass
fall into it, the digger of the pit shall make it good: the like Divines by
good reason gather in case of danger to the soul.

But now the argument is yet stronger, if that which had not an appeara^ce of
evil (as the brazen Serpent, and Gideons Ephod) yet was to be taken away and
destroyed, being a passive scandal only, how much more that which has an
apperance of evil, as the present additions to Gods worship have, for then it
is not only a passive scandal that proceeds from his weakness only that
falls, but also active in respect that it gives occasion of offense.

To the second I answer, that it is a vain plea to say that magistrates are
offended by the refusal of ceremonies, as well as weak Christians by the
injoyning of them, for that is not to be called an offense that is taken by
any man's disobedience to an unjust command: might not Nebuchadnezzar also have
made this plea, when those three noble Jews would not worship his golden
image? And Jeroboam likewise when the Priests and Levites and godly Israelites
refused to go up to Dan and Bethell? why, these Puritan Ministers, and People,
regard not the offense of the King and State, but all they stand upon, is that
themselves are offended and scandalized, belike then they are more to be
respected then governors themselves; again it is a silly pretense, that they
should complain of offenses, that have power to reform them and to take away
the occasions of them, without any damage to themselves, as Magistrates may
easily do by their command.

The second pretense for railes is, lest that the Communion Table should be
anoyed with boys or dogs, or telling of money, or laying on of hats upon the
Table.

The proof of the idleness of this second plea.
Upon a common reason or disconvenience (if the anoyance of the Table be
granted to be such) no special privilege can be grounded, (as the railing
about of the table alone is).

But all the pretended reasons or disconveniences are common to other
instruments and utensiles about Churches, as to the Font, to the pulpit, the
Church-bible, etc.

The proof of the Major or former Proposition.
Every special privilege is grounded upon some special reason. It were a
senseless reason to say, that a King because he is a man should have a guard
attending upon him, his Cou^sellors of state, his palace, his power to call
Parliaments, to press Soldiers, etc. if this were a good ground, then every
man, because he is a reasonable creature, must have all these royalties: or to
say, that a garden, because it has trees, and herbs, and flowers, therefore it
should be enclosed, or fenced and walled in; nay but there is a special reason
for both these; Kings have such great privileges, and State, because God has
given such power unto them, and because of the great charge that lies upon them
above other men, and the safety of all the people stands in their preservation
and safety, so gardens are enclosed and fenced in, because of the special
fruitfulness, usefulness, and virtue that is in them, above common fields;
here is now a special reason for the special and peculiar privileges both of
the one and of the other; so in the case in hand, there must be found some
peculiar reason why the Communion Table should be railed rather then other
parts, or instruments of worship in the Church, for the rule of Logic holds
sure, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.

The proof of the assumption or second Proposition.
All these pretended disconveniences of annoyance are common to other
instruments or utensils about Churches, as to the Font, to the Pulpit, to the
Bible, or reading-seat, etc. for why should it be a greater annoyance, for Dogs
to foul, or boys, or men to lay their hats, or to tell money upon the Table
(after the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is administered) then it is for the
same or the like anoyances to be done to the Font or Bible, or Pulpit, or
reading seat? It was indeed a reason of a great Prelate of this Land given to
my self for the setting up of rails; Why said he, What if there should be Cows
in the Churchyard, if the Church-dores be open, is it fitting or decent, that
the Cows should come and play the beasts at the holy Table? but what would not
this filthiness defile other parts of the Church, as well as the holy Table
(as he called it?) or should we therefore say, that every part of the Church
should have a particular rail about it, or rather that the whole Church should be
railed about, that one rail might serve for all, for fear of such defileme^ts?
But the truth is, that our Prelates have some secret mystery of special
holiness in the Table above other parts of the Church (as was specified
before) but that is utterly ungrounded in the Word of God, and unreasonable,
and stinkes of the breaden and dunghill God, and is odious superstition, and
therefore to be abhorred.

The third pretense for rails refuted, that they do make for the Ministers
ease, it being troublesome to him, to go with the elements from seat to seat,
etc.

If the observation of Christ's own institution be far more ease to the
Minister, then can come by the setting up of rails, and the peoples repayring
to them to receive, then by their own plea the former is better then the
latter.

But the observation of Christ's own institution is far more ease to the
Minister, then can come by the setting up of rails, and the peoples repayring
to them, etc.

I shall not need to prove the former proposition, or the consequence; for let
this be granted on both sides, that that course is to be observed about the
administration of the Sacraments, that may breed the most ease and the least
trouble both to Ministry and people.

Therefore I will come to the assumption, to prove that the institution of our
Savior Christ will bring more ease and less trouble both to Ministry and
people. For the clearing of this I will show that Christ never ordained that
the Minister should go about to every Communicant, to deliver the Bread and
Wine unto him, much less that the Minister should say a prayer to every
Communicant in the delivery of the elements of Bread and Wine. For first Christ
said in the plural number, (...), Take ye, eat ye, drink ye all of this,
but he never practiced, nor commanded to say, Take thou, eat thou, drink
thou, etc. so Fenner in his doctrine of the Sacraments says, that this speech
in the plural number is most fit to signify the communion and society of the
Church in this work, seeing Christ by his Ministers exhorts all the
Communicants, as it were with one expression of common love and charity, that
they should rejoice and eat together the same spiritual food of faith.

Ob. But it will be said, that Ministers must apply to every one in particular
the promises of the Gospel.

Ans. It is true, but must they therefore deliver the elements in particular to
every one, i. cannot the application be made but by changing the order of
administration appointed by Jesus Christ? When the Minister preaches the Word,
he does particularly apply the promises of the Gospel, yet he does not go to
every man in particular in the Congregation, so as to go from seat to seat,
from man to man, to say, believe thou and then, etc. all believers apply these
things to themselves by faith: yea, but in the administration of the Sacrament,
the Minister changes the words of promise into a prayer, saying, The body of
our Lord Jesus Christ that was given for you, etc. true they have these words,
but in the Canon of the Mass (for there is the rise of them) and they do not
utter them to the people but to God, as intending some oblation to him, or as
if it were a great impiety to distribute the elements to such as kneel
devoutly, before they have uttered those words charm-wise to consecrate the
Bread and Wine to every one in particular, which is all one, as if when thanks
are given to God at meals for a company met together, some Zelot should go and
give thanks for every man in particular.

Again, when as Christ said, take and eat, the meaning is not, that he gave to
every one of them that sat at the Table in particular the elements of Bread
and Wine, no, though it be said he gave to the Disciples, for so, Mark 6.
39-41. our Savior commanded the Disciples, that all the multitudes should sit
down by companies upon the green grass, and they sat down in ranks by
hundreds and by fifties, and when he had taken the five loaves and two fishes,
he looked up to heaven, and blessed and brake the loaves, and gave to the
Disciples to set before them, and the two fishes divided he among them all, and
yet it follows not that either Christ or his Disciples gave immediately and
particularly to the five thousand men, but they set them before them; so in
this case: and this even Jesuits, Cajetan and Suarez confess, and with them in
this particular, Beza and Piscator do agree, and it may clearly also be proved
by the commandment of Christ, when he delivered the Cup saying, Divide it
among your selves, Luke 22. 17. Some answer indeed, that those words are to be
understood not of the Cup in the Lords Supper, but of the Cup used in the
Passover; for of the cup in the Lords Supper our Savior speaks, Verse 20. But
I answer that in both Verses our Savior speaks of the same cup, but that this
precept of dividing it among themselves is meant of the cup in the Eucharist,
it appears by the protestation subjoyned in the next Verse, But I say unto you,
That I will not drink any more of the fruit of the Vine, etc. but the same
protestation in the other Evangelists, Math. 26. 29. Mark 14. 23. is added
touching the Lords Supper: besides if he had made this protestation of the
paschall cup that he would not drink any more, etc. He would not have
afterward drunk of the cup in the Eucharist. But on the contrary, the
Evangelists Matthew and Mark say that after he had reached forth the Cup in the
Lords Supper, he protested that he would no more drink of the fruit of the
Vine, etc. therefore he had already drunk of it. Now to gather up this
argument, if our Saviors course of holy institution might stand, that the
Minister should deliver the outward elements to one or two that were nearest
unto them, and the communicants should divide the rest among themselves, might
not the Minister have more ease and far less trouble without any rail? Yea,
would not this prevent that intolerable protracting and lengthning of
Sacraments, when there is a great multitude of Communicants, (which is
occasioned by a rail, and the particular distribution of the elements, and
form of Prayer joined with it) as it falls out in many popular Congregations,
so that Sacraments last many times two or three hours together? Thus much
shall serve for the fifth Argument.

The sixth and last Argument.
That which brings in conformity with the Papists and Idolaters, ought not to
be endured in reformed Churches.

But the erecting and setting up of rails about Communion Tables, and so
turning Tables into Altars, makes reformed Churches conformable with Papists
and Idolaters, etc.

I shall not need to insist upon the proof of the assumption, for the
arguments before alleged, and the practice of foreign popish, and our own
Cathedral Churches is sufficient to prove this, therefore for brevity sake I
will omit this.

The proof of the major or first proposition. That all conformity with
Idolaters must be avoided, we are taught by diverse precepts given to the
Israelites, as Deuteronomy. 12. 30. 32. Take heed that thou be not snared by following
of Idolaters, and Canaanites, etc. and that thou enquire not after their gods,
saying, how did these nations serve their Gods? Thou shall not do so to the
Lord thy God: for every abomination to the Lord, which he hates, have they done
to their Gods; whatsoever thing I command you, that observe to do it, thou
shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it: therefore, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9. Abijah
reproves Jeroboam and his army, that they had made them Priests after the
manner of the Nations of the Lands: and it was one of the greatest sins of
Achaz, 2 King. 16. 10. That when he saw an Altar at Damascus, he sent to
Vriah the Priest the fashion of the Altar, and the pattern of it, that he
might make such another in the house of the Lord: so doubtless our Priests
first took the pattern of their railed Altars from Rome, and so commanded them
to be set up amongst us.

Our Adversaries reply, that they do not use the same rites with the Papists,
with the same mind that they do. Answ. To use the same things, that the
Papists do, in civil affairs, we go not about to condemn; if they would use a
rail to enclose walks or gardens, who would speak against it? but to use the
same Rites or Ornaments in the worship of God, that the Papists, the Ministers
of the Antichrist, the Priests of Baal do, what is this, but with Achaz, to
set up the Altar of Damascus.

Ob. But what a blasphemous speech is this, that a rail should be used about
walks or gardens, that is appointed for the adorning of the Communion Table?
Answ. It Is true, that for using such a speech against a Rail at Ware, Master
Humphry Parker of Hartford was censured very severely by the high Commission
Court, Sir Thomas Fanshaws zeal prosecuting the cause against him and me,
against him, for no other cause pretended, but because upon the dislike of
rails provided for the Communion Table, as being not so decent, he cast out
such a speech, That if the rails provided did not like them, he would buy them
for his garden; and let me here insert how this offense of his was set forth
and aggravated by the A. B. at his censure. Suppose (said he) that when Aholiab
and Bezalcel were making the hangings for the Tabernacle, some malepert person
should have come to them, and said, What is here a motly coat for a fool that
you are making of diverse colors? Had not this been a very wicked speech? So
though this Parker (said he) spoke thus irreverently of the rail whilst it
was in the Joyners shop, before it ever had been consecrated to that sacred use
about the communion Table, yet because it was destined to this holy nse,
therefore thus and thus he deserves to be censured.

Oh the patience of our good God, that endures such blasphemies to be daily
belched out in these hellish Courts, by those that set their mouths against
Heaven! Belike then his Highness edicts and inventions are to be compared to,
and are of equal binding force with the Commandments of Almighty God, and his
rail is of like authority with the pattern that God showed Moses on the Mount,
and the heavenly figure of the Tabernacle; yea, should a man speak against the
flax or linen in the Drapers shop, in case that a Surplice should afterward
be made of it, it would be as great an offense in the repute of his greatness,
as of old to speak against the Levitical Ceremonies ordained by the only
Lawgiver himself, though perhaps as well a Whores smock, as a Priests frock
may be made of it; but of this by the way.

To return to the argument of the imitation of Idolaters, the Formalists say,
that they do it not with the same mind and intention with Idolaters: well, but
the Rail is the same, the Altar is the same, the manner of using is the same,
and in the same part of worship, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; what shall
we term imitation to be, if these things make not imitation?

Ob. It Is true, that in those things that have been invented by Antichrist or
his instruments, we are not to communicate with them, but those that are more
ancient then Popery and Antichristianisme, though used by them, we may lawfully
use the same, but such was the use of the rail, as may appear out of
Eusebius, for Constantine himself invented and used it.

Answ. Though a Rail be as ancient as the times of Constantine the Great, yet
we know that the mystery of iniquity began to work in the Apostles time. Many
errors and heresies were broched even in those days, besides in Constantines
days, the Idol of the Mass, and unbloudy sacrifice was not invented,
therefore then there was much less danger of a Rail, therefore let the Rail be
as ancient as the age of Constantine, or the Apostles themselves, yet if it
has been abused or defiled by Antichrist, it is to be abhorred by us. Zanchie
a learned Author upon the fourth Commandment, That even indifferent things
polluted and defiled by superstition are to be abolished, and to the like
purpose to Queen Elizabeth, Neque enim honestum est, ut quae in Dei contumeliam
usurpata diu fuerunt sires sint perse (...), ea in Ecclesia cum discrimine
etiam salutis piorum retineantur: and he proves it by the example of
Hezechias, Serpens aeneus qui institutus fuerat a Deo, and quidem ad salutem
Israelitarum, per pium Regem Hezechiam, quia illo contra Dei verbum abutebantur
Israelitae, sublatus est, and ab hoc facto sum laudatur Hezechias, quod illum
scilicet Serpentem redigeret in cineres, eosque in profluentem, ne ullum uspiam
extaret vestigium, projici jusserit: How much more then should rails about
Communion Tables be burnt, that have been and are daily so wickedly abused,
though never so innocent in their first invention?

Ob. But if all these evils are inferred upon the railing in of Communion
Tables, then it will be said unto me, why then have you, when you were called
into the high Commission Court, and prosecuted by Sir Thomas Fanshaw of Ware
Park, for words spoken against the Rail there, which you had called an
innovation, a snare to men's consciences, a breach of the second Commandment,
Idolatry and Superstition, why have you so basely yielded to the submission
imposed upon you by that Court? acknowledging at the last, that you were sorry
for such words spoken by you?

Why did you profess at last before them, that now you were of a contrary
judgment, and that you allowed a rail with a kneeling bench affixed to be a
decent and convenient ceremony, and promimised never to oppose that rail or any
other ceremony more?

Answ. It Is true, that by the persuasion of friends, thus far I yielded, and
truly very basely and timorously, I deny not, I will not go about to plead now
for that accursed fact, nor excuse my self by the greatness of my temptations
and straights; no, but I will lay my hand upon my mouth, or rather cry out to
the shame and confusion of mine own face, that I have denied the truth of
Christ, and been ashamed of him in this adulterous and sinful generation,
worthy also to be denied of him, when he shall come in the glory of his Father
with his holy Angels; and I do with indignation and detestation retract every
word of that submission, desiring earnestly the Lord, not to lay this sin to my
charge, and his people to forgive the scandal of it, or rather not to take
offense at it; and do willingly to make up this breach, forgo all the certain
comforts that I had upon the earth; only let this be added, which I must needs
speak for caution to others, that I perceived evidently whilst I was
conformable in my judgment, that I must needs give way to the Rail, or what
soever innovations, upon the same grounds that I conformed upon. But the Lord
be thanked, that though I was a servant of sin, yet he has at the last subdued
my soul to obey from the heart the form of Doctrine to which I am delivered.

It is then (I hope) upon far other, and far better grounds, that I have
reversed my former sin, then that I yielded upon at the first; this I did
rashly and unadvisedly, and in temptation, but now that the other is done in
cold blood, and with due deliberation (I mean this retractation of my error)
let these few Reasons testify unto the World; and I do humbly entreat every
soul that shall peruse these few lines, to acquaint as many as he can perceive
to be any ways scandalized by my fall, with what is here contained, that they
may be raised up again; this I do earnestly beg of them, yea, let me be bold
to charge them in the name of the Lord Jesus, so far to tender the Gospel of
Christ, and the honor of Christian profession, yea, and the bleeding heart of
a wounded Christian: as also to make this use of it to themselves, Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall.

FINIS.

