CANTERBURY TALES: COMPOSED For the Entertainment of All Ingenuous young Men
and Maids at their merry Meetings, upon Christmas, Easter, Whitsontide, or any
other time; especially in long Winter Evenings, to keep good Wits implied.

Intermixed with pleasant Stories, witty Jests, and delightful Songs, very
proper for either City, Town or Country, with an Epistle Dedicated to the
Bakers, Smiths and Millers. By Chaucer Junior.

This may be printed, R. P.

Printed for I, Back at the Black Boy near the Drawbridge on London Bridge,
1687.

The Dedication to the Bakers, Smith^ Millers, and other Readers
YOU are presented here with a Choi^ Banquet of delightful Tales, pleas^^^
Stories, witty Jests, and merry Songs to ^^^vert the young Men and Maids when
(...) come to the Bake-house, Forge or Mill; (...) by these you may increase
your Trade and (...) Customers to you: for be sure the merry L^^ses will go
where they can be furnished with Tales, Stories and Jests; therefore these ^re
as necessary for you as a fair Wife for a fine Tavern, a young Hostess for an
old Inn, or a Gazet for a Coffee-House. It is fitted for all manner of Persons,
therefore I hope you will all furnish your selves with it; for it will be a
rare Companion for Old and Young upon many Oc^asions; especially at Christmas,
Easter, VVhitsontide, or long Winter Evenings over a Cup of Nut-brown-Ale and
Lambs-wool. In a word, you will find it a^ comfortable as Matrimony, or as
sweet as ^ Maidenhead at midnight, or a Sack-Posse^ at the latter end of a
Fire, what would yo^ have more the young Men and Maids man laugh till their
Lungs ache, and the old an^ melancholy, will find Dr. Merryman the be^^
Physician.

CANTERBVRY Tales.
(1.)
A Canterbury Carrier, driving his Wagon a-long the Road, called at a House to
drink, knowing the Man's Wife to be very kind to her Guest; and that he ^^ght
have the more opportunity for his design, ^cquainted her Husband that his
Horses was very warm with hard Traveling; desired him to ^rive a little way
while he refreshed himself, and he would soon overtake him, and quit him ^f his
Charge: to the which, the Innkeeper ^eadily consented. During which time, the
Car^ier addressed himself ^o his loving Landlady, in (...) more than ordinary
manner, insomuch, that ^here was nothing he required, but she willingly
consented to. In the Interim, came by a Gentleman who designed to drink at the
Inn: but perceiving at a Window, the Amorous passages between these lusty
Lovers, resolved as he could make no sport, so to spoil none; rid on, and soon
overtook the Innkeeper, driving the Carriers Wagon, accosted him thus:
Friend, said he, at such an Inn, naming the House where the Innkeeper lived: I
saw a Woman, describing her to him, and one I suppose to be a VVaggoner, so
fast linked in one another Arms, as if they intended never to be separated. By
my Faith, replied the Landlord, it is my own Wife, bu^ I Will be revenged of the
Rogue; so driving the VVaggon to a deep slowy place, over-turns it; leaving the
Horses stuck fast in the mire: returns homeward, meets the Carrier, who asked
him where his Horses and VVaggon was: O said the Landlord, they are safe enough
from running away, for in yonder Slow the VVaggon is over-turned, and your
Horses sticking fast in the mud: and what was your reason for that, says the
Carrier? and what was your reason of your too much familiarity with my Wife,
replied the Innkeeper? because, says the other, sweet opportunities are not to
be let slip. Then answered the Landlord, sweet Meat requires sour sauce: so
home he went, telling his Wife how cunning^y he had been revenged of her
Gallant.

(2.)
An unlucky Boy in Canterbury, got a great many a Rams-horns together in a
Basket, went up and down the streets in VVinter-time; crying, here is choice of
new Fruit. At length, an ancient Gentleman, that was Husband to a Beautiful
young Wife, asked to see them, which as soon as he had, he replied, you fool,
do you think I want Horns? no says the Boy, though you are provided yet I may
meet with some body ^at is not: at which several Spectators laughed ^^artily.

(3.)
A certain Shoemaker of Canterbury, by his ^^travagancy had wasted his whole
stock; his ^reditors coming fast upon him, was obliged to ^^ck up his St. Hughs
Bones, and march off. Tra^elling toward London, near Rochester by the side
(...) a VVood stood a Gentleman's House, and hard^y a couple of Turkies, who
upon his approach, ^ryed out; Cobble, Cobble, Cobble, to which he ^ade answer,
'twas a lie for it was well known (...) was a Shoemaker and no Cobbler. Being
terri^ly vexed, observing the coast to be clear, he whips ^p one of the Turkies,
clapping him under his Coat, and was a marching off; but considered ^e had as
good take the other for Company, which he did: but the Gentleman, looking out
^f an obscure VVindow, observed all the Passages, who coming down, followed the
Shoemaker, and soon overtook him: Friend, said he what business have you with
that Turkey? Sir, said the other, he has defamed me; calling of me Cobbler, when
it is well known I am a Shoemaker: but says the Gentleman what do you design
with the other? why truly, Sir said he, I take him along with me, to bear
witness of my abuse.

(4.)
A Young Man and Maid living in Kent, being in Love together, but Marriage
deferred by their Friends, by reason of the inequality in the Maidens Portion:
they resolved to steal some private embraces, contrary to their Parents
knowledge. And it fell out, they met together at Canterbury, that being a place
pretty far from home, and not much acquainted. There they took Lodgings at a
certain Inn: but the Man having some small business in the City, fell into
Company, and night approaching, the young Maid waiting with patience, and no
Lover came, ten a clock strikes, up stairs she goes, admiring to the House,
that her pretended Husband did not come; desiring to have a little Sack Posset,
thinking he might ^at some after his Journey. That was made, brought up, and
set on the Cupboards head with a Candle lighted, she being tired, goes to Bed
and there waits the happy hour, of her Lovers coming: Now you must understand,
there comes a Bearh^ard, that had been newly landed in the Down's, with three
lusty Bears; which being la^e was placed in a Stable-Room, just under the floor
where the Lovers was to enjoy themselves: but one of the Bears winding the Sack
Posset; begins to roar, when scratching the wall and finding it yield, made a
large hole just in the staircase, gets through and up stairs he comes into the
Chamber, where the Maid was then fallen asle^p; the Bear mounting his
twofore-feet on the C^bbord, to get to the Sac^ Posset his claws hung so in the
Cubboard-cloath that he pulls down the Sack Posset, Candle and all, upon him:
which noise awakened the young Maid, ^ho thinking her Lover was come, started
up (...) a sudden, but seeing a hairy thing all on fire (...) the Bear was, by
the Candles falling upon (...)m: she hid her ^elf under the Bed-cloaths, ^he
Bear by rouling about, at length put out the (...)e on his back, and falls to
licking up the Posset; which at length, so intoxicated his Brain, that being
disposed to sle^p, he leaps on the bed, and their lies; the fright whereof,
caused our young Woman to let fly behind. In the interim comes in her Lover,
who ascending the stairs, half slu^er'd, falls on the Bed, hugging the Bear
instead of his sweetheart; and begging her Pardon for his long stay: but he
scented such a smell of baked, boiled, stewed and Roasted, that he knew not
what to think of it; calling out, my Dear, my Dear, why do not speak? when
in the midst of al^ this Freak, the Bearheard missed his Bear, and looking for
him, found the hole, where he had made his escape^ comes up stairs with a
lighted Torch, and three or four belonging to the ^nn, discovered the whole
in^rigue, to the no small shame of the two Amoretta's.

(5.)
At a Coffee-house in Cant^rbury, several Gentlemen were together: one was
asking what news they heard from London, why replied, another^ there was forty
thousand Men rose yesterday morning; which made them all to wonder, and ask if
he knew for what, yes says he, only to go to Bed when night came: which
occasioned a great laughter.

(6.)
In Canterbury, there was a Carpenter that ha^ married a handsome young wife;
and he had ^ Gentleman that had boarded with him, that pre^tended to study
Astrology; but no otherwis^ than to gu^l the Husband and lie with his Wife,
who had promised him that favor, if he could beguile the Carpenter. Now this
Gentleman had a Rival, that had a months mind to have a lick at her Honey-pot,
but she hated him and loved her Boarder. It happened that the Carpenter missed
his Boarder upon a time, and searching about, found him in a Cock-loft, looking
up toward the Sky: what is the matter, quoth he? Oh says the Gentleman, I find
by Astrology that on Monday next at quarter-night, there will fall such a
Prodigious Rain that Noah's Flood was not half so great; therefore get quickly
thr^e Bucking-Tubs that we may get into them, and tie them to the top of the
Garret, that we may save our Lives: the Carpenter quaked for fear, got three
Tubs, and at night, he and his wife and the boarder, climb a Ladder and
severally get in. After much sighing, the Carpenter falls asleep, and the
Gentleman and the Landlady, merrily marches to to their intended business: but
while they were at it, the Rival knocks at the door and entreats her to grant
him a Kiss; now, said she to the Boarder, you shall laugh your fill: my
Dearest, quoth she, come close to the window, and I will be with you
immediately: the Rival wipes his mouth to receive the kiss. At length, she
opens ^^e VVindow, and desires what he does to do ^^ickly: now the night was
very dark, and she ^^lt about till she found him, and to tell the Tale either
better nor worse; he very savourly kissed ^^r bare Arse. The Rival cruelly
vexed; got a ^ed hot iron, and comes again, tell her he had ^rought her a Ring,
provided she would give ^im another kiss; and the Boarder thinking to ^ncrease
the sport, places his Arse out at the same window; which his Rival did singe
and burn, that he cried out, water, water, water; at which, ^he poor Carpenter
thinking that Noah's Flood ^as come, starts on a sudden, out of the
Bucking-^ub, fell upon the floor, broke his noddle, be^^ss'd his Breeches; and
at l^ngth discovers all ^he intreague.

(7.)
A Woman sitting with Fish in Canterbury Market, would always have a saying to
Men when they came to buy any thing: As a Man was cheapning her Fish, says she
to him, as you intend to have some of my Fish in your Belly, so I would fain
have some of your Flesh in my Belly; no says he, I cannot spare my Flesh to such
an ugly Puss as you: No, no, replied she, I did not mean as you mean, I mean
your nose in my Arse.

(8.)
A Gentleman living at Canterbury, having a So^, who was none of the Offspring
of Solomon, his name being William; used to frequent a Farmers House, n^ar the
City; was very freely received in respect of his Parents, or rather,
nonsensicall Figaries. One day above the rest; it happened that honest Will.
coming to the Farmers, and he being all alone at home, though^ to have some
Pastime with the Fool proposes to have Will. play at Blind-mans-buff: Lots
being drawn who should be first blinded, it happened to the Farmer, whereupon
Will. ties a Napkin fast over his eyes, so that he might not see. In the mean
time, the Fool capers about the Room, and the Farmer as fast after him to
caught him: but whilst they were traversing the Kitchen; the Fool espies
several Hogs-puddings hanging in the Chimney, and having a mind ^o them; he
cries out, You see, you s^e: no faith Will I don't, replied the Farmer, drawing
the Napkin more over his Eyes; in which time the Fool Whips down ha^f a scor^.
Links of Puddings out of the Chimney, and the Door standing open, away he trips
with them; and the Farmer, in the mean time, calling out ^ill. where art thou;
speak? but having no answer pulls of the Napkin, and finding what had happened,
and the Fool gone; horridly vexed, unties his House-dog, which in the daytime,
was always chamed up; sends hi^ eag^rly after hon^st Will: but when he cam^
near the Fool, he cried out. Oh poor Dog don'^ meddle with poor Will. throwing
down a Pudding, which wh^le the Dog devouring, he go^ about twenty yards in
ground; and so held him ^^ play till he got to his Father's House: where
relating the whole story to all the ^amily, caused ^ great deal of Mirth, which
the Farmer hearing of; was so ashamed, in being outwitted by ^ Fool: that for
a twelvemonth after, he would ^ot^ come to the Gentleman's House. But at ^^ngth
by much soliciting, and that the Gentlem^n would promise that his Son should
say nothing, he came to Dinner: but in the midst, before a great Company that
was there, the Fool cried ou^ to the Farmer, calling him by his ^ame. Remember
the Pudding, Remember the Pudding; which so aba^h'd the Farmer, that he
immediately rises up from Dinner, and went away, and never would come to the
House again.

(9.)
A c^rtain Gentleman formerly of Canterbury, a little before his death, made
his Will, and bequeathed a considerable Portion to a Niece; leaving his own
Brother as her Guardian, and the young Gentlewoman being near at Age: this
Covetous old Man fearing she would marry and the Estate go from him. By the
instigation of the Devil, resolves upon her Destruction; the night was come,
where this Guardian purposed to put his horrid Design in Execution: Himself
with two or three more in the dead time of the night, beset her House; when
behold Providence had allotted a far better success to this Virtuous and
Religious Gentlewoman; for the same Evening, a Gentleman be-lated on the Road,
implores her favor for a nights Lodging; which she granted him, in
consideration it was some distance from Canterbury, and no Village nearer and
the night proving very dark and rai^ny, and he a stranger. All being a bed this
wicked Guardian with his damned Accomplices, of^fers to break into the House;
which the young Lady hearing, runs to this strange Gentleman^ Chamber begging
her life of him, thinking he belonged to those without: but he protested by all
that is Sacred, he knew nothing of them but would spend the last drop of blood
he had^ in her Defense. In order, to which he descended the stairs into the
yard, where those Villains were breaking in, and discharged his Pistol^ which
happily shot one in the head; who falling so discouraged the rest, that they
betook them selves to flight, leaving the dead Body in the place, who in the
morning was found to be the Ladies Uncle and Guardian. Which Villainy being thus
discovered caused the Lady to respect the Gentleman, who was a younger Brother
of a good Family, and of a small Estate: but for his Generous vent^ing his
Life, in her defense, so valiantly. She in a short time, made him her Husband
and Master of a plentiful Estate; living together in great Love and prosperity
enjoying that which was so wickedly aimed at, by that Monster of a Man, her
cursed Uncle.

(10.)
Some Company being at a Tavern in Canter^^^y a drinking, one requested another
to pledge (...), but he refused; saying, he resolved to leave ^ drinking,
because it made him have a short ^emory; which occasioned the other to l^ugh
^^d reply that he would drink on still, for it made ^^m have a long Memory: for
since said he, I ^^ve used to drink hard, I am a twelve month (...) remembering
that I could a called to mind in a ^oment before, so I think I have a long
Memory.

(11.)
A Beautiful young Gentlewoman of Canterbury, ^eing wedded to an old Man in
respect of his ^iches, he being as full of Ice, as she of Fire, ^^d a mind to
try the difference between young and old Flesh, showed some Kindness more than
^rdinary to her Serving-man; which he perceiving, ^ays hold of all
Opportunities to address himself ^o her by way of Love; but she would not yield
^o his Desire, unless he would contrive some way to cornute her Husband in his
presence and he not to believe it, this caused the Serving-man to stretch his
Invention upon the Rack, who at last acquainted his Mistress that he had found
an Experiment to do it, provided she would when her Husband and she was a
walking in the Garden, pretend to Long for some Fruit on some of he highest
Trees, and to leave to him the management of the rest, which accordingly she
did: The old Man calling his Man to ascend the Tree to gather the Fruit; which,
as soon as h^ had got up, cried out with a loud Voice, Master Master, leave off
for shame, I never in all m^ life see so unseemly a^ Action, for shame
dise^^gage your self from my Mistress, or else some of the Neighbors will see
you: the old Man amazed at this Language, asked if the Fellow was mad, and what
he meant? O Sir, said the Man, the Tree is either bewitched, or else I can^not
believe mine own Eyes; for I fancy I see you upon my Mistress. Come down, come
down, and let me get up the Tree to know if, it seems so to me; the Fellow
comes down and the old Man gets up: in the Interim, the young Fellow fell to
work with his Mistress, the old Man looks down and sees it, cries out, in good
Faith says he, it seems to me just as it did to you, for methinks I see you
upon your Mistress as perfectly as if it was really so: the old Man gets down
and thinks the Tree bewitched^ orders presently to be cut down, for fear it
should infect the rest. Thus was the old Man made a ^uckold to his own Face and
would not believe it.

(12)
A Tinker going through Canterbury, sounds briskly on his Kettle, crying have
you any worl^ for a Tinker; upon which, a certain Shopkeeper living
over against the Pillory, standing at his Door, was minded to put a Je^t upon
the Tinker; bid him stop those two holes, pointing to ^he Pillory, to whom the
Tinker said, Sir, i^ ^ou please to lend me your Head and Ears, ^ will find a
Hammer and Nails and give you ^y Labor into the Bargain.

(13)
A young Man of Canterbury, by his Extrava^ancy had spent all his Estate, and
keeping ill Company accustomed himself to get Money by ^nlawful ways: one
Morning going to the Ca^hedral to Prayers, more to see if he could meet ^ith a
Booty than any Intention of Goodness: (...) happens to meet with a Country
Farmer who ^ad a heavy purse of Money in his Pocket, which ^e perceived, watched
an Opportunity, soon ^ade it his own, and marching off with it; met ^t the
Cathedral door two or three of his boon Companions, whom he made acquainted of
his ^eing fuller of Money than ordinary, and invited them to a Tavern not far
off, promising to treat them: Prayers ending, and and the Money missed, caused
the Looser to make inquiry after it, which one hearing, remembered the Passages
of our Sparks at the door, and acquainted him of it; advising him to take an
Officer and search them at the Tavern, and he need not question finding his
Money: which Advice he took, when coming where the Company were, and charging
them stoutly with it. Our Sharper inquired the Marks of the Purse and what Sum
was in it, pretending he found it; to which the Farmer answered, just 5^ l. at
which he said it was so, but he had spent 5 s. and the rest he was willing to
r^^turn, but the Looser would have his whole Sum or else he would have him
before a Magistrate^ which our youngster perceiving, and the Mon^ lay upon the
Table, he whips it into his Pocke^ again, so makes his Escape being followed by
the Officer, he had not run far, but an Ass stood in his way, our Offender
taking hold of his Ta^^ pulled it off, when running on, he happened to run over
a woman big with Child, upon which miscarried; still running on he run against
a Ladder that a Plaisterer was at work on, and flung the Plaisterer on the
Officer who had his Arm broken seeing these Mischiefs hap'ning, and fearing to
commit more, he suffered himself to be taken and carried before a Justice: The
Farmer made a Complaint for the loss of his 5. l. the Man forth loss of his
Asses Tail, the woman's Husband for the loss of his Child, and the Officer for
his broken Arm; all which Complaints delivered against the Delinquent, and
seriously weighed by the Magistrate, he considered the Retaliation was the best
method he could use; therefore he ordered that since the Looser would not abate
the 5 s^ spent, the Offender should keep it till he could make up the whole
Sum, and then deliver it: A^ for the Man whose Asses tail he had pulled off;
the Offender should take and keep the Ass and mak^ use of him, till such time
as his Tail was grown ^^gain, and then deliver it to the owner: and for the
Woman who miscarried, the Offender should ^ake and keep and lie with, till such
time she was as forward with Child, as when she miscarri'd, and then to deliver
her to her Husband; and lastly, for the Officer whose Arm was broke, ^e was
ordered to ascend the Ladder, and the Delinquent to stand under it, that the
Plaisterer might run against it, and fling it down, that the Officer might fall
upon the Offender and break ^is Arm as the others was before; thus was the
order of the Magistrate, which was put in Ex^cution, but I leave the Readers to
imagine.

(14.)
A handsome young Maid that waited upon a Physitian's Wife in Canterbury, had a
young Man addressed himself to her, in hopes of gaining her Love; and as she
was but a Servant, his Visits was chiefly a nights after the rest of the Family
was in Bed: now it happened one night, the young Man was not very well, and the
Maid out of her tender Love, would go into her Mistresses Room where his
Physic was, and fetched him some thing that was good, but he going a-long with
her, would be tasting several things, till at last he took a Dose of Opium: now
they being both returned into the former Room, s^tting very lovingly kissing
and expressing their Affections after a little time of silence, the Maid finds
her Lover fallen a sleep, jogs him, but could not wake him, mistrusts what he
had taken, did not know what to do; bnt to prevent a discovery, puts him into a
Chest that was in the Room, thinking he might come to himself by morning, she
goes to bed, and falls a sleep being pretty late, soon after a parcel of
Thieves beset the House, all being fast a sleep breaks in, binds all the
Family, taking a great deal of Money, Plate and Linen, ties it up in a Blanket
and carrying it off, the Blanket rent in the outer Room, and all their Booty
fell about: they seeing the Chest, opens it, and being deep, sees nothing at
the bottom. In they put the Linen, Plate and Money, and away they carry it to
one of their homes, which was not far off; morning comes, the robbing was
noised all about the City, and search was made, but no discovery; the Rogues
havi^g not time to divide the Spoil, set it in one of their bed-chambers, now
next morning our young Lover awakes, struggles and gets out of the Chest, the
woman being only in bed was frighted; out she gets, down stairs she runs in her
smock crying out murder, murder, murder, which the Neighbors hearing, runs to
see what was the matter, discourses the whole business, and upon further
Examination, our young Lovers pe^vate Enjoyments was publicly known, the
Robbery made very plain, and the Actors of it seized, sent to Prison, and
afterward Tried, Cast and Executed for the same.

15.
A married Gentleman coming through Cante^bury, his Horse threw him, which a
young Gentlewoman seeing, fell a laughing; the Man being terribly vexed that she
should laugh at hi^ fall, angerly said, Madam, pray admire not at this, for my
Horse always stumbles when he meets a Whore; she sharply replied, have a care
then Sir, you do not meet your Wife, for then you will certainly break your
neck.

(16.)
A Gentleman living at Canterbury, being to go to London, and having no
opportunity of re^urning a great sum of Money which he should have occasion for,
takes it in Gold, and sows it up in the wast-band of his Man's Breeches, who
was a good lusty Fellow, but a great ^oward; fearing he might meet with some
opposition upon the Road, and that he should be soundly beat if the Gold was
not discovered, and no Money sound about them: he puts 5 s. in his own Pocket,
and gave his Man 20 s. in his, as it was always his Custom to order his Man to
pay upon the Road, and give him an Account. Now it happened, when they were in a
lone place, of a sudden started out of a Wood three Men well mounted, two
laying hold of the Gentleman's hors^s Bridle, and one of the Man's, with their
Pistols cockt, commanding them to stand; the Gentleman desired them to be
civil, but however they was earnest for Money; the Gentleman told them he had no
more than to bear their Charges to London, putting his hand into his Pocket,
gave them what he had, and they going to the Man to see what he had; the
Gentleman calls to him by his Name, bidding him give the Gentlemen his Money,
which the Fellow putting his hand in his Pocket gave it them, and they going
away; but the Fellow crying out aloud to his Master, who was a liittle distance
from him, must I give them the Gold Master? which they immediately hearing,
returned, searched him, and took it away: The Gentleman horridly vexed, sed
little, but before they went away, desired that they would pleasure him in one
thing, and he should acknowledge it a Favor, that was to take his Man and
thrash him stoutly; they being all alighted, belabour'd him to the purpose: in
the mean time, their Horses graising about, was not very near; the Fellow
feeling the dry Blows, in a Rage draws his Hanger which he had by his side,
furiously lays about him; kills two upon the spot, disables the other, taking
the Money back again, with some from the Rogues, which his Master let him have
for his pains, though blaming him for his great simplicity in speaking of the
Gold.

^ merry Song fit to be sung at Christmas. The Tune, Oh Mother Roger.
(1.)
NOw, now this happy Christmas Season,
I present you with Delight;
^^nce it is no more than Reason,
For to pass away each Night:
Here is many a pleasant Tale,
Whilst you drink your nappy Ale,
and in Merriment abound,
Here is Pastime to be found;
Then take my word, for it is True,
It Is full of Mirth and Laughter to^
(2.)
For when we are all met together^
It will very well appear,
To forget the Winter weather,
Let us taste your dainty Cheer^
Minced Pie, with Roasted Beef,
This will soon afford Relief:
Christmas comes but once a Year,
Therefore let it now appear,
That Christmas shall receive its due,
In Feasting, Mirth and Laughter too.
(3.)
I pray let me come to the Table
Mistress Goose shall not go fre^,
I am Sturdy, Stout and and Able,
I will make her yield to me;
Though she be both Stout and Brave,
Either Leg or Wing I Will have,
Fearing not her Spice nor Salt,
Since we have the Juice of Malt^
I never fear, but to subdue
The force of Pig and Capen too.
(4.)
Then further for our Recreation,
Men and Maids at Cards may play,
Sure there needs no Disputation,
For this same we freely may;
Reason will not this refuse,
So we do not this Abuse:
Then we may Enjoy Content,
All the days of Merriment,
In telling many a pleasant Jest,
Which is for Merriment Expressed.
A pleasant Song to be sung at Easter The Tune, King James 's Jigg.
(1.)
NOw, now the b'^ak Gales of Winteir is past^
The Spring is returning with Flora at last.
Each green Hill with Primrose and Violets is sprad,
The tender young Branches now hold up their Heads,
Whereon the sweet Birds their Anthems will sing
which makes all the Groves and the Valleys to ring
Oh this is the Triumph they make in the Spring
Now this to each Maiden much Pleasure dot^ bring.
(2)
^ow Easter with holy Days here are come on,
And Robin takes Susan, and William takes Nan;
(...) their Recreation a Walk they do take,
And give them stewed Pruons with Custord and Cake:
^^d while they do thus in the Blessings appear^
^at Robin is Kissing and Courting his Dear,
^^d giving her Cheesecakes and choice of good Cheer,
^^eet Susan could wish it would last all the Year.
(3.)
^^oth William to Nancy pray let me prevail,
To have your admittance to tell you a Tale,
^^s to make us merry, and pass away time
Quoth Nancy begin then, I count it on Crime:
^^en merrily passing the Hours away,
^ith Susan and Nancy both Bonny and Gay,
^^t Night soon approaching no longer they stay,
^^t promise to meet them again on May Day.
^ delightful Song in honor of VVhitsontide^ The Tune, Caper and Jirk it.
(1.)
NOw W^itson-Holy-days they are come,
Each Lass enjoys her Mate,
The youthful Gallants both all and some,
Their Love they do Relate
To be Entire, both Chaste and Pure,
With many sweet words beside,
Then strait they advance, and call for a Dance,
For the Honor of Whitsontide.
(2.)
Sweet William he taking jumping Ione,
They dance a Turn or two,
Whilst Sarah she sighing makes sad Moan,
She knew not what to do:
But after this to Stool-Ball play.
And many fine Games beside,
From morning till night they take their Delight^
For the Honor of Whitsontide.
(3.)
It is a most gallant sight to see,
The Damsels how they Trip
A long the Green with a merry Glee,
Sometimes her Foot does slip,
But yet they valley it not a Rush,
In sport they will abide;
The Bells they will ring, and the Maidens will sing
For the Honor of Whitsontide.
(4.)
Now when this Pleasure is at an end,
And night approaching near,
Then every young Man takes his Friend,
Whom he esteemed dear:
And down they sit beneath a Tree,
Tell many a Tale beside,
With many a Kiss, no hurt is in this,
For the Honor of Whitsontide.
FINIS.

