A SERMON PREACHED IN SAINT PAVLES CHVRCH THE tenth of October. 1641.

By Mr. Thomas Chisheare. Master of Arts of Brasennose College in Oxford.

Wherein are many memorable passages most worthy of serious observations in
these Times.



Printed at London in the year of our Lord 1641.

A SERMON PREACHed at Saint Paul's Church the tenth of October. 1641.
Upon Psalm. 148. ver. 12. and part of the 13. Young men, and maidens, old
men, and children, let them Praise the name of the Lord.
MY whole allotted time would be to short to stand, either to speak of the
Penman here the holy Prophet David, or this his work in general, or this
his Psalm in particular. For himself, he was a man after Gods own heart,
that is his greatest title, and he went beyond all the Sons of Adam, who was
a King, and a Prophet, in all causes, both Ecclesiastical, and pollitique, in
four particulars never yet paralleld; A Shepherd a Musition: a Soldier: and a
Prophet.

For the first, ye know what service he did, he slew a Lion, and a Bear, an
absolute tipe of Death, and Hell, to be overcome by this victorious Lion, of
the Tribe of Judah. For a Musician, he was the sweet singer of Israel, yea he
was able to charm the Devil himself, and quit that evil Spirit which vexed
Saul. For a Soldier, he was most famous, witness that Battle wherein he slew
Goliath, and beheaded that great Champion of the Philistines with his own
sword. For a Prophet, none so fully, and so clearly foretells the Person,
Incarnation, Passion, and resurrection of Christ foretold, as David did: he in
his own person did oftentimes intimate many other men, so that his divine
writings are the Compendium of all the sacred Scripture, it seems Christ
himself set much by this book, for you may observe that he used the sayings
of the Prophet David, more then any other Prophet, yea more then all the
Prophets together, Moreover when the Devil tempted Christ, he arged a Text out
of this Prophet, as if the Devil had observed how greatly David's sayings were
respected Our Church considering the useful excellency of this part of
Scripture, has ordained a more frequent use, then of any other part of Divine
write. But I must stay no longer in the commendation of this our Prophet, or
his book of Psalms, he rather bids as practice what we find written: young
Men and Maidens etc.

Which words are the Conclusion of a Psalm, which we may not unfitly style by
the name of a Divine Masque, where is scarce any Creature in the whole world
but the Species are in this Psalm.

Here are Angels, verse. 2.
and all Hosts. Sun, and Moon, and Stars of light. verse. 3.
The Heaven, and Heavens, and the waters that be above the Heavens. verse. 4.
The Earth, the Dragons, and all Depths. verse. 7.
Fire, Hayle, Snow, and vapors and stormy winds. verse. 8.
Mountains and all Hills, Fruitful trees, and all Cedars, verse. 9.
Beasts, and all cattle, creeping things, and flying Fowls verse. 10.
Kings of the earth, and all People, Princes, and all Judges of the earth.
verse. 11.


And in the words of my text, Both Young Men, and Maidens, Old Men, and
Children, let them praise the Name of the Lord. You that desire strange, and
rare sights, O come hither, and view the whole troop of Gods creatures, a
Chorus that is led by Angels, followed by men, and directed by God himself,
and yet stay not too long in contemplating of them, for thou they self also of
what degree soever, have a part to act, as well as the rest. Young Men, and
Maidens etc.

For my better proceeding herein, I shall first observe the connection of these
words, with the precedent. Secondly the duty that is commanded, and that is
praise to God. And thirdly the Actors, and those are, Iuvenes and virgins etc.

So that you see the Text like the Iron gate to Peter, opens unto us of its
own accord; and to look for more abroad, were like Esaw to hunt for Venison a
far off, when like Jacob, we may have it near our hand. I will treat of
this Text very plainly, for, Ita non debet loqui Theologus, ut possit
intelligi, sed ut non possit non intelligi. First that we may know that this
Masque is worth our labor, and not unbeseeming so glorious a creature as man
is, our Prophet shows us that it befits the Angels in Heaven, verse. 2.
yea it is the height of their felicity, to comfort themselves in Anthems of
praise to Almighty God. So says Saint Luke And suddenly there was with the
Angels a multitude of the heavenly Hosts praising God. Luke 2. verse. 13.
The Angels leaped out of Heaven for joy, to congratulate mankind with a
morning Antheme of praise, and thanks. Thus you see the part we have of act is
nothing derogatory unto our worth, since the glorious Angels themselves are
employed in the same. But to go on, this our Prophet shows; that the very
Beasts, and Trees, and Fowls can perform that, which the Devil would
persuade us, is so difficult. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. Esa: 1.
verse. 3.
So here our Prophet would have us to take notice of Beasts, and Fowls of the
air, nay the air it self, wind, and storms fulfilling his word. Christ tells
the Jews, that the Queen of the South should rise up in Judgment against them
at the last day, and not only the Queen of the South, but the arie wind of
the South, shall as it were rise up in Judgment against us at the last day,
because that also does perform the will of God; Which man will not do. Now I
come to that which I chiefly (...) at, Young men, and Maidens etc.

The Duty here enjoined, is a duty of Praise, but not so much (...), as (...)
for then the Pharisee would have acted his part best: our praise must be both
Ore, Opere, and Cora^ Christ forbidding swearing in that Divine Sermon of his
upon the mount, shows us a Method, how to affirm, or deny any thing, Mat. 5.
verse. 37.
Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, (...): for whatsoever is more then
these, comes of evil.

On which place (I remember) one glosseth well Christ does not intend (says
he) that we should pronounce yea twice, or nay twice with our tongues, but that
the heart should first consent or refuse, and then the tongue should follow,
either in yea or nay, there should be an agreement between the tongue, and the
heart, let your communication be, yea yea, nay, nay, so likewise in preaching
the name of God it must be first performed by the heart, and then ecchoed out
by the tongue, verse. 8.
and afterward commented upon in all our actions, verse. 4.
as yea may see in this Psalm, where the Prophet calling upon the creatures to
praise God, urges them thereunto with an argument taken from the wind, and
storm, fulfilling his word. So that it is not enough for the wind to whisle,
or the rain to rattle, if we should Praise God as we ought, it must by
fulfilling his word: What is that instrument of ten strings which our Prophet,
speaks of but the devout heart of a Christian, tuned, and rightly set to the
ten commandments? This Music sounds sweetest in the ears of Heaven, so says
Saint Augustine more at large in that excellent work of his, de december chordis.
Good works should say to orall confession as Ruth did to Naomi, And Ruth said
entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee, for
whither thou go I will go, etc. Ruth. 1. verse 16. and 17.


And where a godly conversation does not concomitate orall confession, that
praise sounds harsh in the ears of God, Ergo (as the Father says) Noli (...)
We must have brace-lets as well as Earerings, good deeds as well as courteous
language: or the ornament which our spiritual Isaac gives to his Rebechah,
and which he most esteems; these are they which make him take pleasure in our
beauty, therefore let us take pleasure not only to speak, and hear, but do
the same: for this is truly to praise the name of the Lord, and as we must
praise God in thought, word, and work, we must labor to keep an agreement
between them all; for if one only string be out of tune, although all the rest
be rightly set, yet this one will so jar, that the lesson played upon it, to a
skillful ear, will sound as bad as if all were out of tune. If thou do
forsake drunkenness, Whoredom, or such like, and yet do cleave to
covetousness, it comes all to on reckoning, for he that offends in one point,
is guilty of all, (says the Apostle) look therefore to thy bosom sin, and
never leave striving until thou quite extirpate the same. How many are there
of us, that will pray in necessity, but will not praise in prosperity. The
husbandman so long as the corn is growing, will hedge and fence the field,
with all care, and diligence: but when it is reaped then he lets it lie open,
for Hogs, and other Beasts to tread, and trample in. When we have what we
looked for, then welet the reine slip, in a storm we would be glad to shelter
our selves under the branches of that tree: which afterward we are ready to cut
down; and burn it. After the same manner the ungrateful Athenians dealt with
Themistocles, when there was any sedition, or uproare in the City, then who but
Themistocles, but when by his discreet wisdom, and good Counsel all was
quieted, then who more vile, who more contemptible then poor Themistocles? I
wish, this might be applied to too many of our times, who are fitly compared to
a Herd of Hoggs, the keeper beats them down acornes, and they eat them up
greedily, but never look up to the tree, only when they find their store
spent, grunt a little for more like as when some wholesome potion is boiled in
a brass vessel, yet the brass gives it such a relish, that it becomes good
for nothing. Prayers, and praise in a good man's mouth, is like sweet incense,
but in others, it is like brass, and savours too strong of the Cask, and
therefore the wise man says, that praise is not seemly in the mouth of a
Sinner.

The husband man when he is like to have a good harvest, or the Merchant a good
return from Sea. He will give praise to God, but with such a relation to his
gain, that a man may easily perceive it was not of free will, neither indeed
willingly did he give praise to Almighty God: and indeed men do behave
themselves so, as if they were bound no more to give God praise, then he is to
give them benefits. The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away (says
Job) blessed be the Name of the Lord. verse. 5.


Quando tibi been est, lauda misericordiam Dei: quando male, lauda iusticiam
Dei. And that lustily, and with a good courage. Our prophet David calling upon
the creatures to praise the Lord, he joyneth a reason: For (says he) Let them
praise the Lord, for he commanded, and they were created.

But we have much more cause; for besides we have the benefit common with them,
we have above all other creatures, a great benefit of redemption by Jesus
Christ: in this God has exalted men above Angels, in giving unto them his
only begotten Son, as his power was manifest in the creating of the world,
so the riches of his love, was never so fully showed, as in sending his only
begotten Son to suffer for us. I remember a story of one Saleucus, who made a
law, that all adulterers should be punished with the loss of both their eyes:
on a time it came to pass his own son was taken in the same fault: his good
old Father being perplexed much thereat, at last resolved on this course: that
the executioner should pull out one of his own eyes: and another of his
Sons; that so both justice might be satisfied, and mercy showed. We likewise
were in danger both of loosing this life, and that which is to come, as also of
suffering a double Death, temporal, and eternal, but God has found out a
means for our delivery: Christ came in, and suffered one Death himself, to
free us from the other Death. Plato gave thanks unto the Gods. First, that he
was a man, and not a Beast. Secondly that he was a Graetian, and not a
Barharian. Thirdly that he was not one of the common rout, but a Philosopher.
But besides we are men, we are Christian men, who live in peace, and plenty
with the free passage of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Therefore let us both
Young Men and Maidens, old Men and Babes praise the name of the Lord. Gratiarum
actio, respicit gratiam dantis, ubi igitur est gratia mayor dantis, ibi gratia
mayor accipientis. Assure thy self of one thing as Saint Augustine has, Qui
non vult laudare in hoc seculo, obmutescet in futuro. God at the last day, will
say to such an one, as the King did to him, that had not on the wedding
garment. I should be too tedious if I should stand to reckon up the manifold
mercys that God has be stowed on this our land, beyond all the world besides,
our Peace, and Plenty, with the Gospel of Christ, our many, and great
deliverances, both from foreign enemies, and Domesticke Traitors: so that we
may rightly say, Ignem and aquam transivimus. God has delivered us from the
Spanish invasion, and the Gunpowder treason, and has placed us in a wealthy
land. Be ye therefore filled with the Spirit (says our Prophet David) speaking
to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs: and here I might
speak of the godly care of our Church, which has ordained singing of Psalms,
both before, and after Sermon, and indeed are very fitting to be sung in order,
for the better stirring up of our affections. And here I have a just cause to
task them of the Separation, who will not admit of any set form of prayer,
for that (as they say) is cursing of the Spirit, but why then should we have a
set form of singing? For my part it shall ever have my allowance and I think
that these their Ex tempore prayers sounds as harshly in the ears of heaven,
as diverse Psalms sung together in sevorall tunes, would in ours. I remember
the Apostle Paul makes mention of three graces viz. Faith, Hope, and Charity,
but the chiefest of these is Charity, Charity, and love is the chiefest 1 Chro.
1(...) verse 13.
Propter durationem, for in Heaven we shall enjoy both that we did believe, and
hoped for; but love shall accompany us there also: in imitation thereof, I
shall also name three, prayer, praise, and Patience, but the chiefest of these
is Praise, and that for the same reason, because it shall outlast all other,
here we stand in need of things necessary both for the body, and soul, and
therefore we have need of prayer, here we are troubled, and afflicted with
diverse kinds of adversities, And therefore we had need of Patience: but
hereafter in heaven, all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, we shall
have no need then, of Prayer, or patience, only praise shall still remain,
then it shall be as it now is, the greatest joy of the Angels to consort
themselves with the Saints, in singing glory, and Honor, and praise, to him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. And so I have done
with the duty in general. And now give me leave a little to acquaint you with
some observations; and first for reproof, there is no impartial Christian,
but it would grieve his heart to see the profanation of Gods ordinances, when
Cobblers, Weavers, and Taylours, and Feltmakers. Frange leves calamos, and
scinde Thalia libellos. And these to go unpunished, nay much made on, and well
countenanced: many of our Pulpits now a days, do ring of the Doctrine of
Devils. On did preach publicly, that it was not fit for Parents to teach their
children the Lords prayer. Another did maintain, and approve, of that bloody
act of Eelton. An other (to use his own words) would maintain that there was
no more holiness in the Church, then in his Kitchen, nor in our communion
Table, then his Dresserboard. O horrid Blaspemy! what will become of us, if
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction may not curb such as these are. O that they might
be permitted to punish these things, with what fury would they dart out their
thunderbolts, and with their Coruscant beams beat these bats into their
accursed holes; the house of God profaned: the memory of the Saints razed: the
monuments of good Christians; it is great pity to see, that those who have
been special benefactors to this City, that their Monuments are defaced. I
would it might be taken into serious consideration, neither Insignia Regalia
can escape their censure. For in one Church of this City, it was openly
preached, that the Kings Crown should be pulled down, because it had a cross
upon it. I wish we could pull down the old man of Sin, and leavell those
mountains of Pride which are in our hearts. Gods house is abused, and the
Ministers of God abused: there cannot one of them go along the streets, but
straight he is taken notice on, who he is, or the like contumelious reproaches,
look yonder goes a Jesuit: and Abbilubber, one of Baals Priests: one of
Canterburies whelps.

There is one place I would have you look unto: where it is said. They mocked
the messenger of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets: until
the wrath of the Lord was against his People, till there was no remedy. 2 Chro.
36. verse 16.
We read in the former verses that they had polluted the Temple and committed
many, and great sins, bnt yet God did forbear, until they came to misusing of
his Prophets, and then there was no remedy, the word in the original does
properly signify, that their sore was cancred. The decent Munimenta which have
stood time out of mind in diverse Churches, to keep the Lords table from
prophanaion, is fetched away by those that have no authority. (I conceive the
order of the honorable house of Parliament) and I do confess that there were
too many alterations of late, but for those that have stood decently, time out
of mind, that the rude, and inconsiderate multitude should demolish them! I
would wish these to consider what the holy Prophet says, He that breaks a
Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him: I conceive that ye all know what I mean by
the Hedge, and I wish you may not too soon feel what is meant by the Serpent.
We have too many in these our days are so invective against Bishops, as if they
would pluck up both branch, and root in one day, although there may be some
faulty in the Church, therefore shall the Church suffer? Some Aldermen have
been faulty, and some Judges have been Dilinquent, but therefore shall there be
no Judges, and no Aldermen? Let the parties, that have done evil, be punished,
and not their (...) office. So likewise for the book of Common Prayer, how is
it condemned, and reviled (that I say) what was made by the consent of many
godly Ministers, and sealed with their dearest blood; it has bin termed by the
name of Pottage, or Porridge, you must give me leave to be a forewarner to
tell: you. For what things the wrath of God does hang over our heads, but by my
conseut, those that will have none of the Porridge, should have none of the
meat, Ex tempore Prayer, and Ex tempore Preaching, as if their glorious Lord,
and heavenly Father, had deserved no more reverence at their hands then to
serve for blocks, and Posts, that when they are ready to tumble out of their
way, by taken of theirin considerate have, taken hold of these names, keep
their tongues in play, while their rash invention makes a farther passage you
shall read what Method was observed in the building of Solomon's Temple, that it
was built of stone, made ready, before it was brought thither; so that there
was neither hammor, nor Axe, nor any tool of Iron heard in the house while it
was in building: 1 King 6. verse 7.
if this Method were observed in the building of the Temple, we should not have
such hacking, and hamering, as if Babell were now building, rather then the
house of God; or if it were rather a pulling down, then a building up, and
therefore our late King James, calls such Prayers, Monstrous births, and indeed
how can they be otherwise, when they are conceived, and brought forth all in
one hour? Prayer is the most necessary duty to a Christian of all other, and
of all other most acceptable to Almighty God. Oration fidelis est coeli clavis.

But thou (such as these) must not think to open Heaven gate with the rusty
picklock of ex tempore prayer. The same author King James says in his (...).
If we were to come before an earthly Prince, how would we think with our
selves before hand, what gesture, and language, we should use before we came
into his presence: Do you think this fitting to be done to an earthly King:
and shall the King of Kings (my beloved) be thus dishonored, in many places of
this your City, and Surburbs, by Anabaptists, S^peratists, Burtonists, and
Brownists, and I shall acquaint you with the passage concerning the first
founder of the last of these sects?

It was one Brown a Minister who would preach no where but in private houses,
ann desert places, and the like: and the reason that he alleged, was, because
we had no true Church but mark the event, a good benefice was offered this
Brown, which he willingly accepted of, and he, that before would not
acknowledge a Church in England, was content to be a Parson of A-Church a
certain town in Northamptonshire: lo here you may behold the sincerity
together with the antiquity of these Brownists! We read in the vision of
Elijah, that there was a Whirlwind, but God was not in the whirlwind: next
an earthquake: next a fire: but last of all a still small voice, and there God
was.

When was there a greater whirlwind and Tempest in the Land then now is, and
is there not an earthquake in this land of ours? when one shall go away with
five or 600. pounds a year, and a poor Vicar for 40. pounds shall undergo
all the burden? There was also a fire, but God was not in it, when many of our
protestant Martyrs in the Marian days, were carried up to heaven like Elijah in
chariots of fire. But as for us throughout our second Deborah's days, and our
second Solomon's days, and in the reign of our second Josiah (whom God long
preserve) among us, we have, and do hear the still small voice of the preaching
of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, we have had free liberty for the public
Worship, and service of God, even the full age of a man, till now of late,
these disturbers of the peace of our Church, have risen, and the wind has
begun to blow again in the whisling, and blustering of these Brownists. I know
there are some who are ready to task us for meddling with these things we have
nothing to do with, but one answer is, what things are out of our reach, or
what men in points of Religion? I am sure our commission extends to the highest
Cedars, in Lebanon, as will as the Hysop, that grows upon the wall. We are
dogs of the flock, and therefore when we see cause we may bark, and live too.
Now I come to give you a view of the actors: and those Young Men, and Maidens,
etc.

The parties are mentioned by couples, being tied two and two together. Young
men, and Maidens, old Men, and Children, etc.

And here is a double Caveat, first against presumption, and secondly against
Despair. First, that the younger sort might desire to praise God, they are
exhorted to address themselves to the service of God, to remember their
Creator in the days of their youth. Secondly, for aged men, that they might not
doubt of the acceptance of their service, our Prophet exhorts them also, for
the first you know David calls upon the Sun, and the Moon, to praise God.
Should the Sun reply, I will not do it in the morning, or at noone time, but
when I am about to sit? or the Moon reply, I will not in the full, but in the
waine? or the Tree not in the springtime, or Summer, but at the fall of the
leaf? so likewise, thou Young man defer not the time of Praising God: take
the swinge of thy youth and do not defer to apply thy self to the service of
God, till thy old age, but remember that for all these things, thou shall come
to judgment. He that styles himself by the title I am cares not for I will
be, or I have been; but he that is at this present: take heed therefore, thou
strong, and lusty young Man, the Devil that holds the now, will every day tie
a new cord about thee: Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit: consider this,
you that are yet young, whom the morning Sun of light adornes with his glorious
rays, every-one does not live to be old. Let us not procrastinate Gods
service: For the longer we defer to serve God, the farther God's grace is
distant from us, and the dominion of Satan is more strenghthened in our
hearts, the more we delay, the more is our debt, the greater our sin, and less
our grace. I will commend this lesson unto all. He, that does not repent to
day, bath a day more to repent of, and a day less to repent in. I shall only
conclude this point with an hearty exortation for us all, of what sect, Age,
and degree soever, I could wish that all our lives, might end, like this book
of Psalms in blessing, and praising Almighty God. I will hold your patience no
longer in suspense, but will consummate all with the Psalmist. Let young Men,
and Maidens, Old Men, and Children, praise the name of the Lord. Yea this name
especially the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to whom with the Father, and Holy
Spirit, be all honor, Praise and glory now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

