A SECOND EDITION OF CAMDEN'S Description OF SCOTLAND, Containing a Supplement
of these Peers, or Lords of PARLIAMENT, who were Mentioned in the First
Edition; and an Account of these since Raised to, and further Advanced in the
Degrees of Peerage, until the Year 1694.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. M.DC.XCV.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
IN the Description of Scotland, the Author Camden has been at great Pains,
and taken Information from the most Intelligent, in the Antiquities, Peerage
and Constitutions of the Kingdom; and especially from Sir Alexander Hay
Secretary of State, who in the year 1608, did succeed in that Office to the
Lord Balmerinoch; till which time, he has given the most full and exact
account of our Nobility, or Lords of Parliament, in the Order and Description
of the Countries or Shires, the Places from which they take their Designations,
and where they have their Interest or Residence; and therefore his Work
deserves very well a Second Edition, for the benefit of the Kingdom of
Scotland; which if it had been finished in due Time, as it was begun to be
Printed, might have been a part of the Second Edition of the whole Britannia,
and will always be a Treatise by it self concerning Scotland, to satisfy these
whose Curiosity lead them no further.

In this Edition, little Alteration is made from the Words of the Author,
albeit now less used, except where the Error or Mistake can be mended by a few
Words, and might have proceeded, rather from the Fault of the Transcriber or
Printer, then the Author; and I have left out the Latin Lines made by
Johnston, the Poet on several Occasions, and also the Translation of them in
English Rhyme, as Tending more to increase the Volumn, then to give Light to
the History; and have made Alteration of these words which directly relate to
the former Treatise, as a part of it, and so have omitted the Authors Preface
and Apology, for his little experience in Scottish Affairs, which he lightly
passes over, reserving the due Honor to these of that Nation, with a more
full Pinsel to set forth these Matters. Albeit in several things of more remote
and ancient Times he is mistaken; yet still the Treatise is useful, and
deserving well to be published: nor is he or his Informers liable to Censure on
that account, most of these being Vulgar Errors, passing in that Time, and
since, for truth: and a second Edition was more proper, passing over them, then
in this to have Commented upon, and contradicted the Author, which is but
seldom and slenderly done, in Matters only concerning the Kingdom in General,
and the Great Stewarts of SCOTLAND, the Progenitors of our Kings.

It will be a Task, requiring great time, skill and pains, and the help of more
knowing persons, by particular Treatises, going in order from the greater
Antiquity downward, out of the most ancient and approved Histories, most exact
Collections and authentic Records and Documents, to describe the considerable
and eminent Families, who have by their Actions deserved to be Noticed, without
which the Account of the Nation in general, and of the other great Families
will be incomplete; albeit some of them did never attain to the Degree of
Peerage: seeing in the Sense and Language of our Law, as well as of the French,
the Nobility is composed of the Barons, Freeholders, and immediate Tennents of
the King, and not of the Peers only, now called Lords of Parliament. In which
undertaking, the Errors in this Treatise, to the Advantage of some, and
Prejudice of other Families, may be rectified; and in the mean time, the
Publisher of this Edition is not to be concluded of the Opinion, that all the
Matters contained therein, are to be received as Truth, and is not to Incurr
the displeasure of any, by the further publishing of these smaller Errors.

If in the Supplement and Addition, the Publisher has erred in anything, upon
better Information, and full Conviction, he is most willing to amend, and shall
study to find an Opportunity to publish the same: and if in the Descriptiou of
some Families, he has been more Large then in others, it is not to be imputed
to Partiality, but that his Knowledge and Information was not alike full in
all. As to these more ancient. Lords, who are described by the Author, the
Publisher has given no more particular account of the times of their Creation*
then the Author did, reserving that to another Time and Occasion; but has been
more special in the Accounts of the Later Lords, and in the method of the
Author has mentioned them, according to the Order of the Situation of the
several Places from which they have their Designations: Some Errors are mended
in the Description of Places, but in that, exactness is not studied, there
being particular Maps and Descriptions of the Countries by Straloch and
Scotstarbat, Printed anno 1654, and lately by Mr. Adair, some more exact Tables
are published, and the rest daily expected.

It is Observable, That a great part of the Nobility, since the Reign of King
James the Sixth, have made and increased their Estates, by being Members of the
College of Justice, or Session, and obtaining the Erection of Church
Benefices, (whereof they were Commendators) in Temporal Lordships, to them and
their Successors: the finer Spirits, who formerly were employed in the Wars, or
became Churchmen, since the Reign of King James the Fifth, beginning to apply
themselves to the Laws, some of them did attain to the Degrees of Lords of
Session, and other public Employments; and for their better Encouragement,
were rewarded with Abbacies in Commendam, and were Created Peers, or Temporal
Lords of Parliament.

It is likewise worth Observing, That King James the Sixth (after his
Succession to the Crown of England) did make a considerable Addition to the
ancient Nobility of this Nation, by new Creations, as well as in his other
Dominions; for in England and Ireland, as well as here, the Peers were much
diminished by Forfaultures, extinction of Dignities, and by the suppression of
the Abbots, and Priors, which Queen Elizabeth had not supplied.

Since the Reformation of Religion, the Constitution of our Parliament did
receive a considerable Alteration, the Clergy, the third Estate, for some
time, being almost Abolished; and these in the Sederunts of the Parliaments,
and Articles pro Clero, not being Churchmen, but mere Laics, Titulars and
Commendators of Abbacies and Priories; and of them seldom a full and equal
Number with the other Estates in the Articles, and for the most part but two or
three of them designed Bishops, who had not the full Power and Episcopal
Jurisdiction, which was for a long time lodged in the Synods and General
Assemblies, and the only Popish-Bishop, who embraced the Reformation, and
continued in Office in the Church and State, was Adam Bothwel, Bishop of
Orkney. There was also a great Alteration in the Representation of Barons and
Freeholders in Parliament, who albeit fred by Act of Parliament King James the
First, from general appearances in Parliament to which they were formerly
liable, and allowed to send their Commissioners to represent them; yet if this
Act was ever observed, it was long in desuetude, till revived in the Parliament
1587; Since which time the Freeholders of the Shires, under the Degrees of
Peers, have sent their Commissioners to represent themselves and their Vassals
in Parliament.

To supply these Alterations, it was necessar that more should be Created Lords
of Parliament, to come in proper Right, and as representing these holding their
Lands of them, as the Bishops and Abbots did for themselves and their Vassals,
in right of their Baronies, which they held immediately of the Crown; and
Bishops being again suppressed, as well as Abbots and Priors, whose Lands are
possessed by the Peers or Freeholders, or their Vassals, the great number of
Peers is still more reasonable, whereof the half do never appear in Parliament,
by reason of Minority, or as being Females, or being otherways Legally
incapacitat or hindered to take place there; and also, the Addition of Twenty
six Members, by a late Act of Parliament to the representation of the Barons,
did make a just Balance, the Freeholders representing a great part of the
Property of the Nation.

It is to be remembered, that of those Dignities noted as Extinct, some of them
do stand in the Rolls of Parliament, their Honors being lately enjoyed, and
the Rolls not altered, but by special Warrant.

To the Treatise, is subjoyned a List of the Nobility with their Sirnames, and
the Titles of such of their eldest Sons who are Lords, and of the other Members
of this Current Parliment, Commissioners for Shires and Burghs Royal; and a
second Alphabetical Table of these whom the Publisher observed to have been
created, or to have used at anytime, the Titles or Dignities of Lords,
Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses and Dukes; and a Table of the Abbacies and
Priories, especially these who were Conventual, once a part constituent of our
Parliament; with a List of the Presbytries, Synods and Commissariots not
specified in the Treatise.

These are the few Things with which the Publisher thought fit to advertise the
Reader, Farewell.

A DESCRIPTION OF Scotland.
CHAP. I.
The Division of SCOTLAND.
THe North part of the Island of Britain, was of old time inhabited throughout
by the Picts, who were divided into two Nations, the Dicalidonii, and
Vecturiones: of whom the Author did speak out of Ammianus Marcellinus. But when
the Scots became Lords and Rulers over all this part, it was shared into seven
parts among seven Princes, as we find in a little ancient Pamphlet touching the
division of Scotland, in these words and old Name.

The first part contained Enegus and Maern.

The second, Atheodl and Goverin.

The third, Stradeern and Meneted.

The fourth, was Forthever.

The fifth, Mar with Buchan.

The sixth, Muref and Ros.

The seventh Cathanes, which Mound, a Mountain in the midst divides, running
on forward from the West Sea to the East.

Then afterward the same Author reports, according to the Relation of Andrew
Bishop of Cathanes, that the whole Kingdom was divided likewise into seven
Territories.

The first from Erith, in the British tongue called by the Romans Worid, now
Scotwade, to the River Tae.

The second to Hilef, according as the Sea fetches a compass, to a Mountain in
the Northeast part of Sirivelin, named Athran.

The third from Hilef to Dee.

The fourth from Dee to the River Spe.

The fifth from Spe to the Mountain Brunalban.

The sixth Mures and Ros.

The seventh, the Kingdom Argathel, as it were the border and skirt of the
Scots: who were so called of Gathelgas their Captain.

Also according to the Habitation of the People, Scotland is now divided into
Highland-men and Lawland-men: Highlandmen. Lawlandmen.
These being more civil, use the English Language and Apparel; the other, which
are rude and unruly, speak Irish, and go apparelled Irish-like. Out of this
division the Borderers are excluded, because by reason of Peace shining now
upon them on every side, by a blessed and happy Union, they are to be ranged
and reckoned in the very heart and midst of the British Empire, as who begin to
be weary of Wars, and to acquaint themselves with the delightful benefits of
Peace.

Moreover, according to the Situation and Position of the places, the whole
Kingdom is divided into two parts: the South on this side the River Tay, and
the North beyond Tay; besides a number of Islands lying round about. In the
South part, these Countries are more remarkable than the rest.

Tiviotdale Merch Lauden Liddesdale Eskedale Annandale Niddasdale Galloway
Carrick Kyle Cunningham Arran Clidesdale Lennox Stirling Fife Strathern
Menteith Argile Cantire Lorn.
In the North part are reckoned these Countries.

Loquabrea Braidalbin* Perth Atbol Angus Merns Mar Buquhan Murray Rosse
Sutherland Cathanes Strathnavern.
These are subdivided again according to their civil Government into Counties,
called Sheriffdoms, Seneschalsies, commonly Stewartries, and Bailliwicks, or
Bailliaries, whereof a List shall be subjoyned as they now are, and in the
Order they stand in the Rolls of Parliament.

As touching the Administration of the divine City and Commonwealth,
Bishoprics.
which we term the Church, likeas the Bishops in all the world besides, had no
certain Dioeceses, before that Dionysius Bishop of Rome, about the year 268.
did set out Dioeceses for Bishops: so the Bishops of Scotland executed their
Episcopal Functions in what place soever they came, indifferently and without
distinction, until the time of King Malcolm the third, that is about the year
of our Redemption 1070, at which time the Dioeceses were confined within their
Bounds and Limits.

Afterward, in process of time, this Hierarchy, or Ecclesiestical government,
was established in Scotland. Two Archbishops, one of Saint Andrews, the other
of Glasgow; whereof the former is counted Primat of all Scotland: under whom
there be* eight Bishoprics.

Dunkeld. Aberdene. Murray. Dunblan. Brechin. Rosse. Cathanes. Orkney.
Under the Archbishop of Glasgow there be only three.

Whiterne,
Candida Casa, or Galloway. Lismore, or Argile. The Isles, or Sodorensis Episc.
Edinburgh was erected an Episcopal See 1633 by K. Chapter 1. Suffragan to the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and has place of Dunkeld. By the 3d. Act of the
1st. Session of this current Parliament, the Estate of Bishops being the third
Estate of Parliament is abolished. By the fifth Act of the second Session,
Presbyterian Church Government was settled, and the Nobility which did consist
of the great Barons or Lords, or the lesser Barons or Freeholders, is divided
in two Estates; so that by the third Act of the second Session of the same
Parliament, the three Estates are declared to be the Lords of Parliament,
designed the Nobility, the Barons or Commissioners from Shires designed the
Gentlemen; and the Commissioners from Burghs designed the Burgesses.

CHAP. II.
The States or Degrees of SCOTLAND.
THe Republic, or Commonwealth of the Scots, like as that of Englishmen,
consists of a King, the Nobility or Gentry, and Commons.

The King, to use the words of the Record, is Directus totius Dominus, that is,
The direct Lord of the whole Domain, or Dominion, and has Royal Authority and
Jurisdiction over all the States and Degrees, as well Ecclesiastical as Lay or
Temporal.

Next unto the King is his eldest Son, who is called Prince of Scotland, and by
a peculiar Right Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschal or Steward of Scotland. But all
the rest of the Kings Children are named simply Princes.

Among the Nobles, the greatest and most honorable were in old time, Thanes,
The Thanes, that is, those who were enobled only by the Office which they
administered. For the word in the ancient English Saxon Tongue signifies, The
Kings Minister. Of these, they of the superior place were called Abthanes, the
inferior Under Thanes. But these Names by little and little grew out of use,
ever since that King Malcolm the third conferred the Titles of Earls and
Barons, after the manner received from the English, upon Noblemen of good good
de^^^^^. In process of time, new Titles of Honors were much taken up, and
Scotland as well as England, has had Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons. As for the Title of Duke, the first that brought it into Scotland was
King Robert the third, about the year of Salvation 1400. Likeas the honorable
Titles of Marquess and Viscount were first brought in by King JAMES the sixth.
These are counted Nobles of the higher degree, and have both place and voice in
the Parliament, and by a special Name are called Lords, likeas also the Bishops.

Among the Nobles of a lower degree, in the first place are ranked Knights,
Knights,
who verily are dubbed with greater solemnity than in any other place
throughout all Europe, by taking of an Oath, and are proclaimed by the public
voice of an Herald. In the year 1621 was instituted the Hereditary Order of
Knight Baronet, for advancing the Plantation of Nova Scotia in America, with
Precedence of all ordinary Knights, Lesser Barons or Lairds; Of which Order
there is a great Number, but the ancient Great Lairds, Chiefs of Clans or
Families, have not generally yielded Precedence to them. Of a second sort are
they, who are termed Lairds and Barons, among whom none were reckoned in old
time, but such as held immediately from the King, Lands in Chief, and had jus
furcarum, that is, power to Hang, etc. In the third place are all such as being
descended from worshipful Houses, and not honored with any special Dignity, be
termed Gentlemen. Gentlemen.
All the rest, as Citizens, Merchants, Artisans, etc. are reputed among the
Commons.

CHAP. III.
The Judicatories, or Courts of Justice.
THe supreme Court, as well for Dignity as Authority, is accounted the Assembly
of the States of the Kingdom, which is called by the very same Name as it is in
England, Parliament.
A Parliament: and has the same very power as absolute. It consists of three
States, of Lords Spiritual, namely, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors: and of Lords
Temporal, to wit, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons: and
Commissioners for Cities and Burghs. Unto whom were adjoined not long since for
every County or Shire also two Commissioners. And by the 11th Act of the second
Session of this current Parliament, certain Shires, and the Stewartrie of
Kirkcudbright therein enumerat, according to the largeness and extent of the
Lands, are allowed an additional Representation of Commissioners in Parliament,
whereby the greater Shires are allowed four, some Shires three, and in the
Stewartrie of Kirkcudbright two Commissioners. As will appear clearly by the
List of Parliament subjoyned. It is appointed and solemnly called by the King
at his pleasure, at a certain set time, before it be holden. When these States
abovesaid are assembled, and the causes of their assembly delivered by the
King, his Commissioner, or Chancellor, the Lords Spiritual choose out apart by
themselves, eight of the Lords Temporal; as also, the Lords Temporal make
choice of as many out of the Lords Spiritual: then the same all jointly
together nominat eight, of the Commissioners for the Counties, and as many of
the Commissioners for the free Burghs regal, which make up in all the number of
thirty two. And then these Domini pro articulis.
Lords of the Articles (so they are termed) together with the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Kings Secretary, etc. do admit or reject
every Bill proposed unto the States, after they have been first imparted unto
the King, or his Commissioner. Being allowed by the whole Assembly of the
States, they are thoroughly weighed and examined, and such of them as pass by
the greater number of Voices, are exhibited unto the King, or his Commissioner,
who by touching them with the Scepter, pronounces, that he either ratifieth
and approves them, or disableth and makes the same void^ But if any thing
dislike the King, it is razed out before.

This Method of the Lords of Articles is altered by the 3d. Act of the first
Session of this current Parliament, whereby the Committee of Parliament is
abrogated, and the Parliament to appoint Committees of what Number they please,
being alike of Noblemen, Barons, and Burg^sses, to be chosen out of each Estate
by it self, for preparing all Motions and overtures first made in the House,
and that the Parliament may alter the said Committees at their pleasure, or
conclude upon matters proponed before them in plain Parliament, without
Committees, and that in the Committes, some of the Officers of State may be
present by their Majesty's or their Commissioners appointment, who is freely to
propose and debate allennerly, but not to Vote. By Act of Parliament 1617, the
Officers of State are restricted to the number of Eight, including the Master
of Requests, beside the Chancellor, who by his Office is President of the
Parliament. Since the Restoration of King Chapter 2d. there has been no Master of
Requests, but frequently two Secretaries; and there has been also Debate
amongst the lesser Officers of State: and especially between the
Thesaurer-Depute and the others, concerning their Precedence; but at present by
Order, the Thesaurer-Deput is ranked after the Advocat, and before the
Justice-Clerk.

The second Court, or next unto the Parliament, is the College of Justice, or
Session, The Session.
which King James the fifth, Parl. 5. Art. 36. 40. and 41. anno 1532.
instituted after the form of the parliament of Paris, consisting of a
President, fourteen Senators, seven of the Clergy, and as many of the Laity
(unto whom is adjoined the Lord Chancellor, who being present, is to have Vote,
and be Principal of the said Council; And sick^ike other Lords as shall please
the Kings Grace to enjoin to them of his great Council, to have vote sicklike,
to the number of three or four: By virtue whereof the King uses to adjoyn
besides the Chancellor four of the Nobility or Lords of Parliament, who are
called Extraordinar Lords, and are not counted of the Quorum of the Nine, which
must be of the Ordinar Lords. The Distinction of half Spiritual half Temporal
is laid aside, and the Lords are all of the Temporality, and three principal
Scribes or Clerks: But by the 38 Act. 1st. Sess Parl. K. Ja. 7. there is
allowed two persons to be conjoined in each of the three Offices of ordinary
Clerks of Session, and so now six Clerks, and as many Advocats as the Senators
shall think good. These sit and minister Justice, not according to the rigor
of Law, but with Reason and Equity, every day (save only on the Lords day and
Monday) from the first of November to the fifteenth of March; and from Trinity
Sunday unto the Calends of August. But by Law and Custom, the Session fitteth
from the First, of November to the last of February, and from the First, of
June to the last of July inclusive. In regard the Office of the Lords of
Session are for Lifetime, they are set down as follows.

JAMES Viscount of STAIR, Lord President of the Session. Sir John Baird of
Newbyth, Mr. Alexander Swinton of Mersingtoun, Sir Colin Camphel of Aberuchil,
James Murray of Philiphaugh, Robert Dundass of Arnistoun, Mr. John Hamilton of
Haleraig, Mr. David Hume of Crossrig, Sir John Lawder of Haltoun, Sir John
Lawder of Fountainhal, William Enstruther of that llk, Mr. Archibald Hope of
Rankeilor, Mr. James Falconer of Phesdo, Robert Hamilton of Presmenuan, Sir
William Hamilton of Whitelaw.
Extraordinary LORDS.
William Duke of Queensberry, William Earl of Annandale, Patrick Lord Polwarth,
The fourth is vacant by the Death of William Duke of Hamilton.
The President of the Session by an Act of Parliament 1661. is declared to have
Precedence of the Lord Register and Advocat, and they to have Precedence of the
Lord Thesaurer-Deput. Mckenzies Precedence. page. 37.
* Sir George Mckenzie in his Precedence, does relate, That there was an
Ordinance upon the 20. Feb. 1623 amongst his Majesty's Officers and
Counselors, where the lesser Officers of State are ranked, and after them the
Lords of Session, according to their Admission, and before Privy Counselors
being Barons and Gentlemen. Suitable to this precedence, the Lords of Session
have since their Institution enjoyed the Title of Lord, both in Designation and
Compellation, albeit the Designation be proper to the Lords of Parliament: The
Lords of Session in the beginning being composed of Bishops and Abbots, and
dignified beneficed Persons, Chief Barons, and eminent Lawers; This Designation
is frequently given to them in the Acts of Parliament, and particularly to
President Provan, in an unprinted Act, anno 1581. entitled Act in favors of
Mr. William Baillie Lord Provan, and frequently thereafter. All the space
between Sessions, being the times of Sowing and Harvest, is Vacation and
Intermission of all Suites and Law matters. They give Judgment according to the
Parliament, Statutes, and Municipal Laws, and where they are defective, they
have recourse to the Imperial Civil Law.

There are besides in every County or Shire, in ferior civil Judicatories or
Courts kept, wherein the Sheriff of the Shire, or his Depute, decideth the
Controversies of the Inhabitants, about violent Ejections, Instrusions,
Damages, Debts, etc. From which Courts or Judges, in regard of hard and unequal
dealing, or else of Alliance and Partiality, they appeal sometime to the
Session. These Sheriffs are all for the most part Hereditary, for the Kings of
Scotland, like as these of England also, to oblige more surely unto them the
better sort of Gentlemen by their Benefits and Favors, made in old time, these
Sheriffs hereditary and and perpetual. But the English Kings soon perceiving
the inconveniences thereby ensuing, of purpose changed this Order, and
appointed them from year to year. There be Civil Courts also in every
Regalitie, holden by their Baillies, to whom the Kings have graciously granted
Royalities: as also in Free-Burghs, by the Magistrates thereof.

There are likewise Judicatories, which they call Commissariats, the highest
whereof is k^pt at Edinburgh: In which before four Judges, or Commissars;
Actions are pleaded concerning Wills and Testaments, the Right of
Ecclesiastical Benefices, Tithes, Divorces, and such other Ecclesiastical
Causes. In every other several part almost throughout the Kingdom, there
sits but one Judge alone in a place about these matters.

In criminal Causes, Courts of Criminal Matters.
the Kings Chief Justice holds his Court for the most part at Edinburgh,
(which Office the Earls of Argile executed for some time,) and he does deput
two or three Lawers, who have the hearing and deciding of Capital Actions
concerning Life and Death, or of such as infer loss of Limbs, or of all Goods.
And by the 16 Act 3d. Sess 2d. Parl. K. Cha. 2d. concerning the Justice Court,
it does now consist of the Lord Justice-General, the Lord Justice-Clerk, who
are both at the Kings Nomination, and to them are added five of the Lords of
Session, who are supplied from time to time by the King, and are called Lords
of the Justiciary. In this Court the Defendant is permitted, yea in case of
High Treason, to entertain a Counselor or Advocat to plead his Cause.

Moreover in Criminal Matters, there are sometimes by virtue of the Kings
Commission and Authority, Justices appointed for the deciding of this or that
particular Cause.

Also the Sheriffs in their Territories, and Magistrates in some Burghs, may sit
in Judgment of Manslaughter (in case the Manslayer be taken within 24 hours
after the Deed committed) and being found guilty by a Jurie, put him to death.
But if that time be once over-past, the Cause is referred and put over to the
Kings Justice, or his Deputs. The same privilege also some of the Nobility and
Gentry enjoy against Theives taken within their own Jurisdictions. There be
likewise that have such Royalities, as that in Criminal Causes they may
exercise a Jurisdiction within their own Limits, and in some Cases recall those
that dwell within their own Limits and Liberties from the Kings Justice,
howbeit with a Caution and Proviso interposed, That they judge according to Law.

Thus much briefly the Author has put down, as one that had but slightly
looked into these matters, yet by the information of the judicious Knight, Sir
Alexander Hay, Secretary to K. Ja. 6. for Scotland, who had given the Author
good light. He being one of the three principal Clerks of Session, was in the
year 1608 appointed Secretary in place of the Lord Balmerinoch removed, and
admtted a Lord of Session the 3d, of Feb. 1610. But as touching SCOTLAND, what
a Noble Country it is, and what Men it breeds (as sometimes the Geographer
wrote of Britain) there will within a while more certain and more evident
matter be delivered, since that most high and mighty Prince K. Ja. 6. did set
it open for us, which had so long time been shut from us. Mean time before we
proceed to the Description of particular Places, according to the Authors
project, we must give some short Account of the Privy Council, Thesaury and
Exchequer, being Sovereign Courts, and omitted by the Author. The Privy Council
is constitute by the King's Commission to decide in matters that concerns the
Government and public Peace of the Nation, wherein the Chancellor by his
Office does preside, and after him the President of the Council, who has the
same precedence as in England: The Persons are chiefly named out of the
Nobility, with the addition of some Barons. In the Thesaury and Exchequer, the
Lord high Thesaurer does preceed, but this Office is frequently in Commission,
as it is at present, and then the Lord Chancellor is, and uses to be one and
Chief of the Commission, as also the Lord Thesaurer Deput, and they together
with the Lords of Exchequer nominat by Their Majesty's do Order, Determine, and
dispose of the Kings Rents, Revenues, Gifts, and Casualities: I have omitted
particular Lists of them, in regard the Commissions to the Council, Thesaury
and Exchequer are some times changed, as the King does think fit; and that the
persons employed in them are eminent, of whom occasion will be to make mention
in some part of this Treatise, either as Noblemen, Sheriffs of, or
Commissioners from Shires, or otherwise.

CHAP. IV.
GADENI, or LADENI,
UPon the Ottadini, or Northumberland, bordered as next Neighbors the (...),
that is, GADENI, who also by the inversion or turning of one Letter upside
down, are called in some Copies of Ptolomy LADENI, seated in that Country
which lies between the mouth of the River Tweed and Edinburgh Forth: And is at
this day divided into many petty Countries: The chief whereof are Teviotdale,
Tweddale, Merss, and Lothian, in Latin Lodenium, under which one general Name
alone the Writers of the middle time comprised all the rest.

CHAP. V.
TEVIOTDALE.
TEviotdale, that is to say, the Vale by the River Tiviot, or Teveat, lying
next unto England, among the edges of high craigie Hills, is inhabited by a
warlike Nation, which by reason of so many Encounters in foregoing Ages,
between Scots and English, are always most ready for Service and sudden
Invasions. The first place among these that we meet with, ^. Royal.
is Jedburgh, a Burgh well inhabited and frequented, standing near unto the
confluence of Teviot and Jed, whereof it took the Name: Also Melros, a very
ancient Monastry, wherein at the beginning of our Church, were cloistered Monks
of that ancient Order and Institution, that gave themselves to Prayer, and with
their Hand-labour earning their Living; which holy King David restored, and
replenished with Cistertian Monks. And more Eastward, where Tweed and Teviot
join in one Stream, Rosburgh shows it self, The Shire of Roxburgh.
called also Roxburgh, and in old time MARCHIDUN, because it was a Town in the
Marches, where stands a Castle, that for natural Situation, and towred
Fortificatons, was in time past exceeding strong. Which being surprised and
held by the English, whiles James the second King of Scots encircled it with a
Siege, he was by a piece of a great Ordnance that broke, slain untimely in the
flower of his youth; A Prince much missed and lamented of his Subjects. As for
the Castle, it was yielded; and being then for the most part of it laid even
with the ground, is now in a manner quite vanished and not to be seen. The
Territory adjoining, called of it the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh, has one
hereditary Sheriff out of the Family of the Douglas, who is usually called the
Sheriff of Teviotdale; Douglas of Cavers.
The Heir of this Family is Sir William Douglas of Cavers, who is present
Sheriff, and one of the Commissioners of the Shire to this present Parliament.
And now has Roxburgh also a Baron, Roxbert Ker, through the favor of King
James the sixth, out of the Family of Kers, a famous House, and spread into a
number of Branches, as any one in that Tract: Out of which the Fernhersts, and
others inured in martial Feats, Spotswood Hist. of the Church of Scotland. lib
7. page 476.
have been of great Name. Sir Robert Ker of Cessfuird, was amongst other great
Men, chosen by K. James the sixth, to attend him in his Journey to England, in
the year 1603. to take possession of that Crown, at which time he was created
Lord Roxburgh, and is mentioned amongst the Commissioners for the Union, Parl.
1604. first of all the Lords created about that time; and in like manner in the
Decree of Ranking and the several Rolls of Parliament, he is placed before
Loudown, Lindores, etc. till the year 1617, E. Roxburgh.
when he is designed by the Rolls of that Parliament Earl of Roxburgh; he was
Lord Privy Seal to King Chapter the first, whose Grandchilds Grandchild is Robert
Earl of Roxburgh: The Lord of Berneherst, the other principal Family of that
Name, was by King James the sixth created Lord Jedburgh, L. Jedburgh.
which Peerage does belong to the Lord Newbottle, eldest Son to the Earl of
Lothian, and in the Quality of Lord Jedburgh, William Lord Newbottle is a
Member of this present Parliament, which is special to the Earl of Lothians
Family, that both the Father and the Son are Peers. Sir Robert Ker the youngest
Brother of the first Lord Jedburgh, a great Favorite of King Ja. the sixth, was
by him made Thesaurer of Scotland and Earl of Somerset in England. Also of the
Family of Ferneherst, Sir Robert Ker of Ancrum was created Earl of Ancrum by
King Cho. ^. Ancrum.
he first, in the year 1633, of whom is descended Robert Earl of Lothian, by
his Father, William Earl of Lothian, who married the Heiress, and the younger
Brother succeeded to his Father in the Dignity of the Earl of Ancrum residing
in England, who sat in the Parliament 1681. Colonel Rutherfoord of the Family
of Hunthill, was created Earl of Teviot by King Cha. E. Teviot.
the second, who left his Fortune and the Dignity of Lord Rutherfoord to the
family of Hunthill, L. Rutherfoord
which has been possessed by three Brothers, the youngest is Robert Lord
Rutherfoord. The Dignity of Viscount Teviot was conferred by King Ia. V. Teviot.
the seventh anno 1686, on the Lord Spencer eldest Son to the Earl of
Sunderland in England. In the same Shire lived Sir Walter Scot of Bran^holme,
who by King Ja. the sixth, 17 May 1606 was created Lord Scot of Buckcleugh, he
was the next after the Lord Scoon, and these mentioned in the Decree of
Ranking, Mackenzies precedence page 48.
and was immediately created before the Lord Blantyre, his Son Walter was
created Earl by the same King in the year 1619, and in the Rolls of Parliament
1621, is ranked after the Earls of Roxburgh and Kellie and before the Earl of
Melros^; his Son Earl Francis was Father to Countess Margaret, married to
Walter Scot of Heychester, who shortly deceased, her Husband was by King Cha.
the second created Earl of Tarras during life, by whose decease the Dignity is
extinct, the younger Daughter Countess Anna, was married to James Scot Duke of
Monmouth, Son to K. Chapter the second, and was by him created Duchess of
Buckcleugh, D. Buckcleugh
about the year 1661. who lives, and her Son is James Earl of Dalkeitb.

Tweed aforesaid runs through the midst of a Dale, taking Name of it,
replenished with Sheep, that bear Wool of great request. A very goodly River
this is, which springing more inwardly Eastward, after it has passed, as it
were in a straight Channel by Drumelzier Castle, The Shire of Peebles
by Peebles a Burgh Royal, which had for the Sheriff thereof Baron Yester, now
Earl of Tweddale Lord high Chancellor, who sold his Estate in that Shire, and
the Sheriffship to the Duke of Queensberry, E. Tweddale.
of whom afterward in East-Lothian. In this Shire the Lord of Traquair as a
Baron, Commissioner to the Parliament 1621, was by King Chapter the first created
Lord Stuart of Traquair, and in anno 1633 was made Earl, E. Traquair.
his Predecessor was a Lord of Session, in the year 1560 he himself was first
Thesaurer-deput, and afterward Lord high Thesaurer and high Commissioner for
the King, whose Grandchild is Charles Earl of Traquair. In this Shire also,
Sir Patrick Murray of Elibank, was designed in the rescinded Parliament 1644,
1. Elibank.
Lord Elibank, whose Father Sir Gideon Murray Thesaurer-deput, was admitted a
Lord of the Session anno 1613, the great Grandchild is Alexander Lord Elibank.

Likeas Selkirk a Burgh Royal hard by, The Shire of Selkirk.
has another Sheriff out of the Family of Murray of Falahill, Philiphaugh.
an ancient Family, designed of Philiphaugh, James Murray now of Philiphaugh is
one of the Lords of Session and Sheriff; This place is famous by the Defeat of
the Army of the great Marquess of Montrose. By King Charles the first anno
1646, Lord William Douglas second Son to the Marquess of Douglas was created
Earl of Selkirk, E. Selkirk.
was married to Anna Duchess and Heiress of Hamilton, and by King Charles the
second (after the Restoration) created Duke of Hamilton, he was Commissioner
to two Sessions of this current Parliament, and enjoyed many great and
honorable Offices, who in his Lifetime did convey and establish the Title and
Dignity of Earl of Selkirk on Charles his second Son now Earl of Selkirk, his
Lady Anna Duchess of Hamilton and James Earl of Arran does survive. Tweed also
receives Lawder a Riverat, upon which is situat a Royal Burgh, and seat of a
Bailliary, belonging to the Family of Lawderdale, within the Sheriffdom of
Berwick; near to which stands Thirlestane Castle, a very fair House of Sir John
Maitlands, sometime Chancellor of Scotland, whom, for his singular Wisdom, King
Ja. the sixth created Baron of Thirlstane. Sir Richard Maitland of Lethingtoun
was his father, who is marked in the Book of Sederunt of the Lords of Session
1553 amongst the Lords, being then an extraordinary Lord; In the Sederunt 1561,
he is admitted an ordinar Lord, and his eldest Son William, then Secretary is
admitted Extraordinar, and thereafter Ordinar, in place of Sir Robert Carnagie
deceased, (it being Customary at that time, first to be entered Extraordinar,
and then Ordinar;) This Sir Richard was Privy Seal to Queen Mary, and continued
an Ordinar Lord till his old Age, when he demitted the eleventh of July 1584,
in favors of Sir Lewis Ballenden Justice-Clerk upon the Kings Letter, bearing
Lethingtoun to have served his Grand-sir, Good-sir, Good-dame, his Mother and
himself faithfully in many public Offices, and now greatly disabled by Age, he
had demitted in favors, etc. Reserving all Profits to himself during his Life;
which notwithstanding of his Dimission, he enjoyed till his death, anno 1586.
The said Mr. John Maitland of Thirlstane, his second Son was in April 1581
admitted Lord of the Session, and about the year 1584 Secretary, and in the
1586 Vice Chancellor, and thereafter Chancellor, and in the 1592 designed Lord
Thirlstane Chancellor, whose Son John was created Viscount of Lauderdale by
King Ja. sixth, and is so marked in the Rolls of Parliament 1617, and in June
1618, under the Designation of Viscount of Lauderdale, he is admitted an
ordinar Lord of Session, E. Lawderdale.
and thereafter created Earl of Lauderdale by King Ja. thessixth; about the
year 1624, whose Son John Earl of Lauderdale was Secretary to King Chapter the
second, and by him created Duke of Lauderdale in the year 1672, he was high
Commissioner to the hail Sessions of the second Parliament King Chapter the second
and Convention of Estates 1678, and enjoyed many other honorable Offices, and
upon his decease without Heirs-male of his Body, his brother Charles Maitland
of Haltoun Thesaurer-deput, and a Lord of the Session succeeded to him in his
Dignity of Earl of Lauderdale, the Title of Duke being extinct with himself)
whose Son is Richard Earl of Lauderdale.

Then Tweed beneath Roxburgh, augmented with the River of Teviot resorting unto
him, waters the Sheriffdom of Berwick throughout; a great part whereof is
possessed by the Humes (wherein the chief man of that Family exercises the
Jurisdiction of a Sheriff (and so passes under Berwick, the strongest Town of
Britain, where he is exceeding full of Salmons, and so falls into the Sea.

CHAP. VI.
MERCHIA, MERCH, or MERS^
MERCH, which is next, and so named because it is a March Country, lies
wholly upon the German Sea. In this, first Hume Castle shows it self: the
ancient Possession of the Lords of Home, or Hume, who being descended from the
family of the Earls of Merch, are grown to be a noble and fair spread Family:
Out of which Alexander Hume, who before was the first Baron of Scotland, and
Sheriff of Berwicks, was about the 1604, advanced by James the 6. the first
King or Great Britain to the Title of Earl of Hume; to whom Charles now Earl of
Hume succeeds. E. Hume.
Sir James Douglas, Brother to the first Marquess of Douglas, married the
Heiress of Oliphant, and in her Right had the Precedence of the Lords of
Oliphant, L. Mordingtoun.
with the Dignity of Mordingtoun; whose Grandchild is presently Lord
Mordingtoun. Near unto Hume Castle lies Kelso, famous sometime for the
Monastery, which with thirteen others, King David the first of that Name built
out of the ground, for the propagation of Gods glory, but to the great
empairing of the Crown-Land.

Then is to be seen Coldingham, which Bid calls the City Coldana, and the
City of Coludum, happily Colania mentioned by Ptolomy, a place consecrated many
ages since unto professed Virgins or Nuns, whose chastity is recorded in
ancient Books: For that they, together with Ebba their Prioress, cut off their
own Noses and Lips, choosing rather to preserve their Virginity from the Danes,
than their Beauty and Favor; and yet for all that the Danes burnt their
Monastry, and them withal. Hard by is Fast-Castle, a Castle of the Lord Humes,
so called for the firmness and Strength thereof, at the Promontory of the said
Saint Ebb, who being the Daughter of Edilfrid King of Northumberland, when her
Father was taken prisoner, got hold of a Boat in Humber, and passing along the
raging Ocean, landed here in safety, became renowned for her Sanctimony, and
left her Name unto the place. But this Merch is mentioned in the
Historiographers a great deal more for the Earls thereof, than for any places
therein, who for Martial Prowess were highly renowned, and descended from
Gospatrick Earl of Northumberland, whom after he had fled from William
Conqueror of England, Malcom Canmor, that is, With the great head, King of
Scotland entertained, enriched him with the Castle of Dunbar, and honored with
the Earldom of Merch; E. Merch.
Whose Posterity, besides other goodly and fair Lands in Scotland, held (as
appears plainly in an old Inquisition) the Barony of Bengelly in
Northumberland, that they should be Inborow and Utborow between England and
Scotland, What the meaning should be of these Terms let others guess. In the
Reign of King James the first, George de Dunbar Earl of Merch by Authority of
Parliament, for his Fathers Rebellion lost the Property and Possession of the
Earldom of Merch, and the Seignorie of Dunbar; And when as he proved by good
Evidences and Writings brought forth, that his Father had been pardoned for
that Fault by the Regents of the Kingdom, he was answered again, that it was
not in the Regents power to pardon on Offense against the State; and that it
was expressly provided by the Laws, that Children should undergo Punishment for
their fathers Transgressions, to the end that being thus Heirs to their fathers
Rashness, as they are to their Goods and Lands, they should not at any time in
the haughty Pride of their own Power, plot any Treason against Prince or
Country. This Title of Earl of Merch, among other honorable Titles, was given
afterward to Alexander Duke of Albany, and by him forfeited; And this Title of
Honor was revived again in Robert, the third Brother of Matthew Earl of
Lennox, who being of a Bishop of Cathanes made Earl of Lennox, resigned up that
Title soon after unto his Nephew, then created Duke of Lennox; and he himself
in lieu thereof received of the King the Name and Style of the Earl of Merch;
Which Title was also brooked by Charles, Uncle to King James, and younger
Brother to Henry Lord Darnley, afterward King. Colonel John Churchhil was
created by King Charles the second Lord Churchhil of Eymouth, L. Eymouth.
near Berwick, who is now Earl of Marleburrow in England; And Sir Patrick Hume
of Polwarth Baronet, L. Polwarth.
was by Their Majesty's created Lord Polwarth in the year 1691.

CHAP. VII.
LAUDEN, or LOTHIEN.
LOTHIEN, Lothian.
which is also called Lauden, named in times past of the Picts, Pictland,
shoots out along from Merch unto the Scottish Sea, or the Forth, having many
Hills in it, and little Wood; but for fruitful Cornfields, for Courtesy also
and Civility of Manners, commended above all other Countries of Scotland; which
is divided in three Shires, Haddingtoun called East Lothian, Edinburgh called
Mid-Lothian, and Linlithgow called West-Lothian. About the year of our
Salvation 873, Edgar King of England (between whom and Keneth the third, King
of Scotland, there was a great Knot of Alliance against the Danes, (common
Enemies to them both) resigned up his Right unto him in this Lothian, as
Matthew the Florilegus.
Flour-gatherer witnesses: And to win his Heart the more unto him, He gave
unto him many Mansions in the way, wherein both he and his Successors, in their
coming unto the Kings of England, and in return homeward might be lodged: Which
unto the time of King Henry the second continued in the hands of the Kings of
Scotland.

In this Lothian, The Shire or Constabulary of Haddingtoun.
the first place that offers it self to the view, to these coming from the
Mers, is Dunbar, a passing strong Castle in old time, B. Royal.
and the Seat of the Earls of Merch aforesaid, who thereupon were called Earls
of Dunbar. A Piece many a time won by the English, and as often recovered by
the Scots. But in the year 1567, by Authority of the States in Parliament it
was demolished, because it should not be a Hold and place of Refuge for Rebels:
But James King of Great Britain conferred the Title and Honor of Earl of
Dunbar upon Sir George Hume Thesaurer, who is marked last Earl, E. Dunbar.
and after Dumfermling in the Decree of Ranking, March 5. 1606, for his
approved Fidelity, whom he had created before Baron Hume of Berwick, to him,
his Heirs and Assigneys. Afterward the same King did confer the Dignity of
Viscount of Dunbar upon an English Gentleman of the Name of Constable, V.
Dunbar.
whose Heirs in England does presently enjoy that Dignity; this Viscount is
marked in the Rolls of Parliament 1621. Hard by, Tine a little River after it
has run a short Course, falls into the Sea; near unto the Springhead,
whereof stands Yester, which has his Baron out of the Family of the Hays
Earls of Erroll. John Lord Yester, was by King Charles the first created Earl
of Tweddale about the year 1646: E. Tweeddale.
John now Earl of Tweddale his Son, after he had enjoyed several honorable
public Employments, was by Their Majesty's constitute Lord High Chancellor of
Scotland. The Lord Hay of Yester, is descended of the ancient Family of the
Hays of Locherward, near Borthwick, which raise to greatness by the Marriage of
three Heiresses, viz. of Frazer of Oliver-Castle, in Tweddale, and the Heiress
of Gifford of Yester, and the Heiress of Cunninghame of Belton, both in East
Lothian; his chief Residence is Yester, which he has extraordinarly improven
and beautifyed by Planting and Enclosing. By the same Riveret, some few miles
higher, E. Royal.
is seated Hadingtoun or Hadina, in a wide and broad Plain: which Town the
English fortifyed with a deep and large Ditch, with a Mure or Rampire also
without, apiece, and with four Bullworks at the Corners, and with as many
other at the Inner-wall: and Sir James Wilford, an Englishman valiantly
defended it against Dessie the Frenchman, 1548.
who with Ten thousand French and Dutch together fiercely assaulted it, until
that by reason of the Plague, which grew hot among the Garrison Soldiers, Henry
Earl of Rutland coming with a royal Army, raised the Siege, removed the French,
and having laid the Munitions level, conducted the English home. And King James
the sixth about the year 1606 ranged Sir John Ramsey among the Nobles of
Scotland, with Title and Honor of Viscount Haddingtoun, V. Haddingtoun.
for his faithful Valor, as whose Right hand was the Defender of Prince and
Country, in that most wicked Conspiracy of the Gowries against the Kings
Person. I shall choice this place to speak of Sir Thomas Hamilton, whose last
Designation was Earl of Haddingtoun, and the more particularly, in respect he
did pass through very many Degrees in the Session, and enjoyed many public
Offices, and attained to great Honor and Riches, the first of November 1587,
in the Books of Sederunt of the Lords of Session, Mr. Thomas Hamilton appear
and Heir of Priestfield, was admitted an ordinar Advocat, he was Son to Thomas
Hamilton of Priestfield, afterward a Lord of the Session, descended of the
Hamiltons of Inner, weick, one of the most ancient and great Cadets of the
Family of Hamilton; he was admitted Lord of the Session 1592, under the
Designation of Lord Drumcairn, he is appointed one of the Commissioners for the
Thesaurey and Exchequer, commonly called Octavians in the year 1595; and is
admitted in February thereafter Kings Advocat; the fifteen of May 1612, under
the Designation of Sir Thomas Hamilton of Buyers, is made Clerk Register: In the
Parliament 23 of October, the same year he is designed Secretary in place of
Sir Alexander Hay formerly mentioned, who became in his place Lord Register.
The fourteen of June 1616, upon the death of President Preston, he under the
Designation of Lord Binny, was admitted President of the Session: In the Rolls
of Parliament 1617, he is designed Lord Binny, and before the Lord Carnagie; In
the Rolls of Parliament 1621, he is designed Earl of Melross, which Title he
thereafter exchanged for Earl of Haddingtoun, E. Haddingtoun.
he continued Secretary and President till the year 1626, and then was
constitute Lord Privy Seal and he and his Successors in that Office have had
the same Precedence, as the Lord Privy Seal in England, which he enjoyed
several years, his Grand-childs Grandchild is Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun.

Within a little of Haddingtoun stands Athelstanford, Athelstanford.
so called of Athelstane, a chief Leader of the English, slain there with his
men about the year 815. But that he should be that warlike Athelstane, which
was King of the West Saxons, both the Account of the Times, and his own Death
do manifestly control it. The Sheriff ship of this Shire, being at the Kings
disposal, is given to Sir Robert Sinclar of Stevinson Baronet, and one of Their
Majesty's Privy Council, and a Member of this present Parliament for the Shire.

Above the mouth of this Tine, in the very bending of the Shore, stands
Tantallon Castle; from whence Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, wrought James
the fifth, King of Scots, much Teene and Trouble. Here by retiring back off the
Shores on both sides, is room made for a most noble Arm of the Sea, and the
same well furnished with Islands, which by reason of many Rivers encountering it
by the way, and the Tides of the surging Sea together, spreads exceeding
broad: Ptolomy calls it Boderia, Bodotria.
Tacitus Bodotria, of the depth, as is thought; the Scots the Forth, and Firth,
we Edinburgh Firth; others the Fresian Sea, and the Scottish Sea, and the
Eulogium, Morwiridh. Patrick Ruthven General to King Charles the first his
Forces, was created by him in the year 1639, first Lord Estrick, from the Name
of a Rivolet, and in the year 1641, E. Forth*
Earl of Forth in Scotland, and Earl of Branford in England; there is none
descended of him that claims the Title. Upon this River, after you be past
Tantallon, Tantallon.
are seated, first B. Royal.
North-Berwick, a famous place sometime for an House there, of religious
Virgins: And then Dirltoun, which belonged in times past to the notable Family
of the Halyburtons, and by them to the Ruthvens, and by their Forfeiture to Sir
Thomas Erskin Captain of the English Guard, whom James King of Great Britain
for his happy Valor, in preserving him against the traitorous Attempts of
Gowrie, first created Baron of Dirlton about the 1603, being the next after the
Lord Loudoun, and before Kinloss, Abercorn and Balmerinoch: And afterward
advanced him to the honorable Title of Viscount Fenton, V. Fenton.
in the year 1606, making him the first Viscount that ever was in Scotland,
James Maxwel of the Bedchamber, was created by King Charles the first, E.
Dirltoun.
Earl of Dirlton, who left no lawful Issue Male, but two Daughters, the one
married to William Earl of Lanerk, afterward Duke of Hamilton, and at present
his Dignity is not claimed by any. A Gentleman of the Name of Douglas was first
created Viscount of Belhaven, V. Belhaven.
a place near to Dunbar, which Honor being extinct, Sir James Hamilton was
created Lord Belhaven by King Charles the first, L. Belhaven.
about the year 1648, to whom succeeds John now Lord Belhaven. Against these
places there lies in the Sea, not far from the Shore, the Island Bass, which
rises up as it were all one craigy Rock, and the same upright and steep on
every side: yet has it a Block-house belonging to it, a Fountain also and
Pastures; but it is so hollowed with the Waves working upon it, that it is
almost pierced through: What a multitude of Sea-fowles, and especially of those
Geese which they call Scouts and Soland-Geese, Soland Geese, which seem to be
Plinies Picarniae.
flock hither at their times (for by report, their Number is such, that in a
clear day they take away the Suns Light,) what a sort of Fishes they bring (for
as the Speech goes, a hundred Garrison Soldiers that here lay for defense of
the place, fed upon no other Meat but the fresh Fish that they brought in,)
what a Quantity of Sticks and little Twigs they get together for the building
of their Nests, so that by their means the Inhabitants are abundantly provided
of Feuel for their fire; what a mighty gain grows by their Feathen and Oil,
the report thereof is so incredible that no man scartcely would believe it, but
he that had seen it. The Garrison of the Bass having stood long out against
Their Majesty's before they surrendered about the beginning of May 1694. The
Fortifications were ordered to be slighted.

Then as the shore draws back, Seton shows it self, which seems to have
taken that Name of the Situation by the Seaside, and to have imparted the same
unto a right Noble House of the Setons, branched out of an English Family, and
from the Daughter of King Robert Bruce: Out of which the Marquess of Huntly, E.
Winton.
Robert Earl of Wintoun, Alexander Earl of Dumfermling, advanced to Honors by
King James the sixth, are propagated. George now Earl of Winton, is great Grand
child to the first Earl, whose Brother was Alexander Seton of Vrquhart an
extraordinar Lord of Session, and by the same Designation admitted ordinary
Lord in February 1587-8, in August 1591 created Lord Vrquhart, and in May 1593
on the death of President Provan, admitted President of the Session, and in the
year 1595, one of the Octavians, in the year 1604 he was a Commissioner for the
Union, by the Designation of the Lord Fyvie, and in that Parliament the Earl of
Montrose Chancellor being Commissioner he did preside; in March 1605 in the
Books of Sederunt, Alexander Earl of Dumfermling is made Chancellor, E.
Dumfermling.
and was afterward Commissioner to the Parliament, his Designation was from a
Royal Burgh in Fife, formerly a famous Abbey, his Son was Charles Earl of
Dumfermling Lord Privy Seal to King Charles the second, and his Grandchild
James Earl of Dumfermling is now forefault, also Alexander Seton Uncle to
George now Earl of Wintoun, was by King Charles the first created Viscount of
Kingston, V. Kingstoun.
whose Son is now Viscount.

After this, The Shire of Edinburgh.
the River Eske in Mid-Lothian, which discharges it self into this Firth, L.
Borthwick.
when it has run by Borthwick (which has Barons surnamed according to that
name, and those deriving their Pedigree out of Hungary) by Newbottle, that is,
The new building, sometimes a fair Monastrey, now the Barony of Sir Mark Ker;
by Dalkeith now belonging to the Duchess of Buckcleugh, and from whence her
eldest Son is designed Earl, a very pleasant Habitation of the late Earls of
Morton; and by Musselburgh, hard under which in the year of our Lord 1547, when
Sir Edward Seymor Duke of Somerset, with an Army Royal had entered Scotland, to
claim and challenge the keeping of a Covenant made, concerning a Marriage
between Mary Queen of Scotland, and Edward the sixth King of England, there
happened the heaviest Day that ever fell, to the adventurous Youth of the most
noble Families in all Scotland, who there lost their lives, at Pinky-Cleugh.

The Dignity of the Lord Borthwick is not now claimed by any. Mark Commendator
of Newbottle an extraordinar Lord of Session anno 1569, after his decease was
succeeded by his Son Mark also Commendator of Newbottle in the same Office in
the year 1584, at which time he was Master of Requests, which he enjoyed long
after; and obtained of King James the sixth the Erection of that Abbacy in a
temporal Lordship to him and his Heirs, in October 1591; who was thereafter
created Earl of Lothian, E. Lothian.
by the same King anno 1606; whose Grandchild Anna Countess of Lothian was
married to William Ker eldest Son of Ancrum, of the Family of Ferneherst; he
was by King Charles the first created Earl of Lothian, of which Marriage is
descended Robert now Earl of Lothian Justice-general, with the precedence of
his great Grandfather, and was Commissioner to the General Assembly; he is
Sheriff of the Shire of Edinburgh: The Dignity of the Earl of Ancrum was
conveyed to the younger Brother, and the eldest Son of this Family is Lord
Jedburhg, a Peer as has been said. Near to this place was the Seat of Sir
William Cranston of that Ilk, who was created Lord Cranston by King James the
sixth, L. Cronstoun.
and is the last Lord marked in the Rolls of Parliament 1612, whose Descendants
enjoyes that Title and Dignity, and reside in Teviotdale. As also the Residence
of Sir James Mcgill of Cranston-riddel Baronet, who being one of the Lords of
Session, V. Oxenford.
was created Viscount of Oxenford by King Charles the second, whose Son is
Robert now Viscount of Oxenford, his Grandfather was Mr. David Mcgill of
Nisbet, Advocat to King James the sixth, and one of the Lords of Session; his
Grand Uncle Mr. James Mcgill was Clerk Register to Queen Mary and King James
the sixth, and one of the Lords of Session; and his Uncle Mr. David Mcgill of
Cranston-riddel, also a Lord of Session. Upon the Seaside is the Town of
Prestoun, V. Prestoun.
from which Sir Richard Graham had the Title of Viscount of Prestoun conferred
on him by King Charles the second in the year 1681. In this Shire of Edinburgh
is the Castle of Dalhousie, which belongs to the ancient Family of the
Ramsays, who by King James the sixth was created Lord Ramsay, and is marked in
the Rolls of Parliament 1621 after the Lord Carnagy, and by King Charles the
first anno 1633, L. Dalhousie.
was made Earl of Dalhousie, whose Granchilds Grandchild is William Earl of
Dalhousie, General Major George Ramsay is his Uncle. Near to Edinburgh is the
Castle of Marchistoun, which belonged to the Napers; Sir Archibald Naper of
Marchistoun Baronet, was Thesaurer-deput to K. Cha. the first, and an ordinar
Lord of Session, who in the beginning of that Reign was created Lord Naper, L.
Naper.
whose Grandchild Margaret Lady Naper does succeed him, and has a Son to
succeed her; their Residence now is near to Dumblane. Here is not to be passed
over in silence this inscription, which. John Naper, a learned Man, Predecessor
to the Lord Naper, has in his Commentaries upon the Apocalypse recorded to have
been here dug up, and which the right learned Knight Sir Peter Young,
Teacher and Trainer of King James the sixth in his youth, in this wise more
truly copied forth. APOLLINI Procurator.
PROC: Votum susceptum solvit lubens merito.
V. S. S. LV. M.

Who this Apollo Granus might be, Apollo Granus.
and whence he should have this Name, not one to my knowledge, of our grave
Senate of Antiquaries hitherto could ever tell: But if I might be allowed, from
out of the lowest bench, to speak what I think, I would say that Apollo Granus
amongst the Romans, was the same that (...), that is, Apollo with long hair
amongst the Greeks: for Ifidor calls the long hair of the Goths, Grannos.

Lower yet, and near unto the Scottish Forth, is seated Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
the Metrapolitan City.
which the Irish Scots call Dun Edin, that is, the Town Edin, or Edin Hill, and
which no doubt is the very same that Ptolomy named (...), that is, The winged
Castle: for Adain in the British Tongue signifies a Wing: and Edinburgh (a
word compounded out of the British and Saxon Language) is nothing else but The
Burgh with Wings. From Wings therefore we must fetch the reason of the Name:
and fetched it may be, if you think good, either from the Companies of
Horsemen, which are called Wings, or else from those Wings in Architecture,
which the great Master builders term Petromata, that is, as Vetruvius shows,
two Walls so rising up in height, as that they resemble a show of Wings: Which,
for that a certain City of Cyprus wanted, it was called in old time (as we read
in the Geographers) Aptera, that is, without Wings. But if any Man believe that
the Name was derived from Ebrauk a Britain, or from Heth a Pict, good leave
have he for me, I will not confront them with this my conjecture.

This City in regard of the high situation, of the wholesome Air and plentiful
Soil, and many Noblemens towred Houses built round about it, watered also with
clear springing Fountains, reaching from East to West a Mile out in length, and
carrying half as much in breadth, is worthily counted the chief City of the
whole Kingdom, strongly walled, adorned with Houses as well public as private,
well Peopled and frequented, by reason of the opportunity from the Sea, which
the neighbor Haven at Leith affords. And as it is the Seat of the Kings, so
is it the Oracle also, or Closet of the Laws, and the very Palace of Justice.
For the high Courts of Parliament are here for the most part holden, for the
enacting and repelling of Laws: also the Session, and the Court of the Kings
Judicators, and of the Commissariat, whereof I have spoken already, are here
settled and kept.

On the East Side, hard unto the Monastry of Saint Cross, or Holyruide, is the
Kings Palace, which King David the first built, and was burnt by Oliver
Cromwell: King Charles the second after his Restoration, did raise there a fair
and stately Court and Palace, all of Hewn Stone. In anno 1633, the City of
Edinburgh did to their great Expense, build a stately Hall for the Meetings of
the Parliament, with other Rooms adjoining for the Session, and above Stairs
for the Privy Council and Exchequer, with a large Closs or Yard, to the South
of St. Giles-Church, surrounded from the Entry with that Church, and other fair
high Buildings, all in Hewn Stone, and in the middle is raised a stately
Statue of King Charles the second on Horseback in Brass. And to the
South-west, on a rising Ground, is a curious and large Hospital, built with the
Money left by George Heriot Goldsmiths, which does entertain above an hundred
young Boys, Children of decayed Burgesses. This City is well watered with five
large Fountains on the high and broad Street thereof. In this City also, by
King James the sixth an University was founded over which, within a large Park,
rises an Hill with two Heads, called of Arthur the Britain, Arthurs Chair. On
the West side, a most steep Rock, mounteth up aloft to a stately hight every
way, save only where it looks toward the City: On which is placed a Castle,
with many a Tower in it, so strong that is counted impregnable, which the
Britains called Castle Mined Agned, the Scots, The Maidens Castle, and the
Virgins Castle, of certain young Maidens of the Picts royal Blood, who were
kept there in old time, and which may seem in truth to have been that Castrum
Alatum, or Castle with a Wing abovesaid. John Bothwel Commendator of
Holy-rud-house, who being one of these Honorable persons who attended King
James the sixth to England, in the year 1603, was by him created a temporal
Lord of Holy-rud-house in the year 1607, L. Holy-rud-house.
which Honor is now extinct, he was a Lord of the Session, as also was his
father Adam Bishop of Orkney, who excambed that Bishopric with Robert Stuart
for the Abbacie of Holy-rud-house, and the Heir of the one became Earl of
Orkney, and the Heir of the other Lord Holy-rud-house: In the Institution of
the College of Justice, Mr. Richard and Francis Bothwels were nominated two of
the Lords of Session. Near to Edinburgh, is Brughtoun, which belonged to the
Family of the Ballendens, and Sir William Ballenden being Thesaurer Deput to
King Charles the second, was by him made Lord Ballenden of Brughtoun about the
year 1661, L. Ballenden.
whose Honor was conveyed to John Ker now Lord Ballenden, Uncle to the present
Earl of Roxburgh, who carries the Name and Arms of Ballenden: Of this Family,
were Sir John Ballenden of Auchinnoul, Justice Clerk, and one of the ordinar
Lords of Session in the Reign of Queen Mary and King James the sixth; and Sir
Lewis Ballenden also of Auchinnoul, Justice Clerk, and an ordinar Lord of the
Session; in the Reign of King James the sixth, by Cnarter under the Great Seal,
Sir John Ballenden foresaid, had the Heretable Office of Usher to the
Exchequer, which is transmitted to the Lord Ballenden, and is exerced by a
Deput named by him. Fairfax an English Gentlemen, was created Lord Cameron, L.
Cameron.
who is in the Rolls of Parliament 1633, his Successor Thomas Lord Fairfax is a
Member of the House of Commons for the County of York in this current
Parliament. Richardson an English Gentleman, was created Lord Cramond. L.
Cramond.
About the same time Lord Forrester of Corstorphine was created by King Charles
the first anno 1633. George Lord Forrester of Corstorphine is one of the
Commissioners for the holding of the Parliament 1633, L. Forrester.
and yet in the Rolls of the same Parliament, he is marked Sir George Forrester
for the Shire of Edinburgh, so that he has been Nobilitat after he was chosen
for the Shire, and before the sitting of the Parliment, his Grandchild is
William Lord Forrester.

How Edinburgh in the alternative Fortune of Wars was subject one while to the
Scots, and another while to the English, who inhabited this East part of
Scotland, until it became wholly under the Scots Dominion, about the year of
our Salvation 960, what time the English Empire sore shaken with the Danish
Wars, lay as it were gasping and dying.

How also, as an old Book of the Division of Scotland, in the Library of the
right honorable Lord Burghly sometime high Thesaurer of England, shows:
Oppidum Eden.
Whiles Indulph reigned, the Town of Eden was voided and abandoned to the Scots
unto this present day, as what variable Changes of reciprocal Fortune it has
felt from time to time, the Historiographers do relate, and out of them ye are
to be informed.

A Mile from hence lies Leith, Leith.
a most commodious Haven, hard upon the River Leith, which when Dessey the
Frenchman, for the security of Edinburgh had fortified, by reason of many men
repairing thither, within a short time from a mean Village, it grew to be a big
Town. Again, when Francis the second King of France, had taken to Wife Mary the
Queen of Scots, the Frenchmen, who in Hope and Conceit had already devoured
Scotland, and began now to gape for England, in the year 1560, sttengthned it
with more Fortifications. But Elizabeth Queen of England, solicited by the
Nobles of Scotland that embraced the reformed Religion to side with them, by
her Puissance and Wisdom effected, that both they returned into France, and
these their Fortifications were laid level with the Ground, and Scotland ever
since has been freed from the French. As also, near this place is New Haven,
from which an English Gentleman of the Name of Cheney, (being by K. Charles the
second anno 1681, created Viscount) got the Designation of Viscount of
New Haven. V. New Haven.


Where this Forth grows more and more narrow, it had in the midst of it the
City Caer Guidi, as Bede notes, which now may seem to be the Island named
Inchkeith. Whether this were that Victoria which Ptolomy mentions, I will not
stand to prove; although a man may believe, that the Romans turned this Guidh
into Victoria, as well as the Isle Guith or Wight into Victesies or Vecta:
truly seeing both these Islands be dissevered from the shore, the same Reason
of the Name will hold in both Languages. For Ninius has taught us, that Guith
in the British Tongue betokens a separation.

In West-Lothian, The Shire of Linlithgow.
the first remarkable place in the same Forth, is the Burgh of B. Royal.
Queens-Ferry, supposed to be called from Saint Margaret, Queen to King Malcom
Canmore, as the shortest and easiest Passage over the River of Forth to
Dumfermling, where she did much reside, and began to found that Monastry. Upon
the same Forth is situat Abercorn, in Bedes time a famous Monastry, which by
the gracious favor of King James the sixth gave unto James Hamilton eldest Son
to Claud Hamilton, first Commendator and then Lord of Pasley youngest Son to
the Duke of Chattelrault, the Title of Lord of Pasley in Renfrew, he is ranked
after the Lord Torphichen, and before the Lord Newbottle; James his said Son
was created Lord Abercorn about the year 1603, and is ranked after the Lord
Kinloss, and before Balmerinoch; and in the year 1606 was created Earl of
Abercorn, E. Abercorn.
which Title is enjoyed by Hamilton Lord Straband an Irish Peer, descended of
the first Earls of Abercorn. And fast beside it stands Blackness Castle,
Blackness.
and beneath it Southward, the anctient City Lindum, whereof Ptolomy makes
mention, which the better learned as yet call Linlithgow, B. Royal.
commonly Lithgow, beautified and set out with a very fair House of the Kings,
a goodly Church, and a fishful Lake; of which Lake it may seem to have assumed
that Name: For Lin, in the British Tongue sounds as much as a Lake. A Sheriff
it had in times past by inheritance out of the Family of the Hamiltons of
Peyle; and now in our days it has for the first Earl, Sir Alexander
Livingston, whom King James the sixth raised from the Dignity of a Baron,
wherein his Ancestors had flourished a long time, to the Honor of an Earl. In
the same Shire is situat Livingstoun, the Peyle of Livingstoun, which was burnt
by Oliver Cromwell, and did anciently belong to the Family of Livingston, who
from the seat and surname were first designed Lairds of Livingstoun: And
afterward Callender of that Ilk being Forfaulted for adhering to the Baliol. A
Daughter of that Family was married to Livingstoun, who by Right of Blood, and
Grant from King Robert the Bruce, obtained the Lands and Barony of Callender,
whose Successor Sir Alexander Livingston of Callender was great Counselor to
King James the first, and by him appointed Governor to King James the second;
himself or his Heir was created Lord Livingstoun: Alexander Lord Livingstoun
about the year 1603, was by King James the sixth created Earl of Linlithgow,
and was one of the Commissioners for the Union 1604. E. Linlithgow.
George Earl of Linlithgow, great Grand child to the first Earl, does presently
enjoy the Dignity, and is one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury. Near to
Livingstoun is the Castle of Calder, which anciently belonged to the Family of
Sandilands; in the Reign of Queen Mary 1563, Sir James Sandilands being
Preceptor of Torphichen, and Lord of St. John, L. Torphichen.
was created Lord Torphichen, whose Successor Walter Lord Torphichen does enjoy
the Title. The Sheriffdom of Linlithgow being annexed to the Barony of
Abercorn, it does belong to Charles Hope of Hoptoun, Hoptoun.
who does inherit the Barony and Sheriffship.

CHAP. VIII.
SELGOVAE.
BEneath the Gadeni, toward the South and West, where now are the small
Territories of Liddesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annandale, and Nidesdale, so
called of little Rivers running through them, which all lose themselves in
Solway Firth, dwelt in ancient times the Selgovae; the Relics of whose name
seemed to the Author to remain in that name Solway.

In Lidesdale there rises aloft Armitage, Liddesdale.
so called, because it was in times past dedicated to a solitary life; of old a
very strong Castle, which belonged to the Hepburns, who draw their Original
from a certain Englishman a prisoner, whom the Earl of Merch, for delivering
him out of a danger, greatly enriched. These were Earls of Bothwell in
Clydsdale, L. Bothwel.
and a long time by the right of inheritance Admirals of Scotland: But by a
Sister of James Earl of Bothwell, the last of the Hepburns, married unto John
Prior of Coldinghame, base Son to King James the fifth (who begat many
Bastards) the Title and Inheritance both came unto his Son now extinct. Hard by
is Branksholm, the Habitation of the warlike Family of Buckcleugh, surnamed
Scot; of whom already in Teviotdale, or the Shire of Roxburgh, where Branksholm
is situat* beside many little Piles or Forts of military Men every where. In
Eusdale, one would deem by the affinity of the Name, that old Vzellum,
mentioned by Ptolomy, stood by the River Euse.

In Eskdale some are of Opinion that the Horesti dwelt, into whose Borders
Julius Agricola, when he had subdued the Britains inhabiting this Tract,
brought the Roman Army: especially if we read Horesci instead of Horesti. For
Ar-Esc in the British Tongue betokens a Place by the River Eske. The Author
has disjoined this Chapter too far from the Description of Teviotdale, but
gives an Entry to treat of Annandale.

CHAP. IX.
ANNANDALE.
UNto this on the West side adjoyneth Annandale, This Stewarttry lies in
Dumfreis Shire
that is, The Vale by the River Annan; into which the Access by Land is very
difficult. The Places of greater note herein are these; B. Royal.
a Castle and Town by Lough-Maban, three parts whereof are environed with
Water, and strongly walled, and the Town Annan at the very mouth almost of the
River Annan: B, Royal*
which lost all the Glory and Beauty it had by the English War, in the Reign of
Edward the sixth.

In this Territory, the Johnstons are Men of greatest Name; a Kindred even bred
to War: between whom and the Maxwels there has been professed an open Enmity
over long, even to deadly Feud and Bloodshed: which Maxwels by Right from
their Ancestors, had the Rule of this Seneschalsie or Stewartrie, for so it is
accounted. This Vale Edgar King of Scots, after he was restored to his Kingdom
by auxiliary Forces out of England, gave in Consideration and Reward of good
Service, L. Annandale
unto Robert Bruise or Brus Lord of Cliveland in Yorkshire; who with the good
favor of the King bestowed it upon Robert his younger Son, when himself would
not serve the King of Scots in his Wars. From him flowered the Bruses Lords of
Annandale, of whom Robert Brus married Isobel the Daughter of William King of
Scots by the Daughter of Robert Avenal: His Son likewise, Robert the third of
that Name, wedded the Daughter of David Earl of Huntington and of Garioch:
whose Son Robert surnamed The Noble, when the Issue of Alexander the third King
of Scots failed, challenged in his Mothers Right the Kingdom of Scotland,
before Edward the first King of England, (as the direct and superior Lord of
the Kingdom of Scotland, (so the English give it out) or, an honorable
Arbitrator (for so say the Scots) as being nearer in proximity, in Degree and
Blood, to King Alexander the third and Margaret Daughter to the King of Norway,
although he was the Son by a second Sister, who soon after resigning up his own
Right, granted and gave over to his Son Robert Brus, Earl of Carrick, E.
Carrick.
to his Heirs (the Author alleges this out of the very Original) all the Right
and Claim which he had or might have to the Kingdom of Scotland. But the Action
and Suit went with John Balliol, who sued for his Right, as descended of the
eldest Sister, although in a degree farther off: and Sentence was given in
these words. For that the Person more remote in the second Degree, descending
in the first Line, is to be preferred before a nearer in a second Line, in the
succession of an Inheritance that cannot be parted. Howbeit the said Robert,
Son to the Earl of Carrick, by his own virtue, at length recovered the Kingdom
unto himself, and established it to his Posterity. A Prince, who as he
flourished notably, in regard of the glorious Ornaments of his Noble Acts, so
he triumphed as happily with invincible Fortitude and Courage, over Fortune
that so often crossed him. Sir Richard Murray of Cock-pool Baronet was first
created Viscount of Annan, V. Annan.
and is so designed in the year 1623, and thereafter in the 1624, was by King
James the sixth created Earl of Annandale. E. Annandale Murray.
The Lord of Johnstoun was created Lord Johnstoun by King Charles the first,
anno 1633, and by the same King made Earl of Hartfield, E. Hartfield.
and so designed in the rescinded Parliament 1644: and by King Charles the
second after the Restoration, the Title of Earl of Hartfield was changed into
that of the Earl of Annandale, E. Annandale Johnstoun.
(the Dignity of Annandale Murray being extinct) and William the present Earl
is a Privy Counselor, and extraordinar Lord of Session, and now Hereditary
Stewart of Annandale.

CHAP. X.
NIDISDALE.
CLose unto Annandale on the West Side lies Nidisdale, The Shire of Dumfreis.
sufficiently furnished with Cornfieldsd and Pastures; so named of the River
Nid, which in Ptolomy is wrongly written Nobius, for Nodius or Nidius: of which
Name there be other Rivers in Britain, full of shallow Foords and muddy
Shelves, like as this Nid is also. It springs out of the Lake Logh-Cure, by
which flowrished Corda, a Town of the Selgovae. He takes his course first by
Sanquher a Town and Castle of the Creightons, B. Royal.
who a long time kept a great Port, as enjoying the Dignity of the Barons of
Sanquher, and the Authority besides of Hereditary Sheriffs of Nidisdale.
Afterward by King james the sixth, anno 1622, was created William Viscount of
Air, and by K. Cbarles the first anno 1633, Earl of Dumfreis, E. Dumfreis.
whose great Grandchild is Penelope Countess of Dumfreis. then by Morton,
which gave Title of Earl to some of the Family of Douglas, out of which others
of that Surname have their Mansion and Abiding at Drumlanrig. The Lord of
Drumlanrig was one of the Commissioners to the Parliament 1617, for the Shire
of Dumfreis, and being a Baron of a great Estate, was at his first Promotion
created Viscount of Drumlanrig, after the Viscount of Air, and is so Ranked in
the Rolls of Parliament 1633, and in the same year was created Earl* of
Queensberry, whose Grandchild William Earl of Queensberry was first created
Marquess, D. Queensberry
thereafter Duke of Queensberry by King Charles the second, and was Lord high
Thesaurer of Scotland, and Commissioner to the Parliament anno 1685, and did
enjoy other great Offices and Honors, (The Lordship of Sanquhar and
Sheriff-ship of Dumfreis, was purchased by the Earl of Queensberry from the
Earl of Dumfreis, whose Residence since has been at Leifnoris, near Cumnock, a
Regality belonging to them in Kingskyle in the Shire of Air:) The Duke of
Queensberries eldest Son, is James Earl of Drumlanrig, who besides other
Offices enjoyed by him, is one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury; and by a
special Commission did represent the Lord High Thesaurer in the last Session of
this current parliament. I cannot pass over in silence his Uncle, James Douglas
of Scraling, second Son to James the second Earl of Queensberry, who being an
expert Captain, and Lieutenant General, was joined with the Duke of Schomberg
in the first Expedition into Ireland 1689, where he continued that year and the
next, until he went with the Army into Flanders in the year 1691, where he
died, leaving Children by his Wife Anna Hamilton, Daughter to the Lord of
Red-house, of the Family of Haddingtoun. Also a Natural Son of the Regent
Mortons, was created by King James the sixth Lord Tothorwald, L. Tothorwald
it seems betwixt the year 1585, at which time the natural Children of the said
Earl were restored, and the year 1592, Tothorwald being ranked in the Rolls of
Parliament 1612, before the Lord Thirlestane, albeit omitted out of the Decree
of Ranking 1606, his Honors are now extinct, but many considerable Persons are
descended of him, his Lands being purchased by the Family of Queensberry, is
one of the Titles of the present Duke. By the same River, near unto the Mouth
whereof stands Dumfreis, B. Royal.
between two Hills, the most flourishing Town of this Tract; which has to show
also an old Castle in it, famous for making of Woollen Clothes, and remarkable
for the Murder of John Commin, the mightiest man for Manred and Retinew in all
Scotland; whom Robert Brus, for fear he should fore-close his way to the
Kingdom, ran quite through with his Sword in the Church, and soon obtained his
Pardon from the Pope, for committing that Murder in a Sacred place. Near unto
the Mouth, is Solway, a little Village which retains still somewhat of the
old Name of Selgovae: Upon the very mouth, is situat Caer-Laverock, which
Ptolomy I suppose called Carbantorigum, accounted an impregnable Fort; when
King Edward the first, accompanied with the flower of English Nobility,
besieged, and hardly won it: but now it is a weak Dwelling House of the Barons
of Maxwel, who being men of an ancient and noble Lineage, were a long time
Wardens of these West Marches, and of late advanced by Marriage with the
Daughter of one of the Heirs of the Earl of Morton; whereby John Lord Maxwel
was declared Earl of Morton upon the Forfaulture of the Regent Morton, and is
designed John Earl of Morton in the Parliament 1581, and the Dowglasses being
restored to the Dignity of Earl of Morton in the Parliament 1585, the E. of
Angus, Nephew to the Regent, was first vested with that Earldom; Thereafter it
came to the Lord of Loch-Leven, of which Family was William E. of Morton,
Thesaurer to K. Chapter the first, E. Morton.
and James now Earl of Morton, is his Grandchild. The Lord Maxwel was created
by King James the sixth Earl of Nithsdale, E. Nithsdale.
with the same precedence he would have had when created E. of Morton, which
Dignity his Successor William now E. of Nithsdale does enjoy: As also by the
Daughter and Heir of Lord Hereis of Taregles, L. Hereis.
whom J. a younger Son of the Family of Maxwel took to Wise, and obtained by
her the Title of Baron Hereis. The Heirs of the eldest Son of the Earl of
Nithsdale failing in the Reign of King Charles the second, the Lord Hereis
succeeded to be Earl of Nithsdale, and so the lesser Dignity of Hereis is
swallowed up in the greater of the Earl Nithsdale, and is now in the person of
the present Earl. Moreover, in this Vale by the Lake side lies Glencairn,
Glencairn.
whence the Cunninghams, of whom I am to write more in place convenient, bare a
long time the Title of Earl.

This Nithsdale, together with Annandale, nourishes a Warlike kind of Men,
who have been infamous for Robberies and Depredations; for they dwell upon
Solway Frith, a foordable Arm of the Sea at Low-waters, through which they made
many times Out-rodes into England for to fetch in Booties, and in which the
Inhabitants thereabout on both sides with pleasant Pastime and delightful Sight
on Horseback with Spears hunt Salmons, whereof there is abundance. What manner
of Cattel-stealers these be, that inhabit these Vales in the Marches of both
Kingdoms, John Lesly, Bishop of Ross, will tell you in these Words. The
behavior of Scottish Borderers.
They go forth in the Night by Troops out of their own Borders, through desert
by-ways, and many winding Crankies. All the day time they refresh their Horses,
and recreat their own Strength in lurking places appointed before hand, until
they be come thither at length, in the dark Night where they would be. When
they have laid hold of a Booty, back again they return home likewise by Night,
through blind ways only, and fetching many a compass about; The more skillful
any Leader or Guide is, to pass through those wild Deserts, crooked turnings,
and steep Down-falls, in the thickest Mists and deepest Darkness, he is held in
greater Reputation, as one of an excellent Wit: And so Crafty and Wily these
are, that seldom or never they forgo their Booty, and suffer it to be taken out
of their hands, unless it happen otherwhiles that they be caught by their
Adversaries following continually after, and tracting them directly by their
footing, according as quick-senting Slugh-hounds do lead them. But say they be
taken, so fair spoken they are and eloquent, so many sugared words they have at
will, sweetly to plead for them* that they are able to move the Judges and
Adversaries both, be they never so Austere and Severe, if not to Mercy, yet to
Admiration, and some Commiseration withal.

CHAP. XI.
NOVANTES, GALLOWAY.
FRom Nithsdale as you go on westward, the Novantes inhabited in the Vales,
all that Tract which runs out far and wide toward the West, between the Sea
and Dunbritain Frith, or Clyd-forth: yet so indented and hollowed with Nooks
and Creeks, that here and there it is drawn into a narrow Room, and then again
in the very utmost Skirt it opens and spreads it self abroad at more
Liberty: whereupon some have called it the Chersonesus, that is, The Biland of
the Novantes. But at this day their Country contains Galloway, Galloway:
Carrick, Kyle, and Cunninghame.

Galloway, in the Latin Writers of the middle time, The Stewartrie of
Kirkcudbright.
Gaelwallia and Galovidia, so called of the Irish, who in times past dwelt
there, and term themselves short in their own Language Gael, is a Country
rising up every where with Hills, that are better for feeding of Cattle than
bearing of Corn: the Inhabitants practice Fishing, as well within the Sea lying
round about them, as in little Rivers, and the Loches or Myres in every place
standing full of Water at the foot of the Hills: out of which in September they
take in Weels and Weer-nets, an incredible Number of most sweet and savourie
Eels, whereby they make no less gain than others do by their little Naggs,
which for being well Limmed, fast knit, and strongly made to endure Travail,
are most in request, and bought from hence. Among these, the first place that
offers it self by the River Dea, mentioned in Ptolomy, which keeping the Name
still full and whole, they call Dee, is Kirkcudbright, the most commodious Port
of this Coast, and the second Stwartrie of Scotland, B. Royal.
which belongs Heretably to the Earls of Nithsdale. The Family of Mcclellan of
Bomby, was dignifyed by King Charles the first, about the year 1633, with the
Title of Lord Kirkcudbright, L. Kirkcudbright.
but at present no person claims that Dignity* Then Cardines, a Fort set upon a
craggie and high Rock by the River Fleet, and fenced with strong Walls. Near
unto it the River Ken, corruptly read in Ptolomy Jena, runs into the Sea.

On this River stands Kenmore, from which Alexander Gordon, now Viscount of
Kenmore is designed, V. Kenmore.
whose Predecessor was dignified with that Title by King Charles the first
before the year 1633, descended from an ancient Family of the Gordons of
Stitchel near Kelso, and Lochinvar in this Stewartrie: near to Kenmore, B.
Royal.
is New-Galloway a Burgh Royal.

After it is Wigton, The Shire of Wigton.
an Haven Town with a narrow Entrance unto it, B. Royal.
between the two Rivers, Bluidnoo and Crea, which also is counted a Sheriffdom,
over which Sir Andrew Agnew of Lochna^ Baronet, is Heretable Sheriff, and a
Member for that Shire to this current Parliament. In times past, it had for
Lord, Archibald Douglas, renowned in the French War, and by the Favor of King
James the Sixth, John Lord Fleming of Cummernald, who deriveth his Pedigree
from the ancient Earls of Wigton, E. Wigtoun.
was created Earl of Wigton, whose Posterity does still enjoy that Honor.

Near unto this, Ptolomy placed the City Leucopibia, Leucopibia.
which I know not, to say truth, where to seek. Yet that place requires that
it should be that Episcopal Seat of Ninian, which Bid calls Candida Casa,
and the English and Scots in the very same sense Whithern: What say you then,
B. Royal.
if Ptolomy after his manner translated that Name in Greek (...), that is,
White-houses (in stead whereof the O(...)piers.
Transcribers have thrust upon us Leucopibia) which the Britains termed
Candida Casa. Hern a House or Habitation.
In this place Ninia or Ninian the Britain, an holy Man, the first that
instructed the South-Picts in Christian Faith, in the Reign of the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, had his Seat, and built a Church consecrated to the
Memory of Saint Martin, after a manner unusual among the Britains, as Bede
says, who wrote that the English in his time held this Country, and when the
Number of the faithful Christians multiplied, an Episcopal See was erected at
this Candida Casa. A little higher there is a Bi-land, having the Sea
insinuating it self on both sides with two Bays: The Loch of Luce, on the
South toward Whit-hern, and Loch-rian to the North, designed Abravanus, which
being set a little out of his own place, is so called of Ptolomy, for
Aber-Ruanus, that is, The mouth of Ruan. For at this day that River is named
Rian, and the Lake out of which it flows, Loch-Rian, exceeding full of
Herrings and Stonefishes. On this Lake stands Stranrawer, B. Royal.
a Burgh-Royal; the Promontory or point by which it enters into the sea, is
called the point of Corsehill stretching to Cantyre, and on the other side is
Port-Patrick, a known Seaport, opposite to Donaghadee in Ireland, and from
thence running southward to the point of the Mule. The land betwixt the two
points of Corsehill and the Mule, is called the Rinnes of Galloway, perhaps,
because the points run out narrow a great length into the sea, and are twenty
four Miles distant* And to the south of Lochrian is another Bay, called the
Loch or Bay of Luce, running betwixt the points of the Mule and Whitehern,
opposite to the Isle of Man, the neck of land interjected betwixt the Lakes
joining the Rinnes to the Main-land, is six mile broad, and near to the midst
whereof in a little rising ground, stands the Castle of the Inch among the
Lakes: on this Bay is the Vale or Glen of Luce, where there was an Abbey
founded by Rolland Lord of Galloway, father to Allan, confirmed by the King
with a Regality; whereof the Viscount of Stair is hereditary Baillie.

This Galloway had in times past Princes and Lords over it: Lords of Galloway.
of whom the first recorded in Chronicles was Fergus, in the Reign of Henry the
first King of England, who gave for his Arms, A Lion rampant Arg, Crowned, Or,
in a Shield Azur: who after many troubles that he had stirred, was driven to
this exigent by King Malcolm, that he gave his Son Vcthred to the King for an
Hostage, and himself weary of this world, took the Habit of a Chanon at
Holy-rud-house in Edinburgh. As for Vcthred, Gilbert his younger Brother took
him Prisoner in Battle, and when he had cut out his Tongue, and plucked his
Eyes forth of his Head, he cruelly bereaved him both of Life and Inheritance.
But within some few years, when Gilbert was dead, Vcthreds Son recovered his
fathers Inheritance, who of a Sister of William Morvill Constable of Scotland,
begat Allan Lord of Galloway, Constable of Scotland.
and Constable of Scotland: This Allan, by Margaret the eldest Daughter of
David Earl of Huntingtoun, had Dervolgilda wife to John Balliol, and the Mother
of John Balliol King of Scotland, who contended with Robert Brus for the
Kingdom of Scotland; and by a former Wife as it seems, he had Helen, married
to Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester, who thereby was Constable of Scotland, like
as William Ferrars of Groby, the Nephew of the said Roger, by a Daughter and
one of the Heirs: But these Englishmen soon lost their Inheritance in Scotland,
as also the Dignity of Constably, which the Cummins Earls of Buchan, descended
likewise from a Daughter of Roger Quincy obtained, until it was translated unto
the Earls of Errol. But the Title of the Lords of Galloway fell afterward to
the Family of the Dowglasses.

And now the Title of Earl of Galloway belongs to the Family of Stuarts of
Garleis, an ancient Family of the name of Stuart, which being first dignified
by King James the Sixth, about the year 1609, with the Title of Lord of
Garleis, is marked in the Rolls of Parliament after the Lord Haly-rood-house,
and before the Lords Cowper, Maitherty, Kintail, and Cranstoun; he was also
created by the same King about the year 1622, E. Galloway.
Earl of Galloway, and is ranked in the Rolls of Parliament, next after the
Earl of Haddingtoun: and James now Earl of Galloway, is the fifth Earl, and
Great Grandchild of the first.

CHAP. XII.
CARRICTA. CARRICK.
NOw follows Carrick upon Dumbritain Frith, The Shire of Air.
lying on the East Side of Loch-Rian opposite to the Corse-hill fair to be seen
with fresh Pastures; Baillairy of Carrick.
supplied both by Land and Sea with Commodities abundantly. In this Province
Ptolomy placed Rerigonium a Creek, and Rerigonium a Town. For which Berigonium
is read in a very ancient Copy of Ptolomy, Berigonium Bargeny.
printed at Rome in the year 1480, so that we cannot but verily think it was
that which now is called Bargeny. A Lord it has out of the Family of the
Kennedies, which came forth of Ireland in the Reign of Robert Brus, and is in
this Tract of high Birth, spread into many Branches, and of great power. The
Chief of which Lineage is the Earl of Cassils; for this is the Name of a Castle
wherein he dwells by the River Dun: Upon the Bank whereof he has also
another Castle, Named Dunnure, his Predecessor was first designed of Dunnure,
and being married to Mary Stuart, lawful daughter to King Robert the Third,
whose Successor was first created Lord Kennedy, and thereafter Earl of Cassils,
and John now Earl of Cassils, E. Cassils.
is one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury. An ancient Family of the
Kennedies, did possess the forementioned Lands of Bargeny, which were purchased
from them by Sir John Hamilton, Son to John Marquess of Hamilton, whose Son Sir
John, was created Lord Bargeny, by King Charles the First, Anno 1639, his
Grandchild is William Lord Bargeny. L. Bargenie.
The Earl of Cassils is the hereditary Bailiff of this Country. For this
Carrick, together with Kyle and Cunninghame, are counted the three Bailleries
of Scotland, because they that govern these with an ordinary Power and
Jurisdiction, are called Bailliffs, by a Term that came up in the middle times,
and among the Greeks, Sicilians, and French men, signifies a Conservator,
Earls of Carrick.
or Protector. But in the Age aforegoing Carrick had Earls: for, to say nothing
of Gilbert of Galloway's, Book of Melrosse.
Son unto whom King of William gave all Carrict to be possessed for ever, we
read that Adam of Kilconcath, was about the year 1270. Earl of Carrick, and
died serving in the Holy Land: whose only Daughter Martha fell extremely in
love with Robert Bruce, a beautiful young Gentleman, as she saw him hunting,
and thereupon made him her Husband, advanced him with the Title of Earl, and
with Possessions: unto whom she bare Robert Bruce, that most renowned King of
Scots, from whom the royal Line of the Kings is descended. But the Title of the
Earl of Carrick being left for a time to the younger Sons of the Family of
Bruce, afterward among other honors increased the Style of the Princes of
Scotland. The Title of the Lord Kincleven in Perth-Shire was conferred by King
James the Sixth, Anno 1607. and Earl of Carrick by King Charles the First,
Stuart, E. Carrick.
upon John Stuart brother to Patrick Stuart, last Earl of Orkney, descended of
King James the Fifth by a natural Son, which is now Extinct.

CHAP. XIII.
KYLE.
MOre inward, The Shire of Air, Kingskyle and Kylestewart.
toward Clyds-forth, follows Kyle, plentiful in all things, and as well
inhabited: In Bedes Auctarium, it is called Campus Cyel, that is, The Field
Cyel, and Coil: where it is recorded, That Eadbert King of Northumberland
annexed this with other Territories, unto his own Kingdom. In Ptolomy's time,
there was known a place here named Vidogara, B. Royal.
happily Air, which is a Sheriffdom, has a Town also of Merchandise, and a
well known Port by a River of the same name.

This Country lies between the River of Dune bordering Carrick, and the River
of Irwine northward, bordering Cunninghame; and is divided in Kings-Kyle, under
the Jurisdiction of the Sheriff, which lies betwixt Dune on the South and
West, and the Rivers of Air and Lougar running into Air on the North and East,
including also the Paroch of Achinleck on the other side of Lougar; and
Kyle-stewart containing the rest of the Country, northward to the River of
Irwine, which belonged anciently to the Stuarts of Scotland, since, to the
Prince, the Kings eldest Son. The Wallaces Lairds of Craiggie, were heretable
Stuarts, but now both Sheriffship and Stewartry being at the Kings disposal,
are granted to one person; which Rivers has many little Villages scattered
along their Banks. L. Uchiltrie.
Upon Lougar stands Vchiltrie, sometime the Seat of the Stuarts of the
Blood Royal, as who issued from the Dukes of Albanie, and were created Lords of
Vchiltrie, which Title is now failed, out of which House was that noble Robert
Stuart, who kept continually with the Prince of Condie as an inseparable
Companion, and was slain in Battle with him in France. Near to this place to
the westward, on the River Air in Kings-kyle is situat Stair, the Inheritance
of Sir James Dalrymple, Knight and Barronet, who being learned* in the Laws,
was admitted an ordinar Lord of Session, in the first nomination and settlement
of the Judicatory, by King Charles the Second, after his Restoration anno
1661, and President anno 1671. And being removed from that Office in the year
1681, was by Their Majesty's, restored to be President of the Session in the
year 1689. And in anno 1690, was created Viscount of Stair, V. Stair.
whose eldest Son John Master of Stair, also an eminent Lawyer, after he had
been honored with several public Employments, was constitute one of the
principal Secretaries of State, anno 1691. In this Country are the Crawfords
and Campbels of Cessnock, and others of these Sirnames, all Families of good
Note. The chief Message of the Stewartry of Kyle, was Dundonald, purchased by
Sir William Cochran of Cowdoun, who was by King Charles the First, created Lord
Cochran in the year 1648. And by King Charles the Second, appointed one of the
Commissioners to the Thesaury, and by him created Earl of Dundonald about the
year 1669. E. Dundonald.
His great Grandchild is William Earl of Dundonald. The Government of this
Jurisdiction belonged anciently to the Lairds of Lowdoun, as hereditary
Sheriffs: who had many Lands in Kyle, albeit their chief Residence was on the
other side of the River of Irwine at Lowdoun in Cunninghame, from which they
were designed.

CHAP. XIV.
CUNNINGHAME.
CVnninghame adjoining to Kyle on the east side and on the north, The Shire of
Air. Baillarie of Cunninghame.
butteth upon the same Firth so close, that it restrains the breadth thereof,
which hitherto lay out and spread at large. The Name, if one interpret it, is
as much as the Kings Habitation: by which a man may guess how commodious and
pleasant it is. This Territory is watered with Irwine, that divides it from
Kyle: at the Springhead, well near whereof, stands Lowdoun the ancient
dwelling place of the Crawfords, which by the Marriage of Sir Duncan Campbel of
the Family of Lochaw, in Argyle Shire, with the Heiress, the Campbels did enjoy
that Estate, with the Sheriff-ship of Air, or Kings Kyle annexed to it, as said
is. Sir Hugh Campbel of Lowdoun, Sheriff of Air, was by King James the Sixth,
about the year 1604, created Lord Lowdoun, whose Grandchild Lady Margaret
Campbel, being married to Sir John Campbel of Lawers, had the Title of Earl of
Lowdoun from King Charles the First, E. Lowdoun.
anno 1633. and was made Lord Chancellor anno 1641, in which Office he
continued, until the year 1651, Earl James his Son died in Holland, and the
Grandchild is Hugh now Earl of Lowdoun. King Charles the First, did redeem the
Sheriff-ship from John Earl of Lowdoun, which together with the Stuartry, is
conferred by Their Majesty's on Sir George Campbel of Cessnock. The Earls of
Lowdoun carries the Arms of the Crawfords* quartered with their own. Below
Lawdoun on the River Irwine, lies Kilmarnock* the Habitation of the Lord
Boyds; of whom in the Reign of K. James 3d, Robert, by a prosperous gale of
Court-favour, was advanced to the Authority of Regent or Viceroy, Thomas his
Son, to the Dignity of Earl of Arran, and marriage with the Kings Sister. But
soon after, when the said gale came about, and blew contrary, they were judged
Enemies to the State: Thomas also had his Wife taken from him, and given unto
James Lord Hamilton; their Goods were confiscate, Fortune made a game of them,
and when they had lost all, they died in Exile: (This is the received History,
but the Family of Hamilton does contravert many of the Circumstances thereof.)
Howbeit the Posterity of the Lord Boyd, recovered the ancient honor of Barons,
and honorably enjoy it at this day. This Family was dignified with the Title
of Earl of Kilmarnock by King Charles the Second, E. Kilmarnock.
about the year 1661, and William now Earl of Kilmarnock, is the third Earl. At
the mouth of this River stands Irwine, B. Royal.
with an Haven so barred up with Shelves of Sand, and so shallow withal, that
it can bear none other Vessels but small Barks and Boats. James, Brother to the
Earl of Argyle, was created Lord Kintyre, E. Irwine.
and then Earl of Irwine by King Charles the First. The former Dignity being
extinct, Arthur Ingram an English man, was created Viscount of Irwine by King
Charles the Second, V. Irwine.
about the year 1661. Ardrossan also, a Pile belonging to the Montgomeries,
more above stands higher over the Creek: this is a very ancient and famous
family as any other, who have to show for witness of their warlike prowess,
Ioununy, a Fort built with the ransom money of Sir Henry Percie, surnamed
Hot-spur, whom J. Montgomerie with his own hand, took prisoner in the Battle at
Otterburn, and led away captive. Not far from Ardrossan is Largis, embrued with
the Blood of the Norwegians by King Alexander the Third. From whence, as you
follow the shore bending and giving in, you meet with Eglington a fair Castle,
which was the Possession of certain Gentlemen highly descended of the same
surname: from whom it came by Marriage unto the Montgomeries, who thereby
received the Title of Earls of Eglington. E. Eglington.
Of this ancient Family of the Montgomeries, is descended Alexander now Earl
Eglington, heretable Baillie of Cuninghame, and Lord of the Regality of
Kilwinning, formerly an Abbacie. But whence the said surname should come, a man
can hardly tell: this I know, that out of Normandy it came into England, and
that diverse Families there, were of the same name: but that in Essex, from
which Sir Thomas Montgomerie, Knight of the Order of the Garter, descended, in
the Reign of Edward the Fourth, gave Arms a little different from these.

This noble Lineage is fair and far spread, and out of those of Gevan, was that
Gabriel de Lorges, called Earl of Montgomerie, Captain of the Guard of Scots
(which Charles the Fifth King of France instituted for defense of his own
person, and his Successors, in testimony of their fidelity, and his love toward
them) who in running at Tilt, slew Henry the Second, King of France, by
occasion that a broken splint of his Spear, where the Helmet chanced to be
open, entered at his Eye, and pierced into his Brain; and afterward in that
Civil War, wherein all France was in a broil, whiles he took part with the
Protestants, he was apprehended and beheaded. But the Cunninghames in this
Tract, were counted to be the greater and more numerous Family, the Chief
whereof, enjoying the honor of Earl of Glencairn in Dumfreis-Shire, Dwelt at
Kilmaurs in Cunninghame, and fetches his Descent out of England, and from an
English Gentleman, who, together with others, killed Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, the chief of which Family, was first created Lord Kilmaurs, E.
Glencairn*
and afterward Earl of Glencairn. John Son to William Earl of Glencairn, late
Chancellor of Scotland is now Earl. How true this Descent is, I know not; but
they ground it happily upon a probable Conjecture, taken from an Archbishops
Pall, which the Cuninghames give in their Coat of Arms.

CHAP. XV.
ISLE GLOTTA; OR, ARRAN.
WIthin the sight of Cunninghame, among sundry other Islands, Glotta, the Isle
mentioned by Antonine the Emperor, bears up his head, in the very Forth and
Salt Water of the River Glotin, or Cluyd, called at this day Arran, of a Castle
bearing the same name. Inwardly it mounteth up altogether with high rising
hills, at the bottom and foot whereof, along the Shore, it is well inhabited.
The first Earl hereof that I can read of, was Thomas, eldest Son to Robert
Boyd, whose Wife and Earldom together, when Boyd was banished the Realm, James
Lord Hamilton, as I said before, obtained, and his Posterity enjoyed the same
Earldom, saving that Sir James Stuart, appointed Guardian to James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, when he was so defective in understanding, that he could not
manage his Estate, took this Title in the right of being Guardian.

Near unto this stands Bute, so called of a little Religious Cell which
Brendanus founded (for so is a little religious Cell termed in the Scottish
Tongue.) Rothsay Castle.
In this Island is Rothsay Town and Castle, B. Royal.
which gives the Title of Dukedom unto the King of Scots eldest Son, who is
born Prince of Scotland, Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschal of Scotland, since the
time that King Robert the third invested Robert his eldest Son Duke of Rothsay,
the first in Scotland that ever was created Duke. With which Title also Queen
Mary honored Henry Lord Darnly before she took him to be her Husband. Then
show themselves Hellan, sometimes called Hellan Leneow, that is, as John Fordon
interprets it, The Saints Islands, and Helen Tinoc, that is, The Swines
Island, with a great number of other Islands of less Note and Reckoning in the
same Forth. These Islands are erected in a Sheriffdom, and Sir James Stuart of
Bute descended of a Son of King Robert the second, Sheriff of Bute.
is Heretable Sheriff thereof.

CHAP. XVI.
DAMNII, CLYDSDALE, etc.
BEyond the Novantes, more inward, by the River Glotta or Clyd, and farther
still even to the very East-Sea, dwelt in times past the Damnii, in those
Countries, if I have any Judgment (for in things so far remote from our
Remembrance, and in so thick a Mist of Obscurity, who can speak of Certainty?)
which are now called Clydsdale, the Barony of Renfrew, Lennox, Stirlingshire,
Monteith, and Fife.

Near unto the head of Clyde in Crawford Moor, among the wild Wastes; certain
Husband men of the country, after great store of violent Rain, happened to
find certain small Pieces like scrapings of Gold, which gave great hope of much
Riches, since that Sir Beamis Bulmer undertook with great endeavor, to find
out here a Mine of gold; near to which place, are the Lead-mines belonging to
the Lord of Hoptoun. The Castle of Crawford, E Crawford.
together with the Title of the Earl of Crawford, was by Robert the Second,
King of Scots, given unto Sir James Lindsey, who by a single Combat performed
with Baron Wells an English man, won high Commendation for his Valor. These
Lindseys have deserved passing well of their Country, and are of ancient
Nobility, ever since that Sir William Lindsey married one of the Heirs of
William of Lancaster, Lord of Kandale in England, whose Neice in the third
Degree of lineal Descent, was married unto the most honorable Family of Coucy
in France. The Dignity of the Earl of Crawford was conveyed to the Lord
Lindsey, of whom hereafter. Clyde, after he has from his Springhead with much
struggling, L. Somervel.
got out northward by Baron Somervels house, called Carnwath, which being
purchased by the Family of Dalziel, also residing in Clyds-dale, was by King
Charles the First, created Lord Dalziel, who is ranked the last Lord in the
Rolls of Parliament 1633, and thereafter, Earl of Carnwath, E. Carnwath.
whose Grandchild is John Earl of Carnwath. No person at present claims the
Dignity of Lord Somervel. The last Lords marked in the Rolls of Parliament
1633, are Cranstoun, Deskford, Melvil, Carnegy, Ramsey, Naper, Cameron,
Newburgh, Weyms, Ashtoun of Forfar, Rae, Dalziel. And thereafter out of the
West, falls in the River Duglasse or Douglasse, Douglasse.
so called of a blackish or greenish water that it has: which River
communicates his name both to the Vale through which he runs, called
Douglasdale, and also to Douglasse Castle therein: which name that Castle
likewise has imparted unto the Family of the Dowglasses: which I assure you is
very ancient, but most famous ever since that Sir James Douglas stuck very
close at all times, as a most fast friend unto King Robert Bruce, and was ready
always with singular Courage, Resolution, and Wisdom, to assist him, claiming
the Kingdom in most troublesome and dangerous times: and whom the said King
Robert charged at his death, to carry his Heart to Jerusalem, that he might be
discharged of his Vow, made to go to the Holy Land; in memorial whereof, the
Dowglasses have inserted in their Coat of Arms, a man's Heart: from which time,
this Family grew up to that power and greatness, and namely, after that King
David the Second, had created William, Earl of Dowglass, E. Dowglasse.
that they after a sort, awed the Kings themselves; For at one time well near,
there were six Earls of them, namely, of this Dowglass, of Angus, of Ormund, of
Wigton, of Murray, and of Morton: among whom, the Earl of Wigton, through his
martial Prowess and desert, obtained at the hands of Charles the Seventh, King
of France, the Title of Duke of Tourain, and left the same to six Earls of
Dowglasse his Heirs after him. The Earl of Dowglass being forefeited by King
James the Second, the Earl of Angus got the Castle and Country of Dowglasse,
whose Heir William Earl of Angus, M. Dowglass.
was created Marquess of Dowglasse by King Charles the First, in the year 1633,
whose Grandchild is James Marquess of Dowglass. Concerning the Lives and
Actions of this Family, see the History written by Godscroft. In this place of
Clyds-dale, is the Seat of the Lairds of Carmichael. Sir James Carmichael
Baronet, was a Lord of the Session, and Thesaurer Depute to King Charles the
First: and by King Charles the Second when in Scotland, created Lord
Carmichael, L. Carmichael.
whose Grandchild is John Lord Carmichael: he has been twice employed by
Their Majesty's, as Commissioner to the General Assembly, and is of the Privy
Council.

Below the falling of Dowglasse into Clyde, is the Town of Lanerk, B. Royal.
head Burgh of the Sheriffdom thereof, whereof the Lords of Hamilton are
heretable Sheriffs; and eight Miles below that, stands the Town and Castle of
Hamilton, in a fruitful and pleasant Soil, the Lords whereof derive there
Original from England: They have enjoyed great Lands in Scotland, since the
time of King Robert Bruce, and their Estate was much augmented by the Bounty of
King James the Third, who bestowed upon the Lord Hamilton, his Sister in
marriage, after the death of the Lord Boyd her first Husband, as is asserted by
Mr. John Ballenden Arch-Dean of Murray, Translator in Scots of the Chronicle of
Hector Boethius, Ballendens Translation of Boethius Hist. Book 12. Chap. 5.
who lived in the Reign of King James the Fifth, Book 12. Chap. 5. anent the
Genealogy of the Stuarts, in these words, The first Douchter of James the
Secound, was marryit to the Lord Boyd, of whom was gottin ane Son, quhylk was
slain be the Lord of Mongumry, and ane Douchter Gregane, quhylk was maryit
after on the Erl of Casselis: and after the deith of the Lord Boyd, this
Douchter of James the Secound, was maryit on the Lord Hammylton, and be that
way the House of Hammylton is decorit in the Kings Blude: And thereafter in
Parliament 1542, James Earl of Arran, the Grandchild of this marriage, was
declared Governor of the Kingdom, during the Nonage of Queen Mary: And in the
year 1548, was by Henry the Second King of France, created Duke of
Castle-herald in France, and thereafter his Son John, was by King James the
Sixth, created Marquess of Hamilton anno 1599, and was the first that enjoyed
that Dignity in Scotland* his Son James Marquess of Hamilton was Commissioner
for the King to the Parliament 1621, whose eldest Son James Marquess of
Hamilton, D. Hamilton.
was created thereafter Duke of Hamilton; his second Son Lord William Hamilton
was Secretary to King Charles the first, and created Earl of Lanerk in the year
1640, from the Head-Burgh of the Shire, who after the death of his Brother Duke
James, was also Duke of Hamilton, the Lives and Actions of James and William
Dukes of Hamilton, and Castle-Herald, are set forth in the Memoirs written by
Dr. Gilbert Burnet, now Bishop of Salisburry; William Duke of Hamilton as well
as James Duke of Hamilton, having deceased without Heirs-Male of their own
Body, the Dignity of Hamilton and Castle-Herald did descend upon Duchess Anna,
eldest Daughter to Duke James, who married that Noble and Stately Person
William Earl of Selkirk, thereafter Duke of Hamilton formerly mentioned, who
have that advantage above others, of many and excellent Children, who already
have appeared much in the World, viz. Their eldest Son James Earl of Arran, who
after he had finished his Travells Abroad, Resided at the Court of England, and
from King Charles the second, and King James the seventh, enjoyed many
Honorable Employments. The second Lord William, of great Hopes, dyed in
France. Upon his third Son Lord Charles descended his Dignity of Earl of
Selkirk, as is said, who is one of the Gentlemen of Their Majesty's
Bedchamber. The fourth Son Lord John, is General of Their Majesty's Mint, and
married to Lady Anna Kennedy Daughter to John Earl of Cassils, by his most
excellent and virtuous Lady Susanna, second Daughter to James Duke of Hamilton.
Their fifth Son Lord George, Colonel of that Valiant and Renowned Regiment,
ordinarily Commanded by one of the Family of Dowglass, of which this Lord is a
Grandchild. The sixth Son Lord Basile, married to Mrs. Mary Dumbar, Heiress to
Sir David Dumbar of Baldone Baronet in the Shire of Wigtoun her Grandfather,
by his Son of the same Name, married o Lady Helen Montgomery Daughter to Hugh
Earl of Eglington. The seventh Lord Archibald, is Commander of the Woolage, one
of Their Majesty's Ships of War. Their eldest Daughter Lady Katharine, is
married to John Lord Murray, eldest Son to the Marquess of Atholl. The second
is, Susanna Countess Dowager, and Mother of William Earl of Dundonald; and Lady
Margaret is married to James Earl of Panmure.

The River Glotta or Clyde, runs from Hamiltoun by Bothwel, which glories
in the Earls thereof, E. Bothwel.
namely, John Ramsey, whose greatness with King James the Third, was excessive,
but pernicious both to himself and the King: and the Hepburns, of whom already.
Near to this place is Blantyre, from which Walter Prior of Blantyre, Lord
Privy Seal, and afterward Thesaurer, and one of the Octavians to King James the
Sixth, and an extraordinar Lord of Session, was created Lord Blantyre, L.
Blantyre.
July 10. 1606; his Descendant is Alexander Lord Blantyre. This River runs
straight forward with a ready stream through Glasgow, B. Royal.
in ancient times past a Bishops Seat: but discontinued a great while, until
that King William restored it up again: but now it is an Archbishops See, and
an University, which Bishop Turnbul, after he had in a pious and religious
intent, built a College in the year 1454, first founded. This Glasgow is the
most famous Town of Merchandise in this Tract: for pleasant Situation,
Apple Trees, and other like Fruit Trees much commended, having also a very fair
Bridge supported with eight Arches. Near to it is Rutherglen, B. Royal.
a Burgh Royal, and head Burgh of the nether-ward of Clydsdale, as Lanerk is of
the whole Shire, and specially of the upper-ward.

Lower on the Bank of Clyde, lies the Barony of Renfrew, Shire of Renfrew.
anciently in the Shire of Lanerk, but by King Robert the 3d. erected in a
Shire so called of the principle Town, B. Royal.
which may seem to be Randvara in Ptolomy, upon the River Cart, L. Cathcart.
which had the Baron of Cathcart dwelling upon it, carrying the same surname,
and of ancient Nobility* The present Lord Cathcart is called Allan, his
Residence is now at Sundrom in Kings-kyle on the River of Kylne, near where it
falls into the River Air. Near unto Cathcart (for this little Province can show
a goodly Breed of Nobility) there Bordereth Cruikston, the Seat in times past
of the Lords of Darnley, L. Darnley.
from whom by right of marriage, it came to the Earls of Lennox, whence Henry
the Father of King James the Sixth, was called Lord Darnley. Halkead, the
Habitation of the Barons of Ross, L. Ross.
descended orginally from English Blood, as who fetch their Pedigree from that
Robert Ross of Wark, who long since left England, and came under the
Alledgeance of the King of Scots, of whom is descended William Lord Ross.
Pasley, sometimes a famous Monastery, founded by Alexander the Second of that
name, High-steward of Scotland, which for a gorgeous Church, and rich
Furniture, was inferior to few: but by the beneficial Favor of King James the
Sixth, it yielded both Dewlling Place, and Title of Baron, to Lord Claud
Hamilton, a younger Son of the Duke of Chasteu Herald; the eldest Son of the
Earl of Abercorn, is designed Lord Pasley, L. Pasley.
of whom already. And Semple; L. Semple.
the Lord whereof Baron Semple by ancient Right, was Sheriff of this Barony.
The Lady Heiress of Semple being married to Francis Abercrombie of Fiternier,
he was by King Charles the 2d, created Lord Glasford, and is Father to the
present Lord Semple. L. Glasford.
In this Country of Renfrew, is Areskine, the Seat of the ancient Lords of
Areskine, L. Areskine.
now Earls of Mar. But the Title of Baron of Renfrew, by a peculiar
privilege, since the Reign of King Robert the 3d. does appertain unto the
Prince of Scotland. The heretable Sheriffs of this Shire, are the Earls of
Eglington.

The Author Camden is not to be blamed, for asserting, that Alexander the
Second, Great Stewart of Scotland, Founded the Monastry of Pasley, since it was
generally related by the Scottish Historians: but because the Errors in this
Matter are so many and gross, to the disadvantage of the Great Stewarts of
Scotland, Progenitors to our Kings, and that a wrong Genealogy of them is
printed, with our Acts of Parliament. I must be allowed to prevent the further
course of that mistake, to digress a little beyond my ordinary in private
Families, to give a true and brief account of that ancient, great and noble
Family of the Stuarts, from undoubted Records, Charters and History.

Their Barony was the Shires of Renfrew, and Bute, and the Stewartry of Kyle.
The first of that Family, I find mentioned in Charters and Records, Walter the
Son of Allan Dapifer Regis, Founder of the Abbacy of Pasley.
is Walter, the Son of Allan Dapifer Regis, Founder of the Monastry of Pasley,
who in the Register Book of Charters, of the Abbacy of Pasley, now in the
custody of the Earl of Dundonald, Proprietar of these Lands, and where he has
his chief Residence, is mentioned as the Founder and Son of Allan, and
particularly in a Discharge granted by himself to the Monks, of two Chalders of
Meal, payable out of the Miln, he is designed Walter, the Son of Allan, and in
a Confirmation by Pope Alexander of the Abbacy of Pasley, to Alexander Stuart
of Scotland, he is designed Heir by Progress, to Walter the Founder. There are
also Charters extant, granted by this Walter, designing himself the Son of
Allan, and Dapifer Regis. The Chronicles of Melross and Fordon, do design him
Walter the Son of Allan Dapifer Regis Scotiae, qui fundavit Pasletum, and that
he died in the year 1177, by the former, and 1178. by the latter, which was in
the 12th or 13th year of the Reign of King William. And frequently in King
William's Charters in the said Register of Pasley, Allan Dapifer is mentioned,
Allan Dapifer.
and also in the foresaid Confirmation by the Pope, he is designed Allan the
Son of Walter the Founder, Chronica de Melross and Fordon.
he died in the year 1204. To him succeeded Walter his Son, designed
Senescallus Scotiae. Fordon relates, Walter Stewart and Justiciar of Scotland.
that King Alexander the 2d, at the Feast on his Birth day, in the year 1231,
made Walter the Son of Allan, Stewart of Scotland, Justiciar of Scotland. A
Manuscript of Andreas Wintonius, Prior of the Inch in Lochlevin, who wrote in
the time of the Government of Robert first Duke of Albany, and Uncle to King
James the First, Dedicate to Sir John Weyms, Predecessor to the Earl of Weyms,
agrees with Fordon, that at St. Andrews, King Alexander made Walter, Allan's
Son, Stewart of Scotland, the Kings Justiciar. The Manuscript contains many
things useful to the History, and is in the hands of the Reverend Mr. James
Kirktoun, one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, a person well known in Scottish
Antiquities. This Walter is an ordinary witness in King Alexander the Second's
Charters, under the Designation of Senescallus and Justitiarius Scotia. And as
the same Winton mentions, Walter, Stewart and Justiciar of Scotland, was in the
year 1238, sent over to France, to bring Mary Daughter to Ingeram de Coucy, to
be Queen to King Alexander. Anno 1241. Obiit Walterus filius Allani junioris.
Chron. de Melross.


To Walter succeeded his Son Alexander, Alexander Stewart of Scotland.
Stewart of Scotland, frequently so designed in his own and other Charters,
Recorded in the Register of Pasley. Fordon mentions him to be killed in the
Battle of the Largis in Cunninghame, which he places in the year 1263, Chron.
de Melross 1262, where the Norwegians were defeated, and ever since banished
from any possession of the Isles: he is designed Alexander Stuart of Dundonald,
great Grandchild to the first Walter Stuart, and Grandfather of the noble
Walter, who married King Robert Bruce's Daughter. Beside the Records of Pasley,
many of his Charters are extant, and I have seen one by this Alexander,
confirming the Donation which Walter the Father, gave to the Church of St.
Andrews of Bromholm, of 20 shilling yearly, to be taken out of the Burgh of
Renfrew, with the Seal entire, himself on Horseback on the one side, and the
Checker on the other for his Arms, which the surname of Stuart do still bear.
James Stewart of Scotland.
To him succeeded James, Great Stewart of Scotland, his Son who was one of the
Wardens of Scotland, after the death of Alexander the third, and one of these
who Treated with Edward the First of England, in relation to the marriage
betwixt the Maid of Norway, and King Edward's Son, and in the Competition
concerning the Crown, betwixt Bruce, Baliol, and others. As also after Baliol
was defeated, and resigned the Crown, he is amongst these whom Prinns History,
Prinns Hist. page 649. anno 24. Ed. 1.
bears to have given Allegiance to Edward Longshanks, and designed James
Seneschall de scoce saluz, etc. A little after 15 die Maij apud Rokesburgh,
venit Dominus Ioannes quondam Seneschallus, praedicti Domini Jacobi `Germanus,
miles. And I have a Charter of James Stuart of Scotland, designing himself Son
to Alexander Stuart of Scotland, and confirming the Charter formerly mentioned,
granted by Alexander Stuart of Scotland his Father, and Walter his
Grandfather, his Seal appended, is also entire: he died in the year 1309. At
the Battle of Falkirk 1298, Sir John Stuart designed of Bute, Sir John Stuart
of Bute.
who contended with John Cummine, for leading the Vanguard of the Army, was
killed, it seems he was the same person who in the 1296, in Prinns History, is
called frater Germanus, domini Jacobi, and in the absence or restraint of his
elder Brother the Stewart of Scotland, acted as Stewart for him: this probably
has been the mistake, why our Historians omitted James Stuart of Scotland,
Predecessor and Godfather to all the King James's, and insert John Stuart, to
be Father to Walter Stuart of Scotland, Walter Stuart of Scotland.
who is well known to have been Husband to Marjory Bruce the Kings Daughter,
and by her, Father to Robert Stuart, Robert Stuart of Scotland, and E. of
Strathern K. R. 2.
who in the absence of King David Bruce his Uncle, and in Defense of his Title
against Edward Baliol, did many brave Actions from the year 1335, to the year
1338, when he was chosen Governor of the Kingdom, which he freed from the
English and Baliol's claim, and restored it to King David Bruce at his Return
from France: this King being afterward taken Prisoner at the Battle of Durham,
commonly placed in the year 1348, was again Governor, till the King returned
from England in the 1359, by the help of his two eldest Sons, John then Lord*
Kyle, designed Senescallus de Kyle, afterward King, and Robert, designed
Senescallus de Monteith, afterward Duke of Albanie. Maurice Murray, Lord of
Bothwel, and Clydsdale and Earl of Strathern, being killed in the Battle of
Durham, Robert Stuart of Scotland was created Earl of Strathern; at the same
Battle, John Ranulph Earl of Murray being killed, the Stewart of Scotland,
married his Relict Eupham Ross, Daughter to Hugh Earl of Ross, as appears by a
Charter granted by Robert, Stewart of Scotland, Earl of Strathern, and Eupham
his Spouse, Countess of Murray, to John Maxwel, Predecessor to Sir John Maxwel
of Netherpollock, of certain Lands within the Earldom of Strathern, which have
of a long time, belonged to the Lairds of Glenagies: John Hadden now of
Glenagies, has the Charter and Lands, an ancient Baron, nobly descended. There
is a Charter to the same person of the same Lands, but then designed Sir John
Maxwel, by David Earl of Strathern, who was eldest Son of the second Marriage,
by the said Countess Eupham, and who got from his Father the said Robert, when
he became King of Scotland, the Earldom of Stathern, it being then usual to
renew the Investiture or Infeftment, upon the change of the Superior, as well
as upon the change of the Vassal: the Charter is dated at Edinburgh May 10.
1372. Coram his testibus, nobilibus viris and potentibus, Domino Joanne, Domini
nostri, etc. Regis Scotiae primogenito, Comite de Carrick, and Senescallo
Scotiae, Roberto Comite de Fyfe, and Monteith, fratribus nostris charissimis.
King Robert confirmed the 25 of April the third year of his Reign the said
Charter, by his Son David Earl of Strathern, whom he designed dilectus filius,
and amongst the Witnesses to the Charter, is, Joannes Comes de Carrick
primogenitus, and Robertus Comes de Fyfe and Monteith, filius noster dilectus,
This is a clear acknowledgment, both by the King the Father, and by the Earl of
Strathern himself, the eldest Son of Eupham Ross, that the Earls of Carrick and
Monteith, were his elder Brothers, but of this, Sir George Mackenzie has
already said very much, and more Proofs do daily occur, to rectify this
universal mistake of our Historians, which, together with the Description of
that ancient Family* and the Family of Darnly and Lennox, and other great
Branches descended thereof, deserve a particular Treatise. I shall only repeat,
that Fordon in his Chronicle lib. 14 page 73, inserts a Charter of Confirmation
of the Popes Bull, granted by King David Bruce to the Bishops, with the consent
of Robert Earl of Strathern his Nephew, giving power to Bishops, to dispose in
Testament upon their own Movables: in which Charter, the Witnesses are
Robertus Senescallus Comes de Strathern, Nepos noster, Ioannes Senescallus
Comes de Carrict, filius suus primogenitus and haeres, etc. before all the
other Earls, which is an Attestation of the Grand-uncle King David, owning the
Earl of Carrick to be his Fathers eldest Son in this matter of Importance: and
there are two Declarations in Parliament concerning the Succession of the
Crown, whereof one of them is extant with the Seals of the Nobility, by Robert
Earl of Strathern after he was King, the one the first, and the other the third
year of his Reign, asserting the Earl of Carrick to be his eldest Son, and to
succeed him in the Kingdom, for proving that this Robert Stuart the first King,
was Grandchild to James, Stewart of Scotland, there is a Charter recorded in
the public Register of Charters, by the same King Robert, the first year of
his Reign, to Sir Adam Fullertoun, of the Lands of Fullertoun and others,
confirming the Charters granted by himself, when Stewart of Scotland, and by
his Grandfather James, Stuart of Scotland, to Sir Adam Fullertoun: this Sir
Adam Fullertoun was Predecessor to William Fullertoun now of the Ilk in
Kyle-stewart, of these Lands.

CHAP. XVII.
LENNOX.
ALong the other Bank of Clyde, The Shire of Dunbarton.
above Glasgow, runs forth Leviana, or Lennox, northward, among a number of
Hills close couched one by another, having that name of the River Levin, which
Ptolomy calls Lelanonius, and runs into Clyde out of Loch-Lomund, which
spreads it self here under the Mountains, twenty Miles long and eight Miles
broad, passing well stored with variety of Fish: but most especially with a
peculiar Fish that is to be found no where else, (they call it Pollac) as also
with Islands, concerning which, many Fables have been forged, and those rife
among the common people.

As touching an Island here that floateth and waveth too and fro, I list not to
make question thereof. For what should let, but that a lighter Body, and
spongeous withal in manner of a Pumice-stone, may swime above the water? And
Pliny writes, how in the Lake Vadimon, there be Islands full of Grass, and
covered over with Rushes and Reeds, that float up and down. But I leave it unto
them that dwell nearer unto this place, and better know the nature of this
Lake, whether this old Distichon of Necham be true or not Ditatur fluviis
Albania, saxea ligna
Dat Lomund multa frigiditate potens.
With Rivers Scotland is enriched,
And Lomund there a Lake
So cold of nature is, that Sticks
It quickly Stones does make.


Round about the edge of this Lake there be Fishers Cottages, but nothing else
memorable, unless it be Kilmaronock, a proper fine house, sometimes of the
Earls of Glencairn, (which they had by the Marriage with the Heiress of
Dennistoun) the east side of it, which has a most pleasant Prospect into the
said Lake. But at the confluence where Levin emptieth it self out of the Lake
into Clyde, Al-Cluyd.
stands the old City called Al-Cluyd. Bid notes, that it signified (in
whose Language I know not) as much as The Rock Clyde. True it is, that Ar-cluyd
signifies in the British tongue, upon Clyde, or upon the Rock; and Clyde in
ancient English, sounded the same that a Rock. The succeeding Posterity called
this place Dunbritton, B. Royal.
that is, The Britans town, (and corruptly by a certain transposition of
letters, Dubarton) because the Britains held it longest against the Scots,
Picts, and Saxons; for it is the strongest of all the Castles in Scotland by
natural situation, towering up on a rough, craggy, and two-headed Rock, at the
very meeting of the Rivers in a green Plain. In one of the Tops or Heads
abovesaid, there stands up a lofty Watchtower, or Keep: on the other, which
is the lower, there are sundry strong Bulwarks: between these two Tops on the
north side, it has one only Ascent, by which hardly one by one can pass up,
and that with a labor by Degrees or Steps, cut out aslope traverse the Rock:
In stead of Ditches on the west side, serves the River Levin; on the south,
Clyde; and on the east a boggy Flat, which at every Tide is wholly covered over
with Waters; and on the north side, the very upright steepness of the place, is
a most sufficient defense. Certain Remains of the Britains, presuming of the
natural strength of this place, and their own manhood, who, as Gildas writes,
gat themselves a place of Refuge in high Mountains and Hills, steep and
naturally fenced, as it were with Rampires and Ditches, in most thick Woods and
Forests, in Rocks also of the Sea, stood out and defended themselves here,
after the Romans departure, for three hundred years, in the midst of their
Enemies. For in Bedes time, as himself writes, it was the best fortified City
of the Britains. But in the year 756. Eadbert King of Northumberland, and Oeng
King of the Picts, with their joint Forces, enclosed it round about by Siege,
and brought it to such a desperate Extremity, R. Hoveden.
that it was rendered unto them by Composition. Of this place, the Territory
round about it, is called the Sheriffdom of Dunbarton, and has had the Earls
of Lennox this long time for their Sheriffs, by Birthright and Inheritance.

As touching the Earls of Lennox Earls of Lennox.
themselves, to omit those of more ancient and obscure times, there was one
Duncan Earl of Lennox, in the Reign of Robert the Third, who died, and left
none but Daughters behind him: of whom one was married to Allan Stuart,
descended from Robert, a younger Son of Walter the Second of that Name, High
Stewart of Scotland, and Brother likewise to Alexander Stuart the Second, from
whom the noblest and Royal Race of Scotland has been propagated. This surname
Stuart was given unto that most noble Family, in regard of the honorable
Office of the Stewart-ship of the Kingdom, as who had the Charge of the Kings
Revenues. The said Allan had Issue, John Earl of Lennox, and Robert, Captain of
that Company of Scottish men at Arms, A Troop of Scots in France.
which Charles the Sixth, King of France, first instituted, in lieu of some
Recompense unto the Scottish Nation, which by their Valor had deserved passing
well, of the Kingdom of France; who also by the same Prince, for his virtues
sake, was endowed with the Seigniory of Aubigny in Auvergne. John had a Son
named Matthew, Earl of Lennox, who wedded the Daughter of James Hamilton, by
Marion Daughter to King James the Second; on whom he begat John Earl of Lennox:
he taking Arms to deliver King James the Fifth, out of the hands of the
Dowglasses and the Hamiltons, was slain by the Earl of Arran his Uncle on the
Mothers side. This John was Father to Matthew Earl of Lennox, who having
sustained sundry Troubles in France and Scotland, found Fortune more friendly
to him in England, through the favor of King Henry the Eight, considering that
he bestowed upon him in marriage his Neice, with fair Lands. By the means of
this happy Marriage, were brought into the world Henry and Charles.

Henry, by Mary Queen of Scots, had Issue James the Sixth, King of Britain, by
the propitious Grace of the Eternal God born in a most auspicate and lucky
Hour, to knit and unite in one Body of an Empire, the whole Island of Britain,
divided as well in it self, as it was heretofore from the rest of the World,
and to lay a most sure Foundation of an everlasting Security, for our Heirs and
the Posterity. As for Charles, he had Issue one only Daughter Arbella, married
to the Earl of Hertford in England, who above her Sex, so embraced the Studies
of the best Literature, that therein she profited and proceeded with singular
Commendation, and comparable with the excellent Ladies of old time. When
Charles was dead, after that the Earldom of Lenox whereof he stood Enfeoffed,
was revoked by Parliamentary Authority, in the year of our Lord 1579. and his
Uncle by the Fathers side, Robert Bishop of Caithness, had some while enjoyed
this Title (in lieu whereof he received at the Kings hands, the honor of the
Earl of March.) King James the Sixth conferred the honorable Title of Duke of
Lennox, D. Lennox.
upon Esme Stuart, Son to John Lord D' Aubigny, younger Brother to Matthew
aforesaid Earl of Lennox, which Lodowick Esme his Son, after him did enjoy. For
since the time of Charles the Sixth, there were of this Line, Lords of Aubigny
in France, Lords of Aubigny.
the said Robert before named, and Bernard or Eberdard under Charles the
Eighth, and Lewis the Twelfth, who is commended with great praise unto
Posterity by P. Jovius, for his noble Acts most valourously exploited in the
War of Naples, a most firm and trusty Companion of King Henry the Seventh, when
he entered into England, who used for his Emprese or Devise, a Lion between
Buckles, with this Motto, Distantia Jungit: for that by his Means the Kingdoms
of France and of Scotland, severed and dis-joined so far in distance, were by a
straighter League of friendship conjoined: likeas Robert Stuart, Lord D'
Aubigny of the same Race, who was Marshal of France under King Lewis the
Eleventh, Paradine.
for the same cause used the royal Arms of France, with Buckles Or, in a border
Gules: which the Earls and Dukes of Lennox have ever since born quarterly with
the Arms of Stuart.

The Dukes of Lennox were also heretably great Chamberlains of Scotland, and
High-Admirals, and had several Regalities, and the Baillerie of Glasgow. The
Race of the Earls and Dukes of Lennox aforesaid, being extinct, by the death of
Charles Duke of Lennox, and Richmond, Ambassador for King Charles the Second in
Denmark, about the year 1672, his Estate in Scotland did fall to the King by
Succession, who bestowed it on his Son Charles, by the Name of Charles, Lennos
Duke of Lennox, about the year 1675, who enjoys that honor. Lord George
Dowglass, one of the younger Sons of William Marquess of Dowglass, Colonel of
the Scottish Regiment, and Marshall of the Camp in France, thereafter
Lieuetenant General in Britain, was by King Charles the Second, before the
year 1677, created Earl of Dunbarton, E. Dunbarton.
whose Son does enjoy that Title.

CHAP. XVIII.
STIRLING.
UPon Lennox North-eastward, The Shire of Stirling.
bordereth the Territory of Stirling, so named of the principle Town therein:
for fruitful Soll, and numbers of Gentlemen in it, second to no Province of
Scotland. Here is that narrow Land or Straight, by which Dunbritton Firth and
Edinburgh Firth, piercing far into the Land out of the West and East Seas, are
divided asunder, that they meet not one with the other.

Which thing Julius, Agricola, who marched hitherto and beyond, first observed;
and fortified this Space between with Garrisons, so as all the part of Britain,
on the east and south side was then in possession of the Romans, and the
Enemies removed and driven as it were, into another Island, in so much as
Tacitus judged right truly, There was no other bound or limit of Britain to be
sought for. Neither verily in the time ensuing, did either the Valor of
Armies, or the Glory of the Roman name, which scarcely could be stayed, set out
the Marches of the Empire in this part of the World farther, although with
Inrodes they other whiles molested and endamnaged them. But after this glorious
Expedition of Agricola, when himself was called back, Britain, as says
Tacitus, become for-let, neither was the Possession kept still thus far: for
the Caledonian Britains drove the Romans back as far as to the River Tine: in
so much as Hadrian, who came into Britain in person about the fortieth year
after, and reformed many things in it, went no further forward, but gave
commandment that the God Terminus, God Terminus
which was wont to give ground unto none, should retire backward out of this
place, like as in the East on this side Euphrates. God Terminus. Aug. de Civ.
Dei l. 4. c. 29.
Hence it is that S. Augustine wrote in this wise: God Terminus, who gave not
place to Jupiter, yielded unto the will of Hadrianus, yielded to the rashness
of Julian, yielded to the necessity of Jovian, in so much as Hadrian had enough
to do, for to make a Wall of Turff between the Rivers Tine and Esk, well near
an hundred Miles southward on this side Edinburgh Firth. But Antoninus Pius who
being adopted by Hadrian, bare his name, styled thereupon Titus Aelius
Hadrianus Antoninus Pius, under the conduct of Lollius Vrbicus, whom he had
sent hither Lieutenant, repelled the northern Enemies back again beyond
Bodotria, or Edinburgh Firth, The Wall of Antoninus Pius.
and that by raising another Wall of Turff, namely, besides that of Hadrianus,
as Capitolinus writes: which Wall, that it was reared in this very place
whereof I now speak, and not by Severus (as it is commonly thought) I will
produce no other Witnesses, than two ancient Inscriptions dug up here; of
which the one fastened in the Wall of an house at Calder, belonging to the Lord
of Keir, Chief of the surname of Stirling: near to the place where the Wall
was built, shows how the second Legion Augusta, set up the Wall for the space
of three Miles and more: the other, now in the house of the Earl Marshal at
Dunnotire, which implies, that a Band of the twentieth Legion Victrix raised
the Wall three Miles long. But see here the very Inscriptions themselves, as
Servatius Riheley a Gentleman of Silesia, who curiously travailled these
Countries, copied them out for the Author Camden. IMP. CAESARI IMP. CAES. TIT.
-- IO AELIO

At Calder where this latter Inscription is extant, there is another Stone also
erected by the second Legion Augusta, wherein within a Laurel Garland,
supported by two little Images resembling Victory, are these Letters. LEG.

And in a Village called Miniabruch, out of a Ministers house, there was
removed this Inscription into a Gentleman's house, which is there new built out
of the Ground: D. M. Cohors prima Hamiorum.
COH. I. HAMIOR.

But when the northern Nations in the Reign of Commodus, having passed once
over the Wall, had made much waste and spoil in the Country, the Emperor
Severus repaired this Wall of Hadrian. Howbeit afterward the Romans brought
oft-times the Country lying between under their subjection. For Ninius has
recorded, that Carausius under Dioclesian, strengthened this Wall another time,
and fortified it with seven Castles. Lastly, the Romans fenced this place (when
Theodosius the younger was Emperor) under the conduct of Gallio of Ravenna.
Now, says Bid, they made a Turff Wall, rearing it not so much with Stone as
with Turfs, (as having no cunning Artificer for so great a piece of Work) and
the same to no use, between two Firths or Arms of the Sea, for many miles in
length: that where the fense of Water was wanting, there by the help of a Wall,
they might defend there Borders from the Invasion of enemies: of which work,
that is to say a very broad and high Wall, a man may see to this day, most
certain and evident Remains.

This Wall began as is generally believed, at the River Aven, Ninius.
that goes into Edinburgh Firth, and having passed over the River of Carron,
reaches unto Dunbarton: but Bid affirms, that it begins in a place
called Pen-vael, that is in the Picts Language, as much as the head of the
Wall; in the Britains tongue Pen-Gual, in English Penwalton, in Scottish
Cevall: all which names no doubt are derived from Vallum in Latin: and he
says, that place is almost two Miles from Abercurvig or Abercurving; Abereorn.
and it ends as the common Sort think, at Kirk-Patrick, the native Soil as
some write of Saint Patrick the Irish-mens Apostle) near unto Clyde, according
to Bid at Al. cluid; after Ninius at the City Pen Aloloyt, which may seem all
one.

Now this Wall is commonly called Grahams Dyke; Grahams dyke.
either of Graham a Warlike Scot, whose Valor was especially seen when the
breach was made through it, or else of the Hill Grampie, at the foot whereof it
stood. The Author of Rota Temporum calls it the Wall of Aber. corneth, that
is, of the mouth of the River Corneth: where, in Bedes time, there was a famous
Monastery standing, as he has recorded, upon English Ground, but near unto
that Firth or Arm of the Sea, which in those days severed the Lands of the
English and the Picts.

Hard by this Wall of Turff, what way as the River Carron crosses this
Sheriffdom of Stirling, toward the left hand are seen two Mounts cast up by
man's hand, which they call Duni-pacis that is, Duni-Pacis.
Knolls of peace. Near to this place is Kilsyth, which belonged to an ancient
Cadet of the Family of the Livingstons, who in the year 1606, was a Lord of the
Session, and his Successor was by King Charles the Second, in the year 1661,
created Viscount of Kilsyth, V. Kilsyth.
which Dignity his Son now enjoys: (here the Marquess of Montross obtained a
signal Victory.) And almost two Miles lower, there is an ancient round Building
four and twenty Cubits high, and thirteen broad, open in the Top, framed of
rough Stone without Lime, having the upper part of every Stone so tenanted into
the nether, as that the whole work still rising narrow by a mutual interlacing
and clasping, upholdeth it self. Some call this the Temple of God Terminus,
Arthurs Oven.
others Arthurs-Oven, who father every stately and sumptuous thing upon Arthur.
Others again, Julius Hoff, and suppose it to have been built by Julius Caesar.
But I would think rather that Julius Agricola built it, who fortified this
frontier part, were it not that Ninius has already informed us, that it was
erected by Carausius for a triumphal Arch. For he, as Ninius writes, built
upon the Bank of Carron, a round house of polished Stone, erecting a triumphal
Arch in memorial of a victory: he re-edified also the Wall, and strengthened it
with seven Castles. The mid space between Duni-pacis and this Building, on the
right hand Bank of Carron, there is yet to be discerned a confused face of a
little ancient City: where the vulgar people believes there was sometimes a
Road for Ships, who call it Camelot, by a name that is rise in King Arthurs
book; and they contend, but all in vain, to have it that Camalodunum which
Tacitus mentions. But it would seem rather by the name of the River Carron
running underneath, to have been Corta Damniorum, Corta Damniorum.
which Ptolomy mentions in this Tract. And now take with you that which
George Buchanan that excellent Poet, wrote of the limit of the Roman Empire at
Carron.

Roma securigeris praetendit maenia Scotis,
Hic spe progressus posita, Buchananus Scotus.
Carronis ad undam
Terminus Ausonii signat divertia regni.
Against warlike Scots with Axes armed,
A mighty frontier Wall
The Romans raised: and limit there,
Which Terminus they call,
Near Carron Stream now past all hope
More British ground to gain,
Marks out the Roman Empires end,
Whence they to turn were fain.
In this Territory of Stirling on the East side, there shows it self Castle
Callender, belonging to the Barons of Livingstoun, which with the Lands of
Almond, were purchased by James, second Son to Alexander the first Earl of
Linlithgow, who by King Charles the First, was created Lord Almond, and then
Earl of Callender in the year 1641, E. Callender.
he was Lieutenant General to the Parliaments Army, his Successor by entail is
James, Brother Son to George now Earl of Linlithgow: mention has been made of
the Earl of Linlithgow in Lithgow Shire. The Family of the Barons F^^^ing
dwelling hard by at Cumbernald, which they received at the hands of King Robert
Bruce, for their Service valiantly and faithfully performed in defense of their
Country: whereby also they attained unto the hereditary Honor to be
Chamberlanes of Scotland: and the favor of King James the Sixth, honored this
House with the Title of Earl of Wigtoun. E. Wigtoun.
About the year 1606, his Predecessor had that Title with the Lordship of
Galloway, in the Reign of King David Bruce, which they resigned to the Earl of
Dowglass, who, and his Successors, amongst other Titles, were designed Earls of
Wigtoun, till the Forefaulture in the Reign of King James the Second, and the
Dignity was vacant, till conferred by King James the Sixth as said is: the Heir
of this Family is John Earl of Wigtoun. In a place near adjoining stands
Elphingstoun, which likewise has his Barons, advanced to that Dignity by King
James the 4th. of whom is descended John now Lord Elphingstoun. L. Elphingstoun.
And where Forth, full of his windings and crooked Cranks, runs down with a
rolling pace, and has a Bridge over him, stands Stirling, commonly called
Striviling, B. Royal.
and Stirling Burgh; where on the very brow of a steep Rock, there is mounted
on high, a passing strong Castle of the Kings, which King James the Sixth
beautified with new Buildings, and where of a long time the Lords of Areskine
Earls of Mar have been Captains, unto whom the Charge and Tuition of the
Princes of Scotland, during their Minority, have been at other times committed.
Whereas some there be, that would have the good and lawful money of England,
which is called Sterling money, to take the name from hence, they are much
deceived: for that Denomination came from the Germans, of their easterly
Dwelling termed by English men Easterlings, whom King John of England first
sent for, to reduce the silver to the due fineness and purity: and such Moneys
in ancient writing are ever more found by the name of Easterling.

About two Miles hence, the Banock-burn runs between exceeding high Banks on
both sides, and with a very swift Stream in Winter, toward the Forth: a Burn
most famous for as glorious a Victory as ever the Scots had, Battle of
Banock-burn.
what time as Edward the Second King of England, was put to flight, who was
fain to make hard shift, and in great haste and fear, to take a Boat and save
his life: yea and the most puissant Army which England had before sent out, was
discomfited through the valiant prowess of King Robert Bruce, insomuch as for
two years after, the English came not into the Field against the Scots. About
Stirling, Ptolomy seems to place Alauna, Alauna.
which is either near the little River Alon, that here enters into the Forth;
or else by Alloway, an house and ordinar Residence of the Areskins, who by
Inheritance are the Sheriffs of all this Territory without the Burgh; but have
been of a long time Earls of Mar, from a country in Aberdeen Shire to be
described after. The Sheriffship of this Shire belongs to the Earls of
Callender. Sir William Alexander was the Kings Lieutenant in Nova Scotia, and
had Precedence of all those Baronets: he succeeded Sir Archibald Aitchison as
Secretary of State to King Charles the First, and is so designed in the Kings
Letter, anent the Baronets November 17. 1629. Amongst the Commissioners for
continuing the Parliament August 4. 1631, is William Viscount of Stirling,
principal Secretary, E. Stirling.
he was created Earl of Stirling anno 1633, his Heir does reside in England.

To conclude this Chapter, take here a Description of the principal Seal of the
Burgh of Stirling, which carries on the one side a Bridge of seven Arches, with
a Cross mounted on the the middle, and armed men on each side of the Cross,
with this Inscription, Hic armis Bruti, Scoti stant hic Cruce tuti.

And on the other side a large strong Castle in a Wood, with this Motto,
Continet hoc in se Nemus and Castrum Strivlingnense. Which two Inscriptions
they give us in English thus, The Britains stand by force of Arms,
The Scots are by this Cross preserved from Harms.
The Castle and the Wood of Stirling town,
Are in the compass of this Seal set down.
Which agrees well with what Buchanan said, that the River Carron was the
Boundary of the Roman Conquests, and Stirling the Limits of the Britains and
Scots. However it be, the Seal and Inscription must be very old, when special
notice is taken of a Wood at Stirling, whereof there is but small Remains; and
at this place, does the River Forth admit of a Bridge, which is the secure
Passage betwixt the South and North of Scotland.

CHAP. XIX.
CALEDONIA.
WHatsoever part of Britain lies northward beyond Grahams Dyke, or the Wall
of Antoninus Pius before named, and bears out on both Seas, is called by
Tacitus, Caledonia, likeas the people thereof Britains inhabiting Caledonia.
Ptolemy divides them into many Nations, as Caledonii, Epidii, Vacomagi, etc.
who were all of them afterward, for continuing their ancient manner and custom
of painting their Bodies, named by the Romans and provincial people, Picts:
divided by Ammianus Marcellinus into two Nations, the Dicalidones and
Vecturiones: howbeit in the approved and best Writers, they go all under the
name of Caledonians; whom I would think to have been so called of Kaled, a
British word that signifies Hard, and in the plural Number makes Kaledion,
whence the word Caledonii may be derived, that is to say, hard, rough, uncivil,
and a wilder kind of people, such as the northern Nations for the most part
are; who by reason of the rigorous cold of the Air, are more rough and fierce,
and for their abundance of Blood, more bold and adventurous. Moreover, beside
the position of the Climat, this is furthered by the nature and condition of
the Soil, which rises up all throughout, with rough and rugged Mountains; and
Mountainers, verily all men know and confess to be hardy, stout, and strong.
But whereas Varro alleges out of Pacuvius, that Caledonia breeds and
nourishes men of exceeding big Bodies, I would understand the place rather of
Caledonia the Region of Epirus, than this of our; although ours may also justly
challenge unto it self this commendation. Among this was the Wood Caledonia,
termed by Lucius Florus, Saltus Caledonius, that is, Caledon Forest.
the Forest of Caledonia, spreading out a mighty way, and impassible by reason
of tall Trees standing so thick, divided also by Gramp Hill, now called
Granizbain, that is, the crooked bending Mountain. That Ulysses arrived in
Caledonia, (says Solinus) appears plainly by a votive Altar, Ulysses his
Altar.
with an Inscription in Greek letters; but I would judge it to have been rather
erected to the honor of Ulysses, than reared by Ulysses himself. Martial the
Poet likewise in this Verse, Caledonian Bears.
makes mention of Caeledonian Bears, Nuda Caledonio sic pectora praebuit urso.
Thus yielded he his naked Breast,
To Bear of Caledonian Forest.


Plutarch also has written, that Bears were brought out of Britain to Rome,
and had there in great admiration; whereas notwithstanding Britain for these
many Ages past, has bred none. What Caledonian Monster that should be, whereof
Claudian wrote thus, -- Caledonio velata Britannia monstro,
With Monster Caledonian Britain all attired
To tell you truth, it is uncertain, that it nourished in times past,
Caledonian Bulls.
a number of white wild Bulls, with thick Mains in manner of Lions, (but in
these days few) and those very cruel, fierce, and so hateful of Mankind, that
for a certain time they abhorred whatsoever they had either handled or breathed
upon: yea, they utterly scorn the forcible strength of Dogs; albeit Rome in
times past, wondered at the fierceness of Scottish Dogs, that it was thought
there, they were brought thither within Iron Grates and Cages. But this term
and name Caledonii grew so rise with Roman Writers, that they used it for all
Britain, and for all Woods of Britain whatsoever. Hereupon Lucius Florus
writes, that Caesar followed the Britains unto the Caledonian Woods, and yet
he never saw them in his life: hence also Valerius Flaccus writes thus to
Vespasian the Emperor, -- Caledonius postquam tua carbasa vexit Oceanus:
that is, the British Ocean.

Hence likewise it is, that Statius versified thus unto Crispinus, Son of
Vectius Volanus Proprietar of Britain, about the time of Vitellius. Quanta
Caledonios attollet gloria campos,
Cum tibi longavus referet trucis incola terrae?
Hic suetus dare jura parens, hoc cespite turmas
Affari, ille dedit, cinxitque haec moenia fossa:
Belligeris haec dona deis, haec tela dicavit,
Cernis adhuc titulos: hunc ipse vacantibus armis
Induit, hunc regi rapuit thoraca Britanno.
How much renowned shall the fields
Of Caledonia be?
When as some old Inhabitant
Of that fierce Land to thee
Shall in these Terms report and say?
Behold, thy Father often
Was wont in judgment here to sit:
Upon this Bank aloft
To th'armed Troops to speak; also
'Twas he that walled this Fort,
That built thus strong, and it with Ditch
Entrenched in this sort.
By him to gods of War, these Gifts
And Arms were consecrate,
The Titles (lo) are extant yet;
Himself this brave Breast Plate
In time of Battle did put on,
This Cuirace finally,
In Fight he plucked by force of Arms
From King of Brittainny.


But in these, and in other things I may say, Crescit in immensum facunda
licentia vatum.
Poetical license is boundless.


For neither Caesar, nor Volanus so much as ever knew the Caledonians. In
Plinies time as himself witnesses, thirty years almost after Claudius, the
Romans with all their warlike Expeditions, had discovered no farther in
Britain, than to the Vicinity of the Caledonian Wood. For Julius Agricola
under Domitian, was the first that entered Caledonia: whereof at that present,
Galgacus the Britain.
Galgac was Prince, (who is named Galauc ap Liennauc in the Book of Triadum.
Triplicites, among the three Worthies of Britain) a man of a mighty Spirit
and stout Stomach: who having put to flight the ninth Legion, in exceeding heat
of Courage, joined Battle with the Romans, and most manfully defended his
Country so long, until Fortune rather than his own Valor, failed him: for
then, as he says, These northern Britains, beyond whom there was no Land, and
beside whom none were free, were the utmost Nation verily of this Island: like
as Catullus called the Britains the utmost of all the World, in that Verse
unto Furius, Caesaris visens monumenta magni,
Gallicum Rhenum, horribiles and ultimosque Britannos.
Great Caesar's Monuments to see
In his Memorial,
The Rhene in Gaul, and Britains grim,
The farthest man of all.


In the days of Severus* as we read in Xiphilinus, Argetecox Argetocoxus.
a petty Prince, reigned over this Tract; whose Wife being rated and reviled as
an Adulteress by Julia the Empress, frankly and boldly made this answer: We
Britain Dames have to do with the bravest and best men, and you Roman Ladies
with every lewd base Companion secretly.

The Author Camden is at great pains to persuade, that the Walls were built
betwixt the two Firths of Edinburgh and Dunbartoun, and the Actions in these
places had by the Romans, was against native Britains passing under different
names by Ptolomy, and other names by Ammianus Marcellinus, and the Country by
Tacitus, called Caledonia, and the People by the approved and best Writers
called Caledonians, and in aftertimes by the Romans and Provincial Britains
called Picts. But he will by no means, allow the Scots to be comprehended under
these Northern unconquered Nations, who made Opposition to the Romans, and to
pass under the name of the caledonians, and others as he owns the Picts were:
albeit there is the same Authority to join the Scots with the Picts in these
Martial Feats against the Romans, from the Latin Authors themselves, and from
Gildas and Bid the most ancient British and Saxon Writers, who join the Scots
and Picts in these Actions: and that the Seas which the Roman Enemies were
driven over, were the Firths of Edinburgh from the East, and of Dunbartoun from
the West, and not over the Sea to Ireland, which made some late Writers
imagine, against the express Opinion of Bid, that the Scots during these
times, were not settled Inhabitants in Britain, but only as Auxiliaries to the
Picts, made Incursions from Ireland which they inhabited, and were beat back
over the Seas to Ireland. But in Vindication of the ancient settlement of the
Scots in Britain, before the Romans and Saxons came to fix their Residence in
this Island, and their early Conversion to the Christian Religion: much has
been said in these Books published by Sir George Mackenzie, in the year 1685,
in Answer to the Bishop of St. Asaph and Dr. Stillingfleet, to which the Reader
is referred. There is also now in the Press, the Manuscript of the judicious
and learned Mr. Thomas Craig Advocat, to justify the Sovereignty of the Crown
of Scotland, and the Independncy of its Church from the Sea of York.

CHAP. XX.
FIFE.
IN this large Country of the Caledonians, beyond the Territory of Stirling
before mentioned, are two Countries or Sheriffdoms of less note; The Shires of
Clackmannan and Kinross.
Clackmannan, over which a Knight surnamed Monteith of Carsse; and Kinross,
over which the Earls of Mortoun were Sheriffs. The Sheriffship of the first,
viz. Clackmannan, was purchased by Bruce of Clackmannan, and the Lands and
Sheriffship of Kinross, by Sir William Bruce.

Fife, Shire of Fife.
a most goodly Country, wedged as it were between the two Arms of the Sea,
Forth and Tau, shoots out far into the East. This Land yields plenty of
Corn and Forage, yea and of Pit Coals: the Sea, besides other Fishes,
affords Oysters and and Shellfish in great abundance, and the Coasts are
well bespread with pretty Townlets, replenished with stout and lusty Mariners.
In the south side hereof by Forth, first appears westward Culross, B. Royal.
which gave the Title of a Barony to Sir I. Colvil, L. Colvil.
created Lord Colvil of Culross, about the year 1604, and is the last in the
Decree of Ranking, except the Lord Scoon; his Father was a Lord of the Session
and Commendator of Culross; and King Charles the Second, when in Scotland,
created Sir Robert Colvil of Cleish, Lord Colvil, his Successor is Robert Lord
Colvil. Near to Culross, to the north-west is Kincardine, whereof Edward Bruce
of Carnock, was created Earl by King Charles the First, anno 1648, E.
Kincardine.
his Brother Alexander succeeded him in his Dignity, who was one of the
Commissioners of the Thesaury to King Charles the Second, his Son is Alexander
Earl of Kincardine, Culross, and these places adjacent, albeit surrounded with
Fife and Clackmannan, yet make a part of the Shire of Perth. Then stands
Dumfermling, B. Royal.
a famous Monastery in old time, both the Building and Burial place of King
Malcolm the Third, which gave both name and honor of an Earl unto Sir
Alexander Seton a most prudent Counselor, whom James King of Great-Brittain,
worthily raised from Baron of Fivie, to be Earl of Dumfermling, E. Dumferming.
and Lord Chancellor of the Realm of Scotland: of the Succession of this Earl,
mention is made in the Description of the Family of Seton in East- Lothian.
Then Kinghorn stands hard upon the Forth, B. Royal.
from which place Sir Patrick Lion Baron Glames, received at the bountiful Hand
of K. James the 6th, the Title and honor of an Earl, E. Kinghorn.
anno 1606. After this there is upon the Shore Dysert, B. Royal.
situat on the rising of an Hill, from whence there lies an open Heath of the
same name, where there is a good large place which they call the Cole-plot,
that has great plenty of an earthy Bitumen, and partly burns to some damnage
of the Inhabitants. William Murray of the Bedchamber of the Family of
Tullibardine, was by King Charles the First, E. Dysert.
created Earl of Dysert, whose Daughter and Heiress Elizabeth, Countess of
Dysert, is Duchess of Lawderdale, by Marriage with John late D. of Lawderdale:
and by a former Marriage, her Son Sir Leonald Talmash L. Huntingtour residing
in England, is to succeed her as Earl of Dysert. Her second Son of that
Marriage, was Thomas Talmash, who attended his Majesty in his Expedition to
Britain, in the year 1688, who for his Valor in the Wars, and Reduction of
Ireland, was advanced to be General Major, and thereafter Lieutenant General:
which Office he did worthily discharge in Flanders, and in the Summer 1694,
being chief Commander in the Attempt upon Breast, was unfortunatly wounded,
whereof he died after his landing in England. Unto it adjoineth Ravens-Heugh,
as one would say, the steep hill of Ravens, the Habitation of the Barons
Sinclar, L. Sinclar.
whose Successor is Henry Lord Sinclar. Above it the River Levin hides himself
in the Forth: which River running out of the Lake Levin, wherein stands the
Castle of the Dowglasses, which belonged to the Earls of Mortoun. Sir Alexander
Lesly General of the Scots Forces, was by K. Charles the 1st, created Earl of
Levin anno 1641, E. Levin.
whose Successor is David now Earl of Levin, second Son to George Earl of
Melvil, begotten on Lady Katherine Leslie, Grandchild and Heiress to the said
Earl of Levin: which River, has at the very mouth of it Weyms Castle, the Seat
of a noble Family, bearing the same surname. The Lord of Weyms is in the Rolls
of Parliament 1617, one of the Commissioners for the Shire of Fife; he was
thereafter made Lord Weyms, and in the Parliament Rolls 1633, is ranked after
the Lord Newburgh, and before Ashtoun of Forfar, and in the same year created
Earl of Weyms, E. Weyms.
whose Grandchild Margaret now Countess of Weyms, was married to Sir James
Weyms, who by K. Charles the 2d. was made Lord Burntisland, L. Burntisland.
from a Burgh Royal of the same Shire, B. Royal,
and has a Son Lord Elcho to succeed her in that Dignity. From hence the Shore
draws back with a crooked and wiuding Tract unto Fife-ness, that is, the
Promontory or Nose of Fife. B. Royal
Above it Saint Andrews, an Archiepiscopal City, has a fair Prospect into the
open main Sea: the more ancient name of the place as old Memorials witness, was
Regimund, that is, Saint Regulus Mount: in which we read thus, Oeng or Vng King
of the Picts, granted unto God and Saint Andrew, that it should be the chief
and mother of all Churches in the Picts Kingdom. Afterward there was placed
here an Episcopal See, the Bishops whereof like as all the rest within the
Kingdom of Scotland, were consecrated by the Archbishop of York, (as is
asserted by the English Historians) until at the Intercession of King James the
Third, by reason of so many Wars between the Scottish and English men. Pope
Sixtus the fourth, ordained the Bishop of Saint Andrews to be Primat and
Metropolitan of all Scotland; and Pope Innocentius the eighth, bound him and
his Successors to the imitation and precedent of the Metropolitan of
Canterbury, in these words: That in Matters concerning the Archiepiscopal
state, they should observe and firmly hold the Offices, Droits, and Rights of
Primacy, and such like Legacy; and the free Exercise thereof, the Honors,
Charges, and Profits: and that they should endeavor to perform inviolably the
laudable Customs of the famous Metropolitan Church of Canterbury, the
Archbishop wherewhereof is Legatus natus of the Kingdom of England, etc.
Howbeit before that, Laurence Lundoris and Richard Corvel* Doctors of the Civil
Law, publicly professed here good Literature, laid the Foundation of an
University: which now, for happy increase of Learned men, for three Colleges
and the Kings Professors in them, is become highly renowned. Hard by there
loses it self into the Sea Edan, or Ethan, a little River which springs up
near Falkland (a place from which Carry an English man, had the Designation of
Viscount from King James the Sixth, V. Falkland.
and is so marked in the Rolls of Parliament 1621; his Successor is Anthony
Viscount of Falkland, a Member of the House of Commons in the current English
Parliament,) it belonged anciently to the Earls of Fife, and was a retiring
place of the Kings, when residing in Scotland, and is very well Seated for
hunting Pleasures, and Disports; sometimes it was reckoned amongst the Burghs
Royal, and is the Seat of the Stewartry of Fife; this River has its Course
under a continued Ridge of Hills, which divide this Country in the midst, by
Struthers (a place so called of a Reed plot) a Castle of the Barons Lindsey of
whom is descended John Lord Lindsey, created by King Charles the First, anno
1633, Earl of Lindsey. And in anno 1641, was Lord High Thesaurer, and after the
Forfaulture of Lodowick Earl of Crawford, and by virtue of a former Entail, the
Honor, Dignity and Precedence of the Earl of Crawford, was declared in
Parliament to belong to him and his Successors, and since ratified in
Parliament anno 1661; he was by King Charles the Second, restored to be
Thesaurer, from which Office he had been removed in the year 1649: his Son
William now Earl of Crawford, was President of the Parliament 1689, and 1690,
and one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury: the secondary Title belonging to
his eldest Son, is Lord Lindsey. Eden also runs by Cowper a notable Burgh,
B. Royal.
where the Sheriff sits to minister Justice.

Now where the shore turns inward a Front northward, hard by the Salt water
of Tau, there flourished in old time two goodly Abbeys, Balmerinoch, built by
Queen Ermengard, Wife to King William, Daughter of Viscount Beaumont in France.
King James of Great Britain, advanced Sir James Elphingston of Barntoun, L.
Balmerinoch.
to the honor of Baron Balmerinoch, about the year 1604, being mentioned in
that Parliament, one of the Commissioners for the Union with England: he is
placed in the Decree of Ranking, after the L. Abercorn, and before the L.
Tullibardine; he was a Lord of the Session, and Secretary and thereafter
succeeded to the L. Fyvie to be President of the Session, anno 1605, whose
Grandchild is John L. Balmerinoch. The other Abbey is that of Lindoris,
Founded among the Woods by David E. of Huntingtoun, and is the Barony of Sir
Patrick Lesly created L. Lindoris about the year 1604, and placed in the
Decree of Ranking immediately after the Lord Roxburgh, L. Lindoris.
and before the Lord Lowdoun, his Successor is John Lord Lindoris. Between
which stands Banbrich, the Habitation of the Earl of Rothes, strongly built
Castle-wise.

Near to these places on the Confines toward Perth-shire, is Balvaird, which
belongs to the Murrays, ancient Cadets of the Lairds of Tullihardine: their
Successor was created L. Balvaird L. Balvaird
by K. Charles the 1st. after the year 1641, his Grandchild has succeeded to
the Dignity of Lord Scoon, and Viscount Stormonth by entail, Sir David Murray
the first Lord and Viscount, being a younger Brother of the Lord of Balvaird.

The Governor of this Province, like as of all the rest in this Kingdom, was
in times past a Thane, that is in the old English tongue, The Kings Minister:
as it is also at this day in the Danish Language: but Malcolm Canmore made
Macduff who before was Thane of Fife, E. Fife.
the first hereditary Earl of Fife; and in consideration of his good desert and
singular service done unto him, granted that his Posterity should have the
Honor to place the King, when he is to be Crowned in his Chair, and to lead
the Vant-guard in his Army; and if any of them should happen by casualty to
kill either Gentleman or Commoner, to buy it out with a piece of Money. Not far
from Lindoris, there is to be seen a Cross of Stone, which standing for a limit
between Fife and Strathern, had an Inscription of barbarous Verses, and a
certain privilege of Sanctuary, that any Manslayer Allied to Macduff Earl of
Fife, within the ninth Degree, if he came unto this Cross, and gave nine Kine
with an Colpindach^.
Heifer, should be quit of Manslaughter. When his Posterity lost this Title and
Privilege, is uncertain; but it appears, that King David the Second, gave
unto William Ramsey this Earldom, with all and every the Immunities and Law,
which is called Clan-Mac-Duff: and received it is for certain, that the Lineage
of the Weymesses and Dowglasses, yea and that great Kindred Clan-Hatan, the
Chief whereof is Mac-Intoshech, descended from them. And the most learned Sir
John Skeen of Currie-hill Clerk of Register, in his Treatise de verborum
significatione, informs, that by an Indenture at Perth the penult day of March
1371, betwixt Robert Stuart Earl of Monteith, and Dame Isabel Countess of Fife,
Daughter and Heir to Duncan Earl of Fife. The Countess is obliged to resign her
Earldom in the Kings hands, in favors of the said Earl for new heretable
Infestment thereof to be given to him; which Earl being afterward designed of
Fife and Monteith, was thereafter Duke of Albany, and affecting the Kingdom,
with cruel Ambition, caused David the Kings eldest Son to be most pitifully
famished to death, which is the highest extremity of all misery. But his Son
Murdac suffered due punishment for the Wickedness both of his Father, and his
own Sons, being put to death by King James the First for their violent
Oppressions, and a Decree passed, that the Earldom of Fife should be united
unto the Crown for ever. But the Authority of the Sheriff of Fife belongs in
right of Inheritance, E. Rothes.
to the Earl of Rothes, the Heir of which Family, was John Earl of Rothes: who
after he was High Commissioner for King Charles the Second to the Parliament,
and Conventions of Estates, and enjoyed several other honorable and profitable
Employments, was made Chancellor anno 1668, in which Office he continued till
his death, in anno 1681, and was shortly before created Duke of Rothes: D.
Rothes.
which Dignity is extinct, by default of Heirs male of his Body, but his eldest
Daughter Margaret Countess of Rothes, being married to Charles Earl of
Haddingtoun, has John Lord Leslie, who is to succeed in the Dignity of the
Earl of Rothes, and Thomas who has succeeded his Father in the Dignity of the
Earl of Hadingtoun.

Since Printing of the former Edition, several Lords were created in this
Shire, some whereof have already been mentioned, and also others to be
mentioned, viz. Sir Michael Balfour of Balgarvie by K. James the 6th, created
L. Burghlie July 16, 1607, whose Successor is John Lord Burghlie. L. Burghly.
And by the same King, Sir Robert Melvil, first of Murdocairny, and thereafter
of Burntisland, who had been Thesaurer Deput, and Thesaurer, before the year
1592, and an extraordinar Lord of Session anno 1594, was created Lord Melvil
about the year 1617, to whom succeeded Robert his Son: he is ranked in the
Parliament 1633, after the Lord Deskford and before Carnegie, and is amongst
the Commissioners for holding that Parliament, who had been admitted an
extraordinar Lord of Session upon the dimission of his Father, and then by
entail, the honor fell to the Lord of Raith, descended of the eldest Brother,
and the only Male representative of the ancient Family of the Melvils: George
Lord Melvil his Son, is the 4th. Lord, who was sole Secretar of State to, and
created by Their Majesty's Earl of Melvil, E. Melvil.
Lord High Commissioner to the second and third Sessions of this current
Parliament 1690, and now Lord Privy Seal: his Son Alexander Lord Raith, was
constitute Thesaurer Deput anno 1689. Mr. John Lindsey of Belcarras, was a Lord
of the Session, and one of the Octavians of the Thesaury, and Secretary before
K. Ja. his Succession to the Crown of England: his Grandchild Alexander about
the year 1633, was created Lord Belcarras by King Charles the First, and
afterward Earl of Belcarras by King Charles the Second when in Scotland: E.
Belcarrras.
his Son is Colin Earl of Belcarras. The Viscount Fentoun, of whom before, was
created by King James the Sixth about the year 1617, Earl of Kelly, E. Kelly.
and is in the Rolls of Parliament 1621, next after the Earl of Roxburgh, and
before Buckcleugh, whose Successor is Alexander Earl of Kelly. Sir John Living
stoun of Kinnaird Baronet, was by K. Charles the First, made Lord Newburgh, and
Earl of Newburgh by King Charles the Second, E. Newburgh.
whose Male Successor is deceased lately in England, without Issue Male.
Sandilands Lord of St. Minnans, was by King Charles the First, L. Abercromby.
advanced to the Title of L. Abercromby, in the year 1648, whose Honor is not
now claimed by any. Lieutenant General David Lesly, Son to the Lord Lindoris,
was created by King Charles the Second, L. New-wark.
Lord New-warki he had been Lieutenant General to the Scots Army, and at
Philiphaugh, surprised and defeat the Marquess of Montross: he was General of
the Army at Dumbar and Worcester: his Son being deceased without Heirs Male,
the Grand. child is married to Mr. Alexander Anstruther, a younger Son of Sir
Philip Anstruther of that Ilk. Beside the Burghs Royal mentioned in this Shire,
there are also others, viz. Innerkeithing, Kirkaldy, Anstruther Easter, Burghs
Royal
and Wester, Pitttenweem, Crail and Kilrenny, all lying on Forth from the West
to the East.

CHAP. XXI.
STRATHERN.
AS far as to the River Tau, In Perth-shire
which Boundeth Fife on the North-side, Julius Agricola, the best Proprietar of
Britain under Domitian the worst Emperor, marched with victorious Armies in
the third year of his warlike Expeditions, having wasted and spoiled the
Nations hitherto. Near the outlet of Tau, the notable River Ern intermingleth
his Waters with Tau: which River beginning out of a Lake or Loch of the same
name, bestows his own name upon the Country through which he runs, for it
is called Strathern, which in the ancient Tongue of the Britains, signifies
the Vale along Ern. The Bank of this Ern is beautified with Drymein Castle,
belonging to the Family of the Barons of Drummond, advanced to highest Honors,
ever since that King Robert Stewart the third; took to him a Wife out of that
Lineage: for the Women of this Race, have for their singular Beauty, and well
favored sweet Countenance, won the prize from all others, insomuch as they
have been the Kings most amiable Paramours. Baron Drummonds Successor was
created by King James the Sixth, Earl of Perth about the year 1605, and so
designed from the head Burgh of the Shire: E. Perth.
of whom is descended James now Earl of Perth: his great Grandchild, who was
an extraordinar Lord of the Session, Justice General, and Chancellor to K. Chapter
the 2d. and K. Ja. the 7th. James a Son of this Family, was created by K. Ia.
the 6th. Lord Maderty, L. Maderty.
and is in the Rolls of Parliament 1617, after the Lord Garlies, and before the
Lord Kintail, whose Successors second Son L. General William Drummond, was by
King James the Seventh, about the year 1686, created Viscount of Strathallan,
V. Strathallan.
to whom his Son William now Viscount of Strathallan succeeded, and also is
Heir to his Uncle the Lord Maderty. Upon the same Bank, Tullibardine Castle
shows it self aloft, but with greater jollity, since that by the propitious
favor of King James the Sixth, Sir John Murray created Baron of Tullibardine,
before the Lords Colvil and Scoon, was raised to the Honor and Estate of Earl
of Tullibardine anno 1606. By an unprinted Act anno 1612, there is a
Ratification to the Master of Tullibardine of the Lands of the Earldom of
Athol, who was the Earl of Tullibardines eldest Son, (Earls eldest Sons at that
time, being designed Masters and not Lords;) this Master, afterward William
Earl of Tullibardine, having married the Heiress of Stuart Earl of Athol, his
Son John succeeded to the Dignity of Earl of Athol, and his Uncle Sir Patrick
Murray by Resignation, became Earl of Tullibardine, whose Son James Earl of
Tullibardine dying without Issue, his Estate and Dignity fell to his Cousin
John Earl of Athol, Son to the Earl of Athol before named, who lives, and was
to King Charles the Second, Lord Justice General, and thereafter Lord Privy
Seal; and extraordinar Lord of the Session, and before the year 1677, created
Marquess of Athol; M. Athol.
he retains the surname of Murray, and carries, the Arms of Stuart Earl of
Athol quartered. Upon the other Bank, more beneath Duplin Castle, sometime the
Habitation of the Barons Oliphant, L. Oliphant.
reports yet what an overthrow (the like to which was never before) the
English men that came to aid King Edward Balliol, gave there unto the Scots;
insomuch as the English Writers in that time do write, that they won this
Victory not by man's hand, but by the power of God: and the Scottish Writers
relate, how that out of the Family of the Lindseys, there were slain in the
Field fourscore persons, and that the name of Hays had been quite extinguished,
but that the chief of that House left his Wife behind him great with Child. The
Precedence of Oliphant is transmitted to Dowglass Lord Mordingtoun as Heir of
Line, of whom before: and Charles Lord Oliphant, residing in the Shire of
Bamff, as Heir-male, does also claim the Precedence. The Lands of Duplin were
purchased by Sir George Hay of Kinfauns, a Lord of the Session, and Clerk of
Register, and thereafter in the year 1622, made Lord Chancellor: September 25
1629 George Viscount Dupline is one of the Commissioners for holding of the
Parliament: in a Roll of the Nobility about that time, he is ranked last
Viscount, after the Viscount of Drumlanrig, and in anno 1632, created by King
Charles the First Earl of Kinnoul, E. Kinnoul.
to whom he continued Chancellor till his death, and was succeeded by John
Spotswood Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Earl of Kinnoul his Successor resides
in England. Not far from it stands Innermeth, L. Innermeth.
well known by reason of the Lords thereof, the Stuarts out of the Family of
Lorn: this Dignity at present is claimed by none. Inch Chafra, that is in the
old Scottish tongue, the Isle of Masses, hereby may be remembered when as it
was a most famous Abbey of the Order of Saint Augustine, founded by Gilbert
Earl of Strathern, about the year 1200.

When Ern has joined this Water with Tau in one Stream, so that Tau is now
become more spacious, he looks up to Abernethy seated upon his Bank, the
Royal Seat in old time of the Picts, and a well peopled City: which, as we read
in an ancient Fragment, Nectane King of the Picts gave unto God and St. Brigid
until the day of Doom, together with the bounds thereof, which ly from a stone
in Abertrent, unto a stone near to Carfull, that is, Loghfoll, and from thence
as far as to Ethan. But long after, it became the possession of the Dowglasses
Earls of Angus, who are called Lords of Abernethy, and there some of them ly
entered.

Malisse Earl of Strathern, in the time of King Henry the Third of England,
married one of the Heirs of Robert Muschamp, a potent Baron of England. Long
afterward Robert Stuart about the year 1360, was E. Then David a younger Son of
K. Robert the 2d. whose only Daughter given in Marriage to Patrick Graham,
Stuart Earl of Strathern.
b^gat Mailise or Melasse Graham, from whom King James the First took away the
Earldom as Escheated; after that, he understood out of the Records of the
Kingdom, that it was given unto his Mothers Grandfather, and the Hirs Male of
his Body. This Territory, the Barons Drummond, Earls of Perth, govern
hereditarly by Seneschals Authority, as their Stewartries; as the Lords of Down
(now Earls of Murray) are hereditary Stewarts of the Jurisdiction of Monteith.
L. Down.


Monteith has the name of Teith, a River which also they call Tai^h, and
thereof this little Province they term in Latin Taichia; upon the Bank of
which lies the Bishopric of Dumblain, which King David the first of that Name
erected. Sir Thomas Osburn Thesaurer of England, was by King Charles the
Second, before the year 1677, created Viscount of Dumblain, V. Dumblain.
who is now Duke of Leeds in England, and President of the Council: the Dignity
was conveyed to Peregrine his 2d. Son, who now by the death of his elder
Brother, is Marquess of Carmarthan. The Lord of Dincrub, was by King Charles
the Second when in Scotland, L. Rollo.
created Lord Rollo from his surname, whose Successor is Andrew Lord Rollo. At
Kilbride, that is Saint Brigids Church, Earls of Monteith.
the Earls of Monteith had their principal House, or Honor. This Monteith
reaches unto the Mountains, that enclose the East Side of the Loch or Lake
Lomund. The ancient Earls of Monteith were of the Family of Cumming, which in
times past being the most spread and mightiest House of all Scotland, was
ruinated with the over-weight and sway thereof: Graham E. of Monteith.
but the later Earls were of the Grahams Line, ever since that Sir Mailise
Graham attained to the Honor of an Earl.

The Author begins the Description of the Grahams of Monteith, before the
Grahams of Montross, it seems in regard they did first attain to the Degree of
Earls. William Earl of Monteith descended of these Earls, was by King Charles
the First made President of his Council: and being served Heir to David Earl of
Strathern, who was Son to King Robert the first of the Stuarts, was by Patent
from that King, Ratified and Approven in his Title and Dignity of Earl of
Strathern. April 13. 1632, amongst the Commissioners for holding the
Parliament, is William Earl of Strathern, Graham E. of Strathern.
President of the Council, ranked before the L. Privy Seal; it is reported,
that being vain of the Title of Strathern, joined with the general error of
Historians, of David Earl of Strathern's being a Son of the first Marriage of
King Robert the Second, a Decree of Reduction and Improbation was obtained at
the Instance of Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, Barroner, Kings Advocat, and that
Earl and his Successors appointed to use in time coming, E. Monteith, or Airth.
the Title of Earl of Monteith, or Airth: His Grandchild, William Earl of
Monteith lately deceased, did convey his Estate and Dignity to the Marquess of
Montross, descended of the same Stock of Grahams at Kincardine not far off, who
had many noble and valiant Progenitors; and in late times, John Earl of
Montross, Chancellor to King James the Sixth was the first, who as Great or
High Commissioner, did represent the Kings person in the Parliament 1604, as
distinguished from several Noblemen and Gentlemen, appointed Commissioners by
the King under the quarter Seal, to meet at the Diet of Parliament, and to
continue the same to a further time, and to see the Solemnities constituting the
Parliament performed, the first day of its sitting; which Form was constantly
observed, till the year 1640. This Earls Grandchild James, was famous in the
late Wars in Scotland, M. Montross.
and was created Marquess by King Charles the first: George Wishart Dr. of
Divinity, and afterward Bishop of Edinburgh, did write his Actions; his Great
Grandchild is James Marquess of Montross. Near these places is the Abbacy of
Cardross, which by K. Ja. the 6th, was erected in a temporal Lordship, L.
Cardross.
to Henry Erskin a Son of the E. of Mar, he is ranked in the Rolls after the
Lord Blantyre, the Great Grandchild is David Lord Cardross.

Before I end the Description of this Country of Strathern, which is so famous
for the Roman Actions there, and several noble and ancient Families inhabiting
it. I return to the Cross of Macduff before mentioned, placed in the Limits of
Fife and Strathern, of whose Inscription Sir John Skeen took notice, that the
Privileges of Clan Macduff were expressed in barbarons Verses, whereof he
gives a short hint in his de verborum significatione; of which Mr. James
Cunninghame has given a more full Description in Print, the Inscription as it
is set down by him, is thus,

Maldraradrum dragos Malairta largia largos
Spalando spados sive nig fig knippite gnaros Inscription of Macduffs Cross.

Lorca lauriscos lanringen louria luscos
Et Coluburt^s sic fit tibi bursca burtus
Exitus et blaradrum sive lim sive iam sive labrum
Propter macgidrim et hoc obla^um
Accipe smeleridem super limpide lampida labrum.
But one Dowglass in New-burgh, near to Cross Macduff, had by him a Version,
which seems to be much more probable, and agreeable to the Matter, which reads
thus, Ara, urget lex quos, lare egentes atria lis, quos
Hoc qui laboras, haec fit tibi pactio portus,
Mill reum Drachmas mulctam de largior agris
Spes tantum pacis cum nex fit a nepote natis
Propter Macgidrum, and hoc oblatum accipe semel
Haeredum, super lymphato lapide labem.


Here seems to be wanting a Line of the Inscription, which is lost, or could
not be read by the Translater, which probably related to Macduffs leading of
the Van of the Kings Army, which Inscription is thus paraphrased in English
Rhyme, All such as are within the ninth Degree
Of Kindred to that ancient Thane Macduff,
And yet for Slaughter are compelled to fly
And leave their houses, and their household Stuff;
Here they shall find for their refuge, a place
To save them from the cruel blood Avenger:
A privilege peculiar to that Race,
Which never was allowed to any Stranger.
But they must enter Heir, on this condition
(Which they observe must, with a faith unfeignzied)
To pay a thousand Groats for their Remission,
Or else their Lands and Goods shall be distrenzied.
For Saint Macgidders sake, and this Oblation,
And by their only washing at this Stone,
Purged is the Blood shed by that Generation:
This privilege pertains to them alone.


In this Country about midway betwixt Dumblain and the Castle of Drummond, is
the house of Ardoch, belonging to Sir William Stirling Barronet, where there is
large Vestiges of a Roman Camp, enclosed on some sides with treeple Trenches,
wherein at several times, Roman Medals have been found, and from that there is
a great Mercat-Road leads toward St. Iohnstoun or Perth, Calseyed in many
places, and thence through Strathmore toward Angus. This incampment is believed
to have been made by Julius Agricola, being near to the Grampian Hills where he
defate the Scots and Picts.

Within this Camp there was found a squair Stone, which is yet kept at the
Castle of Drummond, and may be seen there, whereon is engraven the Inscription
following, DIS MANIBUS

Mr. Adair in his Map of Strathern, has printed this Inscription with some
small difference, whee the has also a draught of the Roman Camp before
mentioned.

CHAP. XXII.
ARGATHELIA: OR, ARGILE,
BEyond the Lake Lomund and the west part of Lennox, The Shire of Argile.
there spreads it self near unto Dumbarton Firth, the large Country called
Argathelia, and Ar. Gwithil, that is Near unto the Irish; or as old Writings
have it, the edge or Border of Ireland: for it lies toward Ireland, the
Inhabitants whereof, the Britains term Gwithil and Gaothel. The Country
runs out in length and breadth, all mangled with fishful Pools, and in some
places with rising Mountains, very commodious for feeding of Cattle; in which
also there range up and down wild Kine and red Deer: but along the Shore it is
more unpleasant in sight, what with Rocks, and what with blackish barren
Mountains. In this part, as Bede writes, Britain received after the Britains
and Picts, a third nation of Scots, in that Country where the Picts inhabited:
who coming out of Ireland, under the leading of Reuda, either through
friendship, or by dint of Sword, planted their seat amongst them which they
still hold. Of whom, their Leader they are to this very day called Dalreudini:
for in their language, Dal signifies (a part.) And a little after, Ireland
(says he) is the proper Country of the Scots, for, being departed out of it,
they added unto the Britains and Picts, a third Nation in Britain. And there
is a very great Bay or Arm of the Sea, that in old time severed the Nation of
the Britains from the Picts, which from the West breaks a great way into the
Land, where stands the strongest City of all the Britains even unto this
day, called Alchith. In the north part of which Bay, the Scots aforesaid when
they came, got themselves a place to inhabit. Of that name Dalreudin, no
Remains at all are now extant; neither find we any thing thereof in Writers,
unless it be that same Dalrieta. For, in an old Pamphlet, touching the division
of Albany, we read of one Kinnady (who for certain was a King of Scots and
denied the Picts) these very words; Kinnady two years before he came into
Pictavia (for so it calls the Country of the Picts) entered upon the Kingdom
of Dalrieta. Also in an History of latter time, there is mention made of Dalrea
in some place of this Tract, where King Robert Bruce fought a field
unfortunatly.

That Justice should be ministered unto this Province by Justices itinerant at
Perth, whenever it pleased the King, King James the Fourth by Authority of
the States of the Kingdom, enacted a Law. But the Earls themselves have in some
cases their Royalties, as being men of very great Command and Authority,
followed with a mighty Train of Retainers and Dependants, who derive their Race
from the ancient Princes and Potentates of Argile, by an infinite descent of
Ancestors, and from their Castle Campbel, took their surname: E. Argile.
but the Honor and Title of Earl was given unto them by King James the Second,
who, as it is recorded, invested Colin Lord Campbel, Earl of Argile, in regard
of his own virtue, and the worth of his Family: whose Heirs and Successors
standing in the gracious favor of the Kings, have been Lords of Lorn, and a
good while General Justices of the Kingdom of Scotland, or, Justices ordained
in General, and Great Masters of the Kings Royal Household. Archibald Earl of
Argile, by King Charles the First, created Marquess of Argile, was forefaulted
by King Charles the Second, and his Son Archbald Lord Lorn, restored to the
Dignity and Precedence of the Earl of Argile: who thereafter in that same Kings
Reign, upon very nice and slender Grounds, was also forefaulted; which
Forefaulture was particularly taxed as a Reproach to the Nation in the Claim of
Right, or Instrument of Government anno 1689, and by a special printed Act of
Parliament 1690, his Son Archbald Lord Lorn now Earl of Argile restored. Since
the printing of the first Sheets of this Book, he has presented a Letter from
the King to the Lords, nominating him an Extraordinar Lord of the Session, in
place of the Duke of Hamilton deceased, and is accordingly admitted. From
Melfort in this Country, did John Drummond of Lundie, first married to the
Heiress of that Family, and Brother to James Earl of Perth, by grant from King
James the Seventh, take first the Title of Viscount, and thereafter of Earl, E.
Melfort.
and was Thesaurer Depute to King Charles the Second, and Secretary to him and
King James the Seventh. The head Burgh of this Shire is Inerara, B. Royal.
a Burgh Royal.

CHAP. XXIII.
CANTIRE.
LOgh. Fin, In the Shire of Argile.
a Lake breeding such store of Herrings at a certain due season, as it is
wonderful, severeth Argile from a Promontory, which for thirty Miles together
growing still toward a sharp Point, thrusts it self forth with so great a
desire toward Ireland (betwixt which and it there is a narrow Sea, scarce
thirteen Miles over) as if it would conjoyn it self. Ptolomy terms this, the
Promontory Epidiorum, between which name, and the Islands Aebudae lying
over against it, there is, in my conceit, some affinity. At this day it is
called in the Irish Tongue (which they speak in all this Tract) Can-tyre, that
is, The Lands Head; inhabited by the Mac-conells, a Family that here swayeth
much, howbeit at the pleasure and dispose of the Earl of Argile: yea and other
times they make out their light Pinnaces and Galleys for Ireland, to raise
Booties and Pillage, who also hold in Possession those little Provinces of
Ireland, which they call Glines and Rowts. This Promontory lies annexed to
Knapdale by so thin a Neck (as being scarce a Mile broad, and the same all
Sandy) that the Mariners find it the nearer way to convey their small Vessels
over it by Land. Which I hope a man may sooner believe, than that the Argonauts
laid their great Ship Argos upon their Shoulders, and so carried it along with
them five hundred Miles, from Aemonia unto the Shores of Thessalia. L. Kintyre.
This place gave first the Title of Lord to a Brother of the Earl of Argiles,
as has been said, and thereafter when Argile became Marquess, he was designed
Earl of Kintyre.

CHAP. XXIV.
LORN.
SOmewhat higher toward the North lies Lorn, In the Shire of Argyle.
bearing the best kind of Barley in great plenty, and divided with Leave a vast
and huge Lake: by which stands Berogomum a Castle, in which sometime was kept
the Court of Justice, or Session: and not far from it Dunstaffage, that is,
Stephens Mount, the Kings House in times past: above which Logh Aher, a Lake
insinuating it self from out of the Western Sea, Lochaber:
windeth it self so far within Land, that it had conflowed together with Ness,
another Lake running into the East Sea, but that certain Mountains between kept
them with a very little Partition asunder. The chiefest Place of Name in this
Tract is Tarbar in Loch Kinkeran, where King James the fourth ordained a
Justice and Sheriff, to administer Justice unto the Inhabitants of the out
Islands, but now the Shires of Argile and Tarbat are joined in one These
Countries and those beyond them, in the year of our Lords Incarnation 655. the
Picts, held: whom Beda calls the Northern Picts, where he reports, Lib: 3:
cap: 4:
that in the said year Columbane a Priest and Abbot, famous for his Monkish
profession and life, came out of Ireland into Britain, to instruct these in
Christian Religion, that by means of the high rough Ridges of the Mountains
were sequestered from the Southern Countries of the Picts: and that they, in
lieu of a Reward, allowed unto him the Island Hii, over against them, Bed:
Hist: Ecclesiast: S. G: Mackenzie against St: Asaph, and Dr: Stillingfleet.
now called I-Comb-Kill, a famous Monastry and Nursery of the Christian
Religion over Britain. The Lord of Lorna in the age aforegoing were the
Stuarts: but now, by reason of a Female their Heir, the Earls of Argile use
this Title in their Honorable Designation.

CHAP. XXV.
BRAID ALBIN, OR, ALBANY.
MOre inwardly, In Perth Shire
where the uninhabitable, lofty, and rugged Ridges of the Mountain Grampius,
begin a little to slope and settle downward, is seated Braid-Albin, that is,
The highest part of Scotland: for they that are the true and right Scots
indeed, call Scotland in their Mother Tongue, Albin; like as that part where it
mounteth up highest, Drum Albin, that is, the Ridge of Scotland. But in an old
Book it is read Brun Albin, where we find this Written: Fergus filius Eric,
etc. That is, Fergus the Son of Eric was the first of the Seed or line of
Chonare, that entered upon the Kingdom of Albanie, from Brun-Albain unto the
Irish Sea and Inch-Gall. And after him the Kings descended from the Seed or
Race of Fergus, Reigned in Brun-Albain or Brunhere unto Alpin the Son of
Eochall.

But this Albanie is better known for the Dukes thereof, than for any good
Gifts that the Soil yields. D: of Albanie:
The first Duke of Albanie was Robert Earl of Fife, whom his Brother King
Robert the third of that Name, advanced to that honor: yet he (ungrateful
person that he was) pricked on with the spirit of ambition, famished to Death
his Son David, that was Heir to the Crown. But the punishment due for this
wicked Fact, which himself by the long sufferance of God self not, his Son
Mordac, the second Duke of Albanie, first designed in his Fathers time, Sir
Murdac Stuart of Kinclevin suffered most grievously, being condemned for
Treason and beheaded, when he had seen his two Sons the day before executed in
the same manner. The third Duke of Albanie was Alexander, second Son to King
James the second, who was also designed Earl of March, Mar, and Garioth, Lord
of Annandale and of Man, was by his own Brother King James the third outlawed,
and after he had been turmoiled with many Troubles, in the end, as he stood by
to behold at Justs and Tourneament in Paris, chanced to be wounded with a piece
of shattered Lance, and so died. His Son John, the fourth Duke of Albanie, was
called home and made Regent and Tutor to King James the fifth, taking
contentment in the pleasant Delights of the French Court, after he had Wedded
there the Daughter, and one of the Heirs of John Earl of Anverne and
Lauragveze, died there without Issue: Whom in respective reverence to the Blood
Royal of the Scots, Francis the first King of France gave thus much honor
unto, as that he allowed him place between the Archbishop of Langres, and the
Duke of Alenson, Peers of France. After his death there was no Duke of Albanie
until that Queen Mary conferred this Title upon Henry Lord Darnly, whom within
some few days after she made her Husband: likeas King James the sixth granted
the same unto his own second son Charles being an Infant, during the lifetime
of Prince Henry his elder Brother, to whom he succeeded as Prince and Steward
of Scotland, and to his Father as King of Great Britain, and first of the Name
of Charles: King James, the seventh did enjoy the Title of Duke of Albany
during the lifetime of his elder Brother.

There inhabit these Regions a kind of People, rude, warlike, ready to fight,
quarrellous and mischievous: they be commonly termed Highlandmen, who being
indeed the right Progeny of the ancient Scots, speak Irish, and call themselves
Albinich; their bodies be firmly made and well compact, able withal and strong,
nimble of Foot, high minded, inbread and nuzzeled in warlike exercises, or
Robberies rather, and upon a deadly feud and hatred, most forward and desperate
to take revenge. They go attired Irish-like, in stripped or streaked Mantles of
diverse colors, wearing thick and long Glibes of Hair, living by hunting,
fishing, fowling and stealing. In the War their Armor is an Headpiece, or
Morion of Iron, and an Habergeon, or Coat of Mail: their Weapons be Bows,
barbed or hooked Arrows, and broad Back Swords: and being divided by certain
Families or Kindreds, which they term Clans, they commit such cruel Outrages,
what with Robbing, Spoilling and Killing, that their Savage Cruelty has forced
a Law to be enacted, whereby it is lawful, That if any person, out of any one
Clan or Kindred of theirs has trespassed ought, and done harm, whosoever of
that Clan or Lineage chance to be taken, he shall either make amends for the
harms, or else suffer Death for it; when as the whole Clan commonly bears
Feud for any hurt received by any one Member thereof, by execution of Laws,
order of Justice, or otherwise. Sir John Camphel of Glenurchie Baronet an
ancient and powerful Cadet of Argile, descended of one of the Heiresses of
Stuart, Lord Lorn of whose Lands he enjoyes a part, and their Arms quartered,
and of other great Families, and from whom many Noblemen and Barons derive
their Pedigree, was by King Charles the second, about the year 1677. Earl of
Braid-albine.
Created Earl of Brade Albine, and is one of the present Commissioners of their
Majesty's Thesaury, he is Hereditary Baillie of Broad Albine.

CHAP. XXVI.
PERTHIA: OR, PERTH Sheriffdom.
OUt of the very bosom of the Mountains of Albany, The Shire of Perth.
Tau the greatest River of all Scotland issues: and first runreth amain
through the Fields, until that spreading broad into a Lake full of Islands, he
restrains and keeps in his course. Then gathering himself narrow within his
Banks into a Channel, and Watering Perth, a large, plentiful and rich Country,
he takes in unto him Amond, a small River coming out of Athol.

This Athol, that I may digress a little out of my way, is infamous for Witches
and wicked Women: the Country, otherwise fertile enough, has Valleys bespread
with Forests: namely, where that Wood Caledonia, dreadful to see, for the
sundry turnings and windings in and out therein, for the hideous horror of
dark Shades, for the Burrows and Dens of Wild Bulls with thick Manes (whereof I
made mention heretofore) extended it self in old time far and wide every way in
these parts. As for the Places herein, they are of no great account, but the
Earls thereof are very memorable.

Thomas, a younger Son of Rolland of Galloway, Earl Athol.
was in his Wives Right Earl of Athol, whose Son Patrick was by the Bissets his
Concurrents Murdered in Feud, at Had dingtoun in his Bedchamber, and forthwith
the whole House wherein he Lodged burnt, that it might be supposed he perished
by casualty of Fire.

To the Earldom there succeeded David Hastings, who had Married the Aunt by the
Mothers side of Patrick; whose Son that David surnamed of Strathbogie may seem
to be, who a little after, in the Reign of Henry the third King of England,
being Earl of Athol, married one of the Daughters and Heirs of Richard, base
Son to John King of England, and had with her a very goodly inheritance in
England. She bare unto him two Sons, John Earl of Athol, who being of a
variable disposition and untrusty was hanged up aloft on a Gallows fifty Foot
high; and David Earl of Athol, unto whom by Marriage with one of the Daughters
and Heirs of John Cummin of Badzenoth, by one of the Heirs of Aumer de Valence
Earl of Pembroch, there fell great Lands and Possessions. His Son David, who
under King Edward the second was other whiles amongst English summoned to the
Parliaments in England, and under King Edward Baliol made Lord Lieutenant
General of Scotland, was vanquished by the valerous Prowess of Andrew de
Murray, and slain in Battle within the Forest of Kelblen, in the year of our
Lord 1335: And his Son David left two young Daughters only, Elisabeth Wedded
unto Sir Thomas Piercy, from whom the Barons of Borough are descended: and
Philip, Married to Sir Thomas Halsham an English Knight. Then fell the Title of
Athol unto that Walter Stuart, Son to King Robert the second, who cruelly
Murdered James the first, King of Scotland, who for this execrable cruelty
suffered most condign punishment accordingly: in so much as Aeneas Sylvius,
Ambassador at that time in Scotland from Pope Eugenius the fourth, gave out
this Speech: That he could not tell whether he should give them greater
commendations that revenged the Kings Death, or brand them with sharper Censure
of Condemnation, that distained themselves with so heinous a Paricide.

After some few years passed between, this honor was granted unto John Stuart
of the Family of Lorn, the Son of James, surnamed The Black Knight, by Joan the
Widow of King James the first, Daughter to John Earl of Somerset, and Niece to
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, whose posterity at this day enjoy the same.
The eldest son of Tullibardine being descended of the Stuarts of Athol,
Marquess Athol
whose successor is John Marquess of Athol, as has been said. Lord Charles
Murray second Son to the Marquess of Athol, was by King James the seventh, Earl
Dunmore.
Created Earl of Dunmore, and Sir Robert Nairn of Stra^hurd, one of the Lords
of Session, was by King Charles the second, about the year 1681. Created Lord
Nairn, Lord Nairn.
his only Daughter to be Married to a younger Son of the Marquess of Athols, by
virtue whereof William Lord Murray is now Lord Nairn. The Marquess of Athol is
Heretable Sheriff of Perth.

This River is increased by receiving the River of Bra^n, which having given
name to a Strath through which it passes, loses its name by augmenting of Tau
at Dunkeld, Burgh-Royal.
which was adorned by King David the first with an Episcopal See. Sir James
Galloway Master of Requests to King James the sixth, and King Charles the
first, was by the latter Created Lord Dunkell, Lord Dunkell.
about the year 1646. whose Grand Child is Forfeited for opposing their
Majesty's in the Highlands by force of Arms. Gillichrankie.
In these bounds lies Gillichrankie, a place remark^ble for the Defeat of the
Kings Forces, under the Command of General Major Mckay, by the late Viscount of
Dundee and his Associats, but himself was killed in the Action, which fell out
the 27th of July 1689.

Most Writers grounding upon the signification of that Word, suppose Dunkeld to
be a Town of the Caledonians, and interpret it, The Mount or Hill of Hazeles,
as who would have that name given unto it of the Hazeltrees in the Wood
Caledonia, from hence the Tau passes forward to the old Castle of Kincleiven,
where it is much augmented by the River Ila, a very pleasant and large River,
and thence goes downward by the Carcass of Bertha, a little desolat City,
remembering well enough what a great loss and calamity he brought upon it in
times past, when with an extraordinary swelling Flood, he surrounded all the
Fields, laid the goodly standing Corn along on the Ground, and carried headlong
away with him this poor City, with the Kings Child and Infant in his Cradle,
and the Inhabitants therein. In steed whereof in a more commodious place, King
William builded Perth, Burgh-Royal.
which straightways became so wealthy, that Necham, who lived in that age,
versified of it in this manner:

Transis ample Tai per rura per oppida, per Perth,
Regnum sustentant istius urbis opes.
By Villages, by Towns, by Perth,
thou runn'st great Tay amain,
The Riches of this City Perth
does all the Realm sustain.
But the posterity ensuing call it of a Church founded in honor of Saint John,
Saint John's Town: and the English whiles the Wars were hot between the Bruces
and the Balliols, Fortified it with great Bulwarks, which the Scots afterward,
for the most part overthrew, and disman led it themselves. Howbeit it is a
proper pretty City, pleasantly seated between two Greens: and for all that some
of the Churches be destroyed, yet a goodly show it makes; ranged and set out
in such an uniform manner, that in every several Street almost there dwell
several Artificers by themselves, and the River Tau brings up with the Tide
Sea Commodities by Lighters. King James the sixth having erected it to the
Title of an Earldom, Created James Baron Drummond Earl of Perth, of whom in
Strathern.

Unto Perth these places are near Neighbors, Methven near to which runs the
river of Almond, which passing downward falls in Tau, near to the place where
the ancient Town of Bertha stood. Margaret an English Lady, Widow unto King
James the fourth, purchased Methven with ready Money for her third Husband
Henry Stuart descended of the Royal Blood, and for his Heirs; and withal
obtained of her Son King James the fifth for him the dignity of a Baron, L.
Methven.
since extinct, and was one of the Titles of the late Dukes of Lennox. More
beneath is Ruthven, a Castle of the Ruthvens, whose name is of damned Memory,
considering that the three Estates of the Kingdom has ordained, that whosoever
were of that name should forego the same, and take unto them a new: after that
the Ruthvens, Brethren in a most cursed and horrible Conspiracy, had complotted
to murder their Sovereign King James the Sixth, who had created William their
Father, E. Gowry.
Earl of Gowrie, and afterward beheaded him, being lawfully convicted, when he
would insolently prescribe Laws to his Sovereign. But of men condemned to
perpetual Oblivion, I may seem to have said overmuch, although it concerns
Posterity also for a Caveat, that wicked Generations be notified as well as
noisome Weeds and venomous Plants. Sir Thomas Ruthven of Freeland, descended of
this Family, was created by King Char^^s the second while in Scotland, L.
Ruthven.
Lord Ruthven, whose Son is David Lord Ruthven, and in anno 1689, was appointed
by their Majesty's, one of their Privy Council, and one of the Commissioners of
the Thesaury.

As for the Country Gowrie aforesaid, famous for the Cornfieldsd, and singular
fertility of the Soil, it lies more plain and flat along the other Bank of
Tay. In this Tract over against Perth, on the farther side of Tay* stands
Scoon, a renowned Monastery in old time, and of reverend respect for the
Coronation therein of the Kings of Scotland: since that time, King Kenneth
having hard by, put the Picts for the most part to the sword, placed a stone
here enclosed within a Chair of Wood, for Inaugaration of the Kings of
Scotland, that had been transported out of Ireland into Argile: which Stone
Edward the First, King of England, caused to be conveyed unto Westminster:
touching which, I have put down this Prophecy so rise in every man's mouth,
since it has now proven true and taken effect, as very few of that sort do. nI
faLLat fatuM sCotI qVoCVnque LoCatVM
InVenIent LapIDeM regnare tenentVr IbIDeM.
Except old Sawes be vain,
And Wits of Wizards blind,
The Scots in place must reign,
Where they this Stone shall find.


Scoon gave the Title of Baron to Sir David Murray Comptroller, whom King James
for his good service, advanced to that honor, and is the last in the Decree
of Ranking, after the Lords Torphichen, Pasley, Newbottle, Thirlestane,
Spenzie, Roxburgh, Lindores, Lowdoun, Dirleton, Kinlos, Abercorn, Bal^^crinoch,
Murray of Tullibairn. Colvi^^ of ^u^ross: he was afterward created by that same
King Viscount of Stormonth, V. Stormonth.
which is the upper part of the Country of Gowry, and is in the Rolls of
Parliament 1633, before the Viscount Air, who being descended of the Lairds of
Balvaird, the Dignity of V. Stormonth did fall to their Successors, of whom is
descended David now Viscount Stormonth, as has been said.

Where Tay now grown bigger enlarges himself, there appears over it Arrol,
which was the Habitation of the noble Earls of Arrol, E. Arrol.
who ever since the Bruces days, have been by Inheritance the Constables of
Scotland: and verily they deduce an ancient Pedigree from one Hay, a man of
exceeding strength and excellent courage, who together with his Sons, in a
dangerous Battle of Scots against the Danes at Longcartie, caught up an Ox
Yoke, and so valiantly and fortunatly withal, what with fighting, and what
with exhorting, re-enforced the Scots at the point to shrink and recule, that
they had the day of the Danes: and the King, with the States of the Kingdom,
ascribed the Victory and their own Safety, unto his Valor and Prowess:
whereupon in this place, the most battle and fruitful Grounds were assigned to
him and his Heirs; who in testimony hereof, have set over their Coat a Yoke for
their Crest, over their Arms, Three Escutcheons Gules in Argent. Of this Family
is descended John now Earl of Arrol. Near to which lived Sir George Kinnaird of
Rossie, Privy Counselor to King Charles the Second, L. Kinnaird.
created Lord Kinnaird about the year 1683, Patrick Lord Kinnaird in his Son.
Touching Huntley Castle that joyneth unto it, I have nothing to write, but that
it has given Title to a very Potent, Great, and honorable Family, whereof I
am to speak hereafter. But I think rather, the Title of Earl of Huntly was
taken from a place in the Merse, called by that name, which is a part of the
Barony of Gordon, the ancient Inheritance of this Family. Huntly Castle, is one
of the Dwelling Houses of the Earl of Strathmore, and now passes under the
Name of Castle-Lyon, well planted and pleasantly situat in the Carse of Gowry.

In the Description of this Kingdom, the following Method had been more
agreeable to the Situation of the Country, and there had been less disjunction
of the Countries described; to have begun with the Country of the Merse, and
then East, Mid, and West- Lothian, and to have subjoyned the Shires of Peebles,
Selkirk, and Roxburgh; and in the end of Roxburgh, to have added the Selgovae,
viz. Liddesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annandale, and Nithisdale; and to have gone
to Galloway, Carrick, Kyle, Cunninghame, Isle of Arran, Cliddesdale, the Shire
of Stirling, Lennox, Argyle, Kintyre and Lorn, these three in one Shire; and to
have begun the description of Caledonia with that part of Perth Shire called
Brade-Albion, which joineth Lorn; and then to have added Athol and Perthia, and
in the third place Strathern, which compleats the Shire of Perth; and Fife,
Kinross and Clackmannan bordering with Strathern, and then to proceed to the
Country of Angus, or Shire of Forfar, which is divided from Fife by the River
Tay: the ordinar division of Scotland in public Acts and Letters, being by
south and be north Tay.

CHAP. XXVII.
ANGUSIA, or ANGVS.
BY the outlet or mouth of Tay, The Shire of Forfar.
and more within, beside the River North-Esk, Anguis, called by the natural and
true Scots Aeneia lies, extended with goodly fields bearing Wheat and Corn of
all kinds plentifully, with large Hills also and Pools, Forests, Pastures, and
Meadows, and also garnished with many Forts and Castles. In the very first
entry into it; from Gowry, stands Glamis a Castle, and the Barony of a Family
surnamed Lion, which arose to honor and reputation, ever since that Sir J.
Lion standing in the high favor of King Robert the Second, received this and
the Dignity of a Baron with the Kings Daughter for her marriage Portion, and
therewith as I find written, the surname of Lion, with a Lion in his Arms,
within a Treassure Floury, as the Kings themselves do bear, but in different
colors: Likeas Sir Patrick Lion, Lord Glamis, was advanced by King James the
Sixth of that name, E. Kinghorn.
to the honor of the Earl of Kinghorn. This Title was changed by Patrick the
present Earl, E. Strathmore.
from Kinghorn to Strathmore, as being the largest Strath in Scotland, running
through Perth Shire and Angus, where the said Earls Estate for the greatest
partlyes.

Not far hence stands Forfar, B. Royal.
where for the administration of Justice, L. Gray.
the Barons Grays are hereditary Sheriffs, who being descended from the Grays
of Chillingham in the Country of Northumberland, came into Scotland with King
James the First, at his return out of England, of whom is descended Patrick now
Lord Gray; upon the first of whom named Andrew, the King of his bounteous
liberality, bestowed the Segniory of Foulis, together with Helen Mortimer in
Marriage for his Advancement. Ashtoun an English Gentleman, L. Forfar.
was created Lord Forfar, about the year 1633, by King Charles the First: and
Archibald second Son to the Earl of Angus, and Brother to James Marquess of
Dowglass, was by King Charles the Second, created Earl of Forfar, E. Forfar.
about the year 1651.

Hard by the mouth of Tay is situat Dundee, B. Royal.
sometimes called Alectum: others term it in Latin Taodunum, a Town verily of
great resort and Trade, and the Constable whereof by a special privilege, was
Standard bearer to the King of Scots. Hector Boethius.
Hector Boethius who was here born, expounded this name Dundee by way of
allusion, to Donum Dei, that is, Gods gift This Hector, in the reflourishing
time of Learning, wrote the Scottish History elegantly, and that out of such
hidden and far fetched Monuments of Antiquity, that Paulus Jovius wondered in
his Writings, there should be Records extant for above a thousand years, of
these remote parts of the World, Scotland, the Hebrids, and the Orcads:
considering that Italy the Nurse of fine Wits, for so many Ages after the Goths
were cast out, was defective of Writers and Records. The ancient Family of the
Scrymsours of Dudup, Constables of Dundee, was first created by King Charles
the first, Viscount of Dudup, E. Dundee.
and by King Charles the Second Earl of Dundee: and by gift of last Heir and
Recognition, being carried to Charles Maitland of Haltoun, came afterward to
be at the Kings disposal, who gifted the same to Colonel John Graham of
Claverhouse, who by King James the Seventh, V. Dundee.
was created Viscount of Dundee, and opposing their Majesty's in Arms, was
killed at Gillichrankie in Athol, in July 1689: and both he and his Brother
David also present at that Action, were forefaulted in Parliament 1690.

From hence stands within sight Brochty-Craig, which being a good Fortress,
was with the English Garrison Soldiers, manfully defended and made good for
many Months together, what time as in their affectionat love to a perpetual
peace, they desired and wished for a Marriage, between Mary Heir apparent of
Scotland, and Edw. the 6th. K. of England; and upon promise thereof, demanded
it by force of Arms: and in the end, of their own accord, abandoned the said
place: Then there lies full against the open Ocean Aberbroth, B. Royal.
short Arbroth, a place endowed with ample Revenues, and by King William
dedicated in old time to Religion, in honor of Thomas of Canterbury; beside
which, the Red-head, a Promontory.
Red-head shoots into the deep Sea, and is to be seen a far of. Hard by
Southesk voideth it self into the Ocean; which River flowing amain out of a
Lake, passes by Finnevin Castle, well known by reason of the Lindseys Earls of
Crawford keeping Residence there; of whom is already written. And downward on
the same River stands Kinnaird, the Inheritance of the Carnagies, who amongst
other Families, by being Members of the College of Justice, have raised their
Fortunes, and advanced into great Honors. Robert Carnagy of Kinnaird in the
year 1553, is marked in the Sederunt of the Lords of Session. And about the
year 1561, under the designation of Sir Robert Carnagy of Kinnaird, admitted
Ordinary Lord of Session; Mr. David Carnagy of Coluthy I suppose his second
Son, was a Lord of the Session, and one of the Octavians; he dyed in the year
1598, his Son Sir David, Carnagy of Kinnaird succeeded, of whom frequent
mention is made in the Acts of Parliament of King James the Sixth; he was by
that King created Lord Carnagy after the Lord Binnie, and is so ranked in the
Rolls of Parliament 1617. In the Books of Sederunt July 5th 1616, David Lord
Carnagy is admitted an Ordinary Lord of Session: in the year 1633, by King
Charles the First, he was created Earl of Southesk, E: Southesk.
his great Grandchild is Charles Earl of Southesk. Sir John Carnegie of Ethie,
younger Son to the before named Mr. David Carnagie of Colluthy, and Brother to
David Earl of Southesk, was by King Charles the First, created Lord Lour, and
thereafter by that same King Earl of Ethie: E: Ethie.
his eldest Son David, exchanged the said Titles with these, E: Northesk.
of Earl of Northesk and Lord Rosehill, as being more agreeable to the Title of
Earl of Southesk, the Chief of the Family. David Earl of Northesk, is great
Grandchild to the first Earl. Then upon the said River stands Brechin, B:
Royal.
which King David the First adorned with a Bishops See. Patrick Maul of Panmure
of the Bedchamber, of an ancient Family, was created by King Charles the
First, E: Panmure.
about the year 1646, Earl of Panmure, Lord Maul and Brechin, immediately before
the Earls of Selkirk, Tweeddale and Northesk; whose Grandchild is James Earl
of Panmure. And at the very mouth thereof stands Montross; B: Royal.
as one would say the Mount of Roses; a Town in times past called Celurca,
risen by the fall of another Town bearing the same name, which is seated
between the two Esks, and imparteth the Title of Marquess to the Family of the
Grahams: M: Montross:


Not far from hence is Boschain, belonging to the Barons of Ogilvy, of very
ancient Nobility, lineally descended from Alexander Sheriff of Angus, who was
slain in the Bloody Battle at Harlaw against the Mac-Donald of the out Isles.
In this Shire is also Airlie, which was the first Designation of the Lord
Ogilvie of Airlie, Andrew Lord Ogilvie was created by King Charles the first,
E: Airlie:
anno 1633, Earl of Airlie, whose Son is James Earl of Airlie.

As touching the Earls of Angus; E: Angus:
Gilchrist of Angus, renowned for his brave exploits under King Malcolm the
fourth, was the first Earl of Angus that we read of. About the year 1241, John
Cummin was Earl of Angus, who died in France, and his Widow (happily inheritrix
to the Earldom) was married to Sir Gilbert Vmfranvill an Englishman. For, both
he and his Heirs successively after him, were summoned to the Parliament in
England (until the third year of King Richard the second) by the Title of Earls
of Angus. Howbeit the Lawyers of England refused in their Brieves and
Instruments to acknowledge him Earl, for that Angus was not within the Kingdom
of England, until he had brought forth openly in the face of the Court, the
Kings Writ and Warrant, wherein he was summoned to the Parliament by the name
of Earl of Angus. In the reign of David Bruce, Thomas Stuart was Earl of Angus,
who by a sudden surprise won Berwick, and straightways lost it; yea, and within
a while after died miserably in Prison at Dunbritton. But the Douglasses, Men
of invincible Hearts, from the time of King Robert the second, when William
first E. of Douglas married Stuart Heiress and Countess of Angus, Douglass E:
Angus:
of which marriage was George Douglas Earl of Angus, who married King Robert
the Thirds Daughter, have been Earls of Angus, and reputed the chief and
principal Earls of Scotland, and to whom this Office belongs, to carry the
Regal Crown before the Kings, at the solemn Assembly of the Kingdom. The sixth
Earl of Angus out of this stock, was Archibald, who espoused Margaret, Daughter
to Henry the seventh King of England, and Mother to James the fifth King of
Scots, by whom he had Issue Margaret Wife to Matthew Stuart Earl of Lennox; who
after her Brothers decease (that died Childless,) willingly resigned up her
Right and Interest in this Earldom, unto Sir David Douglass of Pittindreich,
her Uncles Son by the Fathers side, and that with consent of her Husband and
Sons; to the end that she might bind the surer unto her self, by the link also
of a beneficial demerit, that Family, which otherwise in Blood was most near;
what time Henry her Son went about to Wed Mary the Queen: by which Marriage
King James the sixth, the mighty Monarch of Great Britain was happily born to
the good of all Britain; and from these Earls of Angus and Douglass, the
Marquess of Douglass is lineally descended. From an Abbacy in this Shire James
Elphingstoun second Son to Secretary Elphingstoun Lord Balmerinoch, was created
by King James the sixth Lord Couper, L: Couper:
but dying without Issue, the Title and Dignity is confounded in the person of
the now Lord Balmerinoch. The Sheriffship of this Shire being at the Kings
disposal, Patrick Earl of Strathmore is Sheriff.

CHAP. XXVIII.
MERNIS: OR, Shire of KINCARDIN.
THese Regions were in Ptolomy's time inhabited by the Vernicones, The Shire of
Kincardin:
the same perhaps that the Vecturiones mentioned by Marcellinus. But this their
name is now quite gone, unless we would imagine some little piece thereof to
remain in Mernis. For many times in common speech of the British Tongue, V.
turns into M.

This small Province Mernis lying on the North-side of the North-Water of Esk,
abutting upon the German Ocean, and of a Rich and fertile Soil, lies very
well, as a plain and level Champion. But the most memorable place therein is
Dunnotyr, Dunnotyr Castle:
a Castle advanced upon an high and unaccessible Rock, whence it looks down
to the underflowing Sea; well fensed with strong Walls and Turrets, which has
been a long time the habitation of the Keiths of an ancient and very noble
Stock; who by the guidance of their Virtue, E: Marshall:
became Hereditary Earls Mareschals of the Kingdom of Scotland, in the Reign of
King Robert Bruce and Sheriffs of this Province; of whom is descended William
now Earl Marshall. In a Porch or Gallery here, is to be seen that ancient
Inscription formerly mentioned, of a Company belonging to the twentieth Legion,
the Letters whereof the right Noble and Honorable Earl George, Commissioner to
the Parliament 1609, a great lover of Antiquity, caused to be Gilded. Somewhat
further from the Sea stands Fordon, John de Fordon:
graced in some sort and commendable in regard of John de Fordon; who being
born here, diligently and with great pains Compiled Scoti Chronicon, that is,
The Scottish Chronicle: unto whose laborious studies the Scottish
Historiographers are very much indebted: but more glorious and renowned in old
time, St: Palladius:
for the Relics of St. Palladius, bestowed and shrined sometime, as is verily
thought, in this place; who in the year 431, was by Pope Coelestinas appointed
the Apostle of the Scottish Nation. In this Shire the Lord of Arbuthnet of
that lik, of an ancient Family, was created Viscount Arbuthnet by King Charles
the first, V: Arbuthnet:
about the year 1641, whose Great Grandchild is Robert Viscount of Arbuthnet.
As also, Sir Alexander Falconer one of the Lords of Session, was by King
Charles the first, anno 1648, L: Halcartoun:
Created Lord Halcartoun, whose Grandchild is now Lord Halcartoun. Also
Lieutenant General Middletoun, of an ancient Family designed by that Surname,
was by K. Charles the second appointed Commissioner for holding the Parliament
1661, and Created at that time Earl of Middletoun, E: Middletoun
his Son is Charles Earl of Middletoun, who was first Secretary of Scotland,
and then of England, to King Charles the second, and King James the seventh. In
this Shire is Inverbervie a Burgh-Royal. B: Royal:


In the ancient times the Country Horestia did comprehend both Angus and
Mernis: in this matter I must be allowed to differ from the Learned Author, who
places the Horesti in the Country of Eskdale, See Chap: 8: page: 49:
a small and inconsiderable Country, surrounded with others, and not bordering
on the Sea, whereas Tacitus in the Life of Agricola, Describing his War in our
part of Britain, says Tacitus vit: Agric: c: 22: Tertius expeditionis annus
novas gentes aperuit: vastatis usque ad Taum (aestuarii nomen est) nationibus
Agricola in fines Horestorum exercitum deducit: ibi acceptis obsidibus
praefecto circumvehi Britanniam praecepit, etc.
The third year of the War Agricola discovered new Nations which he conquered
even to the River Tau. And after this he adds, Agricola having beat Galgacus
near to the Grampian Hills, brought back the Roman Army to the boders of the
Horesti, and having received Hostages from them, he ordered the Commanders of
the Roman Fleet to sail about the Isle. The chief part of this quotation is on
the Margin, in the words of the Author, which is only applicable to the Mouth
and Firth of Tay, and the Country of Angus and Mernis situat thereupon, where
the Roman Navy has Landed their Men, and in the which station remained to
receive them at the end of the expedition, and from this Port to the Grampian
Hills, through the large Country of Strathmore, they have marched their Army
and Carriages, and by the same Way returned them to their Ships, of which great
ways there are certain Vestiges remaining; but there is no direct continued way
betwixt the Grampian Hills and Eskdale, nor could any army with such great
Carriages march betwixt these places, Sir George Mckenzies Answer to the B: of
St: Asaph, page: 77. 78, 79:
nor thereafter be Embarked at Eskdale. See more of this in Sir George
Mckenzies Answer to St. Asaph.

CHAP. XXIX.
MARRIA: OR, MAR.
FRom the Sea in the Mediterranean, In the Shire of Aherdene:
or In-landparts above Mernis, Mar enlarges it self, and runs forward
threescore Miles, or thereabout: where it lies broadest VVest-wards, it
swells up with Mountains, unless it be where the Rivers Dee, which Ptolomy
calls Diva, and Don make way for themselves, and infertile the Fields. Upon
the Bank of Don, Kildrummy stands as a fair Ornament to the Country, E: Mar:
being the ancient Seat of the Earls of Mar: and not far distant from it the
Habitation of the Barons Forbois, L: Forbois:
who being issued from a Noble and Ancient Stock, assumed this Surname: whereas
before time they were called Bois, after that the Heir of that Family had
manfully killed a Savage and Cruel Bare, of whom is Descended William now Lord
Forbes. But at the very Mouth of this River, there be two Towns that give
greater Ornament, which of the said Mouth, that in the British Tongue they call
Aber, borrowing one Name, are divided asunder by one little Field lying
between: the hithermost of them, which stands nearer to Dee Mouth, is much
ennobled by an Episcopal Dignity (which King David the first Translated
hitherto from Murthlake a little Village) by fair Houses of the Canons, an
Hospital for poor people, and a free Grammar School; which William
Elphingstoun, Bishop of the place, in the year 1480. consecrated to the
Training up of Youth, and is called B: Royal:
New Aherdene: The other beyond it, named Old Aherdene, is most famous for the
taking of Salmons.

It is almost incredible what abundance of Bid, and our Writers called them in
Latin Isicii:
Salmons as well these Rivers, as others also in Scotland on both sides of the
Realm, do breed: this Fish was altogether unknown unto Pliny, unless it were
that Esox of the Rhine: but in this north part of Europe, passing well known,
shining and glittering (as he says) with his red bowels: in Autumn they
engender within little Rivers, and in shallow places for the most part, what
time they cast their Spawn, and cover it over with Sand: and then are they so
poor and lean, that they seem to have nothing else in a manner, but their small
Bones. Of that Spawn in the Spring next following, there comes a Fry of tender
little Fishes, which making toward the Sea, in a small time grow to their full
bigness: and in returning back again to seek for the Rivers wherein they were
bred, they strive and struggle against the Stream, and look whatsoever lies in
their way to hinder their passage, with a jerk of their Tail, and a certain
leap (whence happily they had their name Salmons) to the wonder of the
Beholders, they nimbly whip over, and keep themselves within these Rivers of
theirs, until they breed: during which time it is enacted by Law, they should
not be caught; namely, from the Feast of the Assumption of our Lady, to the
Feast of Saint Andrew in Winter.: and it should seem they were reputed among
the greatest Commodities of Scotland, when likewise it was ordained that they
should not be sold unto Englishmen, but for English Gold, and no other
contentation. But these Matters is left for others.

To come now unto the Earls of Mar. Earls of Mar.
In the Reign of Alexander the Third, William Earl of Mar, is named among
those that were sore offended and displeased with the King. Whiles David Bruce
reigned, Donald Earl of Mar, Protector of the Kingdom, was before the Battle
at Dyplin, murdered in his Bed by Edward Balliol, and the Englishmen that came
to aid him: whose Sister Isobel, King Robert Bruce took to be his first Wife,
on whom he begat Marjory, Mother to Robert Stuart King of Scots. Under the same
David there is mention also made of Thomas Earl of Mar, who was banished in
the year 1361. Likewise in the Reign of Robert the 3d, Alexander Stuart is
named Earl of Mar, who in the Battle at Harlaw against the Islanders, lost his
life in the year 1411. In the days of King James the First, we read in Scoto
Chronicon thus, Alexander Earl of Mar, died in the year 1435, the base Son of
Alexander Stuart Earl of Buchan, Son to Robert the Second King of Scots; after
whom, as being a Bastard, the King succeeded in the Inheritance. John the
second Son of King James the Second, afterward bare this Title; who being
convict for attempting by Art Magic, to take away the King his Brothers life,
was let blood to death: and after him, Robert Cochran was promoted from a Mason
to this Dignity, by King James the Third, and soon after hanged by the
Nobility: since which time, this honorable Title was discontinued, until that
Queen Mary adorned therewith, James her Bastard Brother: and not long after,
when it was found that by ancient Right, the Title of Earl of Mar appertained
to John Lord Ereskin; in lieu of Mar, she conferred upon him the Honor of
Earl of Murray, and created John Lord Ereskin, a man of ancient and noble
Birth, Earl of Mar; afterward Regent to King James the Sixth, of whom is
descended John now Earl of Mar. Forbes Lord Pitsligo, was by King Charles the
First, L: Pitsligo.
created Lord Pitsligo anno 1633; whose descendant does still enjoy the Title.
And Fraser of Stony-wood or Muchill, was at the same time, created by King
Charles the First, L: Fraser.
Lord Fraser, whose Successor is Lord Fraser. Sir John Keith of Keith-hall
Knight, Marshall, and Son to the Earl Marshall, was by King Charles the
Second, about the year 1677, E: Kintore.
created Earl of Kintore, from a Burgh Royal, B: Royal.
and was Thesaurer Deput to K. Char. the 2d, and K. Ja. the 7th, his eldest Son
is designed Lord Inverurie, B. Royal.
from another Burgh Royal, B: Royal.
both lying in this Shire. Sir George Gordon of Haddo, Baronet, a Lord of the
Session, was admited President anno 1681, and constitute Chancellor the year
following, and created Earl of Aberdeen shortly thereafter. E: Aberdeen.
James L. Gordon second Son to the Marquess of Huntly was created by K. Char.
V: Aboyn.
the 1st, V. of Aboyn, and thereafter Charles his fourth Son, was created Earl
of Aboyn by King Charles the Second, E: Aboyn.
anno 1661; his Son is Charles Earl of Aboyn. Creighton Lord of Frendraught,
descended of the L. Creighton, Chancellor to King James the Second, was by King
Charles the First, created Viscount of Frendraught about the year 1641, V:
Frendraught.
whose Successor is Lewis Viscount of Frendraught. In this Shire is the River
Ythan, from which King Charles the First, after the year 1641, gave the Title
of Lord Ythan to Lieutenant General King, L: Ythan.
of whom none is descended claiming the Title. John Earl of Arrol, is by the
Kings Nomination, Sheriff of this Shire.

CHAP. XXX:
BUCHANIA, OR BVQVHAN.
THe Taizali mentioned by Ptolomy, In the Shire of Aberdeen.
in ancient times inhabited which is now Buquhan, in Latin Boghania and
Buchania, above the River Don, bears forth toward the German Sea. Some derive
this latter name a Bobus, that is, from Oxen and Kine; whereas notwithstanding
the Ground serves better to feed Sheep, whose Wool is highly commended. Albeit
the Rivers in this Coast every where breed great store of Salmons, yet do they
never enter into the River Ratra, as Buchannan has Recorded. Neither let it be
offensive if his Testimony be cited, although his Books by Authority of
Parliament in the year 1584, were forbidden: because many things in them
contained, are to be dashed out. Who also has written, That on the Bank of
Ratra, there is a Cave near unto Stangs Castle, the nature whereof seems not
to be passed over. The water distilling by drops out of a natural Vault,
presently turns into Pyramidal stones; and were not the said Cave or Hole
otherwhiles rid and cleansed by man's labor, the whole space as far as up to
the Vault, would in short time be filled therewith. Now the stone thus
engendered, is of a middle nature, between Ice and hard Stone: for it is
brittle and easy to crumble, neither grows it ever to the solidity and
hardness of Marble. Concerning those Claik-geese, which some with much
admiration have believed to grow out of Trees; both upon this Shore and
elsewhere; and when they be ripe, to fall down into the Sea, it is scarce with
the labor to mention them. That there be little Birds engendered of old and
rotten Keels of Ships, they can bear. Witness, who saw that Ship wherein
Francis Drake sailed about the World, standing in a Dock near the Thames; to
the outside of the Keel, whereof a number of such little Birds without Life and
Feathers stuck closs. Yet it would be thought, that the Generation of these
Birds, was not out of the Logges of Wood, but from the very Ocean, which the
Poets termed the Father of all things.

A mighty Mass likewise of Amber, as big as the body of an Horse, was not many
years since cast upon this shore. The learned call it Succinum, Glessum, and
Chryso Electrum: and Sotacus supposed, that it was a certain juice or liquor
which distilleth out of Trees in Britain, and runs down into the Sea, and is
therein hardened. Tacitus also was of the same Opinion, when he wrote thus: I
can verily believe, that likeas there be Trees in the secret and inward parts
of the East which sweat out Frankincense and Balm, so in the Islands and other
Countries in the West there be Woods and Groves of a more fatty and firm
Substance, which melting by the hot Beams of the Sun approaching so near,
runs into the Sea hard by, and by force of Tempest, floateth up to the hoars
against it. But Serapio, and the Philosophers of later times write, that it
arises out of a certain clammy and bituminous Earth under the Sea, and by the
Seaside; and that the Billows and Tempests cast up part thereof a land, and a
Fishes devour the rest.

In the Reign of King Alexander the Second, Alexander Cummin rose up to the
honor of Earl of Buquhan, Cummin E. of Buchan.
who married the Daughter and one of the Heirs of Roger de Quincy, Earl of
Winchester in England, and his Niece by a Son, brought the same Title unto
Henry de Beaumont her Husband: for he, in King Edward the Third his days, had
his place in the Parliament of England, by the name of Earl of Buquhan.
Afterward Alexander Stuart, Son to King Robert the Second, was Earl of this
place; Stuart E. of Buchan.
unto whom succeeded John, a younger Son of Robert Duke of Albany, who arriving
in France with seven thousand Scottish men, to aid Charles the Seventh, King of
France, bare himself valiantly, and performed singular good Service against the
Englishmen, and that with so great Commendation, as having victoriously slain
Thomas Duke of Clarence, Brother to Henry the Fifth King of England, at Baugie,
and discomfited the English, he was made Constable of France. But in the third
year following, when the fortune of War turned, he with other most valiant
Knights, to wit, Archibald Dowglass Earl of Wigton, and Duke of Tourain, etc.
was vanquished at Vernoil by the English, and there slain. Whom,
notwithstanding as that Poet said, -- aeternum memorabit Gallia cives
Grata suos, titulos quae dedit and tumulos*
France thankfully will ay recount,
As Citizens of her own,
On whom both Titles glorious,
And Tombs she has bestown.


And whereas under the Kings, K. Charles the Sixth and Seventh, France was
preserved, and Aquitain recovered, by thrusting out the English, the Frenchmen
cannot choose but acknowledge themselves much beholden to the fidelity and
fortitude of the Scots. But afterward, King James the First gave the Earldom
of Buquhan unto George of Dumbar, moved thereto upon pity and commiseration,
because he had deprived him before of the Earldom of March by Authority of
Parliament, for his Fathers Crime: and not long after, James the Son of James
Stuart of Lorn, surnamed the Black-Knight, whom he had by Queen Joan Sister to
the Duke of Somerset, and Widow to King James the 1st obtained this Honor, and
left it to his Posterity: but for default of Heirs-male, it came by a Daughter
married to Robert Dowglass, a younger Brother of Dowglass of Lochlevin, to the
Family of the Dowglasses, and so to James Ereskin eldest Son of the Earl of
Mar Thesaurer, Ereskin E. of Buchan.
by his second Wife, Daughter to Esme Duke of Lennox, of whom is descended the
present Earl.

From Buquhan, In the Shire of Bamff.
as the Shore bends backward, and turns full into the North, lies Boena,
and B: Royal.
Bamff a small Sheriffdom, also Ajuza a little Territory of no especial
account, and Rothamay Castle, the dwelling place of the Barons of Salton, L.
Abernethy of Salton.
surnamed Abernethy. Beneath these lies Sirathbolgy, that is, the Vale by
Bolgy, the Habitation in times past of the Earls of Athol, who of it assumed
their surname; but now the principle Seat of Marquess of Huntly. For this Title
King James the Sixth conferred upon George Gordon, Earl of Huntly, Lord Gordon
and Badzenoth, a man of great Honor and Reputation for his ancient nobleness
of Birth, and the multitude of his Dependants and Followers; whose Ancestors
descended from the Setons, by Parliamentary Authority, took the Name of Gordon,
(when as Sir Alexander Seton had taken to Wife the Daughter of Sir John Gordon
Knight, by whom he had a large and rich Inheritance) and received the Honor of
the Earl of Huntly at the hands of King James the Second, in the year 1445: his
Successor George Marquess of Huntly, D: Gordon.
was by King Charles the Second about the year 1683, created Duke of Gordon. In
this Shire also did reside the Ogilvies of Findlater, of whom Walter Ogilvie
was by King James the Sixth created Lord Deskford: and in the Rolls of
Parliament 1633, he is Ranked immediately after the Lord Cranstoun, and before
the Lords Melvil, Carnegy and Ramsey; his Son James was created Earl of
Findlater by King Charles the First anno 1633, who married his Daughter, E:
Findlater.
and Heiress to Ogilvie of Inch-martine in Perth Shire, an ancient Family of
that surname; the Son of the Marriage, is James now Earl of Findlater, who does
compet with the Earl of Airly, both for the Antiquity of his Family, and
Precedence as an Earl: his second Son Sir James Ogilvie, is designed of
Ogilvie, from a Barony which belonged to their Family purchased by him, he is
his Majesty's Solicitor, and a Member of this present Parliament, for the
Royal Burgh of Cullen. B: Royal.
In this Shire, Ogilvie of Dunlaguse, afterward designed Sir George Ogilvie of
Bamff, Baronet, descended of the Ogilvies of Boyn also in this Shire, who are
Cadets of Findlater, was by King Charles the First, anno 1639, created Lord
Bamff, L: Bamff.
whose Successor is George Lord Bamff. Sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth, in
Right of his Mother Abernethy, Daughter to the Lord Saltoun, was by Grant of
King Charles the Second, declared Lord Saltoun, and approven in Parliament
1670, upon the death of Alexander Abernethy last Lord Saltoun of that surname,
whose Grandchild is William Fraser now Lord Saltoun; he carries the Arms of
Abernethy, L: Saltoun Fraser.
quartered with the Arms of Fraser. His Majesty has nominat the forementioned
Sir James Ogilvie, Sheriff of Bamff.

CHAP. XXXI.
MORAVIA: Or, MVRRAY.
THe Vacomagi remembered by Ptolomy, The Shire of Elgin.
anciently inhabited on the further side of Crantzbain Mountain, which as it
were in a continued Range, by Hills hanging one by another; drives out his
Ridge with many a winding as far as to Murray Firth* where now lies Murray, in
Latin Moravia, celebrated for the Fertility, pleasant Situation, and commodity
of fruitful Trees. By this Province, Spey a famous River, makes his Issue
into the Sea, wherein he lodges, when he has watered Rothes Castle, whence
the Family of the Leslys took the Title of Earl, E: Rothes.
ever since that King James the Second conferred the Honor of Earl of Rothes
upon Sir George Lesly, of whom in the Shire of Fife. Concerning this Spey, the
Poet Necham has thus written. Spey loca mutantis praeceps agitator arenae,
Inconstans certas nescit habere vias.
Officium lintris corbis subit, hunc regit audax
Cursus labentis nauta fluenta sequens.
Spey raising heaps of sand amain,
That shift oft-times their place,
Inconstant he does change eft-soons,
And keeps no certain race.
A Panier serves here for a Boat,
Some ventrous Swain it guides,
Who follows still the Rivers course,
Whild down the Stream it glides.


The River Loxa mentioned by Ptolomy, which now is called Loss, hides himself
in the Sea hard by, B: Royal.
near unto which Elgin appears, in which and in Forres adjoining, B: Royal.
J. of Dumbar of Cumnock, descended from the Stock of the Earls of March and
Murray, has his Jurisdiction as Sheriff by Inheritance, whose Descendent is
Alexander Dumbar of West-field, Dumbar of Westfield Sheriff of Murray.
Sheriff of Murray; his Predecessor Sir Alexander Dumbar of Westfield, Sheriff
of Murray, was Son to the last Dumbar Earl of Murray, whose Son James Dumbar,
married one of the Heiresses of Patrick Dumbar of Cumnock, descended of the
Earls of March, by which Marriage, their Successors had the Barony of Cumnock,
and were designed Lairds of Cumnock, till they sold these Lands about the year
1600, which now belong to the Countess of Dumfreis, and then they resumed their
former designation of West-field and Sheriff of Murray. But where Loss is now
ready to enter into the Sea, he finds a more plain and soft Soil, and
spreads abroad into a Mere full of Swans, wherein the Herb Olorina
plentifully grows, he has Spiny Castle standing upon it, whereof the first
Baron was Alexander, of the Lineage of the Lindseys now extinct. L: Spenzie.
Likas Kinloss also a neighbor by, sometime a famous Monastery (some call it
Kill-flos, of certain Flowers miraculously there springing up on a sudden, when
the Carcass of King Duff, murdered and hidden in the same place, was found) had
for the Lord thereof Edward Bruce* a Lawyer, and a Commissar of Edinburgh,
afterward a Lord of the Session, and Commendator of Kinloss, and Ambassador to
Queen Elizaheth, and afterward Master of the Rolls in England, and of the
Kings Majesty's Privy Council, whom King James the Sixth created Baron Bruce of
Kinloss, about the year 1604, whose Son was created Earl of Elgin by K. Chapter the
1st. anno 1633, and a Lord Baron in York Shire: E: Elgin.
and his Son Rohert was by K. Chapter the 2d, created Earl of Ailshury in England,
whose Son does succeed him in both Dignities. In this Shire also, Sir Alexander
Sutherland of Duffus, an ancient Cadet of the Earls of Sutherland, L: Duffus.
was created Lord Duffus in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the
Second about the year 1651, whose Son is Alexander now Lord Duffus.

Thus much for the shore. More inward, where now stands Bean Castle, (thought
to be Banatia that Ptolomy mentions) there was found in the year 1460, a
Vessel of Marble artificially engraven, and full of Roman Coin. B: Royal, and
Shire of Nairn.
Hard by is Nardin or Nairn, an hereditable Sheriffdom of the Camphels of Lorn,
designed of Caddel, Sir Hugh Camphel of Caddel is the present Sheriff: and
Alexander Campbel his eldest Son, is one of the Commissioners for that Shire in
this current Parliament: where there stood within a Biland, a Fortress of a
mighty hight, built with wonderful Bulwarks, and in times past defended by the
Danish Forces against the Scots.

A little off is Logh-ness, a very great Lake, as reaching out 23 miles in
length, the Water whereof is so warm, that even in this cold and frozen Climat
it never freezeth: from which, by a very small Isthim or partition of Hills,
the Logh Lutea or Louthea, which by Aher lets it self forth into the west
Sea, is divided. Near unto these Loghs, there stood in old time two notable
Fortifications, the one named Iuverness, B: Royal.
the other Innerlothea, according to the names of the said Loghs.

Iuverness had for Sheriff thereof by right of Inheritance, The Shire of
Iuverness.
the Marquess of Huntly, who is of great command hereabout* now at the Kings
disposal, Lodovick Grant of Freuchie, commonly designed Lord of Grant a Privy
Counselor, and one of the Commissioners for the Shire, is Sheriff thereof.

Under the reign of Rohert Bruce, Thomas Randolph his Sisters son, who in his
Countries behalf, undertook exceeding great pains and most grievous Quarrels,
was highly renowned by the Title of Earl of Murray. E: Murray.
Under King Rohert the Second, John of Dumhar took to Wise the Kings Daughter,
to make amends for her devirgination, received this Earldom of Murray with her
in Marriage. Under King James the Second, William Creighton Chancellor of the
Realm, and Archihald Dowglass, were at great variance and eager contention
about this Earldom; when as against the Laws and ancient Customs, Dowglass who
had married the younger Daughter of James of Dumhar Earl of Murray, Dumbar E.
of Murray.
was preferred to the Earldom before Creighton, who had wedded the elder, and
that through the powerful Authority that William Earl Dowglass had with the
King; which was so great, that he advanced not only him to the Earldom of
Murray, but also another Brother to the Earldom of Ormond; and made two Cousins
of his Earls, the one of Angus, and the other of Morton: but this greatness of
his not to be trusted upon, because it was excessive, turned soon after to his
own confusion; under King James the Fifth, his own Brother whom he appointed
his Vicegerent in the Government of the Kingdom, enjoyed this honor: and James
the base Son of King James the Fifth, Stuart Earl of Murray.
received this honor of Queen Mary his Sister: but he requited her ill, when
joining with others of the Nobility and Nation, she was deposed from her Royal
Estate and Kingdom; a President prejudicial to Kings and Princes, which
notwithstanding was revenged; for shortly after he was shot through with a
Bullet: his only Daughter brought this Title unto her Husband Sir James Stuart
of Down, who was also of the Blood Royal from the Dukes of Albany: who being
slain by his Concurrents, left his Son James to succeed him in this honor. Sir
James Stuart of Down, first created Lord Down by King James the Sixth about the
year 1581; the Successor of the Lord Down and Earl of Murray, is Alexander Earl
of Murray, who was Secretary to King Charles the Second, and King James the
Seventh, and by the latter, was sent Commissioner to the Parliament 1686.

CHAP. XXXII.
LOQHUABRE.
WHatsoever beyond the Nesse bends to the west Coast, In the Shire of
Inverness.
and adjoineth to the Lake Aber, is thereupon called Loqhuabre, that is in the
ancient tongue of the Britains, the mouth of the Lakes, as what lies toward
the North is commonly called Ross.

Loqhuabre is full of fresh Pastures and Woods, neither is without Iron Mines,
but not so free in yielding of Corn, but for most fishful Pools and Rivers,
searce inferior to any Country thereabout. At Logh-Lothy, Innerlothy senced
with a Fort, and well frequented with Merchants, was of great name and
importance in times past, but being razed by the Piracies and Wars of Danes and
Norwegians, it has lien for these many Ages so deserted, that there remained
scarce any show of it. Loquhabre has had no Earls, but about the year of our
Salvation 1050, there was a Thane over it of great fame, and much spoken of,
named Banquho, whom Macbeth the Tyrant, Banquho Thane of Loquhabre.
when with Murder and Bloodshed he had usurped the Crown, being fearful and
suspicious, caused to be made away; for that he had learned by a Prophesy of
certain Wise-Women, that his Posterity when the Line of Macbeth was expired and
extinct should one day obtain the Kingdom, and by a long successive Descent
reign in Scotland, which verily has fallen out accordingly: for Fleanch the
Son of Banquho, who unknown in the Dark, escaped the Trains laid for him, fled
into Wales, where for a time he kept himself close: and having taken to Wife
Nesta the Daughter of Griffith ap Lewellin, Prince of North Wales, begat
Walter; who returning into Scotland with so great Fame of his Fortitude,
repressed the Rebellion of the Islanders, and with as great Wisdom managed the
Kings Revenues in this Tract, that the King made him Seneschal, whom they
commonly call Stewart of the whole Kingdom of Scotland, whereupon this name of
Office imposed the surname of Stuart unto his Posterity: who spreading
throughout all parts of Scotland into a number of noble Branches, after many
honors heaped upon them, have flourished a long time, and from out of them
three hundred and twenty four years ago, Robert Stuart by Marjory his Mother,
Daughter to King Robert Bruce, obtained the Kingdom of Scotland: and James
Stuart of that name, the sixth King of Scots, by Margaret his great
Grandmother, Daughter to King Henry the Seventh (the Divine power of that most
High and Almighty Ruler of the World so disposing) ascended with the general
Applause of all Nations to the hight of Monarchial Majesty, over all Britain
and the Isles adjacent. In the Shire of Inverness, Aeneas Macdonald Lord of
Glengarie, L: Macdonald.
was by King Charles the Second created Lord Macdonald, about the year 1661,
the Patent being granted to Heirs-male of his Body, does not descend upon his
Successor the Lord of Glengarie.

CHAP. XXXIII.
ROSSIA.
THe Province Ross, The Shire of Ross.
so called by an old Scottish word, which some interpret to be a Promontory,
others a Biland, was inhabited by the people named Cantae (which term in effect
implies as much) in the time of Ptolomy. This extends it self so wide and
large, that it reaches from the one Sea to the other, what way it bears upon
the Vergivian or western Ocean, by reason of huge swelling Mountains advancing
their heads aloft, and many Woods among them: it is full of Stags, Roe-Bucks,
Fallow-Deer, and wild Fowl; but where it butteth upon the German Sea, it is
more lovely bedecked with Cornfieldsd ane Pastures, and withal much more
civil: in the very first entrance into it, Ardmanoch no small Territory,
whereof the second Sons of the Kings of Scotland bear the Title, L: Ardmannoch.
rises up with high Mountains that are most trusty preservers of Snow: as
touching their hight some have reported strange Wonders; and yet the ancient
Geometers have written, that neither the depth of Sea, nor hight of Hills,
exceed by the Plumb-Line ten S^adia, that is one Mile and a quarter; which
notwithstanding, they that have beheld Tenariff amongst the Canary Islands,
which is fifteen Leagues high, and sailed withal the Ocean near unto them, will
in no ways admit for truth. In this part stands Lovat Castle, and the Barony
of the worthy Family of the Frasers, whom for their singular good service for
the Scottish Kingdom, King James the 2d. accepted into the Rank of Barons,
whose Descendant at present is Hugh Lord Lovat, L: Lovat.
and whom the Clan-Ranalds a most bloody Generation, in a Quarrel and Brawl
between them, had wholly destroyed every Mothers Son; but that by the
Providence of God, fourscore of the principal persons of this Family, left
their Wives at home all great with Child, who being delivered of so many Sons,
renewed the house, and multiplied the name again. But at Nesse-mouth, there
flourished sometimes Chanonrie, otherwise called Fortrose, a Burgh-Royal, B:
Royal.
so called of a rich College of Chanons, whiles the Ecclesiastical State stood
in Prosperity, in which there is erected a See for the Bishop of Ross. In this
Country resided the Lord of Kintail, or Mckenzie; in an unprinted Act of
Parliament 1593, Colin Mckenzie of Kintail, is mentioned: and in the Convention
of Estates 1598, the Lord of Mckenzie is a Member: amongst the Commissioners
under the Great Seal, for holding the Parliament 1607, Kenneth Mckenzie of
Kintail, is mentioned: and also amongst the Commissioners for holding the
Parliament 1609, Colin Mckenzie of Kintail, is named: and also in a Sederunt of
the same Parliament, the Lord of Mckenzie is ranked inter Barons and
Commissioners of Shires. It seems shortly after tha^ time, and before the year
1612, the foresaid Colin was created Lord Kintail; for in the Rolls of
Parliament 1617, Kintail is ranked after Garleis and Madertie, and before the
Lord Cranstoun and Carnagie, and the Lord Cranstoun is the last Lord in the
Rolls of Parliament 1612: in like manner in the Rolls of Parliament 1621,
Kintail is after Garleis and Cowper, and before Cranstoun and Carnagie. Colin
Lord Kintail December 3. 1623, by K. James the Sixth, E: Seaforth.
was created Earl of Seaforth, his Grand-nephew is Kenneth Earl of Seaforth.

Hard by is placed Cromarty, The Shire of Cromarty.
where Vrquhart a Gentleman of noble Birth, by hereditary Right from his
Ancestors, ministered Justice as Sheriff to this Sheriffdom: and this is so
commodious and safe an Harbor for any Fleet, be it never so great, that both
Sailers and Geographers name it Portus salutis, that is, the Haven of Safety.
Sir Roderick M^kenzie, a Son of the Lord of Kintail, was married to the
Heiress of Mcleod of the Lews, of which Marriage was Sir John Mackenzie
Baronet, who married Dame Margaret Ereskin, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
Sir George Ereskin of Innerteil, one of the Lords of Session, and Grandchild
to the Lord Ereskin: Sir George Mckenzie of Tarbat Baronet, their Son, was a
Lord of the Session, by the first nomination and settlement of the Judicature
by King Charles the Second after his Restoration in anno 1661, in the year
1678, he was by the same King appointed Justice General; and thereafter in the
year 1681, constitute Lord Register, and continued in that Office during the
Reign of King Charles the Second, and King James the Seventh: and in the year
1685, was created Viscount of Tarbat, V: Tarbat.
Lord Mcleod and Castle-haven, and is present Lord Register to his Majesty King
William: and he having purchased the Lands of Cromartie, and Sheriffship
thereof, procured the enlargement of this Shire by Act of Parliament, as did
Sir William Bruce the Shire of Kinross.

Above it is Littus Altum, whereof Ptolomy makes mention, called now as it
seems, Tarharth: for there indeed the Shore rises to a great hight, enclosed
on the one side with Cromer, a most secure and safe Haven; and on the other
with Colnius, now Killian the River, and thus much of the places toward the
East Ocean. Into the West Sea the River Longus mentioned in Ptolomy, at this
day named Lough Longus, runs: then the Cerones anciently dwelt, where now is
Assinshire, a Country much mangled with many In-lets and Arms of the Sea,
inbosoming it self with manifold Commodities.

As for the Earls of Ross, Earls of Ross.
it is full of difficulty to set them down in order successively out of
Writers. In the Reign of King Alexander the Second, we read that Ferquhard
flourished and enjoyed this Title, but for default of issue Male, it came by a
Daughter to Walter Lesly, who for his noble feats of Arms, courageously
achieved under Lewis the Emperor, was worthily named the Nohle Knight: he
begat Alexander Earl of Ross, and a Daughter married unto Donald Lord of the
Islands Hebrides. This Alexander had issue one only Daughter, who made over by
her Deed, all her own Title and Right unto Robert Duke of Albany; whereat the
said Donald of the Islands being highly incensed, and repining, Styled himself
in the Reign of James the Third, King of the Islands, and Earl of Ross; having
with Fire and Sword, laid waste his native Country far and near. At length, the
said King James the 3d, by Authority of Parliament in the year 1476, annexed
the Earldom of Ross to the Crown, leaving only to him the Title of Lord of the
Isles, so as it might not be lawful for his Successors, to alienat by any means
from the Crown, either the Earldom it self, or any parcel thereof; or by any
device to grant the same unto any person, save only to the Kings second Sons
lawfully born: and so Charles afterward King, during the Lifetime of his elder
Brother Prince Henry, enjoyed the Title of Earl of Ross. This Country has
lately been erected in a Sheriffdom, the Sheriffship whereof is at the Kings
disposal: and David Ross of Balnagoun is present Sheriff, lineally descended of
Hugh Ross of Rarichies, lawful Son to Hugh Earl of Ross, and Brother to Earl
William the last of that surname, and to Eupham Queen of Scotland Dingwal was
the Seat of the Earls of Ross, B: Royal.
and is now a Burgh Royal. Andrew Keith one of the Commissioners, sent anno
1589, to treat a Marriage betwixt King James the Sixth, and Anna then Princess
of Denmark, afterward Queen, was created Lord Dingwal. L: Dingwal.
In the Rolls of Parliament 1621, the Lord Dingwal is Ranked after the Lord
Holy-rud-house, and before the Lord Garleis, who behoved to be of a latter
Creation, I suppose of the surname of Preston of the Family of Craigmiller, of
whom perhaps the Duke of Ormond is descended. In this Shire is also Tayn a
Burgh Royal. B: Royal.


CHAP XXXIV.
SUTHERLAND.
BEyond Ross, The Shire of Sutherland.
Sutherland looks toward the East Ocean, a Land more meet to breed Cattle,
than to bear Corn; wherein there be Hills of white Marble, (a wonderful thing
in this so cold a Climat) but of no use almost, considering excess in Building,
and that vain ostentation of Riches, is not yet reached to these remote
Regions. Here is Dunrobin, a Castle of very great Name, the principal Seat of
the ancient Earls of Sutherland, Earls of Sutherland.
descended of the Family of Murray: among whom, one William under King Robert
Bruce is most famous, who married the Sister of the whole Blood to King David,
and had by her a Son, whom the said David declared Heir Apparent of the Crown,
and compelled his Nobles to swear unto him Alledgeance: but he within a little
after departed without Issue, and the Earldom in the end came by a Daughter and
Heir hereditarily unto Adam Gordon, one of the Line of the Earls of Huntly, of
whom is descended George, present E. of Sutherland: this Dignity by the Decree
of Ranking anno 1606, being placed after the Earls of Argile, Crawford, Errol
and Marshal; the Earls of Sutherland have quarrelled that Ranking, and claimed
Precedence of these other Earls by Citations in Processes and Protestations in
Parliament, and in the last Session of Parl. 1693, the said E. did by Petition,
apply to the Parliament to have his Precedence declared, which was remitted to
be judged by the Lords of Session, before whom the Process at his Instance
against these Earls is depending. This Country was in the year 1633, Erected in
a Sheriffship, to belong heretably to the Earls of Sutherland, who also have
there the Jurisdiction of Justiciar and Admiral: and because there are but few
of the Heretors who hold of the King, and not of the Earl, by particular
Privilege they are allowed to Choice their Commissioners to represent them in
Parliament, such as are not free Tennents holding of the King, but only Vassals
holding of the Earl. Dornock is now become a Burgh Royal, B: Royal.
and Seat of the Sheriff.

CHAP. XXXV.
CATHANES.
HIgher lies Cathanes, The Shire of Caithness.
butting full upon the said East Sea, bending inward with a number of Creiks
and Compasses, which the Waves as it were indent: in which dwelt in Ptolomy's
time the Catini, but written falsely in some Copies Carini, among whom the self
fame Ptolomy places the River Ila, which may seem to be the Wifle at this day.
The Inhabitants of this Province raised their greatest Gain and Revenues, by
Grazing and raising of Cattle, and by Fishing: the chief Castle therein is
called Girnego, in which the Earls of Caithness for the most part make there
abode: the Bishops See is in Dornock, a little mean Town otherwise; where also
King James the Fourth appointed the Sheriff of Caithness to reside, or else at
Wike as Occasions shall require, B. Royal.
for the Administration of Justice.

The Earls of Caithness in ancient times, E. Caithness.
were also Earls of the Orcades, but at last they became distinct, and by the
eldest Daughter of one Malise, given in Marriage to William Sinclar the Kings
Pantler, his Heirs successively came to be Earls of Caithness, and do still
enjoy the same Honor, of whom is descended George now Earl of Caithness. E.
Caithness.
The Earl of Braid-Albion having purchased the greatest part of the Estate of
Caithness, is Sheriff of this Shire.

CHAP. XXXVI.
STRATH-NANERN.
THe utmost and farthest Coast of all Britain; In the Shire of Sutherland.
which with the Front of the Shore looks full against the North Point, and
has the midst of the greater Bears Tail, which as Cardan was of Opinion,
causes Translations of Empires, just over head, was inhabited as we may see in
Ptolomy, by the Carnabii, among whom he places the River Nabeus, which names
are of so near Affinity, that the Nation may seem to have drawn there
Denomination from the River that they dwelt by: neither does the modern name
Strath-Navern, which signifies the Valley by Navern, jar altogether in sound
from them. The Earl of Sutherland is Superior of this Country, and his eldest
Son is designed from it Lord Strathnaver. The chief Inhabitants here are the
Mackeys, who were designed from their Lands of Fare; but about the year 1625,
Sir Donald Mackey was designed of Strathnaver, and made a Baronet, and in the
year 1631, was created Lord Rae, from a place belonging to him in the Country
of Caithness, holding of the King; he was employed by Gustavus K. of Sweden in
his Wars: L. Rae.
George Lord Rae is his great Grandchild; of whose Grand-uncle by the Mothers
side: Lieutenant General Hugh Mackey, descended of the same Stock and Lineage;
it is reasonable to make mention, he was one of the Captains of Dowglass
Regiment, who for his Service to the Venetians, did from them receive a Medal
of considerable value; he continued in that Regiment and the French Service,
till they had made their Conquests of some of the united Provinces in the year
1672: and then being employed by the States, he was at the Siege of Grave made
Lieutenant Colonel, and thereafter Colonel; in the year 1685, his Regiment
and others were called over to England by K. Ja. the 7th, to oppose the D. of
Monmouth, when he was made General Major; in the year 1688, he did attend and
assist his Majesty in his Expedition to Britain, and in anno 1689, was sent to
command the Forces in Scotland, where albeit he had not good Success at
Gillicharnkie, yet by his great Fidelity and Diligence, he settled Garrisons at
Inverlochy and other places of the High-lands, which laid the Foundation of the
settlement of these Countries, and then was appointed to Command in Ireland,
where with great Courage, amongst the first to encourage the Soldiers under
him, he Waded through the River, whereby they gained the Town of Athlone, and
did signalize his Courage and Conduct at the Battle of Aghrim, and in the other
parts of that War, till the Reduction of the whole Kingdom; which by the
acknowledgement of his Fellow Great Captains and Commanders, was in a great
measure due to him; for which Service, he was made Lieutenant General: and with
the Duke of Wirtemberg, having Commanded at Steenkirk, was near the beginning
of that Action, unfortunatly slain with James Lord Angus, and Sir Robert
Dowglass of Glenbervie, both Colonels and Heirs of these two noble Families of
the Dowglasses, and representing the Valor of their many Predecessors the
Dowglasses, the last of whom slain in Flanders, was L. Ja. Dowglass Marshall
of the Camp, Grand-Uncle to the Lord Angus of the first Marriage, immediate
elder Brother to the last Duke Hamilton: in which Action also, were many other
brave Scottish Officers concerned, and of them a great part killed, or wounded;
and amongst the rest, Lieutenant Colonel Aeneas Mackey Uncle to the Lord Rae,
was wounded, who succeeded as Colonel to the Lieutenant General his Uncle, to
whom both he and Colonel Robert the younger Brother, were Disciples in the
War, and in recompense of the Dangers undertaken, and Wounds they received, are
advanced to the Commands they now worthily Exerce. The Country it self is for
the Soil nothing fertile, and by reason of the sharp and cold Air, less
inhabited, and thereupon sore haunted and annoyed with most cruel Wolves; which
in such violent rage, not only set upon Cattle, to the exceeding great damnage
of the Inhabitants, but also assail men with great danger; and not in this
Tract only, but in many other parts likewise of Scotland, in so much as by
virtue of an Act of Parliament, the Sheriffs and Inhabitants in every Country,
are commanded to go forth thrice a year a Hunting, for to destroy the Wolves
and their Whelps. But (if in this so northerly a Country, this be any comfort
to speak of) it has of all Britain again, the shortest night and the longest
day: for by reason of the position of Heaven, here distant from the
Aequinoctial Line 59. Degrees and forty Minutes, the longest day contains 18
hours and 25 Scruples: and the shortest night not above five hours and 45
Scruples: so that the Panegyrist is not true in this, who made report in times
past, That the Sun in manner sets not at all, but passes by, and lightly
glanceth upon the Horizon; happily relying upon this Authority of Tacitus, for
that the extreme Points and plain Levels of the Earth, with their shade so low,
raised up no darkness at all. But more truly Pliny (according to true reason)
where he treats of the longest days, according to the inclination of the Suns
Circle in the Horizon. The longest days (says he) in Italy are 15 hours, in
Britain 17, where the light nights do prove, that undoubtedly by experience,
which reason forces credibly, that in Mid-summer days, when the Sun
approaches near to the Pole of the World, the places of the earth under the
Pole have day 6 Months, though the Light having but a narrow compass, the night
contrariwise when he is far remote in middle Winter.

In this utmost Tract, which Ptolomy extends out far East, whereas indeed it
bears full North (for which Roger Bacon in his Geography taxed him long
since) where Tacitus said, That an huge and enorm space of Ground, running
still forward to the farthest Point, grows narrow like a Wedge. There run out
three Promontories mentioned by the old Writers, namely Berubium, now called
Vrdehead, near to Bernswal a Village: Virvedrum now Dunsby, otherways named
Duncansbay, which is thought to be the most remote Promontory of Britain. Orcas
now named Howburn, which Ptolomy sets over against the Islands Orcades, as
the utmost of them all: this also in Ptolomy is called Tarvedrum and Tarvisium,
and so named as is conjectured, because it is the farthest end of Britain: for
Tarvus in the British tongue, has a certain signification of ending.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The Stewartry of ORKNAY, and the other Northern and Western Isles.
I Do not design to treat particularly concerning the Isles of Scotland, The
Stewartry of Orknay.
where I can find little to my purpose of Jurisdiction, Nobility, or Burghs
Royal: and as to these, I leave the Reader to Straloch and Scots-Tarbat, who
made very particular Descriptions of them, published in Latin at Amsterdam in
the year 1654; and to Mr. Adairs Geography not yet fully ended, which is
expected will be exact in relation to them: only something I would add first
concerning the Northern Isles, called the Orcads and Shotland, who have been
longer in the possession of the Kings of Denmark and Norway, than any other of
the Scottish Isles. In the year 1320, amongst the Barons of the Kingdom of
Scotland, who in the Reign of King Robert Bruce, wrote to Pope John, E. Orknay.
is, Magnus Comes Cathaniae and Orcadiae. To these Earls succeeded the Sinclars
Earls of Orknay, the last of whom was William Sinclar Earl of Orknay, and
Chancellor to K. James the Second, whom in the year 1456, resigned the Lordship
of Nithsdale to the King, and in place thereof, got the Earldom of Caithness.
King James the 3d, got a further Right to these Isles, by his Marriage with the
K. of Denmarks Daughter; which Right was renewed and became complete, and
absolute by K. James the Sixth, his Marriage with the Princess of Denmark; by
which King, Robert Stuart Earl of Coldinghame, descended of a natural Son of
King James the Fifth, was created Earl of Orknay; his Successor Patrick E. of
Orknay, anno 1614, was foresaulted These Countries were erected in a
Stewardship, and the Rents thereof managed by a Steward named by the King, and
paid in to the Exchequer: to represent this Stewartry two Commissioners are
sent to the Parliament, and Kirkwal is the head Town thereof, B. Royal.
and Burgh Royal: there was also here a Bishop, last of the Province of St.
Andrews, and a Commissar or Official under him.

As concerning the Western Isles commonly called the AEbudae, The Western Isles.
and the Hebrides; they were the ancient possessions of the Scots, in their
first inhabiting from Ireland, as does appear from our Historians, and
particularly Chronicon de Melross, that in the year 1098, Magnus the Son of
Olavus, King of Norway, added the Isles Orcadae and Menaniae to his Kingdom,
which happened by the Wars and Divisions after the Death of Malcolm Canmore,
betwixt Donald Bain his Brother, and Duncan his Bastard Son, who usurped the
Crown, and were expelled, and Edgar his eldest Son alive, settled on the
Throne; since which time, there were Feudatory Kings or Princes of the Isles,
generally depending on the Kings of Norway, and sometimes upon the Kings of
Scotland, till the year 1263, or 1263. that the Danes in the Reign of Alexander
the Third, were defeat at the Battle of Largs in Cunninghame, and driven out of
the Isles as has been said. Donald Earl of Ross, in the Reign of King James
the Second, with the Earls of Dowglass and Crawford, joined in Arms against the
King; and doing the like against King James the Third, (designing himself King
of the Isles) was in the year 1476 Forefaulted, and the Earldom of Ross annexed
to the Crown, to be enjoyed by the second Sons of the Kings of Scotland,
leaving only to him the Title of L. of the Isles, as has been said before:
which is the only Dignity of L, I have observed to have been taken from the
Isles. These Isles had also a Bishop, who was called Sodorensis, from his Seat
and Church in the Isle of Man; bnt since that Isle did belong to the English,
his Seat has been at Icolmkill, he was of the Province of Glasgow, and had
likewise an Official or Commissar under him.

I shall conclude this Treatise with a Note of the Charter by King Malcolm the
Fourth anno 1159, at Rokesburg, confirming a Charter granted by King David the
First, his Grandfather, of the Abbacy of Selkirk
Seleschirke, which is narrated to have been Founded by him, when he was Earl,
in the Life of his Brother King Alexander the First, who died in the 1124: and
that King David by the Advice of John Bishop of St. Andrews, translated the
Abbacy from this place to Kelso
Kelcho; which Robert the succeeding Bishop of St. Andrews, in whose Bishopric
it was granted, the Abbacy freedom from all Episcopal Service; and that the
Abbots might be ordained by any Bishops in Scotland or Cumberland. The
Witnesses to the Kings Charter, are Herbert Bishop of Glasgow, William Bishop
of Murray, Gregory Bishop of Dunkeld, William and David the Kings Brothers, Ada
his Mother, Jeffery Abbot of Dumfermling, Osbert Abbot of Jedworth, Amfrid
Abbot of Newbottle, Ailvred Abbot of Stirling, Walter Cancellarius, Robert
Prior of St. Andrews, Matthew Archdeacon of St. Andrews, Thor. Archi-Diacon.
Laodoniae, Herber. Camerarius, Nic: Clericus, Ric: Cappellanus, Walterus
Clericus Cancellarii, Joannes nepos Episc: Roberti,

Godredus Rex Insularum, Cospatricius Comes, Ferteth Comes, Dunc: Comes,
Uthredus filius Fergusii, Gilbertus de Vmfravil, Will: de Somervel, Ric: de
Morevil, Ranulphus de Soulis, David Olyphard, Ric: Cumin, Robertus Avenal,
Will: de Morevil, Will: Finimund, Walterus Corbet, Asketi de Ridala, Henricus
de Perth, Vlphus filius Maccus.

This Charter is special, both because of the Antiquity related to, and the
great number of famous and considerable Witnesses, and especially of the King
of the Isles, (whom I just now mentioned) before four Earls, and albeit the
Earl of Angus be only designed by his Earldom, yet the other three were
certainly Cospatricius Earl of Dumbar, or March, Ferteth Earl of Strathern, who
was Father of Gilbert before mentioned, and Duncan Earl of Fife, and Vchtred
was Lord of Galloway, and Father of Rolland. This Note I took from the
Principal Charter, which if I had at hand, I would have inserted the Tenor, and
the Initial Letters as they are Gilded, containing the Effigies and Regalia of
the Kings David and Malcolm.

This Charter is again confirmed by King William, formerly mentioned the Kings
Brother, to whose Charter the Witnesses are Joceline Bishop of Glasgow, Earl
David my Brother, Archibald Abbot of Dumfermling, Hugo Cancel, Simon
Archi-Diacon. Glasc. William Morevil Constab. meus, Robert de Londonys, Rolland
filius Vthredi, William de Linddeseys, Malc. filius Comitis Dunecani, Phil. de
Vallonys, Allanus filius Walteri Gervosius de Avenel, Constab: de Rockesburg,
Walter Corbet, Ranulphus de Souls, Herb. de Maxhwill, Tho. de Colvil, Rob. de
Phil. de Setune, Herb. Maresc. Earl David was Earl of Huntingtoun in England,
and Garviath or Garrioth in Scotland, of whom our Kings are Lineally descended:
as also Allan the Son of Walter, of whom before concerning the Stuarts of
Scotland. Amongst these Witnesses are also the Predecessors of the Earls of
Crawford, Nithsdale, and Winton.

And now having gone through the whole Countries of Scotland, according to the
Method of the Author, I conclude.

FINIS.

