PHYSIOLOGIA Epicuro-Gassendo-Charltoniana: OR A FABRIC OF SCIENCE NATURAL,
Upon the Hypothesis of ATOMS, Founded by EPICVRVS, Repaired by PETRVS
GASSENDVS, Augmented by WALTER CHARLETON,
Dr. in Medicine, and Physician to the late CHARLES, Monarch of Great- Britain.

The FIRST PART.

Fernelius, in praefat. ad lib. 2. de Abditis rerum Caussis. Atomos veteres jam
ridemus, miramurque ut sibi quisquam persuaserit, Corpora quaedam solida, atque
individua, fortuita illa concursione, res magnitudine immensas, varietate
multitudineque infinitas, omnemque absolutissimum hunc Mundi ornatum effecisse.
At certe, si Democritus mortem cum vita commutare posset, multo acri^^ haec,
quae putamus Elementa, suo more rideret.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Thomas Heath, and are to be sold at his
shop in Russel Street, near the Piazza of Covent Garden. 1654.

TO THE HONORABLE Mris. ELIZABETH VILLIERS, WIFE TO THE HONORABLE ROBERT
VILLIERS ESQUIRE.
MADAM,
THe excellent Monsieur Des Carts, I remember, in his Dedicatory Epistle of
his Principles of Philosophy, to that illustrious Lady, the Princess Elizabeth;
showed Himself so much a Courtier, as to profess unto Her Highness, that of all
Persons living, who had perused his former Writings, He knew none, that
perfectly understood them, except Herself only. This, Madam, is somewhat more
than what I shall adventure to say to you, in this my humble Address. Not that
I might not, with the Authority of Truth, and the willing Testimonies of all
judicious Persons, whom you have at any time dignified with your incomparable
Conversation, affirm; That Acuteness of Wit, and Soundness of Judgment are as
Eminent in you, as in any that I know, of either Sex. But, that I conceive it
to be more consistent with my Duty of Conformity to the strict Laws of your
Humility (which is supreme among your many Virtues, if there can be Supremacy
where All are Superlative) only to ask you leave, so far to justify My self,
in this way of Devotion, as publicly to own my Assurance; that of all my
Readers, none will meet with fewer Difficulties, or discover more Lapses and
Errors, than your self: nor could that Book be clearly understood by the
Author, when He wrote it, which you cannot easily understand, when you are
pleased to read it; be the Argument thereof of what kind soever, and the
Language either Italian, French, or English, which are all equally your own.

But, I have little reason to speak of justifying this my Devotion, to the
World; when that, by the General Tribute of Admiration and Reverence, which
your Excellencies duly receive from it, is fully convinced, that I am not
capable of declaring a greater Prudence, in any action of my whole life, than
in this of laying down both my self and this mean Oblation of my Observance and
Gratitude, at the feet of a Personage, whose single Name is acknowledged to
define All the possible Perfections of Humanity: and, upon consequence, cannot
fail to give to both Me and my Writings not only an Estimation among Good Men;
but also a full Protection from the Malevolence of Evil. And, I have been very
lately told by some (and Those such Eminent Wits too; as that very Noble
Persons, to whom they have Dedicated their Labors, have thereby received no
small Additions of Honor) that they seriously Envied the good fortune of my
resolution of invocating your Patronage of this Epicurean Philosophy; forasmuch
as they were confirmed, that I had taken the most certain course, to procure
Immortality thereunto, by offering it up to the Favor of so great an Example
of all Heroic Accomplishments, as that Her Memory must ever continue verdant
and sacred to all Posterity since it could not be, while Generous Minds should
conserve the Memorials of Her as the Mirror in which Virtue used to dress
Herself, when she would appear Amiable and Graceful; but that they must often
cast some glances of value upon the Remains of Him, who had so deep a sentiment
of Her goodness, as to have known no other Ambition, but that commendable one
of making Himself eternally known for Her most humble and obsequious Votary.

That, which would more become me, were to make my Excuses for the exceeding
Boldness of this my Application; and to pravent such Objections as may lie
against the Rashness of my Zeal: in selecting such a way to express my
Reverence, as cannot secure me from a suspect of Profanation; and praesenting
to you such a Sacrifice of my Thankfulness, as, if estimated according to its
own Unworthiness, must make it a quaestion, whether I had any design of being
Thankful at all. And here, to the First, I might justly plead; that a great
Part of this Volume was composed in your House (the chief Mansion of
well-ordered Hospitality) and All of it in the strength of your Inspiration.
That the Book comes not into your hands, to Inform, but only Remember you of
many of those Discourses of Nature, which your Noble Husband and your self have
often suffered me to entertain (would to God, I might have said, satisfy) your
eager Curiosity withal, at those hours your industrious Minds required
Relaxation from the bent of more grave and advantageous Thoughts. That, having
the Honor of so great a Trust, as that of your most praecious Lives committed
unto me; it highly concerned me, to study and pursue all ways of Demonstrating
my self not altogether incapable thereof, and more especially this of Natural
Philosophy, which being the Grounds, is also the Measure of a Good Physician.
And, that when your Husband being acquainted with my Purpose of Enquiring into
the Nature of Souls, both Brutal and Human, in a distinct Work, though but the
Remaining Moity of this Physiologie; had enjoined me to deliver the same into
his hands, as soon as I should have finished it: I instantly apprehended, I had
an opportunity of a Double Happiness, the one of being equally Grateful to Two
singular Friends; the other, of Allying those Two Treatises by Consecration,
which would be of so near Affinity in their Subjects.

As for the Other; I might easily allege, that Great spirits use not to
estimate Praesents that are brought them, by the value they carry in
themselves: but the Affections of those who offer them. That Thank fullness is
the Poor man's wealth, and makes him, in the eyes of Generosity, stand in
competition, for respect, with the Rich. That though this my Oblation hold no
proportion to the immense height of your Merit, yet it is equal to that of my
Power, and, indeed, the best that my Gratitude was able to advance upon the
slender stock of my Capacity. And, that I never intended it as a Retribution
f^r your incompensable Favors; but only as an Homage, to testify that I
confess my self infinitely your Debtor.

But, Madam, for me to attempt to Excuse, unto your self, the Unfitness of
this Act of my devotion; is no less unnecessary, than for me to justify to
the World, that I have placed it upon a most worthy Object: forasmuch as I have
no more reason to doubt, that so transcendent a Charity, as is diffused through
and surrounds your perfect Soul, can be large enough to dispense with the
Rudeness of the Ceremonies, and Poverty of the Offering, where you are
satisfied of the sincere Respects, and unalterable Fidelity of his Heart, who
tenders it; than I have to fear, that the World should not most readily confirm
my judgment, that your Deserts have rightfully entitled you to all the
Demonstrations of Honor and Reve^ence, that can possibly be given to you.

The Chief part, therefore, yea the whole of my present Duty, is only humbly to
Beg your benign Acceptance of this Dedication, as the Best Expression I was
able to make of those profound sentiments which as well your Goodness in
General to others, as your Particular Favors to my self, have impressed upon
my Soul. And this I now do, upon the Knees of my Heart; and solemnly vow, that
as I esteem a perfect Friend, the greatest Treasure of my life, so I do and
ever shall account you the most perfect of Friends: That I shall confess my
self to have lost not only all Piety, but all Humanity also, when ever I shall
willingly lose any the least opportunity of serving you: and that your own Good
Angel (I speak familiarly, but at the same time believe you to be under the
Tuition of a Legion of Good ones) cannot more fervently desire your complete
Happiness, than, Incomparable Madam,

Your Eternal Servant, W. CHARLETON.
London the 20 of July, An. Dom. 1654.
THE CONTENTS, SERIES, AND ORDER OF THE WHOLE BOOK.
BOOK THE FIRST.
CHAP. I. All Modern Philosophers reduced to four general Orders; and the
principal causes of their Dissension* page 1.
SECT. I.
ARTIC:
1 THe principal Sects of the ancient Grecian Philosophers, only enumerated.
page 1 2 The same revived among the Moderns, with increase. 2 3 Who are reduced
either to the Pedantique or Female Sect. 2 4 Or, to the Assertors of
Philosophical Liberty. 3 5 Or, to the Renovators. 3 6 Or to the Electors. 4
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe principal causes of the Diversity of Philosophical Sects; and the
chiefest among them, the Obscurity of Nature. 5 2 The Imperfection of our
Understanding. 5 3 The Irregularity of our Curiosity. A paradox. 6
CHAP. II. That this World is the Universe. page 9.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Ambition of Alexander in affecting the Conquest, less vain then that of
many ancient Philosophers in affecting the Knowledge of a Multitude of Worlds.
9 2 A reduction of those Philosophers to four distinct Sects; respective to
their distinct persuasions: and the Heads of each Sect nominated. 9 3 The two
main pillars on which the opinion of a Plurality of Worlds was anciently
erected. 10
SECT. II. The Redargution.
ARTIC.
1 THe Question stated to be concerning the real Existence, not the possibility
of an Infinity of Worlds. 11 2 Because the supposed Infinity of the Extramundan
Spaces, is no impossibility. ibid. 3 Because an Infinity of Bodies is also
possible as to the Omnipotence of God. ibid. 4 The Error of concluding the
Esse, from the Posse of an Infinity of Worlds. 12 5 The first main Pillar of a
Plurality of world^ subverted ibid. 6 The second Pillar found sophisticate, and
demolished. 13 7 A Plurality of Worlds manifestly repugnant to Authority Divine
14 8 And Human. ibid. 9 The result of all; the Demonstration of the Authors
Thesis, That this World is the Universe. ibid. 10 Extramundane Curiosity, a
high degree of Madness. 15
CHAP. III. Corporiety and ^nanity, p. 16
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 BOdy and Inanity, the two general Parts of the Universe. 2 Three the most
memorable Definitions of Corporiety extant among Physiologists, recounted and
examined. ibid. 3 Four Descriptions of the nature of Inanity, by Epicurus,
Cleomedes, Empericus, Aristotle. 17 4 Their importance extracted: and what is
the formal or proper notion of a Vacuum. 18 5 The Existence of Bodies in the
World, manifest by Sense: whose Evidence is perfect Demonstration. ibid.
CHAP. IV. A Vacuum in Nature. p 21.
SECT. I.
ART.
1 The Distinction of a (...) into (^) Natural, and (2) Praeternatural* and the
one called Disseminate, the other Co^cervate. 21 2 The nature of a Dissemi^^te
Va^uity, explained by the Analogy of a heap of Corn. ibid. 3 The first Argument
of a Disseminate Vacuity, desumed from the evidence of Motion, in General: and
Aristotle's error concerning the Essence or Place, concisely detected, and
corrected. 22 4 Motion demonstrated by Sense: and Zeno's aenigmatical Argument*
for an Universal Quiet, dissolved. 23 5 The Consequution of the Argument (if no
Vacuum, no Motion) illustrated. 24 6 An Objection, that the ^ococession of some
Bodies, depends on their ^arity or Porosity; not on a Disseminate Vacui^^:
praevented. ibid. 7 No beginning of Motion, without Inanity inter^^ersed. 25
SECT. II.
ART^C.
1 A Second Argument of a Vacuity Disseminate, collected from the reason of
Rarefaction and Condensation. ibid. 2 The eminent Phenomenon ^f an
Aerosclopet, or Wind Gun, solved by a Vacuity Disseminate among the
incontiguous (quoad totas superficies) parts of aer. 26 3 Experiment of an
Aeolipile, or Hermetical Bellows, attesting a Vacuity Disseminate. ibid. 4
Experiment of a Sulphurate Tapor, included in a Glass Vial, partly (...) with
Water: of the same importance. 27 5 No Combustible in Aer: and so the opinion
of the Aristoteleans, that the Extinction of F^ame imprisoned, is to be charged
on the De^ect of Aer for its sustentation; grossly err^neous. 28 6 A fourth
singular and memorable Experiment of the Authors, of Y^e at the nose of a large
Reverberatory Furnace, charged with Ignis rotae; evidencing a Vacuity
interspersed in the Aer. 29 7 An inference from that Experiment; that Aer as to
its General Destination, is the Common Receptary of Exhalations. ibid. 8 A
second Illation, that the Aer does receive Exhalations at a certain rate, or
definite proportion; which cannot be transcended without prodigious violence.
30 9 The Existence of Inane Incontiguities in the Aer, confirmed by two
considerable Arguments. ibid
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 THat Water also contains Vacuola empty Spaces; demonstrated. 31 2 From the
Experiment of the Dissolution of Alum, Halinitre Sal Ammoniac, and Sugar, in
Water formerly sated with the Tincture of Common Salt. ibid. 3 The verity of
the Lord Bacons Assertion, that a repeated infusion of Rhubarb acquires as
strong a virtue Cathar^^ical as a simple infusion of Scamony, in equal
quantity: and why 32 4 Why two Drachms of Antimony impraegnate a pint of Wine
with so strong a vomitory Faculty as two ounces. ibid. 5 Why one and the same
Menstruum may be enriched with various Tinctures. ibid.
SECT. IV.
ARTIC.
1 TWo other Arguments of a Vacuity Disseminate inferrible from (1) the
difference of Bodies in the degrees of Gravity: (2) the Calefaction of Bodies
by the penetration of igneous Atoms into them. 33 2 The Experiments vulgarly
adduced to prove no vacuity in nature, so far from denying, that they confess a
Disseminate one. ibid. 3 The grand Difficulty of the Cause of the Aers
restitution of it self to its natural contexture, after rarefaction and
condensation, satisfied in brief. ibid.
CHAP. V. A Vacuum praeternatural. p. 35.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 WHat is conceived by a Coacervate Vacuity: and who was the Inventer of the
famous Experiment of Quicksilver in a Glass Tube, upon which many modern
Physiologists have erected their persuasion of the possibility of introducing
it. 35 2 A faithful description of the Experiment, and all its rare Phenomenon.
36 3 The Authors reason, for his selection of only six of the most
considerable Phenomenon to explore the Causes of them. 37
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe First Cardinal Difficulty. 37 2 The Desert space in the Tube argued to
be an absolute Vacuum coacervate, from the impossibility of its repl^tion with
Aer. ibid. 3 The Experiment praesented in Iconism 38 4 The Vacuity in the
Desert Space, not praevented by the insinuation of Ether. 40 5 A Paradox, that
Nature does not abhor all vacuity, per se; but only ex Accidenti, or in
respect to Fluxility. ibid. 6 A second Argument against the repletion of the
Desert space by Ether. 41 7 The Vacuity of the Desert space, not praevented by
an Halitus, or Spiritual E^^lux from the Mercury: for three convincing reasons.
42 8 The Authors Apostasy from the opinion of an absolute Coacervate Vacuity in
the desert space: in regard of ibid. 9 The possibility of the subingression of
light. ibid. 10 Of the Atoms or insensible bodies of Heat and Cold: which are
much more exile and penetrative then common Aer. 43 11 Of the Magnetical E^^lux
of the Earth: to which opinion the Author resigns his Assent. 44 12 No absolute
plenitude, nor absolute Vacuity, in the Desert Space: but only a Disseminate
Vacuity. ibid.
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 THe second Difficulty stated. 45 2 Two things necessary to the creation of
an excessive, or praeternatural Vacuity. ibid. 3 The occasion of Galilaeos
invention of a Brass Cylindre charged with a wooden Embol, or Sucker: and of
Torricellius invention of the praesent Experiment. ibid. 4 The marrow of the
Difficulty, viz. How the Aer can be impelled upward, by the Restagnant Quick
silver, when there externally wants a fit space for it to ci^culate into. 46 5
The solution of the same, by the Laxity of the Contexture of the Aer. ibid. 6
The same illustrated, by the adaequate simile of Corn infused into a Bushel.
ibid. 7 A subordinate scruple, why most bodies are moved through the Aer* with
so little resistance, as is imperceptible by sense? 47 8 The same Expeded.
ibid. 9 A second dependent scruple concerning the Cause of the sensible
resistance of the Aer, in this case of the Experiment: together with the
satisfaction thereof, by the Gravity of Aer. ibid.
SECT. IV.
ARTIC.
1 THe State of the Third Difficulty. 48 2 The Solution thereof in a Word.
ibid. 3 Three praecedent positions briefly recognized, in order to the worthy
profounding of the mystery, of the Aers resisting Compression beyond a certain
rate, or determinate proportion ibid. 4 The Aequiponderancy of the External
Aer, pendent upon the surface of the Restagnant Mercury, in the vessel to the
Cylindre of Mercury residuous in the Tube, at the altitude of 27 digits: the
cause of the Mercuries constant subsistence at that point. 49 5 A convenient
simile, illustrating and enforcing the same. 50 6 The Remainder of the
Difficulty; viz. Why the Aequilibrium of these two opposite weights, the
Mercury and the Aer, is constant to the praecise altitude of 27 digits:
removed. ibid. 7 Humane Perspicacity terminated in the exterior parts of
Nature, or simple Apparitions: which eluding our Cognition, frequently fall
under no other comprehension, but that of rational Conjecture. ibid. 8 The
constant subsistence of the Mercury at 27 digits, adscriptive rather to the
Resistance of the Aer, then to any occult Quality in the Mercury. 51 9 The
Analogy betwixt the Absolute and Respective Aequality of weights, of
Quicksilver and Water, in the different altitudes of 27 digits and 32 feet. 52
10 The definite weights of the Mercury at 27 digits, and Water at 32 feet, in a
Tube of the third part of a digit in diametre; found to be near upon two pound,
Paris weight. ibid. 11 Quaere, Why the Aequilibrium is constant to the same
point of altitude in a Tube of a large concave, as well as in one of a small;
when the force of the Depriment must be greater in the one, then the other. 53
12 The solution thereof by the appropriation of the same Cause, which makes the
descent of two bodies, of different weights, aequivelox. ibid.
SECT. V.
ARTIC.
1 THe Fourth Capital Difficulty proposed. 54 2 The full solution thereof, by
demonstration. ibid. 3 The same confirmed by the theory of the Cause of the
Mercuries frequent Reciprocations, before it acquiesce at the point of
Aequipondium. ibid.
SECT. VI.
ARTIC.
1 THe Fifth Principal Difficulty. 55 2 Solved, by the Motion of Restoration
natural to each ins^nsible particle of Aer. ibid. 3 The incumbent Aer, in this
case, equally distressed, by two contrary Forces. 56 4 The motion of
Restoration in the Aer^extended to the satisfaction of another consimilar
Doubt, concerning the subintrusion of Water into the Tube; if superaffused upon
the restagnant Mercury. ibid. 5 A Third most important Doubt, concerning the
nonapparence of any Tensity, or Rigidity in the region of Aer incumbent upon
the Restagnant Liquors. ibid. 6 The solution thereof, by the necessary
reliction of a space in the vic^^^ region of Lax aer, equal to that, which the
Hand commoved possesses in the region of the Comprest. 57 7 A confirmation of
the same Reason, by the adaequate Example of the Flame of a Tapour. ibid. 8 2
By the Experiment of Urination. ibid. 9 3 By the Beams of the Sun, entering a
room, through some slender crany, in the appearance of a White shining Wand,
and constantly maintaining that Figure, notwithstanding the agitation of the
aer by wind, etc. 58 10 4 By the constancy of the Rainbow, to its Figure,
notwithstanding the change of position and place of the cloud and contiguous
aer. ibid. 11 Helmonts D^lirium, that the Rainbow is a supernatural Meteor:
observed. ibid.
SECT. VII.
ARTIC.
1 THe sixth and last considerable Difficulty. ibid. 2 The clear solution
there^^, by the great disproportion of weight betwi^t Quicksilver and Water.
59 3 A Corollary; the Altitude of the Atmosphere conjectured. ibid. 4 A second
Corollary; the desperate Difficulty of conciliating Physiology to the
Mathematics: instanced in the much discrepant opinions of Galilaeo and
Mersennus, concerning the proportion of Gravity that Aer and Water hold each to
other. ibid. 5 The Conclusion of the Digression: and the reasons, why the
Author ^^^cribes a Cylindrical Figure to the portion of Aer impendent on the
Restagnant Liquors, in the Experiment. 60
CHAP. VI. Of PLACE. p. 62.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Identity Essential of a Vacuum and Place, the cause of the praesent
Enquiry into the Nature of Place. ibid. 2 Among all the Quaeries about the Hoti
of Place; the most important is, Whethor Epicurus or Aristotle's Definition of
it, be most adaequate. ibid. 3 The Hypothesis of Aristotle's Definition 63 4 A
convenient supposition inferring the necessity of Dimentions Incorporeal. ibid.
5 The Legality of that supposition. ibid. 6 The Dimensions of Longitude,
Latitude, and Profundity, imaginable in a Vacuum. 64 7 The Grand Peripatetick
objection, that Nothing is in a Vacuum; ergo no Dimensions. ibid. 8 Des
Chartes, and Mr. White seduced by the plausibility of the same. 65 9 The
Peripateticks reduction of Time and Place to the General Categories of
Substances and Accidents, the cause of this Epidemick mistake. ibid. 10 Place
neither Accident nor Substance. 66 11 The praecedent Giant- Objection, that
Nothing is in a Vacuum; stabbed, at a blow. ibid 12 Dimensions Corporeal and
Incorporeal, or Spatial. 67 13 The former supposition reassumed and enlarged.
ibid. 14 The scope and advantage thereof; viz. the comprehension of three
eminent Abstrusities concerning the Nature of Place. ibid. 15 The Incorporiety
of Dimentions Spatial, Discriminated from that of the Divine Essence, and other
Substances Incorporeal. 68 16 This persuasion, of the Improduction and
Independency of Place; praeserved from the suspicion of Impiety. ibid.
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 PLace, not the immediate superfice of the Body invironing the Locatum;
contrary to Aristotle. 69 2 Salvo's for all the Difficult Scruples, touching
the nature of Place; genuinely extracted from Epicurus his (...). ibid 3
Aristotle's ultimate Refuge. 70 4 The Invalidity thereof: and the
Coexistibility, or Compatibility of Dimensions Corporeal and Spatial. 71
CHAP. VII. Of Time and Eterntiy. p. 72.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Hoti of Time more easily conceivable by the Simple Notion of the Vulgar,
then by the complex Definitions of Philosophers. ibid. 2 The General
praesumption that Time is Corporeal, or an Accident dependent on Corporeal
Subjects; the chief Cause of that Difficulty. 73 3 The variety of opinions,
concerning it; another Cause of the Difficulty: and Epicurus Description of its
Essence, recited and explained. ibid. 4 Time defined to be Celestial Motion,
by Zeno, Chrysippus, etc. and thereupon affirmed, by Philo, to be only
Coaevous to the World. 74 5 Aristotle's so much magnifyed Definition of Time to
be the Measure of Motion Celestial, etc. perpended and found too light. ibid.
SECT. II.
ARTIC*
1 TIme, nor substance, nor Accident: but an Ens more General, and the
Twin-brother of Space. ibid. 2 A Paralellism betwixt Space and Time. ibid. 3
Time, Senior unto, and independent upon Motion: and only accidentally
indicated by Motion, as the Mensuratum by the Mensura. 76 4 A demonstration of
the independence of Time upon Motion, from the miraculous Detention of the Sun,
above the Horison, in the days of Joshua. 77 5 An Objection, that, during the
arrest of the Sun, there was no Time, because no Hours; satisfied. ibid. 6 The
Immutability of Time also asserted against Aristotle. ibid.
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 THe Grand Question, concerning the Disparity of Time and Aeternity: stated.
78 2 Two praeparatory Considerations, touchant the aequivocal use of the word
Aeternity: requisite to the clear solution thereof. ibid 3 Two decisive
Positions, thereupon inferred and established. 79 4 The Platonicks Definition
of Eternity, to be one Everlasting Now; not intelligible, and therefore
collusive. 80 5 Their Assertors subterfuge, that Eternity is Coexistent to
Time; also unintelligible. ibid. 6 Our Ecclesiastic Doctors, taking Sanctuary
in the 3. Exodus for the authorizing of their Doctrine, that the Present Tense
is only competent to God, and so that Eternity is one permanent Instant,
without Fusion or Succession: not secure from the rigor of our Demonstration.
81 7 The Objective Praesence of all things at once, to the Divine Intellect; no
ways impugned by our contradiction of the Doctors theory. ibid 8 Nor the
Immutability of the Divine Nature, against Aristotle. 82 9 Coronis. 83
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. The Existence of Atoms, Evicted. p. 84.
SECT. I.
ARTIC:
1 THe right of the Authors Transition from the Incorporeal to the Corporeal
part of Nature: and a series of his subsequent speculations: ibid. 2 Bodies
generally distinshed into Principles and Productions, with their Scholastic
Denomiminations and proprieties. 85 3 The right of Atoms to the Attributes of
the First Matter. ibid. 4 Their sundry Appellations allusive to their three
eminent proprieties. ibid. 5 Two vulgarly passant Derivations of the word,
Atom, exploded. 86 6 Who their Inventor: and who their Nomenclator. 87 7 Their
Existence demonstrated. 87 8 That Nature, in her dissolution of Concretions,
does descend to the insensible particles. 88 9 That she can run on to Infinity.
ibid. 10 But must consist in Atoms, the Term of Exsolubility. ibid. 11 A second
Argument of their Existence, drawn from that of their Antitheton Inanity. 89 12
A third, hinted from the impossibility of the Production of Hard Bodies, from
any other Principle. ibid. 13 A Fourth, from the Constancy of Nature in the
specification and Determinate Periods of her Generations. ibid.
CHAP. II. No Physical Continuum, infinitely Divisible. p. 90.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Cognation of this Theorem, to the Argument of the immediately praecedent
Chapter. ibid* 2 Magnitude divisible by a continued progress through parts
either Proportional, or Aliquotal. ibid. 3 The use of that Distinction in the
praesent. 9^ 4 The verity of the Thesis, demonstrated. ibid. 5 Two detestable
Absurdities, inseparable from the position of Infinite parts in a Continuum.
ibid. 6 Aristotle's subterfuge of Infinitude Potential; 92 7 Found openly
Collusive. 93 8 A second subterfuge of the Stoic; ibid. 9 Manifestly
dissentaneous to Reason. ibid
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Absurdities, by Empericus, charged upon the supposition of only Finite
parts in a Continuum. 94 2 The sundry Incongruities and Inconsistences, by the
Modern Anti-Democritans, imputed to the supposition of Insectility. ibid. 3 The
full Derogation of them all together, by one single Responce; that the minimum
of Atomists is not Mathematical, but Physical, contrary to their praesumption.
95 4 A seeming Dilemma of the Adversary, expeditely evaded. 96 5 A Digression,
stating and determining that notable Quaestion, Whether Geometrical
Demonstrations may be conveniently transferred to the Physical or sensible
Quantity? ibid.
CHAP. III. Atoms, the First and Universal Matter. p 99.
SECT. I.
ART.
1 THe introduction, hinting the two general assumptions of the Chapter. ibid.
2 Democritus and Epicurus vindicated from the absurd admission of Inanity to be
one Principle of Generables. ibid. 3 Atoms not inconsistent with, because the
Principles of the four vulgar Elements. 100 4 The dissent of the Ancients,
about the number of Elements. 101 5 No one of the four Elements sufficient to
the production of either any of the other three, or of any Compound nature
ibid. 6 The four Elements, not the Protoprinciple of Concretions. 102 7 Atoms
discriminated from the Homoiomerical Principles of Anaxagoras. ibid. 8 The
principal Difficulties urged against the Hypothesis of Atoms, singularly
solved. 103 9 A recapitulation of the praemises, introductory to the
verification of the praesent thesis: 106
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe 4 notable opinions, concerning the Composition of a Continuum. 107 2 A
Physical Continuum cannot consist of Points Mathematical. ibid. 3 Nor of Parts
and Points Mathematical, united. 108 4 Nor of a simple Entity, before division
indistinct: but of Indivis^bles. ibid. 5 A second Apodictical reason, desumed
from the nature of Union, evi^cing that Atoms are the First and Catholic
Principle of Concretions. 109 6 An objection praevented. ibid. 7 The reason of
the Authors supercession of all other Arguments of the like importance. ibid.
CHAP. IV. The Essential Proprieties of Atoms: p. 111.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe two links connecting this to the praecedent Chapter. ibid. 2 The General
Proprieties of Atoms: and the Inseparability of each, demonstrated. ibid. 3 The
Resistance of Atoms, no distinct propriety; but pertinent to their Solidity or
Gravity* 112 4 The specifical Proprieties of Atoms. ibid.
SECT. II. Concerning the Magnitude of Atoms. p. 113.
ARTIC.
1 BY the Magnitude, is meant the Parvity of Atoms. ibid. 2 A consideration of
the Grossness of our senses, and the extreme subtilty of Nature in her
operations; praeparatory to our Conjectural apprehension of the Exiguity of Her
Materials, Atoms. ibid. 3 The incomprehensible subtility of Nature, argued from
the Artifice of an exquisite Watch, contrived in a very narrow room. 114 4 The
vast multitude of sensible particles, and the vaster of Elemental Atoms,
contained in one grain of Frankinsense; exactly calculated. ibid. 5 The
Dioptrical speculation of a Handworm, discovering the great variety of
Organical Parts therein, and the innumerability of their Component Particles.
115 6 A short Digressive Descant upon the Text of Pliny, touching the
multiplicity of parts in a Flea; hinting the possible perspicacity of Reason.
ibid. 7 The Exility of Atoms, conjectural from the great diffusion of one Grain
of Vermillion dissolved in Water. 116 8 The same, inferrible from the small
quantity of oil depraedated by the Flame of a Lamp, in a quarter of an hour.
ibid. 9 The Microscope of great use, in the discernment of the minute particles
of Bodies: and so advantageous to our Conjecture, of the exility of Atoms. ibid
SECT. III. Concerning the Figures of Atoms. p. 117.
ARTIC.
1 AN Epitome of all that directly concerns the Fig^res of Atom^ in three
General Canons. ibid. 2 The First Canon explained and certifyed. ibid. 3 The
Exility of Atoms, does not necessitate their General Roundness (...) contrary
to the common conceit. ibid. 4 The Diversity of Figures in Atoms, evicted from
the sensible Dissimilitude of Individuals, as well Animate as Inanimate. 118 5
A singular Experiment, antoptically demonstrating the various Configurations of
the minute Particles of Concretions. 119 6 A variety of Figures in Atoms,
necessary to the variety of all Sensibles. ibid. 7 The second Canon, explained
and Certified. 120 8 The Third Canon, explained, and refuted. 121
SECT. IV. Concerning the Motions of Atoms. p. 121.
ARTIC.
1 TWo introductory Observables. ibid. 2 The Motion of Atoms, according to the
General Distinction of the Ancients, Twofold; viz Natural, and Accidental: and
each of these redivided into two different Species. ibid. 3 The summary of
Epicurus Figment, of the Perpendicular Motion of Atoms, without a common
Center. 122 4 His Declinatory natural Motion of Atoms, excused; not justified.
ibid. 5 The genuine sense of Epicurus, in his distinction of the Reflex Motion
of Atoms into ex Plaga, and ex Concussione. 123 6 The several Conceptions of
Epicurus, about the perpetual Motions of Atoms. 124 7 The perpetual Inquietude
of Atoms, even in compact Concretions, adumbrated in melted Lead. ibid. 8 The
same more sensibly exemplified, in the spirit extracted from Mercury, Tin, and
Subsimate. 125 9 The Mutability of all Concretions, a good Argument of the
perpetual intestine Commotion of Atoms, in the most adamantine Compositions.
ibid. 10 What we are to explode, and what retain, in the opinion of Epicurus,
touching the Motion of Atoms. ibid.
The Third Book.
CHAP. I. The Origin of Qualities. p. 127:
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 AN introductory Advertisement^; of the obscurity of many thing to Reason
which are manifest to sense: and of the Possibility, not necessity of the
Elementation of Concretions, and their sensible Qualities, from the Principles
praesumed. 127 2 The Authors Definition of a Quality, in geral: and genuine
exposition of Democritus mysterious Text, concerning the Creation of Qualities.
128 3 The necessary deduction of Qualities from Naked or Unqualified
Principles. 130 4 The two primary Events of Atoms, viz. Order and Position,
associated to their three essential Proprieties, viz. Magnitude, Figure, and
Motion; sufficient to the Origination of all Qualities. ibid. 5 The necessity
of assuming the Magnitude and Motion of Atoms, together with their Order and
Situation, as to their production of Qualities, evicted by a double instance.
131 6 The Figure, Order and Position of Parts in Concretions, alone sufficient
to the Caussation of an indefinite variety of Qualities, from the analogy of
Letters. ibid. 7 The same Exemplifyed in the arise of White Froth, on the Waves
of the Sea. 132 8 The Nativity of Colors in General, explained by several
obvious Examples. ibid. 9 The Accention of Heat, from Concretions actually
Cold, upon a mere ttransposition of their Component Particles; exemplifyed in
sundry Chemical Experiments. 133 10 The Generation of all kinds of sensible
qualities in one and the same Con^retion, from the variegated positions of its
particles: evidenced in the Example of a putrid Apple. 134 11 The assenting
suffrage of Epicurus. ibid.
CHAP. II. That Species Visible are Substantial Emanations. p. 136.
SECT. I.
ARTIC:
1 THe Visible Images of objects, substantial: and either corporeal Emanations
from the superficial parts of Concretions; or Light it self, disposed into
contextures, consimilar to the figure of the object. ibid, 2 The position of
their being Effluviaes, derived from Epicurus; and praeferred to the common
doctrine of the Schools of the Immateriality of Species Visible. ibid. 3
Epicurus Text concerning the same. 137 4 The faithful Exposition thereof. ibid.
5 The contents thereof reduced to four heads. 134 6 The Existence of Images
visible, certifyed by autoptical Demonstration. ibid* 7 Epicurus opinion, of
the substantiality of Images Visible, consonant to the judgment of Plato and
Empedocles. 139 8 The Aristoteleans Thesis, that Images optical are mere
Accidents, recited: and ibid. 9 Convicted of sundry Impossibilities,
Inconsistences, and Absurdities. ibid. 10 The grand Objection of Alexander,
that a con tinual Efflux of substance must minorate the Quantity ^f the most
solid Visible. 140 11 Solved by two Reasons; the possible Accretion of other
particles; and the extreme Tenuity of the Emanent. 141 12 The Tenuity of Images
visible, reduced to some degree of Comprehensibility, by conceiving them to be
most thin Decortications. ibid. 13 By Instance, in the Visible species of the
Foot of a Handworm. ibid. 14 By exemplifying in the numerous round Films of
Wax, successively derepted from a Wax tapor by the flame thereof, in the space
of an hour* and 142 15 In the innumerable Films of Oil, likewise successively
delibrated, by the flame of an Ellychnium, or Match, perpendicularly floating
in a vessel of equal capacity with Solomon's Brazen Sea, in the space of 48
hours. ibid. 16 By the Analogy betwixt an Odorable and Visible Species. ibid.
17 The Manner and Reason of the Production of visible Images; according to the
hypothesis of Epicurus. 143 18 The Celerity of the Motion of visible Images,
reasoned; and compared to that of the Light of the Sun. 144 19 The Translation
of a moveable from place to place, in an indivisible point of time, impossible:
and why? ibid. 20 The Facility of the Abduction, or Avolation of Images
Visible, from solid Concretions; solved by the Spontaneous Exsilition of their
superficial Atoms: and the Solicitation of Light incident upon them. ibid. 21
That Objects do not emit their Visible Images; but when Illustrated: a Conceit
though paradoxical, yet not improbable. 145
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 VIsible Images Systatical, described; and distinguished from Apostatical
ones. 146 2 Their Existence assured, by the testimony of Diodorus Siculus: and
ibid. 3 Damascius, together with the Autopsy of Kircher. ibid. 4 Kirchers
Description of that famous Apparition at Rhegium, called Morgana Rheginorum:
and 147 5 Most ingenious Investigation of the Causes thereof. ibid. 6 His
admirable Artifice, for the exhibition of the like aereal Representation, in
Imitation of Nature. 148
CHAP. III. Concerning the Manner and Reason of VISION. p. 149.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Reason of Vision, according to the opinion of the Stoics. 149 2 Of
Aristotle. 150 3 Of the Pythagoreans. ibid. 4 Of Empedocles. ibid. 5 Of Plato.
ibid. 6 Of Epicurus. ibid. 7 Of Mons. Des Chartes. 151 8 The ingenuity of Des
Chartes Conceit, acknowledged: but the solidity indubitated. 152 9 The Opinion
of Epicurus more satisfactory, then any other: because more Rational, and less
obnoxious to inexplicable Difficulties. ibid. 10 The Two most considerable
Difficulties opposed to Epicurus position, of the Incursion of Substantial
Images into the Eye. 153
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THat the superfice of no body is perfectly smooth: evicted by solid Reason,
and Autopsie. ibid. 2 That the visible Image does consist of so many Rays as
there are points designable in the whole superfice of the object: and that each
Ray has its line of Tendency direct, respective to the face of that particle
in the superfice, from which it is emitted. 154 3 That the Density and Union of
the Rays, composing the visible Image, is greater or less; according to their
less, or greater Elongation from the Object. ibid. 4 That the Visible Image is
neither total in the total medium; nor total in every part thereof: but so
manifold as are the parts of the medium from which the object is discernable.
Contrary to the Aristoteleans. 155 5 PARADOX. That no man can see the same
particle of an object, with both Eyes at once; nay, not with the same Eye, if
the level of its Visive Axe be changed. ibid. 6 CONSECTARY. That the Medium is
not possessed with one simple Image; but by an Aggregate of innumerable Images,
deradiate from the same object: all which notwithstanding constitute but one
entire Image. 156 7 CONSECTARY. 2. That Myriads of different Images, emanant
from different objects, may be Coexistent in the Aer; without reciprocal
penetration of Dimensions, or Confusion of particles: contrary to the
Peripateticks. ibid 8 That the place of the visible Images ultimate Reception,
and complete Perception; is the Concave of the Retina Tunica. 157 9 That the
Faculty forms a judgment of the Conditions of the Object, according to the
representation thereof by the Image, at its impression on the principal part of
Vision, the Amphiblestroides. ibid. 10 CONSECTARY. That the Image is the Cause
of the Objects appearance of this or that determinate Magnitude. 158 11
CONSECTARY. 2 That no Image can replenish the Concave of the Retina Tunica,
unless it be deradiated from an object of an almost Hemispherical ambite. 159
12 Why, when the Eye is open there is always pourtrayed in the bottom thereof,
some one Total Image; whose various Parts, are the Special Images of the
several things included in the visual Hemisphere. ibid. 13 PARADOX. That the
prospect of a shilling, or object of a small diametre is as great, as the
Prospect of the Firmament. 160 14 Why an object appears both greater in
Dimensions and more Distinct in parts, near at hand, than far off. ibid. 15 Why
an object, speculated through a Unequal Lens, appears both greater and more
distinct; but through a Concave, less and more Confused: than when speculated
only with the Eye. 161 16 DIGRESSION. What Figured Perspicils are convenient
for Old: and what for Purblind persons. 162 17 That to the Dijudication of one
of two objects, apparently Equal, to be really the Greater; is not required a
greater Image: but only an Opinion of its greater Distance. 163 18 Des Carts
Opinion concerning the Reason of the Sights apprehending the Distance of an
object: 164 19 Vnsatisfactory; and that for two considerations. ibid. 20 And
that more solidone of Gassendus (viz. that the Cause of our apprehending the
Distance of an object, consists in the Comparation of the several things
interjacent betwixt the object and the Eye, by the Rational Faculty) embraced
and corroborated. ibid. 21 PARADOX. That the same Object, speculated by the
same man, at the same distance, and in the same degree of light; does always
appear greater to one Eye, than the other. 165 22 A second PARADOX. That all
men see (distinctly) but with one Eye at once: contrary to that eminent Optical
Axiom, that the Visive Axes of both ey^ concur, and unite in the object. 166 23
The three degrees of Vision, viz. most perfect, perfect, and imperfect: and the
verity of the Paradox restrained only to the two former Degrees. 167
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 A Research into the Reason of the different Effects of Unequal and Concave
Glasses; as well Dioptrical, as Catoptrical. ibid. 2 A COROLLARIE. Hinting the
Causes, why an Elliptical Concave reflects the incident rays, in a more Acute
angle, than a Parabolical: and a Parabolical than a Spherical. 170 3 A
CONSECTARY. Why a Plane Perspicil exhibits an object in genuine Dimensions; but
a Unequal, in Amplified, and a Concave in minorated. 171
SECT. IV.
ARTIC.
1 A Recapitulation of the principal Arguments precedent: and summary of the
subsequent. 173 2 The Eye Anatomized: and the proper use of each Part thereof,
either absolutely Necessary, or only Advantageous to Vision concisely
demonstrated. viz. 1 The Diaphanity of the Horny Membrane, and the three
Humors, Aqueous, Chrystalline, and Vitreous. 2 The Convexity of all its parts
except the Amphiblestroides. 3 The Uvea Tunica, and Iris. 4* The Pupilla. 5 The
Blackness of the inside of the Uvea Tunica. 6 The Tunica Arachnoides. 7 The
Ciliary Filaments thereof. 8 The Chrystalline. 9 The Retina Tunica. 10 The six
Muscles, viz. 1 The Direct, as the Atollent, Depriment, Adducent, Abducent. 2
And Oblique, as the 2 Circumactors, or Lovers Muscles. 173, to 177 3 Why the
Situation of an object is perceived by the sight. 177 4 The Reason of the
eversion of the Image, in the Amphiblestroides. 178 5 The same illustrate by an
Experiment. ibid. 6 Why the Motion and Quiet of objects are discerned by the
sight. ibid. 7 Why Catoptrical Images imitate the motions of their Antitipes or
Originals. ibid. 8 Why the right side of a Catoptrical Image respects the Left
of its Exemplar. And why two Catoptrick Glasses, confrontingly posited, cause a
Restitution of the parts of the Image to the natural Form. 180
CHAP. IV. The Nature of Colors. p. 182.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Argument duly acknowledged to be superlatively Difficult, if not
absolutely Acataleptical. ibid. 2 The sentence of Aristotle concerning the
Nature of Colors: and the Commentary of Scaliger thereupon. 183 3 The opinion
of Plato. ibid. 4 Of the Pythagorean and Stoic. 184 5 Of the Spagyrical
Philosophers. ibid. 6 The reason of the Authors desertion of all these; and
election of Democritus and Epicurus judgment, touching the Generation of
Colors. ibid. 7 The Text of Epicurus, fully and faithfully expounded. 185
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 A PARADOX. That there are no Colors in the Dark. 186 2 A familiar
Experiment, attesting the Verity thereof. ibid. 3 The Constancy of all
Artificial Tinctures, dependent on the constancy of Disposition in the
superficial Particles of the Bodies that wear them. 187 4 That so generally
magnified Distinction of Colors into Inhaerent, and merely Apparent; redargued
of manifest Contradiction. ibid. 5 The Emphatical, or Evanid Colors, created
by Prisms; no less Real and Inhaerent, than the most Durable Tinctures. 188 6
COROLLARY. The Reasons of Emphatical Colors, appinged on Bodies objected, by a
Prism. 189 7 The true Difference of Emphatical and Durable Colors, briefly
stated. ibid. 8 No Color Formally inhaerent in objects; but only Materially,
or Effectively: contrary to the constant Tenent of the Schools. ibid 9 The same
farther vindicated from Difficulty, by the tempestive Recognition of some
praecedent Assumptions of the Atomists. 190
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 THe Nativity of White; or the reason of its perception by the sight. 191 2
Black, a mere Privation of Light. ibid. 3 The Genealogy of all Intermediate
Colors. ibid. 4 The Causes of the Sympathy and Antipathy of some Colors 192 5
The intermis^ion of small shadows, among the lines of Light; absolutely
necessary to the Generation of any Intermediate Color. ibid. 6 Two eminent
PROBLEMS concerning the Generation and Transposition of the Vermillion and
Caerule, appinged on Bodies by Prismes. 193 7 The Solution of the Former: with
a rational Conjecture of the Cause of the Blew, apparent in the Concave of the
Heavens. 194 8 The Solution of the Latter. 195 9 The Reasons, why the Author
proceeds not to investigate the Causes of Compound Colors in Particular. 196
10 He confesses the Erection of this whole Discourse, on simple Conjecture:
and enumerates the Difficulties to be subdued by him, who hopes to attain an
Apodictical Knowledge of the Essence and Causes of Colors. ibid. 11 Des Carts
attempt to dissolve the chief of those Difficulties; unsuccessful: because
grounded on an unstable Hypothesis. 197
CHAP. V. The Nature of Light. p. 198.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Clasp, or Ligament of this, to the praecedent Chapter. ibid. 2 The
Authors Notion of the Rays of Light. ibid. 3 A Parallelism betwixt a stream of
Water exsilient from the Cock of a Cistern, and a Ray of Light emanent from its
Lucid Fountain. ibid* PRAECONSIDERABLES. 199 4 Light distinguished into Primary,
Secondary, etc. 199 5 All Light Debilitated by Reflection: and why. ibid. 6 An
Example, sensibly demomonstrating the same. 200 7 That light is in perpetual
Motion; according to Aristotle. ibid. 8 Light, why Corroborated, in some cases,
and Debilitated in others, by Refraction. 201 COROLLARY. Why the Figure of the
Sun, both rising and setting, appears rather Elliptical, than Sphaerical. ibid.
9 PARADOX. That the proportion of Solary Rays reflected by the superior Aer, or
Ether, toward the Earth, is so small, as not to be sensible. 202 10 That every
Lucid Body, as Lucid, does emit its Rays Sphaerically: but, as Visible;
Pyramidally. ibid. 11 That Light is invisible in the pure medium. 203
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe necessity of the Authors confirmation of the First Praeconsiderable. 204
2 The Corporiety of Light, demonstrated by its just Attributes: viz. 1
Locomotion. 2 Resilition. 3 Refraction. 4 Coition. 5 Disgregation. 6 Igniety.
224, 225 3 Aristotle's Definition of Light, a mere Ambage, and incomprehensible.
205 4 TheCorporiety of Light imports not the Coexistence of two Bodies in one
Place; contrary to the Peripatetick. 206 5 Nor the motion of a Body to be
Instantaneous. ibid. 6 The Invisibility of Light in the limpid medium, no
Argument of its Immateriality: as the Peripatetick praesumes ibid. 7 The
Corporiety of Light fully consistent with the Duration of the Sun: contrary to
the Peripatetick. 207 8 The insensibility of Heat in many Lucent Bodies, no
valid Argument against the praesent Thesis, that Light is Flame Attenuated.
ibid.
CHAP. VI. The Nature of a Sound. p 208.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 AN Elogy of the sense of Hearing: and the Relation of this and the
praecedent Chapter. ibid. 2 The great Affinity betwixt Visible and Audible
species; in their representation of the superficial Conditions of Objects. 209
3 In the Causes and manner of their Destruction. ibid. 4 In their Actinobolism,
or Diffusion, both Sphaerical and Pyramidal. 210 5 In their certifying the
sense of the Magnitude, Figure, and other Qualities of their Originals. ibid. 6
In the obscuration of Less by Greater. 211 7 In their offense of the organs,
when excessive. ibid. 8 In their production of Heat by Multiplication. ibid. 9
In their Variability, according to the various disposition of the Medium. ibid.
10 In their chief Attributes, of Locomotion, Exsilition, Impaction, Resilition,
Disgregation, Congregation. ibid.
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Product of the Praemises, concerning the points of Cons^nt, and Dissent
of Audible and Visible Species: viz That Sounds are Corporeal. 213 2 An
obstruction of praejudice, from the generally supposed repugnant Authorities of
some of the Ancients; expeded. ibid. 3 An Argument of the Corporiety of Sounds.
214 4 A Second Argument. ibid. COROLLARY. ibid. 5 The Causes of Concurrent
Echoes, where the Audient is equally (almost) distant from the Sonant and
Repercutient. ibid. COROLLARY. 2. 215 6 Why Concaves yield the strongest and
longest Sounds. ibid. COROLLARY. 3. ibid 7 The reason of Concurrent Echoes,
where the Audient is near the (...), and remote from the sonant. ibid.
COROLLARY. 4. ibid. 8 W^y (...) Monophon rehearse so much the f^^er syllables,
by how much nearer the audient is to the R^f^^ctent. ibid. COROLLARY. ibid. 9
The reason of Polyphon Echoes. ibid. 10 A Third Argument of the Materiality of
Sounds: 216 11 The necessity of a certain Configuration in a Sound; inferred
from the Distinction of one sound from another, by the Sense. ibid. 12 The same
confirmed by the Authority of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle. ibid. 13 And by
the Capacity of the most subtle parts of the Aer 217 14 The Reason and manner
of the Diffusion of Sounds, explicated by a congruous Simile. ibid. 15 The most
subtle Particles of the Aer only, the material of Sounds. 218 PARADOX. ibid.
16 One and the same numerical voice, not heard by two men, nor both ears of one
man. ibid. 17 A PROBLEM not yet solved by any Philosopher: viz. How such
infinite Variety of Words is formed only by the various motions of the Tongue
and Lips. 219 18 A Second (also yet unconquered) Difficulty, viz. the
determinate Pernicity of the Aers motion, when exploded from the Lungs, in
Speech. ibid. 19 All Sounds Created by Motion, and that either when that
intermediate Aer is confracted by two solids mutually resistent; or when the
aer is percust by one Solid; or when a solid is percust by the Aer. ibid. 20
Rapidity of motion necessary to the Creation of a Sound, not in the First Case.
220 21 But, in the Second and Last. ibid. 22 That all Sounds are of equal
Velocity in the Delation. ibid. 23 The Reason thereof. ibid. 24 To measure the
Velocity of great Sounds. 221 25 Sounds, not subject to Retardation from
adverse; nor Acceleration, from Secund Winds. ibid.
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 THat all Sounds, where the Aer is percussed by one solid, are created
immediately by the Frequency, not the Velocity of motion; demonstrated. 222 2
And likewise, where the Aer is the Percutient. ibid. 3 That all Acute sounds
arise from the more, and Grave from the less Frequent percussions of the aer,
demonstrated. 223 4 The suavity of musical Consonances, deduced from the more
frequent; and Insuavity of Dissonances from the less frequent Union of the
vibrations of strings, in their Terms. 224 5 The same Analytically pr^sented in
Scheme. 226 6 A just and unanswerable Exception against the former Harmonical
Hypothesis. ibid. 7 PROBLEM 1. In what instant, an Harmonical Sound, resulting
from a Chord percussed, is begun. 227 8 That a Sound may be created in a
Vacuum; contrary to Athanas. Kircher in Art. Magn. Consoni and Dissoni lib. 1.
cap. 6, Digres. 229 9 Why all Sounds appear more Acute, at large, than at small
distance. 231 10 Why Cold water falling, makes a fuller noise, than warm. ibid.
11 Why the voice of a Calf is more Base than than that of an Ox, etc. 232 12
Why a Dissonance in a Base is more deprehensible by the ^ar, than in a Treble
voice. ibid.
CHAP. VII. Of Odours. p. 233.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THat the Cognition of the Nature of Odours is very difficult; in respect of
the Imperfection of the sense of Smelling, in man: and ibid. 2 The contrary
opinions of Philosophers, concerning it. 234 3 Some determining an Odor to be
a substance. ibid. 4 Others a mere Accident or Quality. 235 5 The Basis of the
Latter opinion, infirm and ruinous. 235 6 That all odor^us Bodies ^mit
corporeal Exhalations. ibid. 7 That Odours cause sundry Affections in our
Bodies, such as are consignable only to substances. ibid. 8 That the Reason of
an Odour's affecting the sensory, consists only in a certain Symbolism be-the
Figures and Contexture of its Particles, and the Figures and Contexture of the
Particles of the Odoratory Nerves. 236 9 That the Diversity of Odours depends
on the Diversity of Impressions made on the sensory, respondent to the various
Figures and Contexture of their Particles. 237 10 Why some persons abhor those
smells, which are grateful to most others. ibid. 11 Why, among Beasts, some
species are offended at those scents in which others highly delight. 238 12 The
Generation and Diffusion of Odours, due only to Heat. ibid. 13 The Differences
of Odours. 239 14 The Medium of Od^urs. 240
CHAP. VIII. Of Sapours. p. 241.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 FRom the superlative Acuteness of the sense of Tasting, Aristotle concludes
the cognition of the Nature of Sapours to be more easily acquirable, than the
nature of any other sensible object* but refutes himself by the many Errors of
his own Theory, concerning the same. ibid. 2 An Abridgment of his doctrine,
concerning the Essence and Causes of a Sapour, in General. 242 3 And the
Differences of Sapour, with the particular Causes of each. ibid. 4 An
Examination and brief redargution of the same Doctrine. 244 5 The post position
thereof to the more verisimilous Determination of the sons of Hermes, who
adscribe all Sapours to Salt. ibid. 6 But far more to that most profound and
satisfactory Tenent of Democritus and Plato; which deduceth the Nativity of
Sapours from the various Figures and contextures of the minute particles of
Concretions. ibid. 7 The advantages of this sentence, above all others touching
the same subject. 245 8 The Objections of Aristotle concisely, though solidly
solved. 24^ 9 That the salivous Humidity of the Tongue s^rveth to the
Dissolution and Imbibition of Salt in all Gustables. 247
CHAP. IX. Of Rarity, Density, Perspicuity, Opacity. p. 248.
SECT. I.
ART.
1 THis Chapters right of succession to the former. ibid. 2 The Diverse
acceptance of the term, Touching* ibid. 3 A pertinent (though shortt)
Panegyric on the sense of Touching. 249 4 Some Tactile Qualities, in common to
the perception of other senses also. ibid. 5 A Scheme of all Qualities, or
Commonly, or Property appertaining to the Sense of Touching, as they stand in
their several Relation to, or Dependencies on, the Universal Matter, Atoms: and
so, of all the subsequent Capital Arguments to be treated of, in this Book. 250
6 The right of Rarity and Density to the Priority of consideration. ibid
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Opinion of those Philosophers, who place the Reason of Rarity, in the
actual Division of a Body into small parts; and the brief Refutation thereof.
51 ^ A second Opinion, de^iving ^arity and Density from the several
proportions, which Quantity has to its substance: convicted of
incomprehensibility, and so of insatisfaction. ibid. 3 A third, desuming the
more and less of Rarity in Bodies, from the more and less of VACVITY
intercepted among their particles: and the advantages thereof above all others,
concerning the same. ibid. 4 The Definitions of a Rare, and of a Dense Body;
according to the assumption of a Vacuity D^sseminate. 252 5 The Congruity of
those Definitions, demonmonstrated. ibid. 6 That Labyrinth of Difficulties,
wherein the thoughts of Physiologists have so long wandered; reduced to a
point, the genuine state of the Quaestion. ibid. 7 That Rarity and Density can
have no other Causes immediate, but the more and less of Inanity interspersed
among the particles of Concretions; DEMONSTRATED. 253 8 Aristotle's Exceptions
against Disseminate Inanity; neither important nor c^mpetent. ibid. 9 The
Hyp^the^is of a c^rt^in Ethereal substance to replenish the por^s ^f Bo^ies,
in Ra^ifaction; demonstrated insufficient, to solve the Difficulty, or demolish
the Ep^cu^ean Th^sis of small Vacuities. 254 10 The Facility of understanding
the Reasons and Manner of (...) and Condensation, from the Conc^ssion of s^all
Vacuities, illustrated by a (...). 255 11 PARADOX. Tha^ the Matter of a Body,
when (...) no more of true Place, (...), and the Co^c^lia^ion thereof to the
(...) Definitions of a Rare and of a Den^e Bo^y. 2^6 12 PROBLEM. (...) be
capable of Condensation to so hi^g (...) as it is of Rari^faction: and the
(...) ^olution thereof. ibid.
SECT. III.
ART C.
1 THe opportunity of the present speculation, concerning the C^uses of
Per^picuity and Opacity. ^^8 2 The true Notions of a Per^picuum and Opacum.
ibid. 3 That every Concretion is so much the more (...) by how much the more,
and more ample Inane Spaces (...) in^^rcepted among its particles; caeteus
pa^^bus. ibid. 4 Why Glass though much more Dense, is yet much more Diaphanous,
than Paper. 259 5 Why ^he Diaphanity of Glass is gradually diminished,
according to the various degrees of its Crassitude. ibid. 6 An Apodictical
Confutation of that popular Error, that Glass is totally, or in every particle,
Diaphanous. 260
CHAP. X. Of Magnitude, Figure; And their Consequents, Subtility, Hebetude,
Smoothness, Asperity. 261
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Contexture of this Chapter, with the praecedent. ibid. 2 That the
Magnitude of Concretions, arises from the Magnitude of their Material
Principles. ibid. 3 The praesent intenti^n of the term, Magnitude. ibid. 4 That
the ^uantity of a thing, is merely the Matter of it. 2^2 5 The Quantity of a
thing, neither Augmented by its Rarefaction, nor diminished by its
Condensation: contrary to the Aristotelians, who distinguish the Q^antity of a
Body from its Substance. ibid. 6 The reason of Quantity, explicable also merely
from the notion of Place. 263 7 The Existence of a Body, without real
Extension; and of Extension without a Body: though impossible to Nature yet
easy to God. ibid. 8 COROLLARY. That the primary Cause, why Nature admits no
Penetration of Dimensi^ns, is rather the Solidity, than the Extension of a
Body. 264 9 The reasons of Quantity Continued and D^screte, or Magnitude and
Multitude. ibid. 10 That no Body is perfectly Continued, beside an Atom. ibid.
11 Aristotle's D^finition of a Continuum* in what respect true and what false.
265 12 Figure (Physical^y considered) nothing but the superficies, or terminant
Extremes of a Body. ibid.
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Continuity of this, to the first Section. 266 2 Subtility and Hebetude,
how the Consequents of Magnitude. ibid. 3 A considerable Exception of the
Chymests ( viz. that some Bodies are dissolved in liquors of grosser particles,
which yet conserve their Continuity in liquors of most subtle and corrosive
particles) prevented. ibid. 4 Why Oil dissociates the parts of some Bodies,
which remain inviolate in Spirit of Wine: and why Lightning is more
penetrative, than Fire. 267 5 Smoothness and Asperity in Concretions, the
Consequents of Figure in their Material Principles. ibid.
CHAP. XI. Of the Motive Virtue, Habit, Gravity, and Levity of Concretions. ^69
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Motive Virtue of all Concretions, derived from the essential Mobility of
Atoms ibid. 2 Why the Motive Virtue of Concretions does reside principally in
their spiritual Parts. 270 3 That the Deviation of Concretions from motion
Direct; and their Tardity in motion: arise from the Deflections and
^epercussions of Atoms composing them. ibid. 4 Why the motion of all
Concretions necessarily praess^p^ss^th something, that remains unmoved; or
that, in respect of its slower motion, is equival^nt ^o a thing Vnmoved ibid. 5
What (...) A^tive Faculty of a thing, is. 271 6 That in Nature every Faculty is
Active: none Passive. ibid. 7 A Peripatetick Contradiction, assuming the Matter
of al^ Bodies to be devoid of all Activity; and yet d^suming some Faculties a
tota substantia. 272 8 That the ^aculties of Animals (the Ratiocination of man
only excepted) are Identical with their spirits. ibid. 9 The Reasons of the
Coexistence of Various Faculties in one and the same Concretion. ibid. 10 Habit
defi^ed 273 11 That the Reason of all Habits in Animals, consists principally
in the conformity and flexibility of the Organs, which the respective Faculty
makes use of, for the performance of its proper Actions, ibid. 12 Habits,
acquirable by Bruits: and common not only to Vegetables, but also to some
Minerals 2^4
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 GRavity, as to its Essence or Formal Reason, very obscure. 275 2 The opinion
of Epicurus good as to the Cause of Comparative: insufficient as to the ^ause
of Absolute Gravity. ibid. 3 Aristotle's opinion of Gravity, recited. ibid. 4
Copernicus theory of Gravity, insatisfactory; and wherein. 276 5 The
Determination of Kepler, Gassendus, etc. that Gravity is Caused me^rly by the
Attraction of the Earth: espoused by the Author. 277 6 The External Principle
of the perpendicular Descent of a stone, projected up in the Aer; must be
either Depellent, or Attrahent. ibid. 7 That the Resistance of the Superior Aer
is the only Cause which gradually refracteth, and in fine wholly overcomes
the Im^rest Force, whereby a stone projected, is elevated upward. ibid. 8 That
the Aer, distracted by a stone violently ascending, has as well a Depulsive,
as a Resistent Faculty; arising immediately from its Elaterical, or Restorative
motion. 279 9 That nevertheless, when a stone, projected on high in the Aer, is
at the highest point of its mountee; no Cause can Beg^^ its Downward Motion,
but the Attractive Virtue of the Earth. 280 10 Argument, that the T^r^aqueous
Globe is endowed with a certain Attractive Faculty in order to the D^tention
and Retraction of a^l its Parts. 2^1 11 What are the Parts of the
TerrestrialGlobe 282 12 A Second Argument that the Earth is Magnetical ibid. 13
A Parallelism betwixt the Attraction of Iron by a Loadstone, and the Attraction
of Terrene bodies by the Earth. 283 14 That as the sphere of the Loadstones
Allective Virtue is limited: so is that of the Eart^s magnetism. ibid. 15 An
Objection of the Disproportion between the great Bulk of a large stone and the
Exility of the supposed magnetique Rays of the Earth: Solved by three weighty
Reasons. 284 16 The Reason of the Aequivelocity of Bodies, o^ different
weights, in their perpendicular Descent: with sundry unquestionable Authorities
to confirm the Hoti thereof. ^85 17 That the whole Terrestrial Globe is devoid
of Gravity: and that in the universe is no Highest, nor Lowest place. 2^6 18
That the Center of the Universe is not the Lowest part thereof: nor the Center
of the Earth, the Center of the World 287 19 A Fourth Argument, that Gravity is
only Attraction. 289 20 Why a greater Gravity, or stronger Attractive force is
impressed upon a piece of Iron by a Loadstone, than by the Earth ibid. 21 A Fifth
Argument, almost Apodictical; that Gravity is the Effect of the Earths
Attraction. ibid.
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 LEvity nothing but less Gravity. 290 2 Aristotle's Sphere of Fire,
extinguished. 291 3 That Fire does not As^ned spontaneously, but Violently; i.
e. is impelled upward by the Aer. ibid.
CHAP. XII. Of Heat and Cold. p. 293.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Connection of this to the immediately precedent Chapter. ibid. 2 Why the
Author deduceth the 4 First Qualities, not from the 4 vulgar Elements; but from
the 3 Proprieties of Atoms. ibid 3 The Nature of Heat is to be conceived from
its General Effect; viz. the Penetration, Discussion, and Dissolution of the
Bodies concrete. ibid. 4 Heat defined as no Immaterial, but a Substantial
Quality. 294 5 Why such Atoms, as are comparated to produce Heat, are to be
Named the Atoms of Heat: and such Concretions, as harbor them, are to be called
Hot, either Actually, or Potentially. ibid. 6 The 3 necessary Proprieties of
the Atoms of Heat. ibid. 7 That the Atoms of Heat are capable of Expedition or
deliverance from Concretions, Two ways; viz. by Evocation and Motion. 296 8 An
Unctuous matter, the chief Seminary of the Atoms of Heat: and why. 297 9 Among
Unctuous Concretions, Why some are more easily inflammable than others. 298 10
A CONSECTAR^. That Rarefacti^n is the proper Effect of Heat ibid 11 PROBLEM 1.
Why the bottom of a Caldron, wherein Water i^ boiling, may be touched by the
hand of a man, without burning it: Sol. 299 12 PROBLEM 2. Why Lime becomes
ardent upon the affusion of (...). Sol. 300 13 PROBLEM 3 Why the Heat of Lime
burning is more vehement, than the Heat of any Flame whatever. Sol. ibid. 14
PROBLEM 4. Why boiling Oil scalds more vehemently, then boiling Water. Sol. 301
15 PROBLEM 5. Why Metals, melted or made red hod, burn more violent than the
Fire, that melts or heateth them. Sol. ibid. 16 CONSECTARY. That, as the
degrees of Heat, so those of (...) are innumerably various. ibid. 17 That to
the Calefaction, Combustion, or* Inflammation of a body by fire, is required a
certain space of time; and that the space is greater or less, according to the
paucity, or abundance of the igneous Atoms invading the body objected; and more
or less of aptitude in the contexture thereof to admit them. 30^ 18 Flame more
or less Durable, for various respects. 303 19 CONSECTARY. 3. That the immediate
and genuine Effect of Heat, is the Disgregation of all bodies, as well
Homogeneous, as Heterogeneous: and that the Congregation of Homogeneous
Natures, is only an Accidental Effect of Heat; contrary to Aristotle. 305
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Link connecting this Section to the former. 306 2 That Cold is no
Privation of Heat; but a Real and Positive Quality: demonstrated. ibid. 3 That
the adaequate Notion of Cold, ought to be desume^ from its General Effect, viz.
the Congreg^tion and Compaction of bodies. 307 4 Cold, no Immaterial; but a
Substantial Quality. ibid. 5 Gassendus conjectural Assignation, of a
Tetrahedical Figure to the Atoms of cold; asserted by sundry weighty
considerations. ibid 6 Cold, not Essential to Earth, Water, nor Aer. 309 7 But
to some Special Concretions, for the most part, consisting of Frigorifick
Atoms. 312 8 Water* the chief Antagonist to Fire; not in respect of its
Accidental Frigidity, but Essential Humidity: and that the Aer has a juster
title to the Principality of Cold, than either Water, or Earth. 313 9 PROBLEM:
Why the breath of a man does Warm, when expired with the mouth wide open; and
Cool, when efflated with the mouth contracted. ibid. 10 Three CONSECTARIES from
the premises. 314
CHAP. XIII. Fluidity, Stability, Humidity, Siccity. p. 316.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 WHy Fluidity and Firmness are here considered before Humidity and Siccity.
ibid. 2 The Latin Terms, Humidum and Siccum, too narrow to comprehend the full
sense of Aristotle, (...) ibid. 2 The Latin Terms, Humidum and Siccum, too
narrow to comprehend the full sense of Aristotle. (...). ibid. 3 Aristotle's
Definition of a Humid substance, not praecise enough; but, in common also to a
Fluid; and his Definition of a Dry, accommodable to a Firm. 317 4 Fluidity
defined. 318 5 Wherein the Formal Reason thereof does consist. ibid. 6 The same
farther illustrated, by the twofold Fluidity of Metals; and the peculiar reason
of each. 319 7 Firmness defined: 320 8 And derived from either of 3 Causes.
ibid.
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 HUmidity defined. 321 2 Siccity defined. 322 3 Siccity rather Comparative
than Absolute. ibid 4 All moisture either Aqueous or Oleaginous. ibid. 5
PROBLEM ^. Why pure water cannot wash out oil from a Cloth; which yet water,
wherein Ashes have been decocted, or soap dissolved, easily does? Solut. 323 6
PROBLEM 2. Why stains of Ink are not to be taken out of clothes, but with some
Acid Liquor? Solut. ibid.
CHAP. XIV. Softness, Hardness, Flexility* Tractility, Ductility, etc. p. 325.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Illation of the Chapter. ibid. 2 Hard and Soft, defined. ibid. 3 The
Difference betwixt a Soft and Fluid. 326 4 Solidity of Atoms, the Fundament of
Hardness and Inanity intercepted among them, the fundament of Softness, in all
Concretions. ibid. 5 Hardness and Softness, no Absolute, but merely Comparative
Qualities; as adscriptive to Concretions, contrary to Aristotle. 327 6 Softness
in Firm things, deduced from the same cause, as Fluidity in Fluid ones. ibid.
7 The General Reason of the Mollification of Hard, and Induration of Soft
bodies. ibid. 8 The special manners of the M^llification of Hard: and
Induration of Soft bodies. 328 9 PROBLEM Why Iron is Hardened, by being immersed
red-hot into Cold Water; and its SOLVTION. ibid. 10 The Formal Reasons of
Softness and Hardness. 329 11 The ground of Aristotle's Distinction betwixt
Formatilia and Pressilia. ibid. 12 Two Axioms, concerning, and illustrating the
nature of Softness. 330
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 FLexility, Tractility, Ductility, etc. derived from Softness, and Rigidity
from Hardness 3^1 2 PROBLEM. What is the Cause of the motion of Restoration in
Flexiles? and the Solut. ibid. 3 Two Obstructions expeded. 332 4 Why Flexile
bodies grow weak, by overmuch, and over frequent Bending 333 5 The Reason of
the frequent Vibrations, or Diadroms of Lutestrings, and other Tractile Bodies;
declared to be the same with that of the Restorative Motion of Flexiles: and
demonstrated. ibid. 6 PROBLEM. Why the Vibrations, or Diodroms of a Chord
distended and percussed, are Aequitemperaneous, though not Aequispatial: and
the SOLVT. 335 7 PROBLEM. VVy does a Chord of a duple length, perform its
diadroms in a proportion of time duple, to a Chord of a single length; both
being distended by equal force; and yet if the Chord of the duple length be
distended by a duple force or weight, it does not perform its Diadroms, in a
proportion of time duple to that of the other; but only if the Force or weight
distending it, be quadruple to the First supposed: and its SOLVT. 336 8 The
Reasons of the vast Ductility, or Extensibility of Gold. 337 9 Sectility and
Fissility, the Consequents of Softness. ibid. 10 Tractility and Friability, the
Consequents of Hardness. 338 11 Ruptility the Consequent partly of Softness,
partly of Hardness. 339 12 PROBLEM. Why Chords distended, are more apt to
break near the Ends, than in the middle? and its SOLVT. ibid.
CHAP. XV. Occult Qualities made Manifest. p. 341
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THat the Insensibility of Qualities does not import their Unintelligibility;
contrary to the presumption of the Aristotelean. ibid. 2 Upon what grounds; and
by whom, the Sanctuary of Occult Qualities was erected. 342 3 Occult Qualities
and professed ignorance, all one. ibid. 4 The Refuge of Sympathies and
Antipathies, equally obstructive to the advance of Natural Scienee, with that
of Ignote Proprieties. 343 5 That all Attraction, referred to Secret Sympathy;
and all Repulsion, adscribed to secret Antipathy, betwixt the Agent and
Patient, is effected by Corporeal Instruments, and such as resemble those
whereby one body Attracteth, or repelleth another, in sensible and mechanique
operations. ibid. 6 The Means of Attractions sympathetical, explicated by a
convenient Simile. 345 7 The Means of Abaction and Repulsions Antipathetical,
explicated likewise by sundry similitudes. 346 8 The First and General Causes
of all Love and Hatred betwixt Animals. 347 9 Why things Alike in their
natures, love and delight in the Society each of other: and why Unlike natures
abhor and avoid each other. ibid
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Scheme of Qualities (reputed) occult. 348 2 Natures Avoidance of
Vacuity, imputed to the tyzugia or Conspiration of all parts of the Universe;
no Occult Quality. ibid. 3 The power and influence of Caelestial Bodies, upon
men, supposed by Judicial Astrologers, inconsistent with Providence Divine, and
the Liberty of man's will. 349 4 The Afflux and Reflux of the Sea, inderivative
from any immaterial Influx of the Moon. ibid. 5 The Causes of the diurnal
Expansion and conversion of the Heliotrope and other Flowers. ibid. 6 Why
Garden Claver hides its stalk, in the heat of the day. 350 7 Why the House
Cock usually Crows soon after midnight; and at break of day. ibid. 8 Why
Shellfish grow fat in the Full of the moon, and lean again at the New. 352 9
Why the Selenites resembles the Moon in all her several Adspects. ibid. 10 Why
the Consideration of the Attraction of Iron by a Loadstone, is here omitted.
353 11 The secret Amities of Gold and Quicksilver of Brass and Silver,
unridled. ibid. 12 A COROLLARY. Why the Granules of Gold and Silver, though
much more ponderous then those of the Aqua Regis and Aqua ^ortis, wherein they
are dissolved, are yet held up, and kept floating by them. 354 13 The Cause of
the Attraction of a Less Flame by a Greater. ibid. 14 The Cause of the
Involation of flame to Naphtha at distance. ibid. 15 Of the Ascension of Water
into the pores of a Sponge. 355 16 The same illustrated by the example of a
Siphon. ibid. 17 The reason of the Percolation of Liquors, by a cloth whose one
end lies in the liquor, and other hangs over the brim of the vessel, that
contains it. 356 18 The reason of the Consent of two Lutestrings, that are
Aequison. ibid. 19 The reason of the Dissent betwixt Lutestrings of sheeps
Guts, and those of Woolfs. ^57 20 The tradition of the Consuming of all
Feathers of Foul, by those of the Eagle; exploded. 358 21 Why some certain
Plants befriend, and advance the growth and fruitfulness of others, that are
their neighbors. ibid. 22 Why some Plants thrive not in the society of some
others. 359 23 The Reason of the great friendship betwixt the Male and Female
Palm Trees. 360 24 Why all wines grow sick and turbid, during the season
wherein the Vines Flower and Bud. 361 25 That the distilled waters of Orange
flowers, and Roses, do not take any thing of their fragrancy, during the season
of the Blooming and pride of those Flowers; as it vulgarly believed. ibid.
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 WHy this Section considers only some few select Occult Proprieties, among
those many imputed to Animals. 362 2 The supposed Antipathy of a Sheep to a
Woolf solved. ibid. 3 Why Bees usually invade Froward and Choleric Persons:
and why bold and confident men have sometimes daunted and put to flight, Lions
and other ravenous Wild-Beasts. 363 4 Why diverse Animals Hate such men, as are
used to destroy those of their own species: and why Vermin avoid such Gins and
Traps, wherein others of their kind have been caught and destroyed. ibid. 5
The Cause of the fresh Cruentation of the Carcass of a murdered man, at the
presence and touch of the Homicide. 364 6 How the Basilisk does empoyson and
destroy, at distance. 365 7 That the sight of a Woolf does not cause Hoarsness
and obmutescence in the spectator; as is vulgarly reported and believed. 366 8
The Antipathies of a Lion and Cock: of an Elephant and Swine merely Fabulous.
^67 9 Why a man intoxicated by the venom of a Tarantula, falls into violent
fits of Dancing: and cannot be cured by any other means, but Music. ibid. 10
Why Diverse Tarantiacal Persons are affected and cured with Diverse Tunes, and
the music of diverse Instruments. 369 11 That the venom of the Tarantula does
produce the same effect in the body of a man; as it does in that of the
Tarantula it self: and why. ibid. 12 That the Venom of the Tarantula is lodged
in a viscous Humor, and such as is capable of Sounds. 371 13 That it causes an
uncessant Itching and Titillation in the Nervous and Musculous parts of man's
body, when infused into it, and fermenting in it. ibid. 14 The cause of the
Annual Recidivation of the Tarantism, till it be perfectly cured. 372 15 A
Conjecture, what kind of Tunes, Strains, and Notes seem most accommodate to the
cure of Tarantiacal Persons in the General. ibid 16 The Reason of the
Incantation of Serpents, by a rod of the Cornus. 373 17 DIGRESSION. That the
Words. Spells, Characters, etc. used by Magicians, are of no virtue or Efficacy
at all, as to the Effect intended; unless in a remote interest, or as they
exalt the Imagination of Him, upon whom they praetend to work the miracle.
ibid. 18 The Reason of the Fascination of Infants, by old women* 374 19 The
Reason of the stupefaction of a man's hand by a Torpedo. 375 20 That ships are
not Arrested in their course, by the Fish called a Remora: but by the Contrary
impulse of some Special Current in the Sea. ibid. 21 That the Echineis, or
Remora is not Ominous. 3^7 22 Why this place admits not of more than a General
Inquest into the Faculties of Poisons and Counterpoisons. ibid. 23 Poisons
defined. ibid. 24 Wherein the Deleterious Faculty of poison does consist. ibid.
25 Counterpoisons defined. 378 26 Wherein their Salutiferous Virtue does
consist. ibid. 27 How Triacle cures the venom of Vipers. ibid 28 How the body
of a Scorpion, bruised and laid warm upon the part, which it has lately
wounded and envenomed; does cure the same. 379 29 That some Poisons are
Antidotes against others by way of direct Contrariety. ibid. 30 Why sundry
particular men, and some whole Nations have fed upon Poisonous Animals and
Plants, without harm^ 380 31 The Armary Unguent, and Sympathetick Powder,
impugned. ibid. 32 The Authors Retraction of his quondam Defense of the
Magnetic Cure of Wounds, made in his Prolegomena to Helmonts Book of that
subject and title. 381
CHAP. XVI. The Phenomenon o^ the Loadstone Explicated* p. 383.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Nature and Obscurity of the Subject, hinted by certain Metaphorical
Cognomina, agreeable thereunto, though in diverse relations. ibid. 2 Why the
Author insisteth not upon the (1) several Appellations, (2) Inventor of the
Loadstone, (3) invention of the Pixis Nautica. 384 3 The Virtues of the
Loadstone, in General, Two, the Attractive, and Directive. ibid. 4 Epicurus his
first Theory of the Cause and Manner of the Attraction of Iron by a Loadstone;
according to the Exposition of Lucre^ius. ibid* 5 His other solution of the
same, according to the Commentary of Galen. 386 6 Galens three Grand Objections
against the same, briefly Answered. 387 7 The insatisfaction of the Ancients
Theory necessitates the Author to recur to the Speculations and Observations of
the Moderns, concerning the Attraction of Iron by a Magnet; and the Reduction
of them all to a few Capital observables. viz. 388 8 A Parallelism betwixt the
Magnetique Faculty of the Loadstone and Iron; and that of Sense in Animals. 389
9 That the Loadstone and Iron interchangeably operate each upon other, by the
mediation of certain Corporeal Species, transmitted in ^ays: and the Analogy of
the Magnetic, and Luminous Rays. 390 10 That every Loadstone, in respect of
the Circumradiation of its Magnetical Aporrhae's ought to be allowed the
supposition of a Center Axis, and Diametre of an Equator: and the Advantages
thence accrewing. 391 11 The Reason of that admirable Bi-form, or Janus-like
Faculty of Magneticks: and why the Poles of a Loadstone are incapable, but
those of a Needle easily capable of transplantation from one Extreme to the
contrary. 392 12 An Objection, of the Aversion or Repulsion of the North Pole
of one Loadstone, or Needle, by the North Pole of Another: praevented. 393 13
Three principal Magnetic Axioms, deduced from the same Fountain. ibid. 14 A
DIGRESSION to the Iron Tomb of Mahomet. 394 15 That the Magnetique Vigor, or
Perfection both of Loadstones and Iron, does consist in either their Native
Purity and Uniformity of Substance, or their Artificial Politeness. 396 16 That
the Arming of a Magnet with polished Steel, does highly Corroborate; but as
much diminish the sphere of its Attractive Virtue. ibid. 17 Why a smaller or
weaker Loadstone, does snatch away a Needle from a Greater, or more Potent one;
while the small or weak one is held within the sphere of the great or stronger
ones Activity: and not otherwise. 397 18 COROLLARY. Of the Abduction of Iron
from the Earth by a Loadstone. 398
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THe Method, and Contents of the Sect. ibid. 2 Affinity of the Loadstone and
Iron. ibid. 3 The Loadstone conforms it self, in all respects, to the
Terrestrial Globe; as a Needle conforms it self to the Loadstone. 399 4 Iron
obtains a Verticity, not only from the Loadstone, by affriction* or
Aspiration; but also from the Earth it self: and that according to the laws of
Position. 400 5 One and the same Nature, in common to the Earth, Loadstone and
Iron. 401 6 The Earth, impragnating Iron with a Polary Affection, does cause
therein a Local Immutation of its insensible particles. 402 7 The Loadstone
does the same. 403 8 The Magnetique Virtue, a Corporeal Efflux. ib. 9 Contrary
Objections, and their Solution^* 404 10 A Parallelism of the Magnetique Virtue,
and the Vegetative Faculty of Plants 405 11 Why Poles of the same respect and
name, are Enemies: and those of a Contrary respect and name, Friends. 406 12
When a Magnet is dissected into two pieces, why the Boreal part of the one
half, declin^s Conjunction with the B^rea^ part of the other; and the Austral
of one with the Austral of the other. ibid. 13 The Fibers of the Earth extend
from Pole to Pole; and that may be the Cause of the firm Cohaesion of all its
Parts, conspiring to conserve its Spherical Figure. 407 14 Reason of Magnetical
Variation, in diverse climates and places. ibid. 15 The Decrement of Magnetical
Variation, in one and the same place, in diverse years. 410 16 The Cause thereof
not yet known. ibid. 17 No Magnet has more than Two Legitimate Poles: and the
reasons of Illegitimate ones 411 18 The Conclusion, Apologetical; and an
Advertisement, that the Attractive and Directive Actions of Magnetiques, arise
from one and the same Faculty; and that they were distinguished only (...),
for convenience of Doctrine. 412
The Fourth Book.
CHAP. I. Of Generation and Corruption. p. 415
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 THe Introduction. ibid 2 The proper Notions of Generation and Corruption.
4^6 3 Various opinions of the Ancient Philosophers, touching the reason of
Generation: and the principal Authors of pacti. 417 4 The two great opinions of
the same Philosophers concerning the manner of the Commistion of the Common
Principles in Generation; faithfully and briefly stated. 418 5 That of
Aristotle and the Stoics, refuted: and Chrysippus sub^ersuge, convicted of 3
Absurdities. 419 6 Aristotle's twofold Evasion of the Incongruities attending
the position of the Remane^ce of things commixed, notwithstanding their
supposed reciprocal Transubstantiation: found lik^wise merely S^phistical. 420
7 That the F^rms of things, arising in Generation* are no New substances, nor
distinct from their matter: contrary to the Aristoteleans. 422 8 That the Form
of a thing, is only a certain Quality, or determinate Modification of its
Matter. 424 9 An abstract of the theory of the Atomists, touching the same. 4^5
10 An illus^ration thereof, by a praegnant and ^pportu^^ I^stance. viz. the
Gen^ration of Fire, Flame, Fume, Soot, Ashes, and Salt, from Wood dissolved by
Fire. 4^6
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 THat in Corruption, no substance perishes; but only that determinate
Modification of substance, or Matter, which specified ^he thing. 428 2
Enforcement of the same Thesis by an illustrious Example. 429 3 An Experiment
demonstrating that the Salt of Ashes was praeexistent in Wood; and not
produced, but only educed by Fire. ibid. 4 The true sense of three General
Axioms, deduced from the precedent doctrine of the Atomists. 4^0 5 The General
Intestine Causes of Corruption, chiefly Two: (1) the interception of Inanity
among the solid particles of Bodies. (2) The essential Gravity and inseparable
Mobility of Atoms. 431 6 The General Manners, or ways of Generation and
Corruption. 432 7 Inadvertency of Aristotle in making Five General Modes of
Generation. 433 8 The special Manners of Generation, innumerable* and why.
ibid. 9 All sorts of Atoms, not indifferently competent to the Constitution of
all sorts of things. 434
CHAP. II. Of Motion. p. 435.
SECT. I.
ARTIC.
1 WHy the Nature of Motion, which deserved to have been the subject of the
first speculation, was reserved to be the Argument of the Last, in this
Physiology. ibid. 2 An Epicurean Principle, of fundamental concern to motion.
436 3 Aristotle's Position, that the first Principle of motion, is the very
Form of the thing moved; absolutely incomprehensible: unless the Form of a
thing be conceived to be a certain tenuious Contexture of most subtle and most
active Atoms. ibid. 4 A second Epicurean Fundamental, concerning motion: and
the state of the Difference betwixt Epicurus, Aristotle, and Plato, touching
the same. 4^7 5 Epicurus's Definition of motion, to be the Remove of a body
from place to place; much more intelligible and proper, than Aristotle's, that
it is the Act of an Entity in power, as it is such. 438 6 Empericus his
Objections against that Definition of Epicurus: and the full Solution of each.
439 7 That there is motion; contrary to the Sophisms of Parmenides, Melissus,
Zeno, Diodorus and the Scepticks. 441
SECT. II.
ARTIC.
1 Aristotle's Definitions of Natural and Violent motion; incompetent* and more
adaequate ones substituted in the room of them. 444 2 The same deduced from the
First Epicurean Principle of motion, praemised: and three considerable
Conclusions extracted from thence. 445 3 A short survey of Aristotle's whole
theory concerning the Natural motion of Inanimates: and the Errors thereof. 446
4 Uniformity, or Aequability, the proper Character of a Natural motion: and the
want of uniformity, of a Violent. 447 5 The Downward motion of Inanimates,
derived from an External Principle; contrary to Aristotle. 449 6 That that
External Principle, is the Magnetique Attraction of the Earth 450 7 That the
Upward motion of Light things, is not Accelerated in every degree of their
Ascent as Aristotle praecariously affirmed: but, the Downward motion of Heavy
things is Accelerated in every degree of their Descent* ibid 8 The Cause of
that Increase of Velocity in Bodies descending; not the Augmentation of their
Specifical Perfection as they approach nearer and nearer to their proper place:
as Simplicius makes Aristotle to have thought. 452 9 Nor the Diminution of the
quantity of Aer underneath them: as some Others conjectured. ibid. 10 Nor, the
Gradual Diminution of the Force impressed upon them, in their projection upward:
as Hipparchus alleged. 453 11 But, the Magnetique Attraction of the Earth.
ibid. 12 That the Proportion, or Ration of Celerity to Celerity, increasing in
the descent of Heavy things; is not the same as the Proportion, or Ration of
Space to Space, which they pervade: contrary to Michael Varro the
Mathematician. 455 13 But, that the moments or Equal degrees of Celerity, carry
the same proportion, as the moments or equal degrees of Time, during the
motion: according to the Illustrious Galilaeo. 456 14 Galilaeo's Grounds,
Experience, and Reason. 457 15 The same Demonstrated. 458 16 The Physical
Reason of that Proportion. 460 17 The Reason of the Equal Velocity of Bodies of
very different weights, falling from the same altitude; inferred from the same
Theory. ibid. 18 Gravity Distinguished into Simple, and Adjectitious. 461 19
The Rate of that superlative velocity with which a Bullet would be carried, in
case it should fall from the Moon, Sun or region of the Fixed stars, to the
Earth: and from each of those vast heights, to the Center of the Earth. 462
SECT. III.
ARTIC.
1 WHat, and whence is that Force, or Virtue Motive, whereby Bodies Projected
are carried on after their Dismission from the Projicient. 463 2 The M^nner of
the Impression of that Force. 465 3 That all M^tion, in a free or Empty space,
must be Uniform, and Perpetual: and that the chief Cause of the Inequality and
Brevity of the motion of things projected through the Atmosphere, is the
ma^netique Attraction of the Earth. 466 4 That, in the Atmosphere, no body can
be projected in a Direct line; unless perpendicularly Upward, or Downward: and
why. 468 5 That the Motion of a stone proj^cted upwards obliquely, is Composed
of an Horizontal and Perpendicular together. ibid. 6 Demonstration of that
Composition. 469 7 That of the two different Forces, impressed upon a ball,
thrown upward from the hand of a man standing in a ship, that is under sail:
the one does not destroy the other, but each attains its proper scope. ibid. 8
That the space of time, in which the Ball is Ascending from the Foot to the Top
of the Mast: is equal to that, in which it is again Descending from the top to
the foot. 470 9 That, though the Perpendicular motion of a stone thrown
obliquely upward, be unequal, both in its ascent and descent: yet is the
Horizontal of Equal Velocity in all parts of space. ibid. 10 The Reason and
Manner of the Reflection or Rebounding motion of Bodies, diverted from the line
of their direction by others encountering them. 471 11 That the Emersion of a
weight appensed to a string, from the perpendicular, to which it had reduced it
self, in Vibration; is a Reflection Median betwixt No Reflection at all, and the
Least Reflection assignable; and the Rule of all other Reflection whatever. 472
12 The Reason of the Equality of the Angles of Incidence and Reflection. ibid.
13 Two Inferences from the praemises: viz^ (1) That the oblique Projection of a
Globe against a plane, is composed of a double Parallel: and ( 2) That Nature
suffers no diminution of her right to the shortest way, by Reflection. 474 14
Wherein the Aptitude or Ineptitude of bodies to Reflection does consist. ibid.
BOOK the FIRST.
CHAP. I. All Modern Philosophers reduced to four general Orders; and the
principal causes of their Dissension.
SECT. I.
IF we look back into the Monuments or Remains of Antiquity, Art. 1. The
principal Sects of the ancient Grecian Philosophers, only enumerated.
we shall observe as many several SECTS of Philosophers, as were the Olympiads
in which Greece wore the Imperial Diadem of Letters; nay, perhaps, as many as
she contained Academies, and public Professors of Arts and Sciences: Each
Master affecting to be reputed the principal Secretary of Nature; and his
Disciples (their minds being deeply imbued with his principles) admiring him as
the Grand Oracle of Divinity, and the infallible Dictator of Scientifical
Maxims. The chiefest, most diffused, and most memorable of these Sects, were
the Pythagorean, the Stoic, the Platonist, the Academick, the Peripatetick,
the Epicurean, and what, derided all the rest, the Pyrrhonian, or Sceptick;
which feircely contended for the Laurel, by subtle disputations on the side of
absolute Ignorance, and aspired to the Monarchy of Wisdom, by detecting the
vanity and incertitude of all Natural Science. As for the Megarick, Eretrick,
Cyreniack, Annicerian Theodorian, Cynick, Eliack, Dialectick, and others less
famous; Diogenes Laertius, (de vita Philosophor.) has preserved not only a
faithful Catalogue of them, but has also recorded their originals,
declinations, periods, opinions.

Art. 2. The same revived among the Moderns, with en^rease.
If we enquire into the Modern state of Learning, down even to our present age,
we cannot but find not only the same Sects revived, but also many more New ones
sprung up: as if Opinion were what mysterious Poets intended by their imaginary
Hydra; no sooner has the sword of Time cut off one head, but there grows up
two in the place of it; or, as if the vicissitudes of Corruption and Generation
were in common as well to Philosophy, as the subject of it, Nature. Insomuch as
that Adage, which was principally accommodated and restrained to express the
infinite dissension of Vulgar and Unexamining Heads, Tot sententiae quot
homines; may now justly be extended also to the Scholiarchs and professed
enquirers into the Unity of Truth. To enumerate all these Modern dissenting
Doctors (the most modest of all which has not blushed to hear his pedantique
Disciples salute him with the magnificent Attributes of a Despot in
Physiologie, and the only Cynosure by which the benighted reason of man may
hope to be conducted over the vertiginous Ocean of Error, to the Cape of
Verity) is neither useful to our Reader, nor advantageous or pertinent to our
present Design. But, to reduce them to four General Orders, or range them into
four principal Classes; as it may in some latitude of interest, concern the
satisfaction of those who are less conversant among Books: so can it in no wise
affront the patience of those, whose studies have already acquainted them with
the several kinds of Philosophy now in esteem.

Art 3. Who are reduced either to the Pedantique or Female Sect.
1 Some there are (and those not a few) who in the minority of their
Understandings, and while their judgments are yet flexible by the weak fingers
of mere Plausibilitie, and their memories like Virgin wax, apt to retain the
impression of any opinion that is presented under the specious disguise of
Verisimilitie only; become constant admirers of the first Author, that pleases
them, and will never after suffer themselves to be divorced from his
principles, or to be made Proselytes to Truth; but make it the most serious
business of their lives to propugne their Tutors authority, defend even his
very errors, and excogitate specious subterfuges against those, who have with
solid Arguments and Apodic^ical reasons, clearly refuted him. These stifle
their own native habilities for disquisition, believe all, examine nothing;
and, as if the Lamp of their own Reason were lent them by their Creator for no
use at all, resign up their judgments to the implicit manuduction of some
other; and all the perfection they aim at, is to be able to compose
unnecessary, and perhaps erroneous Commentaries upon their Masters text. This
easy Sect may, without much either of incongruitie or scandal, be named Secta
(...), the FEMAL Sect; because as women constantly retain their best affections
for those who untied their Virgin Zone; so these will never be alienated from
immoderately affecting those Authors who had the Maiden* head of their minds.
The chiefest Chair in this Classis ought to be consigned to our Junior
Aristoteleans, who villifie and despise all doctrine, but that of the
Stagirite, and confidently measure all men's deviations from truth, by their
recessions from his dictates. This we say not to derogate from the honor due
to so great a Clerk; for we hold it our duty to pay him as large a tribute of
Veneration, as any man that ever read his excellent Writings, without
prejudice, and esteem him as (...) of the greatest and brightest stars in the
sphere of Learning; nay we dare assert, that He was the Center in which all the
choicest speculations and observations of his Praedecessors were united, to
make up as complete abody of Natural Science, as the brain of any one single
person, wanting the illumination of Sacred Writ, seems capable of, in this life
of obscurity: and that He has won the Garland from all, who have labored to
invent and praescribe a general Method for the regulation and conduct of men's
Cogitations and Conceptions. But, that I am not yet convicted, that his
judgment was superior to mistake; that his Writings, in many places more then
obscure, can well be interpreted by those who have never perused the Moniments
of other Ancients; nor, that it can consist with Ingenuity to institute a
Sacrament in Philosophy, (i. e.) to vow implicit vassalage to the Authority
of any man, whose maxims were desumed from no other Oracle, but that of Natural
Reason only; and to arrest all Curiosity, Disquisition, or Dubitation, with a
mere (...).

Hither may we refer also the patient Interpreters of Scotus; the vain
Idolaters of Raimund Lully; but, above all, the stupid admirers of that
Fanatic Drunkard, Paracelsus. In whose whole life, the only Rarities any sober
man can discover were his Fortune, and his Impudence. His Fortune, in that he
being an absolute bankrupt in merit, could be trusted with so large a stock of
Fame: his Impudence, in that, being wholly illiterate (for in stead of
refining, He much corrupted his mother tongue) He should praetend to subvert
the Fundamentals of Aristotle and Galen, to reform the Commonweal of Learning,
consummate the Arts and Sciences, write Commentaries on the Evangelists, and
enrich the world with Pansophy in Aphorisms.

(2) Others there are (and those too few) whose breasts being filled with true
Promethean fire, and their minds of a more generous temper, Art. 4. Or, to the
Assertors of Philoso^hical Liberty*
scorn to submit to the dishonorable tyranny of that Usurper, Authority, and
will admit of no Monarchy in Philosophy, besides that of Truth. These ponder
the Reasons of all, but the Reputation of none; and then conform their assent,
when the Arguments are nervous and convincing; not when they are urged by one,
whose Name is inscribed in Golden Characters in the Legend of Fame. This Order
well deserves the Epithet, (...), and therefore we shall Christen it, The
Order of the ASSERTORS OF PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERTY; in regard, they vindicate the
native privilege of our Intellectuals, from the base villenage of
Praescription. Of this Order, Gratitude it self does oblige us to account the
Heroical Tycho Brahe, the subtle Kepler, the most acute Galilaeus, the profound
Scheinerus, the miraculous because universally learned Kircherus, the most
perspicacious Harvey, and the Epitome of all, Des Carts. In honor of each of
these Hero's, we could wish (if the constitution of our Times would bear it) a
Colossus of Gold were erected at the public charge of Students; and under each
this inscription: Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, magis amica veritas.

(3) The third Classis is possessed by such, who, Art. 5. Or, to the Renov^tors.
without either totally neglecting or undervaluing the Inventions and
Augmentations of the Modern; addict themselves principally to research the
Moniments of the Ancients, and dig for truth in the rubbish of the Grecian
Patriarchs. These are the noblest sort of Chemists, who labor to reform those
once-excellent Flowers out of their Ashes: worthy Geometricians, that give us
the true dimensions of those Giant Wits, by the measure of their Feet: and
genuine ^ons of Aesculapius, who can revive those, whom the fleet chariot of
Time has dragged to pieces, and recompose their scattered fragments into large
and complete bodies of Physiologie. The Course of these Worthies in their
studies does denominate them (...), RENOVATORS.

For, being of opinion, that Philosophy as well as Nature does continually
decline, that this is the Dotage of the World, and that the minds of men do
suffer a sensible decay of clarity and simplicity; they reflect their thoughts
upon the (...), or Epoche of Physical Writings, ransack the urns of Athens to
find out the medal of some grave Philosopher, and then with invincible industry
polish off the rust, which the vitriolate dampness of Time had superinduced;
that so they may render him to the greedy eyes of Posterity in his primitive
splendour and integrity. The uppermost seats in this infinitely-deserving
Classis justly belong to Marcilius Ficinus, who from many moldy and worm-eaten
Transcripts has collected, and interpreted the semidivine Labors of Plato: to
Copernicus, who has rescued from the jaws of oblivion, the almost extinct
Astrology of Samius Aristarchus: to Lucretius, who has retrived the lost
Physiologie of Empedocles: to Magnenus, who has lately raised up the reverend
Ghost of Democritus: to Mersennus, who has not only explained many Problems of
Archimed; but renovated the obsolete Magic of Numbers, and charmed the most
judicious ears of Musicians, with chiming Pythagoras Hammers, in an Arithmetic
Harmony: and to the greatest Antiquary among them, the immortal Gassendus; who,
out of a few obscure and immethodical pieces of him, scattered upon the
rhapsodies of Plutarch and Diogenes Laertius, has built up the despised
Epicurus again, into one of the most profound, temperate, and voluminous among
Philosophers.

Our Fourth Classis is to be made up of those, who indeed adore no Authority,
Art. 6. Or to the Electors.
pay a reverend esteem, but no implicit Adherence to Antiquity, nor erect any
Fabric of Natural Science upon Foundations of their own laying: but, reading
all with the same constant Indifference, and aequanimity, select out of each of
the other Sects, whatever of Method, Principles, Positions, Maxims, Examples,
etc. seems in their impartial judgments, most consentaneous to Verity; and on
the contrary, refuse, and, as occasion requires, elenchically refute what will
not endure the Test of either right Reason, or faithful Experiment. This Sect
we may call (as Potamon Alexandrinus, quoted by Diogenes Laertius, long before
us) (...) the ELECTING, because they cull and select out of all others, what
they most approve.

Herein are Chairs provided for those Worthies, Fernelius, Sennertus, and most
of the junior Patriots and Advancers of our Art. And the lowest room, we ask
leave to reserve for our selves. For* we profess our selves to be of his
persuasion, who says; Ego quidem arbitror, re diu perpensa, nullius unquam
scientiam fore absolutam, quin Empedoclem, Platonem, Aristotelem, Anaxagoram,
Democritum adjungat Recentioribus, and ab un^quoque quod verum est, rejectis
falsis, eligat. His enim Principibus peculi^ri ratione Coeleste Lumen affulsit:
and quamvis Corporis imbecilitate multa corruperint; plurima tamen, quae Fidei
lumine discernimus, scripsere verissima He can never make a good Chemist, who
is not already an excellent Galenist, is proverbial among us Physicians: and as
worthy the reputation of a Proverb is it among Professors in Universities* He
can never clearly understand the Moderns, who remains ignorant of the doctrines
of the Ancients. Here to declare our selves of this Order, though it be no
dishonor, may yet be censured as superfluous: since not only those Exercises
of our Pen, which have formerly dispersed themselves into the hands of the
Learned, have already proclaimed as much; but even this praesent Tractate must
soon discover it.

SECT. II.
TO explore the Chief Grounds, or Reasons of this great Variety of Sects in
Philosophy; we need search no further, then the exceeding Obscurity of Nature,
the Dimness and imperfection of our Understanding, the Irregularity of our
Curiosity.

Of the First, they only can doubt, who are too stupid to enquire. Art. 1. The
principal causes of the Diversity of Philosophical Sects; and the chiefest
among them, the Obscurity of Nature
For, Nature is an immense Ocean, wherein are no Shallows, but all Depths: and
those ingenious Persons, who have but once attempted her with the sounding line
of Reason, will soon confess their despair of profounding her, and with the
judicious Sanchez sadly exclaim; Una Scientia sufficit toti orbi: nec tamen
totus hic ei sufficit. Mihi vel minima mundi res totius vitae contemplationi
sat est superque: nec tamen tandem eam spero me nosse posse: nor can they
dislike the opinion of the Academicks and Pyrrhonicks, that all things are
Incomprehensible.

And (as for the second) if Nature were not invelloped in so dense a Cloud of
Abstrusity, but should unveil her self, Art. 2. The Imperfection of our
Understanding.
and expose all her beuteous parts naked to our speculation: yet are not the
Optics of our Mind either clear or strong enough to discern them. Men indeed
fancy themselves to be Eagles; but really are grovelling Moles, uncessantly
laboring for light: which at first glimpse perstringeth their eyes, and all
they discover thereby, is their own native Blindness. Naturae mysteria etiamsi
^ille facibus revelentur, arbitrantium oculis numquam tota excipientur:
restabit semper quod quaeras; and quo plus scies, eo plura a te ignorari
miraberis. This meditation, we confess, has frequently stooped our ambitious
thoughts, dejected us even to a contempt of our own nature, and put us to a
stand in the midst of our most eager pursuit of Science: insomuch that had not
the inhaerent Curiosity of our Genius sharply spurred us on again, we had
totally desisted, and sat down in this resolution; for the future to admire,
and perhaps envy the happy serenity of their Condition, who never disquiet and
perplex their minds with fruitless scrutiny, but think themselves wise enough,
while they acquiesce in the single satisfaction of their Senses. Nor do we look
ever to have our Studies wholly free from this Damp: but expect to be surprised
with many a cold fit, even then when our Cogitations shall be most ardent and
pleasing. And to acknowledge our pensive sense of this Discouragement, is it
that we have chosen this for our Motto: Quo magis quaerimus* magis dubitamus.
But lest this our despair prove contagious, and infect our Reader, and He
either shut up our Book, or smilingly demand of us, to what purpose we wrote
it; if (as we confess) Insatisfaction be the End of study, and (as we intimate)
our Phisiology at most but ingenious Conjecture: we must divert him with the
novelty of a Paradox, viz. that the Irregularity of our Curiosity is one Cause
of the Dissent of Philosophers.

Art. 3. The Irregularity of our Curi^s^t^. A paradox.
That our desire of Truth should be a grand Occasion of our Error; and that our
First Parents were deluded more by the instigation of their own essential
CURIOSITY, than by either the allurement of their Sensual Appetite or the
subtle Fallacies of the Serpent: is a conceit not altogether destitute of
thesupport and warrantry of Reason. For, the Human Soul (the only Creature,
that understands the (...), or transcendent Dignity of its Original, by
reflecting upon the superlative Idea, which it holds of its Creator) from the
moment of its immersion into the cloud or opacity, of flesh labors with an
insatiable Appetence of Knowledge; as the only means, that seems to conduce to
the satisfaction of its congenial Ambition of still aspiring to Greater and
Better things: and therefore has no Affection either so Essential, or Violent,
as the Desire of Science; and consequently, lies not so open to the deception
of any Objects, as of those which seem to promise a satisfaction to that
desire. And obvious it is from the words of the Text; that the Argument which
turned the s^ales, i. e. determined the Intellect, and successively the Will of
our Grandmother Eve, from its indifferency, or aequilibration, to an
Appetition, and so to the actual Degustation of the Forbidden Fruit, was this:
Desiderabilis est arboris fructu^ ad habendam scientiam. Besides, though we
shall not exclude the Beauty of the fruit, transmitted by the sight to the
judicatory Faculty, and so allecting the Sensual Appetite, from having a finger
in the Delusion: yet can we allow it to have had no more then a finger; and are
persuaded, that in the syndrome or conspiracy of Causes, the most ponderous and
praevalent was the Hope of an accession or augmentation of Knowledge. Since ^t
cannot but highly disparage the primitive or innocent state of man, to admit,
that his Intellect was so imperfect, as not to discern a very great Evil,
through the thin Appearance of Good, when the utmost that Appearance could
promise, was no more, than the momentany pleasure of his Palate or Gust: Or,
that the express and poenal Interdiction of God, yet sounding in his ears,
could be over-balanced by the light species of an object, which must be lost in
the Fruition.

Nor is this Curiosity to be accused only of the First Defection from Truth,
but being an inseparable Annex to our Nature, and so derived by traduction to
all Adams posterity, has proved the procatarctick Cause of many (some
contemplative Clerks would have adventured to say of All) the Errors of our
judgments. And, though we have long cast about, yet can we not particular any
one Vicious inclination, or action, whose Scope or End may not, either directly
or obliquely, proximly or remotely, seem to promise an increase of Knowledge in
some kind or other. To instance in one, which appears to be determined in the
Body, to have no interest beyond the Sense, and so to exclude all probability
of extending to the Mind, as to the augmentation of its Science. Whoever loves
a beutiful Woman, whom the right of Marriage has appropriated to another,
ardently desires to enjoy her bed; why, not only for the satisfaction of his
sensual App^tite, because that might be acquired by the act of carnali^y with
some other less beutiful, and Beuty is properly the object of the Mind: but
because that Image of Beuty, which his eye has transmitted to his mind, being
praesented in the species or apparition of Good and Amiab^e, seems to contain
some Excellence, or comparitively more Good, then what He has, formerly
understood. If it be objected, that if so, one enjoyment must satisfy that
Desire; and consequently, no man could love what He has once enjoyed, since
Fruition determines Desire: We Answer, that there is no such necessity justly
inferrible, when Experience assures, that many times Love is so far from
languishing, that it grows more strong and violent by the possession of its
Object. The Reason is, because the passionate Lover, apprehending no fruition
total* or possession entire, supposes some more Good still in the object, then
what his former enjoyment made him acquainted withal. And if it be replied,
that the Lover does, in the perseverance of his Affection, propose to himself
merely the Continuation of that Good, which He has formerly enjoyed: we are
provided of a sufficient Rejoinder, viz. that whosoever wishes the Continuation of
a Good, considers it not as a thing praesent, but to come; and consequently as
a thing which yet He does not know: for, no man can know what is not.

Other Instances the Reader may be pleased to select from among the Passions;
tracing them up to their first Exciting Cause, in order to his more ample
satisfaction: it being digressive and only collateral to our Scope. Good thus
being the only proper Object of our Affections (for Evil exhibited naked, i. e.
as Evil, never Attracts, but ever Averts our Will, or Rational Appetite: as we
have clearly proved in our Discourse of the Liberty Elective of man's Will.) if
we mistake a real evil praesented under the disguise of a Good: this mistake is
to be charged upon the account of our Rational or judicatory Faculty, which not
sufficiently examining the Reality of the species, judges it to be good,
according to the external Appearance only; and so misguideth the Will in its
Election. Now, a^ong the Causes of the Intellects erroneous judicature (we have
formerly touched upon its own Native Imperfection, or Coecity, and Praejudice,)
the chiefest and most general is the Impatience, Praecipitancy, or
Inconsiderateness of the Mind; when, not enduring the serious, profound, and
strict examen of the species, nor pondering all the moments of Reason, which
are on the Averting part of the Object, with that impartiali^y requisite to a
right judgment; but suffering it self, at the first occursion or praesentation
thereof, to be determined, by the moments of Reason apparent on the Attracting
part, to an Approbation thereof: it misinformeth the Will, and ingageth it in
an Election and prosecution of a Falsity, or Evil, couched under the specious
semblance of a positive Truth, or Good.

Now, to accommodate all this to the interest of our Paradox; if Good, real or
apparent, be the proper and adaequate object of the Intellect; and the chief
reason of Good does consist in that of Science, as the principal end of all our
Affections: then, most certainly, must our praecedent assertion stand firm,
viz. that our understanding lies most open to the delusion of such objects,
which by their Appearance promise the most of satisfaction to our Desire of
Science; and, upon consequence, by how much the more we are spurred on by our
Curiosity, or Appe^ence of Knowledge, by so much the more is our mind impatient
of their strict examen, and aequitable perpension. All which we daily observe
experimented in our selves. For, when our thoughts are violent and eager in the
pursuit of some reason for such or such an operation in Nature; if either the
discourse, or writings of some Person, in great esteem for Learning or
Sagacity, or our own meditations furnish us with one, plausible and
verisimilous, such as seems to solve our Doubt: how greedily do we embrace it,
and without further perpension of its solidity and verity, immediately judge it
to be true, and so set up our rest therein? Now, it being incontrovertible,
that Truth consists in a Point, or Unity; it remains as incontrovertible, that
all those judgments, which concur not in that Point, must be erroneous: and
consequently that we ought ever to suspect a multiplicity of dissenting
j^dgments, and to suppose that Phenomenon in Nature to be yet in the dark, i.
e. uncomprehended, or not understood, concerning whose solution the most
various opinions have been erected.

And thus have we made it out; that our Curiosity is the most frequent Cause of
our Minds Impatience or Praecipitancy: that Praecipitancy the most frequent
Cause of our Erroneous jdugments, concerning the Verity or Falsity of Objects:
those Erroneous judgments always the Cause of the Diversity of Opinions: and
the Diversity of Opinions always the Cause of the Variety of Sects among
Philosophers.

CHAP. II. That this World is the Universe.
SECT. I.
AMong those Fragments of Antiquity, which History has gathered up from the
table of sated Oblivion, Art. 1. The Ambition of Alexander in affecting the
Conquest, less vain then that of many ancient Philosophers in affecting the
Knowledge of a Multitude of Worlds.
we find two worthy the entertainment of our Readers memory, though, perhaps,
not easy to be digested by his Belief. The one that Alexander the Great grew
melancholy at the lecture of Anaxarchus his discourse of an Infinity of Worlds,
and with tears lamented the confinement of his Ambition to the Conquest of One:
when yet, in truth, the wings of his Victory had not flown over so much as a
third part of the Terrestrial Globe; and there remained Nations more then
enough to have devoured his numerous Armies at a breakfast, to have learned him
the unconstancy of Fortune, the instability of Empire, and the vanity of
Pride, by the experiment of his own overthrow, and captivity in a narrow
prison. The Other, that there were whole Schools of Philosophers, who fiercely
contended for a Plurality of Worlds, and affected the honor of invincible
Wits, by extending their disquisitions beyond the Extrems or Confines of this
adspectable World to a multitude of others without it, as vast, as glorious, as
rich in variety of Forms: when, indeed, their Understandings came so much short
of conquering all the obvious Difficulties of this one, that even the grass
they trod on, and the smallest of Insects, a Handworm, must put their Curiosity
to a stand, reduce them to an humble acknowledgment of their Ignorance, and
make them sigh out the Scepticks Motto, Nihil Scitur, for a Palinodia. Whether
His or Their Ambition were the greater, is not easy to determine; nor can we
find more wildness of Phansy, or more insolent Rhodamontadoes in Camps, than
Academies, nay if we go to Absurdities, Cedunt Arma Togae, the Sword must give
place to the Gown. But, that his Error was more venial then theirs, is manifest
from hence; that He had conquered all of the World that he knew: but they could
not but find themselves foiled and conquered by every the most minute and
sensible part of the world, which they had attempted to know. Art. 2. A
reduction of those Philos^phers to four distinct Sect^; respective to their
distinct persuasion* and the H^ads o^ each Sect nominated.


This Genus of Philosophers does naturally divide it self into two distinct
species. The First of which does consist of those, who assert only a Plurality
of Worlds: the Second of those, who have been so bold as to ascend even to an
Infinity. Those who assert only a Plurality may be again subdistinguished into
two subordinate divisions: (1 Such as held a Plurality of Worlds Co^xis^ent;
among whom the most eminent was Plutarch, who ( in lib. de Oracul. defect.)
affirms, that to have many Worlds at once, was consistent with the maje^^y of
the Divine Nature, and consonant to Human Reason; and (in 1. placit. 5.)
earnestly labors to dissolve the contrary Arguments of Plato and Aristotle for
the Unity of the World. No^ were th^se all of one Sect; for some opinioned that
there were many other Worlds synchronical in the Imaginary space, or on the
outside of this: and others would admit of nothing, beyond Trismegistus Circle,
or without the unequal part of the Empyraeum; but conceived that every Planet,
nay, every Star, contained in this, was an entire and distinct World. Among
these the Principal were Heraclides, the Pythagoreans, and all the Sectators of
Orphe^s: as they are enumerated by Plutarch (2 Placit. 13.)

(2) Such as held a Plurality of worlds, not coexistent or synchronical, but
successive* i. e. that this praesent world, Phoenix-like, sprung up from the
ruins of another praecedent; and that the Ashes of this s^all produce a Third,
the Cinders of that a Fourth, etc. of this persuasion were Plato, Heraclitus,
and all the Stoics.

The Second species is made up of those, who dreamt of an Infinity of Worlds
coexistent in an infinite space: and the chief seats in this Classis belong to
Epicurus and Metrodorus, upon the last of which this peremptory saying is
commonly fathered; (...). Tam absurdum esse in Universo infinito unum fieri
mundum, quam in magno agro unam nasci spicam. And below them shall sit
Anaximander, Anaximenes, Archelaus, Xenophon, Diogenes, Leucippus, Democritus,
and Zeno Eleates, as may be collected from the records of Stobaeus (Ecl.
Physic. l. 9.) That Epicurus was a grand Patron of this Error, is con^est by
himself ( in Epist. ad Herodotum, apud Laertium) in these words: (...),
Caeterum in universitate, seu natura rerum, infiniti sunt mundi, alij quidem
similes isti quem nos incolimus, alij vero dissimiles.

The Reasons, or rather the Apparences of Reason, which seduced the
Understandings of so many and great Philosophers into a judgment, Art. 3. The
two main pillars on which the ^pinion of a Plurality of Worlds was anciently
erected.
that there was an Infinity of Worlds; are comprehended under these Two.

(1) Quod Caussae sunt infinitae. Nam si hic quidem mundus sit, fi^itus Caussae
vero, ex quibus est, fuere omnino infinitae: necesse est mundi etiam sint
infiniti. Prorsus enim, ubi sunt Caussae, Effectus quoque ibi sunt. That Worlds
there are infinite in multitude, is manifest from hence, that there are
infinite Causes for Worlds: for, since this World is finite, and the Causes of
which it was made, were infinite; necessary it is that there be in^^nite
Worlds. Insomuch as where are Causes, there also must be Effects. This Epicurus
more then intimated, when He argued thus: Quippe Atomi, cum sint infinitae, per
insinitatem spatiorum feruntur* and alibi aliae, ac pr^cu^ ab hoc ad
fabricationem mundorum infinitorum vary concurrunt. Consule Plutarc hum, (1.
Placit. 5.) and Lucretium. (lib. 2.)

(2) Quod nulla sit specialis res, cui non suo sub genere sint singularia multa
similia: That there is no one thing special, to which under that kind, many
^ingulars are not alike. Upon this sand was it that Plutarch erected his feeble
structure of a Plurality of Worlds; for ( in defect. Oracul.) he expresses it
at large, in these words, Videmus naturam ipsis generibus, speciebusque, quasi
quibusdam vasculis aut involucris seminum, res singulares continere. Neque enim
res ulla est numero una, cujus non sit communis ratio, neque ulla certam
denominationem nanciscitur, quae singularis cum sit, non etiam com^unem
qualitatem habeat. Quare and hic mundus, ita singulariter dicitur, ut communem
tamen rationem, qualitatemque mundi obtineat: singularis autem conditionis sit,
ex differentia ab alijs quae ejusdem Generis sunt. Et certe non unicus Homo,
non unicus Equus, non unicum Astrum, non unicus Deus, non unicus Demon in
rerum natura est: quid prohibit, quo ^inus plures, non unicum mundum Natura
contineat, etc.

SECT. II. The Redargution.
THat our Redargution of this vain Error may obtain the more both of
Perspicuity and Credit, Art. 1. The Question stated to be concerning the real
Existence, not the possibility of an Infinity of Worlds
we are to advertise that the Quaestion is not concerning the Possibility, but
the real or actual Existence of an Infinity of Worlds. For, of the Possibility,
no man, imbued with the principles of Physiology, or Theology, can doubt.

(1) Because, Art. 2. Because the supposed Infinity of the Extramundan Spaces,
is no imposs^bility.
to the most profound and nice Enquirers into that abstruse point, no Argument,
whether simple or complex, has appeared weighty enough to dissuade them from
admitting an immense Tohu, or infinite Vacuum, without the extremities of this
World. For, not a few, nor the least judicious part of even our Christian
Doctors have asserted those Extramundane spaces calling them IMAGINARY; because
we can imagine the same Dimensions of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, to
be in them, as are in those real Spaces, wherein Bodies are included in this
world: and since all men, acknowledging the Omnipotence of God, conclude, that
He might, had He so pleased, have created this World larger and larger even to
infinity; necessary it is, that they also admit a larger and larger space or
Continent, for the Reception of that enlarged World. Which may with equal Truth
be accommodated also to an Infinity of Worlds; insomuch as all, who acknowledge
Gods Omnipotence, readily condescend, that He could, had it seemed good in the
eye of his Wisdom, have created more and more Worlds, even to Infinity:
necessary it is, that they understand those Worlds must be received in
proportionate spaces, which ought to be over and above that space, which this
World possesses. For, whereas some have conceived* that if God would create
more Worlds besides this, He must also create more spaces to contain them:
undoubtedly they entangle themselves in that inextricable Difficulty which is
objected upon them, concerning the space interjected between any two Worlds;
since that space may be brought under the laws of Mathematical Commensuration,
and clearly explained by a greater or less Distance.

(2) Because, it is found no (...), Art 3. Because an I^finity of Bodies is
also possible: as to the Omn^potence of God.
or desperate Difficulty to defend a Possible Infinity of Bodies. For the
Fathers of our Church have delivered it as Canonical, that God might have
created any thing Actually Infinite not only in Magnitude, but also in
Multitude. Only they reserve the infinity of Essence; which since it can be
competent to none but the Divine Essence, and comprehends all perfections
whatever in a most transcendent or Eminent manner: it is as absolutely
impossible that any thing should be Created Actually Infinite in Essence, as
that God should be created. Which we conceive to be the ground of that Truth;
that to imagine God to be able to create any thing equal to Himself: is to
suppose an Imperfection in his Nature. Nor have They, without good Cause,
deserted the conduct of Plato and Aristotle, when they would seduce them into
an opinion, that Infinity is only Potential, not Actual, i. e. that nothing in
Rerum Natura can be infinite in Actu, but only in Potentia; insomuch as though
a Continuum may be either divided* or Augmented even to Infinity: yet cannot
that Continuum either by Division, or Augmentation, ever become Actually
infinite. For, since even Aristotle himself describes an Infinite to be, non
cujus extra nihil est, sed ex quo accipientibus semper aliquid accipiendum
restat, that from which though nere so much be abstracted, yet still there
shall more remain undeducted; which is, in the sum or importance, to say that
the Essence of Infinity is Inexhauribility: it seems possible to admit not only
many, but even infinite infinities in an Infinite. Thus we say, and truly, that
in an infinite Number are comprehended not only infinite Unities, but also
infinite Binaries, infinite Ternaries, infinite Denaries, Centenaries, etc.
which is the reason of that Axiom, That all the parts of an Infinite are
infinite.

Now though to be able, by perfect Demonstration, to evince that there are no
more Worlds but this one, Art. 4. The Error of concluding the Esse, from the
Posse of an Inf^nity of Wo^lds
which we inhabit, is that of which to despair can be no dishonor to the most
acute and Mathematical Wit in the world; since none ought to doubt, but God
might have created, and may yet at his pleasure create others innumerable,
because neither can His Infinite Power ever be exhausted, nor that Abyss of
Nothing, out of which the Energie of his Word instantly educed this World, not
afford or space or matter for them: yet notwithstanding to affirm, that because
it is possible therefore there are many other Worlds actually coexistent; is a
manifest inartificial Argument, and a Conclusion repugnant to all the
inducements of Persuasion.

For, albeit we readily concede, that there is an Infinite Inanity or
Ultramundan Space, yet can it not follow of necessity, that there are Infinite
Atoms contained in that Ultramundane Space; as Democritus and Epicurus
praeposterously infer: insomuch as it sounds much more concordant to reason,
that there are no more Atoms, then those of which this single World was
compacted.

And when they Argue thus; Since the vacuity or ultramundane Space is infinite
in Magnitude or Capacity, Art. 5. The first main Pillar of a Plurality of
Worlds subverted.
necessary it is that the Abyss of Atoms included therein be also Infinite in
Extent; because otherwise they could never have convened, and coalesced in that
Form, which the World now holds: we admit their Induction for natural and
legitimate, but detest their supposition as absurd and impossible. For, They
take it for granted, that the Chaos of Atoms was not only eternal and Increate,
but also that it disposed, and compacted it self into that Form, which
constitutes the World, by the spontaneous motion inhaerent in Atoms, and their
fortuitous coalescenc^ in such and such respective Figures: when to a sober
judgment it appears the highest Impossibility imaginable, that either the Chaos
of Atoms could be eternal, self-principate, or increate, or dispose and fix it
self into so vast, so splendid, so symmetrical, so universally harmonical, or
Analogical a structure, as this of the World. For, as the Disposition or
Dispensation of the Chaos of Atoms into so excellent a form, can be ascribed to
no other Cause, but an Infinite Wisdom: so neither can the Production or
Creation of the same Chaos be ascribed to any other Cause, but an Infinite
Power, as we have formerly demonstrated in our Darkness of Atheism, cap. 2.

And therefore, since it is most probable that Atoms were the Materia Prima, or
material Principle of the World; as we shall clearly enunciate in a singular
Chapter subsequent: we may adventure to affirm, that God created exactly such a
proportion of Atoms, as might be sufficient to the making up of so vast a Bulk,
as this of the World, and that there remained no one superfluous. It Is unworthy
a Philosopher to acknowledge any superfluity in Nature: and consequently a
dangerous soloecism to say the God of Nature knowing not how to proportion the
quantity of his materials to the model or platform of his structure, created
more Atoms, then were necessary, and left an infinite Residue to be perpetually
hurried too and fro in the ultramundane space. If they shall urge upon us, that
no man was privy to the Council of God at the Creation, and consequently no can
know, whether He created either more Atoms then were requisite to the amassment
of this World, or more Worlds then this one: we may justly retort the Argument
upon them, and conclude, that since no man was privy to the Council of God,
they have no reason to pretend to know, that God created either more matter, or
more Worlds; and so the whole substance of the Dispute must be reduced only to
this: That they have no more Reason for the support of their opinion of a
Plurality of Worlds then we have for ours of the Unity of the World* Nay the
greatest weight of Reason hangs on our end of the scale; for, we ground our
Opinion upon that stable Criterion, our sense, and asserting the singularity of
the world, discourse of what our sight apprehends: but They found theirs upon
the fragil reed of wild Imagination, and affirming a Plurality discourse of
what neither the information of their sense, nor solid reason, nor judicious
Authority, has learned them enough to warrant even Conjecture.

And, as to their second Argument, viz. Art. 6. The second Pillar found
sophisticate, and demolished.
That there is in Nature no one Thing special, to which under the same kind,
there are not many singulars alike: we Answer, that All those singulars, which
we observe to be multiplied under one and the same kind, are such which perish
in the Individual, and therefore cannot but be lost, if not conserved by the
multitude of Successors; and not such as are not obnoxious to destruction by
Corruptibility, for they, constantly existing in the ^ndividual, need not
Multiplicity to their conservation. For which cause, one Sun, and one Moon are
sufficient, and in all probability of this sort is the World; for though it be
conceived obnoxious to corruption, and shall once confess a Period: yet is this
no valid reason to justify the necessity of a multitude of worlds, since the
Dissolution of the World shall be synchronical to the Dissolution of Nature,
when Sun, Moon, and all other kinds of Creatures, as well single as numerous
shall be blended together in one common ruin; and then the same Infinite Cause
which has destroyed them, can, with as much facility as he first Created them,
repair their ruins, educe them out of their second Chaos, and redintegrate
them into what Form His Wisdom shall design.

Art. 7. A Plurality of Worlds manif^stly r^pugnant to Authority Divine,
Nor is this opinion of a Plurality of Worlds only destitute of, but even e
diametro repugnant to the principal Inducements of Belief. For, if we consider
Authority Divine; in Moses inaestimable Diary or Narrative of the Creation can
be found no mention at all of a Multitude of Worlds, but on the contrary a
positive assertion of one world; and the express declarement of the manner how
the Fiat of Omnipotence educed the several Parts thereof successively out of
the Chaos, disposed them into subordinate Piles, and endowed them with
exquisite configurations respective to their distinct destinations, motions and
uses: and in all the other Books of Sacred Writ, whatever concerns the
Providence of God, the Condition of man, the mysteries of his Redemption, means
of salvation, etc. does more then intimate the singularity of the World; nor is
there any one word, if rightly interpreted, which can be produced as an excuse
for the opposite Error.

Art. 8. An^ Human.
If Humane Authority; we may soon perceive, that those Ancient Philosophers, who
have declared on our side, for the Unity of the World, do very much exceed
those Pluralists nominated in our praecedent Catalogue, both in Number and
Dignity. For, Thales, Milesius, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Ecphantus, Parmenides,
Melissus, Heraclitus, Anaxagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Zeno the Sto^ck, attended
on by all their sober Disciples, have unanimously rejected and derided the
Conceit of many Worlds, not only as vain and weak, but as extremly
Hypochondriack, and worthy a whole acre of Hellebor. Nor, indeed, are we
persuaded, that so great Wits as those of Democritus and Epicurus, did
apprehend it as real; but only Imaginary, proposing it as a necessary
Hypothesis, whereon to erect their main Physical Pillar, (...), Vniversum esse
ortus interitusque expers, That the Universe is nonprincipiate and
indissoluble. For, having mediated thus; Whatever is Finite, is circumscribed
by an External Space, from which a cause may come and invading destroy it, and
into which the matter thereof, after the dissolution of its Form, may be
received: now this World, being Finite, must be environed by a circumambient
space, from which a Cause may invade and destroy it; and into which the matter
thereof, after the dissolution of its Form, may be received; must of necessity
therefore be dissoluble: They inferred, that, unless they would concede the
Universe to be dissoluble, which could never consist with their Principles*
they must affirm it to be Infinite, i. e. without which no space can be, from
whence any Cause might invade it, and into which the matter thereof after the
destruction of its Form, might be received: and thereupon concluded to suppose
an Infinity of Worlds Coexistent.

Which seems to be the Reason also that induced Epicurus and Metrodorus to
opinion, that the Universe was not only (...) Immutable, but also (...)
Immovable: as may be collected from these words of Plutarch quoted by Eusebius
(1. praepa. Evang. 5.) concerning Metrodorus, Is inter caetera non moveri
universum dixit quoniam non est quo migrare possit; Art. 9. The result of all;
the Demonstrati^n of the Authors Thesis, That this World is thy Universe.
nam si posset quidem, vel in plenum, vel in vacuum; atqui universum continet
quicquid hujusmodi est, quia si non contineret, minime foret Vniversum.

Having thus amply refuted the Dream of a Plurality of Worlds, both by
detecting the exceeding invalidity of those two Cardinal Reasons, on which the
Authors and Abettors of it had rashly fixed their Assent; and by convicting it
of manifest Repugnancy to Authority Divine and Human: we may safely praesume,
the understanding of our Reader is sufficiently praepared to determine his
judgment to an Approbation of our Thesis, the Argument and Title of this
Chapter, viz. That this Adspectable world is the (...) Omne, (...) Vniversum,
the All in Rerum Natura, the large Magazine wherein all the wealth and treasure
of Nature is included; and that there is Nothing Quantitative, but merely
Local, beyond the Unequal extremity, or (as Arist.) (...), substantiam quae est
in ultima Coeli conversione; the outside of the Empyraeum. Thus much Aristotle,
though upon the conviction of other Arguments, seems fully to have both
understood and embraced, when in positive terms He affirmed, (...) Extra coelum
neque est quicquam Corpus, neque esse omnino potest (de coelo l. 1. c. 9.) As
also whenever He used those two words, (...) and (...), Vniversum and Mundus,
as perfect synonymaes, indifferently signifying one and the same thing: which
was most frequent not only to him, but to Plato also, and most of the most
judicious sort of Philosophers.

If any Curiosity be so immoderate, as to transgress the Limits of this All,
Art. 10. Extramundane Curiosity, a high degree of Madness.
break out of Trismegistus Circle, and adventure into the Imaginary Abyss of
Nothing, vulgarly called the Extramundan Inanity; in the Infinity (or, rather,
Indefinity) of which many long-winged Wits have, like seel'd Doves, flown to
an absolute and total loss: the most promising Remedy we can praescribe for the
reclaiming of such wildness; is to advertise; that a serious Diversion of
thought to the speculation of any the most obvious and sensible of sublunary
Natures, will prove more advantageous to the acquisition of Science, then the
most acute metaphysical Discourse, that can be hoped from the grovelling and
limited Reason of man, concerning that impervestigable Abstrusity; of which the
more is said, the less is understood; and that the most inquisitive may find
Difficulties more then enough within the Little World of their own Nature, not
only to exercise, but empuzle them. To which may be annexed that judicious
Corrective of Pliny, (l. 2. Not. Hist. c. 1.) Furor est, profecto furor est
egredi ex hoc mundo, and tanquam interna ejus cuncta plane jam sint nota, ita
scrutari Extera. Quasi vero mensuram ullius possit agere, qui sui nesciat: aut
men's Hominis videre, quae mundus ipse non capiat. And that facete scoff of the
most ingenious Mr. White (in Dialog. 1. de mundo.) That the Extramundan Space
is inhabited by Chymaera's which there feed, and thrive to Giants upon the dew
of Second Intentions.

CHAP. III. Corporiety and Inanity.
SECT. I.
THE Universe, or this adspectable World (henceforth Synonymaes) does, Art. 1.
Body and Inanity, the two general Parts of the Universe.
in the general, consist of only two Parts, viz. Something and Nothing, or Body
and Inanity. (...), Naturam rerum esse Corpora and Inane, was the Fundamental
position of Epicurus (apud Plutarch. advers. Colot.) which his faithful
Disciple Lucretius has ingenuosly rendered in this Distich: Omnis, ut est
igitur per se, Natura duabus
Consistit rebus; quae Corpora sunt, and Inane.
The All of Nature in two Parts does lie,
That is, in Bodies and Inanity.


Art. 2. Three the most memorable Definitions of Corporiety extant among
Physiologists, recounted and examined.
Concerning the nature or essence of a BODY, we find more then one Notion among
Philosophers.

(1) Some understanding the root of Corporiety to be fixed in Tangibility: as
Epicurus (apud Empericum advers. Physic.) says, (...): intell^gi Corpus ex
congerie figurae magnitudinis, resistentiae (seu soliditatis ac
impenetrabilitatis mutuae and gravitatis; that by Body is to be understood a
congeries of figure, magnitude, resistance (or solidity and impenetrability
mutual) and gravity.

To which Aristotle seems to allude ( in 4. Physic. 7.) where He says of those
who assert a Vacuum, (...) they conceive all Bodies to be Tangible: and
Lucretius, Tangere enim and tangi sine Corpore nulla potest res. Here we are,
per transennam, to hint; that the Authors of this Notion, do not restrain the
Tangibility of Bodies only to the Sense of Touching proper to Animals; but
extend it to a more general importance, viz. the Contact of two Bodies
reciprocally occurring each to other secundum superficies; or what Epicurus
blended under the word, (...), Resistance mutual arising from Impenetrability.

(2) Others placing the Essential Propriety of a Body in its Extension into the
three Dimensions of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity. Thus Aristotle (Not.
Auscult. 4. cap. 3.) strictly enquiring into the Quiddity of Place, says most
profoundly; (...): Sane Dimensiones tres habet, longitudinem, latitudinem, and
altitudinem, quibus omne Corpus definitur. And thus Des Carts (princip.
Philos. Part. 2. Sect. 4.) Naturam materiae, sive Corporis (...) universum
spectati, non consistere in eo quod sit res dura, vel ponderosa, vel colorata,
vel aliquo alio modo sensus afficiens; sed tantum in eo, quod sit res extensa
in longum latum and profundum: that the Essence of matter, or a Body considered
in the General does not consist in its hardness, weight, color, or any other
relation to the senses; but only in its Extension into the three Dimensions.

And (3) Others, by an excessive acuteness of Wit, dividing the Substance of a
Body from the Quantity thereof, and distinguishing Quantity from Extension. Of
this immoderately subtle Sect are all those, who conceived that most Bodies
might be so rarefied and condensed, as that by Rarefaction they may acquire
more, and by Condensation less of Extension, then what they have before in
their native dimensions. We say immoderately subtle, because whoever shall with
due attention of mind profound the nature of Rarefaction and Condensation, must
soon perceive; that by those motions a Body does suffer no more then a mere
Mutation of Figure, but its Quantity admits of neither Augmentation, nor
Diminution. So as those Bodies may be said to be Rare, betwixt whose parts many
Intervals or Interstices, repleted with no Bodies, are interspersed; and those
Bodies affirmed to be Dense, whose parts mutually approaching each to other,
either diminish, or totally exclude all the Intervals or intercedent Distances.
And when it eveneth, that the Intervals betwixt the distant parts of a Body,
are totally excluded by the mutual access, convention and contact of its parts:
that Body must become so absolutely, or (rather) superlatively Dense, as to
imagine a possibility of greater Density, is manifestly absurd. But yet
notwithstanding, is not that Body thus extremly Dense, of less Extension, then
when having its parts more remote each from other, it possessed a larger space:
in respect, that whatever of Extension is found in the Pores, or Intervals made
by the mutually receing parts, ought not to be ascribed to the Body rarefied,
but to those small Inanities that are intercepted among the dissociated
particles. For instance; when we observe a Sponge dipped in Liquor to become
turgent and swell into a greater bulk; we cannot justly conceive, that the
Sponge is made more Extense in all its parts, then when it was dry or
compressed: but only, that it has its pores more dilated or open, and is
therefore diffused through a greater space. But we may not digress into a full
examen of the nature of Rarefaction and Condensation; especially since the
Syntax of our Physical Speculations will lead us hereafter into a full and
proper consideration thereof. Art. 3. Four Descriptions of the nature of
Inanity, by Epicurus, Cleomedes, Empiricus, Aristotle.


Of the nature of the other ingredient of the Universe, INANITY, there are
several Descriptions:

(1) Epicurus names it (...), a Region, or Space, and a Nature that cannot be
touched: thereby intimating the direct Contrariety betwixt the essential notion
of Corporiety and Inanity; which Antithesis Lucretius plainly expresses in
that Verse, Tactus coporibus cunctis intactus Inani.

(2) Cleomedes describes a Vacuum to be, (...), ex sua natura incorporeum:
adding for furrher explanation, siquidem est incorporeum, tactumque fugit, and
neque figuram habet ullam, neque recipit, and neque patitur quicquam, neque
agit, sed praebet solummodo liberum per seipsum corporibus motum; it is
incorporeal, because it cannot be touched, has no figure of its own, nor is
capable of any from others, neither suffers nor acts any thing, but only
affords free space for the motion of other bodies through it.

(3) Empiricus (2. advers Physic.) descanting upon Epicurus description of
Inanity, says; Natura eadem corpore destituta, appellatur Inane; occupata vero
a corpore, Locus dicitur, pervadentibus ipsam corporibus evadit Regio: the same
Nature devoid of all body, is called a Vacuum, if possessed by a body, it is
called a Place, and when bodies pervade it, it becomes a Region.

And (4) Aristotle (3. Physic. 7.) defines a Vacuum to be Locus in quo nihil
est, a Place wherein no body is contained.

Art. 4. Their importance extra^ted: and what is the f^rmal or proper notion of
a Vacuum.
Now if we faithfully extract the importance of all these several Descriptions
of Inanity, we shall find them to concur in this common Notion. As according
to vulgar sense, a Vessel is said to be empty, when it being capable of any,
does yet actually contain no body: so, according to the sense of Physiology,
that Place, that Region, or that Space, which being capable of bodies, does yet
actually receive or contain none, is said to be a Vacuum or Emptiness. Such
would any Vessel be if upon remove of that body, whereby its capacity was
filled, no other body, the Aer, nor ought else, should succeed to possess it:
or such would that Space be, which this Book, that Man, or any other Body
whatever does now actually replenish, if after the remove of that Tenent,
neither the circumstant Aer, nor ought else should succeed in possession, but
it should be left on every side as it were limited by the same concave
superficies of the circumambient, wherein the body, while a Tenent, was
circumscribed and included.

Of the Existence of Bodies in the World, no man can doubt, but He who dares
indubitate the testimony of that first and grand Criterion, Art. 5. The
Existence of Bodies in the World, manifest by Sense: whose Evidence is perfect
Demonstration.
SENSE, is regard that all Natural Concretions fall under the perception of
some one of the Senses: and to stagger the Certitude of Sense, is to cause an
Earthquake in the Mind, and upon consequence to subvert the Fundamentals of all
Physical Science. Nor is Physiology, indeed, more then the larger Descant of
Reason upon the short Text of Sense: or all our Metaphysical speculations
(those only excluded, which concern the Existence and Attributes of the Supreme
Being, the Rational Soul of man, and Spirits: the Cognition of the two former
being desumed from proleptical or congenial impressions implantate in, or
coessential to our mind; and the belief of the last being founded upon
Revelation supernatural) other then Commentaries upon the Hints given by some
one of our External senses. Which Consideration caused Epicurus to erect these
two Canons, as the Base of Logical Judicature.

(1) Opinio illa vera est, cui vel suffragatur, vel non refragatur sensus
evidentia.
(2) Opinio illa falsa est, cui vel refragatur vel non suffragatur sensus
evidentia.
That Opinion is true, to which the Evidence of Sense does either assent, or
not dissent: and that false, to which the evidence of Sense does either not
assent, or dissent.

By the suffragation or Assent of the Evidence of Sense, is meant an Assurance
that our Apprehension or Judgment of any Object occuring to our sense, is
exactly concordant to the reality thereof; or, that the Object is truly such,
as we, upon the perception of it by our sense, did judge or opinion it to be.
Thus Plato walking far off toward us, and we seeing him conjecture or opinion,
as confidently as the great distance will admit, that it is Plato, whom we see
coming toward us: but when, by his nearer approach, the great impediment of
Certitude, Distance is removed; then does the evidence of sense make an
Attestation or suffragation of the verity of our opinion, and confirm it to be
Plato, whom we saw.

The Non-refragation of Sense, intends the Consequution of some Inevident
thing, which we suppose or praesume to be, with reflection upon something
sensibly evident, or apparent. As when we affirm that the^e is a Vacuum; which
taken singly, or speculated* in its own obscure nature, is wholly inevident,
but may be demonstrated by another thing sufficiently evident, viz. Motion: for
if no Vacuum, no Motion; since the Body to be moved must want a Place, wherein
to be received, if all Places be already full and crowded. Hence comes it that
the thing Evident does not Refragari to the Inevident. And thus the
Suffragation and Nonrefragation of the Evidence of sense, ought to be
understood as one Criterion, whereby any Position may be evicted to be true.

Hither also may be referred that Tetrastick of Lucretius, (lib. 1.) Corpus
enim per se communis deliquat ess^
Sensus: quo nisi prima fides fundata valebit,
Haud erit, occultis de rebus, quo referentes
Confirmare Animi quicquam ratione queamus.
That Bodies in the World existent are,
Our Senses undeniably declare:
Whose Certitude once quaestion'd; we can find
No judge to solve nice scruples of the Mind.


It remains therefore only that we prove (1) That there is a Vacuum in Nature.
(2) That there is in the Universe no Third Nature besides that of Body and
Inanity.

CHAP. IV. A Vacuum in Nature.
SECT. I.
IN order to our more prosperous Evacuation of that Epidemick Opinion, Vacuum
non dari in rerum natura, that there is no Vacuity or Emptiness in the World;
it is very requisite, that we praemise, as a convenient Praeparative, this
short advertisement.

Among the speculations of many Ancient Physiologists, Art. 1. The Distinction
of a Vacuum into (1) Natural, and

(2) Praeternatural: and the one called Disseminate, the other Coacer^vate.


and especially of Aristotle (4. Physic. 6) we find a Vacuum distinguished into
(...), and (...), Secundum naturam, and Eternaturam, a Vacuum consistent with,
and a Vacuum totally repugnant to the fundamental constitutions of Nature.
According to which proper distinction, we may consider a Vacuum (1) as (...),
Disseminatum, Interspersed, or of so large diffusion as variously to interrupt
the Continuity of the parts of the World. 2 As (...), Coacervatum, Coacervate
or separate from all parts of the World, such as the Ultramundan Space is
conceived to be. Now, if we respect the First consideration or acception of a
Vacuum, the Quaestion must be, An detur vacuum Disseminatum? Whether there be
any small Vacuity in nature, or more plainly, Whether among the incontinued
particles of Bodies there be any minute insensible Spaces intermixed, which are
absolutely empty, or unpossessed by any thing whatever? If the second; then the
doubt is to be stated thus: An detur vacuum intra mundanum Coacervatum? Whether
within the World (for of the extramundane Inanity, the difficulty is not great,
as may be collected from the contents of our Second Chapter praecedent) there
can be any great or sensible Vacuity, such as we may imagine possible, if many
of the small or interspersed V^cuities should convene and remain in one entire
coacervate Inanity.

Concerning the First Problem, Art. 2. The nature of a Disseminate Vacuity,
explained by the Analogy of a heap of Corn.
we cannot state the Doubt more intelligibly, then by proposing it under the
analogy of this Example. Let a man intrude his hand into a heap of Corn, and
his hand shall possess a certain sensible space among the separated Grains: his
hand again withdrawn, that space does not remain empty, but is immediately
repossessed by the mutual confluent grains, whose Confluxibility, not impeded,
causes their instant convention. And yet betwixt the Grains mutually convened
there remain many intercepted or interposed Spaces or Intervalls, unpossessed
by them; because the Grains cannot touch each other so secundum totas
superficies, according to all parts of their superficies, as to be contiguous
in all points. Exactly thus, when any Body is intruded into Aer, Water, or any
such rare and porous nature, betwixt whose incontinued parts there are many
Interstices variously disseminated, it does possess a certain sensible space
proportionate to its dimensions: and when that Body is withdrawn, the space
cannot remain empty, because the insensible or atomical particles of the Aer,
Water, etc. agitated by their own native Con^luxibility, instantly convene and
repossess it. And yet, betwixt the convened particles, of which the Aer, and
Water, and also all porous Bodies are composed, there remain many empty spaces
(analogous to those Intervalls betwixt the incontingent Grains of Corn) so
minute or exiguous, as to be below the perception and commensuration of sense.
Which is the very Difficulty, concerning which there are so many Controversies
extant, as their very Lecture would be a Curse to the greatest Patience.
However, we conceive our selves sufficiently armed with Arguments to become the
Assertors of a Vacuum Disseminatum; or empty Intervals betwixt the particles of
Rare, Porous, or Incontinued Bodies.

Art 3. The first Argument of a Disseminate Vacuity, desumed from the evidence
of Motion, in General: and Aristotle's error concerning the Essence of Place,
concisely detected, and corrected.
Our First Argument is that Reason given for a Vacuum by Epicurus: (...), Nisi
esset Inane, non haberent Corpora neque uti essent, neque quo motus suos
obirent, cum moveri ea quidem manifestum sit: Unless there were a Vacuum,
Bodies could have neither where to consist, nor whither to be moved; and
manifest it is, that they are moved. Which solid Reason, though seemingly
perspicuous, has in it so many recesses of obscurity, as may not only excuse,
but efflagitate a cursory paraphrase. First, we are to observe that, in the
theory of Epicurus, the Notions of Inanity and Locality are one and the same
essentially, but not respectively: i. e. that the same space when replenished
with a Body, is a Place, but when devoid or destitute of any Tenent whatever,
then it is a Vacuum. Secondly, that Aristotle did not sufficiently profound the
Quiddity of Place, when He taught, that the Concave superficies of the
Circumambient did constitute the Essence thereof. For, when it is generally
conceded that the Locus must be adaequate to the Locatum; it is truly
praesumed, that the internal superficies of the Circumambient or Place, ought
to be adaequate to the external superficies of the Locatum or Placed; but not
to its Profundity, or Internal Dimensions. And, since it is of the formal
reason of Place, that it be Immovable, or incapable of Translation; for,
otherwise any thing might, at one and the same time, be immote and yet change
place: it is evident, that the superficies of the Circumambient is not
Immovable, since it may both be moved, the Locatum remaining unmoved, and e
contra, persist unmoved, when the Locatum is removed. And, therefore, the
Concave superficies of the Circumambient may, indeed, obtain the reason of a
Vessel, but not of a Place. And, upon consequence, we conclude, that the Space
comprehended within the superficies of the Circumambient, is really and
essentially what is to be understood by Place Since that Space is adaequated
perfectly to its Locatum in all its internal Dimensions, and is also truly
Immovable; in regard that upon the remove of the Locatum, it remains fixed,
unchanged, unmoved; in the same state as before its occupation, it persevers
after its desertion. And when the Body removed possesses a new Space: the old
Space is instantly possessed by a new Body. Thirdly, that this argument desumed
from the Evidence of Motion, was proposed by Empiricus, (advers. Geometr.) more
Syllogistically, thus, (...). Si Motus est, Inane est; atqui Motus est, est
ergo Inane. If there be Motion, there must be ^^anity; but Motion there is,
therefore there is a Vacuum.

That there is Motion, is manifest from sense. Art. 4. Motion demonstrated by
Sense: and Zeno's aenigmatical Argument, for an Universal Quiet, dissolved.
And as for that memorable Argument of Zeno against Motion, though we judge
that he affected it more for the singularity, then solidity thereof, and only
proposed it as a new Paradox to gain some credit to Skepticism, of which he was
a fierce Assertor; and that no man did ever admit it to a competition with the
Authority of his Sense: yet, since many have reputed it indissoluble, we
conceive the solution thereof must become this place.

Motus non potest fieri per spatium quodvis, nisi pri^s mobile pertranseat
minus, quam majus; sed quamcunque assigns partem, alia est minor, and alia
minor in infinitum: Ergo non potest fieri motus, numquam enim incipiet. No
Motion can be made through any space whatever, unless the Moveable first pass
through a less, before a greater space; but, what part of space soever you
shall please to assign, still there will be another less part, and another less
then that, and so up to infinity: therefore can there be no motion at all,
since it can never begin at a space so little as that no less can remain.
Solution.
The Fallacy lies in the Minor, which we concede to be true ratione
Mathematica, in the Mathematical acceptance thereof; and so no solution can be
satisfactory to the Argument, unless we admit an infinite Divisibility in the
parts of a Continuum: But deny it ratione Physica, in the proper Physical
acceptance, and so we may solve the riddle by proving the parts of a Continuum
not to be divisible ad infinitum, and Motion is to be considered penes realem
rerum existentiam. Now, that Space is divisible ad infinitum only Extrinsece
and Mathematice, not Physice, may be thus evinc^^. If Motion be divisible in
infinitum, the parts of a slow Motion will be as many as the parts of a swift
Motion: but it is indubitate, that two parts of a swift motion are coexistent to
one of a slow: therefore either that one part must be permanent, since it
existeth in two times, or all Motions are equal in velocity and tardity, which
is repugnant to experience. And Motion, Space, and Time, are perfectly
Analogous, i. e. Proportional: for there is no part of Motion, to which there
may not be assigned a Part of Space and Time fully respondent. Besides, should
we allow the Argument to be too close for the teeth of Reason; yet no man can
affirm it to be too hard for the sword of Sense, and therefore it ought not to
be reputed inextricable: since those objects which fall under the sincere
judicature of the sense, need no other Criterion to testify their Verity. Upon
which the judicious Magnenus happily reflected ( p. 162. Democriti
reviviscent.) when He laid down this for a firm Principle: Sensibilia per
sensus sunt judicanda, nam illius potentiae est judicare de re, per quam res
cognoscitur; neque fides omnis sensibus deneganda.

Art. 5. The Consequution of the Argument (if no Vacuum, no Motion) illustrated.
This short Excursion ended, we revert to our Fourth observable, viz. the
Consequution or Inference of Epicurus, in his argument for a Vacuum: If no
Vacuum, no Motion. Which seems both natural and evident; for what is full,
cannot admit a second tenent: otherwise nothing could prohibit the synthesis or
Coexistence of many Bodies in one and the same place; which to imagine, is the
extremest Absurdity imaginable.

For Illustration, let us Imagine, that the Uuniverse (having nothing of
Inanity interspersed among its parts) is one Continued Mass of Bodies so
closely crowded, ramm'd, and wedged together, that it cannot receive any the
least thing imaginable more: and keeping to this Hypothesis, we shall soon
deprehend, whether any one Body among those many disposed within this compact
or closely crowded Mass may be removed out of its own to invade the place of
another. Certainly, if all places be full, it must extrude another body out of
its place, or become joint-tenant with it and possess one and the same place.
Extrude a body out of its possession it cannot, because the Extruded must want
a room to be received into; nor can the Extruded dispossess a third, that third
expel a fourth, that fourth eject a fifth, etc. Since the difficulty sits
equally heavy on all: and therefore, if the invaded does not resign to the
invading, there can be no beginning of Motion, and consequently no one Atome in
the Universe can be moved. And, as for its becoming synthetical or
joint-tenant, that is manifestly impossible: because a Collocat^on of two
Bodies in one and the same place, imports a reciprocal Penetration of
Dimensions, then which nothing can be more repugnant to the tenor of Nature:
and therefore it remains, that every part of the Universe would be so firmly
bound up and compacted by other parts, that to move those Cochles, Snails, or
Insects, which are found in the ferruminated womb of Rocks, and incorporated to
the heart of Flints, would be a far more modest attempt, then to move the least
atome therein.

Art. 6. An Ob^ecti^n, that the Lococessi^n of some Bodies, d^p^nds on their
Rarity or Por^sity; no^ on a Disseminate Vacuity: praevented.
Nor can the Dissenting evade the compulsion of this Dilemma, by praetending,
that in the Universe are Bodies of rare, porous, and fluxible Constitutions,
such as are more adapted to Lococession, or giving place upon their invasion by
other Bodies, then are Rocks or Flints. Because, unless their Rarity, Porosity,
Fluxibility, or yeeldingness be supposed to proceed from Inanity disseminate;
or, that all the particles of those Bodies are contiguous, or munually
contingent secundum totas superficies* doubtless, they must be so Continued, as
that it can make no difference, whether you call them Bodies of Flint or Aer.
For, neither shall the Aer possess a place less absolutely then a Flint:
because how many particles soever of place you shall suppose, no one of them
can remain unpossessed; it being of the Essence of Place, that it be adaequate
to its Tenent in all its internal Dimensions, i. e. in the number and
proportion of Particles: nor a Flint more perfectly then Aer, whose insensible
Particles are praesumed to be reciprocally contingent in all points, and so to
exclude all Interspersed Inanity.

We said, without Inanity interspersed, Art. 7. No beginning of Mo^ion, without
Inani^y inter^persed.
there can be no Beginning of Motion. Which to explain, let us suppose that a
Body, being to be moved through the Aer, does in the first degree of motion
propel the contiguous aer, the space of a hairs breadth, Now, the Universe being
absolutely full, that small space of a hairs breadth must be praepossessed, and
so the Body cannot be placed therein, until it has thence depelled the
incumbent Aer. Nor can the contiguous Aer possessing that space of a hairs
breadth be depelled per latera to a place behind: because that place also is
replete with Aer. Insomuch, therefore, as the body to be moved, cannot progress
through so small a space, as that of an hairs breadth, because of the defect of
place for the reception of the Aer replenishing that space: it must of
necessity remain bound up immoveably in that place, wherein it was first
situate. But if we conceive the Aer to have small Inane Vacuolas, or Spaces
(holding an analogy to those spaces interceding betwixt the Grains of a Heap of
Corn or Sand) variously interposed among its minute insensible particles: then
may we also conceive, how the Motion of a Body through the Aer is both begun
and continued: viz. that the Body moved, does by its superfice protrude the
particles of the contiguous Aer, those protruded particles being received into
the adjacent empty interstices, press upon the next vicine particles of aer,
and likewise protrude them, which received also into other adjacent empty
spaces become contiguous to, and urgent upon other next particles of Aer, and
so forward until, upon the successive continuation of the Compression by
protrusion, and the consequent dereliction of a place behind, the lateral
particles of the Aer, compressed by the anterior parts dissilient, are effused
into it: and so, how much of Aer is compressed and impelled forward, so much
recurrs backward per latera, and is dilated. The same also may be accommodated
to the Lococession of the Parts of Water; allowing it this praerogative, that
being propelled by a Body movent, it does by its particles more easily propel
the contiguous particles of the Aer, then its own; because the empty minute
spaces of the aer incumbent upon the Water, are larger, which may be the
reason, why water propelled forwards, becomes tumid and swells somewhat
upwards in its superfice, and is depressed proportionately backward. Now
according to this theory, ought we to understand the Reason of Epicurus for a
Vacuum, desumed from the necessity of motion.

SECT. II.
AS the nature of Motion considered in the General, Art. 1. A second Argument
of a Vacuity Disseminate, collected from the reason of R^refaction and
Condensation.
has afforded us our First Argument, for the comprobation of a Vacuity
Disseminate: so likewise does the nature of Rarefaction and Condensation, which
is a species of Local Motion, speculated in particular, readily furnish us with
a Second. Examine we therefore, with requisite scrutiny, some of the most
eminent Apparences belonging to the Expansion and Compression of Aer and Water:
that so we may explore, whether they can be salved more fully by our hypothesis
of a Disseminate Vacuity, then by any other, relating to an Universal Plenitude.

Art. 2. The eminent Phaenomen^n of an Aero^^l^pe^, or Wind-Gun, so^ved by a
Vacuity Dis^eminate among the incontiguous ( quoad totas superfi^ies) parts of
aer.
Take we a Pneumatique or Wind-Gun, and let that part of the Tube, wherein the
Aer to be compressed is included, be four inches long (the diameter of the bore
or Cavity being supposed proportionate:) now if among the particles of that aer
contained in the four inched space of the Tube, there be no empty Intervals, or
minute Inanities; then of necessity must the mass of Aer included be exactly
adaequate to the capacity or space of four inches, so as there cannot be the
least particle of place, wherein is not a particle of aer aequal in dimensions
to it, i. e. the number of the particles of aer is equal to the number of the
particles of the Cavity. Suppose we then the number of particles common to
both, to be 10000. This done, let the aer, by the Rammer artificially intruded,
be compressed to the half of the space (not that the compression may not exceed
that rate, for Mersennus (in praef. ad Hydraulicam Pneumaticam Artem.) has by
a most ingenious demonstration taught, that Aer is capable of Compression even
to the tenth part of that space, which it possessed in the natural disposition,
or open order of its insensible particles:) and then we demand, how that half
space, viz. two inches, can receive the double proportion of Aer, since the
particles of that half space are but 5000. Either we must grant that, before
compression, each single particle of Aer possessed two particles of space,
which is manifestly absurd: or, that after Compression, each single particle of
space does contain two of aer, which is also absurd, since two bodies cannot at
once possess the same place: or else, that there were various Intervals Inane
disseminate among the particles of Aer, and then solve the Phenomenon thus. As
the Grains of Corn, or Granules of Sand, being powered into a vessel up to the
brim, seem wholly to fill it* and yet by succussion of the vessel, or
depression of the grains upon the imposition of a great weight, may be reduced
into a far less space; because from a more la^ and rare, they are brought to a
more close and constipate congeries, or because they are reduced from an open,
to a close order, their points and sides being more adapted for reciprocal
contact quoad totas superficies, nor leaving such large Intervals betwixt them
as before succussion or depression. So likewise are the particles of aer
included in the four-inched space of the Tube, by Compression or Coangustation
reduced down to the impletion of only the hal^ of that space; because from a
more lax or rare Contexture they are contracted into a more dense or close,
their angles and sid^^ being by that force more disposed for reciprocal
Contingence, and leaving less Intervals, or empty spaces betwixt them then
before.

Art. 3. Experiment of an Ae^lipile, or Hermetical B^llow^, attesting a Vacuity
(...).
Our Second Experiment is that familiar one of an Aeolipile which having one
half of its Concavity replete with Water, and the other with Aer, and placed in
a right position near the fire: if you will not allow any of ^he spaces within
it to be empty, pray, when the Water by incalescen^^ rarefied into vapors,
issues out with thundering impetuosity through the slender perforation or exile
outlet of its rostrum, successively for many hours together, how can the same
Capacity still remain full? For, if before incalefaction the particles of Water
and Aer were equal to the number of the particles of space contained therein*
Pray, when so many parts both of Water and Aer, consociated in the form of a
vapor, are evacuated through the Orifice, must not each of their remaining
parts possess more parts of the capacity, and so be in many places at once? If
not so, were there not, before the incalescence, many parts of Water and Aer
crowded into one and the same part of space, and so a manifest penetration of
real dimensions? Remains it not therefore more verisimilous, that, as an heap
of dust dispersed by the W^nd, is rarefied into a kind of cloud and possesses
a far larger space then before its dispersion; because the disgregated Granules
of Dust intercept wider spaces of the ambient aer: so the remaining parts of
Water and Aer in the cavity of the Aeolipile possess all those Spaces left by
the exhaled parts; because they intercept more ample empty Spaces, being
disposed into a more lax and open contexture. And that this is caused by the
particles of Fire, which intruding into, and with rapid impetuosity agitated
every way betwixt the sides of the Aeolipile, suffer not the parts of Aer and
Water to quiesce, but disperse and impel them variously: so that the whole
space seems constantly full by reason of the rapidity of the Motion.

The Third Mechanic Experiment, Art. 4. Experiment of a Sulphu^a^e Tapor*
included in a Glass Vial, partly filled with Water* of the same importance.
which may justify the submission of our assent to this Paradox, is this.
Having praepared a short Tapor of Wax and Sulphur grossly powdered, light and
suspend it by a small Wier in a Glass Vial of proportionate reception, wherein
is clean Fountain Water sufficient to possess a fifth part, or thereabout, of
its capacity: and then with a Cork fitted exactly to the Orifice, stop the
mouth of the Vial so closely, that the eruption of the most subtle Atom may be
prevented. On this you shall perceive the flame and fume of the Sulphur and Wax
instantly to diffuse and in a manner totally possess the room of the Aer, and
so the fire to be extinguished: yet not that there does succeed either any
diminution of the Aer, since that is imprisoned, and all possibility of evasion
praecluded; or any ascent of the Water, by an obscure motion in vulgar
Physiology called Suction, since here is required no suction to supply a
vacuity upon the destitution of aer. But if you open the orifice, and enlarge
the imprisoned Aer, you shall then indeed manifestly observe a kind of obscure
suction, and thereupon a gradual ascension of the Water: not that the flame
does immediately elevate the water, as well because it is extinct, and the
water does continue elevated for many hours after its extinction, as that, if
the flame were continued, can it be imagined that it would with so much
tenacity adhaere to the tapor, as is requisite to the elevation of so great a
weight of water; but rather, that upon the Coangustation or compression of the
aer reduced to a very close order in the mutual contact of its insensible
particles, the empty spaces formerly intercepted betwixt them being replenished
with the exhalations of the tapor; when the orifice is deobturated, there
sensibly succeeds a gradual expiration of the atoms of Fire, as the most agile,
volatile and prepared for motion, and then the aer, impelled by its own native
Fluxibility, re-expands or dilates it self by degrees. But since the narrowness
of the Evaporatory, or ori^ice prohibits the so speedy reflection or return of
the compressed particles of the aer to their natural contexture or open order,
as the renitency of their fluxibility requires, so long as there remain any of
the atoms of Fire in possession of their Vacuities, as long continues the
reexpansion of the Aer; and that reexpansion pressing upon the sides of the
water, causes it to ascend, and continue elevated. And no longer, for so soon
as the aer is returned to its native contexture, the water by degrees subsideth
to the bottom, as before the accension of the Tapor: and so that motion
commonly called a Suction in avoidance of Vacuity, is more properly a
Protrusion, caused by the expanding particles of aer compressed.

Art 5. No C^mbu^t^^le in Aer: and so the opinion of the Ari^^ot^leans, that
the Extincti^n of Flame impris^ned, is to be charged on the Defect of Aer, for
its sustenta^ti^n; grossly erroneous.
If any praecipitous Curiosity shall recur to this Sanctuary, that in the
Substance of the Aer is contained Aliquid Combustibile, some combustible
matter, which the hungry activity of the flame of the Tapor does prey upon,
consume and adnihilate: He runs upon a double absurdity; (1) That in Nature is
a substance, which upon the accidental admotion of Fire, is subject to absolute
Adnihilation, which to suppose, smells of so great a wildness of Imagination as
must justify their sentence, who shall consign the Author of it to seven years
diet on the roots of White Hellebor, nor durst any man but that Elias Artium
Helmont, adventure on the public Patronage of it. (2) That the Aer is the
Pabulum, or Fuel of Fire: which though no private opinion, but passant even
among the otherwise venerable Sectators of Aristotle (who unjustly refer the
Extinction of flame imprisoned, to the Defection of Aer: as intimating that the
destruction of Fire, like that of Animals does proceed from the destitution of
Aliment) is yet openly inconsistent to Reason and Experiment. To Reason,
because the Aer, considered sincerely as Aer, without the admixture of vapors
and exhalations, is a pure, simple and Homogeneous substance, whose parts are
consimilar: not a composition of heterogeneous and dissimilar, whereof some
should submit to the consumptive energie of Fire, and other some (of the
invincible temper of Salamandes Wool, or Muscovy Glass,) con^erve their
originary integrity inviolable in the highest fury of the flames. Again,
Themselves unanimously approve that Definition of Galen lib. 1. de Element.
cap. 1.) Elementa sunt natura prima and simplicissima corpora, quaeque in alia
non amplius dissolvi queant: that it is one of the essential Proprieties of an
Element as to be ingenerable, so also Indissoluble: and as unanimously
constitute the Aer to be an Element. To Experiment, because had the Fire found
(and yet it is exceedingly inquisitive, especially when directed by Appetite,
according to their supposition) any part of the Aer i^flamable; the whole
Element of aer had been long since kindled into an unive^sal and inextinguable
conflagration, upon the accension of the first focal ^^re: nor could a flash of
Lightning or Gunpowder* be so soon extinct if the flame found any maintenance
or sustentaculum in the Aer, but would enlarge it self into a Combustion more
prodigious and destructive then that caused by the wild ambition of Phaeton.
Most true it is, that Fire deprived of aer, does suffer immediate extinction:
yet not in respect of Aliment denied (for Nutrition and Vitality are ever
convertible) but of the want of room sufficient to contain its igneous and
fuliginous Exhalations, which therefore recoiling back upon the flame,
coarctate, suffocate, and so extinguish it. For upon the excessive and
impetuous sudden afflation of aer, Flame does instantly perish, though not
imprisoned in a glass: the cause is, that the flame, not with tenacity
sufficient adhaering to the body of the tapor, or lamp, is easily blown off,
and being thus dislodged has no longer subsistence in the aer. And Heat,
beating upon the outside or unequal part of a Glass, seems sensibly to dilate
the Aer imprisoned within; as is manifest upon the testimony of all
Thermometres, or Weather-Glasses, those only which contain Chrysulca, or Aqua
Fortis in stead of Water, at least if the experiment be true, excepted: but
Fire in the Concave or inside of the Glass violently compresseth the aer, by
reason of its fuliginous Emissions, which wanting vacuities enough in the aer
for their reception, recoil and suffocate the fire.

The Fourth, this. Being in an intense frost at Droitwich in Worcestershire,
Art. 6. A fourth singular and memorable Experiment of the Authors, of Ice at
the nose of a large Reverberatory Furnace, charged with Ignis rotae; evidencing
a Vacuity inter spersed in the Aer.
and feeding my Curiosity with enquiring into the Mechanic operations of the
Wallers (so the Salt-boylers are there called) I occasionally took notice of
Ice, of considerable thickness, in a hole of the earth, at the mouth of a
Furnace very great and charged with a Reverberatory fire, or Ignis rotae.
Consulting with my Philosophy, how so firm a congelation of Water could be made
by Cold at the very nose of so great a fire; I could light on no determination,
wherein my reason thought it safe to acquiesce, but this. That the ambient Aer,
surcharged with too great a cloud of exhalations from the fire, was forced to a
violent recession or retreat, and a fresh supply of aer as violently came on to
give place to the receding, and maintain the reception of fresh exhalations;
and so a third, fourth and continued relief succeeded: and that by this
continued and impetuous afflux, or stream of new aer, laden with cold Atoms,
the activity of the cold could not but be by so much the more intense at the
mouth of the furnace, then abroad in the open aer, by how much the more violent
the stream of cold aer was there then elsewhere. To complete and assure the
Experiment, I caused two dishes, of equal capacity, to be filled with river
Water; placed one at the mouth of the furnace, the other sub Dio: and found
that near the furnace so nimbly creamed over with Ice, as if that
visibly-freezing Tramontane Wind, which the Italian calls Chirocco, had blown
there, and much sooner perfectly frozen then the other. And this I conceive to
be also the reason of that impetuous suction of a stream of aer, and with it
other light and spongy bodies, through the holes or pipes made in many
Chimneys, to praevent the repercursion of smoke.

From these observations equitably perpended and collated, our meditations
adventured to infer

(1) That the Aer; Art. 7. An Inference from that Experiment; that Aer, as to
its General Destination, is the Common Recepta^y of Exhalations.
as to its principal and most universal Destination was created to be the
(...), or common RECEPTARY of Exhalations: and that for the satisfaction of
this End, it does of necessity contain a Vacuum Desseminatum in those minute
and insensible Incontiguities or Intervals betwixt its atomical Particles;
since Nature never knew such gross improvidence, as to ordain an End, without
the codestination of the Means requisite to that End. To praevent the danger of
misconstruction in this particular, we find our selves obliged to in^imate;
that in our assignation of this Function or Action to the Aer, we do not
restrain the aer to this use alone: since Ignorance it self cannot but observe
it necessarily inservient to the Conservation of Animals endowed with the
organs of Respiration, to the transvection of Light, the convoy of odours,
sounds, and all Species and Aporrhaeas, etc. but that, in allusion to that
Distinction of Anatomists betwixt the Action and Use of a Part, we intend; that
the grand and most General Action of the Aer, is the Reception or entertainment
of Vapors and Exhalations emitted from bodies situate in or near the
Terraqueous Globe. And in this acception, allowing the Aer to be constituted
the General Host to admit; we insinuate that it has rooms wherein to lodge the
arriving Exhalations: insomuch as the necessity of the one, does import as
absolute a necessity of the other; the existence of the Final ever attesting
the existence of the Conductive, or Mediatory Cause.

Art. 8. A second ^llation, that the Aer does receive Exhalations at a certain
rate, or definite* proportion; which cannot be transcended without prodigious
violence.
(2) That, though the Aer be variously interspersed with empty Interstices, or
minute Incontiguities, for the reception of Exhalations: yet does it receive
them at a just Rate, Tax, or determinate Proportion, conform to its own
Capacity, or Extensibility; which cannot without Reluctance and Violence be
exceeded. For when the Vacuities, or Holds have taken in their just portage,
and equal fraught, the compressed aer hoyseth sail, bears off, and surrenders
the Scene to the next advenient or vicine aer, which acts the like part
successively to the continuation of the motion. This may be exemplified in the
experiment of the Furnace and Chimneys newly mentioned, but more manifestly in
that of the Sulphurate Tapor in the Vial: where the Aer, being overburthened
with too great a conflux of fuliginous Exhalations, and its recession impeded
by the stopping of the Vial, it immediately recontracteth it self, and in that
renitency extinguisheth by suffocation the rude Flame, which oppressed it with
too copious an afflux. As also in those of Canons and Mines; which could not
produce such portentous effects, as are daily observed in Wars, if it were not
in this respect, that the Receptaries in the Aer suffer a ra^k or extension
beyond their due Capacities. For, when the Powder fired in them is, in the
smallest subdivision of time, so much subtiliated, as to yield a Flame
(according to the compute of M^rsennus) of 10000 parts larger in extension,
then it self, while its Atoms remained in the close order and compact form of
Powder; and the Aer* by reason of its imprisonment, is not able to recede, and
bear off so speedily, as the velocity of the motion requires: for avoidance of
a mutual Penetration of Dimensions among the minute particles of the Fire,
smoke, and its own, it makes an eruption with so prodigious an impetuosity, as
to shatter and evert all solid bodies situate within the orb of impediment.

Art. 9. The Existence of Inane Incontiguities in the Aer, confirmed by two
considerable A^guments.
For the further Confirmation of our First Thesis, viz. That the Aer is
interspersed with various Porosities, or Vacuities, by reason of the
Incontiguity of its insensible Particles; and that these serve to the reception
of all Exhalations: we shall superadd these two considerable Arguments. (1) If
this Vacuum Disseminatum of the Aer be submoved, and an absolute Plenitude in
the Universe from a Continuity of all its parts supposed; then must every the
smallest motion, with dangerous violence run through the whole Engine of the
World, by reason of that Continuity. (2) If the Aer were not endowed with such
Porosities, other Bodies could never suffer the dilatation or rarefaction of
themselves; since, upon the subtiliation or dilatation of their minute
particles, i e. the remove of their Atoms from a close to an open contexture,
they possess 1000 times larger Capacities: and so there would be no room to
entertain the continual Effluviums, expiring from all bodies passing their
natural vicissitudes and degenerations.

SECT. III.
TO these Four eminent Experiments, Art. 1. That Water also contains Vacuola,
empty Spaces; demonstrated.
we might have annexed others numerous enough to have swelled this Chapter into
a Volume; but conceiving them satisfactory to any moderate Curiosity, and that
it can be no difficulty to a Physiological Meditation, to salve any Appearance
of the same nature, by this Hypothesis of a Vacuum Disseminatum in the Aer, as
the Caussa sine qua non of its Rarefaction and Condensation: we judged it more
necessary to address to the discharge of the residue of our duty, vi^. to
praesent it as verisimilous; that in the Water also are variously dispersed the
like Vacuola, or empty spaces, such as we have not unfitly compared to those
(...), or Intervals betwixt the Granules of Sand in a heap, in those parts
where their superficies are not contiguous, in respect of the ineptitude of
their Figures for mutual contact in all points. And this seems to us so
illustrious a Verity, as to require neither more attestation, nor explanation,
then what this one singular Experiment imports.

It Is generally known, Art. 2. From the Experiment of the Dissolution of Alum,
Halinitre, Sal Ammoniac, and Sugar, in Water formerly sated with the Tincture
of Common Salt
that Water does not dissolve Salt in an indefinite quantity, but ad certam
taxam, to a certain determinate proportion; so as being once sated with the
Tincture thereof, it leaves the overplus entire and undissolved. After a long
and anxious scrutiny for a full solution of this Phenomenon, our thoughts
happily fixed upon this: That, the Salt being in dissolution reduced (Analysi
ret. ograda) into its most minute or Atomical Particles, there ought to be in
the Water Consimilar or adaequate Spaces for their Reception; and that those
Spaces being once replenished, the Dissolution (because the Reception) cease.
Not unlike to a full stomach, which eructates and disgorges all meats and
drinks superingested: or full vessels, which admit no liquor affused above
their brim. Hereupon, having first reflected upon this, that the Atomical
Particles of common Salt are Cubical; and thereupon inferred, that, since the
Locus must be perfectly adaequate to the Locatum, they could only fill those
empty spaces in the water, which were also Cubical: we concluded it probable,
that in the water there ought to be other empty spaces Octohedrical,
Sexangular, Sphaerical, and of other Figures, which might receive the minute
particles of other Salts, such as Alum, Sal Ammoniac, Halinitre, Sugar, etc.
after their dissolution in the same Water. Nor did Experiment falsify our
Conjecture. For, injecting Alum parcel after parcel, for many days together,
into a vessel of Water formerly sated with the tincture of common Salt; we
then, not without a pleasant admiration, observed that the Water dissolved the
Alum as speedily, and in as great quantity, as if it altogether wanted the
tincture of Salt; nor that alone, for it likewise dissolved no small quantities
of other Salts also. Which is no obscure nor contemptible Evidence, that water
does contain various insensible Loculaments, Chambers, or Receptaries of
different Figures: and that this variety of those Figures does accommodate it
to extract the Tinctures of several Bodies in^ected and infused therein* So as
it is exceedingly difficult, to evince by Experiment that any Liquor is so
sated with precedent Tinctures, as no^ to be capable of others also: especially
while we cannot arrive at the exact knowledge of the Figure of the Atomical
Particles of the body to be infused, nor of the Figures of those minute spaces
in the liquor, which remain unpossessed by the former dissolutions.

Art. 3. The verity of the Lord (...), that a repeated (...) not Rhu^barb (...)
a virtue (...) a simp^e (...), in equal quantity: and why.
Upon which reason, we are bold to suspect the truth of the Lord S. Albans
assertion; Centur. 1 Not. Hist.) that by repeating the infusion of Rhubarb
several times, letting each dose thereof remain in maceration but a small time
(in regard to the Fineness and volatility of its Spirits, or Emanations) a
medicament may be made as strongly Catharctical or Purgative, as a simple
infusion of S^amony in the like weight. For (1) when the empty spaces in the
Menstruum, or Liquor, which respond in Figure to the Figure of the Atomical
particles of the Rhubarb, are replenished with its Tincture; they can admit no
greater fraught, but the Imbibition of Virtue cease: and that two or three
infusions, at most, suffice to the repletion of those respective spaces, may be
collected from hence, that the Rhubarb of the fourth infusion loses nothing of
its Purgative Faculty thereby, but being taken out and singly infused in a
proportionate quantity of the like liquor, it works as effectually as if it
had never been infused before. (2) Experience testi^ieth the Contrary, viz.
that a Dram of Scamony singly infused in an ounce and half of White wine,
does operate ( caeteris paribus) by 15 parts of 20, more smartly then 5 drachms
of Rhubarb successively infused in the like quantity of the same or any other
convenient Liquor.

Art. 4. Why two Drachms of Antimony impragna^e a pint of Wine, with so strong
a vomitory Faculty, as two ounces.
Here also is the most probable Cause, why two Drachms of Antimony crude, or
Crocus Metallorum, give as powerful a Vomitory impraegnation to a Pint of Sa^^,
or White wine, as two ounces: viz. because the menstruum has no more Vacuities
of the same Figure with the Atomical Ef^luviums of the Antimony, then what
suffice to the imbibition or admission of the two Drachms. For the Certitude of
this, we appeal to the experience of a Lady in Cheshire, who seduced by an
irregular Charity, and an opinion of her own skill, does praetend to the cure
of the sick, and to that purpose praepares her Catholic Vomitory, consisting
of four Drachms and an half of crude stibium infused all night in 3 or 4 ounces
of White wine, and usually gives it (without respect to the individual
temperament of the Assument for one dose to the sick* and yet, as our selves
have more then once observed, the infusion does work with no greater violence,
in some persons, then as much of our common Emetique Infusion praescribed in
the reformed Dispensatory of our Venerable College. Nay more then this, our
selves have often reduced the Dose of the same Emetique Infusion down only to 4
Scruples, and yet found its operation come not much short of the usual Dose of
an ounce.

Art. 5. Why one and the same Menstruum ^ay be enriched wi^h v^rious Tinctures.
Hence also may be desumed a satisfactory reason for the impraegnation of one
and the same Menstruum with various Tinctures: for Example, Why an Infusion of
Rhubarb, sated with its tincture, does afterward extract the tinctures of
Agarick, Senna, the Cordial Flowers, Cremor Tartari, etc. injected according to
the praescript of the judicious Physician, in order to his confection of a
Compound Medicament requisite to the satisfaction of a Complex Scope or
Intention.

SECT. IV.
A Third Argument, for the comprobation of a Vacuum Disseminatum, Art. 1. Two
other Arguments of a Vacuity Diss^minate inferrible from (1) the difference of
Bodies in the degrees of Gravity: (2) the Calefaction of Bodies by the
penetration of igneous Atoms into them.
may be adferred from the Cause of the Difference of Bodies in the degrees of
Gravity, respective to their Density or Rarity, (i. e.) according to the
greater or less Inane Spaces interspersed among their insensible Particles. And
a Fourth likewise from the reason of the Calefaction of Bodies by the
subingress or penetration of the Atoms of Fire into the empty Intervals
variously disseminate among their minute particles. But, in respect that we
conceive our Thesis sufficiently evinced by the Praecedent Reasons; and that
the consideration of the Causes of Gravity and Calefaction, does, according to
the propriety of Method, belong to our succeeding Theory of Qualities: we may
not in this place insist upon them.

And as for those many Experiments of Water-hour-glasses, Syringes, Art. 2. The
Experiments vulgarly adduced to prove no vacuity in nature, so far from
denying, that they confess a Disseminate one.
Glass Fountains, Cuppinglasses, etc. by the inconvincible Assertors of the
Peripatetick Physiology commonly objected to a Vacuity: we may expede them
altogether in a word. We confess, those experiments do, indeed, demonstrate
that Nature does abhort a Vacuum Coacervatum; as an heap of Sand abhors to
admit an Empty Cavity great as a man's hand extracted from it: but not that it
does abhor that Vacuum Disseminatum, of which we have discoursed; nay, they
rather demonstrate that Nature cannot well consist without these small empty
Spaces interspersed among the insensible Particles of Bodies, as an heap of
Sand cannot consist without those small Interstices betwixt its Granules, whose
Figures prohibit their mutual contact in all points. So that our Assertion
ought not to be condemned as a Kaenodox inconsistent to the laws of Nature,
while it imports no more then this; that, as the Granules of a heap of Sand
mutually flow together to replenish that great Cavity, which the hand of a man
by intrusion had made* and by extraction left, by reason of the Confluxibility
of their Nature: so also do the Granules, or Atomical Particles of Aer, Water,
and other Bodies of that Rare condition, flow together, by reason of the
Fluidity or Confluxibility of their Nature, to praevent the creation and
remanence of any considerable, or Coacervate Vacuum betwixt them. To instance
in one of the Experiments objected. Water does not distill from the upper into
the lower part of a Clepsydra, or Water-hour-glass, so long as the Orifice
above remains stopped; because all places both above and below are full, nor can
it descend until, upon unstopping the hole, the aer below can give place, as
being then admitted to succeed into the room of the lateral aer, which also
succeeds into the room of that which en^ered above at the orifice as that
succeeds into the room of the Water descending by drops, and so the motion is
made by succession, Art. 3. The g^and Difficulty of the C^u^e of the Aers
restitution of it self to i^s natural ^ontexture, after ra^efaction and
condensation, ^atisfied in brief.
and continued by a kind of Circulation. The same also may be accommodated to
those Vessels, which Gardners use for the irrigation of their Plants, by
opening the hole in the upper part thereof, making the water issue forth below
in artificial rain.

It only remains, therefore, that we endeavor to solve that Giant Difficulty,
proposed in defiance of our Vacuum Disseminatum, by the mighty Mersennus (in
Phaenomen. Pneumatic. propos. 31.) thus. Quomodo Vacuola, solito majora in
rarefactione, desinant, aut minora facta in condensatione crescant iterum:
quaenam enim Elateria cogunt aerem ad sui restitutionem? How do those Vacuities
minute in the aer, when enlarged by rarefaction, recover their primitive
exility; and when diminished by condensation, reexpand themselves to their
former dimensions: What Elaters or Springs are in the aer, which may cause its
sudden restitution to its natural constitution of insensible particles?

We Answer; that, as it is the most catholic Law of Nature, for every thing,
so much as in it lies, to endeavor the conservation of its originary state;
so, in particular, it is the essential quality of the Aer, that its minute
particles conserve their natural Contexture, and when forced in Rarefaction to
a more open order, or in Condensation to a more close order, immediately upon
the cessation of that expanding, or contracting violence, to reflect or restore
themselves to their due and natural contexture. Nor need the Aer have any
Principle or Efficient of this Reflection, other then the Fluidity or
Confluxibility of its Atomical Parts: the essence or Quiddity of which Quality,
we must reserve for its proper place, in our ensuing theory of Qualities.

CHAP. V. A Vacuum Praeternatural.
SECT. I.
BEsides a Natural, Art. 1. What is conceived by a Coacervate Vacuity: and who
was the Inventor of the famous Experiment of Quicksilver in a Glass Tube, upon
which many modern Physiologists have erected their persuasion of the
poss^bility of introducing it.
or Disseminate Vacuity frequently intercepted betwixt the incontiguous
Particles of Bodies (the Argument of our immediately precedent Chapter) not a
few of the highest form in the school of Democritus have adventured to affirm
not only the possibility, but frequent introduction of a Praeternatural or
Coacervate Inanity: such as may familiarly be conceived, if we imagine many of
those minute inane spaces congregated into one sensible void space. To assist
this Paradox, the autoptical testimony of many Experiments has been pleaded;
especially of that Glass Fountain invented by Hero (praef. in Spirit.) and
fully described by the learned and industrious Turnebus (in lib. de calore) and
of that Brass Cylindre, whose concave carries an Embolus, or sucker of wood,
concerning which the subtle Galilaeo has no sparing discourse in the first of
his Dialogues: but, above all, of that most eminent and generally ventilated
one of a Glass Cylindre, or Tube filled with Quicksilver, and inverted;
Experientiam apponam, cusus inven^ionem etsi (...) qui alii ambitiosi^s (...)
tamen mihi con^^at, (...) a Torricellio, (...)
concerning which not long after the invention thereof by that worthy
Geometrician, Torricellius, at Florence, have many excellent
Physicomathematical Discourses been written by Monsieur Petit, Dr. Paschal
Mersenn^s, Gassendus, Stephanus Natalis. Who, being all French, seemed
unanimously to catch at the experiment, as a welcome opportunity to challenge
all the Wits of Europe to an aemulous combat for the honor of perspicacity.
Now albeit we are not yet fully convinced* that the chief Phenomenon in this
illustrious Experiment does clearly demonstrate the existence of a Coacervate
Vacuity, such as is thereupon by many conce^ed, and with all possible subtlety
defended by that miracle of natural Science, the incomparable Mersennus (in
reflexionib. Physicomathemat.) yet, insomuch as it affords occasion of many
rare and sublime speculations, whereof some cannot be solved either so fully,
or perspicuously by any Hypothesis, as that of a Vacuum Disseminatum among the
insensible particles of Aer and Water; and most promise the pleasure of
Novelty, if not the profit of satisfaction to the worthy considerer; we judge
it no unpardonable Digression, here to present to our judicious Reader, a
faithful Transcript of the Experiment, together with the most rational
solutions of all the admirable Apparences observed therein, first by
Torricellius and the rest beyond Sea, and since more then once by our selves.

The Experiment.
Art. 2. A (...) description of the Exp^riment, and (...) rate (...).
Having praepared a Glass Tube (whose longitude is 4 feet, and the diameter of
its concavity equal to that of a man's middle finger) and stopped up one of its
extremities, or ends, with a seal Hermetical: fill it with Quicksilver, and
stop the other extreme with your middle finger. Then, ha^ing with a most slow
and gentle motion (lest otherwise the great weight of the Quicksilver break it)
inverted the Tube, immerge the extreme stopped by your finger into a Vessel
filled with equal parts of Quicksilver and Water, not withdrawing your finger
until the end of the Tube be at least 3 or 4 inches deep in the subjacent
Quicksilver: for, so you praevent all insinuation or intrusion of Aer. This
done, and the Tube fixed in an erect or perpendicular position; upon the
subduction of your finger from the lower orifice, you may observe part of the
Quicksilver contained in the Tube to descend speedily into the restagnant or
subjacent Quicksilver, leaving a certain space in the superior part of the
Tube, according to appearance at least, absolutely Void or Empty: and part
thereof (after some Reciprocations or Vibrations) to remain still in the Tube,
and possess its cavity to a certain proportion, or altitude of 27 digits, or 2
feet, 3 digits and an half (proxime) constantly. Further, if you recline, with
a gentle motion also, the upper extreme of the Tube, until the lower, formerly
immersed in the Quicksilver, arise up into the region of the Water incumbent on
the surface of the Quicksilver: you may perceive the Quicksilver remaining in
the Tube to ascend by sensible degrees up to the superior extreme thereof,
together with part of the Water; both those liquors to be confounded together;
and, at length, the Quicksilver wholly to distill down in parcels, surrendering
the cavity of the Tube to the possession of the Water. Likewise, if you recline
the superior extreme of the Tube, until its altitude respond to that of 27
digits, still retaining the opposite extreme in the region of the subjacent
Quicksilver in the vessel: then will the Quicksilver be sensibly impelled up
again into the Tube, until that space formerly vacated be replenished.
Finally, if, when the Quicksilver has fallen down to the altitude of 27
digits, the Tube be suddenly educed out of the subjacent Quicksilver and
Water, so as to arrive at the confines of the Aer; then does the Aer rush into
the Tube below, with such impetuosity, as to elevate the Quicksilver and Water
contained in the Tube, to the top; nay, to blow up the sealed end thereof, and
drive out the liquors 4 or 5 feet perpendicular up in the aer; not without some
terror, though not much danger to the Experimentator, especially if he do not
expect it.

Now though it be here praescribed, that the Tube ought to be 4 feet in length,
and the amplitude of its Cavity equal to that of an ordinary man's finger: yet
is neither of these necessary; For, whatever be the longitude, and whatever the
amplitude of the Tube, still does the Quicksilver, after various
reciprocations, acquiesce and subsist at the same standard of 27 digits; as Dr
Paschal junior found by experience in his Tube 15 feet long, which he bound to
a spear of the same length, so to prevent the fraction thereof, when it was
erected perpendicularly, replete with Quicksilver, in libro cui titulus,
Experiences Novelles touchant le Vuide.)

Among those many ( Natalis reckons up no less then 20) stupendous
Magnalities, or rare Effects, Art. 3. The Authors reason, for his selection of
only six of the most considerable Phaenomenae to explore the Causes of them.
which this eminent Experiment exhibits to observation; the least whereof seems
to require a second Oedipus more perspicacious then the first, for the
accommodation thereof though but to plausible and verisimilous Causes, and
might had Aristotle known it, have been reputed the ground of his despair, with
more credit then that petty Problem of the frequent and irregular Reciprocation
of Euripus: we have selected only six, as the most considerable, and such whose
solution may serve as a bright tapor to illuminate the reason of the Curious,
who desire to look into the dark and abstruce Dihoties of the rest.

SECT. II. The First Capital Difficulty.
WHether that Space in the Tube, Art. 1. The First Cardinal Difficulty.
betwixt the upper extreme thereof and the Quicksilver delapsed to the altitude
only of 27 digits, be really an entire and absolute Vacuity?

Concerning this, some there are who confidently affirm the space between the
superfice of the Quicksilver defluxed and the superior extreme of the Tube, to
be an absolute COACERVATE VACUITIE: such as may be conceived, if we imagine
some certain space in the world to be, by Divine or miraculous means, so
exhausted of all matter or body, as to prohibit any corporeal transflux through
the same. And the Reasons, upon which they erect their opinion, are these
subsequent.

This space, if possessed by any Tenent, Art. 3. The Desert space in the Tube
argued to be an absolute Vacuum coacervate, from the impossibility of its
repletion with Aer.
must be replenished either with common Aer, or with a more pure and subtle
substance called Ether, which some have imagined to be the Universal Caement
or common Elater, by which a general Continuity is maintained through all parts
of the Universe, and by which any Vacuity is praevented: or by some exhalation
from the mass of Quicksilver included in the Tube.

First, that it is not possessed by Aer, is manifest from several strong and
convincing reasons.

(1) Because the inferior end of the Tube, D, is so immersed into the subjacent
mass of Quicksilver below the line OF, that no particle of aer can enter
thereat.

(2) Because, if there were aer in the Tube filling the deserted space CK, then
would not the circumambient or extrinsecal aer, when the Tube is educed out of
the restagnant Quicksilver, and Water, rush in with that violence, as to
elevate the remainder of the Quicksilver in the Tube, from K to D, up to the
top C, and break it open, as is observed: in regard, that could not happen
without a penetration of bodies. So that, if we suppose any portion of aer to
have slipped into the Tube below, at the subduction of the finger that closed
the orifice: then would not the Mercury reascending (upon the inclination of
the Tube down to the horizontal line KM,) rise up quite to the top C, but
subsist at OP. But the contrary is found upon the experiment.

(3) When the Tube, after the deflux of the Mercury to K, is reclined so as the
extreme C, be of the same horizontal altitude with the point K, as is visible
in the Tube LM: then does the Mercury in the subject vessel reascend into the
same, and again possess the desert Space KC, or NM. This being so, Whither can
the aer, if any the least portion of it were resident in the space NM, retreat,
since the extreme M, is hermetically closed, and so no way for its egression
can be praetended. Art. 4. The Experiment praesented in Iconism.
AB, A Tube of Glass, replete with Quicksilver. A, The lower extreme thereof,
hermetically sealed. B, The upper extreme thereof; open. DC, The same Tube
inverted, and perpendicularly erected in a vessel full of Quicksilver: so as
the orifice D, be not unstopped, until it be immersed in the subjacent
Quicksilver. HGI, A vessel filled up to the line OF, with Quicksilver: and
thence up to the brim HI, with Water. CK, The Vacuum, or Space deserted by the
Quicksilver descended OCP, The quantity of Aer supposed to have insinuated it
self at the subduction of the finger from the inferior orifice D. KM, A Line
parallel to the Horizon. LM, The same Tube again filled with Quicksilver, and
reclined until the upper extreme thereof become parallel to the same
horizontal altitude with K. N, The distance of 27 inches from L, as K from D.


(4) If any portion of Aer chance to intrude into the cavity of the Tube, which
may come to pass either if, when the superior orifice of the Tube is inverted,
it be not exactly obturated by the finger of the Experimentator; or, if at the
extraction of his finger the lower e^treme be not immersed deep enough in the
subjacent Mercury, to prevent the subingress of some aer; or, if the orifice of
the Tube educed out of the region of the subjacent Mercury and Water* be not
wholly deobturated at once, but so as there is only some slender inlet of Aer:
We say, if in any of these Cases it happen, that some small portion of aer be
admitted into the cavity of the Tube; we have the evidence of our sense, and
the most infallible one too, that the aer so admitted does not ascend to the
top C, but remain visible in certain small Bubbles (such as usually mount up
to the surface of seething water) immediately upon the superfice of the Mercury
at the altitude of 27 digits K. As if, indeed, the aer were attracted, and in a
manner chained down by the Magnetical Effluviums of the earth, together with
the pendent Quicksilver: which having more Ansulae or Fastnings, whereon the
small Hooks of the Magnetical Chains exhaling from the Globe of the Earth, may
be accommodately fixed, is therefore attracted downward more forcibly, and, in
that respect, is reputed to have the greater proportion of Gravity. Again, If
upon the inclination of the Tube, and the succeeding repletion of the same by
the regurgitating Mercury, that portion of aer formerly entered be propelled up
to the top of the Tube, C; and then the Tube again reduced to its
perpendicular, so as the Quicksilver again deflux to K: in this case the aer
does not remain at C, but sinks down as formerly to K also, and there remains
incumbent upon the face of the Quicksilver. Which Descent of the aer cannot be
more probably referred to any Cause, then the Attraction of the Magnetic
streams of the Earth.

(5) Having admitted some few Bubbles of aer to slide up by the margin of the
Mercury into the desert Space KC; and then reclined the Tube to the altitude of
the horizontal line KM: you may perceive the delapsed Quicksilver not to be
repelled up again quite to the top, as before the irreption of aer, but to make
a stand when it arrives at the confines of the included aer at OP, leaving so
much space, as is requisite for the reception of it. Nor can it do otherwise,
without a penetration of Dimensions, by the location of two Bodies in one and
the same place.

(6) Moreover, after the acquiescence of the Quicksilver at K, if you stop the
inferior extreme D, with your finger, while it remains immersed in the
restagnant Quicksilver OF, so as to praeclude the irreption of any more aer;
and then invert the Tube again: the Scene of the Desert Capacity CK, will be
changed to the contrary extreme stopped by your finger, and yet without the least
sign of aer pervading the mass of Quicksilver in a kind of small stream of
Bubbles, contrary to what evene's, when aer is admitted into the Tube in a
small quantity, for in that case, upon the inversion of the Tube, you may
plainly behold an intersection between the descending Quicksilver and the
ascending aer, which mounts up through it in a small stream or thread of
Bubbles.

(7) To those, who conceive that a certain portion of the Circumstant Aer,
being forced by the compression of the restagnant Mercury in the Vessel, rising
higher, upon the deflux of the Mercury contained in the Tube, does penetrate
the sides of the Tube, and so replenish the desert Capacity therein: we answer;
that though we deny not but aer may penetrate the pores or Incontiguities of
Glass, since that is demonstrable in Weather Glasses, and in the experiment of
Sr. Kenelm Digby, of making a sensible transudation of Mercury mixed with Aqua
Fortis in a Bolt-head, through the sides thereof, if gently confricated with a
Hares-foot on the outside; yet cannot it be made out, that therefore the Desert
Capacity in the Tube is possessed with Aer, for two inoppugnable reasons. (1)
Because though the Tube be made of Brass, Steel, or any other Metal, whose
conte^ture is so close, as to exclude the subtlest aer, yet shall the
Experiment hold the same in all Apparences, and particularly in this of the
deflux of the Quicksilver to the altitude of 27 digits. (2) Because, if the
desert Cavity were replete with aer; the incumbent aer could not rush in to the
Tube, at the eduction of its lower end D, out of the restagnant Mercury and
Water, with such violence; since no other cause can be assigned for its
impetuous rushing into the Tube, but the regression of the compressed parts of
the ambient aer to their natural laxity, and to the repletion of the violent or
forced Vacuity. Since, if the whole Space in the Tube were possessed, i. e. if
there were as many particles of Body, as Space therein: doubtless, no part of
place could remain for the reception of the irruent aer.

Art. 5. The Vacuity in the Desert Space, not praevented by the insinuation of
Ether.
Secondly, As for that most subtle and generally penetatrive substance,
ETHER, or pure Elementary Fire which some have imagined universally diffused
through the vast Body of Nature principally for the maintenance of a Continuity
betwixt the parts thereof* and so the avoidance of any Vacuity, though never so
exile and minute; we do not find our selves any way obliged to admit, that the
Desert Space in the Tube is repleted with the same, until the Propugnators of
that opinion shall have abandoned their Fallacy, Petitio principii, a
praecarious assumption of what remains dubious and worthy a serious dispute,
viz. That Nature does irreconcileably abhor all vacuity, per se. For, until
they have evinced beyond controversy, that Nature does not endure any
Emptiness or solution of Continuity, quatenus an Emptiness, and not merely ex
Accidenti, upon some other sinister and remote respect: their Position, that
she provided that subtle substance, Ether, chiefly to prevent any Emptiness,
is rashly and boldly anticipated, and depends on the favor of Credulity for a
toleration. Nor is it so soon demonstrated, as affirmed, that all Vacuity is
repugnant to the fundamental constitution of Nature.

Art. 6. A Parad^^, that Nature does not abhor all vacuity, per se* but only ^x
Accidenti, or in respect to Fluxility.
Naturam abhorrere Vacuum, is indeed, a maxim, and a true one: but not to be
understood in any other then a metaphorical sense. For, as every Animal, by the
instinct of self-conservation, abhors the solution of Continuity in his skin,
caused by any puncture, wound, or laceration; though it be no offense to him to
have his skin pinkt or perforated all over with insensible pores: so also by
the indulgence of a Metaphor, may Nature be said to abhor any great or sensible
vacuity, or solution of Continuity, such as is imagined in the Desert Space of
the Tube; though it be familiar, nay useful and grateful to her, to admit those
insensible inanities, or minute porosities, which constitute a Vacuum
Disseminatum. We say, by the indulgence of a Metaphor; because we import a kind
of sense in Nature, analogous to that of Animals. And, tollerating this
Metaphorical Speech, that Nature has a kind of sense like that of Animals;
yet, if we allow for the vastity of her Body can it be conceived no greater
trouble or offense to her, to admit such a solution of Continuity, or
Emptiness, as this supposed in the Desert space of the Tube, then to an Animal,
to have any one pore in his skin more then ordinarily relaxed and expanded for
the transudation of a drop of sweat. This perpended, it can seem no
Antiaxiomatisme, to affirm, that nature does not abhor Vacuity, per se, but
only ex Accidenti: i. e. upon this respect, that in Nature is somewhat, for
whose sake she does not, without some reluctany, admit a Coacervate or sensible
Vacuity. Now that somewhat existent in Nature per se, in relation to which, she
seems to oppose and decline any sensible Vacuity, can be no other then the
Fluxility of her Atomical Particles, especially those of Fire, Air, and Water.
And, for ought we poor Haggard Mortals do, or can, by the Light of Nature, know
to the contrary, all those vast spaces from the margent of the Atmosphere,
whose altitude exceeds not 40 miles (according to Mersennus and Cassendus)
perpendicular, up to the Region of the fixed Stars; are not only Fluid, but
Inane; abating only those points, which are pervaded by the rays of the Sun
and other Celestial Bodies. But, why should we lead the thoughts of our Reader
up to remote objects, whose sublimity proclaims their incertitude; when from
hence only, that the Aer is a Fluid substance: it is a manifest, direct and
unstrained consequence, that the immediate cause of its avoidance of any
sensible or coacervate Vacuity, is the Confluxibility of its Atomical
particles; which being in their natural contexture contiguous in some, though
not all points of their superficies, must of necessity press or bear each upon
other, and so mutually compel each other, that no one particle can be removed
out of its place, but instantly another succeeds and possesses it; and so there
can be no place left empty, as has been frequently explained by the simile of
a heap of Sand? Now, if the Confluxibility of the insensible particles of the
aer, be the immediate and per se Cause of its avoidance of any aggregate
sensible solution of Continuity: we need no farther justification of our
position, that Nature does oppose vacuity sensible not per se, but only in
order to the affection of Confluxibility, i. e. ex Accidenti

Again, should we swallow this praecarious supposition of the Ether, Art. 7. A
second Argument against the repletion of the Desert space by Ether
with no less pertinacity, then ingenuity asserted by many Moderns, but
professedly by Natalis, in both his Treatises ( Physica Vetus and Nova, and
Plenum experimentis novis confirmatum) and admit, that Nature provided that
most tenuious and fluid substance chiefly to praevent Vacuity: yet cannot the
Appetite of our Curiosity be satisfied, that the Desert space in the tube is
replenished with the same, prenetrating through the glass; until they have
solved that Appearance of the violent irruption of the ambient Aer into the
orifice of the tube, so soon as it is educed out of the subjacent liquors, the
Quicksilver and Water, by the same Hypothesis. Which whether they have done, so
as to demonstrate, that the sole cause of the Aers impetuous rushing into the
canale of the Tube, and prodigiously elevating the ponderous bodies of
Quicksilver and Water residuous therein, is not the Reflux of the incumbent
aer, by the ascension of the restagnant Quicksilver in the vessel, compressed
to too deep and diffused a subingression of its insensible Particles, to
recover its natural laxity, by regaining those spaces, from which it was
expelled and secluded; and to supply the defect of this reason, by substituting
some other syntaxical to their hypothesis of the Ether, which shall be more
verisimilous and plausible: this we ought to refer to the judgment of those,
who have attentively and aequitably perused their Writings.

Art. 8. The Vacuity of the Desert space, not praevented by an Halitus, or
Spiritual Efflux from the Mercury: for three convincing reasons.
Lastly, as for the third thing supposed to replenish the Desert space in the
Tube, viz. A certain spiritual Efflux, or Halitus, in this exigent, educed out
of the Mass of Quicksilver, by a secret force of Nature, which makes any shift
to avoid that horrid enemy of hers, Inanity; we deny not the possibility of
extracting or exhaling a spiritual substance from Quicksilver, fine enough to
possess such a space, without obnubilating it: but cannot conceive in this
case, what should be the efficient of that Extraction; for who can acquiess in
that General, a secret Force of Nature? (2) What becomes of that Exhalation,
when the Tube, merely upon its reclination to the altitude of the Horizontal
line, K. M. is repossessed with Mercury; for, to admit its reduction to what it
was before separation, is to suppose a second secret force in Nature
syncritical, or Conjunctive, Antagonist to the former Diacritical or
Separative, which operateth without Heat, as the other without Cold: and to
admit, its expiration through the pores or incontiguities of the Glass, is
either to suppose the same portion of Quicksilver rich enough in spirit to
replenish that Desert space a thousand times successively, in case the Tube be
so often elevated and reclined; for if all the spiritual substance be once
exhausted, then must that Fox, Nature, recur to another expedient, or else
tolerate a vacuity Coacervate; or to suppose that the same exhalation does
again return into the Glass, by the same slender ways it expired, which is a
Fancy worthy the smile of Heraclitus. (3) How this Halitus, in respect it is
praesumed more rare and subtle, then the aer admittible by the orifice of the
Tube, upon its reseration, can consist without Inanity Disseminate: which
implicateth an Universal Plenitude.

And these are the Reasons, which at first inclined our judgment to determine
on their part, who opinion the Desert space in the Tube to be an absolute
Coacervate Vacuity.

But, it was not long, before our second and more circumspect cogitations, Art.
9. The Auth^rs Apostasy from the opinion of an absolute Coacervate Vacuity in
the desert space: in regard of
assisted by time, which insensibly delivered our mind from that pleasant
enchantment of novel conceptions, and reduced it to that just temper of
indifferency, requisite to sincere discernment and aequitable arbitration;
perpending also the Arguments impugning the former persuasion of a Coacervate
Vacuity, and diminishing it down only to a Disseminate one in the Desert space
of the Tube: found them, by incomparable excesses, to preponderate the former,
and with many more grains or moments of Verisimilty to counterpoyse our
judgment to their end of the balance. And the Arguments Negative, are these.

1) Manifest it is even to the most critical of our senses, that LIGH
Tpenetrating the sides of the Glass Tube, Art. 10. The possibili^ of the
subingression of light.
does totally pervade the Desert Space: therefore it cannot be an absolute
sensible Vacuum. Now, that Light is a Body, or that the rays of Light are
certain* Corporeal, though most minute Effluviums transmitted from the luminous
Body, or Focus; is a Truth so universally embraced by all Knowing men, and upon
such apodictical commendations, that here to demonstrate it, would not only be
an unseasonable Digression, but a criminal Parergy.

(2) Though the Tube might be made of some metal, or other material, Art. 2. Of
the Atoms or insensible bodies of Heat and Cold: which are much more exile and
penetrative then common Aer.
whose contexture of Atomical Particles is so dense and compact, as not to
permit the trajection of the beams of Light; and though the Experiment would be
the same, in all Apparences, if made in the dark: yet may the Desert Space be
possessed by the subtle Atoms of Heat, or Cold, proceeding from the ambient
aer, and insinuating themselves through the incontiguities of the Tube. That
the Atoms of Heat and Cold ordinarily transfix Glass, is evident from the
Experience of Weather-glasses: in which the cause of the descent of the Water
included, is the Rarefaction of the aer therein by the Heat, and the cause of
the ascent of the water in cold Weather, is the Condensation of the same aer by
Cold; neither of which were possible, if the subingression of Cold and Hot
Atoms through the Glass were excluded. And, that the aer incarcerated in a
Thermometre, or Temperamental organ of Silver, Coper, or Brass, is subject to
the same mutations of qualities, upon the same vicissitude of Causes: has been
so frequently experimented, as to cut off all praetext of diffidence. Which is
also a sufficient manifest, that the Atoms of Heat and Cold are more exile and
penetrative, then those of the common Aer of use to Animals in Respiration:
insomuch as they insinuate themselves through such bodies, whose almost
continued parts interdict the intrusion of the grosser particles of Aer, which
cannot permeate through ordinary Glass. (1) Because, if you shut your self in a
closet, or chamber, that has but one small window consisting of one entire
pane of Glass, and that so caemented into Lead, as that no chinke is left
between; and whose cranies as well in the door, as elsewhere are all damm'd up:
you cannot hear the voice of another person, though speaking very loud and near
the Glass on the outside, notwithstanding you lay your ear close thereunto.
Now, since a Sound (at least the Vehicle of a sound) can be naught else, but a
subtle portion of the aer modified; as shall be professedly commonstrated, when
time has brought us so far on our praesent journey, as the proper place for
our Enquiry into the Nature of Sounds: and yet this so subtle and fine a
portion of the aer cannot penetrate Glass of an ordinary thickness: we have the
auctority of no weak nor obscure Reason, to countenance this our Conjecture,
that the Atoms of Cold and Heat, are more exile and searching, then the common
Aer. (2) If you include small Fishes in a large vial of the thinnest Glass,
filled with River water; they may live therein for many months, provided the
orifice of the Glass remain open and free to the aer: but, if you once stop it,
so as to exclude the aer, they shall expire in few moments. Whence we may
conclude, that however Fishes seem to have an obscure kind of Respiration, such
as may be satisfied with that small portion of Aer, which is commixt with
Water: yet is not that thin and subtle aer, supposed to penetrate Glass, the
same they (or any other Animal) use in Respiration. Which had those grand
Masters of mysterious Disquisitions, Mersennus and Robervallius animadverted;
they might have soon divined, what would be the event of their intended
Experiment, of including some small Animal, as a Mouse or Grasshopper, in a
Glass of sufficient capacity, and luting on the same on the top of the Tube,
where the Desert Space uses to be, in the Experiment of Mercury, so to try
whether the vital organs thereof could keep on their motions in a place devoid
of aer: insomuch as that purer substance dimanant from the region of the
circumjacent Aer, is not corporeal enough to serve the necessity of Respiration
in any Animal, though never so minute. The manner of making this Experiment,
is, by Mersennus (p. 50. reflect. physicomathemat.) praescript, thus: Porro,
operae praetium foret aliquam muscam admodum vegetam and robustam, v. c.
Crabronem, aut Vespam, in tubo includere, priusquam Mercurio impleretur, ut
post depletionem ad altitudinem 27 digit. proxime, videretur n^m in eo Vacuo,
aut, si mavis, aethere viveret, ambularet, volaret, and number Bombus a volante
produceretur.

(3) Deducting the possibility of both these, there yet remains a Third
substance, Art. 12. Of the Magnetical Efflux of the Earth: to which opinion the
Author resigns his Assent.
which may well be conceived to praevent a Coacervate Vacuity in the forsaken
space of the Tube: and that is the MAGNETICAL EFFLUX of the Earth. For (1) that
the Terraqueous Globe is one great Magnet, from all points of whose superfice
are uncessantly deradiated continued Threads or beams of subtle insensible
Aporrhaea's, by the intercession whereof all Bodies, whose Descent is commonly
adscribed to Gravity, are attracted toward its Center; in like manner as there
are continually expired from the body of the Loadstone invisible Chains, by the
intercession whereof Iron is nimbly allected unto it: is so generally conceded
a position among the Moderns, and with so solid reasons evicted by Gilbert,
Kircher, Cartesius, Gassendus and others, who have professedly made
disquisitions and discourses on that subject; that we need not here retard our
course, by insisting on the probation thereof.

(2) That, as the Magnetical expirations of the Loadstone, are so subtle and
penetrative, as in an instant to transfix and shoot through the most solid and
compact bodies, as Marble, Iron, etc. without impediment; as is demonstrable to
sense, the interposition of what solid body soever, situate within the orb of
energy, in no wise impeding the vertical or polory impregnation of a steel
Needle by a Magnet loricated, or armed: so also the Magnetical Effluvias of the
Globe of Earth do pervade and pass through the mass of Quicksilver contained
both in the Tube, and the Vessel beneath it, and fixing their Uncinulae or
hamous points, on the Ansulae, or Fastnings of the Quicksilver therein, attract
it downward perpendicularly toward the Center: is deduceable from hence, that
if any Bubbles of aer chance to be admitted into the Tube together with the
Quicksilver, that aer does not ascend to the top of the Tube, but remains
incumbent immediately upon the summity of the Quicksilver, as being, in respect
of its cognation to the Earth, attracted and as it were chained down by the
Magnetical, Emanations of the Earth transmitted through al interjacent bodies,
and hooked upon it. For we shall not incur the attribute of arrogance, if we
dare any man to assign the incumbence of the aer upon the Mercury, to any more
probable Cause. It being, therefore most Verisimilous, that the Earth does
perpetually exhale insensible bodies from all points of its surface, which
tending upward in direct lines, penetrate all bodies situate within the region
of vapors, or Atmosphere without resistance; and particularly the masses of
Quicksilver in the Tube and subjacent vessel: we can discover no shelf, that
can dissuade us from casting anchor in this serene Haven; That the magnetical
Exhalations of the Earth, do possess the Desert space in the Tube, so as to
exclude a sensible Vacuity.

Art. 13. No absolute plenitude, nor absolute Vacui^y, in the Desert Space: but
only a Disseminate Vacuity.
We said, so as to exclude a sensible Vacuity, thereby intimating that it is no
part of our conception, that either the Rays of Light, or the Atoms of Heat
and Cold, or the Magnetical Effluvia^s of the Earth, or all combined together,
do so enter and possess the Desert ^pace, as to cause an absolute Plenitude
therein. For, doubtless, were all those subtle Effluxions coadunated into one
dense and solid mass; it would not arise to a magnitude equal so much as to the
10th, nay the 40th part of the capacity abandoned by the delapsed Mercury. But
fill it to that proportion, as to leave only a Vacuity Disseminate: such as is
introduced into an Aeolipile, when by the Atoms of fire entered into, and
variously discurrent through its Concavity, the insensible Particles of Aer and
Water therein contained, are reduced to a more lax and open order, and so the
inane Incontiguities betwixt them ampliated. And this we judge sufficient
concerning the solution of the First Difficulty.

SECT. III. The Second Capital Difficulty.
WHat is the immediate Remora, or Impediment, whereby the Aer, Art 1. The
second Difficulty stated.
which in respect of the natural Confluxibility of its insensible particles, so
strongly and expeditely praeventeth any excessive vacuity, in all other cases,
is forced to suffer it in this of the Experiment?

The Solution.
Insomuch as the Fluidity, Art. 2. Two things necessary to the creation of an
excessive, or praeternatural Vacuity.
or Confluxibility of the Atomical or insensible particles of the Aer, is the
proxime and sole Cause of Natures abhorrence of all sensible Vacuity; as has
been proved in the praecedent Section: Manifest it is, that whosoever will
admit a Vacuity excessive, or against the rite of Nature, must, in order to the
introduction or Creation thereof, admit also two distinct Bodies; (1) One,
which being moved out of its place, must propel the contiguous aer forward. (2)
Another, which interposed, must hinder the parts of the circumstant aer,
propulsed by the parts of the aer impelled by the first movent, from obeying
the Confluxibility of their Figure, and succeeding into the place deserted by
the body first moved.

Which is the very scope, that the profound Galilaeo proposed to himself, Art.
3. The occasion of Galilaeos invention of a Brass Cylindre charged with a
wooden Embol, or Sucker: and of Torricellius invention of the praesent
Experiment.
when He invented a wooden Cylindre, as an Embolus or Sucker to be intruded
into another concave Cylindre of Brass, imperviously stopped below; that by the
force of weights appended to the outward extreme, or handle thereof, the sucker
might be gradually retracted from the bottom of the Concave, and so leave all
that space, which it forsakes, an entire and coacervate Vacuum. Upon which
design Torricellius long after meditating, and casting about for other means
more conveniently satisfactory to the same intention; He most happily lighted
upon the praesent Experiment: wherein the Quicksilver became an accommodate
substitute to Galilaeo's wooden sucker, and the Glass Tube to the Brass concave
Cylindre.

Art. 4. The marrow of the Difficulty, viz. How the Aer can be impelled upward,
by the Restagnant Quicksilver, when there externally wants a fit space for it
to circulate into.
The remaining part of the Difficulty, therefore, is only this relative Scruple;
How the Aer can be propelled by the wooden sucker, downward, or by the
restagnant Quicksilver in the Vessel, upward, when externally there is provided
no void space for its reception* For, indeed in the ordinary Translation of
bodies through the aer, it is no wonder that the adjacent aer is propelled by
them; since they leave as much room behind them, as the aer propelled before
them formerly possessed, whereinto it may and does recur: but in this case of
the Experiment, the condition is far otherwise, there being, we confess, a
place left behind, but such as the aer propelled before cannot retreat into it,
in regard of the interposition of another dense solid and impervious body. Upon
which consideration, we formerly and pertinently reflected when reciting some
of those Experiments vulgarly objected to a Vacuum Disseminatum, we insisted
particularly upon that of a Garden Irrigatory: showing, that the Reason of the
Waters subsistence, or pendency therein, so long as the orifice in the Neb
remains stopped, is the defect of room for the aer pressed upon by the basis of
the Water to recur into upon its resignation of place; because all places being
full, there can be none whereinto the inferior aer may recede, until upon
deobstruction of the hole above, the circumjacent aer enters into the cavity of
the Vessel, and resignes to the aer pressed upon below, and so the motion
begins and continues by a successive surrender of places. For, though the aer
contiguous to the bottom of the Irrigatory, be not sufficient to resist the
compressure of so great a weight of water, by the single renitency of the
Confluxibility of its atomical particles; yet the next contiguous aer,
possessing the vicine spaces, and likewise wanting room to recede into, when
compelled by the first aer, aggravates the resistance: which becomes so much
the greater, by how much the farther the pressure is extended among the parts
of the circumjacent aer; and by so much the farther, is the pressure of the
circumjacent aer extended, by how much the greater is the pressure of the next
contiguous aer; and that pressure is proportionate to the degrees of Gravity
and velocity in the body descendent. Which is manifestly the reason, why the
water does not descend through the perforated bottom of the Vessel, viz.
because the Gravity thereof is not sufficient to counterpoyse so diffused,
prolix, and continued resistance, as is made and maintained by the
confluxibility of the parts of the circumambient aer successively uniting their
forces.

Art. 5. The solution of the same, by the Laxity of the Contexture of the Aer
Notwithstanding this seeming plenitude, we may absolve our reason from the
intricacy of the scruple, by returning: that, though all places about the Tube
are filled with aer, yet not without some Laxity. So, though there be, indeed,
no sensible or coacervate space, wherein there are not some parts of the aer:
yet are there many insensible or disseminate spaces, or ^oculaments variously
interspersed among the incontiguous (in all points) particles of the aer, which
are unpossessed by any Tenent at all. For the familiarizing of this Nicety, let
us have recourse once again to our so frequently mentioned example of a heap of
Corn.

Art. 6. The same illustrated, by the adaequate simile of Corn infused into a
Bus^el.
When we have poured Corn into a Bushel up to the brim thereof; the capacity
seems wholly possessed by the Grains of Corn, nor is there therein any space,
which sensibly contains not some Grains: yet if we shake the bushel, or
depress the Corn, the Grains sink down in a closer posture, and leave a
sensible space in the upper part of the bushel, capable of a considerable
access or addition. The reason is, that the Grains, at their first infusion, in
respect of the ineptitude of their Figures for mutual contact, in all points of
their super^icies, intercept many empty spaces betwixt them; which dispersed
minute inane spaces are reduced to one great and coacervate or sensible space,
in the superior part of the Continent, when, by the succussion of the vessel,
the Grains are disposed into a closer posture, i. e. are more accommodated for
mutual contingency in their ends and sides. Thus also may aer be so compressed,
as the Granules, or insensible particles of it, being reduced to a more close
or dense order, by the s^bingression of some particles of the aer nearest to
the body Compressing, into the incontiguities of the next neighboring aer; may
possess much less of space, then before compression; and consequently surrender
to the body propelling or compressing, leaving behind a certain space
absolutely devoid of aer, at least, such as does appear to contain no aer.

But this Difficulty, Hydra-like, Art. 7. A subordinate scruple, why most
bodies are moved through the Aer, with so little resistance, as is
imperceptible by sense?
sends out two new Heads in the room of one cut off. For, Curiosity may justly
thus expostul^te.

(1) Have you not formerly affirmed, that no body can be moved, but it must
compel the aer forward, to suffer a certain subingression of its insensible
particles into the pores, or Loculaments of the next contiguous aer, such as is
requisite to the leaving of a space behind it for the admission of the body
moved? And, if so; how comes it, that when most bodies are moved through the
aer, with so much facility, and therefore cause the parts thereof before them
to intrude themselves into the incontiguities of the next vicine aer, with a
force so small, as that it is altogether insensible: yet in this case of the
Experiment, is required so great a force to effect the subingression and mutual
Coaptation of the parts of the aer?

The Cause seems to be this. Art 8. The same Expeded.
In all common motions of bodies through the liberal aer, there is left a Space
behind, into which the parts of the aer may instantly circulate, and deliver
themselves from compression; and so there is a subingression and Coaptation of
only a few parts necessary, and consequently the motion is tolerated without
any sensible Resistance: but in this Case of the Experiment, in regard there is
no place left behind by the Propellent, into which the compressed parts of the
aer may be effused; necessary it is that the parts of aer immediately
contiguous to the body Propellent, in their retrocession and subingression
compress the parts of the next contiguous aer; which though they make some
resistance (proportionate to their measure of Confluxibility) do yet yield,
retrocede, and intrude themselves into the incontiguities of the next
contiguous aer; and those making also some resistance, likewise yield,
retrocede, and insinuate themselves into the Loculaments of the next, which
acts the like part upon the next, and so successively. So that a greater force
then ordinary is required to subdue this gradually multiplied resistance
successively made and maintained by the many circumfused parts of the aer; and
to effect, Art. 9. A second dependent scruple concerning the Cause of the
sensible resistance of the Aer, in this case of the Experiment: together with
the satisfaction thereof, by the Gravity of Aer
that the retrocession, subingression and coaptation of the parts of the aer be
propagated farther and farther, until convenient room be made, for the
reception of the body Propellent.

(2) Whence do you derive this Resistance of the Aer?

From its Gravity. For, the Aer of its own nature is Heavy, and can be said to
be Light only comparatively, or as it is less ponderous then Water and Earth:
nor can there be given any more creditable reason of the Aers tendency upward
here below near the convexity of the Earth, then this; that being in some
degree ponderous in all its particles, they descend downwards from the upper
region of the Atmosphere, and in their descent bear upon and mutually compel
each other, until they touch upon the surface of the Earth, and are by reason
of the solidity and hardness thereof repercussed or rebounded up again to some
distance: so that the motion of the Aer upwards near the face of the Earth, is
properly Resilition, and no natural, but a violent one. Now, insomuch as the
Aer seems to be no other, but a common Miscelany of minute bodies, exhaled from
Earth and Water and other concretious sublunary, and proportionately to their
Crassitude or Exility, emergent to a greater or less altitude: it can be no
illegal process for us to infer, that all parts thereof are naturally endowed
with more or less Gravity proportionate to their particular bulk; whether that
Gravity be understood to be (as common Physiology will have it) a Quality
congenial and inhaerent, or (as Verisimility) their conformity to the magnetic
Attraction of the Earth. And, insomuch as this Gravity is the cause of the
mutual Depression among the particles of aer in their tendency from the upper
region of the Atmosphere down to the surface of the Earth: we may well
conceive, that the Depression of the inferior parts of the aer by the superior
incumbent upon them, is the origin immediate from whence that Reluctance or
Resistance, observed in the Experiment, upon the induction of a praeternatural
Inanity between the Parts thereof. But a farther prosecution and illustration
of this particular, depends on the solution of the next Problem.

SECT. IV. The Third Capital Difficulty.
WHat is the Cause of the Quicksilvers not descending below that determinate
Altitude, Art. 1. The State of the Third Difficulty.
or Standard of 27 digits?

Solution.
Art. 2. The Solution thereof in a Word.
The Resistance of the parts of the aer, which endures no compression, or
subingress of its insensible particles, beyond that certain proportion, or
determinate rate. Art. 3. Three praecedent positions briefly recognized, in
order to the worthy profounding of the mystery, of the Aers resisting
Compression beyond a certain rate, or determinate proportion.


To profound this mystery of Nature to the bottom, we are to request our Reader
to endure the short recognition of some passages in our praecedent discourses.
(1) That upon the ordinary translation of bodies through the Aer, the
resistance of its insensible parts is so small, as not to be discoverable by
the sense; because the subingression of its contiguous parts into the
loculaments of the next vicine aer, is only perexile, or superficial: and that
we may safely imagine this superficial subingression not to be extended beyond
the thickness of a single hair; nay, in some cases, perhaps, not to the
hundredth part thereof. So stupendiously subtle are the fingers of Nature in
many of her operations. But, that the resistance observed in the present
Experiment, for the enforcing of a praeternatural Vacuum, is therefore
deprehensible by the sense, because in respect of a defect of place behind the
body propellent, into which the parts of the aer compelled forward may
circulate, the subingression must be more profound; and so the resistance being
propagated farther and farther by degrees, must grow multiplied, and
consequently sensible. (2) That the Force of the body propellent is greater,
then the force of the next contiguous aer protruding the next, and the force of
the third protruded wave of the aer (for a kind of Undulation may be ascribed
to aer) greater on the Fourth, then that of the Fourth upon the Fifth, and so
progressionally to the extrem of its diffusion or extension: so that the Force
becomes so much the weaker and more oppugnable, by how much the farther it is
extended; and dwindles or languishes by degrees into a total cessation. (3)
That, as upon the succussion, or shock of a Bushel apparently full of Corn, is
left a certain sensible space above, unpossessed by any part or Grain thereof;
which coacervate empty space responds in proportion to those many Disseminate
Vacuola, or Loculaments intercepted among the incontingent sides of the Grains,
before their reduction to a more close order by the succussion of the Bushel:
so likewise, upon the impulse of the aer by a convenient body, is left behind a
sensible space absolutely empty, as to any part of aer; which Coacervate empty
space must respond in proportion to those many Disseminate spaces intercepted
among the incontiguous parts, or Granules of the aer, before their reduction to
a more close order, or mutual subingression and coaptation of sides and points,
by the body compressing.

These Notions recogitated, Art. 4. The Aequiponderancy of the External Aer,
pendent upon the surface of the Restagnant Mercury, in the vessel, to the
Cylindre of Mercury residuous in the Tube, at the altitude of 27 digits: the
cause of the Mercuries constant subsistence at that point.
our speculations may progress with more advantage to explore the proxime and
proper Cause of the Mercuries constant subsistence at the altitude of 27
digits, in the Tube perpendicularly erected. For, upon the credit of their
importance, we may justly assume; that upon the compression of the
circumambient Aer by a small quantity of Quicksilver (suppose only of two or
three inches) impendent in the concave of the tube, can be caused, indeed, some
small subingression of the particles thereof; but such, as is only superficial
and insensible: in respect the weight of so small a proportion of Quicksilver
is not of force sufficient to propel the parts of the aer to so great a
crassitude that the space detracted from the Aggregate of Disseminate Vacuities
should amount to that largness, as to become visible above the Quicksilver in
the Tube; since the quantity of the Quicksilver being supposed little, the
force of Reluctance, or Resistance in the parts of the aer, arising from their
inhaerent Fluidity, must be greater then the force of compression arising from
Gravity; and therefore there succeeds no sensible Deflux of the Quicksilver.
But, being that a greater and greater mass of Quicksilver may be successively
infused into the Tube, and so the compressive force of its Gravity be
respectively augmented; and thereupon the aer become less and less able
successively to make resistance: it is difficult not to observe, that the
proportion of Compression from Gravity in the Quicksilver, may be so equalized
to the Resistance from Gravity in the Aer, as that both may remain in statu
quo, without any sensible yiedling on either side. Hence comes it, that at the
aequipondium of these two Antagonists, the space in the Tube detracted from the
Aggregate of minute Inanities disseminate in the aer, is so small as not to be
commensurated by sense: and at the cessation of the Aequilibrium, or succeding
superiority of the increased weight of the Quicksilver, the parts of the Aer
being compelled thereby to a farther retrocession and subingression; the space
detracted from the Aggregate of disseminate Vacuities in the aer, becomes
larger, and consequently sensible, above the Quicksilver in the upper region of
the Tube.

Art 5. A convenient (...), illustrating and enforcing the same.
This may be most adaequately illustrated, by the simile of a strong man,
standing on a plane pedestal, in a very high wind. For, as He by a small
afflation or gust of wind, is in some degree urged or pressed upon, though not so
much as to cause him to give back; because the force of his resistance is yet
superior to that of the Wind assaulting and impelling him; nor, when the force
of the Wind grows upon him even to an Aequilibrium, is He driven from his
station, because his resistance is yet equal to the impulse of the wind; but
when the force of the Wind advances to that height, as to transcend the
Aequilibrium, then must the man be compelled above the rate of his resistance,
and so be abduced from the place of his station: so likewise, while there is
only a small quantity of Quicksilver contained in the Tube, though, by the
intervention or mediation of the Quicksilver restagnant in the subjacent
vessel, it press upon the parts of the incumbent aer, in some degree; yet is
not the aer thereby urged so, as to be compelled to retrocede, and permit the
restagnant Quicksilver to ascend higher in the vessel; and therefore the
Quicksilver impendent in the Tube cannot descend, because the restagnant wants
room to ascend. But, when the quantity, and so the Gravity of the Quicksilver
contained in the Tube is so augmented, as to exceed the Resistance of the aer;
then is the aer compelled or driven back, by the restagnant Quicksilver rising
upwards, to a sensible subingression of its atomical particles, and the
Quicksilver in the Tube instantly defluxeth into the place resigned by the
restagnant, until it arriveth at that point of altitude, or standard, where the
resistance of the aer becomes again equal to the force compressing it, and
there subsisteth, after various reciprocations up and down in the Tube. Art. 6.
The Remainder of the Difficulty, viz. Why the Aequilibrium of these two
opposite weights, the Mercury and the Aer, is constant to the praecise altitude
of 27 d^g^t^: rem^ved.


Now concerning the remaining, and, indeed, the most knotty part of the
Difficulty, viz. Why the Aequilibrium of these two opposite Forces, is constant
to the certain praecise altitude of 27 digits? of this admirable Magnale no
other cause seems worthily assignable, but this; that such is the nature of
aer, in respect both of the atomical particles of which it is composed, and of
the disseminate vacuities variously interspersed among them, as that it does
resist compression at such a determinate rate, or definite proportion, as
exactly responds to the altitude of 27 digits. Should it be demanded of us, Why
He, Art. 7. Huma^e Perspicacity terminated in the exterior parts of Nature, or
simple Apparitions: which eluding our Cognition, frequently fall under no other
comprehension, but that of rational Conjecture.
who stands on a plane, does resist the impulse of a mighty wind to such a
determinate rate or height, but not farther: we conceive our Answer would be
satisfactory to the ingenious, if we returned only, that such is the exact
proportion of his strength, resulting from the individual temperament of his
body.

We are Men, i. e. Moles; whose weak and narrow Optics are accommodated only
to the inspection of the exterior and low parts of Nature, not perspicacious
enough to penetrate and transfix her interior and abstruse Excellencies: nor
can we speculate her glorious beauties in the direct and incident line of
Essences and Formal Causes, but in the refracted and reflected one of Effects;
nor that, without so much of obscurity, as leaves a manifest incertitude in our
Apprehensions, and restrains our ambition of intimate and apodictical Science,
to the humble and darksome region of mere superficial Conjecture. Such being
the condition of our imperfect Intellectuals; when we cannot explore the
profound recesses, and call forth the Formal Proprieties of some Natures, but
find our disquisitive Faculties terminated in the some Apparences, or Effects
of them: it can be no derogation to the dignity of Humanity, for us to rest
contented, nay thankful to the Bounty of our Creator, that we are able to erect
verisimilous Conjectures concerning their causation, and to establish such
rational Apprehensions or Notions thereupon, as may, without any incongruity,
be laudably accommodated to the probable solution of other consimilar Effects,
when we are required to yield an account of the manner of their arise from
their proper originals. Thus, from our observation of other things of the like
condition, having extracted a rational Conjecture, that this so great Gravity
of the Quicksilver does depend upon the very Contexture of its insensible
particles, or minute bodies, whereof it does consist, by which they are so
closely and contiguously accommodated each to other in the superficies of their
points and sides, as no body whatever ( Gold only excepted) does contain more
parts in so small a bulk, nor consequently more Ansulae, or Fastnings, whereon
the Magnetique Hooks of the Earth are fixable, in order to its attraction
downward: and on the contrary, that the so little Gravity of the Aer, depends
on a quite dissimilar Contexture of its insensible particles, of which it is
composed, by which they are far less closely and contiguously adapted each to
other, and so incomparably fewer of them are contained in the like space, and
consequently have incomparably fewer Ansulae or Fastnings, whereon the Hooks of
the Magnetic Chains of the Earth may be fixed: having, we said, made this
probable conjecture, what can be required more at our hands, then to arrest
Curiosity with this solution; that the Aer is of such a Nature, i. e.
consists of such insensible particles, and such Inane Spaces interspersed
among them, as that it is an essential propriety of it, to resist compression,
to such a determinate rate, and not beyond? Had we bin born such Lyncei, as to
have had a clear and perspect Knowledge of the Atoms of Aer, of their Figure,
magnitude, the dimensions of the Inane spaces intercepted among them, of the
facility or difficulty of their reciprocal adaptation, of the measure of their
Attraction, the manner and velocity of their Tendency, etc. then, indeed, might
we, without any complex circumambage of Discourse, have rendered the express
and proper Reason, why the Aer does yield praecisely so much, and no more to
the Gravity of the Quicksilver compressing it. Since we were not, it may be
reputed both honor and satisfaction, to say; that it is essential to the
Natures of Mercury and Aer, thus and thus opposed, to produce such and only
such an Effect. Art. 8. The constant subsistence of the Mercury at 27 d^gits,
adscriptive rather to the Resistance of the Aer, then to any occult Quality in
the Mercury.


However, that we may not dismiss our Reader absolutely jejune, who came hither
with so great an Appetite; we observe to him, that the constant subsistence of
the Mercury at the altitude of 27 digits, does seem rather to proceed from the
manifest Resistance of the Aer, then from any secret Quality in the Mercury,
unless its proportion of Gravity be so conceived. This may be collected from
hence; that Water infused into the Tube does also descend to the point of
Aequipondium, and stops at the altitude of 32 Feet, nor more, nor less; and in
that altitude becomes aequiponderant to the Mercury of 27 digits. So that it is
manifest, that with what Liquor soever the Tube be filled, still will the Aer
resist its deflux at a certain measure: provided only, that the Tube be long
enough to receive so much of it, as the weight thereof may equal that of the
Mercury at 27 digits, or the Water at 32 feet.

Art 9. The Anal^gy betwixt the Absolute and Respective Aequality of weigh^s,
of Quicksilver and Water, in the different altitudes of 27 d^gits and 32 feet.
Here we meet an opportunity also of observing to Him, by how admirable an
Analogy this respective Aequality of the weights of Quicksilver and Water, in
these so different altitudes, does consent with the absolute weight of each.
When, as the weight of Quicksilver carries the same proportion to the weight of
Water, of the same measure or quantity, as 14 to 1: so reciprocally does the
Altitude of 32 feet, carry the same proportion to 27 digits, as 14 to 1. And
hence comes it, that, if Water be s^peraffused upon the restagnant Quicksilver
in the vessel under the Tube; the Quicksilver does instantly ascend above the
standard of 27 digits, higher by a 14^^. part of the water superaffused. Which
truly, is no immanifest argument, that the Aer, according to the measure of its
weight, or the praecise rate of its resistance, becomes aequilibrated to the
Mercury at the altitude of 27 dig. since the superaffused Water does no more
then advance the Aequilibrium according to the rate of its weight, or
proportion of resistance. Besides, it is farther observable, that because the
Tube is replenished by a 14th part in 27 dig. of the altitude, above the first
Aequilibrium (a proportionate access to the Mercury in the Tube, being made by
a like part of that in the subject vessel, impelled into it) therefore is the
Vacuum above the Mercury in the Tube, diminished also by one 14th. part; and
the compression of the Aer, impendent on the surface of the restagnant Mercury,
relaxed and diminished also by a 14th part. So that if the vessel underneath
the Tube be large enough to admit an addition of Water successively affused,
until so much of the restagnant Mercury, as formerly descended, shall be again
propelled up into the Tube: then must the whole Tube be replenished, and so the
whole Vacuity disappear, for then all Compression of the incumbent aer cease,
and so much space as was possessed before the Experiment, both without and
within the Tube, by the Mercury, Water, Aer, is again repleted.

Art. 10. The definite weights of the Mercury at 27 d^gits, and Water at 32
feet, in a Tube of the third part of a digit in diametre; ^^und to be near upon
two pound, Paris wei^ht.
If you shall still insist, and urge us to a praecise and definite account of
the weight of the Quicksilver contained in the Tube to the altitude of 27
digits, and of the Water of 32 feet; which makes the Aequilibrium with the
opposite weight of the circumstant Aer: our Answer is, that the exact weight of
neither can be determined, unless the just Diameter or Amplitude of the Tube be
first agreed upon. For albeit neither the Longitude nor the Amplitude of the
Tube makes any sensible difference in this Phenomenon of the Experiment, the
Aequilibrium being still constant to the same altitude of 27 digits, for the
Mercury, and 32 feet for Water: yet, according as the Cavity of the Tube is
either smaller, or greater, must the weight of the Liquors contained therein be
either less, or more. Since therefore, we are to explore the definite weight of
the Liquor contained, by the determinate Amplitude of the Tube containing;
suppose we the Diametre of the cavity of the Tube to be one third part of a
Consul^ndus Mersennus, in tract. de Mensuris and ponderibus, cap 1. and (...)
physicomathemat. p. 229.
Digit, and we shall find the weight of the Quicksilver, from the base to the
altitude of 27 digits, to be near upon two pound, Paris weight: and upon
consequence the weight of Water in the same Tube, of 32 feet in altitude, to be
the same; and the weight of the Cylindre of Aer, from its base incumbent on the
surface of the restagnant Quicksilver, up to its top at the summity of the
Atmosphere, to be also the same; otherwise there could be no Aequilibrium.
Here, as a Corollary, we may add, that insomuch as the force of a body
Attrahent may be aequiparated to the weight of another body spontaneously
descending or attracted magnetically by the Earth: thereupon we may conclude,
that the like proportion of weight appended to the handle of the wooden Sucker,
may suffice to the introduction of an equal vacuum, in Galilaeo's Brass
Cylindre.

But, perhaps, you will object; Art. 11. Quaere, Why the Aequilibrium is constant
to the same point of altitude in a Tube of a large concave, as well as in one
of a small; when the force of the Depriment must be greater in the one, then
the other.
that this seems rather to entangle then dissolve the Riddle. Since by how much
the larger the cavity of the Tube, by so much the greater the quantity, and so
the weight of the Quicksilver contained: and by how much the greater the
weight, or force of the Depriment, by so much the more must the Depressed
yield, and consequently, so much the lower must the Aequilibrium be stated.

To extricate you from this Labyrinth, we retort; that the cause of the
Aequilibriums constancy to the point of 27 digits, whatever be the quantity of
the Mercury contained in the Tube, is the same with that, which makes the
descent of two bodies of the same matter, but different weights, to be Aequally
Swift: for a bullet of Lead of an ounce, Art. 12. The solution thereof by the
appropriation of the same Cause, which makes the descent of two b^dies, of
different weights, aequivelox.
falls down as swiftly as one of 100 pound. For, in respect, that a Cylindre of
Quicksilver contained in a Tube of a large diametre, does not descend more
swiftly, then a Cylindre of Quicksilver contained in a Tube of a narrow
diametre: therefore is it, that the one does not press the bottom, upon which
as its Base, it does impend, more violently then the other does press upon its
Base; and consequently, the restagnant Quicksilver about the larger Cylindre
does not, in its elevation or rising upward, more compress the Basis of the
impendent Cylindre of Aer, then what is restagnant about the lesser Cylindre.
Whereupon we may conclude, that a great Cylindre of Aer resisting a great
Cylindre of Quicksilver, no less then a small does resist a small: therefore
ought the Aequilibrium betwixt the depressure of the Quicksilver, and the
resistance of the circumstant Aer, to be constant to the altitude of 27 digits,
as well in a large, as a narrow Tube. Which reason may also be accommodated to
Water and all other Liquors.

SECT. V. The Fourth Capital Difficulty.
Art. 1. The Fourth Capital Difficulty proposed.
WHy is the deflux of the Quicksilver always stinted at the altitude of 27
digits, though in Tubes of different longitudes? when it seems more reasonable,
that according to the increase or enlargement of the Inanity in the upper part
of the Tube, which holds proportion to the Longitude thereof; the Compression,
and so the Resistance of the Aer circumpendent, ought also to be increased
proportionately: and consequently, that the Aequilibrium ought to be so much
the higher in the Tube, by how much the greater Resistance the Aer makes
without; because, by how much a larger Space is detracted from the Aer, by so
much more diffused and profound must the subingression of its Atomical
Particles be, and so the greater its resistance.

Solution.
Art. 2. The full solution thereof, by demonstration.
Certain it is, as well upon the evidence of sense, as the conviction of several
demonstrations excogitated chiefly by Mersennus (in Phaenom* Hydraulic.) that a
Cylindre of any Liquor does with so much the more force or Gravity impend upon
its Base, or bottom, by how much the higher its perpendicular reaches, or, by
how much the longer it is: and consequently, having obtained a vent, or liberty
of Exsilition below at its Base, issues forth with so much the more rapidity of
motion. And this secret reveals what we explore. For, according to the same
scale of Proportions, we may warrantably conceive; that, by how much the higher
the Cylindre of Quicksilver is in the Tube, by so much the more forcibly it
impendeth upon its Base, in the Restagnant Quicksilver; and so having obtained
a vent below, falls with so much the more rapidity of motion or exsilition
thereupon: and upon consequence, by so much the more violently is the incumbent
Aer compressed by the restagnant Quicksilver ascending, its resistance
overcome, and the subingression of its insensible particles into the inane
Loculaments of the vicine aer, propagated or extended the farther; and the
space detracted from the Aggregate of Disseminate Inanities, so much the
larger, and consequently the Coacervate Vacuum apparent in the superior region
of the Tube, becomes so much the greater. And, because the Resistance made
against the subingression, dilating or distending it self, is in the instant
overcome, by reason of a greater impulse caused by the Cylindre of Mercury
descending from a greater altitude; and that resistance remains, Art. 3. The
same confirmed, by the theory of the Cause of the Mercuries frequent
Reciprocations, before it acquiesce at the point of Aequipondium.
which could not be overcome, by the remnant of the Mercury in the Tube, at the
height of 27 digits: therefore, is this Remaining Degree of resistance, the
manifest Cause, why the Mercury is Aequilibrated here at the point of 27
digits, as well when it falls from a high as a low perpendicular.

This may receive a degree of perspicuity more, from the transitory observation
of those frequent Reciprocations of the Quicksilver, at the first deflux of it
into the restagnant, before it acquiesce and fix at the point of
Aequiponderancy: no otherwise then a Ball bounds and rebounds many times upon a
pavement, and is by successive subsultations uncessantly agitated up and down,
until they gradually diminish and determine in a cessation or quiet. The Cause
of which can be no other then this; that the extreme or remotest subingression
of the insensible particles of the Aer, is (we confess) propagated somewhat
farther, then the necessity of the Aequipondi^m requires, by reason of a new
access of Gravity in the Quicksilver; but, instantly the insensible particles
of the Aer, being so violently and beyond the rate of subingressibility pressed
upon, and made as it were more powerful by their necessary Reflection, then the
re^idue of Quicksilver remaining in the Tube; result back to their former
station of liberty, with that vehemence, as they not only praevent any further
subingression, and reduce the even-now-superior and conquering force of the
Quicksilver to an equality; but also repel the Quicksilver delapsed up again
into the Tube above the point of the Aequipondium: and again, when the
Quicksilver defluxeth, but not from so great an altitude, as at first; then is
the Aer again compelled to double her files in a countermarch, and recede from
the restagnant Quicksilver, though not so far, as at first charge. And thus the
force of each being by reciprocal conquests gradually decreased, they come to
that Equality, as that the Quicksilver subsists in that point of altitude,
wherein the A^quilibrium is.

SECT. VI. The Fifth Capital Difficulty.
WHat Force that is, whereby the Aer, Art. 1. The Fifth Principal Difficulty.
admitted into the lower orifice of the Tube, at the total eduction thereof out
of the restagnant Quicksilver and Water; is impelled so violently, as suffices
not only to the elevation of the remaining Liquors in the Tube, but even to the
discharge of them through the sealed extreme, to a considerable height in the
Aer?

Solution.
The immediate Cause of this impetuous motion, Art. 2. Solved, by the Motion of
Restoration na^ural to each insensible particle of Aer.
appears to be only the Reflux, or Resilition of the so much compressed Basis
of the Cylindre of Aer, impendent on the surface of the Restagnant Liquors,
Quicksilver and Water, to the natural Laxity of its insensible particles upon
the cessation of the force Compressive: the Principle, and manner of which
Restorative or Re^lexive Motion, may be perspicuously deprehended, upon a
serious recognition of the Contents of the last Article in the praecedent
Chapter of a Disseminate Vacuum; and most accommodately Exemplified in the
discharge or explosion of a bullet from a Wind-Gun. For, as the insensible
particles of the Aer included in the Tube of a Wind-Gun, being, by the Embolus
or Rammer, from a more lax and rare contexture, or order, reduced to a more
dense and close (which is effected, when they are made more contiguous in the
points of their superfice, and so compelled to diminish the inane spaces
interjacent betwixt them, by subingression) are, in a manner so many Springs or
Elaters, each whereof, so soon as the external Force, that compressed them,
cease (which is at the remove of the Diaphragme or Partition plate in the
chamber of the Tube) reflecteth, or is at least reflected by the impulse of
another contiguous particle: therefore is it, that while they are all at one
and the same instant executing that Restorative Motion, they impel the Bullet,
gaged in the canale of the Tube, before them with so much violence, as enables
it to transfix a plank of two or three digits thickness. So also do the
insensible Particles of the Base of the Cylindre of Aer incumbent on the
surface of the Restagnant Liquors, remain exceedingly compressed by them, as so
many Springs bent by external Force: and so soon as that Force cease (the
Quicksilver in the Tube, after its eduction, no longer pressing the Restagnant
Mass of Quicksilver underneath, and so that by his tumefaction no longer
pressing the impendent Aer) they with united forces reflect themselves into
their natural rare and liberal contexture, and in that Restorative motion drive
up the remainder of Quicksilver in the canale of the Tube to the upper extreme
thereof with such violence, as suffices to explode all impediments, and shiver
the glass.

Art. 3. The incumbent Aer, in this case, equally distressed, by two contrary
Forces.
For, in this case, we are to conceive the Aer to be aequally distressed betwixt
two opposite Forces; on one side by the Gravity of the long Cylindre of Aer
from the summity of the Atmosphere down to the Base impendent on the superfice
of the Restagnant Liquors; on the other, by the ascendent Liquors in the
subjacent vessel, which are impelled by the Cylindre of Quicksilver in the
tube, descending by reason of its Gravity: and consequently, that so soon as
the obex, Barricade, or impediment of the Restagnant Quicksilver, is removed,
the distressed Aer instantly converteth that resistent force, which is inferior
to the Gravity of the incumbent aereal Cylindre, upon the remainder of the
Quicksilver in the Tube, as the now more superable Opponent of the two; and so
countervailing its Gravity by the motion of Reflection or Restoration, hoyseth
it up with so rapid a violence, Art. 4. The motion of Restaurati^n in the Aer,
extended to the satisfaction of another consimilar Doubt, concerning the
subintrusion of Water into the Tube; if superaffused upon the restagnant
Mercury.
as the easily frangible body of the Glass cannot sustain.

Which Reason does also satisfy another Collateral Scruple, viz. Why Water,
superaffused upon the Restagnant Quicksilver, does intrude it self as it were
creeping up the side of the Tube, and replenish the Desert Space therein; so
soon as the inferior orifice of the Tube is educed out of the Restagnant
Quicksilver, into the region of Water. For, it is impelled by the Base of the
Aereal Cylindre exceedingly compressed, and relaxing it self: the resistance of
it, which was not potent enough to praevail upon the greater Gravity of the
Quicksilver in the Tube, so as to impel it above the point of Aequiponderancy;
being yet potent enough to elevate the Water, Art. 5. A Third most important
Doubt, concerning the nonapparence of any Tensity, or Rigidity in the region of
Aer incumbent upon the Restagnant Liquors.
as that whose Gravity is by 13 parts of 14 less then that of the Quicksilver.

Here the Inquisitive may bid us stand, and observe a second subordinate Doubt,
so considerable, as the omission of it together with a rational solution, must
have rendered this whole Discourse not only imperfect, but a more absolute
Vacuum, i. e. containing less of matter, then the Desert Space in the Tube; and
that is: How it comes, that during the Aequilibrium betwixt the ^eight of the
Quicksilver in the Tube on the one hand, and the long Cy^lindre of Aer on the
other, even then when the Base of the Cylindre of Aer is compressed to the term
of subingression; we find the aer as Fluxile, soft, and yiedling, (for, if you
move your hand transversly over the Restagnant Quicksilver, you can deprehend
none the least Tensity, Rigidity, or Urgency thereabout) as any other part of
the Region of Aer not altered from the Laxity of its natural contexture?

We reply, Art. 6. The solati^n thereof, by the necessary reliction of a space
in the (...) regi^n of Lax aer, equal to that, which the Hand commoved
possesses in the region of the Comprest.
that though nothing occurr in the whole Experiment more worthy our absolution;
yet nothing occurrs less worthy our admiration then this. For, if my hand, when
moved toward the region of the compressed Aer, did leave the space, which it
possessed before motion, absolutely Empty, so as the aer impelled and dislodged
by it could not circulate into the same; in that case, indeed, might I
perceive, by a resistance obvening a manifest Tensity or Rigidity in the
compressed aer: but, insomuch as when my hand leaves the region of the lax aer,
and enters that of the compressed, there is as much of space lest in the lax
aer for the compressed to recurr into, as that which my hand possesses in the
region of the compressed; and when it has passed through the region of the
compressed, and again enters the confines of the lax, there is just so much of
the lax aer propelled into the space left in the compressed, as responds in
proportion to the space possessed by it in the lax: therefore does my hand
deprehend no sensible difference of Fluxility in either, and yet is the Urgency
or Contention of the Base of the Cylindre of aer impendent upon the restagnant
Quicksilver, constantly equal, though it may be conceived to suffer an
Undulation or Wavering motion by the traversing of my hand to and again, by
reason of the propulse and repulse.

This may be enforced by the Example of the Flame of a Candle; Art. 7. A
confi^ma^ion of the same Reason, by the adaequate Example of the Flame of a
Tapour.
which though ascending constantly with extreme pernicity, or rapidity of
motion, and made more crass and tense by the admixture of its own ^uliginous
Exhalations: does yet admit the traversing of your finger to and fro through it
so easily, as you can deprehend no difference of Fluxility between the parts of
the Flame and those of the circumvironing Aer; the cause whereof must be
identical with the former.

Secondly, by the Experience of Urinators or Diverse; Art. 8. 2 By the
Experiment of Vrination.
who find the Extension and contraction of their arms and legs as free and
easy at the depth of 20 fathoms* as within a foot of the surface of the Water;
notwithstanding that water comes many degrees short of Aer, in the point of
Quam ob caussam, corpus h^m^nus ad (...) nullum incumbentis aquae p^ndus
sentiat, lector (...) Hyd^aul^^. (...) p. ^05.
Fluidity.

Art. 9. 3 By the Beams of the Sun, entering a room, through some slender crany,
in the appearance of a white shining Wand, and constantly maintaining that
Figure, notwithstanding the agitation of the aer, by wind, etc.
Thirdly, by the Beams of the Sun; For, when these insinuate themselves through
some slender hole or crany into a chamber, their stream or Thread of Solary
Atoms appears like a white shining wand (by reason of those small Dusty bodies,
whose many faces, or superficies making innumerable refractions and reflections
of the rays of Light toward the Eye) and constantly maintains that figure,
though the wind blow strongly transverse, and carry off those small dusty
bodies, or though with a fan you totally dispel them: why? Because fresh
Particles of Dust succeeding into the rooms of those dispelled, and aequally
refracting and reflecting the incident radii of light toward the Eye, conserve
the Appearance still the same. So though the wind blow off the first Cylindre of
comprest aer, yet does a second, a third, etc. instantly succeed into the same
Space, so as that region, wherein the Base thereof is situated, does constantly
remain comprest: because the compression of the insensible Particles of the Aer
and Wind, during their Continuation in that region, continues as great as was
that of the particles formerly propulsed and abduced.

Art. 10. 4 By the constancy of the Rainbow, to its Figure, notwithstanding the
change of position and place of the cloud and contiguous aer.
And Fourthly, by the Rainbow; which persisteth the same both in the extent of
its Arch, and the orderly-confused variety of Colors: though the Sun, rapt on
in his diurnal tract, shifts the angle of incidence from one part of the
confronting Cloud to another, every moment; and the Wind change the Scene of
the Aer, and adduce consimilar small bodies, whose various superficies making
the like manifold Refractions and Reflections of the incident lines of Light,
dispose them into the same colors, and praesent the eye with the same
delightful Apparition.

Art. 11. Helmonts Dellrium, that the Rainbow is a supernatural Meteor;
observed.
Which had the Hairbrain'd and Contentious Helmont in the least measure
understood; he must have blush't at his own most ridiculous whimsy, that the
Rainbow, is a supernatural Meteor, or Ens extempore created by Divinity, as a
sensible symbol of his Promise no more to destroy the inhabitants of the Earth
by Water, having no dependence at all on Natural Causes: especially when the
strongest Argument He could excogitate, whereby to impugn the common Theory of
the Schools, concerning the production thereof, by the refraction and
reflection of the rays of the Sun incident upon the variously figured parts of
a thin and rorid Cloud in opposition diametrical; was only this. Oculis,
manibus, and pedidus cognovi istius figmenti falsitatem. Cum ne quidem simplex
Nubes esset in loco Iridis. Neque enim, etsi manu Iridem finderem, eamque per
colores Iridis ducerem, sensi quidpiam, quod non ubique circumquaque in aere
vicino: imo non proin Colores ^ridis turbabantur, aut confufionem tollerabant.
(in Meteor on Anomalon.)

SECT. VII. The Sixth and last Capital Difficulty.
Art. 1. The sixth and last considerable Difficulty.
UPon the eduction of the lower extreme of the Tube out of the region of the
Restagnant Quicksilver, into that of Water superaffused; wherefore does the
Water instantly intrude into the Tube, and the Quicksilver residuous therein by
sensible degrees deflux, until it has totally surrendered unto it?

Solution.
This Phenomenon can have for its Cause no other but the great Disparity of
weight betwixt those two Liquors. For, Art. 2. The clear solution thereof, by
the great disproportion of weight betwixt Quicksilver and Water.
insomuch as the subsistence of the Quicksilver in the erected Tube, at the
altitude of 27 digits, justly belongs to the Aequipondium betwixt it and the
circumpendent Cylindre of Aer; and the proportion of Weight which Quicksilver
holds to Water, is the same that 14 holds to 1: it must as manifestly, as
inevitably follow, that the Water, being by so much less able, in regard of its
so much minority of Weight, to sustain the impulse of the Aer uncessantly
contending to deliver it self from that immoderate Compression, must yield to
the descending Base of the aereal Cylindre, and so ascend by degrees, and
possess the whole Space; every part of Quicksilver that delapseth, admitting 13
parts of Water into the Tube.

Here occurrs to us a fair opportunity of erecting, Art. 3. A Corollary; the
Altitude of the Atmosphere conjectured.
upon the praemised foundation, a rational Conjecture concerning the
perpendicular Extent of the Region of Aer from the face of the Terraqueous
Globe. For, if Aer be 10^0 times (according to the compute of the great
Mersennus (reflect. physicomath. page 104) who exceedingly differs from the
opinion of Galilaeo (Dialog. al. moviment. page 81.) and Marinus Ghetaldus (in
Archimed. promot.) both which demonstrate Aer to be only 400 times) lighter
then Water, and Water 14 times lighter then Quicksilver: hence we may conclude
(1) That Aer is 14000 times lighter then Quicksilver; (2) That the Cylindre of
Aer aequiponderant to the Cylindre of Quicksilver of the altitude of 27 digits,
is 14000 times higher; and (3) That the altitude of the Cylindre of Aer amounts
to 21 Leucae, or Leagues. Since 14000 times 27 digits ( i. e. 378000 digits)
divided by 180000 digits (so many amounting to a French League, that consists
of 15000 feet) the Quotient will be 21.

From the so much discrepant opinions of these so excellent Mathematitians, and
most strict Votaries of Truth, Galilaeo and Mersennus; Art. 4. A second
Corollary; the desperate^ Difficulty of conciliating Physiology to the
Mathematics: instanced in the much discrepant opinions of Galilaeo and
Mersennus, concerning the proportion of Gravity that Aer and Water hold each
to other.
each of which conceived his way for the exploration of the exact proportions
of Gravity betwixt Aer and Water, absolutely Apodictical: we cannot omit the
opportunity of observing; how insuperable a difficulty it is, to conciliate
Aristotle to Euclid, to accommodate those Axioms, which concern Quantity abstract
from Matter, to Matter united in one notion to Quantity, to erect a solid
fabric of Physiology on Foundations Mathematical. Which Difficulty the
ingenious Magnenus well resenting, made this a chief praeparatory Axiom to his
second Disputation concerning the Verisimility of Democritus Hypothesis of
Atoms: Non sunt expendendae Actiones Physicae regulis Geometricis; subnecting
this ponderous Reason, Cum Demonstrationes Geometricae procedant ab Hypothesi,
quam probare non est Mathematici, sed alterius Facultatis, quae eam refellit;
id eo lineis Mathematicis, regulisque stricte Geometricis, Actiones Physicae
non sunt expendendae. (Democrit. Reviviscent. p. 318.)

Art. 5. The Conclusion of this Digression: and the reasons, why the Author
adscribes a Cylindrical Figure to the portion of Aer impendent on the
Restagnant Liquors, in the Experiment.
And now at length having run over these six stages, in as direct a course, and
with as much celerity, as the intricacy and roughness of the way would
tolerate; has our Pen attained to the end of our Digression: wherein, whether
we have gratified our Reader with so much either of satisfaction, or Delight,
as may compensate his time and patience; we may not praesume to determine.
However, this praesumption we dare be guilty of, and own; that no Hypothesis
hitherto communicated, can be a better Clue to extricate our reason from the
mysterious Labyrinth of this Experiment, by solving all its stupendous
Apparences, with more verisimility, then this of a Disseminate Vacuity, to
which we have adhaered. But, before we revert into the straight tract of our
Physiological journey, the praecaution of a small scruple deduceable from that
we have consigned a Cylindrical Figure to the portion of Aer impendent on the
surface of the Restagnant Liquors; advises us to make a short stand, while we
advertise; That though we confess the Diametre of the Sphere of Aer to be very
much larger then that of the Terraqueous Globe, and so, that the Aer, from the
Unequal to the Concave thereof incumbent on the surface of the Restagnant
Liquors in the vessel placed on the Unequal of the Earth, does make out the
Section or Frustum of a Cone, whose Basis is in the summity of the Atmosphere;
and point at the Center of the Earth (as this Diagram exhibiteth.)

CIK, The Terraqueous Globe. B, The Center thereof. CDG, A vessel situate on
the superfice thereof. C, The lower region of the vessel, filled with
Quicksilver. G, The upper region possessed by Water. FED, The Tube
perpendicularly ere^ted in the Vessel. E, The point of Aequilibrium, at 27 dig.
to which the Cylindre of Quicksilver has descended. ABH, A Cone extending from
the Center of the Earth to the unequal superfice of the region of Aer ADGH, A
Frustum, or part of that Cone extending from the Unequal to the Concave of the
Aer, impendent on the surface of the Restagnant Liquors in the vessel DCC.


Note that neither Earth, Aer, Vessel, nor Tube, are delineated according to
their due proportions: since so, the Earth would have appeared too great, and
the rest too small, for requisite inspection.

Yet, insomuch as the Aer is Aequiponderant to the Cylindre of Quicksilver
contained in the Tube (the only requisite to our praesent purpose) no less in
the Figure of a Cone, then in that of a Cylindre; and since both Mersennus and
Gassendus (to either of which we are not worthy to have been a mere Amanuensis)
have waved that nicety, and declared themselves our Praecedents, in this
particular: we have thought our selves excusable for being constant to the most
usual Apprehension, when the main interest of Truth was therein unconcerned.

CHAP. VI. OF PLACE.
SECT. I.
THat Inanity and Locality bear one and the same Notion, Art. 1. The Identy
Essential of a Vacuum and Place, the cause of the praesent Enquiry into the
Nature of Place.
Essentially, and cannot be rightly apprehended under different conceptions,
but Respectively; or, more expressly, that the same Space, when possessed by a
Body, is a Place, but when left destitute of any corporeal Tenent whatever,
then it is a Vacuum: we have formerly insinuated, in the third Article, Sect.
1. of our Chap. concerning a Vacuum in Nature. Which essential Identy, or only
relative Alterity of a Vacuum and Place, is manifestly the Reason, why we thus
subnect our praesent Enquiry into the Nature or Formality of Place, immediately
to our praecedent Discourse of a Vacuum: we conceiving it the duty of a
Physiologist, to derive his Method from Nature, and not to separate those
Things in his Speculation, which she has constituted of so near Affinity in
Essence.

Art. 2. Among all the Quaeries, about the Hoti of Place; the most important
is, Whether Epicurus, or Aristotle's Definition of it, be most adaequate.
Among those numerous and importune Altercations, concerning the Quiddity or
formal reason of Place, in which the too contentious Schools usually lose their
Time, their breath, their wits, and their Auditors attention; we shall select
only one Quaestion, of so much, and so general importance, that, if rightly
stated, calmly and aequitably debated, and judiciously determined, it must
singly suffice to imbue the mind of any the most Curious Explorator, with the
perspicuous and adaequate Notion thereof.

Epicurus (in Epist. ad Herodot^) understands Place to be, (...), Intervallum
illud, quod privatum Corpore, dicitur INANE, and oppletum corpore, LOCUS: That
Interval, or Space, which being destitute of any body, is called, a Vacuum, and
possessed by a body, is called Place.

And Aristotle (in 3. Auscult. Nature. cap. 6.) thinks He has hit the white,
when He defines Place to be, (...), Circumdantis Corporis extremum immobile
primum; Concava nempe, seu proxima immediataque, and ipsum locatum contingens
corporis ambientis superficies: the concave, proxime, immediate superfice of
the body circumambient, touching the Locatum.

Now the Difficulty in Quaestion, is only this: Whether this Definition of
Aristotle, or that modest Description of Epicurus, does with the greater
measure of verisimility and perspicuity respond to the nature of what we ought
to understand, in propriety of conception, signified by the word, Place.

In order to our impartial perpension of the moments of reason on each side,
requisite it is, that we first strictly ponder the Hypothesis, or Ground, Art.
3. The Hypothethesis of Aristotle's Definition.
on which Aristotle erected his assertion, which is this; Praeter dimensiones
Corporis locati, and ipsam ambientis superficiem, nullas alias dari (in 4.
Physic. 1.) that in nature are none but Corporeal Dimensions: for, if we can
discover any other Dimensions, abstruct from Corporiety, such wherein the
formal reason of Space may best and most intelligibly be radicated; it can no
longer remain in the suspense of controversy, how unsafe it is for the Schools
to recurr to that superstructure, as a Sanctuary impraegnable, whose Foundation
is only sand, and depends for support upon no other but a praecarious
supposition.

Imagine we, therefore, Art. 4. A convenient supposition inferring the
necessity of Dimensions Incorporeal.
that God should please to adnihilate the whole stock or mass of Elements, and
all Concretions resulting therefrom, i. e. all Corporeal Substances now
contained within the ambite, or concave of the lowest Heaven, or Lunar Sphere:
and having thus imagined, can we conceive that all the vast Space, or Region
circumscribed by the concave superfice of the Lunar Sphere, would not remain
the same, in all its Dimensions, after as before the reduction of all bodies
included therein to nothing? Undoubtedly, that conceit cannot endure the test
of Reason, which admits, that this sublunary Space can suffer any other
alteration, but only a privation of all Bodies that possessed it. Now, that it
can be no Difficulty to God, at pleasure, to adnihilate all things comprehended
within it; and yet at the same time to conserve the Sphere of the Moon entire
and unaltered: cannot be doubted by any, but those inhumane Idiots, who dare
controvert his Omnipotence.

Nor can it advantage our Dissenting Brother, the Peripatetick to plead; Art.
5. The Legality of that supposition.
that we suppose, what ought not to be supposed, an absolute Impossibility, as
to the Firm and fundamental Constitutions of Nature, which knows no such thing,
as Adnihilation of Elements: since, though we allow it impossible to Nature,
yet can no man be so steeled with impudence, as to deny it facile to the Author
and Governor of Nature; and should we conced it impossible to Him also, yet
does not the impossibility of any Effect interdict the supposition thereof as
possible, in order to the appropinquation of a remote, and explanation of an
obscure verity, nor invalidate that Illation or assumption, which by genuine
cohaerence depends thereupon.

Besides, it is no Novelty, nor singularity in us, upon the same consideration,
to suppose Natural Impossibilities: insomuch as nothing is more usual, nor
laudable amongst the noblest order of Philosophers, then to take the like
course, where the abstruse condition of the subject puts them upon it; and even
Aristotle Himself has been more then once our Praecedent and Exemplar therein.
For, when He had demonstrated the Necessity of the motion or circumgyration of
the Celestial Orbs; He yet requires of us, that we suppose them to quiesce
constantly: that so we may the more satisfactorily apprehend the truth of that
position, at which his whole discourse was collineated; viz. that the Cause of
the Earths Quiet is not, as some dreamed, the rapid motion of the Heavens; for,
having cleared the eye of his Readers mind from all the dust of praesumption,
with this supposition He th^n with advantage demands of him, Ubinam terra
moraretur? (2 de Caelo.) Nay, even concerning this our Argument, need we not
want the Authority of Aristotle to justify the lawfulness of this our
supposition: for, attempting to enforce, that in a large imagined Vacuum, in
part whereof a Cube of Wood is conceived to be situate, there can be no
Dimensions but those of the Cube; He admits them conceiveable as clearly
abstracted from the mass or bulk of wood, and divested of all corporeal
Accidents; wh^^ein (under favor) He more then seems to incurr an open
Contradict^^^ of his own dear Tenet, that it is absurd to imagine any
Dimensions Incorporeal. Nor is the Facility of our supposition less manifest
then the Lawfulness thereof: since we dare our Opponents to produce any
contemplat^ve Person, who shall conscientiously attest, that He could not, when
He fixed his thoughts thereupon, clearly and easily imagine the same; What
therefore can remain to impede our progress to the Use, or scope of this our
supposition?

Art. 6. The Dimensions of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, imaginable in a
Vacuum*
Having, therefore, imagined the whole sublunary Region to be one continued and
entire Vacuum: we cannot but also imagine, that from any one point designed in
the concave superfice of the Lunar Sphere, to another point ^ diametro opposite
in the same, there must be a certain Distance, or Intercedent Space. If so;
must not that Distance import a Longitude, or more expressly an incorporeal and
invisible Line? (2) If so; must not the medium of that Line be the Central
point of the empty Space, the same which stood for Center to the Terraqueous
Globe, before its adnihilation? (3) If so; may we not conceive How much of that
void Region was formerly possessed by the mass of Elements: and with mental
Geometry commensurate how much of that Space did once respond to the superfice,
how much to the profundity of each of those Bodies? (4) If so; must we not
allow the Dimensions of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity imaginable therein?
undoubtedly, (...): since we can no where conceive a Distance, or intercedent
Space, but we must there also conceive a Quantum; and Quantity imports
Dimensions, nor is there any Distance, but of determinate extent, and so
commensurable.

Art. 7. The G^and (...), objecti^n, that Nothing is in a Vacuum; ergo (...)
Dimensions
From the pressure of this Socraticism, has our Peripatetick retreated to that
ruinous sanctuary of the Term, Nothing: retarding our pursuit, with this
Sophism. When you suppose the sublunary Region to be an absolute Vacuum, you
expressly concede, that Nothing is contained therein; and upon consequence, that
those Dimensions by you imagined therein, are Nothing, and so that therein are
no Dimensions at all. Why; because Dimensions consist essentially and so
inseparably in Quantity: and all Quantity is inseparable from Corporiety.
Wherefore, supposing no Body existent in that Empty Space: you implicitly
exclude all Quantity, and consequently all Dimensions from thence.

This Evasion, we confess, is plausible; Art. 8. Des Carts, and Mr. White
seduced by the plausibility of the same.
nor has it imposed only upon young and paedantique Praetenders to Science,
such as having once read over some Epitome of the Commentaries upon Aristotle's
Physics, and learned to cant in Scholastic Terms* though they understand
naught of the Nature of the Things signified, believe themselves wise enough to
rival Solomon: but even many gray and sage Enquirers, such who most sedulously
dug for the jewel of Knowledge in the Mine of Nature, and emancipated their
intellectuals betimes from the slavery of Books. For, among the most celebrated
of our Modern Physiologists, we can hardly find two, who have judged it safer
to abide the seeming rigor of this Difficulty, then to run upon the point of
this Paradox; that, if all Bodies included in the ambite of the Lunar Heaven,
were adnihilated, then would there be no Distance at all betwixt the opposite
sides of the same: and the Reason they depend upon, is this; Necessary it is
that those points should not be distant each from other, but be contiguous,
betwixt which Nothing does intercede. Nay, even Des Carts himself cannot be
exempted: since, it is confessed by him in Princip. Philosoph. articul. 18.) that
He subscribed the same common Mistake, in these Words: si quaeratur, quid fiet,
si Deus auferat omne corpus, quod in aliquo vase continetur, and nullum aliud
in abluti locum subire permittat? Respondendum est vasis latera hoc ipso fore
contigua. Cum enim inter duo corpora nihil interjacet, necesse est, ut se mutuo
tangant; ac manifest repugnat, ut distent, and tamen ut distantia illa sit
Nihil: quia omnis Distantia est modus Extensionis, and ideo sine substantia
extensa esse non potest. To him also may we associate Mr. White (in Dialog. 1.
de Mundo.)

The most direct and shortest way to the Redargution of this Epidemick Error,
Art. 9. The Peripa^^ticks reduction of Time and Place to the General Categories
of Su^stances and Accidents, the Cause of this Epidemick mistake.
lies in the detection of its grand and procatarctick Cause; which is the
Praeoccupation of most Scholars minds by the Peripatetick Institutions, that
limit our Notions to their imperfect Categories, and explode those Conceptions
as Poetical and extravagant, that transcend their classical Distinction of all
Entities into Substance and Accident. For, first, insomuch as in the Dialect of
the Schools, those three Capital Terms, Ens, Res, Aliquid, are mere Synonyma's,
and so used indiscriminately; it is generally concluded, that whatever is
comprehensible under their signification, must be referred either to the
Classis of Substances, or that of Accidents: and upon illation, that what is
neither Substance, nor Accident, can praetend to no Reality, but must be damned
to the praedicament of Chimaera's, or be excluded from Being. Again, having
constituted one Categorie of all Substances, they mince and cantle out poor
thin Accident into Nine, accounting the first of them Quantity* and subdividing
that also into (1) Permanent, i. e. the Dimensions of Longitude, Latitude,
Profundity; and so make Place to consist if not in all three, yet at least in
one of them, viz. Latitude or the superficies of a Body: (2) Successive, i. e.
Time and Motion, but especially Time, which may be otherwise expressed by the
Term, Duration. Hereupon, when they deliver it as oraculous, that Quantity is a
Corporeal Accident: they confidently infer, that if any Quantity, or
Permanent, or Successive, be objected, that is not or separately, or conjunctly
Corporeal, it ought to be exploded, as not Real, or an absolute Nothing.

Now this their Scheme is defective. (1) Because it fails in the General
Distribution of Ens, or Res, into Substance and Accident: in regard, that to
those two Members of the Division there ought to be superadded other two, more
general then those; viz. Place and Time, Things most unreducible to the
Categories of Substance and Accident. We say, more General then those Two;
because as well all Substances as Accidents whatever, have both their Existence
in some Place, and their Duration in some Time; and both Place and Time are,
even by those who dispute whether they are Accidents, or not, willingly granted
to persever constantly and invariately the same.

(2) Because it offends Truth in the confinement of all Quantity, or Dimension,
and so of that of Place and Time, to the Category of Accidents, nay even of
Corporeal ones: when there wants not a species of Quantity, or Extension having
Dimensions, that is not Corporeal; for, nor Place, nor Time, are Corporeal.
Entities, being no less congruous to Incorporeal, then Corporeal Beings. Upon
which consideration, it is a genuine and warrantable Inference; that albeit
Place and Time are not pertinent to the Classis either of substances, or
Accidents: yet are they notwithstanding Realities, Things, or not-Nothings;
insomuch as no substance can be conceived existent without Place and Time.
Wherefore, when any Choleric Bravo of the Stagirites Faction, shall draw upon
us with this Argument; Whatever is neither Substance, nor Accident, is a
downright Nothing, etc. we need no other buckler then to except Place and Time.

Art. 10. Place, neither Accident nor Substance.
To authenticate this our Schism, and assert our Affirmation; we must now
evince, that Place is neither Accident, nor substance: which to effect, we need
not borrow many moments of its Twin-brother, Time, to hunt for Arguments in.
For (1) though it be objected, that Place is capable of Accession to, and
sejunction from the Locatum, without the impairment, or destruction thereof;
and in that relation seems to be a mere Accident: yet cannot that justify the
consignation of Place to the Category of Accidents; because Place is incapable
of Access and Recess, and it is the Locatum to which in right we ought to
adscribe Mobility. So that when various Bodies may be successively situate in
one and the same Place, without causing any the least mutation therein: we must
allow the force of this Argument, to bring it nearest to the propriety of a
substance. (2) A substance it cannot be; because the Term, Substance imports
something, that does not only exist per se, but also, Art. 11. The praecedent
Giant- Objection, that Nothing is in a Vacuum; s^abb^d, at a blow.
and principally, what is Corporeal, and either Active or Passive: and neither
Corporiety, nor Activeness, nor Passiveness, are Attributes competent to Place:
Ergo.

Now, to leave our roving, and shoot level at the mark; the Extract of these
praemised Considerations, will easily and totally cure the desperate Difficulty
objected. For, when it is urged, that betwixt the opposite sides of a vessel
supposed to be absolutely devoyd of any Body whatever, nothing does intercede,
and consequently that they are Contiguous; we need no other solution but this:
that (indeed) nothing Corporeal does interced, betwixt the diametrally opposite
sides of a void concave, that is either Substance, or Accident; but yet there
does intercede something Incorporeal, such as we understand by Spatium,
Intercapedo, Distantia, Intervallum, Dimensio, which is neither Substance nor
Accident. But, alas! that Thing you call Space is, according to your own
supposition, an absolute Vacuum: What though? it must not therefore be Nothing,
unless in the sense of the Peripatetick: because it has a Being (suo modo) and
so is something.

The same also concerns those Dimensions, which we conceive, Art. 12.
Dimensions Corporeal and Incorporeal, or Spatial.
and the Schools deny to be in our imaginary Vacuum: For of them it may be
likewise truly said, that they are Nihil Corporeum, but not that they are Nihil
Incorporeum, or more emphatically, Nihil SPATIALE, Nothing Spatial. Hence,
according to the distinction of Things into Corporeal, and Incorporeal; we may,
on the design of Perspicuity, discriminate Dimensions also into (1) Corporeal,
such as are competent to a 'Body, wherein we understand Longitude, Latitude,
Profundity: (2) Spatial, such as are congruous to Space, wherein we may
likewise conceive Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity. And so we may conclude,
that those Dimensions, which must remain in that supposed Inane Region
circumscribed by the concave of the Lunar Orb, in case God should adnihilate
the whole mass of Elements, and all their off springs, included therein; are,
in truth, not Corporeal, but Spatial.

Let us skrew our supposition one pin higher, and farther imagine, Art. 13. The
former supposition reassumed and enlarged.
that God, after the Adnihilation of this vast machine, the Universe, should
create another, in all respects consimilar to this, and in the same part of
Space, wherein this now consists: and then shall our thoughts be tuned to a
fit key for the speculation, nay the comprehension of Three notorious
Abstrusities, viz.

(1) That as the Spaces were Immense, Art. 14. The scope and advantage thereof;
viz. the comprehension of three eminent Abstrusities concerning the Nature of
Place.
before God created the World; so also must they eternally persist of infinite
Extent, if He shall please at any time to destroy it: that He, according to the
counsel of his own Beneplacit, elected this determinate Region in the infinite
Spaces, wherein to erect or suspend this huge Fabric of the World; leaving the
residue which we call Extramundan Spaces, absolutely void: and that as the
whole of this determinate Region of Space is adaequately competent to the whole
of the World; so also is each part thereof adaequately competent to each part
of the World; i. e. there is no part of the World, Great or Small, to which
there is not a part of Space exactly respondent in all dimensions.

(2) That these immense Spaces are absolutely Immovable. And therefore should
God remove the World into another determinate region of them, yet would not
this Space wherein it now persisteth; accompany it, but remain immote, as now.
In like manner, when any part of the World is translated from one place to
another; it leaves the part of Space, which it formerly possessed, constant and
immote, and the Spaces through which it passes, and wherein it acquiesceth,
continue also immote.

(^) That, in respect the Dimensions of these Spaces are Immovable, and
Incorporeal: therefore are they every where Coexistent, and Compatient (we
speak in the dialect of the Schools) with Corporeal Dimensions, without
reciprocal repugnancy; so as in what part soever of Space any Body is lodged,
the Dimensions of that part of Space, are in all points respondent to the
Corporeal Dimensions thereof. In this case, therefore, it is far from an
Absurdity, to affirm, that Nature does not abhor a Penetration of Dimensions.
To bring up the rear of these advantages resulting from our supposition, we may
from thence deprehend, Why Aristotle has not cleft a hair in his position,
that there is in the Universe no Interval, nor Dimensions, but what are
Corporeal.

Art. 15. The Inc^rpor^ety of Dimensions S^atial, Discriminated from that of
the Divine Essence, and other Su^stances Incorporeal.
To discriminate the Incorporiety of these Dimensions Spatial, from that
adscribed to the Divine Nature, Intelligences Angelical, the Mind of Man, and
other (if there be any) Incorporeal substances; we advertise, that the term
Incorporeal bears a double importance. (1) It intends not only a simple
Negation of Corporiety, and so of corporeal Dimensions; but also a true and
germane substance, to which certain Faculties and Operations essentially
belong; and in that sense it is adscriptive properly to God, Angels, the Souls
of men, etc. spiritual Essences. (2) It signifies a mere Negation of
Corporiety, and so of corporeal Dimensions, and not any positive Nature capable
of Faculties and Operations; and in this sense only is it congruous to the
Dimensions of Space, which we have formerly intimated to be neither Active, nor
Passive, but to have only a general Non-repugnancy, or Admissive Capacity,
whereby it receives Bodies either permanenter, or transeunt^r.

Art. 16. This persuasion* of the Improduction and Independency of Place;
praeserved from the suspicion of Impiety.
Here we discover our selves in danger of a nice scruple, deductive from this
our Description of Space, viz. that, according to the tenor of our Conceptions,
Space must be unproduced by, and independent upon the original of all Things,
God. Which to praevent, we observe, that from the very word Spatial Dimensions,
it is sufficiently evident, that we understand no other Spaces in the World,
then what most of our Ecclesiastical Doctors allow to be on the outside
thereof, and denominate Imaginary: not that they are merely Fantastical, as
Chimaera's; but that our Imagination can and does apprehend them to have
Dimensions, which hold an analogy to the Dimensions of Corporeal substances,
that fall under the perception and commensuration of the sense. And, in that
respect, though we concede them to be improduct by, and independent upon God;
yet cannot our Adversaries therefore impeach us of impiety, or distort it to
the disparagement of our theory: since we consider these Spaces, and their
Dimensions to be Nihil Positivum, i. e. nor Substance, nor Accident, under
which two Categories all works of the Creation are comprehended. Besides, this
sounds much less harsh in the ears of the Church, then that which not a few of
her Chair-men have adventured to patronize; viz. that the Essences of Things
are Non-principiate, Improduct, and Independent: insomuch as the Essence being
the noblest, constitutive, and denominative part of any Thing, Substance or
Accident; to hold it uncreat and independent, is obliquely to infer God to be
no more then an Adopted Father to Nature, a Titular Creator, and Author of only
the material, grosser and unactive part of the World.

SECT. II.
BY the discovery of Dimensions independent upon Corporiety, Art. 1. Place, not
the immediate superfice of the Body invironing the Locatum; contrary to
Aristotle.
such wherein the Formal reason of Space appears most intelligibly to consist,
have we fully detected the weakness of Aristotle's Basis, praeter dimensiones
Corporis locati, and ipsam ambientis superficiem, nullas alias dari: it remains
only, that we demolish his thereupon-erected Definition of Place, in which his
legions of Sectators have ingarrisoned their judgments, as most impraegnable.

That Place is not the immediate and contiguous superfice of the body
invironing the Locatum, may by the single force of this Demonstration be fully
evicted. Immobility is essential to Place, as Aristotle well acknowledged; for
if Place were moveable, then would it follow of inevitable necessity, that a
body might be translated without mutation of place, and e converso, the place
of any thing might be changed, while the thing it self continues immote; both
which are Absurdities so manifest, as no mist of Sophistry can conceal them
even from the purblind multitude: Now the superfice of the Circumambient can in
no wise praetend to this propriety of place, Immobility; as may be most
conveniently argued from the example of a Tower; for that space, which a Tower
possesses, was there before the structure, and must remain there the same in
all dimensions after the ruin thereof; but the superfice of the contiguous
Aer, the immediate Circumambient, is removed, and changed every moment, the
whole mass of Aer being uncessantly agitated more or less, by winds and other
violences: Ergo. So numerous are the shifts and subterfuges of the distressed
Disciples of Aristotle, whereby they have endeavored to Fix this Volatile
superfice of the Circumambient: that should we insist upon only the
commemoration of them all; we might justly despair of finding any Charity great
enough, to pardon so criminal an abuse of leisure.

Besides, from Epicurus (...), or Space, Art. 2. Salvo's for all the Difficult
Scruples, touching the nature of Place; genuinely ex^^acted from Epicurus his
(...).
we may extract Salvo's for all those Scruples, which are commonly met with by
all, who worthily enquire into the nature of Place. For, when it is questioned
(1) How a body can persist invariately in the same place, though the
circumambient be frequently, nay infinitely varied? (2) How a body can change
place, though the Circumambient accompany it in its remove? (3) Why one body
can be said to be thus or thus far, more or less distant from another? we may
easily satisfy all with this one obvious Answer, that all mobility is on the
part of the Locatum, all Space continuing constant and immote. Further, hence
come we to understand, in what respect Place is commonly conceived to be
exactly adaequate to the Locatum: for, the Dimensions of all Space possessed,
are in all points respondent to those of the body possessing there being no
part of the body, profound or superficial, to which there is not a part of
Space respondent in aequal extent; which can never be made out from the mere
superfice of the Circumambient, in which no one of the Profound or Internal
parts of the Locatum, but only the superficial are resident. Moreover, hence
also may we understand, How Incorporeal substances, as God, Angels, and the
Souls of men, may be affirmed to be in loco. For, when God, who is infinite,
and therefore incapable of Circumscription, is said to be in Place; we
instantly cogitate an infinite Space: which is more then we can do of Place, if
accepted in Aristotle's Notion, which imports either that God cannot be in any
place, or else He must be circumscribed by the contiguous superfice thereof:
which how ridiculous, we need not observe. For Angels likewise, who dares
affirm an Angel to be in a place, that considers his Incorporiety, and the
necessity of his circumsciption by the superfice of the Circumambient, if
Aristotle's Definition of Place be tolerable? To excuse it with a distinction,
and say, that an Angel may be conceived to be in a determinate place, not
Circumscriptive, but definitive, i. e. So Here, as no where else: is
implicitly and upon inference, to confess the truth of our assertion; Since
that Here, designs a certain part of Space, not the superfice of any
circumambient. For, though you reply, that an Angel, being an incorporeal
substance, wants as well internal and profound Dimensions, by which his
substance may respond to Space, as those superficial ones, that respond to
Place: yet cannot that suffice to an evasion, since if his substance has any
Diffusion in place, as is generally allowed; and though it be constituted in
puncto, as is also generally conceived: nevertheless, does that Diffusion as
necessarily respond to a certain aequal part of Space, as a point is a
determinate part of space. This perhaps, is somewhat abstruse, and therefore
let us conceive an Angel to be resident in some one point of that Inane Region
circumscribed by the concave of the Lunar orb, formerly imagined: and then we
may without any shadow of obscurity understand, How his substance may respond
to a certain part, or point of the Inane Space, so as He may be said to be
Here, not There, in this but no other place: but impossible it is, to make it
out, How the substance of an Angel constituted in puncto of an empty space, can
respond to the superfice of a Body Circumambient, because all Bodies formerly
included in that sublunary Region are praesupposed to be adnihilated. Lastly,
by the Incorporiety of Space we are praeserved from that Contradiction, which
Aristotle endeavoring to praevent, praecipitated himself upon no small
Absurdity, viz. that the supreme Heaven, or Primum mobile is in no Place. For,
if we adhere to his opinion, that place is the superfice of a body
circumambient; the Primum mobile being the extreme or bounds of the World, we
deny any thing of Corporiety beyond it, and so exempt it from Locality: but if
we accept space to be the same without and within the world, we admit the
Primum mobile, the noblest, largest, and most useful of all Bodies in the
World, to enjoy a Place proportionate to its dimensions, and motion, as
adaequately as any other. The necessity of which concession, Thales Milesius
well intimated, when interrogated, What Thing was greatest? He answered, Place:
because, as the World contains all other Bodies, so Place contains the World.

Art. 3. Aristotle's ultimate Refuge.
Reduced to these straights, Aristotle, among sundry other Sophisms, entrusteth
the last part of his Defense, to this slight Objection; If Place were a certain
Space, constant in three dimensions; then would it inevitably follow, that the
Locatuus and the Locus must reciprocally penetrate each others dimensions, and
so the parts of each be infinitely divided: which is manifestly absurd, since
Nature knows nor penetration of Dimensions, nor infinity of corporeal division.

To this Induction we could not refuse the attribute of Probability, Art. 4.
The Invalidity thereof: and the Coexistibility, or Compatibility of Dimensions
Corporeal and Spatial.
no more then we do now of Plausibility, had we not frequently praevented it,
and openly by our Distinction of Dimensions into Corporeal and Incorporeal, and
appropriating the last to Space. For, indeed, the Fundamental Constitutions of
Nature most irrevocably prohibit the substance of one Body to penetrate the
substance of another, through all its Dimensions: but, alas! Place is ((...))
properly and altogether Incorporeal; and therefore may its dimensions
Incorporeal be Coexistent, or Compatient with the Corporeal Dimensions of any
Body, without mutual repugnancy, the Spatial Dimensions not excluding the
Corporeal, nor those extruding the spatial. This cannot be a diaphanous, or
aenigmatical to those, who concede Angels to be Incorporeal, and therefore to
penetrate the Dimensions of any the most solid Bodies, so that the whole
substance of an Angel may be simul and semel, altogether and at once in the
same place with that of a stone, a wall, the hand of a man, or any other body
whatever, without any necessity of mutual Repugnancy. Nor to those, who observe
the Synthesis, or Collocation of Whiteness, Sweetness, and Qualities in the
substance of Milk: for as those are conceived to pervade the whole substance of
Milk, without any reciprocal repugnancy of Dimensions, so are we to conceive
that the Dimensions of Space are totally pervaded by the whole Body of the
Locatum, without Renitency.

CHAP. VII. OF TIME AND ETERNITY.
SECT. I.
SOme Texts there are in the Book of Nature, Art. 1. The Hoti of Time more
easily conceivable by the Simple Notion of the Vulgar, then by the complex
Definitions of Philos^phers.
that are best interpreted by the sense of the Vulgar, and become so much the
more aenigmatical, by how much the more they are commented upon by the subtle
discourses of the Schools: their overcurious Descants frequently rendering that
Notion ambiguous, complex and difficult, which accepted in its own genuine
simplicity, stands fair and open to the discernment of the unpraejudicate, at
the first conversion of the a^^es of the Mind thereupon. Among these we have
just cause to account TIME; since if we keep to the popular and familiar use of
the word, nothing can be more easily understood: but if we range abroad to
those vast Wildernesses, the Dialectical Paraphrases of Philosophers thereupon,
and hunt after an adaequate Definition, bea^^ng its peculiar Genus, and
essential Difference; nothing can be more obscure and controversial. This the
sacred Doctor (Au^ust. 11. Confess. 14.) both ingenuously confessed, and most
emphatically expressed, in his, Si nemo (...) me quaerat, quid sit Tempus,
scio; si quaerenti explicare velim, nescio: intimating that the Mind may,
indeed, at first glance speculate the nature of Time by a proper Idea; but so
pale and fine a one, as (...) a lively representation thereof. (...) bold to
list it among the most despe^^^^ (...) Generaliter. To which we may annex (...)
quoted by Stobaeus (Eccl. Phys. 11.) Tempus esse (...) non re, sed cogitatione
constans. As also (...) who not only injoyns, that we discourse of Time in a
certain key of thought far different from that wherein we use to consider
things, which have a real inhaerence in subjecto; as if Time had no other
subject of inhaerence but the Mind, were only a mere Ens Rationis, extrinsecal
Denomination, and could expect no exacter a description, then His Numerus, qui
absque ratione numerante est nullus: but advises, if any shall demand, what
Time is, to afford him no other but Democritus Answer; Tempus esse (...), quale
spatium diei noctisque apparet.

If we research profoundly into the Original of this Difficulty, Art. 2. The
General praesumption that Time is Corporeal, or an Accident dependent on
Corporeal Subjects; the chief Cause of that Difficulty
of acquiring a clear and perspect theory of the Quiddity of Time, from the
Lecture of those prolix Treatises, whose plausible Titles promise satisfaction
concerning it: we shall soon find the chief Cause to be this; that most
Philosophers have praesupposed Time to be some Corporeal Ens, or at least some
certain Accident inexistent in and dependent on Corporeal Subjects; when (in
verity) if it be any thing at all it seems to be the Twin-brother of Space,
devoyd of all relation to Corporiety, and absolutely independent on the
Existence of any Nature whatever. For, to Him, who shall, in abstract and
attentive meditation, sequestre Time from all Bodies, from their motions,
successive alternations, and contingent vicissitudes insequent upon those
motions; i. e. all Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours, Minutes, Seconds, and
all Accidents or Events contingent therein: it will soon appear most evident,
that Time ( in suo esse) owes no respect at all to Motion, its constancy,
variety, or measure; since the understanding must deprehend Time to continue to
be what it ever was and is, whether there be any Motion or Mutation in the
World, or not, nay, whether there be any World or not. For, examining what is
meant by the term Duration, and what by the term Motion, in their single
importances apart: we discover, that Motion holds no relation to Duration, nor
e converso, Duration to Motion, but what is purely Accidental, and Mental, i.
e. imagined by man, in order to his commensuration of the one by the other.

Another Cause of this Difficulty, Art. 3. The variety of opinions, concerning
it: another Cause of the Difficulty: and Epicurus Description of its Essence,
recited and explained.
may be the irreconcilable Discrepancy of judgments concerning it, even among
the most Venerable of the Ancients. For (1) Epicurus has a complex and
periphrastical Description of the Essence of Time, when He concludes it to be,
(...), an Accident of Accidents, or Event of Events, consequent to days and
nights, and hours to passions and indolency, motion and quiet. The reason of
which Empiricus (2. advers. Physic.) by way of explanation, thus renders: Days
and Nights are Accidents supervenient upon the ambient Aer, the one being
caused by the praesence, the other by the absence of the Sun; Hours are also
accidents, as being parts of day or night; but Time is coextended to each day,
night and hour, and therefore we say, that this day is long, this night short,
while our thoughts are constantly pointing at Time in that respect
supervenient; Passions likewise and Indolences, or Dolours and Pleasures, are
Accidents not without Time evenient; lastly, Motion and Quiet are Accidents
contingent in Time, and therefore by it we commensurate the Celerity and
Tardity of Motion, the long or short duration of Quiet: therefore is Time the
Accident of Accidents. And Lucretius alluding to the same opinion of Epicurus,
translates his (...), Tempus esse incorporeum, into Tempus item per se non est,
etc. lib. 1.

(2) Zeno, Chrysippus, Apollodorus, Posidonius, and their Sectator Philo, Art.
4. Time de^ined to be (...) by Z^no, (...), etc. and thereupon affirmed, by
Philo, to be only (...) to the VVo^ld.
define Time to be, Motus coelestis, sive mundani intervallum, understanding as
well all particular Conversions, as the Generality of Motion from the beginning
to the end of the World. Whereupon Philo would infer, that Time was coaevous
to the World, i. e. before the World there was no Time, nor should be any
after: though the Stoics unanimously defend the Infinity of Time, in regard
they affirmed an infinity of Worlds successive, the second springing up,
Phaenix-like, from the ashes of the first, the the third from the second, etc.
(3) Pythagoras, according to the Records of Plutarch (in quaestion. Platonic.)
to one interrogating him concerning the Essence of Time, calls it Animam Coeli,
the soul of Heaven. To which Plotinus (En. 3. lib. 7. cap. 10.) seems to have
alluded, when interpreting Plato's saying, that Time was the Image of Eternity
(in Timaeo) He make ^ternity to be the very soul of the World, as considered in
se, in its own simple essence; and Time to be the same soul of the world,
considered, prout varias mutationes suscipit, as it admits various mutations.

(4) And Aristotle, as every Paedagogue has heard, after a long and anxious
scrutiny, Art. 5. Aristotle's so much magnified Definition of Time, to be the
Measure of Motion Celestial, etc. perpended and found too light.
positively and magisterially determines Time to be, Numerum Motus (coelestis
ac primi) secundum prius and posterius, the Number of the first Celestial
Motion, according to former and later, i. e. insomuch as in Motion we may
observe parts Antecedent and Consequent by a perpetual succession. At the first
word of this eminent Definition, some superficial Critics have sawcely
nibbled, urging (forsooth) that it sounds soloecistical, because Number is
Quantity Discrete, but Time Continued; and therefore that the Word Measure
ought to be its substitute: but alas! had they read His whole discourse of the
nature of Time, they could not have been ignorant, that Aristotle intended
nothing less, then that Time should be reputed a Quantity Discrete; when both
in his praecedent and subsequent lines He expressly teaches, that Motion is
continued, in respect of Magnitude, and Time in respect of Motion. Had They
Excepted against the whole, indeed, their Quarrel had bin justifiable, and our
selves might safely have espoused it; because, if Time be the Measure of
Celestial Motion, then must it follow, that if there were a Plurality of
Worlds, or Prima Mobilia's; there would also be a Plurality of Times, because a
Plurality of Motions. To those of His Disciples, who reply, that in case there
were many First Movables, and consequently many distinct Motions; yet would
there be but one Measure of them all: we rejoyn, if it be supposed that some of
the many Motions are swifter then others, then of necessity must they have many
Prior and Posterior Parts; and if so, how can all those, more or less
discrepant in velocity and tardity, fall under one and the same measure? or,
what sober man can admit, that there would be but one Time, where must be many
distinct subjects of Motion, and so of Time? Nor can it more avail them to
distinguish Time INTERNAL from EXTERNAL, assigning to each particular Primum
Mobile a proper or Internal Time within its ambite, and one General or External
Time to them all in common: because it is a manifest Adynaton, that there
should be a General Time, without a General Motion, whose parts being prior and
posterior, in respect of perpetual succession, must be the common Norma, or
Rule of observation to all the rest; nor, indeed, can we admit, that a Flux of
ten hours at once, or together, is possible, where ten Spheres are in one hour
moved. And, therefore, though Aristotle seems to have had some Hint of the true
nature of Time, in his Objection against those, who opinioned it to be
Celestial Motion: yet he lost it again, when He defined it to be the Measure
of Celestial Motion. For, Reason attesteth the contrary, it being evident that
the Celestial Motion is rather the Measure of Time: insomuch as the measure
ought to be more known then the thing measured; and Time is a certain Flux no
less independent upon Motion then Quiet. Which those Worthies well understood,
who confessed Time to be IMAGINARY, such as flowed infinitely in duration before
the Creation, and shall continue its flux infinitely after the Dissolution of
the World.

SECT. II.
FAiling of satisfaction concerning the Nature of Time, from the Definitions of
others: it remains only, Art. 1. Time, nor substance, nor Accident: but an Ens
more General, and the Twin-brother of Space.
that we sedulously employ our own Cogitations in quest of some competent
Description of it. Seneca (in Epist. 58.) descanting upon Plato's General
Distinction of all Entities into six Classes, says thus; Sextum Genus est
eorum, quae quasi sunt, tanquam Inane and Tempus, the sixth Genus contains only
those things, which have as it were a being, as INANITY and TIME: which we thus
expound, Space and Time are things more General then to be comprehended under
the Categories of Substance and Accident. With this Text we had not long
exercised our thoughts, before we conceived, that the most hopeful way for
exploring the mysterious Quiddity of Time, lay in the strict examen of the
Affinity or Analogy betwixt it and the subject of our immediately praecedent
Chapter, Space. Nor did our Conjecture prove abortive; for, having confronted
their proprieties in all points, we soon found their Natures fully
correspondent: so as the Notion of one seems involved in that of the other; as
is manifest in this Paralellism.

(1) As Place, or Space, in the total, is illimitate and immense: Art. 2. A
Paralellism betwixt Spa^^ and Time.
so is Time, in its totality, non-principiate and interminable. (2) As every
Moment of Time is the same in all places: so is every canton or part of Place
the same in all times. (3) As Place, whether any, or no Body be collocated
therein, does still persist the same immovable and invariately: so does
unconcerned Time flow on eternally in the same calm and equal tenor, whether
any or nothing has duration therein, whether any thing be moved or remain
quiet. (4) As Place is incapable of expansion, interruption or discontinuity,
by any Cause whatever: so is Time incapable of acceleration, retardation, or
suspension; it moving on no less, when the Sun was arrested in the midst of its
race in the days of Joshua, when the Hebrews vanquished and pursued the
Amorrhites, then at any time before, or since. (5) As God was pleased, out of
the Infinite Space to elect a certain determinate Region for the situation: so
has He, out of Infinite Time, elected a determinate part for the Duration of
the World. (6) And therefore, as every Body, or Thing, in respect to its HERE
or THERE, enjoyes a proportionate part of the Mundane Space: So likewise does
it, according to its NOW, or THEN of Existence, enjoy a proportionate part of
the Mundane Duration. (7) As, in relation to Place, we say, Everywhere, and
Somewhere ^ so, in relation to Time, we say, Always, and Sometimes. Hence, as
it is competent to the Creature to be only somewhere, in respect of Place, and
sometimes, in respect of Time: so is it the praerogative of the Creator, to be
Everywhere as to place, and Forever, as to time. And therefore those two
illustrious Attributes, Immensity, whereby He is praesent in all places, and
Aeternity, whereby He is existent at all Times, are proper only to God. (8) As
Place has Dimensions Permanent, whereby it responds to the Longitude,
Latitude, and Profundity of Bodies: so has Time Dimensions successive, to
which the Motions of Bodies may be adaequated. Hence comes it, that as by the
Longitude, of any standing measure (V.G.) of an Ell, we commensurate the
longitude of Place: so by the flux of an Horologe do we commensurate the flux
of Time. And, insomuch as no motion is more General, Constant and Observed,
then that of the Sun: therefore do we assume its motion for a General Horodix,
by it regulate all our computations, and confide in it as an universal
Directory, in our Mensuration of the flux of Time. Not that the Feet of Time
are chained to the Chariot of the Sun, so as the Acceleration or Retardation of
the motion of that should cause an equal Velocity, or Tardity in the progress
of this: but that Custom has so praevailed, as we compute the flux of Time by
the diurnal and annual revolution of the Sun. For, in case the motion of the
Sun were doubly swifter, then now it is, that of Time would not therefore be
doubly swifter also; but only the space of two days would then be equal to the
space of one, as now during the praesence of the Sun to our Hemisphere: nor, on
the contrary, if the motion of the Sun were doubly slower, would the pace of
Time be likewise doubly slower; but only the Space of one day, would be equal
to that of two. And, therefore, He that will defend Empedocles conceit, that in
the beginning of the World, the length of the days did by six parts in seven
exceed that of our days: must demonstrate that the urnal Arch of the Sun was
then by six of seven larger then now, or its motion so much slower.

Art. 3. Time, Senior unto, and independent upon Motion: and only accidentally
indicated by Motion, as the Mensuratum by the Mensura.
From this Paralellism it is difficult not to conclude, that Time is infinitely
elder then Motion, and consequently independent upon it: as also, that Time is
only indicated by Motion, as the Mensuratum by the Mensura. For, insomuch as it
had been otherwise impossible for Man to have known how much of Time He had
spent either in action, or rest; therefore did He fix his observation upon the
Celestial motion, and compute the quantity of Time pr^^terlapsed by the
Degrees of the Suns motion in the Heavens. And because the observation of the
Suns motion was easy and familiar; therefore did the Ancients invent several
instruments, as Water and Sand Hour-glasses, and Sun-dials, and the Neotoricks
Trochiliack Horodixes, circumgyrated by internal springs, or external weights
appensed; and so artificially adaequated them to the motion of the Sun, that
defines the day by its praesence, and might by its absence, as having
subdivided their horary motions into equal smaller parts, at last they
descended to the designation of each step in the progress of Time, i. e. to the
computation even of Minutes and Seconds.

If any yet doubt (which we cannot suppose, Art. 4. A demonstration of the
independence of Time upon Motion, from the miraculous Detention of the Sun,
above the Horison, in the days of Joshua.
without implicit scandal) of the Independence of Time on Celestial Motion;
or, that old Chronos must stand still, in case the Orbs should make a Halt: we
advise him seriously to perpend that supernatural Detension of the Sun in the
day of battle betwixt the Israelite and the Amorrhite; assuring our selves that
his thoughts will soon light upon this Apodictical Argument. Either there was
no Time during the Cessation of the Suns motion on that day; or else Time kept
on its constant flux: for one of these positions must be true. That the First
is false, is manifest from the extraordinary Duration of the day, the Text
positively expressing, that no day was ere, nor should be so long as that; and
the word Long undeniably importing a Continued flux of time: Ergo, the second
must be most true; and upon Consequence, though the Detention of the Sun was
miraculous, yet was the Duration of the day Natural, because Time has no
dependence on Celestial Motion.

Nor do they at all infirm the news of this Dilemma, who object; Art. 5. An
Objection, that, during the arrest of the Sun, there was no Time, because no
Hours; satisfied.
that there was then no Time, because there were no Hours: since Hours are no
more Essential to Time then Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, which are only
successive mutations of the temperament of Aer, convenient to the conservation
and promotion of seminalities; and as for Days, they likewise are absolute
Aliens to Time, since while our Hemisphere enjoyes the illumination of the Sun,
the subterraneous one wants it, and so our day is night to the Antipodes
inhabiting the opposite part of the Globe Terrestrial; but Time is constantly
the same through the Universe. Besides, there were Hours during the arrest of
Don Phoebus; in this respect, that the space of Time, in which he stood still,
was designable by the flux of Hour-glasses, or any other Temporary Machine: nor
ought we to say, there are no hours but those which we commensurate. And
therefore, we incur no Soloecism when we say, that God, had it seemed good in
the eye of his Wisdom, might have created the World many thousands of millions
of years sooner then He did: because such was the praecedent Flux of Time as
might be computed by Spaces of Duration in longitude respondent to that
determinate space of Time, which the Sun in its progress through the Zodiac
annually does fulfill; not that before the Creation, there were real years,
distinct and defined by the repeated Conversions of the Sun.

Further, As Time has no Dependence on, Art. 6. The Immutability of Time also
asserted, against Aristotle.
so can it receive no Mutation from Motion. Aristotle, indeed, accuses it of
Mutability, merely because we use to connect that Time in which we fall asleep,
to that in which we awake, losing that of which the cessation of our senses
operation makes us insensible: but alas! this looks like too weak a conceit to
be the mature issue of so strong a brain as His; insomuch as albeit we concede
some Mutations to be necessary, as to our perception of the flux of Time, yet
does it not follow, that therefore those Mutations are necessary; as to the
Flux of Time it self. True it is also, that we use to measure various Mutations
by Time: but if we examine the matter profoundly, we shall animadvert, that the
Time, during which those Mutations last, is rather measured by Motion then the
contrary; for though that motion be not observed in the Heavens, yet may it be
aequivalent indicated by Hour-Glasses, or any other Chronodix. Which Aristotle
himself seems to acknowledge (in 12. de Coelo) when He affirms, that as Motion
may be measured by Time, so may time by Motion.

SECT. III.
Art. 1. The Grand Quaestion, concerning the Disparity of Time and Eternity;
stated.
IF Time be, as our Description imports, Non-principiate and Infinite: how can
we Discriminate it from Aeternity? Should we resolve, that Aeternity, in the
ears of an unpraejudicate understanding, sounds no more then PERPETUAL
DURATION, or Time that never knew beginning, nor can ever know an end: we are
instantly assaulted with this Difficulty; that Time has Dimensions successive,
comprehends Priority and Posteriority of parts, and essentially consists in a
certain perpetual Flux; but Eternity is radicated in one permanent point, falls
under none but the Praesent Tense, and is only a certain constant (...), or
intransible NOW; or, as Booetius defines it, Interminabilis vitae tota simul
and perfecta possessio, an interminable and perfect possession of life
altogether, i. e. without praeterite and future, or, Forever at once. To
extricate our selves from this seeming Confusion of two things, whose Natures
appear so irreconcileably disparate; we are to begin at two praevious
Considerables.

(1) That Plato (out of whose Timaeus that eminent Definition of Booetius was
extracted, Art. 2. Two praeparatory Considerations, touchant the aequivocal use
of the word Aeternity; requisite to the clear solution thereof.
which has received the approbation and praises of most of our Ecclesiastic
Patriarchs) asserting his opinion, that Immutable and Eternal Natures are not
subject to Time, to which Aristotle also assented; does not intend the word,
Aeternity, abstractly and praecisely, to signify a species of Duration: but
Concretely, for something whose Duration is Eternal, viz. the Divine Substance,
which He otherwise calls, the Soul of the World. This may be, without violence
or sinister perversion, collected from hence, that He dislikes the incongruous
conference of both and either of those Tenses, Fuit and Erit, as well upon
Eternity or interminable Duration, abstractly considered; as (...), upon the
Eternal Substance. And Plotinus (En. 3. lib. 7. cap. 1.) more then once
expressly declares as much: and most ingeniously insinuates the same both when
He derives the word Aeternity, (...), ab eo quod semper est; and when he
excludes all real Alterity, or difference from (...), quod est, and (...), quod
semper est, importing that Is and Eternity are Identical.

(2) That when Plato denies the Congruity of Praeterite and Future, but
allows that of the Praesent Tense, or Est, to the Eternal Substance; He only
aims at this, that, saying of the Eternal Substance, Fuit, it has been, we do
not understand it the same with Non amplius est, it is no more; and also when
we say of it, Erit, it shall be, we do not understand it as Nondum est, it is
not yet: but not that Fuit is incompetent to the Eternal Substance, provided we
intend that it does now continue to be the same it ever has been; nor Erit,
while we conceive it shall be to all Eternity the same, that it ever has been,
and now is. It being manifest from the Syntax and purport of all his Dialogue,
that his cardinal scope was only to praevent the dangerous adscription of those
temporary Mutations to the Eternal Being, which are properly incident to
Generable and Corruptible Natures: and to demonstrate, that we ought to
conceive God, (...), neque seniorem, neque juniorem. In a word, Plato does
judge, that the Tense Est is proper only to the Divine Nature, because it is
ever the same, or invariably possesses the same perfections, nor is there any
moment in the vast amplitude of Eternity, wherein it can be justly said, Now it
has some Attribute, which it had not formerly, or which it shall not have in
the future: since the progress of Time can neither add any thing unto, nor
detract any thing from it, as it does to other Natures, that are obnoxious to
mutation; so that God may well be called, in Plato's Phrase, (...), Habens se
immobiliter.

These remora's of ambiguity removed, Art. 3. Two decisive Positions, thereup^n
in^erred, and established.
we may uninterruptedly advance to inference, and without further haesitancy
determine, (1) That when Aeternity is said to be, Quidpiam totum simul,
something wanting succession or flux of parts, as in the memorable Definition
of Booetius; then is it to be accepted, not abstractly for Duration, but
Concretely for the Divine Substance, whose Duration is sempiternal. (2) That
Time and Eternity differ each from other, in no other respect, then that
Eternity is an infinite Duration, and Time (according to the Vulgar intent of
the word) a certain part of that infinite Duration, commensing at the Creation,
and determining at the Dissolution of the World.

This Cicero rightly apprehended, and emphatically expressed, in his sentence,
Tempus est pars quaedam Aeternitatis, cum alicujus annui, menstrui, diurni,
nocturnive spatii certa significatione. In this respect, Eternity is said to be
Duration Non-principiate and Interminable; which is proper only to God: and
Time is said to be Duration Principiate and Terminable; which is competent to
all Caduce, Mutable, and Corruptible Natures: as also that part of Eternity,
which the Neotericks by a special idiome name ^^vum, is Duration Principiate,
but Interminable, which is adscriptive to Angelical or Intellectual Natures,
and to the Rational Soul of man; for thus we understand that frequent
Bipartition of Eternity into a part ante, and a part post, invented by the
Schoolmen.

Art. 4. The Platoni^ks Definition of Eternity, to be one Everlasting New; not
intelligible, and therefore collusive.
These Positions being indisputable, the remaining subject of our praesent
Disquisition, is only Whether the Platonicks spoke rationally and intelligibly,
when they defined Eternity to be one everlasting NOW, or a Duration void of
succession, or flux of parts?

Concerning this grand Doubt, we profess, would Truth have connived, we could
most willingly have past it by untoucht; because most of our Christian Doctors
have fully assented unto them in this particular: but, since the convulsion of
this their opinion does stagger no Principle of Faith, or Canonical Document
made sacred and established by the Authority of the Church; we shall not
deserve Excommunication, nor suffer the expurgatory Sponge of Rome, if we
quaestion the Congruity of that Definition, and affirm that No man can
understand it. For, what Wit is so acute and sublime, as to conceive, that a
thing can have Duration, and that Duration can be as a point without Fusion and
Continuation from one moment to another, by intervenient or mediate moments?
Easy enough, we confess, it is to conceive, that the Res durans is altogether
at once, or does retain the sameness of its Nature, without mutation,
diminution, or amission of any Perfection: but that, in this Perseveration,
there is not many Nows, or many Instants, of which, compared among themselves,
some are Antecedent, and others Consequent; is to us absolutely
incomprehensible.

Nor can we understand, why it may not be good Christian Phrase, to say; God
WAS in the time of the First Man, and SHALL be in the time of the Last: or why
it is not more Grammatical and proper for us to say, God Created the World
HERETOFORE, and will both destroy and renovate the World HEREAFTER; then, that
God does NOW Create, destroy and renovate.

Art. 5. Their Assertors subterfuge, that Eternity is Coexistent to Time; also
unintelligible.
To this the Common Answer is, that the Reason why these Anthropopathical
Phrases are tolerable, is because Eternity is Coexistent to our Time* but this
is Ignotum explanare per ignotius; for the manner of that supposed Coexistence
has been never explained, and seems said by till the advent of Elias. That
an Instant, i. e. what wants succession, can be Coexistent to a successive
thing; is as manifest an impossibility, as that a Point, i. e. what wants
Longitude, can be Coexistent or Coextensive to a Line. Indeed, They have
endeavored to wave the Difficulty, by subnecting, that the Instant of Eternity
is of such peculiar Eminency, as that it is Aequivolent to Time though
Successive: But as to the Formal Reason, and manner of this peculiar Eminency,
they have left it wholly to our Enquiry also. Nor did they bestow one serious
thought upon the consideration of it; for had they, doubtless they must have
found their Wit at a loss in the Labyrinth of Fancy, and perceived themselves
reduced to this Exigent: either that they had fooled themselves in trifling
with words not well understood; or that they had praecariously usurped the
Quaestion; or that the same Instants are in Eternity, that are in our Time, but
with such Eminency, that infinitely more are contained in Eternity, then in our
Time. How much better were it said, that we are Coexistent with God; or, that
we are existent in a small part of that Duration, in which God infinitely
existeth? For, while we are, certainly, we cannot imagine Two distinct
Durations; but one, which in respct to our Nature, that is principiate,
mutable, and terminable, does contain designable Terms; and in respect of the
Divine Nature, which is nonprincipiate, immutable, interminable, has its
Diffusion or Extension infinitely long before, and as long after us. This may
receive ample justification from that speech of the Hebrew Poet, whose Inspirer
was the Holy Ghost, ( Psalm. 101.) Thou shall Change them and they shall be
changed; but thou, O God! art the same forever, and thy years shall not fail.
For here YEARS are attributed to God, but not any mutation of Substance: so
that when our years are exhausted, in a short, or span-like flux of Time, the
Glass of His Duration is always full. And, therefore, the Expression is only
Tropological, when it is said, that the years of our life make but a Day in the
Almanac of Divinity: for the life of the Hemerobii compared to ours of
threescore years and ten, holds some proportion; but the life of Methusalem,
compared to the Duration of the Life of our lives, the Divine Essence, holds
none at all. Upon this consideration, it was more then a Heathen observation of
Plutarch (in Consolat. ad Apollon.) that there is no difference betwixt a long
and a brief time, in respect of Eternity: since, as Simonides, a thousand, nay
a million of years make but a point, nor so much as the least part of a point
in the line of infinite Duration.

Convicted thus by Reason, our Doctors convert to Scripture, Art. 6. Our
Ecclesiastic Doctors, taking Sanctuary in the 3 Exodus for the authorizing of
their doctrine, that the Praesent Tense is only competent to God, and so that
Eternity is one permanent Instant, without Fusion or Succession: not ^^cure
from the rigor of our Demonstra^ion.
urging that God ( Exodus 3.) indicates his Being only in the Praesent Tense,
as peculiar to his Eternity, saying, I am, that I am, and I am has sent thee
to Moses. But this Objection admits of a threefold evasion. (1) The Hebrew Text
does not, in that place, use the Praesent, but the Future Tense, I shall be,
what I shall be, and I shall be has sent thee. (2) We can oppose many other
Texts, which adscribe to God as well Praeterite and Future, as Praesent time;
and most eminently in the Revelation, He is described, (...), He that is, and
was, and is to come. (3) God Himself does frequently enunciate many actions,
not that He now does, but that He has formerly done, and will do in the
future, in that moment of opportunity, which His Wisdom has praedetermined.
Hence also expulsed, They fly to their last fortress, viz.

If Eternity be not one permanet Now, Art. 7. The Objective Praesence of all
things at once, to the Divine In e^^ect, no ways impugned by our contradiction
(...) the Doctors theory.
then cannot all things be praesent to God, objectively. But vain is their hope
of security in this also. For, many things, if we respect the when of their
existence, have already been, and as many are not yet; but, because the
Omniscience of God pervades as well the darkness of past, as of praesent Time,
and always speculates all things most clearly and distinctly therefore do we
say, that all things are objects to His Optics, or, that all things are
praesent to His Cognition; not that He knows, all things to be praesent at once
altogether, but that He has before Him at once all the diversities of Times,
and as perfectly contemplates them Future and Praeterite, as Praesent. For, the
Divine Intellect does not apprehend Objects, as the Humane, one after another,
or in a successive and syntactical series; but grasps all things together in
one entire act of Cognition, and comprehends in one simple intuition whatever
has been, or may be known. And, therefore, our opinion is not at all impugned
by that sacred sentence; All things are open and naked to His eyes, and He
calls upon those things, that are not, as if they were Hereupon some have, with
unpardonable temerity and incogitancy, inferred; that ONCE there was no Time;
for in this their very denial, they openly confess, that Time has ever been:
it being all one as if they had said, There was a Time when there was no Time.

Art. 8. No^ the Immutability of the Divine Nature; against Aristotle.
Lastly, as the Omniscience of God cannot be indubitated by our persuasion of
the Identity of Eternity and Time, so neither can His Immutability, as
Aristotle would have it, only for this Reason (forsooth) that Time, or that
Duration, which has successive, and so prior and posterior parts, is the
General Cause of Corruption. For, our praecedent Discourse has left no room
for the intrusion of that futile Objection; insomuch as it rather
commonstrateth the Divine Nature to be so Constant and Perfect, that in the
eternal flux of Time it can know nothing of Innovation or Corruption. Besides,
Time, or the succession of Duration, is not the Cause, that induces
Corruption: but the Native Imbecility of compound Natures, invaded and subdued
by some Contrary Agent; and God is a Pure, Simple, Homogeneous substance, and
so not subject to the invasion of any Contrary. Evident it is, therefore, that
Aristotle, when He urged this Sophism, spoke more like a Poet, then a
Philosopher; since Poets only use to give Time the Epithet of Edax rerum: nor
could He be so absurd, as to dream, that Time was a vast Animal, with sharp
teeth, an insatiate appetite, and a belly inexplebile, or an old man armed with
a Sith, as the Poets describe Saturn, making (...) and (...), Saturn and Time
one and the same thing. For, Time really does neither Eat nor Mow down any
thing; and the Dissolution of all Create compound Natures can be imputed to no
other Cause, but the Domestic Hostility of their Heterogenieties, or the
uncessant intestine war of their Elements, from whose commixture their
Compositions, or Concretions did first result. With this qualification,
therefore, we are not angry at that of Periander, in Stobaeus, Tempus est Causa
omnium rerum: because in the process of Time all things have their origin,
state, and declination. In this restrained sense we also tolerate the saying of
Thales Milesius, quoted by Laertius, Tempus est sapientissimum: since Time
produces Experience, and Experience Prudence. And that Antitheton of Pharon
the Pythagorean, recited by Aristotle; Tempus est Ineruditissimum: because in
process of Time the Memory of all things is obliterated, and so oblivion may
well be called the Handmaid of Time, that perpetually follows at the heels of
her Mistress.

Our Clue of thoughts concerning Time is now wholly unravelled; Art. 9. Coronis.
and though we may not praesume, that we have therewith led the mind of our
Reader through all the mysteries of its Nature: yet may we hope, that it may
serve as a conduct to those, who have a more ample stock of Learning and
Perspicacity for the support and encouragement of their Curiosity; at least
that the Attentive and Judicious may easily collect from thence, that we have,
upon no Interest but that main one of Verity, withdrawn our assent from the
common Doctrine of the Schools, that Eternity is one permanent Now, without
Succession, or Priority and Posteriority of Moments.

The Second Book.
CHAP. I. The Existence of Atoms, Evicted.
SECT. I.
Art. 1. The right of the Authors Transition from the Incorporeal to the
Corporeal part of Nature: and a series of his subsequent speculations*
AMong infinite other hypochondriack Conceits of the Teutonick (rather,
Fanatique) Philosophers, they frequently adscribe a Dark and a Light side to
God; determining the Essence of Hell in the one, and that of Heaven in the
other. Whether the expression be proper and decent enough to be tolerated;
requires the arbitration of only a mean and vulgar judgment. We shall only
affirm, that had they accommodated the same to the shadow, or Vicegerent
General of God, to Nature; their Dialect had been, as more familiar to our
capacity, so more worthy our imitation. For, that the INCORPOREAL, and
therefore Invisible part of the Universe, the Inane Space, may bear the name of
the DARK; and the CORPOREAL and visible part of the LUMINOUS side of Nature:
seems consentaneous to reason. On the First, has the eye of our Mind been thus
long levelled; taking in by collateral and digressive glances the Essential
Proprieties of Place and Time; the one of which is absolutely Identical, the
other perfectly Analogous to Inanity: on the other we are now to convert it,
and with more then common attention, therein to speculate the Catholic
Principles, Motions and Mutations, or Generation and Corruption of BODIES.

All Bodies, by an universal Distinction, Art. 2. Bodies generally
distinguished into Principles and Productions, with their Scholastic
Denominations and proprieties.
are either (1) (...), such, from the convention and coalition of which all
Concretions result; familiarly called by Physiologists, Principia, Primordia,
Componentia, but most commonly, Elementa, and Materia Prima. Or (2) (...), such
as consist of the former coacervated, and coalesced: or such as are composed of
many single particles Component. The Former were made by Creation, and are
superior to Corruption: the Later are produced by Generation, and reducible by
Corruption. The First are Simple and Originary; such as Plato intends ( in
Phaedro) when he says, Principii nullam esse originem, quoniam ex ipso
principio oriuntur omnia: the other, Compound and Secondary; such as Lucretius
(lib. 1.) understands by his Concilio quae constant principiorum.

What these First, Simple, Ingenerable, Incorruptible, Art. 3. The right of
Atoms to the Attributes of the First Matter.
Universally Component Bodies are, or to speak in the Dialect of the Vulgar,
What is the General Matter of all Concretions (it is no soloecism in
Physiology, to transfer a word abstractly importing a Natural Action upon the
thing produced by that action) has been by more Disputed, then Determined, in
all Academies. That there must be some one Catholic Material Principle, of
which all Concrete Substances are composed; and into which they are again, at
length by Corruption resolved: is unanimously confessed by all. And,
consequently, that this Matter is Incorruptible, or the Term wherein all
Dissolution cease; has been indubitated by none, but those, who, upon a
confusion of Geometrical with Physical Maxims, run upon the point of that
dangerous Absurdity, that the infinite division of a real Continuum is
possible. Insomuch therefore, as the Essential reason or Formality of
Corporiety does solely consist in Extensibility, or the Dimensions of
Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity real; as our Third Chapter praecedent has
demonstrated, and as the Patriarch of the Schools does expressly confess (
Nature. Auscult. 4. cap. 3.) and insomuch as nothing can be the Root or
beginning of Material or Physical Extension, but (...), Aliquid indissolubile,
something so minute and solid, that nothing can be conceived more exiguous and
impatible in Nature (for, as the Radix of Mathematick, or Imaginary Continuity,
is a Point: so must that of Physical or sensible Continuity be a Body of the
smallest Quantity) such as are the ATOMS of Democritus, Epicurus, and other
their Sectators; and the Insensible Particles of Cartesius: therefore, from
manifest necessity, may we determine, that no Principle can justly challenge
all the Proprieties, or Attributes of the First Universal Matter, but (...),
Indivisible Bodies, or Atoms. Which fundamental Position clearly to establish
by demonstration; is a chief part of our difficult Province: having, for method
and prevention of obscurity, first briefly insisted upon their various
Appellations, with the Etymological relation of each, traced them up to their
(...), or Invention, and evicted their Existence.

(1) As for their various DENOMINATIONS; Art. 4. Their sundry Appellations
allusive to their three eminent proprieties.
they naturally reduce themselves to three General Imports, bearing a congruous
and emphatick respect to their three most eminent Proprieties. For, (1) In
relation to their Corporiety, they are called, (...), Bodies, by way of
transcendency: because they are (...), devoyd of all Incorporiety, i. e. they
contain nothing of Inanity, as do all Concretions emergent from them, there
being in all Compound Bodies more or less of Inanity disseminate among their
particles. For which reason, they are also named, (...), Plena. (2) In regard
of their affording Matter to all Concretions, they are denominated, (...),
Principles, (...), Elements, (...), First Bodies, (...), First Magnitudes,
(...), the Matter of all things, and (...), Genitalia semina rerum, the
seminaries of all productions: because all material things are composed of
them. In which concern also, by a Pythagorical Epithet, they are s^^led,
(...), Unities; because, as all Numbers arise from Unities, so all Compositions
from them. (3) To denote their Indissolubility, they are most frequently known
by the term, (...), and (...), Atoms; either because they are incapable of
Section, as Isodor, Plutarch, Servius, Budaeus, Scapula, etc. or (...), ob
indissolubilem soliditatem, for their indissoluble solidity. For, all Concrete
Bodies, insomuch as they came short of absolute solidity, having somewhat of
Inanity intermixed, may be divided, and subdivided until their ultimate
resolution into these, their component parts: but Atoms admit of no division
below themselves. Wherefore they are usually christened, (...), Individual,
Insectile, Impartible; as likewise, (...), Invisible, and by the mind only
perceptible, Bodies, i. e. so exile as no man can conceive a real Exility
beyond theirs.


Art. 5. Two vulgarly pass^nt Derivations of the word, Atom, exploded.
Hence are we assured, that Two vulgarly passant Derivations of the word, Atome,
are ingenuine and extorted. (1) That of Hesychius, with too much semblance of
approbation mentioned by the Reviver of the great Democritus, Magnenus, (de
Atom. disput. 2. cap. 2.) which would have it a sprigg of that root, (...),
Fumus; because (forsooth) from all bodies, in their reversion from mix^ion to
dissolution, their Elements disperse by Exhalation: as if this Etymology were
so adaequate and important, as to compensate the de^ect o^ an omicron, in the
second syllable. (2) That embraced not only by many paedantique Grammarians,
but even acute Philologers, who interpret the word Atomus to signify a Defect
of Parts; as if an Atom were destitute of all Magnitude, or no other then a
mere Mathematical Point: when, indeed, the Nomenclator had his eye fixed only on
their Solidity, Ha^dness, or Impatibility, which is such, as excludes all
possibility of Fraction, Section, Division. Thus much Epicurus himself
expresses, in most persp^cuous and unpervertible terms ( apud Plutarch. 1.
pla^^t. 3.) thus; Dicitur Atomus, non quod minima sit, vel i^star puncti, sed
quod non possit dividi; cum sit patiendi incapax, and inanis expers. And Galen
(1 de Elem.) recounting their doctrine, who affirmed the Principles of all
Bodies to be Atoms, s^ith of Epicurus, Fecit Atomos, (...), He made them
Infrangible in respect to their solidity.

(2) Concerning their INVENTION; Art. 6. Who their Inven^or: and who their
Nomenclator.
if we reflect upon them as in Re, before their reception of any constant
Denomination; we have the tradition not only of Possidonius the Stoic, related
by Empiricus (advers. Physic. lib. ib.) but also of Strabo, to assure the
honor thereof upon one Moschus, a Phoenician, who flourished not long before
the ruin of Troy by the Graecians. Allowing this for Authentic, we have some
cause to judge Magnenus to have been too favorable to his Grand Master,
Democritus, when ( in testimon. de Democrito. page 3^.) He enricheth his
Panegyric of him with, Effluvia Corporum Atomosque comperit, and invexit
omnium primus: ex Laertio quod unum tanti apud me est, ut congestas omnium
Philosophorum lauds vel exaequet vel superet. Besides, to do Laertius right,
He finds Leucippus, not Democritus, to have been the Founder of this
incomparable Hypothesis: as his records lie open to testify ( in vita
Leucippi.) But, if we reflect upon them only as in Nomine, enquiring who was
their Godfather, that imposed the most convenient name, Atoms, upon them; we
need not any more ancient, or faithful monuments to silence all competition
about that honor, then those of Theodoret: who rightly sets the Laurel on the
deserving front of Epicurus, in this text; (...); Epicurus, Neoclis filius,
dicta illis (meaning Democritus and Metrodorus Chius) Nasta and Adiaereta,
appellavit Atomos. We are not ignorant, that Sidonius Apollinaris (carmin. 15.)
adscribes the imposition of this name, to Archelaus in these Verses: Post hos,
Archelaus divina, mente paratam
Concipit hanc molem, confectam partibus illis,
Quos Atomos vocat, ipse leveis etc.
But how unjustly, even S. Augustine (8. de Civit. Dei, cap 3.) sufficiently
declares; saying, that Archelaus deduced all things, non ex Atomis, sed ex
Particulis dissimilibus. And therefore, though we may not file up the first
Discovery of this noble Principle, Atoms (of all others, hitherto excogitated,
the most verisimilous, because most sufficient to the solution of all Natures
Phenomenon) among those many benefits, which the Commonweal of Philosophy owes
to the bounteous Wit of Epicurus: yet has his sagacity in accommodating them
with so perfectly congruous an Appellation, and successful industry in
advancing and refining their Theory, in the General, worthily entitled him to
the homage of a grateful Estimation equal to that, which the merit of their
Inventor claims.

(3) Concerning their EXISTENCE; that there are such Things, Art. 7. Their
Existence demo^strated.
as Atoms, or Insectile Bodies, in Rerum Natura; cannot be long doubted by any
judicious man, who shall thus reason with himself.

(1) Nature can produce Nothing out of Nothing; nor reduce any thing to
Nothing: is an Axiom, whose tranquillity was never yet disturbed, no not by
those who have invaded the ^ertitude of even First Notions, and accused
Geometry of delusion. If so; there must be some Common Stock, or an Universal
Something, Ingenerable, and Incorruptible, of which being praeexistent, all
things are Generated, and into which being indissoluble, all things are, at the
period of their duration, again resolved.

Art. 8. Th^^ Nature, in her dissolution of (...), does des^end to (...)
partic^es.
That Nature does dissolve Bodies into exceeding minute, or insensible
particles; Her self does undeniably manifest, as well in the Nutrition of
Animate (their Aliment being volatilized into so many insensible particles, as
those whereof the Body nourished does consist; otherwise there could be no
General Apposition, Accretion, Assimilation) as the Incineration of ^ead
Bodies. Which ground Des Carts rightly apprehended to be so firm and evident,
that he thought the existence of his Insensible Particles sufficiently
demonstrable from thence. Quis dubitare potest (says He) quin multa Corpora
sint tam minuta, ut ea nullo sensu deprehendamus, si tantum consideret, quidnam
singulis horis adjiciatur iis quae lent augentur, vel quid detra^atur ex iis
quae sensim minuuntur? Cresci^ enim arbor quotidie, nec potest intelligi
majorem illam reddi quam prius fuit, nisi simul intelligatur aliquod corpus
eidem adjungi. Quis autem unquam sensu deprehenderit, quaenam sint illa
corpuscula, quae in una die arbori crescenti accesserunt, etc. (princip Philos.
part. 4. articul. 201.)

That she cannot in her Dissolution of Bodies, proceed to Infinity, but must
consist in some definite Term, Art. 9. That ^he (...) to (...).
or extreme, the lowest of Physical Quantity; is demonstrable from hence, that
every real Magnitude is incapable of interminable Division. For, since to an
infinite process is required an infinite Time; she could never Generate any
thing New, because the old would require an infinite time and process to their
Dissolution. Convicted by this apodictical Argument, Aristotle (1 Phys. 9.)
detesting the odious Absurdity of ((...)) running on to Infinity; solemnly
concludes ((...)) that there must be an Extreme Matter, wherein all Exolution
is terminated: only herein He recedes from the supposition of Democritus,
Epicurus, and other Patrons of the same Doctrine that they terminated all
Exolution in the Insectility of Atoms; but He describes no such Extreme, or
point of Consistence, his Materia Prima being stated rather Potential, then
Actual, and absolutely devoid of all Quantity; then which we know no more open
and inexcusable a Contradiction. Again, if the Exolution of Bodies were not
Definite, and that Nature knowing no n^ ultra, did progress to Adnihilation:
then must it inevitably follow, that the Matter of all things, that have been
formerly, is totally Adnihilated; and the matter of all things now Existent,
was educed out of Nothing. Two most intolerable Absurdities; since Adnihilation
and Creation are terms not to be found in the Dictionary of Nature, but proper
only to Omnipotence: nor is there any sober man, who does not understand the
Common Material of Things to be constantly the same, through the whole flux of
Time, or the duration of the World; so as that from the Creation thereof by the
Fiat of God, no one particle of it can perish, or vanish into Nothing, until
the total Dissolution of Nature, by the same Metaphysical power; nor any one
particle of new matter be superadded thereto, without miracle. The Energy of
Nature is definite and praescribed: nor is she Commissioned with any other
Efficacy, then what extends to the moulding of Old Matter into New Figures; and
so, the noblest Attribute we can allow her, is that of a Translator. Art. 10.
(...) the Term of Ex^olu^ility.


Now, to extract the spirit of all this, since there must be an Extreme, or
ultimate Term of Exolubility, beyond which can be progress; since this Term can
be conceived no other but the lowest degree of Physical Quantity; and since,
beyond the In^ectility of Atoms, no Quantity Physical can be granted: what can
the genuine Consequent be, but that in Nature there are extremly minute Bodies,
(...), Indivisible and Immutable?

(2) For Confirmation; as in the Universe there is, Aliquid Inane, Art. 11. A
second Argument of their Existence, drawn from that of their Antitheton,
Inanity.
something so purely Inane, as that it is absolutely devoyd of all Corporiety:
so also must there be Aliquid Corporeum, somewhat so purely Corporeal, or
solid, as to be perfectly devoyd of all Inanity; to which peculiar solidity
nothing but Atoms, in regard of their Indivisibility, can praetend: therefore
is their Existence to be confessed. This Reason Lucretius most elegantly thus
urges; Tum porro* si nil esset, quod INANE vacaret,
Omne foret solidum; nisi contra CORPORA caeca
Essent, quae loca complerent quaecunque tenerent,
Omne quod est spatium, Vacuum constaret Inane, etc. Lib. 1.


(3) Evident it is to sense, that in the World are two sorts of Bodies, Art.
12. A third, hinted from the impossibility of the Production of Hard Bodies,
from any other Principle.
Soft and Hard; now, if we assume the Principles of all things to be
exquisitely Hard, or Solid; then do we admit the production of not only Hard,
but also of soft Bodies to be possible, because softness may arise to a
Concretion of Hard Principles, from the Intermistion of Inanity: but, if we
assume soft Principles, then do we exclude all possibility of the production of
Hard Bodies, that Solidity, which is the Fundament of Hardness, being
subtracted: Therefore is the Concession of Atoms necessary.

(4) Nature is perpetually Constant in all her specifical Operations, Art. 13.
A Fourth, from the Constancy of Nature in the specification and Determinate
Periods of her Generations.
as in her Production and Promotion of Animals to the determinate periods of
their Increment, Stature, Vigor, and Duration; and, more evidently, in the
impression of those marks, whereby each species is discriminated from other.
Now, to what Cause can this Her Constancy be, with greater probability,
referred then to this, that her Materials are Certain, Constant, and
inobnoxious to Dissolution, and consequently to mutation: and such are Atoms
praesumed to be? Ergo, they are Existent.

CHAP. II. No Physical Continuum, infinitely Divisible.
SECT. I.
THe Grand Base on which the whole Fabric of the Atomists, Art. 1. The
Cognation of this Theorem, to the Argument of the immediately praecedent
Chapter.
i. e. our Physiology is supported, confesses it self to be this; that Nature
cannot extend her Dissolution of Bodies beyond (...), somewhat that is Firm and
Inexsoluble. And the rock on which that adamantine Base is fixed, is soon
understood to be this; that the Parts of no Physical Continuum, or Magnitude,
are subdivisible to Infinity. The Former, we conceive so clearly comprobated by
Reasons of evidence and certitude equal to that of the most perfect
Demonstration in Geometry, that to suspect its admission for an impraegnable
Verity, by all, who have not, by a sacramental subscription of Aristotle's
Infallibility, abjured the ingenious Liberty of estimating Philosophical
Fundaments more by the moments of Verisimility, then the specious Commendums of
Authority; were no less then implicitly to disparage the Capacity of our
Reader, by supposing Him an incompetent judge of their importance and validity.
And that the Other is equally noble in its alliance to Truth, and so secure
from subversion by the minds of the acutest Sophistry, that may oppose it; is
the necessary Theorem of this praesent Exercitation.

Art. 2. Mag^i^ude divi^^^le by a continued progress through parts either (...).
To usher in this Verity with the greater splendour, we are required to advertise

(1) That Philosophers have instituted two distinct Methods, for the regular
Division of Magnitude. For, their Divisions are continued by a progression
through Parts either (1) PROPORTIONAL; which is when a Physical Continuum is
divided into two parts, and each of those parts is subdivided again into two
more, and each of those into two more; or when the whole of any magnitude is
divided into 10 equal parts, and each of those into 10 more, and each of those
into 10 more, and so forward, observing the same decimal proportions through
the whole division: or (2) ALIQUOTAL; i. e. when a Continuum is divided into
such parts, as being diverse times repeated, are aequated to the whole, or into
so many parts as seem convenient to the Divisor, provided they hold equal
proportions among themselves, whether they be Miles, Furlongs, Fathoms, Feet,
Digits, etc. Which Distinction Aristotle seems to allude unto, when he declares
(3. physic. 7.) that the Difference betwixt Magnitude and Number does consist
in this, that by the Division of Numbers we arrive at last, (...), ad Minimum,
at the Least; but of Magnitude, (...), ad Minus, only to a Less.

(2) That when Democritus, Epicurus, Art. 3. The use of that Distinction in the
praesent.
and other Ancients of the same Antistoical Faction, treating of the Division
of Magnitude, determine it (...); they did chiefly intend that Methodical
Division, which is made in parts Proportionales; insomuch as every part made
by a second division must be less then that made by a first.

The Demonstration.
If in a Finite Body, the number of Parts, into which it may be divided, Art.
4. The veri^y of the Thesis, demonstrated.
be not Finite also; then must the Parts comprehended therein be really
Infinite: and, upon Consequence, the whole Composition resulting from their
Commixture, be really Infinite; which is repugnant to the supposition.

So perfectly Apodictical, and so inoppugnably victorious, Art. 5. Two
detestable Absurdities, inseparable from the position of Infinite parts in a
Continuum.
is this single Argument, that there needs no other to the justification of our
instant Cause: nor can the most obstinate and refractory Champion of the
Peripateticks, refuse to surrender his assent thereto, without being reduced to
a most dishonorable exigent. For, He must allow either that the whole of any
Body is something besides, or distinct from the Aggeries, or Mass of Parts, of
which it is composed: or, that all the Parts, together taken, are somewhat
greater then the whole amassed by their convention and coalescence. If so;
there must be as many parts in a grain of Mustard seed, as in the whole
Terrestrial Globe: since in either is supposed an equal Inexhauribility; which
is contrary to the First Notion of ^uclid, Totum est majus sua part. And if
any man's skull be so soft, as to admit a durable impression of an opinion so
openly self-contradictory, as this, that the Whole is less then its Parts; we
judge him a fit Scholar for Chrysippus, who blushed not publicly to affirm,
that one drop of Wine was capable of commistion with every particle of the
Ocean, nay, diffusive enough to extend to an union with every particle of the
Universe, were it 1000^0 times greater, then now it is. Nor, need we despair to
make him swear, that Arcesilas did not jeer the Disciples of Zeno, when he
exemplified the inexhaurible division of Magnitude, in a man's Thigh, amputated,
putrified, and cast into the Sea; ironically affirming the parts thereof so
infinitely subdivisible, that it might be incorporated per minimas, to every
particle of Water therein; and consequently, that not only Antigonus Navy might
sail at large through the thigh, but also that Xerxes thousand two hundred
ships might freely maintain a Naval fight with 300 Galleys of the Greeks, in
the compass of its dispersed parts. We deny not, but Zeno's Argument against
Motion, grounded on the supposition of interminable Partibility in Magnitude,
is too hard and full of Knots, to be undone by the teeth of common reason: yet
who has been so superlatively stupid, as to prefer the mere plausibility
thereof to the contrary Demonstration of his sense, and thereupon infer a
belief, that there is no Motion in the World? What Credulity is there so easy,
as to entertain a conceit, that one granule of sand (a thing of very small
circumscription) does contain so great a number of parts, as that it may be
divided into a thousand millions of Myriads; and each of those parts be
subdivided into a thousand millions of Myriads; and each of those be redivided
into as many; and each of those into as many: so as that it is impossible, by
multiplications of Divisions, ever to arrive at parts so extremely small, as
that none can be smaller; though the subdivisions be repeated every moment, not
only in an hour, a day, a month, or a year, but a thousand millions of Myriads
of years? Or, What Hypochondriack has been so wild in Fancy, as to conceive
that the vast mass of the World may not be divided into more parts then the
Foot of a Handworm, a thing so minute as if made only to experiment the
perfection of an Engyscope? And yet this must not be granted, if we hearken to
the spells of Zeno and the Stoics; who contend for the Divisibility of every
the smallest quantity into infinite parts: since, into how many parts soever
the World be divided, as many are assumable in the Foot of a Handworm, the
parts of this being no less inexhaustible, nor more terminable by any continued
division, then the parts of that, according to the supposition of Infinitude.
And, hereon may we safely conclude, that albeit the Arguments alleged in
defense of Infinite Divisibility of every Physical Continuum, were (as not a
few, nor obscure Clerks have reputed them) absolutely indissoluble: yet
notwithstanding, since we have the plain Certificate of not only our Reason,
but undeluded sense also to evidence the Contrary, ought we to more then
suspect them of secret Fallacy and Collusion; it being a rule, worthy the
reputation of a First Notion, that in the examination of those Physical
Theorems, whose Verity, or Falsity is determinable by the sincere judicature of
the sense, we ought to appeal to no other Criterion, but to acquiesce in the
Certification thereof; especially where is no Refragation, or Dissent of Reason.

Notwithstanding the manifest necessity of this apodictical Truth, yet have
there been many Sophisms framed, upon design to evade it: among which we find
only Two, whose plausibility and popular approbation seem to praescribe them to
our praesent notice.

Art. 6. Aristotle's sub^erfuge of Infinitude Potential*
The First is that famous one of Aristotle (de insecabil. lineis) Non creari
propterea infinitum actu ex hujusmodi partibus infinitis, quoniam tales parts
non actu, sed potestate duntaxat infinitae sunt; adeo proinde ut creent solum
infinitum potestate, quod idem sit actu finitum: that the division of a finite
body into infinite parts does not make it actually infinite, because the parts
are not actually, but only potentially infinite; so as they render it
infinitely divisible only potentially, while it still remains actually Finite.

The Collusion of this Distinction is not deeply concealed. For, Art. 7. Found
openly Collusive.
every Continuum has either no parts in actu, or infinite parts in actu.
Since, if by parts in actu, we understand those that are actually divided: then
has not any Continuum so much as two or three parts; the supposed Continuity
excluding all Division. And if we intend, that a Continuum has therefore two
parts actually, because it is capable of division into two parts actually: then
is it necessary, that we allow a Continuum to have parts actually infinite,
because we presume it capable of division into infinite parts actually; which
is contradictory to Aristotle. Nor can any of his Defendants excuse the
consequence by saying; that the Division is never finishable, or terminable,
and that his sense is only this, that no Continuum can ever be divided into so
many parts, as that it may not be again divided into more, and those by
redivision into more, and so forward without end. Since, as in a Continuum two
parts are not denied to exist, though it be never divided into those two parts:
so likewise are not infinite parts denied to exist therein, though it be never
really divisible into infinite parts. Otherwise, we demand, since by those
requisite divisions and subdivisions usque ad infinitum, still more and more
actual parts are discovered; can you conceive those parts, which may be
discovered to be of any Determinate Number, or not? If you take the Affirm.
then will not there be parts enough to maintain the division to infinity: if
the Negat. then must the parts be actually infinite. For, how can a Continuum
be superior to final exhaustion, unless in this respect, that it contains
infinite parts, i. e. such whose Infinity makes it Inexhaustible. Because, as
those parts, which are deduced from a Continuum, must be praeexistent therein
before deduction (else whence are they deduceable?) so also must those, which
yet remain deduceable, be actually existent therein, otherwise they are not
deducible from it. For, Parts are then Infinite, when more and more
inexhaustibly, or without end, are conceded Deducible.

The other, with unpardonable confidence insisted on by the Stoics, Art. 8. A
second subterfuge of the Stoic;
is this; Continuum non evadere infinitum; quoniam illud proprie resultat non
ex Proportionalibus, sed ex Aliquotis partibus, quas constat esse Definitas,
cum inter extrema Corporis versentur: that [by admitting an infinity of parts
in a Finite Continuum] a Continuum does not become infinite; because that
results properly not from Proportional, but Aliquotal parts, which are
therefore confessed to be Definite, because they relate only to the Extremes of
a Body.

First, this subterfuge is a mere Lusus Verborum, Art. 9. Manifestly
dissentaneo^s to Reason.
sounding naught at all in the ears of Reason. For since every thing does
consist of those parts, into which it may be at last resolved; because every
Continuum is at last resolved into, therefore must it con^ist of Proportional
Parts. Again, since every one of Aliquotal parts is Continuate, each of them
may be divided into as many Aliquotal parts, as the whole Continuum was first
divided into, and so upwards infinitely: so as at length the Division must
revert into Proportional Parts, and the Difficulty remain the same.

SECT. II.
THe impossibility of Dividing a Physical Continuum into parts interminably
subdivisible, being thus amply Demonstrated; and the Sophistry of the most
specious Recesses, invented to assist the Contrary opinion, clearly detected:
the residue of this Chapter belongs to our Vindication of the same Thesis from
the guilt of those Absurdities and In^ongruities, which the Dissenting Faction
has charged upon it.

Art. 1. The Absurdities, by Empiricus, charged upon the supposition of only
Finite parts in a Continuum.
Empiricus, with great Virulency of language inveighing against the Patrons of
Atoms, accuses them of subverting all Local Motion, by supposing that not only
Place and Time, but also Natural Quantity indivisible beyond Insectile Parts.
To make this the more credible, He Objects (1) That if we assume a Line,
consisting of nine Insectils, and imagine two insectile Bodies to be moved,
with equal velocity, from the opposite extremes thereof toward the middle; it
must be, to their mutual occurse, and convention in the middle, necessary that
both possess the median part of the median, or Fifth Insectile place (there
being no cause, why one should possess it more then the other) when yet both
the Places and Bodies therein moved, are praesumed Insectile, i. e. without
parts. (2) That all Bodies must be moved with equal celerity; for, the pace of
the Sun and that of a Snail must be aequivelox, if both move through an
insectile space, in an insectile Time. (3) That, if many Concentrical Circles
be described by the circumduction of one Rule, defixed upon one of its
extremes, as upon a Center; since they are all delineated at one and the same
time, and some are greater then others: it must follow, that unequal portions
of Circles are described in the same individual point of Time, and consequently
that an Insectile of an Interior Circle must be aequated to a sectile of an
Exterior.

Art. 2. The sundry Inc^ngruities and Inconsistenc^s, by the Modern
Anti-Democritans, imputed to the suppos^tion of Insectility.
To these our Modern Anti-Epicureans have superadded many other (...), or
Inconcistencies, as dependent on the position of Insectility viz. (1) That a
Line of unaequal Insectiles, suppose of 3.5.9. or 11. cannot be divided into
two equal halfs: when yet, that any Line whatever may be exactly bipartited, is
demonstrable to sense. (2) That a less line cannot be divided into so many
parts, as a Greater: though the Contrary be concordant to the maxims of
Geometry. (3) That though lines drawn betwixt all the points of the Legs of an
Isoscelis Triangle, parallel to its Base, are less then its Base; yet will they
be found greater: because, supposing the Base to be of five points, and the
Legs of 10; it must follow, that the least Line, or the nearest to the Vertex,
does consist of only two points, the second of 3, the third of 4, the fourth of
5, the fifth of 6, the sixth of 7, the seventh of 8, and the greatest, or
nearest to the Base, of 9; then which nothing can be more absurd. (4) That the
Diagone of a Quadrate would be commensurable in longitude with the side
thereof: one and the same point being the measure common to both; though the
Contrary is demonstrated by Euclid. (5) That the same Diagone of a Quadrate
could not be greater then, but exactly adaequate to the side thereof: because
each of all its points must be possessed by just so many, nor more nor fewer
lines, then may be drawn betwixt the points of the opposite sides; which is
highly absurd. (6) That, with the danger of no less absurdity, would not a
semicircle be greater then its Diametre; since to every point in the semicircle
there would respond another in the Diametre, and there would be in both as many
points, on which as many perpendicular Lines, deduced from them, might be
incident. (7) That, according to the supposition of Insectility, of many
Concentrick Circles the Exterior would not be greater then the Interior;
insomuch as all the Lines drawn from all the points of it toward the Center,
must pass through as many points of the other. Many other Exceptions lie
against our Insectility; but being they are of the same Nature with these,
rather Mathematical, then Physical, and that one common solution will serve
them all: we may not abuse our leisure in their recitation.

That there have been hot and scarce ingenious Altercations among the gravest
and leading Philosophers, in all ages; Art. 3. The full Derogation of the (...)
all together, by o^e single Resp^nse; that the minimum of Atomists is not
Mathematical, but Ph^sical, contrary to their praesumption.
and even about those Arguments, which wear the proper Characters of Truth
fairly engraven on their Fronts: can be esteemed no wonder; because the general
custom of men to speculate the Fabric of Nature through the deceivable Glass
of Authority, does amply solve it. But, that so many Examples of Sagacity and
Disquisition, as have condemned the Hypothesis of Atoms, should think their
Choler against the Patrons of it excusable only by the allegation of these
light and impertinent Exceptions: cannot be denied the reputation of a Wonder,
and such a one as no plea, but an ambitious Affectation of extraordinary
subtilty in the invention of Sophisms (wherein Fallacy is so neatly disguised
in the amiable habit of right Reason, as to be charming enough to impose upon
the incircumspection of common Credulity, and cast disparagement upon the most
noble and evident Fundamentals.) can palliate. For, certainly, They could not
be ignorant, that they corrupted the state of the Quaestion; the Minimum, or
Insectile of Atomists, being not Mathematicum, but Physicum, and of a far
different nature from that Least of Quantity, which Geometricians imagining
only, denominate a Point. And therefore, what Cicero (1. de finib.) said
against Epicurus; Non esse ne illud quidem Physici, credere aliquid esse
minimum: may be justly converted into, Esse praesertim Physici, natural
quoddam minimum asserere; since Nature in her Exolutions cannot progress to
infinity. We say, Physici; because it is the Naturalist, whose enquiries are
confined to sensible objects, and such as are really Existent in Nature: nor is
He at all concerned, to use those Abstractions (as they are termed) from
Matter; the Mathematician being the only He, who cannot, with safety to his
Principles, admit the Tenet of Insectility, or Term of Divisibility. For to Him
only is it requisite, to suppose and speculate Quantity abstract from
Corporiety; it being evident, that if He did allow any Magnitude divisible only
into Individuals, or that the number of possible parts, or points in a
Continuum, were definite: then could he not erect Geometrical, or exquisite
Demonstrations. And hence only is it, that He supposes an Infinitude of points
in every the least Continuum, or (in his own phrase) that every Continuum is
div^sible into parts infinitely subdivisible: not that He does, or can really
understand it so; but that many Convenient Conclusions, and no considerable
Incongruities, follow upon the Concession thereof. This considered, we need no
other evidence, that all the former Objections, accumulated upon Epicurus by
the malicious Sophistry of Empiricus and others, concern only the
Mathematicians, not the Physiologist, who is a stranger to their supposition of
interminable Divisibility.

Art. 4. A seeming D^lemma of the Adversary, expeditely evaded.
If this Response praevail not, and that we must yet sustain this seeming
Dilemma; Either the suppositions of the Mathematicians are True or False: if
true, then does their verity hold, when accommodated to Physical Theorems, by
the assumption of any sensible Continuum, or real Magnitude; if false, then are
not the Conclusions Necessary, that are deduced from them, but the contray is
apparent in their demonstrations; Therefore, etc. Our Expedient is, that,
though we should concede those suppositions to be False, yet may they afford
true and necessary Conclusions: every Novice in Logic well knowing how to
extract undeniable Conclusions out of most false propositions, only supposed
true, as may be Instanced in this Syllogism. Omnes arbores sunt in coelo
(that is false) sed omnia sydera sunt Arbores (that is false) Ergo, omnia sydera
sunt in coelo (that is indisputable). Besides, it is evident, that of those many
Hypotheses celebrated by Astronomers, either no one is absolutely true, or all
except one, are false: yet Experience assures, that from all, at least from
most of them the Motions of Celestial Bodies may be described, and respective
Calculations instituted with equal Certude.

Digression.
Art. 5. A Digression, stating and determining that notable Quaestion, Whether
Geomet^ical Dem^nstrations may be conveniniently trans^f^^red to Physical or
sensible Quantity?
Here, because our Reader cannot but perceive us occasionally fallen into the
mouth of that eminent Quaestion; An liceat in materiam physicam, sive
sensibilem, transfer Geometricas Demonstrationes? Whether it be convenient to
transfer Geometrical Demonstrations to Physical or sensible Quantity? Since
they, who accept the Negative, seem to adnihilate the use of Geometry: we need
not deprecate his impatience, though we digress so long, as to praesent him the
summary of our thoughts concerning it.

First, we conceive it not justifiable, always to expect the eviction of
Physical Theorems; by Geometrical Demonstrations. This may be authorized from
hence, that Geometricians themselves, when they fall upon the theory of those
parts of the Mathematics, which are Physicomathematical, or of a mi^t and
complex Consideration, are frequently necessitated to convert to suppositions,
not only different from, but directly and openly repugnant to their own proper
and established maxims. Thus* in Optics, Euclid concedes a Least Angle; and
Vitellio admits a Least Light, such as being once understood to be divided,
has no longer the act of Light, i. e. wholly disappears: which is no less,
then in Optics to allow a Term, or point of Consistence to the Division of
Quantity, which yet in Geometry they hold capable of an infinite process. We
are provided of a most pertinent Example, for the illustration of the whole
matter. The Geometrician Demonstrateth the Division of a Line into two equal
segments, to be a thing not only possible, but most easy: and yet cannot the
Physiologist be induced to swallow it, as really performable. For He considers
(1) That the superfice of no body can be so exactly smooth and polite, as to be
devoyd of all uneveness or asperity, every common Microscope discovering
numerous inaequalities in the surface of even the best cut Diamonds, and the
finest Crystal, Bodies, whose Tralucency sufficiently confesses them to be
exceeding polite: and consequently, that there is assumable thereon no Line so
perfectly uniform, as not to be made unequal by many Valleculae and Monticulae,
small pits and protuberances frequently interjacent. (2) That the Edge of no
Dissecting Instrument can be so acute, as not to draw a line of some Latitude.
(3) That should the edge of the acutest Rasor be laid on the foot of a
Handworm, which may be effected by the advantage of a good Magnifying Glass,
and a steady hand: yet is that composed of many Myriads of Atoms, or insensible
particles of the First universal Matter. And thence Concludes that no real Line
drawn upon the superfice of any the smoothest Body, can be practically divided
into two Halfs, so exactly, as that the section shall be in that part, which is
truly the median to both extremes. Since, that part, which appears, to the
sense, to be the median, and is most exiguous; does yet consist of so many
Myriads of particles, as that though the edge of the Rasor be imposed by many
Myriads of particles aside of that, which is truly in the middle, yet will it
seem to the eye still to be one and the same. This duly perpended, we have no
cause to fear the section of an Atome, though the edge of a knife were imposed
directly upon it: Since the edge must be gross and blunt, if compared to the
exility of an Atome: so that we may allow it to divide an Assembly, or Heap of
Atoms, but never to cut a single one.

Secondly, We judge it expedient in some cases to accommodate suppositions
Geometrical to Subjects merely Physical; but to this end only, that we may
thereby acquire majorem (...), a greater degree of Acuteness, or advance our
speculations to more Exactness. Thus the soul of the Mathematics, Archimed,
(de Arenarum number.) supposed the Diametre of a grain of Poppy seed to consist of
10000 particles; not that He conceived that any Art could really discern so
vast a multitude of parts in a body of so minute circumscription: but that, by
transferring the same reason to another body of larger dimensions, He might
attain the certitude of his Proposition by so much the nearer, by how much the
less he might have erred by neglecting one of those many particles. Thus also
is it the custom of Geometricians, in order to their exactness in Calculations,
to imagine the Semi-diametre, or Radius of any Circle, divided into many
Myriads of Parts; not that so many parts can be really distinguished in any
Radius, but that, when comparation is made betwixt the Radius, and other right
lines, which in parts Aliquotal, or such as are expressed by whole numbers, do
not exactly respond thereunto, particles may be found out so exile, as though
one, or the fraction of one of them be neglected yet can no sensible Error
ensue thereupon. And this (in a word) seems to be the true and only Cause, why
Mathematicians constantly suppose every Continuum to consist of Infinite parts:
not that they can, or ought to understand it to be Really so; but that they may
conserve to themselves a liberty of insensible Latitude, by subdividing each
division of Parts into so many as they please; For, they well know, that the
Physiologist is in the right, when He admits no Infinity, but only an
Innumerability of parts in natuaral Continuum. Lastly, if these Reasons appear
not weighty enough to counterpoise the Contrary Persuasion; we can aggravate
them with a Grain of noble Authority. For, no meaner a man then Plato, who
seems to have understood Geometry as well as the Egyptian Theuth, the supposed
Inventor thereof ( vide Platon. in Phaedro) and to have honored it much more
in a solemn Panegyric (9. dialog. de Rep.) sharply reprehends Eudoxus,
Archytas, Menaechonus, etc. for their error in endeavoring to adjust
Geometrical speculations to sensible objects: subnecting in positive terms,
that ((...)) thereby the good of Geometry was corrupted. ( Lege Marsil. Ficin.
in Compend* Timaei. cap. 19.)

CHAP. III. Atoms, the First and Universal Matter.
SECT. I.
NO man so fit to receive and retain the impressions of Truth, as He, Art. 1.
The introduction, hinting the two general assumptions of the Chapter.
who has his Virgin mind totally dispossessed of Praejudice: and no Thesis
has ever, since the Envy of Aristotle was so hot, as to burn the Volumes of
Democritus and most of the Elder Philosophers, which might have conserved its
luster, Superbissimo furore ambitiosus nominis Aristoteles, in Philos^phorum
Principes est deba^cha^us, uno ^ue incendio congestas trigintae sex seculis tot
sapientiae divitias absumpsit; and si quae voluit superesse funeri, ea omnium
^udib^i^, dicteriisque lacessenda tradidit p^steris, dum in optimorum bona
invectus, ab^cissis perditisque sapientiae statu^rum capitibus, suum imp suit
singulis: ut Magn^nas, in Democrit. Script. Elench. ex Plinio in p^ae^at. ad D.
Vespanianum Imp.
been more Eclipsed with a praesumption of sundry Incongruities, then this
noble one, that Atoms are the First and Catholic Principle of Bodies.
Requisite it is therefore that this Chapter have, Ianus like, two faces: one to
look backward on those Impediments to its general admission, the Inconsistences
charged upon, and sundry Difficulties supposed inseparable from it; the other
to look forward at the plenary Remonstrance of its Verity.

In obedience to this necessity, therefore, we advertise, first; Art. 2.
Demo^itus and Epicurus vindicated from the absurd admission of Inanity to be
one Principle of Generables.
that it has proved of no small disadvantage to the promotion of the Doctrine
of Atoms, that the Founders thereof have been accused of laying it down for a
main Fundamental, that there are two Principles of all things in the Universe,
BODY and INANITY; importing the necessary Concurrence of the Inane Space to
the constitution of Bodies complex, as well as of Atoms. This Absurdity has
been unworthily charged upon Epicurus by Plutarch, in these words; Principia
esse Epicuro Infinitatem and Inane: and upon Leucippus and Democritus by
Aristotle (1. Metaphys. 4.) in these; Plenum and Inane Elementa dicunt.

To vindicate these Mirrors of Science from so dishonorable an Imputation, we
plead; that though they held the Universe to consist of two General Parts,
Atoms and Vacuity: yet did not they, therefore, affirm, that all things were
composed of those two, as Elementary Principles. That which imposed upon their
Accusers judgment, was this, that supposing Atoms and the Inane Space to be
Ingenite and Incorruptible, they conceived the whole of Nature to arise from
them, as from its two universal Parts; but never dreamt so wild an Alogy, as
that all Concretions, that are produced by Generation, and subject to
destruction by Corruption, must derive their Consistence from those two, in the
capacity of Elements, or Componentia. For, albeit in some latitude and liberty
of sense, they may be conceded Elements, or Principles of the Universe: yet
does it not naturally follow, that therefore they must be equal Principles, or
Elements of Generables; since Atoms only fulfill that title, the Inane Space
affording only Place and Discrimination. Nor is it probable, that those, who
had defined Vacuity by Incorporiety, should lapse into so manifest a
Contradiction, as to allow it to be any Cause of Corporiety, or to constitute
one moiety of Bodies. Besides, neither can Epicurus in any of those Fragments
of his, redeemed from the jaws of oblivion by Laertius, Cicero, Empiricus,
Plutarch, etc. nor his faithful Disciple and Paraphrast, Lucretius, in all his
Physiology, be found, to have affirmed the Contexture of any Concretion from
Inanity, but of all things simply and solely from Atoms. And for Democritus,
him does even Aristotle himself wholly acquit of this Error; for ( in 1. Phys.)
enumerating the several opinions of the Ancients concerning the Principles, or
Elements of all things, He says of him; Fecit principiorum Genus unicum,
Figuras vero differentes. All therefore that lies against them in this case,
is only that they asserted the interspersion or dissemination of Inanity among
the incontingent particles of Bodies concrete, as of absolute necessity to
their peculiar Contemperation: which we conceive our selves obliged to embrace
and defend, until it shall be proved unto us, by more then paralogistical
arguments, that there is any one Concretion in the world so perfectly solid, as
to contain nothing of the Inane Space intermixed* which till it can be
demonstrated that a Concretion may be so solid, as to be Indissoluble, we have
no cause to expect.

Art. 3. Atoms not inconsistent with, because the Principles of the four vulgar
Elements.
Secondly, That the Patrons of Atoms do not (as the malice of some, and
incogitancy of others has praetended, to cast disparagement upon their Theory)
deny the Existence of those four Elements admitted by most Philosophers: but
allow them to be Elementa Secundaria, Elements Elementated, i. e. consisting of
Atoms, as their First and Highest Principles. Thus much we may certify from
that of Lucretius (2. lib.) treating of Atoms; Unde mare, and Terrae possent
augescere, and unde
Adpareret spatium Coeli Accipitur pro Igne^seu Aethere, quem dictum Anaxagoras
censuit, (...), ab ^rendo.
domus, altaque tecta,
Tolleret a terris procul, and consurgeret Aer, etc.
Nor can the most subtle of their Adversaries make this their Tenet bear an
action of trespass against right Reason; especially when their Advocate shall
urge, the great Dissent of the Ancients concerning both the Number and Original
of Elements, the insufficiency of any one Element to the Production of Compound
Natures, and that the four vulgar Elements cannot justly be honored with the
Attributes of the First Matter.

(1) The Dissent of the Ancients about the number of Elements cannot be unknown
to any, Art. 4. The dissent of the Ancients, about the number of Elements.
who has revolved their monuments and taken a list of their several opinions;
their own, or their Scholiasts volumes lying open to record, that of those who
fixed upon the four Vulgar Elements, Fire, Aer, Earth, Water, for the universal
Principles, some constituted only one single first Principle, from which by
Consideration and Rarefaction, the other three did proceed, and from them all
Elementated Concretions: among which are Heraclitus, who selected Fire;
Anaximenes, who pitched upon Aer; Thales Milesius, who praeferred Water; and
Pherecydes, who was for Earth. Others supposed only Two primary, from which
likewise, by Condensation and Rarefaction the other two secondary were
produced: as Xenophanes would have Earth and Water; Parmenides contended for
Fire and Earth; Oenopides Chius for Fire and Aer; and Hippo Rheginus for Fire
and Water. Others advanced one step higher, and there acquiesced in Three; as
Onomacritus and his Proselytes affirmed Fire, Water, and Earth. And some made
out the Quaternian, and superadded also Aer; the Principal of which was
Empedocles. Now, to him who remembers, that there can be but one Truth; and
thereupon justly inferrs, that of many disagreeing opinions concerning one and
the same subject, either all, or all except one must be false; and that it is
not easy which to prefer, when they are all made equally plausible by a parity
of specious Arguments: it cannot appear either a defect of judgment, or an
affectation of singularity in Democritus and Epicurus to have suspected them
all of incertitude, and founded their Physiology on an Hypothesis of one single
Principle, Atoms, from the various transposition, configuration, motion, and
quiescence of whose insensible Particles, all the four generally admitted
Elements may be derived, and into which they may, at the term of Exsolubility,
revert without the least hazard of Absurdity or Impossibility; as will fall to
our ample enunciation in our subsequent Enquiries into the Originals of
Qualities, and the Causes of Generation and Corruption.

(2) That one of the four Elements cannot singly suffice to the production of
any Compound Nature; Art. 5. No one of the four Elements sufficient to the
production of either any of the other three, or of any Compound nature.
needs no other eviction but that Argument of Hippocrates (de Nature. Hominis)
Quo pacto, cum unum existat, generabit aliquid, nisi cum aliquo misceatur?
Instance we in Heraclitus Proto-Element, Fire; from which nothing but Fire can
be educed: though it run through all the degrees of those fertile Modifications
of Densescence and Rarescence* (2) To suppose Rarefaction and Condensation,
without the more or less of Inanity intercepted; as they do: is to usurp the
concession of an Impossibility. (3) It Is absurd, to conceive Fire transformable,
by Extinction, into any other Element: because a simple substance cannot be
subject to essential transmutation. So that, if after its extinction any thing
of Fire remain, as must till Adnihilation be admitted; its surviving part must
be the Common Matter, such as Atoms, which according to the various and
respective addition, detraction, transposition, agitation, or quiet of them,
now put on the form of Fire, then of Aer, anon of Water, and lastly of Earth;
since, in their original simplicity, they have no actual, but a potential
Determination to the forms of all, indiscriminately. And, what is here urged,
to evince the impossibility of Fires being the sole Catholic Element,
carries the same proportion of reason and evidence, (the two pathognomick
characters of Verity) to subvert the supposition of any of the other three for
the substantial Principle of the rest.

Art. 6. The four Elements, not the Prot^principle of Concretions.
(3) That though the four vulgar Elements may be the Father, yet can they not be
the Grandfather Principle to all Concretions; is evidencible from hence. (1)
They are Contrary each to other, and so not only Asymbolical or Disharmonious,
but perfectly Destructive among themselves, at least incapable of that mutual
correspondence requisite to peaceful and durable Coalescence. (2) They are
praesumed to coalesce, and their Concretions to consist without Inanity
interspersed among their incontiguous particles: which is impossible. (3) Their
Defendants themselves concede a degree of Dissolution beyond them: and
consequently that they know a Principle Senior. (4) Their Patrons must grant
either that they, by a praevious deperdition of their own nature, are changed
into Concretions, which by mutation of Forms escheat again into Elements; in
which case Elements can be no more the Principle of Concretions, then
Concretions the Principle of Elements, since their Generations must be
vicissitudinary and Circular, as that of Water and Ice: or, that, conserving
their own natures immutable, they make only confused Heaps, and confer only
their visible Bulks to all productions; in which case, nothing can revera be
said to be generated, since all Generations owe their proprieties and peculiar
denominations to their Forms. (5) Whosoever admits a reciprocal or symbolical
Transmutation of Elements: must also admit one Common, and so a Former Matter,
which may successively invest it self in their several Forms; For Contraries,
while Contraries, cannot unite in the assumption of the same nature. (6) That
Achilles, or Champian Objection, that Vegetables and Animals owe their
Nutrition and Increment to the four Elements, is soon conquered by replying;
that Elements are not therefore the First Principles, but rather those from
whose respective Contexture they borrowed the nature of Elements, and so
derived an aptitude, or qualification requisite to the condition of Aliment.

Art. 7. A^oms discriminated from the H^m^^omerical Principles of Anaxagoras.
Thirdly, that the Principles of Democritus, Epicurus, etc. are toto coelo, by
irreconcilable disparities, different from those of Anaxagoras, called (...),
CONSIMILAR Parts, or abstractly, (...), SIMILARITY ((...)) because they are
supposed to be parts in all points consimilar to the Things generated of them,
according to the paraphrase of Plutarch (1. placit. 3.) who there explains it
by the Example of Aliment. Wherein, whether it be Wine, Water, Bread, Flesh,
Fruits, etc. notwithstanding the seeming difference in the outward form, there
are actually contained some Sanguineous, some Carnous, other Osseous, other
Spermatick Parts, which, upon their sequestration, and selection by the
Nutritive Faculty are discretely apposed to the sanguineous, carnous, osseous,
and spermatick parts praeexistent in the body nourisht. And the Disparity does
chiefly consist herein; that They endow their Atoms with only three congenial
Qualities, viz. Magnitude, Figure, and Gravity: but He investeth his
Similarities with as great variety of essential Proprieties, as there is of
Qualities, nay Idiosyncrasies in Bodies.

Which to suppose, is to dote: (1) Because if the nature of the whole be one
and the same with that of its Parts: then must the Principles, no less then the
Concretions consisting of them, be obnoxious to Corruption. (2) Because, if it
be assumed, that Like are made of Like, or that Concretions are absolutely
Identical to their Elements; it cannot be denied; that there are La^ghing and
Weeping Principles concurrent to the generations of Laughing and Weeping
Compositions. (3) Because from hence, that (concordant to Anaxagoras) all
things are actually existent in all things, and that the difference rests
only in the external Appearance, arising from the praedominion of such or such
over such or such parts of the Consimilar Principles: it necessarily ensues (as
Aristotle argues against Him, 1 Physic. 4.) that in the contusion, section, or
detrition of Fruits, Herbs, etc. there must frequently appear Blood, Milk,
Sperm, etc. as being thereby enfranchised from the tyranny of those parts,
which ruled the roast in the induction of the outward appearance, and emergent
out of those Clouds which concealed and disguised them. All which are
Absurdities so palpable that a blind man may thereby Distinguish the rough and
spurious Hypothesis of Anaxagoras, from the smooth and genuine Principle of
Democritus and his Sectators.

Fourthly and lastly, that the Difficulties, which many Dissenters, Art. 8. The
principal Difficulties urged against the Hypothesis of Atoms, singularly solved*
and more eminently their most potent and declared Opponent, Lactantius (in
lib. de Ira D^^, cap. 10.) have posted up against the supposition of Atoms for
the Catholic Principle of Bodies Concrete, thereby to praevent their further
approbation, and admission into the Schools; carry not moments enough of reason
to in^^ect and determine the judgment of an aequitable Arbiter to a suspicion,
much less a positive negation of its verisimility. Of this we desire our Reader
to be judge, when he has made himself competent, by a patient hearing, and
upright perpension of the pleas of both parties, here praesented.

(1) Anti-Atomist; Whence had these minute and indivisible Bodies, called
Atoms, their original? or, out of what were they educed?

Atomist; This inapposite Demand lies open to a double response. As a mere
Philosopher I return; that the assumption of Atoms for the First Matter does
expressly praevent the pertinency of this Quaere. Nor would Aristotle, Plato, or
any other of the Ethnic Philosophers, who would not hear of a Creation, or
production of the First Matter out of Nothing, but contumaciously maintained
its Ingeneration and Eternity, have had Gravity enough to suppress the
insurrection of their spleen against the absurdity thereof: since to enquire
the Matter of the First Matter, is a Contradiction in terminis. As a proficient
in the sacred School of Moses, I may answer; that the fruitful Fiat of God, out
of the Tohu, or infinite space of Nothing, called up a sufficient stock of the
First Matter, for the fabrication of the World in that most excellent Form,
which He had Idea'd in his own omniscient intellect from Eternity.

(2) Anti-Atomist; If Atoms be smooth and sphaerical, as their Inventors
suppose; it is impossible they should take mutual hold each of other, so as by
reciprocal adhaesion and coalition to constitute any Concretion. For, what
power can mould an heap of Millet-seed into a durable figure, when the
Laevitude or politeness, and roundness of the Grains inexcusably interdict
their Coition into a Mass?

Atomist; This Objection discovers the rancour, no less then the praecedent
Interrogation did the weakness of the proposers. For, they could not be
ignorant, that the Defendants of Atoms do not suppose them to be all smooth and
globular, but of all sorts of figures requisite to mutual Application,
Coalition, Cohaerence. And therefore they could not but expect this solution.
That, though polite and orbicular Atoms, cannot by mutual apprehension and
revinction each of other, compact themselves into a Mass; yet may they be
apprehended and retained by the Hooks, and accommodated to the Creeks and
Angles of other Atoms, of Hamous and Angular figures, and so conspire to the
Coagmentation of a Mass, that needs no other Caement besides the mutual
dependence of its component particles, to maintain its Tenacity and
Compingence. This may receive light, from observation of the successive
separation of the dissimilar Parts of Bodies, by Evaporation. For, first those
Atoms, which are more smooth, or less angular and hamous, easily extricate
themselves, and disperse from the Concreted Mass; and then, after many and
various Evolutions, circumgyrations, and change of positions, the more rough,
hamous, and angular, they expede themselves from reciprocal concatenation, and
at last, being wholly disbanded, pursue the inclination of their inhaerent
Motive Faculty, and disappear. Experience demonstrating, that by how much more
Unctuous and Tenacious any Consistence is, by so much a longer time do the
particles thereof require to their Exhalation. Thus is Water much sooner
evaporated, then Oil: and Lead then Silver.

(3) Anti-Atomist; If Atoms be unequal in their superfice, and have angular and
hamous processes; then are they capable of having their rugosities planed by
detrition, and their hooks and points taken off by amputation: contrary to
their principle propriety, Indivisibility.

Atomist; the hooks, angles, asperities, and processes of Atoms are as
insecable and infrangible as the residue of their bodies, in respect an equal
solidity belongs to them, by reason of their defect of Inanity interspersed,
the intermixture of Inanity being the Cause of all Divisibility.

Haec, quae sunt rerum primordia, nulla potest vis
Stringere, nam solido vincunt ea corpore demum.
(4) Anti-Atomist; That Bodies of small circumscription, such as grains of
sand, may be amassed from a syndrome, and coagmentation of Atoms; seems,
indeed, to stand in some proportion to probability: but to conceive a
possibility, that so vast a Bulk, as the adspectable World bears may arise out
of things but one degree above nothing, such insensible materials convened and
conglobated; is a symptom of such madness, as Melancholy adust cannot excuse,
and for which Physicians are yet to study a cure.

Atomist; To doubt the possibility, nay dispute the probability of it: is
certainly the greater madness. For, since a small stone may be made up of a
Coagmentation of grains of Sand; a multitude of small stones, by coacervation,
make up a Rock; many Rocks by aggregation, make a Mountain; many Mountains, by
coaptation, make up the Globe of Earth; since the Sun, the Heavens, nay the
World may arise from the conjunction of parts of dimensions equal to the
Terrestrial Globe: what impossibility does he incurr, who conceives the
Universe to be amassed out of Atoms? Doubtless, no Bulk can be imagined of such
immense Dimensions, as that the greatest parts thereof may not be divided into
less, and those again be subdivided into less; so that, by a successive
degradation down the scale of Magnitude, we may not at last arrive at the foot
thereof, which cannot be conceived other then Atoms. Should it appear
unconceivable to any that a Pismire may perform a perambulation round the
terrestrial Globe; we advise him to institute this Climax of Dimensions, and
consider, first that the ambite of the Earth is defined by miles, that miles
are commensurated by paces, paces consist of feet, feet of digits, digits of
grains, etc. and then He may soon be convinced, that the step of a Pismire
holds no great disproportion to a grain, and that a grain holds a manifest
proportion to a digit, a digit to a foot, a foot to a pace, a pace to a perch,
a perch to a furlong, a furlong to a mile, and so to the circumference of the
whole Earth, yea by multiplication to the convexity of the whole World. If any
expect a further illustration of this point, it can cost him no more but the
pains of reading the 45. page of our Treatise against Atheism; and of Archimeds
book de Arenarum Numero.

(5) Anti-Atomist; If all pieces of Nature derived their origin from
Individual Particles; then would there be no need of Seminalities to specify
each production, but every thing would arise indiscriminately from Atoms,
accidentally concurring and cohaering: so that Vegetables might spring up,
without the praeactivity of seeds, without the assistance of moisture, without
the fructifying influence of the Sun, without the nutrication of the Earth; and
all Animals be generated spontaneously, or without the prolification of
distinct sexes.

Atomist; This inference is ingenuine, because unnecessary, since all Atoms are
not Consimilar, or of one sort, nor have they an equal aptitude to the
Conformation of all Bodies. Hence comes it, that of them are first composed
certain Moleculae, small masses, of various figures, which are the seminaries
of various productions; and then, from those determinate seminaries do all
specifical Generations receive their contexture and Constitution, so
praecisely, that they cannot owe their Configuration to any others. And,
therefore, since the Earth, impraegnated with Fertility, by the sacred Magic
of the Creators Benediction, contains the seeds of all Vegetables; they cannot
arise but from the Earth, nor subsist or augment without roots, by the
mediation of which, other small consimilar Masses of Atoms are continually
allected for their nutrition* nor without moisture, by the benefit of which,
those minute masses are diluted, and so adapted for transportation and final
assimilation; nor without the influence of the Sun, by virtue whereof their
vegetative Faculty is conserved, cherished and promoted in its operations.
Which Reason is aequivalent also to the Generation, Nutrition and Increment of
Animals.

(6) Anti-Atomist; If your Proto-Element, Atoms, be the Principle of our 4
common Elements, according to the various Configurations of it into Moleculae,
or small masses; and that those are the Seminaries of all things: then may it
be thence inferred, that the Seeds of Fire are invisibly contained in Flints,
nay more, in a Sphaerical Glass of Water, exposed to the directly incident
rays of the Sun; our sense convincing, that Fire is usually kindled either way.

Atomist; Allowing the legality of your Illation, we affirm, that in a Flint
are concealed not only the Atoms, but Moleculae, or Seeds of Fire, which
wanting only retection, or liberty of Exsilition, to their appearance in the
form of fire, acquire it by excussion, and pursuing their own rapid motion
undiquaque, discover themselves both by affecting the sight and accension of
any easily combustible matter* on which they shall pitch, and into whose pores
they shall with exceeding Celerity penetrate. Nor can any man solve this
eminent Phenomenon so well, as by conceiving; that the body of a Flint, being
composed of many igneous (i. e. most exile, sphaerical, and agile) Atoms,
wedged in among others of different dimensions and figures; (which contexture
is the Cause of its Hardness, Rigidity and Friability) upon percussion by some
other body conveniently hard, the insensible Particles thereof suffering
extraordinary stress and violence, in regard it has but little and few
Vacuola, or empty spaces intermixed, and so wanting room to recede and disperse,
are conglomorated and agitated among themselves with such impetuositie, as
determinately causes the constitution of Fire. It being manifest, that violent
motion generateth Heat: and confessed even by Aristotle (1. Meteor. 3.) that
Fire is nothing but the Hyperbole or last degree of Heat. Secondly, That the
seeds of Fire are not contained either in the sphaerical Glass or the the Water
included therein; but in the Beams of the Sun (whose Composition is altogether
of Igneous Atoms) which being deradiated in dispersed lines, want only Concurse
and Coition to their investment in the visible form of Fire; and that the
Figure of the Glass naturally induces, it being the nature of either a Unequal,
or Concave Glass to transmit many Beams variously incident toward one and the
same point, which the virtue of Union advances to the force of Ignition.

Art. 9. A recapitulation of the praemises, i^troductory to the verification of
the praesent thesis.
Having thus vindicated our Atoms from the supposed Competition of the Inane
Space, in the dignity of being one Principle of Bodies; reconciled them ^o the
4 Peripatetick Elements; discriminated them from the Consimilar Particles of
Anaxagoras; solved the most considerable of the Difficulties charged upon them;
and thereby fully performed our assumption of removing the principal praetexts
of Prajudice: we may now, with more both of perspicuity, and hopes of
persuasion, advance to the Demonstration of our Thesis, the Title and Argument
of this Chapter.

SECT. II.
BEsides the manifest Allusion of Reason, Art. 1. The 4 no^able opinions
concerning the C^mposition of a (...)
we have the assent of all Philosophers, who have declared their opinions
concerning the Composition of a Continuum, to assure a necessity, that it must
consist either (1) of Mathematical Points; or (2) of Parts and Mathematical
points, united; or (3) of a simple Entity, before actual division, indistinct;
or (4) of Individuals, i. e. Atoms.

(1) Not of Mathematical Points; because (...), Punctum, Art. 2. A Physical
(...) cannot cons^^^ of Points M^thema^^^^l*
in the sense of Euclid, is Cujus nulla sit pars, in respect it wants all
Dimensions, and consequently all Figure: which is the ground of Aristotle's
Axiom, Punctum puncto additum non potest facere majus. To render the absurdity
of this opinion yet more conspicuous, let us remember, that the Authors and
Defendants of it have divided themselves into three distinct Factions. (1) Some
have admitted in a Continuum, points Finite simpliciter and determinate; (2)
Others allow points also Finite, but not simpliciter, sed (...) secundum quid;
(3) And others contend for points Infinite, simpliciter* and absolute. The
First and Second endeavor to stagger the former Axiom of Aristotle, by an
illegal transition from Quantity Continued, to Discrete, alleging this
instance, that one Unity added to another makes a greater quantity. The Last
recur to Plato's Authority, who concedeth two Infinites, ^ Greater and Less,
commemorated by Aristotle (3. phys. 27.) Now, for a joint redargution of all,
we demand, how they can divide a Line consisting of 5 insectiles into two equal
segments? For, either they must cast off the intermediate insectile, or annex
it to one division: if the first, they split themselves upon that rock, our
supposition; if the last, they clash with the 9. proposit. 1. lib. Euclid. To
evade the force of this Dilemma, they have invented many subter^uges: but how
unsuccessfully, may be enquired of Aristotle (in 6. physicor.) who there
convicts them all of either Falsity, or Impossibility; where, having praemised
an excellent enunciation of the Analogy between Motion, Time, and Place, He
apodictically concludes, that, if a Continuum did consist of points
Mathematical, all Motions would be equally swift. Notwithstanding this, such
was the contumacy of Arriaga, that in hopes to elude this insoluble Difficulty,
He praetends to discover a new kind of Motion, distinguished by certain
Respites, or Pauses intercedent^ thereupon inferring that all things are moved,
during their motion, with equal Celerity, but because the motion of one thing
is intercepted with many pauses, and the motion of another with few, therefore
does the motion of this seem swift, and the motion of that slow; as if the
degrees of Celerity and Tardity did respond to the Frequency and Rarity of
Respites interceding. If this be true, then must a Pismire move flower then an
Eagle only because this dist^nguisheth its motion by shorter pauses, and that
by longer: nor can a Faulcon overtake a Partridge, since our eyes assure, that
a P^rtridge strike^ six strooks at least with his wings* while its (...)
strikes one. Mar^gravius (in histor. Animal. Brasilicus) tells of an Animal,
which from the wonderful ta^^igradous incession of it, is named by the
Portugals PRIGUIZA, or Lubart: because though goaded on, it cannot snail over a
stage of 10 paces in 48 hours. Had Arriaga beheld this sloth, either He must
have disavowed his nicety, or held it an equal lay which should have sooner run
over a four mile course, that, or the fleetest Courser in the Hippodrome at
Alexandria: because the Pauses, which intercept the constant progression of the
one, in the space of 10 paces, cannot be more then those that interrupt the
continuity of the others motion, in the space of four miles. These
considerations therefore enable us to conclude, that those who constitute a
Continuum of points Mathematical, absurdly maintain, (1) That a point added to
a point makes an augmentation of quantity; (2) That no Motion is successive,
but only Discrete; (3) That all motions are of equal velocity, sunt enim puncta
minimum quod pertransiri possint: and Arriaga's Quiet, imagined to be in
motions, is no part of Motion. (4) That a Wheel is dissolved, when
circumrotated upon its Axis; for, since the Exterior Circle must praecede the
Interior, at least, by one point, it follows that the same points do not
correspond to the same points; which is absurd and incredible. Therefore is not
a Continuum composed of Mathematical points.

Art. 3. Not of Parts and Points Mathematical, united.
(2) Not of Parts and Mathematical points, united. Because (1) Parts cannot be
conceived to be united or terminated, unless by an adaequation of Points to
them; (2) Since those points, which are imagined to concur to the conjunction
of parts, are even by Suarez the chief Patron of them, ( in Metaphys. Disput.
de quantitat.) named Entia Modalia; it must thence follow, that Parts, which
are Entia Absoluta, cannot consist without them; which is ridicul^^s. (3) Since
they allow no Last Part, how can there be a Last, i. e. a Terminative Point?
(4) Either something, or nothing is intermediate between one Indivisible and
other Indivisibles: if something, then will there be a part without points; if
nothing, then must the whole consist of Indivisibles, which is the point at
which we aim.

Art. 4. No^ of a simple E^tity before divisi^n (...) of Indivisibles
(3) Not of a simple Entity before Division, Indistinct; as not a few of our
Modern Metaphysicians have dreamt, among whom Albertinus was a Grand Master.
Who, that He might palliate the Difficulty of the Distinction of Part, that
threatened an easy subversion of his fantastic position; would needs have
that all Distinction does depend ab Extrinseco, i. e. arises only from mental
Designation, or actual Division. But, O the Vanity of affected subtilty! all
that He, or his whole faction has erected upon this foundation of Sand, may be
blown down with one blast of this single Argument. Those things which can exist
being actually separate; are really distin^t: but Parts can exist being
actually separate; therefore are they really distinct, even before division.
For Division does not give them their peculiar Entity and Individuation, which
is essential to them and the root of Distinction. The Major is the general and
only Rule of Distinctions, which who^^ denies cannot distinguish Plato from
Aristotle, nor Albertinus from Thersites. The Minor holds its verity of sense,
for the part A, is existent without the part B, though being before conjoined,
they both conspired to the constitution of one Continuum. And that the
Propriety of Entity, is the Base of Distinguibility, is verified by that serene
Axiom, Per idem res dis^inguitur ab omni alta, per quod constituitur in suo
esse. Therefore cannot a Continuum consist of a simple Entity before division
indistinct: but of Individuals, or Atoms, which is our scope and Conclusion.

Our second Argument flows from the nature of Union. Art. 5. A second
Apodictical reason, de^umed from the nature of Union, evincing that Atoms are
the First and Catholic Principle of Concretions.
For the decent introduction of which, we are to recognize, that a Modal Ens
cannot subsist without conjunction to an Absolute; as, to exemplify,
Intellection cannot be without the Intellect, though on the reverse, the
Intellect may be without the act of Intellection: so likewise cannot Union be
conceived without Parts, though on the contrary, Parts may be without Union.
And hence we thus argue:

That only which is made independent^r a subjecto, or holds its essence ex
proprio, is the Term of Creation; but Union is not independent a subjecto:
therefore is not Union the Term of Creation. Since therefore the Term of
Creation in the First Matter is devoid of Union; it must consist of
Individuals, for Division proceeds from the solution of Union. This derives
Confirmation from hence; that the subject from whence another is deduced, must
be praecedent in nature to that which is derived: now the Parts of the First
Matter are the Subject from whence Union is derived; Ergo, are the Parts of the
First Matter in nature praecedent to all Union; and consequently they are
Individuals, i. e. Atoms.

If it be objected, Art. 6. An ob^ection praevented.
that the understanding cannot apprehend the First Matter to consist without
some implicit Union we appeal to that Canon, Quod non est de essentia rei, non
ingreditur ejus conceptum: For, Union not being of the essence of the parts of
the First Matter, ought not to fall under the comprisal of that Idea, by which
we speculate them. And, upon consequence, if they are conceived without
implicit Union: certainly they are conceived as Individuals, or Atoms. The
Major is justified by that common Principle; Ex ^o quod res est, vel non est,
dici potest vel esse, vel non esse; conceptus enim mensura est rei Entitas,
mensura autem vocis est conceptus. And the Certitude of the Minor results from
that Metaphysical Canon, Nullus modus actualis est de Essentia rei.

Upon these Two Arguments might we have accumulated sundry others of the like
importance, Art. 7. The reason of the Authors superc^ssion of all other
Arguments of the like importance.
such as are chiefly insisted upon by the Modern Redeemers of Democritus and
his noble Principles from that obscurity and contempt, which the Envy of Time
and the Peripatetick had introduced, Sennertus (in Hyponemat. de Atomis.) and
Magnenus (in cap. 2. disput. 2. de Atomis.) and, in imitation of their ample
model, have explicated the mystery of our Thesis, from the Syncritical and
Diacritical Experiments of Chemistry, (whereby all Bodies are sensibly
dissolved into those Moleculae, or First Conventions of Atoms, which carry
their specifical seminaries; and the Heterogeneous parts of diverse
Concretions, after dissolution, coagmentated into one mass, and united per
minimas) but most eminently from that natural miracle, the Tree of Hermes, made
by an artificial Resuscitation of an entire Herb from the Atoms of it in a
Glass, honestly effected by a Polonian Physician in the praesence of Gaffarel,
as himself records ( in Curiositat. inaudit.) asserted by Quercetan (in defens
contra Anonym. cap. 23) and to the life described by Hierem. Cornarius, famous
for his long profession of Philosophy and Medicine at Brandenburgh, in an
Epistle to the great Libavius, which he therefore made an Appendix to his acute
dissertation de Resuscitatione Formarum ex cineribus plantarum (syntagm. Arcan.
Chymic. lib. 1. cap. 22.) But having upon an upright and mature perpension of
their weight, found it such, as warrants our adscription of them to the golden
number of those Reasons, that are (...) (as Aristotle speaks of other Arguments
concerning the same subject, in de Generat. and Corrupt. cap. 2.) such as urge
and compel the mind to an assent, and bid defiance to all solution: we judged
our praesent Fundamental sufficiently firm, though erected upon no other but
those two pillars; especially when we remembered that supererogation is a kind
of Deficiency.

CHAP. IV. The Essential Proprieties of Atoms.
SECT. I.
THat our Theory of those Qualities, Art. 1. The two links connecting this to
the praecedent Chapter.
which being congenial to, and inseparable from Atoms, fulfill the necessary
Attributes of the First Universal Matter, may, according to the Method
requisite to perspicuity, immediately succeed to our Demonstration of their
Existence, and the impossible Elementation of Concrete substances from any
other general Principles; and that the expectance raised in our Reader by our
frequent transitory mention of the Proprieties of Atoms; may be opportunely
sated by a profess Enumeration and Enunciation thereof: are the two reasons
that justify our subnection of this to our praecedent Discourse.

The PROPRIETIES of our Atoms difference themselves into General and
Specifical. The General are (1) Consimilarity of Substance; Art. 2. The General
Proprieties of Atoms: and the Inseparability of each, demonstrated.
for all Atoms being equally Corporeal and solid, must be substantially
identical, or of one and the same nature, knowing no disparity of Essence. Thus
much Aristotle intimates (1. Physic. 2.) when He infers Democritus holding,
esse principiorum (...), Genus unicum, or (...), Naturam ^nam, that the
Principles of all things are of one Kind, or of one Nature. In respect of this,
there is no difference among Atoms. (2) Magnitude, or Quantity, which they
cannot want, since they are not Mathematical Insectiles, but Material
Realities, and Quantity or Extension is the proper and inseparable affection of
Matter; and therefore every thing has so much of Extension, as it has of
Matter. (3) Figure, which is the essential Adjunct of their Quantity. For,
insomuch as Atoms are most minute Bodies, and stand diametrally opposed to
Points Imaginary; therefore must they have dimensions real, and consequently a
termination of those dimensions in their extreme or superfice, i. e.
determinate Figure. Which is the ground of Magnenus 3. Postulate (de Atomis,
disput. 2.) Quicquid magnitudinem habet, finitamque extensionem, si pluribus
dimensionibus substet, concedatur illi suam inesse Figuram; and perhaps also of
Euclids definition of Figure, Figura est, quae sub aliquo, vel sub aliquibus
terminis comprehenditur. Nor have they only a Plain figure, but a solid one,
according to that of Euclid (lib. 2. def. 1.) solidum est, quod longitudinem,
latitudinem, and crassitudinem habet. (4) Gravity, or Weight; which is also
coessential to them in respect to their solidity, and the principle of their
Motion. And therefore Epicurus had very good cause to add his (...), to
Democritus (...): which Plutarch (1. placit. 3.) expressly renders thus; (...),
quia necesse est Corpora moveri ipso impetu Gravitatis. For, having supposed
that Motion was essentially competent to Atoms, it must have been no venial
defect, not to have assigned them a certain special Faculty, or Virtue for a
Cause to that motion praesumed; and such must be their inhaerent Gravity, or
the tendency of weight. Now, in respect to either of these three last
Proprieties, Atoms may be conceived to admit of difference among themselves;
for, in regard of Magnitude, some may be greater then others, of Figure, some
may be sphaerical, others cubical, some smooth, others rough, etc. and of
Gravity, some may be more, and others less ponderous, though this can cause no
degrees of Velocity or Tardity in their Motion, it being formerly demonstrated,
that two bodies of different weights are aequally swift in their descent.

To these 4 Essential Attributes of Atoms, Empiricus has superadded a Fifth,
Art. 3. The Resistance of Atoms, no distinct propriety; but pertinent to their
Solidity or Gravity.
viz. (...), Renitency, or Resistance. But, by his good leave, we cannot
understand this to be any distinct Propriety; but as (...), something resilient
from and dependent on their solidity, which is the formal reason of Resistance:
besides, we may confound their Renitency with their Gravity, insomuch as we
commonly measure the Gravity of any thing, by the renitency of it to our arms
in the act of Elevation. Which may be the reason, why Aphrodisaeus (lib. 1.
Quest. cap. 2.) enumerating the proprieties of Atoms, takes no notice at all of
their Gravity; but blends it under the most sensible effect thereof, Resistance.

Art. 4. The specifical Proprieties of Atoms.
The specifical are such as belong to Atoms of particular sorts of Figure, as
Smoothness, Acuteness, Angularity, and their Contraries, Asperity, Obtuseness,
Orbicularity, etc. These, in the dialect of Epicurus, are (...), Cognatae
Proprietates. Now all these Proprieties, both Generical, and Specifical, or
Originary and Dependent, are truly (...), as Plutarch (1. adv. Colot.) calls
them, Congenial, and inseparable. Other Proprieties there are adscriptive to
Atoms, such as their Concurse, Connection, Position, Order, Number, etc. from
which the Qualities of Compound Bodies do emerge; but since they are only
Communia Accidentia, Common Accidents, or (as Lucretius) Atomorum Eventa, the
fortuitous Events of Atoms considered as complex and coadunated in the
Generation of Concretions, and not in the entire simplicity of their Essence;
and consequently seperable from them: therefore may we hope, that our Reader
will content himself with our bare mention of them in this place, which is
designed for the more advantageous Consideration of only the Essential and
Inseparable.

SECT. II. Concerning the Magnitude of Atoms.
MAgnitude and Atoms, Art. 1. By the Magnitu^e, is meant the Parvity of Atoms.
though two terms that make a graceful Consonance to ears acquainted with the
most charming harmony of Reason, may yet sound harsh and discordant in those of
the Vulgar, which is accustomed to accept Magnitude only Comparatively, or as
it stands Antithetical to Parvity: and therefore it concerns us to provide
against misapprehension by an early advertisement; that in our assumption of
Magnitude as the first essential Propriety of Atoms, we intend not that they
hold any sensible bulk, but that, contrary to Insectiles, or Points
Mathematical, they are Entities Quantitive simply, i. e. Realities endowed with
certain corporeal Dimensions, though most minute, and consisting in the lowest
degree of physical quantity; so that even those of the largest size, or rate,
are much below the perception and discernment of the acutest Optics, and
remain commensurable only by the finer digits of rational Conjecture. And
somewhat the more requisite may this Praemonition seem, in respect that no
meaner an Author then Theodoret has, through gross inadvertency, stumbled at
the same block of ambiguity. For ( in Sermon. 4. therap^ut.) He positively
affirms, that Democritus, Metrodorus, and Epicurus, by their exile Principles,
Atoms, meant no other but those small pulverized fragments of bodies, which the
beams of the Sun, transmitted through lattice Windows, or chincks, make visible
in the aer: when according to their genuine sense, one of those dusty granules,
nay, the smallest of all things discernable by the eyes of Linceus, though
advantaged by the most exquisite Engyscope, does consist of Myriads of Myriads
of thousands of true Atoms, which are yet corporeal and possess a determinate
extension.

To avert the Wonder impendent on this nice assertion, Art. 2. A consideration
of the Grossene^s of our senses, and the extreme (...) of Nature, in her
operations, pr^paratory to our Conjectural apprehension of the Exigu^ty of Her
Materials, (...).
and tune our thoughts to a key high enough to attain the Verisimility thereof;
We are first to let them down to a worthy acknowledgment of the exceeding
Grossnesse and Dullness of our Senses, when compared to the superlative
Subtility, and Acuteness of Nature in most of her Operations: for that once
done, we shall no longer boast the perspicacity of our Optics, nor
circumscribe our Intellectuals with the narrow line of our sensible
discoveries, but learn there to set on our Reason to hunt, where our sense is
at a loss. Doubtless, the slender Crany of a Pismire contains more distinct
Cellules, then that magnificent Fabric, the Eschurial, does rooms; which
though imperceptible to the eye of the body, are yet obvious to that of the
mind: since no man can imagine how, otherwise, the Faculties of sense and
voluntary Motion can be maintained, a perpetual supply of Animal (or, a^ D^.
H^rv^^ will have them, Vital) spirits being indispensably necessary to the
continuation of those actions; and therefore there must be Elaboratories for
the praeparation and confection, Treasuries for the conservation, and various
Conduits for the emission, and occasional transvection of them into the Nerves
and Muscles of that industrious and provident Animal. The due resentment of
which praegnant Instance, is alone sufficient to demonstrate the incomputable
degrees of distance betwixt the sensible Capacity of man, and the curious
Mechanics of Nature: and make the acutest of us all call for a Table Book to
enroll this Aphorism; Ubi humana industria subtilitasque desinit, inde incipit
industria subtilitasque Naturae. The wings of our Arrogance being thus clipped,
let us display those of our Discoursive Faculty, and try how near we can come
to deprehend the Magnitude, i. e. the Parvity of Atoms, by an ingenious
Conjecture.

Art. 3. The incomprehensible subtility of Nature, argued from the Art^fice of
an exquisite Wat^h, contrived in a very narrow room.
Consider we, first, that an exquisite Artist will make the movement of a Watch,
indicating the minute of the hour, the hour of the day, the day of the week,
month, year, together with the age of the Moon, and time of the Seas
reciprocation; and all this in so small a compass, as to be decently worn in
the pall of a ring: while a bungling Smith can hardly bring down the model of
his grosser wheels and balance so low, as freely to perform their motions in
the hollow of a Tower. If so; well may we allow the finer fingers of that grand
Exemplar to all Artificers, Nature, to distinguish a greater multiplicity of
parts in one Grain of Millet seed, then ruder man can in that great Mountain,
Caucasus; nay, in the whole Terrestrial Globe.

Art. 4. The vast multitude of sensible particles, and the vaster of Elemental
Atoms, contained in one grain of Frankinsense; exactly calculated.
Consider we, with Magnenus, that one grain of Frankinsense being fired, does so
largely diffuse it self in fume, as to fill a space in the aer, more then seven
hundred millions of times greater then it possessed before combustion. For, to
the utmost dispersion of its fume, the space might easily have received of
grains of Frankinsense, equal in dimensions to the seed of a Lupine, according
to its Altitude 720 according to its Latitude 900 in the Longitude 1200 in the
Superfice of the whole figure 5184000 in the Superfice of the end only 648000
in the Area, or whole enclosure 777600000 Since, therefore, our nostrils
ascertation, that in all that space of Aer, there is no one particle which is
not impraegnated with the fragrant exhalations of that combust grain of
Frankinsense, which, while it was entire might be by a steady hand, a sharp
incision knife, and a good magnifying Glass, or by that shorter way of
trituration, divided at least into a thousand sensible particles: it must
follow, in spite of Contradiction, that the sensible odorous particles of it do
fulfill the number of 777600000000. And, insomuch as each of these sensible
Particles, is mixed, it being lawful and commendable according to the subtle
speculations of Archimed (in Arenar.) to assume that the smallest of them is
composed of a Million of Elemental Atoms: therefore by the same rule, must
there have been in the whole Grain of Elemental Atoms 777600000000000000, at
least. If so; we have but one step lower to Insectility, and so may guess at
the Exiguity of a single Atome.

Consider we the delicate Contexture of Atoms, Art. 5. The Dioptrical
speculation of a Handworm, discovering the great variety of Organical Parts
therein, and the innumerability of their Component Particles.
in the body of that smallest of Animals, a Handworm. First, if we speculate
the outside of that organical tenement of life, a good Engyscope will praesent
our eye with not only an oval-head, and therein a mouth, or prominent snout,
armed with an appendent proboscis, or trunk consisting of many villous
filaments contorted into a cone, wherewith it perforates the skin, and sucks up
the blood of our hands; but also many thighs, legs, feet, toes, laterally
ranged on each side; many hairy tufts on the tail, and many asperities,
protuberances, and rugosities in the skin. Then our Reason if we contemplate
the inside thereof, will discover a great variety of Organs necessary to the
several functions of an Animal. For Nutrition, there must be Gullet, Stomach,
Intestines, Liver, Heart, Veins; or at least parts in their offices and uses
perfectly analogous thereto: For Vitality, there must be Lungs, and Heart for
the praeparation and confection, and Arteries for the general diffusion of
Spirits; for Locomotion voluntary and sensation, there must be Brain, Spinal
Marrow, Nerves, Tendons, Muscles, Ligaments, Articulations; and for the support
and firmitude of all these, there must be some more solid stamina, or a kind of
Bones and Cartilagineous contextures; in a word, there must be all members
requisite to entitle it to Animation, with a double skin for the investiment of
the whole Machine. Now, if we attentively compute, how many particles go to the
composure of each of those organical parts, and how many Myriads of Atoms go to
the contexture of each of those particles (for even the Spirits inservient to
the motion of one of its toes, are compositions consisting of many thousands of
Atoms), as we shall think it no wonder, that the exile and industrious fingers
of Nature have distinguished, sequestered, selected, convened, accommodated,
coadunated, and with as much aptitude as decorum disposed such an
incomprehensible multitude of Parts, in the structure of so minute an Animal;
so may we, in some latitude of analogy, conjecture the extreme Parvity of Her
common Material, Atoms. On this ingenious pin hung the thoughts of Pliny, when
( in lib. 11. cap. 1 and 2.) He exclaimed, Nusquam alibi Naturae artificium
spectabilius est, qu^m in Insectis: in magnis siquidem corporibus, aut cer^e
majoribus, facilis officina sequaci materia fuit. In his vero tam parvis, atque
tam nullis; que ratio, aut quanta vis, tanquam inextricabilis perfectio? ubi
tot sensus collocavit in Culice? and sunt alia dictu minora. Sed ubi visum in
ea praetendit? ubi Gustatum applicavit? ubi odoratum inseruit? ubi truculentam
illam, and proportione maximam vocem ingeneravit? Qua subtilitate pennas
adnexuit, praelongavit pedum crura, disposuit jejunam caveam, uti alvum, avidam
sanguinis, and potissimum humani sitim accendit? Telum vero perfodiendo
tergori, quo spiculavit ingenio? atque cum prae exilitate pene non videatur ita
reciproca generavit art, ut fodiendo acuminatum, pariter sorbendoque
fistulosum esset, etc.

Here had we haulted a while, and wondered, how Pliny could, Art. 6. A short
Digressive Descant upon the Text of Pliny, touching the multiplicity of parts
in a Flea; hinting the possible perspicacity of Reason.
without the assistance of a Magnifying Glass (an Invention, whose Antiquity
will hardly rise above the last revolution of Saturn) deprehend so vast a
multiplicity of Parts in the machine of an Insect, of so small circumscription,
that to commensurate the Base of the visive Cone, by which its slender image is
transmitted to the pupil of the eye, would trouble a good Master in Optics,
and drive him to the Minimus Angulus of Euclid: but that it soon came into our
thoughts, that He speculated the same by the subtiler Dioptrick of Reason;
which indeed is the best Engyscope of the Mind, and renders many things
perspicuous to the Understanding, whose exceeding Exility is their sufficient
Darkness.

Art. 7. The Exility of Atoms, conjectural from the great diffusion of one
Grain of Vermillion dissolved in Water.
To put more weights into the Scale of Conjecture, let us moreover observe; how
great a quantity of Water may be tinged with one grain of Vermillion; how many
sheets of Paper may be crimsoned with that tincture; how innumerable are the
points, by the apex of a needle, designable on each of those sheets: and when
it is manifest that many particles of Vermillion are found in each of those
points; who can longer doubt, that the particles comprehended in the compass of
that grain are indefinable by the exactest Arithmetique.

Art. 8. The same, inf^rrible from the small quantity of oil depraedated by the
Flame of a Lamp, in a quarter of an hour.
Again, (for we could be content, to let the Almund tree bud, before we take off
our cogitations from this pleasant Argument) consider we, how small a portion
of oil is consumed by the flame of a Lamp, in a quarter of an hour; and yet
there is no moment passes, wherein the stock of flame is not wasted and as
fast repaired, which if it could be conserved alive all at once, would fill not
only whole rooms, but even ample Cities: and if so, what need we any further
eviction of the extreme Exiguity of those Parts, of which all Concretions are
material'd?

Art. 9. The Microscope of great use, in the discernment of the minute
particles of Bodies: and so advantageous to our Conjecture, of the exility of
Atoms.
Had the Ancients, indeed, been scrupulous in this point; their want of that
useful Organ, the Engyscope, might in some part have excused their incredulity:
but for us, who enjoy the advantages thereof, and may, as often as the Sun
shines out, behold the most laevigated Granule of dissolved Pearl, therein
praesented in the dimensions of a Cherry stone, together with its various
faces, planes, asperities, and angles, (such as before inspection we did not
imagine) most clear and distinct, longer to dispute the possible Parvity of
Component Principles, is a gross disparagement to the Certitude of Sense, when
it is exalted above deception, and all possible impediments to its sincere
judicature are praevented.

Conclude we therefore, since the Diametre of a granule of Dust, when
speculated through a good Engyscope, is almost Centuple to the diametre of the
same, when looked on merely by the eye, on a sheet of Venice Paper: we may
safely affirm, with Archimed (in arenario.) that it is conflated of ten hundred
thousand millions of insensible Particles; which is enough to verify our
praesent Assumption.

SECT. III. Concerning the Figures of Atoms.
IN all the sufficiently prolix Discourses of the Ancient Assertors of Atoms,
concerning their FIGURE, Art. 1. An Epitome of all that directly concerns the
Figures of Atoms in 3 General Canons.
and the no sparing Commentaries of the Moderns thereupon; whatever seems
either worthy our serious animadversions, or in anywise pertinent to our
Designation: may be, without perversion, or amission of importance, well
comprised under one of these 3 Canons. (1) That Atoms are, in their simple
essence, variously figurate; (2) That the distinct species of their Figures are
Indefinite, or Incomprehensible, though not simply, or absolutely Infinite; (3)
That the Number of Atoms retaining unto, or comprehended under each peculiar
species of Figure, is not only indefinite, but simply Infinite.

Concerning the FIRST; we advertise, Art. 2. The First Canon, explained and
certified.
that no man is to conceive them to have supposed the Figure of Atoms
deprehensible by the Sight, or Touch, no more then their Magnitude, the
termination whereof does essence their figure, according to that definition of
Euclid, lately alleged; but such, as being inferrible from manifold reasons,
is obvious to the perception of the Mind. Which Plutarch (1. placit. 2.)
personating Epicurus, expressly declares in his, (...), Atomos proprias habere,
sed ratione, seu mente contemplabiles Figuras. To avouch the verity hereof, we
need no other argument but this; insomuch as every Atome has some determinate
Quantity, or Extension, and that all Quantity must be terminated in some
certain Figure: therefore is it necessary, that however exile the dimensions of
an Atome are, yet must the superfice thereof be or plane, or sphaerical, or
angular, or Cubical, etc. i. e. of some figure either regular, or irregular.

Does any incline to believe, Art. 3. The Exility ^f Atoms, does no^
necessitate their General Roundness; contrary to the common conceit.
that the extreme Exility of Atoms may necessitate their general Roundness; and
the rather because he perceives all those dusty fragments of bodies, visible in
the aer by Sunshine, (which are the Atoms of the Vulgar) to be clad in that
figure: We advise him to collect a multitude of them, on a clean sheet of the
finest white Paper, and then speculate any the smallest granules among them
with a perfect Engyscope. For, in so doing He will acquire autoptical
satisfaction, that none of them are exactly orbicular and perpolite, but all of
various angular figures, pyramidal, pentahedrical, cubical, trapezian,
heptahedrical, octahedrical, dodecahedrical, icosahedrical, etc. nay of so many
irregular and dissimilar apparences, as must refute his error with a delightful
Wonder. Though, in troth, it can be no wonder to him that considers the Defect
of any Cause, that should break off the angles from those fragments volatile,
after their detrition from hard bodies, and so tornate them into smooth
sphaerules: observation ascertaining, that when hard bodies are broken into
large pieces, those pieces are always angular, and extremely discrepant in the
parts of their superfice; and Reason thence inferring, that lesser pieces must
confess the like irregularity and disparity of figures among themselves. True
it is, they enter the eye in a perfect sphere, because of the exiguity of their
Angles; for every small, or remote Icosahedrical body, nay even Oblong and
Cylindrical, posited at excessive distance, the extremities of their images
being, in their long trajection through the aer, confracted, retused, and so
entering the Retina tumica in a lesser angle; always appear orbicular. Thus,
if we speculate any star, which is not of a spherical figure, as Saturn, which
both Kircher and Hevelius, having beheld it with their excellent Telescopes,
describe in this appearance it will deradiate its species in a pyramid, (In
Ph^tism^ C^rporum coel^stium; and ^e^enographia.)
which has so many distinct faces, as are comprehended in the Section, made
from the position of the eye, in right lines drawn to the circumference
thereof; and yet in the decurse of the angle, they all become so retused, as
that the image of the Starr is received by the eye in a figure perfectly
sphaerical. And, as the excessive Remotion, so likewise does the immoderate
Exiguity of objects cause our sense not to discern their genuine Figure and so
to delude the common judicatory Faculty, by giving in dissimilar images: as is
demonstrable from the reason, whereby Magnifying Glasses meliorate the sight,
i. e. their enlarging the basis of the Radius Visorius, according to the theory
of Kircherus (in Magia Catoptrica.) and Scheinerus (in Fundam. Optic lib. 3.
part. 2.). Thus, if he credit the single information of his eye, who does not
judge a Handworm to be exactly round? and yet let him but behold it through an
Engyscope, and he shall at first inspection discern the several di^arications
of its Members, Legs, Feet, Tail, and other parts, no less diverse in
proportion, then those observed in multipedous Insects, of far greater bulk.

Art. 4. The Di^e^sity of Figures in Atoms. evi^ted from the sensible
Dissimilitude of individuals, as well Animate, a^ (...).
To guard this Assertion of the variety of Figures in Atoms, with other
Arguments of its Verisimility; let us Consider, that all Individuals, as well
Animate, as Inanimate, are distinguishable each from other of the same species,
by some peculiar signature of disparity visible in the superficial parts of
their Bodies: and Reason will thereupon whisper us in the ear, that they are
also different in their Configurations; and that the Cause of that sensible
Dissimilitude, must be a peculiar, or idiosyncritical Contexture of their
insensible Component particles. For Animals, we may instance in the noblest
species. Among the Myriads of swarms of men, who can find any two Persons, so
absolute Twinns in the aer of their faces, the lines of their hands, the
stature of their bodies, proportion of their members, etc. as that Nature has
left no impression, whereby not only their familiar friends, but even strangers
comparing them together, may distinguish one from the other? For Inanimates;
does it not deserve our admiration, that in a whole Bushel of Corn, no two
Grains can be found so exquisitely respondent in similitude, as that a curious
eye shall not discover some disparity betwixt them: and yet we appeal to strict
observation, for the verity thereof. If our leisure and patience will bear it,
let us conferr many Leaves, collected at one time from the same Tree; and try
whether among them all we can meet with any two perfectly consimilar in
magnitude, color, superfice, divarications of filaments, equality of stemms,
and other external proportions. If not; we must assent to a variety of
Configurations in their parts, and consequently admit no less, but indeed a
far greater variety of Figures in the particles of those parts, their Atoms.

To these it concerns us to annex one singular Experiment, easy, Art. 5. A
singular Experiment, antoptically* demonstrating the various Configurations of
the minute Particles of Concretions.
delightful, and satisfactory. Exposing a vessel of Salt water, to the Sun, or
other convenient heat, so as the aqueous parts thereof may be gently
evaporated; we may observe all the Salt therein contained, to reside in the
bottom, conformed into Cubical Masses. And, if we do the like with Alum Water,
the Alum will concrete in Octohedrical figures. Nay, the Cubes generated of
Salt, will be so much the larger, by how much the more and deeper the Water,
wherein it was dissolved; and e contra, so much the smaller, by how much
shallower the Water: so that from a large vessel will arise saline Cubes in
dimensions equal to those of a Gamesters Die; but from a small we shall receive
Cubes, by five parts of six, lesser, and if we drop a small quantity of brine
upon a plane piece of Glass, the Cubical Concretions thereon fixing, will be so
minute, as to require the help of an Engyscope to their discernment. Now, as to
that part of this Experiment, which more directly points at our praesent scope;
we may perceive the greater Cubes to be a mere Congeries or assembly of small
ones, and those small ones to be coagmentated of others yet smaller, or
certainly composed of exiguous Masses bearing the figure of Isoscele Triangles,
from four of which convened and mutually accommodated, every Cube does result.
Hence is it obvious to Conjecture, that those small Cubes, discernable only by
an Engyscope, are contexed of other smaller, and those again of smaller, until
by a successive degradation they arrive at the exility of Atoms, at least of
those Moleculae, which are the Seminaries of Salt, and, according to evident
probability, of either exactly Quadrate, or Isoscele Triangular figures. Now,
insomuch as the same, allowing the difference of Figure, is conjectural also
concerning Alum, Sugar, Nitre, Vitriol, etc. Saline Concretions: why may we not
extend it also to all other Compositions, especially such as have their
Configurations certain and determinate, according to their specifical Nature.

Again, whosoever substracts a diversity of Figures from Atoms: Art. 6. A variety
of Figures in Atoms, necessary to the variety of all Se^sibles.
does implicitly destroy the variety of sensibles. For, what does cause the
Odoratory Nerves of man to discriminate a Rose from Wormwood? but the different
Configurations of those Moleculae, Flores Elementorum, or Seminaries of
Qualities, which being conflated of exceeding fine and small congregations of
Atoms, do constitute the odorable species; and so make different impressions
upon them. What makes a Dog, by the mere sagacity of his nose, find out his
Master, in the dark, in a whole host of men? but this; that those subtle
Effluvia, or Expirations, emitted insensibly from the body of his Master, are
of a different Contexture from those of all others, and so make a different
impression upon the mamillary processes, or smelling Nerves of the Dog. The
like may also, with equal reason, be demanded concerning those ways of
Discrimination, whereby all Animals agnize their own from others young; and
Beasts of prey, in their difficult venations, single out the embossed and
chased, though blended together with numerous Herds of the same species. Nor
does the Verisimility hereof hold only in objects of the sight and smelling;
but diffuseth to those of the Hearing, Tasting, and Touching: as may be soon
inferred by him, who shall do us the right, and himself the pleasure to descend
to particulars. These things jointly considered, we are yet to seek, what may
interdict our Conception of great Diversity of Figures in the Principles of
Concretions, Atoms.

Concerning the SECOND, viz. (...), Art. 7. The second Canon, explained and
Certified.
esse Figuras Atomorum incomprehensibiles, non infinitas, that the figures of
Atoms are so various, as to be incomprehensible, though not simply infinite:
this can be nor Problem, nor Paradox. For, though the species of Regular
Figures be many, of Irregular more, and of those that are producible from both
regular and irregular, according to all the possible ways of their Commixture
and Transposition, so amusingly various; as that the mind of man, though
acquainted with all the mysteries of Arithmetique and Algebra, cannot attain to
a definite compute, nor praecise d^^^ription of them all: yet do they not run
up to absolute Infinity, so as that there can be no extreme and terminating
species. That the variety of Figures competent to Atoms, ought to be held only
Incomprehensible; these Reasons evince (1) Since Atoms are circumscribed and
limitate in Magnitude, that Configurations in diversity infinite should arise
from that finite magnitude, is clearly impossible. For, every distinct
figuration praesupposeth a distinct position of parts; and the parts of finite
Magnitude may be transposed so many several ways, as no further way of
transposition can remain possible: otherwise there would be new and new parts
inexhaustibly, and so magnitude would become infinite. (2) If the Diversity of
figures were infinite, then could not the Qualities arising to concretions from
the various Contexture of their parts, be certain and determinate: since,
allowing an inexhaustible novelty of Configurations, their insensible particles
might be so variegated, as that a better then the best, and a worse then the
worst (...) Configurations might be produced; which is no obscure absurdity.
(3) All things are determined by Contrary Qualities, which are so extreme, that
they admit many mediate or Inclusive degrees, but none Exclusive, or without
their boundaries. (4) That only a Finite variety is sufficient to that
incomprehensible diversity of figures, observed in nature.

That the variety of Figures allowable to Atoms, is Incomprehensible; may be
thus familiarized. Think we, what great multiplicity of words may be composed
of only a few Letters variously transposed. For, if we assume only Two Letters,
of them we can create only two words; if three, 6; if four, 24; if five, 120*
if six, 720; if seven, 5040; if eight, 40320; if nine, 362880* if ten, 3628800:
so that before we fulfill the 24 Letters, the number of words componible of
them, according to all the possible ways of positions, will swell above our
computation. This done, let us no more but exchange Letters for Figures, and
assuming only Round, Oblong, Oval, Eliptick, Lenticular, Plane, Gibbous,
Turbinate, Hamous, Polite, Hispid, Conical, Obtuse, Tetrahedical,
Pentahedrical, Hexahedrical, Heptahedrical, Dodecahedrical, Icosahedrical,
Striate or skrewed, Triangular, Cylindrical Atoms: cast up to what an
inassignable number the Figures producible from them, according to the several
ways of their Composition and transposition, may amount. Doubtless, we shall
discover so great variety, as to elude our comprehension. If so, how much more
incomprehensible must that Diversity be, which is possible from the assumption,
and complication of all the Regular and Irregular figures, that a good
Geometrician can conceive, and which it is justifiable for us to allow existent
in Nature?

But as for the LAST; viz. that the number of Atoms, Art. 8. The Third Can^n,
explained, and re^uted.
retaining to each distinct species of Figures, arises to Infinity, i. e. that
there are infinite Oval, infinite Pyramidal, infinite Sphaerical, etc. Atoms:
from this we must declare our Dissent. Because, how great a number soever be
assigned to Atoms, yet must the same be Defined by the Capacity of the World,
i. e. of the Universe, as has been formerly intimated. And, therefore, the
common Objection, that if so, the sum of things existent in the World, would
be Finite; is what we most willingly admit, there being no necessity of their
Infinity, and a copious syndrome of reasons, that press the Contrary. And as it
is unnecessary to Nature: so likewise to her Commentator, the Physiologist; to
whom it suffices, having exploded this delirium of Infinity, to suppose (1)
that the material Principles of the Universe are essentially Figurate, (2) that
the species of their figures are incomprehensible, as to their Variety, (3)
that the Number of indivisible Particles comprehended under each difference of
Figures, is also incomprehensible, but not inexhaustible, as Epicurus
inconsiderately imagined.

SECT. IV. Concerning the Motions of Atoms.
TO give the more light to this dark Theorem, Art. 1. Two introductory
Observables.
we are to praepossess our Reader with Two introductory Observables; (1) that
our praesent insistence upon only the MOTION of Ato^s, does not suppose our
omission of their GRAVITY; but duly include the full consideration thereof:
since their Motion is the proper Effect of their Gravity, and that which does
chiefly bring it within the sphaere of our Apprehension. (2) That the genuine
Atomist does worthily disavow all Motion, but what Plutarch in the name of
Epicurus, has defined to be, (...), Migratio de loco in locum, the translation
of a thing from one place to another. The suspicion of a Chasme in our
Discourse, and the Ambiguity imminent from the Aequivocality of the term,
Motion, thus maturely praevented: we may more smoothly progress to our short
Animadversions on the Conceptions of the Ancients, touching the Last General
Propriety of Atoms, Art. 2. The Motion of Atoms, according to the General
Distinction of the Ancients, Twofold; viz. Natural, and Accidental: and each
of these redivided into two different Species.
their Congenial and intestine Motion.

Herein we are to recognize their opinions, that concern (1) the Multiplicity,
(2) the Perpetuity of motions essentially competent to Atoms.

As to the FIRST; they have, according to a General Distinction, assigned to
Atoms a Twofold Motion; (1) Natural, whereby an Atom, according to the
tendency of its essential weight, is carried directly downward: (2) Accidental,
whereby one Atom justling or arienating against another, is diverted from its
perpendicular descendence, and repercussed another way. The Former, they called
Perpendicular, the other, Reflex. The Natural or Perpendicular Epicurus has
doubled again into (...), ad perpendiculum, or as Cicero (de fato) interprets
it, ad Lineam: and (...), ad Declinationem. The Accidental, or Reflex has
also, according to the tradition of Plutarch, (1. placit. 12.) been by him
subdivided into (...), ex plaga, seu ictu; and (...), ex concussione, or
rather, ex Palpitatione. So that, according to this special Distinction, there
must be four different sorts of motions assignable to Atoms.

Art. 3. The summary of Epi^urus Figment, of the Perpendicular Mo^ion of Atoms,
without a common Center.
For the Perpendicular Motion, we advertise; that Epicurus therein had no
respect to any Center either of the World, or the Earth; for He conceded none
such possible in the Universe, which He affirmed of infinite extent: but to two
contrary Regions allowable therein, the one Upward, from whence, without any
terminus a quo, Atoms flowed; the other Dow^ward, toward which, without any
terminus ad quem, in a direct line they tended. So that, according to this wild
dream, any coast from whence Atoms stream, may be called Above, and any to
which they direct their course, Below; insomuch as He conceited the superfice
of the Earth, on which our feet find the Center of Gravity in standing or
progression, to be one continued plane, and the whole Horizon above it likewise
a continued plane running on in extent not only to the Firmament, but the
entire immensity of the Infinite Space. According to which D^lirament, if
several weights should fall down from the firmament, one upon Europe, another
upon Asia, a third upon Africa, a fourth upon America; and their motion be
supposed to continue beyond the exteriors of the terrestrial Globe: they could
not meet in the Center thereof, but would transfix the four quarters in lines
exquisitely parallel, and still descend at equal distance each from other,
until the determination of their motion in the infinite Space, by the occurse
and resistance of other greater Weigh^^.

Art. 4. His Declinat^^y natural Motion of Atoms, excused; not justified.
For the Declinatory Motion; we observe, that Epicurus was by a kind of seeming
necessity constrained to the Fiction thereof; since otherwise He had left his
fundamental Hypothesis manifestly imperfect, his Principles destitute of a
Cause for their Convention, Conflictation, Cohaerence, and consequently no
possibility of the emergency of Concretions from them. And, therefore, to what
Cicero (in ^. de fin.) objects against him, viz. that he acquiesced in a
supposition merely praecarious, since he could assign no Cause for this motion
of Declination, but usurped the indecent liberty of endowing his Atoms with
what Faculties he thought advantageous to the explanation of Natures Phenomenon
in Generation and Corruption: we may modestly respond, by way of excuse not
justification, that such is the ^^becillity of Human understanding, as that
every Author of a physiological ^abrick, or mundane Systeme, is no less
obnoxious to the same objection, of praesuming to consign Provinces (for the
phrase of Cicero, is dare provincias principiis) to his Principles, then
Epicurus. For, in Concretion^ or Complex Natures, to determine on a reason for
this or that sensible Affection, is no desperate difficulty; since the
condition of praeassumed Principles may afford it: but, concerning the
originary Causes of those Affections inhaerent in and congenial to the
Principles of those Concretions, all we can say, to decline a downright
confession of our ignorance, is no more then this, that such is the necessity
of their peculiar Nature; the proper and germane (...) remaining in the dark to
us, and so our Curiosity put to the shift of simple Conjecture, unless we level
our thoughts above Principles, and acknowledge no term of acquiescence. And
even the acute and perspicacious Cicero, notwithstanding his reprehension of it
in Epicurus, is forced to avow the inevitability of this Exigent, in express
words, thus; Ne omnes a Physicis irrideamur, si dicamus quicquam fieri si^e
Causa distinguendum est, and ita dicenaum; ipsius Individui hanc esse naturam,
i^ pondere and gravitate moveatur, eamque ipsam esse Caussam, cur ita feratur,
etc. Nor is this Crime of consigning provinces to his Principles, proper only
to Epicurus; but common also to the Stoic, Peripatetick, etc. since none of
them has adventured upon a reason of the Heat of Fire, the Cold of Water, the
Gravity of Earth, etc. Doubtless, had Cicero been interrogated, Why all the
Stars are not carried on in a motion parallel to the Equator, but some steer
their course obliquely; why all the Planets travel not through the Ecliptic,
or at least in a motion parallel thereto, but some approach it obliquely: the
best answer He could have thought upon, must have been only this, ita Natu^ae
leges ^erehant; which how much beseeming the perspicacity of a Physiologist
more then to have excogitated Fundamentals of his own, endowed with inhaerent
Faculties to cause those diverse tendencies, we referr to the easy arbitration
of our Reader.

Concerning the Accidental, or Reflex Mot^on, Art. 5. The genuine sense of
^pi^arus, in his distinction o^ the Reflex Mot^on of Atoms, into ec Plaga, and
(...) Concu^^^^ne.
all that is worthy our serious notice, is only this; that when Epicurus
subdivideth this Genus into two species, namely (...), ex plaga, and (...), ex
concussione, and affirms that all those Atoms which are ((...)) moved upward,
pursue both sorts of this Reflex tendency; we are not to understand him in this
sense, that both these kinds of Reflex motion are opposite to the
Perpendicular, since it is obvious to every man, that Atoms respective to their
Direct, or Oblique incidence in the different points of their superfice, may
make, or rather suffer or direct, or oblique resilitions, and Epicurus expressly
distinguishes the Motion from Collision or Arietation into that which points
upward, and that which points sidewayes; but in this, that he might
constitute a certain Generical Difference, whereby both the species of Reflex
motion might be known from both the species of the Perpendicular. For the
further illustration of this obscure Distinction, and to praevent that
considerable Demand, which is consequent thereto, viz. Whether all the possible
sorts of Re^^ex Motion are only two, the one directly Upward, the other
directly Lateral: we advertise, that Epicurus seems to have alluded to the most
sensible of simple Differences in the Pulse of Animals. For, as Physicians,
when the Pulsifick Faculty distends the Artery so amply, and allows so great a
space to the performance of both those successive contrary motions, the
Diastole and Systole, as that the touch does apprehend each stroke fully and
distinctly, denominate that kind of Pulse, (...); and on the contrary, when the
vibrations of the Artery are contracted into a very little space as well of the
ambient, as of time, so as they are narrow and confusedly praesented to the
touch, they call it (...): so likewise Epicurus terms that kind of Rebound, or
Resilition, which by a strong and direct incurse and arietation of one Atom
against another, is made to a considerable distance, or continued through a
notable interval of space, (...); and, on the contrary, that which is
terminated in a short or narrow interval (which comes to pass, when the
resilient Atom soon falls foul upon a second, and is thereby reviberated upon a
third, which repercusseth it upon a fourth, whereby it is again bandied against
a fifth, and so successively agitated, until it endure a perfect Palpitation)
he styles (...). Upon this our Master Galen may be thought to have cast an eye,
when he said ( lib. de facult. not.) it was the opinion of Epicurus, Omnes
attractiones per resilitiones atque implexiones Atomorum fieri that all
Attractions were caused by the Resilitions and Implexions of Atoms. Which
eminent passage in Galen, not only assisted, but interpreted by another of
Plato (Magnetem non per Attractionem, sed Impulsionem agere, in Timaeo) of the
same import; has given the hint to Des Carts, Regius, Sir K. Digby, and some
other of our late Enquirers, of supposing the Attractive, rather Impulsive
Virtue of the Loadstone, and all other bodies Electrical, to consist in the
Recess, or Return of those continued Effluvia, or invisible filaments of
streated Atoms, which are uncessantly exhaled from their pores. Nor does He
much strain these words of Gilbert [Effluvia illa tenuiora concipiunt and
amplectuntur corpora, quibus Uniuntur, and Electris, tanquam extensis brachiis,
and ad fontem prope invalescentibus effluviis, deducuntur] who has charged
them with the like signification.

Art. 6. The several Conceptions of Epicurus, about the perpetual Motions of
Atoms.
As to the SECOND, viz. the Perpetuity of these Motions adscribed to Atoms; we
think it not a little material to give you to understand, at least to recognize
that the conceptions of Epicurus concerning this particular, are cozen Germans
to Chimaera s, and but one degree removed from the monstrous absurdities of
Lunacy. For, He dreamt, and then believed, that all Atoms were from all
Eternity endowed, by the charter, of their uncreate and independent Essence,
with that ingenite Vigor, or internal Energy, called Gravity, whereby they are
variously agitated in the infinite space, without respect to any Center, or
General term of Consistence: so as they could never discontinue that natural
motion, unless they met and encountered other Atoms, and were by their shock or
impulse deflected into another course. That the Dissilient or deflected Atoms,
whether rebounding upwards directly, or ad latus obliquely, or in any line
intercedent betwixt those two different regions, would also inde^inently pursue
that begun motion, unless they were impeded and diverted again by the occurse
and arietation of some others floating in the same part of space. And, that
because the Revibrations, or Resilitions of Atoms regarding several points of
the immense space, like Bees variously interweaving in a swarm, must be
perpetual: therefore also must they never quiesce, but be as variously and
constantly exagitated eve^ in the most solid or adamantine of Concretions,
though the sense cannot deprehend the least inquietude or intestine
tumultuation therein; and the rather in respect of those Grotesques or minute
Inanities densely intermixed among their insensible particles. Art. 7. The
perpetual In^u^e^ude of Atoms, even in compact Concretions, ad^^^^rated in
(...) Lea^.


To explicate this Riddle, we must praesent some certain adumbration of this
intestine aestuation or commotion of Atoms in Concretions; and this may most
conveniently be done in melted Metals, as particularly in Lead yet floating in
the Fusory vessel. To appearance nothing more quiet and calm: yet really no
quicksand more internally tumultuated. For, the insensible particles of Fire
having penetrated the body of the crucible, or melting pan, and so permeating
the pores of the Lead therein contained; because they cannot return back upon
the subjacent fire, in regard they are uncessantly impelled by other ingeneous
particles continually succeeding on their heels, therefore are they still
protruded on, until they disunite all the particles of the Lead, and by the
pernicity and continuation of this their ebullition, hinder them from mutual
revinction and coalescence: and thereby make the Lead a fluid, of a compact
substance, and so keep it, as long as the succussion of igneous particles is
maintained from the fire underneath. During this act of Fusion, think we, with
what violence or pernicity the Atoms of Fire are agitated up and down, from one
side to another, in the small inanities interspersed among the particles of the
Lead; otherwise they could not dissolve the compact tenor thereof, and change
their positions so as to introduce manifest Fluidity: and, since every particle
of the Lead, suffers as many various concussions, repercussions, and repeated
vibrations, as every particle of Fire; how great must be the Commotion on both
sides, notwithstanding the seeming quiet in the surface of the Lead?

But, because our sense, as well as our Reason; may have some satisfaction,
Art. 8. The same more sensibly exemplified, in the spirit extracted from
Mercury, Tin, and Sublimate.
touching the perpetual Commotion of Atoms, even in Compositions; we offer to
Exemplify the same either in the Spirit of Halinitre, or that which Chemists
usually extract from Crude Mercury, Tin, and Sublimate codissolved in a
convenient menstruum: For, either of these Liquors being close kept in a luted
glass, you may plainly perceive the minute moleculae, or seminary conventions
of Atoms, of which it does consist, to be uncessantly moved every way, upward,
downward, transverse, oblique, etc. in a kind of fierce aestuation, as if
goaded on by their inhaerent Motor, or internal impulsive Faculty, they
attempted speedy emergency at all points, most like a multitude of Flies
imprisoned in a glass Vial.

Now, Art. 9. The Mutab^lity of all Concretions, a good Argument of the
perpetual intestine Commotion of Atoms, in the most adamantine Compositions.
the Argument that seems to have induced Epicurus to concede this perpetual
Inquietude of Atoms, was the inevitable mutation of all Concrete Substances,
caused by the continual Access and Recess of their insensible particles. For,
indeed, no Concretion is so compact and solid, as not to contain within it self
the possible Causes of its utter Dissolution; yea, though it were so immured in
Adamant, as to be thought secure from the hostile invasion of any Extrinsecal
Agent whatever. And the ruin of solid bodies (i. e. such whose parts are of
the most compact Contexture allowable to Concretions,) cannot be so reasonably
adscribed to any Cause, as this; that they are compacted of such Principles, as
are inde^inently motive, and in perpetual endeavor of Emergency or Exsilition:
so that never desisting from internal evolutions, circumgyrations, and other
changes of position; they at length infringe that manner of reciprocal
Coaptation, Cohaesion, and Revinction, which determined their solidity, Art.
10. What we are to explode, and what retain, in the opinion of Epicurus,
touching the Motion of Atoms.
and thereby dissolving the Compositum, they wholly emancipate themselves, obey
their restless tendency at random, and disappear.

This faeculent Doctrine of Epicurus, we had occasion to examine and refine all
the dross either of Absurdity, or Atheism, in our Chapter concerning the
Creation of the World ex nihilo, in our Book against Atheism. However, we may
not dismiss our Reader without this short Animadversion. The Positions to be
exploded are (1) That Atoms were Eternally existent in the infinite space, (2)
that their Motive Faculty was eternally inhaerent in them, and not derived by
impression from any External Principle, (3) that their congenial Gravity
affects no Center, (4) that their Declinatory motion from a perpendicular, is
connatural to them with that of perpendicular descent, from Gravity. Those
which we may with good advantage substitute in their stead, are (1) That Atoms
were produced ex nihilo, or created by God, as the sufficient Materials of the
World, in that part of Eternity, which seemed opportune to his infinite Wisdom;
(2) that, at their Creation, God invigorated or impraegnated them with an
Internal Energy, or Faculty Motive, which may be conceived the First Cause of
all Natural Actions, or Motions, (for they are indistinguishable) performed in
the World; (3) that their gravity cannot subsist without a Center; (4) that
their internal Motive Virtue necessitates their perpetual Commotion among
themselves, from the moment of its infusion, to the expiration of Natures
lease. For, by virtue of these Correctives, the poisonous part of Epicurus
opinion, may be converted into one of the most potent Antidotes against our
Ignorance: the Quantity of Atoms sufficing to the Materiation of all
Concretions; and their various Figures and Motions to the Origination of all
their Qualities and Affections, as our immediately subsequent Discourse does
professedly assert.

The Third Book.
CHAP. I. The Origin of Qualities.
SECT. I.
THat the sounding Line of Man's Reason is much too short to profound the
Depths, Art. 1. An introductory Advertisement; of the obscurity of many things
to Reason, which are manifest to sense: and of the Possibility, not necessity
of the Elementation of Concret^^ns, and their sensible Q^alities, from the
Principles prae^ua^ed.
or Channels of that immense Ocean, Nature; needs no other evictment but this,
that it cannot attain to the bottom of Her Shallows. It being a discouraging
truth, that even those things, which are familiar and within the sphere of our
Sense, and such to the clear discernment whereof we are furnished with Organs
most exquisitely accommodate; remain yet ignote and above the Moon to our
Understanding. Thus, what can be more evident to sense, then the Continuity of
a Body: yet what more abstruse to our reason, then the Composition of a
Continuum? What more obviously sensible then Qualities: and yet what problem
has more distracted the brains of Philosophers, then that concerning their
Unde, or Original? Who does not know, that all Sensation is performed by the
Mediation of certain Images, or Species: yet where is that He, who has hit the
white, in the undoubted determination of the Nature of a species, or
apodictically declared the manner of its Emanation from the Object to the
Sensorium, what kind of insensible-sensative impression that is, which it
makes thereupon, and how being from thence, in the same instant transmitted to
that noble something within us, which we understand not, it proves a lively
Transumpt, or type, and informs that ready judge of the Magnitude, Figure,
Color, Motion, and all other apparences of its Antitype or Original? or, what
has ever been more manifest or beyond dubitation, then the reality of Motion?
and yet we dare demand of Galilaeo himself, what does yet remain more
impervestigable, or beyond apodictical decision, then the Nature and Conditions
thereof.

Concerning the First of these 4 aenigmatical Quaestions, we have formerly
praesented you no sparing account of our Conjectural opinion: which we desire
may be heartily accepted in the latitude of Probability only, or how it may be,
rather then how it is, or must be; i. e. that it is, though most possible and
verisimilous that every Physical Continuum should consist of Atoms; yet not
absolutely necessary. For, insomuch as the true Idea of Nature is proper only
to that Eternal Intellect, which first conceived it: it cannot but be one of
the highest degrees of madness for dull and unequal man to praetend to an
exact, or adaequate comprehension thereof. We need not advertise, that the
Zenith to a sober Physiologists ambition, is only to take the copy of Nature
from her shadow, and from the reflex of her sensible Operations to describe her
in such a symmetrical Form, as may appear most plausibly satisfactory to the
solution of all her Phenomenon. Because it is well known, that the eye of our
grand Master Aristotle's Curiosity was levelled at no other point, as himself
solemnly professes (in Meteorolog. lib. 1. cap. 7. initio) in these words:
(...): i. e. Cum autem de hisce, quae sensui pervia non sunt, satis esse juxta
rationem demonstratum putemus, si ad id ^uod fieri possit ea reduxerimus, ex
hisce quae in praesentia dicuntur, existimaverit quispiam de hisce maxim ad
hunc modum usu venire. And evident it is that Mons. Des Carts never was more
himself, that is, profoundly ingenious, then when he crowned his excellent
Principles of Philosophy with this advertisement: a^ quamvis forte hoc pacto
intelligatur, quomodo res omnes naturales fieri potuerint; non tamen ideo
concludi debet, ipsas revera sic factas esse: and sati^ a me praestitum esse
putabo, si tantum ea quae scripsi, talia sint, ut omnibus Naturae Phaenomenis
accurate respondeant; hoc enim ad usum vitae sufficient.

And, concerning the other three, which according to the natural order of their
dependence, are successively the Arguments of our next ensuing Exercitations;
we likewise deprecate the same favorable interpretation, in the General: that
so, though our attempts perhaps afford not satisfaction to others, yet they may
not occasion the scandal of Arrogance and Obstinacy in opinion to our selves.

Art. 2. The Authors Definition of a Quality, in general: and (...) exposition
of Dem^critu^ mysterious Text, conc^r^ing the Creation of Qualities.
By the Quality of any Concretion, we understand in the General, no more but
that kind of Appearance, or Representation, whereby the sense does distinctly
deprehend, or actually discern the same, in the capacity of its proper Object.
An Appearance we term it, because the Quale or Suchness of every sensible thing,
receives its peculiar determination from the relation it holds to that sense,
that peculiarly discerns it: at least from the judgment made in the mind
according to the evidence of sensation. Which doubtless was the genuine intent
of Democritus in that remarkable and mysterious text, recorded by Galen (in
lib. 1. de Element. cap. 2.) thus: (...), etc. Lege enim Color, lege amaror,
lege dulcor; revera autem Atomus, and Inane, inquit Democritus, existimans
omneis Qualitates sensibileis ex Atomorum concursu gigni, quatenus se habent ad
nos, qui ipsarum sensum habemus: Natura autem nihil candidum esse, aut flavum,
aut rubrum, etc. The importance of which may be fully and plainly rendered thus;
that since nothing in the Universe stands possessed of a Real or True Nature,
i. e. does constantly and invariately hold the praecise ^uale, or Suchness of
their particular Entity, to Eternity; Atoms (understand them together with
their essential and inseparable Proprieties, lately specified.) and the Inane
Space only excepted: therefore ought all other things, and more eminently
Qualities, in regard they arise not from, nor subsist upon any indeclinable
necessity of their Principles, but depend upon various transient Accidents for
their existence, to be reputed not as absolute and entire Realities, but simple
and occasional Apparences, whose specification consists in a certain
modification of the First Matter, respective to that distinct Affection they
introduce into this or that particular sense, when thereby actually
deprehended. Not that Democritus meant, in a litteral sense, that their
production was determinable ex instituto hominum, by the opinionative laws of
man's Will; as most of his Commentators have inconsiderately descanted: but in a
Metaphorical, that as the justice, injustice, decency, turpitude, culpability,
laudability of Human actions, are determined by the Conformity or Difformity
they bea^ to the Constitutions Civil, or Laws generally admitted, so likewise
do the whiteness, blackness, sweetness, bitterness, heat or cold, of all
Natural Concretions receive their distinct essence, or determination from
certain positions and regular ordinations of Atoms. And this easily hands us to
the natural scope of that passage in Laertius; (...), Esse Atomos and Inane
Universorum principia, caetera omnia Lege sanciri: as also of another in
Empiricus (1. hypot. 30.) (...), VERE esse Insectilia ac Inane. However, if any
please to prefer the exposition of Magnenus, that Democritus by that unfrequent
and gentilitious phrase, Nomo esse Qualitates would have the determinate nature
of any Quality to consist in certa quadam lege, and proportione inter agens and
patiens, in a certain proportion betwixt the Agent and Patient, or object and
sensorium; we have no reason to protest against his election. For we shall not
deny, but what is Ho^y to the palate of one man, is Gall to another; that the
most delicious and poynant dishes of Europe, are not only insipid but loathsome
to the stomachs of the Iapones* who in health eat their Fish boiled, and in
sickness raw, as Maffeus (in libro de Iaponum moribus) reports; that some have
feasted upon Rhubarb, Scammony, and Esula, which most others are ready to vomit
and purge at the sight of; that Serpents are dainties to Deer, Hemlock a
perfect Cordial to Goats, Hellebor a choice morsel to Quails, Spiders
restorative to Monkeys* Toads an Antidote to Ducks, the Excrements of man pure
Ambre Grise to Swine, etc. All which most evidently declare the necessity of a
certain proportion or Correspondence betwixt the object and particular organ of
sense, that is to apprehend and judge it.

But since the Notion of a Quality is no rarity to common apprehension, every
Clown well understanding what is signified by Color, Odor, Sapour, Heat,
Cold, etc. so far as the concernment of his sense we are no longer to suspend
our indagation of their possible ORIGIN, in the general.

Which, were our Atoms identical with the Homoiomerical Principles of
Anaxagoras formerly described, Art. 3. The necessary deduction of Qualities
from Naked or Vnqualified Principles.
and exploded; might be thought a task of no difficulty at all: in regard those
Consimilarities are supposed actually to contain all Qualities, in the
simplicity of their nature, or before their Convention and Disposition into any
determinate Concretion; i. e. that Color, Odor, Sapor, Heat, Cold, etc. arise
from Colorate, Odorate, Sapid, Hot, Cold particles of the First Catholic
Matter. But, insomuch, as Atoms, if we except their three congenial
Proprieties, viz. Magnitude (which by a general interest, retains to the
Category of Qualities) Figure, and Motion; are unanimously assumed to be
Exquales, seu Qualitatis Expertes, absolutely devoid of all Quality: it may
seem, at first encounter, to threaten our endeavors with infelicity, and damp
Curiosity with despair of satisfaction. And yet this Giant at distance, proves
a mere Pygmie at hand. For, the Nakedness, or Unqualifiedness of Atoms, the
point wherein the whole Difficulty appears radicated; to a closer consideration
must declare it self to be the basis of our exploration, and indispensably
necessary to the Deduction of all sensible Qualities from them, when disposed
into Concrete Natures. Because, were any Color, Odor, etc. essentially
inhaerent in Atoms; that Color, or Odor must be no less intransmutable then
the subject of its inhaesion: and that Principles are Intransmutable, is
implied in the notion of their being Principles; for it is of the formal reason
of Principles, constantly to persever the same in all the transmutations of
Concretions. Otherwise, all things would inevitably, by a long succession of
Mutations, be reduced to clear Adnihilation. Besides, all things become so much
the more Decolored, by how much the smaller the parts are into which they are
divided; as may be most promptly experimented in the pulverization of painted
Glass, and precious stones: which is demonstration enough, that their Component
Particles, in their Elementary and discrete capacity, are perfectly destitute
of Color. Nor is the force of this Argument restrained only to Color, as the
most eminent of Qualities sensible: but extensible also to all others, if
examined by an obvious insistence upon particulars.

Art. 4. The two primary Events of Atoms, viz. Order and (...), associated to
their three essential Proprieties, viz. Magnitude, (...), and (...); sufficient
to the Origination of all ^^alities.
Now, having taken footing on the necessary Incompetence of any sensible Quality
to the Material Principles of Concretions: we may safely advance to our
Investigation of the Reason, or Manner how Color, and all other Qualities may
be educed from such naked and unqualified Principles. And first we must have
recourse to some few of the most considerable EVENTS consignable to Atoms, as
well as to their 3 inseparable Proprieties. The primary, and to this scope,
most directly pertinent Events of Atoms, are only two, viz. (...), ORDER and
SITUATION. That Leucippus and Democritus, besides those two eminent events,
(...), Concretion, and Secretion, from which the Generation and Corruption of
all things are derived; have also attributed unto Atoms, two other as requisite
to all Alteration, i. e. the procreation of various Qualities, namely Order and
Position: is justifiable upon the testimony of Aristotle (in lib. de ortu and
interitu) however He was pleased ( in 8. Metaphys. cap. 2.) interpreting the
Abderitane terms of Democritus, to adnumerate (...), Figure, unto them, and
thereupon infer that Atoms are different, (...), i. e. aut Rhysmo, quod est
Figura; aut Trope, quod est situs; aut Diathege, quod est ordo: and ( in
Metaphys. 1. cap. 4.) to exemplify this difference in Letters of the Alphabet;
saying that A and N differ in Figure; A N, and N A, in order; and Z N, in
situation. Which is the same with what Empiricus (2. advers. phys.) reports to
have been delivered by Epicurus. True it is, his Disciple Lucretius, exceeded
him in the number of Events assignable to Atoms, in order to the emergency of
all sensible Qualities from them; for he composing this Distich Intervalla,
Viae, Connexus, Pondera, Plagae,
Concursus, Motus, Ordo, Positura, Figurae,
confounds both Events and Conjuncts together: wherein He seems to have had
more regard to the smoothness of his Verses, then the Methodical traction of
his Subject. For, Motion, Concurse, and Percussion are the natural Consequents
of Gravity: and Distance and Connection are included in Position; and Ways or
Regions belong to Order, as may be exemplified in the former Letters, which
respective to their remote or Vicine Position, and their Change from the right
to the left hand, exhibit to the sense various faces or apparences.

That those two Conjuncts, Magnitude and Motion, Art. 5. The necessity of
assuming the Magnitude and Motion of Atoms, together with their Order and
Situation, as to their production of Qualities, evicted by a double instance.
are necessarily to be associated to Order and Position; is evident from hence,
that if it be enquired, why there is in Light so great a subtility of parts, as
that in an instant it penetrates the thickest Glass; but so little in Water, as
that it is terminated in the superfice thereof: what more verisimilous reason
can be alleged to explain the Cause of that difference in two fluid bodies,
then this, that the Component Particles of Light are more minute, or have less
of Magnitude, then those of Water? And if it be enquired, why the Aer, when
agitated by the wind, or a fan, appears Colder, then when quiet: what solution
can be more satisfactory, then this, that by reason of its motion it does more
deeply penetrate the pores of the skin, and so more vigorously affect the
sense? However, if we confine our assumption only to these three Heads, Figure,
Order, and Position; we shall yet be able, without much difficulty, to make it
out, how from them, either single, or diversely commixt, an infinite
Multiplicity of Qualities may be created; as may be most appositely explained
by the Analogy which Letters hold to Atoms. For as Letters are the Elements of
Writing, and from them arise by gradation, Syllables, Words, Sentences,
Orations, Books: so proportionately are Atoms the Elements of Things, and from
them arise by gradation, most exile Moleculae, or the Seminaries of
Concretions, Art. 6. The Figure, Order and (...) Concretions, alone sufficient
to the Caussation of an indefini^e variety of Qualities from the (...).
then greater and greater Masses successively, until we arrive at the highest
round in the scale of Magnitude.

But we are restrained to an insistence only upon our 3 Heads assumed. As
Letters of diverse Figures, U, G, A, E, O, when praesented to the eye, carry 3
different species, or aspects; and when pronounced, affect the Ear with as many
distinct sounds: exactly so do Atoms, respectively to the variety of their
Figures, and determinate Contexture into this or that species, occurring to the
Organs of Sight, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Touching, make diverse impressions
thereupon, or praesent themselves in diverse Apparences, or what is tantamount)
make diverse Qualities. (2) As one and the same Letter diversely posited, is
diverse to the Sight, and Hearing, as may be instanced in Z, N, y, ^, b, d, p,
q: so likewise does one and the same Atom, according to its various positions,
or faces, produce various affections in the Organs of Sense. For instance, if
the Atome assumed be Pyramidal: when the Cone is obverted to the sensory Organ,
it must make a different impression upon it, from that which the Base, when
obverted and applied, will cause. (3) As the same two three or more Letters,
according to their mutation of Site, or Antecession and Consequution, impart
diverse words to the eye, diverse sounds to the ear, and diverse things to the
mind; as ET, TE, IS, SI, SUM, MUS, ROMA, AMOR, MARO, RAMO, ORAM, MORA, ARMO,
etc. so also may two three, or more Atoms, according to their various positions
and transpositions, affect the sense with various Apparences, or Qualities. (4)
And as Letters, whose variety of Figures exceeds not those of the Alphabet, are
sufficient only by the variety of order, to compose so great diversity of
words, as are contained in this, or all the Books in the World: so likewise, if
there were but 24 diverse Figures competent to Atoms, they alone by variety of
Order, or transposition, would suffice to the constitution of as
incomprehensible a diversity of Qualities. But, when the diversity of their
Figures is incomparably greater: how infinitely more incomprehensible must that
variety of Qualities be, which the possible changes of their Order may produce?

Art. 7. The (...) Exemplified in the (...), on the Waves ^f the Sea
Thus in the Water of the Sea, when agitated into a white froth, no other
mutation is made, save only the situation and differing contexture of the parts
thereof disposed by the included aer into many small bubbles; from which the
incident rays of Light (which otherwise would not have been reflected in
united) are reflected in united and direct streams to the eye, and so creat a
whiteness continued, which is but paler, or weaker light, which must disappeari
mmediately upon the dissolution of the bubbles, and return of the p^rts of the
water to their natural constitution of fluidity.

Art. 8. (...) Example.
And since we are fallen upon that eminent Quality, Color* we shall illustrate
the obscure nativity thereof, in the general, by a most praegnant example.
Immerge into a Glass Vial of clean fountain Water, set upon warm embers, half^n
ounce more or less, according the quantity of Water) of the leaves of (...) and
after a small interval of time, instill into the infusion a few drops of the
oil of Tartar made per Deliqu^um, which done, you shall perceive the whole
mixture to become Red. Now, seeing that no one of the three ingredients, in
their simple and divided state, do retain to that species of Color in the
remotest degree of affinity; from what original can we derive this emergent
Redness? Doubtless, only from hence; that the Water does so penetrate, by a
kind of Discussion separate, and educe the smaller particle^ of that substance,
whereof the leaves of Senna are composed, as that the particles of the oil of
Tartar subtily perme^ting the infusion, totally after the Contexture thereof,
and so commove and convert its minute dissolved particles, as that the rays of
Light from without falling upon them, suffer various refractions and
reflections from their several obverted faces, and praesent themselves to the
eye in the appearance of that particular Color. And to confirm you herein; you
need only instead of oil of Tartar, infuse the like proportion of oil of
Vitriol into the same Tincture of Senna: for, thereupon no such redness at all
will arise to the composition. Which can be solved by no better a reason than
this; that the oil of Vitriol wants that virtue of commoving and converting the
educed particles of the Senna into such positions and order, as are
determinately requisite to the incidence, refraction, and reflection of the
rays of Light to the eye, necessary to the creation of that Color. On the
Contrary, instead of Senna, infuse Rose leaves in the Water, and superaffuse
thereto a few drops of the Spirit of Vitriol: and then the infusion shall
instantly acquire a purple tincture, or deep scarlet; when from the like or
greater quantity of oil of Tartar instilled, no such event shall ensue. Both
which Experiments collated are Demonstration sufficient, that a Red may be
produced from simples absolutely destitute of that gloss, only by a determinate
Commixture, and position of their insensible particles: no otherwise then as
the same Feathers in the neck of a Dove, or train of a Peacock, upon a various
position of their parts both among themselves, and toward the incident Light,
praesent various Colors to the eye; or as a piece of Changeable Taffaty,
according as it is extended, or plicated, appears of two different dies. The
same may also be conceived of the Caerule Tincture caused in White Wine by
Lignum Nephriticum infused when the Decoction thereof shall remain turbid and
subnigricant.

Moreover, lest we leave you destitute of Examples in the other 4 orders of
Qualities, respondent to the 4 remaining senses, to illustrate the sufficiency
of Figure, Order and Situation, to their production; be pleased to observe.

First, that Lead calcined with the spirit of the most eager Vinegre, Art. 9.
The Accension of Heat, from Concretions actually C^^d, upon a m^er
transposition of their (...): Particles, exe^plifies in ^^ndry Chy^^cal
Experiments.
so soon as it has imbibed the moisture of the ambient aer, or be irrigated
with a few drops of Water, will instantly conceive so intense a heat, as to
burn his finger that shall touch it. Now, since both the Calcined Lead and
Water are actually Cold, and no third Nature is admixt, and nothing more can be
said to be in them when commixt, that was in them during their state of
separation; whence can we deduce that intense Heat, that so powerfully
affects, indeed, misaffecteth the sense of Touching? Quaestionless, only from
this our triple fountain, i. e. from hence, that upon the accession of
humidity, the acute or pointed particle of the spirit of Vinegre, (whereby the
fixed salt of the Lead was, by potential Calcination, dissolved, and the
Sulphur liquated) change their order and situation, and after various
convolutions, or the motions of Fermentations, obvert their points unto, and
penetrate the skin, and so cause a dolorous Compunction, or discover themselves
to the Organ of Touching in that species of Quality, which men call Heat. The
reason of this Phenomenon is clearly the same with that of a heap of Needles;
which when confused in oblique, transverse, etc. irregular positions, on every
side prick the hand that graspeth them: but if disposed into uniform order,
like sticks in a Faggot, they may be laterally handled without any asperity or
puncture: or that of the Bristles of an Urchine, which when depressed, or
ported, may be stroked from head to tail, without offense to the hand; but
when erected or advanced, become intractable.

By the same reason also may we comprehend, why Aqua Fortis, whose Ingredients
in their simple natures are all gentle and innoxious, is so fiery and almost
invincible a poison to all that take it: why the Spirit of Vitriol, freshly
extracted, kindles into a fire, if confused with the Salt of Tartar: why the
Filings of Steel when irrigated with Spirit of Salt, suffer an aestuation,
ebullition, and dissolution into a kind of Gelly, or Paste: with all other
mutations sensible, observed by Apothecaries and Chemists, in their
Compositions of Dissimilar natures, from which some third or neutral Quality
does result.

Art. 10. The Generation of all kinds of sensible Qualities in one and the same
Concretion, from the variegated positions of its particles: evidenced in the
Example of a putrid Apple.
Secondly, that in the parts of an Apple, whose one half is rotten, the other
sound, what strange disparity there is in the points of Color, Odor, Sapour,
Softness, etc. Qualities. The sound half is sweet in taste, fresh and fragrant
in smell, white in Color, and hard to the touch: the Corrupt, bitter, earthy
or cadaverous, duskish, or inclinining to black, and soft. Now to what Cause
can we adscribe this manifest dissimilitude, but only this: that the Particles
of the Putrid half, by occasion either of Contusion, or Corrosion, as the
Procatarctick Cause, have suffered a change of position among themselves, and
admitted almost a Contrary Contexture, so as to exhibit themselves to the
several Organs of Sense in the species of Qualities almost contrary to those
resulting from the sound half; which upon a farther incroachment of
putrefaction, must also be deturbed from their natural Order, and Situations in
like manner, and consequently put on the same Apparences, or Qualities. For,
can it be admitted, that the sound mo^ty, when it shall have undergone
Corruption, does consist of other Particles then before? if it be answered,
that some particles thereof are exhaled, and others of the aer succeeded into
their rooms; our assertion will be rather ratified, then impugned: because it
praesumes, that from the egression of some particles, the subingression of
others of aer, and the total transposition of the remaining, Corruption is
introduced thereupon; and thereby that general change of Qualities, mentioned.

Art. 11. The assenting suffrage of Epicurus.
These Instances, and the insufficiency of any other Dihoties, to the rational
explanation of them, with due attention and impartiality perpended; we cannot
but highly applaud the perspicacity of Epicurus, who constantly held, (...),
that the Motion of Mutation was a species of Local Transition: and (...):
Concretum, quod secundum Qu^litatem mutatur, omnino mutatur Locali and
transitivo motu eorum corporum, ratione intelligibilium, quae in ipsum
concreverint. Which Empiricus (2. advers. Phys.) descanting upon, says thus;
Exempli caussa, ut ex dulci fiat aliquid amarum, aut ex albo nigrum; oportet
moleculas, seu Corpuscula quae ipsum constituunt, transponi, and alium, vice
alterius, ordinem suscipere: Hoc autem non contigerit, nisi ipsae moleculae,
motione transitus, moveantur. Et rursus, ut ex molli fiat quid Durum, and ex
duro molle; oportet eas, quae illud constituunt, particulas secundum locum
moveri: quippe earum extensione mollitur, coitione vero and condensatione
durescit, etc. All which is most adaequately exemplified in a rotten Apple.

And this, we conceive, may suffice in the General for our Enquiry into the
possible Origin of sensible Qualities.

CHAP. II. That Species Visible are SUBSTANTIAL EMANATIONS.
SECT. I.
SEnsus non suscipere SUBSTANTIAS, though the constant assertion of Aristotle,
Art. 1. The Visible Images of objects, substantial: and either corporeal
Emanations from the superficial parts of Concretions; or Light it self,
disposed into contextures, consimilar to the figure of the object.
and admitted into his Definition of Sense, (...), Sensus est id, quod est
capax sensibilium specierum sine materia; (lib. 2. de Anima, cap. ultim.) and
swallowed as an Axiom by most of his Commentators: is yet so far from being
indisputable, that an intent examination of it by reason may not only suspect,
but convict it of manifest absurdity. Witness only one, and the noblest of
Senses, the SIGHT: which discerns the exterior Forms of Objects, by the
reception either of certain Substantial, or Corporeal Emanations, by the
solicitation of Light incident upon, and reflected from them, as it were
Direpted from their superficial parts, and trajected through a diaphanous
Medium, in a direct line to the eye: or, of Light it self, proceeding in
straight lines from Lucid bodies, or in reflex from opace, in such contextures,
as exactly respond in order and position of parts, to the superficial Figure of
the object, obverted to the eye.

Art. 2. The position of their being (...), derived from (...); and p^^ferred
to the (...) Species Visible.
For the FIRST of these Positions, Epicurus has left us so rational ^ Ground,
that deserves, besides our admiration of His Perspicacity, if not our plenary
Adhaerence, yet at least our calm Allowance of its Verisimility, and due
praelation to that jejune and frothy Doctrine of the Schools* that Species
Visible are Forms without Matter, and immaterial not only in their admission
into the Retina Tunica, or proper and immediate Organ of sight; but even in
their Trajection through the Medium interjacent betwixt the object and the eye.
Which Argument, since too weighty, to be entrusted to the support of a Gratis,
or simple Affirmation; we shall endeavor to prop up with more then one solid
Reason.

And this that we may, with method requisite to perspicuity, effect: Art. 3.
Epicurus Text concerning the same.
we are to begin at the faithful recital of Epicurus Text, and then proceed to
the Explanation, and Examination of it.

Reputandum est, esse in mundo quasdam Effigies, ad Visionem inservienteis,
quae corporibus solidis delineatione consimiles, superant long sua tenuitate
quicquid est rerum conspicabilium. Neque enim formari repugnat etiam in medio
aere circumfusove spatio, hujusmodi quasdam Contexturas: uti neque repugnat,
esse quasdam in ipsis rebus, and maxim in Atomis, dispositiones, ad operandum
ejusmodi spectra, quae sunt quasi quaedam merae inanesque Cavitates, and
superficiales* soliditatisve expertes tenuitates. Neque praeterea repugnat,
fieri ex Corporibus extimis Effluxiones quasdam Atomorum continenter a
volantium in quibus i them positus, idemque ordo, qui fuerit in solidis,
superficiebusve ipsorum, servetur: ut tales proind^ Effluxiones sint quasi
Formae, sive Effigies, and Imagines Corporum, a quibus dimanant. Tales autem
Formae sive Effigies and Imagines sunt, quas moris est nobis, ut Idola, seu
simulachra appellitemus. Ex lib. 10. Diogen. Laertij. and versione Gassendi.

The importance of which, and the remainder of his judgment, concerning the
same theorem, may be thus concisely rendered. Art. 4. The faithful Exposition
thereof.
Without repugnancy to reason, it may be conceived (1) That in the University
of Nature are certain most tenuious Concretions, or subtle Contextures, holding
an exquisite analogy to solid bodies. (2) That by these, occurring to the
sense; and thence to the Mind, all Vision, and Intellection is made: for they
are the same that the Grecian Philosophers call (...), and the Latin
Imagines, Spectra, Simulachra, Effigies, and most frequently Species
Intentionales. (3) That among all the sundry possible ways of the generation
of these Species Visible, the two primary and most considerable are (1) by
their Direption from the superficial parts of Compound bodies, (2) by their
Spontaneous Emanation, and Concretion in the aer; and therefore those of the
First sort are to be named (...), and those of the second (...). (4) That those
Images, which are direpted from the extremes of solid bodies, do conserve in
their separated state the same order and position of parts, that they had
during their united. (5) That the ineffable or insuperable Pernicity, whereby
these Images are transferred through a free space, depends upon both the
Pernicity of the Motion of Atoms, and their Ten^ity or Exility. For, the motion
of Atoms, while continued through the Inane Space, and impeded by no retundent,
is supposed to be inexcogitably swift: nor are we to admit, that when an Atom
is repercussed by another directly arietating against it, and afterward
variously bandied up and down by the retusion of others encountering it; these
partial or retuse motions are less swift, i. e. are performed in a space of
time more assignable or distinguishable by thought, then if they were extended
into one direct, simple, or uninterrupted motion. And for the second Fundament,
the extreme Tenuity of Atoms; insomuch as these Images are praesumed to be no
more but certain superficial Contextures of Atoms: it cannot seem inconsequent,
that their Pernicity can know no remora. And thus much of Epicurus Text; and
the competent Exposition thereof.

Art. 5. The Contents thereof reduced to 4 Heads
It succeeds that we examine the relation it bears to Probability; refering the
consideration of his spontaneous and systatical Images, to the Last Section:
and reducing our thoughts concerning the Direpted and Apostatical (which are,
indeed, the proper subject of our praesent disquisition) to four capital
points, viz. (1) their An sint, or Existence; (2) their Quid sint, or proper
Nature; (3) their Unde, or Production; (4) their Celerity of Transmission.

Art. 6. The E^isten^e of Images vis^ble, certified by autoptical Demonstration.
Of the FIRST, namely the EXISTENCE of Species Visible; this is sufficiently
certified by the obvious experience of Looking-glasses, Water, and all other
Catoptrick or Speculary bodies: which autoptically demonstrate the Emission of
Images from things objected. For, if the object be removed, or eclipsed by the
interposition of any opace body, sufficiently dense and crass to terminate
them, the Images thereof immediately disappear; if the object be moved,
inverted, expansed, contracted, the Image likewise is instantly moved,
inverted, expansed, contracted; in all postures conforming to, and so
undeniably proclaiming its necessary dependence upon its Antitype. Thus also,
when in Summer we shade our selves from the intense fervor of the Sun, in green
Arbours, or under Trees; we cannot but observe all our clothes tincted with a
thin Verdure, or shady Green: and this from no other Cause, but that the Images
or Species of the Leaves, being as it were stripped off by the incident light,
and diffused into the vicine Aer, are terminated upon us, and so discolor our
vestiments. Not, as Magirus would solve it* qualitate, i. e. immateriali forma,
qua aer, corpus (...), a folijs arborum viridibus imbuitur, tingitur, pingitur,
(Comment. in Phylologiam Peripat. lib. 6. cap. 6. number. 27.) And thus are the
bodies of men sitting, or walking in a large room, infected with the Colors of
the Curtains or Hangings, when the Sun strikes upon them: Of which Lucretius
thus, Nam jacier certe, atque emergere multa videmus,
Non solum ex alto, penitusque, ut diximus ante;
Verum de summis ipsum quoque saepe Colorem.
Et vulgo faciunt id lutea, russaque vela,
Et serruginea, cum magnis intenta theatris
Per malos volgata, trabeisque frementia flutunt.
Namque ibi concessum caveai subter, and omnem
Scendi speciem patrum, matrumque, Deorumque,
Insiciunt, coguntque suo fluitare Color.
Ergo lintea de summo cum Corpore fucum
Mittunt, Effigias quoque debent mittere tenueis
Res quaeque, ex summo quoniam jaculantur utraeque etc. Lib. 4.
Upon which Reason also the admirable Kircher hinted his parastatical
Experiment, of Glossing the inside of a Chamber, and all things as well
Furniture as Persons therein contained, with a pleasant disguise of grass
Green, Azure, Crimson, or any other light Color (for Black cannot consist in
any Liquor, without so much density, as must terminate the Light:) only by
disposing a capacious Vial of Glass, filled with the Tincture of Verdegrease,
Lignum Nephriticum, or Vermilion, etc. in some aperture of the Window
respecting the incident beams of the Sun. ( Art. Magn. Lucis, and Umbrae, lib.
10. part. 2. Mag^^, parastaticae Experimento 5.)

Concerning the SECOND, viz. Art. 7. Epicurus opinion, of the subst^ntial^^^
(...) Images Visi^le* (...)
the NATURE of Images Visible; we observe First, that Epicurus seems only to
have revived and improved the notion of Plato, and Empedocles, who positively
declared the sensible Forms, or Visible species of things, to be (...),
Effluxiones quaedam substantiales: in that He denominates them Aporrhea, and
defines them to be most thin and only superficial Contextures of Atoms effluxed
from the superficial parts of Bodies, and jugi s^uore, by a continued stream
em^ning from them into all the circumfused space.

Secondly, that the Common Opinion, Art. 8. The (...): and
most pertinaciously patronized by Alexander the Peripatetick, and Scaliger,
with the numerous herd of Aristotelea^s (whom it is as easy to convert, as
nominate) is, that visible species are mera Accidentiae, simple pure Accidents,
that neither possess, nor carry with them any thing of Matter, or Substance;
and yet being transmitted through a diaphanous Medium from solid objects, they
affect the organ of Sight, are reflected from polite and speculary bodies, etc.
Here we are arrested with wonder, either how these great Masters of Learning
could derive this wild conceit from their Oracle, Aristotle; when in troth all
they could ground upon his Authority of this kind, is desumable only from these
words of his, Colorem rei Visibilis movere perspicuum actu, quod deinceps
oculum moveat: or how they could judge it consentaneous to reason, that those
Affections should be attributed to mere Accidents, which are manifestly
Competent only to mere Substances. For, to be moved or to be the subject of
Local Motion, to be impinged against, and reflected from, or permeate a body;
to be dilated, contracted, inverted, etc. cannot consist, nor indeed by a sober
man be conceived, without absolute substantiality. Some there are, we confess,
who tell us, that they kindled this Conceit from sundry scattered sparks
blended both in his general Discourses of Motion and Alteration, and particular
Enquiries into the nature of Dreams, and Sounds, in his Problems: and these,
thereupon, most confidently state the whole matter, thus. That the Visible
Object does first Generate a Consimilar Species in the parts of the aer next
adjacent; that this Embryon species does instantly Generate a second in the
parts of the aer next to it, that generates a third, that third a fourth, and
so they generate or spawn each other successively in all points of the Medium,
until the last species produced in the aer contiguous to the Horny membrane of
the eye, does therein produce another; which praesents to the Optic Nerve the
exact delineations and pourtraiture of the Protoplast, or Object. To Cure the
Schools of this Delirium, our advice is, that they first purge off that
faeculent humor of Paedantism, and implicit adhaerence to Authority; and then
with clean stomachs take this effectual Alterative.

If the Visible Species of Objects be, as they define; mere Accidents, i. e.
immaterial: we Demand (1) What does Creat them? Not the Object; Art. 9. (...)
since that has neither power, nor art, nor instruments, to pourtray its own
Counterfeit on the table of the contiguous aer. (2) What does Conserve and
Support them when portrayed? Not the Aer; since that is variously agitated,
and dispelled by the wind, and commoved every way by Light pervading it: and
yet the Species of objects are always transmitted in a direct line to the eye.
(3) What can Transport them? Neither Aer, nor Light: since it is of the formal
reason of an Accident, not to be removed or transmitted but in the arms of it
Subject. Nor can the same numericall species be extended through the whole
space of the Medium; because it is repugnant to their supposition: and
themselves affirm the transmigration of an Accident from one subject to
another, impossible. (4) Is the species changed and multiplied by Propagation?
That Is if not an impossibility absolute, yet a Difficulty inexplicable; first
because no man ever has, nor can explain the Modus Propagationis, the manner
of their Propagation: Secondly, since the parts of space intermediate betwixt
the Object and the Eye, though but at a small distance removed, are
innumerable; and a fresh propagation must be successively in each of those
parts; and the space of Time required to each single propagation is a moment;
certainly it must be long before the propagation could attain to so small a
part of space, as is aequal to one Digit. If so; how many hours would run by,
after the Suns Emergency out of an Eclipse, before the light of it would arrive
at our eye? since, as the moments, or points of space betwixt it and us are
more then innumerable; so likewise must the moments, or points of Time, while a
fresh species is generated in each point of that vast space, be more then
innumerable: and yet we have the Demonstration of the most Scientifick of our
senses, that the light of the Sun is darted through that immense space, in one
single moment. (5) What is the material of these species, or Whether is the
(...) First species educed out of Nothing? That Is manifestly absurd; because
above the power of Nature: and to recur to any other power superior to Hers, is
downright madness. (6) Or, ex Materiae Potentia, out of some secret Energie of
the matter of the Medium? That Is Unconceivable; for we dare the whole world to
define, what kind of Power that is, supposed inhaerent in the Medium (Aer,
Water, Glass, or any other (...)) that can be actuated so expeditely into the
production of infinite several species, in a moment. From one and the same part
of Aer, in one and the same moment, how can be educed the different species not
only of the Sun and a S^^ne, of a Man and a Stock, of a Head and a Foot; but
even of two absolute Contraries, Snow and Pich? (7) If Visible Species contain
nothing of Matter; how can they with such insuperable Velocity be projected on
a speculary body, and recoyl back from it to so great a distance, as is
commonly observed, even in the Repercussion, or rather Reflection of a Species
from a Concave Glass: How consist of Various Parts, and conserve the order and
position of them invariate, and the Colors of each clearly inconfused, through
the interval of the Medium? How be really ampliated, contracted, deflected,
inverted, etc. All which are properly and solely Congruent to Bodies or
Entities consisting of Matter? (8) But all these and many more as manifest
Incongruities and open Absurdities may be praevented by the assumption of the
more durable and satisfactory Hypothesis of Epicurus: for conceding the Visible
Species of Objects to be Substantial Effluxes, it can be no difficulty to solve
their Trajection, Impaction, Refraction, Reflection, Contraction, Diduction,
Inversion, etc.

Art. 10. The grand (...) of Alexander, that a continual Efflux of substance
must minorate the (...) of the most solid (...).
Nor is it oppugnable by the objection of any Dif^^culty more considerable, then
that so insultingly urged by Alexander the Peripatetick: quanam ratione fi^ri
possit, ut ex tot, tantisque effluentibus particulis, unumquodque
adspectabilium non celerit^r absumatur? How can it consist with reason, since
the Visible Species are praesumed to be substantial Effluviaes, that any the
most solid and large adspectable body should not in a short time be minorated*
(...) wholly exhausted by the continual deperdition of so many particles? ( in
Comment* in lib. de Sensu and Sensili, cap. 3. and Epist. 56. ad Dioscor.)

Which yet is not so ponderous, Art. 11. (...).
as not to be counterpoysed by these two Reasons, (1) (...), Accrescere ipsis
adspectabilibus advenientia ex opposito corpuscula alia; that the decay is
praevented by the apposition and accretion of other minute particles succeeding
into the rooms of the effluxed; so that how much of substance decedes from the
superficial parts of one body toward others, as much accedes to it by the
advent of the like Emanations from others, and thereupon ensues a plenary
Compensation. Nor can it diminish one grain of the weight of this solution, to
rejoyn; that the Figures of adspectables must then be changed: because the
substantial Effluxes which Accede, cannot be in point of Figure, Order, and
Position of parts exactly consimilar to those which Recede. For, though there
be a dissimilitude in Figure, betwixt the Deceding and Acceding particles; yet,
in so great a tenuity of particles, as we suppose in our substantial species,
that can produce no mutation of Figure in the object deprehensible by the
sense: for many things remain invariate to the eye, which are yet very much
changed as to Figure, in the judgment of the understanding; as may most
eminently be exemplified in the Change that every Age insensibly steals upon
the face of man. (2) (...), Tenuitatem simulachrorum esse omnem modum
excedentem, the Tenuity of these Emanant Images is Extreme^ and therefore the
uninterrupted Emission of them, even for many hundreds of years, can introduce
no sensible either mutation of Figure; or minoration of Quantity in the
superficies of the Emittent. Which Averrhoes (at least the Author of that Book,
Destructionis Destructionum, fathered upon him) had respect unto, when He said;
Neminem agniturum decrementum in Sole factum, tametsi ab eo circum deperierit
quantitas pa^mi, aut etiam major.

To approach some degrees nearer in our Comprehension to the almost
Incomprehensible TENUITY of these substantial Emanations, Art. 12. The (...) o^
Images (...) reduced to some (...)
that essence the Visible Images of Objects; Let us First, conceive them, with
Lucretius, to be, Quasi Membranae summo de Corpore rerum Dereptae, Certain
Excortications, or a kind of most thin Films, by the subtle fingers of Light,
stripped off from the superficial Extremes of Bodies; for Alexander himself calls
them (...), Pelliculae and Membranulae, and Apuleius Exuviae, because as the
slough or spoil of a Snake, is but a thin integument blancht off the new ^kin,
and yet representing the various Spots, Scales, Magnitude, Figure etc. thereof:
so likewise do the Visible Species, being mere Decortications, or Sloughs
blancht off from Bodies, carry an exact resemblance of all (...) and Colors in
the Exteriours thereof.

Secondly, assume the smallest of things Visible, Art. 13. (...).
the Foot of an Handworm, for the Object. For conceding the species Emanant
from it, which is deprehensible by a Microscope, to consist only of those
Atoms, which cohaering only Secundum La^^^a, and non (...), Laterally and not
Profound^^ constitute the (...) and then we cannot deny, that this species must
be by many (...) thinner th^n the Foot, or Object it (...).

Art. 14. By Exemp^^fying in the numerous round Films of Wax, successively
derep^ed from a Wax (...) by the flame thereof, in the space of an hour: and
Thirdly, Exemplify the ineffable Tenuity of these Excortications, in those
round Films of Wax that are successively lickt off by the Flame of a Tapour
accended. For, having supposed, that one inch of a Wax Candle may suffice to
maintain its flame, for the space of an hour: let us thus reason. Since the
Diminution of that inch, perpendicularly erected, is uncessant, i. e. that
there is no distinguishable moment of time, wherein there is not a distinct
round of Wax taken off the upper part thereof, by the depredatory activity of
the flame: how many must the Round Films of Wax be, that are successively
direpted? Certainly, as many as there are distinguishable points, or parts in
the 24 part of the Equator, or ambite of the Primum Mobile, successively
interjacent toward the Meridian. And if, in stead of that vast Heaven, the
Primum Mobile, you think it more convenient to assume the Terrestrial Globe
(whose Magnitude, in comparison of the other, amounts not above a point)
observe what may be thence inferred. Since, according to the supputation of
Snellius and Gassendus, the ambite of the Earth is commensurable by 26255
Italian miles; and the 24 part thereof makes 1094 miles, and so 1094000 paces,
and so 5470000 feet, each whereof is again subdivisible into 1000 sensible
parts: it follows, that as the product, or whole number of these parts in the
24 part of the Circumference of the Globe Terrestrial arises to 5470000000; so
likewise must the distinct membranules of Wax successive derepted from the inch
of Candle in the space of an hour fulfill the same high number of 5470000000.
And if so, pray how incomprehensible thin must each of them be?

Art. 15. In the innumerable Films of Oil, likewise successively delibrated, by
the flame of an Ellychnium, or Match, perpendicularly floating in a vessel of
equal capacity with Solomon's Bra^en Sea, in ^he space of 48 hours.
If this Example seem too gross to adumbrate the extreme Tenuity of our species;
be pleased to exchange the Wax Tapour of an inch diameter, for Solomon's Brazen
Sea, filled with oil, and an inch of Cotton Weeck perpendicularly immersed, and
at the upper extreme accensed, in the middle thereof. For, insomuch as the
Decrement of the oil in altitude must be uncessant, as is the exhausting
activity of the flame, there being no instant of time, wherein its diminution
is interrupted; and that, should the flame constantly adhaere to the Weeck for
48 hours, without extinction, the space of the oils descent from the margin of
the vessel could not in crassitude equal that of a piece of Lawn, or a Spiders
Web: certainly the number of Rounds of oil successively delibrated by the
flame, in that constitute time, must require a far greater number of Ciphers to
its Calculation. Which would you definitely know; it is but computing the
distinguishable points of time in 48 hours, during which the flame is supposed
to live, and you have your desire; and we ours, as to the conjectural
apprehension of the Tenuity of each of them.

Art. 16. By the Analogy betwixt an ^dorable and Visible Species.
Lastly, let us argue a simili, and guess at the Tenuity of a Visible, from that
of an Odorable Species. How many Aromaticks are there, that for many years
together, emit fragrant exhalations, that replenish a considerable space of the
ambient aer; and gratefully affect the nostrils of all persons, within the orb
of projection: and yet cannot, upon the exactest statick experiment, or
trutination of the Scate, be found to have amitted one grain of Quantity? Now
if we consider, how Crass the Emanation of an Aromatic, or an odorous
Anathymiasis, is comparatively to the substance of a Visible Species (for no
meaner a Philosopher then Gassendus, whose name sounds all the Liberal
Sciences, has conceived; that the Visible Images effluxing from an Apple in a
whole year, if all cast into one bulk, would not exceed that of the odorous
vapor exhaled from it in one moment) we shall not gainsay, but a solid Body
may constantly maintain an Emanation of its Images Visible, for many hundreds
of years, from its superficial parts, without any sensible abatement of
Quantity, or variation of Figure. To which we shall superadd only this; that
should we allow these substantial Effluxes, that are supposed to constitute the
Visible Species, to amount in many hundred years, to a mass deprehensible by
sense, in case the collection of them all into one were possible: yet would it
be so small, as to elude the exactest observation of man; for, who that has
perchance weighed a piece of Marble, or Gold, and set down the praecise gravity
thereof in his life time, can obtain a parrol from the grave and return to
complete his experiment; after the deflux of so many Ages, as are required to
fulfill the sensibility of its minoration?

Concerning the THIRD, Art. 7. The Manner and Reason of the Production of
visible Images; according to the hypothesis of Epicurus.
viz. the PRODUCTION of Species Visible; Epicurus Text may be fully illustrated
by this Exposition. That a solid Body, so long as environed with a rare or
permeable space, may be conceived without Alogie, freely to emit its Images:
because it has Atoms ready in the superfice, that being actuated by their
coessential motive Faculty, uncessantly attempt their Emancipation, or
Abduction; and those so exile, that the Ambient cannot impede their Emanation.
(2) That in regard they conserve the Delineations both of the Depressed and
Eminent parts in the superfice of the Antitype, or Object, after their Efflux
therefrom: therefore do the Images deceding from it become Configurate of Atoms
cohaerently exhaling in the same Order and Position that they held among
themselves, during their Contiguity, or Adhaesion. Which also satisfies for the
praesumed mere superficiality, i. e. Improfundity of the species: because it is
deraded only from the Extremities of the Object. (3) That, forasmuch as no
Cause can be alleged, why the particles of the Image should, in their progress
through a pervious medium to considerable distance, be deturbed or discomposed
from that Contexture, or order and situation, which they obtained from the
Cortex or outward Film of their solid original: therefore do they invariately
hold the same Configuration, until their arrival at the eye. Which to
familiarize, we are to reflect upon a position or two formerly conceded, viz.
that Atoms are, by the impulse of their ingenite Motion, variously agitated
even in Concretions most compact; and yet cannot without difficulty expede
themselves from the Interior or Central parts, because of their mutual
Revinction, or Complication: but for those in the Exterior or superficial
parts, they may, upon the least evolution disingage themselves, having no Atoms
without to depress, but many within to express or impel them. (4) That, since
the Motion of all Atoms, when at liberty to pursue the Tendency of their Motive
Faculty, is Aequivelox: hence is it, that those Atoms which exhale from the
Cavities or Deprest parts of the superficies of any Concretion, and those which
exhale from the Prominencies, or Eminent Parts, are transferred together in
that order, that they touch not, nor crowd each other, but observe the same
distance and decorum, that they had in their Contiguity to, and immediate
separation from the superficies. So that the Antecedent Atoms cannot be
overtaken, or praevented by the Consequent: nor those farther outstrip these,
then at the first start. (5) That the Emanation of Visible Images is Continent,
i. e. that one succeeds on the heels of another, jugi quodam Fluore, in a
continued stream more swiftly then that thought can distinguish any
intermediate distance. So that, as in the Exsilition of Water from the Cock of
a Cistern perpetually supplied by a Fountain, the parts thereof so closely
succeed each other, as to make one Continued stream, without any interruption
observable: are we to conceive the Efflux of Images to be so Continent, that
the Consequent press upon the neck of the Antecedent so contiguously, as the
Eye can deprehend no Discontinuity, nor the Mind discern any Interstice in
their Flux. And this ushers us to the reason, why Apuleius, discoursing in the
Dialect of Epicurus, says, Profectas a nobis Imagines, velut quasdam exuvias
jugifluore manare. (6) And lastly, that a Visible Image does not so constantly
retain its Figure, and Colors, as not to be subject to Mutilation and
Confusion, if the interval betwixt its original and the eye be immoderately
large: as may be exemplified in the species of a square Tower, which by a long
trajection through the aer, has its Angles retused, so that it enters the eye
in a Cylindrical Figure. This Epicurus expressly admitted in his (...), confusam
interdum evadere imaginem. Which ought to be interpreted not only of the
detriment sustained in its long progress through the Medium, but also of that
which may arise from some perturbation caused in the superfice of the Exhalant.

Art. 18. The Celerity of the Moti^n of visible Images, reasoned; and compared
to that of the Light of the Sun.
Concerning the FOURTH, viz. the CELERITY of their Motion; this will Epicurus
have to be (...), Inexsuperabilem, swift in the highest degree: and his Reason
is, because such is the Pernicity of Atoms, when enfranchised from Concretions,
and upon the Wings of their Gravity. Lucretius most appositely compares the
Celerity of Images in their Trajection, to that of the beams of the Sun, which
from the body thereof are darted to the superfice of the Earth in an instant,
or so small a part of time, as none can be supposed less. And this we may
clearly comprehend, if we observe that moment when the Sun begins its Emergency
from the Discuss of the Moon, in an Eclipse; for in the same moment, we may
discern the Image of its cleared limbus, appearing in a vessel of Water,
respectively situate.

Art. 19. The Translation of a moveable from place to place, in an indivisible
p^int of time, impossible: and why?
And yet we say, the Celerity of their Trajection, not, with the Vulgar, the
Instantaneous Motion: because we conceive it impossible, that any Moveable
should be transferred to a distant place, in an indivisible moment, but in some
space of time, though so short as to be imperceptible; because the Medium has
parts so successively ranged, that the remote cannot be pervaded before the
vicine.

Art. 20. The Facility of the Abdu^tion, or A^olation of Images Visible, from
solid Concretions; solved by the Spontaneous E^silition of their superficial
Atoms: and the Solicitation of Light, incident upon them.
And thus have we concisely Commented upon the 4 Consider ables comprehended in
the Text of Epicurus, touching Apostatical Images Visible; and thereupon
accumulated those Reasons, which justify our praelation of this His Opinion,
to that not only less probable, but manifestly impossible one of the
Aristoteleans: so that there seems to us only one Consideration more requirable
to complete its Verisimility, and that is touching the FACILITY of the
ABDUCTION of Visible Images from solids.

We confess, that Epicurus supposition, of the spontaneous Evolution and
consequent Avolation of Atoms from the extremes of solid Concretions; is not
alone extensible to the solution of this Difficulty: and therefore we must
lengthen it out with that consentaneous Position of Gassendus (de apparente
magnitudine solis humilis and sublimis, Epist. 2. page 24.) Lucem sollicitare
species, that Light does solicit and more then excite the Visible species of
Objects, as well by agitating the superficial Atoms of Concretions, as by
Carrying them off in the arms of its reflected rays. For, that Light is
intinged not only with Colors, which it pervades, but also with those, which
it only superficially touches upon, provided the Colorate body be compact
enough to repercuss it; all opace and speculary bodies, on which its beams are
either trajectly, or reflextly impinged, sensibly demonstrate. And though it
may be objected, that the solicitation of Light is not necessary to the
Dereption, or Abduction of Images Visible; because it is generally praesumed,
that they continually Emane from Objects, and so as well in the thickest
Darkness, as in the Meridian light: it must notwithstanding be confessed, that
they are unprofitable to Vision, unless when they proceed from an object
Illustrate; and consequently that they flow hand in hand with the particles of
Light reflected from it superfice. Which truly is the reason why the Eye that
is posited in the dark does well discern Objects posited in the Light; but that
which is in the light has no perception at all of objects in the dark.

And therefore whosoever shall affirm, Art. 21. That Objects do not emit t^^ir
Visible Images, but when Illustrated: a Conceit though paradoxic^l, yet not
improbable.
that Visible Species are not Emitted from bodies, unless Light strike upon
them, and being repercussed, carry their superficial Atoms, which constitute
the Visible Species, off from them, in direct lines toward the eye: though He
may perhaps want a Demonstration, yet not the evidence of Experience and
probability, to credit his Paradox. Nor is there, why we should opinion, that
only the Primary, or first incident Light is reflected; because Light emaneth
from the Lucid, in a continued Fluor, so that the praecedent particles are
still contiguously pursued by the consequent: and hence is it that Light is
capable of repercussions even to infinity, if solid and impervious bodies could
be so disposed, as that the first opposed might repercuss it on the second, the
second reflect it to the third, the third to the fourth, etc. successively, so
long as the Fluor should be continued, and no Eclipse intervene. For, the
reason, why Light, formerly diffused, does immediately disappear, upon the
intervention of any body, that intersects it stream; is really the same with
that, wherefore Water exsilient from the Tube of a Cistern, in an arched
stream, does immediately droop and fall perpendicularly, upon the shutting of
the Cock: the successive flux of those parts of Water, which, by a close and
forceable pressure on the back of the praecedent, maintained the Arcuation of
the stream, being thereby praevented, and the effluxed committed to the
tendency of their Gravity. And the reason, why by the mediation of a small
remainder of light, after the intersection of its fluor from the Lucid
fountain, we have an imperfect and obscure discernment of objects; is no more
then this: that only a few rays, here and there one, are incident upon and so
reflected from the superfice thereof, having touched upon only a few scattered
particles, and left the greater number untoucht; which therefore remain
unperceived by the eye, because there wanted Light sufficient to the
illustration of the whole, and so to the Excitement and Emission of a perfect
species.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. Visible Images Systatical, described; and distinguished from
Apostatical ones
THere is yet a second sort of Images Visible, which though consistent of the
same Materials with the Former; are yet different in the reason of their
production, according to the theory of Epicurus. For, as the former are
perfectly substantial, being Corporeal Effluviaes, by a kind of Dereption as it
were blancht from the Extremes of Concretions: so likewise are these of the
second Genus, perfectly substantial, being certain Concrements or
Coagmentations of Atoms in the aer, representing the shapes of Men, Beasts,
Trees, Castles, Armies, etc. not caused by an immediate Dereption from such
solid Prototypes, but a SPONTANEOUS convention and cohaesion of convenient
particles. So that if we only call them, Spontaneous Systatical
Representations; we shall not only import the Disparity of their Creation to
that of the Derepted Apostatical ones, but also afford a glimpse of their
abstruse Nature. Of these, all that can be brought to lie in lines parallel to
our praesent Theorem, does concern only their Existence: and that may be
evicted by the conspiring testimonies of many Authors, whose pens were not dipped
in the fading ink of mere Tradition, nor their minds deluded with the
affectation of Fabulous Wonders. Among which our leisure will extend to the
quotation of only Two, most pertinent and significant.

Art. 2. Their Existence assured, by the testimony of Diodorus Siculus: and
Diodorus Siculus (lib. 3.) speaking of certain Spectraes; spontaneously
conceited, and at set seasons of the year exhibiting themselves to Travelers
in the regions of Africa, beyond the Quicksands and Cyrene; says thus: (...);
Quandoque, ac praesertim vigente tranquillitate aeris, conspiciuntur per aerem
Concrementa quaedam, forma^ Animalium omnis generis referentia. Ipsorum
nonnulla quiet se habent, nonnulla vero motionem subeunt. Quinetiam interdum
insequentes fugiant, interdum fugientes insequuntur, etc.

Art. 3. Damascius, together with the Autopsy of Kircher.
And Damascius (in Vita Isidori Philosophi, apud Photium) declaring the common
report about that memorable (...), or Prodious Aereal Representation, annually
beheld in the lower region of the aer, imminent upon that arm of the Adriatic
Sea, that runs up betwixt Messana in Sicily, and Rhegium Julium in Calabria;
delivers it thus: Nostra tempestate narrarunt homines bonae fidei, juxta
Siciliam in campo nominato Tetrapyrgio, and in aliis non paucis locis, videri
Equitum pugnantium sin ulacra; idque maxim aestatis tempore, cum ardentissimus
est meridies; etc. Concerning the verity of this report, the most Curious
Athanasius Kircherus having some doubt; purposely takes a long journey from
Rome to Messana and thence crosses over to Rhegium, at the opportune time for
its observation. Where what He beheld, and by what Physical reasons he solved
the wonderment; we have thought worthy your patient notice, to extract from his
excellent discourse thereupon ( in cap. 1. Magiae Parastaticae, parastasi 1.
Naturae.)

MORGANA RHEGINORUM.
In the midst of Summer, Art. 4. Kirchers Description of that famous Apparition
at Rhegium, called Morgana Rheginorum: and
when the Sun boyls the Tyrrhene Ocean with most fervent rays, then is it,
that wanton Nature entertains the wondering eyes of the inhabitants of Rhegium,
a Town in Calabria most ancient and no less famous for having been the seat of
many Philosophers, with a prodigious spectacle in the aer. There may you,
whether with more delight, or wonder, is not soon determined, behold a spacious
Theater in the vaporous aer, adorned with great variety of Scenes, and
Catoptrick representations; the Images of Castles, Palaces, and other Buildings
of excellent architecture, with sundry ranges of Pillars, praesented according
to the rules of Perspective. This Scene withdrawn, upon the sailing by of the
Cloud, there succeeds another, wherein, by way of exquisite Landscape, were
exhibited spacious Woods, Groves of Cypress, Orchards with variety of trees,
but those artificially planted in Uniform rows like a perfect Phalanx, large
Meadows, with companies of men, and herds of beasts walking, feeding, and
couching upon them: and all these with so great variety of respondent Colors,
so admirable a commixture of Light and Darkness, and all their motions and
gestures counterfeited so to the life, that to draw a Landscape of equal
perfection seems impossible to human industry.

It may well be conceived, though not easily expressed, Art. 5. Most ingenious
Investigation of the Causes thereof.
how much this Parastatical Phantasm (which the Inhabitants of Rhegium call
Morgana) has excruciated the greatest Wits of Italy, while they labored to
explore a reason for the appearance of such things in the Cloud, as were not
found either on the shore, or adjacent fields. This much increased the ardor of
Curiosity in me, so that crossing over from Messana to Rhegium, at the usual
time of the Apparition, I examined all the Circumstances thereof, together with
the situation of the place, the nature and propriety of the soil, and the
constitution of the vapors arising from the Sea: and examining my observations
by Physical and Optical reasons, I soon detected the Causes of the whole
Phenomenon. First I observed the Mountain called Tinna, on the Sicilian side,
directly confronting Rhegium, to run along in a duskish obscure tract upon
Pelorus; and the shores subjacent, as also the bottom of the Sea, to be covered
with shining sand, being the fragments of Selenites, Antimony, and other
pellucid Concretions, devolved from the eminent parts of the land, the
contiguous Hills, that are richly fraught with veins of those Minerals. Then I
observed that these translucid sands, being, together with vapors from the Sea
and Shore, exhaled into the aer, by the intense fervor of the Sun; did coalesce
into a Cloud, in all points respondent to a perfect Polyedrical, or Multangular
Looking-glass: the various superficies of the resplendent Granules, making a
multiplication of the species; and that these, being opacated behind by crass
and impervious vapors, directly facing the Mountains, did make reflection of
the various Images of objects respective to their various positions to the eye.
The several Rows of Pillars in the aereal Scene are caused by one single
Pillar, erected on the Shore; for being by a manifold reflection from the
various superficies of the tralucent particles, opacated on the hinder part by
dense Vapors, in the speculary Meteor, it is multiplied even to infinity. No
otherwise then as one single Image, posited betwixt two polyedrical
Looking-glasses, confrontingly disposed, is so often repercussed or reflected
from superfice to superfice, that it exhibiteth to the eye almost an infinite
multitude of Images exactly consimilar. Thus also does one man standing on the
shore, become a whole Army in the Cloud; one Beast, a whole Herd, and one Tree
a thick-set Grove. As for the vanishing of this first Scene, and the succession
of a second, adorned with the representations of Castles, and other magnificent
structures; the Cause hereof is this: since the eye of the Spectator has its
sight variously terminated in the several speculary superficies of the Cloud,
that is in perpetual motion according to the impulse of the Wind; it comes to
pass, that according to the rules of the Angles of Incidence and Reflection,
diverse Species are beheld under the same constitute Angle, and as the speculary
Vapor does reflect them toward the eye, which diverse species are projected
from objects conveniently situate; and particularly from the Castle on the
ascent toward Rhegium from the place of our prospect.

Some, perhaps, may judge our affirmation, of the Elevation of those shining
Grains of Vitreous Minerals into the aer, by the mere attraction of the Sun;
and the Coalition of them there with the Cloud of Vapors: to be too large a
morsel, to be swallowed by any throat, but that Cormorant one of Credulity. If
so, all we require of them, is only to consider; that Hairs, Straws, grains of
Sand, fragments of Wood, and such like Festucous Bodies, are frequently found
immured in Hailstones: which doubtless, are sufficient arguments, that those
things were first elevated by the beams of the Sun, recoyling from the earth,
into the middle region of the aer, and there coagmentated with the vapors
condensed into a Cloud, and frozen in its descent.

Now this solution of the Morgana, acquires the more of Certitude and Auctority
from hence; Art. 6. His admirable Artifice, for the exhibition of the like
a^real Representation, in Imitation of Nature.
that in imitation of this Natural Prodigious Ostent, or Aereal Representation,
Kircher invented a way of exhibiting an Artificial one, by the Fragments of
Glass, Selenites, Antimony, etc. stewed in an iron trough, and vapors
ascending from Water superaffused, and terminated by a black Curtain
superextended. The full description of which Artifice, He has made the Subject
of his 2. parastasis in Magia Parastat. cap. 1.

CHAP. III. CONCERNING THE MANNER and REASON OF VISION.
SECT. I.
AMong the many different Conceptions of Philosophers, both Ancient and Modern,
touching the Manner and Reason of the Discernment of the Magnitude, Figure,
etc. of Visible Objects by the Visive Faculty in the Eye; the most Considerable
are these.

(1) The STOICS affirmed, Art. 1. The Reason of Vision, according to the
opinion of the Stoics.
that certain Visory Rays deradiated from the brain, through the slender
perforations of the Optic Nerves, into the eye, and from thence in a continued
fluor to the object; do, by a kind of Procusion, and Compression, dispose the
whole Aer intermediate in a direct line, into a Cone, whose Point consists in
the superfice of the Eye, and Base in the superfice of the Object. And that, as
the Hand by the mediation of a staff, imposed on a body, does, according to the
degrees of resistance made thereby either directly, or laterally, deprehend the
Tactile Qualities thereof, i. e. whether it be Hard, or Soft, Smooth or Rough,
whether it be Clay, or Wood, Iron, or Stone, Cloth, or Leather, etc. So
likewise does the Eye, by the mediation of this Aereal staff, discern whether
the Adspectable Object, on which the Basis of it rests, be White or Black,
Green or Red, Symetrical or Asymetrical in the Figure of its parts, and
consequently Beautiful or Deformed.

Art. 2. Of Aristotle.
(2) ARISTOTLE, though his judgment never acquiesced in any one point, as to
this particular, does yet seem to have most constantly inclined to this; that
the Color of the Visible does move the Perspicuum actu, i. e. that Illustrate
Nature in the Aer, Water, or any other (...), Transparent body; and that, by
reason of its Continuity from the extremes of the Object to the Eye, does move
the Eye, and by the mediation thereof the Internal Sensorium or Visive Faculty,
and so inform it of the visible Qualities thereof. So that, according to the
Descant of those, who pretend to be his most faithful Interpreters, we may
understand Him, to have imagined the Color of the object to be as it were the
Hand; the diaphanous Medium as it were the Staff; and the Eye as it were the
Body on which it is imposed and impressed: e diametro opposite to the conceit of
the Stoics, who suppose the Eye to supply the place of the Hand; the Aer to
analogize the Staff; and the Object to respond to the Body on which it is
imposed and impressed.

Art. 3. O the Phythagoreans.
(3) The PYTHAGOREANS determined the reason of Vision on the Reflection of the
Visive Rays, in a continued stream emitted from the internal Eye, to the
visible, back again into the eye; or, more plainly, that the radious Emanations
from the Eye, arriving at the superfice of the object, are thereby immediately
Repercussed in an uninterrupted stream home again to the eye, in their return
bringing along with them a perfect representation thereof, as to Color, Figure
and Magnitude.

Art. 4. Of Empedocles.
(4) EMPEDOCLES, though admitting (as we hinted in the next praeceding Chapter)
substantial Effluxes, from the Visible to the Organ of Sight; does also assume
the Emission of certain Igneous or Lucid Spirits from the Organ to the Object:
supposing the Eye to be a kind of Glass Lantern, illustrate, and illustrating
the Visible, by its own Light.

Art. 5. Of Plato.
(5) PLATO, though He likewise avouched the Emanation of Corporeal Effluviaes
from the Object; does not yet allow them to arrive quite home at the Eye: but
will have them to be met half way by rays of Light extramitted from the Eye:
and that these two streams of External and Internal Light encountering with some
Renitency reciprocal, do recoyl each from other, and the stream of Internal
Light resilient back into the eye, does communicate unto it that particular
kind of Impression, which it received from the stream of Extradvenient Light,
in the encounter; and so the Sentient Faculty comes to perceive the adspectable
Form of the object, at which the Radius of Internal Light is levelled. This we
judge to be sense of his words (in Timaeo, circa finem tertiae partis)
Simulachrorum, quae vel in speculis oboriuntur, vel in perspicua, laevique
cernuntur superficie; facilis assecutio est. Nam ex utriusque ignis, tam
intimi, quam extra positi Communione, ejusque rursus consensu, and congruentia,
qui passim terso, laevique corpori accommodatus est; necessari^ haec omnia
oriuntur, quam ignis oculorum cum eo igne, qui est e conspecto effusus, circa
laeve nitidumque Corpus sese confundit.

Art. 6. O Epicurus.
(6) EPICURUS, tacitly subverting all these, foundeth the Reason of Vision, not
in any Action of the intermediate Aer, as the Stoics and Aristotle; nor in any
Radious Emanation from the Eye to or toward the Object, as the Pythagoreans,
Empedocles, and Plato: but, in the Derivation of a substantial Efflux from the
Object to the Eye.

(7) And as for the opinion of the excellent Monsieur Des Carts, Art. 7. Of
Mons. Des Carts.
which with a kind of pleasant violence, has so ravished the assent of most of
the Students of Physiology, in the praesent Age, especially such as affect the
accommodation of Mechanic Maxims to the sensible operations of Nature; that
their minds abhor the embraces of any other: those, who have not heedfully
perused his Dioptricks, may fully comprehend it in summary, thus.

For Sensation in Common, He defines it to be a simple Perception, whereby a
certain Motion, derived from a body conveniently objected, communicated, by
Impression, to the small Fibers, or Capillary Filaments of a Nerve, and by
those, in regard of their Continuity, transmitted to the Tribunal, or
Judicatory Seat of the Soul, or Mind (which He supposes to be the Glandula
Pinealis, in the center of the Brain) and there distinctly apprehended, or
judged of. So that the Diverse Motions impressed upon the slender threads of any
Nerve, are sufficient to the Causation of diverse perceptions; or, that we may
not eclipse his notion by the obscurity of our Expression, that the Impulse, or
stroke given to the Nerve, does, by reason of the Continuity of its parts,
cause another Motion, in all points answerable to the first received by the
External Organ, to be carried quite home to the Throne of the Mind, which
instantly makes a respective judgment concerning the Nature of the Object, from
whence that particular Motion was derived. In a word, that only by the Variety
of Strokes given to the External Organ, thence to the filaments of the Nerve
annexed thereto, thence to the Praesence Chamber of the Soul: we are informed
of the particular Qualities, and Conditions of every Sensible; the variety of
these sensory Motions being dependent on the variety of Qualities in the
Object, and the variety of judgments dependent on the variety of Motions
communicate.

And for the sense of Seeing, in special; He conceives it to be made, not by
the mediation of Images, but of certain Motions (whereof the Images are
composed) transmitted through the Eye and Optic Nerve to the Centrals of the
Brain: praesuming the Visible Image of an Object to be only an exact
representation of the motions thereby impressed upon the External Sensorium;
and accordingly determining the Reason of the Minds actual Discernment of the
Color, Situation, Distance, Magnitude, and Figure of a Visible, by the
Instruments of Sight, to be this. (1) The Light desilient from the adspectable
Body, in a direct line, called by the Masters of the Optics, the Axe of
Vision, percusseth the diaphanous fluid Medium, the Ether, or most subtle
substance (by Him assumed to extend in a Continuate Fluor through the Universe,
and so to maintain an absolute Plenitude, and Continuity of Parts therein.) (2)
The Ether thus percussed by the Illuminant, serving as a Medium betwixt the
Object and the Eye; conveyeth the impression through the outward Membranes and
Humors, destined to Refraction, to the Optic Nerve most delicately expansed
into the Retina Tunica, beyond the Chrystalline. (3) The Motion thus impressed on
the outward Extreme of the Optic Nerve, runs along the body of it to the
inward Extreme, determined in the substance of the Brain. (4) The Brain
receiving the impression, immediately gives notice thereof to its Noble Tenent,
the Soul; which by the Quality of the stroke judges of the Quality of the
Striker, or Object. In some proportion like an Exquisite Musician, who by the
tone of the sound thereby created, does judge what Cord in a Virginal was
struck, what jack struck that string, and what force the jack was moved
withal, whether great, mean, or small, slow or quick, equal or unequal, tense
or lax, etc.

Art. 8. The i^genuity of (...) Conceit, acknowledged: but the solidity
^^dubitated
This you will say, is a Conceit of singular Plausibility, invented by a Wit
transcendently acute, adorned with the elegant dress of most proper and
significant Terms, illustrate with apposite similes and praegnant Examples,
and disposed into a Method most advantageous for persuasion; and we should
betray our selves into the Censure of being exceedingly either stupid, or
malicious, should we not say so too: but yet we dare not (so sacred is the
interest of Truth) allow it to be more then singularly Plausible; since those
Arguments, wherewith the sage Digby (in the ^2. chap. of His Treatise of
Bodies) has long since impugned it, are so exceedingly praeponderant, as to
overbalance it by more then many moments of Reason; nor could Des Carts
himself, were He now Unglorified, satisfy for his Non-Retractation of this
Error; after his examination of their Validity, by any more hopeful Excuse,
then this; that no other opinion could have been consistent to His Cardinal
Scope of Solving all the Operations of Sense by Mechanic Principles.

Now, of all these Opinions recited, we can find, after mature and aequitable
examination, Art. 9. The Opinion of Epicurus, more satisfactory, then any
other: because more Rational, and less obnoxious to inexplicable Difficulties.
none that seems, either grounded on so much Reason, or attended with so few
Difficulties, or so sufficient to the verisimilous Explanation of all the
Problems, concerning the Manner of Vision, as that of Epicurus; which stateth
the Reason of Vision in the INCURSION of substantial Images into the Eye. We say

FIRST, Grounded on so much Reason. For, insomuch as it is indisputable, that
in the act of Vision there is a certain Sigillation of the figure and color of
the object, made upon that part of the Eye, wherein the Perception is; and this
sigillation cannot be conceived to be effected otherwise then by an Impression;
nor that Impression be conceived to be made, but by way of Incursion of the
Image, or Type: it is a clear Consequence, that to admit a Sigillation without
Impression, and an Impression without Incursion of the Image, is a manifest
Alogy, an open Inconsistence. And upon this consideration is it, that we have
judged Epicurus to have shot nearest the White, in his Position that Vision is
performed, (...), per simula* chrorum Incursionem, sive Incidentiam: which
Agellius (lib. 5. cap. 16.) descanting upon, says expressly, Epicurus affluere
semper ex omnibus corporibus simulachra quaedam ipsorum, eaque sese in oculos
infer, atque ita fieri sensum videndi putat.

SECONDLY, Encumbred with so few Difficulties. For, of all that have been
hitherto, either by Alexander (2. de Anima 34.) Macrobius (7. Saturnal. 14.)
Galen (lib. 7. de Consensu in Platonicis, Hippocraticisque Decretis) or any
other Author, whose leaves we have revolved, objected against it; we find only
Two, that require a profound exercise of the Intellect to their Solution: and
they are these.

(1) Obvious it is even to sense, Art. 10. The Two most considerable
Difficulties opposed to Epicurus position, of the Incursion of Substantial
Images into the Eye.
that every Species Visible is wholly in the whole space of the Medium, and
wholly in every part thereof; since in what part soever of the Medium, the Eye
shall be admoved, in a position convenient, it shall behold the whole object,
represented by the species: and manifest it is, that to be total in the total
Space, and total in every part thereof, is an Affection proper only to
Incorporeals; therefore cannot Vision be made by Corporeal Images incurrent
into the Eye.

(2) In the intermediate Aer are coexistent the Images of many, nay innumerable
Objects; which seems impossible, unless those Images are praesumed to be
Incorporeal: because many Bodies cannot coexist in one and the same place,
without reciprocal penetration of Dimensions, Ergo, etc.

SECT. II.
TO dispel these Clouds, that have so long eclipsed the splendour of Epicurus
Assertion, of the Incidence of Images Visible into the Eye (for we shall not
here dispute, whether he intended the sigillation to be made in that Unequal
Speculum, the Chrystalline Humor; or that Concave one, the Retina Tunica) and
explicate the abstruse nature of Vision: we ask leave to possess you with
certain necessary Propositions: We assume therefore,

Assumption the First.
That the superfice of no Visible is so exquisitely smooth, polite, or equal,
Art. 1. That the superfice of nobody is perfectly smooth: evicted by solid
Reas^n, and Aut^psie.
as not to contain various Inaequalities, i. e. Protuberant and Deprest parts,
or certain (Monticuli and Valleculae) small Risings and Fallings: which in some
bodies being either larger, or more, are discoverable by the naked intuition of
the Eye; and in others, either smaller, or fewer, require the detection of the
Microscope.

This is neither Praecarious, nor Conjectural: but warranted by Reason, and
autoptical Demonstration. For, if the object assumed be polisht Marble; since
that apparent Tersness in the surface thereof is introduced by the detrition of
its grosser inaequalities by Sand, and that Sand is nothing but a multitude of
Polyedrical solid Grains, by the acuteness and hardness of their Angles cutting
and derasing the more friable particles of the Marble: it must follow, that
each of the grains of Sand must leave an impression of its edge, and so that
the whole superfice must become scarified by innumerable small incisions,
variously decussating and intersecting each other. If Steel of a speculary
smoothness, such as our common Chalybeat Mirrours; since the Tersness thereof
is artificial, caused by the affriction of Files, which cut only by the
acuteness of their teeth, or lineal inaequalities: it is not easy to admit,
that they leave no scratches, or exarations on the surface thereof; and where
are many Incisions, each whereof must in Latitude respond to the thickness of
the Tooth in the File, that made it, there also must be as many Eminences or
small Ridges intercepted among them. And if Glass* whose smoothness seems
superlative; since it is composed of Sand and Salts, not so perfectly dissolved
by liquation, as not to retain various Angles: it cannot be unreasonable to
infer, that those remaining points or angular parts must render the
Composition in its exteriors full of Asperities. And, as for Autoptical
Evidence; that Marble, Steel, and Glass are unequal in their superfice, is
undeniable not only from hence, that a good Engyscope, in a convenient light,
does discover innumerable rugosities and Cavities in the most polisht superfice
of either: but also from hence, that Spiders and Flies do ordinarily run up and
down perpendicularly on Venice Glass, which they could not do, if there were
not in the surface thereof many small Cavities, or Fastnings for the reception
of the Uncinulae, or Hooks of their Feet. To which may also be added, the
Humectation of Glass by any Liquor affused; for, if there were no Fosses and
Prominences in the superfice thereof, whereon the Hamous particles of the
Liquid might be fastened, it would instantly run off without leaving the least
of moisture behind. And hence

Assumption the Second.
Art. 2. That the visible Image does consist of so many Rays as there are
Points designable in the whole superfice of the object: and that each Ray has
its line of Tendency direct, respective to the face of that particle in the
superfice, from which it is emitted.
That as the whole Visible Image does emane from the whole superfice of the
object; so do all the parts thereof emane from all the parts of the Object: i.
e. that look how many Atoms are designable in the superfice, from so many
points thereof do Atoms exhale, which being contiguously pursued by others and
others successively deceding, make continued Rays, in direct lines tending
thitherward, whither the faces of the particles point, from which they are
deradiated.

For, insomuch as in the superfice no particle can be so minute to the sense,
as, in respect to the Asperity, or Inaequality of its surface, not to have
various Faces, by which to respect various parts of the Medium: it must
inevitably follow, that all the rays effluxed from an object, do not tend one
and the same way, but are variously trajected through the Medium, some upward,
others downward, some to the right, others to the left, some obversly or
toward, others aversly or fromward, etc. So that there is no region or point of
the compass designable, to which some rays are not direct. And from this
branch shoots forth our

Third Assumption.
Art. 3. That the Density and Union of the Rays, composing the visible Image,
is greater or less; according to their less, or greater Elongation from the
Object.
That every visible Image is then most Dense and United, when it is first
abduced from the Object: or, that by how much the nearer the visible Species is
to the Body, from which it is delibrated, by so much the more Dense and United
are the rays of which it does consist; and so much the more Rare or
Disgregate, by how much the farther it is removed from it. This may be
exemplified in lines drawn from the Center of a Circle to the Circumference;
for by how much the farther they run from the Center, by so much the greater
space is intercepted betwixt them: and by how much the larger space is
intercepted betwixt them, by so much the greater must their Rarity be, the
degrees of Rarity being determinable by the degrees of intercepted space. Thus
also must the rays of the Visible Image, in their progress mutually recede
each from other, and according to the more or less of their Elongation from the
point of abduction, become more or less Rare and scattered, into the amplitude
of the Medium. However, we deny not the necessity of their innumerable
Decussations, and Intersections; in respect to the various Faces, and
Confrontings of the parts of the superfice, from which they are emitted. And
hence we extracted our

Fourth Assumption. Art. 4. That the Visible Image is neither total in the
total medium; nor total in every part thereof: but so manifold as are the parts
of the medium from which the obj^ct is discernable. Contrary to the
Aristoteleans.

That the Visible Image, though really diffused through the space of the medium
within the sphere of Projection; is notwithstanding neither total in the total
space, nor total in every part thereof, as is supposed in the First Objection:
but so Manifold, as there are parts of the Medium, from which the Object is
adspectable.

Here may we introduce a Paradox, which yet does not want a considerable
proportion of Verisimilitude to justify the sobriety and acuteness of his Wit,
that first started it; which is, That of diverse men, at the same time,
speculating the same object, no one does behold the same parts thereof, that
are beheld by another: nay more, that no man can see the same parts of an
Object, Art. 5. PARADOX*

That no man can see the same particle of an object, with both Eyes at once;
nay, not with the same Eye, if the level of its Visive Axe be changed


with both eyes at once; nay more, not the same parts with the same eye, if he
remove it never so little, because the level of the Visive Axe is varied. This
may be verified by a single reflection on the Cause hereof, which is the
Inequality, or Asperity of the superfice of Bodies, seemingly most polite: for,
in respect of that, it is of necessity, that various Rays, proceeding from the
various parts thereof, variously convene in the parts of the Medium; and
insomuch as each of those rays does represent that particle only, from which
it was effused, and no other, in their concurse they cannot but represent other
and other parts, according to the respective places or regions of the Medium,
in which the Eye is posited, that receives them. However, we shall familiarize
it by Example. Let two men at once behold a Third, one before, the other
behind: and both may be said to behold the same man, but, truly, not the same
parts of him; because the eyes of one are obverted to his Anterior, and those
of the other to his Posterior parts. Take it yet one note higher. Let the Face
of a man be the Object, on which though diverse persons gaze at the same time,
one on the right a second on the left side, a third confrontingly, a fourth and
a fifth obliquely betwixt the other three; and all may be said to have an equal
prospect of the face: yet can it not be asserted, that they do all see the same
parts thereof, but each a particular part. Whence it may be inferred, that
albeit we may allow them all to behold his Forehead, Eyes, Nose, Cheeks,
Mouth, etc. yet can we not allow them all to see the same parts of Forehead,
Eyes, Nose, Cheeks, etc. because of their unequal situation, which Causes that
the whole species prodient from the face, does not tend into the whole medium,
but into various parts of it, respective to the various faces of the deradiant
parts. Moreover, because this praesumed Inaequality is not competent only to
the greater parts of the face, such as the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Chin, etc. but as
justly considerable in the very Skin, which has no designable place, wherein
are not many smaller and smaller Eminencies and Depressions, deprehensible (if
not by the Optics of the body, yet) by the ac^es of the Mind: hence is, that
having imagined the Eyes of the Five Spectators to move their visive Axes from
part to part successively, and as slowly as the shadow of the Gnomon steals
over the parts of a Dial, until they have ranged over the whole face; we may
comprehend the necessity, of the discovery of a fresh part by every new aim or
level of each eye, and the baulking of others; as if in Particles of devex
Figure, no Particels can be detected a new, but as many of those formerly
discerned must be lost, and as many, nay more remain concealed.

Art. 6. CONSECTARY.

That the Medium is not possessed with one simple Image; but by an Aggregate of
innumerable Images, deradiate from the same object: all which notwithstanding
constitute but one entire Image.


And this Consideration smoothly ushers in two Consectaries

(1) That to say, one simple species does replenish the whole Medium, is not,
in the strict Dialect of Reason, so proper, as to say, the Medium is possessed
by an Aggeries, or Convention of innumerable species: which being diverse in
respect to the diverse parts of the Object, from which they were deradiated,
must also be diverse in their Existence, and Diffusion through the several parts
of the Perspicuum. And yet must they be allowed to constitute but one entire
species; and this in respect to their Emanation from one Object: because as the
single parts of the species represent the single parts of the object, so does
the whole of the species represent the whole of the Object.

(2) That many, nay Myriads of different Species may be Coexistent in the
Common Medium, Art. 7. CONSECTARY 2.

That Myriads of different Images, emanant from different objects, may be
Coexistent in the Aer; without reciprocal penetration of Dimensions, or
Confusi^n of particles: contrary to the Pe^ipateticks.


the Aer; and yet no necessity of the Coexistence of many Bodies in one and the
same place; it being as justifiable to affirm, that they reciprocally penetrate
each others dimensions, as that the Warp and Woof, or intersecting threads in a
Cloth, do mutually penetrate each other: because the Aer is variously
interspersed with Inanities, or small empty Roads, convenient to the inconfused
transmission of all those swarms of Rays, of which the species consist. Have
you not frequently observed, when many Candles were burning together in the
same room, how, according to the various interposition of opace bodies, various
degrees of Shadows and Light have been diffused into the several quarters of
the same? and can you give any better reason of those various Intersections and
Decussations of the several Lights, then this; that the rays of Light
streaming from the diverse Flames, are directly and inconfusedly trajected
through the several inane Receptaries of the Aer, respective to the position of
each Candle, without reciprocal impediment; the rays of one, that are
projected to the right hand, in no wise impeding the passage of those of
another, that are projected to the left, in the same sensible part of the Aer.
Exactly so do the rays of diverse Species Visible, in their progress through
the aer, pass on in direct and uninterrupted lines, without Confusion: and
though they may seem to possess the same sensible part of the medium, yet will
not reason allow them to possess the same Insensible particles thereof; in
regard the distinct transmission of each clearly demonstrateth, that each
possesses a distinct place. Nor does this their Iuxta-position, or extreme
Nearness necessitate their Confusion; since we daily observe that Water and
Wine may be so Commixt in a Vial, as therein can be assigned no sensible part,
wherein are not some parts of both Liquors: and yet most certain it is, that
the particles of Wine possess not the same Invisible Loculaments, or
Receptaries, that are replete with the particles of Water, but others
absolutely distinct; because otherwise there would be as much of Water, or Wine
alone, in the Vial, as there is of both Water and Wine, which in that Continent
is impossible. And hereupon we Conclude, that to admit every distinct species
to replenish the whole medium; is no less dangerous, then to admit, that each
of two Liquors confused does singly replenish the whole Capacity or the
Continent: the parity of reasons justifying the Parallelism.

Assumption the Fifth.
That the visible Image, being trajected through the Pupil, Art. 8. That the
place of the visible Images ultimate Reception, and complete Perception; is the
Concave of the Retina Tunica.
and having suffered its ultimate refraction in that Unequal Mirror, the
Chrystalline Humor; is received and determined in that principal seat of
Vision, (which holds no remote analogy to a Concave Mirror) the Retina Tunica,
or Expansion of the Optic Nerve in the bottom of the eye: and therein
represents the Object from whence it was deradiated, in all particulars to the
life, i. e. with the same Color, Figure, and Situation of parts, which it
really bears; provided the Distance be not excessive.

The First part of this eminent Proposition, that excellent Mathematician,
Christopher Scheinerus, has so evicted by Physical Reasons, Optical
Demonstrations, and singular Experiments; as no truth can seem capable of
greater illustration, and less opposition: and therefore the greatest right we
can do our selves, or you, in this point, is to remit you to the observant
lecture of his whole Third Book, de Fundament. Opticis; which we dare commend
with this just Elogie, that it is the most Elaborate and Satisfying
investigation of the Principal Seat of Vision, that ever the World was enriched
with, and He who shall desire a more accomplished Discourse on that (formerly)
abstruse Theorem, must encounter the censure of being either scarce Ingenious
enough to comprehend, or scarce Ingenuous enough to acknowledge the convincing
Energy of the Arguments and Demonstrations therein alleged, for the
confirmation of his Thesis, Radij formaliter visorij nativam sedem esse tunicam
retinam.

And the other is sufficiently evincible even from hence; Art. 9. That the
Faculty forms a judgm^nt of the Conditions of the Object, according to the
representation thereof by the Image, at its impression on the principal part of
Vision, the Amphiblestr^ides.
That the Sight, or (if you please) the Interior Faculty does always judge of
the adspectable form of an Object, according to the Condition of the Image
emanant from it, at least, according as it is represented by the Image, at the
impression thereof on the principal visory part. Which is a position of Eminent
Certitude. For, no other Cause can be assigned, why the Visive Faculty does
deprehend and pronounce an object to be of this, or that particular Color: but
only this, that the Image impressed on the Network Coat does represent it in
that particular Color, and no other. Why, when half of the Object is eclipsed,
by some opace body interposed, the eye can speculate, nor the faculty judge of
no more then the unobscured half: but only this, that the Image is mutilated,
and so consists of only those radii, that are emitted from the unobscured
half, and consequently can infer the similitude of no more. Why an Object, of
whatever Color, appears Red, when speculated through Glass of that Tincture:
but only because the Image, in its trajection through that Medium, being
infected with redness, retains the same even to its sigillation on the
Expansion of the Optic Nerve. Why the sight, in some cases, especially in that
of immoderate distance, and when the object is beheld through a Reversing
Glass, deprehends the object under a false figure: but because the Image
represents it under that dissimilar figure, having either its angles ^etused,
by reason of a too long trajection through the Medium, or the situation of its
parts inverted, by decussation of its rays in the Glass.

CONSECTARY the First.
Art. 10. CONSECTARY.

That the Image is the Cause of Objects appearance of this or that determinate
Magnitude.


Now, it being no less Evident, then Certain, that the Image is the sole cause
of the Objects appearance under such or such a determinate Color, and of this
or that determinate Figure: it is of pure Consequence, that the Image must also
be the Cause of the Objects appearance in this or that determinate Magnitude;
especially since Figure is essenced in the Termination of Magnitude, according
to Euclid. (lib. 1. def. 14.) Figura est, quae sub aliquo, vel aliquibus
terminis comprehenditur. For, why does the object appear to be of great, small,
or mean dimensions; if not because the Image arriving at the sentient, is
great, small, or mean? Why does the whole object appear greater then a part of
it self; unless because the whole Image is greater then a part of it self? To
speak more profoundly, and as men not altogether ignorant of the Mysteries in
Optics; demonstrable it is, that the Magnitude of a thing speculated may be
commensurated by the proportion of the Image deradiated from it, to the
distance of the Common Intersection. For as the Diametre of the Image,
projected through a perspective, or Astronomical Tube, on a sheet of white
paper, is in proportion to the Axis of the Pyramid Eversed; so is the diameter
of the basis of the Object to the Axis of the Pyramid Direct. And hereby also
come we to apprehend the Distance of the Object from the Eye; for having
obtained the Latitude of the object, we cannot want the knowledge of its
Distance: and by conversion, the knowledge of its distance both assists and
facilitates the comprehension of its Magnitude. Which comes not much short of
absolute necessity; since as Des Carts (Dioptrices cap. 6.) has excellently
observed, in these words: Quoniam autem longitudo longius decurrentiam radiorum
non exquisite salis ex modo impulsus cognosci potest, praecedens Distantiae
scientia hic in auxilium est vocanda. Sic, ex Gr. s^ distantia cognoscatur esse
magna, and Angulus visionis sit parvus; res objecta longius distans judicatur
magna: sin vero distantia sciatur esse parva, and angulus Visionis sit magnus;
objectum judicatur esse parvum, si vero distantia objecti longius dissiti sit
in cognita; nihilcerti de ejus magnitudine decerni potest: if the Distance of
an object far removed be unknown, the judgment concerning the magnitude thereof
must be uncertain.

CONSECTARY the Second.
Again, insomuch as the Receptary of the Visible Image, Art. 11. CONSECTARY 2.

That no Image can rep^enish the C^ncave of the Retina Tunica, unless it be
deradiated from an object of an almost Hemispherical ambite.


is that Concave Mirror, the Retina tunica (we call it a Concave Mirror, not
only in respect of its Figure and Use, but also in imitation of that grand
Master of the Optics, Alhazen, who ( in lib. 1. cap. 2.) says thus; Et
sequitur ex hoc, at corpus sentiens, quod est in Concavo Nervi (retina nimirum)
sit aliquantulum Diaphanum, ut appareant in eo formae lucis and coloris, etc.)
Hence is it, that no Image can totally fill that Receptary, unless it be
derived from an object of an almost Hemispherical ambite, or Compass; so that
the rays, tending from it to the eye, may bear the form of a Cone, whose Base
is the Hemisphere, and point (somewhat retused) the superfice of the Pupil.
This perfectly accords to Keplers Canon; Visionem fieri, cum totius Hemispherij
mundani, quod est ante oculum, and amplius paulo, idolum statuitur ad album
subrufum Retinae cavae superficiei parietem. (in Paralipomen. ad Vitellion.
cap. 5. de modo Vision. number. 1.) Not that either He, or we, by the Optical
Hemisphere, intend only the Arch of the Firmament; but any Ambite whatever,
including a variety of things obverted to the open eye, partly directly, partly
obliquely, or laterally, and Circumquaque in all points about.

And this being conceded, we need not long hunt for a reason, why, Art. 12.
Why, when the Eye is open there is a^wayes pourtrayed in the bottom thereof,
some one T^tal Image; whose vario^^ Parts, are the Special ^mages of the
several things included in the visual Hemisphere.
when the eye is open, there always is pourtraied in the bottom of the eye
some one Total Image; whose various parts may be called the Special Images of
the diverse things at once objected. For, as the whole Hemisphere Visive
includes the reason of the whole Visible: so do the parts thereof include the
reason of the special Visibles, though situate at unequal distance. And, since,
the Hemisphere may be, in respect either of its whole, or parts, more Remote,
and more Vicine; hence comes it, that no more Rays arrive at the Eye from the
Remote, than the Vicine: because in the Vicine, indeed, are less or fewer
bodies, than in the Remote, but yet the Particles, or Faces of the particles of
bodies, that are directly obverted to the Pupil, are more. Which certainly is
the Cause, why of two bodies, the one Great, the other Small, the Dimensions
seem equal; provided the Great be so remote, as to take up no greater a part of
the Visive Hemisphere, than the small: because, in that case, the rays emanant
from it, and in direct lines incident into the pupil of the Eye, are no more
then those deradiate from the small, and consequently cannot represent more
parts thereof, or exhibit it in larger Dimensions. Whereupon we may conclude
that the Visive Faculty does judge of the Magnitude of Objects, by the
proportion that the Image of each holds to the amplitude of the Concave of the
Retina Tunica: or, that by how much every special Image shall make a greater
part of the General Image, that fills the whole Hemisphere Visive, and so
possess a greater part of the Concave of the Retina Tunica; by so much the
greater does the Faculty judge the quantity thereof to be: and ^ Contra. And,
because a thing, when near, does possess a greater part of the Visive
Hemisphere, than when remote: therefore does the special Image thereof also
possess a greater part of the Concave in the Retina Tunica, and so exhibit in
greater Dimensions; and it decreaseth, or becomes so much the less, by how
much the farther it is abduced from the eye; For it then makes room for another
Image of another thing, that is detected by the abduction of the former, and
enters the space of the Hemisphere obverted. And hereupon may we ground a

PARADOX.
That the Eye sees no more at one prospect then at another: or, that the Eye
beholds as much when it looks on a shilling, Art. 13. PARADOX. That the
prospect of a shilling or object of a small diametre is as great, as the
Prospect of the Firmament.
or any other object of as small diameter, as when it speculates a Mountain,
nay the whole Heaven.

Which though obscure and despicable at first planting, will yet require no
more time to grow up to a firm and spreading truth, than while we investigate
the Reasons of Two Cozen-German optical Phaenomena's.

(1) Why an Object appears not only greater in dimensions, but more distinct in
parts, when looked upon near at hand; than afarr off?

(2) Why an Object, speculated through a Unequal Glass, appears both larger and
more distinct; than when beheld only with eye: but through a Concave, both
Smaller, and more confused?

Art. 14. Why an object appears both greater in Dimensions and more Distinct in
parts, near at hand, than far off.
To the solution of the First, we are to reflect on some of the praecedent
Assumptions. For, since every Visible diffuseth rays from all points of it
superfice, into all regions of the medium, according to the second Assumption;
and since the superfice of the most seemingly smooth and polite body, is
variously interspersed with Asperities, from the various faces whereof,
innumerable rays are emitted, tending according their lines of Direction, into
all points of medium circularly; according to the first Assumption; and since
those swarms of Emanations must be ^o much the more Dense and Congregate, by
how much the less they are elongated from their fountain, or body exhalant; and
e Contra, so much the more Rare and Disgregate, by how much farther they are
deduced, according to the third Assumption: Therefore, by how much nearer the
eye shall be to the object by so much a greater number of Rays shall it
receive from the various parts thereof, and the particles of those parts; and e
Contra: and Consequently by how much a greater number of rays are received
into the pupil of the eye, by so much greater do the dimensions of the object,
and so much the more distinct do the parts of it superfice appear. For it is
axiomatical among the Masters of the Opticl^s, and most perfectly demonstrated
by Scheinerus (in lib. 2. Fundament. Optic. part. 1. cap. 13.) that the Visive
Axe consists not of one single raye, but of many concurring in the point of
the pyramid, terminated in the concave of the Retina Tunica: and as
demonstrable, that those rays only concur in that conglomerated stream, which
enters the Pupil, that are emitted from the parts of the object directly
obverted unto it; all others ^ending into other quarters of the medium. And
hence is it, that the image of a remote object, consisting of rays (which
though streaming from distant parts of the superfice thereof, do yet, by reason
of their concurse in the retused point of the visive Pyramid, represent those
parts as Conjoined) thin and less united, comparatively; those parts must
appear as Contiguou^ in the visifical Representation, or Image, which are
really Incontiguous or separate in the object: and upon consequence, the object
must be apprehended as Contracted, or Less, as consisting of fewer parts; and
also Confused, as consisting of parts not well distinguished. This may be truly,
though somewhat grossly, Exemplified in our prospect of two or three Hills
situate at large distance from our eye, and all included in the same Visive
Hemisphere; for, their Elongation from the Eye makes them appear Contiguous,
nay one and the same Hill, though perhaps they are, by more then single miles,
distant each from other: or, when from a place of eminence we behold a spacious
Campania beneath, and apprehend it to be an entire Plane; the Non-apparence of
those innumerable interjacent Fosses, Pits, Rivers, etc. deprest places,
imposing upon the sense, and exhibiting it in a smooth continued plane.

And to the solution of the second Problem, Art. 15. Why an o^ject, speculated
through a Conve^ Le^s* appears both greater and more distinct; but through a
Concave, ^e^s and more Confused: than when speculated only with the Eye.
a concise enquiry into the Causes of the different Effects of Concave and
Unequal Perspicils, in the representation of Images Visible, is only necessary.
A Concave Lens, whether Plano-concave, or Concave on both sides, whether it be
the segment of a great, or small Circle, projects the Image of an Object, on a
paper set at convenient distance from the tube that holds it, Confused and
insincere; because it refracts the rays thereof even to Disgregation, so that
never uniting again, they are transmitted in divided streams and cause a chaos,
or perpetual confusion. On the Contrary, a Unequal Lens refracts the rays
before divided, even to a Concurse and Union, and so makes that Image Distinct
and Ordinate, which at its incidence thereon was confused and inordinate. And
so much the more perfect must every Unequal Lens be, by how much greater the
Sphere is, of which it is a Section. For, as Kircher well observes ( in Magia
parastatica.) if the Lens be not only a portion of a great sphere, V. Gr. such
a one, whose diametre contains twenty or thirty Roman Palms; but has its own
diametre consisting of one, or two palms: it will represent objects of very
large dimensions, with so admirable similitude, as to inform the Visive Faculty
of all its Colors, Parts, and other discoverables in it superfice. Of which
sort are those excellent Glasses, made by that famous Artist, Eustachio Divini,
at Rome; by the help whereof the Painters of Italy use to draw the most
exquisite Chorographical, Topographical, and Prosopographical Tables, in the
World. This Difference betwixt Concave and Unequal Perspicils is thus stated by
Kircher (Art. Magnae Lucis and Umbrae* lib. 10. Magiae part. 2. Sect. 5.) Hinc
patet differentia lentis Conve^ae and Concavae; quod illa confusam speciem
acceptam transmissamque semper distinguit, and optime ordinat: ^lla vero eandem
perpetuo confundit; unde officium lentis Convexae est, easdem confuse accept
is, in debita distantia, secundum suam potentiam, distinguere and ordinare. And
by Scheinerus (in Fundam. Optic. lib. 3. part. 1. cap. 11.) thus; Licet in
vitro quocunque refractio ad perpendicularem semper accidat, quia tamen ipsum
superficie cava terminatur, radij in aerem egressi potius disperguntur, quam
colliguntur: cujus contrarium evenit vitro Convexo, ob contrariam extremitatem.
Rations sumuntur a Refractionibus in diversa tendentibus, vitri Convexi and
Concavi, ob contrarias Extremitatum configurationes. Concavitas enim radios
semper magis divergit: sicut Convexitas amplius colligit, etc.

Now, to draw these lines home to the Center of our problem; since the Rays of
a Visible Image trajected through a Unequal Perspicil, are so refracted, as to
concur in the Visive Axe: it is a clear consequence, that therefore an object
appears both larger in dimensions, and more distinct in parts, when speculated
through a Unequal Glass, than when looked upon only with the Eye; because more of
the rays are, by reason of the Convexity of its extreme obverted to the
object, conducted into the Pupil of the Eye, than otherwise would have been.
For, whereas some rays proceeding from those points of the object, which make
the Center of the Base of the Visive Pyramid, according to the line of
Direction, incurr into the Pupil; others emanant from other parts circumvicine
to those central ones, fall into the Iris; others from other parts circumvicine
fall upon the eyelids; and others from others more remote, or nearer to the
circumference of the Base of the Pyramid, strike upon the Eyebrows, Nose,
Forehead, and other parts of the face: the Convexity of the Glass causes, that
all those rays, which otherwise would have been terminated on the Iris,
eyelids, brows, nose, forehead, etc. are Refracted, and by refraction deflected
from the lines of Direction, so that concurring in the Visive Axe, they enter
the Pupil of the Eye in one united stream, and so render the Image impressed on
the Retina Tunica, more lively and distinct, and increased by so many parts, as
are the rays superadded to those, which proceed from the parts directly
confronting the Pupil. On the Contrary; because an Image trajected through a
Concave Perspicill, has its rays so refracted, that they become more rare and
Disgregate: the object must therefore seem less in dimensions, and more
confused in parts; because many of those rays, which according to direct
tendency would have insinuated into the Pupil, are diverted upon the Iris,
Eyelids, and other circumvicine parts of the face.

Here opportunity enjoins us to remember the duty of our Profession, nor would
Charity dispense, Art. 16. DIGRESSION.

What Figured Perspicils are convenient for Old: and what for Purblind persons.


should we, in this place, omit to prescribe some General Directions for the
Melioration of sight, or natively, or accidentally imperfect. The most common
Diminutions of Sight, and those that may best expect relief from Dioptrical
Aphorisms, and the use of Glasses; are only Two: Presbytia, and Myopia. The
First, as the word imports, being most familiar to old men, is ( Visus in
perspiciendis object is propinquis obscuritas; in remotis vero integrum acumen)
an imperfection of the sight, by reason whereof objects near hand appear
obscure and confused, but at more distance, sufficiently clear and distinct.
The Cause hereof generally, is the defect of due Convexity on the outside of
the Chrystalline Humor; arising either from an Error of the Conformative
Faculty in the Contexture of the parts of the Eye, or (and that mostly) from a
Consumption of part of the Chrystalline Humor by that Marasmus, Old Age: which
makes the common Base of the Image Visible to be trajected so far inwards, as
not to be determined precisely in the Center of the concave of the Retina
Tunica. And therefore, according to the law of Contrariety, the Cure of this
frequent symptom is chiefly, if not only to be hoped from the use of Unequal
Spectacles, which determine the point of Concurse exactly in the Center of the
Retina Tunica; the rays, by reason of the double Convexity, viz. of the Lens
and Chrystalline Humor, being sooner and more vigorously united, in the due
place.

The Other, being Contrary to the first, and always Native, commonly named
Purblindness, Physicians define to be Obscuritus visus in cernendis rebus
distantibus; in propinquis vero integrum acumen: a Dimness of the sight in the
discernment of Objects, unless they be appropinquate to the Eye. The Causes
hereof generally are either the too spherical Figure of the Chrystalline Humor;
or, in the Ductus Ciliares, or small Filaments of the Aranea Tunica (the proper
investment of the Chrystalline) a certain ineptitude to that contraction,
requisite to the adduction of the Chrystalline inwards toward the retina
tunica, which is necessary to the discernment of objects at distance: either of
these Causes making the common Base of the Image to be determined in the
Vitrious Humor, and consequently the Image to arrive at the retina tunica,
perturbed and confused. And therefore our advice is to all Purblind Persons,
that they use Concave Spectacles: for such prolong the point of concurse,
until it be convenient, i. e. to the concave of the retina tunica.

Assumption the Sixth and last.
Since all objects speculated under the same Angle, Art. 17. That to the
Di^udication of one of two ob^ects, apparently Equal, to be really the Greater;
is not required a greater Image: but only an Opinion of its greater Distance.
seem of equal Magnitude (according to that of Scheinerus, sicut oculus rem per
se parvam, magnam arbitratur, quia sub magno angulo, refractionis beneficio,
illam apprehendit: and magnam contrario parvam; fundament. Optic. lib. 2. part.
2. cap. 5.) and are accordingly judged, unless there intervene an Opinion of
their unequal Distance, which makes the Spectator praesume, that that Object is
in it self the Greater, which is the more Remote, and that the Less, which is
the less Remote: therefore, to the appehension and Dijudication of one of two
objects, apparently equal, to be really the greater, is not required a greater
Image, than to the apprehension and dijudication of an object to be really the
less; but only an opinion of its greater Distance.

This may receive both Illustration and Confirmation from this easy
Experiment. Having placed horizontally, in a valley, a plane Looking Glass, of
no more then one foot diametre; you may behold therein, at one intuition the
Images of the firmament, of the invironing Hills, and all other things
circumsituate, and those holding the same magnitude, as when speculated
directly, and with the naked eye: and this only because, though the Image in
Dimensions exceed not the Area of the Glass, yet is it such, as that together
with the things seen, it does also exhibit the Distance of each from other.
Exactly like a good Landscape, wherein the ingenious Painter does artificially
delude the eye by a proportionate diminution and decurtation of the things
praesented, insinuating an opinion of their Distance. And therefore, the
Reason, why the Images of many things, as of spacious Fields, embroydered with
rows of Trees, numerous Herds of Cattle, Flocks of Sheep, etc. may at once be
received into that narrow window, the Pupil of the eye, of a man standing on
an Hill, Tower, or other eminent place, advantageous for prospect: is only
this, that to the Speculation of the Hemisphere comprehending all those things,
in that determinate magnitude, is required no greater an Image, than to the
Speculation of an Hemisphere, whose diametre is commensurable only by an inch.
Since neither more rays are derived from the one to the Pupil of the Eye, than
from the other: nor to the judication of the one to be so much Greater than the
other, is ought required, beside an Opinion that one is so much more Distant
than the other. And this we conceive a sufficient Demonstration of the Verity
of our last Paradox, viz. that the Eye sees as much, when it looks on a
shilling, or other object of as small diametre; as when it looks on the
greatest Ocean.

Here most opportunely occurs to our Consideration that notorious PROBLEM,
Quomodo objecti distantia deprehendatur ab oculo? How the Distance of the
Object from the eye is perceived in the act of Vision?

This would Des Carts have solved (1) By the various Figuration of the Eye.
Art. 18. Des Carts Opinion, concerning the Reason of the Sights apprehending
the Distance of an object:
Because in the Conspection of Objects remote, the Pupil of the Eye is expanded
circularly, for the admission of more Rays; and the Chrystalline Humor
somewhat retracted toward the Retina Tunica, for the Determination of the point
of Concurse in the same, which otherwise would be somewhat too remote: and on
the contrary, in the conspection of objects vicine, the Pupil is contracted
circularly, and the Chrystalline Lens protruded somewhat outwardly, for the
contrary respects. (2) By the Distinct, or Confused representation of the
object; as also the Fortitude, or Imbecility of Light illustrating the same.
Because things represented confusedly, or illustrated with a weak light always
appear Remote: and on the contrary, things praesented distinctly or illustrate
with a strong light, seem vicine.

Art. 19. Unsatisfactory; and that for two Considerations.
But all this we conceive unsatisfactory. (1) Because, unless the variation of
the Figure of the Eye were Gradual, respective to the several degrees of
distance intercedent betwixt it and the object; it is impossible the sight
should judge an object to be at this or that Determinate remotion: and that the
variation of the Figure of the Eye is not Gradual respective to the degree of
distance, is evident even from hence; that the Pupil of the Eye is as much
Expanded, and the Lens of the Chrystalline Humor as much Retracted toward the
Retina Tunica, in the conspection of an object situate at one miles distance,
as of one at 2, 3, 4, or more miles; there being a certain Term of the
Expansion of the one part, and Retraction of the other. (2) Because though
Vision be Distinct, or Confused, both according to the more or less
illustration of the object by light, and to the greater or less Distance
thereof from the Eye; yet does this Reason hold only in mean, Art. 20. And that
more solid one of Gassendus (viz. that the Cause of our apprehending the
Distance ^f an object, consists in the C^mparation ^f the (...) things (...)
^^wixt the o^ject and the (...), by the Rati^nal Facu^^^) embraced and
corrobo^^ted
not large distance: since the orbs of the Sun and Moon appear greater at their
rising immediately above the Horizon, that is, when they are more Remote from
the Eye, than when they are in the Zenith of their gyre, that is, when they are
more Vicine to the Eye; and since all objects illustrate with a weak light, do
not appear Remote, nor ^ contra, as common observation demonstrateth.

And therefore allowing the Acuteness of Des Carts Conceit, we think it more
safe, because more reasonable to acquiesce in the judgment of the grave
Gassendus; who ( in Epist. 2. de Apparente Magnitud. solis humilis and
sublimis) most profoundly solves the Problem, by desuming the Cause of our
apprehending the distance of an Object, in the act of Vision, from a Comparison
of the thing interjacent between the object seen, and the Eye. For, though that
Comparation be an act of the Superior Faculty; yet is the connection thereof to
the sense, necessary to the making a right judgment, concerning the Distance of
the Visible. And, most certainly, therefore do two things at distance seem to
be Continued, because they strike the Eye with cohaerent, or contiguous Rays.
Thus does the top of a Tower, though situate some miles beyond a Hill, yet seem
Contiguous to the same, nay to the visible Horizon; and this only because it is
speculated by the Mediation of Contiguous Rays: and the Sun and Moon, both
orient and occident, seem to cohaere to the Horizon because though the spaces
are immense, that intercede betwixt their Orbs and the Horizon, yet from those
spaces does not so much as one single Raye arrive at the Eye, and those which
come to it from the Sun and Moon are contiguous to those which come from the
Horizon. And hence is it, that the Tower, Hill, and Horizon seem to the sight
to be equidistant from the Eye; because no other things are interposed, at
least, seen interposed, by the comparison of which, the one may be deprehended
more than the other. Besides, the distance of the Horizon it self is not
apprehended by any other reason, but the diversity of things interjacent
betwixt it and the Eye: for, look how much of Space is possessed valleys and
lower grounds interjacent, so much of Space is defalcated from the distance;
the sight apprehending all those things to be Contiguous, or Continued, whose
Rays are received into the Eye, as Contiguous, or Continued, none of the
spaces interjacent affording one raye. Of which truth Des Carts seems to have
had a glimpse, when ( in Dioptrices cap. 6. Sect. 15.) he conceds; objectorum,
quae intuemur, praecedaneam cognitionem, ipsorum distantiae melius dignoscendae
inservire: that a certain praecognition of the object does much conduce to the
more certain dignotion of its Distance.

And on this branch may we ingraft a PARADOX; Art. 21. PARADOX. That the same
Object, speculated by the same man, at the same distance, and in the same
degree of light; does always appear greater to one Eye, than the other
that one and the same object, speculated by the same man, in the same degree
of light, does always appear greater to one Eye, than to the other. The truth
of this is evincible by the joint testimony of those incorruptible Witnesses of
Certitude, Experience and Reason. (1) Of Experience, because no man can make
the vision of both his eyes equally perfect; but beholding a thing first with
one eye, the other being closed, or eclipsed, and then with the other, the
former being closed or eclipsed; shall constantly discover it to be greater in
dimensions in the apprehension of one Eye, than of the other: and Gassendus,
making a perfect and strict Experiment hereof, testifies of himself, ( in
Epist. 2. de Apparent. Magnitud. Solis, etc. Sect. 17.) that the Characters of
his Book appeared to his right Eye, by a fifth part, greater in dimensions,
though somewhat more obscure, than to his left. (2) Of Reason; because of all
Twin Parts in the body, as Ears, Hands, Legs, Testicles, etc. one is always
more vigorous and perfect, in the performance of its action, than the other.
Which Inaequality of Vigor, if it be not the Bastard of Custom, may rightfully
be Fathered upon either this; that one part is invigorated with a more liberal
afflux of Spirits, than the other: or this, that the Orgaganical Constitution
of one Part is more perfect and firm, than that of the other. And, therefore,
one Eye having its Pupil wider; or the figure of the Chrystalline more Unequal,
or the Retina Tunica more concave, than the other; must apprehend an object to
be either larger in Dimensions, or more Distinct in Parts, than the other,
whose parts are of a different configuration: either of these Causes
necessitating a respective Disparity in the Action.

Art. 22. A ^econd PARADOX. That all men see (distinctly) but with ^ne Eye at
once: contrary to that eminent Optical Axiom* that the V^sive Axes of both eyes
concur and unite in the o^j^ct.
If this sound strange in the ears of any man, how will he startle at the
mention of that much more Paradoxical Thesis of Ioh. Baptista Porta (lib. 6. de
Refra^tion. cap. 1.) That no man can see (distinctly) but with one eye at once?
Which though seemingly repugnant not only to common persuasion, but also to
that high and mighty Axiom of Alhazen, Vitellio, Franc. Bacon. Niceron, and
other the most eminent Professors of the Optiques, That the Visive Axes of both
eyes concur and unite in the object speculated: is yet a verity, well worthy
our admission, and assertion. For, the Axes of the Eyes are so ordained by
Nature, that when one is intended, the other is relaxed, when one is employed,
the other is idle and unconcerned; nor can they be both intended at once, or
employed, though both may be at once relaxed, or unimployed: as is
Experimented, when with both eyes open we look on the leaf of a Book; for we
then perceive the lines and print thereof, but do not distinctly discern the
Characters, so as to read one word, till we fix the Axe of one eye thereon; and
at that instant we feel a certain sudden subsultation, or gentle impulse in
the Center of that eye, arising doubtless from the rushing in of more spirits
through the Optic Nerve, for the more efficacious performance of its action.
The Cause of the impossibility of the intention of both Visive Axes at one
object, may be desumed from the Parallelism of the Motion of the Eyes; which
being most evident to sense, gives us just ground to admire, how so many subtle
Mathematicians, and exquisite Oculists have not discovered the Coition and
Union of the Visive Axes in the object speculated, which they so confidently
build upon, to be an absolute Impossibility. For, though man has two Eyes; yet
does he use but one at once, in the case of Distinct inspection, the right eye
to discern objects on the right side, and the left to view objects on the left:
nor is there more necessity, why he should use both Eyes at once, than both
Arms, or Legs, or Testicles, at once. And for an Experiment to assist this
Reason; we shall desire you only to look at the top of your own Nose, and you
shall soon be convicted, that you cannot discern it with both eyes at once; but
the right side with the right eye, and afterward the left side with the left
eye: and at the instant of changing the Axe of the first eye, you shall be
sensible of that impulse of Spirits, newly mentioned. No^, indeed, is it
possible, that while your right eye is levelled at the right side of your nose,
your left should be levelled at the left side, but on the contrary averted
quite from it: because, the motion of the eyes being Conjugate, or Parallel,
when the Axe of the right eye is converted to the right side of the nose, the
Axe of the left must be converted toward the left Ear. And, therefore, since
the Visive Axes of both Eyes cannot Concur and Unite in the Tipp of the Nose;
what can remain to persuade, that they must Concur and unite in the same
Letter, or Word in a book, which is not many inches more remote than the Nose?
And, that you may satisfy your self, that the Visive Axes do never meet, but
run on in a perpetual Parallelism, i. e. in direct lines, as far distant each
from other, as are the Eyes themselves; having fixed a staff or lance upright
in the ground, and retreated from it to the distance of 10 or 20 paces, more or
less: look as earnestly as you can, on it, with your right eye, closing your
left, and you shall perceive it to eclipse a certain part of the wall, tree, or
other body situate beyond it. Then look on it again with your left eye, closing
your right; and you shall observe it to eclipse another part of the wall: that
space being intercepted, which is called the Parallaxe. This done, look on it
with both eyes open; and if the Axes of both did meet and unite in the staff,
as is generally supposed, then of necessity would you observe the staff to
eclipse either both parts of the Wall together, or the middle of the Parallaxe:
but you shall observe it to do neither, for the middle shall never be eclipsed;
but only one of the parts, and that on which you shall fix one of your eyes
more intently than the other. This considered, we dare second Gassendus in his
promise to Gunners, that they shall shoot as right with both eyes open, as only
with one: for levelling the mouth of the Piece directly at the mark, with one
eye, their other must be wholly unconcerned therein, nor is it ought but the
tyranny of Custom, that can make it difficult.

Here, to prevent the most formidable Exception, Art. 23. The three Degrees of
Vision, viz. most perfect, perfect, and imperfect: and the verity of the
Paradox restrained only to the two former Degrees.
that lies against this Paradox, we are to advertise you of two Considerables.
First, that as well Philosophers, as Oculists unanimously admit three Degrees,
or gradual Differences of sight. (1) Visus Perfectissimus, when we see the
smallest (visible) particles of an object, most distinctly: (2) Perfectus, when
we see an object distinctly enough, in the whole or parts, but apprehend not
the particles, or minima visibilia thereof: (3) Imperfectus, when besides the
object directly obverted to the Pupil of the eye, we also have a glimmering and
imperfect perception of other things placed ad latera, on the right and left
side of it. Secondly, that the verity of this Paradox, that we see but with one
eye at once, is restrained only to the First and Second degrees of Sight, and
extends not to the Last. For, Experience assures, that, as many things
circumvicine to the principal object, on which we look only with one eye open,
praesent themselves together with it, in a confused and obscure manner: so
likewise, when both eyes are open, many things, obliquely incident into each
eye, are confusedly, and indistinctly apprehended. So that in confused and
Imperfect Vision, it may be truly said, that a man does see with both eyes at
once: but not in Distinct and Perfect.

SECT. III.
TO entertain Curiosity with a second Course, Art. 1. A research into the
Reason of the different Effects of Unequal and Concave Glasses, as well
Dioptrical, as Catoptrical.
we shall here attempt the Conjectural Solution of those so much admired
Effects of Unequal and Concave Glasses; that is, Why the Rays of Light, and
together with them those substantial Effluxes, that essence the Visible Images
of Objects, being trajected through a Unequal Glass, or reflected from a
Concave, are Congregated into a perpendicular stream: and likewise, why the
Rays of Light, being trajected through a Concave, or reflexed from a Unequal,
are Disgregated from a perpendicular radius.

First, insomuch as Glass, of the most polite and equal superfice is full of
insensible Pores, or Perforations, and solid impervious Granules, alternately
interspersed; we may upon consequence conceive, that each of those solid
Granules is as it were a certain Monticle, or small Hillock, having a small
top, and small sides circularly declining toward those little Valleys, the
Pores. This conceded* if a Glass, whose superfice is Plane, be obverted to the
Sun, since the small Pores thereof tend from one superfice to the other in
direct and parallel lines, for the most part; it must be, that all the Rays
incident into the Pores, pass through in direct and parallel lines, into the
Aer beyond it: and so can be neither Congregated, nor Disgregated, but must
constantly pursue the same direct course, which they continued from the body of
the Sun, to their incidence on the surface of the Glass. But if the Extreme of
the Glass, respecting the Sun, be of a Unequal figure; then, because one Pore
(conceive it to be the Central one) is directly obverted to the Sun, and all
the others have their apertures more oblique and, pointing another way;
therefore it comes to pass, that one ray, falling into the directly obverted
pore, is directly trajected through the same, and passes on into the aer
beyond it in a direct line; but another ray, falling on the side of the Hillock
next adjacent to the right pore, is thereby Refracted and Deflected, so that it
progresseth not forward in a line parallel to the directly trajected ray, but
being conjoined to it, passes on in an united stream with it. And necessary it
is, that the Angle of its Refraction be by so much the more obtuse, by how much
nearer the point of the Hillock, from which it was refracted, is to the direct
or perpendicularly transmitted ray; and, on the contrary, by so much the more
Acute, by how much the more remote: because There the ray falls more deeply
into the obvious pore, and strikes lower on the adjacent Hillock, whose
Protuberancy therefore does less Deflect it; but Here the ray falls higher on
the side of the Hillock, and so by the Protuberancie, or Devexity thereof is
more deflected. But if the Extreme of the Glass confronting the Sun, be of a
Concave figure; in that case, because one pore being directly open, others have
their apertures more obliquely respecting the Sun, it comes to pass, that the
ray falling into the direct pore, is directly trajected, and passes through
the aer in a perpendicular; but another ray falling on the side of the next
adjacent Hillock, is thereby refracted and deflected, so that it does not
continue its progress in a line parallel to the directly-transient ray, but is
abduced from it, and that so much the more, by how much the farther it passes
beyond the Glass. And necessary it is, that the Angle of its Refraction be also
so much the more obtuse, by how much nearer the point of its incidence on the
side of the Hillock, is to the Aperture of the Direct pore; because it falls
deeper into it, and strikes lower on the devex side of the Hillock: and on the
contrary, so much the more Acute, by how much more remote its point of
incidence is to the Aperture of the Direct pore; for the contrary respect. And
this is the sum of our Conjecture, touching the reasons of the different
Trajection of Rays through Unequal and Concave Glasses.

As for the other part of our Conception, concerning Reflexed Rays; if the
Glass obverted to the Sun be Plane in it superfice, then, because all the Topps
of the solid and impervious Hillocks, are directly obverted to the Sun,
therefore must it be, that all the rays incident upon them become Reflected
back again toward the Sun, if not in the same, yet at least in Contiguous
lines. But if the face of the Glass obverted to the Sun, be Unequal; then,
because the topp of one Hillock is directly obverted, and those of others
obliquely respecting the Sun; it comes to pass, that one ray being directly
Reflected, the others are reflected obliquely in lines quite different: and
this in an Angle by so much more Acute, by how much nearer the Topps of the
obliquely respecting Hillocks are to that of the directly respecting one; and
by so much the more obtuse, by how much the more Remote. And, if the side of
the Glass turned toward the Sun, be Concave; because the Top, of one Hillock is
directly, and those of others obliquely obverted to the Sun; hence comes it,
that the Ray incident on the directly-obverted one, is directly Reflected, and
those that fall on the topps of the obliquely-obverted ones, are accordingly
reflected obliquely, toward the Directly reflected; so that at a certain
distance they all Concur and Unite with it in that point, called the Term of
Concurse: and this in an Angle so much more Acute, by how much nearer the Topps
of the obliquely-reflecting Hillocks are to that of the Directly-reflecting
one; and e contra.



Art. 2. A COROLLARIE. Hinting the Causes, why an Elliptical Concave reflects
the incident rays, in a more Acute angle, than a Parabolical: and a
Parabolical than a Spherical.
These things clearly understood, we need not want a perfect Demonstration of
the Causes, why a Concave Glass, whose Concavity consists of the segment of
an Ellipsis, reflecteth the rays of the Sun in a more Acute Angle, and
consequently burns both more vigorously, and at greater Distance, then one
whose Concavity is the segment of a Parabola: and why a Parabolical Section
reflecteth them in an Angle more Acute, and so burns both at greater
distance, and more vigorously, than the Section of Circle. Especally if we
familiarize this theory by the accommodation of these Figures.



Thus have we, in a short Discourse, Art. 3. A CONSECTARY.

Why a Plane Perspicil exhibits an obj^ct in genuine Dimen^io^s; but a Unequal,
in Amplified, and a Concave, in minorated.


not exceeding the narrow limits of a single Article, intelligibly explicated
the Cause of that so much admired Disparity in the Effects of Plane, Unequal,
and Concave, Glasses; as well Dioptrical, or Trajecting the rays of Light into
the Aer beyond them, as Catoptrical, or Reflecting them back again from their
obverted superfice. And we ask leave to increase our Digression only with this
CONSECTARY. Because the Rays of Light, and the rays of visible Images are
Analogical in their nature, and flow hand in hand together into the Eye, in the
act of Vision; therefore is it, that to a man using a Plane Perspicil, an
object always appears the same, i. e. equal in dimensions, and distinction of
parts, as it does to his naked Eye: by reason the Angle of its Extremes is the
same in the Plane Glass, as in the Eye. But, to a man using a Unequal Perspicil,
an object appears Greater; because the Angle of its Extremes is ampli^ied: and
through a Concave, Less; because the Angle is diminished. In like manner, the
Image of an object reflected from a Plane Mirror, appears the same to the
Spectator, as if Deradiated immediately, or without reflection, from the object
it self; because the Reflex Angle is equal to the Direct: but the Image of an
Object Reflected from a Unequal Mirror appears Less; because the Angle of its
Reflection is less than that of its Direction: and from a Concave, Greater;
because the Reflex Angle is greater than the Direct: This may be autoptically
Demonstrated thus. If you admit the Image of a man, or any thing else, through
a small perforation of the wall, into an obscure chamber, and fix a Unequal Lens
in the perforation, with the Unequal side toward the Light; you shall, admoving
your eye thereto, at Convenient distance, observe the transmitted Image to be
Amplified: but, receiving the Image on a sheet of white Paper, posited where
your Eye was, you shall perceive it to be Minorated: the Contrary Effect
arising from a Concave Lens, posited in the hole, with its Concave side toward
the Light. And this, because the Unequal Congregating the rays into the Pupil
of the Eye (and so making the (...), or Apparition Greater, for the cause
formerly exposited) does also Congregate them on the Paper; and therefore the
Image cannot appear Contracted, or Minorated: but on the contrary, the Concave
Disgregating the rays from the Pupil (and so making the (...), or Apparition
less in the Retina of the Optic Nerve) does also Disgregate, or diffuse them
largely on all parts of the Paper, and so the Image thereon received cannot but
appear much Amplified.

SECT. IV.
HItherto we have in some degree of satisfaction, Art. 1. A Recapitulation of
the principal Arguments precedent: and summary of the subsequent.
explicated the Manner, how, by the Incursion of substantial Images, dera^^ated
from the object to the Eye, the Visive Faculty comes to apprehend the Color,
Figure, Magnitude, Number, and Distance of objects: and therefore it remains
only, to the Complement of our present Designation, that we explore the Reasons
of the Perception of the Situation, Quiet, and Motion of objects, by the sight.
To our more perspicuous solution of which notable Difficulty; and to the
illustration of many passages precedent in the two last Sections: it must be
confessed not only ornamental, or advantageous, but simply necessary, that we
here Anatomize the whole Eye, and consider the proper Uses of the several parts
thereof; those especially, that are either immediately and primarily
instrumental, or only secundarily inservient to Vision.

In the Conformation of the Eye, or minor Microcosm, Art. 2. The Eye Amtomized:
and the proper (...) of each Part thereof, either absolutely Necessary, or only
Advantageous to Vision, concisely demonstrated. viz. of
as Casserius Placentinus calls it, in respect to the admirable Constructure
thereof; the First observable is, that it is composed of many Diaphanous, or
Transparent Parts, as the Horny Membrane (BCB) the Aqueous Humor (EFKFE) the
Chrystalline (L) and the Vitreous (MGHMIN): The Diaphanity of the Horny
Membrane, and the three Humors, Aqueous, Chrysta^^ine, and Vitreous.
and the intention of that Unimitable Mistress of the Optiques, Nature, herein
was, that the Visive Rays might not be Reflected from, but easily Trajected
through them, into the Amphiblestroides, or Network Coat, The Second is it
Unequal Figure; The Convexity of all its parts, except the Amphiblestroides.
wherein the Providence of Nature had respect to the necessary Congregation and
Unition of most of the rays incident on the Area of the Eye, so that the
Visive Axe might consist of many more rays, than otherwise, i. e. had the
figure of the Eye been Plane, or Concave, it would have done: for, being by
this Convexity refracted, they convene in a Cone determined in the Center of
the Amphiblestroides. For the Convexity is so exactly proportionate to the
Distance of the Retina Tunica from the Chrystalline, that most of the Visive
Rays, emanant from the several points of the object, and incident upon the
several points of the Horny Membrane, may, after various Refractions, have
their Rendezvous, or point of Concurse exactly in the middle of the Retina
Tunica: because, should their point of Concurse be either short of, or beyond
the Retina Tunica; of necessity the Image could not be at all, or, at most, but
very obscurely presented therein, as consisting of Dispersed, and mutually
Intersecting rays. The Third is the Uvea Tunica, The (...) Tunica, and (...).
or anterior part of the Choroides, whose exterior superfice (OF, FE) being
Diversicolor, or of various Colors, is called the Iris or Rainbow: which
Galen, Gasserius Placentinus, and Riolanus will have to consist of a six-fold
Circle, but Plempius only of a Threefold, the Two outmost at the white of the
Eye being more narrow in latitude, and the Third respecting the Pupil of the
Eye more ample, and illustrate with the constant color on the Limbus of the
Uvea Tunica, which in some bears Sables, in others Azure, in others Sables and
Argent confused: whence the Difference of Black, The Pupilla.
Bluish, and Gray Eyes. In the middle of this Coat is a Perforation, called
the Pupil, (FKF) and by the vulgar, the Apple of the eye; of such a
Constitution, that by Dilatation and Constriction, as if it were a Sphinctre
Muscle, it might be made wider, or narrower: and this for the Moderation of the
incurrent rays, which being sometimes more, sometimes fewer, and sometimes
strong, sometimes weak, require a certain Moderation proportionate to the
Faculty of the recipient and terminating sensory. For, insomuch as an excess of
Light is destructive, and the Defect of it insufficient to distinct Vision;
therefore did the Eternal Wisdom in the Entrance into the Chrystalline,
contrive this Window capable of Dilatation and Constriction: in Dilatation to
admit so much of the weaker Light as is required to perfect and distinct
Vision; in Contraction to exclude so much of the Excessive, as would offend, if
not perish the Organ. Yet in many the Amplitude of the Pupil varies, and those
who have it very narrow, are strong and acute sighted; but those, who have it
more dilated constantly, see but weakly and obtusely. The interior superfice of
this Membrane is obduced, or lined with a certain F^^^ginous substance that
gives it the Color of a blackish Grape, The (...) of the inside of the V^ea
Tunica.
fully ripe: but to what end Nature provided this opacating Tincture, has been
a quaestion, that, even from Galens days to ours, has made the Schools both
of Anatomists and Professors of the Optiques, ring again with Controversies.
Some affirming the design of Nature therein to be, that the Chrystalline being
veyled over with this obscure parget, might have its own splendour more intense
by Congregation: because, according to the position of Alhazen (lib. 1. propos.
33.) as a small light in a dark obscure place is better perceptible, as
diffusing a brighter luster, than in a wide, luminous place; and consequently
makes the circumjacent parts more visible: so does the internal splendor of
the Chrystalline become more illustrious, because the inner circumference of
the whole Uvea Tunica is lined with this footy matter, the rays deradiating
from it by reflection from the opposite opacity of the Membrane, becoming
reassembled and united in a more vigorous luster. Others conceiving the
intention of it to be, the Recreation or Reflection of the Visive Spirits;
because when ever the Chrystalline is offended, or rather the Amphiblestroides,
with too vehement a Light, we use, for present remedy, to close our eyes, and
the spirits recoyling upon the Chrystalline from the natural darkness of this
Coat, are reassembled, and so refreshed. And others contesting that the only
use of it is, the Interception of Light; for, since the Pupil, or anterior
perforation of the Uvea Tunica, is the only Aperture, or portal framed for the
intromission of the Visible Images, and there ought to be no other passage,
whereat Light might intrude it self into the concave of the Eye: what could
wise Nature have thought on more convenient to the Exclusion of unnecessary
light, than the interjection of this sable Curtain? Experience evincing that
nothing intercepts and shuts out Light, than opace Bodies interposed. These,
indeed, are ingenious and plausible Conceits, but if truth be to be preferred
to Acuteness; we may determine, that the only and proper use of this
Atramentous or sooty Blackness is, that the Rays of Light, incident on the
Concave of the Amphiblestroides, (GHI) and thence resilient back to the Concave
of the Uvea Tunica, might by the Blackness of its lining be extinguished, i. e.
absolutely terminated: lest thence again Reflected to the Amphiblestroides,
they might perturb the Visible Image, and consequently the sight. The Fourth
observable, The Tunica Arachnoides.
is the Tunica Arachnoides, in its middle containing the most precious of
Gemms, the Chrystalline Humor, whose Figure also is Unequal (but whether of a
Parabolical, Elliptical, or Sphaerical Section, is a noble problem, because not
yet determined.) on both sides, though somewhat more on that side respecting
the Retina Tunica, and manifestly oblong, or inclining to an oval. The Ciliary
Filaments thereof
This Coat, by the Mediation of the Ciliary Processes, or slender Filaments
(BN, NB) dispersed from the Tunica Arachnoides, does move the Chrystalline
either nearer to, or farther from the Retina Tunica, as the greater or less
Distance of the object requires. For, in the Chrystalline, The Chrystalline.
by reason of its greater both Density and Convexity, the rays of the species
are more strongly Refracted and more closely United, than in any other part of
the Eye: which justifies their opinion who make it the Primary Medium of
Vision. Because, as a Unequal Lens posited in a hole of the wall, admits the
species into an obscure room and also collect the rays of it: so does the
Chrystalline both admit and congregate them. And because it is Diaphanous,
therefore are not the species terminated therein, as Galen, and after him most
Anatomists have dreamt: since otherwise no reason can be alleged, why the
species should not be as well terminated in the Horny Membrane, the Vitreous,
or Aqueous Humor. Wherefore, Vision is not made in the Chrystalline but the
Retina Tunica: The Retina Tunica.
because the species are therein Terminated, as in an opace body. Scheinerus
opinioned, that the species, which otherwise, by reason of several refractions
before their arrival at the Chrystalline, would have been exhibited in Reverse
positions, are therein refracted, and Rectified. But, from the Observation of
Franc. Sylvius, Franc. Vander Scha^en, Ioh. Wallaeus, and Athanas Kircherus,
the tunica Choroides being sublated from the hinder part of the Eye, and then
the Sclirotica, and lastly the Amphiblestroides; all objects appear inversed in
the Chrystalline: and in a smaller form by much in the Eye of an Ox, than in
the Eye of a Man. The same has Plempius demonstrated by the Experiment of an
Artificial Glass Eye, placed in the small Aperture of a Window: all things
externally objected appearing therein Inverst, as also on a sheet of paper
posited before the decussation of the rays. And, doubtless, it is necessary,
that the species be inverted, at their termination on the Retina Tunica; since
otherwise we should have apprehended the object as inverst: which Kepler
demonstrates from hence, that ( in passione Patientia ^gentibus e regione esse
opposita debere) in Passion the Patients must be on the contrary region to the
Agents. Some, we confess would have it, that the judicatory Faculty does
correct the depraved Figure of the species: because (forsooth) it discerns the
just magnitude of objects and their situation, by most small Images; as a good
Geometrician does judge of the dimensions of Hercules whole body, by
commensurating those of his Heel. And others consign that office to the Common
Sense, which looking ( retro and desuper) on the inverted species, apprehends
them in a right position. And lastly, others desume the right judgment, from
the rectitude of the line, by which the species are impressed. And thus poor man
aggravates the Difficulties in Nature, though to his own greater disquiet and
perplexity. The Last of Parts in the Eye, immediately necessary to Vision, is
the Retina Tunica, or Network Coat (GHI) in the bottom of the Eye; contexed of
an innumerable multitude of Filaments, or thread-like Expansions of the Optic
Nerve: and this is that noble sensory, formed for the Last Reception and
Sigillation of the Image, which from hence by the Continuity of the Optic
Nerve, is communicated (...), to the Principal Faculty, residing in the Brain.

But, because the Axe of the Visive Pyramid is a perpendicular line, beginning
in the Extrems of the object, The ^^x Muscles* viz.
and ending in the Amphiblestroides; had the Eye been nailed or fixed in its
orbita, we must have been necessitated to traverse the whole Machine of the
body, for a position thereof convenient to Vision, since it can distinctly
apprehend no object, but what lies e directo opposite; or have had this
semi-rational sense, whose glory builds on Variety, restrained to the
speculation of so few things, that we should have received more Discomfort from
their Paucity, than either Information, or Delight from their Discernment:
therefore, that we might enjoy a more enlarged Prospect, and read the whole
Hemisphere over in one momentany act of Vision, Nature has furnished the Eyes
with Muscles, or Organs of agility; that so they may accommodate themselves to
every visible, and hold a voluntary verlisity to the intended object; Par^^ula
sic magnum pervisit Pupula Coelum.

And of these Ocular Muscles there are in Man, just so many, as there are kinds
of Motion, The D^^ect, as the
4 Direct, and 2 Oblique or Circular; all situate within the Orbita, and
associated to the Optic Nerve, and conjoining their Tendons, at the Horny
Membrane, they constitute the Tunica Innomitata, so named by Columbus, who
arrogates the invention thereof to himself, though Galen (lib. 10. de usu part.
cap. 2.) makes express mention of it.

The First of the four Direct Muscles, implanted in the superior part of the
Eye, ^.
draws it Upward; whence it is denominated Atollens, the Lifter up, and
Superbus, the Proud: because this is that we use in Haughty and sublime looks.

Depr^ment,
The Second, situate in the inferior part of the Eye, and Antagonist to the
former, stoops the Eye Downward; and thence is called Deprimens the Depressor,
and Humilis, the Humble: for this position of the eye speaks the Dejection, and
Humility of the Mind.

The Third, fastened in the Major Canthus, or great angle of the Eye, (...),
and converting it toward the Nose; is therefore named Adducens the Adducent,
and Bibitorius, for in large draughts we frequently contract it.

The Fourth, opposite both in situation and office to the former, Abducent.
abduceth the Eye laterally toward the Ear; and is therefore named Abducens,
and Indignatorius, the scorning muscle: for, when we would cast a glance of
scorn, contempt, or indignation, we contract the Eye toward the outward angle,
by the help of this muscle.

If all these Four work together, the Eye is retracted inward, fixed, and
immote: which kind of Motion Physicians call Motus Tonicus, and in our
language, the Set, or Wist Look.

Of the ^bl^que Muscles, the First, running betwixt the Eye, And Oblique, as
the 2 Circumactors, or Lovers Muscles
and the tendons of the Second and Third Muscles, by the outward angle ascends
to the superior part of the Eye, and inserted near to the Rainbow,
circumgyrates the Eye downward.

The Second, and smallest, twisted into a long tendon, circumrotates the Eye
toward the interior angle, and is called the Trochlea, or Pully. These two
Circumactors are surnamed Amatorij, the Lovers Muscles; for these are they that
roll about the eye in wanton or amorous Glances.

And thus much of the Conformation of the Eye.

Now, as to the Solution of our Problem, viz. Art. 3. Why the Situation of an
object is perceived by the sight.
How the SITUATION of an object is perceived by the sight? Since it is an
indisputable Canon, Omnem sensum deprehendere rem ad eam regionem, e qua ultimo
directa metione feritur, that every sense does apprehend its proper object to
be situate in that part of Space, from whence, by direct motion, it was thereby
affected: we may safely infer, that the Visible Object always appears situate
in that part of space, from whence the Image thereof in a direct line invadeth
the Eye, and enters the Pupil thereof. Which is true and manifest not only in
the intuition of an object by immediate or Direct rays; but also in the
inspection of Looking-Glasses, that represent the object by Reflex: and a pure
Consequence, that a Visible Object, by impression of its rays proceeding from
a certain place, or region, must of necessity be perceived by the sight, in its
genuine position, or Erect Form; though we have the testimony both of Reason
and Autopsie, that the Image of every Visible is pourtraid in the
Amphiblestroides, in an unnatural position, or Everse Form.

Art. 4. The Reason of the Eve^sion of the Image, in the Amphiblestroides.
As for that of Reason, it is thus Demonstrated. Suppose the Eye to be CD; the
bottom thereof to be E; the object illustrate by the Sun AB. viz. a Cross
painted on a Wall; the Pupil of the Eye, GH; and the Center of the Pupil, I;
Now, the Image of this Cross emanant therefrom, and entering the Pupil, in the
lines AT, BS, must arrive at the bottom of the Eye, ST, in an Everse, or
praeposterous Form: because the narrowness of the Pupil, together with the
praevious Refraction, makes the rays concurrent at the point I, to Decussate,
or mutually intersect each other; so that the raye proceeding from A, falls
upon the part of the Retina Tunica, T, and the ray B falls upon S. Which makes
it of absolute necessity, that the upper part or Head of the Cross, A, be
depicted in the lower patt of the Concave of the Retina Tunica, T: and the
lower part, or Foot, B, in the upper part of the Concave of the Retina Tunica,
S.

And, as for that of Autopsie, or Ocular Experiment; Take the Eye of an Ox,
Art. 5. The same illustrate by an Experiment.
or (if the Anatomick Theater be open) of a man, for in that the species are
represented more to the life, than in the Eye of any other Animal, as Des
Carts (in dioptrices cap. 5. Sect. 11.) and having gently stripped off the three
Coats in the bottom, in that part directly behind the Chrystalline, so that
the Pellucidity thereof become visible, place it in a hole of proportionate
magnitude, in the wall of your Closet, made obscure by excluding all other
light, so that the Anterior part theaeof may respect the light. This done,
admoving your Eye toward the denudated part of the Chrystalline; you may
behold the Species of any thing obverted to the outside of the Eye, to enter
through the Chrystalline to the bottom thereof, and there represented in a most
lively figure, as if pourtrayed by the exquisite Pencil of Apelles; but who^ly
Eversed: as in this following Iconisme.



Finally, an object appears either in Motion, or Quiet, Art. 6. Why the Moti^n
and Quiet of ob^ects ^re d^scerned by the sight.
according as the Image thereof, represented on the Retina Tunica, is moved: or
Quiet: only because, according to the Canon, in the praecedent Article,
touching the reason of the perception of the situation of an object, the
Visible is always judged to be in that part of Space, from which, in a direct
line, the last impression is made upon the Sensorium.

And this Reason is of extent sufficient to include the full Solution also of
that PROBLEM, Art. 7. Why (...) Images imita^e the motions of t^e^r Arti^pes o^
O^iginals.
by Alexander (2. de Anima 34.) so insulting proposed to the Defendants of
Epicurus Material Actinobolisme Visive, or the Emanation of substantial Images
from the Object to the Eye: viz. Why does the Image of a man move, when
reflected from a Mirror, according as the man moves? For, this Phenomenon we
are to referr to the Variation of the parts of the Mirror, from each of which
it is necessary that a fresh Reflection of the Species be made into the Eye: and
consequently, that the Image appear moved, according to the various motions of
the object. The necessity of this is evident from hence; if you stand beholding
your face in a Glass, and there be diverse others standing by, one at your right
hand, another at your left, a third looking over your head in the same Glass;
they shall all behold your image, but each in a distinct part of the Glass.
Whence you may also understand, that in the Looking-glass is not only that
Image, which you behold, but also innumerable others; and those so mutually
communicant, that in the same place, where you behold your nose, another shall
see your chin, a third your forehead, a fourth your mouth, a fifth your Eyes,
etc. and yet does no one see other then a simple and distinct Image. Moreover
you may hence infer, that in the medium is no point o^ Space, in which there
is not formed a perfect Image of the ^aye^ concurring therein, and advenient
from the same object; though not from the same parts, or particles thereof: and
consequently that in the whole Medium there are no two Images perfectly alike;
as also, that what the Vulgar Philosophers teach, that the whole Image is in
the whole Space or Medium, and whole in every part thereof, is a manifest
Falsity. For, though it may be said justly enough, that the whole Image, i. e.
the Aggregate of all the Images, is in the whole Space: yet is there no part of
that Space, in which the whole Image can be.

Art. 8. W^y the right ^ide of a C^toptrical Image respects the L^ft of its
Exemplar. And why two Catoptrick Glasses, confrontingly posited, cause a
R^stitution of the parts of the Image to the natural Form.
To this place belongs also that PROBLEM; Why does not the right hand of the
Image respond to the right of the object: but contrariwise, the left to the
right, and right to the left?

The Cause whereof consists only in the Images Confronting the Object: or,
as Plato (in Timaeo) most perspicuously expresses it, quia contrarijs visus
partibus ad contrarias parts ^it contactus. Understand it by supposing a
second person posited in the place of the Mirror, and confronting the first:
for, his right hand must be opposed to the others left.

Nor is the reason of the Inversion of the parts of the Image other than this;
that the rays emitted from the right side of the object, are reflected on the
left, and ^ Contra. Just as in all Impressions, or Sigillations, the right side
of the Antitype responds to the left of the type. Consule Aquilonium, lib. 1.
opt. proposit. 46. And, as for the reason of the Restitution of the parts of
the Image to the right position of the parts of the object; by two Mirrours
confrontingly posite^* it may most easily and satisfactorily be explained by
the Decussation of the reflected rays.

To Conclude. We need not advertise, that the Optical Problems referrible to
this place, are, (if not infinite) so numerous, as to require a larger Volume
to their orderly Proposition and Solution, than what we have designed to the
whole of this our Physiology. Nor remember you, that our principal Scope in
this Chapter, was only to evince the Prae^^inence of Epicurus Hypothesis above
all others, concerning the Reason and Manner of Vision; and this by
accommodating it to the Verisimilous Explanation of the most Capital
Dif^^culties* occurring to a profound inquest into that abstruse subject. All
therefore that remains unpaid of our praesent Debt, is modestly to referr it to
your equitable Arbitration; Whether we have deserted the Doctrine of the
Aristoteleans, touching this theorem, and addicted ourselves to the Sect of the
Epicureans, on any other Interest, but that sacred one of Verity: which once to
decline, or neglect, upon the sinister praetext of vindicating any Human
Auctority; is an unpardonable Profanation of Reason, and high treason against
the state of Learning.

CHAP. IV. THE NATURE OF COLOVRS*
SECT. I.
THe Rabbis, whenever they encounter any Problem; Art. 1. The Argument duly
acknowledged to ^e superlatively Difficult, i^ not absolutely A^atalept^cal.
that seems too strong for their Reason; to excuse their despair of conquering
it, they instantly recurr to that proverbial Sanctuary, Reservatur in adventum
Eliae, it belongs to the Catalogue of secrets, that are re^erved for the
revealment of Elia^. And, ingenously, if any Abstrus^^y in Nature be so
impervestigable, as to justify our open profession of Incapacity, and
necessitate our oppressed Understanding to retreat to the same common Refuge; it
must be this of the NATURE OF COLORS, to the consideration whereof the Clue of
our Method has now brought us. For, though all Philosophers unanimously
embrace, as an indubitable verity, that the object of Sight in General, is
(...), Visible, whatever is deprehensible by that Sens^* and that, in
Particular, the Proper and Adequate object thereof, is (...), Color, because
nothing is visible but under the gloss or vernish of Color, nor does Light it
self submit to the d^scernment of the eye, quate^us Lux, in the capacity ofits
Form, or merely as Light, but instar Albedinis, (...) it retains to Whiteness;
all which Mersennus (optic^e part 2. theorem. 1.) has judiciously contracted
into this one Theorem, ^bjectu^ visus praecipuum est Lux and Color, vel Lux
colorata, aut Color incidus: we say, notwithstanding this their Groundwork be
laid in the rock of manifest Certitude, yet when they attempt to erect thereon
an established and permanent Theory of the Essence of Colors, either in their
s^^ple and first Natures, or complex and secondary Removes; they find the eye
of their Curiosity so obnubilated with dense and impervious Difficulties, that
all of certainty they can discover, is only this; that their most subtle
indagations were no more but anxious Gropings in the dark, after that, whose
Existence is evidenced only by, and Essence consists chiefly in Light. But,
this Infelicity of our Intellectuals will be more fully commonstrated by our
abridged rehearsal of the most memorable Opinions of others, and the
declarement of our own, concerning this Magnale.

The Despot of the Schools ( in lib. de sensu and sensili, Art. 2. The sentence
of Arist^tle, concerning the Nature of Colors: and the Comment^^y of Scal^ge^
thereup^n.
cap. 3.) defines Color to be, (...), the Extremity of a Diaphanum, or
transparent body terminated: subjoining that Color appertains to all things,
ratione Perspicuitatis, and consequently, that the extremity of a perspicuous
body terminated is the Subject of Color. Which that we may clearly understand,
let us consult the great Scaliger, who ( in Exercit. 325.) thus concisely
Comments thereupon. If the Perspicuum (says He) suffer condensation so far as
to the amission of its Transparency, and so prohibit the trajection of the
Visible Species; it instantly becomes Colorate, and ought to be accounted
Terminate, because it bounds or limits the Visive rays. Wherefore, the law of
Consequence injoineth, that we explore the Essence of Colors, in the Gradual
Termination of the Diaphanum; and derive that Termination (1) from mere
Condensation, without the admixture of any other thing to the Diaphanum; as may
be instanced in the Stars, for they become visible, though of a Lucid nature,
only because they are of a Compact or Dense contexture. (2) From the Admission
of an Opace with a Translucid body; as is exemplified in our Culunary Fire,
which though in the simplicity of its most perspicuous, does yet appear Red,
because commixt and in some degree obnubilated with fuliginous Exhalations,
from the pabulum or Fuel thereof, or compound body in combustion. The same
likewise is to be understood of Aer and Water; for, those three Elements are
all perspicuous, though in diverse degrees: Fire being most perspicuous, Aer
possessing the next degree, and Water coming behind them both, as seeming to be
a Medium betwixt Perspicuity and Opacity. And, therefore, from the admission of
the parts of that Opace Element, Earth, to any other of the three Diaphanous*
one or other Color among the many must arise. But, the Perspicuum passes
first into Whiteness, and therefore is it that Perspicuity, Light and
Whiteness, are of the same nature, cozen Germans once removed, and discriminate
only by Degrees: as, on the contrary, an Opacum, Darkness, and Blackness are
also cognate. ^his being the original of the Two Father, or Ground Colors: it
can be no Difficulty to attain the specifical Causes of all others, since they
are only Intermediate, i. e. they arise from the various Complexion or
Contemperation of the two Extrems. And this is the sense of Aristotle's Text, if
we admit the interpretation of Scaliger.

Plato, being either unable, Art. 3. The opinion of Plato.
or unwilling to erase out of the table of his mind some of the ingravements of
Democritus; understands Color to be Flammula quaedam, sive Fulgor, e singulis
corporibus emicans, parts habens visui accommodatas (in Timaeo). For, having
held, as Diogenes Laertius (lib. 3.) has well observed, and we may easily
collect from that discourse of his, in the name of Timaeus Locrus; that the
world consists of the four Elements, of Fire, as it is Visible, of Earth, as
Tangible, of Aer and Water, ut proportione non vacet: lest he should apostate
from his Fundamentals, He affirmed, Corpora videri propter Ignem, and propter
Terram tangi, that the Visibility of all things was radicated in their
participation of Fire, and their Tangibility in their share of Earth; and
consequently that the Color of bodies was nothing but an (...), or Emicancy of
their internal Fulgor, and the variety of its Species dependent merely on the
various degrees, or more or less of that inhaerent luster.

As for the Pythagorean and Stoic; the Former, with inexcusable incogitancy,
Art. 4. Of the Pythagorean and Stoi^k.
confounded the Tinctures of things with their Extrems, allowing no real
difference betwixt the Superfice, and the Color it bears. Pythagor^s Colorem
e^le extimam corporis superficiem censuit, hanc ob Caussam; quod Color Sectilem
naturam habet, non tamen sit Corpus, aut Linea: as Plutarch (de Placit.
Philosoph.) and out of him, Bernhard. Caesius (de Mineral. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Sect. 2. art. 12.). The Later, with unsatisfactory subtility, (as if, indeed,
He meant rather to blanch over the (...), or incomprehensibility of the
Subject, with ambiguous and Sophistical Terms, than confess, or remove it.)
makes Color to be (...), a certain Efflorescence, arising from a determinate
Figuration of the First Matter; as we have collected from the memorials of
Plutarch (lib. 1. de Placit. Philosoph. cap. 15.)

Lastly, the illuminated Sons of Hermes, who boast to have, if not attained to
the bottom of the mystery, Art. 5. Of the Spagyrical Philosophers.
yet out done the endeavors of all other Sects of Philosophers, in profounding
it; confidently lead our curiosity to their general Asylum, the three Universal
Principles, Sal, Sulphur and Mercury, and tell us, that the Elemental Salts
carry the mighty hand, or most potent Energy in the production of Colors. For,
supposing three kinds of Salt in all natural Concretions; the first a Fixed and
Terrestrial, the second a Sal Nitre, allied to Sulphur, the Third a Volatile or
Ammoniac, referrible to Mercury; and that all bodies receive degrees of
Perspicuity, or Opacity, respondent to the degrees of Volatility, or
Terrestriety in the Salts, that amass them: they thereupon deduce their various
Colors, or visible Glosses, from the various Commistion of Volatile or
Tralucent Salts, with Fixed or obscure.

Now, notwithstanding all these Sects are as remote each from other, Art. 6.
The reason of the (...), and election of Democritus and Epicurus judg^^ent,
touching the Genera^i^n of Col^u^s.
as the Zenith from the Nadir, in their opinions touching the Nature and
Causes, of Colors, as to all other respects; yet do they generally Concur in
this one particular, (...), Colores esse Coh^rentes corporibus, that Colors
are CONGENITE* or COHAERENT to bodies. Which being manifestly repugnant to
reason, as may be clearly evinced as well from the Arguments alleged by
Plutarch (1. advers. Colot.) to that purpose, as from the result of our whole
subsequent discourse, concerning this theorem: we need no other justification
of our Desertion of them, and Adhaerence to that more verisimilous Doctrine of
Democritus and Epicurus, (...), Colorem Lege esse, or more plainly in the words
of Epicurus, (...); Colores in corporibus gigni, juxta quosdam, respectu visus*
ordines positusque. The Probability of which opi^^^n, that we may with due
strictness and aequ^n^mity examine; and (...) wh^t we formerly delivered, in
our O^igine of Qualities, touching the possible Causes of an inassignable
Variety of Colors:

We are briefly to advertise, Art. 7. The Text of Epicurus, fully and
faithfully expounded.


First, That by the word, (...), Bodies, we are not to understand Atoms, or
simple bodies, for those are generally praesumed to be devoyd of all Color;
but (...), Concretions, or Compounds. Secondly, that Epicurus, in this text,
according to the litteral importance thereof, and the Exposition of Gassendus,
his most judicious and copious Interpreter, had this and no other meaning. That
in the Extrems, or superficies of all Concretions, there are such certain
Coordinations and Dispositions of their component particles (which, according
to our First Assumption in the immediately praecedent Chapter, borrowed from
the incomparable Bullialdus, are never contexed without more or less of
Inaequality.) as that, upon the incidence of Light, they do and must exhibit
some certain Color, or other, respective to their determinate Reflection and
Refraction, or Modification of the rays thereof, and the position of the Eye,
that receives them. That from these superficial Extancies and and Cavities of
bodies are emitted those substantial Effluviaes, constituting the visible
Image; which striking upon the primary Organ of Vision, in a certain Order and
Position of particles, causes therein a sensation, or Perception of that
particular Color. But, that these Colors are not really Cohaerent to those
superficial particles, so as not to be actually separated from them, upon the
abscedence of Light: and, consequently that Colors have no Existence in the
Dark. Moreover, that the substance of Light, or the minute particles, of which
its beams consist, are necessarily to be superadded to the superficial
particles of bodies, as the Complement, nay the Principal part of Color: as
may be inferred from these words of Epicurus, registered by Plutarch (1. advers.
Colot.) Quinetiam hac part (luce, viz.) seclusa, no^ video, qui dicere liceat,
corpora quae in tenebris in conspicua sunt, colorem habere. Of which persuasion
was also that admirable Mathematician, Samius Aristarchus; who positively
affirmed ( apud Stobaeum, in Ecl. Phys. 19.) Incidentem in subjectas res Lucem,
Colorem esse; ideoque constituta in tenebris corpora color prorsus destitui.
To which, doubtless Virgil ingeniously alluded in his -- Ubi Coelum condidit
Umbra
Jupiter, and rebus nox abstulit atra Colorem.
And Lucretius in his Qualis enim coecis poterit Color esse tenebris,
Lumine qui mutatur in ipso; propterea quod
Recta aut obliqua percussus luce refulget? etc.


And, lastly, that Light does create and vary Colors, according to the various
condition of the minute Faces, or sides of the Particles in the superfice,
which receive and reflect the incident rays thereof, in various Angles* toward
the Eye.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. A PARADOX That there are no Colors in the Dark.
HAving thus recited, explicated, and espoused the Conceptions of Epicurus, of
the Creation of Colors; it behooves us to advance to the Examination of its
Consistency with right reason, not only in its General capacity, but deduction
and accommodation to Particulars.

But, First, to praevent the excess of your wonder, at that so Paradoxical
assertion of his, That there are no Colors in the dark, or that all colors
vanish upon the Amotion or defection of Light; we are to observe that it is one
thing to be Actually Colorate, and another to be only Potentially, or to have a
Disposition to exhibit this or that particular Color, upon the access of the
Producent, Light. For, as the several Pipes in an Organ, though in themselves
all aequally Insonorous, or destitute of sound, have yet an equal Disposition,
in respect of their Figuration, to yield a sound, upon the inflation of Wind
from the Bellows; and as the seeds of Tulips, in Winter, are all equally
Exflorous, or destitute of Flowers, but yet contain, in their seminal Virtues,
a Capacity or Disposition to emit various colored flowers, upon the access of
fructifying heat and moisture, in the Spring: so likewise may all Bodies,
though we allow them to be actually Excolor, in the Dark, yet retain a
Capacity, whereby each one, upon the access and solicitation of Light, may
appear clad in this or that particular Color, respective to the determinate
Ordination and Position of its superficial particles.

Art. 2. A familiar Experiment, attesting the Verity thereof.
To inculcate this yet farther, we desire you to take a yard of Scarlet Cloth,
and having extended it in an uniform light, observe most exactly the Color,
which in all parts it bears. Then extend one half thereof in a primary light,
i. e. the immediately incident, or direct rays of the Sun; and the other in a
secondary, or once reflected light: and then, though perhaps, through the
praeoccupation of your judgment, you may apprehend it to be all of one color;
yet if you engage a skilful Painter to pourtray it to the life, as it is then
posited, He must represent the Directly illuminate half, with one Color, viz.
a bright and lightsome Red, and the Reflexly illuminate half, with another, i.
e. with a Duskish or more obscure Red; or shamefully betray his ignorance of
Albert Durers excellent Rules of shadowing, and fall much short of your
Expectation. This done, gently move the extended Cloth through various degrees
of Light and shadow: and you shall confess the Color thereof to be varied upon
each remove; respondent to the degree of Light striking thereupon. Afterward,
fold the Cloth, as Boys do paper for Lanterns, or lay it in waves or pleights
of different magnitude; and you shall admire the variety of Colors apparent
thereon: the l^minent and directly illustrate parts projecting a lively
C^^nation, the Lateral and averted yiedling an obscure sanguine, clouded with
Murrey, and the Profound or unillustrate putting on so perfect sables, as no
color drawn on a picture can counterfeit it to the life, but the deadest
Black. Your Sense thus satisfied, be pleased to exercise your Reason a while
with the same Example; and demand of your self, Whether any one of all those
different Colors can be really inhaerent in the Cloth? If you pitch upon the
Scarlet, as the most likely and proper; then must you either confess that
Color not to be really inhaerent, since it may, in less than a moment, be
varied into sables, only by an interception of Light: or admit that all the
other Colors exhibited, are aequally inhaerent; which is more, we praesume,
then you will easily allow. And, therefore, you may attain more of
satisfaction, by concluding, that indeed no one of all those Colors is really
so inhaerent in the cloth, as to remain the same in the absence of Light; but,
that the superficial particles of the Cloth have inhaerent in them ( ratione
Figurae, Coordinationis and Positus) such a Disposition, as that in one degree
of Light it must present to the eye such a particular color; in another
degree, a second gradually different from that; in another, a third
discriminate from both, until it arrive at perfect obscurity, or Black.

And, if your Assent hereto be obstructed by this DOUBT, Art. 3. The Constancy
of all Artificial Tinctures, dependent on the constancy of Disposition in the
superficial Particles of the Bodies that wear them.
Why that Cloth does most constantly appear Red, rather then Green, Blew,
Willow, etc. you may easily expede it, by admitting, that the Reason consists
only herein, that the Cloth is tincted in a certain Liquor, whose minute
Particles are, by reason of their Figure, Ordination and Disposition, comparate
or adapted to Refract and Reflect the incident rays of Light, in such a
manner, temperation, or modification, as must present to the eye, the species
of such a Color, viz. Scarlet, rather then a Green, Blew, Willow, or any
other. For, every man well knows, that in the Liquor, or Tincture, wherein the
Cloth was dyed, there were several ingredients dissolved into minute p^rticles;
and that there is no one Hair, or rather no sensible part in the superfice
thereof, whereunto Myriads of those dissolved particles do not constantly
adhere, being agglutinated by those Fixative Salts, such as Sal Gemmae, Alum,
calcined Talk, Alablaster, Sal Armoniack, etc. wherewith Dyers use to graduate
and engrain their Tinctures. And, therefore of pure necessity it must be, that,
according to the determinate Figures and Contexture of those adhaerent
Granules, to the villous particles in the superfice of the Cloth, such a
determinate Refraction and Reflection of the rays of Light should be caused;
and consequently such a determinate species of Color, and no other, result
therefrom.

Now, insomuch, Art. 4. That s^ generally magnif^ed Distinction of Colors into
Inh^rent, and merely Apparent; redargued of manife^t C^ntrad^ction.
as it is demonstrated by Sense that one and the same superfice does shift it
self into various Colors, according to its position in various degrees of
Light and Shadow, and the various Angles, in which it reflecteth the incident
rays of Light, respective to the Eye of the Spectator; and justly inferrible
from thence by Reason, that no one of those Colors can be said to be more
really inhaerent than other therein, all being equally produced by Light and
Shadow gradually intermixed, and each one by a determinate Modification thereof:
What can remain to interdict our total Explosion of that Distinction of Colors
into Real or Inhaerent, and False, or only ^pparent, so much celebrated by the
Schools? For, since it is the Genuine and Inseparable Propriety of Colors, in
General, to be Apparent; ^o suppose that any Color Apparent can be False, or
less Real than other, is an open Contradiction, not to be dissembled by the
most specious Sophistry; as Des Carts has well observed ( in Meteor. cap. 8.
art. 8.). Besides, as for those Evanid Colors, which they call (...), merely
Apparent ones, such as those in the Rainbow, Parheliaes, Paraselens, the trains
of Peacocks, necks of Doves, Mallards, etc. we are not to account them Evanid,
because they are not True: but, because the Disposition of those superficial
particles in the Clouds, and Feathers, that is necessary to the Causation of
them, is not Constant, but most easily mutable; in respect whereof those
Colors are no more permanent in them, than those in the Scarlet cloth, upon
the various position, extension, plication thereof. And Charity would not
dispense, should we suppose any man so obnoxious to absurdity, as to admit,
that the greater or less Duration of a thing does alter the Nature of it. Grant
we, for Example, that the particles of Water constituting the rorid Cloud,
wherein the Rainbow shows it self, were so constant in that determinate
position and mutual coordination, as constantly to refract and reflect the
incident beams of the Sun, in one and the same manner; and then we must also
grant, that they would as constantly exhibit the same Species of Colors, as a
R^inbow painted on a table: but, because they are not, and so cannot constantly
refract and reflect the irradiating light, in one and the same manner; it is
repugnant to reason, thereupon to conclude, that the Instability of the Colors
does detract from the Verity, or Reality of their Nature. For, it is only
Accidental, or Unessential to them either to be varied, or totally disappear.
So that, if you admit that Sea Green observed in the Rainbow, to be less True,
than the Green of an Herb, because its Duration is scarce momentany in
comparison of that in the Herb* you must also admit that Green in the Herb,
which in a short progress of time degenerates into an obscure yellow, to be
less true, than that of an Emrauld, because its Duration is scarce momentany,
in comparison of th^^ of the Emrauld.

Art. 5. The Emphat^^al, or Evan^d Colo^rs, created by (...); n^ less R^al and
(...), than the ^ost (...) Ti^ctures.
But, perhaps* Praejudice makes you yet inflexible, and therefore you will farther
urge; that the Difficulty does chiefly concern those Evanid Colors, which ^^e
appinged on Bodies, reflecting light, by Prisms or Triangular Glasse^, vulgarly
called Fools Paradises: because these seem to have the least of Reality, among
all other reputed merely Apparent. And, in case y^^ assault us with this your
last Reserve; we shall not desert our station, for want of strength to maintain
it. For, that those Colors are as Real, as any other the most Durable, is
evident even from hence; that they have the very same Materials with all other,
i. e. they are the substance of Light it self reflected from those objected
Bodies, and (what happens not to those eyes, that speculate them without a
Prism) twice refracted.

Experience d^monstrates, that if a man look intently upon a polite Globe, in
that part of it superfice, from which the incident Light is reflecte^* in
direct lines toward his eye; He shall perceive it to appear clad in another
Color, than when He looks upon it from any other part of the Medium, toward
which the Light is not reflected: and (...) He have no reason, why He should
not account both those Dif^^^ent Colors to be True* the Reflection of light,
which varieth the Apparition according to the various Position of the eye in
several parts of the Medium, nothing diminishing their Verity. If so, why
should not those Colors created by the Prism, be also reputed Real; the
Refraction of Light, which exhibiteth other Colors in the objected Bodies,
than appear in them without that Refraction, nothing diminishing their Reality?

By way of COROLLARY, let us here observe; Art. 6. COROLLARY.

The Reasons of Emphatical Colors, appinged on Bodies objected, by a Prism.


that the Colors created by Light, reflected from objects on the Prism, and
therein twice refracted, are Geminated on both sides thereof. For, insomuch as
those Colors are not appinged but on the Extremes of the Object, or where the
sup^rfice is unequal (for if that be Plane and Smooth, it admits only an
Uniform Color, and the same that appears thereon, when beheld without the
Prism): therefore are two Colors always observed in that Extreme of the
Object, which respects the Base of the Triangle in the Glass, and those are a
Vermillion and a Yellow; and two other Colors in that extreme, which
respects the Top of the Triangle, and those are a Violet blew, and a Grass
green. And hence comes it, that if the Latitude of the Superfice be so small,
as that the extremes approach each other sufficiently near; then are the two
innermost Colors, the Yellow and Green connected in the middle of the
Superfice, and all the four Colors constantly observe this order, beginning
from the Base of the Triangle; a Vermillion, Yellow, Green, and Violet, beside
the inassignable variety of other Intermediate Colors, about the Borders and
Commissures. We say, Beginning from the Base of the Triangle; because, which
way soever you convert the Prism, whether upward or downward, to the right or
to the left, yet still shall the four Colors distinguishably succeed each
other in the same method, from the Base: however all the rays of Light
reflected from the object on the Prism, and trajected through it, are carried
on in lines parallel to the Base, after their incidence on one side thereof,
with the obliquity or inclination of near upon thirty degrees, and Refraction
therein to an Angle of the same dimensions; that issuing forth on the other
side, they are again Refracted in an Angle of near upon 30 degrees, and with
the like obliquity, or inclination.

These Reasons equitably valued, it is purely Consequent, Art. 7. The true
Difference of Emphatical and Durable Colour^* (...).
that no other Difference ought to be allowed between these Emphatick, or (as
the Peripatetick.) False Colors, and the Durable or True ones, than only this;
that the Apparent deduce their Creation, for the most part, from Light
Refracted in Diaphanous Bodies, respectively Figurated, and Disposed, and
sometimes from light only reflected: but, the Inhaerent, or True (as they call
them) deduce theirs from Light variously Reflexed in opace bodies, whose
superficial particles, or Extancies and Cavities are of this or that Figure,
Ordination, and Disposition.

Not that we admit the Durable Colors, no more than the Evanid, Art. 8. No
Color Formally in^^erent in objects* but onl^ (...)* or (...) c^^^rary to the
constant (...).
to be Formally (as the Schools affirm) Inhaerent in Opace bodies, whose
superficial Particles are determinately configurate and disposed to the
production of this or that particular species of colou^^, and no other: but
only Materially, or Effectively. For, the several species of Colors depend on
the several Manners, in which the minute particles of Light strike upon and
affect the Retina Tunica; and therefore are we to conceive, that op^^e Bodies,
reflecting Light, do create Colors only by a certain Modification or
Temperation of the reflected light, and respondent Impression thereof on the
Sensory: no otherwise than as a Needle which though it contain not in it self
the Formal Reason of Pain, does yet Materially, or Effectively produce it, when
thrust into the skin of an Animal; for, by reason o^ its Motion, Hardness, and
Acuteness, it causes a dolorous sensation in the part perforated.

Art. 9. (...) ^arther* ^indi^ated from Difficulty, by the (...) pra^cede^^
(...) o^ the A^^mists.
To diminish t^^ Difficulty yet more, we are to recognize; that the First
Matter, or Catholic Principles of all Material Natures, are absolutely devoyd
of all Sensible Qualities; and that the Qualities of Concretions, such as
Color, Sound, Odor, Sapor, Heat, Cold, Humidity, Siccity, Asperity,
Smoothness, Ha^dness, Softness, etc. are really nothing else but various
MODIFICATIONS of the insensible particles of the First Matter, relative to the
va^ious Organs of the Senses. For, since the Org^ns of the Sight, Hearing,
^asting, Smelling, and Touching, have each a peculiar Contexture of the
insensible particles that compose them; requisite it is, that in Concretions
there should be various sorts of Atoms, some of such a special Magni^^^^,
Figure and Motion, as that falling into the Eye, they may conveniently move or
affect the Principal Sensory, and therein produce a sensation of themselves;
and that either Grateful or Ungrateful, according as they are Commodious or
Incommodious to the small Receptaries thereof (for the Gratefulness or
Ingratefulness of Colors arises from the Congruity or Incongruity of the
particles of the Visible Species, to the Receptaries or sm^ll Pores in the
Retina Tunica): Some, in like m^nner, that may be conv^nient to the Organ of
Hearing; Others to that of smelling, etc. So that, though Atoms of all sorts of
Magnitude, Figure and Motion contexed into most minute Masses, arrive at all
the Organs of Sense; yet may the Eye only be sensible of Color, the Ear of
Sound, the Nostrils of Odor, etc. Again, that Color, Sound, Odor, and all
other sensible Qualities, are (...) according to the various situation, order,
addition, detraction, transposition of Atoms; in the same manner as Words,
whereof an almost infinite ^ariety may be composed of no more then 24 Letters,
by their various sit^^tion, order, addition, detraction, transposition; as we
have more cop^^^sly discoursed, in our precedent Original of Qualities.

SECT. III.
TO descend to Particulars. It being more than probable, Art. 1. The Nativity
of White; or the reason of its percep^ion by the sight
that the various species of Colors have their Origin from only the various
Manners, in which the incident particles of Light, reflected from the
exteriours of Objects, strike and affect the principal sensory; it cannot be
improbable, that the sense of a White Color is caused in the Optic Nerve,
when such Atoms of light, or rays consisting of them, strike upon the Retina
Tunica, as come Directly from the Lucid Fountain, the Sun, or pure Flame; or
Reflexedly from a body, whose superficial particles are Polite and Sphaerical,
such as we have formerly conjectured in the smallest and hardly distinguishable
Bubbles of Froth, and the minute particles of Snow.

And, as for the perception of its Contrary, Black, generally, Art. 2. Black, a
meet Privation of Light.
though scarce warrantably reputed a Color; we have very ground for our
conjecture, that it arises rather from a mere Privation of Light, than any
Material Impression on the sensory. For, Blackness seems identical, or
coessential with Shadow: and all of it that is positively perceptible,
consists in its participation of Light, which alone causes it not to be
absolutely Invisible. And hence is it, that we have several Degrees, or gradual
Differences of Black, comparative to the several degrees of shadow, progressing
till we arrive at perfect Darkness: and that we can behold nothing so black,
which may not admit of deeper and deeper blackness, according to its greater
and greater recess from light, and nearer and nearer access to absolute
Opacity. To reason, therefore, is it consonant that all Bodies, whose natural
Hew is Black, are composed of such insensible particles, whose surfaces are
scabrous, rough, or craggy, and their Contexture so Rare, or loose, as that
they rather imbibe, or swallow up the incident rays of light, than reflect
them outwardly toward the eye of the Spectator. Of this sort, the most
memorable, yet discovered, is the Obsidian stone, so much admired and
celebrated among the Romans; whose substance being conflated of scabrous and
loosely contexed Atoms, causes it to appear a perfect Negro, though held in
the Meridian Sunshine: because the rays invading it are for the most part, as
it were absorpt and stifled in the small and numerous Caverns and Meanders
variously interspersed among its component particles. Which common and
illiterate eyes beholding, delude their curiosity with this refuge; that it
has an Antipathy to Light, and does therefore reflect it converted into
shadows.

The Generation of the Two Extreme and Ground Colors, Art. 3. The Genealog^ of
all Intermediate Color*
White and Black, being attained by this kind of inquest into the Rolls of
reason; the Former deriving it self from Light; either immediately and in
direct lines profluent from its fountain; or by reflection from bodies, whose
superficial particles are sphaerical and polite; the Later from the Negation of
Light: there can be no great difficulty remaining concerning the Genealogy of
all other INTERMEDIATE ones, since they are but the offspring of the Extreme,
arising from the intermission of Light and shadow, in various proportions; or,
more plainly, that the sense of them is caused in the Retina Tunica, according
to the variety of Reflections and Refractions, that the incident Light suffers
from the superficial particles of objects, in manner exactly analogous to that
of the Evanid Colors, observed in sphaerical Glasses, replete with Water, in
Prismes interposed betwixt the object and eye, in angular Diamonds, Opalls,
etc. For, even our sense demonstrates, that they are nothing, but certain
Perturbations, or Modifications of Light, interspersed with Umbrellaes, or
small shadows.

Art. 4. The Causes of the Sympathy and Antipathy of some Colors.
The Verisimility of this may be evinced from the Sympathy and Antipathy of
these intermediate Colors, among themselves. For, the Reason, why Yellow holds
a sympathy, or symbolical relation with Vermillion and Green, and Green with
Sky-colour and Yellow, (as the experience of Painters testifies, who educe a
yellow Pigment out of Vermillion and Green, in due proportions commixt, upon
their Palatts: and reciprocally, Green out of Yellow and Sky-colour, in
unaequal but determinate quantities contempered) is no other but the Affinity
of their respective Causes, or only gradually different manners of Light
reflected and refracted, and intermixed with minute and singly imperceptible
shadows. And, on the contrary, the Reason of the Antipathy, or Asymbolical
relation betwixt a saffron Yellow and a Caerule, betwixt a Green and a Rose
color, into which a saffron yellow degenerates, and betwixt a Yellow and
Purple, into which a Caerule degenerates: can be nothing else, but the
Dissimilitude or Remoteness of their respective Causes; since things so
remotely Discrepant, are incapable of Conciliation into a Third, or Neutral, or
(rather) Amphidectical Nature, but by the mediation of something, that is
participant of both. This the Philosopher glanced at in his; Colores misceri
videntur, quemadm^dum soni; ita enim qui eximium quoddam proportionis genus
servant, hi Consonantiarum more, omnium suavissimi sunt, ceu purp^reus and
puniceus, etc. (de sens. and sensil. cap. 3.)

Art. 5. The intermistion of small shadows, among the lines of Light;
absolutely necessary to the Generation of any Intermediate Color.
We say, that all these Intermediate Colors emerge from the various
intermistion of Light, and small shadows; because, to the production of each of
them from reflected, or refracted Light, or both, the interposition of minute,
and separately invisible shadows, is indispensably Necessary. Which may be
evidenced even from hence, that Colors are not by Prismes appinged on bodies,
but in their Margines or Extremes, there where is not only the general
Commissure of Light and Shadows; but also an Inaequality of superfice: which,
by how much the more scabrous or rough, by so much the more are the Colors
apparent thereon, ampliated in Latitude. For, since there is no superfice,
however smooth and equal to the sense, devoid of many Extancies and Cavities;
as we have more then once profestly declared: it is of necessity, that betwixt
the confronting sides of the Extancies, reflecting the rays of light hither and
thither, there should be intercedent small shadows, in the interjacent
Cavities, from which no light is reflected. And hence is it, that in an object
speculated through a Prism, the Caerule color appears so much the more Dense
and lively, by how much the nearer to the limbus, or Extreme of the Object it
is appinged; because, in that place, is the greater proportion of small
shadows: and e contra, so much more Dilute and Pale* by how much farther it
recedeth from the Margin, insomuch that it degenerates, or dwindles at last
into weak Seagreen, or Willow, in its inmost part; because, in that place is
the greater proportion of Light. Conformable to that rule of Athanas. Kircher.
(Art. Magn. Lucis and Umbrae. lib. 1. part. 2. cap. 1.) Differunt autem and
Umbra and Fulgores, majore and minore vel candore, and nigrore, prout vel Fonti
lucis, aut tenebrarum propriores fuerint, vel a font longius recesserint, in
quo luce and obscuritate summa sunt utraque. Unde patet, quanto Fulgores a luce
magis recesserint, tanto plus Nigredinis; and quanto a tenebris magis
recesserint Umbrae, diminuto nigrore, tanto plus albedinis acquirere: quae
omnia Visus judicare potest. The same, proportionately, we conceive to hold
good also in all Bodies, whose Colors are Genuine, or apparent to the naked
Eye: chiefly because we may lawfully conceive, that every particle of every
hair in a Scarlet, or Violet colored Cloth, is consimilar in disposition to
the particles in the extremes of an Object speculated through a Prism: and hold
it purely Consequential thereupon, that light may arrive at the Eye from them,
with the like Reflections and Intermistion with shadows, as from the extremes
of the Reflectent Body, through the Glass, which advances its commixture with
small shadows. And what we affirm of Scarlet and Violet, may also, with no less
Congruity, be accommodated to Yellow and Seagreen; allowing the same
proportion and modification of Light and Shadows in them as in that part of the
superfice of any other body, on which the Prism does appinge them: and in like
manner to all other Colorate objects, whose Tinctures bear any Affinity to
either of these four specified, or arise from the Complexion of any two or more
of them.

But here we are arrested by Two notable, Art. 6. Two eminent PROBLEMS
concerning the Generation and Transposition of the Vermillion and Cae^ule,
appinged on Bodies by Prismes.
and to our praecedent theory seemingly inconsistent PROBLEMS: which though of
Difficulty enough to deserve the wealthy speculations of Archimedes, do yet
require from us at least a plausible Solution, on the paenalty of no less than
the loss of reputation, and the posting up a Writ of Bankrupt against our
reason, by that austere Creditor, Curiosity.

(1) How comes it, that those two so discrepant and assymbolical Colors,
created by a Prism, Vermillion and Caerule, arise from Causes so Cognate; the
former only from the Commistion of a greater proportion of Light with a less of
Shadows; the Later from a less proportion of Light with a greater of Shadows?

(2) Why, when those two Colors Emphatical, Vermillion and Carule are by a
Prism intermediate, projected on a Wall or sheet of white paper beyond it, from
the light of a Candle; if you put your eye in that place, ^n which either of
the two Colors is appinged, so that another person, conveniently posited in
the same room, may behold the same distinctly shining on the pupil of your eye;
yet shall you plainly and distinctly perceive the other Color in the Glass?
For Example; if the Vermillion appear on your eye, you shall nevertheless
clearly see a Caerule in the Glass: and transpositively, though your eye be
manifestly and totally tincted with a Carule, yet shall you see a Vermillion.

Art. 7. The Solution of the Former: with a rational Conjecture of the Cause of
the Blew, apparent in the Concave of the Heavens.
Touching the Former, we shall adventure to desume the Solution thereof merely
from the Figure of the Prisme, and determine the Reason on this only; that the
Rays of Light arriving at the Base of the Triangle, are trajected through it
by a longer tract or way, than those arriving at or nearer to the Top thereof:
and therefore, the Glass being in that part most crass, there must be more
impervious particles obsistent to the Rays of Light; each one whereof
repercussing its raye back again into the medium from the Glass, causes that
the number of shadows is multiplied in that part of the object, which the Base
of the Triangle directly respects; and consequently produces a Caerule
Tincture thereon. Such as that, not only by vulgar, but many transcendently
learned Heads adscribed to the Firmament* which yet belongs rather to that vast
(many have said infinite) Space betwixt it and our Terrestrial Globe, being
caused by the rays of the Celestial Lamps, from swarms of minute bodies
interposed, thinly reflected toward our eyes: For, each of those impervious
particles swarming in that immense space, must repercuse a ray of Light
deradiated from above, and so by multiplying the number of shadows, make the
Firmament (which otherwise, according to probability, would wear the mourning
livery of Midnight) appear totally invested in an Azure mantle.

This, though mere Conjecture (and, indeed, the subject is too sublime to admit
of other than conjecture, since St. Paul has left us no observation concerning
it, in his rapture up into the third Heaven, and the design of the Ganzaes is
desperate) has in it somewhat more of reason, then that confident conceit of
Athanas. Kircherus (Art. Magn. lucis and umbrae, lib. 1. part. 3. cap. 3. de
Chromatismis rerum naturalium.) Medium inter utrumque Caeruleum, proximum, viz.
a nigro, seu tenebroso, colorem ad jucundissima illa Caelorum spatia, inoffenso
visu contemplanda, Natura providentissima mundo contulit, etc. that the
Providence of the Creator chose this Azure Tincture to invest the Firmament
withal, as the middle color between the two Extremes, White and Black, that so
our sight might not, when we speculate that universal Canopy, be either
perstringed with the excessive luster of the one, nor terminated by the
absolute opacity of the other. Because, if the natural Color of the Firmament
were Azure, as He praesumes; then would it, by reason of the vast Space betwixt
it and our sight, and the repercussion of the greatest part of the rays of
Light, from our eye, by those Myriads of Myriads of Myriads of small bodies
replenishing that intermediate Space, necessarily appear of some other color:
the experience of Seamen assuring, that all Colors, (White and that of pure
Flame, retaining to Whiteness, only excepted) lose themselves in long
trajection through the medium, and that even Land, which is but few degrees
removed from Opacity, appears to the first discovery like a bluish Cloud lying
level to the Horizon. It being certain, therefore, that by how much the farther
any Color recedeth from Whiteness, by so much the less way it is visible
(which the Grecian intimates in the word, (...), Albus, (...), quod procul
videatur.) and that even the Earth, an Opace body, to Seamen first Kenning it,
at large distance, appears clad in a kind of obscure bluish Mantle: it cannot
be dissonant to reason to conceive, that the natural Color of the Firmament
cannot be Azure, since it so appears to us; and that it is rather Opace,
because it appears Azure, when illustrate by the reflected Light of the
Celestial Luminaries.

Again, because the rays of Light, incident on the Top of the Prism, are
trajected through it by a shorter cut, or passage, than those incident on the
Base; and so meet with fewer impervious and retundent particles, the Glass
being in that part thinnest: therefore is the number of shadows much less in
that part of the object, which respects the Cone or Top of the Triangle, than
in that, which confronts the Base; and those few shadows which remain
undiminisht, being commixt with a greater number of lines of light, are
transformed into the species of a Vermillion Red. Such as that daily observed
in the impure Flame of our Culinary Fires; which having many particles of
Fuligenous Exhalations commixt with its pure luminous particles, that
continuedly ascending, avert as many rays of light from the eye of the
Spectator, and so in some degree obnubulate it throughout: does therefore put
on the semblance of Redness. Or such as the Sun and Moon, commonly wear at
their rising; when the minor part, though many of their rays are re^used, and
averted from our sight, by the particles of dense vapors diffused through the
spacious Medium.

However this may be disputed, yet is it warrantable to conceive, that the
superficial Particles of all Bodies, clad in either of these Liveries,
Vermillion and Caerule, may have in their Contexture obtained such a
Disposition, as to reflect Light permixt with small shadows, in that definite
Temperation, or Modification, in which it usually arrives at the eye, after its
Trajection through a Prism; when it thereupon impresseth the sense of a
Vermillion, or Caerule.

As for the Enodation of the Later Difficulty, Art. 8. The Solution of the
Later.
it is comprehended in the Reasons of the Former. For, it being certain, that
the Vermillion projected by a Prisme, does consist of a greater proportion of
Light mingled with a less of Shadows, and the Caerule, on the contrary, of a
greater proportion of shadows interspersed among the lines of a less Light; and
as certain, that the Vermillion appears on that side of the Prisme, where the
Light is more copious, as therein meeting with fewer retundent impervious
particles, in the substance of the Glass; and the Caerule in that part, where
the Light is diminished, as meeting with more impervious particles, and being
by them repercussed: it must inevitably follow thereupon, that, if an opacous
body be posited within the bounds of this light, so that the light may fall on
each side thereof, and as it were fringe it; a symptom quite contrary to the
former shall evene, i. e. the Vermillion will appear on that side of the
species, which is over against the Caerule, and the Caerule will be transposed
to that side of the species, which confronteth the Vermillion. This is easily
Experimented with a piece of narrow black Ribbon affixt longwise to either side
of the Prisme. For, in that case, the light is bipartited into two Borders, or
Fringes, the opace part veyled by the Ribbon on each side environed with light,
and each border of light environed with two shadows; or, more plainly, between
each border of shadows conterminate to each extreme of Light, trajected through
the unopacate parts of the Glass: and, therefore, in the commissure of each of
the two lights with each of the conterminous shadows, there must be Vermillion
on one side, and Caerule on the other.

Now to drive this home to the head, the solution of the present Problem; the
Reason why, when the light of a Candle is trajected through a Prism, on a White
paper or Wall, posited at convenient distance beyond it, and there transformed
into these two luminous Colors, Vermillion and Caerule, if you put your eye in
that place of the Paper or Wall, whereon the Vermillion shines, you shall
perceive only the Caerule in the Glass, and e contra: we say, the Reason of
this alteration of site in the Colors seems to be only this, that the
circumstant Aer about the flame of the Candle being opacous, and so serving in
stead of two Blacks to environ the borders of light, causes that side of the
Candle, which is seen through the thicker part of the Glass, to appear Blew;
and that which is seen through the thinner, to appear Red; according to the
constant Phenomenon in Prismes. But, if the species be beheld by Reflection
from any illustrate and repercussing Body, such as the paper, or wall, then
must the series or method of the borders of light and shadow be inverted, for
the reason immediately praecedent, and consequently, the situation of the
Colors, emergent from their various contemperations, be also inverted.

Art. 9. The Reasons, why the Author proceeds not to investigate the Causes of
Compound Colors in Particular.
And thus have we, by the twilight of Rational Conjecture, given you a glimpse
of the abstruse Original of the Extreme and Simple Colors; and should now
continue our Attempt to the discovery of the Reasons of each of those many
COMPOUND ones, wherewith both Nature and Art so delightfully imbellish most of
their pieces: but, since they are as Generally, as rightly praesumed to be only
the multiplied removes of Light and Darkness, i. e. to be educed from the
various Commixtures of the Extreme, or Simple, or both; and so it cannot
require but a short exercise of the Intellect to investigate the determinate
proportions of any two, or more of the Simple ones, necessary to the creation
of any Compound Color assigned (especially when those excellent Rules of that
Modern Apelles, Albertus Durerus, praescribed in his Art of Limning; and the
common Experience of Painters, in the Confection of their several Pigments,
afford so clear a light toward the remove of their remaining obscurity, and the
singling out their particular Natures): we cannot but suppose, that any greater
superstructure on this Foundation, would be looked upon rather as Ornamental and
Superfluous, than Necessary to the entertainment of moderate Curiosity.
Especially when we design it only as a decent Refuge, for the shelter of
ingenious Heads from the Whirlwind of Admiration: and not as a constant Mansion
for Belief. Art. 10. He confesses the Erection of this whole Discourse, on
simple Conjecture: and enumerates the Difficulties to be subdued by him, who
hopes to attain an Apodictical Knowledge of the Essence and Causes of Colors.


For, as we cautiously praemonished, in the First Article, the Foundation of it
is not laid in the rock of absolute Demonstration, or de^umed a Priori; but in
the softer mould of mere Conje^ture, and that no deeper than a Posteriori. And
this we judge expedient to profess, because we would not leave it in the mercy
of Censure to determine, whether or no we pretend to understand, What are the
proper Figures and other essential Qualities of the insensible Particles of
Light; with what kind of Vibration, or Evolution they are deradiated from their
Fountain; What are the determinate Ordinations, Positions, and Figures of those
Reflectent and Refringent particles in the extremes of Bodies, Diaphanous and
Opace, which modifie the Light into this or that species of Color; What sort
of Reflection or Refraction, whether simple or multiplied, is required to the
creation of this or that Color; What are the praecise proportions of shadows,
interwoven with Light, which disguise it into this or that color. Besides, had
we a clear and apodictical theory of all these nice^ies; yet would it be a
superlative Difficulty for us to advance to the genuine Reasons, Why Light, in
such a manner striking on the superfice of such a body, therein; suffering such
a Reflection or Refraction, or both, and commixt with such a proportion of
shadows in the medium, should be transformed into a Vermillion, rather then a
Blew, Green, or any other Color. Again, were our Understanding arrived at this
sublimity, yet would it come much short of the top of the mystery, and it might
hazard a dangerous Vertigo in our brains to aspire to the Causes, Why by the
appulse of Light so or so modified, there is caused in the Eye so fair and
delightful a Sensation; as that of Vision; and why the sentient Faculty, or
soul therein operating, becomes sensible not only of the particular stroke of
the species, but also of the Color of it.

For, where is that Oedipus, that can discover any Analogy betwixt the Retina
Tunica, Optic Nerve, Brain, or Soul therein resident, and any one Color? and
yet no man can deny that there is some certain Analogy betwixt the Species and
Sensory: since otherwise there could be no Patibility on the one part, nor
Agency on the other.

We are not ignorant, Art. 11. Des Carts attempt to dissolve the chief of
those Difficulties; unsucsessful: because grounded on an unstable Hypothesis.
that the aspiring Wit of Des Carts has made a towering flight at all these
sublime Abstrusities, and boldly fastened the hooks of his Mechanic Principles
upon them, thinking to stoop them down to the familiar view of our reason. But
supposing that all Colors arise from the various proportions of the process
and circumvolutions of the particles of Light in bodies respective to various
Dispositions of their superficial particles, which accordingly more or less
Accelerate, or Retard them; as He has copiously declared ( in Dioptric. cap.
1. and Meteor. cap. 8.): and erecting this upon his corner stone, or grand
Hypothesis, that Light is nothing but an Appulse or Motion of the Ether; or
most subtle, and so most agile matter in the Universe; which is merely
praecarious, and never to be conceded by any, who fears to ensnare himself in
many inextricable Difficulties, Incongruities, and Contradictions, in the
deducement of it through all the Phenomenon of Light, Colors, and Vision: all
that we can allow him, as to this particular, besides our thanks for his
laborious Endeavors, is that close of Phaetons Epitaph, Magnis tamen excidit
ausis.

CHAP. V. THE NATURE OF LIGHT.
SECT. I.
IN our three immediately praecedent Chapters, Art. 1. The Clasp, or Ligament
of this, to the praecedent Chapter.
we have often mentioned the RAYS OF LIGHT, as the Material Principle both of
all Visible Species, and Colors; and that we may not leave our Reader
unsatisfied in any particular, the communication whereof seems necessary, or
advantageous to His full comprehension of all our Conceptions relating to those
Arguments, or any other of Affinity to them, that may hereafter occurr: we
judge it our Duty, here to let him clearly know, What Notion we have of the
Nature of that so admirably glorious and universally comfortable an Entitie,
Light.

Art. 2. The Authors Notion of the Rays of Light.
By the Rays of Light, we understand, certain most tenuious streams of Igneous
Particles in a continued fluor, and with ineffable pernicity succeding each
other in direct lines, either immediately from their Lucid Fountain, or
mediately from solid bodies reflecting them, toward the eye, and sensibly
affecting the same. Art. 3. A Parallelism betwixt a stream of Wat^r exsilient
from the Cock of a Cistern, and a Ray of Light emanant from its Lucid Fountain.


This Description may receive somewhat more both of perspicuity and credit, if
we consider the parallelism, or analogy, that each distinct Ray of Light holds
to a stream of water, exsilient from the Cock of a Cistern, or tube of an
Arti^icial Fountain. For, the reason why a stream of water issues from a tube
in a kind of arch, and flows to some distance from its source through the aer;
is only this, that the particles of Water first exsilient, upon the remove of
the stopple or obstacle, are so closely and contiguously pursued by other
particles immediately following, and those again by others indesinently
emanant, that they are impelled forward and driven on with such rapidity, as
overcomes their natural propensity to direct descent, by reason of their
Gravity, and carries them in a tense line from the vent so long as their
impulse is superior to that of their Gravity; which increasing more and more in
each degree of distance, does at length become victor over the force of the
Motion, and praecipitate them downright. And as this gradual Tensity, or
Rigidity of a stream of Water arises to it only from the Pressure or impulse
of the Antecedent particles by the Consequent, in an uninterrupted succession:
so may we conceeve, that a Ray of Light, or Wand (many of our Modern and most
discovering Philosophers call a stream of Light, Virgula Lucis; and that by an
unstrained Metaphor.) consisting of many rays seemingly united, such as we
observe shining in a room through some hole in the Window, or other inlet; does
therefore become in a manner Tense, or Direct, only because the particles first
emanant from the Lucid Fountain are so urged and pressed on by the subsequent,
and those again by others, with equal pernicity, that they cannot deflect from
a direct line, or obey the inclination of their Gravity, until some solid Body,
interposed, cut off the fluor, by interrupting the succession, and then the
Tensity, or Pressure ceasing, the Particles become incontiguous and disappear:
as is observable, upon closing the inlet, through which a stream of Light is
admitted into an otherwise ^pace room. For, immediately the successive supply
of luminous particles being intercepted, the Antecedent droop, fail, and
surrender that part of space, which they possessed with splendor sufficient to
affect the sense, to the horrid encroachment of Darkness.

This full Comparison praemised, we shall comply with opportunity,
PRAECONSIDERABLES.
and here concisely observe

(1) That Aquilonius, Art. 4. Light distinguished into Primary, Secondary, etc.
and most other Opticomathematicians do excellently distinguish Light into so
many gradual Differences, as are the Reflections of which it is capable;
denominating that Light, Primary, whereby a Body is immediately, or in direct
lines from the Lucid Fountain, illustrated; that Secondary, which reflected
from one solid body, illuminates another; that a Third Light, which
illuminateth a body, after two Reflections from others: and so forward up to
the Centenary, and Millenary light, if, at least, it be capable of so many
reflections, from bodies most solid and polite.

(2) That Light at Second hand is more weak than at First; Art. 5. All Light
Debilitated by Reflection: and why.
at Third than at Second; at Fourth than at Third, etc. or, that Light becomes
so much Weaker, by how many more Reflections it has suffered. Not (as is
vulgarly concluded) that a Reflex ray is less Tense, or the successive pressure
of its particles less violent or rapid, than those of a Direct; for, the motion
of Light, however frequently reflected, is incomprehensibly swift: but, that
every reflection does much diminish it, some rays being always diverted and
scattered into other parts of the medium, by reason of the Asperity, or
Inaequality of the particles in every superfice; and so there being no
superfice that remits in a direct line the full number of rays (some have
adventured to say, scarce half so many as) it received, and consequently the
eye receiving fewer and fewer rays successively from every Reflectent, must be
more weakly affected and moved by the thin remainder. For, if all the rays of
the Sun directly incident on a Wall, were thence reflected on another wall
situate at a right angle; the Second wall would be fully as luminous as the
First; and consequently, the Secondary light would be as strong and resplendent
as the Primary: but, since the superfice of the First Wall is unequal and
scabrous, it must of necessity come to pass, that though many of the rays
incident thereon are from thence projected on the Second, yet as many are
repercussed into other regions of the Medium, some upward, others downward;
some to the right hand, others to the left, etc. according to the various
faces, or sides of the small particles, with asperity contexed in the superfice
of each stone therein. So that one half, if not the major part of the directly
incident rays being diverted from the Second Wall, the Light thereon appearing
must be proportionately less strong and fulgent, than that, which illuminates
the First. By the same reason, if the Second Wall by reverberation derive the
Light to a Third; it must likewise play the Publican, and remit but half so
many rays, as it received from the First: and so must the Third transmit a
thinner stock of light to a Fourth, and a Fourth to a Fifth, etc.

Art. 6. An Example, sensibly demonstrating the same.
If this Example seem scarce praegnant enough, let us descend into a deep Pit,
or with the Troglodites creep into the bowels of some subterraneous Cavern, and
there our sense will demonstrate, that multiplied Reflections of Light
gradually diminish it even to absolute insensibility. For, the rays of the Sun
falling into the aperture of either Mine, or long Cave, are by oblique
repercussions from their sides conveyed inwards, and so often bandied from side
to side, that few or none attain to the bottom to diminish the opacity thereof:
every reflection remitting some rays, more or less, toward the mouth of the
pit, or cave. And this ushers in our Third observable.

Art. 7. That light is in perpetual Motion; according to Arist.
(3) That Aristotle's assertion, Lumen esse in continuo motu, that Light is in
perpetual motion, or reverberated to infinity; is profound and orthodox. For,
notwithstanding the illusion of our sense persuades us, that all things in the
aer about us, and within our houses, are calm and unmoved: yet does that better
Criterion, our Reason, assure that the Light diffused through the aer is in
perpetual inquietude, and consists of nothing else but a most tenuious
Contexture of innumerable rays, swarming from and to all regions uncessantly,
so long as the Lucidum cease not to maintain the succession of fresh rays,
that may be reflected from all obvious bodies. So that in what ever part of the
medium the eye is posited; it shall ever have some object or other praesented:
and particularly that, from whence some rays are more directly reflected into
its Pupil. Not that we conceive the Light diffused through the whole aer to be
Continued, or United in all points, as are the parts of Water in the Sea: but,
that, as a Spiders Web appears to be one entire and united body, though it
consist of distinct Filaments, variously intricate, and mutually decussating
each other; so also is Light, Non unum quid Simplicissimum, sed
Compositissimum, some one thing not most Simple or consisting of parts
continuedly united, but most Compound, or consisting of parts so interwoven as
to exclude all sensible discontinuity; though our sense deprehend it to be
Incompositissimum* because the acies of the sight is too blunt to discern the
single rays, which like most slender Filaments with exquisite subtilty
interwoven into a visible invisible Web, replenish the whole Medium.

(4) That, though Light be ever debilitated by Reflection, Art. 8. Light, why
Corroborated, in some cases, and Debilitated, in others, by Refraction.
yet is it many time Corroborated by Refraction; as that transmitted through
Unequal Glasses, and Glass Vials replete with limpid water: and then only
debilitated, when it is Refracted by a Concave superficies of a pellucid body,
or after refraction on a Plane superfice, is looked upon obliquely. For as no
reason can be given for the Debilitation of Light by Reflection; but the
Attenuation or Dimmution of the number of its Rays: so can none be assigned
for the Corroboration of it by Refraction in a Unequal Glass, or Vial filled
with clear water; but the multiplication of its Rays, in some part of the
Medium. Nor is there, on the contrary, why we should conceive Light to be made
weaker by some Refraction, unless in this respect only; that if it had not
fallen foul of a Refringent body, a greater number of rays would have
continued their direct progress in a closer order, or more united stream: and
so their Debility depends merely on their Disgregation; not Diminution of
Pernicity. Certainly, that Light which is corroborated by refraction in a
Unequal Glass, would be yet more strong and energytical, if all those Rays,
that strike upon the obverted side of the Glass, were so refracted, as to
permeate and unite in the aer beyond the averted side thereof: and those rays
which are trajected through the bottom of a Glass Vial filled with water,
arrive at the eye so much the more Disgregate, by how much the more obliquely
the eye is posited; because the water being in the bottom more copious, and so
containing more retundent particles, does divert the greatest number of them
into the ambient. And hence we infer, that if the beams of the Sun be conceded
more weak in the Morn and Evening than at Noon, only because of a greater
Refraction by more vapors then interposed; that effect must chiefly arise from
hence, that the Rays come unto us obliquely, after their trajection through
those swarms of denser vapors, and consequently more Dissipated, the major
part of them being diverted into other regions of the Medium. Moreover,
insomuch as all Masters in the Optiques clearly demonstrate that the Image of
an illustrate object, speculated through water in the bottom of a vessel
indiaphanous, does appear less lively to those, that look on it obliquely, than
to those that behold it in direct lines respective to the tendency of the Light
refracted by the Water; and that the superfice of every object has so much the
fewer parts discernable, by how much more obliquely it is speculated: therefore
is it purely necessary, that the Image of an object appear more Contracted,
when speculated by a Vertical line, than when exhibited to the eye in a direct,
and Irrefracted one. COROLLARY.

Why the Figure of the Sun, both rising and setting, ap^ears rather Elliptical,
than Sphaerical.


And this also we judge to be in some part the Cause, why the Sun when nearest
to our Horizon, either Orient or Occident, appears in a Figure more Elliptical
or Oval, than Sphaerical: for then do we behold it per lineam Verticalem. We
say, in part; because the same Effect may also be induced by the Form of the
Vaporous Sphaere. However this may be controverted, yet most certain it is,
that the Lucid Image of the Sun is always more Vitiated, when it arrives at
our ^ight from an Humble position, than a sublime or Meridional: Non quod
pauciores quidem radij Directi mane, quam meridie; sed ^eflexi tamen pauciores,
qui cum illis misceantur, ipsorumque Vim augeant. Quia Directi supra liberam
horizontis planitiem praetereant, nec redeant; cum sub meridiem in terram
impacti non resilire regredique non valiant; as Gassendus, in Epist. ad
Bullialdum, de Apparent. Magnitud. Solis Humilis and sublimis. And this has a
near relation to our fifth observable.

Art. 9. PARADOX. That the proportion of Solary Rays reflected by the
superior Aer, or Ether, toward the Earth, is so sma^l, as not to be sensible.
(5) That the Body from which the rays of a Lucid object more eminently the
Sun, are repercussed so as to diminish the shadow round about it, seems not to
be the Conterminous Aer, but rather some Opacum constitute beyond both it and
the Aer. Not that we deny the necessary reflection of many of the Luminous
rays proceeding from the Sun, by those myriads of myriads of particles
floating in the Atmosphere; and so the remission of them back again toward
their source, and the consequent diminution of the shadow invironing the same:
but that we conceive the proportion of rays so diverted, to be so small, as to
be much below the observation of our sense. For, He that is in the bottom of a
deep Mine, has his sight so little advantaged by the Aer illuminated by the
meridian beams of the Sun, that though he can clearly behold the Stars in the
Firmament, immensely beyond that vast tract of Aer then illustrate; yet can he
hardly perceive his own hand, or ought else about him, since all the rays of
Light, which affect his eyes, are only those few that have escaped repercussion
upward, by those many oblique refractions in the sides of the Mine. Thus also
in the night are we no whit relieved by the aer, or Ether surrunding our
Horizon, or more properly, our Hemisphere beyond that region, to which the Cone
of the Earths shadow extends: though the Sun does as freely and copiously
diffuse its light through all that vast Ocean of Aer, or Ether beyond the
extent of the Earths shadow, at our Midnight, or when it is Vertical to the
Antipodes, as at our noon when it is Vertical to us: which could not be, if any
sensible proportion of light were reflected toward us by the particles of the
Aer, or Ether, replenishing the subcaelestial space. Hence comes it, that what
Light remains to our Hemisphere in the night, ought to be referred, not to any
Reflection of the Suns rays from the sublime aer, or Ether; but to the Stars,
or Moon, or both. And this is also no contemptible argument, that the Concave
of the Firmament is Opace, and not azure, as most suppose.

(6) That every Lucid Body is considerable in a double capacity; (1) Qua
Lucidum, Art. 10. That every Lucid Body, as Lucid, does emit its Rays
Sph^erically: but, as Visible; Pyramidally.
as shining with either native, or borrowed light, it illuminateth other
bodies: (2) Qua Visibile, as it emits the visible Image of it self. In the
First Respect, we may conceive it to be the Center, from which all its luminous
Rays are emitted by Diffusion Sphaerical, according to that established maxim
of Alhazen, Omne punctum luminosum radiare sphaeraliter: in the Second, we may
understand it to emit rays in a diffusion Pyramidal, the base whereof is in it
self, and cone in the eye of the Spectator. For, particularizing in the Sun,
which being both a Lucid Body and a Visible object, falls under each
acceptance; we must admit the Rays thereof illuminating that vast ocean of
Space circumscribed by the concave of the Heavens, to be deradiated from it
sphaerically, as so many lines drawn from one common Center; because they are
diffused throughout a region far greater than the Sun it self: and those rays,
that Constitute the Visible Images of it, stream from it in Cones or pyramids;
because they are terminated in the pupil of the beholders eye, a body by almost
infinite degrees less than it self. This is fully demonstrated by the Forms of
Eclipses, which no man can describe but by assuming the Sun as the Base, from
whose Extremes myriads of Rays emanant, and in their progress circularly
environing the Margin of the Earth, or Moon, pass on beyond them till they end
in a perfect Cone; the Orbs of the Earth and Moon being by many degrees less in
circumference, than that of the Sun. This confirms us, that those
Optico-mathematicians are in the center of truth, who teach, that the rays of
the Sun, and all other luminous Objects as they constitute its visible species,
are darted only Pyramidally; insomuch as they are received in the eye of each
Spectator, so much less than the Sun, or other Luminary: but that they progress
in a sphaerical Diffusion, in respect of the circumambient Aer, in each point
whereof the Luminary or Lucidum is Visible. Since, should we allow the Concave
of the Firmament to be as thickly set with eyes, as Joves vigilant Pandars head
was imagined by Poets; we could not comprehend how the orb of the Sun could be
discernable by them all, unless by conceding this sphaerical diffusion of
Pyramids to all parts of the same. And this does as well illustrate as confirm
a former Antiperipatetical Paradox of ours, that the visible Species of an
object is neither total in the total Space, nor total in every part thereof;
but the General Image is in the whole Medium, and the Partial or Particular
Images, whose Aggregate makes the General Image, in the singular parts of the
Medium: because no singular eye from any singular part of the Medium, can
perceive the whole of the object, but those parts only, which are directly
obverted to that part of the Medium, in which the eye is posited. Which
assertion we inferred from hence, that not only the whole, but also every
sensible particle of an object does emit certain most subtle rays,
constituting the species of it self, in a sphaerical diffusion, so that the
various particles emit various rays, that variously decussate and intersect
each other, in all parts of the Medium: and as these rays are emitted
sphaerically, ex se* according to that maxim, Omne Visibile sui speciem
effundere sphaeraliter; so do most of them, ex Accidente, convene in their
progress, and so reciprocally intersect, as to fulfill the figure of a Pyramid.
Whence it naturally follows, that because some Rays must convene, in all parts
of the Medium, in this manner; therefore are Pyramids of rays made in all
points of the Medium, from whence the object diffusing them is visible.
Notwithstanding this, we shall so far comply with the Vulgar doctrine, as to
allow; that in respect even of one single eye, in whatever part of the Medium
posited, the diffusion of rays from an object may be affirmed to be
Sphaerical: insomuch as no part in the object at considerable distance singly
discernable, can be assigned, which is not less than the pupil of the Eye.

(7) That the Light diffused through the Medium, is not seen by us: Art. 11.
That Light is invisible in the pure medium.
but that thing beyond the Medium from which some rays are ultimately
reflected into the eye. For, if it chance that we persuade our selves, that we
perceive something in the Medium; it is not pure Light it self, but some crass
substance, the small particles of Dust, Vapors, Smoke, or the like, which
having received light from some luminous source, reflect the same toward the
eye.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. The Necessity of the Authors confirmation of the F^^st Praeconsiderable
NOw, of all these Praeconsiderables only the First can be judged Praecarious,
by those whose Festination or Inadvertency has not given them leave to observe
the Certitude thereof inseparably connected to the evidence of all the others,
by the linkes of genuine Consequence. And therefore, that we may not be wanting
to them, or our selves, in a matter of so much importance, as the full
Confirmation of it by nervous and apodictical Reasons; especially when the
Determination of that eminent and and long-lived Controversy concerning the
QUIDDITY or Entity of Light, Whether it be an Accident, or Substance, a mere
Quality, or a perfect Body? seems the most proper and desiderated subject of
our praesent speculations, and the whole Theory of all other sensible Qualities
(as Vulgar Philosophy calls them) is dependent on that one cardinal pin, since
Light is the nearest allied to spiritual natures of all others, and so the most
likely to be Incorporeal: we must devote this short Section to the perspicuous
Eviction of the CORPORIETY of Light.

Art. 2. The CORPORIETY of Light, demonstrated by its j^st Attributes: viz.
Not to insist upon the grave Authority either of Empedocles, who, as Aristotle
(1. de sensu and sensili: and de Gener. Animal. 1. cap. 8.) testifies,
affirmed Light to be (...), Effluxionem, a material Emanation, and required
certain proportionate Pores, or most slender passages in all Diaphanous bodies,
for their transition; or Plato, who defined Color, or Light disguised, to be
(...), Ef^luentem quandam Flammulam; or of Democritus and Epicurus, both which
are well known to have been grand Patrons, if not the Authors of that opinion,
that Light is corporeal: we judge it alone sufficient to demonstrate the
Corporiety of Light, that the Attributes thereof are such, as cannot justly be
adscribed to any but a Corporeal Entity.

Locomotion.
Such are (1) Locomotion; for manifest it is, that some substance, though most
tenuious, is deradiated from every Lucidum to the eye of the distant Spectator:
nor is a Bullet sent from the mouth of a full charged Cannon with the millionth
part of such velocity, as are the arrows shot from the bow of Apollo; since the
rays of the Sun are transformed from one end of the heavens to the other, in a
far less division of time, than a Cannon Bullet is flying to its m^^k.

Resilition.
(2) Resilition; for the rays of light are sensibly repercussed from all solid
bodies, on which they are projected; and that with such pernicity or rapid
motion, as transcends, by inassignable excesses, the rebound of a Cannon Ball
from a Rock of Adamant.

Refraction.
(3) Refraction, for our sense confirms, that Light is ever refracted by those
Bodies, which allow its rays a passage, or through-fare, but not an absolute
free and direct one.

(4) Coition, or Union, or Corroboration, from bodies either reflecting,
Coition.
or transmitting many rays to one common point of concurse, where they become
so violent as to burn any thing applied.

(5) Disgregation and Debilitation, Disgr^gation
from the didaction of its rays reflected or trajected: so that those which
before during their Union were so vigorous as to cause a conflagration, being
one distracted become so languid as not to warm.

(6) Igniety; since Light seems to be both the Subject, Igniety.
and Vehicle to Heat, and those speak incorrigibly, who call Light, Flame
attenuated. Which we shall less doubt, if we consider the natural Parallelism
betwixt Flame and Water, Light and a Vapor. For, as Water by Rarefaction, or
Attenuation becomes a Vapor; so may we conceive Flame by Attenuation to become
Light circumfused in the aer: and as a Vapor is nothing else but Water so
rarefied into small discontinued particles, as that it does scarce moisten the
body on which it is impacted; so is Light nothing else but Flame so dilated by
Rarefaction, that it does hardly warm the body it touches. Lastly, as a Vapor
how finely soever rarefied, is still substantially Water; because only by the
Coition of its dif^used particles it returns again to Water, as in all
distillations: so must we account Light however rarefied, to be still
substantially Flame; because only by the Coition, or Congregation of its
dispersed rays it is reducible into absolute Flame, as in all Burning-glasses.

These Attributes of Light considered, it is not easy for the most
praevaricate judgment not to confess, that Light is a Corporeal substance, and
the Rays of it most tenuious streams of subtle Bodies: since it is impossible
they should be deradiated from the Lucid Fountain with such ineffable
pernicity, transmitted through the Diaphanum in a moment, impacted against
solid bodies, repercussed, corroborated by Unition, debilitated by
Disgregation, etc. without essential Corpulency.

Notwithstanding this apodictical evidence of the Corporiety of Ligh^, the
refractary Peripatetick will have it to be a mere Quality, and objects

(1) That his master Aristotle, Art. 3. Aristotle's Definition of Ligh^, a mere
Ambage, and incomprehensible.
impugning the doctrine of Democritus, Epicurus, and others, who ascribed
Materiality to Light, defined it to be merely (...) perspicui, an act of the
Perspicuum.

To this we answer, (1) That though Aristotle thought it sufficient barely to
deny that light is (...), ullius corporis Ef^luxum, and to affirm it to be
Energian perspicui, ut perspicuum; yet will the judicious discover it to be
rather an ambage to circumvent the incircumspect, than a demonstration to
satisfy the curious. For, though Philopouus (2. de Anim. 7.) willing to
conceal or guild over his Masters error, interprets his Perspicuum actu, or
illustrate Nature, and so Light to be a kind of Chord, which being continuedly
interposed betwixt the object and the eye, causes that the Color thereof
posited beyond the Medium, does affect and move the eye to the act of
intuition: yet has He left the Reason and Manner of this supposed Act of the
Perspicuum on the eye, the chief thing necessary to satisfaction, involved in
so many and great Difficulties, as proclaim it to be absolutely inexplicable.
(2) That albeit we deny not Illumination to be merely ^cc^dental to opace
Bodies; yet therefore to allow the Light, wherewith they are illuminate, to be
an Accident, and no Substance, is a manifest Alogie. And to affirm, that the
Aer, Water, or any Diaphanous body is the subject of Inhaesion to Light, is
evidently incongruous; because every Medium is simply Passive, and remains
unmoved while the Light pervades it: and how can Light pervade it, if it be not
Corporeal? or how can the rays thereof conserve their Tensity and Directness
in the Aer, while it is variously agitated by wind and other causes, if they
were not absolutely independent thereupon? (3) What Aristotle says concerning
the Propagation of the species of Light even to infinity in all points of the
Medium, besides its incomprehensibility, is absolut^ly inconsistent to the
Pernicity of its motion, which is too rapid and momentany to proceed from a
fresh Creation of Light in every point of the medium: since the multitude of
fresh productions successively made, would r^quire a far longer time for the
transmission of the light of a candle to the eye of a man at the distance of
but one yard, than our sense demonstrates to be necessary to the transmission
of the light of the Sun from one end of Heaven to the other.

(2) That by allowing Light to be Corporeal, we incurr the absurd^ty of
admitting two Bodies into one and the same place. Art. 4. The (...) of Light
imp^rts not the Coexistence of two B^dies in one Place: contrary to the
Peripatetick.


Which is soon solved by reflecting on what we have formerly and frequently
said, concerning Inanity interspersed, and observing what we shall (God
willing) say of those eminent Qualities, Rarity and Perspicuity: from either of
which it may be collected, how great a Multitude of Pores are in every Rare and
Perspicuous Body, which remain tenantable, or unpossessed.

Art. 5. Nor the motion of a B^dy to be Instantane^us.
(3) That from the Corporiety of Light it must follow, that a Body man be moved
in an Instant. But he has not yet proved that the motion of Light is
instantaneous: and we have, that it is not, but only Momentany, i. e. that
Ligh^ is moved in a certain space of time, though imperceptible, yet divisible,
and not in one individual point, or Instant.

Art. 6. The Invisibilit^ of ^ight in the limpid medium, no Argument of its
Immateriality: as the Peripatetick praesumes.
(4) That the Rays of Light are Invisible in pure Aer, and by consequence
Immaterial. Solut. Their Invisibility does not necessitate their Immateriality;
for the Wind, which no man denies to be Corporeal, is invisible: and as it
suffices that we feel the Wind in its progress through the aer, so also is it
sufficient that we perceive Light, in the illumination of Opace Bodies, on
which it is impinged, and from which it is reflected. Besides, whosoever makes his
sense the measure of Corporiety, does strain it to a higher subtility, than the
constitution of its Organs will bear, and make many more spiritual Entities,
than can be found in the Universe; nay, He implicitly supposes an Immaterial
Being naturally capable of Incorporation merely by the Unition of its dispersed
particles; since many rays of Light congregated into one stream become visible.

(5) That the Materiality of Light is repugnant to the Duration of the Sun;
which could not have lasted so long, but must have, like a Tapour, Art. 7. The
Corporiety of Light fully consistent with the Duration of the Sun: contrary to
the Peripatetick.
exhausted its whole stock of Luminous Matter, and wincked out into perpetual
night, long since, if all its Rays were substantial Emanations, according to
our Assumption.

But this Refuge may be battered with either of these two shots. 1 The
superlative Tenuity of the Luminous particles continu^lly emitted from the body
of the Sun, is such as to prevent any sensible minoration of its orb, in many
1000 years. (2) If the Diametre of the Sun were minorated by 100000 miles less
than it was observed in the days of Ptolomy; yet would not that so vast
Decrement be sensible to our sight: since being in its Apogaeum, in summer, it
does not appear one minute less in Diameter to the strictest astronomical
observation, than in winter, in its Perigaeum, and yet Snellius, Bullialdus,
and Gassendus, three Astronomers of the highest form, assure us that it is
about 300000 miles more remote from us, in its Apogaeum, than Perigaeum.

(6 and Lastly) That if Light were Flame, Art. 8. The in^^nsibility of Heat in
many Lucent B^die^ no valid Argument against the praesent Thesis, that Light is
Flame Attenuated.
then would all Light warm at least: but there are many Lights actually Cold,
such as that in the Phospher M^neralis, or Lapis Phenggites, of whose admirable
Faculty of imbibing, retaining and emitting a considerable light, the excellent
Fortunius Licetus has written a singular Tract, and Athanas. Kircherus a large
chapter ( in Art. magn. Lucis and Umbrae lib. ^. part. 1. cap. 8.), in
Gloworms, the scales and shells of some Fishes, among which the most eminent
are those Dactyli mentioned by Kircher (in libri jam citati part. 1. cap. 6.)
in these words, sunt and Dactyli, ostreacei generis, qui vel manibus triti
lumen veluti scintillas quasdam ex se spargunt: quemadmodum Melitae, in
Sicilia, Calabria, and Ligustici maris oris non sine admiratione a piscatoribus
and nautis instructoribus observasse memini; in Rotten Wood, etc. Ergo, etc.

Answer, The Defect of actual Heat in these things, does arise, in part from
the abundant commistion of Gross and Viscid Humidity with those igneous
Particles that are Collucent in them; but mostly from the exceeding Rarety of
those Luminous Sparks: which being so thin and languid, as to disappear even at
the approach of a Secondary Light, cannot be expected vigorous enough to infuse
an actual warmth into the hand that touches them; especially when experience
attesteth, that the Rays of the Sun, after two Reflections, become so languid
by Attenuation, as they can hardly affect the tenderest hand with any sensible
Heat. And therefore, unless it can be evinced, that the disgregation of the
parts of a Body, does destroy the Corporiety of it; and that the simple
Attenuation of Lig^t does make it to be no Light: we ask leave to retain our
p^rsuasion, that the existence of many lights, which are devoyd of Heat, as to
the perception of our sense, is no good Argument against the Igniety and
Corporiety of Light.

CHAP. VI. THE NATURE OF A SOUND.
SECT. I.
IT was a hypochondriack conceit of Plato, Art. 1. An Elogy of the sense of
Hearing: and the Relation of this and the praecedent Chapter.
that all our Cognition is but Recognition, and our acquired Inte^lection a
mere Reminiscence of those primitive lessons the Soul had forgotten since her
transmission from the sphere of supreme Intelligences, and Immersion into the
Opacity of Flesh. For, Proper Science is proper only to Omniscience; and not to
have knowledge by infusion or acquisition, is the attribute only of the Essence
of Wisdom; and a privilege due to none but the Ancient of Days, to have his
knowledge derived beyond Antiquity: but Man, poor ignorant Thing, sent to
School in the World, on the design of Sapience, must sweat in the exploration
and pursuit of each single Verity; nor can he ever possess any science, in this
dark region of life, but what he has dearly purchased with his own anxious
discovery, or holds by inhaeritance from the charitable industry of his
Forefathers. And, that the naked Mind of m^n, endowed only with a simple
Capacity of Science, might by degrees adorn it self with the notions of
whatever concerns his well-being either in this state of Mortality, or that
future one of Immortality* has the Bounty of his Creator furnished him with
the Sense of HEARING: a sense particularly and eminently ordained for
Discipline. For, though we sing Hymns to the Eye, for the Invention: yet must
we acknowledge a sacrifice of gratitude due to the Ear, for the Communication
and Diffusi^n of Arts and Sciences. Quemadmodum aspectus ad vi^ae dulcedinem,
and ^ommoda ^st magis necessarius: ita Auditus ad excipiendam artem, scientiam*
and sapientiam est accommodatior: ille ad inventionem, hic ad communicationem
aptior est; says that accurate and eloquent Anatomist, Julius Casserius
Placentinus, (in premio ad libr. de sens. organ.). Thus much the antique
Egyptians intimated in their Hieroglyphick of Memory, the figure of a man's
Ear; and the Philosopher expressed in his Character of the Hearing, Auditus est
sensus Disciplinae; as also that Modern Ornament of Germany, Sennertus (in
hypomn. Phys.) in this memorable sentence; Aures in homine quasi porta mentis
sunt, per quam illi communicantur, quae doctrina and institutione de Deo, and
alijs rebus necessarijs traduntur, quaeque nullo alio sensu addisci possunt.
Now, to bring you home to the scope of this (not otherwise or unreasonable, or
unnecessary) Elogy of the Hearing; since the Relation betwixt the Sight and
Hearing is so great, as to the point of man's acquisition of Knowledge, as that
the one can be no more justly called the Discoverer, than the other the
Propagator of all Arts and Sciences: it is evident we have made no undecent
Knot in the Clue of our Method, by immediately subnecting this Enquiry into the
Nature of a Sound, the adaequate and proper object of the Hearing, to our
praecedent speculations of the Nature of Vision, Colors, and Light.

Besides, as these two Senses are Cousin-Germans, Art. 2. The great Affinity
betwixt Vi^ible and Audible species: in their representation of the superficial
Conditions of Objects.
in their Uses and Ends: so likewise are they of near Alliance, in their
Objects; there being no small, nor obscure Analogy, betwixt the nature and
proprieties of a Visible Species, and the nature and proprieties of an Audible
Species, or Sound. For

(1) As ^t is the property of Light, transfigured into Colors, to represent
the different Conditions or Qualities of bodies in their superficial parts,
according to the different Modification and Direction of its rays, either
simply or frequently reflexed from them, through the Aer, to the Eye: so is it
the propriety of Sounds to represent the different Conditions or Qualities of
Bodies, by the mediation of the Aer percussed and broken by their violent
superficial impaction, or collision, and configurate into swarms of small
consimilar masses, accommodable to the Ear. So that He speaks as
Philosophically, who says; that various sounds are no more but the various
Percussions and impressed Motions of the Aer: as He that says, Colors are no
more then the various Immersions of Light into the superficial particles of
bodies and respective Emersions or Reflections from them, through the
diaphanous medium to the Eye. Nor can we much dislike the conceit of Athanas
Kircher. (Musurgiae Universalis l. 9. part. 4. praelus. 1.) that if it were
possible for a man to see those subtle motions of the aer, caused by the
strings of an instrument, harmonically played upon (as we may the Circular
Undulations, and Tremblings of water, raised by a stone thrown into it, in a
river or standing lake) the whole Tune would appear to him like a well drawn
Picture, ingeniously and regularly adumbrate with admirable variety of Colors,
each one distinctly representing the particular Condition of that string or
sonant Body, that created it.

(2) As Light immediately fails and disappears upon the remove or eclipse of
its lucid fountain; Art. 3. In the Causes and manner of their Destruction.
as is manifest by the succession of darkness in a room at night, when a candle
is either removed out of it or extinguished, the succession of its rays being
intercepted: so does a Sound instantly perish upon the Cessation of the
undulous motion of the Aer, which conduces not only to the Creation, but
Delation of it, as the principal, if not the sole Vehicle. For, the subsistence
of Sounds is not by way of dependence upon the solid bodies, by which they were
produced; according to the 7 Proposit. of Mersennus (Harmon. lib. 1. page 3.)
Soni non pendent a corpore, a quo primum producti sunt: but upon the
Continuation of the motion impressed upon the Aer, so that the Duration of a
Sound is equal to the duration of the Agitation of the aer. And therefore Bapt.
Porta, Cornelius Agrippa, Wecherus, Alexius, and others of the same tribe, that
so highly pretend to Phonocamptical Magic, are worthy more than derision, for
their insolent undertaking to Conserve a voice, or articulate sound of many
syllables, by including it in a long Canale of Lead, or other impervious
matter; so that upon unstopping the extreme of the Tube, after many not only
hours, but months, the voice shall issue out as quick and distinct as at the
first pronunciation, or insusurration into the cavity thereof. Which (whether
more impudent, or ignorant (for both Experience and the Nature of a Sound
evidence the contrary) is disputable) Rhodomantade is demonstrated to be
absolutely impossible, by Athanas. Kircher. (Musurgiae Universal. lib. 9. and
Magiae Echotectonicae cap. 1.) whether we remit the unsatisfied.

Art. 4. In their Actin^bolism, or Diffusion, both Sphaerical and Pyramidal.
(3) As the Actinobolism, or Deradiation of Light from the Luminary, is
Sphaerical, in respect of the circumambient space illuminate by it: so is the
Diffusion of a Sound in excentral lines from the sonorous body, through the
whole space, or medium within the sphere of its virtue; for, otherwise a
General, speaking in the midst of his Army, could not be heard in round. Here
is the only difference betwixt the Actinobolism of Light and Sounds; that the
one is performe^ in time imperceptible, though not instantaneous: the other in
moments distinguishable, which are more or less according to the degrees of
distance betwixt the sonant and audient. Again, as the Deradiation of Light,
considered merely as Visible, not as Lucidum, is Conical, or Pyramidal, in
respect to the Eye of the Spectator; as we have professedly demonstrated in the
10. Article of the 1. Sect. of our Chapt. concerning the Nature of Light: so
likewise does every sound make a Cone, or Pyramid in the medium, whose Base
consists in the extreme of the body producing the sound, and cone in the ear
of him that hears it; or as some Mathematicians, as Blancanus and Mersennus,
whose Base is in the Ear, and Cone in some one point of the sonorous subject.
Allowing only this Difference; that the Cones or Pyramids of Visible Species
are more Geometrical, i. e. more exactly conform to proportion Geometrical,
than those of Audible Species; which in regard as well of the grossness of
their Particles, as less velocity of their motion, are easily injured and
perturbed by Winds. And this, in truth, is the best ground they have to stand
upon, who opinion Sounds to be no more but simple Motions of the Aer.

Art. 5. In their certifying the sense of the Magnitude, Figure, and other^
Qualities of their Originals.
(4) As Visible Species, so do Sounds inform the Sense, of the Magnitude,
Figure, and other Qualities of the Bodies, from which they are emitted. For
experience assures, that Greater Bodies emit a Graver Sound, than smaller;
that Concaves yield a stronger and more lasting Sound, than Planes; that Hard
things sound more Acutely than Soft; strings distended yield a sharper sound,
than lax; Empty vessels than full, etc. Hence is it, that Goldsmiths, and
Coyners distinguish good money from bad, pure Gold from that largely allayed
with Copper; and Metallists judge of simple and compound Metals, only by their
Ring or sound. And we have heard of Vintners, who could exactly distinguish the
Kinds and Goodness of Wines, only by the sound of the Vessels that contained
them: and therefore used to choose them more by their Ear, than Palate. But,
what we here say, that Harder Bodies emit a sound more Acute than softer; we
desire may be understood only of the Plurality, not Generality of Bodies. For
the examining Mersennus, having experimented the different sounds of Metalls,
tells us ( in praefat. ad Harmonic.) that He found a Cylindre of Iron to be
Unisone to another of steel, equal in diametre and length; and both in
acuteness to transcend a Cylindre of Brass of equal dimensions, by a whole
Diatessaron: nay more, that a Cylindre of Firr Wood yielded, upon equal
percussion, a sound more acute by a whole Ditone, than a Cylindre of Brass,
which yet yields a sound more strong, lasting and grateful than any of the
rest. Each of which observations is sufficient to cut off the general intaile
of that Canon, Sonos eo acutiores, quo duriora fuerint corpora. Legendus est
Athanas. Kircher. Art. Magn. Consoni and Dissoni lib. 1. appendice de
Phonognomia.

(5) As a Greater Light always obumbrates a Less, Art. 6. In the obscuration*
of Less by Greater.
so a Great Sound always drowns a Less: for it is manifest, that the sound of
a Trumpet conjoined to the low or submissive voice of a man, makes it wholly
unaudible, and the loud clamours of Mariners are scarce heard in a tempest.

(6) As a too great Light offends always, and often destroys the sight, Art.
7. In their off^nce of the organs, when excessive.
as is eminently exemplified in the tyranny of Dionysius, the Sicilian: so, too
great sounds injure and lacerate the Hearing. For, many men have been stricken
deaf for ever, by great Thunderclaps, and as many by the reports of grand
Artillery.

(7) As Light, merely by the Condensation of it rays, Art. 8. In their
production of Heat by Multiplication.
produces Heat in the aer: so Sounds merely by their Multiplication. For, it
is observed, that in all Battails, and chiefly in Naval fights, where many
Cannons are frequently discharged, the aer becomes soultry and hot; not so much
from the many sulphurous or igneous particles of the Gunpowder commixt with,
as the violent concussions, and almost continued agitation of the Aer. So that
even in this particular, that Axiom, that Motion is the Mother of Heat, holds
exactly sound.

(8) The Effects of Audible Species, as well as of Visible, Art. 9. In their
Variability, according to the various disposition of the Medium.
are subject to variation, according to the diverse Condition of the Medium.
For, as Flame, beheld through smoke, seems to tremble: so do sounds, trajected
through aer variously waved by Winds, rise and fall betwixt every Gust; as is
observable most easily in the ringing of Bells, whether the wind be favorable,
or adverse. Art. 10. In their chief Attributes, of L^comotion, Exsiliti^^,
^mpaction, Resilition, D^^gregation, Cong^egation*


(9) And what most conduces to our comprehension of the Nature of a Sound;
For, as Light, so is a Sound capable of Locomotion, Exsilition, Impaction,
Resilition, Disgregation, Congregation; all which are the proper and
incommunicable Attributes of Corporiety. Only we must confess them discrepant
in this, (1) That Sounds are delated from their Original not only in direct
lines, but circular, elliptical, parabolical, and all others; for a sound heard
on the other side of a high Wall, comes not to the ear in a direct line through
the Wall, as Kircherus contends ( in Musurgiae Universal. lib. 1.) with
taedious arguments, but in an Arch, as the incomparable St. Alban has firmly
evinced ( in Cent. 3. Natural. Hist.): whereas Light constantly progress
through the Medium to the Eye, in Direct lines, whether primary, reflex, or
refracted. (2) A Sound is diffused through it sphere of activity in a longer
space of time, by much, than Light, as is sensibly demonstrated by this, that
the flash of a Cannon arrives much sooner at the Eye, than the report at the
Ear: and the immediate Reason hereof is the less velocity of motion in the
sound, which consisting of grosser particles than those of Light, must be
proportionately slower in its Delation. For, a Sound seems to be naught but the
Aer, at least the subtler or more ethereal part of aer, extrite and formed
into many small ( Moleculae) masses, or innumerable minute Contextures, exactly
consimilar in Figure, and capable of affecting the Organ of Hearing in one and
the same manner: which configurated small masses of aer fly off from bodies
compulsed or knocked each against other, with some violence; and progress by
Diffusion in round. For, because upon pressure they mutually recede, each
particle going off in that point where it finds the freest egress: therefore
must some tend upward, others downward, some to the right, others to the left,
some obliquely, others transversly, etc. but all more slowly than the particles
of Light, whose Tenuity being far greater, causes them not to be subject to
retardment by the like tumultuous Convolution. But, as the greater Corporiety
of Sounds makes them slower in their Diffusion; so does it make them more
impetuous and forcible in their Impaction, than the Species of Light: it being
obvious to observation, that Violent Sounds, such as great Thunders, Volleys of
Cannon shot, the breaking of Granades, etc. usually shake the largest
Buildings, and shiver Glass windows at a mile distance and more. And yet are
Sounds far easilier impeded, perturbed, and flatted, than the rays of Light;
every man knowing that no sound can penetrate Glass, but in one case, or
exigent of Nature, of which we shall particularly speak, in the last Section of
this Chapter: and since Sounds are repercussed more slowly; they (...)
Disgregated more hardly, and Congregated more faintly, than the rays of Light.
Lastly, the Proportion of Retardation in the diffusion of Sounds to the utmost
of their sphere of activity, is such even from Winds; that as Mersennus has
computed, the diameter of the sphere of a sound, heard against the wind, is by
almost a third part less than the diameter of the sphere of the same sound,
assisted by a favorable or secund Wind: but the Diameter of a Lucid Sphere is
always equ^^, which way soever and how violently soever the wind blows. (3)
Bodies of narrow Dimensions make a sensible reflection of Light; as is manifest
from a Burning-glass of an inch diameter: but a Body of far greater dimensions
is required to the sensible Reflection of a Sound, i. e. to the production of
an Echo; though it is not to be doubted, but ^ ^ound may be reflected from
every Hard body on which it is impinged. This considered, we cannot but smile
at the Credulity of many great Aristoteleans, who are persuaded that an Echo is
made by the mere Repercussion of the Sound from the particles of the Aer. For,
notwithstanding we deny not, but the particles of the aer, within the sphere of
the Sounds diffusion, encountering and arietating those particles of the sound,
may in some small measure repercuss them: yet we think it unsafe, therefore to
admit this aereal Repercussion to arise to Sensibility, or to be observable by
the Creation of an Echo. And therefore we conceive, that whatever sensible
Reflection or Multiplication of a Sound, seems to proceed from the Aer, is not
caused really by the Aer, but some Dense and Hard Bodies, such as Rocks,
Aedifices, Arches, etc. whose Concavities reflect the particles of a Sound for
the same reason, that Concaves Multiply Light.

SECT. II.
THE Congruities of Visible and Audible Species being so many and Essential,
and their Incongruities, Art. 1. The Product of the Praemises, concerning the
points of Consent, and Dissent of Audible and Visible Species: viz. That Sounds
are Corporeal.
or points of Discrepancy so few, and those altogether consisting in the mere
Degrees of Velocity, and some other Circumstances relating to the Medium: we
have a fair and direct way opened to our Enquiry into the Quiddity or Essence
of a Sound. Wherefore since to conclude a parity of Essence, from a parity of
Attributes and Effects, in any two Entities; is warrantable even by the
strictest laws of Reasoning: we shall adventure to assume a Sound to be a
Corporeal Ens. Which before we farther confirm by Arguments, it behooves us to
lift that block of contrary Authority out of our Readers way, at which the
credulity and incircumspection of many have made them stumble and hault ever
after in their Opinions concerning this Subject.

True it is, that Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, Art. 2. An obstruction o^
praejudice, from the generally supposed repugnant Auth^rities of some of the
Ancients; expeded.
according to the Memorials of Plutarch (4. Placit. 20.) unanimously held a
Sound to be Incorporeal, a mere Accident, or Quality, or Intentional Species;
contrary to the doctrine of Democritus, Epicurus and the Stoics, who, as
Laertius (in lib* 7.) expressly records, affirmed it to be Corporeal, or a
Material Efflux, the words of Epicurus being [(...)] Vocem seu Sonum, fluxum
esse em^ssum ex rebus aut loquentibus, aut sonantibus, aut quomodocunque
strepitum edentibus. But yet we conceive this repugnancy of Authority
insufficient to infirm our Thesis of the CORPORIETY of Sounds; as well because
simple Authority, though never so reverend, is no demonstration, and scarce a
good argument, in points Physiological, where the appeal lies only to Reason:
as for this weighty consideration, that These accepted a sound in Concreto, i.
e. for the substance of the Aer, or its most tenuious particles, together with
their proper Configuration; but Those in Abstracto, or only for the Figure
impressed upon the superfice of the Aer, which they therefore inferred to be
Incorporeal, that is, devoyd of Profundity. For, otherwise Plato (apud
Agellium, lib. 5. cap. 15.) defines a sound Acris validaque aeris percussio, a
smart and strong percussion of the aer: and Aristotle (2. de Anim. cap. 8.)
calls it downright a Motion of the Aer, as the Stoics, Ictus aeris; a stroke
of the aer. So that the Difference seems occasioned only by their diverse
Acceptance of the word Sound. This obstruction removed, we progress to the
discharge of our province, viz. the Eviction of the Corporiety of a Sound.

The First Argument of the Corporiety of a Sound, is ( Quod vim habet agendi,
Art. 3. An Argument of the Corporiety of Sounds.
sive efficiendi aliquid) that it is Active or Effective. For, the voice of a
man violently emitted, or highly elevated by a kind of grating offends the
vocal organs, and changes their sweetness or evenness into a hoarsness; and
being long continued, leaves them misaffected with lassitude: as the experience
of Hunters and Orators demonstrates.

Hither are we to referr Lucretius his Praeter radit enim vox fauces saepe,
facitque,
Asperiora for as gradiens arteria clamor, etc.


The Second is desumed from its Capacity of Repercussion, or Resilition from
solid bodies; Art. 4. A Second Argumen^.
which is the evident cause of our hearing one sound twice, or more often,
according to the multiplicity of its Reflections: as in all Echoes, monophone
or polyphone. Which Aristotle fitly compares not only to a Ball frequently
rebounding, but also to Light, which Himself confesses capable of reflections
even to infinity: thereon concluding a sound subject to the same laws of
Reflection with either. To which Virgil seems to allude in his Saxa sonant,
vocisque offensa resultat Imago.

Intimating, that an Echo holds a perfect analogy with an Image reflected from
a Mirror. For, as beside that Image, which tends in a direct line from the
Glass to the eye, innumerable others are so transferred from it into all point^
of the Medium, that diverse other eyes variously posited therein shall behold
the same general Image, each one receiving a particular Image: so likewise,
beside that sound or voice, which arrives at your ear, innumerable others are
so dispersed through all parts of the medium or sphere of diffusion, that if
there were as many ears therein as the space could contain* each one would hear
the same general sound or voice; and if it chance that any one particular voice
be impinged against solid and laevigated or smooth bodies (for solids that are
very Spungy or porous, suffer sounds to pass through them, and too scabrous or
rough destroy them by dissipation) it may be repulsed in a direct line toward
your ear, and you shall hear it again at second hand or Echoed.

C^ROLLAR^.

Art. 5. The (...), where (...) d^s^ant f^^m ^he Sonant and Rep^^cu^i^^^.


Touching the Reflection of Sounds, we shall here, by way of Corollary, brie^^^
observe. That in case you stand somewhat near to the smooth solid (...)
reflecteth the sound, and the Creation of the sound be not very (...); then
though an Ec^o thereof be made, yet shall not you hear it* because the Direct
sound and the Reflex enter the ear so continently* (...) the space of time
betwixt their ingress is so imperceptible, that (...) seem but one entire
sound. But, in this case, the sound becom^^ both stronger and longer; in
respect of their Union. And this comes to pass chiefly, when the Reflection is
made from diverse bodies at once; as in all Arches, and Concamerated or vaulted
rooms: in which for the most part, the sound or voice loses its Distinctness,
and degenerates into a kind of long confused Bombe.

And hence, viz. COROLLARY. 2.

Art. 6. Why Concaves yield the strongest and longest Sounds.


the many Repercussions of a Sound from diverse places together, or with so
short intervals of time, as the sense cannot distinguish them; is it, that the
sound of Concaves percussed, lasts much longer, than the sounds of bodies of
any other figure whatever: especially when the Concave hangs at liberty, in the
aer, so that its Tremulation be not hindered as are all Bells in Churches, and
clocks. For, not only the External or ambient aer, but the Internal is agitated
by those frequent Tremblings in the body of the Concave, and continuedly
repercussed from side to side: and therefore, till the trembling cease, the
Bombination is continued.

Again, if you stand far from the sonant body, COROLLARY 3.

Art. 7. The reason of Con^urrent Echoes, where the Audient is near the
Reflectent, and remote from the sonant.


and near to the Reflectent; in this case also will the sound appear single,
and coming only from the Reflectent: because both the Direct and Reflex sound
invade the ear without any sensible difference in time; and yet the Reflex
sound as it is really the posterior, so does it very much intend or increase
the Direct, and consequently makes the impression observable only from it self.

It is observable moreover, that by how much nearer the Ear is to the
Anacamptick, or Reflectent (yet at such distance, COROLLARY 4.

Art. 8. Why Echoes Mon^ph^n rehear^e so much the fewer syllables, by how much
nearer the audient is to the Reflecten^.


as is required to the discernment of the Direct voice from the Reflex.) by so
much the fewer syllables of a word pronounced are Echoed: and e contra, by how
much farther from the Reflectent (provided the distance exceed not the sphere
of diffusion) so many more syllables are repeated. The Reason being this, that
the interval of time betwixt the Cessation of the Speaker, and the audition of
the Reflex voice, is much less in the first case, and much greater in the
later: and consequently, the less interval of time suffices to the Distinction
of a fewer syllables, and the greater for more. This considered, we can no
longer admite the distinct rehearsal of a whole Hexameter by some strong
Echoes; provided the voice pronouncing the verse be sufficiently strong to
drive it to the Reflectent, and thence back again to the Ear, at large
distance, such as is necessary to the allowance of time enough for the
successive repercussion of each syllable: for otherwise the voice fails by
the way.

What has been hitherto said, concerns only Echoes Monophone, COROLLARY 5.

Art. 9. The reason of P^lyph^n Echoes.


that repeat the same syllable but once; but there are Echoes Polyphone, such
as repeat one and the same note, or syllable diverse times over, and of them the
Reason is far otherwise. For, the frequent rehearsal of the same syllable by an
Echo, arises from the multitude of Reflectent Bodies, situate beyond each
other in such order, that the nearer bodies referr it first, and the remoter
successively: and sometimes from Bodies mutually Confronting each other, and
alternately reflecting the same sound. Of this sort were those observed by
Lucretius, in this Tristich.

Sex etiam, aut septem loca vidi reddere voces,
Unam cum jaceres; ita colles collibus ipsis
Verba repulsantes, iterabant dicta refer.
Such also was that prodigious one that entertained the Curiosity of Gassendus
at Pont Charenton standing upon the river Seine, four miles from Paris. For in
a square old aedifice of freestone, uncovered at the top, and having a row of
5 Pillars on each side, as commonly our Churches, He heard a Monosyllable,
which himself pronounced, clearly and orderly repeated by several Echoes, 17
times over; and when he uttered the Monosyllable in the Center of the Aedifice,
it was brought back to his ear 17 times from each extreme (the area being
somewhat oblong) so distinctly, as He could easily numerate the repetitions on
his fingers. If so sileat Miracula Memphis, let the Egyptian Pyramids no
longer boast their Pentaphone Echoes; nor the Porticus Olympiae challenge the
garland from the world for her Heptaphone Resonance, which is highly celebrated
by the pens of Plutarch (lib. 4. de placit. Philosoph. cap. 20.) and Pliny,
(lib. 36. cap. 15.). For, this at Pont Charenton, of which our Lord St. Alban
was also an ear-witness, and not without some admiration, as Himself has
recorded ( in Centur. 3. Not. Hist.) has no Rival, but that many tongued Echo
in a Village called Simoneta, near Millan in Italy, which at some seasons, when
the aer is serene, will iterate any Monosyllable, in which is no S. (which
being but a kind of sibilation, or interior sound, few or no Echoes can
rehearse) 30 times over very distinctly; if credit be due to the testimony of
Blancanus (in Echometria, and in suo additione ad theorem. 20. de Echo
polyphona)

A Third Argument of the materiality of a Sound, results to us from the
Pleasure and Offense, Art. 10. A Third Argument of the Materiality of S^unds:
or Gratefulness and Ingratefulness of Sounds, as they are Concinnous, or
Inconcinnous. For it is highly concordant to truth, that the suavity of a Sound
proceeds from hence, that those minute Particles, which enter the ear and move
the Auditory Nerve, are in their configuration so accommodate to the
Receptaries, or Pores thereof, that they make a gentle, smooth or equal
impression on the filaments, of which the Acoustick Nerve consists: and on
the contrary, the Acerbity, or Harshness of a Sound, only from hence, that the
minute particles invading the sensory, being asper or rough in their
configuration, in a manner exulcerate, grate, or dilacerate the slender
Filaments thereof.

Art. 11. The necessity of a certain Configuration in a Sound; inferred from
the Distinction of one sound from another, by the Sense.
That a certain Configuration of its minute particles, is essentially necessary
to every Sound, may be concluded safely even from hence; that so great variety
of Sounds, and chiefly of Words, or Letters, as well Vowels as Consonants,
could not be so exactly distinguished by the Hearing, unless the sensory were
variously, or in a peculiar manner percelled and affected by each: nor can that
variety of Affection be made out, but by a variety of Sigillation, or
Impression, dependent respectively on the various Configuration of those (
moleculae) small masses, that compose the sound.

Art. 12. The same confirmed by the A^ctority of Pythagoras, Plato, and
Aristotle.
To sweeten the harshness of this Assertion yet more; we allege the unison
Auctority of no less than Pythagoras (whom all knowing men allow to have
lighted the tapour to posterity, in the investigation of the Nature, and causes
of proportions among Musical Sounds) Plato and Aristotle, all which affirmed
the same, if Plutarch be faithful ( in 4. de placit.) while He introduces them
saying, (...), Figuram, quae in aere, ejusque superficie fit certo ex ictu
((...)) evadere vocem, that the Figure made in the aer, and then it superfice,
by some certain percussion, becomes a voice. And, that Plutarch has done no
more than justice to Aristotle, in this particular; is evident from his own
words, ( in Problem. 13. and 51.) where He expressly enquires, Quare Vox, cum
sit (...), Aer quidam Figuratus, and qui dum transfertur, plerumque, (...),
Figurum amittit, illam tamen dum a solido corpore repercutitur, incolumem
servet? Why a voice, which is aer configurate, and for the most part loses its
Figure, in its [long] transmission, does yet conserve it entire and unimpaired,
when repercussed from a solid body, as in all Echoes?

Nor can it be rightly denied, but that Flux of minute aereal Bodies, Art. 13.
And by the Capacity of the most subtle parts of the Aer.
or most ethereal parts of the aer, which are excussed in round by two bodies
arietating, are easily Capable of Configuration: when as much is subindicated
even by those sensible Vortices, or Whirlings and Eddies of Winds, which are
frequent in summer. Under this title fall those words of Epicurus, (...), etc.
Hunc vero fluxum in frustula consimilis Figurae comminui: the full sense
whereof seems to be this. That whem a Voice is emitted from the mouth, or other
sound from what body soever; the Contexture of the minute bodies effluent is so
comprest, and confracted into smaller contextures, that of the Original are
made swarms of Copies, or lesser masses exactly consimular in their Formation:
and that those are instantly dispersed sphaerically, or in round through the
whole circumfused space, still conserving their similitude to the Original, or
General voice, or sound, till their arrival at the Ear; and so retaining the
determinate signature of their Formation, are distinguished accordingly by the
sensory. By this it appears, that Epicurus, in this point, dissented
inconciliably from Democritus; who conceived that all sounds were delated to
the Ear by Propagation, i. e. that the sound being broken into myriads of small
Fragments, each fragment did form the contiguous Aer into Contextures of the
same Configuration with the Prototype, and those again formed the particles of
aer next adjacent into the like, and so successively through all parts of the
medium till they came home to the Organ of Hearing; not much unlike the dream
of the Aristoteleans, concerning the Propagation of the species of Light in
each point of the medium. Whereas the Conception of Epicurus is this, that the
Primitive Configuration of the most tenuious particles of the Aer, by the
percussion or Collision, is broken into many small masses; and each of those,
at farther remove from the sonant into many smaller, and those again into
smaller, all exactly respondent to the First in figure: after the same manner,
as we observe a spark of Fire exsilient from a Firebrand, to be broken into a
multitude of less sparks, and each of those shivered again into many less,
until their exility makes them totally disappear.

This Reason and manner of the Diffusion of a Sound throughout so great a space
of the medium, They may easily comprehend, Art. 14. The Reason (...).
wh^ have observed the Sewers of Princes in Italy spout Orang-flower water, or
other Fragrant Liquors, out of their mouths, with such dextrous violence, as to
disperse it in a kind of mist, through the aer of a spacious room, so that the
aer contained therein becomes impraegnate with the Odor, for the more noble
entertainment of the sense. For the Consent betwixt this Exsufflation of Water,
and the spherical Diffusion of a Sound, is very manifest, the greater Drops of
water being in their trajection through the aer, broken, by reason of the
impulse of the breath, that discharged them in distress, into swarms of less
drops, and those again into less, successively in the several degrees of
remove, until they attain such exig^ity, as we observe in the particles of a
mist: and that small proportion of Aer, emitted from the mouth of him that
speaks, being dispersed into a dense mist of voices, replenishing the whole
sphere of Diffusion.

Art. 15. The most subtle Particles of the Aer only, the material of Sounds.
Here we are constrained to a cautionary advertisement; that when we say, the
Aer is the Material of all voices, we do not mean all the Breath expired from
the Lungs, together with those Fuliginous Exhalations, that the Densation of
the aer, in Cold weather, subjects to the discernment of our sight; but only
the most subtle part of the Aer inspired, and modulated in the Vocal Artery and
other organs of speech: because such only can be judged capable of
Configuration. Nor can so small a quantity of purest Aer be thought
insufficient upon Dispersion to possess so capacious a sphere, as that of every
ordinary voice; so that of a whole Theater of Auditors, each one shall
distinctly hear it: insomuch as only a mouthful of Water blown from a Fullers
mouth, is so diffused as to irrigate the aer replenishing a room of
considerable amplitude. Especially, when the Analogy holds quite through. For,
as the Drops of Water are so much both larger and denser, by how much nearer
they are after exsufflation to the mouth of the Fuller: so also are the Vocal
masses of aer so much more large and dense or agminous, by how much nearer they
are to the mouth of the Speaker; and ^ contra. Which alone is the reason, why
the Voice of an Or^tor in a Theater is more strong and distinct to those of his
Auditory, that sit near at hand, than to those far off; provided the place
afford no Concurrent Echo, for in that case, the Reflex voice entering the
ear united with the Direct or Original, magnifies the impression on the
sensory.

PARAD^X.

Art. 16. One and the sa^e nu^e^ica^ v^yc^, not heard by two men, no^ ^oth ears
of one man.


Now, insomuch as it is consentaneous to right reason, to conceive, that the
Voice at^t first Emission from the mouth, its one General Configuration of the
mos^ ^nuious particles of the Aer, with some vehemence efflated from the (...)
organs, after frequent collisions and tremulous repercussions, and that this
General voice, in its diffusion through the medium, is c^ntracted (...)
dispersed into myriads of minute vocal configurations or Particular voices,
some of which invade the ears of one person, others of another, etc. Hence is
it a clear, though perhaps new and very paradoxical, truth* That the same
numerical voice of an Orator, is not heard by any two of his Auditors, nay not
by the 2 ears of any one; but every man, and every Ear is affe^^ed with a
distinct voice. And yet he incurrs no Contradiction, that affirms the whole
Auditory to receive the same voice. For, as all the water exsufflated into a
mist from the mouth of an Italian Sewer, or common Fuller, may be said to be
one and the same Water; though all the minute Drops, diffused into several
parts of the aer, and irrigating the several parts of the Floor or cloth, on
which they (...) rained down, be not the same drops: so likewise may we allow
all the Aer efflated from the mouth of the speaker, to be one and the same Aer;
though the Particular Voices, delated to particular Ears, are not the same
Numerically. Besides, should we, with the major part of Scholars, admit a voice
to be an Entity merely Intentional, or simple Quality, or Accident, yet should
we not detract one grain of weight from this our Paradox: since, to conceive
any one Particular voice to be in diverse places, or subjects, at once, is
manifestly absurd.

Here opportunity would prompt us to insist upon the admirable Conformation of
an Articulate Sound, Art. 17. A PROBLEM not yet solved by any Philosopher: viz.
How such infi^ite Variety of Words is formed only by the various motions of
the Tongue and Lips.
and to enquire how each Vowel and Consonant is created by such and such
motions of the Vocal Instruments: but the exceeding Difficulty countermands
that inclination. For, though Casserius, Placentinus, (in Anatom Sirmorin.
Organ.) and Athanasius Kircherus (in lib. Anatomico de natura Sonis and Vocis,
a cap. 10. ad finem libri.) have attempted laudably in that abstruse theme: yet
the Audit of their discoveries rises no higher than this single rule, That the
Vocal Artery and Lungs only conduce to the Acuteness and Gravity of the Voice,
as they discharge the inspired aer more Pressly, or Laxly; and Kircher (in cap.
10.) ingenuously confesses, At quomodo voces in gutture formentur, qua
proportione elisionis aeris nascantur, tam obscurum est, quam voces
hujusmodiclarae sunt and manifestae auditui. The difficulty, indeed, seems to
consist chiefly in this, How from the various motions of one single Organ, the
Tongue (the Author of Distinction in all Articulate sounds, though the Palate,
Epiglottis, Uvula and Teeth are in their respective degrees of assistance
inservient to the Elision of aer made by the Tongue) and that two-leafd Door of
the mouth, the Lips, such infinite variety of Letters and words does most
easily and almost insensibly result. To solve this, the General answer is, that
the wonder ought to be no greater, how one Tongue can suffice to the
Articulation or Distinction of innumerable words, by its various Motions; than
that, how one Hand suffices to the Distinction of innumerable Characters. But,
the Motions of the Hand requisite to Distinction of every Character, are
observable by the sense: and those of the Tongue and Lips requisite to the
Formation of every word, together with the proportion of the Aers Elision in
every Articulation, is deeply obscure: and therefore the Disparity being
manifest, the Problem remains untoucht, Art. 18. A Second (also yet
unconquered) Difficulty, viz. the determinate Pernicity of the Aers motion,
when exploded from the Lungs, in Speech.
and our Admiration not so much as palliated.

This Place might also admit another Considerable, as terrible to the most
daring Curiosity as the Former; and that is the ineffable Pernicity, whereby
the Aer is exploded from the Lungs, that so it may attain the Form of a voice.
For, to the Creation of a voice Consonous, or Unison to the sound of some one
string on a Lute; it is necessary, that the Aer be exploded by the Lungs, with
the same Pernicity, as the other Aer is impelled by the string in each of its
most rapid Vibrations, or alternate Recurses, Art. 19. All Sounds Created by
M^tion, and that either when that intermediate Aer is confracted by two solids,
mutually resistent; or when the aer is percust by one Solid; or when a solid is
percust by the Aer.
after its smart percussion by the finger, or plectrum. But this Arcanum
requires a Galilaeo or Mersennus, at least, to its due speculation.

The Observable most proportionate to our Capacity, and Competent to our
praesent Designation, is this; That no Sound is created without Motion: and
consequently, that the Thing Sonant, being endowed with solidity in some degree
or Compactness sufficient to Resistance, ought either to be struck against
another, that is solid and resistent; as when a Hammer is struck upon an Anvil;
or against the Aer, in Flux and not much resisting, and that either by
Pulsation of the Aer by a solid, as when the string of Lute percusseth ^he aer;
or the Pulse of the solid by the Aer, violently agitated, as in all P^^umatick,
or Wind instruments, where the stroke of the aer against the sides of the
Concave causes the Sound.

Art. 20. Rapidity of motion necessary to the Creation of a Sound, not in the
First Case.
In the Former instance, it is not necessary to the Creation of a Sound, that
the Collision be made by a motion rapid; because the Resistance, on either part
equal, causes that when the Access or Appropinquation of one Solid to the
other is Continent, the Aer interposed is Continently impelled and repelled
reciprocally: and as the Aer becomes the more hardly distressed on each part, by
how much nearer the two Solids approach each other; so proportionately is the
motion more rapid. So that, by that time the two solids touch each other
superficially, the motion is increased to the highest rapidity, and the
distressed Aer, no longer able to endure Compression, or to go and come
al^^rnately between the Solids, now contingent, breaks forth laterally in
round, and is diffused in shivers through all parts of the medium, so that
arriving at the Ear, it puts on the species of a Sound.

Art. 21. But, in the S^^^nd and Last.
But, in the Se^ond and Third instances, it is necessary the motion of Collision
be far more rapid, in order to the Creation of a Sound: because the Resistance,
which is wanting on the part of the Aer, must be compensated by the frequent
pulses and repulses of it, as when the Chord of an Instrument percust, does
very frequently impel the aer, by its Vibrations (the Greeks call them, (...))
or Reciprocations; or, as in Wind instruments, where the inflated Aer is, by
quick reverberations from the sides of the Concave, very often impulst and
repulst.

As for the Motion of the Aer, after its Formation into a Sound, from the
Sonant to the Ear, Art. 22. (...) are of (...) the D^lation.
therein is one particular worthy the wonder even of Scholars: and that is,
Whatever be the vehemence or remissness of the Collision, or force, by which
the Aer is exagitated, yet is the Translation of the Sound, thence resulting,
through the intermediate space to the term of it sphaere, always equally swift.
For Experience demonstrates, that all Sounds small and great, excited in one
and the same place, though they differ much. In the extent of their spears of
Audibility, are delated to that place in which they are heard, in equal time.
This is easily observable in the reports of a Cannon and a Musket,
successively discharged at a mile distance. For, standing on a Tower, or other
eminent place, and noting the moment, first when the Cannon is fired (the
report and F^ash being made both at the same instant) and numbering how many
Pulses of your artery, o^ how many Seconds in a Watch denoting them, intercede
betwixt your ^ight of the flame, and hearing the report, and then accounting
how many Pulses, or Seconds intervene betwixt the flash and report of a
Musket* you shall find the number of these equal to the number of those.

The Reason o^ this Aequivelocity of unequal Sounds, the Stoics (apud
Plutarch. 4. placit. 19. and Laertium lib. 7.) well insinuate, Art. 23. The
Reason thereof.
while they affirm, (...) the Aer percussed, in regard of its Continuity, is
formed into man^ Rounds, such as those successively rising and moving on the
surfac^ of Water, upon striking or throwing a stone into it; which Circle^ made
on the surface of Water by a small stone, move in the same (...), and
successively arrive at the margin of the River, or Pool, in as small time, as
those caused by a great stone. And Aristotle (2. de Anim. cap. 8*) expressly
declares his judgment, that the reason of the Delation of a Sound from the
Sonant to the Audient, is the Continuity of the Aer: though Simplicius and
Alexander differently interpret that Text, the one conceiving that he meant
that a Sound was translated through the medium by reason of sympathy among the
parts thereof; the other, by Propagation of the like Sound in all points of the
medium successively, after the manner of species Visible, according to the
dream of Aristotle. But all one it is to us, whether we conceive the motion of
a Sound made by Propagation, or Undulous Promotion; as to our praesent scope:
since either suffices to explicate the Cause, Why a Sound is longer before it
arrive at the Ear, than a Visible species before it arrive at the Eye; because
the Visible species is transmitted from the Object, neither by Propagation, nor
Undulation, but Directly, and therefore is capable of no Retardment from the
Medium.

As for the definite Velocity of Sounds, or determinate space of time, Art. 24.
To measure the Velocity of great Sounds.
in which all Sounds are delated to the Extremes of their spheres; we conceive
it to be Rhodus and Saltus, in the General, inassignable: in regard of the vast
disparity in their several Extents, some sounds being scarce audible at the
distance of 20 yards, and others clear and distinct at as many, nay twice as
many miles distance. But, if we assume this or that determinate Sound, and
attain the praecise diametre of its sphere; it is no difficulty to commensurate
its Velocity. For, Mersennus (in reflection. plysicomath. cap. 14. and Proposit.
39. Ballistica.) upon exact Experiment, found the Fragor of several Cannons
discharge in the Court of the Bast^le at Paris, to arrive at his ear, after
the flashes, at such a rate, that the sound pe^vaded 233^. Fathoms (each
containing six feet Paris measure) in the space of every Second, or Sixtieth
part of a minute: and thereupon rightly concluded, that the Report of a Cannon
flies at the constant rate of near upon 14000 Fathoms every minute, until it
attain the extremes of it sphere. If this expedient for the measure of the Time
wherein Sound is delated, seem either too costly or laborious; you have another
most cheap and easy praescribed by the Lord St. Alban (in Cent. 3. Not. Hist.)
which is this. Let one man stand in a steeple, having a lighted taper with him,
and some vail put before the flame thereof; and another, confaederate in the
trial, stand a mile off in the open field: then let him in the steeple strike
the Bell with a weighty hammer, and in the same instant withdraw the v^^l; and
so let him in the field account by his pulse what distance of time intervenes
betwixt his sight of the Light, and hearing of the Sound. If the strokes of the
Artery, which are subject to variation, for many causes, seem less certain; the
Seconds in a minute watch (which are (...), aequ^temporaneous) will be an exact
measure of the interval, and so of the velocity of a Sound. Plura vid. apud
Mersennum lib. 2. Harmonic. proposit. 40.

Another admirable secret there is in the Motion of Sound, which is, Art. 25.
Sounds, ^oe subject to R^^ardat^^n* ^^om adve^se* no^ Acceleration, from Secun^
Winds.
that no Wind can accelerate, or retard it, but it is delated from the Sonant
to the Audient in equal time, whether the wind be high or gentle, secund or
adverse. For, a Secund or favorable Wind is incomparably slower in motion than
a sound, as appears by the Rack or drift of clouds, the undulation of Corn
fields, the successive inclination of the topsof trees in woods, the rolling of
waves at sea, etc. but an Adverse wind, though it may indeed disturb a sound*
or weaken it by suppressing some of its particles (which is evident from h^nce,
that all sounds attaining the ear against the wind, are not so clear and
distinct, as when they are heard with the wind; as in Bells, whose noise
al^^rnately rises and falls in contrary gusts) yet do all the particles that
r^main uninterrupted, permeate the medium with equal velocity. This may be soon
Experimented either by Cannons, as Mersennus, or a cand^^ and bell, as the Lord
Bacon.

SECT. III.
Art. 1. That all Sounds, where the Aer is percussed by one solid, are created
immed^ately by the Frequenc^* not the Velocity of motion; demonstrated.
THe Praemises duly considered, it can seem no Paradox, That a Sound is created
^n the Aer, not so much by the Velocity, as CREBRITY of motion: and no
unnatural Consequence thereupon, that the Difference of an Acute and ^^ave
Sound arises not from the greater and less swiftness or rapidity of (...)
motion, as Aristotle and most of his Sectators imagined; but from the ^^^quency
and Infrequency thereof, as Galilaeo, Mersennus, and Gassendus.

To secure this by plain Demonstration, take a Lute string in your hand, and
having fast^^ned one end thereof to some hook or pin in a wall, distend it
gently; and then percussing it with your finger, you may perceive the
Vibrations, or ac^urses and recurses alternately succeeding, but you shall hear
no sound result^ng from it: because, as every vibration of the string is
performed in (...) time, so does the aer thereby percussed arrive at the ear
with such ^^^sible intervals betwixt each appulse, as that it leaves no
impression there^^ remaining*, which is not expunged and consolidated before
the invasion o^ ^ second appulse. Then stretch the string somewhat streighter,
so that the ^ibrations thereof may become inobservable by the eye, in respect
of th^^^ Frequency* and you shall hear a certain du^l stridor, or kind of
(...); because the Appulses of the aer, percussed by each Vibration* at the
(...), will be almost Continent, so that the time interjected betwixt each
(...) on the ear becomes imperceptible, and indistinguishable, nor can the
fir^^ ^mpression on the sensory be consolidated before a second renew it, etc.
This done and observed, increase the distension of the string yet more, and
p^^cussing it you shall perceive a clear sound to arise; because as the
Vibratio^, so are the percussions of the aer, and their Appulses to the Ear
far more Continent, or more one, in regard the moments of Time intercedent
betw^^^ the successive strokes, are more short and imperceptible.

Art. 2. An^ likewise, where the ^er is the (...)
And wha^ (...) here say of the reason of a Sound resulting from a Lutestring,
the sam^ (...) proportion, is to be conceived of all other Sounds created in
Wind (...), where the Aer is the Percutient. For, the breath easily and gen^^y
inflated into a Flute, Cornet, Trumpet, etc. yields no sound at all; (...)
because the pulses and repulses of the aer from the sides of the (...) are so
infrequent, as to have the intervals of time distinguishable* (...) aer
likewise slowly emitted from the Lungs (the great Exempla^ to (...)
^neumaticks) makes no voice, only because it is not frequently enough
reverberated from the sides and annulary cartilages of the Vocal Artery, and
consequently the Appulses of it to the ear being proportionately infrequent,
cannot, by their Coition or Union into one stronger Appulse, make any sensible
impression on the sensory. But the Aer then becomes son^nt, when it is efflated
with vehemence, in respect of its more frequent Appulses to the sensory,
respondent to the more itterated pulses and repulses, or reverberati^ns of the
sides of the Vocal Artery. Thus also, when you draw your finger gently along a
Table, or put a Hammer on an Anvil easily, you shall hear no sound; because the
Repercussions of the Aer caused by that gentle motion, are so far asun^e^ in
time, as never to become Continent, or Conjoined: and consequently, the
Appulses of the percussions to the ear being alike infrequent, can never make
a sensible impression on the A^ousti^k Nerve. And this we conceive more than
sufficient evidence of the Verity of the First part of our Thesis; That a Sound
is not generated in the Aer by the Velocity, but Crebrity of motion: unless in
a remote dependence, as Velocity is the Cause of Crebrity.

As for the Remainder, viz. Art. 3. (...) Acute sounds a^i^e from the more, and
^ra^e from ^he less (...) of the aer, demon^^ra^ed.
That an A^ute sound arises from more frequent, and a Grave Sound from l^s^
frequent percussions of the Aer: the Certitude hereof may be easily conc^u^ed
from this Experiment. Fasten a long Lute-string at one extreme on a hook n^yled
to a wall, and suspend a small weight at the other; then strike the string at
convenient distance above the weight: and you shall observe the Swings, or
Vibrations of it to be so slow, as that you may measure the time of each, by
the systole and di^stole of your Pulse, or the Seconds in a Minute Watch. Then
wind up the Chord exactly to the half, the same weight continuing appended, an^
percuss it, as before: and you shall find the Vibrations of it to be doubly
swifter than the former, to that one Vibration shall be in time respondent to
two Pulses. Again, abbreviate the Chord to half, and having percusse^ or
abduced that half, which is now but a fourth part of the whole; you shall
observe the Vibrations to be again doubled in Frequency, in respect of the
Second, and qua^rupled in respect of the First; so that now 4 Reciprocati^ns
shall be isochr^nical to one pulse. This effected, continue this determinate
abbreviation of the Chord, by subdividing it into halfs successively until the
Reciprocations become so swift and frequent, as to be indistinguishable by the
sense though still y^u deprehend their Velocity and Crebrity to be increased at
a certain rate, i. e. duplicated upon each Dimidiation of the chord, when the
Aer is so frequently percussed by it* as that it becomes Sonorous, or ^ctually
sonant. Then aga^^ D^mid^^te the sonant remainder of the Chord, and upon
percussion you shall observe the sound thereof to be more Acute by a whole
Octave, than the Former^ and thence you cannot but concede, that the Acuteness
of this half of the sonant chord, above that of the whole sonant chord, is
caused only by the doubly more frequent Percussions of the Aer, and
proportionate strokes of the Sensory. And, because a Quadruplicate weight
produces the same Effect, being ^ppended to the whole of the sonorous chord,
as a simple weight does in the half, as to the Duplication of the Celerity and
Frequency of the Vibrations* in the same moments: hence is it, that if you
increase the weight, retaining the same Longitude of the Chord, by degrees,
until you advance the sound thereof to an Eighth* it ^s mani^est, that the
Reciprocations of it are still doubly more swift and frequent, than those
caused by the former weight. Moreover, what we affirm concerning the Half of
the sonorous Chord, in respect of an Octave; holds true, in proportion also of
the 2 thirdparts of ^he Chord, in respect of a Fifth, of the Dodrantal, or 3
quarters, in r^spect of a Fourth, and so of the rest of the musical Notes.

For, in a very long Chord, if you stop upon the third part of the half
thereof, and p^^cuss the Bessal, o^ two thirds of the half remaining at
liberty: the proportion of its Reciprocations will not be Duple, but
sesqui^steral in respect to those of the whole length; i. e. 2 Vibrations of
the Chord will not respond in time to one pulse of the Artery, nor 4. to 2. but
3. to 2. And, if you stop on the fourth part; then will the Reciprocations of
the ^^mainder be in proportion sesquitertial, i. e. 4 Vibrations shall be
isochro^^cal to 3 pulses. According to the same method, if you stop on the 5th*
part of the Chord; the proportion of its Vibrations, to that of the former,
will be sesquiquartal: if the 6th part, sesquiquintal; and so consequent^^ of
all other Notes. So that it seems easily determinable, by this scale, What is
the proportion of the strokes inflicted on the Ear in every Acute sound,
comp^^^^ively to those inflicted by every Grave: and this not only in the
sounds o^^* string, but all others of the like Original. To instance; when a
Boy sings with a Man, and emits a note more Acute by an Eighth^ it is to be
conceived, that the Aer efflated from the Vocal Artery of the Boy, is doubly
swifter in its motion, or doubly more frequent in its r^^^^berations from the
sides of the Windpipe, in respect of the double narrowness thereof, than that
expired from the Vocal Artery of the man. And, hence we may occasionally
advertise, that by how much the more (...) any man would sing; by so much more
straightly or narrowly mus^ ^e Compress his Windpipe: that so the Aer may
issue forth more distressed and straightened, having suffered the more Frequent
reverberations from the sides and rings of the same.

Art. 4. (...).
And this (...) noble Fountain from which many of our m^dern Theorical Music^^^
have drawn the Reason of the Suavity of the^r CONSONAN^^S, and Acerbity or
ingratefulness of their DISSONANC^^* and that not without mature consideration.
For, when two Sounds, ^^^chronical in their creation, arrive at the ear in the
same instant* and (...) it with pleasure, or a kind of sweetness; the Cause of
that sweetn^^ ^an be no other but this, that the percussions of the Aer
generating (...) two Sounds, become so united, as to leave no sensible (...)
might grate or exasperate the tender sensory: and on the other si^^* the reason
of the Discord or Insuavity of two sounds, at once emitted, is only this; that
they are not united, so that the ear deprehen^^ and dislikes their
Discrepancy. Again, the several Degrees of thi^ Suavity and Insuavity among
musical sounds, cannot be deduced with equal probability from any other
original, as from the variety of (...), and Discrepancy of the Percussions
creating the Sounds. To ^^emplifie in the Sounds resulting from strings; take
two (...) in their materials, length, and thickness, and (...) ^qual weight^,
or force; and when you percuss them with one (...) they will emit equal sounds,
or that Consonance, which is called an U^^son: which will be therefore
grateful, because as the Vibrations of (...), so will the strokes inflicted on
the sensory, have the same (...) each to other, as one has to one (the
proportion of Equality^ (...) consequently will be equal in number and time, so
as to affect the sensory most equally and Unitedly. But if you abbreviate one
of the strings exactly to half; because (according to the praemises) the sounds
resulting from them, at once percust, must make an Eighth, or that Consonance,
which the Greeks name (...), and we a Diapason: therefore must that Eighth be
eminently grateful also; insomuch as though after the Coalition of two strokes,
one resulting from the shorter string be insociate, yet does the immediately
consequent stroke thereof perfectly unite with that of the longer string, and
so the Unition is made Alternately, or at every other stroke; and therefore
does this Consonance invade the sense of all others, an Unison only excepted,
most unitedly and equally, and consequently is the most pleasant and charming
of all Consonances, after an Unison. And when you make the proportion of the
short string exactly Sequialteral to that of the long; because the sounds
resulting from them, both at once percussed, make a Fifth, or Diapente:
therefore will that Consonance also have a considerable degree of sweetness,
though short of that of an Eight; insomuch as though two strokes pass
insociated, yet does the Union follow in every Third, and so the Unition is
sufficiently frequent to please the sense, which is best delighted with that
object, in which is the least difference of parts, according to that fourth
Praecogn. of Des Carts (in compend. Musicae, page 6.) Illud objectum facilius
sensu percipitur, in quo est minor differentia partium. Again, if you make the
proportion of the short string Sesquitertial to that of the long; because a
Fourth, or Diatessaron, does result from the percussion of them together,
therefore will that Consonance be likewise competently grateful: in respect
that after three insociated strokes, the Coition falls in every fourth. To
Contract; the same holds in proportion exactly true also in Sesquiquartal and
Sesquiquintal proportions, from which arise Thirds major and minor; and of
superbiparting Thirds, and supertriparting Fifths, from which arise Sixths
major and minor; and finally, in all Compound Consonances, such as Disdiapason,
etc. For, always the Consonance is by so much more grateful, by how much more
frequently the strokes unite in the Sensory: and e contra. Whence is generated
the Dissonancy, or ingratefulness of Sounds, when ever the strokes either too
rarely, or never unite: because, in those cases, the sense is held in a kind of
lasting distraction, and unless a restitution of the distracted parts of the
Sensory be made by some Coalitions, and those sufficiently frequent (which are
a kind of Balsam, to cure the gratings and dissolutions) the sensory must be
mis-affected with a kind of Laceration, and undergo that dolor unwittingly.
This the skilful Musician foreknowing, endeavors to praevent, by making a
Diapason, or perfect Consonance tread upon the heels of a Dissonance, for
varieties sake usually inserted into Tunes: thereby with advantage
consolidating the ulceration of the sensory caused by the praecedent Discord,
and making the Harmony the more grateful* as Health is most grateful
immediately after sickness, and a Calm after a Tempest. And this is the
reason, why an Eighth is by many reputed a more pleasing Consonance, than an
Alnison; viz. in respect of the Distraction, which succeeds alternately from
the Dissociated strokes of one of two strings together percust: and not in
respect of its Comprehension of all other Consonances, as Des Carts seems to
conclude ( in cap. 8. Compend Music.)

Art. 5. The same Analytically praesented in Scheme.
If this Genealogy of all Musical Consonances seem either obscure, or taedious;
you may please to accept it in Epitome, thus. The Vibrations of Chords are,
according to most exact observation reciprocally proportional to the Length of
the string, having the same Weight. to the Weight at the string, having the
same Length.
Whence many have concluded, that all Consonances in Music proceed from the
speedier Union of these Vibrations in their Terms.

The Terms of an Eighth are in proportion, as 2 to 1 therefore the space of 1
Vibrations, in the Graver Term, are just equal to 2 Vibrations in the Acuter
Term of an Eighth. Fifth are in proportion, as 3 -- 2 therefore the space of 2
Vibrations, in the Graver Term, are just equal to 3 Vibrations in the Acuter
Term of an Fifth. Fourth are in proportion, as 4 -- 3 therefore the space of 3
Vibrations, in the Graver Term, are just equal to 4 Vibrations in the Acuter
Term of an Fourth. Sixth major are in proportion, as 5 -- 3 therefore the space
of 3 Vibrations, in the Graver Term, are just equal to 5 Vibrations in the
Acuter Term of an Sixth major. Third major are in proportion, as 5 -- 4
therefore the space of 4 Vibrations, in the Graver Term, are just equal to 5
Vibrations in the Acuter Term of an Third major. Third minor are in proportion,
as 6 -- 5 therefore the space of 5 Vibrations, in the Graver Term, are just
equal to 6 Vibrations in the Acuter Term of an Third minor. Sixth minor are in
proportion, as 8 -- 5 therefore the space of 5 Vibrations, in the Graver Term,
are just equal to 8 Vibrations in the Acuter Term of an Sixth minor.


Hereupon our Harmonical Authors (whose Pythagorean souls feast themselves with
the ravishing, though silent Music of Numbers) for the most part account an
Eighth the First of Consonances, because an Union is made before a second
Vibration in the Graver Term; a Fifth the second Consonance, because an Union
is made before a third Vibration in the Graver Term, etc. according to the
Scheme.

But this so universally celebrated Melothetical Foundation has been very
lately shook by that no less Erudite, Art. 6. A just and unanswerable Exception
against the former Harmonical Hypothesis
than Noble Author of the Animadversions on Des Carts Music Compendium, the
Lord Viscount Brouncker; (whose constant Friendship, and learned Conversation,
I must profess to have been one of the chiefest Consolations of my life.) who
having, upon profound, and equitable examination, found this great defect
therein, that according to the former Derivation of all Musical Consonances, a
Third Major must succeed a Fourth and Sixth Major, and the proportion of 7 to 5
makes a Consonance as well, and before a Sixth minor; which is manifestly
repugnant to Experience: has enriched the world with a new Hypothesis of his
own happy invention, sufficiently extensible to the full solution of all
Musical Phaenomenaes. According to which the Consonances arise (physically)
from the Vibrations of Chords, not in respect of their Union, but
Ratio-Harmonical Proportion, as He is pleased to call it: and this upon very
good reason, since, the Vibrations being proportional to the Chords, and the
Chords so proportionally divided; it is of mere necessity, that their
Vibrations have the same proportions. But of this, the Competent Enquirer may
understand more from his Animadversions, etc.

And this speculation, touching the Nativity of Musical Consonances; Art. 7.
PROBLEM 1. In what instant, an Harmonical Sound, resulting from a Chord
percussed, is begun.
has engaged us to touch upon that Quicksand, from which none the most
adventurous Curiosity has ever yet returned with full resolution; and that is
that eminent PROBLEM, Quando sonus Harmonicus a nervo fieri incipiat? In what
instant an Harmonical Sound, created by a Chord of an instrument percussed, or
abduced from its directness, is begun?

For the clear understanding of this Quaestion, we are first to advertise; that
from the percussion of any Chord distended, there are made two different
Sounds: one arising from the allision of the Aer betwixt the finger, or
plectrum, and the Chord; which is so far from being Concinnous, that it
frequently diminishes the integrity or sweetness of the Music, and always
makes a kind of Discord, where the unskilful hand strikes too hard or foul;
the other, from the Chord verberating the Aer in its Vibrations, which is the
Concinnous, or Harmonical Sound, by the Graecians, for distinction sake, called
(...), and in our language the Twang. And this is the subject of the praesent
Enquiry. Secondly, we are to praemise this Wherein AB denotes the Chord, in a
straight line, either perpendicularly, or horizontally distended; ABC the same
Chord abduced, or impelled from the direct line to C; and F the same in the
extreme or term of its spontaneous Flexion, after some certain recurses. And
lastly, we are to state the Quaestion, thus. Whether the Concinnous Sound
beginns from the First Excurse, which is made by the Chord from E to C, when it
is impelled by the force of the percussion; or, when it returns, by spontaneous
reflection, from C to E; or, when it has past beyond E to D; or, in its whole
Recurse from D, by E, to C?

(1) Some there are, who observing that, when a Chord is abduced from its
direct line E to C, and returns it self from C to E, if a piece of woollen
cloth, a man's finger, or ought else that may suppress its motion, be so set as
to arrest it at E; then is no Harmonical sound created, either in its first
Excurse from E to C, nor Recurse from C to E: have upon this Experience
concluded, that the Concinnous Sound is begun in the first Recurse of the Chord
from D to E; because they suppose, the Chord then to reverberate the Aer, which
pursued it ( a tergo) from C to D, and force it by contrary violence to fly
back again from D to C by E: so that the Aer at E, being on both sides distressed
by that moving violently from C to E* on one hand, and that lastly impelled
from D to E, on the other, must suffer the highest Condensation, or
Compression, or Percussion of all the other aer within the space CD, and
consequently be the original of the Sound.

(2) Others have affirmed the original of the Sound to be from C to E, the
space of the first Recurse: and their inducement thereto is this Experience. If
a Chord of 30 perches length be with sufficient force extended, and then
abduced from its line of direction to the distance of 15 feet, more or less; it
will yield a kind of stridor, or grave sibilation, in its spontaneous Recurse
from C to E: which sound would perhaps be Concinnous, if included in some
Instrument of sufficient capacity. To which they add, that wands or rodds being
switcht in the aer, and Gunshot in their flight, emitt a singing noise, though
they are impelled only one way, and have no Recurses, or doublings in the aer.
But, to this it may be Answered, (1) That all these Bodies may more justly be
conceived to yield a sound only in this respect; that the inaequalities in
their superficies so distress the aer in their rapid Motion, and by frequent
reciprocations in their small cavities variously agitate the same, that it
suffers such Circumvolutions as are tantamont to their Recurses. (2) That no
Bullet shot from a Gun would yield any sound at all, if it were exactly
sphaerical, polite, and hard, and flew directly without that Volutation, or
Circumvolution, which the resistance and circular returns of the aer constantly
impress upon it. (3) That the Sibilation or Hissing noise made by the long
Chord, in its Recurse from the 15 feet abduction, is not, nor ever can be
Concinnous: and therefore the Experience is impertinent to this Problem.

(3) A Third sort there is, who opinion the Harmonical Sound then to begin,
when the Chord is first impelled from E to C; so that the C^ord should produce
a Sound in the extremity or period of every Flexion, i. e. in C and D, at
alternate Recurses: and consequently, that no sensible Sound is produced in any
part of the whole intermediate space betwixt CD. And the Ground These stand
upon, is the Experience of Cloth, which being violently shook in the aer, for
the excussion of dust, does only then emit a smart sound, or Rapp, when
attaining the extremity of its Flexion, it percusseth the superior aer, and is
in the manner of Sails, swelled up by the inferior aer. But, in this instance,
and that consimilar one of Coach-whips, it is almost evident even to the eye,
that the Rapp is made only by the Doubling of the Cloth, or Chord, at the end
of their Flexion: and therefore we are not convinced, that the Concinnous Sound
is then begun, as these persuade, in either C or D the period of each Flexion;
especially, when the Chord in C and D seems rather to quiesce, than move* and
some quiet must intercede betwixt two contrary motions of the same thing.

(4) But ^nsomuch as all sounds are caused by the Motion of the Aer; and the
Sound always is loudest, where the Motion of the Aer is most rapid; (...) the
whole sonorous line, or space betwixt C and E, the motion of the Aer
intercluded is most swift, when the Chord returns from C to E: therefore does
Mersennus (to whose judgment we most incline, in this nicety) conclude; that
the Harmonical sound is begun in the beginning of the first Recurse of the
Chord from C to E: and that it is then of the same Acuteness, as are all the
subsequent sounds made by the subsequent Recurses; because the reason of the
First Recurse seems to be the same with that of all the consequent.

To this some have objected; that the sound of the First Recurse is too
Expedite and short, to be perceived by the Ear: since even the Eye,
incomparably more prompt in the discernment of visibles, cannot behold an
object, whose Appearance, or Praesence exceeds not the Duration of the foresaid
Recurse of the Chord from the extreme of its flexion C to E; which does scarce
endure the ^600 part of a minute. But this objection is soon dissolved by
Experience, which testifies, that if a quill, or other impediment be placed
some small space beyond E toward D, so that the Chord may complete its first
Recurse from C to E, without interruption: then will a sound be created, and
such as has sufficient Acuteness; though it be scarce momentany in Duration,
because the frequency of its Recurses is praevented.

Many other Problems there are, concerning the Reasons of Sounds, wherewith the
insatiate Curiosity of Naturalists has entertained it self, in all ages: but,
among them all we shall take cognizance of only those more eminent ones, which
as they seem most irreconcilably repugnant to our Theory, when proposed; so
must they much confirm and illustrate the dignity thereof, when clearly
Dissolved by us, without the least contradiction to, or apostasy from our
Principles assumed. Since the unstrained Solution of the most difficult
Phaenomenaes, by the virtue of any Hypothesis, is the best argument of its
Verity and excellency above others, that fail in their Deduction to remote
Particulars.

PROBLEM 2.
Whether may a Sound be created in a Vacuum, Art. 8. That a Sound may be
crea^ed in a Vacuum; contrary to Athanas. Kircher in Art. Magn. Cons^ni and
D^ssoni lib. 1. cap. 6. Digression^.
if any such be in Nature?

SOLUT.
To solve this (by many accounted inexplicable) Aenigme, we need only to have
recurse to our long since antecedent Distinction of a Vacuity Disseminate, and
Coacervate: for, that once entered our judgment, we cannot indubitate that
ingenious Experiment of Gaspar Berthius, laureat Mathematician at Rome
(frequently, and always with honorable Attributes, mentioned by Father
Kircher, in sundry of his Physicomathematical discourses) which sensibly
demonstrateth the actual production of a Sound, in a Disseminate Vacuity.

The Experiment is thus made. Having praepared a large Concave and almost
sphaerical Glass, aemulating the figure of a Cucurbite or Cupping-glass; fix a
small Bell, such as is usual in striking Watches of the largest size, on one
side of the concave thereof, and a moveable Hammer, or striker, at fit
distance, on the other, so as the Hammer being elevated may fall upon the
skirts of the Bell: and then lute or coement on the Glass, firmly and closely
(that all sensible insinuation of the ambient aer be praevented) to one extreme
of a Glass Tube, of about an inch diametre in bore, and 8 or 10 feet in length.
Then, reversing the Tube, pour into it a sufficient quantity of Quicksilver, or
Water, to fill both it and the Head exactly. This done, stop the other extreme
of the Tube with your finger, or other stopple accommodate to the orifice; and
after gentle inversion, immerge the same to a foot depth in a Vessel of Water,
and withdraw your stopple, that so much of the Quicksilver contained in the
Head and Tube, as is superior in Gravity to the Cylindre of Aer, from the
summity of the Atmosphere incumbent on the surface of the Water in the
subjacent Vessel may fall down, leaving a considerable void Space in the
superior part of the Tube. Lastly, apply a vigorous Loadstone to the outside of
the Glass Head, in the part respecting the moveable extreme of the Hammer; that
so, by its Magnetical Effluxions transmitted through the incontiguities or
minute pores of the Glass, and fastened on to its Ansulae or small Holds, it may
elevate the same: which upon the subduction of its Attrahent, or Elevator, will
instantly relapse upon the Bell, and by that percussion produce a clear and
shrill sound, not much weaker than that emitted from the same Bell and Hammer,
in open aer.

Now, that there is a certain Vacuity in that space of the Head and Tube
deserted by the delapsed Quicksilver, is sufficiently conspicuous even from
hence; that the ambient Aer seems so excluded on all hands, that it cannot by
its Periosis (to borrow Platoes word) or Circumpulsion, succeed into the room
abandoned by the Quicksilver, and so redintegrate the solution of Continuity,
as in all other motions.

And that this Vacuity is not Total, or Coacervate, but only Gradual or
Desseminate, may be warrantably inferred from hence; (1) That Nature is
incapable of so great a wound, as a Coacervate Vacuity of such large
dimensions, as we have argued in our Chapter of a Vacuum Praeternatural, in the
First Book: (2) That a Sound is produced therein, for since a Sound is an
Affection of the Aer, or rather, the Aer is the Material Cause of a Sound, were
there no aer in the Desert space, there could be no Sound. Wherefore, it is
most probable, that in this so great distress ingenious Nature does relieve
herself by the insensible transmission of the most ethereal or subtle
particles of the Circumpulsed Aer, through the small and even with a microscope
invisible Pores of the Glass, into the Desert Space; which replenish it to such
a degree, as to praevent a Total though not a Dispersed Vacuity therein: and
though the Grosser Parts of the extremly comprest Aer cannot likewise permeate
the same slender or narrow Inlets; yet is that no impediment to the Creation of
a Sound therein, because the most tenuious and ethereal part of the aer, is
not only a sufficient, but the sole material of a Sound, as we have more than
intimated in the 15. Art. 2. Sect. of the present Chapter.

The only Difficulty remaining, therefore, is only this; Why the sound made in
the disseminate Vacuity should through the Glass-head pass so easily and
imperturbed, as to be heard by any in the circumstant space; when common
Experience certifieth, that the Report of a Cannon, at the distance of only a
few yards, cannot be heard through a Glass window into a room void of all
chinks or crannies?

Nor need any man despair of expeding it. For, whosoever considers the
extraordinary and inscrutable ways to which Nature frequently recurrs, in
cases of extreme Necessity; and that the Distress she undergoes in the
introduction of this violent Vacuity (where her usual remedy the Peristaltick
motion, or Circumpulsion of the Aer, is praevented by the interposition of a
Solid) is much more urgent than that she is put to in the Compression of the
ambient aer by the explosion of Canons (where the amplitude of uninterrupted
space affords freedom of range to the motion impressed) we say, whosoever well
considers these things, cannot doubt, but that it is much easier to Nature to
admit the trajection of the Sound produced in the Disseminate Vacuity, through
the pores of the Glass-head, than the transmission of an External Sound into a
close Chamber, through a Glass window, where is no Concavity for the
Corroboration or Multiplication of the Sound, and consequently where the
impulse is far less (respective to the quantity of the aer percussed) and the
resistance as much greater.

PROBLEM, 3.
Whence is it, that all Sounds seem somewhat more Acute, Art. 9. Why all Sounds
appear more Acute, at large, than at small distance.
when heard far off; and more Grave, near at hand: when the Contrary Effect is
expected from their Causes, it being demonstrated, that the Gravity of a Sound
arises (mediately, at least) from the Tardity, and Acuteness from the Velocity
of the Motion, that creates it; and many great Clerks have affirmed, that the
motion of a Sound is less swift far off from, than near to its origin,
according to that General Law of Motion, omnia corpora ab externo mota, tanto
tardius moventur, quanto a suo principio remotiora fuerint?

SOLUT.
No Sound is Really, but only Apparently more acute at great, then at small
distance; and the Cause of that semblance is merely this: that every Sound,
near its origin, in regard of the more vehement Commotion, and proportionate
resistance of the Aer, dependent on its natural Elater, or Expansory Faculty,
does suffer some Obtusion, or Flatning; which gradually diminishing in its
progress or Delation through the remoter parts of the Medium, the Sound becomes
more Clean, Even and Exile, and that Exility counterfeits a kind of Acuteness.

PROBLEM 4. Art. 10. Why Cold water falling, makes a fuller noise, than warm.

Why does Cold Water, in its effusion from a Vessel, make a more full and acute
noise, than Hot or Warm?

SOLUT.
The substance of Cold Water, being more Dense and Compact, must be more
weighty, and consequently more swift in its fall, and so the noise resulting
from its impulsion of the aer, more sharp than that of Hot: which being
rarefied by the fire, or made more lax in the contexture of its particles,
loses something of its former weight, and so has a slower descent, and in
respect of that slowness, produces a weaker and flatter sound. And this is
also the reason, why Iron hot yields not so smart and full a sound, as when
it is cold.

PROBLEM 5.
Art. 11. Why the voice of a Calf is more Base than that of an Ox, etc.
Why is the Lowing of a Calf much more Deep, or Base, than that of an Ox, Cow,
or Bull, at their standard of growth: contrary to all other Animals, which have
their voices more shrill and acute, when they are young, than when they are old?

SOLUT.
The Cause of this singularity is found only in the peculiar Constitution of
the Larynx of a Calf; which is in amplitude equal to, and in laxity and
moisture much exceeds that of an Ox, Cow, or Bull full grown; and so Age does
Contract and Harden, not ampliate the same, as in all other Animals: and it is
well known that the wideness and laxity of the Asper Artery, is the cause of
all Grave or Base Voices.

PROBLEM 6.
Art. 12. Why a Dissonance in a Base is more deprehensible by the ear, than in
a Treble voice.
Why is a Dissonance more easily discovered by the ear, in a Barytonous, or Base
Voice, or Tone, than in an Oxytonous or Treble?

SOLUT.
Because the Barytonous voice is of a slow Motion, and the Oxytonous of a
swift: and the sense does ever deprehend that object whose appearance is more
durable, more clearly and distinctly than that, whose appearance is only
instantaneous, or less lasting.

CHAP. VII. OF ODOVRS.
SECT. I.
WHoever is natively deprived of any one sense, Art. 1. That the Cognition of
the Nature of Odours is very difficult; in respect of the Imperfection of the
sense of Smelling, in man: and
says Aristotle (in Analyticis) is much less capable of any Science, than He
who has all five Fingers on the left hand of his soul (to use the metaphor of
Casserius Placentinus, in praefat. ad lib. de sens. Organ) or all the Organs of
the sensitive Faculty complete: and His reason is that General Canon, Nihil est
in intellectu, quod non prius fuerit in sensu; the senses being the Windows,
through which the soul takes in her ideas of the nature of sensible Objects. If
so, whoever has any one sense less perfect than the others, can hardly attain
the Knowledge of the nature of objects proper to that sense: and upon
consequence, the Cognition of the Essence of an ODOURE must be so much more
difficult to acquire, than that of Visibles and Audibles, by how much less
perfect the sense of SMELLING is in man, than the sight and Hearing. And, that
Man, generally, is not endowed (for, we may not, with our noble Country man Sir
Kenelme Digby charge this imperfection altogether upon the Errors of our Diet;
because we yet want a Parallel for his John of Liege, who being bred savagely
among wild beasts, in the Forest of Ardenna, could wind his pursuers at as
great distance, as Vultures do their prey, and after his Cicuration or
reduction to conversation with men, retained so much of the former sagacity of
his nose, that He could hunt out his absen^ friends by the smell of their
footsteps, like our Bloodhounds) we say, that man is not generally endowed
with exquisiteness of smell; needs no other eviction, but this: that He does
not deprehend or distinguish any but the stronger, or vehement sorts of Odours;
and those either very offensive, or very Grateful.

Art. 2. The contrary opinions of Philosophers, concerning it.
But, albeit this difficulty of acquiring the knowledge of the Essence and
immediate Causes of Odours, has its origin in the native Imperfection of our
sense accommodate to the perception thereof: yet has it received no small
advance from the obscurity of our Intectuals, the Errors of human judgment,
and the common Effect thereof, the contrary Opinions of Philosophers. For,
however they unanimously decree, that the proper object of smelling is an
Odor; and the adaequate sensory, ordained for the apprehension of it, the
Mammillary Processes of the brain, or two nervous productions derived to the
basis of the nose: yet could they never agree about the chief subject of their
dispute, the Quiddity, or Form of an Odor; or the Commensuration betwixt the
same, and the odoratory Nerves, the theory whereof seems most necessary to the
explanation of the Reason and Manner of its Perception and Distinction by them.

Art. 3. Some determining an Odor to be a substance
Thus, on one side of the schools, Heraclitus, cited by Aristotle (de sensu and
sensili, cap. 5.) is positive, that the smell is not affected with only an
Incorporeal Quality, or spiritual species; but that a certain subtle substance
[(...)] or Corporeal Exhalation, emitted from the odorous object, does really
and materially invade and affect the sensory.

(2) And Epicurus (in Epist ad Herodot. apud Diogen. Laertium, lib. 10.)
seconds him with somewhat a louder voice; Existimandum est, Odorem non facturum
ullam sui impressionem, nisi ab odora re usque deferrentur moleculae se^
Corpuscula quaedam, ea ratione Commensurata ipsi olfact^^ sensorio, u^ ipsum
moveant afficiant ve; alia quidem perturbate ac discrepanter ex quo odores
Ingrati sunt; alia placide and accommodate, ex quo Iucundi sunt odores: men are
to conceive, that an Odor could make no sensible impression of it self, unless
there were transferred from the odorous object certain substantial Effluxes, or
minute Bodies, so Commensurate or Analogous to the peculiar Contexture of the
Organ of smelling, as to be capable of affecting the same; and those either
perturbdly and discordantly, whence some Odours are Ungrateful; or amicably and
conveniently, and those Odours are Grateful.

(3) And Gal^n, attended on by most of the Aesculapian Tribe, sings the same
tune, and in as high a key as either of the Former; saying, ( in lib. de
instrum. olfact cap 2.) Id quod a rerum corporibus exhalat, Odoris substantia
est: though Casserius Placentinus (de fabric. Nasi, Sect. 2. cap. 3.) has
endeavored to corrupt the genuine sense of those words, by converting
substantia into subjectum, as if Galen intended only that the Exhalation from
an odorous body was only the subjectum inhaesionis, and the odor it self
merely the Quality inhaerent therein. Contrary to the rules of Fidelity and
Ingenuity; because incongruous both the Letter of the Text, and the Syntaxis
thereof with his whole Enquiry.

(4) And the Lord St. Alban, though a modern, yet not unworthy to enter the
Chorus with the noblest among the Ancients, though He had too frequently used
his tongue to the Dialect of Immaterial Qualities, and spiritual Images, in his
discourses of the other senses; does yet make a perfect unison with Galen, in
this particular, delivering his judgment in most full and definite terms,
thus: Certain it is, that no smell issues from a body, but with emission of
some Corporeal substance; (Sylva sylvar. Cent. 9. experim. 834.)

On the other side, we hear the great Genius of Nature, Art. 4. Others, a mere
Accident or Quality.
as his Idolaters miscall him, Aristotle, and that most numerous of Sects, the
Peripatetick, vehemently contending, that an Odor belongs to the classis of
simple, or Immaterial Qualities; and that though it be wafted or transported on
the wings of an Exhalation, from the Odorate body to the Sensory: yet is the
sensory affected only with the mere Image, or Intentional species thereof.

Now the moments of Authority being thus equal on both sides, Art. 5. The Basis
of the Latter opinion, infirm and ruinous.
our province is to determine the scales by the praepondium of Reason, i. e,
with an even hand to examine the weight of the Arguments on which each of these
contrary Opinions is grounded

To begin with the Later, as the most Epidemical and generally entertained; we
find the principal Base of it to be only that common Axiom, Sensus non
percipiunt substantias, sed tantum earum Accidentia, that no sense is invaded
and actuated into sensation by the Real or Material, but only the intentional
species of the Object: which being weak of it self, and by us frequently
subverted in our praecedent Discourses; the whole superstructure thereon
relying is already ruined, and they who will reaedifie it, must lay a new
foundation.

But, as to the Former, that an Odor is a perfect substance, by material
impression on the Sensory causing a sensation of it self therein; this seems a
Truth standing upon such firm feet of its own, that it contemns the crutches of
sophistry. For

(1) No Academick can be so obstinate, as not to acknowledge, Art. 6. That all
odorous Bodies emit corporeal Exhalations.
that there is a certain Effluvium, or Corporeal Exhalation from all odorous
bodies, diffused and transmitted through the aer; as well because his own
observation does ascertain him, that all Aromatiques and other odorous bodies,
in tract of a few years, confess a substantial Contabescence, or decay of
Quantity; which makes our Druggists and Apothecaries conserve their parcels of
Ambre Grise, Musk, Civit, and other rich Perfumes, in bladders, and those
immured in Glasses, to praevent the exhaustion of them by spontaneous
emanation: as for this, that the odor does most commonly continue vigorous in
the medium, a good while after the remove of the source, or body from which it
was effused. And Aristotle himself, after his peremptory Negative, Odorem non
esse (...), Effluxionem: could not but let slip this Affirmative, (...), quod
effluit ex corporibus, ipsa est odorum substantia. Art. 7. That Odours cause
sundry Affections in our Bodies, and such as are config^^able only to
substances.


(2) Common Experience confirms, that odours are vigorous and potent, not only
in the production of sundry Affections in the brain, good or evil, according to
their vehemence and Gratefulness or Noysomness, by the refocillation or
pollution of the spirits; but also in the Vellication and frequently the
Corrosion of tender investment of the Nostrills. Thus much the reverend Oracle
of Cous well observed in 28 Aphorism 5 Sect.; Odoramentorum suffitus muliebria
educit, and ad alia plaerumque utilis esset, nisi gravitatem capitis inferret:
and Galen supports with his opinion and arguments, (8 de Compos. medic. secund.
loca, cap. 4.)
that pleasant Odours are a kind of Nourishment of the spirits. Besides,
Plutarch reports, that He observed Catts grow mad only by the smell of certain
odoriferous Unguents: and Levinus Lemnius (de Nature. miracul) has a memorable
story of certain Travelers, who passing through large fields of Beans in the
Flower, in Holland, become Phrantick merely with the strength of their smell.
And all Physicians daily find, that good smells, by a recreation of the languid
spirits, speedily restore men from swooning fits; as evil scents often induce
Vomitings, syncopes, Vertigoes, and other sudden symptoms. Nay, scarce an
Author, who has written of the Plague and its Causes, but abounds in relations
of those accursed miscreants, who have kindled most mortal infections, by
certain Veneficious practices, and Compositions of putrid and noysom Odours:
witness Petrus Droetus (de pestilentia, cap. 10.) Wierus (de Venificiis lib. 3.
cap. 37) Horatius Augenius (lib. de peste, cap. 3) Hercules Saxonia (de plica,
cap. 2. and 11.) Thomas Iordanus (de pestis phaenomen. tr. 1. cap 18.) and
Sennertus, out of Nich. Polius in Haemerologia Silesiae, (in lib. de peste,
cap. 2.) Which prodigious Effects clearly proclaim the mighty energy of their
Causes, and are manifestoes sufficient, that Odours justly challenge to
themselves those Attributes, which are proper only to Corporiety: nor can
ought but downright ignorance expect them from the naked Immaterial Qualities,
or imaginary Images of the Peripatetick.

Art. 8. That the Reason of an Odours affecting the sensory, consists only in a
certain Symbolisme betwixt the Figures and Contexture of its Particles, and the
Figures and Con^epture of the Particles of the Odoratory Nerves.
(3) The Manner of the Odours moving, or Affecting the Sensory can never be
explained, but by assuming a certain Commensuration, or Correspondency betwixt
the Particles amassing the Odor, and the Contexture of the Olfactory Nerves,
or Mammillary Processes of the brain delated through the spongy bone. For (1)
it is Canonical, that no Immaterial can Operate upon a Material, Physically;
the inexplicable activity of the Rational Soul upon the body by the mediation
of the spirits, and that of Angelical essences excepted. (2) Though an Odor,
diffused through the aer, chance to touch upon the hands, cheeks, lips, tongue,
etc. yet does it therein produce no sensation of it self; because the Particles
of it hold no proportion to either the pores, or particles of which those parts
are composed: but arriving at the organ of smelling, it cannot but instantly
excite the Faculty therein resident to an actual sensation, or apprehension of
it; in regard of that correspondency in Figure and Contexture, which the
particles of it hold to the pores and particles of the Odoratory Nerves.
Certainly, as the Contexture of the Odoratory Nerves is altogether different
from that of the Tongue; and so the minute bodies of them, as well as the small
spaces intercepted among those minute bodies, in all points of their
superficies not contingent, are likewise of a dissimilar configuration from the
particles and intercepted vacuola of the Tongue: so also is it necessary, that
the small bodies, which commove and affect the Contexture of the Odoratory
Nerves, be altogether dissimilar to those, which commove and affect the
contexture of the Tongue, since, otherwise all objects would be in common, and
the Distinction of senses unnecessary.

Now (lest we should seem to beg the Quaestion) that the sensation is effected
in the Odoratory Nerves, Art. 9. That the Diversity of Odours depends on the
Diversity of Impressions made on the sensory, respondent to the vari^us Figures
and Contexture of their Particles.
only by the Figures of the particles of an Odor; and that the variety of
Odours depends on the variety of impressions made on the sensory, respective to
their various figures and contextures: this is not obscurely intimated in those
formerly recited words of Epicurus, Molecularum, sive Corpusculorum quaedam
perturbate ac discrepanter, quaedam vero placide ac leniter, seu accommodate se
habere, ad olfactus sensorium. The substance whereof is this, that because the
particles and Contexture of some Odours are such, that they strike the sensory
roughly and discordantly to the contexture thereof; therefore are they
Ungrateful: and on the contrary, because other Odours have such particles and
such contextures, as being smooth in Figure, strike the sensory gently, evenly
and concordantly to the contexture thereof; therefore are they Grateful and
desiderable. We might have introduced Plato himself, as lighting the tapor to
us, in this part^cular; insomuch as He says ( in Timaeo) that the sweet sort
of Odours [(...)] de mulcere, and qua inseritur, amicabiliter se habere, does
softly stroke, and cause a certain blandishment in the sensory: but, that the
kind of noysom or stinking Odours [(...)] does in a manner Exasperate and
wound it. To this Incongruity or Disproportion betwixt offensive smells and the
composure of the Odoratory Nerves, the profound Fracastorius plainly alludeth,
in his; proportionaliter autem se habent and odores, quorum ingratissimus est,
qui F^tidus appellatur, quique abominabili in saporibus respondet; nam and hic
ex iis pariter resultat, quae nullam habent digestionem, nec rationem
mistionis, sed confusionem emultis fere ac diversis, qualia fere sunt
Putrescentia, in quibus dissoluta mistione evaporatio diversorum contingit. (de
sympath. and antipath. cap. 14) importing withal, that the reason why the stink
of corrupting Carcasses is of all other most noysom, is because the odours
effuming from them consist of heterogeneous or diverse particles. If you had
rather hear this in Verse, be pleased to listen to that Tetrastich of
Lucretius; Non simile penetrare, putes, primordia forma
In nares hominum, cum taetra Cadavera torrent;
Et cum Scena Croco Cilici perfusa recens est,
Araque Panchaeos exhalat propter odores.


Upon which we may justly thus descant. As the hand touching a lock of wool, is
pleased with the softness of it; but grasping a Nettle, is injured by that
phalanx of villous stings, wherewith Nature has guarded the leaves thereof: so
are the Nostrills invaded with the odor of Saffron, delighted therewith,
because the particles of it are smooth in figure, and of equal contexture; but
invaded with the odor of a putrid Carcass, they are highly offended, because
the particles thereof are asper in figure and of unequal contexture, and so
prick and dilacerate the tender sensory.

Moreover, Art. 10. Why some Persons abhor those smells, which are grateful to
most others.
whereas there is so great variety of individual Tempe^aments among men, and
some have the Contexture of their odoratory Nerves exceeding dissimilar to that
of others; hence may we well derive (...) Cause of that so much admired secret,
Why those Odours, which are not only grateful, but even highly cordial to some
persons, are most odious and almost poisonous to others. Infinite are the
Examples recorded by Physicians, in this kind; but none more memorable than
that remembered by Plutarch (lib. 1. advers. Coloten.) of Berenice and a certain
Spartan woman, who meeting each other instantly disliked and fainted, because
the one smelt of Butter, the other of a certain fragrant Ointment. However, the
rarity of the Accident will not permit us to pass over the mention of a Lady of
honor and eminent prudence, now living in London; who does usually swoon at the
smell of a Rose (the Queen of sweets:) and sometimes feasts her nose with Assa
faetida (the Devils Turd, as some call it) than which no favor is generally
held more abominable; and this out of no Affectation, for her wisdom and
modesty exclude that praetence, nor to prevent Fitts of the Mother, for she
never knew an Hysterical passion, but in others, in all her life, as she has
frequently protested to me, who have served her as Physician many years.

Art. 11. Why, among Beasts, some species are offended at those scents in which
others h^^^ly delight
Again, as this Assumption of the Corporiety of an Odor does easily solve the
Sympathies and Antipathies observed among men, to particular smells; so
likewise does it yield a plain and satisfactory reason, why some Br^^t Animals
are pleased with those Odours; which are extremely hateful to others. Why Dogs
abhor the smell of Wine, and are so much delighted with the stink of Carrion,
as they are loath to leave it behind them, and therefore tumble on it to
perfume their skins therewith? Why a Cat so much dislikes the smell of Rue,
that she will avoid a Mouse that is rubbd with the juice thereof; as Africanus
(in Geoponicis)? Why Mice are poisoned with the scent of Rododaphne, or
Oleander, commonly named Rose-bay-tree; as Apuleius, and from him Weckerus (de
secretis Animal.)? Why Serpents are driven from Gardens by the smell of Citro^s
as Galen affirms; when yet they solace themselves with that of Savin, which our
nose condemns? Why Cocks cannot endure the breath of Garlic; which is
sovereign incense to Turkeys, and pure Alchermes to their drooping young ones?
Why Moths are destroyed by the fume of Hopps; which is Ambre Grise to Bees, as
Mouffet (de insectis)? For the Caus^ hereof wholly consists in the Similitude
or Dissimilitude betwixt the particular Contexture of the Sensory, and the
Figures of the particles of the odor.

Art. 12. The Ge^erati^n and D^ffusion of Odours, due only to Heat.
The Materiality of an Odor being thus firmly commonstrated; the next
Considerable is the Generation, and proxime Efficient Cause thereof. And herein
Aristotle came nearer the truth, than in his conception of the Essence of it;
for that Assertion of his, Odorem gigni and moveri beneficio Caloris, that Heat
conduces both to the Generation and Motion or Diffusion of an Odor, does well
deserve our assent. For, whether those minute Masses, or small Concretions,
that constitute the body of an Odor, be contained ch^^fly in some sulphurous
substance, as the Dissolutions and Experiment^ of Chemistry seem to conclude;
or ambuscadoed in any other consisten^^ whatever: yet still is it manifest,
that they are deduced into act and seques^^ed from those dissimilar or
heterogeneous bodies of Earth and Water (...) surrund and oppress them, and so
becoming more at liberty and unite^* they more vigorously affect the sense, and
all this by the energy of Heat* Hence comes it, that all Fruits are so much
more Fragrant, by how much more Concocted and Maturated by the warmth of the
Sun. That all Aromaticks grow in Hot Climats. That all smells are stronger in
Summer, than Winter; as Plutarch observes ( lib. de Cause. Nature. cap. 25.)
where he enquires, why in Frost wild beasts leave but a cold scent behind them,
when they are hunted. That all odoriferous Druggs are Hot, and suffer a
perpetual exhaustion or expense of their halituous substance: so that who so
would conserve their Fragrancy, must embalm them in Oil, or incorporate them
with Gumms, or other substance not easily evaporable; according to the common
practice of all Perfumers and Confectioners; or immure them in close
conservatories, and that rather in great lumps, than small fragments, and in
Cold rather than Hot rooms. Hence it is also, that all Botanicks hold it for an
unquestionable Axiom, Omnia Odorata esse calida; so that some have undertaken
to distinguish of the degrees of Heat in Plants and other Simples, merely by
the vehemence or languor of their Odor: and that Aristotle (problem. sect. 12.
quaest. 12.) affirms that all Odorous seeds are Calefactive, because Heat is
the Efficient of an Odor; to which Galen also subscribes (4 de simpl.
medicament. facul. cap. 22.)

From the Nature and Efficient of Odours, Art. 13. The Differences of Odours.
we are conducted to their Difference, or Distinct species; which is an
Argument involved not in the least Difficulties. For, since the imperfection of
our sense of smelling is such, that it is affectable only with the more
vehement sort of them, which are but few in comparison to those many, which the
sagacity of most Bruit Animals makes familiar to their deprehension, and so we
remain ignorant of the greatest part of them; and did we know them, yet should
we be to seek for proper Appellatives to express their particular natures: to
deliver an exact Table of all their Distinctions, is not only difficult, but
impossible. Which Naturalists well understanding, have been forced to the
cleanly shift of transferring the distinct names of sapours over to the
specifical Differences of Odours; there being some manifest symbolism betwixt
the two senses, and no obscure Analogy betwixt the Conditions of their objects:
as Aristotle insinuates in his Affirmation, Nullum corpus esse odoriferum, quod
non pariter saporiferum existat (de sens and sensil. cap. 5.) that all
Odoriferous bodies are also saporiferous; and in his definition of an
olfactile, or odorable object to be, Quod sapidae siccitatis diluendae ac
diffundendae vim sortitur. Well may we, therefore, content our selves with the
Discrimination of those kinds of Odours, that fall under the Cognizance of our
sense; and those are Sweet, Sower, Austere, Acerb, and Fatt or Luscious: as for
Putrid or Faeti^ Odours, they have resemblance to Bitter Sapours, because as
Bitter things are o^ious and distastful to the palate, and no man swallows
them without some horror and reluctance, so likewise does the Nose never admit
rotten and cadaverous smells without loathing and offense. There is also
another Difference of smells, whereof one kind is either pleasant or unpleasant
by Accident, or upon Circumstance; as the smell of Meats and Drinks is pleasant
to the Hungry, but offensive to the Full-gordged, and this sort is in common as
well to Beasts, as Men: the other is pleasant, or unpleasant of their own
Nature, as the smells of Herbs, Flowers, Perfumes, etc. which conduce neither
to the Excitement, nor Abatement of Appetite, unless they be admixt to meats or
drinks; to which Stratis alluded, when taxing Uripides he said, Cum lens
coquitur, unguenti nil infundito, and this Difference is proper only to man.
Lastly, Authors have divided Odours into Natural, and Artificial, or Simple and
Compound; the Latter whereof our Luxury and Delicacy have enhanced to such
immoderate rates, that the Confection of them is become an Art, and reduced to
certain Dispensatories and set Praescripts, and that Lady is not al-a-mode, who
has not her Manuscript of Recipes for Perfumes, nay every street has its
Myropolies or shops of sweets, of all sorts.

Art. 14. The Medium of Odours.
Finally, the Medium inservient to Odoration, is either Aer, or Water: yet
neither according to Essence, but Infection, or Impraegnation. That ^he Aer is
a convenient Convoy, or Vehicle of an Odor, no man did ever doubt: and that
water has the like Capacity, or perodorable Faculty, though in an inferior
degree; we may, with Aristotle (de histor. Animal. 4. cap. 8.) conclude from
the vulgar Experiment of betraying Fishes with perfumed Baits.

CHAP. VIII. OF SAPOURS.
SECT. I.
THE Nature of SAPOURS, Art. 1. From the superlative Acuteness of the sense of
Tasting, Aristotle concludes the cognition of the Nature of Sapours to be more
easily acqui^able, than the nature of any other sensible object: but refutes
himself by the many Errors of his his own Theory, concerning the same.
the proper object of the Taste, Aristotle (de sens. and sensil. cap. 4.)
concludes to be more easily Cognoscible, than that of Odours, Visibles, or the
Objects of the other Senses; because as He praesumes, the sense of Tasting in
Man, is more Exquisite, than his Smelling, Sight, etc. Whether his Reason be
not praecarious, we need not determine: but it too nearly concerns us to
affirm, that the extreme slenderness of his doctrine, touching the Essence and
Principles, of Sapours as well in General as Particular; erected on that common
imaginary base of Immaterial Qualities, has given us just occasion to suspect
the solidity of his Inference or Conclusion; and left us cause to account that
sentence, much more Canonical, That things most manifest to the Sense, often
prove most obscure to the Understanding. For, notwithstanding we have the
demonstration of our sense, that, as He and all other Philosophers unanimously
assert, the Object of the Tasting, in General, is (...), Gustabile: yet do his
endeavors afford so dim a light to our profounder inquisitions, as to leave
us in the dark of insatisfaction, when We come to explore, What is the Formal
Reason of a Sapour; What are the Principles, or Material and Efficient Cause
thereof; and What Relation it bears unto, or Manner how it affects the Tongue,
the prime and adaequate instrument of Tasting. Which that we may with due
fullness and perspicuity declare, it behooves us to invite your attention to a
faithful Summary of His Speculations concerning that Subject.

Art. 2. An Abridgment of his doctrine, concerning the Essence and Causes of a
Sapour, in General.
Aristotle, from whose Text all the Peripateticks have not receded insomuch as
in a title, as to the particular under debate, fixes the original of a Sapour,
in a certain Contemperation of three prime Elemental Qualities* viz. (1)
Terrestrious Siccity. (2) Aqueous Humidity. (3) Heat. The two former as the
Material Causes, the last as the Efficient, to which, according to his custom,
He consigns the masculine and determinative Energy, as in this, so in all
natural productions. The necessity or the Concurrence of these three First
Qualities to the Generation of a Sapour in any Concretion, He inferrs chiefly
from hence; that Water, being in the purity or simplicity of its essence,
absolutely insipid, if percolated through Siccum terrestre, adust Earth, does
always acquire a Sapidity, or Savouriness, proportionate to the intense, or
remiss adustion of the terrestrious material dissolved by, and incorporated to
it self: as is commonly observable in Fountains, which become impraegnate or
tincted with the sapours of those veins of Earth, through whose Meanders and
streights they have steered in their long subterraneous voyages; and in all
Lixivial decoctions, or Lees, which obtain a manifest Saltness only by
transcolation through Ashes, the Earthy and adust relics of compound bodies,
dissolved by Fire. To which, He moreover adds, that because the Contemperature
may be various, according to greater or lesser proportion of either of the
three ingredients; and the Aqueous Humidum, united to the Earthy Siccum, has
its consistence sometimes participant of Crassitude, sometime of Tenuity:
therefore are not all Sapours alike, but different according to the several
Gradualities of their respective and specifical Causes. And thus much in the
General.

Art. 3. And the Differences of Sapours, with the particular Causes of each.
To progress to the brief survey of Particulars, it seems requisite that we
observe; that Galen, Avicenna, Averrhoes, and most Physicians after them, have
conceived this Theory of Aristotle's so firm and impraegnable, as they have
thereon founded one of their pillars for the invention of Remedies, and
advanced rules for the Conjectural investigation of the manifest Faculties of
Medicaments, by the Taste: to that end constituting Eight Differences, or
Generical Distinctions of Sapours, viz.

(1) Acer, which affects the mouth and chiefly the Tongue, with a certain
acrimony and pungent ardor; such as is eminently conspicuous in Pepper,
Pellitory, Euphorbium, Cassea lignea, Winterian Bark, etc. It arises from a
Composition of tenuious, dry and hot parts, and cannot subsist in a subject of
any other constitution.

(2) Acid, or Sharp, which likewise penetrateth and biteth the tongue, but with
some constringency, and without any sense of heat: such as is deprehended in
Vinegre, juice of Limons, Citrons, Woodsorrel, Berberies, and in some
Malacotones and Quinces. It results from a Concretion of subtle and dry parts,
either where the innate heat is resolved by some degree of putrefaction, as in
Vinegre: or where the innate heat is so small as to be inferior to Cold, and
that associated with extreme siccity; as in juice of Limons, etc.

(3) Fat, or Luscious, which sollicites the Gusts neither with heat, nor
acrimony; but furrs and daubs the mouth with an unctuous lentor, or viscidity.
Such is remarkable in Oil Olive, Oil of sweet Almonds, Wallnuts, in Marrow,
Butter, and the Fats of Beasts, which have no rancidity, either acquired by
antiquity, or natural, such as is perceivable in the Fat of Lions, Wolves, and
Tigers: and in all Mucilaginous Plants, as in Althaea and White Lilly roots,
etc. This has its production from a thin aereal matter, temperate in heat and
cold.

(4) Salt, which does not much calefie, but with a sharp and penetring siccity
bite the tongue; as is observed in the degustation of Common Salt, Nitre, and
among Vegetables chiefly in Rock Sampier. This Sapour is also sensible in all
Chemical Salts, extracted from Bodies by the sequestrating activity of Fire,
cinefying their dry and terrestrious remains: nor is there any Compound in
Nature, from which pyrotechny may not extract the Calx or proper Salt thereof,
discernable by the taste. And therefore it is manifest, that all saltness
subsisteth in a matter, whose principal ingredients, Heat and Siccity are equal.

(5) Austere, which being moderately adstringent, does with some asperity
coarctate the particles of the tongue; and therefore according to the judgment
of the palate, it seems dry and cooling. This is more properly called the
Crude Sapour, as being peculiar to all Fruits during their immaturity; as is
generally noted in the juice of unripe Grapes, green Apricocks, Pears, Apples,
Medlars, Porcellane, etc. The substance wherein it consists, must be equally
participant of Earth and Water, but where Cold has the upper hand of Heat.

(6) Sweet, which being not offensive by the unevenness or exuperance of any
Quality, affects the sense with suavity or delight. Such every man knows to be
in Sugar, Honey, Liquorice, Iujubes, Dates, Figgs, and in most Fruits after
their maturity: as also in Manna, and, in some degree, in Milk.

(7) Bitter, the Contrary to Sweet, which offending by the asperity and tenuity
of its parts, does in a manner corrade and devil the sensory. This
superlatively discovers it self in Aloes, Coloquyntida, Rhubarb, Wormwood, the
lesser Centaury, Bitter Almonds, and the Galls of Animals. The matter of it is
crass and terrene, but adust by immoderate Heat; and hence that Galenical
Axiom, Omne amarum est calidum and siccum.

(8) Acerb, or Sower, which bordereth upon the Austere or Pontick Sapour, being
distinguishable from it, only by a greater ingratefulness to the sense; for it
more constringeth and exasperateth all parts of the mouth, and so seems more
exsiccative and refrigerative. It is prodigally perceived in the rind of
Pomegranates, Galls, Sumach, Cypress Nuts, the Bark of Oak, the Cups of
Achorns, etc. Its residence is always in a Composition totally terrene and
dry, whose languid heat is subdued to inactivity by the superior force of its
antagonist, Cold.

To these some Modern Physicians (to whom that Mystagogus or Priest of the
Arabian Oracles, Fernelius, seems to have been the Coryphaeus) have superadded
a ninth Sapour, (...), the Fatuous; which affecting the sense with no
impression, is indeed no Sapour, but rather the Privation of all Sapidity. To
this Heteroclite are commonly referred the several species of Bread Corn,
Gourds, Citrals, Cucumbers, etc. Whose materials though crass, are not yet
terrene, dry and adstrictive; but diluted with a plentiful portion of aqueous
moisture, not exquisitely permixt, because of the small allowance of heat to
their Composition.

Art. 4 An Examination and brief redargution of the same Doctrine
Now (to pass from the faithful Abridgment to the aequitable Examen of this
Doctrine, of such sacred estimation in the Schools.) though the Enquiries of
most have steered this course, directed by the Chart of Aristotle, and
attempted the deduction of all Sapours from Primitive Qualities: yet have they
missed the Cape of truth. For, as Scaliger (in lib. de Plantis.) excellently
argues, we may as safely derive Life, Sense, Increment, voluntary Motion, nay
Risibility and Intellection (actions flowing from Forms more noble and
semi-divine) from Elements immediately, as Sapours from their First Qualities:
unless it can be first evinced, that each Element has some sapour actually
inexistent; which but barely to suppose, is an absurdity gross enough to
degrade the owner from the dignity of a Physiologist forever, and openly
repugnant to the Fundaments of the Aristotelean Philosophy. To which argument
of Scaligers, we shall superadd this weighty exception of our own; that
according to the Hypothesis of First Elemental Qualities, it is absolutely
impossible to Explicate the Causes of that so great Diversity of Tastes not only
among Animals of different species, but Individuals of the same species; of
which we shall discourse more expressly in opportunity.

Art. 5. The postp^sit^on thereof to the more verisimilous Determination of the
sons of H^rmes, who adscribe all Sapours to Salt.
Wheref^re we account it both more honorable and satisfactory, to incline
rather to that laudable opinion of the Chemist, whose Flames have so far
enlightened our reason, as to show, that the Primary Cause of S^pours does
consist in Salt; because all pyrotechnical Dissolutions seem to establish that
Axiom, Sal est primum Sapidum and Gustabile, and omnia quae saporem habent,
eam propter salem habent; ubicunque enim s^por deprehenditur, ibi sal est, and
ubicunque sal, ibi sapor: as the judiciou^ Sennertus has observed ( de
Consensu Chymicorum cum Galenic. cap. 11.) and Lucius Grillus has copiously
and solidly declared in that elaborate treatise of his, de Sapore Amaro and
Dulci, to which we remit the farther Curious. Art. 6. B^t fa^ m^re to that most
profound and satisfact^ry Tenent of Democritus and Plato; which deduceth the
Nativity of Sapours from the various Figures and contextures of the minute
particles of Conc^etions.


But, if we would Anatomize the Heart of this Subject, and establish a more
exact theory of the First Principles of a Sapour; we must consult the Oracles
of Democritus and Plato, which tell us in short, that all Sapours arise from
the minute particles of Bodies, of such determinate Figures and Contextures, as
being applied to the tongue, they naturally produce that Affection therein,
which we call Gustation, or Tasting. Of Democritus ^uctority, in this point, no
man can justly doubt while Aristotle (de sens. and sensil. cap. 4.) avoucheth
that He [(...)] did referr Sapours to Figures: and Theophrastus, in a more
ample descant upon the text, affirms that He defined the particular sorts of
Figures, which constitute the particular species of Sapours; in these words,
Rotundas esse, congruaque mole figuras, quae Dulcem faciant; magna figura, quae
Acerbum; multangula minimeque orbiculari, quae Acrem; angulata distorta, quae
Salsum; rotunda, laevi, distorta, quae Amarum; tenui, rotund^, parv^, quae
Pinguem And, what was Platoes persuasion, concerning the same Argument, Himsef
most perspicuously explains ( in Timaeo) where He in short adscribes the
production of all Sapours [(...)] to Asperity and Laevity: and distinguishing
all Sapours into two general orders, the First a Pleasant or Sweet sort, the
other an Unpleasant, which runs up into several branches (for as it stands
opposed to Sweet, it is either Bitter, or Salt, or Acid, or Acerb, or Acer, or
Austere, etc.) He derives the First kind from hence, that the sapid object
consists of particles so configurate, that effused upon the organ of Tasting,
and entering the small pores or receptaries thereof, they become symbolical or
correspondent to its small particles in figure and contexture, and so affect it
gently, evenly, and concordantly; and the Latter from hence, that the sapid
object is composed of such Particles, as have their Figures and Contexture so
disproportionate and incommensurable to the pores and particles of the tongue,
that invading it and entering its contexture, they exasperate, corrade and
offend the same. And hence was it, that Lucretius seems to have borrowed his,
Ut facile agnosc^s, e laevibus atque rotundis
Esse ea, quae sensus jucunde tangere possunt:
At contra, quae amara, atque aspera cunque videntur,
Haec magis hamalis inter se cumque teneri;
Proptereaque solere vias rescindere nostris
Sensibus, introituque suo perrumpere corpus.


And this is the opinion to which we have espoused our constant assent, as well
upon the obligation of those Reasons formerly alleged, Art. 7. The advantages
of this sentence, above all others touching the same subject.
in our Original of Qualities; as upon this important Consideration, that no
other Hypothesis can afford a satisfactory Reason either of manner of the
Sapours moving and affecting the sensory, or why there is such infinite Variety
of Tastes not only among Animals of different Species, but even in individuals
of the same Species, and particularly in men, among whom Millions are found,
who delight in Wormwood, and abhor Sugar; some that feast their Pallates with
Aloes; others that think their mouths quite out of taste, unless they be
ruminating the leaves of Tobacco; nay, we have known a Noble person of our own
Nation, who had so singular a Palate, that whenever He took a Purging Potion,
would swallow it down by spoonfuls, as judging the pleasure too great to be
shortened by a hasty draught, and when it was wholly exhausted, would wish himself
a Ruminating Animal, that so He might taste it over and over, as if Philoxenus
wish for a Cranes neck were too short to reach the height of so desirable a
delight; and another, who would not be persuaded but the Forbidden Fruit was a
Coloquyntida Apple, because he thought the taste of that the most Ambrosiack of
all others.

But, conceding with Democritus and Plato, that the Variety of Sapours is
caused merely by the Diversity of Impressions on the spongy substance of the
Tongue, respective to the various Figures and Contextures of the minute
Particles of Bodies applied thereto, and by the salivous moisture thereof so
admitted into the pores, as sensibly to affect it: we say, conceding this, we
soon may solve this Dissimilitude of Tastes, only by saying, that because the
Contexture of the particles of the tongue of one man, is different from that of
the particles of another; therefore does one delight in the savor of one thing,
the other of another: every man being of necessity most pleased with the taste
of that, whose particles in figure and contexture are most symbolical or
Correspondent to the Figures and Contexture of the Particles of his tongue; and
e contra. To which we shall only add, that the Reason why to men in Fevers the
sweetest things seem bitter, is only this; that the Contexture of the Particles
of the Tongue being altered, as well by the intense Heat of the Fever, as the
infusion of a Bilious Humor into the pores thereof: those things, whose
Particles being formerly accommodate, appeared in the species of sweetness, are
now become asymbolical and inconvenient to the particles of the tongue, and
therefore appear Bitter.

Art. 8. The Objections of Arist. concisely, though solidly solved.
Nor is Aristotle's reprehension of Democritus, of weight enough to
Counter-encline our judgment; his chief Objections being rather Sophistical,
than Solid, and so no sooner urged than dissolved.

His First is of this importance; if the particles of Sapid Objects were
Figurate, according to Democritus Assumption, then would the sight, as a Sense
far more acute in perception, deprehend their various Figures rather than the
Taste: but the Sight does not discern them; Ergo.

Which is soon expeded, by Answering, that it is not in the jurisdiction of one
sense to judge of objects proper to another; nor is the quaestion about the
Figures, as they are in themselves, i. e. without relation to the sense, but as
they produce such a determinate Effect on the sensory, of which the Tasting is
the sole and proper Criterion. For Qualities are to be reputed, not so much
Absolute and constant Realities, as simple and Relative Apparencies, whose
Specification consists in a certain Modification of the First General Matter,
respective to that distinct Affection they introduce upon this or that
particular Sense, when thereby actually deprehended.

His Second of this. Insomuch as there is a Contrariety among sensible objects
of all kinds; but none among Figures, according to that universally embraced
Canon, Figuris nihil esse Contrarium: if the Diversity of Sapours were
derivative from the Diversity of Figures, then would there be no Cont^^riety
betwixt Sapours; but Sweet and Bitter are Contraries; Ergo.

Which is soon detected to subsist upon a Principle merely precarious; for we
are yet ignorant of any reason, why we should not account an Acute Figure the
Contrary to an Obtuse; a Gibbous the opposite to a Plane; a Smooth the
Antagonist to a Rough; an Angular the Antitheton to a Sphere, etc.

His Third, and most considerable, of this. Because the variety of Figures is
infinite, at least, inassignable; therefore would the variety of Sapours, if
their distinct species were dependent on the distinct species of Figures, be
aequally infinite: but all the observable Differences of Sa^ours exceed not the
number of Eight, at most; Ergo.

Answer; should we allow Aristotle's distinction of Sapours to be genuine: yet
would it not follow, that therefore there are no more Specifical Subdivisions
of each Genus; because from the various commistions of those Eight Generical
Differences one among another, an incomprehensible variety of Distinct Sapours
may be produced. Besides, is not that Sweetness, which the tongue perceives in
Honey; manifestly different from that of Milk? that of Sugar easily discernable
from both? that of Canary Sack different from that of Malago? that of an Apple
distinguishable from that of a Plumm? that of Flesh clearly distinct from all
the rest? yet does that Genus of Sweet comprehend them all. On the other side,
is the Amaritude of Aloes, Coloquyntida, Rhubarb, Wormwood, etc. one and the
same? or the Acerbity of Cherries, Prunes, Medlars, etc. identical? no man,
certainly, dares affirm it. Why therefore should we not write our names in the
Catalogue of those, who conceive as great variety of Tastes, as there is of
Sapid objects in Nature. Or, since the Experiments of Chemistry have made it
probable, that all Sapours derive themselves from Salts, as from their Primary
Cause; why may we not concede so many several sorts of salts, and so many
possible Commistions of them, as may suffice to the production of an
incomprehensible variety of Sapours?

And this gives us occasion to observe, Art. 9. That the salivous Humidity of
the Tongue serves to the Dissolution and Imbibition of the Salt, in all
Gustables.
that Nature seems to have furnished the Tongue with a certain peculiar
Moisture, chiefly to this end, that it might have a General Menstruum, or
Dissolvent of its own, for the eduction of those Salts from hard and dry
bodies, and the imbibition of them into its spongy substance, that so it might
deprehend and discern them.

CHAP. IX. Of Rarity, Density, Perspicuity, Opacity.
SECT. I.
Art. 1. This Chapters right of succession to the former.
HAving thus steered through the deepest Difficulties touching the proper
objects of the other Senses, the Chart of Method directs us in our next course
to profound the particular natures of all those Qualities, which belong to the
apprehensive jurisdiction of the Sense of TOUCHING, either immediately, or
relatively. But, before we weigh Anchor, that we may avoid the quicksands of
too General Apprehensions, and draw a Map or Scheme of all the Heads of our
intended Enquiries; tha^ so we may praepare the mind of our Reader to accompany
us the more easily and smoothly: it is requisite that we advertise,

Art. 2. The Dive^^ accep^ation of the term, -- Touching.
(1) That the Attribute of Touching is sometimes in Common to all Bodies, (...)
well Inanimate, as Animate, when their superficies or extremes ar^ Contingent;
according to that Antithesis of Lucretius, Tactus Corporibus cunctis, intactus
Inani. Sometimes in Common to all Sens^^, insomuch as all Sensation is a kind
of Touching, it being necessa^^, that either the object it self immediately, or
some substantial Em^nation from it, be contingent to the Sensory; as we have
apodictically declared in our praecedent considerations of Visible, Audible,
Odo^^ble, and Gustable Species. Sometimes (and in praesent) Proper to the Sense
of Touching in Animals; which, however it extend to the Per^^ption of Objects,
in number manifold, in nature various and frequ^^^ly even repugnant (whereupon
some Philosophers have contuma^iously contended for a Plurality of Animal
Touchings; others gone so high as to constitute as many distinct Powers of
Touching, as th^re are [(...)] Differences and (...) of conditions in
Tangibles) does yet apprehend them all (...) one and the same common reason,
and determinate qualification, after the same manner, as the sight discernes
White, Black, Red, Green, etc. all sub communi Coloris ratione, in the common
capacity of Colors.

And this is that fertile sense, Art. 3. A pertinent (though short) Panegyric
on the sense of Touching.
to whose proper incitement we owe our Generation; for, had not the Eternal
Providence endowed the Organs official to the recruit of mankind, with a most
exquisite and delicate sense of Touching, the titillation whereof transports a
man beyond the severity of his reason, and charms him to the act of Carnality;
doubtless, the Deluge had been spared; for the First age had been the Last, and
Humanity been lost in the grave, as well as innocence in the fall of our first
Parents. Quis enim* per Deum immortalem, concubitum, rem adeo faedam,
solicitaret, amplexaretur, ei indulgeret? quo Vultu Divinum illud Animal plenum
rationis and consilii, quem vocamus Hominem, obsaenas mulierum parts, tot
sordibus conspurcatus attrectaret, nisi incredibili voluptatis aestro percita
essent Genetalia? And let us but abate the temptation of this sense, and
libidinous invitement of it praeambulous to the act of Congression; and we
shall soon confess that so magnified delight of sensuality, to be no other than
what the noblest of Stoics, Marcus Antoninus defined it, (...), but the
attrition of a base entrail, and the excretion of a little snivel, with a kind
of convulsion, as Hippocrates describes it, This is that Fidus Achates, or
constant friend, that conserves us in our first life, which we spend in the
dark prison of the womb; ushers us into this, which our improvidence trifles
away for the most part on the blandishments of sensual Appetite; and never
forsakes us, till Death has translated us into an Eternal one. For when all
our other unconstant senses perish, this faithful one does not abandon us, but
at that moment, which determines our mortality. Whence Aristotle drew that
prognostic ( de Anim. lib. 3. cap. 13.) that if any Animal be once deprived of
the sense of Touching, death must immediately ensue; for neither is it possible
(says He) that any living Creature should want this sense, nor to the being of
it is it necessary that it have any other sense beside this. In a word, this is
that persuasive sense, and whose testimony the wary Apostle chose to part with
his infidelity, and to conclude the presence of his revived Lord. That painful
sense, on the victory of whose torments the patient souls of Martyrs have
ascended above their faith. That Virtual and Medical sense, by which the Great
Physician of diseased nature, was pleased to restore sight to the blind,
agility to the lame, hearing to the deaf; to extinguish the Fever in Peter's
Mother-in-Law, stop the inveterate issue in his Haemorhoidal Client; unlock the
adamantine gates of death, and restore the widows son from the total privation,
to the perfect habit of life.

(2) That some Qualities are sensible to the Touch, Art. 4. Some Tactile
Qualities, in common to the perception of other senses also.
which yet are common to the perception of other senses also; for no scholar
can be ignorant of that Division of sensibles into Common and Proper; and that
among the Common are reckoned Motion, Quiet, Number, Figure, and Magnitude,
according to the list of Aristotle (2 de Anim. cap. 6.)

Art. 5. A Scheme o^ all Qualities, or Commonly, or Properly appertaining to
the Sense of Touching; as they stand in their several Relations to, or
Dependencies on the Univ^^s^l Mat^er, Atoms: and so, of all the sub^equent
Ca^ital A^guments to be treated of, in this Book.
(3 and principally) That the Qualities of Concretions, either Commonly or
Properly appertaining to the sense of Touching, are to be considered in their
several Relations to the Principles on which they depend. First, some result
from the Universal matter, Atoms, in this respect, that they intercept
Inanity, or space betwixt them; and of this original are Rarity and Density,
with their Consequents, Perspicuity and Opacity. Secondly, Some depend on the
Common Materials, in this respect, that they are endowed with their three
essential Proprieties, Magnitude, Figure, Motion: and that either Singly, or
Conjunctly. (1) Singly, and either from their Magnitude alone; of which order
is the Magnitude o^ Quantity of any Concretion; and the Consequents thereof,
Subtility and Hebetude: or from their Figure alone, of which sort is the Figure
of every thing; and the Consequents thereof, Smoothness and Asperity, etc. or
only from their Motiv^ Virtue, of which kind is the Motive Force inhaerent in
all things in the General, and that which assisteth and perfecteth the same in
most things, the Habit of Motion, and particularly Gravity and Levity. (2)
Conjunc^ly, from them all; of which production are those commonly called the
^our First Qualities, Heat, Cold, Dryness, Moisture; as also those which ^r^
deduced from them, as Hardness, Softness, Flexility, Ductility: and all others
of which Aristotle so copiously (but scarce pertinently) treats in his fourth
book of Meteors: and lastly, those by vulgar Physiologist named Occult
Qualities, which are also derivative from Atoms, in res^^ct of their three
essential Proprieties; and among these the most eminent and generally
celebrated, is the Attractive Virtue of the Loadstone.

Art. 6. The right of Rarity and D^nsity, to the Priority of cons^deration.
Now on each of these we intend to bestow particular speculation, allowing it
the ^^me order, which it holds in this scheme, which seems to be only a
faithful Transsumpt of the method of Nature: and we shall begin at Rarity and
Density. (1) Because nothing can be generated but of Atoms commixt, and that
Commixture cannot be without more or less of the Inane space in^^rcepted among
their small masses; so that if much of the Inane space (...) intercepted among
them, the Concretion must be Rare, if little, Dense, of mere necessity: (2)
Because, the Four First reputed Qualities, Heat, Cold, Dryness, Moisture, are
posterior to Rarity and Density, as appears by that of Aristotle (physic 8.
cap. 16.) where, according to the interpretation of Pacius, He intimates, that
Heat and Cold, Hardness and Sof^ness are certain kinds of Rarity and Density;
and therefore we are ^o set forth from them, as the more Common in Nature, and
consequently the more necessary to be known, a Generalioribus enim, tanquam
notioribus ad minus Generalia procedendum, is the advice of Arist. (physic. 1.
cap. 2.)

SECT. II.
COncerning the immediate Causes of Rarity and Density in Bodies, Art. 1. The
Opinion of those Philosophers, who place the Reason of Rarity, in the actual
Division of a Body into small parts; and the brief Refutation th^reof.
diverse Conceptions are delivered by Philosophers. (1) Some, observing that
Rare bodies generally are less, and Dense more Ponderous, and that the Division
of a body into small parts, does usually make it less swift in its descent
through aer or water, than while it was entire; have thereupon determined the
Reason of Rarity to consist in the actual division of a body into many small
parts: and, on the contrary, that of Density to consist in the Coadunation or
Compaction of many small parts into one great continued mass. But, These
considered not, that Crystal is not more rare, though less weighty
(proportionately) than a Diamond: nor that the Velocity of bodies descending,
does not increase in proportion to the difference of their several Densities,
as their inadvertency made them praesume; there being sundry other Causes,
besides the Density of a body, assignable to its greater Velocity of motion in
descent, as the Heroical pen of Galileo has clearly demonstrated ( in 1.
Dialog. de motu.) and our selves shall professedly evince in convenient place.

(2) Others, Art. 2* A second Opinion, deriving Ra^ity and Density from the
several proportions, which Quantity has to its substance; convicted of
i^compre^ensib^lity, and so of insatisfaction.
indecently leaping from Physical to Metaphysical speculations, and imagining
the substance of a body to be a thing really dist^nct from the Quantity
thereof; have derived Rarity and Density from the ^^veral proportions, which
Quantity has to its substance; as if in Rarefaction a Body did receive no
mutation of Figure, but an Augmentation, and in Condensation a Diminution of
its Quantity. But the excessive subtility, or rather absolute
incomprehensibility of this Distinction, does evidently confess it to be merely
Chimerical, as we have formerly intimated, in our discourse concerning the
proper and genuine notions of Corporiety and Inanity.

(3) A Third sort there are, Art. 3. A Third, desuming the more and less of
Rarity in Bodies, from the more and less of VACUITY intercepted among their
particles: and the Advantages thereof above all ot^ers, concerning the same.
who having detected the incompetency of the first opinion, and absolute
unintelligibility of the Second; judiciously desume the more or less of Rarity
in any body, from the more or less of Vacuity intercepted among the parts
thereof; and on the contrary, the more or less of Density from the greater or
less exclusion of Inanity, by the reduction of the parts of a body to mutual
Contingency. And this is that opinion, which only has subjugated our
judgment, and which seems worthy our best patronage: in regard not only of its
sufficiency to explicate all the various Apparences among bodies, resulting
from their several Differences in Rarity and Density; but also of its
exuperance of reason above the F^rst, and of intelligibility above the second;
it being the duty of a Philosopher, always to prefer Perspicuity to Obscurity,
plain and genuine notions to such as are abstracted not farther from matter,
than all possibility of Comprehension.

Art. 4. The Definitions o^ a Rare, and of a Dense Body; according to the
assumpti^n of a Vacuity Disseminate.
According to this Hypothesis, therefore, of Vacuities interspersed (of which
^pecurus seems to have been the Author) we understand, and dare define a Rare
Body to be such, as obtaining little of Matter, possesses much of Place; and
on the contrary, a Dense one to be that, which obtaining much of Matter,
possesses little of Place: intending by Place, all that space circumscribed by
the superfice of the Ambient, such as is the space included betwixt the sides,
or in the concave of a vessel.

Art. 5. The Con^rui^y of those D^finitions, demonstrated.
For, supposing any determinate space to be one while possessed by Aer alone,
another while by Water alone; the Aer therein contained cannot be said to be
Rare, but only because though it has much less of matter, or substance, yet it
takes up as much of space, or room as the Water: nor the Water to be Dense, but
only because though it has much more of matter, yet does it take up no more of
space, than the Aer. Whence it is purely Consequent, that if we conceive that
Water to be rarefied into Aer, and that Aer to be condensed into Water; the Aer
made of the Water re^ified, must replenish a vessel of capacity not only
ten-fold, as Aristotle inconsiderately conjectured, but a hundredfold greater,
as Mersennus by stalick experiments has demonstrated: and transpositively, the
Water made by the Aer condensed, must be received in a Vessel of capacity an
hundredfold less; when yet in that greater mass of Aer, there can be no more
of Matter, or Quantity, than was in that smaller mass of Water, before its
Rare^action; nor in that smaller mass of Water less of Matter, or Quantity,
than was in that greater mass of Aer, before its Condensation. Evident it is,
therefore, that by those, contrary motions of Rarifaction and Condensation, a
Body does suffer no more than the mere Mutation of its Figure, or the Diffusion
and Contraction of its parts: its Quantity admitting no Augment^tion in the
one, nor Diminution of the other.

Art. 6. (...) of Diff^^ulties, wherein the thoughts of Physi^logists have so
long wandered; ^educ^d to a p^int, the genuine state of the (...).
This being Apodictical, the sole Difficulty that requires our Enodation, is
only this; Whether a Rare Body possessing a greater space, than a Dense,
proportion^tely to its Quantity, does so possess all that space circumscribed
by its superfice, as to replenish all and every the least particle thereof, not
leaving any space or spaces, however exile, unreplenisht with some adaequate
particle of its matter? Or whether there are not some small parts of space,
in^^rmixt among its diffused or mutually incontingent particles, in which no
particles of its matter are included, and so there remain small Vacuola, or
Empty spaces, such as we have formerly more than twi^e described, in our
Chapter of a Disseminate Vacuity in Nature?

And this descends into another Doubt, whose clear solution is of so much
importance, as richly to compensate our most anxious Inquiry; viz. Whether
Rarity be caused from the interception of much Inanity, when the parts of a
Body, formerly Adunate, are separated each from other (at least, in some points
of their superfices) and so the Body become so much more Rare, by how much the
more, or more ample empty spaces are intercepted among its incontingent
particles: or Wheth^r Density and Rarity depend on any other possible Causes
besides th^s, i. e. without the intermistion of inane spaces among ^he (...) of
Bodies? And this we conceive to be the whole and true state of that
Controversy, which has so perplexed the minds of many the most eminent
Philosophers in the world.

That the Rarity and Density of Bodies can arise from no other Cause
immediately, Art. 7. That Rarity and Density can have no other Causes
immediate, but the more and less of Inanity interspersed among the particles of
Concretions; DEMONSTRATED
but the more or less of Inanity intercepted among their particles; may be thus
Demonstrated.

If in a Rare body there be admitted no Vacuola, or small empty spaces, but it
be assumed, that the particles of Matter are adaequate both in Number and
Dimensions to the particles of space, wherein it is contained; then must it
necessarily follow, that in Condensation many particles of Matter must be
reduced into one particle space, which before Condensation was adaequate only
to one particle of Matter: and, on the contrary; in Rarefaction, one and the
same particle of matter must possess many of space, each whereof, before
Rarefaction, was in dimensions fully respondent thereto. For Example; in Aer
condensed into Water, an hundred particles of Aer must be reduced into one
particle of space: and in Water rarefied into Aer, one particle of the matter
of Water must possess an hundred particles of space. Again, according to the
Assumption of no Vacuity, since in a Vessel replete with Aer, the parts of Aer
must be equal in number and dimensions to the parts of space, thereby
circumscribed, none the least particle of space being admitted to be Inane; if
you fill the same Vessel with Water, or Lead, or Gold, it must follow, that the
parts of the matter of Aer, and the parts of the matter of Water, Lead, or
Gold, shall be equal in number, because Quae sunt uni tertio aequalia; aequalia
sunt etiam inter se: and if so, needs must Aer be aequally Dense with Water,
Lead, or Gold, which all men allow to be the most dense and compact body in
Nature in regard it transcends all others in weight and difficulty of Solution,
or Division;

(2) All bodies in the Universe must be equally Dense, or equally Rare;

(3) And so nothing can be capable of Condensation or Rarefaction. The least of
which unconcealable Absurdities, (not to enumerate any others of those many
that depend on the same Concession of an absolute Plenitude, or no Vacuity) is
great enough to render those Heads, which have labored to destroy the Vacuola
of Epicurus, strongly suspected of Incogitancy, if not of stupidity.

Twere good manners in us to praesume, that no man can be so Facile, Art. 8.
Aristotle's Exceptions, against Disseminate Inanity; neither important nor
competent.
as to conceive, that Aristotle has prevented these Exceptions, by that
Distinction of his, de Actu and Potentia: but, because Praejudice may do much,
we judge it expedient a while to insist upon the Examination of the importance
and congruity thereof. He ratiocinates (4* physic. cap. 9.) that the matter of
Contraries, E. G. of Heat and Cold, Rarity and Density is one and the same; so
that as the same matter is one while Actually Hot another while Actually Cold,
because it is both Hot and Cold Potentially: so is one and the same matter now
Actually Rare, now Actually Dense, because it is both Rare and Dense
Potentially. But, in strictness of Logic, all that this Argument enforces, is
only that the same matter is Capable of Rarefaction and Condensation; which no
man ever disputed. The Quaestion is, Whether the same Matter, when Actually
Rare, has its parts dissociated and diffused into a greater space, than what
they possessed while it was only Potentially Rare, and that without the
intermixture of Inanity among them? And all that can be collected from his
discourses touching that, is no more than this; that as a matter or substance
actually Hot, does become more Hot, without the Emersion, or Accession of any
new part, which was not actually Hot before: so likewise does the same matter
actually Extense, become more Extense, without the Emersion, or Accession of
any new part, which was not actually Extense before. But this Arrow was shot at
random, not directly to the mark, nor has it attained the Difficulty* For the
Quaestion again is not, Whether in Rarefaction, any part of the matter were not
formerly Extense: but, Whether that matter, which was formerly Extense, can be
made more Extense without the Dissociation of its particles* and whether the
particles of it can be actually Dissociated, without the interception of
Inanity among them? Besides, His Comparison is as incongruous, as his Argument
is weak; for (1) His Assumption concerning Heat is not only Precarious, but
false, as shall be demonst^^ted, in suo loco: (2) were it true, yet does that
part of matter, which is actually Hot, remain indivulse or indistracted;
otherwise than a part of matter, which being actually Extense, becomes more
Extense, and therefore the Analogy fails.

In conclusion, to mend the matter, He recurrs to that similitude of a Circle,
which though contracted into a less, has yet none of its parts more incurvate
than they were before: But, alas the Quaestion still remains untoucht, and
(that we may not stay to impeach him of indecorum, in making an ^ndecent
transition from a Physical to a Mathematical subject; contrary to his own
Dialectical institutes) his similitude will bear no more of inference but only
this, that a thing may be made more Dense, which is (...) and Lax; which is
impertinently disputed, when all men concede it.

Art. 9. The Hypothesis of a certain (...) substance, to rep^enish the pores of
Bodies, in Ra^ifaction* demonstrated insufficient, to s^l^e the Difficulty, or
demol^^h the Epicu^^a^* (...) Vacu^^e:
The Ad^ocates of Aristotle generally allege in his Defense, that He supposed a
certain Ethereal, or as some have called it, Animal substance, which
inexistent in all Bodies, does replenish their pores, and more espe^^^lly if
their Contexture be Rare; and that when a Dense Body is rarefied, there are no
small Inane spaces intercepted among its Dissociated parti^les, but that the
spaces betwixt them are immediately possessed by that subtle Ethereal
substance: and that when a Rare Body is Condensed, that Ethereal substance,
which did replenish its pores, is excluded.

But th^^ supposition, though it come nearer to the Quaestion, or center of the
Difficulty, is yet far short of solving it. For, take we (for Example) ^
C^b^cal foot of Aer, and insomuch as the substance of the Aer is more (...), or
less exile, than the substance of the supposed Ether, therefore (...) it
consist of fewer particles, than the Ether: and upon consequence* (...) the
whole Cubical foot of Aer there are not more particles of Matte^ (...) the
Aereal and Ethereal ones being conjoined, than if it consisted o^^y of Aereal
particles. Now we enquire of Aristotle's Champions, Whether or no in that
Cubical foot consisting of the Aggregate of both sorts of particles, there are
as many particles of Matter, as are in a Cubical foot of Water, Lead, or Gold*
The Affirmative is more than they dare own; nor can they deny, but that the
space possessed by one foot contains as many small parts of space, respondent
to the particles of matter, as the other: and if so, must not there be in the
Foot of Aer, many particles of space, which are possessed neither by the Aereal
nor Ethereal particles, and are not those unpossessed particles of space
absolutely Empty? If you undertake the Negative, you ensnare your self in this
Absurdity, that the particles of a Cubical Foot of Aer and Ether conjoined,
must be equal in number to the particles of a Cubical foot of Water, Lead, or
Gold.

The Difficulty of understanding the Formal and Immediate Reason of Rarity and
Density in Bodies, Art. 10. The (...) understand^ng the Reason^ and Manner of
^a^i action and C^ndensation, from the (...)
by that so popularly applauded Hypothesis of an Ethereal substance (imagined
to maintain an absolute Plenitude, and so a Continuity through the whole vast
Body of Nature) being thus evinced; let us a while consider, how easily even
the meanest Capacity may comprehend the full Nature of those Primary and
Eminent Affections, from the concession of small Vacuities. We have formerly
explicated the matter, by the convenient similitude of an Heap of Corn, or
Sand; which being lightly and gently poured into a Vessel, takes up more room
then when pressed down: and we shall yet more facilitate the Conception thereof
by another simile, somewhat more praegnant, because more Analogous. When a
Fleece, or Lock of Wool is deduced, or distended, we say, it is made more Rare;
and when Compressed, more Dense: now the Rarity thereof consists only in
this, that the Hairs, which were formerly more Consociate, United, or at closer
Order among themselves, are Dissociated, Dis-united, or reduced to more open
Order, and the spaces betwixt them, become either more, or larger, in which no
particle of Wool is contained: and on the contrary, the Density thereof
consists only in this, that the Particles or Hairs, which were before more
Dissociated, or at open order, are by Compression brought to more Vicinity, or
to closer order, and the spaces betwixt them become fewer and lesser. And thus
are we to conceive, how the same Matter, without Augmentation or Diminution of
Quantity, may be now Rarefied into Aer, and anon Condensed into Water; for,
instead of the Hairs in the Fleece of Wool, we need only put the Particles of
the matter, which in Rarifaction are Dissociated, in Condensation Coadunated.
And this Conception may be extended also to a Sponge, Flax, or any other
Porous and Lax body* because they are capable of Expansion and Contraction
only in this respect, that the small spaces intercepted in the incontiguities
or distances of their particles, are now enlarged, now contracted. We confess,
this similitude is not adaequate in all points, there being this Difference,
that when a Fleece of Wool is expansed, the ambient Aer does instantly
insinuate into the small spaces intercepted betwixt the dissociated particles
of it, and so possess them* but* nothing of Aer, or Ether, or other substance
whatever does insinuate it self into the small spaces intercepted betwixt the
dissociated particles or Aer* or Water, when either of them is Rarefied: we
say, notwithstanding this Disparity, yet does it hold thus far good and
quadrant, that as nothing of Wool possesses those spaces, which would
therefore remain absolutely Empty, in case the sociable Aer did not instantly
succeed in possession of them; so, since the parts of the matter of Water are
Expansed or Dissociated after the same manner, as are the Hairs of Wool, and
after the same manner Contracted or United; and certain small Loculaments are
likewise intercepted betwixt the particles of that matter, in which nothing of
Water can be contained, during the state of Rarifaction, and which no other
substance can be proved to possess; it must thence follow, that those deserted
small spaces, or Loculaments remain absolutely Empty. And more than that, our
similitude is not concerned to impart.

Art. 11. PARADOX. That the Matter of a Body, when Rarefied, does possess no
more of true Place, than when Condensed, and the Conciliation thereof to the
praeposed Definitions of a Ra^e and of a Dense Body.
But, that we may make some farther advantage thereof, we observe; that as when
a Fleece of Wool is expansed, it is of a greater circumference, and so
includes a greater Capacity therein, than when it is compressed; not that the
single Hairs thereof take up a greater space in that capacity, for no Hair can
possess more space, than its proper bulk requires, but because the inane spaces
or Loculaments intercepted betwixt their divisions are enlarged: exactly so,
when the same Matter is now Rarefied into Aer, anon Condensed into Water, the
Circumference thereof becomes greater and less, and the Capacity included in
that circumference is augmented and diminished accordingly; not that the single
Particles of the Matter possess a greater part of that capacity in the state of
Rarifaction, th^^ in that of Condensation, because no particle can possess more
of space than what is adaequate to its dimensions; but only because the Inane
spaces intercepted betwixt their divisions are more ample in one case, than in
the other. And hence it is purely consequent, that the matter of a Body
Rarefied can not be justly affirmed to possess more of true or proper Place,
than the matter of the same body Condensed; though, when we speak according to
the customary Dialect of the Vulgar, we say, that a Body Rarefied does possess
more of space, than when Condensed: insomuch as under the term Place is
comprehended all that Capacity circumscribed by the extremes or superfice of a
Body; and to the Matter, or Body it self are attributed not only the small
spaces possessed by the particles thereof, but also all those inane spaces
interjacent among them, just as by the word City, every man understands not
only the dwelling Houses, Churches, Castles, and other aedifices, but also all
the streets, Piazzaes, Churchyards, Gardens, and other void places contained
within the Walls of it. And in this sense only are our praecedent Definitions
of a Rare, and Dense Body to be accepted.

Art. 12. PROBLEM. Whether Aer be capable of Condensation to so high a rate as
it is of Rarifaction: and the Apodictical solution thereof.
The Reasons of Rarity and Density thus evidently Commonstrated, the
pleasantness of Contemplation would invite us to advance to the examination of
the several Proportions of Gravity and Levity among Bodies, respective to their
particular Differences in Density and Rarity; the several ways of Rarifying and
Condensing Aer and Water; and the means of attaining the certain weights of
each, in the several rates, or degrees of their Rarifaction and Condensation;
according to the evidence of Aerostatick and Hydrostatick Experiments: but in
regard these things are not directly pertinent to our present scope and
institution, and that Galilaeus and Mersennus have enriched the World with
excellent Disquisitions upon each of those sublime Theorems; we conceive
ourselves more excusable for the Omission, than we should have been for the
Consideration of them, in this place. However, we ask leave to make a short
Excursion upon that PROBLEM, of so great importance to those, who exercise
their Ingenuity in either Hydraulick, or Pneumatick* Mechanics: viz. Whether
may Aer be Rarefied as much as Condensed; or whether it be capable of
Rarifaction and Condensation to the same rate, or in the same proportion?

That common Oracle, for the Solution of Problems of this abstruse nature,
Experience has assured, that Aer, may be Rarefied to so great a height, in
red-hot Aeolipiles, or Hermetical Bellows, that the 70 part of Aer formerly
contained therein, before rarifaction, will totally fill an Aeolipile upon
extreme Rarifaction thereof. For, Mersennus, using an Aeolipile, which being
Cold, would receive exactly 13 ounces, one Dram and an half; and when Hot,
would suck in only 13 ounces: found, that the whole quantity of Aer ignified,
and replenishing the same Aeolipile, when glowing Hot, being reduced to its
natural state, did possess only the 70. part of the whole Capacity, which was
due to the Dram and half of Water. We say, upon Extreme Rarifaction; because
this seems to be the highest rate, to which any Rarifaction can attain, in
regard the Metal of the Aeolipile can endure no more violence of the Fire,
without Fusion.

As for the Tax, or Rate of its utmost Condensation; though many are persuaded,
that Aer cannot be reduced, by Condensation, to more than a Third part of that
Space, which it possesses in its natural state; because they have observed,
that Water infused into a Vessel of three Heminae, does not exceed two Heminae,
in regard of the Aer remaining within: yet certain it is, that Aer may be
Condensed to a far higher proportion. For, Experience also confirms, that into
the Chamber of a Wind-Gun (of usual Dimensions) Aer may be intruded, to the
weight of a Dram, or sixty Grains: and that in that Capacity, which contains
only an ounce of Water, it may be so included, as that yet a greater proportion
of Aer may be injected into it. Now, therefore, insomuch as the Aer in
^ersennus his Aeolipile amounts to four Grains (at least) or six (at most)
which number is ten times multiplied in sixty; and that the Concave of the
Aeolipile is to the Concave of the Pipe of the Wind-Gun, in proportion
sesquialteral: by Computation it appears, that the Aer condensed in the Chamber
of the Wind-Gun must be sufficient to fill the Aeolipile ten times over, or the
same Chamber 15 times over, if restored to its natural tenor. And hereupon we
may safely Conclude, that Aer may be Compressed in a Wind-Gun, to such a rate,
as to be contained in a space 15 times less, than what it possessed during its
natural Laxity; and that by the force only of a Man's hand, ramming down the
Embol^s, or Charging Iron: which Force being capable of Quadruplication, the
Aer may be reduced into a space subquadruple to the former. If so, the rate of
the possible Condensation of Aer, will not come much short of that of its
extreme Rarefaction: at least, if a Quadruple Force be sufficient to a
Quadruple Condensation; and Aer be capable of a Quadruple Compression: both
which are Difficulties not easily determinable.

SECT. III.
PERSPICUITY and OPACITY we well know to be Qualities not praecisely
conformable to the Laws of Rarity and Density; Art. 1. The opportunity of the
present speculation, concerning the Causes of Perspicuity and Opacity.
yet, insomuch as it is for the most part found true ( caeteris paribus) that
every Concretion is so much more Perspicuous, by how much the more Rare; and e
contra, so much the more Opace, by how much more Dense; and that the Reason of
Perspicuity can hardly be understood, but by assuming certain small Vacuities
in the Body interposed betwixt the object and the eye, such as may give free
passage to the visible Species; nor that of Opacity, but by conceding a certain
Corpulency to the space or thing therein interposed, such as may terminate the
sight: therefore cannot this place be judged incompetent, to the Consideration
of their several originals.

By a Perspicuum [(...)] we suppose, that every man understands that Body, Art.
2. The true Notions of a Perspicuum and Opa^um.
or Space, which though interposed betwixt the Eye and a Lucid, or Colorate
Object, does nevertheless not hinder the Transition of the Visible species from
it to the Eye: and by an Opacum; that which obstructing the passage of the
Visible Species, terminates the sight in it self.

We suppose also, that (according to our praecedent Theory) the Species Visible
consist of certain Corporeal Rays emitted from the Object, Art. 3. That every
Concretion is so much the more Diapha^ous, by how much the more and more ample
Inane Spaces are intercepted among its particles; caeteris pa^ibus.
in direct lines toward the Eye; and that where the Medium, or interjacent
space is free, those Rays are delated through it without impediment; but,
where the space is praepossessed by any solid or Impervious substance, they are
repercussed from it toward their Original, the Object. And hence we infer,
that because the total Freedom of their Transmission depends only upon the
total Inanity of the Space intermediate; and so the more or less of freedom
trajective depends upon the more or less of Inanity in the Space intermediate:
therefore must every Concretion be so much more Perspicuous, by how much the
more, and more ample Inane Spaces it has intercepted among its Component
particles; which permit the Rays freely to continue on their progress home to
the Eye.

This we affirm not Universally, but under the due limitation of a Caeteris
Paribus, as we have formerly hinted. Because, notwithstanding a piece of Lawn
is more or less Perspicuous, according as the Contexture of its Threads is more
or less Rare; and the Aer in like manner is more or less pellucid, according as
it is perfused with more or fewer Vapors: yet do we not want Bodies, as Paper,
Sponges, etc. Which though more then meanly Rare, are nevertheless
Indiaphanous; and on the contrary, we see many Bodies, sufficiently Dense, as
Horn, Muscovy-glass, common glass, etc. which are yet considerably Diaphanous.

Now, that you may clearly comprehend the Cause of this Difference, be pleased
to hold your right hand before your eye, with your fingers somewhat distant
each from other; and then looking at some object, you may behold it through the
chinks or intervals of your fingers: Art. 4. Why Glass, though much more Dense,
is yet much more Diaphanous, than Paper.
this done, put your left hand also over your right, so as the fingers of it
may be in the same position with the former; and then may you perceive the
object, at least as many parts of it as before. But, if you dispose the fingers
of your left hand so as to fill up the spaces or intervals betwixt those of
your right; the object shall be wholly eclipsed. Thus also, if you look at an
object through a Lawn, or Hair Sieve, and then put another Sieve over that, so
as the holes or pores of the second be parallel to those of the first; you may
as plainly discern it through both as one: but, if the twists of the second
sieve be objected to the pores of the first, then shall you perceive no part of
the object, at least so much the fewer parts, by how much greater a number of
pores in the first are confronted by threads in the second. And hence you
cannot but acknowledge that the Liberty of inspection does depend immediately
and necessarily upon the Inanity of the pores; the Impediment of it upon the
Bodies that hinder the trajection of the Rays emitted from the Object: and yet
that to Diaphanity is required a certain orderly and alternate Position of the
Pores and Bodies, or Particles. This considered, it is manifest, that the
Reason why Glass, though much more Dense, is yet much more perspicuous than
Paper, is only this; that the Contexture of the small filaments, composing the
substance of Paper, is so confused, as that the Pores that are open on one side
or superfice thereof, are not continued through to the other, but variously
intercepted with cross-running filaments: as is more sensible in the Co^texture
of a Sponge, whose holes are not continued quite through, but determined at half
way, (some more, some less) so that frequently the bottom of one hole is the
cover of another, as the Cells in a Honeycomb: but, Glass, in regard of the
uniform and regular Contexture of its particles, which are ranged as it were in
distinct ranks and files, with pores or intervals orderly and directly
remaining betwixt them; has its pores not so soon determined by particles
oppositely disposed, but continued to a greater depth in its substance.

Though this make the whole matter sufficiently intelligible, yet may it
receive a degree more of illustration, Art. 5. Why the Diaphanity of Glass is
gradually diminished, according to the various degrees of its Cra^^^tude.
if we admit the same Conditions to be in the substance of Glass, that are in a
Mist, or Cloud; through which we may behold and object, so long as the small
passages or intervals betwixt the particles of the Vapors, through which the
rays of the visible species may be trajected, remain unobstructed: but yet
perceive the same so much the more obscurely, by how much the more remote it
is; because, in that case, more impervious particles are variously opposed to
those small thorow-fares, that obstruct them, and so impede the progress of
most of the rays. For, thus also Glass, if thin, does hinder the sight of an
object very little, or nothing at all; but if very thick, it wholly terminates
the progress of the species: and, by how much the thicker it is, by so much the
more it obscures the object. And this, only because Glass, consisting of small
solid Particles, or Granules, and insensible Pores alternately situate, has
many of its pores running on in direct lines through its substance to some
certain distance; but sometimes these; sometimes those are obturated by small
solid particles succedent, when at such a determinate Crassitude, it becomes
wholly opace.

Art. 6. An Apodictical Confutation of that popular Error, that Glass is
totally, or in every particle, Diaphanous.
And this gives us an opportunity to refute that vulgar Error, That the
substance of Glass is totally Diaphanous, or that all and every Ray of the the
Visive Species is trajected through it, without impediment. To demonstrate the
contrary, therefore, we advise you to hold a piece of the finest and thinnest
Venice Glass against the Sun, with two sheets of white paper, one betwixt the
Sun and the Glass, the other betwixt the Glass and your Eye: for, then shall
all the Trajected Rays be received on the paper on this side of the glass, and
the Reflected ones be received on that beyond it. Now, insomuch as that paper,
which is betwixt your eye and the glass, does receive the Trajected rays, with
a certain appearance of many small shadows intercepted among them; and that
paper beyond the glass, does receive the Reflected rays with an appearance of
many small lights: therefore we demand (1) from whence can that species of
small shadows arise, if not from the Defect of those rays, that are not
transmitted through the Glass, but averted from it? (2) Whence comes it, that
in neither paper the Brightness or Splendor is so great, as when no Glass is
interposed betwixt them; if not from hence, that the reflected rays are
wanting to the nearest, the trajected ones to the farthest? (3) Whence comes it
that some rays are reflected, others trajected; if not from hence, that as a
Lawn sieve transmits those rays, which fall into its pores, and repercusseth
others that fall upon its threads: so does Glass permit those rays to pass
through, that fall into its pores; and reverberate those, that strike upon its
solid particles? And what we here say of Glass, holds true also (in proportion)
of Aer, Water, Horn, Vernish, Muscovy-glass, and all other Diaphanous Bodies.

CHAP. X. OF MAGNITUDE, FIGURE: And their Consequents, SUBTILITY, HEBETUDE,
SMOOTHNESS, ASPERITY.
SECT. I.
THe MAGNITUDE and FIGURE of Concretions, Art. 1. The Contexture of this
Chapter, with the praecedent
in regard our Reason does best derive them from the Two First Proprieties, or
Essential Attributes of the Universal Matter, Atoms; are the Qualities which
justly challenge our next Meditation. Concerning their Origination, therefore,
we advertise

First, Art. 2. That the Magnitude of Concretions, arises from the Magnitude
of their Material Principles.
that although it be not necessary, that a Body made up of greater Atoms should
therefore be greater, nor contrariwise, that a Body composed of lesser Atoms,
should therefore be lesser; nor that a Body consisting of Atoms of this, or
that determinate Figure, should constantly retain that Figure, without capacity
of determination to any other: yet does it seem universally true, that every
Concretion therefore has Magnitude, because its Material Principles, or
Component Particles have their certain Magnitudes, or are essentially endowed
with real Dimensions; and as true, that every Concretion is therefore
determined to this or that particular Figure, because the Component Particles
thereof are not immense, or devoyd of circumscription, but terminated by some
Figure or other.

Secondly, that the term Magnitude here used, Art. 3. The praesent intention of
the term, Magnitude*
is not to be accepted in a Comparative intention, or as it stands in
opposition to Parvity; in which sense vulgar ears always admit it: but a
Positive, or as it is identical and importing the same thing with Quantity, or
Extension. For, as every Atom, or that ultimate and indivisible portion of
Matter, so called, is no Mathematical point, but possesses its own simple
Magnitude, or Quantity, without respect or comparison to Greater or Less. So
must every Concretion be considered, as it stands possessed of its own compound
Magnitude, or Quantity, without respect to any other Body, in comparison
whereof it may be said to be Greater or Less. Because without the relative
conception of any other Body, the Mind does most clearly and dictinctly
apprehend the Magnitude of a Concretion by a Positive ^otion; insomuch it
conceives it to have various parts, whereof none are included within other, but
all situate in order, and each in its proper place: so that from thence must
follow the Diffusion of them, and consequently the Extension of the whole
consisting of them. And well known it is, that the Magnitude, or Quantity of a
Body, is nothing but that kind of Extension, which amounts from the aggregate
of the singular Extensions of its component particles: of which if any be
conceived to be Detracted, or Apposed; so much is instantly understood to be
Detracted from, or Apposed to the Extension of the whole Body. To this alludes
that Distich of Lucretius, Propterea, quia quae decedunt Corpora quoique,
^nde abeunt, minuunt; quo venere, augmine donant.


This du^ly perpended, no man need hereafter fear the drilling of his ears by
those clamorous and confused litigations in the Schools, Art. 4. That the
Quantity of a thing, is merely the Matter of it.
about the Formal reason of Quantity; for nothing can be more evident than
this, that (...) Extension or Quantity of a thing is merely Modu^ Materiae, or
^ather) the Matter it self composing that thing; insomuch as it cons^^^eth not
in a Point, but has parts posited without parts, in respect ^hereof it is
Diffuse: and purely consequent from thence, that every Body has so much of
Extension, as it has of Matter, extension ^eing the proper and inseparable
Affection of Matter or Substance. Hence also may we detect and refute the
extreme absurdity of those high-flying Wits, who imagine that a Body, when
Rarefied, though it has no more of Matter, has yet more of Quantity or
Extension, than when Condensed: because from the praemises it is an apodictical
verity, that the Extension attributed to a Body Rarefied, (...) not an
Extension of the Matter of it alone, but of the Matter and small ^nane Spaces,
intercepted among its dissociated particles, together; so that if you suppose
the Extension of those small Vacuities to be excluded from the Aggregate, you
cannot but confess, that the Matter has no more of Extension in its parts
Dissociated, Art. 5. The Quantity of a thing, neither augmented by its
Rarefaction; no^ diminished by it^ Condensation* contrary to the Aristo^eleans,
who distinguish the Quantity of a Body, from it^ Substance.
than it had in the same parts Coa^unated.

Moreover, this sufficiently instructs us to give a decisive Response to that
so long debated Quaestion, An per Rarifactionem acquiratur, per Condensationem
deperdatur Quantitas? Whether the Quantity of a Body is Augmented in
Rarifaction, and Diminished in Condensation, or no? For, as nothing of Matter
is conceived to be added to a body, while it is Rarefied; nothing of Matter
detracted from it while Condensed: so is it undeniable, at least unrefutable,
that nothing of Quantity is acquired by Rarifaction, or amitted by
Condensation; but only that those empty spaces are admitted, or excluded, which
being in a Rarefied body conjoined to the small spaces, that the particles of
its matter possess, make it appear to be Greater, or to replenish a greater
place, than before; and in a Condensed body, detracted from the small spaces,
that the particles of its matter do possess, make it appear Less, or to fill a
less place than before. If so, it may be cause of wonder even to the wisest and
most charitable Consideration, that the Defendants of Aristotle's doctrine of
Quantity, have with so much labor and anxiety of mind betrayed themselves into
sundry not only inextricable Difficulties, but open Repugnances; while on the
one side they affirm, that as well Quantity as Matter, is Ingenerable and
Incorruptible: and on the other admit, that the same Matter may be one while
Extended to the occupation of all and every part of a greater space; and
another while again so contracted, as to be wholly comprehended in the hundredth
part of the former space (as in the Condensation of Aer into Water) than which
no Contradiction can be or more open, or more irreconcilable. And yet we see
those, who have easily swallowed it, and upon digestion become so
transcendently exalted to sublimities, as to imagine the Quantity of a thing to
be absolutely distinct from the matter, or substance of it: and thereupon to
conclude, that Rarity and Density do consist only in the several proportions,
which substance has to Quantity.

Much more plausible were their Explication, Art. 6. The reason of Quanti^y,
explicable also merely from the notion of Place.
had they derived the Extension of a thing, merely from Space, or Place;
because, whenever any thing is said to be Extense, the mind instantly lays
hold of some determinate part of space, referring the Extension of it simply
and entirely to the Place, wherein it is, or may be contained, and which is
exaequate to its Dimensions: nor is it, indeed, easy to wean the Understanding
from this habitual manner of Conception. Whereof if we be urged to render a
satisfactory Reason, we confess, we know no better than this; that by the Law
of Nature, every Body in the Universe is consigned to its peculiar Place, i. e.
such a canton of space, as is exactly respondent to its Dimensions: so that
whether a Body quiesce, or be moved, we always understand the Place wherein it
is Extense, to be one and the same, i. e. equal to its Dimensions.

We say, By the Lay of Nature; because, Art. 7. The Existence of a Body,
without real Ex^ension; and of Ex^^^sion without a B^dy (...) to Nature* yet
(...) to God.
if we convert to the Omnipotence of its Author, and consider that the Creator
did not circumscribe his own Energy by those fundamental Constitutions, which
his Wisdom imposed upon the Creature: we must wind up the nerves of our Mind
to a higher key of Conception, and let our Reason learn of our Faith to admit
the possibility of a Body existent without Extension, and the Extension of a
Body consistent without the Body it self; as in the sacred mystery of our
Saviors Apparition to his Apostles, after his Resurrection [(...)] the doors
being shut. Not that we can comprehend the manner of either, i. e. the
Existence of a Body without Extension, and of Extension without a Body; for our
narrow intellectuals, which cannot take the altitude of the smallest effect in
Nature, must be confessed an incompetent measure of supernaturals: but that,
whoever allows the power of God to have formed a Body out of no praeexistent
matter* cannot deny the same power to extend to the reduction of the same Body
to nothing of matter again. Which the most pious S. August. (Epist. 3.) (...)
and yet this hinders not, but a Body, which is not actually divided into parts,
may be said to be Continued; insomuch as it so appears to the sense, which
cannot discern the several Commissures of its particles.

Again, forasmuch as Aristotle defines a Continuum to be that, Art. 11
Aristotle's Definition of a Continuum, in what respect true, and wha^ false.
whose Parts are conjoined by some Common mean, or Term; it is requisite we
observe how far forth his definition is consistent with right reason. We allow
it to be true Physically so far forth, as there are no two parts assignable,
which are conjoined by some third intermediate part, either sensible (as in a
magnitude of three feet, the two extreme feet are copulated together by the
third intermediate) or Insensible (as in the magnitude of two feet, which are
joined together by some interjacent particle, so small as to evade the
detection of sense): But, if with Him we accept that Common Mean, or Term, for
a Mathematical Point, or individual (for He expressly affirms, that the parts of
a Line are copulated by a Point; the parts of a Superfice, by a Line; the parts
of a Body, by a Line, or Superfice) it is plain, that our Conceptions must be
inconsistent with Physical verity; because such Insectiles, or Individuals are
not real, but only Imaginary, as we have copiously asserted in our Discourse
concerning the Impossible Division of a Continuum into parts infinitely
subdivisible. Besides, who can conceive that to be a Caement or Glue to unite
two parts into one Continued substance, which has it self no parts designable
either by sense or reason? Nor can any thing be rightly admitted to conjoyn two
Bodies, unless it has two sides, Extremes, or faces; one whereof may adhaere
to one of the two Bodies, the other to the other, so as to make a sensible
Continuity.

Concerning the Quality of a Body called FIGURE, Art. ^2. Figure (Physically
consid^red) nothing but the superficies, or terminant Extre^^ of a Body.
that which is chiefly worthy our praesent adversion, is only this; that if
Figure be considered Physically, it is nothing but the superficies, or
terminant Extremes of a Body. We say, Physically; because Geometricians
distinguish Figures into Superficial, or Plane, and Profound, or Solid: but the
Physiologist knows no other Figure properly, but the Superficial; because, in
strict truth, the Profound or Solid one seems to Him, to be rather the
Magnitude, or Corpulency of a thing circumscribed or terminated by its Figure,
than the Figure it self abstractedly intended. Nay, if we insist upon the
rigor of verity, the Figure of a Body is really nothing but the Body it self;
at least, the mere Manner of its Extreme parts, according to which our sense
deprehends it to be smooth or rough, elated or depressed. This may be most
fully evinced by only one Example, viz. the figure made upon Wax by the
impression of a Seal. For, that Figure really is nothing but the very substance
of the Wax, in some parts made more Eminent, in others more deprest, or
profound, according to the Reverse of its Type engraven in some hard substance;
and that without Adjection, or Detraction o^ any Entity whatever. And what we
affirm of the Figure made in Wax by Sigillation, is of equal truth
(proportionately) if accommodated to any other Figure whatever: no^ does it
imply a Difference, whether the Figure be Natural, such as in Animals,
Vegetables, Minerals; or Artificial, such as in Aedifices, Statues, Characters,
etc.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. The Continuity of this to the first Section.
THe (...) of Magnitude and Figure in Concretions* being thus (...) follows,
that we explore their Effects, i. e. the Qualities which seem so immediately
cohaerent to the Magnitude and Figure of Bodies as that reason cannot consigne
them to more likely and probable Principles, than the two First Proprieties of
the Universal Matter, Atoms*

The (...), therefore, of Magnitude, are SUBTILITY and its (...). Art. 2. (...)
Not that the Emergency of a Great Body from Atoms the (...) Exile; or of a
small body from great Atoms, is impossibl^* (...) formerly intimated: but, that
a Body consisting of more Exil^* (...) A^om^, has a greater subtility, or
obtains a Faculty of pen^^^ating the contexture of another body, by
subingression into the pores, (...) ^hereo^* and a body consisting of grosser
Atoms, must have more of (...) Hebe^ude, and so has not the like Faculty of
penetrating the Co^^^xtures of other bodies, by subingression into the mane
spaces* o^ inte^^^^^ betwixt their particles. This may be Exemplified in Fire
and (...) and Oil; Aqua Fortis and Milk, etc.

Art. 3. A considerable Exception of the Chemists ^ viz. that some Bodies are
dissolved in li^uor^ of (...) particles* which (...)
We are (...) now to learn the truth of that Chemical Canon, Cuique (...), vel
extrahendae eligendum esse idoneum menstruum, quod (...) respondeat: experience
having frequently ascertained us, that Aqu^ (...), which soon dissolves the
most compact of bodies, Gold, will no^ (...) Re^ine. Pitch, Wax* and many other
Unctuous and Re^inous (...); which yield almost at first touch to the
separatory ^acu^ty (...) that Mercurial Waters expeditely insinuate into the
substance of Gold, dissolve the Continuity of its stiffly cohaerent particles
and (...) from a most solid into an oily substance; not so much by (...)
^ymbolisme or Affinity of nature: that Salt, Nitre, and Sulphur, which ^eing
added to Sand, Flints, and many Metals, promote the solution, (...) fire; have
yet no accelerating, but a retarding energy upon Turpentine, Balsome, Myrrh,
etc. in the extraction of their Oils, or (...) that all Waters, or Spirits
extracted from Sa^ine and Metalline nature are most convenient Menstruaes for
the solution of Metals and Minerals; not (...) much in respect of their
Corrosion, as similitude of pores and particles and consequently that every
Concretion requires to its dissolution some (...) dissolvent, that holds some
respondency or analogy to its contexture. (...) yet have we no reason,
therefore to abandon our Assumption* that (...) dissolution of one body, by the
subingression or insinuation (...) another, must arise from the greater
subtility of particles (...), until it be commonstrated to us, that a Body,
whose (...) can penetrate another Body, whose Pores are more (...) whereto is
demonstrated to us by the frequent Experiment^ of (...).

And, therefore, the Reason, Art. 4. Why Oil dissociates the parts of some
Bodies, which remain inviolate in Spirit of Wine: and why Lightning is more
penetrative, than Fire*
Why Oil Olive does pervade some Bodies, which yet are impenetrable even by
spirit of Wine (by ^aimundus Lullius, and after him by Libavius and Quercetan,
accounted the true Sulphur and Mercury of Hermetical Philosophers, extracted
from a Vegetable, for the solution of Gold into a Potable substance, and the
Confection of the Great Elixir; and as General a Dissolvent, as that admired
(but hardly understood) Liquor Alkahest of Paracelsus, if not the same) can be
no other but this: that in the substance of Oil are some Particles much more
subtle and penetrative, than any contained in the substance of Wine; though
those subtle particles are thinly interspersed among a far greater number of
Hamous, or Hooked particles, which retard their penetration. Thus also in that
affrighting and Atheist-converting Meteor, Lightning, seem to be contained many
particles much more exile and searching than those of our Culinary Fires:
because it sometimes dissolves the hardest of Metals in a moment, which
preserve^ its integrity for some hours in our fiercest reverberatory furnaces.
Which Lucretius well expresses in this Tetrastich; Dicere enim possis,
caelestem Fulminis ignem
Subtilem magis, e parvis constare Figuris*
Atque ideo transire foramina, quae nequit ignis
Noster hic elignis ortus taedaque creatus.


Secondly, the Qualities Consequent to Figure, Art. 5. Smoothness and Asperity
in Concretions, the Con^equents of Figure in h^^r Material Principles.
are SMOOTHNESS, and its contrary, ASPERITY. Not that, if we appeal to the
judgment of the sense, the superfice of a Body may not be smooth, though it
consist of angulou^ Atoms; or rough, though composed of plain and polite Atoms:
for, all Atoms, as well as their Figures, are so Exile, as that many of them
that are angular, may cohaere into a mass, without any inequality in the
superfice deprehensible by the sense; and on the contrary, many of those that
are plane and polite, may be convened and concreted into such masses, as to
make angles, edges, and other inequalities sufficiently sensible. But, that if
we refer the matter partly to the judicature of Reason, partly to the evidence
of our senses in General; we cannot but determine it to arise from the
Figuration of Atoms alone. First, to the judicature of Reason* for, as the mind
admits nothing to be perfectly continued, besides an Atom: so can it admit
nothing to be exquisitely smooth, besides either the whole superfice of an
Atom, ^f the same be orbicular, oval, or of the like Figure; or some parts of
it, if the same be tetrahedical, hexahedrical, or of some such poligone figure.
Because, look by what reason the mind does conclude the superfice of no
Concretion in nature to be perfectly continued: by the same reason does (...)
^^nclude the superfice of every thing, seemingly most equal and polite, to be
^^r^^usly interrupted with asperities, or eminent, and deprest particles; and
(...) refers immediately and sole^y to many small masses of Atoms, in (...)
Contexture coadunated, like as it referrs the interruptions in the superfice of
a piece of Lawne, or Cambrique, which to the eye and touch appears most smooth
and united, to the small masses of Filaments interwoven in the webb. And here
the Experiment of a Microscope is opportune; for, when a man looks through it
upon a ^heet of the finest and ^moo^hest Venice Paper, which seems to the naked
eye, and most exquisite touch, to be equal and ^erse in all parts of it
superfice* He shall discern it to be so full of Eminences and Cavities, or
small Hills and Valleys, as the most praegnant and praepared Imagination cannot
suppose any thing more unequal and impolite. Se^ondly, to the Evidence of our
senses in General; because, the very Af^^ction of Pleasure or Pain, arising to
the sensory from the contact of the s^^^ible object, does sufficiently
demonstrate, that smoothness is a Quality (...) either from such Atoms, or such
small masses of Atoms contexed, as (...) smooth and pleasant to the sense, by
reason of their correspondence (...) ^he pores and particles of the Organ: and
contrariwise, that ^sperity is a ^uality, resulting either from such single
Atoms* or such most minute masses of Atoms concreted, as dilacerate, or
exasperate the sense, by reason of (...) incongruity or Disproportion to the
Contexture of the Organ: as w^ (...), even to redundancy, Exemplified in the
Grateful and Ungrateful (...) of each sense.

CHAP. XI. OF THE Motive Virtue, Habit, Gravity, and Levity OF CONCRETIONS.
SECT. I.
THe Third Propriety of the Universal Matter, Atoms, is Mobility, Art. 1. The
Motive Virtue of all Concretions, derived from the essential Mobility o^ Atoms.
or Gravity: and from that fountain is it that all Concretions derive their
Virtue Motive. For, though our deceptable sense inform us, that the minute
Particles of Bodies are fixed in the act of their Coadunation, wedged up
together, and as it were fast bound to the peace by reciprocal concatenation
and revinction: yet, from the D^ssolution of all Compound natures, in process
o^ time, caused by the intestine Commotions of their Elementary Principles,
without the hostility of any External Contraries, may our more judicious Reason
well infer, that Atoms are never totally deprived of that their essential
Faculty, Mobility; but are ance^santly agitated thereby even in the centrals of
Concretions, the most so^id and compact; some tending one way, others another,
in a perpetual (...) of Eruption, and when the Major part of them chance to
^ffect (...) the same way of emancipation, then is their united force
determimined ^o one part of the Concretion, and motion likewise determined to
one region, respecting that Part. That same MOTIVE VIRTUE, therefor, wherewith
every Compound Body is naturally endowed, must owe ^ts ^rigine to the innate
and co-essential Mobility o^ its component particles* being really the same
thing with their Gravity, or Impetus: which yet receives its determinate manner
and degree from their mutual Combination. In respect whereof it necessarily
comes to pa^s, that when Atoms, mutually adh^ering unto (...) other, ca^^ot
obey the ^mpu^^e of (...) ^^ndency singly, they are not moved with that
pernicity, as if each were a^ ^^solute liberty; but impeding and retarding each
other in their progress, ar^ ^^rried with a flower motion, But that more or
less slow, according to (...) rate or proportion of common Resistance: because
always some of them are carried to an opposite, others transversly, others
obliquely to a dif^^rent region.

Art. 2. (...) Part^
An^ (...) is it, that because Atoms are at most freedom of range in (...)
Concretions* every degree of Density and Compactness causin^ (...)
^^oportionate degree of Tardity in their spontaneous motions: (...) the Motive
Faculty not more generally, than rightly conceived, (...) chiefly in the
spiritual, or (as vulgar Philosophy) Ethereal Parts (...) Concretions. And,
whether the spirits of a thing are principa^ de^^^mined to move, thither do
they not only themselves contend, (...) and speed, but also carry along with
them the more (...) less mov^able parts o^ the Concretion; as is superlatively
(...) Voluntary motions o^ Animals.

^
W^ (...) not here insist upon the Redargution of that Blasphemous and Absur^
(...) the forme^ Epi^hit^ always implies the later) dream of (...) Atoms were
not only the First Matter, but also the First and (...) of all things* and
consequently that all Motions, and so all (...) ^niverse and Caused merely by
the inhaerent Mobility of them: be (...) have expressly refuted the same in our
Treatise against Atheism, (...) 1. artic. ultim). Especially, since it is more
opportune for us her^ (...); that insomuch as the motion of all Atoms is
supposed (...) D^rect, and most rapid; therefore does the Deviation, as (...)
of Concretions seem to arise from the Deflection, Repercussion (...) Repression
of the Atoms composing them. For, the (...) meeting of two Atoms* may be in
direct lines: so that among (...) singl^ percussion* or repercussion overcom^ng
the first begun (...) assembly o^ Conventi^n will bear, there may be caused
some (...) though more or less slow: and their Occursations may be (...)
Oblique angles, and so, by the same reason may ensue a (...) more or less slow,
but also more or less Oblique. More^ve^ (...) repe^cussion made to oblique
angles, there chance to (...) repercussion to angles equally oblique; then must
the (...) ^bl^quity multangular, according to the multiplicity (...) the Angles
be very frequent and indistant* the (...) at least to appearance, to be of an
uniform Curvity, and (...) be termed a motion Circular, Elliptical, Helico^^al,
(...) a^cording to the condition of its Deflection and Crooked^^^^.

^
(...) observ^, tha^ every Body, whether Simple or (...) Concretion, from which
a Repercussion is made, must (...) b^ move^ the same way, as is the repercust,
or not (...) because, otherwise there can be no mutual (...) impingent body
rebound from the repercuti^^ (...), why ^excepting only the motion (...) of all
Concretions does ever suppose something that remains Unmoved, or that, in
respect of its less motion, is tantamount to a thing Unmoved: because,
otherwise there could be no reciprocal Resistance, and so all motion might both
begin and repair it self.

Having thus premised these few fundamental Laws of Motion in General, Art. 5.
What the Active Faculty of a thing, is.
opportunity commands us to descend to the consideration of the FACULTY of
Motion: insomuch as it seems not to be any thing distinct from that Motive
Force, inhaerent in all Concretions, which we have now both described, and
deduced from its immediate origin, the Mobility of Atoms; and that it is well
known to all Book-men, to appertain to the second species of Qualities,
according to the method of Aristotle. To which we may add these lessons also,
that it comprehends the Third species of Qualities, and obtains the First, or
Habit, as its proper appendix. Know we, therefore, that the Faculty or Power of
Motion does therefore seem to be one and the same thing with the coessential
Mobility, now described; because every thing in Nature is judged to have just
so much of Efficacy, or Activity, as it has of Capacity to move either it
self, or any other thing.

And hence is it, Art. 6. That in Nature every Faculty is Active* none Passive*
that in Nature there is no Faculty (properly) but what is Active; because,
though the motions of things be really the same with their Actions: yet must
all motion have its beginning only from the Movent, or Agent. Nor can it avail
to the contrary, that all Philosophers have allowed a Passive Faculty to be
inhaerent in all Concretions; since, in the strict dialect of truth, that
Passiveness is no other than a certain Impotency of Resistance, or the
Privation of an Active Power, in defect whereof the subject is compelled to
obey the Energy of another. If you suppose an obscure Contradiction in this our
Assertion, and accordingly Object; that therefore there must be a Faculty of
Resistance, in some proportion, and that that Resistance is Passive: we are
provided of a satisfactory salvo, which is, that though the Active Virtue,
which is in the Resistent, does sometimes scarce discover it self, yet is it
manifest, that there are very many things, which make resistance only by
motion, which no man can deny to be an Active Faculty; as when we row against
wind and tide, or strive with a Bow in the drawing of it, for all these
evidently oppose our force by contrary moton. And, as for other things, which
seem to quiesce, and yet make some resistance; such we may conceive to make
that resistance by a kind of motion, which Physicians denominate a Tonick
motion; like that of the Eye of an Animal, when by the Contraction of all its
muscles at once it is held in one fixed position. Thus not only the whole Globe
of the Earth, but all its parts are held unmoved, and first by mutual
cohaerence, and resist motions as they are parts of the whole: and thus also
may all Concretions be conceived to be made Immote, not that the Principles of
which they consist* are not in perpetual inquietude and motion; but, because
their par^^cles reciprocally wedge and implicate each other, and while some
impede and ^ppose the motions of others, they all conspire to the Consistence
of ^he whole. However the more Learned and Judicious shall further dispute ^his
paradoxical Argument; yet dare we determine the Common Noti^n of a Faculty to
be this, that there is inherent in every thing a Prin^^ple of Moving itself, or
Acting, if not Primary ^which the schools term the Form) yet Secondary at
least, or profluent from the Form, being as it were the immediate Instrument
thereof.

Art. 7. A Peripatetick Contradiction, assuming the Matter of all Bodies to be
devoid of all Activity; and yet desuming some Faculties a tota substantia.
And here we cannot conceal our wonder, that the Peripatetick has not for so
many ages together discovered himself to be entangled in a manifest
Contradiction; while on one part He affirms, that there are certain Faculties
flowing a tota substantia, from the whole substance of a thing, as if they were
derived from the matter of Concretions: and on the other, concludes, as
indisputable, that the Matter is absolutely devoid of all Activity, as if it
were not certain, that the Faculties frequently perish, when yet not the whole
and entire substance of the thing perishes, but only the spiritual, or more
tenuious parts thereof.

Art. 8. That the Faculties of Animals (the Ratiocination of man only excepted)
are Identical with their spirits.
Now, what more praegnant Argument than this can the most circumspect desire, in
order to their Conviction, that the Faculties of an Animal (we exclude the
Rational Faculty of man, from the sphere of our assertion) ar^ Identical with
the Spirits of it, i. e. the most subtle, most free, and most moveable or
active part of its materials? For, though the spirits are by vulgar
Philosophers conceived to be only the Primary Organ, or immediate Instrument,
which the Faculty residing in one part, occasionally transmits into another:
yet, to those Worthies, who have with impartial and profound scrutiny searched
into the mystery, has it appeared more consentaneous, that the spirits are of
the same nature with the Faculty, and not only movent, but Instrument; nor can
it stand with right reason to admit more than this, that as water in the
streams is all one specifically with that in the fountain, so is the Faculty,
keeping its court or chief residence in one part of the body, as it were the
Fountain, or Original, from whence to all other parts, inservient to the same
function, the diffusion of spirits is made, in certain exile rivolets, or (what
more nearly attains the abstrusity) Rays, like those emitted from the Sun, or
other fountain of light. And, what we here say, of the Faculties of Animals,
holds equal truth, also concerning those of Inanimate Concretions; allowing a
difference of proportion.

Art. 9. The R^^sons of the Coexistence of Various Faculties in one and the
same Concretion.
But here arises a considerble Difficulty, that at first view seems to threaten
our Paradox with total ruin; and this it is: if the Faculties of Concretions
be not distinct in essence from their spirits, or most agile particles; how
then can there be so many various Faculties coexistent in one and the same
concretion, as are daily observed; for in an Apple, for example, there is one
Faculty of affecting the sight, another of affecting the taste, a third
affecting the smell. Concerning this, therefore, we give you this solution,
that the coexistence of various Faculties in one Concretion, does depend upon
(1) the variety of multiforme particles, of which the whole Concretion does
consist, (2) the variety of particles and special contexture of its diverse
parts, (3) the variety of External Faculties, to which it happens that they are
applied. To keep to our former Example, in an Apple, it is manifest, there are
some particles, in which consists its faculty of affecting the smell, others
in which consists its faculty of affecting the Taste; for, the Experiments of
Chemistry demonstrate, that these different particles may be so sequestered each
from other, as that the taste may be conserved, when the smell is lost, and the
smell conserved, when the taste is abolished. And in an Animal it is no less
evident, that the organ of one sense has one peculiar kind of contexture, the
organ of another sense another: and finally, that when we shall referr the
Faculties of Odor and Sapour, which are in an Apple, to the Faculties of
smelling and tasting in Animals; they become subject to a further
discrimination. Since the same particles, which move the smelling, shall create
a sweet and grateful odor, in respect of one Animal, and an offensive or
stinking, in respect of another: and in like manner, those particles, which
affect the Taste, shall yield a most grateful and desirable Sapour, to one
Animal, and as odious and detestable a one to another. Ought we, therefore, to
account that Faculty of an Odor, which is in an Apple, either Single, or
Multiplex? If we would speak strictly, it is Single Absolutely: Respectively,
Multiplex. And thus, indeed, may we affirm, that in the General, or absolutely,
an Apple is Odorous and Sapid: but Comparatively and in Special, that it is
fragrant, or foetid; sweet or bitter.

As for that Appendix of a Faculty, which not only Philosophers, Art. 10. Habit
defined.
but the People also name a HABIT; Experience daily teaches, that there are
some Faculties, (in Animals especially) which by only frequency of acting grow
more prompt and fit to act: and upon consequence, that that Hability or
promptness for action, is nothing but a Facility of doing, or repeating that
action, which the same Faculty, by the same instruments, has frequently done
before.

And, as to the Reason of this Facility; Art. 11. That the Reason of all Habits
in Animals, consists principally in the conformity and fl^xibility of the
Organs, which the r^spective Faculty makes use of, for the performance of its
proper Actions.
though it arise in some measure from the Power or Faculty it self, or the
Spirits, as being accustomed to one certain motion: yet does it chiefly depend
upon the Disposition of the Organs, or instruments which the Faculty makes use
of in the performance of its proper action. For, because the Organ is always a
Dissimilar or Compound Body, consisting of some parts that are crass and rigid;
we are to conceive it to be at first somewhat stubborn, and not easily flexible
to such various motions, as the Faculty requires to its several operations: and
therefore, as when we would have a Wand to be every way easily flexible, we are
gently and frequently to bend it, that so the tenor of its fibers running
longwise through it, may be here and there and every where made more lax,
without any sensible divulsion; so if we desire to have our hands expedite for
the performance of all those difficult motions that are necessary to the
playing of a Lesson on the Lute, we must by degrees master that rigidity or
clumsiness in the Nerves, Tendons, Muscles and joints of our fingers, yea in
the very skin and all other parts of our hands. Thus also Infants, while they
stammer, and strive again and again to pronounce a word clearly and distinctly,
do no more than by degrees master the stiffness and sluggishness of their
tongues and other vocal organs, and so make them more flexible and voluble: and
when by assuefaction they have made them easily flexible to all the motions
required to the formation of that idiome, then at length come they to speak it
plainly and perfectly. The same is also true, concerning the Brain, and those
Organical parts therein, that are inservient to the act of Imagination, and by
the imagination to the act of Discourse. For, though the Mind, when divorced
from the the body, can operate most readily, and knows no difficulty or
impediment in the act of Intellection; as being Immaterial, and so wanting no
organs for the exercise of its reasoning Faculty: yet nevertheless, while it is
adliged to the body and its material instruments, does it remain subject to
some impediment in the execution of its functions; and because that impediment
consists only in the less aptitude or inconformity of its proper organs,
therefore the way to remove that impediment, is only by Assuefaction of it to
study and ratiocination. And from this Assuefaction may the Mind be affirmed to
acquire a certain Habit or Promptitude to perform its proper Actions; insomuch
as by reason of that Habit, it operates more freely and expeditely: but, yet,
in stricter Logic, that Habit arises chiefly to its Organs; as may be
inferred only from hence, that the Organs are capable of increment and
decrement, and to increase and decrease, is competent only to a thing that
consists of parts; such as is the Organ, not the Mind.

Art. 12. Habits, acquirable by Bruits: and common not only to Vegetables, but
also to some Minerals.
Nor is the acquisition of a Habit by assuefaction proper only to Man, but in
common also to all Living Creatures, such especially as are used to the hand
and government of Man, as Horses, Dogs, Hawks, and all prating and singing
Birds. And where we affirmed, that some Faculties are capable of advancement to
perfection by Habit; we intended, that there are other Faculties which are
incapable thereof, as chiefly the Natural Faculties in Animals, and such as are
not subject to the regiment of the Will: though still we acknowledge that some
of these there are, which upon change of temperament in their respective
Organs, may acquire such a certain Habit, as may oppose the original
inclination; and of this sort the principal is the Nutrient Faculty, which may
be accustomed even to Poison. Lastly, when we, said Chiefly in Animals; we were
unwilling totally to exclude Plants; because they also seem (at least
Analogically) to acquire a kind of Habit: as is evident from their constant
retaining of any posture or incurvation, which the hand of the Gardener has
imposed upon them, while they were tender and flexible; as also that they may
by degrees be accustomed to foreign soils, and (what is more admirable) if in
their transplantation those parts of them, which at first respected the South
or East, be converted to the North or West, they seldom thrive, never attain
their due procerity. Nay, if the Experiments of some Physicians be true,
Minerals also may be admitted to attain a Habit by assuefaction; For Baptista
van Helmont, (in lib. de Magnetica Vulnerum curatione, and lib. de Pestis
tumulo) reports that He has found a Sapphire become so much the more
efficacious an Attractive of the pestilential Venom from the Vitals, by how
much the more frequently it has been circumduced about Carbuncles or Plague
Sores; as if Custom multiplied its Amuletary Virtue and taught it a more
speedy way of conquest.

SECT. II.
AMong all Qualities of Concretions, Art. 1. Gravity, as to ^^s Essence, o^
Formal Reason, very obscure.
that deduce themselves from the Mobility of Atoms, the most eminent is
GRAVITY, or the motion of perpendicular Descent from Weight. Which, though most
obvious to the observation of Sense, has much of obscurity in its Nature;
leading the Reason of Man into various and perplexed Conceptions concerning its
Causes: nor has the judgment of any been yet so fortunate as to light upon a
Demonstrative Theory concerning it, or fix upon such a determination as does
not lie open to the objection of some considerable Difficulty. So that it may
well seem Ambition great enough for us, only with due uprightness to examine
the Verisimility of each opinion, touching the Formal Reason, or Essence of
Gravity: that so we may direct younger Curiosities, in which they may, for the
praesent, most safely acquiesce.

Epicurus, indeed, well desumes the Gravity of all Concretions, Art. 2. The
opinion of Epicurus, good as to the Cause of Comparative: insufficient as to
the Cause of Absolute Gravity.
immediately from the Gravity of Simple Bodies, or Atoms: insomuch as all
things are found to have so much more of Weight, as they have of Atoms, or
Matter, that composeth them; and e contra. Which reason the exact Ioh. Bapt.
Balianus, a Nobleman and Senator of Genoa, seriously perpending; sets it down
as a firm ground, Gravitatem se habere ut Agens, Materiam vero, seu Materiale
corpus, ut Passum; and proinde gravia moveri juxta proportionem gravitatis ad
materiam: and ubi sine impedimento naturaliter perpendiculari motu ferantur,
moveri aequaliter; quia ubi plus est Gravitatis, plus ibi pariter sit Materiae,
seu Materialis quantitatis; (de motu Gravium Solidorum and Liquidorum, lib. 1.
cap. 1.). But, this being too General, and concerning rather the Cause of
Comparative, than Absolute Gravity; leaves our Curiosity to a stricter search.

The Grand Dictator of the Schools, Aristotle, Art. 3. Aristotle's opinion of
Gravity, recited.
taking it for granted [ Unumquodque sensilium ita in suum locum ferri, ut ad
speciem] that every corporeal Nature is by native tendency carried to its
proper place, as to its particular Species; confidently inferrs this doctrine:
that Gravity and Levity are Qualities essentially inexistent in Concretions (4.
de Caelo, cap. 3.) and passionately reprehending Democritus and Leucippus, for
affirming that there is no such thing in Nature, as Absolute Gravity, or
Absolute Levity; concludes, that in Nature is something absolutely Heavy, which
is Earth, and something Absolutely Light, which is Fire; ( de Caelo, lib. 4.
cap. 4.) But, neither of these Positions are more than Petitionary; and so not
worthy our assent: as the Context of our subsequent Discourse does sufficiently
convince.

Art. 4. Copernicus theory of Gravity, insatisfactory; and wherein.
The Third opinion worthy our memory, is that of Copernicus, who considering,
that all Heavy Bodies, either projected Upwards by external violence, or dropped
down from some eminent place, are observed to fall perpendicularly down upon
the same part of the Earth, from which they were elevated, or at which they are
aimed, and so that the Earth might be thence argued not to have any such
Diurnal Vertigo, as His Systeme ascribes unto it, insomuch as then it could not
but withdraw it self from Bodies falling down in direct lines, and receive them
at their fall not in the same place, but some other more Westernly: we say,
considering this, Copernicus determined Gravity to be, not any Internal
Principle of tendency toward the middle, or Center of the Universe; but an
innate propension in the parts of the Earth, separated from it, to reduce
themselves in direct lines, or the nearest way, to their Whole, that so they
may be conserved together with it, and dispose themselves into the most
convenient, i. e. a sphaerical figure, about the center thereof. His words are
these; Equidem existimo, Gravitatem non aliud esse, quam Appetentiam quandam
naturalem, partibus inditam a Divina Providentia Opificis Universorum; ut in
unitatem integritatemque suam sese conferant, in formam ^lobi coeuntes: quam
Affectionem credibile est etiam Soli and Lunae, caeterisque Errantibus
fulgoribus inesse; ut ejus efficacia in ea, qu^ se repraesentant, rotunditate
permaneant. (lib. 1. cap. 9.). So that according to this Copernican Assumption,
if any part of the Sun, Moon, or other Celestial Orb were divelled from them;
it would, by the impulse of this natural tendency, soon return again in direct
lines to its proper Orb, not to the Center of the Universe. Which as Kepler (in
Epitom. Astronom. page 9^.) well advertiseth, is but a Point, i. e. Nothing,
and destitute of all Appertibility; and therefore ought not to be accounted the
Term of tendency to all Heavy Bodies, but rather the Terrestrial Globe together
with its proper Center, yet not as a Center, but as the Middle of its Whole, to
which its Parts are carried by Cognation.

But, this opinion has as weak a claim to our Assent, as either, of the
former; as well because it cannot consist with the Increase of Velocity in all
Bodies descending perpendicularly, by how much nearer they approach the Earth,
unless it can be demonstrated, that this increase of Velocity in each degree of
descent, arises only from the Increase of Appetency of Union with the whole
(which neither Copernicus himself, nor any other for Him, has yet dared to
assent): as in consideration of many other Defects, and some Absurdities,
which, that wonder of the Mathematics, Ricciolus, has demonstratively
convicted it of ( in Almegisti novi part posteriori, lib. 9. sect. 4. cap. 16.
de Systemate terrae motae.). Who, had He but as solidly determined all the
Difficulties concerning the immediate Cause of this Affection in Bodies, called
Gravity; as He has refuted the Copernican Thesis of an Innate Appetency in the
parts of the Earth to reunite themselves to the Whole: doubtless He had much
increased the obligations and gratitude of his Readers. But, making it his
principal design to propugn the Physiology and Astronomy of the Ancients,
especially such Tenants as are admitted by the Schools, and allowed of by the
Doctors of Rome, as most concordant to the litteral sense of Sacred Writ: He
waved that Province, seeming to adhaere to the common Doctrine of the
Stagirite, formerly recited, and only occasionally to defend it.

Lastly, there are Others (among whom Kepler and Gassendus deserve the richest
Minervals) who, neither admitting with Aristotle, Art. 5. The Determination of
Kepler, Gassendus, etc. that Gravity is Caused merely by the Attraction of the
Earth: espoused by the Author.
that Gravity is any Quality essentially inhaerent in Concretions; nor, with
Copernicus, that it is an Appetency of Union, implanted originally in the parts
of the Earth, by virtue whereof they carry themselves toward the Middle of the
Terrestrial Globe: define it to be an Impressed Motion, Caused immediately by a
certain Magnetic Attraction of the Earth.

And this opinion seems to carry the greatest weight of Reason; as may soon be
manifest to any competent and equitable judgment, that shall exactly perpend
the solid Arguments alleged by its Assertors: which for greater decorum, we
shall now twist together into one continued thread, that so our Reader may wind
them into one bottom, and then put them together into the balance.

Insomuch as frequent and most accurate observation demonstrates, Art. 6. The
Ext^rnal Principle of the perpendicular Descent of a stone, projected up in the
Aer; must be either Depell^nt, or At^rahent.
that the Motion of a Body downward does increase in the same proportion of
Velocity, that the motion of the same Body, violently projected upward, does
decrease; therefore is it reasonable, nay necessary for us to conceive, that
there are Two distinct External Principles, which mutually contend about the
same subject, and execute their contrary forces upon the same Moveable. Now, of
these two Antagonistical Forces, the one is Evident; the other obscure, and the
argument of our instant Disquisition. Manifest it is, when a stone is thrown
upward from the surface of the Earth into the Aer, that the External Principle
of its motion Upward, is the Hand of Him, who projected it: But somewhat
obscure, what is the External Principle of its motion Downward, when it again
returns to the Earth. Nevertheless, this obscurity does not imply a Nullity, i.
e. it is high temerity to conclude that there is no External Cause of the
stones Descent, because that External Cause is not equally manifest with that
of its Ascent: unless any dare to affirm, that because He can perceive, when
Iron is attracted to a Loadstone, no External Cause of that Attraction,
therefore there can be none at all. Many, indeed, are the ways, by which an
External Cause may move a Body: and yet they all fall under the comprehension
of only two Cardinal ways, and those are Impulsion, and Attraction.

This praeconsidered, it follows, Art. 7. That the Resistance of the Superior
Aer is the only Cause which gradually refracteth, and in fine wholly overcomes
the Impressed Force, whereby a stone projected, is elevated upward
that we cast about to find some Cause, or Impellent, or Attrahent (or rather
two Causes, one Impellent, the other Attrahent, operating together) to which we
may impute the perpendicular motion of Bodies Descending. The Impellent Cause
(if any such there be) of the perpendicular motion of a stone Descending, can
be no other but the Aer, from above incumbent upon, and pressing it downward:
because of any other External Cause of that effect, no argument can be given.
For, should you suppose a sphere of Fire, or some other or some other Ethereal
Substance, to be immediately above the unequal Ext^eme of the sphere of Aer;
which closely and with some kind of pressure invironing the Aer, might compel
all its parts to flow together toward the Terraqueous Globe: yet could that
super-aereal sphere, bounded and urged by the circumvolutions of the Celestial
Orbs, do no more, than cause the Aer, being it self pressed downward, to bear
down upon the stone, and so depress it; and so the Aer must still be at least
the Proxime Cause impelling the stone downward. Moreover, that the Aer alone
may be the Impellent Cause of the stones perpendicular Decidence from on high,
even Aristotle Himself seems to concede* insomuch as He is positive in his
judgment, that when a Heavy body projected upward is abandoned by its Motor, it
is afterward moved only by the Aer, which being moved by the Projicient, moves
the next conterm^^ous Aer, by which again the next neighboring Aer is like^^se
moved, an^ so successively forward until the force of the Impressed motion
gradually decaying, the whole communicated motion cease, and a quiet
succeeds. But, betause Aristo le could not tell, what Cause that is* which in
every degree of the stones ascent opposing, at length who^^^ overcomes the
impressed force; un^ess it should be the occurrent superior Aer, which
continually resists the inferior aer, whereby the projected stone is promoted
in its ascent: may not we safely enough conclude, that the Aer from above
incumbent upon the projected stone, may by the same force depress it Downward,
wherewith it first resisted the motion of it Upward? Doubtless, what force^
soever the Hand of a man, who projects a stone upward into the Aer, does
impress upon it, and the contiguous Aer; yet still is (...) the superior Aer,
that both continually resists the tendency (...) the stone upward, and at its
several degrees of ascent re^racteth (...) force thereupon impressed by the hand
of the Projicient, unt^^^ having totally overmastered the same, it so
increases its conqu^^^g Depellent force, as that in the last degree of the
stones De^endent motion, the Depressive force of the Aer is become as great, as
was the Elevating force of the Hand, in the beginning of (...) Ascendent
motion. Suppose we, that a Diver should from the bottom of the Sea throw a
stone directly upward, with the same ^^^ce, as from the surface of the Earth up
into the Aer; and then ^^mand, Why the stone does not ascend to the same height
in the Water, as in the Aer. Is it not, think you, because the (...) does more
resist, and refract the Impressed force, and so soo^^^ overcome it, and then
begins to impress its own con-contrary Depressing Force thereupon, never
discontinuing that impression, (...) it has reduced the stone to the bottom of
the Sea, from whe^^^ it was projected? The Difference, therefore, betwixt the
Resistance of the Impressed force, by the Water, and that of the Aer ^^^sisteth
only in Degrees, or more and less. And, though the (...) of the Aer may be
thought very inconsiderable in comparison o^ (...) great Violence impressed upon
a Cannon Bullet, shot upw^rd (...) the Aer: yet be pleased to consider, that it
holds some (...) proportion, with the Renitency o^ the Water. Which (...) that
we may understand, compare we not only the very (...) Ascent of a stone, thrown
upward from the bottom of the Sea, to the large ascent of the same stone, with
equal force, from the Earth, thrown up into the Aer; but also the almost
insensible progress of a Bullet shot from a Cannon transversly through Water,
with that vast progress it is commonly observed to make through the Aer: and we
shall soon be convinced, that as the Great Resistance of the Water is the
Cause, why the Stone, or Bullet makes so small a progress therein; so is the
small Resistance of the Aer the Cause why they both pervade so great a space
therein. And thus is it Demonstrable, that the Resistance of the superior Aer,
is the External Agent, which constantly resists, by degrees refracteth, and
at length wholly overcomes the impressed Force, whereby Heavy Bodies are
violently elevated up into the Aer.

The Difficulty remaining, therefore, Art. 8. Tha^ the Aer, distracted by a
stone violently ascending, has as well a Depulsive, as a Resistent Faculty;
arising immediately from its Elaterical, or Restorative motion.
does only concern the Impellent Cause of their Fall Down again; or, whether
the Aer, besides the force of Resistance, has also any Depulsive Faculty,
which being impressed upon a stone, bullet, or other ponderous body, at the top,
or highest point of its mountee, serves to turn the same Downward, and
afterward to continue its perpendicular descent, till it arrive at and quiesce
on the Earth. Which, indeed, seems well worthy our Doubt, because it is
observable, that Walls, Pavements, and the like solid and immote Bodies, though
they strongly resist the motion of bodies impinged against them; do not yet
impress any Contrary motion thereupon: the Rebound of a Ball or Bullet from a
Wall, being the effect merely of the same force impressed upon it by the Racket,
or Gunpowder fired, which first moved it; as is evident even from hence, that
the Resilition of them to greater or less distance, is according to the more or
less of the Force impressed upon them. Which those Gunners well understand, who
experiment the strength of their Powder, by the greatness of the bullets
rebound from a Wall.

And to solve this Difficulty, we must distinguish betwixt Bodies, that are
devoid of Motion, and which being distracted, have no faculty of Restitution,
whereby to recollect their dissociated particles, and so repair themselves; of
which sort are Walls, Pavements, etc: and such bodies that are actually in
motion, and which by reason of a natural Elater, or Spring of Restitution,
easily and speedily redintegrate themselves, and restore their severed parts to
the same contexture and tenor, which they held before their violent
distraction; to which classis the Aer does principally belong. Now, concerning
the First sort, what we object of the non-impression of any Contrary motion
upon Bodies impinged against them, is most certainly true: but not concerning
the Latter. For, the Arm of a Tree, being inflected, does not only resist the
inflecting force, but with such a spring return to its natural site, as serves
to impel any body of competent weight, that shall oppose its recurse, to great
distance; as in the discharge of an Arrow from a Bow. Thus also the Aer, though
otherwise unmoved, may be so distracted by a Body violently pervading it; as
that the parts thereof, urged by their own native Confluxibility (the Cause of
all Elaterical or Restorative Motion) must soon return to their natural tenor
and site, and not without a certain violence, and so replenish the place
form^rly possessed, but now deserted by the body, that distracted them. Th^^
there is so powerful a Restorasive faculty in the Aer, as we here ^ssume;
innumerable are the Experiments, those especially by Philosophers usually
alleged against a Vacuum Coacervate, which attest. However, that you may the
less doubt of its having some, and a consid^rable force of propelling bodies
notwithstanding it be Fluid in so high a degree: be pleased only to reflect
your thoughts upon the great ^orce of Winds; which tear up the deepest and
firmest rooted Cedars ^^om the ground, demolish mighty Castles, overset the
proudest C^^racts, and roll the whole Ocean up and down from shore to sho^^.
Consider the incredible violence, wherewith a Bullet is discharged from a
Wind-Gun, through a firm plank of two or three inches thickness. Consider that
no effect is more admirable, than that a very small quantity of Flame should,
with such prodigious impetuosity* drive a Bullet, so dense and ponderous, from
a Cannon, through the Gates of a City, and at very great distance: and yet the
Flame (...) the Gunpowder is not less, but more Fluid than Aer. Who, without
the certificate of Experience, could believe, that merely by the force of so
little Flame (a substance the most Fluid of (...), that we know) not only so
weighty a Bullet should be driven with such pernicity forward through the aer
to the distance of many furlongs; but also that so vast a weight, as a Cannon
and its Carriage bear, should at the same time be thereby driven backwards, or
made to recoyle? What therefore will you say, if this could not come to pass,
without the concurrence of the Aer? For* it seems to be effected, when the
Flame, at the instant of its Creation, seeking to possess a more ample room, or
space, does conv^^ its impetus, or violence as well upon the breech, or hinder
part (...) the Canon, as upon the bullet lying before it in the bore or (...);
which discharged through the concave, is closely pressed upon (...) the pursuing
flame: so that the flame immediately perishing* (...) leaving a void space, the
Aer from the front or adverse part insta^^ rusheth into the bore, and that with
such impetuous pernicity, (...) it forces the Cannon to give back, and yields
a Fragor, or Report* as loud as Thunder; nay, by the Commotion of the vicine
Aer (...) ^^akes even the largest structures, and shatters Glass-windows (...)
in the sphere of its violence. And all merely from the (...) Motion of the Aer,
restoring its distracted parts to their n^^ural tenor, or Laxity: so that you
may be satisfied of its Capacity not only to resist the Ascent of a stone
thrown upward; but also of Depelling it downward, by an impressed Motion. Art. 9.
That neverthele^^ when (...) on high in the (...) no Caus^ can (...) Downw^^^
Motion, (...).


Notwithstanding our conquest of the main body of this Difficulty, about the
Restorative Motion of the Aer, we are yet to encounter (...) formidable
Reserve, which consists of these Scruples. When a (...) is thrown upward, does
not the Aer in each degree of (...) ascent, suffer a Distraction of its parts;
and so is compelled (...) a Periosis, or circular motion, to succeed into the
place left below by the stone? Does it not therefore impress rather an (...),
than a Depulsive Force thereupon, and so promote the force impressed upon it by
the hand of Him, who projected it? And must it not thence follow, that the
first impressed motion is so far from being decreased by the supposed Renitency
of the superior Aer, that it is rather increased and promoted by the
Circulation thereof: and upon consequence, that the stone is carried upward
twice as swiftly, as it falls downward, since it is impelled upward by two
forces, but falls down again only by a single force? True it is, that while a
stone is falling down, the distracted aer beneath seems to circulate into the
place above deserted thereby: but, in case a stone be held up on high in the
Aer by a man's hand, or other support, and that support be withdrawn so gently,
as to cause no considerable commotion in the Aer; in this case there seems to
be no reason, why the Aer should flow from above down upon it in the first
moment of its delapse. Besides, when a stone projected upward, has attained to
the highest point of its ascent, at which there seems to be a short pause, or
respite from motion, caused by the aequilibration of the two Contrary Forces,
the Movent and Resistent: why does not the stone absolutely quiesce in that
place, there being in the Aer no Cause, which should rather Depel it ^ownward,
then elevate it upward?

These considerations, we ingenuously confess, are potent, and put us to the
exigent of exploring some other External Principle, beside the motion of
Restitution in the Aer; such as may Begin the Downward motion of the stone,
when gently dropped off from some convenient supporter, or when it is at the
zenith or highest point of its ascent, and and at the term of its
Aequilibration overcome the Resistance of the subjacent Aer, that so it may not
only yield to the stone in the first moment of its Descent; but by successive
Circulations afterward promote and gradually accelerate its motion once begun.
Depellent Cause there can be none; and so there must be some Attrahent, to
begin the stones praecipitation: and that can be no other, but a Certain
peculiar Virtue of the whole Terrestrial Globe, whereby it does not only
retain all its Parts, while they are contiguous or united to it, but also
retract them to it self, when by any violence they have been avulsed and
separated. And this Virtue may therefore be properly enough called Magnetique.

In Nature, nothing is whole and entire, Art. 10. A^gument, that (...)
Terraqueous Gl^be is endowed with a certain Attractive Faculty, in order to the
Detention and Retraction of all its Parts.
in which there is not radically implanted a certain self-Conservatory Power,
whereby it may both contain its several parts in cohaerence to it self, and in
some measure resist the separation or distraction of them; as all Philosophers,
upon the conviction of infinite Experiences, decree: and if so, it were a very
par^ial A^s^rdity to bereave the Terraqueous Globe, being a Body whole and
entire, of the like conservatory Faculty. And hence comes it, that if any Parts
of the Earth be violently avelled from it; by this Conservatory, (which must be
Attractive) Virtue, it in some measure resists their avulsion, and after the
cessation of the Avelling violence, retracteth them again; and this by
insensible Emanations, or subtle threads, deradiated continually from its
whole body, and hookt or fastened to them: as a man retracts a Bird flown from
his hand, by a line or thread tied to its feet.

Art. 11. What are the Parts of the Terrestrial Globe.
By the Parts of the Terrestrial Globe we intend not only the parts of Earth and
Water (the liquid part of the Earth, and as Blood in an Animal) nor only all
stones, Metalls, Minerals, Plants, Animals, and whatever Bodies derive their
principles from them, such as Rain, Dew, Snow, Hail, and all Meteors, Vapors,
and Exhalations; nor only the Aer, wherewith the globe of Earth is
circumvested, as a Quince or Malacotone is periwiggd about with a lanuginous or
Hoary substance, (because, if we abstract from the surface of the Earth all
vapors, expirations, fumes, and emanations of subtle bodies from water and
other substances, which ascend, descend, and everywhere float up and down in
the Atmosphere, nothing can remain about the same, but an Empty space,) but
also Fire it self, which has its original likewise from terrestrial matter, as
wood, oil, fat, sulphur, and other unctuous and combustible substance. Because
all these are Bodies, which as Parts of it self the Earth contains and holds
together; not permitting any of them to be avelled from its orb, but by some
force that exceeds its retentive power: and when that avellent force cease,
it suddenly retracts them again to it self. And, insomuch as two bodies cannot
coexist in one and the same place at once; therefore comes it to pass, that
many bodie^ being at once retracted toward the Earth, the more terrene are
brought nearer to the surface thereof, extruding and so succeeding in to the
rooms of the less terrene: whence the nearer adduced and Extruding Bodies are
accounted Heavy, and the Extruded and farther removed, are accounted Light.

Art. 12. A Second Argument that the Earth is Magnetical.
Secondly, that the Earth is naturally endowed with a certain Magnetical Virtue,
by which perpetually diffused in round, it contains its parts in cohaerence,
and reduces those, which are separated from it self; after the same manner, as
a Loadstone holds its own parts together, and attracts Iron (which is also a
Magnetique Production, as Gilbert (de magnet. lib. 1. cap. 16.) from the
observation of Miners, and other solid reasons, has confirmed) to it self, and
retracts it after divulsion or separation: we say, all this may be argued from
hence, that the whole Globe of the Earth seems to be nothing but one Grand
Magnet.

(1) Because a Loadstone, tornated into a sphere, is (more than Analogically
only) a Little Earth: being therefore nicknamed by Gilbert (de magnet. lib. 1.
cap. 3*) (...), Terella; insomuch as the one, so also has the other its Poles,
its Axis, Equator, Meridian, Paralels.

(2) Excepting only some parts, which have suffered an alteration and
diminution, if not a total amission of Virtue, in the Exteriors of the Earth;
all parts thereof discover some magnetic impraegnation: some more vigorous and
manifest, as the Loadstone, and Iron; others more languid and obscure, as White
Clay, Bricks, etc.

Whereupon Gilbert erects his conjectural judgment, that the whole Globe
Terrestrial is composed of two General parts, the shell, and Kernel: the Shell
not extending it self many hundred fathoms deep (which is very small
comparatively to the vastness of its Diametre, amounting to 6872 miles, Italian
measure) and all the rest, or Kernel, being one continued Loadstone
subst^ntially. (3.) The Loadstone always converteth those parts of it self
toward the Poles, which respected them in its mineral bed, or while it remaind
united to the Earth. All which are no contemptible Arguments of our Thesis,
that the whole Earth is endowed with a magnetique Faculty, in order to the
Conservation of its Integrity.

Whether the Entrals of our Common Mother, and Nurse, Art. 13. A Parallelisme
betwixt the Attraction of Iron by a L^ad^tone, and the Attraction of Terrene
bodies by the Earth.
the Earth, be, as Gilbert would persuade us, one Great Loadstone
substantially; is not more impossible to prove, than impertinent to our
praesent scope* it being sufficient to the verisimility of our assigned Cause
of the perpendicular motion of Terrene Bodies, to conceive the Globe of the
Earth to be a Loadstone only Analogically, i. e. that as the Loadstone ^^th
perpetually emit certain invisible streams of exile particles, or Rays of
subtle bodies, whereby to allect magnetical bodies to an union with it self; so
likewise does the Earth uncessantly emit certa^n invisible streams, or Rays of
subtle bodies, wherewith to attract all its ^^stracted and divorced Parts back
again to an Union with it self, and there closely to detain them. And
justifiable it is for us to affirm, that f^^m the Terraqueous Orb there is a
continual Efflux, not only of Vapou^s, Exhalations, and such small bodies, of
which all our Meteors are composed* nor only of such, as the general mass of
Aer does consist of: but also of other particles far more exile and insensible,
nor less subtle than those, which deradiated from the Loadstone, in a moment
permeate the most solid Marble, without the least diminution of their Virtue.
Because, as the Attractive Virtue of the Loadstone is sufficiently demonstrated
by the Effect of it, the actual Attraction of Iron unto it: so is it lawful for
us to conclude the Earth to be endowed with an Attractive Virtue also, merely
from the sensible Effect of that Virtue, the actual Attraction of stones, and
all other bodies to it self; especially since no other Conception of the Nature
of that Affection, which the world calls Gravity, can be brought to a clear
consistence with that notable Appearance, the gradual Increase of Velocity in
each degree of a bodies perpendicular fall.

Besides, the Analogy may be farther deduced from hence; Art. 14. That as the
sphere o^ the Loadstones Allective Virtue is limited: so is that of the Earths
magnetism.
that as the Virtue of the Loadstone is diffused in round, or spherically, and
upon consequence, its Effluvia, or Rays are so much the more rare, by how much
the farther they are transmitted from their source or original; and so being
less united, become less vigorous in their attraction, and at large distance,
i. e. such as exceeds the sphere of their Energy, are languid and of no force
at all: so does the Terrestrial Globe diffuse its Attractive Virtue in round,
and upon consequence, its Effluvia, or Rays become so much the more rare or
dispersed, by how much farther they are transmitted from their fountain; and so
being less united, cannot attract a stone or other terrene body at excessive
d^stance, such as the Supralunary and Ultramundane spaces. Which that we may
assert with more perspicuity, let us suppose a stone to be placed in those
Imaginary spaces which are the outside of the World, and in which God, had He
so pleased, might have created more worlds; and then examine, whether it be
more reasonable, that that stone should rather move toward this our Earth, than
remain absolutely immote in that part of the Ultramandan spaces wherein we
suppose it posited. If you conceive, that it would tend toward the Earth;
imagine not only the Earth, but also the whole machine of the world to be
Annihilated, and that all those vast spaces, which the Universe now possesses,
were as absolutely Inane, as they were before the Creation: and then at least,
because there could be no Center, and all spaces must be alike indifferent, you
will admit, that the stone would remain fixed in the same place, as having no
Affecctation, or Tendency to this part of those spaces, which the Earth now
possesses. Imagine the World to be then again restored, and the Earth to be
resituate in the place as before its adnihilation; and then can you conceive
that the stone would spontaneously tend toward it? If you suppose the
Affirmative; you will be reduced to inextricable difficulties, not to grant the
Earth to affect the stone, and upon consequence, to transmit to it some certain
Virtue, consisting in the substantial Emanations, not any simple and immaterial
Quality, whereby to give it notice of its being restored to its pristine
situation and condition. For, how otherwise can you suppose the stone should
take cognizance of, and be moved toward the Earth. Now, this being so, what can
follow, but that stones, and all other Bodies accounted Heavy, must tend toward
the Earth, only because they are Attracted to it, by rays or streams of
Corporeal Emanations from it to them transmitted? Go to then, let us farther
imagine, that some certain space in the Atmosphere, were, by Power
supernatural, made so Empty, as that nothing could arrive thereat either from
the Earth, or any other Orb: can you then conceive, that a stone placed in
that Inanity, would have any Tendency toward the Earth, or Affectation to be
united to its Center? Doubtless, no more, than if it were posited in the
Extramundan spaces* because, having nothing of Communication therewith, or any
other part of the Universe, the case would be all one with the stone, as if
there were no Earth, no World, no Center. Wherefore, since we observe a stone
from the greatest height, to which any natural force can elevate the same, to
tend in a direct or perpendicular line to the Earth; what can be more rational
than for us to conceive, that the Cause of that Tendency in the stone is only
this, that it has some communication with the Earth; and that not by any naked
or Immaterial Quality, but some certain Corporeal, though most subtle
Emanations from the Earth? Especially, since the Aer incumbent upon the stone,
is not sufficient to Begin its motion of Descent.

Art. 15. An Objection of the Disproportion between the great Bulk of a large
(...) and the Ex^^^^y of the supposed magnetique Rays of the Earth: Solved by
three w^ighty Reasons.
If you shall yet withhold your Assent from this Opinion, which we have thus
long endeavored to defend; we conjecture the Remora to be chiefly this: that
it seems improbable, so great a Bulk, as that of a very large stone, and that
(...) such pernicity, should be attracted by such slender means, as our
supposed magnetic Emanations: and therefore think it our duty to satisfy you
concerning this Doubt. We Answer (1) That a very great quantity of Iron
(proportionately) is easily and nimbly rusht into the arms of a Loadstone
merely by Rays of most subtle particles, such as can be discovered no way, but
by their Effect. (2) That stones, and other massy Concretions have no such
great ineptitude, or Resistance to motion, as is commonly praesumed. For, if a
stone of an hundred pound weight be suspended in the Aer, by a small wier, or
chord: how small a force is required to the moving of it hither? Why therefore
should a greater force be required to the Attraction of it downward. (3) When
you lift up a stone or other body from the Earth, you cannot but observe that
it makes some Resistance to your Hand, more or less according to the bulk
thereof; which Resistance arises from hence, that those many magnetique lines,
deradiated to, and fastened upon it, by their several Deflexions and
Decussations, hold it as it were fast chained down to the Earth, so that unless
a greater force intervene, such as may master the Earth Retentive power, and
break off the magnetique lines, it could never be avelled and amoved from the
Earth. And hence is it, that by how much the greater force is impressed upon a
stone, at its projection upward; by so many more degrees of excess does that
impressed force transcend the force of the Retentive Magnetique lines, and
consequently to so much a greater Altitude is the stone mounted up in the Aer:
and e contra. Which is also the Reason, why the Impressed Force, being most
vigorous in the first degree of the stones ascent, does carry it the most
vehemently in the beginning; because it is not then Refracted: but afterward
the stone moves slower and slower, because in every degree of ascension, it
loses a degree of the Impressed Force, until at length the same be so
diminished, as to come to an Aequipondium with the Contrary force of the
magnetique Rays of the Earth detracting it Downward.

Lastly, from hence is it, Art. 16. The Reason of the Aequivelocity of Bodies,
of different weights, in their perpendicular Descent: with sundry
unquestionable Authorities to c^nfirm the Hoti thereof.
that the perpendicular Delapse of most Bodies, though of far different
weights, is observed to be Aequivelox: contrary to that Axiom of Aristotle (2.
de Caelo, text 46) quo majus fuerit corpus, eo velocius fertur, and ( text 77.)
parvum terrae particulum, si elevatu dimittatur, ferri deorsum, quo major
fuerit, velocius moveri; upon which the Aristoteleans have grounded this
erroneous Rule, Velocitates gravium descendentium habere inter se eandem
proportionem, quam gravitates ipsorum, that the Velocities of Heavy bodies
falling downward have the same proportion one to another as their Gravities
have.

And the Reason of this Aequivelocity of Unequal weights, seems to be this;
that of two Bullets, the one of only an ounce, the other of an hundred pounds
weight, dropped from the battlements of an high tower, at the same instant,
though the Greater Bullet be attracted by more magnetique lines deradiate from
the Earth, yet has it more particles to be attracted, than the Lesser: so that
there being a certain Commensuration betwixt the Force Attractive, and the
quantity of Matter Attracted; on either part the Force must be such, as
suffices to the performance of the motion of either in the same space of time;
and consequently, both the Bullets must descend with equal Velocity, and arrive
at the surface of the Earth in one and the same moment. All which that Lynceus,
Galilaeo well understood, when (in the Person of Salviatus) desiring to
calculate the time, in which a Bullet might be falling from the concave of the
Moon to our Earth; and Sagredus had said thus to Him, Sumamus igitur globum
determinati (...) with the great body or Globe thereof; yet is it not
Congregative of the whole Globe to any thing else, as if the Globe of the Earth
were to be united to the Moon, or any other Orb in the World. Nor can it be
affirmed, that Gravity, or this Virtue to motion Direct, is conceded to the
Terraqueous Orb, to the end it should, at the Creation, carry it self to that
place, which is Lowest in the Universe; or being there posited, constantly
retain it self therein: since in the Universe is neither Highest, nor Lowest
place, but only Respectively to the site of an Animal, and chiefly of Man,
whose Head is accounted the Highest, and Feet the Lowest part; in the same
manner as there is no Right, nor Left side in Nature, but comparatively to the
site of the parts in man's body, and in reference to the Heavens. For, those
Lateralities are not determined by any general and certain standard in Nature:
but variously assigned according to our Imagination. The Hebrews, Chaldeans,
and Persians, confronting the Sun at his arising in the East; place the Right
side of the world in the South: as likewise did all the Roman Southsayers, when
they took their Auguries. The Philosopher takes that to be the East, from
whence the Heavens begin their Circumgyration: and so assigns also the right
hand to the South. The Astronomer, regarding chiefly the South and Meridian
Sun, accounts that the Dextrous part of Heaven, which respects his right
hand, and that's the West. And Poets, differing from all the rest, turn their
faces to the West, and so assign the term of Right to the North: for otherwise
Ovid must be guilty of a gross mistake in that verse, Utque duae dextra zonae,
totidemque sinistra. Hence is it, that as the East cannot be the Right side of
the World, unless to Him, who faceth the North: so is the Vertical point of the
world not to be accounted the Highest part of the Universe, but only as it
respects the Head of a man standing on any part of the Earth; because, if the
same man travail to the Antipodes, that which was before the Highest, will then
be the Lowest part of the World. This considered, we must praefer that solid
opinion of Plato, that in the World there is an Extreme, and a Middle Place,
but no Highest and Lowest; to that merely petitionary one of Aristotle, that
all Bodies tend toward the Center of the Earth, as to the Lowest place in the
Universe.

How, says the offended Peripatetick, Art. 18. That the Center of the Univer^e
is not the L^w^st part ^^^reof: nor the Center of the Earth* the Center of the
World.
the merely Petitionary opinion of Aristotle? Why, do not all men admit that to
be the Lowest part of the World, which is the Middle or Center thereof? And is
not that the Center of the Earth?

And our Reply is, that, indeed, we can admit Neither. (1) Because, should we
allow the World to have a Middle, or Center; yet is there no necessity, that
therefore we should concede the Center to be the Lowest place in the World* no
more than that the Navil, or Central part of a man should therefore be the
Lowest part. For, to speak like men, who have not enslaved their reason to
praejudice; what is opposed to the Mi^dle, is not suprem, but Extreme: and
Highest and Lowest are opposite points in the same Extreme. So likewise in the
Terrestrial Globe, whose middle part we account not the Lowest, but the
contrary point in the sphere: since, otherwi^e we must grant the Earth to have
a double Infinity, one in regard of its Center, the other in respect of the
extreme points of it^ (...)* according to which the Antipodes are Lowest to us*
and we (...) to them.

(2) Wh^ (...) praetend to demonstrate* that there is an ^xtreme in the
Universe* (...) ^here be, ^o determine where and wh^t it is: and upon
consequence* (...) the Universe has an^ Center, and where that Center is. It Is
mo^^ ^han Galilaeo durst* as appears b^ that his modest confession* N^scimus
(...) ubi sit Universi centrum, n^q^^ an si^^ quodque, si maxim d^tur* aliud
(...) nisi pun^tum imaginari^m, adeoque nihilum, omni facul^ate (...). ((...)
Cosmici dialog. 1 p^g. 22) Besides, we see i^ to be* an^ ^^on very good
ground^, d^^put^^ amongst the most Curious an^ Learn^^ (...) o^ ^he world*
whether the ^^xt star^ are m^ved about the Earth, or the ^arth by a Diurnal
motion upon it^ own a^is* Whether the ^ix^ stars (...) one and the same con^ave
superfi^^: or rath^^ (as the Planets* which ^^^^i^hstanding the deluded sight,
are demonst^^ted not to be in on^* bu^ (...) sphere^ some farther from* some
ne^r^^ to the Earth* disper^e^ (...) immense space* For* from hence* that the
Distance betwixt (...) u^ i^ so vast* that our sight not discerning the large
spaces intercepted (...) them in the^^ several orbe^* they all appe^^e at the
same distanc^* (...) same ^ircum^^rence* wo^^ C^ntre must be there* where the
Eye (...) sel^ about* does behold them: so that in whatsoever part of the (...)
^pace o^ the World* whether in the Moon* Sun, or any other Orb* (...) shall
imagin^ your sel^ to be placed; still you must, according to (...) o^ your
sight, judge the World to be spherical, an^ that you (...) in the ver^ center
of that Circumference, in which you conceive all the (...) stars t^ be
constitute.

Trul^* (...) worthy the admiration of a wise man, to obser^e, that the very
Plane^^ (...) admitted by the Aristoteleans to have cert^^n motions (...) be
moved in such Gyres, as have not their Centres in the (...) immensly distant
from it: and yet that the same Persons (...) Contradict th^mselve^* as to
account that the Center o^ the (...) common Center of the world, about which
all the Coelest^al (...) Dif^^culties perpended* w^ cannot infall^bl^ (...)
Earthy B^^ie^, when descending in direct line^ to (...) toward the Center of
the World: and thoug^ the^ (...) toward the Center of the World, yet does that
seem (...) is also by Accident, that they are carried towa^^ the (...) Earth*
in which as being a mere imagin^ry Point, the^ (...) attain quiet. For, per se*
they are carried towar^ the (...) Whole* or Princip^e; and having once attained
there^^, (...) as they no more seek to pass on from thenc^ (...) ^entre* tha^
an Infant received into his Nurses arms or lap* (...) into he^ Entrals: and
merely per Accidens is it, that they (...) the Center of the Earth* because
tending in the neeres^ (...) line to the place o^ their quiet, they must be
directed (...), since if we suppose that direct line to be continued, it must
(...) the Center of the Earth. And thus have we left no stone (...) all
Aristotle's Theory of Gravity, which is, that Weight is a Quality es^^ntially
inhaerent in all terrene Concritions, whereby they spontan^ous^y (...) ^oward
the Center of the Terrestrial Globe, a^ to the Common Cen^^e (...) place in the
Universe. The whole Remainder of our praes^^^ (...)* the^e^o^e, concerns our
farther Confirm^tion of that (...) of Gravity, which we have espoused; which
is* (...) mere Effect of the Magnetique Attraction of the Earth.

Let us therefore once more resume our Argument a Simili, Art. 19. A Fourth
A^gument, that Gravity is only Attraction.
considering the Analogy betwixt the Attraction of Iron by a Loadstone, and
that of Terrene Concretions by the Earth; not only as to the Manner of their
respective Attractions, but chiefly as to the parity of Reasons in our
judgments upon their sensible Effects. When a man holds a plate of Iron of 6
or 7 ounces weight, in his hand, with a vigorous Loadstone placed at convenient
distance, underneath his hand; and finds the weight of the Iron to be increased
from ounces to pounds: If Aristotle on one side should tell him, that that
great weight is a Quality essentially inhaerent in the Iron, and Kepler or
Gilbert, on the other, affirm to him, that that weight is a quality merely
Adventitious, or impressed upon it by the Attractive influence of the Loadstone
subjacent; it is easy to determine, to which of those so contrary judgments he
would incline his assent. If so, well may we conceive the Gravity of a stone,
or other terrene body, to belong not so much to the Body it self, as to the
Attraction of that Grand Magnet, the Terraqueous Globe lying underneath it.
For, supposing that a Loadstone were, unknown to you, placed underneath your
hand, when you lifted up a piece of Iron from the earth; though it might be
pardonable for you to conclude, that the great weight, which you would observe
therein, was a Quality essentially inhaerent in the Iron, when yet in truth it
was only External and Attractitious; because you were ignorant of the Loadstone
subjacent; yet, if after you were informed that the Loadstone was placed
underneath your hand, you should persever in the same opinion, the greatest
Candor imaginable could not but condemn you of inexcusable pertinacity in an
Error. Thus also your ignorance of the Earths being one Great Loadstone may
excuse your adhaerence to the erroneous position of Aristotle, concerning the
formal Reason of Gravity; but, when you shall be convinced, that the Terrestial
Globe is naturally endowed with a certain Attractive or Magnetique Virtue, in
order to the retention of all its parts in cohaerence to it self, and
retraction of them when by violence distructed from it, and that gravity is
nothing but the effect of that virtue; you can have no Plea left for the
palliation of your obstinacy, in case you recant not your former persuasion.

Nor ought it to impede your Conviction, that a far greater Gravity, Art. 20.
Why a greater Gravity, or stronger Attractive force is ^mprest upon a piece of
iron by a Loadstone, than by the Earth.
or stronger Attractive Force is impressed upon a piece of Iron by a Loadstone,
than by the earth; insomuch as a Loadstone suspended, at convenient distance,
in the aer, does easily elevate a proportionate mass of Iron from the earth*
because this gradual Disparity proceeds only from hence, that the Attractive
Virtue is much more Collected or United in the Loadstone, and so is so much
more intense and vigorous according to its Dimensions, than in the Earth, in
which it is more diffused; nor does it discover how great i^ is in the ^ingle
or divided parts, but in the Whole of the Earth. Thus, if you lay but one Grain
of salt upon your tongue, it shall affect the same with more saltness, than a
Gallon of Seawater: not that there is less of salt in that great quantity of
Sea Water, but that the salt is therein more diffused. Art. 21 A ^ifth
Argument, almost Ap^^ictica^^; that Gravity (...) the Effect (...) the Earth
^^^^raction.


But to lay aside the Loadstone and its Correlative, Iron, and come to our
taste and Incomparative Argument; since the Velocity of the motion of a stone
falling downward, is gradually augmented, and by the accession of new degrees
of Gravity, grows greater and greater in each degree of its Descen^ (...) that
Augmentation, or Accession of Gravity, and so of Veloc^^^* seems no^ so
reasonably adscriptive to any other cause, as to this, that it is the
Attraction of the Earth increasing in each degree of the stones Appropinquation
to the Earth, by reason of the greater Density or Union of its Magnetique
Rays: What can be more (...) than that the First degree of Gravity, belonging
to a stone no^ (...) moved, should arise to it from the same Attraction of the
(...) When, doubtless, it is one and the same Gravity that causes both those
Effects; the same in Specie, though not in Grad^^: (...) no Quality can be
better intended, or augmented, than by an Accession of more Degrees of force
from the same Quality.

SECT. III.
LAstly* as concerning LEVITY, which is vulgarly reputed the (...) Gravity,
Art. 1. ^word nothing (...)
and by Aristotle defined to be a Quality inhaerent in (...) Bodies* whereby
they spontaneously tend upward; we understand it to be nothing a less Gravity:
and so that Gravity and (...) are Qualities of Concretions, not Positive, or
Absolute* but (...) Comparative, or Respective. For, the same Body man be (...)
be Heavy, in respect to another that is Lighter; and Light* (...) to another
that is Heavier. For Example, let us compare a Stone* Water, Oil, and Fire
(which we have formerly annumerated (...) Terrene Concretions) one to another;
to the end that our (...) may be both illustrated and confirmed at once. Water*
we (...) being poured into a ves^el, immediately descends to the bottom (...)
and if permitted to settle, does soon acquiesce: but* upon (...) ^ropping of
Stone into the same vessel, as the Stone descends* (...) Water ascends
proportionately to give it room at the bottom. And Oil, infused into a vessel
alone, does likewise instantly (...) and remains quiet at the bottom thereof:
but, if Water be poure^ ^^ereupon* the oil soon ascends, and floats on the
surface of the Water. If the Vessel be repleat only with Aer, the Aer (...)
therein: but when you pour oil into it, the Aer instantly as^ends, and
resignes to the oil. Lastly, thus Fire would be ^mmediately incumbent upon the
surface of the Earth, and there (...); but that the Aer, being circumstant
about the superfice (...) the Terrestria^ Globe, and the more weighty body of
the two (...) extrude it thence by depressure, and so impell ^t upwards (...)
make room for it self beneath. And thus are all these bodies (...) and Light,
Comparatively or Respectively. The (...) all is the Stone, as being the most
strongly attracted (...) Earth: or, is the least Light among them all, as being
(...) abduced from the Earth. And, Water, which is Light, (...) of the Stone,
is yet* Heavy in compa^^son of Oil: (...) seu fumum rapi in sublime, and
extrudi suum extra locum, ideoque statim langues^^re tanquam confessa causa
violentiae, quae terrestri materiae illata fuit^ quapropter Levitatem non dari,
aut non esse Connaturalem hisce corporiubs. Conclude also, with Us; that in the
Earth indeed, there are Direct Motions Upward and Downward: but those Motions
are proper only to the Parts (as Gravity and Levity are likewise proper only to
the Parts) not to the Whole, or Globe of the Earth.

CHAP. XII. HEAT and COLD.
SECT. I.
THe Genealogy of those sensible Qualities of Concretions which arise from
either of the three Essential Proprieties of Atoms, Art. 1. The Connection of
this to the immediately precedent Chapter.
in its Single capacity, thus far extending it self; here begins that other of
those, which result from any Two, or All of the same Proprieties, in their
several Combinations, or Associations.

Of this order, Art. 2. Why the Author deduceth the 4 First Qualities, not from
the 4 vulgar Elements; but from the. 3 Proprieties of Atoms.
the First are Heat, Cold, Humidity, Siccity; which though the Schools,
building on the fundamentals of their Dictator, Aristotle, derive immediately
and solely from the 4 First Qualities of the vulgar Elements, Fire, Aer, Water,
Earth; yet, because those reputed Elements are but several Compositions of the
Universal matter, and so must desume their respective Qualities from the
consociated Proprieties of the same; and because the original of no one of
those Qualities can be so intelligibly made out from any other Principles:
therefore does our reason oblige us, to deduce them only from the Magnitude,
Figure, and Motion of Atoms.

Concerning the First of this Quaternary, HEAT; we well know, Art. 3. The
Nature of Heat is to be conceived from its General Effect; viz. the
Penetration, Discussion, and Dissolution of Bodies concrete.
that it is commonly conceived and defined by that relation, it bears to the
sense of touching in Animals; or, as it is the Efficient of that passion, or
Acute Pain, as Plato (in Timaeo) calls it, which Fire, or immoderate Heat
impresseth upon the skin, or other organ of touching; yet, forasmuch as this
Effect, which it causes in the sensient part of an Animal, is only special and
Relative; therefore ought we to understand its Nature, from some General and
Absolute Effect, upon which that Special and Relative one depends, and that is
the Penetration, Discussion and Dissolution of Concretions.

Art. 4. Heat defined as no Immaterial, but a (...)
To come therefore to the Determination of its Essence, by the explanation of
its Original; by Heat, as from our praecedent Disquisition of the Origin of
Qualities in General may be praesumed, we do not understand any Aristolet^^^,
i. e. naked or Immaterial Quality, altogether abstract from matter: but certain
Particles of matter, or Atoms, which being essentially endowed with such a
determinate Magnitude, such a certain Figure, and such a (...) Motion, are
comparated to insinuate themselves into Concrete Bodies, to penetrate them,
dissociate their parts, and dissolve their Contextur (...) to produce all thus
mutations in them, which are commonly (...) Heat, or Fire. Not that we gainsay,
but Heat may be considered (...), or as it is a certain peculiar Manner,
without which a substanc^ (...) which sense Anaximene^ (apud Plutarch, de (...)
allowed to have spoken tollerably, when he said, (...) substantial, but affirm
only, that it is not (...) independent upon matter ^as most have (...) (...)
ought else, in Reality, but Atoms themselves, (...) Concretions; so of all
their Faculties (...) Motion, so all Action ought to be imputed.

^
(...) from which we derive this noble and most (...) be not Hot essentially;
yet do they deserve the (...) of Heat, or Calorifick Atoms, insomuch as they
have (...) to Create Heat, i. e. cause that Effect, which consists (...)
Discussion, Exsolution. Likewise, those Bodies which (...) such Atoms, and may
emit them from themselves; ought also to be (...) Hot, insomuch as that by the
emission of their Calorifick (...) empowered to produce Heat in other bodies:
and (...) Actually emit them, i. e. give their Calorifick Atoms liberty (...)
Motions, after exsilition; then may they be (...) or Formally Hot, as the
Schools phrase it; but which (...) them within themselves, and hinder their
exsilition, they are (...) To the First of these Difference^, we are to refer
(...) Second, not only all those things, which Physicians call (...) such as
Wine, Euphorlium, Peper, etc. but (...), combustion, incalescence and the (...)
(...) objected, such as Wood, Resine, Wax, (...) be conceived to contain
igneous or Calorifick (...) or imprisonment in Concretions, (...) so not
produce Heat; but immediately (...), or emption, they manifest their nature
(...).

^
(...) What kind of Atoms these Calorifick ones are, and (...) Heat depends;
Democritus, Epicurus, (...) Atomists unanimously tell us, that they are Exile
in (...) in Figure, most Swift in Motion. And this upon (...) That they must be
most Exile in bulk, is (...) that no Concretion can be so compact and solid,
(...) find some pores or small inlets, whereat to insinuate (...) of it, and
penetrate through its substance; (...) a number, as is required, to the total
dissolution of its Contexture, as in the Adamant, which as Naturalists affirm,
no Fire can demolish or dissolve. (2.) That they ought to be Spherical in
Figure, is probable, yea necessary from hence; that of all others they are most
Agile, and evolve themselves quoquoversum, on all parts of the Concretion, into
which they are admitted. And Geometry teaches, that no figure is so easily
moved, as a Sphere, whether naturally, or violently. First, Naturally; because,
by how much nearer to a Sphere the figure of any solid body approaches, by so
much the more speedily does it descend, as is observed of globular stones in
Water: and a round stone rowles it self farther and swifter down hill, than a
plane or angular one. Secondly, Violently, because a globular stone may be
projected much farther, than one of any other figure. This is also evident in
the Motion of Volutation; so that the line of direction to the Center of the
World (if any such there be) consisting in the axis of the Globe, the motion of
it is most hardly refracted and arrested. For, there are 3 points, through
which the direct imaginary line, in which alone a Globe can quiesce, must pass,
viz. the Center of the World, the Center of Gravity in the Globe, and the point
of Contact: and if either of these 3 be without, or beside the line of quiet, a
Globe once moved shall never rest, but be continually moved, until all the 3
points be in the line of direction. Furthermore, how easy it is to impel^ a
Globe, is demonstrable merely from hence, that being posited upon a perfect
plane, it can touch the same but only in one point; and so relying upon that
point, may most easily be deturbed from that slender support; but in all other
Figures the reason of innixion or Relying, is quite contrary. Lastly, as a
sphere does most easily admit an impressed motion; so does it longest retain the
same, most violently press upon other occurring bodies, and most equally
dispense its conceived force; as has been profoundly demonstrated by Magnenus
(in theoricae militaris lib. 1. theorem. 4. and 5) (3) And that they must be
also superlatively swift in motion, may be argued not only a posteriori, from
the impetuous discussion and separation of the particles of bodies by them, and
their uncessant aestuation among themselves arietating each other: but also a
Priori, because, being spherical, they are most mobile. Thus much, at least in
importance, we have from Philoponus (in 1 physic.) where he says, Sphaericus
Atomos, tanquam facillime mobiles, esse Cal^ris, ignisque caussas; quatenus
enim sunt facile mobiles, dividunt, sub^^mque velocius: id quippe ignis
proprium est, and dividere, and moveri facile posse. And albeit Plato would not
have the Atoms of Fire to be spherical, but Pyramidal; because having most
exile points, slender angles; and acute sides, they might be more accommodate
for Penetration or su^ingression: yet, to the Division or Cutting of bodies, He
requires (...). the Exiquity of particles, and celerity of Motion. So that the
Patrons of Atoms praesuming the Calorifick Atoms to be extremely Exile, i. e as
small as Plato supposes the points and angles of his Pyramids to be: we do not
perceive any considerable difference betwixt their opinion and his. But before
we take off our pen from this subject, we are to advertise; that indeed all
Atoms, of their own nature, are inexcogitably swift; and so that our assertion
of the superlative Velocity of Calorifick Atoms, does appertain only to Atoms
as they are in Concretions, where their native Velocity and Agility is retarded
and diminished by reciprocal cohaerence and revinction. And, therefore, seeing
that all Atoms, agitated by their essential mobility, are in perpetual attempt
to extricate themselves from Concretions, that so they may attain their
primitive freedom of motion; that none can so soon extricate and disengage
themselves; as those that are spherical; because such cannot be impeded by the
small hooks, or angles of others. Cum enim sphaera ^mnibus angulis careat,
nihil hamati, aut retinentis offendet, facile permeabit, and quoquoversus ad
naturae penetrabit instituta, dividet instar cunei, and (quod nulli alteri
figurae conting^t) contactu puncti labefaciens planum, statim amplo sinu sibi
viam facit, cum nihil habet angulosi, quo possit detineri; quod ejus activitati
necessarium suit: says Magnenus (de Atom. lib. 2 cap. 3.) As also, that we
speak the Dialect of Democritus, when we call these Calorifick Atoms, sometimes
the Atoms of Heat, sometimes the Atoms of Fire, indiscriminately; because Heat
and Fire know none but a Gradual Difference; at least, because Heat, in a
General sense, implies all degrees, and Fire, in a Special, the highest degree
of Heat; Aristotle himself (1 Meteor. 3) excellently defining Heat to be
nothing else, but Caloris Hyperbole, the Excess of Heat.

Art. 7. That the Atoms of Heat are capable of Expedition or deliverance from
Concretions. Two ways; viz. by Ev^cation and Motion.
The Proprieties, or requisite Conditions of these Calorifick Atoms, being thus
explored; our next Enquiry must be concerning the Manner of their Emancipation,
or Expedition from the fetters of Concretions. We observe, therefore, that the
Atoms of Fire, imprisoned in Concretions, have Two ways of attaining liberty.
(1.) By Evocation, or the Assistance of other Atoms of the same nature; when
such invading and insinuating themselves into the centrals of a body, do so
dissociate its particles, as that dissolving the impediments or chains of the
igneous Atoms therein contained, they not only give them an opportunity, but in
a manner solicit them to extricate themselves. And by this way do the Atoms
of Fire, included in Wood, Wax, Turpentine, Oil, and all other Inflammable
Concretions, extricate themselves, when they are set on fire; the sparks or
flame, wherewith they are accensed, penetrating their contexture, and removing
the remoraes, which detained and impeded their internal Atoms of Fire, and
exciting them to Emption: Which thereupon issue forth in swarms, and with the
violence of their exsilition drive before them, in the appearance (...)
fuliginous* Exhalations or smoke, those dissimilar particles, which suppressed
and incarcerated them, during the integrity of the Concretion. (2.) By Motion,
or Concussion; and that either Intestine, or External. First, Intestine; when,
after many evolutions, the igneous Atoms, included in a Body, do of themselves
dissociate and discuss those heterogeneous masses, wherein they were
imprisoned: Which they chiefly effect, when after some of them have by
spontaneous motion attained their freedom, if any thing be circumstant, which
has the power of repelling them, as (...); for, in that case, returning again
into the centrals of the body, from whence they came; and so associating with
their fellows, promote the discussion of the remaining impediments, and concur
to a general Emption. From this Motion arises that Heat, or Fire, which is
vulgarly ascribed to the Antiperistasis, or Circumobsistence of Cold; as, for
Example, when a heap of new Corn, or Mow of green Hay, being kept too close,
during the time of its fermentation, or sweating (as our Husbandmen (...), sets
it self on fire: the cold of the ambient aer, repelling the Atoms of (...)
which otherwise would expire insensibly) back again into it; and so causing
them to unite to their fellows: and upon that consociation they suddenly
engage in a general cumbustion, and dissolving all impediments, (...) their
liberty. Hence also proceed all those Heats, which are observed in
Fermentation, Putrefaction and all other intestine Commotions and Mutations of
Bodies.

Hither likewise would we refer that so generally believed Phenomenon, the
Warmness of Fountains, Cellars, Mines, and all subterraneous Fosses, in Winter:
but that we conceive it not only superfluous, but also of evil consequence in
Physiology, to consign a Cause, where we have good reason to doubt the verity
of the Effect. For, if we strictly examine the ground of that common Assertion,
we shall find it to consist only in a misinformation of our sense; i. e. though
Springs, Wells, Caves, and all subterraneous places are really as Cold in
Winter, as Summer; yet do we apprehend them to be warm: because we suppose that
we bring the organs of the sense of Touching alike disposed in Winter and
Summer, not considering that the same thing does appear Cold to a hot, and warm
to a Cold hand, nor observing, that oil will be conglaciated, in Winter, in
subterraneous Cells, which yet appear warm to those, who enter them, but not in
Summer, when yet they appear Cold. Secondly, by Motion External, when a Saw
grows Hot, by continual affriction against wood, or stone; or when fire is
kindled by the long and hard affriction of 2 dry sticks, etc. This is manifest
even from hence, that unless the bodies agitated, or rubbed against each other,
are such as contain igneous Atoms in them; no motion, however lasting and
violent, can excite the least degree of Heat in them. For, Water agitated most
continently and violently, never conceives the lest warmth: because it is
wholly destitute of Calorifick Atoms. Lastly, as for the Heat, excited in a
body, upon the Motion of its Whole, whether it be moved by it self, or some
External movent; of this sort is that Heat, of which motion is commonly
affirmed to be the sole Cause: as when an Animal grows hot with running, etc.
and a Bullet acquires heat in flying, etc. And thus much concerning the manner
of Emancipation of our Calorifick Atoms.

The next thing considerable, is their peculiar Seminary or Conservatory; Art.
8. An Vn^ra^us matter, the chief Seminary of the Atoms of Heat: and why.
concerning which it may be observed, that the Atoms of Fire cannot, in regard
of their extreme Exility, sphaerical Figure, and velocity of motion, be in any
but an Unctuous and viscous matter, such whose other Atoms are more hamous, and
reciprocally cohaerent, than to be dissociated easily by the intestine motions
of the Calorifick Atoms; so that some greater force is required to the
dissolution of that unctuousness and tenacity, whereby they mutually cohaere.
And hereupon we may safely conclude, that an Unctuous substance is as it were
the chief, nay the sole Matrix or Seminary of Fire or Heat; and that such
Bodies only, as are capable of incalescence and inflammation, must contain
somewhat of Fatness and unctuo^ity in them. Sometimes, we confess, it is
observed, that Concretions, which have no such Unctuosity at all in them, as
Water, are Hot, but yet we cannot allow them to be properly said to wax Hot,
but to be made Hot; because the principle of that their Heat is not Internal to
them, but External or Ascititious. For instance; when Fire is put under a
vessel of Water, the small bodies, or particles of Fire by degrees insinuate
themselves through the pores of the vessel into the substance of the Water, and
diffuse themselves throughout the same; though not so totally, at first, as not
to leave, the major part of the particles of the Water untoucht: to which other
igneous Atoms successively admix themselves, as the water grows hotter and
(...). And evident it is, how small a time the Water does kee^ ^ts acquired
heat, when once removed from the fire: because, the ^toms of Heat being merely
Adventitious to it, they spontaneousl^ (...) it one after another, and leave
it, as they found it, Cold only (...) Alteration* they cause therein, that they
diminish the Quantity the (...)* insomuch as successively as^ending into the
aer, they carry along (...) them the more tenuious and moveable particles of
the Water, in (...) ^pparence of vapors, which are nothing but Water Diffused,
(...).

A^^. ^. Among ^nctuou^ Concre^^ons. Wh^ some ar^ more ^asily inflammabl^ than
others*
Bu^, (...) we affirm* that only Unctuous Bodies are Inflammable* be g^^^rally
true* whence comes it, that amongst Unctuous and (...), some more easily take
fire* than others? The (...) is this* that the Atoms of Fire, incarcerated, in
^ome (...)* are not so deeply immerst in, nor so oppressed and (...) other
Heterogenous particles of matter, as in others* (...) the l^berty of Eruption
much more easily. Thus (...) kindled, than Green* because, in the green* the
A^ueous (...), surrounding and oppressing the Atoms of Fire therein containe^
(...) first t^ be discussed and attenuated into vapors: but, in the (...)
time* b^ the mediation of the warmth in the ambient ae^* has (...) that
luxuriant moisture, so that none but the (...)* o^ un^tuous part, wherein the
Atoms of Fire have their (...), remains to be discussed; which done, the Atoms
of (...) issue forth in swarms, and discover themselves in (...) spirit of Wine
is so much the sooner inflammable, by how much (...) more pure and defaecated
it is; because the igneous Atoms (...) concluded, are delivered from the
greater part of that (...) humidity, wherewith they were formerly ^urrounded
(...)* On the contrary, a stone is not made Combustib^e (...) great ^^fficulty*
because the substance of it is so compact, as (...) Unctuous humidity is long
in discussion. We ^ay, a Stone (...), or Arenaceous one, because such is
destitute of all (...), and so of all igneous particles: but, a Limestone,
(...) capable of reduction to a Calx: or a Flint out of which by (...) against
steel, are excussed many small fragments, plentifully (...) Atoms of Fire.

^
The (...) and Origin of Heat being thus fully explicated, according (...) most
ver^imilous Principles of Democritus, Epicurus, and their (...), that we
progress to those Porifmata or (...), which from thence result to our
observation; and the (...) some most considerable Problems, retaining to the
same (...), suc^ especially as have hitherto eluded the folutive (...) any
other Hypothesis, but what we have here (...).

(...), as the Atoms of Heat, which are always (...) ^nctuous Matter, do, upon
the acquisition of (...) ^orth with violence, and insinuating themselves into
Bodies, which they meet withal, and totally pervading them, dissociate their
particles, and dissolve their Compage or Contexture. Hence is it manifest, that
Rarefa^tion, or Dilatation is upon good reason accounted the proper Effect of
Heat; since those parts of a body, which are Conjoined, cannot be Disjoined,
but they must instantly possess a greater part of space (understand us in that
strict sense, which we kept our selves to, in our Discourse of Rarefaction and
Condensation) than before. Hence come^ it, that Water in boiling, seems so to
be increased, that what, when cold, filled scarce half the Caldron, in
ebullition cannot be contained in the whole, but swells over the brim thereof.
Hence is it also, that all bodi^^ attenuated into Fume, are diffused into space
an hundred, nay sometimes a thousand degrees larger than what they possessed
before.

From this Consectary we arrive at some Problems, Art. 11. PROBLEM 1. Why the
^otto^ of a Cald^^n, wherein Water is boiling, may be touched by the hand of a
man* without burning (...).
which stand directly in our way to another; and the First is that Vulgar one,
Why the bottom of a Caldron, wherein Water, or any other Liquor is boiling, is
but moderately warm, at most not so hot, as to burn a man's hand applied thereto?

The Cause of this culinary Wonder (...) our Housewifes account it) seems to be
this; when the Atoms of He^t, passing through the pores in the bottom of the
Caldron into the water, do ascend through it, they elevate and carry along with
them some particles thereof: and at the same time, other particles of Water,
next adjacent to them, sink down, and instantly flow into the places deserted
by the former, which ascended, and insinuate themselves into the now laxarated
pores in the bottom of the caldron. And though these are soon repelled upwards
by other Atoms of Fire ascending through the pores of the Vessel^, and carried
upwards, as the former, yet are there other particles of Water, which sinking
down, insinuate also into the open pores of the vessel, and by their confl^x or
downward motion, much refract the violence of the subingredient Atoms of Fire:
and so, by this ^^ciffitude of Heat and Moisture, it comes to pass, that the
Heat cannot be diffused throughout the bottom of the Caldron, the Humidity
(which falls into the pores of it in the same proportion, as the Heat passes
through them) hindering the possession of all ^ts empty spaces by the invading
Atoms of Fire. Nor does it avail to the contrary, that the Water which
insinuates into the pores of the vessel, is made Hot, and so must calefie the
same, in some proportion, as well as the Fire underneath it; because boiling
Water poured unto (...) Caldron, does more than warm it: For, those particles
of Water, which successively enter into the void spaces of the vessel^, are
such as have not yet been penetrated per ^i^imas, by the A^^ms of Fire. For,
all the cold, formerly entered into the water, ^s not at once ^iscussed, though
the Water be in boiling; the (...) arising ^nly from the cohaerence of the
calefied with the (...) particles of the Water. And from the same Cause ^s ^t,
that a sheet of the thinne^t Venice Paper* if so (...) hold Oil infused into
(...) does endure the (...) Which some Cooks observing, use to fry Bacon upon a
sheet of Paper only.

Secondly, Why does Lime acquire an Heat and great Ebullition upon the affusion
of Water? Art. 12. PROBLEM 2. Why Lime becomes ardent upon the affusion of
Water. ^ol.
since, if our praecedent Assertion be true, the Heat included in the Lime
ought to be suppressed so much the more, by how much the more Aqueous Humidity is
admixt unto it.

This Difficulty is discussed by Answering; that the Aqueous Humidity of the
Limestone is indeed wholly evaporated by fire in its calcination; but yet the
Pingous, or Unctuous for the most part remains, so that its Atoms of Fire lie
still blended and incarcerated therein: and when those expede themselves, and
by degrees expire into the ambient aer, if they be impeded and repelled by
water affused, they recoyle upon the grumous masses of the Lime, and by the
Circumobsistence of the Humidity, become more congregated; and so upon the
uniting of their forces make way for the Exsilition of the other Atoms of Fire,
which otherwise could not have attained their liberty but slowly and by
succession one after another. So that all the Atoms of Fire contained in the
Lime, issuing forth together, they break through the water, calefie it, and
make it bubble or boil up; the calefied parts thereof being yet cohaerent to
the uncalefied.

Art. 13. PROBLEM 3. Why the Heat of Lime burning is more vehement, than the
Heat of any Flame whatever. Sol.
The Third Problem is, Why the Heat of Lime, kindled by Water is more intense
than that of any Flame whatever?

Answer, that forasmuch as Flame is nothing but Fire Rarefied, or as it were an
Explication, or Diffusion of those Atoms of Fire, which were lately ambuscadoed
in some Unctuous matter; and that all Fire is so much more intense or vehement,
by how much more Dense it is, i. e. by how much the more congregated the Atoms
which constitute it are: therefore is the Heat of Lime unslaking more vehement
than that of any Flame, in regard the smallest grains of Lime contain in them
many Atoms of Fire, which are not so diffused or disgregated in a moment, as
those in Flame. So that a man's hand being waved to and fro in Flame, is invaded
by incomrably fewer particles of Fire, than when it is dipped into, or waved
through water at the unslaking of Lime thereby; the small granes of Lime
adhaering unto, and insinuating into the pores of the hand, the many Atoms of
fire invelloped in them, incontinently explicate themselves, violently
penetrate and dilacerate the skin, and other sentient parts, and so produce
that Pungent and Acute pain, which is felt in all Ambustions. From the same
Reason also is it, that a glowing Coal burns more vehemently than Flame: and
the Coals of more solid wood, as Juniper, Cedar, Guaiacum, Ebony, Oak, etc.
more vehemently than those of Looser wood, such as Willow, Elder, Pine tree,
etc. The like Disproportion is observable also in the Flames of diverse Fewels;
for in the flame of Juniper are contained far more Igneous Atoms, than in that
of Willow: and consequently they burn so much more vehemently. True it is, that
spirit of Wine enflamed, is so much more Ardent, by how much more refined and
cohobated: yet this proceeds from another Cause; viz. that the Atoms of Fire
issuing from spirit of Wine of the first Extraction, have much of the
Phletegme, or Aqueous moisture of the Wine intermixed among them; and so cannot
be alleged as an Example that impugne's our Reason of the Different Heats of
several Flames.

The Fourth, is that Vulgar Quaere, Art. 14. PROBLEM 4* Why boiling Oil scalds
more vehemently, then boiling Water* Sol.
Why boiling Oil does scald more dangerously, than boiling Water?

To which it is easily Answered; that Oil, being of an Unctuous and Tenacious
consistence, and so having its particles more firmly cohaerent, than Water,
does not permit the Atoms of Fire entered into it, so easily to transpire: so
that being more agminous, or swarming in oil, they must invade, and dilacerate
the hand of a man, immersed into it, both more thickly and deeply, than those
more Dispersed ones contained in boiling Water. Which is also the Reason, why
Oil made fervent is much longer in cooling, than Water: and may be extended to
the Solution of the

Fifth Problem, viz. Wherefore do Metals, especially Gold, Art. 15. PROBLEM 5*
Why Metals, melted or made red hot, burn more violent than the Fire, that
melts or heateth them. Sol.
when melted, or made glowing hot, burn more violently, than the Fire that
melts, or heateth them; especially, since no Atoms of Fire can justly be
affirmed to be lodged in them, as in their proper seminary, and so not to be
educed from them, upon their Liquation, or Ignition.

For, the Heat, wherewith they procure Ambustion, being not domestic, but only
Adventitious to them from the Fire, wherein they are melted, or made red hot;
the reason why they burn so extremely, must be this, that they are exceedingly
Compact in substance, and so their particles being more tenacious or
reciprocally cohaerent, then those of wood, oil, or any other body whatever,
they more firmly keep together the Atoms of fire immitted into them: insomuch
that a man cannot touch them with his finger, but instantly it is in all points
invaded with whole swarms of igneous Atoms, and most fiercely compunged and
dilacerated. And, as for the Derasion of the skin from any part of an Animal,
immersed into melted metal; this arises partly from the total dissolution of
the tenor of the skin by the dense, and on every side compungent Atoms of
Fire; partly from the Compression and Resistance of the parts of the Metal, now
made Fluid, which are both so great, that upon the withdrawing of the member
immersed into the metal, the part which is immediately pressed upon by the
particles thereof, is detained behind, and that is the skin. Hence also is it no
longer a Problem, Why red h^t Iron sets any Combustible matter on Fire; for it
is evident, that it cannot inflame by its own substance, but by the Atoms of
Fire immitted into, and for a while retained in its Pores. And this brings us
to a

Second CONSECTARY, viz. That as the Degrees of Heat are various (Physicians,
indeed, allow only 4, Art. 16. CONSECTARY 2. That, as the degrees of Heat, so
those of fire are innumerably v^rious.
and Physiologists but double that number; the Former, in order to the more
convenient reduction of their Art to certain and established principles; the
Latter, merely in conformity to the Dictates of Aristotle: but Neither upon
absolute necessity, since it is reasonable for any man to augment their number
even above number, at pleasure) So also must the Degrees of fire be various.
For, since Fire, even according to Aristotle is only the Excess of Heat, or
Heat increased to that height, as to Burn, or Inflame a thing; if we begin at
the gentle Meteor called Ignis Fatuus (which lighting upon a man's hand, and a
good while adhereing thereto, does hardly warm it) or at the fire of the purest
spirit of Wine enflamed (which also is very languid, for it is frequent among
the Irish, for a Cure of their Endemious Fluxes of the belly, to swallow down
small balls of Cotton, steept in spirit of wine, and set on fire, and that many
times with good success.) We say, if we begin from either of these weak Fires,
and run through all the intermediate ones, to that of melted Gold, which all
men acknowledge to be the Highest: we shall soon be convinced, that the Degrees
of Fire are so various, as to arise even to innumerability.

Art. 17. That to the Calefaction, Combustion, or Inflammation of a body by
fire* is required a certain space of time; and that the space is greater or
less, according to the paucity, or abundance of the igneous Atoms invading the
body objected; and more or less of aptitude in the contexture thereof to admit
them.
Most true it is, in the General, that every Fire is so much the more intense,
by how much more numerous, or agminous the Atoms of Fire are, that make it:
yet, if we regard only the Effect, there must be allowed a convenient space of
time, for the requisite motion of those Atoms, and a supply of fresh ones
successively to invade and penetrate the thing to be burned or enflamed. For,
since the Igneous Atoms, exsilient from their involucrum, or seminary, and
invading the extrems of a body objected to them, are subject to easy
Repercussion, or (rather) Resilition from it; therefore, to the Calefaction,
Adustion, or Inflammation of a body, it is not sufficient, that the body be
only moved along by, or over the Fire: but it must be held near* or in it, so
long as till the first invading Igneous Atoms, which otherwise would recoyle
from it, be impelled on, and driven into the pores of the same, by streams of
other Igneous Atoms contiguously, succeeding and pressing upon them. And,
however the space of time, be almost in assignably short, in which the finger
of a man, touching a glowing Coal, or melted metal, is burned; because, the
Atoms of Fire are therein exceeding Dense and Agminous, and so penetrate the
skin, in all points: yet nevertheless common observation assures, that in the
General a certain space of time is necessary to the Effect of Calefaction or
Ambustion; and that so much the Longer, by how much the Fewer, or more
Disgregated the Igneous Atoms are, either in the Body Calefying, or the Aer
conterminous thereto. And this (as formerly) to the end, that the Motion of the
Igneous Atoms first assaulting the object may be continued, and a supply of
fresh ones, promoting and impelling the former, be afforded from the Focus, or
Seminary. Hence is it, that a man's hand may be frequently Waved to and fro in
Flame, without burning; because the Atoms of Fire, which invade it, are
repercussed, and not by a continued aflux of others driven foreward into its
pores, the motion of his hand preventing the Continuity of their Fluor: but, if
his hand be held still in the flame, though but a very short time, it must be
burned; because the first invading Atoms of Fire are impelled on by others, and
those again by others, in a continent fluor, so that their Motion is continued,
and a constant supply maintained. Hence comes it also, that no Metal can be
molten only by a Flash, or transient touch of the Fire (for, we are not yet
fully satisfied of the verity of that vulgar tradition, of the instantaneous
melting of money in a purse, or of a sword blade in its sheath, by Lightning:
and if we were, yet could we assign that prodigious Effect to some more
probable Cause; viz. the impetuosity of the motion, and the exceeding
Coarctation of those Atoms of Fire, of which that peculiar species of Lightning
does consist) but it must be so long held in, or over the Fire, as until the
Igneous Atoms have totally pervaded its contexture, and dissociated all its
particles: and therefore, so much the longer stay in the fire does every Metal
require to its Fusion; by how much the more Compact and Tenacious its particles
are.

As the Degrees of Fire are various, Art. 18. Flame more or less Durable, for
various respects.
as to the more and less of Vehemence, respective to the more and less Density,
or Congregation of the Igneous Atoms: So likewise is there a considerably
variety among Flames, as to the more and less of Duration. Concerning the
Causes, therefore of this Variety, in the General, we briefly observe; that
Flame has its Greater or Less Duration, respective to the

(1.) Various Materials, or Bodies inflammable. For, such Bodies, as have a
greater Aversion to inflammation, being commixt with others, that are easily
inflammable, make their flame less Durable; as Bay Salt, dissolved in spirit of
Wine, shortens the duration of its flame, by almost a third part, as the Lord
Bacon affirms upon exact experiment ( Not. Hist. cent. 4.) and contrariwise,
such as approach nearer to an affinity with fire, i. e have much of
Unctuousness, and plenty of igneous Atoms concealed therein, yield the most
lasting Flames; as Oil and Spirit of Wine commixt in due proportions; and
spirit of Salt, to a tenth part, commixt with Oil Olive, makes it burn twice
as long in a Lamp, as Oil alone, from whence some Chemists have promised to
make Eternal Lamps with an Oil extracted from common Salt, and the stone
Ami^nthus.

(2.) The more or less easy Attraction of its Pabulum, or Nourishment. For,
Lamps, in which the Flame draws the oil from a greater distance, always burn
much longer, than Candles, or Tapers, where the circumference of the fuel is
but small; and the broader the surface of the Oil, or Wax, wherein the Wiek is
immersed, so much the longer does the flame thereof endure; not only in regard
of the greater Quantity of Nourishment, but of its slower Calefaction, and so
of its longer Resistance to the absumptive faculty of the flame. Since it is
observed, that the Coolness of the Nourishment, does make it more slowly
consumable: as in Candles floating in water. This was experimented in that
service of our quondam English Court, called All night; which was a large Cake
of Wax, with the Wiek, set in the midst: so that the flame, being fed with
nourishment less heated before hand, as coming far off, must of necessity last
much longer, than any Wax Taper of a small circumference.

(3) Various Conditions of the same Materials. For, Old and Hard Candles,
whether of Wax, or Tallowe, maintain flame much longer than New, or soft. Which
good Houswives knowing, use no Candles under a year old, and such as have, for
greater induration, been laid a good while in Bran, or Flower. And, from the
same reason is it, that Wax, as being more firm and hard, admixt to Tallowe and
made up into Candles, causes them to be more lasting, then if they were
praepared of Tallowe alone.

(4.) Different Conditions, and Tempers of the ambient Aer. For, the Quiet and
Closeness of the Aer, wherein a Taper burns, much conduces to the
prolongation of its flame: and contrariwise, the Agitation thereof, by winds,
or fanning, conduces as much to the shortning of it: insomuch as the motion of
flame makes it more greedily attract, and more speedily devour its sustenance.
Thus a Candle lasts much longer in a Lantern, than at large in a spacious
room. Which also might be assigned as one Cause of the long Duration of those
subterranean Lamps, such as have been found (if credit be due to the tradition
of Bapt. Porta, (lib. 12. Magiae natural. cap. ultim.) Hermolaus Barbarus (in
lib. 5. Dio cap. 11.) and Cedrenus Histor. Compend.) All which most confidently
avouch it, upon authentic testimonies.) in the Urns of many Noble Romans,
many hundreds of years after their Funerals. Here should our Reader bid us
stand, and deliver him our positive judgment, upon this stupendous Rarity,
which has been uged by some Laureat Antiquaries, as a chief Argument of the
transcendency of the Ancients Knowledge as in all Arts, so in the admirable
secrets of Pyrotechny, above that of Later Ages; as we durst not be so
uncharitable, to quaestion the Veracity of either the Inventors, or Reporters
of it: so should we not be so uncivil, as not to relieve his Curiosity, at
least with a short story, that may light Him toward farther satisfaction. A
certain Chemist there was, not many years since, who having decocted Litharge
of Gold, Tartar, Cinnaber, and Calx vive, in spirit of Vinegre, until the
Vinegre was wholly evaporated; closely covering and luting up the earthen
vessel, wherein the Decoction was made, buried it deeply in a dry Earth, for 7
months together (in order to more speedy maturation, expected from the
Antiperistasis of Cold) came at length to observe what became of his
Composition: and opening the vessel, observed a certain bright Flame to issue
from thence, and that so vehement, as it fired the hair of his eyebrowes and
head. Now, having furnished our Reader with this faithful Narrative; we leave
it to his own determination: Whether it be not more probable, that those
Coruscations, or Flashes of Light, perceived to issue from Vials of Earth,
found in the demolisht sepulchers of the Great Olybius, and some eminent
Romans, at the instant of their breaking up by the spade, or pickaxe; did
proceed rather from some such Chemical Mixture, as this of our Chemist (who
acquired Light by the hazard of Blindness) which is of that nature as to be in
a moment kindled, and yield a shortlived flame, upon the intromission of Aer
into the vessel, wherein it is contained; than from any Fuel, that is so
slowly Absumable by Fire, as to maintain a constant Flame, for many hundred
years together, without extinction, and that in so small a vial, as the Fume
must needs recoyle and soon suffocate the Flame. But we return from our
Digression, and directly pursue our embost Argument. It much imports the
greater and less Continuance of Flame, whether the Aer be Warm, or Cold, Dry or
Mo^st. For Cold Aer irritateth flame, by Circumobsistence, and causes it burn
more fiercely, and so less durably; as is manifest from hence, that Fire
scorcheth in frosty weather: but Warm Aer, by making flame more calm and
gentle, and so more sparing of its nourishment, much helps the Continuance of
it. If Moist, because it impedeth the motion of the igneous Atoms, and so in
some degree quenches flame, at least, makes it burn more dimly and dully; it
must of necessity advance the Duration of flame: and contrariwise, Dry Aer,
merely as dry, produces Contrary Effect, though not in the same proportion;
nay so little, that some Naturalists have concluded the Dryness of Aer to be
only indifferent, as to the Duration of Flame.

And now we are arrived at our Third and Last CONSECTARY; Art. 19. CONSECTARY
3. That the immediate and genuine Effect of Heat, is the Disgregation of all
bodies, as well Homogeneous, as Heterogenous: and that the Congregation of
Homogeneous Natures, is only an Accidental ^ff^ct of H^a^; contrary to
Aristotle.
That the immediate and genuine Effect of Heat, is Disgregation* or Separation:
and that it is only by Accident that Heat does Congregate Homogeneous natures.
To argue by the most familiar way of Instance; when Heat has dissolved a piece
of Ice, consisting of water, earth, and perhaps of gravel and many small
Festucous bodies commixt; the Earth, Sand and other Terrene parts sink down
and convene together at the bottom, the water returns to its native fluidity,
and possesses the middle region of the Continent, and the strawes swim on the
surface of the water: not that it is essential to the Heat so to dispose them;
but essential to them, being dissociated and so at liberty, each to take it
proper place, according to the several degrees of their Gravity. Thus also,
when a Mass of various Metals is melted by Fire, each metal, indeed, takes it
proper region in the Crucible, or fusory vessel: but yet the Congregation of
the Homogeneous particles of each particular Metal, is not immediately caused,
but only occasioned, i. e. Accidentally brought to pass by the Disgregation or
praecedent separation of the particles of the whole Heterogeneous Concretion,
by heat. Again, the Energy of every Cause in Nature cease, upon the
production of its perfect Effect; but the Effect of Heat cease not, when the
Homogenieties of the mass of Ice, or Metal, are Congregated, but continues the
same after, as before, i. e. to Dissolve the compage of the Metal, or Ice, and
Dissociate all the particles thereof: for, so long as the Heat is continued, so
long do the Ice and Metal remain Dissolved and Fluid. This considered, what
shall we say to Aristotle, who makes it the Essential Attribute of Heat,
Congregare Homogenea, to Congregate Homogeneous Bodies. Truly, rather then
openly convict so great a Votary to truth of so palpable an Error; we should
gladly become his Compurgator, and palliate his mistake with an indulgent
comment; that in his Definition of Heat, to be a Quality genuinely Congregative
of Homogeneous natures, He had his eye, not upon the General Effect of Heat
(which He could not but observe, to Disgregate the particles of all things,
as well Homogeneous, as Heterogeneous.) but upon some special Effect of it upon
some particular Concretions, such as are Compounded of parts of Diverse natures,
as Wood and all Combustible bodies Concerning which, indeed, His Assertion is
thus far justifiable, that the whole Body is so dissolved by fire, as that the
Dissimilar parts of it are perfectly sequestered each from other, and every one
attains it proper place; the Aereal part ascending and associating with the
Aer, the Aqueous evaporating, the Igneous discovering themselves in Flame, and
the earthy remaining behind, in the form of Ashes. But alas! this favorable
Conjecture cannot excuse, nor gild over his Incogitancy; for, the Congregation
of the Homogenous particles of a Body, dissolved by Fire, in the place most
convenient to their particular Nature, arises immediately from their own
Tendency thither, or (that we may speak more like our selves, i. e. the
Disciples of Epicurus) from their respective proportions of Gravity, the more
Heavy extruding and so impelling upward the less heavy: and only Accidentally
from Heat, or as it has dissolved the caement, and so the Continuity of the
Concretion, wherein they were confusedly and promiscuously blended together. So
that Truth will not dispense with our Connivence at so dangerous a Lapse,
though in one of Her choicest Favorites; chiefly, because it has already
deluded so many of Her seekers, under the glorious title of a Fundamental
Axiom: but strictly enjoynes Us, to Conclude; that Heat, per se, or of its own
nature, is always a Disgregative Quality; and that it is of of mere Accident,
that upon the sequestration of Heterogeneities, Homogeneous Natures are
associated, rather than, e contra, that it is of mere Accident, that while Heat
Congregates Homogeneous, it should Disgregate Heterogeneous Natures, as
Aristotle most inconsiderately affirmed and taught.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. The Link connecting this Section to the former.
AS in the Course, so in the Discourse of Nature, having done with the principle
of Life, Heat, we must immediately come to the principle of Death, COLD: whose
Essence we cannot seasonably explain, before we have proved, that it has an
Essence; since many have hotly, though with but cold Arguments, contended, that
it has none at all, but is a mere Privation, or Nothing.

Art. 2. That Cold is no Privation of Heat; but a Real and Positive Quality:
demonstrated.
That Cold, therefore, is a Real Ens, and has a Positive Nature of its own, may
be thus demonstrated. (1.) Such are the proper Effects of Cold, as cannot,
without open absurdity, be ascribed to a simple Privation; since a Privation is
incapable of Action: for, Cold compingeth all Bodies, that are capable of its
efficacy, and congealeth Water into Ice, which is more than ever any man durst
assign to a privation. And, when a man thrusts his hand into cold Water, the
Cold He then feels, cannot be said to be a mere privation of the Heat of his
hand; since, his hand remains as Hot, if not hotter than before; the Calorifick
Atoms of his hand being more united, by the circumobsistence of the Cold. (2.)
All Heat does Concentre and unite it self, upon the Antiperistasis of Cold; not
from fear of a privation, because Heat is destitute of a sense of its own
being, and so of fear to lose that being; and if not, yet Nothing can have no
Contrariety, nor Activity: but, from Repulsion, as we have formerly delivered.
(3.) Though many bodies are observed to become Cold, upon the absence, or
Expiration of Heat: yet is it the intromission of the Quality contrary to Heat,
that makes them so; for, if External Cold be not introduced into their pores,
they cannot be so properly said, Frigescere, to wax Cold, as Decalescere, to
wax less Hot. Thus a stone, which is not Hot, nor Cold, unless by Accident,
being admoved to the fire, is made Hot; and removed from the fire, you cannot
(unless the ambient Aer intromit its Cold into it) so justly say, that it
grows Cold, as that it grows Less hot, or returns to its native state of
indifferency. (4.) When Water (vulgarly, though untruely praesumed to be
naturally or essentially cold) is congealed into Ice by the Cold of the aer, it
would be most shamefully absurd, to affirm, that the Cold of the Ice arises
merely from the Absence of Heat in the water; because it is the essential part
of the supposition, that the Water had no Heat before. (5.) Privation knows no
Degrees; for the Word imports the total Destitution, or Absence of somewhat
formerly had, otherwise, in rigid truth, it can be no Privation (and therefore
our common Distinction of a Partial, and Total privation, has lived thus long
merely upon indulgence and tolleration.): but Cold has its various Degrees,
for Water is colder to the touch than Earth, Ice than Water, etc. therefore
Cold is no Privative, but a Positive Quality.

The Reality of Cold being thus clearly evicted, we may, Art 3. That the
adaequate Notion of Cold, ought to be de^umed from its General Effect, viz. the
Congregation and Compaction of bodies.
with more advantage undertake the consideration of its Formality, and explore
the roots of those Attributes commonly imputed thereunto.

First, therefore, we observe; that though Cold be Scholastically defined by
that passion caused in the organs of the sense of touching, upon the contact of
a Cold object; yet does not that special Notion sufficiently express its
Nature: because there is a more General Effect by which it falls under our
cognizance; and that is the Congregation and Compaction of the parts of bodies.
For, since Cold is the Antagonist to Heat, whose proper virtue it is, to
Discuss and Disgregate; therefore must the proper and immediate virtue of Cold
be, to Congregate and Compinge: and consequently, ought we to form to our
selves a notion of the Essence of Cold, according to that general Effect,
rather than that special one produced in the sense of Touching, which does
adumbrate only a Relative part of it.

Secondly, that by Cold, we understand not any Immaterial Quality, Art. 4.
Cold, no ^mmaterial; but a Substantial Quality.
as Aristotle and the Schools after him; but a Substantial one, i. e. certain
particles of Matter, or Atoms whose determinate Magnitude and Figure adapt or
empower them to congregate and compinge bodies, or to produce all those Effects
observed to arise immediately from Cold. And, as the Atoms, which are
comparated to the Causation of such Effects, may rightly be termed, the Atoms
of Cold, or Frigorifick Atoms: so may those Concretions, which harbor such
Atoms, and are capable of Emitting them, be named Cold Concretions; either
Actually, as Frost, snow, the North Wind, etc. or Potentially, as Nitre,
Hemlock, Nightshade, and all other simples as well Medical, as Toxical or
Poisonous, whose Alterative Virtue consists chiefly in Cold.

Now, as for the determinate Figure of Frigorifick Atoms; Art. 5. Gassendus
conjectural Assignation of a Tetrahedical Figure to the Atoms of cold; asserted
by sundry weighty considerations.
our enquiries can hope for but small light from the almost consumed vaper of
Antiquity: For, though Philoponus (in 1 physic.) and Magnenus (de Atomis,
disput. 2. cap. 3.) confidently deliver, that Democritus assigned a Cubical
Figure to the Atoms of Cold; and endeavor to justify that assignation, by
sundry Mathematical reasons: yet Aristotle, a man as well acquainted with the
doctrines of his Predecessors, as either of those, expressly affirms, that nor
Democritus, nor Leucippus, nor Epicurus determined the Atoms of Cold to any
particular Figure at all; for, His words are these (3 de caelo, cap. 4.) (...),
Nihilpend^ determinarunt. So, that rather than remain altogether in the dark,
we must strike fire out of that learned Conjecture of our Master Ga^sendus; and
taking our indication from the rule of Contrariety, infer, that the Atoms of
Heat being spherical, those of Cold, in all reason, must be Tetrahedical, or
Pyramidal, consisting of 4 sides, or equilateral Triangles. To make the
reasonableness of this supposition duly evident, let us consider (1.) That as
Heat has its origin from Atoms most exile in magnitude, spherical in figure,
and so most swift of motion: so must its Contrary, Cold, be derived from
principles of Contrary proprieties, viz. Atoms not so exile in magnitude, of a
Figure most opposite to a sphere, and so of most slow motion. (2.) That none
but Tetrahedical Atoms can justly challenge to themselves these proprieties,
that are requisite to the Essensification of Cold. For (1.) If we regard their
Magnitude, a Tetrahedical Atom may be Greater than a Spherical, by its whole
Angles: because a Sphere may be circumscribed within a Tetrahedon. (2.) If the
Figure it self; none is more opposed to a Sphere, than a Tetrahedon: because it
is Angular, and farthest recedeth from that infinity, or (rather)
innumerability of small insensible sides, which a profound Geometrician may
speculate in a Sphere. (3.) If their Mobility; no body can be more unapt for
motion, than a Tetrahedical one: for, what vulgar Mathematicians impute to a
Cube, viz. that it challenges the palm from all other Figures, for Ineptitude
to motion, does indeed more rightfully belong to a Tetrahedon; as will soon
appear to any equitable consideration, upon the perpension of the reasons
alleagable on both parts. But here we are to signify, that this ineptitude to
motion proper to Tetrahedical Atoms, is not meant of Atoms at liberty, and
enjoying freedom of motion, in the Inane space; since, in that state all Atoms
are praesumed to be of equal velocity: but only of Atoms wanting that liberty,
such as are included in Concretions, and by intestine evolutions continually
attempt Emancipation and Exsilition. (4.) It cannot impugn, at least, not
stagger the reasonableness of this conjectural Assignation of a Tetrahedical
figure to the Atoms of Cold, that Plato (in Timaeo) definitely adscribeth a
Pyramidal Figure to Fire, not to the Aer, i. e. to the Atoms of Heat, not to
those of Cold: because, if any shall thereupon conceive, that a Pyramid is most
capable of penetrating the skin of a man, and consequently of producing therein
the sense of Heat, rather than Cold; He may be soon converted by considering a
passage in our former section of this Chapter, that the Atoms of Heat may,
though spherical, as well in respect of their extreme Exility (which the point
of no Pyramid can exceed) as of the velocity of their Motion, prick as sharply,
and penetrate as deeply, as the Angles of the smallest Pyramid imaginable. To
which may be conjoined, that the Atoms of Cold, according to our supposition,
are also capable of Pungency and Penetration; and consequently that a kind of
Adustion is also assignable to great Cold; according to that expression of
Virgil (1 Georg.) Boceae penetrabile frigus adurit. For, in fervent Frosts (to
use the same Epithet, as the sweet-tongued Ovid, in the same case) when our
hands are, as the English phrase is, Benumbed with Cold; if we hold them to the
fire, we instantly feel a sharp and pricking pain in them. Which arises from
hence, that the Atoms of Heat, while by their agility and constant supplies
they are dispelling those of Cold, which had entered and possessed the pores of
our hands, do variously commove and invert them; they are hastily driven forth,
and in their contention and egress, cut and dilacerate the flesh and skin, as
well with their small points, as edges lying betwixt their points, and so
produce an acute and pungitive pain. Whereupon the sage Sennertus (de Atomis)
grounds his advice, that in extreme cold weather, when our hands are so
stupefied, as that an Extinction of their vital heat may be feared; we either
immerse them into cold water, or rub them in snow, that the Atoms of Cold,
which have wedged each other into the pores, may be gently and gradually called
forth, before we hold them to the fire: and this, least not only grievous pain
be caused, but a Gangrene ensue, from the total dissolution of the Contexture
of our hands by the violent intrusion of the Cold Atoms, when they are forcibly
impelled and agitated by the igneous; as the sad experience of many in Ruscia,
Groenland, the Alps* and other Regions obnoxious to the tyranny of Cold, has
taught. Concerning this, Helm^nt also was in the right, when He said, Mechanice
namque videmus, membrum fere congelatum sub nive recalescere, and a syderatione
praeservari; quod alias aer mox totaliter congelare pergeret, vel si repent ad
ignem sit delatum, moritur propter extremi alterius festinam actionem* etc. (in
cap. de Aere articul 8.) (5.) Nor does it hinder, that Philoponus and Magnenus
affirm, that the Atoms of Cold ought to be Cubical, in respect of the eminent
aptitude of that figure, for Constipation and Compingency, the General Effects
of Cold: because, a Pyramid also has its plane sides, or faces, which empower
it to perform as much as a Cube, in that respect; and if common Salt be
Constrictive, only because, being Hexahedrical in form, it has square plane
sides, as a Cube; certainly Alum must be more Constrictive, because being
Octahedrical in form, it has triangular plane sides, as a Pyramid. Besides, it
is manifest, that these plane sides must so much the more press upon and wedge
in the particles of a body, by how much more of the body, or greater number of
its particles they touch: and that by how much more they are entangled by their
Angles, so much more hardly are they Expeded, and so remain cohaerent so much
more pertinaciously. Hence comes it, that all Concretions consisting, for the
most part, of such figurated Atoms, are Adst^ictive Effectually: for,
interposing their particles amongst those of other bodies, that are Fluid; they
make their Consistence more Compact and somewhat Rigid, as in Ice, Snow, Hail,
Hoar-frost, etc.

The Consignation of a Tetrahedical Figure to Frigorifick Atoms appearing thus
eminently verisimilous; Art. 6. Cold, not Essential to Earth, Water, nor Aer.
to the full Explanation of the Nature of Cold, it remains only, that we decide
that notable Controversy, which so much perplexed many of the Ancients: viz.
Whether Cold be an Elementary Quality; or (more plainly) Whether or no the
Principality of Cold belongs to any one of the four vulgar Elements; and so
whether Aer, or Water, or Earth may not be conceived to be Primum Frigidum, as
rightfully as Fire is said to be Primum Calidum? Especially, since it is well
known, that the Stoics imputed the principality of Cold to the Aer; Empedocles
to Water, to whom Aristotle plainly assented, though He sometimes forgot
himself, and affirmed that no Humor is without Heat (as in 5. de Generat.
Animal. cap. ^.); and Plutarch to Earth, as we have learned from Himself ( lib.
de frigore primigenio.)

To determine this Antique Dispute, therefore, we first observe; that it arose
chiefly from a Petitionary Principle. For it appears, that all Philosophers,
who engaged therein, took it for granted, that the Quality of Heat was
eminently inhaerent in Fire, the chief of the 4 Principal or Elementary
substances; and thereupon inferred, that the Contrary Quality, Cold, ought in
like manner to have its principal residence in one of the other 3: when,
in troth, they ought first to have proved, that there was such a thing as an
Element of Fire in the Universe; which is more than any Logic can hope, since
the Sphere of Fire, which they supposed to possess all that vast space between
the unequal of the Sphere of Aer, and the concave of that of the Moon, is a mere
Chimaera, as we have formerly intimated, and Helmont has clearly commonstrated
( in cap. de Aere.) And Secondly we affirm, that as the Highest degree of Heat
is not justly attributary to any one Body more than other, or by way of
singular eminency (for, the Sphere of Fire failing, what other can be
substituted in the room thereof?) but to sundry special Bodies, which are
capable of Exciting or Conceiving Heat, in the superlative degree: so likewise,
though we should concede, that there are 3 Principal Bodies in Nature, namely
Aer, Water, Earth, in each whereof the Quality of Cold is sensibly harbored;
yet is there no one of them, of its own nature more principally Cold than
other, or which of it self contains Cold in the highest degree; but some
special Bodies there are, composed of them, which are capable of Exciting and
Conceiving Cold, in an eminent manner. But, in Generals is no Demonstration;
and therefore we must advance to Particulars, and verify our Assertion, in each
of the Three supposed Elements apart.

For the Earth: forasmuch as our sense certifieth that it is even Torrified
with Heat, in some places, and Congealed with Cold in others, according to the
temperature of the ambient Aer in diverse climats, or as the Aer, being calefied
by the Sun, or frigified by frost, does variously affect it, in it superficial
or Exterior parts; and so it cannot be discerned, that its External parts are
endowed with one of these opposite Qualities more than the other: and since we
cannot but observe, that there are many great and durable subterraneous Fires
burning in, and many fervid and sulphlureous Exlations frequently emitted, and
more Hot Springs of Mineral Waters perpetually issuing from its Interior parts,
or bowels; and so it is of necessity, that vast seminaries of Igneous Atoms be
included in the Entrals thereof: We say, considering these things, we cannot
deny, but that the Earth does contain as many Particles of Heat, or Calorifick
Atoms, both without and within, as it does of seeds of Cold, or Frigorifick
Atoms, if not more; and upon consequence, that it cannot be Primum Frigidum, as
Plutarch and all his Sectators have dreamt. What then; shall we conclude
Antithetically, and conceive that the Globe of the Earth is therefore
Essentially rather Hot, than Cold? Truly, No; because experience
demonstrateth, that the Earth does belch forth Cold Exhalations, and congealing
blasts, as well as Hot Fumes, and more frequently: witness the North Wind,
which is so cold, that it refrigerates the Aer even in the middst of Summer,
when the rivers are exhausted by the fervor of the Sun; to which Elihu, one of
Jobs sorry Comforters, seems to have alluded, when He said, That Cold comes
out of the North, and the Whirlwind out of the South. All, therefore, we dare
determine in this difficult argument (the decision whereof does chiefly depend
upon Experiments of vast labor and costs) is only thus much; that the Earth,
which is now Hot, now Cold, in its extreme or superficial parts, may, as to its
Internal or profound parts, be as reasonably accounted to contain various
seminaries of Heat, as of Cold: and that the principal seeds of Cold, or such,
as chiefly consist of Frigorifick Atoms, do convene into Halinitre, and other
Concretions of natures retaining thereto. And our Reason is that Halinitre is
no sooner dissolved in Water, than it congealeth the same into perfect Ice, and
strongly refrigerates all bodies, that it touches; insomuch that we may not
only conclude, that of all Concretions in Nature, at least that we have
discovered, none is so plentifully fraught with the Atoms, or seeds of Cold, as
Halinitre; but also adventure to answer that Problem proposed to Job, Out of
whose womb came the Ice, and the Hoary Frost of heaven, who has gendred it? by
saying, that all our Freezing and extreme Cold winds seem to be only copious
Exhalations of Halinitre dissolved in the bowels of the Earth; or consisting of
such Frigorifick Atoms, as compose Halinitre; and this because of the identity
of their Effects, for the Tramontane Wind (the coldest of all winds, as
Fabricius Paduanus, in his exquisite Book de Ventis, copiously proves) which
the Italians call Chirocco, can pretend to no natural Effect, in which
Halinitre may not justly rival it. Long might we dwell upon this not more rare
than delightful subject: but, besides that it deserves a professed Disquisition,
apart by it self, our speculations are limited, and may not, without indecency,
either digress from their proper Theme, or transgress the strict Laws of
Method. May it suffice, therefore, in praesent, that we have made it
justifiable to conceive that the Earth contains many such Particles, or Atoms
(whether such as pertain to the Composition of Halinitre, or of any other kind
whatever) upon the Exsilition of which the body containing them may be said to
become Cold, or pass from Potential to Actual Cold: and upon the insinuation of
which into Aer, Water, Earth, Stones, Wood, Flesh, or any other terrene
Concretion whatever, Cold is introduced into them, and they may be said to be
Frigefied, or made Cold.

Secondly, as for Water; that the praetext thereof to the praerogative of
Essential Frigidity is also fraudulent, and inconsistent with the Magna Charta
of right Reason, may be discovered from these considerations. 1. When Water is
frozen, the Ice always begins in it superfice, or upper parts, where the Aer
immediately touches it: but, if it were Cold of its own Nature, as is
generally praesumed, upon the auctority of Aristotle, the Ice ought to begin in
parts farthest situate from the Aer, that is in the middle, or bottom, rather
than at the top; at least, it would not be more slowly conglaciated in the
middle and bottom, than at the top. (2.) In all Frosts, the Cold of Water is
increased; which could not be, if it were the principal seat of Cold. For, how
could the Aer which according to the vulgar supposition, that Water is the
subject of inhaesion to extreme Cold, if less cold, infuse into water a greater
cold, than what it had before of its own? or, how could Nitre, dissolved in
water, so much augment the Cold thereof, as to convert it into Ice, even in the
heat of summer, or by the fires side; as is experimented in Artificial
conglaciations: if Nitre were not endowed with greater cold than Water? (3.) If
Water be formally ingravidated with the seeds of Cold; why is not the sea, why
are not all Rivers, nay, all Lakes and standing Pools (in which the excuse of
continual motion is praevented) constantly congealed, and bound up in ribbs of
Ice? Whence comes it, that Water does constantly remain Fluid, unless in great
frosts only, when the Atoms of Cold, wafted on the wings of the North Wind, and
plentifully strawed on the waters, do insinuate themselves among its
particles, and introduce a Rigidity upon them? Certainly, it is not conform to
the Laws of Nature, that any Body, much less so eminent and useful a one as
Water, should for the most part remain alienated from its own native
constitution, and be reduced to it again only at some times, after long
intervals, and then only for a day or two. (4.) Were Cold essentially competent
to Water, it could not so easily, as is observed, admit the Contrary Quality,
Heat, nor in so high a degree, without the destruction of its primitive form.
For, no subject can be changed from the Extreme of one Quality inhaerent, to
the extreme of a contrary, without the total alteration of that Contexture of
its particles, upon which the inhaerent quality depended; which done, it
remains no longer the same: but Water still remains the same, i. e. a Humid
Fluid substance, both at the time of, and after its Calefaction by fire, as
before. And, therefore, that common saying, that Water heated does reduce it
self to its native Cold, though it be tolerable in the mouth of the people;
yet He that would speak as a Philosopher, ought to change it into this, that
Water after calefaction, returns to its primitive state of Indifferency to
either Heat, or Cold: for, though after its remove from the fire, it gradually
loses the Heat acquired from thence, the Igneous Atoms spontaneously ascending
and abandoning it one after another; yet would it never reduce it self to the
least degree of cold, but is reduced to cold by Atoms of Cold from the
circumstant Aer immitted into its pores. What then; shall we hence conclude,
that Water is Essentially Hot? Neither; because then it could not so easily
admit, nor so long retain the Contrary Quality, Cold, for Hot springs are never
congelated. Wherein therefore can we acquiesce? Truly, only in this
determination, that Water is Essentially Moist, and Fluid: but neither Hot, nor
Cold, unless by Accident, or Acquisition, i. e. it is made Hot, upon the
introduction of Calorifick, and Cold, upon the introduction of Frigorifick
Atoms; contrary to the tenent of Empedocles, and Aristotle.

Lastly, as for the Aer: insomuch as it is sometimes Hot, sometimes Cold,
according to the temperature of the Climate, season of the year, praesence or
absence of the Sun, and diversity of Winds: we can have no warrant from reason,
to conceive it to be the natural Mother of Cold, more than of Heat* but rather
that it is indifferently comparated to admit either Quality, according to
diverse Impraegnation. Whoever, therefore, shall argue, that because in the Dog
da^es, when the perpendicular rays of the Sun parch up the languishing
inhabitants of the Earth in some positions of its sphere, if the North Wind
arise, it immediately mitigates the fe^vor of the Aer, and brings a cool relief
upon its wings; therefore the Aer is Naturally Cold: man as justly infer, that
the Aer is Naturally Hot; because, in the dead (...) Winter, when the face of
the Earth becomes hoary and rigid with ^r^st, if the South Wind blow, it soon
mitigates the frigidity of the Aer, and dissolves those fetters of Ice,
wherewith all things were bound up. Wherefore, it is best for us to Conclude,
that the Essential Quality of the Aer* is Fluidity; but as for Heat and Cold,
they are Qualities merely Accidental or Adventitious thereto; or, that it is
made Hot, or Cold, upon the commixture of Calorifick, or Frigorifick Atoms. So
that where the Aer is constantly impraegnate with Atoms of Heat, as under the
Torrid Zone, there is it constantly Hot, or Warm at least: where it is
Alternately perfused with ^^lorifick and Frigorifick Atoms, as under the
Temper^te Zones; Art. 7. (...).
(...) it Alternately Hot and Cold: and where it is constantly pervaded by
^^igorifick Atoms, as under the North Pole; there is it constantly Cold.

To put a p^^iod, therefore, to this Dispute; seeing the Quality of Cold is not
Essen^^^^ly inhaerent in Earth, Water, or Aer, the Three Principal Bodies of
Nature; where shall we investigate its Genuine Matrix, or proper subject of
inhaesion? Certainly, in the nature of some Special Bodies, or a particular
species of Atoms (of which sort are those whereof Salnitre is for the most part
composed) which being introduced into Earth, Water, Aer, or any other mixed
Body, impraegnate them with cold.

But, happily, you may say, that though this be true, Art. 8. Water, the chief
Antagonist to Fire; not in respect of its Accidental Frigidity, but Essential
Humidity* and that the Aer has a juster title to the Principality of Cold,
than either Water, or Earth.
yet does it not totally solve the doubt; since it is yet demandable, Whether
any one, and which of those Three Elements is highly Opposite to the Fourth,
viz. Fire? We Answer, that forasmuch as that Body is to be accounted the most
Opposite to Fire, which most destroys it: therefore is Water the chief
Antagonist to Fire, because it soonest Extinguisheth it. Nevertheless there is
no necessity, that therefore Water must be Cold in as high a degree, as Fire is
Hot: for, Water does not extinguish Fire, as it is Cold (since boiling water
does as soon put out fire, as Cold) but as it is Humid, i. e. as it enters the
pores of the enflamed body, and hinders the Motion and Diffusion of the Atoms
of Fire. Which may be confirmed from hence (1.) That Oil, which no man
conceives to be Cold, it poured on in great quantity, does also extinguish
fire, by suffocation, which is nothing but a hindering the Motion of the
igneous Atoms: (2.) That in case the Atoms of Fire issue from the accensed
matter, with such pernicity and vehemence, and reciprocal arietations, and in
such swarms, as that they repel the water affused, and permit it not to enter
the pores of the fuel (as constantly happens in Wildfire, where the
ingredients are Unctuous, and consist of very tenacious particles.) in that
case, Water is so far from extinguishing the flame, that it makes it more
impetuous and raging. However, we shall acknowledge thus much, that if the
Principality of Cold must be adscribed to one of the Three vulgar Elements; the
Aer doubtless, has the best title thereunto: because, being the most Lax and
Porous body of the Three it does most easily admit, and most plentifully
harbor the seeds of Cold; and being also subtle and Fluid, it does most
easily immit, or carry them along with it self into the pores of other bodies,
and so not only Infrigidate, but some times Congeal, and Conglaciate them; in
case they be of such Contextures and such particles, as are susceptible of
Congelation and Conglaciation.

The Fable of the Satyr and Wayfering man, who blew hot and cold, Art. 9.
^ROBLEM* Why the breath of a man does Warm, when expi^ed with the m^uth wide
open; and Cool, when efflated with the mouth contracted.
though in the mouth of every Schoolboy, is yet scarce understood by their
Masters; nay, the greatest Philosophers have found the reason of that
Contrariety of Effects from one and the same Cause, to be highly problematical.
Wherefore since we are fallen upon the cause of the Frigidity in the Aer; and
the Frigidity of our Breath does materially depend thereon: opportunity invites
Us, to solve that Problem, which though both Aristotle (sect 3. prob. 7. and
Anaximenes (apud Plutarch. de frigore primigenio) have strongly attempted; yet
have they left it to the conquest of Epicurus principles: viz. Why does the
breath of a man warm when eff^ated with the mouth wide open; and cool, when
efflated with the mouth contra^^ed? To omit the opinions of others, therefore,
we conceive the cause hereof to be only this* that albeit the Breath does
consist of aer, for the most part fraught with Calorifick Atoms, emitted from
the lungs and vital organs, yet has it many Frigorifick ones also interspersed
among its particles: which being of greater bulk, than the Calorifick, and so
capable of a stronger impuls, are by the force of efflation transmitted to
greatter distance from the mouth; because, the Calorifick Atoms commixt with
the breath, in regard of their exility, are no sooner dischaged from the mouth,
than they instantly disperse in round. Wence it comes, that if the breath be
expired in (...) large stream, or with the mouth wide open; because the circuit
of the (...) of brea^h is large, and so the Hot Atoms emitted are not so soon
dispersed: therefore does the stream feel warm to the hand objected there* and
so much the more warm, by how much nearer the hand is held to the mouth; the
Calorifick Atoms being less and less Dissipated in each degree of remove. But,
in case the breath be ^mitted with contracted lips; because ^hen the compass
of the stream is small, and the force of Efflation greater (...) therefore are
the Calorifick Atoms soon Disgregated, and the Frigorific^* only r^main commixt
with the Aer, which affects the objected hand (...) Cold, and by how much
farther (in the limits of the power of Efflation^ (...) hand is held from the
mouth, by so much colder does the breath appear (...) contra. That Calorifick
Atoms are subject to more and more (...) the stream of a Fluid substance, to
which they are commixt, is greater and greater in circuit, may be confirmed
from hence; that if we pour ho^ ^^ter, from on high, in frosty weather, we
shall observe a fume to issue (...) ^scend from the stream all along* and that
so much the more plentifully, by how much greater the stream is. Thus we use to
cool Burnt wine, or (...) by frequent refunding it from vessel to vessel, or
infunding it into broad and shallow vessels; that so the Atoms of Heat may be
the sooner disper^^^ for, by how much larger the superfice of the liquor is
made, by so much more of liberty for Exsilition is given to the Atoms of Heat
containe^ ^herein, and as much of Insinuation to the Atoms of Cold in company
(...) the circumstant Aer. Thus also we cool our faces in the heat of (...),
with fanning the aer toward us: the Hot Atoms being thereby (...), and the
Cold impelled deeper into the pores of the skin: which (...) the reason, why
all Winds appear so much the Colder, by how much ^^^onger they blow; as De^s
Carts has well observed in these words: (...) vehementior majoris
frigiditatis perceptionem, quam aer (...) corpore nostro excitat; quod aer
quietus tantum exteriorem nostram (...) quae interi^ribus nostris carnibus
frigidior est, contingat: ventus vero, ^^hementius in corpus nostrum actus,
etiam in penetralia ejus adigatur, (...) illa siut cute calidiora, id circo
etiam majorem frigiditatem ab ejus conta^^^ percipiunt.

Art. 10. (...) the premises.
In our prece^ent Article, touching the necessary assignatin of a Tetrahedical
Figure (...) Atoms of Cold, we remember, we said* that in respect of their
(...) or plane faces, they were most apt to Compinge, or bind in the particle
(...) all Concretions* into which they are intromitted; and from thence we
shall ^^ke the hint of inferring Three noble CONSECTARIES.

(1.) That (...) Snow, Hail, Hoarfrost, and all Congelations, are made merely
by the ^^^romission of Frigorifick Atoms among the particles of (...), being
once insinuated and commixt among them, in sufficie^^ (...) alter their fluid
and lax consistence into a rigid and compact, i. e. they Congeal them.

(2.) That (...), or Trembling sometimes observed in the members of (...) that
Rigor, or Shaking, in the beginning of most putri^ (...) when the Fits of
Intermittent fevers invade, are chiefly cause^ (...) Frigorifick Atoms. For,
when the Spherical Atoms of Heat, which swarm in and vivifie the bodies of
Animals, are not moved quaquaversum in the members with such freedom, velocity,
and directness excentrically, as they ought; because, meeting and contesting
with those less Agile Atoms of Cold, which have entered the body, upon its
chilling, their proper motion is thereby impeded: they are strongly repelled,
and made to recoyle toward the Central parts of the body, in avoydance of
their Adversary, the Cold ones; and in that tumultuous retreat, or
introcession, they vellicate the fibers of the membranous and nervous parts,
and so cause a kind of vibration or contraction, which if only of the skin,
makes that symptom, which Physicians call a Horror; but if of the Muscles in
the Habit of the body, makes that more vehement Concussion, which they call a
Rigor. Either of which does so long endure, as till the Atoms of Heat, being
more strong by Concentration and Union, have re-encountered and expelled them.
That it is of the Nature of Hot Atoms, when invaded by a greater number of Cold
ones, to recoyle from them, and concentre themselves in the middle of the body,
that contains them; is demonstrable from the Experiment of Frozen Wines:
wherein the spirits concentre, and preserve themselves free from Congelation in
the middle of the frozen Phlegm, so that they may be seen to remain fluid and
of the color of an Amethyst: as Helmont has well declared, in his History of
the Nativity of Tartar in Wines.

(3.) That the Death of all Animals, is caused immediately by the Atoms of
Cold; which insinuating themselves in great swarms into the body, and not
expelled again from thence by the overpowered Atoms of Heat; they wholly impede
and suppress those motions of them, wherein Vitality consists: So that the
Calorifick ones being no longer able to calefy the principal seat of life, the
Vital flame is soon extinguished, and the whole Body resigned to the tyranny of
Cold. Which is therefore well accounted to be the grand and professed Enemy of
Life.

CHAP. XIII. OF Fluidity, Stability, Humidity, Siccity.
SECT. I.
Art. 1. Why Fluidity and (...) are here considered before Humidity and (...).
HEre our very Method must be somewhat Paradoxical, and the Genealogy we shall
afford of those Two vulgarly accounted Passive ^^ualities, Humidity and
Siccity, very much different from that universally embraced in the Schools.
For, should we tread in the steps of Aristotle, as most, who have traveled in
this subject, have constantly done; we must have subnected our Disquisition
into the Nature and Origin of Moisture and Dryness, immediately to that of
Heat and Cold, as the other pair of First Elemental Qualities, and ^diametro
opposite to them. But, having observed, that those 2 Terms, Moist and Dr^* are
not, according to the severe and praecise Dialect of truth, rightly
^^commodable to all those things, which are genuinely imported by (...) Greek
Words, (...) and (...), according to the definions of Aristotle* and
consequently that we could not avoid the danger of losing ^^^selves in a
perpetual Aequivocation of Terms, unless we committed ou^ thoughts wholly to
the conduct of Nature Herself, progressing from the more to the less General
Qualities, and at each step explicating their distinct dependencies: we
thereupon inferred, that we ought to praem^se the Consideration of Fluidity and
Firmness, which are more Gener^^^ to that of Humidity and Siccity, as less
General Qualities, and (...) seem to be one degree more removed from Catholic
Principles. Art. 2. (...)


That those (...) Terms so frequent in the mouth of Aristotle, (...)* (...) in
signification, than Humidum and Siccum, by which His (...) Interpreters and
Commentators commonly explicate them; (...) even from hence, that under the
word (...) is comprehended no^ only, in General, whatever is (...), Fluid and
Liquid, but also, in special, that matter or body, whereby a thing is moistened,
when immersed into, or perfused with the same: and likewise, under the contrary
term (...), is comprehended as well, in General, whatever is (...), Compact or
Firm and Solid, as in special, that matter or body, which being applied to a
thing, is not capable of Humectating or Madefying the same, and which is
therefore called also (...), Aridum. Now this duly perpended does at first
sight detest the Aequivocation of the Latin Terms, and direct us to this
praecise determination; that whatever is Fluid, is not Humid; nor whatever is
Dry, Compact or Firm; but that a Humid body properly is that, whereby another
body, being perfused, is moistened [(...)] or madefied [(...)]: and, on the
contrary, that a Dry or Arid body is that, which is not capable of Humectating,
or madefying another body, to which it is applied.

Again, forasmuch as Aristotle positively defines (...), Art. 3. (...) a Firm.
id qu^d facile, terminum admittens, proprio tamen non terminatur, that which
being destitute of self-termination, is yet easily terminated by another
substance; it is evident, that this His Definition is competent not only to a
Humid thing, in special, but also to a Fluid, in General: such as are not only
Water, Oil, every Liquor, yea and Metal or other Concretion, actually fused or
melted; but also the Aer, Flame, Smoke, Dust, and whatever is of such a nature,
as that being admitted into any vessel or other continent of whatever figure;
or however terminated in it superfice, does easily accomodate it self
thereunto, put on the same figure, and confess termination by the same limits
or boundaries; and this, because it cannot terminate it self, as being
naturally comparated only to Diffusion. On the other side, since He defines
(...), quod facile terminatum proptio termino, terminatur aegre alieno; to be
that which is easily terminate^ by its own superfice, and hardly terminated by
another; it is also manifest, that this Definition is not peculiar only to a
Dry or ^rid substance, but in common also to a Firm or Solid one: such as not
only Earth, Wood, Stones, etc. but also Ice, Metal unmolten, Pitch, Resine,
Wax, and the like Concreted juices, and (in a word) all bodies, which have
their parts so consistent and mutually cohaerent, as that they are not
naturally comparated to Diffusion, but conserve themselves in their own
superfice, and require compression, dilatation, section, detrition, or some
other violent means, to accommodate them to termination, by the superfice of
another body. And, certainly, if what is praecisely signified by the Term
(...), were no more than what is meant by the Latin substitute thereof,
Humidum: then might the Aer be justly said to be Humid, which is so far in its
own nature from being endowed with the faculty of Humectating bodies, that its
genuine virtue is to exsiccate all things suspended therein; nay even Fire it
self might be allowed the same Attribute, together with Smoke, Dust, and the
like Fluid substances, which exsiccate all bodies perfused with mo^sture. On
the advers part, if what is praecisely intended by the Term (...), were fully
expressible by the Latin, Siccum, or Aridum; then, doubtless, might Wax,
Re^ine, and all Concreted juices be accounted actually Dry* nay Ice it self,
which is only Liquor congealed, could not be excluded the Categorie of Arid
substances. These Considerations premised, though we might here enquire,
Whether Aristotle spoke like Himself, when He confined Fluidity (and that
according to his own definition) to only 2 Elements, Water and Aer; when yet
the Element of Fire, which He placed above the Aer^^l region, must be
transcendently Fluid (else how could it be so easily terminated by the Concave
of the Lunar Sphere, on one part, and the Unequal of the Aereal, on the other?)
And whether His Antithesis or Counter assertion, viz. that the 2 Firm Elements
are Fire and Earth, be not a downright Absurdity: yet shall we not insist upon
the detection of either of those two Errors, because they are obvious to every
man's notice; but only Conclude, that though every Humid body be Fluid, and
every Arid or Dry body be Firm; yet will not the Conversion hold, since every
Fluid is not Humid, nor every Firm, Dry; and upon natural consequence, that
Humidity is a species of Fluidity, and Siccity a Species of Firmity; and also
that it is our duty to speculate the Reasons of each accordingly beginning at
the Generals.

FLUIDITY we conceive to be a Quality, arising merely from hence; that the
Atoms* Art. 4. Fluidity defined
or insensible particles, of which a fluid Concretion does consist, are smooth
in superfice, and reciprocally contiguous in some points, though disso^^^^^ or
incontiguous in others; so that many inane spaces (smaller and grea^^^
according to the several magnitudes of the particles, which intercept them
being interspersed among them, they are, upon the motion of the mass o^ body,
which they compose, most easily moveable, rolling one upon ^^other, and in a
continued fluor, or stream diffusing themselves, till th^^ are arrested by some
firm body, to whose superfice they exactly accommodate themselves.

Art. 5. Wherein the F^rmal Reason thereof does consis^.
That the ^^sence of Fluidity don't consist only in these Two conditions, the
smoothness of insensible particles, and interruption of small inane spaces
among them* where their extrems are incontiguous; may be even sensibly
demonst^^^^d in an heap or measure of Corn. Which is apt for Diffusion, or
Fluid, only because the Grains, of which it does consist, are superficially
smooth and hard, and have myriads of inane spaces intercepted among them* by
reason of the incontiguities of their extrems, in various points: so (...)*
whenever the heap is moved, or effused from one vessel into another* the Grains
mutually rolling each upon other, diffuse themselves in one continued stream,
and immediately upon their reception into the concave of the vessel, the
Aggregate or mass of them becomes exactly accommo^^te to the figure, or
internal superfice of the same. And, forasmuch as the ^ifferent magnitudes of
composing particles, do not necessitate a differe^^e of formal qualities; but
only variety of Figures, contexture and (...): well may we conceive the same
reasons to essence the Fluidity of Water also; because betwixt an heap of
Corn, and an heap or mass of Water, the Difference is only this, that the
Grains, which compose the one, are of sensible magnitude, and so have sensible
empty spaces interposed amo^^ them; but the Granules, or particles, which
compose the other, are (...) sensible magnitude, or incomparably more exile,
and so have the inane (...) intercepted among them, incomparably less. For,
that Water does consist of small Grains, or smooth particles, is conspicuous
even from (...)* that Water is capable of conversion into Fume, or Vapou^* only
(...) ^^refaction, and Fume again reducible into Water, merely by (...); and
the reason why Fume becoms visible, is only this, that the (...) part of fume
is a Collection or Assembly of many thousand of tho^^ ^^^gly-invisible
particles, which constitute the Water, from whence the ^^me ascends, as may be
ascertained from hence, that to the composition of one single drop of Water,
many myriads of myriads of insensible particles must be convened and united. So
that Water contained in a Caldron, set on the fire and seething, does differ
from the Fume exhaled from it, only in this respect; that the one is Water
Condensed, the other Rarefied: or, that Water is made Fume, when its particles
are violently dissociated, and the aer variously intercepted among them; and
Fume is returned to Water, when the same particles are reduced to their natural
close order, and the intercepted aer again excluded. Again, that the Fluidity
of Water depends on the same Cause (proportionately) as that of an heap of
Corn, may, according to the Law of Similitude, be justified by the parallel
capacity of Water to the same Effects, viz. Diffusion, Division, and
Accommodation to the figure of the Recipient, or Terminant: For, the result
hereof is, that it has no Continuity or mutual Cohaerence of its particles,
which should hinder their easy Dissociation. Nor is it a valid Argument to the
contrary, that Water appears to be a Continued body, but an heap of Corn, a
Discontinued; for, that is only according to Appearance, caused from hence, that
by how much smaller the component particles of a Concretion are, by so much
smaller must the inane spaces be, which are intercepted among them, where they
are incontiguous, and upon consequence, so much the less interrupted, or more
continued must the mass or Aggregate appear: as may be most familiarly
understood, if we compare an heap of Corn, with one of the finest Callis sand;
that with an heap of the most volatile or impalpable Powder, that the Chemist
or Apothecary can make; and so gradually less and less in the dimensions of
Granules, till we arrive at the smallest imaginable. So that we cannot wonder,
that the substance of Water should be apprehended by the dull sense, as wholly
Continued, though really it be only less interrupted than an heap of sand: when
the Grains, whereof Water is amassed, are incomparably smaller, than those of
the finest sand, and intercept among them inane spaces incomparably smaller
such as are by many degrees below the discernment of the acutest sight, though
advantaged by the best Microscope.

If this Argument reach not the height either of the Difficulty it self, Art.
6. The ^ame ^arther illustrated, by the two^^^ld Fluid^ty of Metals; and the
peculiar reason of each.
or your Expectation and Curiosity concerning it; be pleased to imp the Wings
of it with the feathers of another, of the same importance, but more
perspicuity. It is well known, especially to Chemists and Refiners, that every
metal is capable of a twofold Fluid^ty: one, in the form of an impalpable or
volatile Powder; the other, of a Liquor, whose fluor is continued, according to
the judgment of sense. For, when a Metal is Calcined by Praecipitation, i. e.
by Corrosive and Mercurial Waters, specifically appropriate to its nature;
being thereby reduced into small Grains, it becomes Fluid, after the manner of
sand, and therefore may as conveniently be used in Hour-glasses, for
Chronometry, or the measure of time: but, because each of those visible Grains
is made up of millions of other more exile and invisible Granules or particles,
which are the component principles or matter of the Metal; hence it is, that if
we put them all together in a Crucible, and melt them in a reverberatory fire,
whose igneous Atoms invade, penetrate and subdivide each Granule into the
smallest particles (to which the Corrosive Virtue of the Aqua fortis could not
extend) then will the whole mass put on another kind of Fluidity, such as that
of Water, Oil, and all other Liquors* Now, the Reason of the Former Fluidity
is manifestly the same with that of Corn and Sand, newly explicated: and that
of the Latter* the same as of Water, i. e. the Granules of the Calcined powder,
being dissolved into others of dimensions incomparably smaller, do intercept
among themselves, or betwixt their superficies, where those a^e incontiguous,
innumerable multitudes of Inane spaces, but those incomparably less than before
their ultimate subtiliation; and consequently (as has been said) make the
Metal dissolved to be deprehended by the sen^^* as one entire and continued
substance. To Conclude, therefore; (...) discover no Reason against us, of bulk
sufficient to obstruct the (...) o^ our Conception, that the Fluidity of Fire,
Flame, Aer, and all ^^quid substances whatever, cannot well be deduced from any
other (...), but what we have here assigned to Water and Metals dissolved:
(...) when we consider, that is equally consentaneous to conceive, th^^ ^^ery
other Fluid or Liquid body is composed also of certain specially ^^^^igurate
Granules* or imperceptible particles; which being only (...) in some points of
their superficies* not reciprocally Cohaerent (...) intercept various inane
spaces betwixt them* and be therefore easily (...), dissociable, externally
termin^ble, and capable of making the body app^^^ntly Continuate, as Water it
sel^.

Art. 7. Firmness defined:
And, as (...) other General Quality, FIRMNESS, or STABILITY; since (...) m^st
have Contrary Causes, and that the solidity of Atoms is the (...) of all
solidity and firmness in Concretions: well may we understand (...) be radicated
in this, that the insensible particles, of which a ^irme (...) is composed
(whether they be of one or diverse sorts, i. e. (...) or dissimilar in
magnitude and figure) do so reciprocally comp^^^ and adhaere unto each other,
as that being incapable of rolling (...) each others superfice, both in respect
of the ineptitude of (...) figures thereunto, and the want of competent inane
spaces among them* they generally become incapable (...) without extreme (...)
of Emotion, Dissociation, Diffusion, and so of Terminatio^ (...) any other
superfice, but what themselves constitute.

Art. 8. And d^rived from either of ^ Causes*
If it (...) Enquired, Whence this reciprocal Comp^ession, Indissociability.
(...) Immobility of insensible particles in a Firm, Concretion does (...)
proceed* we can derive it from Three sufficient Causes. (1. The (...) small
[Hamul^, Uncinulive] Hooks or Claws by which Atoms of (...) superficies are
adapted to implicate each other, by mutual (...) and that so closely, as that
all Inanity is excluded from betwixt (...) ^^mmissures or joynings; and this is
the principal and most frequent (...) of stability. (2.) The Introduction and
pressure of Extran^ou^ (...)* which invading a Concretion, and wedging in both
themselves, (...) intestine ones together, and that chiefly by obverting the^
(...) or superficies thereunto; cause a general Compression and (...) of all
the particles of the mass. And by this way does (...) Water and all Humid
Substances; for, since the Atoms of (...), and those of Water octahedrical, as
is most (...); those of Cold insinuating themselves into the (...) by obversion
of their plane sides to them, they (...) particle^ thereof, and so not
permitting them to be (...) fluidity, and make the whole mass Rigid and (...)
Hither also may we most congruously referr the Coagulation of milk, upon the
injection of Rennet, Vinegre, juice of Limons, and the like Acid things. For,
the Hamous and inviscating Atoms, whereof the Acid is mostly composed, meeting
with the Ramous and Grosser particles of the milk, which constitute the Caseous
and Butyrous parts thereof; instantly fasten upon them with their hooks,
connect them, and so impeding their fluiditie* change their lax and moveable
contexture into a close and immovable or Firm: while the more exile and
smooth particles of the milk, whereof the serum or whey is composed, escape
those Entanglings and conserve their native Fluidity. This may be confirmed
from hence; that whenever the Cheese, or Butter made of the Coagulation, is
held to the fire, they recover their former Fluidity: because the tenacious
particles of the Acid are disentangled and interrupted by the sphaerical and
superlatively agile Atoms of fire. (3.) The Exclusion of introduced Atoms, such
as by their exility, roundness and motion, did, during their admistion,
interturbe the mutual Cohaesion and Quiet of domestique ones, which compose a
Concretion. Thus, in the decalescence of melted metals, and Glass, when the
Atoms of fire, which had dissociated the particles thereof and made them Fluid,
do abandon the metal, and so cease to agitate and dissociate the particles
thereof: then do the domestique Atoms return to a closer order, mutually
implicate each other, and so make the whole mass Compact and Firm, as before.
Thus also when the Atoms of Water, Wine, or any other dissolvent, which had
insinuated into the body of Salt, Alume, Nitre, or other Concretion retaining
to the same tribe; and dissolving the continuity of its particles,
metamorphosed it from a solid into a fluid body, so that the sight apprehends
it to be one simple and uniforme substance with the Liquor: we say, when these
dissociating Atoms are evaporated by heat, the particles of the Salt instantly
fall together again, become readunated, and so make up the mass compact and
solid, as before, such as no man, but an eyewitness of the Experiment, could
persuade himself to have been so lately diffused, concorporated, and lost in
the fluid body of Water.

SECT. II.
BY the light of the Praemises, it appears a most perspicuous truth, Art. 1.
Humidity defined.
that HUMIDITY is only a certain Species of Fluidity. For, whoever would frame
to himself a proper and adaequate Notion of an Hum^r, or Humid substance; must
conceive it to be such a Fluid or Fluxile body, which being induced upon, or
applied unto any thing, that is Compact, does adhare to the same (per minimas
particulas) and madify or Humectate so much thereof as it touches. Such,
therefore, is Water, such is Wine, such ^s Oil, such are all those Liquors,
which no sooner touch any body not Fluid, but either they leave many of their
particles adhaerent only to the superfice thereof (and this, because the most
seemingly polite superfice is full of Eminences and Cavities, as we have
frequently asserted) and so moisten it; or, penetrating through the whole
contexture thereof, totally Humectate or wett the same. But, such is not Aer,
such is not any Metal fused, such is not Quicksilver, nor any of those Fluors,
which though they be applied unto, and subingress into the pores of a Compact
body do yet leave none of their particles adhaerent to either the superficia^
(...) internal parts thereof; but, without diminut^^n of their own quantity
(...) off clearly, and so leave the touched o^ pervaded body, unma^ified, (...)
^^humecta^e, as they found it.

Art. 2. (...) defined.
On the other side, it is likewise manifest, that SICCITY o^ ARIDITY, is only a
certain species of Firmness, or st^bility: because a Dry or (...) ^ubstance is
conceived to be Firm or Compact, only insomuch as it is (...) of all moisture.
Of this sort, according to vulgar conception, may (...) account all Stones,
Sand, Ashes* all Metals, and whatever is of so firm a constitution* as
contain^ nothing of Humidity, either in it superfice, (...), which can be
extracted from it, or, i^ extracted, is not capable (...) moistning any other
body: but, not Plants nor Animals, nor Minerals* (...) any other Concretion^
which* though apparently dry to the sense does (...) cont^in some moisture
within it, and such as being educed, is capable of (...) another body.

Art. 3. (...).
We say* according to Vulgar Conception; because, not Absolutely: for* though
(...) be opposed to Humidity, not as an Habit, to which any Act can (...)
attributed, but as a mere Privation (for, to be Dry, is nothing else (...) want
moisture yet, because a Moistened body may contain more (...) Humidity*
therefore may it be said to be more or less Dry (...), and a body that is
imbued with less moisture, be said to be dry (...) one imbued with more. Thus
Green Wood, or such as has (...) extraneous moisture, is commonly said to grow
more and more (...) degrees, as it is more and more Dehumect^ted; and then at
leng^^ (...) be perfectly dry, when all the Aqueous moisture, as well natural
(...) ^mbibed, is consumed, though then also it contain a certain (...)
mo^sture, which Philosophers call the Humidum Primigentum (...)* this only
Comparatively, or in respect to its forme^ (...) was imbue^ with a greater
proportion of Humidity*

^
For the (...) of this, we are to observe, that there are Two sorts (...)
compact bodies are usually humectated; the one, (...) ^he other, Oleag nous and
Fat. The First is easily (...) by heat, but not inflammable: the other, though
it (...) and is as easily inflammable in regard of the many (...) is not easily
exsoluble, nor attenuable into (...) cohaerence of its particles. To the First
(...) that m^^sture in Concretions* which Chemists extracting (...) Vegetables:
because, though it mo^stens as Wate^ (...) incapable of infl^mmation* yet is it
much more volatile (...) And to e^ther or both sorts, though in a diverse
respect belong (...) they call Aqua Vitae, or the spirits of a Vegetable, such
(...) because though it does moisten as Water, yet is (...) evaporable by heat,
and as inflammable as (...) learn in the School of Sense, that such bodie^
(...) Aqueous and Lean moisture, are easily (...) are humectate with the
Unctuous (...) hardly* Why? because the Atoms, of which the Aqueous does
consist, are more laevigated or smooth in their superfice, and so having no
hooks, or claws, whereby to cohaere among themselves, or adhaere to the
concretion, are soon disgregated; but those, which compose the Oleaginous,
being entangled as well among themselves, as with the particles of the body, to
which they are admixt, by their Hamous angles, are not to be expeded and
disengaged, without great and long agitation; and after many unsuccessfull
attempts of evolution. Thus Wood is sooner reduced to Ashes, than a stone:
because that is compacted by much of Aqueous Humidity; this by much of
Unctuous. For the same reason is it likewise, that a clodd of Earth, or piece
of Cloth, which has imbibed Water, is far more easily resiccated, than that
Earth or Cloth, which has been dippt in oil, or melted fat. And this gives us
somewhat more than a mere Hint toward the clear Solution of Two PROBLEMS,
frequently occurring, but rarely examined.

The one is, Why pure or simple Water cannot wash out spots of Oil, Art. 5.
PROBLEM 1. Why pure water cannot wash out oil from a Clo^^; which yet wa^er,
wherein Ashes have been deco^ted, or soap dissolved, easily does* Solut.
or Fat from a Cloth, or silk Garment: which yet Water, wherein Ashes have been
boiled, or soap dissolved, easily does? For, the Cause hereof most probably is
this; that though Water of it self cannot penetrate the unctuous body of oil,
nor dissociate its tenaciously cohaerent particles, and consequently not
incorporate the oil to it self, so as to carry it off in its fluid arms, when
it is expressed or wrung out from the cloth: yet, when it is impraegnated with
Salt, such as is abundantly contained in Ashes, and from them extracted in
decoction; the salt with the sharp angles and points of its insensible
particles, penetrating, pervading, cutting and dividing the oil, in minimas
particulas, the Water following the particles of salt at the heels,
incorporates the oil into it self, and so being wrung out from the cloth
again, brings the same wholly off together with it self. Which d^ubtless* was
in some part understood by the Inventor of soap; which being compounded (...)
Water, Salt and Oil most perfectly commixt, is the most general Abstersive for
the cleansing of Clothes polluted with oil, grease, turpentine, sweat and the
like unctuous natures: for, the particle^ of oil ambuscadoed in the soap,
encountering those oily or p^nguous particle^, which adhaere to the hairs and
filaments of Cloth and st^^n it, become easily united to them, and bring them
off together with themselves, when they are dissolved and set afloat in the
Water by the incisive and di^^^ciating particles of the Salt; which also is
brought off at the same time by the Water, which serves only as a common
vehicle to a^l the rest.

The other, Why stains of Ink are not Delible, with Water, Art. 6. PROBLEM 2
Why stains of Ink are not to be taken out of cloths, but with ^ome Acta Liquor*
Solut.
though decocted to a Lixirium, or Lee, with Ashes, or commixt with soap: but
wi^^ (...) Acid juice* such as of Limons, Oranges, Crabbs, Vinegre, etc. (...)
Reason hereof seems to be only this; that the Vi^^io^ or (...) which ^tr^kes
the black in the Decoction of Galls, Sumach, or other (...) Ingredients, being
Acid, and so consisting of particles congener^^s ^n figure and other
proprieties to those which constitute the (...): whenever the spot of Ink is
thoroughly moystned with an acid (...), the vitrio^ ^s soon united thereto, and
so educed together with ^t upon expression, the union arising ( propter (...))
from the Similitude of their two natures. For, there always is the most easy
and perfect union, where is a Similitude of Essences, or formal proprieties; as
is notably experimented in the eduction of Cold from a man's hands or other
benumbed parts by rubbing them with snow; in the evocation of fire by fire; in
the extraction of some Venoms from the central to the outward parts of the
body, by the application of other Venoms to the skin (which is the principal
cause, why some Poisons are the Antidotes to others); the alliciency and
^^^^uation of Choler by Rhubarb, etc.

Lastly, in (...) place, we might pertinently insist upon the Causes and Manner
of Co^^osion and Dissolution of Metals and other Compact and Firm^ bodies*
(...) Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regis, and other Chemical Waters; the (...) of Salt,
Alume, Nitre, Vitriol, Sugar and other Salin concreted (...) by Water* the
Exhalability or Evaporability of Humid and (...) substances* and other useful
speculations of the like obscure nature but (...) of these deserves a more
exact and prolix Disquisition, than the (...) signed to our praesent province
will afford; and what we have already (...) sufficiently discharge^h our debt
to the Title of this Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Softness, Hardness, Flexility, Tractility, Ductility, etc.
SECT. I.
THe two First of this Rank, Art. 1. The (...) of the Chap^er.
of Secun^darie Qualities HARDNESS and SOFTNESS, being so near of Extraction
and Semblance, that many have confounded them with Firmness and Fluid^ty* in a
General and looser accept^tion (for^ so Virgil gives the Epithe^e of Soft to
Water, and Lucretius to Aer, Vapor^ Clouds, etc. because a Firm body, or such
whose parts are reciproc^lly cohaerent, and superfice more (...) apparently
continued, as (...) may be Soft; and on the other side, a Fluid body, or such
whose (...) not reciprocally cohaerent, nor (...) really continued, as (...) be
Hard: therefore ought we (...) examination ^f the nature of Hardness and
Softness, (...) Consequents, Flexility, Tractility, (...), etc. where that of
^^^mness and (...) ends* that so we may* by explicating their Cognation, when
men^^one^ in a general sense, manifest the^r Differences* when considered in a
Special and praecise, and so prevent the otherwise imminent danger of
aequivocat^on.

To come, therefore, without farther circumambage* Art. 2. (...) and Soft,
(...).
to the discuisition of the proper nature of each of these Qualities, according
to the method of their production; conforming our conceptions to those of
Aristotle, who ^4. Meteor. 4.) defines Durum to be* Quod ex superficie in
seipsum non ^edit; and Molle, to be Quod ex superficie in seipsum cedit; and
referring both to the cognizance of the sense of Touching, we understand a HARD
body to be such* who^e par^icles are so firmly coadunated among themselves,
and superfi^e is so con^inued, ^s that being pressed by the finger* it does not
yield thereto* nor ha^^ (...) ^uperfice at all indented or depressed thereby;
such ^s a stone* and on the contrary, a SOFT one to be such, as does yield to
the pressure of the finger in the superfice, and that by retrocession or giving
back of the superficial particles, immediately pressed by the finger, versus
profundum, toward it profound or internal; such as Wax, the Flesh of Animals,
Clay, etc.

Art. 3. The Difference betwixt a S^ft and Fluid.
For, the chief Difference betwixt a Fluid, and a Soft body, accepted in a
Philosophical or praecise, not a Poetical or random sense, consists only in
this; that the Fluid, when pressed upon, does yield to the body pressing, not by
indentment or incavation of it superfice, i. e. the retrocession of it
superficial particles, which are immediately urged by the depriment, toward its
middle or profound ones, which are farther from it; but by rising upwards in
round and equally on all sides, as much as it is deprest in the superfice: and
a Soft does yield to the body pressing, only by retrocession of it superficial
inwards toward it central particles, so that they remain during, and sometimes
long after the depression, more or less lower than any other part of the
superfice. Which being considered, Aristotle's judgment, that Softness is
incompetent to Water, must be indisputable: because it is evident to sense, that
Water, being deprest in the superfice does not recede toward its interior or
profound parts, as is the property of all soft things to do; but rises up in
round equally on all sides of the body pressing, and so keeps it superfice
equally and level as before.

Art. 4. Solidity of Atoms, the Fundament of Hardness and Inanity, intercepted
am^ng them, the fu^dament of Softness, in all Concretions.
As for the Fundamental Cause of Hardness observed in Concretions; it must be
the chief essential propriety of Atoms Solidity: and upon consequence, the
Original of its Contrary, Softness must be Inanity. For, among Concretions,
every one is more and more Hard, or less and less soft, according as it more
and more approaches to the solidity of an Atom, which knows nothing of
softness: and on the other side, every thing is more and more soft, or less and
less hard, according as it more and more approaches the nature of Inanity,
which knows nothing of Hardness. Not that the Inane space is therefore capable
of the Attribute of Soft, as if it had a superfice, and such as could recede
inwards upon pression: but, that every Concretion is always so much the more
soft, i. e. the less hard, by how the more it yields in the superfice upon
pressure; and this only in respect of the more of Inanity, or the Inane space
intercepted among the solid particles, whereof it is composed. It need not be
accounted Repetition, that we here resume what we have formerly entrusted to
the memomory of our Reader; viz. that touching the deduction of these two
Qualities* Hardness and Softness, the provident Atomist has wonn the Garland
from all other Sects of Philosophers: for, supposing the Catholic materials of
Nature to be Atoms, i. e. Solid or inflexible and exsoluble Bodies, he is
^urnished with a most sufficient, nay a necessary Reason, not only for the
Hardness or Inflexibility, but also for the Softness or Flexibility of all
Concretions; insomuch as it is of the essence o^ his Hypothesis, that every
compound nature derives its Hardness only from the ^olidity of its materials,
and softness only from the Inane space intercepted amon^ its component
particles; in respect whereof each of those particles is moveable, and so the
whole Aggregate or mass of them becomes flexible, or devoid of rigidity in all
its parts, and consequently yielding in that part, which is pressed. But, no
other Hypothesis excogitable is fruitful enough to afford a satisfactory, nay
not so much as a merely plausible solution of this eminent and fundamental
Difficulty; for, those who assume the universal matter to be void of Hardness,
and so infinitely exsoluble, i. e. not to be Atoms, though they may, indeed,
assign a sufficient reason, why some Concretions are soft; yet shall they ever
want one to answer him, who demands, why other Concretions are Hard; because
themselves have exempted Atoms, from whose solidity all Hardness arises to
Concretions.

And this most easily detecteth the gross and unpardonable incogitancy of
Aristotle, Art. 5. Hardne^s and So^^nes^, no (...), but m^^rly ^omparative
Qualities; as adscriptive to Concretions: contrary to Aristotle.
when He determined the Hardness and Softness of Concretions to be Absolute
Qualities; for, since Atoms alone are absolutely void of all Softness, and the
Inane space alone absolutely void of all Hardness; and all Concretions are made
up of Atoms: nothing is more manifest, than that Hardness and Softness, as
attributary to Concretions, are Qualities merely Comparative, or more
praecisely, that Softness is a Degree of Hardness; and consequently, that there
are various Degrees of Hardness, according to which Concretions may be said to
be more or less Hard, and such as are hard, in respect of one, may be yet soft
in respect of another, that is more hard, or less soft.

As for the praecise Manner, Art. 6. S^ftness in Firm things, deduced from the
same cause, as Fluidity in Fluid one^.
how the several Degrees of Hardness and Softness result from Atoms and Inanity
commixt; we need not much insist thereupon; since the production of each degree
may be easily and fully comprehended, from our praecedent explanation of the
Causes of Fluidity and Firmness. For, though Softness be observable in bodies
endowed with Firmness, or Influxibility; yet because the degrees of Firmness
are also various, and proceed from the more or less Arresting or Impeding of
Fluidity, and so that the thing consist of Atoms more or less Coarctated,
moveable among themselves, and dissociable each from other (from whence alone
does the yeeldingness of it in the superfice arise): therefore is it necessary,
that in Firm things the same is the cause of Softness, which in Fluid things
is the cause of Fluidity. Nor is the Difference betwixt their productions other
than this, that to Softness, specially and strictly accepted, are required
Atoms somewhat Hooked, and so Retentive each of other, as not to be wholly
dissociated, or to permit a manifest abruption or breach of continuity, upon
pressure: but, to strict Fluidity it is not requisite, that the Atoms be at all
Hamous, or reciprocally retentive.

Insomuch, therefore, Art. 7. The General Reason of the Mollification of Hard*
and Ind^ration of Sof^ bodies.
as there is some certain Compactness (more or less) even in all Soft
Concretions; from thence it may be easily inferred, that the General reason of
the Mollification of Hard bodies, does consist in this; that their insensible
particles be in some degree dissociated, i. e. so separated each from other, in
many points, as that more and larger inane spaces be intercepted among them,
than while they were closely coadunated: and on the contrary, that the General
reason of the Induration of Soft bodies, does consist only in this; that their
insensible particles, before in some degree dissociated, be reduced to a closer
order, or higher degree of Compactness, and so most of the inane spaces
intercepted, be excluded from among them. To this the doubting Mersennus fully
subscribes ( in lib. 2. Harmonicor. proposit. ultima) where deducing the causes
of Hardness, Rigidity, and the like qualities from the Atoms of Democritus and
Epicurus, he plainly says; Duritiem fieri ab Atomis ramosis, quae suis hamatis
implicationibus perexigua spatia relinquunt inania, per quae nequeant ingredi
corpuscula caloris, etc. Nay, such is the urgencie of this truth, that
Aristotle Himself seems to confess it, in these words: quae humoris absentia
concrescunt and duruntur, ea liquefacere humor potest; nisi adeo sese
(particulae nimirum) collegerint coierintque, ut minora partibus aquae foramina
sint relicta: id quod fictili accidit, etc. (4. Meteorum. cap. 8.) And we need
seek no farther than a ball of wool, for the Exemplification of both; for, that
being so relaxed, as that the hairs touch each other more rarely, or in fewer
points, and thereupon more of the ambient Aer be intercepted among them,
instantly becomes soft: and then being so compressed, that the hairs touch each
other more frequently, or in more points, and the aer be thereupon again
excluded from among them, it as soon becomes hard.

Art. 8. The special manners of the Mollification of Hard: and Induration of
Soft bodies.
But if we wind up our curiosity one note higher, and enquire the Special Manner
of Mollifying Hard bodies; we shall find it to rest upon either Heat, or
Moisture. Upon Heat, when the Atoms of fire, subingressing into the pores of a
Hard Concretion do so commove and exagitate the insensible particles thereof,
that they become incontiguous in more points, than before, and so the whole
mass being made more lax and rare, upon the interception of many new inane
spaces among its particles, puts on a capacity of yielding to any thing that
presses it, and of receding from it superfice toward its interiors, according
to the property of softness. Thus Iron made red hot, is mollefied, and hard Wax
liquefied by heat. Upon Moisture, when the particles of an Humor so insinuate
themselves among the closely cohaerent particles of a Hard body, that
dissociating them in some measure, they intermix among them, and so (themselves
being sufficiently yielding upon pressure) cause the body to become yielding
and recessive from it superfice inwards. Thus Leather is softened by lying in
Water, or Oil; and Clay assumes so much the more of softness, by how much the
more of water it has imbibed.

On the other side, if we pursue the Induration of Soft bodies up to its
Special Manner, we shall secure it either in Cold, or Siccity. In Cold, whether
we understand it to be a simple expulsion of Calorifick Atoms, lately contained
in the body; as in the growing hard of Metals after fusion: or the
introduction of Frigorifick Atoms into the body, naturally void of them; as in
the induration of Water into Ice. In Siccity, whether we conceive it to be a
mere expulsion of the particles of moisture from a Concretion; as when Earth is
baked into Bricks: or a superinduction of dry particles upon a moist
concretion; as in the composition of Pills, which for the most part consist of
Dry Powders and Syrup, or some other viscid moisture.

Art. 9. PR^^LEM. Why Iron is Hardened, by being immersed red-hot into Cold
Water; and its SOLUTION.
But here we feel a strong Remora, or Doubt; How it comes about, that Iron made
glowing hot, and immediately plunged into cold Water, acquires a greater degree
of hardness, than it had before? And to remove it, we Answer; that the
particles of the Water subingress into the amplified pores of the Iron, and are
not again excluded from thence, though the particles thereof return to their
former close order, and reciprocally implicate each other, as before in
candescence; but, remaining imprisoned in the small incontiguities, or inane
spaces, which otherwise would have been empty, make the body of the iron
somewhat more solid or hard than otherwise it would have been. That this is a
sufficient Cause of that Effect, may be warrantably inferred from hence; that
if the sam^ seasoned iron be afterward brought to the fire again, and therein
made red hot, so that the contexture of its particles be relaxed, and the
particles of Water, which possess the inane spaces betwixt them, be evaporated;
there does it resume its former Softness; and this our Smiths call Nealing of
Iron.

To steer on, therefore, Art. 10. The Formal Reasons of Softness and Hardness.
the same course of Disquisition we have begun; forasmuch as Softness is
defined by the Facility, and Hardness by the Difficulty of bodies yielding in
the superfice: the only Considerable remaining to our full explanation of the
formal Reason of each of these two Qualities, is, How the yielding of a Soft
body in the Superfice is effected; for, that being once explicated, the rule of
Contraries will easily teach us, Wherein the Resistance of a Hard does
immediately consist. And th^s requires no taedious indagation, for from the
Praemises it may easily be collected; that a soft body does then yield, when
its particles immediately pressed in the superfice, do sink down and subingress
into the pores immediately beneath them, and then press down the next subjacent
particles into pores immediately beneath them; and those likewise press down
the next inferior rank of particles into void spaces below them; an those again
press down others successively until (the number of pores or void spaces
successively in each subingression decreasing) there be no more room to receive
the last pressed particles, and then the subingression cease. If this seem
not sufficient to make the yeildingness of Soft bodies clearly intelligible; we
must remit our Reader to our praecedent Discourse concerning the incapacity of
Aer to be Condensed or Compressed, in a Wind-gun, beyond a certain proportion,
or determinate rate. Farther, because a soft body cannot be squeezed, unless it
rest upon or against something that is hard, at least, less soft than it self;
so that, though the lower superfice thereof, relying upon the support, is so
bounded, that it has no liberty of space, whether to recede Versus profundum;
yet has it full liberty of space Versus latera: therefore comes it to pass,
that the subingression of particles into pores, and the Compression of others,
is made not only Versus profundum, in that part of the soft body, which
directly confronteth the hard, whereupon it rests; but also Versus latera,
toward the sides, or circumambient. And that after a various manner, according
to the various Contextures of soft bodies in the superfice.

For, if the superfice ( i. e. the outward part) of a soft body, Art. 11. The
ground of Aristotle's Distinction betwixt Formatilia and Pre^^ilia.
be of a more Compact and tenacious Contexture, than the interior mass or
substance; as is the skin of an Animal, compared to the subjacent flesh, and a
bladder in respect of the oil therein contained: in that case, the compression
of the particles is, indeed, propagated by succession to some distance as well
toward the bottom, as the sides, to which the superior particles being pressed
directly downward, and there resisted, deflect; yet not to that distance, as
where the superfice is of the same Contexture with the interior mass, as in Wax
and Clay, in both which, the Compression, and so the yiedling may be propagated
quite through, or from the superior to the inferior superfice, where it
immediately rests upon the hard body, all the intermediate particles starting
toward the sides, as being pressed above and resisted below. And hereupon,
doubtless, was it that Aristotle properly called those soft bodies, whose
superfice is either of a weaker, or of the same contexture with their internal
substance, (...), Formatilia; insomuch as when a Seal or other Solid body does
press them, they suffer such a Diffraction or Solution of Continuity in their
superficial parts, as that the dissociated particles are not able to restore
themselves to their former situation and mutual cohaesion, but retain the
figure of the body which pressed them: and, on the contrary, such as have the
contexture of their superfice more firm and tenacious than that of their
internal mass, (...), Pressilia; insomuch as upon pressure they suffer not so
great a Diffraction or Solution of Continuity in their superficial parts, but
that they still have some mutual cohaerence, and so are able to restore
themselves to their former situation, upon the remove of the body that pressed
them.

Art. 12. Two Axioms, concerning and illustrating the nature of Softness.
For the illustration of this, it is observable (1) That to the yielding of
every soft body, when pressed, it is necessary, that it have freedom of space
on its sides: because, if the lateral particles, when pressed by the
intermedia^^ ones, have not room whether to recede, they cannot yield at all;
and so the Compression must be very small. This may most sensibly be
Exemplified in a tube filled with Water; for, if you attempt to compress the
Water therein contained, with a R^mmer so exactly adapted to the bore of the
tube, as that no spaces be left betwixt it and the sides thereof, whereat the
water may rise upward, you shall make bu^ a very small and almost insensible
progress therein. (2) That no superfice of what contexture soever, can be
depressed versus profundum, or be any way dilated, but it must suffer some
Diffraction or Solution of Continuity; more or less. For, insomuch as each
particle of the superfice does possess a peculiar part of space proportionate
to its dimensions; and though upon the Dilatation of the superfice, i. e. the
remove of its particles to a more lax order, greater spaces are intercepted
among them, yet are not the particles multiplied in number, nor magnified in
dimensions, and so cannot possess more or greater spaces than before: therefore
is it necessary, that the superfice be variously cracked, and the continuity
thereof infringed in many places. The Necessity hereof does farther evidence it
self in the Flexion of a Twig, Cane, or other [(...)] Flexile body; for, when a
Twigg is bended, as the Concave superfice becomes Contracted and Corrugated,
the particles thereof being not able to penetrate each other, nor crowd
themselves into fewer places: So at the same time, is the Unequal Dilated, and
suffers many small breaches or cracks, the particles thereof being incapable
either to multiply themselves, or possess more spaces, than before. The same
likewise is easily intelligible in a Tractile body, such as ( Aristotle names
(...)) a Nerve, or Lutestring: for allbeit the interruption of Continuity be
not so manifest to the sense in a Tractile as in a Flexile body: yet may we
observe, that when a Tractile body is extended or drawn out in length, it is
extenuated or diminished in thickness. And, what, think you, becomes of those
interior particles, which compose its Crassitude or thickness? Certainly, they
must come sorth into the superfice, that so they may interpose themselves among
the Dissociated particles thereof, possess the void spaces left betwixt them,
and with their small claws or hooks on each hand cohaering to them, make the
superfice apparently continued. Would you observe the Interruption of
Continuity among the superficial particles of a Tractile body, and the issuing
forth and intermistion of interior particles among them; be pleased to paint
over a Lutestring with some oyled Color, and afterward vernish it over with
oil of Turpentine: then strain it hard upon the Lute, and you shall plainly
perceive the superfice of it to crack and become full of small clefts or
chinks, and new particles (not tincted with the color) to issue forth from the
entralls of the string, and interpose themselves among those small breaches.
Lastly, the same is also discoverable by the sight in a Ductile body [(...)]
such as every Metal; for, no metal, when pressed or hammerd, is dilated or
expanded on all sides, for any other reason but this, that it is as much
attenuated in thickness, and the particles in the superfice are so dissociated,
as that the interior particles rise up, possess the deserted spaces, and
cohaere to the discontinued exterior particles, as may be more plainly
discerned if the superfice of the Metal be tincted with some color.

SECT. II.
FRom the Praemises, Art. 1. Flexilit^, ^^actility, ^uctility, etc. de^ived
from S^^iness: and Rigidity from ^a^dn^^s.
whereupon we therefore insisted somewhat the longer, ^t is manifest, that
FLEXILITY, TRACTILITY, DUCTILITY, and other Qualities of the same Classis, are
all the Consequents of Softness: as the Contrary to them all RIGIDITY, is the
Consequent of Hardness; insomuch as whoever would frame to himself an exact
notion of a Rigid body, merely as a Rigid, must compose it of the Attributes,
inflexile, intractile, inductile.

Nor does any thing remain to our clear understanding of the nature of
FLEXILITY, but the Solution of that great Difficulty, Art. 2. PROBLEM. What is
the C^use of the motion of Restoration in Flexiles? and the SOLUT.
Cur flexilia, postquam inflexa fuerint, in pristinum statum resiliant? Why a
flexile body, such as a Bow of wood, Steel, Whalebone, etc. does, after
flexion, spring back again into its natural figure and situation?

The Reason of this Faculty of Restitution, we conceive (with the immortal
Gassendus) to be this; that the Recurse or Resilition of a flexile body is a
certain Reflex motion, which is continued with a Direct motion: as we shall
have opportunity professedly to demonstrate, in our subsequent Enquiry into the
nature of Motion. In the mean while, it may suffice to stay the stomach of
Curiosity, that we evidence the cause of it to be the same with that of the
Rebound of a ball, impelled by a racket, from a Wall: for, as the force, which
makes the ball rebound from the wall, is the very same which first impelled it
against the Wall; so is the force, which reflecteth a bow, after bending, the
very same which bended it. To Exemplify; when a man lays a staff transversly
upon a beam, and strikes the end that is toward him, downward; the end that is
from him, must rise, as much upward: as well because of the resistance of the
beam (which here performs the office of an Hypomochlion, or middle Fulciment)
as of the continuity and compactness of the staff it self; and so the same
cause, the hand of the man, which impelled the one extreme of the staff
downward, is also the cause of the rising of its other extreme upward. Again,
let the staff have liberty of play between two beams, the one above, the other
beneath it; and upon the Depulsion of one end, the other shall rise up, and be
impinged against the upper beam, and from thence rebound back again upon the
lower, and thence again to the higher, and thence again to the lower, and so
alternately be reflected from one to the other, till the force of resistance in
the 2 beams has wholly overcome that of the first percussion or impulse: yet
still does the last Rebound, no less than the first, owe it self to the same
Cause, which impressed the first motion upon the staff, which was the hand of
the man, who impelled it. To approach one degree nearer; set up a staff
perpendicularly in some hole in the floor or pavement, so that it may have
some liberty of motion to each hand: and then, if you impel or inflect the
upper extreme to the right hand, the part of the lower extreme, which
respects the upper part of the right side of the hole, will press upon the
same, and the other side of the lower extreme, where it touches the lowest
part of the left side of the hole, shall be at the same time impinged likewise
against the left side; and that so forcibly, that it shall rebound from thence
to the opposite side, and at the same time, the upper part, which you
inflected, shall rebound from the right to the left: and thus shall the staff
be agitated from side to side, by alternate resilitions, till the resistance of
the hole h^^h wholly overcome the force thereupon impressed, by your hand. This
laid down, we infer, that the cause of Return in the staff, is the same with
that of the Self-restorative motion in bodies Flexile; for, that you may be
able to inflect one end of the staff, it is necessary, that some part of it be
held fast in your hand, some hole, chink, or other hold, that so you may
distinguish the Hypomochlion, or point of Rest, from the part inflected.

Nor is it ought available to the contrary, to Object (1) that the staff is not
bent with one single stroke, Art. 3. Two Obstructions expeded.
but a continent pression: because a Continent pression is naught else but a
continent Repetition of strokes; and that is the last stroke, immediately upon
which the last and non-impeded Reflection does ensue. 2. that our Example of the
Resilition of a staff is incongruous, there being a considerable Rigidity
therein, but none in Flexile bodies: for, though there be no perfect or
Absolute Rigidity in Flexile substances, yet is there a sufficient Firmness,
which is a degree of Rigidity; and by how much greater that is, by so much the
greater force of impulse is required to the inflexion, and consequently so much
stronger is the Reflection. So that while the bottom of the staff, and its
Hypomochlion alternately perform their offices, the one reflecting this, the
other the contrary way, so many more Alternate Reflections, or Excurses and
Recurses are made, by how much greater the Rigidity of the staff, and firm
fixation in its hold, are* and (...) contra. And, since the Reflection, which
is made from the firmly fix^ part, is as it were the Fundamental, or General
Reflection; innumerable Special or Particular Reflections, exactly like the
General, are made in singulis partibus* insomuch as the parts of the Concave
superfice are so compressed, in order, one after another, from the Deflected
Extrem to the Fixed, that suffering mutual resistance, they are compelled to
start back in the same order, one after another; and the parts of the Unequal
superfice, from the Fixed Extreme to the Deflected, are so retracted in order
one after another, that they return in order to their natural site; and some
parts thus conspiring with others, reduce the whole inflected body to its
natural situation and figure.

Finally, because every Reflex Motion is always (though, perhaps, Art. 4. Why
Flexile bodies grow weak, by overmuch, and over frequent Bending.
not sensibly) weaker, than the Direct; therefore is it, that in every
Deflexion, both to the Concave superfice, some particles subingress to the
interiors of the Flexile body, which cannot return forth again to the
superfice; and to the Unequal, other particles egress to the superfice, which
cannot return in again to the interiors: Whereupon it comes to pass, that by
how much the longer the Inflexion is continued, or how much the more frequently
repeated; by so much the more Contracted is the Concave superfice made, and so
continues, and so much more Deduced or Dilated is the Unequal superfice made,
and so continues; and consequently both the Inflexion and Reduction become as
so much the weaker, so as much the smaller. Nay, where the Deflexion is so
great, as that some parts of either superfice are wholly Diffracted and
Dissociated, and so can no longer maintain that mutual cohaerence and
continuity, which is necessary to the series of Reflection and Retraction: there
does no Reduction at all follow, after Inflexion, at most only so much, as is
made by the parts, which yet remain cohaerent, in which also we must allow the
distinction of Concavity and Convexity. Thus, when a Twigg is broken half off
in the middle, by overmuch bending; it makes no more Reflection, than what
depends only upon the half which is unbroken.

As for TRACTILITY likewise, Art. 5. The Reason of the frequent Vibrations, or
Diadr^ms of Lutestrings, and other Tractile Bodies; declared to be the same
with that of the Restorative Mot^^n of Flexiles: and Demonstrated.
all the obscurity which remains upon its nature, depends upon this Difficulty;
Cur Nervus distentus, and e suo situ distractus toties hinc inde redeat? Why
does a Tractile body, such as a Nerve or Lutestring, when distended, and
abduced from the line of direction to either side, not only reduce it self from
that obliquity to directness; but recurr beyond it, and then returns toward the
place of its first abduction, and thence back again to and beyond the line of
direction, and so makes many excurses and recurses?

And this may be soon solved, by Answering; that the Cause of this Tremulation
or Vibrations of a Tractile thing, distended and percussed, or abduced, seems
to be the same with that of the Reflection of a Flexile, newly rendered. For (1.)
A chord distended, is nothing but a Flexile body; and so much the more apt for
Reflection, by how much more it is Distended: because Tension is a kind of
Rigidity. (2.) A chord distended has the reason not only of one simple Flexile
body, but also of two conjoined; insomuch as it has 2 Extrems, in each of
which we may distinguish the Hypomochlion, or fixed part, from the Reflectent;
and in the middle, or that part, which is percussed or abduced by the plectrum
or finger, there are as it were 2 other Extremes conjoined, which being
naturally reluctant each to other, cause the reciprocal Reduction each of
other. (3.) As a Twigg, after inflexion, does (...) beyond the middle, or line
of directness, and goes and comes frequently, till it has overcome the fist
impressed motion, and recovered its natural site because after the first
Reflection is made, a second succeeds, for the same reason, as the first, a
third for the same reason as the second, and so a fourth, fifth etc.
successively: So also, is it necessary, that many Vibrations, or Excurses and
Recur^es be alternately made, by a Chord dist^nded and percusled; because the
s^^e cause r^mains to the second, third, fourth, etc. which was to the first.
Lege Me^sennum, Harmonicor. lib. 3. Propos. 22. Corollario de Atomis.

This may be fairly demonstrated in this Chord A. B. vertically distended, by a
weight appensed. For, being elevated to the point C. falling from thence, it
will make its first diadrome to I. not to L. because of the resistance of the
Aer: and thence by n^w force returning over the center B. it will make it
second diadrome, no^ quite home to N. because of the resistance of the Aer, but
only to S. and thence relapsing, it will make its third diadrome no higher then
V. and thence back again, its fourth to R. and at length, its diadroms
successively diminishing, it rests at the center B. And thus you see how the
force or impetus, whereby it is moved, is by sensible degrees and
proportionately diminished: and that it is impossible, it should make any two
Diadroms Aequispatial, during the whole time of its motion. For, if we concede
^wo diadroms to be equal in space; we must find them to be produced by an equal
impetus. Therefore, if the Chord recurr^ng (...) C. (...) on the other side
ascend as high as L. it would of necessity thence returning make its second
Diadrome to C. where it began its first, and thence recur to L. again, and
thence to C. and so the motion would be perpetual. Lest, therefore, that
Absurdity be admitted in nature, it is necessary that the impetus be
proportionately diminished, that so the Chord may after various Vibrations
arrive at the center or term of its motion. You see also, that the Natural
impetus, by whose swindge or rapt, the weight appen^ed at the lower extreme of
the Chord, is carr^ed to the Center, is the Cause of all its Transcursions or
diadroms: and that the Resistance of the constipated or compressed Aer, is the
cause of the Diminution of them.

But here comes the PROBLEM (such a one as put even Mersennus Himself to the
Eruditis Physicomathematicis discutiendum relinquo; Harmonicor. lib. 2.
proposit. 29.) and that is; Art. 6. PROBLEM. Why the Vibrations, or Diadr^ms of
a Chord dist^^ded and percussed, are Ae^uitemporane ^us, though not
Ae^^ispatial: and the SOLUT.
Cur Diadromus Chordae maximus eodem tempore conficit totum spacium, quo
minimus, aut reliqui singuli diadromi intermedii illud conficiant? Whence is
it, that all the Excurses and Recurses, or diadroms of a Chord, either
Vertically, or horizontally distended, and abduced from the line of Direction;
are Isochronical, or Aequitemporaneous, though not Aequispacial: as also are
All the Vibrations of a Flexile body, fixed at one extreme, and deflected at the
other.

This stupendous Phenomenon may be thus Demonstrated. Let F. G. (in the
second diagram) be the Chord horizontally distended; which, being distracted
from its direct situation, F. G. to A. makes its several Diadroms, A.B. B.C.
C.E. and E.D. Now we say, that All these Diadroms, though greatly
disproportionate in point of space, are yet exactly proportionate in point of
Time, i. e. the first Diadrom, A. B. does measure its whole space, in the same
proportion of time, as does the second Diadrom, B. C. or the third, C. E. or
the fourth E. D.* For, since the Violence or impetus, whereby the Chord is
abduced from the line F. G. to the point A. is so much the greater, by how much
the longer the line of the Epidrom is, the Chord must pervade it space so much
the more speedily, by how much the space is greater, compared to that of the
subsequent ones: it necessarily follows, that all the subsequent Diadroms must
be Aequidiurnal, because look how much is detracted from the Longitude,
Magnitude, and Impetus of the subsequent Diadroms exactly so much accedeth to
the Brevity of the space, which they are to percurr; and so the longitude of
the posterior Epidrom becomes inverted in proportion to the Time, and its
Brevity of space compensateth the decay of that Impetus, which was in the Prior
Diadrom. For Example; Let the Chord, which makes an hundred Diadroms, perv^de a
foot space, in its first Diadrom, and the hundredth part of a foot, at its
last, or hundredth Diadrom: we affirm, that the first Diadrom must be an
hundred times swifter than the Last; which is an hundred times slower, as being
to the same proportion less violent, and that which immediately praecedeth the
Quiet of the Cord, in the Direct line, F. G.

More plainly; the First Diadrom, A. B. as it is the Greatest, so is it the
most Violent; and as it is the most Violent, so must the Velocity, whereby it
pervades the whole space betwixt A.B. be also the Greatest: and the Second
Diadrom, B. C. how much it comes short, in violence of tension, and Celerity of
motion, of the First, so much does it come short of the Magnitude also thereof;
so that though the space of the former, A. B. be much larger than that of the
second, B.C. yet do they both pervade their several spaces in the same
proportion of Time, because, as the second Diadrom, B. C. has less of violence
and of Celerity, than the first, A. B. so has it just so much less of space to
pervade, and so the Diminution of space Compensateth the Diminution of Violence
and Celerity. Wherefore, the Reason of the Third Diadrom being the same to the
Second, as that of the Second to the First; and of the Fourth to the Third, as
that of the Third to the Second: it is manifest and necessary, that all the
Diadroms be^ Aequidiurnal, though not Aequispatial; which is what we Assumed.

Art. 7. PROBLEM. Why does a Chord of a duple length, perform its diadroms in a
proportion of time duple, to a Chord of a single length; both being distended
by equal force; and yet, if the Chord of the duple length be distended by a
duple fore or weight, it does not perform its Diadroms, in a proportion of time
duple to that of the other; but only if the Force or weight distending it, be
quadruple to the First supposed: and its SOLUT.
But yet the Lees of the PROBLEM remain behind; for it is worthy farther
Enquiry: Why a Chord of a Duple length, v.g. of 4 foot, does perform its
Diadroms in a Duple proportion of Time, to a Chord of a single length, v. g. of
2 foot; when both are distended by equal Force, or Weight: and yet, if the
Chord of 4 foot be distended by doubly as great a Force or Weight as that of
only 2 foot, it does not perform its Diadroms with Velocity Duple thereunto;
but only if the force of its Distension be Quadruple to the force first
supposed?

And to exhaust them, though somewhat rough and crabbed, we ANSWER, As in a
Pensile body, or Chord vertically distended by a weight, the time of each
single Excurse, is equal to that time, in which the same weight would, if
permitted, be falling from such an Altitude, as is commeasurable by the
diametre of the Circle, whereof Arches are described by the Excurses of the
Pensile body abduced from the perpendicular: So in a Tensile body, such as a
Chord strained upon a Lute, All the times, in which a part of the Chord
accepted exactly in the middle, excurreth from one side, are equal to one time,
in which one of its Extrems, if cut off, would directly pervade the whole
length, and come into the place of the other, toward which the force, being
still the same behind, would draw it. For, the same Force, certainly, is
always able to produce the same Effect: and if the lateral spaces of the
Diadroms do continually decrease; the Velocity of the motion must also
continually decrease. And the cause of that continual Decrement, can be no
other but the Force Drawing or distending the Chord, which continually
refracteth the contrary Force, by the plectrum or finger impressed thereupon.
Now, since All the Excurses of a Chord, of whatever length, are exaequated to
one and the same direct Trajection thereof, as we said even now; in the Former
Case, the Trajection cannot but be performed in a duple proportion of Time, as
a Duple proportion of Space is assumed to be trajected or pervaded, by the same
Motive or Attractive Force: but in the Latter not, because Three Equal things
being supposed, viz. Time, Space, and the Weight or Attractive Force, it is of
pure necessity, that the same space remaining, look how much of Time is
diminished, so much is the motive Force increased, and what is the proportion
of space to Time, the same is the proportion of the Motive Force to Space. And
hence comes it, that the proportion of space to Time being as that of 2 to 1;
the Motive Force must have to space the proportion of 4 to 2: and consequently
to Time, not as 2 to 1, but as 4 to 1.

Lastly, as for DUCTILITY, Art. 8. The Reasons of the vast Ductility, or
Extensibility of Gold.
little remains Additional to what we have formerly said, concerning the Formal
Reason thereof, but the Solution of that notable PROBLEM, about the admirably
vast Extensibility of that King not only of Metals, but of the whole Earth,
Gold. And, indeed, since we have it upon the testimony of our Experience, that
one Ounce of pure Gold may be, by Malleation, extended to such an amplitude, as
to cover ten Acres of Land; and that one Grain thereof may be Wier drawn into
a thread of such incomparable fineness, as to commensurate 400 foot; and
consequently, that one Ounce of Gold is capable of deduction into a thread,
whose length may fufill the measure of two hundred and thirty thousand, and
four hundred feet, of six inches apiece: we say, this being avouched by those
Mechaniques, who deal in Beating of Gold into Leaves, and Drawing it out into
Wier, it seems well worthy our Enquiry, upon what Cause this stupendous
Praerogative of Gold does chiefly depend. In a word, therefore, we conceive
this superlative EXTENSIBILITY of Gold, to be warrantably referrible to a
Threefold Cause, viz. the unparalleld Compactness of it substance, the great
Tenuity of its Component particles, and the Multitude of small Hooks or Claws,
whereby those particles reciprocally implicate each other, and maintain the
Continuity of the whole Mass. For (1) the exceeding Compactness of its
Contexture does afford parts sufficient to so great Extension, i. e. such an
abundance of them, as upon the Decrement of the Mass in Profundity, may rise up
into the superfice and enlarge the Latitude, or Longitude: (2) The Tenuity of
its component particles makes the mass capable of Diminution in profundity,
and so of Augmentation in superfice, even to an incredible proportion: and (3)
The Multitude of small Hooks, whereby those Exile particles reciprocally
cohaere, suffices to the constant Continuity; for, while the mass is suffering
under the Hammer, no sooner can the stroke thereof dissociate one particle from
its neighbor, but instantly it lays hold of and fastneth upon another, and as
firmly cohaereth thereunto, as to its former hold: So that the mutual
Cohaesion is maintained even above the highest degree of Extension or
Attenuation, which any imaginable Art can promise. Nay, so sufficient a Cause
of incredible Ductility does this last seem to be, that Mersennus regarded no
other: as may be collected from these his words: Sunt autem Corpora maxim
Ductilia, quae habent Atomos undique Hamatas, ut Aurum; cujus Atomi non ita
possunt evolui, ut sese deserant in inferioribus, aut superioribus partibus,
quin laterales succedant, quibus usque ad insignem tenuitatem perveniant;
(Harmon. lib. 3. propos. 22. Corollario de Atomis.) This apprehended, the
Chemist needs not longer to perplex himself about the Cause of the
Incorruptibility, and incapacity of Volatilization in Gold: and if his so
promising Art can attain to the investment of any Metal with these Proprieties;
let other men dispute, whether it be Gold or no, for our parts, we oblige our
selves so to accept it.

Now, that we may run through all other Secondary Qualities, Art. 9. Sectility
and Fissility, the Consequents of Softness.
in this one Course, we farther observe; that to the praedominion of Softness,
men ought to refer SECTILITY, such as is seen in wood Cut transversly: and
FISSILITY, such as in wood cleft along the Grain. For, whateve is [(...)]
Sectile, must in some sort return to the nature of Flexility; seeing that the
parts of it, which are immediately pressed upon by the edge of the Axe, Knife,
or other Cutting instrument, must recede inwardly, i. e. from the superfice to
the profundity of the Mass, and the Lateral parts, at the same time, give back
on each hand, for otherwise there could be no yiedling, and so no cutting; and
in like manner, whatever is [(...)] Fissille, must have so much of Flexility
also, as that, when the parts of it, in the place, upon which the Force is
first discharged, begin to be dissociated, a certain Compression must run along
successively to all the other parts, which are afterward to be dissociated.
But, though a Fission, or Cleaving may be made without any Deperdition of
Substance, or excession of parts from the body cleft; those parts, which were
coadunated Sec. Longitudinem, being only separated Sec. Longitudinem: yet is
that impossible in any Section whatever, though made by the acutest edge
imaginable; because, look how much of the body does commensurate the breadth of
the edge of the Cutting instrument, so much, at least, is beaten off and
destracted from the body, betwixt the sides of the incision. And thus much
concerning the Consequents of Softness.

Art. 10. Tractility and Friability, the Consequents of Hardness.
As for those of Hardness; they are TRACTILITY and FRIABILITY. For, whatever is
[(...)] Fractile, capable of fraction into pieces, as a Flint and most other
stones, must have so much of Rigidity, (the chief propriety of Hardness) as may
suffice to hinder the yiedling of it superfice, upon pressure or percussion;
and consequently all subingression of superior particles into the small
vacuities intercepted among the inferior ones; and so to cause, that the
superfice is first diffracted, and successively all the subjacent particles
dissociated, quite through to the contrary superfice, the inferior particles
being still pulsed by the Superior [(...)] by reason of their Continuity. So
that the fragments into which the body is shattered, are greater or less,
either according to the diverse contexture thereof in diverse parts, in respect
whereof some parts may be contexed more Compactly and Firmly, and others again
more Laxly and Weakly: or according to situation, in respect whereof those
parts, which are nearer to the Circumference, she off more easily than those,
which are more remote. In like manner, whatever is properly [(...)] Friabile,
Brittle, as Marble, Glass, Earthern Vessels, etc. must also have so much of
Rigidity, as to make it incapable of Flexion, Traction, Diduction, or
Extension, by any means whatever: so that upon any forcible pression, or
percussion, the whole mass or substance of it is shivered into dust, or broken
into greater fragments, which are easily subject to be Crumbled into dust
afterward. Now, that a Hard or Rigid body being percussed, or pressed, with
force sufficient, in one Extreme or Superfice, the percussion or pressure may
be propagated from part to part successively, till it arrive at and be
determined in the other extreme; may be evinced by sundry most (...)
Experiments, some whereof are recited by the Lord St. Alban (in ^^lva sylvarum
Cent. 1.) But this one will serve the turn. When an Oyster, or Tortois shell
is let fall from a sufficient altitude, upon a stone, (...) is usually
shattered into many pieces; and that for no other Reason but this, that the
lower side, whether Unequal or Concave, being vehemently impinged against the
stone, the particles thereof immediately knocked by the stone, as vehemently
give back, and in their quick Retrocession impell the particles situate
immediately above them; whereupon those impelled particles with the same
violence impell others next in order above them, until the percussion being
propagated from part to part successively quite home to the upper superfice, it
comes to pass, that each percussed part giving back, the whole shell is
shattered into small Fragments.

All which may seem but a genuine Paraphrase upon the Text of Mersennus.
(Harmonicor. lib 2. propos. 43.) Duritiei vero proprietas appellatur Rigiditas;
quae fit ab Atomis ita sibi invicem cohaerentibus, ut Deflexionem impediant:
quod contingit in Corporibus, quae constant Atomis Cubicis, octuedris and
tetruedis, ex quibus resultat perfecta superficiecularum inter se cohaesio;
hinc ^it ut Rigida Corpora Fructilia sint, non autem Sectilia, and ictu impacto
tota in frusta dissiliant. Qui adum praedictae superficiunculae se invicem
premunt, quae sunt ex una part, dimoventur ab iis, quae ex alia; adeo ut unico
impetu externo Corpori impresso, Contusio sentiatur per totum, and partium
eodem, momento fit separatio.

There yet remains a Quality, Art. 11. Ruptility, the Consequent partly of
S^ftness, partly of Hardness.
which is the Offspring neither of Softness alone, nor Hardness alone; but ought
to be referred partly to the one, partly to the other: and that is RUPTILITY.
For, not only such Bodies, as challenge the Attribute of Softness, are subject
to Ruption, when they are distressed beyond the tenor of their Contexture,
either by too much Inflexion, as a Bow over bent; or too much Distention, as
Leather or Parchment over strained; or too much Malleation, as a plate of Lead,
Iron, or other Metal over hammerd: but such also as claim the title of
Hardness, and that in an eminent proportion, as Marble; for, a Pillar of
Marble, if long and slender, and laid transversly or horizontally, so as to
rest only upon its two extrems, is easily broken asunder by its own Weight.
For, as Soft bodies, when rackt or deduced beyond the r^te of mutual Cohaerence
among their parts, must yield to the External Force, which distres^eth them,
and so suffer total discontinuity: so Hard ones, when the Internal Force, or
their own Weight, is too great to be resisted by their Compactness, as in the
example of a long Marble Pillar, not supported in the middle; then must they
likewise yield to that superior force, and break asunder.

And here the Archer and Musician, put in, Art. 12. PROBLEM. Why Chords
d^^^^enced, are more apt to break near the End^, than in the middle and its
SOLUT.
for a Solution of that PROBLEM, which so frequently troubles them; viz. Cur
Chordae facili^^s circa Ex^rema, quam circa Medium frangantur, cum vi vel
pondere, sive horizontaliter, sive verticaliter trahuntur? Why Bowstrings,
Lutestrings, and other Chords, though of uniforme Contexture throughout, and
equally distended in all parts, do yet usually break asunder, not in the
middle, or near it, but at one End, where they are fastened?

The Cause, certainly, must be this; that the Weight or drawing force does
always first act upon the parts of the string, which are nearest to it, and
successively upon those, which are farthest off, i. e. in the Middle: so that
the string suffering the greatest stress near the Extrems, is more subject to
break there, than in any other part. Wherefore, whenever a Bowstring breaks in
or near the middle; it may safely be concluded, that the string was weakest in
that place. To which we may add this also, that Experienced Archers, to
praevent the frequent breaking of their strings, and the danger of breaking the
Bow thereby; enjoin their String-makers, to add a Link of Flax, or Twist more
at the Ends of each string, than in any other parts of it: and that they call
the Forcing, because Experience has taught them, that the Force of the Bow is
most violently discharged upon those parts of the string, which are nearest to
the Horns.

CHAP. XV. OCCULT QUALITIES made MANIFEST.
SECT. I.
HAving thus long entertained it self with the most probable Reasons of the
several ways and means, Art. 1. That the Insensibility of Qualities does not
import their Vnintelligibility; contrary to the presumption of the Aristotelean.
whereby Compound Bodies exhibit their several Attributes and Proprieties to
the judicature of the Sensitive Faculties in Animals, and principally in Man,
the Rule, Perfection and grand Exemplar of all the rest; it is high time for our
Curiosity to turn a new leaf, and sedulously address it self to the speculation
of Another Order, or Classis of Qualities, such as are vulgarly distinguished
from all those, which have hitherto been the subject of our Disquisitions, by
the unhappy and discouraging Epithet, OCCULT. Wherein we use the scarce
perfect Dialect of the Schools; who too boldly praesuming, that all those
Qualities of Concretions, which belong to the jurisdiction of the senses, are
dependent upon Known Causes, and deprehended by Known Faculties, have therefore
termed them Manifest: and as incircumspectly concluding, that all those
Proprieties of Bodies, which fall not under the Cognizance of either of the
Senses, are derived from obscure and undiscoverable Causes, and perceived by
Unknown Faculties; have accordingly determined them to be Immanifest or Occult.
Not that we dare be guilty of such unpardonable Vanity and Arrogance, as not
most willingly to confess, that to Ourselves all the Operations of Nature are
mere Secrets; that in all her ample catalogue of Qualities, we have not met
with so much as one, which is not really Immanifest and Abstruse, when we
convert our thoughts either upon its Genuine and Proxime Causes, or upon the
Reason and Manner of its perception by that Sense, whose proper Object it is:
and consequently, that as the Sensibility of a thing does noe way praesuppose
its Intelligibility, but that many things, which are most obvious and open to
the Sense, as to their Effects, may yet be remote and in the dark to the
Understanding, as to their Causes: so on the Contrary, does not the
Insensibility of a thing necessitate, nay, nor aggravate the Unintelligibility
thereof, but that many things, which are above the sphere of the Senses, may
yet be as much within the reach of our Reason, as the most sensible whatever.
Which being praecogitated, as, when we look back upon our praecedent
Discourses, touching the Originals and Perception of Sensible Qualities, we
have just ground to fear, that they have not attained the happy shore of
verity, but remain upon the wide and fluctuating ocean of mere Verisimility: So
also, when we look forward upon our immediately subsequent Disquisitions into
the Causes of many Insensible Qualities, are we not destitute of good reason to
hope, that though we herein attempt the consignation of Consentaneous and
Probable Causes to sundry of those Effects, which Scholars commonly content
themselves only to Admire, and without farther exercise of their Intellectuals,
to leave wrapped up in the Chaos of Sympathies and Antipathies; yet will not the
Ingenious misunderstand us, or conceive that we esteem or propose those Reasons
as Oraculous or Apodicticall, or create an expectation of the Discovery of such
Originals, whereupon those Rarer Operations and Magnalia of Nature do proximely
and genuinely depend. However, some may think it expedient for us to profess,
that as in our former Enquiries, so in this, our Design is only to explain
sundry admired Effects, by such Reasons, as may appear not altogether Remote
and Incongruous, but Consentaneous and Affine to Truth; that so no man's
judgment may be impeached by embracing them for most Probable, until the (in
that respect, too slow) wheel of Time shall have brought up some more worthy
Explorator, who shall wholly withdraw that thick Curtain of obscurity, which
yet hangs betwixt Natures Laboratory and Us, and enrich the Commonweal of
Letters, by the discovery of the Real Verity And this we must enterprise, by
continuing our progress in the almost obliterated Tract, that Epicurus and
Democritus so long since chalked forth; not by treading in the beaten road of
Aristotle and his Se^tators, who (for ought we have learned) were They, who
first founded that ill contrived Sanctuary of Ignorance, called OCCULT
QUALITIES.

For, generally setting up their rest in the Commistion of Elements, Art. 2.
Upon what grounds; and by wh^m, the Sanctuary of Occult Qualities was erected.
and their supposed Immateriall Qualities; and being not able ever to explicate
any Insensible Propriety, from those narrow and barren Principles: they thought
it a sufficient Salvo for their Ignorance, simply to affirm all such
Proprieties to be Occult; and without due reflection upon the Invalidity of
their Fundamentals, they blushed not to charge Nature Herself with too much
Closeness and Obscurity, in that point, as if she intended that all Qualities,
that are Insensible, should also be Inexplicable.

The ingenious Sanchez, among many Skeptical Arguments of the Uncertainty of
Sciences, Art. 3. Occult Qualities and professed Ignorance, all one.
seasonably urges this one, as very considerable, against Physiologists; that
when any Natural Problem, such as that of the Attraction of Iron by a
Loadstone, of straws by Amber, etc. is objected to them; instead of setting
their Curiosity on work to to investigate the Causes thereof, they lay it in a
deep sleep, with that infatuating opium of Ignote Qualities: and yet expect
that men should believe them to know all that is to be known, and to have
spoken like Oracles cencerning that Theorem; though at the same instant, they
do as much as confess, that indeed they know nothing at all of its Nature and
Causes. For, what difference is there, whether we say, that such a thing is
Occult; or that we know nothing of it?

Nor is it a Course either less dishonorable to the Professors, Art. 4. The
Refuge of Sympathies and Antipathies, equally obstructive to the advance of
Natural Science, with that of Igno^e Proprieties.
or dangerous to the Students of Philosophy, to refer such Effects, upon which
men commonly look with the eye only of Wonder, to Secret Sympathies and
Antipathies: forasmuch as those Windy Terms are no less a Refuge for the Idle
and Ignorant, than that of Occult Proprieties, it being the very same in
importance, whether we have recourse to the One, or to the other. For, no
sooner do we betake ourselves to Either, but we openly confess, that, all our
Learning is at a stand, and our Reason wholly vanquished, and beaten out of the
field by the Difficulty proposed. We deny not, that most, if not All of those
Admired Effects of Nature, which even the Gravest Heads have too long thought
sufficient Excuses of their Despair of Cognition, do arise from some Sympathy,
or Antipathy betwixt the Agent and Patient: but yet for all that, have we no
reason to concede, that Nature does institute or Cause that sympathy or
Antipathy, or the Effect resulting from either, by any other Laws, or Means,
but what she has ordained and constantly uses, to the production of all other
Common and familiar Effects. We acknowlddge also, that Sympathy is a certain
Consent, and Antipathy a certain Dissent betwixt Two Natures, from one, or both
of which there usually arises some such Effect, as may seem to deserve our
limited Admiration: but is it therefore reasonable for us to infer, that those
Natures are not subject unto, nor regulated by the General and Ordinary Rules
of Action and Passion, whereto Nature has fitmely obliged Herself in the rest
of Her Operations?

To lance and cleanse this Cacoethical Ulcer, to the bottom, Art. 5. Thatall
Attraction, referred to Secret Sympathy; and all Repulsion, adscribed to secret
Antipathy, betwixt the Agent and Patient, is effected by Corporeal Instruments,
and such as resemble those, whereby one body Attracteth, or Repelleth another,
in sensible and mechanique operations.
Consider we, that the General Laws of Nature, whereby she produces All
Effects, by the Action of one and Passion of another thing, as may be collected
from sundry of our praecedent Discertations, are these: (1.) That every Effect
must have its Cause; (2) That no Cause can act but by Motion; (3) That Nothing
can act upon a Distant subject, or upon such whereunto it is not actually
Praesent, either by it self, or by some instrument, and that either Conjunct,
or Transmitted; and consequently, that no body can move another, but by contact
Mediate, or Immediate, i. e. by the mediation of some continued Organ, and that
a Corporeal one too, or by it self alone. Which considered, it will be very
hard not to allow it necessary, that when two things are said either to
Attract and Embrace one the other by mutual Sympathy, or to Repel and Avoid
one the other, by mutual Antipathy; this is performed by the same ways and
means, whereby we observe one Body to Attract and hold fast another, or one
Body to Repel and Avoid conjunction with another, in all Sensible and
Mechanique Operations. This small Difference only allowed, that in Gross and
Mechanique operations, the Attraction, or Repulsion is performed by Sensible
Instruments: but, in those finer performances of Nature, called Sympathies and
Antipathies, the Attraction or Repulsion is made by Subtle and Insensible. The
means used in every common and Sensible Attraction and Complexion of one Body
by another, every man observes to be Hooks, Lines, or some such intermediate
Instrument continued from the Attrahent to the Attracted; and in every
Repulsion or Disjunction of one Body from another, there is used some Pole,
Lever, or other Organ intercedent, or somewhat exploded or discharged from the
Impellent to the Impulsed. Why therefore should we not conceive, that in every
Curious and Insensible Attraction of one body by another, Nature makes use of
certain slender Hooks, Lines, Chains, or the like intercedent Instruments,
continued from the Attrahent to the Attracted, and likewise that in every
Secret Repulsion or Sejunction, she uses certain small Goads, Poles, Levers,
or the like protruding Instruments, continued from the Repellent to the
Repulsed body? Because, albeit those Her Instruments be invisible and
imperceptible; yet are we not therefore to conclude, that there are none such
at all. We every day behold Spiders letting themselves down from high roofs,
and as nimbly winding themselves up again at pleasure, by such slender threads
of their own occasional and extemporary spinning, as it is not every common eye
that can discern them. Nay, in a Mask at Court, we have seen a whole Chorus of
Gods descend into the theater, as from the clouds, only by Wires and other
lines, so fine and slender, as that all the light of the tapers burning therein
was not sufficient to discover them to the sight of the Spectators: and vast
and ponderous Scenes so suddenly and dexterously shifted, by the almost
inobservable motions of Skrews, Elevators, Pulleys, and the like Archimedean
Engines and Devices, that the common Beholders, judging only by the Appearance,
or (rather) Non-apparence, have thought those great machines to have been
Automatous, or to have moved themselves, and at last to vanish into nothing.
And shall we not then allow the incomparably more Curious Mechaniques of
Natures, the Exemplar of Art, to be wrought by Instruments of Subtility
incomparably greater: and that many of those small Engines, whereby she usually
moves and susteins bodies of considerable bulk and weight, are Corporeal,
though by incomputable excesses below the perception of our acutest sense?
Certainly, for us to affirm, that nothing Material is emitted from the
Loadstone to Iron, which by continuity may Attract it; only because our sense
does deprehend nothing intercedent betwixt them: is an Argument of equal weight
with that of the Blind man, who denied the Being of Light and Colors, because
He could perceive none. In a word, if there be any validity in what we have so
plainly asserted, and frequently inculcated, touching the Hebetude or Grossness
of our Senses, on one part, and the great Exility of all Aporraea's or Effuxes
streaming from Bodies, on the other; and if tha^ Oracle, Reason, be to be
heard, which so long since persuaded Hippocrates, and many other, Secretaries
of Nature, that most, if not All Bodies are [(...)] Perspirable and
Conspirable, i. e. that they continually emit insensible Effluvia's from
themselves to others: We say, if there be any weight in all this, men cannot
think it unreasonable in us to conceive, that those Admired Effects, which they
commonly ascribe to Hidden Sympathies and Antipathies, are brought about by the
same ways and means, which Nature and Art use in the Causation of the like
Ordinary and Sensible Effects; and that the Instruments of Natural Attraction,
Complectence, Repulsion, Sejunction, are Corporeal, and hold a near Analogy to
those of Artificial; only these are Gross and Perceptible, those Subtle and
Imperceptible.

Notwithstanding the perspicuity of these Arguments, Art. 6. The Means of
Attractions sympathetical, explicated by a convenient Simile.
we shall not supererogate, to heighten the luster of so desirable a Truth, by
the vernish of a convenient and praegnant Simile, or two. If we attentively
observe a Chamaeleon catching Gnats and other small Flies in the Aer, for his
food; we shall see him dart out a long and slender tongue, with a small
recurvation at the tip, and birdlimed with a certain tenacious and inviscating
moisture, wherewith, in a trice, laying hold of a Fly, at some distance from
his mouth, he conveys the same into it with such cleanly speed, as exceeds the
Legerdemane of our cunningst Juglers, and may have been the chief occasion of
that popular Error, that he lives merely upon Aer. And when we see a piece of
Amber, Jet, hard Wax, or other Electrique, after sufficient friction, to
attract straws, shavings of wood, quils, and other festucous bodies of the same
lightness, objected within the orb of their Alliciency; and that with a
cleanly and quick motion: Why should we not conceive, that this Electricity or
Attraction may hold a very near Analogy to that attraction of Gnats, by the
exserted and nimbly retracted tongue of a Chamaeleon. For (1) it is not
improbable, that the Attraction of all Electriques is performed by the
mediation of swarms of subtle Emanations, or Continued Rays of exile
particles, comparative to so many Chamaeleons Tongues; which through the whole
Sphere of their Virtue, in various points mutually intersecting, or
decussating, and more especially toward their Extremes, do not only insinuate
themselves into the pores of those small and light festucous bodies occurrent,
but lay hold upon several insensible Asperities in their superfices, and then
returning (by way of Retraction) back to their Original or Source, bring them
along in their twined arms, and so long hold them fast in their Complicate
embraces, as the warmth and radial Diffusion, excited by affriction, lasts.
(2) All the Disparity, that can be objected, seems to consist only in the
Manner of their Return, or Retraction; the Tongue of the Chamaeleon being both
darted forth, and retracted by help of certain Muscles, wherewith Nature, by a
peculiar providence, has accommodated that otherwise Helpless Animal: but,
Electriques are destitute of any such organs, either for the Exsertion, or
Reduction of their Rays. And this is not so great, but it may be solved, by
supposing, that as if the Chamaeleons Tongue were drawn forth at length by a
man's hand, and not extruded by the instruments of Voluntary Motion, it would
again Contract and Reduce it self spontaneously, after the same manner as
Nerves and Lutestrings retract and curle up themselves, after violent
Distension: so may the Rays, which stream from an Electrique, being abduced
from their fountains, not spontaneously, but by the force of praecedent
Affriction, be conceived to Reduce and Retract themselves, after the manner of
Sinews and Lutestrings violently extended. (3) That such tenacious Rays are
abduced from Amber and other Electriques, is easily convincible (besides the
experiment of their Attraction of convenient objects) from hence; that all
Electriques are Unc^uous and Pinguous Concretions, and that in no mean degree:
and manifest it is, that a viscid and unctuous Body is no sooner Warmed by
rubbing, but there rise out of it certain small Lines or Threads, which adhaere
to a man's finger that touches it, and such as may, by gentle abduction of the
finger, be prolonged to considerable distance. But, however this may be
controverted, and the Way of all Electrique Attractions variously explicated,
according to the various Conceptions of men; the Itch of Fancy being soonest
allayed by the liberty of ones singular Conjecture, in such curious Theorems:
yet still is it firm and indubitable, that though the Attraction of straws by
Amber, be in some sort Admirable, yet is it not Miraculous, as is implied in
that opinion, which would have it to be by some Immaterial (i e. Supernatural)
Virtue; and that it is effected by some Corporeal, though both impalpable and
invisible Organs continued from the Attrahent to the Attracted.

Art. 7. The Means of Abaction and Repulsions Antipathetical, explicated
likewise by sundry similitudes.
On the Other side, as for the Abaction, or Repulsion of one thing by another,
in respect whereunto Vulgar Philosophers have thought and taught, that the
Abacted or Repulsed does (if an Animal) voluntarily (if Inanimate)
spontaneously Fly from and avoid Conjunction with the Abacting, or Repellent,
by reason of some hidden Enmity or Antipathy betwixt their Forms: though the
Reasons and Manner of such Fugation, so far forth as concerns Animals, may be
collected from our former Discourses of the Gratefulness and Offensiveness of
Sensible Objects; yet shall we here f^rther illustrate the same by certain
Analogies and Similitudes. When a Nettle is objected to a man's Hand, why does
He withdraw it from the same? Not upon the account of any Antipathy in his hand
to the Nettle; because being bruised, or withered, no Child but will boldly
handle it: but, because the Nettle is pallizado'd with millions of small
stings, or prickles, which like so many Darts, wounding the the skin, cause a
pain therein, and so the man, for avoidance of harm, catches his hand from it,
as an injurious object. Why likewise does the Nose abominate and avoid stinking
Odours, whenever they are brought near it? Is it not because such Foelid and
Offensive Odours consist, for the most part, of such sharp and pungent
Particles, as holding no Correspondence to the pores and contexture of the
Odoratory Nerves, are no sooner admitted, but they in a manner scratch, wound
and dilacerate the Sensory? And may we not conceive those disproportionate
Particles of the ungrateful Odor to be as so many small Lances or Darts, which
offer the same injury to the Mammillary Processes of the brain, that the
Prickles of a Nettle offer to the skin? Certainly, as the Nettle strikes its
Darts into the skin, and not into the Nails of a man's hand; because those are
of too close and firm a Contexture to admit them: so does an offensive Odor
immit its painted and angular Particles into the tender smelling Nerves, and
not into the skin, because its Contexture is more Compact, than to be capable
of Puncture or Dilaceration thereby. Lastly, Why does the Eye abhor and turn
from Ugly and Odious Objects? Is it not only because the Visible Species
emitted from such Bodies, does consist of Particles of such Configurations and
Contexture, as carry no proportion to the particles and contexture of the
Optique Nerves, but striking upon the Retina Tunica, instantly wound and
exasperate the slender and tender filaments thereof, and so cause the Eye, for
fear of farther injury, to close, or avert it self? And are not those Acute and
Disproportionate Particles, composing the visible Species, worthily resemblable
to so many small Prickles or Lancets, which though too subtle to wound the
Skin, Nostrils, or other parts of the body, whose Composure is less delicate,
do yet instantly mis-affect and pain the Optique Nerves, whose singular
Contexture does appropriate to them the Capacity of being sensible of that
compunction? Now, putting all these Considerations into the scale together, and
ponderating them with an equal hand; we shall find their weight amount to no
less than this: that as every Sympathy is displayed by certain Corporeal, though
Invisible Organs, comparated to Attraction and Amplectence; so is every
Antipathy, by the like invisible Organs, comparated to Repulsion and
Sejunction; which is what we Assumed.

Hence may we, without much difficulty, Art. 8. The First and General Ca^ses of
all Love and Hatred, betwixt Animals.
extract more than a Conjectural judgment, What are the First and General
Causes of all Love and Hatred. For, look what kind of Motions, whether Grateful
or Ungrateful, are by the Species impressed upon the Nerves peculiarly
inservient to that sense, by which the Object is apprehended; the very same are
continued quite home to the Brain, and therein accordingly move and affect the
Common Sensory: so as that, according to the Pleasure or Offense of the
Perception, there is instantly excited an Affection either of Prosecution of
the thing, by whose species that pleasant motion was Caused, and that is the
Hint and Ground of Loving and Desiring it; or of Aversation from it, and that
is the Ground of Hating and Declining it.

Nay, the same may be well admitted also for the Cause, Art. 9. Why things
Alike in their natures, love and delight in the Society each of other: and why
Unlike natures abhor and avoid each other.
Why things A like in their Natures, love and delight in the Society each of
other; and on the contrary, Why Unlike Natures abhor and avoid each other. For,
as those which are Consimilar in their Temperaments, affect each other with
Congenerous and Grateful Emanations: So do those of Dissimilar mis-affect each
other with Discordant and Ungrateful. And therefore it is no longer a wonder,
that men Love, or Dislike each other commonly at first interview, though they
scarce know why: nor can we longer withold our Assent to that unmarkable
Opinion of Plato, that Similitude of Temperaments and so of Inclinations, is
not only the Cement, but Basis also of Amity and Friendship.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. The (...) of Qualit^^ (repu^ed) ^ccult.
FRom this General Disquisition into the Reasons of All Sympathy, and Ant^pat^y,
to (...) most of those Proprieties, which by Ph^losophers are (...) as
stupendous and Abscon^ite, are u^u^lly referred; we must ^^vance to the
Consideration of Part^cular inst^n^es, that by the Solution of Singula^s, we
may afford the gre^ter (...) to men's Curi^sity, and ^^ve so many Oppo^tunities
of examining the Verisimility of our former Thesis, that all such Effects, the
knowledge of w^ose causes is generally (...) of, are produced by Sub^^a^tial
and Explicable Means. An^ in order her^unto, we shall, according to the method
of the no less (...) than Judicious ^racastorius (de Sympath. and Antipath.
Rerum) Distin^u^sh All Occult ^ualities into General, and Special; subdividing
the General into (1) the Conspiration of the Parts ^f the Universe, and (2)
the I^flux of Caelestial upon Sublunary Bodies: and the Special into such as
Concern (1) Inanimates, (2) Insensibles, (3) Sensibles.

Art. 2. Natures (...) in (...) to the (...) or C^^^piration of all parts of
the Universe; no Occult Qual^ty.
To the FIRST GENERAL ORDER, viz. the Conspiration and Harmony of all Parts of
the Universe, Philosophers unanimously adscribe the Avoidance of Vacuity;
whereupon many are the Secrets, that are presumed to ensue, as the Ascension of
Heavy, Descent of Light Bodies, the Sejunction of Congenerous and Sociable
Natures, the Conjunction and Union o^ ^iscordant and Unsociable, and the like
Irregular and Praeposterous Effects. But, as for all these Secrets, we have
long since declared them to be no Secrets but the most ordinary and manifest
operations of Nature. ^or, in our Ex^mination and Solution of all the
Apparences in the late (...) Experiment of introducing a Vacuum in a Tube, by
Water or Quicksilver, invented by Torri^^ius; we have at large proved, that
Nature ^^th not abhor any but Sensible, or Coacervate Emptiness: nor that
neither (...), or upon the necessity of an absolute Plenitude of all places ^n
the ^niverse; but by Accident only, and that either in respect of the natural
Confluxibility of the parts of Fluid Bodies, such as Aer and Water, which
causes them with great velocity to flow into the parts of Space ^e^erted by a
body passing through them; or of the Repugnancie of admitting tw^ bodies into
one and the same place, at the same time, their Solidity prohibiting the
penetration of ones dimensions by the other. Wherefore, (...) no man henceforth
account the Conspiration of the Parts of the Universe, to be an Occult Quality;
or so much stand amazed at all or any of th^^e Phenomenon, which arise from
Natures Aversion from Vacuity (...) as if they had some Extraordinary Laws and
Constitutions particularly o^dained for their production, and belonged to some
higher Economy th^n that, according to which she regulates her Common Active
and Passive Principles.

To the SECOND, Art. 3. The (...) of man's will.
viz. the Influx of Caelestial upon Sublunary Bodies, innumerable are the
Effects, which the Fraud of some, the Admiration of many, and the Credulity of
most have confidently imputed: and therefore it cannot be expected, we should,
in this place, so much as Enumerate the one Half, much less insist upon them
All. Sufficient it is, to the Acquitance of our praesent Debt, that we select
the most considerable among them, and such as seem Capital and Comprehensive of
all the rest. As for the Power and Influence of the Stars, of which Astrologers
talk such wonders, and with such pride and ostent^t^on; truly, we have Reason
to assure us, that our Cognation and Subjection to those ra^iant Bodies, is not
so great as that not only All the Actions, Fortunes, and Accidents of
Particular men, but even the Wars, Peace, Mutations, Subversions of whole
Empires, Nations, States, and Provinces should depend upon their Smiles or
Frowns: as if All Occurrents on the theater of our Lower Orb, were but the
orderly and necessary Effects of the Praescriptions and Consignations of the
Superior Orbs; or as if there were no Providence Divine, no Liberty of Man's
Will.

(2) As for the Reciprocation, or Afflux and Reflux of the Sea, Art. 4. The
Afflux and Reflux of the s^a, inderivative from any immaterial Influx of the
Moon.
so generally fathered upon the Influx and Motion of the Moon, which does
herself suffer the like Ebbs and Floods of her borrowed Light; it is well known,
how Seleucus of old, and Galilaeus of late, have more fully and roundly deduced
it from the motion ascribed to the Earth. And though we should allow this great
Phenomenon to depend upon the several Adspects or Phases of the Moon, yet is
there no necessity to drive us to the subterfuge of any Occult and Immaterial
Influence from her waxing and waning Light: since the System of Des Carts in
Princip. Philoseph. part. 4. page 22. ^ does much more satisfactorily make it
out, from the Elliptical Figure of the Sphere, wherein the Moon moves; as will
soon appear to the Examiner.

(3) As for the Diurnall Expansion, and Conversion of the Heliotrope toward the
Sun; Art. 5. (...) of (...) and ^^nversion of ^he (...) and other Flowers.
though great notice has been taken thereof by the Ancients, and most of our
Modern Advancers of the Vanities of Natural Magic (who will have every Plant
to retain to some one of the Planets, by some secret Cognation, and peculiar
sympathy.) have labored to heighten it to the degree of a Wonder: yet can we
not conceive the Effect to be so singular, nor that any such Solemn Reason
need be assigned thereunto. For, every man's observation may certify him, that
all Marygolds, Tulippa's, Pimpernell, Wartwoort, Mallow Flowers, and indeed
most other Flowers, so long as they are in their Vigor and Pride, use to Open
and Dilate toward noon and somewhat Close and recontract themselves after Sun
set. And the Cause (surely) is only the Warmth of the Suns Rays, which
discussing the Cold and Moisture of the praecedent Night (whereby the Leaves
were laden toward the bottom, or in the bowl of the Flower, and so made to
rise more upright and conjoyn their tops) and somewhat Exsiccating the Flower,
make the pedestalls of its leaves more flaccid, so that they seem to expand and
unfold themselves, and incline more outward, merely by reason of their want of
strength to sustain themselves in an erect and concentrical posture: for
always the hotter the Day, the greater is the Expansion. Likewise, as for the
Flowers Conversion to, or Confronting the Sun in all its progress above the
horizon, wherein our Darksom Authors of Magic Natural, principally place the
Magnale; the Cause thereof is so far from being more obscure than, that it is
the very same with that of its Expansion. For, as the Sun running his race from
East to West, does every moment vary the points of his Rays vertical incidence
upon the stalk which supports the Flower, and upon the leaves thereof; so must
the whole Flower incline its head and wheel about accordingly: those parts of
the stalk upon which the rays are more perpendicular, and so the heat more
intense, becoming more dry and flaccid, and so less able to support the burden
of the ^^ower, than those, which suffer only from the obli^n^, reflected and
weaker beams. Notwithstanding this Solution, if any Champion of secret
Magnetism shall yet defend this Circulation to be a (...) of the Heliotrop^, to
which no other Flower can praetend; and that this Solar Plant discovers it
Amors to the Sun, by not only disclosing its rejoicing head and b^som at the
praesence, and wrapping them up again in the mantle of its own disconsolate
and languishing leaves, during the absence of its Lover, but also by facing him
all day long: lest He should insult, upon an apprehension, that our theory is
at a loss, we shall tell him, in a word; that that Propriety, which he
supposes, must consist only in such a peculiar Contexture and Disposition of
the particles, which compose its Leaves, as makes them more sit to receive, and
be moved, and their spiritual and most subtle parts to be in a manner
Circulated by the Rays of the Sun, than the Leaves of any other Flower
whatever. As in the Organ of Smelling, there is a certain Peculiar Contexture
of its insensible Component Particles, which renders it alone capable of being
moved and affected by Odours, that have no influence nor activity at all upon
the Eye, Ear, or other Organ of Sense.

Art. 6. Why Garden Claver hide^h it s^alk, in the heat of the day.
(4) Great things have been spoken also of the Garden Claver, which bareth its
bosom, and hides the upper part of its stalk, whenever the Sun shines hot and
bright upon it: but, this doubtless) has the same Cause, as the Former, the
Hiding of the stalk being nothing but an over-expansion of the Leaves, which by
reason of the violent ardour of the Sun, grow more faint and flaccid, and so
less able to support themselves.

Art. 7. Why the (...) usually (...) soon after midnight; and at break o^ day.
(5) A Fifth Secret, found in the Catalogue of Caelestial Influxes, is the
Crowing of the House-Cock, at certain and periodical times of night and day,
and more especially soon after midnight, and about day break: for, most esteem
it an Occult Propriety, and all our Crollians and such as promote the dreams of
Signatures and Sydereal Analogies, reckon the Cock a chief Solar Animal, for
this reason alone; as if his Phansy received some magnetique touches and
impressions from the Sun, which made him proclaim his A^vent into our
Hemisphere, and like a faithful Watch or Clock, measure out the several stages
in its race. Great enquiry also has been made after the Cause hereof, in all
ages, and various Conceptions entertained concerning it. Some with lofty and
Rhetorical Discourses endeavoring to persuade, that Nature intended this (...),
(as Plu^arch (...) it) or Gallicinium, as an Alarm to rouse up sluggish man
from the dull arms of sleep, and summon him to the early Contemplation of her
Works; as Pliny (Natural. Histor. lib. 10. cap. 21.) Others ascribing it to a
Desire of Venery in this Animal, arising from the turgescence and stimulation
of his sperm, at certain periods; as Erasmus, who is therefore worthily and
sufficiently derided by Scaliger (Exercit. 239) Others assigning it to an
Appetite of Aliment, invading and exciting after determinate intervalls; as
Cardan. And others alleging we (nor themselves) know not what peculiar
influence of the Sun, causing a sudden mutation, or Evocation of the Spirits
and blood of the Cock, which were Concentred by sleep; as Caelias Rhodiginus
(lib. 16. Antiq. Lection. cap. 13.) But, All these Great Clerks seem to have
graspt the ear, and catched at shadows. For (1) it may be doubted, that all
Cocks, in one and some meridian, do not Crow at the same times of night or
day; and that no Cock does observe set and punctual times of Crowing; both
which are praesumed: and whoever shall think it worth the loss of a nights
sleep, as we have done, to observe the Crowing of sundry Cocks in some Country
Village, where the Houses stand scatteringly and far asunder, so that the Cocks
cannot awake each other; will, perhaps, more than doubt of either. (2) It is,
as Natural, so Familiar to the Cock, so often as his Imagination is moved by a
copious and fresh afflux of Spirits to his Brain, to rowze up himself, clapp
his wings, and sound his trumpet as well at noon, after noon, and at other
times of day and night, upon several occasions; as when he has escaped some
late danger, obtained a victory, found some treasury of grain, compressed his
mistress, and the like; as if his joy were not complete, till he had
communicated the tidings thereof to his Wives and Neighbors, by the elevation
of his gladsome and triumphat voice. (3) May we not allow the Cock to have his
set times of Sleeping and Waking, as well as all other Living Creatures, that
live suo jure, and according to the Aphorisms of their Specifical
Constitutions, and regiment of their proper Archaea's; and likewise most Men,
who live healthfully and orderly, keeping to constant hours for labor, meat,
rest and sleep? (4) What need is there that we should have recourse to such a
far-fetcht (and never brought home) Cause, as that of a Secret Commerce, and
peculiar Sympathy betwixt this Fowl and the Sun in the other Hemisphere; when
we have a more probable and manifest one, nearer hand; viz. The sudden
invasion of the Cock, by increased Cold soon after midnight? For, when the Sun
has made some sensible advance in the lower world, beyond the Nadir point or
midnight circle, and hasteneth toward our East; He moves and drives along
before him into our horizon, the (formerly) quiet and cold Aer of the Night:
which invading the Cock, disturbs him from his rest, during which his Heat is
retired inward, and awakens him on the sudden: so that rowzing up himself,
exciting his courage, and diffusing his Spirits again into his members, to
oppose that Cold, and perhaps also to prevent his falling from the perch; he
stands up, clappeth his wings against his sides, and chants a cheerful Paean
to himself and Roostfellowes, celebrating his safety and conquest with the loud
music of his throat.

Art. 8. Why Shellfish grow fat, in the Full of the moon, and lean again at
the New.
(6) A sixth notable Secret, appertaining to the same Classis, is that of the
Increase of the Substance of Shell Fish, of the Brains in Coneys, and of the
Marrow in the bones of most Land Animalls, as the moon approaches her Full;
and the Decrease of them again, as her Light decreaseth toward her New. But,
laying aside all Lunar Magnetism, Immaterial Influxes, and the like Toys put
into Great Words; we take it, the Phenomenon may be well enough solved, by
referring it merely to the Moons great Humidity; at least, if those vast
Duskish spots, apparent in her Orb, be her moist Element, carrying some analogy
to our Seas, as the most and best of our Modern Astronomers have believed, and
upon grounds almost demonstrative, and wholly irrefutable. For, insomuch as the
Rays of the Sun, in greater abundance falling upon the face of the Moon,
toward and at her Full, than in her Wane, are accordingly more abundantly
reflected from thence upon our Terraqueous Globe, bringing along with them no
sparing Tincture of the Moons Moisture; so that the Light which is Reflected
from the Oceans in the moon, being more moist than warm, must needs be more
Prolifical, Generative, and praedisposed to the Nutrition of Animals: and that
in the New of the Moon no such plentiful Abduction of her moisture can be
expected, because fewer of the Suns Rays are, at that time, Reflected from her
Orb to ours; why should it be thought so strange, that either Aquatile, or
Terrestrial Animals should be nourished more plentifully at the Full, than New
of the Moon? Especially since it is no praecarious, nor novell Assertion, that
the Light coming from the Moon, ^s tincted with Humidity, as being reflected
from the Watery as well as solid parts of her Orb; Experience having frequently
demonstrated, that the Calorifick Rays not only of the Sun, but even of our
terrestrial and culinary Fires, being trajected through various Liquors, and
other Catoptricall bodies, or reflected from them, do imbibe and carry off
much of their Virtues, and become thereby impraegnate, so as to be praedisposed
to the production of sundry noble Effects, such specially as relate to the
Alteration, Germination, Pullulation, and Generation of Vegetables and Animals,
both Aquatile, and Terrestrial. Nevertheless, in case this Cause assigned seem
somewhat Remote and obscure, we shall allege Another, sufficiently
verisimilous to ease men of their wonder, at the Fullness of the Shell Fish in
the Full moon, and their Leane^^ in the New; and that is the Increase of the
Tides of the Sea, which ascending higher upon the shoars, at the Full moon, and
washing down m^re of Mudd, Slime and Saltness from thence, afford greater
plenty of A^^ment to all Shell Fish: which delight in, and thrive best upon
such k^nd of food, and are observed therefore to frequent foul and slimy
shoa^^, and yet nearer and nearer to land, as the Tides rise higher and higher,
and again remove farther and farther off, as the tides sink lower and lower.

Art. 9. Why the Selenites resembles the Moon in all not several A^spects.
(7) To this Classis also belongs the Famous Selenites, or Moon-Geeme, a certain
praecious stone, found only in Arabia, as Dioscorides (lib. 5. cap. 110.)
delivers: whose rare and singular Faculty is this, that it repraesents the Moon
in all her several Dresses of Light, or Apparences, increasing (...) Luster
exactly as she increases hers, and proportionately losing it (...) Relations
be true, which have been made thereof by Authors of the highest form for
Credit, namely Pliny (lib. 36. cap. 10.) S. Augustine (de Civit. D. lib. 21.
cap. 5.) Zanardus (de Univers. Element quaest. 53.) Nichol. Caussinus (lib. 11.
Symbol 5^.) ^oh. Daniel Mylius (Basilicae Chymic. lib. 5. cap 28.) and many
modern Mineralogists. Now, for the Reason of this Rarity, in all liklihood, it
must be if not the very same, yet Cousin German to that of the former. Because,
it is very probable, that some certain portion of a thin, fluid and subtle
matter (we may conceive it to be Hydrargycal, or relating to Quicksilver, since
all the forenamed Authors describe the stone to be White and Candent of
Color.) wherein the Luster of the stone does mostly consist, does suffer some
Alteration, according to the more and less of the Lunar Light incident upon it;
and is respectively Circulated through the looser or less compacted parts of
the stone, after the same manner as the more subtle and spiritual parts of some
Flowers are Circulated by the rays of the Sun; the particular Configuration
and Contexture of its insensible particles being such, as dispose to that
Circulation, upon the influx of the Moons Light.

In the Inventory of SPECIAL Sympathies and Antipathies, Art. 10. Why the (...)
the First Division Concerns INANIMATE Natures; and among such the first place
belongs to the Attraction of I^on by the Loadstone the second to the Attraction
of Straws and other small and light bodies by Amber and oath Electrique^: but
such is the singular Excellency of the Form, that it not only deserves, but
challenges a singular Chapter to its Disquisition; and the Reason of the other
we have plainly, thou (...), in the precaedent Section, the Consideration of
the Ways and Instruments of all Attraction Natural, in the General, impelling
us upon the Anticipation thereof.

In the Third, Art. 11. (...)
we are to examine the secret Amity of Gold and Quicksilver, of Brass and
Silver; which is so manifest, that whenever Gol^ ^s dissolved in Chrysulea or
Aqua R^gis, and the Spirit or Dissolution of Quicksilver superadded thereto,
the subtle E^fluvia streaming from (...) particles of the Gold, will instantly
lay hold of, and at distance attract and firmly embrace the particles of the
Quicksilver, into which the Dissolving liquor has subtiliated it; and in like
manner, when Brass and Silver are dissolved in the same Aqua Fortis, their
particles are observed to (...) to concorporation, though the Spirits issuing
from them, are not potent enough to perform an Attraction, while the Metals
remain entire and in the mass. These Effects we conceive may well be referred
to (...) Correspondency or Compossibility betwixt the Figures of the insensible
particles, of which the Emissions from the Gold, and Brass consist and those of
the pores, inequalities, and fastnings in the superfices of the Granules of the
Dissolved Quicksilver, and Silver: but what those Figures are on each part, is
above our hopes of determination; nor can we afford the Curious any other light
for Conjecture in this true Abstrusity, but what himself may perceive to arise
to him by Reflection from the Reasons, we shall hereafter give, for the
Attraction of Iron by a Loadstone. In the mean while, we praesent Him, for
Diversion of his Scrutiny, with a short and opportune COROLLARY.

Art. 12. A COROLLARY. Why the Granules of Gold and Silver, though much more
pondrous then those of the Aqua Regis and Aqua Fortis, wherein they are
dissolved, are yet held up, and kept floating by them.
Delightful it is, and indeed Admirable to behold the Granules of Gold and
Silver, though much more ponderous than those of the Aqua Regis, and Aqua
Fortis, to be notwithstanding held up, and constantly kept in a floating and
elevated posture by them. And yet, in all likelihood the Salt dissolved in
those Corrosive Waters, must be the Sole Cause of that strange Effect. For, the
Salts which are plentifully dissolved in those Liquors, by a kind of mutual
Cohaesion of their insensible particles supporting each other from the bottom
to the top of the Glass, or other containing vessel; do sustain and bear up
the Granules of the Metals which they have Corroded and Embraced. And this
seems the more probable from hence; that if common Water, impraegnate with a
few dropps of Oil of Tartar (that Great instrument of Separation) be
superinfused upon those Tinctures, the Granules of the dissolved Metals
suddenly disengage themselves from the arms of the Corroding Salts, and sink
to the bottom: the fresh Water yet father dissolving those Salts, and giving
them fuller Fluidity; so that becoming more Attenuate, they lose their mutual
Cohaesion, and so their power of supporting; and it is well known, that Salt
water will bear up such bodies, as will hardly swim in fresh. And this we take
to be the General Reason of all sorrs of Praecipitation, practiced either by
Chemists, or common Refiners of Metals: the Oil of Tartar thereto conducing no
otherwise, than merely as it serves to the farther Attenuation of the Salt
Armoniack and other Corrosive Salts formerly dissolved in the strong Waters.

Art. 13. The Cause of the Attraction of a Less Flame by a Greater.
(4) To the Fourth, we assign the Attraction of a Less Flame by a Greater;
according to the erroneous Dialect of the People: for, really it is rather the
Extension of a Greater Flame to the Fuel of a Less. For, the heat of a Greater
Flame being proportionately more intense and diffusive, extends it self to the
pabulum or nourishment of the less, where the same is situate within the Sphere
of its power: and thence it comes to pass, that the Greater burning more
strongly, by reason of that addition or augmentation of its fuel, does more
and more dilate it self that way, till at length it becomes wholly united to
the Less. Which unexamining heads not understanding, have imputed to a certain
Attractive faculty in the Greater Flame, depending upon the Identity of the two
Natures, or more praecisely, the same Nature in two Divisions and many have
rackt their brains to erect subtle Discourses thereupon, as if they wanted
other Opportunities to exercise their Learning, and entertain their Curiosity.

Art. 14. The Cause of the Inv^^ation of flame to Naphtha, at distance.
(5) To the Fifth belongs the supposed Attraction of Flame by Naphtha of
Babylon, at distance; which is also improperly accounted an Attraction: for the
Flame of its own accord flies to, and lays hold of the Naphtha; and the
Cause of that Involation is only this. From the body of the Naphtha there is
emitted in round a certain fat and unctuous, and so soon inflammable Halitus,
o^ steam, which being extended to the borders of some flame posited at
convenient distance, and thereby kindled in the extreme of its Sphere, becomes
enflamed all along the Rays, and they burning, soon bring home the flame to
the body of the Naphtha, from which they are emitted, in a continued ^luor.

(6) Next to this, Art. 15. Of the Ascension of Water into the pores of a
Sponge.
Philosophers usually place the Attraction of Water by a Sponge; wherein they
are as much mistaken as in either of the two last. For, the Ascension of Water
into the pores of a sponge, so placed as to touch only the superfice of it,
comes not from any Appetite of Attraction, or Suction inhaerent in the Sponge,
as is generally praesumed and affirmed; but only from the Depression, or
downward impulse of the water by the swelling and sensibly dilating sponge; and
the manner of that series of motions is thus. The skirts or lowest parts of the
sponge, touching the superfice of the Water, immediately imbibe some parts of
it into its pores, and becoming thereby dilated and tumid, press down the
subjacent Water to such a proportion as responds to the quantity of their own
expansion; so that as they are more and more dilated by the admission of more
and more parts of Water into their Cells or Receptaries, it must be, that the
Water being more and more depressed toward the bottom, must rise higher and
higher on the sides of the Sponge, and insinuate it self into other and other
pores successively, till the whole sponge be filled. Manifest it is by
Experience, that if Water or any other Liquor, when it is though never so
gently pressed in the superfice, find any the smallest Chinks in the body
pressing it; it does instantly rise up in round, and insinuate it self into
those pores or Chinks, the sides thereof in a manner sustaining it, and so
praeventing its relapse or efflux. This we cannot but observe, when we dip the
nose of our Pen into ink; the small Cleft or slit in the lowest part of the
Quill, assisting the Assent of the ink into the hollow thereof, and carrying up
so much of it, as the mutual Coherence of its parts will permit: for, if we
dipp the point of a Pen, which has no slit, into a standish, we shall observe
no such plentiful Assent of ink; there being no support or fastnings for it on
each side of the nose, and so no obstacles to its relapse and sudden efflux.
And, as for the Reason, Why Water Ascends, when it meets with any body, that is
Dry, Filamentous or Fibrous, and full of pores or Chinks, such as a Sponge,
Cloth, Pen, etc. it may be most fully explained by the Instance of a Siphon, or
Pump.

Take a Pipe of Lead, of the figure of a Carpenters Squire, Art. 16. The same
ill^strated by the example of a Siphon.
whose one arm is longer then the other (such our Wine Coopers exhaust their
Buts of Wine withal) and immerse the shortest into a Cistern of Water, so as it
may come very near the bottom, and yet the longer arm rest upon the margin of
the Cistern, in a dependent or declining posture, then with your mouth suck
forth the Aer contained in the cavity of the pipe: and you shall observe the
Water quickly to follow on the heels of the Aer, and flow in full stream out of
the Cistern through the pipe, without ceasing till all the Water, that covers
the shortest arm of the pipe, and so hinders the ingress of the aer into its
orifice, be exhausted. Of this the Cause is only, that as your Cheeks are
inflated and distended by the Aer, which upon exsuction comes rushing into your
mouth, do strongly move and impell the ambient aer; so does that, receding,
move and impell the neighboring aer, and that again moves and impels the next,
till the impulse be propagated to the surface of the Water in the Cistern: and
the Water being thus depressed in the superfice, rises up into the Cavity of
the pipe, which the extracted Aer had newly deserted and left unpossessed; nor
does it thenceforth cease to ascend and flow in a continued stream through the
pipe, until all be exhausted. Because, how much of Water flows through the
pipe, exactly so much of Aer is, by impulsion, Circulated into the place
thereof; the last round of aer wanting any other place to receive it, but what
it provides for its self in the Cistern, by depressing the water yet remaining
therein: and thus the Circulation once begun, is continued, till all the Water
has past through the pipe.

Art. 17. The reason of the Percolation of Liquors, by a cloth whose one end
lies in the liquor, and other hangs over the brim of the vessel, that contains
it.
Upon the same Cause, or some other so like it, as it is no ease matter to
discriminate them, does that kind of Percolation of Liquors, and especially of
Aqua Calcis, depend, which is made by a long piece of Woollen Cloth, whose one
end lies in the Liquor, and other hangs over the brim of the vessel that
contains it. For, the Liquor gently ascends and creeps along the filaments of
the Cloth, because, being though but very lightly pressed in it superfice by the
same, it does proportionately ascend in round, to deliver it self from that
pressure; and by that motion impelling the incumbent Aer upwards, it causes
the same to Circulate and depress the surface of the Liquor, and so makes it
rise by insensible degrees higher and higher along the hairs and threads of the
Cloth, till at length it arrive at the highest part thereof resting upon the
margin of the vessel; and thence it slides down the decline or propendent half
of the Cloth, and falls down into the Recipient, by dropps. And this Motion is
Continued till all the Liquor has passed the Percolatory, leaving the faeces
adhaerent to the fibers of the same: each drop impelling the Ambient Aer, and
driving it in round, or by a Periosis, upon the surface of the Water, so long
as any remains in the vessel. And this, we conceive, may suffice to any man's
Comprehension of the Reason of the Repletion of a Sponge, by Water Ascending
(not Attracted) into its Cavities or Pores.

Art. 18. The reas^^ of the (...), that ar^ (...).
(7) Another eminent Secret of Sympathy, belonging to the same Division, is that
Consent betwixt two Lutestrings, that are Aequisone: (for Unisone is hardly
proper); which is thus experimented. Take 2 Lutes, or V^^s, and their treble,
mean, or base strings being tuned to an Equality of Sounds, lay one of them
upon a table, with the strings upward, with a small short straw equilibrated
upon the Aequison string: and then strike the Aequison string of the other
instrument, and you shall observe, both by the leaping off of the straw, and
the visible trembling of the string, whereon it was imposed, that it shall
participate of the motions of the string of the other instrument percussed; all
the other Dissonous strings, as wholly unconcerned in the motion impressed,
remaining unmoved. The like also will be, if the Diapason or Eighth to that
string be percussed, either in the same Lute or Vial, or other lying by: but,
in none of these, the Consent is discernable by any report of sound, but merely
by motion. And yet the Cause of this Sympathy is not so very obscure, but the
dullest Pythagorean might soon have discovered it to be only this; that the
percussed string does suffer a certain number of Diadroms, or Vibrations, and
impress the like determinate motions upon the Aer: which lighting upon another
string of equal Contexture and Extension with the former percussed, does
impress the same motions thereupon, and impell and repel it so
correspondently, as to make it suffer an equal number of Diadroms. Nor does the
Aer hinder it in its several Reciprocations or alternate excurses and recurses;
because the percussed string makes all its alternate excurses and recurses, at
and in the same time, as the untoucht string does, and so impels the Aer
alternately to the contrary side thereof. But, that agitated Aer which falls
upon a string of a different degree of extension, and so necessarily of a
different tone; though it impress various insensible strokes thereupon, yet are
those impressed strokes such as mutually check and oppose each other, i. e. the
Excurses hinder the Recurses: and therefore the string remains unmoved, at
least as to the sense. Likewise, the Consent of another string, which makes
that Consonance, which Musicians call a Diapason or Eighth, to that which is
percussed by the hand, arises only from hence; that the Excurses and Recurses
of the string percussed by the hand, do not at all clash with, nor perturb and
confound the Excurses and Recurses of the string moved immediately only by the
Aer, but are Coincident and Synchronical to them, and observe the same periods;
and so both agree in their certain and frequent intervals: more particularly,
in an Eight, every single Diadrom of the longer and more lax string, is
coincident to every second, fourth, sixth, etc. Diadrom of the shorter or more
tense string. Nay farther, if the two strings be Consonous though but in the
less perfect Consonance of a Fifth; yet shall the sympathy hold, and manifest
it self (which is not commonly observed) by the tremulation of the untouched
string, that is tuned to a Fifth: because their Diadroms are not wholly
confused, each single diadrom of the longer or lower string, being coincident
to every third, sixth, ninth, etc. diadrom of the shorter or more tense string.
But if the two strings be Dissonous, the sympathy fails; because the Excurses
and Recurses agree not in any of their Intervals or Periods, but perturb and
confound each other; as may be more fully understood from our praecedent
Discourse of the Reason of Consonances and Dissonances Musical.

(8) Nor is it the Inaequality of Tension, Art. 19. The reason of the Descent
betwixt Lutestrings of sheeps Guts, and those of Woolfs.
disparity of Longitude and Magnitude, or Non-coincidence of the Vibrations in
their several periods, that alone make Two strings Discordant; for, if we admit
the common tradition of Naturalists, where an Instrument is strung with some
strings made of Sheeps, and others of Woolfs Guts intermixed, the best hand in
the World shall never make it yield a perfect Consonance, much less play an
harmonious tune thereupon. And the Cause, doubtless, is no other than this;
that the strings made of a Woolfs Guts are of a different Contexture from those
made of a Sheeps; so that however equally both are strained and adjusted, yet
still shall the Aer be unequally percussed and impelled by them, and
consequently the sounds created by one sort, confound and drown the sounds
resulting from the other. To leave you in the less uncertainty concerning this,
it is commonly observed, that from one and the same string, when it is not of
an Uniforme Contexture throughout, but more close, even, and firm in some
parts than in others (all such our Musicians call False strings) there do
always result various and unequal sounds: the close, even and firm parts
yielding a smart and equal sound, the lax and uneven yielding a dull, flat and
harsh; which two different sounds at the same time created, confound and drown
each other, and consequently where such a string is played upon in Consort, it
disturbs the whole Concent or Harmony. It is further observed also, that the
Music of an Harp does infect the music of a Lute, and other softer and milder
instruments with a kind of Asperity and Indistinction of Notes: which Asperity
seems to arise from a certain kind of Tremor, peculiar only to the Chords of
that Instrument. The like also has been reported of other scarce Consortive
Instruments, such as the Virginalls and Lute, the Welsh Harp and Irish, etc.

But you will Object, perhaps, that the Discordance of Woolves and Sheeps
Gutlings seems to arise rather from some Formal Enmity, or inhaerent
Antipathy betwixt the Woolf and Sheep: because it has been affirmed by many of
the Ancients, and questioned by very few of the Moderns, that a Drum bottomed
with a Woolfs skin, and headed with a Sheeps, will yield scarce any sound at
all; nay more, that a Wolfs skin will in short time prey upon and consume a
Sheeps skin, if they be laid near together. And against this we need no other
Defense than a downright appeal to Experience, whether both those Traditions
deserve not to be listed among Popular Errors; and as well the Promoters, as
Authors of them to be exiled the society of Philosophers: these as Traitors to
truth by the plotting of manifest falsehoods; those as Idiots, for beleiving
and admiring such fopperies, as smell of nothing but the Fable; and lie open to
the contradiction of an easy and cheap Experiment.

Art. 20. The tradition of the Consuming of all Feathers of Foul, by those of
the Eagle; exploded.
(9) Nor can we put a greater value upon the Devouring of all other Birds
Feathers by those of the Eagle commixt with them; though the Author of Trinum
Magicum has bin pleased to tell us a very formal and confident story thereof:
because we have no Reason to convince us, that the Eagle preys upon other
Fowls, out of an Antipathy or Hatred, but rather out of Love and Convenience of
Aliment; and though there were an Enmity betwixt the Eagle and all his
feathered subjects, during life, yet is there no necessity that Enmity should
survive in the scattered pieces of his Carcass, especially in the Feathers
(that are but one degree on this side Excrements) which is praesumed to consist
chiefly in the Form; since those Proprieties which are Formal, in Animals,
must of necessity vanish upon the destruction of the Form, from whence they
result. Thus Glowworms project no luster after death; and the Torpedo, which
stupefies at distance, while alive, produces no such effect though topically
applied, after death: for there are many Actions of Sensible Creatures, that
are mixed, and depend upon their vital form, as well as that of mistion: and
though they seem to retain unto the Body, do yet immediately depart upon its
Disunion.

In the SECOND Division of Special Occult Qualities, viz. such as are imputed
to Vegetables, Art. 21. Why some certain Plants befriend, and advance the
growth and fruitfulness of others, that are their neighbors.
the First that expects our Consideration, is the so frequently mentioned and
generally conceded Sympathy, or mutually beneficial Friendship betwixt some
certain Plants, as betwixt Rue, and the Fig Tree, the Rose and Garlic, the
Wild Poppy and Wheat; all which are observed to delight and flourish most in
the neighborhood of each other, and our skilful Gardners use to advance the
growth and fructification of the one, by planting its favorite near it.
Concerning this, therefore, we advertise; that men are mistaken not only in the
Cause, but Denomination also of this Effect: supposing a secret Friendship
where is none, and imputing that to a certain Cognation, or Sympathy, which
seems to proceed from a manifest Dissimilitude and Antipathy betwixt Diverse
Natures. For, wherever two Plants are set together, whereof the one, as being
of a far Different, if not quite Contrary Nature, and so requiring a different
kind of nourishment, does substract and assimilate to its self such a juice of
the earth, as would otherwise flow to the other, and deprave its nourishment,
and consequently give an evil tincture to its Fruit and Flowers: in this case,
Both Plants are reciprocally the remote Cause of the Prosperity each of other.
And thus Rue, growing near the roots of the Fig Tree, and attracting to its
self the Rank and Bitter moisture of the earth, as most agreeable to its own
nature; leaves the Milder and Sweeter for the aliment of the Fig tree, and by
that means both assisteth the procerity of the Tree, and Meliorateth the Fruit
thereof. Thus also Garlic, set near to a Rose tree, by consuming the Foetid
juice of the ground, and leaving the more Odorate and benign to pass into the
roots of the Rose tree; does both farther the Growth and Germination thereof,
and increase the Sweetness of it Flowers. But, as for the Amity betwixt the
Wild Poppy and Wheat, we should refer it to another Cause, viz. the
Qualification of the ground by the tincture of the Wheat, so as to praepare it
for the Generation and growth of the Wild Poppy; not by substraction of
Disagreeing moisture, but by Enriching the Soil, or impraegnating it with a
fertility, determinate to the production of some sorts of weeds, and chiefly of
that. For, most certain it is, that there are certain ^orn-flowers, which
seldom or never spring up but amongst Corn, and will hardly thrive, though
carefully and seasonably set in other places: such are the Blew-bottle, a kind
of yellow single Marygold, and the Wild-Poppy.

(2) This discovered, we need not search far after the Reasons of those
Antipathies, which are reported to be between the Vine and Cole-woort, Art. 22.
Why some Plants thrive (...) of some others.
the Oak and Olive, the Brake and Reed, Hemlock and Rue, the Shrub called our
Ladies Seal (a certain Species of Bryony) and the Cole-woort, etc. which are
presumed to be so odious each to other, from some secret Contrariety of their
respective Forms, that if any two of them, that are Enemies, be set near
together, one or both will die. For, the truth is, all Plants, that are great
Depraedators of the moisture of the earth, defraud others that grow near them,
of their requisite nourishment, and so by degrees impoverishing, at length
destroy them. So the Colewoort, is an enemy not only to the Vine, but any other
Plant dwelling near it; because it is a very succulent and rank Plant, and so
exhausts the fattest and most prolifical juice of the ground. And if it be
true, that the Vine will avoid the Society of the Colewoort, by Averting its
trunck and branches from it; this may well be only in respect of its finding
less nourishment on that side: for, as the Lord St. Alban has well observed,
though the root continue still in the same place and position, yet will the
Trunk always bend to that side, on which it nourishes most. So likewise the
Oak and Olive, being large trees of many roots, and great spenders of moisture,
do never thrive well together: because, the stronger in Attraction of juice,
deceives and starves the weaker. Thus Hemlock is a dangerous neighbor to Rue;
because, being the Ranker Plant of the two, and living upon the like juice, it
defrauds it of sufficient sustenance, and makes it pine away for penury. And
the like of the rest.

Art. 23. The ^^ason of the great Frie^dship betwix^ the Male and Fema^e
Palm Trees.
(3) But what shall we think of that semiconjugall Alliance betwixt the Male and
Female Palm trees, which is so strong and manifest, that the Femal, which
otherwise would languish, as if she had the Green sickness, and continue
b^rren; is observed to prosper, and load her fruitful boughs, with braces of
Dates; when she enjoys the Society of the Male: nay, to extend her arms to meet
his embraces, as if his masculine influence were necessary not only to her
impregn^tion, and the maturity of her numerous issue; but even to her own
health and welfare? Why, truly, we cannot better expound this dark Riddle of
Nature, than by having recourse to some Corpore^l Emanations, deradiated from
the male, which is the stronger and more spriteful plant, to the Female, which
is the weaker, and wants an Accession of heat and spirits. For, far enou^h from
i^probable it is, that such ^^anation may contain much of the Males S^minal and
fru^t^^^ing vir^^^; and it has been avouched by freq^^nt Experiments, that the
blossoms and Flowers of the Male being dried and poudered, and inspersed upon
the branches of the Female, are no less eff^ctual to her Comfort and Fertility,
than the Vicinity of the Male himself. We are told* indeed, by Heredotus, and
from his own strict observation that the Male Palm pro^uceth yearly a Dwa^fish
sort of Dates, which being incapable of maturi^^ and perfection, men use
therefore to gather early, and bind them on the laden branches of the Female:
that there corrupting, and breeding a kind of small volant In^ect, resembling
our G^ats which the Natives (...) Ps^^e, though Theophrastus seems to
appropriate that name only to those Fiyes, that are a spont^neous pro^uction
out of the immature fruit (...) the Wild Figg tree, suffering putrefaction^
that they may advance the Growth and Maturity of her fruit* not by any secret
influence, but the ^an^^est Voracity of those Insects, which continually
preying upon the ripening fruit, both open the top^ o^ them, an^ so make way
for the rays o^ the Sun to enter more freely and deeply into their substance,
and ^uck out (...) of the luxuriant crude and watery juice, leav^ng the (...)
^nctu^us to the more easy digestion and assim^^^t^on of the ^ormerly
^^^rcharged Seminal V^rtue of the Plant This, we confess, is ^^ce an^
^^^usible, but not totally satisfactory* because it extends only to the Re^^on
of the Males remote Assistance of the Female, in the maturat^^n of her Fruit;
leaving us still to enquire, Why she herself remains in a (...) and pining
condition, unless she enjoys the Society and invigorating (...) of the Male;
and why she inclines her amorous boughs toward his, as (...) Neighborhood were
a kind of Divorce, and nothing less tha^ absolute Union could satisfy her
Affection. And what we h^ve heres^^^, of the Sympathy betwixt the Male and
Female Palms, will not lose a ^rain of its Verisimility, when our Reader shall
please to accomodate (...) to the Explanation of the Cause of the like Amity
betwixt the ^ig ^ree, and Caprificus or Wild Fig tree: of which Pliny (lib. 15.
cap. 19.) ^^lates the very same story, as Herodotus does of the Palms.

(4) This puts us in mind of the great Sympathy betwixt Vine and Wine, Art. 24.
Why all ^^ines grow ^ick and turbid, during the sea^on wherein the Vines Fl^wer
and Bud.
expressed from its Grapes, and immured in Hoggheads, though at the distance of
many miles. For, it seems most convenient, that it is from the like Diffusion
of subtle Emanations, imbued with the Seminal tincture of the Vine, that Wines
stored up in deep Cellars, in the same Country where they grew (for, in
England, whither all wines are transported over sea, no such Effect has been
observed: the Remove being too large to admit any such Transmission of
influence from the transmarine Vineyards to our Cellars) become sick, turbid,
and musty in the Cask, at the same time the Vines Flower and Bud forth: and
again recover their former Clearness and Spirit, so soon as that season is
past. And, that this Conjecture may seem to smell the less of Phansy, we desire
you to consider, through what large tracts of Aer even the Odours (Exhalations
much less Subtle and Diffusive, than those we conceive emitted from Vines to
Wines) of many Aromaticks are usually diffused, in serene weather; especially
in respect of such Persons, and Bruit Animals, as are exquisite in their sense
of smelling. Has it not been observed, that the Flowers of Oranges have
transmitted their odours perfect and strong, from great Gardens to the nostrils
of Mariners, many leagues off at Sea: nay, so far, that some Sailers have
discovered land by the smell of them, when their longest Perspectives could not
reach it? Do not we frequently observe, that Ravens will scent a Carcass, at
many miles distance; and fly directly to it by the Chart of a favorable wind?
Nay, are not there good Historians that assure us, that Eagles in Italy, have
sometime received an invitation by the nose, to come and feast on the dead
bodies of men, in Africa?

Here, since we are occasionally fallen upon the large Diffusion of some
Odours, especially to sage and unpraepossessed Noses; Art. 25. That the
^^stilled waters of Orange flowers, and Roses, do not take any thing of their
fragrancy, during ^he (...) of the (...) and (...) of those (...); as (...)
vulgarly believed.
we shall take the advantage of that Hint, to advertise you of a Vulgar Error,
viz. that Waters distilled of Orange Flowers and Roses, become wholly
Inodorous, and Phlegmatic, at the time of the Blooming and Pride of those
Flowers upon their trees. For, really those distilled Waters are not in
themselves, during the season of the Flowers, from which they were extracted,
less fragrant than at other times: but, because in the season of those Flowers,
they diffuse their odours so plentifully through the Aer, and praepossess the
nostrils, as that the odours of the Waters, being somewhat less quick and
strong, are less perceived, than at other times, when the Aer is not imbued
with the stronger and fresher odours, nor the olfactory Nerves praeoccupied.
And this may be inferred from hence; that when the season of those ^lowers is
past, and the smelling organ unoccupied; the Waters smell as fragrant as ever.
For, as to the Assuefaction of the sense of smelling, to particular odours,
good or bad, we need not say much of that: since Experience does daily
confirm, that the sense is scarce moved and affected by the same odor, though
closely praesented, after Custom has once strongly imbued it with the same.

SECT. III.
Art. 1. Why this (...) only some (...)
IN the THIRD and last Division of Special Occult Qualities, or such as are
vulgarly imputed to Sensible Creatures; the Pens of Scholars have been so
pro^use, that should we but recount, and with all possible succinctness,
enquire into the Verity and Causes of but the one Half of them; our Discourses
would take up more sheets of Paper, than are allowed to the Longest Chancery
Bill: wherefore, as in the former, so in this, we shall select and examine only
a Few of them, but such as are most in vogue, and whose Reasons, is ^udiciously
accommodated, suffice to the Solution of the Rest.

Art. 2. (...)
(1) The Antipathy of a Sheep to a Woolf, is the common argument of wonder; and
nothing is more frequent, than to hear men ascribe it to a provident instinct*
or haereditary and invincible Hatred, that a Lamb* which never saw a Wool^
before, and so could not retain the impression of (...) harm done or attempted
by him, should be invaded with horror and trembling, at first interview, and
run from him: nay, some (...) the secret so far, as to affirm the Antipathy to
be Equal on both (...). Concerning this, therefore, we observe; that the
Enmity is not Reciprocal: For, He that can be persuaded, that the Woolf hates
the Sheep* only because he worries and preys upon him, and not rather, that the
Woolf loves the sheep, because it is a weak and helpless Animal and its s^eth
is both pleasant and convenient food for him: we shall (...) persuade Him, that
Himself also hates a sheep, because he (...) palate and stomach delighted and
relieved with Mutton. Nor as the (...) on the sheeps side Invincible; for,
ourselves have see^ (...), by Custom, to so great familiarity with a Woolf,
that (...) with him, and bleat, as after the Dam, when the (...) of the room:
and the like Kindness have we (...) betwixt a Lamb and Lion of the Lord
General (...) Sion house, and afterward publicly showed in Lond^n. (...)
Fear, which surpriseth the Lamb at first sight of a (...) to arise from any
Hereditary Impression derived from the (...) Both^ as well because all Inbredd
or traduced (...), as that none of the Progenitors of the Lamb, (...) saw or
received any impression of injury from a (...) in England. Besides, in case
they had, and though (...) that some Beasts are afraid of men, and other
Beasts, (...) memory of some Harm received from some man, (...) the Idea of
him, that did the Harm, (...) upon the table of the Memory, and being freshly
(...) the (...), whenever the sense brings in the (...) not likely, that the
same Idea should be propa^^^^ (...), after so many hundred removes, (...)
Individual to the whole species, throughout the (...)*

The Cause, (...), why All Sheep generally are startled and o^^ended (...)
sight (...), seems to be only this; that when the Woolf converts his eyes (...)
pleasing and inviting object, and that whereupon (...) his Imagination; he
instantly darts forth (...) of subtle Effluvia's, which being part of (...) his
newly formed Idea of dilaniating and devouring (...) ^omposed, serve as
Forerunners or Messengers of destruction to the (...) b^ing transmitted to his
Common Sensory, through his opti^k nerve^ most highly misaffect the same, and
so cause the sheep to fear, an^ ^n^^avour the praeservation of his life, by
flight.

This receives sufficient Confirmation from hence* Art. (...).
that not only such Aversions, as arise from the Contrariety of Constitutions
in several Animals (...) commonly observed to produce those Effects of Fear,
Trembling and flight from the objects, from which offensive impressions are
derived, by the mediation of disagreeing Spirits or Ema^ations: but even the
seeing them in a passion of Anger, or Fury, does suddenly cause the like. For,
violent Passions ever alter the Spirits, and Characterize them with the idea at
that time most praevalent in the Imagination of the Passionate; so that those
spirits issuing from the body of the Animal, in the height o^ Passion, and
insinuating themselves into the brain of the other Animal contrari^y (...),
must of necessity highly disgust and offend it. Which is the most likely Reason
that has hitherto been given, Why Bees seldom sting men of a mild and peaceful
disposition: but will by no means endure, not be reconciled to others of a
froward, choleric, and waspish nature. The same* so may serve to answer that
common Quaere, Why some (...) persons, having tuned their spirits to the
highest key of (...) have daunted not only fierce Mastiffs, but (...) other
Wild and ravenous Beasts, merely by (...) put them to flight by the Artillery
of their (...) Eyes. And the Key, wherewith we have unlockt the secret (...)
and Woolf, will also open those like Antipathies supposed to be betwixt the
Dove and Falcon, the Chicken and Kite, and all other weak Animals, and such as
use to make them their pr^y.

(2) It is worthy a serious Remark, Art. 4. (...)
that sundry Animalls bear a kind of (...) to the Persons of such men, as are
delighted or conversant in the Destruction of those of the same species with
them: as we daily see, that (...) are highly offended and angry at Butchers:
that Dogs bark (...) and (...) Glovers, that deal most in Dog skins, and (...)
killing of Dogs, in time of the plague, to praev^nt (...) diffusion (...) and
increase of Putrefaction, by their (...) that Vermin (...) the trapps and gins
of Warrenners, where^^ (...) their own kind has been taken and destroyed,
etc. As (...), or strong Aversions, it is manifest, that they arise (...), or
Character of Providence (...) Natures, or Essential Forms, but only (...) upon
the sense. For the (...) any Animal of the same species, excite a kind of
Horror in the like Animal that smells them; and so cause it to abhor and avoid
all such persons and places, for fear of the like harm and internecion, as
their fellows have suffered from them. Now, that which makes these odours
insinuate themselves with such ^ase and familiarity into the Sensories of
animals of the same species, is the similitude and Uniformity of their
Specifical Constitutions, which yet the rough hand of Corruption seems not
totally to have obliterated in the long since extravenated blood and spirits,
but to have left some Vestigia or R^mains of the Canine nature in the Dogs
blood, of the Porcine in the Sw^^^s, etc. And, that which makes them so
horridly Odious, is the great A^^^^^ion of the blood from its genuine temper
and conditius. For, the smell of the Carcass, or blood of any Animal, having
once suffered the Dep^avation of Corruption; is always most hateful and
dangerous to others of the same Species: and it has been observed, that the
most pernicious in^ections and Plagues have been such, as took their Original
from the Corruption of Humane Bodies; which indeed, is the best reason that
has ^een yet given, why the Plague so often attends long and bloody Sieges*
and is commonly the second to the Sword. We conceive, the same to (...) the
ground of that Axiom of the Lord St. Alban (Not. Hist. cent. 10.^ ^enerally,
that which is Dead, or Corrupted, or Excerned, has Antipa^^^ ^^th the same
thing, when it is Alive, and when it is sound; and with those (...) which do
excern: as a Carcass of Man is most infectious and odious ^^man, a Carrion of
an Horse to an Horse, etc. Purulent matter of (...) and Ulcers, Carbuncles,
Pocks, Scabbs, Leprousy, to Sound flesh. And the Excrements of every species to
that Creature, that excerneth them. But the Exc^ements are less Pernicious,
than the Corruptions.

Art. 5. The Cause of the ^^est (...) Carca^^ of a mu^the^ed man (...) the
praesence and (...) of the H^mi^ia^
(3) The (...) (and, according to some reports, the opening of the Eyes^ of the
Carcass of a murdered man, at the praesence and touch of the Homicide. (...)
in truth, the noblest of Antipathies: and scarce any Writer of the Secrets or
Miracles of Nature, has omitted the Consideration thereof. This Life in Death,
Revenge of the Grave, or loud language of silent Corruption, many Venerable and
Christian Philosophers have accounte^^ holly Miraculous or Supernatural; as
ordained and effected by the just (...) of God, for the detection and
punishment of the inhumane (...). And, least we should seem too forward, to
expunge, from (...) mind of any man, the belief of that opinion, which to some
may (...) more powerful Argument, than the express Command of God, to (...)
them from committing so horrid and execrable a Crime as Mu^^er: we shall so far
concur with them, as to conceive this Effect (...) Divine only in the
I^stitution, but merely Natural in the Production, or Immediate Causes. Because
the Appearance seems not to (...) the Capacity of Natural Means, and the whole
Syndrome and (...) of it Causes may be thus explained. It is an Opinion highly
C^^^entaneous, that in every vehement Passion there is forme^^ certain (...)
well of the Object, whereupon the Imagination is (...) the Good or Evil
connected unto, and expected from that Objec^ and that this Idea is as it were
impressed, by a kind of inexplicable (...) upon the Spirits, at the same
instant the Mind (...) to Will the praesent Prosecution, or Avoidance or the
object (...) by the mediation of the Spirits (those Angels of the Mind) the
same Idea is transmitted to the Blood, and through the Arteries diffused into
all parts of the body, as well as into the Nerves and Muscles, which are
inservient to such Voluntary Motions, as are requisite to the execution of the
Decrees and Mandats of the Will, concerning the Prosecution, or Avoidance of
the Object. This being so, we may conceive, that the Phansy of the Person
assaulted by an Assassine, having formed an Idea of Hatred, Opposition, and
Revenge, and the same being Characterized upon the Spirirs, and by them
diffused through the blood; though the blood become much less Fluid in the
veins after death, by reason the vital influence and Pulsifick Faculty of the
Heart, which Animated and Circulated it, is extinct: yet, because at the
praesence of the Murderer, there issue from the pores of his body such subtle
Emanations, as are Consimilar to those, which were emitted from him, at the
time He strove with overcame, and killed the Patient; and those Emanations
entering the Dead Body, do cause a fresh Commotion in the blood remaining yet
somewhat Fluid in its veins, and as it were renew the former Colluctation or
Duel betwixt the yet wholly uncondensed Spirits of the slain, and those of the
Homicide: therefore is it, that the Blood, suffering an Estuation, flows up and
down in the veins, to seek some vent, or salley-port; and finding none so open
as in that part, wherein the wound was made, it issues forth from thence. And,
where the Murdered Person is destroyed by strangulation, suffocation, or the
like unbloody Death, so that there is no manifest Solution of Continuity in the
skin, or other Exterior parts of the body; in that case, it has been observed,
that the Carcass bleeds at the Mouth, or Nose, or both; and this only because
in all vehement strivings, and especially in Colluctation for life, the Spirits
and Blood flow most plentifully into the Arteries and Veins of the Herd, as is
visible by the great Redness of the Eyes and face of every man that Fights; and
where the blood fixes in most plenty, there will be the greatest tumult,
aestuation and commotion, when it is fermented, agitated, and again set afloat,
by the Discordant Effluvia's emitted from the body of the near appro^ching or
touching Murderer and consequently, there must the vessels suffer the greatest
stress, distension, and disruption, or apertion of their orifices.

(4) And this magnale of the (as it were) Reanimation of the vindictive blood
in the veins of a Dead body, Art. 6. How the Basilisk does empoyson and
destroy, at distance
by the Magic of those Hostile and Fermenting Aporrhaea's, transmitted from
the body of Him, who violently extinguished its former life; ushers in Another,
no less prodigious, nor less celebrated by Naturalists: and that is the sudden
Disanimation of the Blood in Living Bodies, by the mere pr^sence of the
Basilisk, Catablepa, and Diginus; Serpents of a Nature so transcendently
Venomous, that, according to pogular Tradition, and the several relations of
Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, Solinus, Aelian, Avicen, and most other Authors, who
have treated of the Proprieties of Animals and Venoms, they are Dectructive
beyond themselves, i. e. they either kill by intuition, or Hiss out the flames
of life by their Deieterious Expirations. If Natural Historians have herein
escaped that itch of Fiction, to which they are so generally subject, when they
come to handle Rarities; and that Nature has produced any such Spe^^es, whose
optical Emissions, or Pectoral Expirations are fatal and pernicious (...)
whether he sees the Woolf first, or the Woolf him; sudden silence being ever
the Associate, ^or (rather) Consequent of great and sudden Fear. The Aphonia,
therefore, or Defect of voice, which has sometimes, though very rarely, been
observed to invade men, upon the Conspection of Woolves; is not the genuine
Effect of any secret and radicated Antipathy, or Fascinating Virtue in the
subtle Aporrhaea's emitted from the eyes, lungs, or body of the Woolf: but
only of their own Fear and Terror, arising from a strong apprehension of
Danger; the sudden and impetuous Concentration of the Spirits, toward the
Heart, by reason of the violent Terror, at that time, causing a Defection of
spirits, and consequently a kind of Relaxation in the Muscles of the Tongue,
and Nerves inservient to the vocal instruments: So that the inspired Aer cannot
be Efflated with that force and celerity, as is necessary to the loudness and
distinct articulation of the voice.

(6) Nor is it the Eye alone, Art. 8. (...).
that the Folly of men has made obnoxious to Antipathies, but the Ear also
has it share of wonderful Effects; for, there go solemn stories of inveterate
and specifical Enmities betwixt the Lion and Cock, Elephant and Swine, and He
has read little, who has not more than once met with sundry relations, that
the Crowing of the Cock is more terrible than death, to the fiercest Lion, and
the Grunting of a Swine so odious to an Elephant, that it puts him into an
Agony of Horror, Trembling, and Cold sweat. Which notwithstanding, may well be
called to the bar of Experiment, and many worthy Authors have more then
questioned, among whom, Camerarius (in Symbol.) expressly assures us, that in
his time, one of the Duke of Bavaria's Lions, breaking into a yard adjacent to
his Den, and there finding a flock of Poultry, was so far from being afraid of
the Cock, or his Crowing, that he devoured him and his troop of Hens together.
And as for the other Antipathy; ourselves have seen an Elephant feed and sleep
quietly in the same stable, with a Sow and her whole litter of Piggs. However,
lest some should plead the power of Custom, in both these cases, and object,
that that Lion and Elephant had been, by Assuefaction, brought to endure the
naturally hateful Noises of the Cocks Crowing, and the Swines Grunting; to
eradicate the belief of the supposed Occult Antipathies, we say: that such may
be the Discrepancy or Disproportion betwixt the Figures and Contextures of
those subtle particles, that compose those Harsh Sounds, and the Contexture of
the organs of Hearing in the Lion and Elephant, as that they exasperate them,
and so highly offend those Animals. For, thus we suffer a kind of short Horror,
and our Teeth are set on edge, by those harsh and vehement sounds, made by
scraping of trenchers, filing the teeth of saws, squeaking of doors, and the
like: only because those sounds grate and exasperate the Auditory Nerves, which
communicate the harsh impression to the Nerves of the Teeth, Art. 9. (...)
and cause a stridor therein.

(7) But if we pass from these Imaginary* to Real Antipathies, and desire not
to misimploy our Understanding, in the quest of Dihot^es for such things, of
whose Hoti the more sober and judicious part of Scholars justly doubt* let us
come to the wonderful Venom of the TARANTULA, a certain Phalangium or small
Spider frequent in Italy, but most in and about Tarentum in Apulia; which has
this strange Propriety, that being communicated to the body of man, by biting,
it makes him Dance most violently, at the same time, every year, till He be
perfectly cured thereby, being invincible by any other Antidote but Music. An
Effect so truly admirable, and singular, that the Discovery of its abstruse
Causes, and the manner of their operation, cannot but be most opportune and
grateful to the Curious; who, we presume, would gladly know, Why such as are
empoysoned by the biting of a Tarantula, fall into violent Fits of Dancing, and
cannot be Cured by any other Remedies, but the Harmonious Strains of Music
alo^^*

SOLUTION.
How great the power of Music is, as to the excitement, exaltation, and
compescence or mitigation of the Passions of the Mind of Man; and wherein the
C^use of that Harmonical Magic does consist: would be a Digression, and
perhaps somewhat superfluous for us here to enquire. And, therefore, cutting
off all Collateral Curiosities, we shall confine our present (...) to the
limits of our own Profession; endeavoring only to explain the Reasons, why
Music has so strong and generous an Energy, as certainly to cure the Body of
a man, intoxicated with the Venom of the Taruntula, which eludes and despises
the opposition of all other Alexipharmacal Medicaments. Forasmuch, therefore,
as the ^t^ings of a Lute, Vial, or other Musical Instrument, do always mov^
and impell the Aer, after the same manner as themselves are moved an^ impelled,
and by this proportionate misture of Sounds create an Harmony delightful not
only to the Ear, but to that Harmonious Essenc^* the soul, which Animates the
Ear; hence comes it, that by the musical Harmony, that is made by the
Musicians play^^g to the person infected with the Tarant^sme, the Aer, by
reason of the various and yet proportionate motions of the strings, is
harmonically moved and agitated, and carrying th^se various motions of the
harmony impressed upon it self, into the Ear, and so affecting the
Fantastical Faculty with those pleasant motions, (...) like manner affect and
move the spirits in the brain: and the spirits having received those
impressions, and diffused into the Nerves, Muscles and (...) of the whole body,
and there meeting with a certain thin, acrimon^ous and pricking Humor, which is
the chief fuel and vehicle of the Veno^e derived from the Tarantula; they
attenuate and agitate the same, by a (...) very like that of Fermentation, and
disperse it with a quick motion (...) all the parts. And this Humor being thus
set afloat, and estuated, to^^^her with the venom, or seeds of the Poison,
which are contained (...), must needs affect all the Musculousand Nervous
parts, (...), with a kind of Itch, or gentle and therefore pleasan^ (...) or
(rather) Titillation: So that the Patient feeling this universa^ (...)
Tickling, can be no longer at ease and quiet but is compelle^ (...) to dance
and move all the members of his body with all agility (...) possible. This
Dancing causes a Commotion of all the (...) in his body; that Commotion
augments the present Heat there^^* that Heat causes a Relaxation and Apertion
of the pores of the ^kin; and thereupon ensues a liberal and universal sweat;
and together with that sweat, the venom is dispersed and expelled. But, where
the Venom is so deeply settled, and as it were radicated in the solid
substance of the parts, as that one or two, or three Fits of Dancing and
Sweating are not sufficient to the total Eradication and Expulsion thereof; in
that deplorable case, the Patient becomes freshly intoxicated, and relapseth
into his dancing paroxisins, at the same periodical season, every year, without
omission, till his many and profuse Annual sweats have freed him from all
Relics of the Poison.

Most true it is, Art. 10. W^y ^^^ers Tarantia^al Persons are affected and
cured with Diverse T^n^s, and the music of diverse Instruments.
that Diverse Tarantiacal persons are affected with diverse Musical Instruments,
and diverse Tunes and Ayrs; but this is to be imputed to the Diversity of
Complexions and Temperaments either of the Tarantula's, which envenome them, or
of the Persons themselves. For, such as are Melancholy of themselves, or
intoxicated by the poison of the duller and more sluggish sort of Tarantula's;
are ever Affected and Sympathize rather with the music of Drums, Trumpets,
Sackbuts, and other loud and strong sounding instruments, than with that of
Lutes, Vials, and other soft and gentle ones. For, since Melancholy is a thick,
heavy and viscid Humor, and the Spirit^ always follow the Disposition of the
Humor praedominant; to the Concitation and Dissipation thereof, a greater force
of motion is required. And this, doubtless, was the Reason, why a certain Girl
of Tarentum, being there bitten by a Tarantula, and affected with the
stupendous symptom of Tarantism, could never be excited to dance by any
sounds, but those of Guns, Alarms beaten upon Drums, Charges and Triumphs
sounded in Trumpets, and other military music; the heavy and viscid venom,
meeting with a body of a Cold and Phlegmatic Complexion; and so requiring very
strong Commotions of the Aer and Spirits, to its Estuation and Dissipation.
And, on the Contrary, Choleric and Sanguine Complexions, are, by reason of the
Subtility of their Spirits, and greater Fluidity of their Humors, soonest Cured
by the H^rmony of Lutes, Harps, Vials, Virginals, Guitarrs, Tiorba's, and other
stringed Instruments.

But, that which deserves our highest Admiration, is this* Art. 11. That ^^e
venom of the Tarantula does produce the same effect in the body of a man; is
it does in that of the Tarantula it self: and why.
that this Venom of the Tarantula does produce the same Effect in the body of
man, which it does in that of the Tarantula it self, wherein it is generated*
as if there were some secret Cognation and Similitude betwixt the Nature of
that venomous Spider, and that of Mankind. For, as the Poison, being infused
into any part of man's body, and set a work by Music, does, by a continual
vellication or Titillation of the Muscles and Membranes thereof, incite the
intoxicated person to dance: So likewise, while it remains in its own womb and
proper Conservatory, the body of the Tarantula being once set a work by Music,
does it incite the Tarantula to dance, and caper, as is commonly observed by
the Italians, and at large related by At^an. Kircherus (in opere Magnetico) and
some others of un questionable veracity, who would admit no testimony in this
particular, but what they received from their own exact observations. Among the
sundry Narrations of Experiments in this kind, Kircher entertains his Reader
chiefly with this one, as the most exact and commemorable. A certain Italian
Duchess says He) to the end she might be fully satisfied of the truth of this
prodigy of nature, of which ^he had so often heard, and as often doubted,
commanded that a Tarantula should be brought into the Hall, or Refectory of a
College of Jesuits, all the Fathers being praesent; and there set upon a small
chipp of wood, that floated (...) of water. Then she gave order, that an
Excellent Harper should stand by, and play over several of his best composed
Tunes. The Tarantula, for a good while, seemed wholly unconcerned in the
music* discovering no motions of tripudiation in himself; but at length, (...)
the H^rper had hi^ upon some certain Notes Strains, and Airs* (...) held some
proportion to the Humor and Specifical Venom of (...) Spider, ^he now
enchanted Insect began to detect its sympathy to (...), and natural inclination
to dancing, not only by the frequent (...), and nimble agitation of his whole
body, but even most (...) observ^ng time and measures, according to the
Harmoni^^^ Numb^^^ ^^prest in the Tune: and as the Musician played more slowly
(...) the (...) beast dance more slowly or nimbly; not moving a (...) after the
T^m^ was ended. But, this which then app^^r^d (...) the Dutche^s and other
Spectators, they soon after heard (...) to the Musicians of Tarentum, who being
hired, with an (...) paid out of the Public purse, to cure the meane^ (...)
when any is bitten by a Tarantula; that they may not (...) the Patient, and put
themselves to the pains of playing ^ong (...) enquire of the Patient, in what
house, what field, (...) of what color and bigness the Tarantula was, that
(...) him (...) satisfied of these particulars, they forthwith go to the p^ace
(...)* and there looking among the several species of Tarantul^s (...) are
busy in weaving their Cobweb nets, for the ensnaring of (...) they search for
such a one as the Patient has described, and having (...) found the like, they
instantly fall to their instruments; and pla^ over (...) sets of Lessons one
after another, till they light upon (...) holding some proportion to the
Specifical temperament and vene^^ous Humor of that Tarantula, inciteth him to
dance. (...) delightful and strange it is to behold the great (...) among many
Tarantula's together; one while this (...) another (...) that exactly
sympathizing with the Harmonious mo^io^ (...) and aer. When the Musicians have
thus informed (...) particular Genius and Humor of that species of Tarantu^^^
by one (...) which the Patient was envenomed; they return home, an^ (...)
almost at first touch of their instruments, playin^ (...) again those Tunes,
whose Correspondency to the (...) ambuscado ^ in the centrals of his body,
they (...) ^^perimented* and they seldom or never fail of the (...) are certain
what Notes and Tunes are most (...) Genius of the Spider, that has intoxicated
the (...).

(...) inconsistent with Reason, that the Tarantula it self (...) strange
Effect from the Charms of Music, as (...) Venom has intoxicated: for seeing
that (...) supplies the office of Blood in this Insect is exceeding (...) with
subtle and hot spirits, and so becomes a (...) receive the Motions impressed
upon it, by the (...) Aer, whereof the Sounds are composed: it seems (...)
being a s^^ated and set afloat, by the motions of the aer, which are
Harmonical; it should cause the like Vibrissations in the nervous parts of the
Tarantula, as the hand of the Musician has caused in the Consonous strings of
the instrument; the strings caused in the Aer, and the Aer caused in the
spirits of the Animal: and consequently, that the Animal should suffer a kind
of Itch, or gentle vellication in all its nerves, and muscles, and to ease it
self of that troublesome Affection, move all its members, not only with great
agility, but variety of motions correspnodent to those of the Harmony impressed
upon its spiritual substance; especially where the Harmony is proportionate to
the specifical (and perhaps, individual) Constitution of the same.

That the vital Humor of these and most other Spiders, is both viscous, Art.
12. That the Ven^m of the Tarantula is (...) in a (...) H^mor and such as (...)
capable of S^^nds.
and a subject capable of Sounds, as we here assume* may be inferred from the
relation of Peter Martyr (in Histor. sua Indiae Occidental) that in the West
Indies there is a certain species of Phalangiums, or Venenate Spiders, whose
poison, being expressed, is so exceedingly viscid and tenacious, that the
Natives use to draw and spin it out into long threads, and twist those threads
into Treble strings for their instruments of Music: as also from our own
ocular testimony, whenever we press a Spider to death.

And (what is of greatest moment to our praesent Disquisition) that the Venom
of the Tarantula, by rea on of the Acrimony, Art 13. That it causes an
^ncessent itching and (...) ^itillation (...) the Nervous and Musculous par^s
of man's body, when infused into it, and ^ermenting ^n ^t.
or Mordacity of its Spiritual and hot particles, causes an uncessent
Titillation, or Itching joined wi^h great heat, in the nervous and musculous
parts of man's body, when it is in aestuation and commotion therein, may be
collected from the agreeing relations of all persons, who have known the misery
of Tara^tisme* every one complaining of an insufferable Itch in all parts of
his body, during the paroxisme, and finding a remission of the same immediately
after profuse sweating. For your farther Confirmation herein, be pleased to
hear Father Kircher tell you a memorable and pertinent story. A certain
Cappucine (says He) of the Monastery belonging to that Order, in Tarentum,
being bitten by a Tarantula, and by his (in that point, too severe) Superiors
forbidden to have recourse either to Baths, or Dancing, for the cure of his
infection, as means that might seem too light and inconsistent with the gravity
and rigid rules of his Profession; was so miserably and beyond all patience
tormented with an itching and burning in both the interior and and exterior
parts of his body, that rest and quiet were things he had long since been a
stranger to; and hoping to find some ease and allay of his restless pains by
bathing in cold water, he, one night, privily conveyed himself out of the
Covent, and leaped into an Arm of the Sea, that embraced the town. Where,
indeed, he met with a perfect cure of a^l his torments and grievances; being
instantly drowned: leaving his Brethren to lament their own great loss, as well
as the Sadness of his Face; and his Superiors to repent the cruelty of that
Superstition, which had denied him the use of those innocent Remedies, Music
and Dancing, which the happy experience of many thousands had praescribed.

Lastly, as it is not every Harmonical Air that suits with the Genius of every
Tarantula, but every particular species holds a secret Correspondence to some
particular sorts of Instruments, Tunes, and (...) composed of such and such
Notes: So likewise is it not the Music of every instrument, nor every
modulation of sounds that move and excite every person infected with this kind
of poison; but every Tarantiacal Patient requires such and such particular
Harmonious Tunes, Strains, and Notes as are proportionate to that Diathesis, or
Disposition, which results from the Commixture and Confermentation of his own
Humors, and the Venom infused into his body. Which is the Reason, why some
dance to no music but that of Drums, Trumpets and other loud and martial
instruments; and others again are easily charmed to Levolta's by the mild and
gentle Consonances of Lutes and Tiorba's. And if the Patient, being of a hot
and bilious Complexion, be intoxicated by the venom of a Tarantula of the like
Choleric temperament; upon the aestuation and confermentation of those two
consimilar Humors, the Patient shall become Feverish, insatiately thirsty,
restless, and furiously maniacal: but, where a Melancholy Tarantula has
empoysoned a man of the like dull and sluggish Constitution; in that case, He
shall be infested with great and inexpugnable Drowsiness, Stupidity,
Spontaneous Lassitude, love of Solitude, unseasonable and affected Silence, and
the like Symptoms contrary to the former, and shall be relieved only by grave
and solemn tunes; the Accidents supervening upon this kind of intoxication,
always following and betraying the capacity of the praedominant Humor, and
responding to that Harmony, which has the most of proportion to the Genius of
the Poison.

Art. 14. The cause of the Annual Recidivation of the Tarantism, till it be
perfectly cured.
And as for the Annual Relapses of Patients, into their Tarant^acal Fits; the
Cause thereof must be only this, that the Relics of the Poison causing a
fresh Commotion and Fermentation of the most susceptible Humors of the body,
and especially of the Serous and Bilious part of the blood (for, most persons
thus affected; have their Paroxysms in the hottest season of the year) and
imbuing them with exceeding great Acrimony and Mordacity: diffuse themselves
through the Arteries and Veins into all parts of the body; and fixing more
especially on the thin membranes, that invest the muscles, so oppress, prick
and vellicate them, as that the infected shall know no rest nor case, till he
has danced and sweat* to the dissipation and expulsion of all those sharp and
pungent particles, that were diffused into the Habit of his body.

Art. 15. A Conjecture, what kind of Tun^^* Strain^ and Notes seem most
accommodate to the Cure of Tarantiacal Person^ i^ the General.
But, what particular Sounds, and Notes, and Strains, and Airs, are Accommodate
to the Venom of this or that particular Tarantula; we leave to the
determination of the long experienced Musicians of Tarentum only thus much we
may say, in the General; that by how much the more frequent Diminutions of
Notes into halfs and quarters (which is called Division) and the more frequent
permistion of Sharps and Flats, in a Tone charged with frequent Semitones, the
Tune contains: by so much the more grateful will the same be to all
Tarantulized Persons; because, from the Celerity of the motions it comes, that
the Dormant Venom is more nimbly agitated, and so must solicit them to dance
the more spritely and vehemently. Hence is it, that the Musicians of Italy,
such especially who proress the certain and speedy Cure of the Tarantisme, for
the most part, enrich and adorn their strains with various Divisions of Notes;
and that mostly in the Phrygian Tone, because it consists of frequent
Semitones.

(8) What we have here said, Art. 16. The Reason of the Incantation of
Serpents, by a rod of the Cornus.
concerning the Magic of Harmonious Sounds both upon the Tarantula it self,
and those unhappy men, whom its Fascinating venom has Tarantulized; as it
does wholly take off the Incredibility of those Relations, which some Natural
Magicians have set down, of the Incantation of Serpents, by a wand of the
Cornus, or Dog tree: so does it also give us no obscure light into the dark
Cause of that Effect, which among the Ignorant and Superstitious has ever
passed for merely praestigious and Diabolical. For, it being certain, that all
Serpents are most highly offended at the smell, and influx of those invisible
Emanations proceeding from the Cornus, by reason of some great Disproportion or
Incompossibility, betwixt those subtle Effluvia^s, and the temperament of the
Vital and Spiritual Substance of Serpents: insomuch that, in a moment, they
become strongly intoxicated thereby: Why should it seem impossible, that He,
who understands this invincible Enmity, and how to manage a wand or rod of the
Cornus with cunning and dexterity; having first intoxicated a Serpent by the
touch thereof, should, during that fit, make him observe and readily conform
to all the various motions of that wand: So as that the unlearned Spectators
perceiving the Serpent to approach the Enchanter, as he moves the wand nearer
to himself; to retreat from him, as he puts the wand from him; to turn round,
as the wand is moved round* to dance, as that is waved to and fro; and lie
still, as in a trance, when that is held still over him; and all this while
knowing nothing, that the simple virtue of the wand is the Cause of all those
mimical motions and gestures of the Serpent: they are easily deluded into a
belief, that the whole seen is supernatural, and the main Energy radicated in
those words, or Charms, which the Impostor, with great Ceremony and gravity of
aspect mutters forth, the better to disguise his Legerdemane, and dissemble
Nature in the Colors of a Miracle.

And, as in this, so in all other Magical Practices, those Bombast Words, Art.
17. DI^RESSION. That the (...)
nonesense Spells, exotique Characters, and Fanatic Ceremonies, used by all
Praestigiators and Enchanters, have no Virtue or Efficacy at all (that little
only excepted, which may consist merely in the sounds, and tones in which they
are pronounced, in respect whereof the ear may be pleased or displeased) as to
the Causation of the Effect intended; nor do they import any thing, more than
the Circumvention of the Spect^^tors judgment, and exaltation of his
Imagination, upon whom they pr^etend to work the miracle. Which considered, it
will be an argument not only of Christianism, but of sound judgment in any
man, to conclude; that excepting only some few particulars, in which God has
been pleased to permit the Devil to exercise his Praestigiatory power (and yet,
whosoever shall consider the infinite Goodness of God, will not easily be induced
to believe, that He has permitted any such at all.) all those Volumes of
Stories of Fascinations, Incantations, Transformations, Sympathies of men and
beasts with Magical Telesms, Gamahues or Waxen Images, and the like mysterious
Nothings, are mere Fables, execrable Romances. So Epidemical, we confess, has
the Contagion of such Impostures been, that among the People, when any Person
waxes macilent, and pines away, we hear of nothing but Evil Neighbors,
Witchcraft, Charms, Statues of Wax, and the like venefical fopperies; and
instantly some poor decrepite old woman is suspected, and perhaps acc^^^d of
malice and Diabolical stratagems against the life of that person: who all the
while lies languishing, of some Common Disease, and the le^^^ed Physician no
sooner examines the case, but he finds the sick man's Consumption to proceed
from some inveterate malady of the body, as Ulcer of the Lungs, Hectique
Fever, Debility of the Stomach, Liver, or other common Concocting part, or from
long and deep Grief of mind. In like manner, when the Husband man observes his
field to become barren, (...) chattel ^o cast then young, or die, his corn to be
blasted, his fruits (...) immaturely, or the like sinister Accidents nothing is
more usual (...), than to charge those misfortunes upon the Magical
Impraecations of some offended Neighbor, whom the multitude supposes to be a
(...) man, or Conjurer. And yet, were the Philosopher consulte^ ^bou^ those
Disasters, he would soon discover them to be the ordinary (...) genuine Effects
of Natural Causes, and refer each Contingent (...) proper original. True it is
likewise, that many of those Sorcerers* who^ (...) vulgar call White Witches,
in respect of the good they (...) frequently p^^^scribe certain Amulets, or
Per^apts, for the praecentio^ (...) of some di^^ases: and in this case, if the
Amulet or Per^apt* (...) such Natural Ingredients, as are endowed with
Qualitie^ repug^^^^ to the Dis^^se, or its germane Causes, we are not to deny
(...). But, as for those superstitious Invocations of Angels an^ (...) Salamons
Characters, Tetragrammatons, Spells, Circles* an^ (...) and ridiculous Magical
Rites and Ceremonies, used by the (...) at the time of the Composition or
Application of those Amulets or (...)* they are of no power, or virtue at all,
and signify nothing but (...) Delusion of the Ignorant. Again, we grant, that
the Imagination (...) Confidence of the sick Person, being by such means
exalte^* may (...) very much to his Recovery; for, it is no secret, that the
(...) men are for the most part, erected, and their drooping spirit^ (...) by
the good opinion they have entertained of the (...) Confidence they place in
his praescripts: but, yet are (...) allow any Direct and Natural Efficacy to
that (...) and Ceremonious administration of Remedies, which are (...) observed
by such Impostors, as praetend to Extraordinary skill* an^ (...) supernatural
way, in the Cure of Diseases, and seem to affect and (...) the detestable
repute of Magicians. And what we say of the (...) Amulets, and the like, we
desire should (...), or Love-procuring Potions, o^ the Ligature (...) Wedding
night, to cause Impotency in new (...) then Brides a thing very frequent in
Zant and Gasco^^ (...) because each of these has other Causes, than those
(...) Nugaments praescribed by those Cheaters; and (...) they can have upon the
persons, to whom they (...) in the praepossession of their Fancy, and (...) to
Hope, or Fear.

^
(9) (...), a certain sort of Fascination Natural about which (...) and most
Nurses, when they observe (...) fall into Cachex^es, languishing condition^
(...), instantly cry out, that some envious (...) them. Concerning this secret
therefore, in (...) part) has no interest at all; we say* that if there be any
thing of truth, as to matter of Fact, the Fascinating activity of the old
malicious Crone must consist only in this: that she does evibrate or dart forth
from her brain, certain malignant Spirits, or rays, which entering the tender
body of the Infant, do infect the purer spirits, and so the blood in its
Arteries, and assimilating the same to their depraved and malign nature,
corrupt all the Aliment of the body, and alienate the parts from their genuine
and requisite temperament. Not that those Malignant Emissions can arrive at,
and infect an Infant that is absent, as is vulgarly conceived; but that the
malicious old woman must be praesent, and look (with an oblique or wist look)
and breath upon the Child, whose health she envies, nay, conjure up her
Imagination to that height of malice, as to imbue her spirits with the evil
Miasme or Inquinament of those vicious and corrupt Humors, wherewith her
half-rotten Carcass is well stored; and to assist the Contention of her optique
Nerves and Muscles, that so those Spirits may be ejaculated with great force.
For, that an old woman though as highly malignant in her Nature and Malice, as
can be supposed, should be able to infect and envenome an Infant at great
distance; is not to admitted by any, but such as have ignorance enough to
excuse their persuasion of the highest Impossibility imaginable. But, that she
may, in some measure, contribute to the indisposition of an Infant, at whom she
shoots her malign Eye-beams, near at hand; may receive much of credit from the
Pollution of a Lookinglass by the adspect of a Menstruous woman; and from the
Contagion of Blear Eyes, Coughing, Oscitation or Gaping, Pissing and the like:
all which are observed to be somewhat infectious to the standers by.

(10) You may call it Fascination also, if you please, when the Torpedo does
benumb or stupifie the hand of the Fisherman. For, Art. 19. (...).
as the Maleficiation of Infants is the Effect only of certain malign or ill
conditioned Emanations transmitted to them from the brain of some malevolent
and half venomous Ruins of a woman: so likewise must the stupefaction of the
hand of the Fisherman, be the Effect of certain Stupefactive Emanations, either
immediately, or by the mediation of a staff or other continued body,
transmitted thereunto from the offended Fish; which Emanations, by a Faculty
holding some near Analogy to that of Opium Hyosciamus, and other strong
Narcoticks or stupefactive Medicaments, do in a moment Dull and Fix the Spirits
in the part, that they invade, and so make it Heavy, Senseless, and unfit for
voluntary motion.

(11) But, how shall we get free of that Difficulty, Art. 20. That ships are
(...).
wherein so many high-going Wits have been Gravelled; the sudden arrest of a
ship, under sail, by the small Fish Echineis, thereupon general called a
Remora? We cannot expede our selves from it, by having recourse to any Fixing
Emanations transmitted from the Fish to the ship; because the Motion thereof is
not voluntary, but from External Impulse; nor has the ship any spirits, or
other Active principles of motion, that can be supposed capable of Alteration
by any influx whatever. Nor by alleging any motion, contrary to that of the
tide, winds, and oars, impressed upon the ship by the Remora; because,
whatsoever kind of Impulse or Force can be imagined impressible upon it
thereby: yet can it never be sufficient to impede and suppress the so violent
motion thereof; insomuch as the Remora, neither adhaering to any rock, shelf,
or other place more firm than the water, but only to the ship (...) self, must
want that fixation and Firmitude, that is inevitably necessary, whenever any
thing does stop, or move another thing of greater weight then it self. What
then? shall we impeach of unfaithfulness all those Authentic Historians, who
have recorded the sudden and prodigious Arrests of the ships of Peria^^er*
A^tigonus, and Caius Caligula, in the midst of their Courses, though therein
advantaged by the Conspiring impulses of Sa^ls and Oars? Not so neither;
because many other vessels, as well before as since, have been stopped in the
like manner: and there is in nature Another Cause, incomp^^ably more potent,
and so more likely to have arrested them, than that (...), small and weak Fish
Echmeis; and that is the Contrary motion of the sea, which our Mariners ^who
also have been often troubled with (...) experiments of its Retropellent Force)
call the Current; which is always most strong and cumbersome in narrow and
aufractuous Channels. Wh^^h being scarce known to the Seamen of those times,
when Navigation and Hydrography were yet in their infancy, and few Pilots so
expert, as to d^^^^minate the several Re-encounters, or Contrary Drifts of
Waters in (...) and the same Creek or Arm of the Sea; when they found any
(...) ^^ddenly retarded and impeded in its course, they never conceived that
^^moration to arise from some Contrary Current of Waters in that pla^^ ^ut from
some Impediment in the bottom or keel of the vesse^ ^t sel^. (...) ^s ^hey
searched there for it, if it happened twice or thrice, that they (...) small
Fish, such as the Concha Veneris, or any other not (...), adhaering to the
lower part of the Rudder, or Keel; they instantly, (...) without any
examin^tion at all, whether so weak a cause might not be (...) to so great an
Effect, imputed the Remoration of the^r (...). Historians, indeed, tell us,
that the Admiral Galley, which ^^^ried the Emperor Caligula, in his last
voyage to Rome, was unexpecte^* Ar^ested, in the midst of all his numerous
Fleet; and that an (...) found sticking to the bottom thereof: but they forgot
to tell us, (...) or no there were any other Fishes of the same kind affixed to
any (...) of the Galleys, that kept on their course; and we have good ^^ason
(...) ^^njecture, that there were, because very few ships are brought into
(...) and Docks to be carined, but have many small fishes, resembling (...)*
adhaering to their bottoms, as ourselves have more than once obse^^^^ in
Holland. Besides, since, at Caligula's putting forth ^^om Astura (...) Island
Port, and steering his course for Antium, his Galley* as is (...) custom of
Admirals, kept up in the middle Channel; (...) encountered and opposed by some
special current, or violent (...) place, so streitly pent in on both sides by
the situation o^ certain (...) and Shelves, as that its greatest force was in
one certain p^r^ o^ the ^^ane^l, and so not extensible to the other Galleys of
his Navy, (...) ^owed nearer to the shoars, and so rode upon free water? (...)
are now adays often Arrested by special Currents, in the (...), whose Channels
are rocky, aufractuous, and vorti^ou^ (...) to frequent Eddies and strong
Whirlepools; and near (...) every day behold the Contrary Drifts of ships by
the (...) in the same Arm of the Sea; some vessels being (...) whether the sea
runs out, while others rice toward (...) sea run^ in.

(12) So unlimited is the Credulity of man, Art. 21. That the Echineis, or
Remora is not Ominous.
that some have gone farther yet from the bounds of Reason, and imagined a
Second wonderful Faculty in the Remora, viz. the Praesagition of violent Death,
or some eminent Disaster, to the chief person in the ship, which it arresteth.
For, Pliny (lib. 9. cap. 25. and lib. 23. cap. 1.) will needs have it a Prodigy
portending the murder of Caligula, which ensued shortly after his arrival at
Rome from Astura: and that by the like arresting of the ship of Perianders
Ambassadors sent to obtain an edict for the Castration of all Noble youths,
Nature did declare her high detestation of that Course so destructive to the
way of Generation, that she had instituted for the Conservation of her noblest
species. But, every man knows, how easy it is to make any sinister Accident
the Omen of a tragical Event, after it has happened: and that Plinies Remark
upon the inhuman Embassy, and succeeding Infortune of Perianders Messengers,
would better beseem the ranging pen or tongue of an Orator, than the strict one
of a Philosopher.

(13) Here, Art. 22. Why this place admits not of more than a General ^^quest
into the Faculties of Po^^ons and Counterpoisons.
we should open and survey the whole Theater of Venoms or Poisons, on one hand;
and that of Antidotes or Counterpoisons, on the other: those operating to the
Destruction, these to the Muniment and Conservation of Life; and both by such
Qualities and ways, as are generally both by Physiologists and Physicians,
praesumed to be Occult, or beyond the investigation of Reason, and of which all
that is known, is learned in the common School of Experience. But, worthily to
examine the Nature of each particular Poison, among those many found in the
lists of Animals, Vegetables, Minerals; and explicate the Propriety, by which
its proper Antidote or Alexipharmacon does encounter, oppose, conquer and expel
it: must of necessity enlarge this Section into a Volume, besides the expense
of more time, than what we have consigned to our whole Work. And, therefore, we
hope our Reader will not conceive his expectation wholly frustrated, nor
Curiosity altogether defrauded; though we now entertain Him only with the
General Reasons, Why Poisons are Hostile and Destructive, why Counterpoisons
friendly and Conserva^ive of Life.

Gwoinus (de Venen. lib. 2. cap. 24.) we well remember, Art. 23. Poisons
defined.
defines Venenum, Poison, to be [quod in corpus ingressum, vim infert, Naturae
illamque vincit] That which being admitted into the body, offers violence to
Nature, and conquers it. And, according to this Definition, by Poisons we
understand not only such things, as bear a pernicious Enmity in particular to
the temperament of the Heart, or that substance, wherein the Vital Faculty may
be conceived principally and immediately to consist: but all such as are
hostile and destructive to the temperament of the Brain, or any other Noble and
Principal Organ of the body, so as by altering the requisite Constitution
thereof, they subvert the aeconomy and ruin the frame of Nature, wherein the
Disposition of the parts, to perform the Actions of Life, is radicated.

And that, wherein this Deleterious or Pernicious Faculty does consist, Art.
24. Wherein the Deleterious F^culty of Poison does consist.
we conceive to be a certain Substance, which being communicated or infused
into any part of the body, though in very small quantity, does, by reason of
the exceeding Subtility and violent Mobility or Agility of the insensible
particles, of which it is composed, most easily and expeditely transfuse or
disperse it self through the whole body, consociate it self to the spirits, and
invading the Heart, Brain, or other Principal Organ, so alter the requisite
Disposition or temperament and habit thereof, as to make it thenceforth wholly
incapable of performing the Functions or Actions of life, to which it was
destined and framed; and by that means introduces extreme Destruction.

Likewise, by Alexipharmacal Medicaments, or Counterpoisons, we understand,
Art. 25. Counterpoisons Defined.
not such things, as have only a propitious and benign Friendship particularly
for the temperament of the Brain, Heart, or other Noble Organ in the body, and
are therefore accounted specifically Auxiliant and Corroborative thereunto, in
the Expulsion of ought, that is noxious and offensive unto it; because, in that
sense, all Cardiacal, Cephalical, and Specifically Corroborative Medicaments
would be Alexiterial, and every peculiar Venom would not require its proper
Antivenome, both which are contradicted by Experience: But, such things as are
endowed with Faculties e diametro and directly Contrapugnant to Poisons, merely
as Poisons; For, diverse things that are absolute Poisons of themselves, and
would destroy, if taken alone by themselves, do yet become powerful
Praeservatives and Antidotes against other poisons, and afford sudden and
certain relief to nature, when taken to oppose them. Thus Aconite, than which
scarce any venom is more speedy and mortal in its operation upon a sound body,
does yet prove a praesent remedy to one bitten by a Scorpion, if drank in Wine:
as Pliny has observed ( lib. 27. cap. 2.)

And that, wherein this Salutiferous Virtue of Antidotes does consist, we
conceive likewise to be a certain Substance, Art. 26. Wherein their
Salutifer^us Virtue does consist.
which being received into the body, though in small quantity, does with
expedition diffuse it self throughout the same: and encountering the venom
formerly admitted, and then operating, refract its energy, praevent its further
violence, extinguish its operation, and at length either totally subdue, or
totally educe it. For, All Alexipharmacal Remedies do not bring relief to
nature, assaulted and oppressed by Poison, by one and the same way or manner of
operation; some working by way of Repulsion, others by way of Abduction, others
by way of Opposition and downright Conquest, when they are taken Inwardly: some
by Retraction, others by Extinction, where they are applied Externally.

Thus Triacle, whose Basis or master ingredient is the Flesh of Vipers, does
cure a man empoisoned by the Biting of a Viper; Art. 27. How Triacle cures the
venom of Vipers
only because, in respect of Consimilarity or Similitude of substance, it
uniteth it self to the Venom of the Viper, which had before taken possession
of and diffused it self throughout the body, and afterward educeth the same
together with it self, when it is expelled by sweating, procured by diverse
Cardiacal and Hidrotical, or Sudorifick Medicaments commixt in the same
Composition: no otherwise than as Soap, whose principal Ingredient is oil, does
therefore take off oily and greasy spots from Clothes; because, uniting it
self unto a Cognate or Consimilar substance, the Oil or Fat adhaering to the
Cloth, and so assisting its Dilution and Concorporation with the Water, in
which it self is dissolved; it carries the same away together with it self in
the water, when that is expressed or wrung out by the hand of the Laundress.
More plainly; As oil is therefore commixed with Ashes, or Salt, in the
composition of Soap, to the end it may not stain the Cloth anew, to which it is
applied, but being confused with the oil or Fat, wherewith the cloth was
formerly stained, Abduce or carry off the same together with it self in the
water, which is the Vehicle to both: so likewise is the Flesh of Vipers
therefore commixt with so many Alexiterial Simples as concur to the Confection
of Triacle, to the end it may by them be hindered from envenoming the body a
new, but yet at the same time be so commixt with the Venom already diffused
t^rough the body, as that when those Alexiterial Medicaments are by S^^at or
otherwise educed from the body, carrying along with them the Venom of the
Vipers flesh, to which they are individually consoci^ted, they may also abduce
or carry away that venom of the Vipers tooth, which was formerly diffused
through the body. And this, we m^reover conceive, may be the General Reason not
only of the Evacuat^on of Venomes by Sweat, where the Antidote works by Union
and A^^uction; but also of the Evacuation of superfluous Humors by Elective
(...), or Purging Medicaments, that specifically educe this, or that Humor:
for, it may be as lawfully said, that Like may be cured by Like, or (...) by
Unlike; as that oil may be absterged by its Like, viz. the oil in So^p, and by
something that is Unlike, viz. the Salt, or Water carrying (...) o^l
individually commixt with it.

Thus also does the body of a Scorpion, Art. 28. How the body of a Scorpion,
bruised and laid warm upon the part, which it has lately wounded and
envenomed; does cure the same.
being bruised and laid warm to t^^ part, which it has lately wounded and
envenomed, suddenly Retract, and so hinder the further Diffusion of the Poison
that it had immitted into the body; only because the Nervous and Fibrous parts
of the Scorpions body bruised, by a motion of Vermiculation recontracting
themselves, as Chords too much extended, and so retracting the Venom that yet
remains adhaerent to them: do at the same time Extract that Consimilar Venom,
that was infused into the wound. The same also may be conceived of the Cure of
the venom of a Spider by the body of the Spider contused, and applied to the
part envenomed: and of the Cure of the Biting of a Mad Dog, by the Liver of the
same Dog, in like manner Contused and imposed.

Nor is it by way of Union and Abduction alone, Art. 29. That some Poisons are
Antidotes against others by way of direct Contrariety
that some Poisons become Antidotes against others; but also by that of direct
Contrariety, Colluctation and Conquest: for, there being great Diversity of
Venoms, some must be Contrapugnant to others; and whenever any two, whose
Natures and Proprieties are Contrary one to the other, meet together, they must
instantly encounter and combat each other, and at last the Activity of the
Weaker submit to that of the stronger, while Nature acting the part of a third
Combatant, observes the advantage, and coming in with all her forces to the
assistance of her Enemies Enemy, completes the Victory, and delivers Her self
from the danger. Besides, we have the testimony of Experience, that Diverse men
have fortified their bodies against the assault and fury of some Poisons, by a
gradual Assuefaction of them to others, as Mithridates, and the Attick old
Woman, etc.

Art. 30. Why sundry particular men, and some whole Nations have ^ed upon
Poisonous Animals and Plants, without harm.
Hence we remember Another considerable Secret concerning Poisons, much disputed
of in the School of Physicians; viz. Whence comes it, that not only sundry
Particular Persons, but even Whole Nations have fedd upon venomous Animals and
Plants, without the least of harm, nay with this benefit, that they have
thereby so familiarized Poisons to their own Nature, as that they needed no
other Praeservative against the danger of the strongest Poison, but that
Venenate one of their own Temperament? Whereto, we Answer, in a word, that that
Tyrant, Custom, alone challenges the honor of this wonder; such men having,
by sensible degrees, or slow advance from lesser to greater Doses of Poisons,
so changed the temperament and habit of their bodies, that the wildest Venoms
degenerated into wholesome Aliments, and Poisons were no more Poisons to them,
than to the Animals themselves, which Generate and contain them. Which duly
considered, we have little reason to doubt the verity of Galens relation ( de
theriaca ad Pison.) of the Marsi, and Aegyp^ians, whose ordinary Diet was
Serpents: or of the like in Pliny (lib. 6. cap. 29.) concerning the Psyllae,
Tintyritae, and Candei, who were all ophiophagi, or Serpent-Eaters: or of
Theophrastus his story ( lib. 9. de histor. animal. cap. 18.) of certain
Shepherds in Thrace, who made their grand Sallads of white Hellebor: or of
Avicens (lib. 4. sen. 6. tract. 1. cap. 6.) of a certain Wench, who living upon
no other Viands but Toads, Serpents, and other the strongest poisons, and
mostly upon that of Napellus, became of a Nature so prodigiously virulent, that
she outpoisoned the Basilisk, kissed several Princes to death, and to all those
unhappy Lovers, whom her rare beauty had invited to her bed, her Embraces
proved as f^tal, as those of Jupiter armed with his thunder, are feigned to
have been to femele: or of Iul. Caes. Scaligers (Exercit. 175.) concerning the
Kings son of Cambaia, who being educated with diverse sorts of poisons from his
infancy, had his temperament thereby made so inhumane and trans^endently
Deleterious, that He destroyed Flies only with his breath, kille^ several women
with his first nights Courtship, and pistolled his Enemies with his Spittle;
like the serpent Ptyas, that quickly resolves a man into his originary Dust,
only by Inspuition, as Galen reports ( de theriaca ad Pison. cap. 8.)

The Rear of this Division of Secrets concerning Animals, belongs to the
ARMARIE or MAGNETIC UNGUENT, Art. 31. The A ma^^ Vrg^^^^, and (...) P^wder,
im^ugned
and its Cousin German, the SYMPATHETICK POWDER, or Roman Vitriol calcined;
both which are in high esteem with many, especially with the Disciples of
Para^^lsus, Cro^lius, Goclenius, and Helmont, all which have labored hard to
assert their Virtue in the Cure of Wounds, at great distance, either the
Unguent, or Powder being applied only to the weapon, wherewith the wound was
made, or to some piece of Wood, Linen, or other thing, to which any of the
blood, or purulent matter issuing from the wound, does ^^haere. Concerning
those, therefore, we say, in short; (1) That notwithstanding the stories of
wounds supposed to have been cured by Hoplochrism, both with the Unguent and
Vitriol, are innumerable; yet is not that a suffi^^ent Argument to convince a
circumspect and wary judgment, that either o^ them is empowered with such a
rare and admirable Virtue, as their admire^^ praesume: because many of those
stories may be Fabulous; and were the several Instances or Experiments of their
Unsuccessfulness summed up and alleged to the contrary, they would, doubtless,
by incomparable excesses overweigh those of their successfulness, and soon
counter-incline the minds of men to a suspicion at least of Error, if not of
Imposture in their Inventors and Patrons. (2) Though the Examples of their
success were many more than those of their Failing; yet still would it be less
reasonable for us to fly to such remote, obscure, imaginary Faculties, as do
not only transcend the capacity of our Understanding, but openly contradict
that no less manifest than general Axiom, Nihil agere in rem distantem: than
to have recourse to a proxime, manifest, and real Agent, such as daily
producing the like and greater Effects by its own single power, may justly
challenge the whole honor of that Sanative Energy to it self, which the fraud
of some, and incircumspection of others have unduly ascribed to the Unguent, or
Sympathetick Powder: We mean, the Vital (if you please, you may call it, the
Animal, or Vegetative) Faculty it self; which rightly performing the office of
Nutrition, does by the continual apposition of the Balsam of the Blood, to the
extremes of the small Veins, and to the Fibers in the wound, repair the lost
flesh, consolidate the Disu^^ted parts, and at length induce a Cicatrice
thereupon. For, common Experience demonstrateth, that in men of temperate Diet
and euchymical bodies, very deep and large wounds are many times soon healed of
themselves; i. e. merely by the goodness of Nature it self, which being
vigorous, and of our own provision furnished with convenient means, wholesome
and assimilable Blood, does every moment freshly apply it to the part that has
suffered solution of Continuity, and thereby redintegrate the same: especially
when those Impurities generated by putrefaction in the wound, which might
otherwise be impediments to Natures work of Assimilation and Consolidation, are
removed by the Detersive and Adstrictive Faculty of the Salt in the Urine,
wherewith the wound is daily to be washed, according to the praescript of our
Sympathetical Chirons. Nor is this more than what Dogs commonly do, when by
licking their wounds clean, and moistning them with the saltish Humidity of
their tongues; they easily and speedily prove their own Surgeons. (3) The
Basis or Foundation of Hoplochrism is merely Imaginary and Ridiculous; for, the
Assertors thereof generally dream of a certain Anima Mundi, or Common Soul in
the World, which being diffused through all parts of the Universe, does
constantly transferr the Vulnerary Virtue of the Unguent, and Vitriol, from the
Extravenated blood adhaering to the weapon or cloth, to the wound, at any
distance whatever, and imbuing it therewith, strongly assist Nature in the
Consolidation of the Disunion. But, insomuch as this Anima Mundi, according to
their own wild supposition, ought to be praesent to all other wounds in the
world, no less than to that, from which the blood, whereunto the Unguent, or
Vitriol is applied, was derived: therefore would it cure all other wounds, as
well as that particular one; since it interveneth betwixt that wound and the
Unguent or Vitriol, by no more special reason, than betwixt them and all other
wounds; unless it can be proved, that some other special thing is transmitted
to that particular wound from the Unguent, and that by local motion through all
points of the intermediate spaces successively; Art. 32. The Au^^ors Retraction
of his quondam De^ence of the Magnetic C^re of W unds, (...) in his
P^o^egomena to He^m^nts Book of that subject and title.
which they will by no arguments be induced to concede.

This Verdict, I praesume, was little expected from Me, who have, not many
years past, publicly declared my self to be of a Contrary judgment; written
profestly in Defense of the cure of wounds, at distance, by the Magnetic, or
Sympathetick Magic of the Weapon-Salve; and Powder of Calcined Vitriol; and
excogitated such Reasons of my own, to support and explicate the so generally
conceded and admired Efficacy of Both, as seemed to afford greater satisfaction
to the Curious, in that point, than the Romantique Anima Mundi of the
Fraternity of the Rosy-Cross, the Analogical Magnetism of Helmont, or, indeed,
than any other whatever formerly invented and alleged. And, therefore, to take
off my Reader from all admiration thereat, it is necessary for me here to
profess; that the frequent Experiments I have, since that time, made, of the
downright Inefficacy and Unsuccessfulness as well of the Armary Unguent, as
Sympathetick Powder, even in small, shallow, and in dangerous Wounds; my
discovery of the lightness and invalidity of my own and other men's Reasons,
adferred to justify their imputed Virtues, and abstruse ways of operation;
and the greater Probability of their opinion, who charge the Sanation of
wounds, in such cases, upon the sole benignity and Consolidative Energy of
Nature it self: these Arguments, I say, have now fully convinced me of, and
wholly Converted me from that my former Error. And glad I am of this fair
opportunity, to let the world know of my Recantation: having ever thought my
self strictly obliged, to praefer the interest of Truth, infinitely above that
of Opinion* how plausible and splendid soever, and by whomsoever conceived and
asserted; to believe, that Constancy to any unjustifiable Conception, after
clear Conviction, is the most shameful Pertinacity, a sin against the very
Light of Nature, and never to be pardoned in a professed Votary of Candor and
Ingenuity; and to endeavor the Eradication of any Unsound and Spurious Tenent,
with so much more of readiness and sedulity, by how much more the unhappy
influence of my Pen, or Tongue has, at any time, contributed to the Growth and
Authority thereof.

CHAP. XVI. THE PHENOMENON OF THE LOADSTONE EXPLICATED.
SECT. I.
WHose Wit had the best edge, and came nearest the slitting of the hair; Art.
1. The Nature and Obscurity of the Subject, hinted by certain Metaphorical
Cognomina, agreeable thereunto, though in diverse relations.
His, who said, that the LOADSTONE is the real Ianus, because of its Two
opposite Faces, or Poles, one whereof confronteth the North, the other the
South: or His, who called it the Egg and Epitome of the Terrestrial Globe;
because as the Egg contains the Idaea of the whole and every part of its
Protoplast or Generant, so does the Loadstone comprehend the Idaea of the whole
and every part of the Earth, and inherit all its Proprieties, being Generated
thereby, at least therein: or His, Who named it The Nest of Wonders; because,
as a Nest of Boxes, it includes many admirable Secrets, one within another,
insomuch, that no man can well understand the mystical platform of its Nature,
till he has opened and speculated them all one after another: or His, who
affirmed it to be the Antitype of the Poets Hydra; because, no sooner has the
Sword of Reason cut off one Head, or Capital Difficulty, but Two new ones
spring up in the place of it, nor ought any man to hope the total and absolute
Conquest thereof, but by Cauterizing the veins of every Difficulty, i. e.
leaving not so much as the seeds of a Scruple, but solving all its various
Phaenomenaes to the full: or His, who thought it sufficient, with Aristotle, to
call it [(...)] The stone, that singularity importing its transcendent Dignity:
we freely leave to the judgment of our Reader.

Art. 2. Why the Author insisteth not upon the (1) several Appellations, (2)
Inve^^o of the Loadstone, (3) ^nvention of the Pixis Nautica.
And, as for sundry other Enquiries, that do not in any direct or oblique
interest concern the Investigation of the Causes of All, or Any of those
admirable Proprieties observed in the Loadstone; such as that of the various
Appellations given it by several Philosophers of old, by several Nations, at
this day, together with the proper Original, Etymology and Reason of each:
Whether it was first Discovered by the Shepherd Magnes, on Mount Ida; as Pliny
(lib. 6. cap. 26.) reports out of the records of Nicander: Whether its
Attractive Virtue was known not only to Hippocrates and other Senior
Philosophers of Greece, but also to the Primitive Hebrews, and Egyptians; as
Gilbert conjectureth ( de Magnet. lib. 1. cap. 2.): Whether the Knowledge of
its Ve^^icity, or Polary Virtue cannot be derived higher than the top of the
four last Centuries, and ought to be ascribed to a French man, together with
the honor of the Invention of the Pixis Nautica, or Navigators Compass, about
the year of Christ, M. CC. as ^assendus would persuade, out of one Guyotus
Provi^eus, an old French Poet, who not long after, writ a Panegyric in Verse
upon the Excellency and sundry uses of the same; or to John Goia (alias Gira)
of Salerna* who lived not till almost an hundred years after the said Guyotus
had divulged his Poem, as Blancanus (in Chronolog. Mathemat. Sec l. 2.)
contends: Whether the Nations inhabiting the Sinnae had the use of the Mariners
Compass, before the Europeans; or whether they learned it of the European
ships, that first advanced beyond the Cape of Good-hope, and coasted the Mare
Rubrum, and begun Commerce with them: All these things, as being not only not
easy to determine, but also scarce pertinent to our praesent scope, we refer
to our Readers own enquiry, in Gilbert, Cabeus, Kircher, and other Authors, who
promise him all possible satisfaction therein.

Art. 3. The Virtues of the Loadstone, in General, Two the Attractive, and
Directive.
To come, therefore, directly to the prosecution of our main design; we observe,
that the VIRTUES of the Loadstone are, in General Two, one whereby it
attracteth Iron to it self, the other whereby it directs both it self and
Iron* which it has impregnated by contact or influence, to the Poles of the
Earth: the First is called Alliciency, the Other its Verticity or Polarity.
Concerning the Cause of its Alliciency, or the reason of the Attraction of Iron
by the Loadstone, or (if you would have us speak in the sense and dialect of
Dr. Gilbert) the Coition of Iron and a Loadstone; various opinions have been
conceived and asserted as well by Modern as Ancient Philosophers. Among those
of the Ancients, that which best deserves our commemoration and consideration,
is the opinion of Epicurus: who, lest He might seem scarcely sufficiently
conscious of the great difficulty of the subject, Art. 4 (...)
excogitated a Twofold Theory for its Explication and Solution; the F^^mer of
which we may easily collect from the Commentary of Lucretius thereupon; the
Latter from the Dispute of Galen (lib. 1. De Nature. Facult.) against it. For,

Lucretius, professing to explain the Reason and Manner of the Attraction of
Iron by the Loadstone, according to the Principles and judgment of Epicurus,
founds his Discourse upon these Four Pillars, or Praeconsiderables; (1) That
all Concretions do continually emit subtle Effluvia's, or Aporrhaea's: (2)
That the contexture of no Concretion is so compact, as not to have many small
Vacuities, or insensible Pores, variously intercepted among its solid and
component particles: (3) That the Effluvia's streaming from Concretions, are
not equally Congruous or Accommodate to all Bodies they meet with in the sphere
of their Diffusion: (4) That the small Pores, or insensible Inanities
intercepted among the particles of Concretions, are not all of one and the same
Circumscription, or Figure; and so not indifferently accommodable or
proportionate to all sorts of Effluvia s issuing from other bodies, but only to
such, as are symmetrical or Correspondent to them in Figure and Magnitude. And
then He proceeds to erect this superstructure thereupon.

The Attractive Virtue of the Loadstone, being determinate only to Iron and
Steel (which is Purified Iron) seems to consist in this; that both from the
Loadstone and Iron there perpetually issue forth continued streams of
insensible particles, or bodies, which more or less, according to their number
and force of diffusion, commove and impel the ambient Aer: and because the
streams which flow from the Loadstone are both more numerous and more potent,
than those which are emitted from the Iron; therefore is the ambient Aer
always more strongly discussed and impelled about the Loadstone, than about
the Iron; and so there are many more Inane Spaces therein created about the
Loadstone, than about the Iron. That forasmuch as, when the Iron is placed
within the sphere of the Aer Discussed by the Effluxions of the Loadstone,
there cannot but be much of Inanity intercepted (understand insensible Inanity)
betwixt it and the Loadstone; thence it comes, that the Aporrhaeaes of the Iron
tend more freely or uninterruptedly toward that part, which faceth the
Loadstone, and so are carried quite home unto it: and because they cannot tend
thither in such swarms, and with such freedom, but they must impell the
Particles of the Iron that are yet cohaerent together; therefore must they also
move and impel the whole mass of Iron, consisting of those reciprocally
Cohaerent Particles, and so carry it quite home to the Loadstone. That, when a
Loadstone Attracteth Iron, not only through the Aer, but also through diverse
compact and firm bodies, and particularly through Marble; we are to conceive
that there are more and more capacious Inanities made in that part of such
interposed bodies, which respects the Loadstone, than in that part of them,
which confronteth the Iron. That the reason, why other things, as Straw, Wood,
Gold, etc. being situate within the sphere of the Aer Discussed by the Effluxes
of the Loadstone, do not in like manner emit their subtle particles in such
numerous and potent streams, as carrying along their Cohaerent Particles with
them, should move and impel their whole masses to a Conjunction with it: is
only this, that the Particles emitted from the Iron are alone Commensurable to
the Inane Spaces in the Loadstone. That, because Iron tends to the Loadstone
indiscriminately, i. e. either upward or downward, transversly or obliquely,
according to the region of its Application; this indifferency could not be, but
in respect of the introduced Vacuities, into which the particles (otherwise
prolabent only downward) are carried without Distinction of region. And,
lastly, that the motion of the Iron toward the Loadstone, is assisted and
promoted by the Aer, by reason of its continual Motion and Agitation; and first
by the Exterior Aer, which being always most urgent on that part, where it is
most Copious, cannot but impel the Iron toward that part where it is less
Copious, or more full of Inanities, i. e. toward the Loadstone: and afterward
by the Interior Aer, which being likewise always commoved and agitated, cannot
but cause the stronger motion toward that part, where the Space is rendered more
Inane. And this we conceive to be the summary of Lucretius Exposition of
Epicurus Opinion touching the Reason of the Loadstones Iron-attractive Faculty.

Art. 5. His (...)
And Galen (in loco citato) impugning the Magnetic Theory of Epicurus, first
makes a contracted, but plain recital thereof, in these words: A lapide quidem
Herculeo ferrum, a succino vero paleus attrahi, etc. quippe effluentes Atomos
ex lapide illo ita figuris congruere cum illis, quae ex ferro effluunt, ut in
amplexus facile veniant; quamobrem impactas utrinque (nempe in ipsa tum
lapidis, quam ferri corpora concreta) and resilientes deinde in medium,
circumplicari invicem, and ferrum simul pertrahi, etc. Wherein, besides his
usual fidelity in the Recitation even of such opinions of other men, as he
thought good to endeavor to refute, we have good reason to believe, that Galen
came as near as possible to the true and genuine sense of Epicurus: forasmuch
as those Four Praeconsiderables alleged by Lucretius for the support of his
exposition of the Cause and Manner of the Coition of the Loadstone and Iron,
may be with equal Congruity accommodated also to this latter Epicurean Solution
of the same problem, according to this praesent interpretation and abridgement
of Galen. For, according to the tenor thereof, both the Loadstone and Iron are
praesumed to consist of particles exactly alike in configuration, and to have
the like Inane Spaces, or insensible pores intercepted among those particles:
and this upon no slender ground, seeing that the Loadstone and Iron are perfect
Twinns, being both generated not only in the same Matrix, but of the same
Materials, one the same Mineral Vein of the Earth. And, therefore, it is the
more probable, that the particles or Atoms issuing in continued streams from
the Loadstone, and invading Iron situate within the Orb of their activity,
should easily and deeply insinuate themselves into the pores of the Iron; and
there meeting with streams of other Atoms so exactly consimilar to themselves,
engage them to reciprocal Cohaerence, and being partly repercussed or rebounded
from thence toward their Source, abduce those Atoms along with them, to which
they cohaere, and by the impulse of other cohaerent particles, abduce also the
whole and entire mass: especially since it is part of the supposition, that the
Atoms transmitted from the Iron to the Loadstone, do reciprocally move, engage,
and compel the particles thereof, after the same manner; it being almost
necessary that the Atoms on both sides, in good part rebounding or resilient,
toward their sources, and mutually implicated, should flow together into the
medium, and so doing, that the whole bodies or masses of the iron and Loadstone
should be brought to a Conjunction in the Medium, because of the Cohaesion of
both sorts of the flowing Atoms, with those, of which the whole masses are
contexed. For, notwithstanding it be vulgarly apprehended and affirmed, that
the Iron does come to the Loadstone, rather then the Loadstone to the Iron;
that the streams of Atoms emanant from the Loadstone, are both more numerous
and much more potent; and found by Experiment that pieces of Iron do not only
meet Loadstones half way, but come quite home to them, where the Loadstones are
either much greater and weightier, or so held fast in a man's hand, or
otherwise, as that they cannot exercise their reciprocal tendency: yet, as
Gilbert speaks ( de Magnet. lib. 2. cap. 4.) Mutuis viribus fit Concursus ad
unitionem, the Coition is not from one single Attraction, but from a Double,
(...), or Conactus. And, as for the reason, why other things do not apply
themselves to the Loadstone, as well as Iron; it may be said, that the streams
of Atoms flowing from the Loadstone, and encountering those that are emitted
from other bodies, do either pass uninterruptedly along by them, or are not, in
respect of their Dissimilitude in Figures, so implicated or Complected with
them, as in their resilition to flow together and concur in the medium.

And then He attempts the subversion thereof, Art. 6. Galens three Grand
Objections against the same, briefly Answered.
by the opposition of some Arguments, and especially of these Three Quaeries.
(1) How such minute and insensible bodies, as those of which the Magnetic
Aporrhaeas are supposed to consist, can be able to Attract [(...)] so great a
weight as that of a mass of Iron? Whereto it may be Answered, in behalf of
Epicurus, that the Magnetic Effluxes are not supposed to be so potent, as to
draw any mass of Iron of what weight soever, but only such a one, whose bulk or
weight carries some proportion to the force of the Attrahent, or Loadstone.
Again, He might have considered, that the motions of the Grossest and Heaviest
Animals are performed by their spirits, that are bodies as exile and
imperceptible as the Magnetic Effluviaes: that Winds, which also consist of
insensible particles, do usually overturn trees and vast aedifices, by the
impetuosity of their impulses: and that subterraneous Vapors are frequently
the Causes of Earthquakes. And, as for the reason, How the Magnetic
Aporrhaea's can Deduce, Apprehend, and Detain a mass of Iron; He might have
remembered, that the Atoms of the Magnet are conceived to have certain small
Hooks, or Claws, by which they may lay hold upon the Ansulae, or Fastnings in
the Iron; to have a violent Motion, which is the Cause both of their Impaction
against, and Resilition from the Iron, and to have a perpetual Supply of the
like Atoms continually streaming from the same fountain, by which they are
assisted in their Retraction, whereupon the Attraction may ensue, and that so
much the more forcible, by how much nearer the Iron is praesented, in regard of
the more copious Efflux, or Density of the Magnetical rays. (2) How comes it,
That a piece, or ring of Iron, being it self Attracted by a Loadstone, and on
one part adhaerent unto it, should at the same time attract and suspend another
ring on the contrary part; that second ring likewise attract and suspend a
third, that third a fourth, that fourth a fifth, etc. To this we may apply that
Response of Epicurus, which Galen himself commemorates; An dicemus, effluentium
ex lapide particularum nonnullas quidem, ubi serro occu^saverint, resilire; and
has ipsas esse, per quas ferrum suspendi contingat? nonnullas vero illud
subeuntes, per inanes meatulos transire qu^m o^yssime, and consequenter
impactas in aliud ferrum proximum, cum illud nequeant subi^gredi, tametsi prius
penetraverint, hinc resilientes versus priu^, complexus alios prioribus similes
efficere? For, herein is nothing so incongruous, as Galen conceives; it being
not improbable, that some of the Magnetical Atoms, falling upon a piece of Iron
should be impinged against the solid p^^ticles thereof, and others of them, at
the same time, penetrate the sm^^^ manities or pores betwixt those solid
particles; after the same manne^* (...) we have formerly asserted the particles
of Light to be partly R^fl^c^^d from the solid parts, and partly Trajected
through the Pores of (...) and other Diaphanous bodies: nor that some of those
Magnetic Ray^^* which pass through the pores of the first Iron, should invade
a second (...) posited beyond it, and be impinged likewise against the soli^
particl^^ (...) that, and so reflected toward their original, while some others
pervading the In^nities of the second, should attract a third piece of Iron,
and so ^ons^quently a fourth, a fifth, and sometimes more. And* certainly*
(...) this case it is of no small advantage to Epicurus, that the Force of the
Magnetic Attraction is so Debilitated by degrees, as that in the seco^^ ^^on
it becomes weaker than in the first, in the third than in the second* in the
fourth than the third, etc. until at length it be totally evira^^ and decayed:
because, upon the second there cannot fall as many ray^^* as did upon the
first, nor upon the third, as upon the second* etc. as (...) have at large
explicated, in our discourse of the Causes of the Debilitat^^^ of Light. It may
be further added also, in defense of Epicurus* that the Atoms of the Loadstone,
penetrating the substance of Iron, do so ex^^mulate the Atoms thereof, that the
Iron instantly suffering an Altera^^^n of the position of all its component
particles, does in a sort compo^e (...) self according to their mode, and put
on the nature of the Loadstone it self: and therefore it can be no such wonder,
that one iron Magneti^^^d should operate upon another iron, as the Magnet did
upon it.

Art. 7. (...)
But, all this* (...) confess, though it conferr somewhat of strength and
plainness to the opinion of Epicurus, cannot yet be extended so far, as to
equal the length of our Curiosity, concerning the Reason of the Co^tion of the
Loa^^^one and Iron; and therefore it imports us to superadd thereunto so m^^^
of the Speculations and Observations of our Modern Magnet^^^an Au^^ors,
Gilbert, Cabeus, Kircher, Grandamicus, etc. (who have with more profound
scrutiny searched into, and happier industry discovered (...) the mystery) as
may serve to the enlargement at least, i^ not the full (...) of our
satisfaction. And, in order hereunto, to the en^ Peripicuity (...) Succ^^ctness
may walk hand in hand together through our whole (...) Discourse; we are to
compose it of sundry OBSERV^BLES: (...) as may not only conduct our
Disquisitions through all the (...) and serp^^^^ne ways of Magnetism, and
acquaint us with the seve^^^ Laws o^ ^^gnetick Energy; but also, like the links
of a Chain, sustain eac^ other (...) a continued series of mutual Dependency
and Connection.

The FIRST OBSERVABLE is; that as well the Loadstone, Art. 8. A Par^ll^l^^^
^^^wixt the M^gnetique Fac^l^y of the L^adstone and (...); and tha^ of (...) i^
Animals*
as its beloved Mistress, Iron, seems to be endowed with a Faculty, that holds
some Analogy to the sense of Animals; and that principally in respect of
Attraction. For (1) as an Animal, having its sensory invaded and affected by
the species of a grateful object, does instantly desire, and is accordingly
carried, by the instruments of Voluntary motion, to the same: so likewise so
soon as a lesser or weaker Loadstone, or piece of Iron, is invaded and
percelled with the species of a greater or more potent one; it is not only
invited, but rapt on toward the same, by a kind of nimble Appetite, or
impetuous tendency.

(2) As sensible objects do not diffuse their species of Color, Odor, Sound,
etc. to an Animal at any distance whatever, but have the spheres of their
Diffusion or transmission limited: so neither does the Loadstone, nor Iron
transmit their Species or Emanations each to other, at any distance whatever,
but only through a determinate interval of space, beyond which they remain
wholly insensible each of others virtue.

(3) As a sensible object, that is convenient and grateful, does by its species
immitted into the sensory of an Animal, convert, dispose, and attract the Soul
of the Animal; and its soul being thus converted disposed and attracted toward
that object, does by its Virtue or Power, carry the body, though gross and
ponderous, along to the same: exactly so does the Loadstone seem, by its
species transfused, to convert, dispose and attract toward it the (as it were)
soul, or spiritual substance of Iron; which does instantly by its power or
virtue, move and carry the whole mass, or grosser parts of it along to an union
with the same. Certainly, it would not easily be believed, that a thing so
exile and tenuious, as is the Sentient Soul of an Animal (which is only Flos
substantiae, the purer and subtler part of its matter) should be sufficiently
potent to move and from place to place transfer so ponderous and unweildy a
mass, as that of the Body; unless our sense did demonstrate it unto us, and
therefore, why should we not believe, that in Iron there is somewhat, which
though it be not perfectly a Soul, is yet in some respects Analogous to a Soul;
that does though most exile and tenuious in substance, move, and transferr the
rest of the mass of Iron, though ponderous, gross and of it self very unfit for
motion? All the Difficulty, therefore, which remains, being only about the
Manner, How the Sentient Soul of an Animal is affected by and attracted toward
a Grateful Object, let us conceive, that the sensible species, being it self
Corporeal, and a certain Contexture of small particles effluxed from the
object, such as do gently and pleasantly commove and affect the Organ of Sense,
being once immitted into the Sensory, does instantly move the part of the Soul,
(which is also Corporeal, and a certain Contexture of small particles)
inhaerent or resident in that Organ, and evolving the particles of the Soul
converted (perchance) another way, and turning them about toward that part,
from whence themselves are derived, i. e. toward the object, it does impress a
kind of impulse upon them, and so determine and attract the soul, and
consequently the whole Animal, toward the object. For, admitting this
Conception, we may complete the Parallelism intended, thus; as the particles of
a sensible species, transmitted from a grateful object, and subingressing
through the organ into the contexture of the Soul, or Sentient part thereof, do
so solicit it, as that it becomes converted toward, and is carried unto that
particular object, not without a certain impulse of appetite: so do the
particles of the Magnetical species, subingressing into the Soul of the Iron,
so evolve its insensible particles, and turn them toward the Loadstone, as
being thus solicited, it conceives a certain appetite or impetus toward the
same, and which is more, forthwith resalutes it, by diffusing the like species
toward it. For, as if the Iron were before asleep and unactive, it is awakened
and excited by this exstimulation of the Magnetical Species; and being as it
were admonished, what is the propriety of its nature, it sets it self nimbly to
work, and owns the Cognation. But, by what other way soever it shall be
explicated, How an Animal is affected by, and rapt toward a sensible object: by
the same way may it still be conceived, how Iron is affected by, and rapt
toward a Loadstone. For, albeit as to diverse other things, there be no Analogy
betwixt the Nature and Conditions of an Animal, and those of Iron: yet cannot
that Disparity destroy the Analogy betwixt them in point of Alliciency or
Attraction, here supposed. Which well considered, Scaliger had no reason to
charge Thales Milesius with ridiculous Madness, for conceding the Loadstone and
Iron to have Souls: as Dr. Gilbert (lib. 2. de Magnet. cap. 4.) has observed
before us.

Art. 9. (...)
The SECOND; that forasmuch as betwixt the Loadstone and its Paramour, Iron,
there is observed not only an Attraction, or mutual Accession, or Co^^ion, but
also a firm Cohaesion of each to other, like two Friends closely entwined in
each others arms; and that this Cohaesion supposes reciprocal Revinction,
which cannot consist without some certain corporeal Instruments, that hold some
resemblance to Lines and Hooks: hence (...) it warrantable for us to conceive,
that the species diffused from the Loadstone to the Iron, and from the Iron to
the Loadstone, are transmitted by way of Radiation, and that every Ray is Tense
and Direct in its progress through the intermediate space, like a small thread
or wire extended, and this because it consists of Myriads of small particles,
or Atoms flowing in a continued stream, so that the praecedent particles are
still urged and protruded forward, in a direct line, by the consequent, after
the same manner as the rays of Light flowing from a Lucid body, the Cause of
whose Direction must be their Continued Fluor, as we have formerly
Demonstrated, at large. We may further conceive, that as the rays of Light do
pass through a Perspicuous body; so do the Magnetical rays pass through the
body of Iron. That as among all the Lucid rays incident upon a Perspicuous
body, whose side obverted to the Luminary is of a Devex figure, only one ray,
viz. that which falls upon the middle point or center, is directly trajected;
and all the rest are inclined or refracted toward that Direct one, in their
progress through the aer beyond ^he Diaphanous body: so is only one of the
Magnetic rays, incident upon Iron, directly trajected through the same, and
all the others are refracted or deflected toward that one direct. Only here is
the Disparity* that from the Diaphanous body to the Luminary no rays are
interchangeably transmitted: but from the Iron to the Loadstone there are* and
o^ these also, in their permeation through the Loadstone, only one is direc^*
and all the rest deflected toward that one. That forasmuch a^ these M^gnetick
rays, being hence and thence refracted, and accordingly passing ^^orow the
pores of the body of the Iron, on one side, and those of the Loadstone, on the
other; do variously intersect each other at certain Angles, and in respect of
those angles, become like so many Arms embowed, or Chords inflected, and so
perstringe the solid particles interjacent among the pores: thence does it come
to pass, that the whole masses or bodies being thus, on this side and that
interchangeably perstringed, there ensues the mutual Adduction of the one to
the other, or of the less or weaker to the greater or stronger; and
consequently the Cohaesion of the one to the other, the Devinction being, as
the Adduction, reciprocal. We need not advertise, that the Magnetic rays are
so much stronger and tens^r than the Luminous; by how much they are more
Subtle and Agile: being such as that in a moment they pass through a very great
ma^s of Marble, which the rays of Light cannot do. Nor that the Magne^ique
rays do not attract Marble, though they do attract Iron posited beyond it; nor
strawes, or other lighter things interposed: because, except the Loadstone and
Iron, no other bodies whatever do reciprocally emit and effect each other with
their rays; nor have they that Disposition of their Pores or passages, which
is necessary to the determinate Refraction of the Magnetique rays, and to the
constriction of their solid particles thereby.

The THIRD; the Magnetique Species being diffused by Deradiation Excentrical,
Art. 10. That every L^adstone, in respect of the Circumradiation of its
Magnetical (...) ac^rewing.
and the Attraction of the Loadstone (of a Spherical figure) being therefore
Circumradious, or from all points of the circumference of its ^phere of Energy:
it will be requisite that we allow it to have (1) a Center, as that which is on
all sides Corroborated by all the circumstant parts; (2) an Axis, as that to
which the virtues of all the circumjacent Fibers are contributed; (3) the
Diametre of an A^quator, which lying in the middle of all its Fibers, may also
contain the strongest virtue of them all. For, having conceded this Geometrical
Distinction of parts to a Terrella, or Spherical Magnet; we shall reap this
advantage thereby, that we shall easily comprehend and describe the several
reasons of Laws and Experiments Magnetical. To particularize; insomuch as the
Magnetique Rays are diffused from the Center of the Loadstone to all points of
it superfice, and beyond it to the bounds of their Orb of Activity; that ray,
which passes through either of its Poles, does attract only by the force of
the Axis; and that, which passes through the Equator, draws only by the force
of the Diametre of the Equator; and the other rays, which like Meridians,
pass through the other parts, draw by a Compound or Complicated force, insomuch
as they are always intermediate betwixt one ray, which proceeds directly from
the Axis, and is parallel to the Equator, and another which comes directly
from the Diametre of the Equator, and is parallel to the Axis. And, because
the Equator is aequidistant from either Pole; thence is it, that an Iron
Obelus, or Needle, being praesented thereunto, shall be drawn parallel to the
Axis, and in a direct line to the Diametre of the Equator: because all the
rays expiring from the Axis, as they are the longest and strongest of all
others, so are they also on each hand Equal, and equally attractive of the
Extremes of the Needle; so that when it cannot incline to one Pole more than to
the other, as being aequilibrated by two equal rivals, it must consist in the
middle betwixt them both. Again, if the Needle be praesented to any part of the
Terrella, beyond the Equator, toward either Pole, in this case, because the
ray issuing from the Diametre of the Equator does then display its virtue to
the height, and that ^ay which is derived from the Axis, is not of so much
power as another longer one passing through, or near to the Equator: therefore
shall the extreme of the Needle, toward the nearest Pole, feeling that stronger
virtue, be somewhat inclined; as if affecting to be conformed to that ray,
which is direct to the Diametre of the Equator; and it shall be always
inclined so much the more, by how much longer that ray is, and the other,
pro^^uent from the Axis, the shorter. Lastly, because in approaching very near
to the Pole, the one ray becomes very long, the other very short
(comparatively); and so the Ne^^le must be now almost right to the Equator:
thence comes (...), that at the very Pole, that Extreme of the Needle, which
regards it, shall cohaere to the Pole, and so the Needle shall be ^^^posed in
the same line with the Axis itself.

Art. 11. The Reason o^ that admirable (...) or (...) of Magne^ick^* and why
the ^ole^ of a Loadstone are incapable* but those of a Nee^le easily capable of
Tran^plantation from one Extreme to the contra^^.
The FOUR^H; the Loadstone being of such singular Contexture, and so admirab^^
comparated by Nature, as that while it remains whole, the one half of its
particles have a certain Polary respect, or manner of Con^^^sion to one part,
and the other half to the opposite part; and ^hen it is cut in two at the
Equator, each segment, which formerly had all its particles converted one and
the same way, does in a mom^^^ alter their respect, and convert the one half of
them to one (...) and the other to the Contrary part: therefore does a Needl^
^^^vigorated) though all its particles were before indiscriminately and
confusedly posited, likewise in a moment obtain a Conversion o^ one half of its
particles to one part, and of the other half to the contrary part; and this
either from its long situation above the eart^* or affriction to a Loadstone,
or to another Needle strongly M^^netified. And this is that prodigious
Propriety of Magnetical (...), which Cabeus calls Facultatem Duarum facierum, a
Faculty of (...) Faces; and Kircher [(...)] Biforme^ Facultatem* though they
differ beyond reconciliation in their reasons, or Explications of ^t. But,
though this Janus Quality be in common as well to Iro^ as to the Loadstone it
self; to the former, only by infu^ion, t^ the latter by essence: yet are we to
allow this Difference, that (...) Poles of the Loadstone are never to be
changed from one extreme to the other; but those of a Needle are easily capable
of trans^^^ntation, so that the Cuspis, which now is strongly affected to the
North, may in a minute be alienated and inspired (...) to the South, only by a
praeposterous Affriction of (...) Loadstone. And hence comes it, that as the
North pole (...) one Loadstone does not attract or unite with the North pole of
another Loadstone; so does not the North Cuspis of a Needle (...) it self to
the North pole of a Loadstone; provided ^t be (...) praesented, not applied, or
affricted upon it. For, (...) Touch or Affriction of the Loadstone, the Cuspis
from (...) a Verticity ^ diametro opposite to its former: in ^ase it be (...)
upon a contrary pole, or upon the same pole with (...) Ductus. Hence also is
it, that if you fill a (...) or Powder of a Loadstone, and offer it to either
(...) of a whole Loadstone; it shall remain altogether (...) ^nfluence, and
acquire no Verticity at all: because (...) of the Powder, intruded into the
quill, have (...) some respecting this, others that, others a quite contrary
region. But, if you exchange the Filings of Loadstone for the Filings of Steel,
and offer either of the extrems of the quill to either Pole of a Loadstone; it
shall instantly own the Magnetique influx, and be imbued with the Polary
Virtue, or Directive Faculty thereof: and this, because all the Granules of the
Steel powder, wanting determinate poles of their own, are indifferently
disposed to admit and retain the virtue of either Pole of the Loadstone, in any
part.

If this be true, you will ask us, How it comes about, Art. 12. An Objection* of
the (...) or Repulsion of the North ^ole of one Loa^dst^ne, or Needle, by the
N^rth Pole of Another: praeven^e^.
that the Northern Pole of one Loadstone does not only not Attract, but nimbly
Repel or Avert the Northern Pole of another Loadstone, if they be brought
within the orb of their power?

And we Answer; that the Aversion is not really from the Repulsion of one North
Pole by the other, but from the Attraction of the South Pole, which is felt and
owned at that distance: but, because the South Pole cannot be detorted toward
the North, but the North Pole of the other Loadstone must receed and veer from
it; therefore does that conversion seem, indeed, to be a kind of Fugation,
which really is only an Attraction. The same is to be understood of the
Austrine Pole of one Loadstone, in respect of the Austrine Pole of another; and
also of either Cuspis of a Needle excited as well in respect of another Needle
invigorated, as of a Loadstone. The same also of a Loadstone dissected
according to its Axis, when the Divisions or Segments being never so little
dissociated, do not attract each other respectively to their former situation;
but the Austral part of the one segment is wheeled about to the Boreal part of
the other: and so of the other Poles* the contrary whereunto always happens,
when a Loadstone is dissected according to the Aequinoctial.

And from this one Fountain flow these Three Magnetique Axioms. Art. 13. Three
prin^^pal Magneti^^e Axioms, de^uced from the same Fountain
(1) Contraria Contrarijs sunt amica; similia similibus Inimica: i. e.
Magnetical Poles of the same Aspect and Apellation, are always Enemies, and
decline both commerce and conjunction each with other; and Poles of a Contrary
respect and denomination, are always Friends, and affect and embrace each
other. For, to all Magneticks this is singular; that those par^s, which are
friends each to other, ever regard opposite regions, and convert to contrary
points; but those, which are Enemies, regard the same region, and convert to
the same point: because Friendly parts may constitute the same Axis; but
Adverse cannot.

(2) Quae eadem sunt uni tertio, non sunt eadem inter sese; i. e. Two Poles of
the same respect and name, are both Friends to a Third pole of the Contrary
respect and name: but yet they are Enemies and irreconcilable among
themselves. And hence comes it, that a third Pole, being offered to either of
two friendly Poles, cannot be a common friend, but a necessary Enemy to
either. For, those Poles, which are Friends, are of a contrary respect, one
Septentrional* the other Meridional: to which a Third cannot approach, unle^s
it be a Meridional, that shall be an Enemy to the Meridional, or a
Septentrional, th^^ shall be an Enemy to a Septentrional: because, Poles of the
same Aspect, cannot compose the same Axis, but those of a Contrary (...). And
this starts up another singularity of Magnetiques; that there can be no more
than Two Twin^s: ^nsomuch as more than Two cannot compose the same Axis, in the
same part.

(3) ^irtus ex eadem ^onte petita, inimica and noxia; ex Contrarijs fontibus,
amica and jucunda. For, if you imbue the Head^ of two Needles with the virtue
of the same Pole, their Heads shall reciprocally turn away ^ach from other, and
mutually destroy each others verticity: but, (...) you imbue them with the
virtue of Contra^y poles, they shall unite and mutually conserve each others
verticity. Likewise, if a long Needle be applied, in the middle, to either pole
of a Loadstone, and ^hen be cut off in the place of the late Contact; the New
Extrem^^ formerly united in the middle) shall instantly display Contrary
Virtues* and re^iprocally avoid each other.

Art. 14. (...).
And here, (...) Oath of Allegiance to Truth, whereby we are obliged to serve
He^ upon all occasions, will excuse our Digression, if we st^p a little asid^
(...) the so famous Sepulcher of that greatest of Impostors, Maho^e^* and
observe how egregiously false that common report is, conc^^ning the suspension
of his Iron Tomb in the Aer, by the equal Virtues of two Loadstones, the one
fixed above in the arched root, the other beneath in the floor of his Temple at
Medina Talnab: in (...). If we consult the Relations of Travelers concerning
it, we shall not only not meet with any, who affirms it upon any other g^^unds,
but the Tongue of Popular Fame, and tradition of the ^^^^itude: but also with
some, that expressly Contradict it: for, (...) V^ssius tells us, both Gabriel
Sionita, and Iohann^s H^sronita, (...) le^rned Maronites, who journied to
Medina on purpose to satisfy themse^^es and others in that point, positively
deliver, that the Tomb o^ Maho^^^ is made of White Marble, and stands upon the
ground in the East end (...) that Mosque.

Les Voyages Fameux Du Sieur Vincent L^ Blanc Marseillois, p. 21. l 1. c. 4
Quant a la ^^lle de Medine, quelques-uns ont done ^ entendre que le Sepulchr^
d^ Mahomet estoit la, ou ^ la Meque, tout de fer and suspendu (...) par le
moyen de quelques pierres d^ aymant: Mais ^ est une c^ose tres fausse, esta^t
bien certain, comme i e l' ay appr^^ sur le (...) mesme, que ce faux Prophet
mourut and fut enterre a M^^ine* (...) voit encore son sepulcher fort frequente
de pelerins Mahometans (...) les quartiers du monde* comme est le Sepulcher de
Jerusalem de (...) les Chrestiens. Ce Sepulcher est de marbre blan^; ave^ (...)
Ebube^er, Ali, Omar, and Otman Califs, successeurs de Ma^omet, (...) au pres de
soy les livres de sa vie and de sa Sect, (...) etc.

And, if we consult our own Reason, considering the settled (...) alterable Laws
of Magnetical Attraction; we shall soon be (...) not only of the monstrous
Falsity, but absolute Impossibility (...) the Effect. For, should we grant it
to be in the power of (...) industry, to place an Iron so praecisely in the
neutral point of the Medium betwixt two Loadstones, equally attracting it, the
one upward, the other downward; as that the Gravity of the Iron, and downward
Attraction of the Inferior Loadstone might not exceed, nor be exceeded by the
^pward Attraction of the Superior Loadstone, and so the Iron should remain,
without any visible support, Aequilibrated betwixt them, i^ the Aer: yet could
not that position of the Iron be of any Duration; because, upon the least
mutation of the temper of the Iron, or motion of it by the waving of the Aer
from high winds, and diverse other causes, the Aequilibration must cease, and
the Iron immediately determine it self to the Victor, or strongest Attractor.
But, since what is here supposed, is wholly repugnant to the Experience of all,
who have or shall attempt so to aequilibrate an Iron in the Aer betwixt two
Loadstones, as that it shall not feel the Attractive Virtue of one more strong
than that of the other: we need not long study what to think of the suspension
of Mahomets Iron Chest.

Nor is it less impossible, that an Iron should be held up, at distance, in the
Aer, by the Virtue of a Loadstone placed above it: insomuch as that force,
which at first is sufficient to overcome the resistance of the Irons Gravity,
and elevate it from the ground, must, as the Iron approaches nearer, be still
more potent to attract it; and so that cannot oppose the Attractive Energy of
the Loadstone, in the middle of it sphere, which was forced to submit and
conform unto it, in the Extremes. This we may soon experiment, with a Needle by
a thread chained to a table, and elevated perpendicularly in the aer, by the
pole of a Loadstone: for, the Needle will nimbly spring up to meet the
Loadstone, so far as the thread will give it scope; and if the t^read be cut
off, it instantly quits the medium, and unites it self to its Attractor, from
whose embraces it was before violently detained. Hereupon as we may assure our
selves, that Dinocrates, that famous Architect, who, as Pliny relates ( lib.
34. cap. 14.) began to Arch the Temple of Arsinoe in Alexandria, with
Loadstones, that so Her Iron Statue might remain Pendulous in the aer, to
excite wonder and Veneration in the Spectators; but was interrupted in the
middle of his Work both by his own death, and that of Ptolomy, Arsinoes
Brother, who expired not long before him; died most opportunely in respect of
his Reputation, because He must have failed of the chief Design, though he had
lived to finish his structure: so also can it be no longer doubted, that
Ruffinus his story, of the Iron Chariot in the Temple of Serapis, and Beda's of
the Iron Horse of Beller^phon, sustained by Loadstones so cunningly posited, as
that their Virtues concur and become adjusted in one determinate point; are
mere Fables, and fit to be told by none but doting old women in the chimney
corner.

Art. 15. That the Magnetique Vigor, or Perfection both of Loadstones and
Iron, does consist in either their Native Purity and Uniformity of Substance,
or their Artificial Politeness.
The FIFTH; As one Loadstone is stronger in its Attractive Virtue than another,
though of the same, nay, perhaps, much greater bulk and weight* so is some Iron
more disposed than other, both to admit and conform to the Attraction of a
Loadstone, and, after invigoration, to attract and impraegnate other Iron. As
for the Vigor and Perfection of a Loadstone; it consists both in its Native
Purity, and Artificial Politeness. (1) In its Native Purity; for, if no Dross
or Heterogeneous substance be admixt to the Magnetic Vein in the earth, from
which a Magnet is extracted; then is that Loadstone superlatively potent and
energetical in Attraction: and among Loadstones of this sincere and homogeneous
Constitution, there are found no degrees of Comparison, but what the Difference
of their several Bulks does necessarily create. But, in case any Heterogeneous
matter be commixt with the Magnetic seeds or particles of a Loadstone, at its
Concretion; as it for the most part falls out: then must the Attractive Energy
of that stone be weaker, according to the proportion of that spurious matter
admixed thereunto. This may be confirmed from hence; that some very small
Loadstones are more potent than very Great ones; of which sort shall we account
that of which Mersennus (de Magnete) affirms, that weighing but 7 Gr. in all,
it would nimbly attract and elevate a mass of Iron 17 times higher than it
self: and from hence, that some stones that were dull and languid before, after
the secretion of their Drossy and Impure parts, become very active and potent.
Thus, when any Heterogeneous substance has been, like a Cortex or shell
circumobduced about a Loadstone, in its concretion; if the same be pared or
filed away, and the remaining Kernel be polished; its Virtue shall be augmented
to a very great proportion. (2) In its Artificial Tersness or Politeness; for,
by how much smoother a Loadstone is, in it superfice, with so many the more
rays of Virtue, both Attrahent and Amplectent or Connectent, does it touch
Iron oblated unto it; and e contra. Likewise, as for the more or less
praedisposi^ion of Iron, both to receive the Attractive influence of a
Loadstone, and, after excitement to attract other iron; this also consists
either in its more or less of Native Purity, or of Acquired Politeness:
because, how much the nearer it comes to the pure nature of Steel, by so many
the more parts has it both Unitive unto the Loadstone, and susceptive of its
rays; and by how much more smooth and equal it superfice is made, by so many
more are the parts, by which it does touch and adhaere unto the Loadstone; and
consequently imbibe so much the more of its Virtue, and e contra.

And this introduces

The SIXTH OBSERVABLE; That a Loadstone, being Armed or Capp't with steel, Art.
16 That the A^ming of a Magnet with polished Steel, does highly Corroborate;
but a^ much diminish the sphere of its Attractive Virtue.
is thereby so much Corroborated, that it will take up a far greater weight of
Iron or Steel, than while it remained naked or unarmed. For, Mersennus had a
Loadstone, which, (as himself avoucheth) being naked, could elevate no more
than half an ounce of Iron; but when he had armed it with pure and polisht
steel, it would easily suspend 320 times a greater weight, i. e. ten pounds of
Iron: a proportion not credible, but upon the certificate of Experiment. Now,
the Cause of this admirable Corroboration of the Loadstones Attractive Virtue,
by a plate of polisht Steel, can be no other than this; that the Loadstone
being of such a rough contexture, as that in respect of the particles of some
heterogeneous matter concorporated unto it, it is incapable of that exquisite
smoothness in the surface, which may be obtained by steel; therefore can it not
touch Iron so exquisitely, or in so many points, as Steel may: and consequently
not invade it with so many Direct and united rays. But, Steel being of a more
simple substance, and close contexture; may in all its substance be imbued with
the Magnetique Virtue: and being polisht, touch an Iron, to which it is
admoved, with more parts, and invade it with more dense and united rays. For,
those indirect rays, which otherwise the Loadstone would diffuse scatteringly
through the Medium, in respect of the various inequalities of it superfice, and
multitude of small pores intercepted among its particles; the Steel does
recollect, unite and transmit to the Iron admoved, and thereby more strongly
embrace and detain it. We say, To Iron Admoved; For, though the Retentive
Virtue of a Loadstone Armed with Steel, be by many degrees stronger; yet is its
Attractive Virtue by some degrees weaker than that of an unarmed Loadstone: i.
e. it does not diffuse its Attractive virtue half so far, and a sheet of the
finest Venice paper interposed betwixt an Armed stone and Iron, does impede its
Attraction; a manifest argument, that the Fortification is determined only to
contact. This we confess Mersennus flatly denies, and upon his own observation:
but till our Reader shall meet with such a stone, as Mersennus used, we advise
him not to desert the common Experience of the impediment of the Attraction of
Iron by an Armed Loadstone, by paper interposed, since Grandamicus, whose chief
business was the exact observation of all Magnetique Apparences, expressly
says; vix fit adhaesio ferri ad lapidem armatum, si vel Charta, vel aliud
tenuissimum Corpus interponatur. It has, moreover, observed, that if a Magnet
be perforated along its Axis, and a rod of polisht Steel, exactly accommodated
to the perforation, be thrust through it; its orb of Attraction shall be much
enlarged, and its Energy fortified to an incredible rate. Consule Jacob.
Grandamicum, in Nova Demonstrat. Immobilitatis Terrae, ex Magneticis, cap. 5.
Sect. 1. page 99.

Having laid down these six Observables, which are of such Capital
concernment, Art. 17. Why a smaller or weaker Loadstone, does snatch away a
Needle from a Greater, or more Potent one; while the small or weak one is held
within the sphere of the great or stronger ones Activity: and not otherwis^
as that there is no Effect or Phenomenon of Attraction Magnetical, that may
not conveniently be referred to one, or more of them; and consigned a probable
Reason to each: the only memorable Difficulty that remains, concerning the
Attractive Virtue of Magnetiques, is, Why a small or weak Loadstone does snatch
away an Iron from a Great or more potent one? But, as the incomparable Kircher
has subtely observed, a small or weak Loadstone does remove a Needle from a
Great and Potent one, while it self remains within the sphere of the Great or
strong ones activity: because the virtue of the small or weak stone, is
Corroborated by the Accession of that of the Great or strong. Which is
demonstrable from hence, that if the Needle be so long, that its extremes reach
beyond the orb of the Great Loadstones activity; then cannot a less or less
potent one remove it away and elevate it: and in case one of the extremes be
somewhat too near to either Pole of the Great Loadstone, then is the Less stone
much less able to substract the Needle than in the former case; because so, the
Virtue of the Great Loadstone is augmented by the Addition of that of the Less.

Art. 18. COROLLARY. Of the Abduction of Iron from the Ear^h by a Loadstone.
And hence, by way of COROLLARY, we observe; that the Abduction of a piece of
Iron from the Earth by a Loadstone, is so far from being a good Argument
against the Earths being Magnetique, or one vast Loadstone; that it rather
makes for it: because the Loadstone being applied to the Iron, and operating
within the sphere of the Earths Virtue, is so Corroborated thereby, that it
abduceth the Iron from it, by the same reason, that a Less Loadstone snatcheth
a Needle from a Great one. And thus much concerning the Attractive Faculty of
the Loadstone; both according to the most considerable Doctrine of the
Ancients, and the more exact Theory of the Moderns.

SECT. II.
TO enquire the Reason, therefore, of the other General Propriepriety of
Magnetiques, Art. 1. The Method, and C^ntents of the Section.
their DIRECTION, or Conversion of their Poles ^o North and South; is all the
remainder of our praesent Design: which that we may accomplish with as much
plainness and brevity, as the quality of the Argument will admit of; we shall
observe the same advantageous Method of Disquisition as we have done in the
former, touching the Causes and Ways of Magnetique Attraction, reducing all
the observations of the Moderns, of the Direction, Declinat^on, and Inclination
of the Loadstone, and other Magnetical bodies, to certain Heads, and disposing
them according to their order of subalternate dependency.

Art. 2. Affinity of the Loadstone and Iron.
The FIRST OBSERVABLE is; that the Loadstone and Iron are Twinns in their
Generation, and of so great Affinity in their Natures, that Dr. Gilbert might
justly say, that a Loadstone is Iron Crude, and Iron a Loadstone excocted: For
they are for the most part found lodged together in the same subterraneons bed;
as the experience of all such as are conversant about Iron Mines in Germany,
Italy, France, England, and most other Countries, does every day demonstrate.

And that i^ the most probable Cause, that can be given, why Loadstones
gene^^lly are so much the more Vigorous and perfect, by how much deep^^ in the
Veins of Iron Mines they are dug. There is, indeed, a re^^rt diffused not
only among the People, but also some of the highest fo^^ of Learned Writers,
and chiefly derived from the authority of Strabo; that in the Western Ocean are
certain vast Magnetic ^ooks, (...) drawing Ships that sail near them (by
reason of the Iron (...), wherewith their ribbs and plancks are fastened, and
held together) with irresistible violence and impetuosity, split them in
pieces, or extracting the Iron pinns, carry them like arrows flying to a Butt,
through the aer: But, the light of Navigation has long since discovered this
story to be as highly Romantique, as the Enchanted Castles of our Knights
Errant, or the most absurd of Sir John Mandevils Fables; and herein we may say
of Strabo, as Lucian of the Indian History of Ctesias the Cnidian, Physician to
Artaxerxes King of Persia, scripsit de ijs, quae nec ipse vidit unquam, neque
ex ullius sermon audivit.

The SECOND; Art. 3. The Loadst^ne conf^rms it self, in all respects, to the
Terrest^ial Globe; as a Ne^^le conforms it self to the Loa^stone
That the Loadstone seems not only to have all the Conditions of the
Terrestrial Globe, but also to imitate the positional respects thereof,
conforming it self exactly unto it. For, as the Terraqueous Globe has Two
Poles, by which it owns a respect to the Poles of the Heavens, the one Bor^al,
the other Austral: so likewise has the Loadstone two contrary Poles, always
discoverable in the opposite parts or extremes thereof, especially if it be
turned into a sphere. And, as the Globe of the Earth has an Equator,
Parallels and Meridians; so has the Loadstone: as may be demonstrated to the
eye, by applying a small Steel Needle thereunto; for, at either of its Poles,
the Needle shall be erected perpendicularly, and lie in the same line with its
Axis; but at any of the intermediate Spaces, or Parallels, it shall be neither
plainly erected, nor plainly lie along, but observe an oblique situation, and
more or less oblique, according to the variety of the Parallels; and at the
middle interstice, or Equator, it shall dispose it self in conformity to the
ductus of the Meridian, and fix in a position parallel to the Axis of the
Loadstone. That a Loadstone does accommodate it self exactly to the Earth, as a
Needle does accommodate it self to the Loadstone; is evinced from this easy
Experiment. If you suspend a Loadstone (whose Poles you have formerly
discovered, and noted with the Characters, N. S.) in calm aer, or set it
floating at liberty in a vessel of Quicksilver, or a small Skiff of Cork
swimming upon Water, that so it may freely perform the office of its nature;
you shall observe it continually to move it self from side to side, and suffer
alternate Vibrations or accesses and recesses, till it has so disposed it self
according to the Meridian, as that one of its Poles, viz. that marked with N.
shall point to the North, and the other, upon which S. is inscribed, to the
South. Nor that only, but, forasmuch as England is situate near the North of
the Earth, and so has the North pole somewhat demersed or depressed below the
horizon, nearer than the South Pole of the Earth: therefore does not the
Loadstone keep up both its Poles in a level or perfectly horizontal position,
but depresseth that pole which affects the N, somewhat below the plane of the
horizon, as much as it can, directing the same to the N. pole of the Earth.
Farther, being it is commonly observed, that this Depression (some call it the
DECLINATION, others the INCLINATION) of the N. pole of the Loadstone, or point
of an excited Needle, is so much the greater, by how much nearer the stone or
needle is brought to the Boreal part of the Earth; so much less, by how much
nearer to the Equator: therefore may we conclude, that a Loadstone, being
removed, in the same position of freedom, from the Equator by degrees to each
of the Earths poles, would more and more depress or decline its Boreal pole, by
how much it should come nearer and nearer to the Boreal pole of the Earth; and
on the otherside of the Equator, more and more decline its Austral pole to the
Austral pole of the Earth, by how much nearer it did approach the same; nor
could it lie with both poles above the horizon at once, in any part of the
Earth, but upon the Equator, and at either of the Poles of the Earth, the Axis
of the stone would make one with the Axis of the Earth. Art. 4. Iron obtains a
Verticity, not only from the Loadstone, by Affriction, or Aspiration; but also
from the Earth it self: and that according to the laws of P^siti^n.


The THIRD; That Iron acquireth a Verticity not only from the touch or
affriction of a Loadstone, but also from its mere situation in, upon, or above
the Earth, in conformity to the poles thereof. For, all Iron bars, that have
long remained in Windows, Grates, etc. in a position polary, or North and
South; if you suspend them in aequilibrio by lines in the aer, so as they may
move themselves freely, according to the inclination of their Virtue received
from the Earth, will make several diadroms hither and thither, and rest not
until they have converted to the North that extreme, which in their former
diuturne position regarded the North, and that to the South, which formerly
respected the South: and having recovered this their Cognation, they shall fix
in a Meridional posture as exactly as the Loadstone it self, or a Magnetified
Needle.

To experiment this, the most easy way is to offer, at convenient distance, a
Magnetic Dial, or Mariners Compass, to the extrems of an Iron bar, that has
long layn N and S: for, then may you soon observe the Needle or Versory freely
equilibrated therein to be drawn in that point, which respects the North, by
that extreme of the bar, which is Australized, and, on the contrary, the South
point of the Needle to be drawn by that extreme of the bar, which is
Borealized. This Vertical impraegnation of Iron merely by the Earth, is also
evidenced from hence; that Iron bars made red hot, and then set to cool in a
Meridional position, do acquire the like polary Cognation, and being either at
liberty of conversion suspended by small Chords in the aer, or set ^loating in
small boats of Cork, or applied to the Needle of a Pixis Nautica, immediately
discover the same.

This being most manifest, why may not our Mariners, in defect of a Loadstone,
make a Needle or Fly for their Chard, of simple Iron alone; since, if it has
layn in a Meridional situation above the earth, or been extinguished according
to the same laws of position, it will bear and demonstrate as strong an
affection to the poles of the Earth, as a Needle invigorated by a Loadstone,
nor shall the Depression or Declination of the one, in each degree of remove
from the Equator toward either pole, be less or greater than that of the other.

The FOURTH; Art. 5. One and the same Nature, in common to the Earth, Loadstone
and Iron.
that insomuch as both the Loadstone and Iron h^ve so near a cognation to the
Earth, and conformity of situation to the parts of it: nothing, certainly, can
seem more consentaneous, than that they both hold one and the same nature in
common with the E^rth, at le^st with the Internal parts, or Kernel thereon;
but yet with th^s difference, that Iron, being a part of the Earth very much
altered from its orginall constitution by the activity of its seminall
principle, cannot therefore so easily manifest its extraction, or prove it self
to be the genuine production and part thereof, without praecedent Repurgation,
and Excitation, or fre^h An^mation from the Effluviums of the Earth; but a
Loadstone, hav^ng not un^ergon the like mutations from concoction, and so
re^aining nearer allied to the Earth, does retain a more lively t^^cture of its
polary faculty, and by the evidence of spontaneous D^^^ct^on demonstrate its
Verticity to be purely native, and it (...) by consequence, to be only a
divided part, or legitimate (...) of the Earth. Further, from hence, that the
Loadstone an^ the Terrestrial Globe have both one and the same power, th^ugh
in different proportions, of impraegnating Iron with a (...) ^^^^ction,
impressing one and the same faculty thereupon; it is iust^y in^errible, that
the Loadstone, not only in respect of ^ther Conditions wherein it resembles
the Earth, but also, and in chief of this noble Efficacy of invigorating and
renovating the (...) qu^lity of Iron, may well be accounted (as the Fat^e^ of
Magnetique Philosophy, Dr. Gilbert has named it) (...) Ter^^lla, the Globe of
Earth in epitome; and that the E^^th it self may be reputed Ingens Magnes, a
Great Loadsto^e Th^ugh, in truth, the Earth may challenge the title or a Great
(...) by another right, though somewhat less evi^ent; and that i^ its
Attraction of all ^errene bodies in direct lines to it self ^as we ^ave
formerly made most verisimilous, in our Chapt. of Gr^vity and Levity) by the
same way and instrum^nts, as the L^^^stone att^^cteth Iron. And though it
cannot (...) ^enied, that (...) Co^tex of the Terrestrial Globe, which may ^e
^^ny (...) t^^ck, is variously interspersed with waters, (...), stones,
metalls, metalline juices, and div^rs other dissimilar and unmagneticall
bodies: yet notwithstandin^ may we justly conceive, that the Nucleus Kernel or
interior part (...) the E^^th is a substance wholly Magneticall, and that many
Ve^ns or branches thereof, being derived unto the exterior ^^rts, are those
very subterraneous Veins from which by effossion Lo^^stones are extracted.
Especially since nature does invite us to this conception by certain clear
evidences not only in Iron, which may be dug out of most places in the
Earth, but also in ^^st Argillous and Arenaceous Concretions; all which are
found to be endowed with a certain, though obscure^ Polary inclination, as
appears in Bricks and Tiles, that have a long time enjoyed a meridion^ll
situation, regarding the N. with one extreme, and the S. with the other, or
been made red hot and afterward cooled north and south, o^ perpendicularly
erected, as has been said of Iron bars.

Art. 6. The Earth, impraegnating Iron with a Polary Affection, does cause
therein a Local Immutation of its insensible particles.
The FIFTH; It being then most certain, that Iron obtaines a magneticall
Verticity, or faculty of self-direction to the poles of the earth, merely
either from its long situation, or refrigeration after ignition, in a position
respective thereunto: we may be almost as certain, that this Affection arises
to the Iron from no other but a Local immutation, or change of position of its
insensible particles, solely and immediately caused by the magneticall
Aporrhaea's of the Earth invading and pervading it. When we observe the Fire by
sensible degrees embowing or incurvating a piece of wood, held near it, how can
we better satisfy our selves concerning the cause and manner of that sensible
alteration of the figure of the wood, then by conceiving, that its insensible
particles are all of them so commoved by the Atoms of Fire immitted into it
substance, as that some of them are consoc^ated which were formerly at
distance, and others dissociated, which were formerly contingent, all being
inverted and so changing their pristine situation, and obtaining a new
position, or local direction, much different from their former? And, when we
observe a rod of Iron, freshly infected with the Polary virtue of the Earth, to
put on a certain spontaneous inclination in its extremes, and convert it self
exactly according to the meridian, and with a kind of humble homage salute that
pole of its late inspirer, from whence it received the strongest influence: how
can we more reasonably explain the reason of that effect, than by conceaving,
that upon the immi^sion of the Earths magneticall Rays into the substance of
the Iron, the insensible particles thereof are so commoved, distructed,
inverted, and turned about, as that they all are disposed into a new posture,
and acquire a new local respect or Direction; according to which they become
as it were reinnimated with a tendency, not the same way, but another much
different, and (when the cognation of their extremes are varied by an inverted
ignition and refrigeration) quite contrary to that, whither they tended before
this mutation of their position and respect* This Conjecture may seem somewhat
the more happy from hence; that a bar of Iron, when made red hot, does acquire
this Polary Direction in a very few minutes of time: but being kept cold* it
requires many years situation North and South, to its impraegnation with the
like virtue; a sufficient manifest, that the particles of the Iron being, by
the subingression of the Atoms of Fire among them, reduced to a greater laxity
of contexture, are more easily commoved and inverted by, and more expeditely
conform themselves unto the disposition of the magnetique influence of the
Earth. When a red hot bar of Iron is cooled, not in a meridian position to the
poles of the Earth, but transversly or equinoctionally; why does it not
contract to it self the like vertical disposition? doubtless, the best reason
that can be given for it, is this; that the insensible particles of it are not
converted, nor their situation varied so much in the one position of the whole
mass, as in the other: the magneticall Rays of the Earth invading the
substance of the Iron in indirect and so less potent lines. Likewise, if the
same bar of Iron, after it has imbibed a Verticity, be again heated and coold
in a contrary position; what reason can be assigned to the change of the
Southern Verticity into a Northern, and its Northern into a Southern, by the
contrary obversion of its ends: unless this, that the particles of the Iron do
thereby suffer a fresh conversion, and quite contrary disposition; no otherwise
than those of a piece of wood, when it is incurvated by the fire according as
this or that side is obverted thereunto?

The SIXTH; forasmuch as Iron does derive the same Verticity or Direction from
its Affriction against a Loadstone; Art. 7. The Loadstone does the same.
as it does from the magneticall influence of the Earth, when posited
respectively to its po^es: it appears necessary, that it does suffer the same
Local Immutation of its insensible particles, from the efficacy of the
magneticall rays of the Loadstone, as from those of the Earth; especially
since we cannot comprehend, how a Body should acquire a strong propension or
tendency to a new place, without some general Immutation, and that a Local
one too, of all its component particles. The strength of this our conception
consists chiefly in this; that after a rod or needle of Iron has contracted
a sprightly Verticity from a Loadstone, by being rubbed thereupon from the
middle toward the ends, it does instantly lose it again, if it be rubbed upon
the same, or any other Loadstone, the opposite way, or from either end toward
the middle. For, how can it be imagined, that a righthand stroke of a knife
upon a Loadstone should destroy that polary Faculty, which it had obtained from
a left hand stroke upon the same; unless from hence, that the insensible
particles of the blade of the knife, were turned one way by the former
affriction, and reduced again t^ their former natural situation by the latter?
It seems to be the same, in proportion, as when the ears of Corn in a field are
blown toward the South by the North wind, and suddenly blown from the South
toward the North by the South wind. Nor does Iron, after its excitement retain
any of the magneticall Atoms immitted into it either from the Earth, or a
Magnet; but, suffers only an immutation of its insensible particles, which
suffices to its polary respect a long time after: for, a Needle is no whit
heavier after its invigoration by a Loadstone, than before, as Mersennus and
Gassendus together experimented, in such a Zygostata or Balance, wherewith
Jewellers are to weigh Pearls and Diamonds; which is so exact, that the
ninety-sixth part above four thousand of a grain, will turn it either way.

The SEVENTH; that the Virtue immitted into Iron, Art. 8. The Magnetique
Virtue, a Corporeal Efflux.
either from the Earth it self, or a Loadstone, is no simple, or immateriall
Quality, as both Gilbert and Grandamicus earnestly contend; but a certain
Corporeal Efflux, or Fluor, consisting of insensible bodies, or particles,
which introduce upon the particles of Iron the same Disposition, and Local
respect, as themselves have.

For (1) That an Immutation is caused in the particles of Iron, as well by the
influence, or Magnetical rays of the Loadstone (which does also invigorate
Iron, at some distance, though not so powerfully, as by immediate contact, or
affriction) as of those transmitted from the Earth; we have already declared to
be not only verisimilous, but absolutely necessary: and that nothing should yet
be derived unto the Iron from them; as the Instrument of that Immutation; is
openly repugnant to the Fundamental Laws of all Physical activity, since
nothing can act upon a distant subject but by some Instrument, either continued
or transmitted.

(2) What is immitted into the Iron from the Earth and Loadstone, cannot be any
naked ^uality, or Accident without substance; because, what wants substance,
must also want all Activity.

(3) The Materiality of the Magnetique Virtue is inferrible likewise from
hence, that it decays in progress of time (as all Odours do) and is
irreparably destroyed by fire, in a few minutes, and is capable of Rarity and
Density ^whence it is more potent near at hand, than at the extremes of it
sphere) all which are the proper and incommunicable Attributes of Corporiety.

(4) Insomuch as it changes the particles of Iron, that have Figure and
Situation; therefore must it self consist of particles also, and such as are in
figure and situ^tion consimilar to those of Iron: no less being assumable from
the Effect even now mentioned, viz. the Ablation of that Verticity, by a right
hand draught of a Needle upon a Loadstone, which it lately acquired from it, by
a left hand one. Nor, indeed, does the Loadstone seem to act upon Iron,
otherwise than as a Comb does upon wool or hair; for as a Comb being drawn
through Wool, one way, does convert and dispose the hairs thereof accordingly,
and drawn praeposterously or the contrary way, does invert and praeposter the
former ductus of the hairs: so do the Magnetical Rays invading and pervading
the substance of Iron, one way, dispose all the insensible particles thereof
according to their own ductus, toward the same way; and immitted into it the
quite contrary way, they reduce the particles to their native situation and
local respect; and so the formerly imprinted Verticity comes to be wholly
obliterated.

Art. 9. Contrar^ ^bj^ctions, and their Solutions.
OBJECTED, we confess it may be; that the Incorporiety, or Immateriality of the
Loadstones Virtue seems inferrible from hence, that it most expeditely
penetrateth and passes through many bodies of eminent solidity, and especial
Marble: (2) That it is (Soul-like) total in the total Loadstone, and total in
every part thereof: seeing that into how many sensible pieces soever a
Loadstone is broken or cut, yet still does the Virtue remain entire in every
one of those pieces, and there instantly spring up in each single fragment, two
contrary Poles, an Axis, Equator, Meridians and Parallels.

But, as to the subtility of Particles and Pores in Concretions, our Book is
even surcharged with discourses upon that subject, in the General: ^o that
notwithstanding the first objection, we may adhaere to our former Conception,
that the particles flowing from the Earth and Loadstone, are of such
superlative Tenuity, as without impediment to penetrate and permeate the most
compact and solid Concretions, and specially Marble, whose small pores may be
more accommodate to the figures of the magnetic Atoms, and so more fit for
their transmission, than those of diverse other bodies much inferior to it in
compactness and solidity. And being we have the oath of our sense, that the
Atoms of Fire do instantly find out many inlets or pores in the body of
Marble, by which they insinuate themselves into its centrall parts, and so not
only calefie the whole mass or substance thereof, but reduce it suddenly into
a brittle Calx: why should we not concede, that the Magnetic Atoms may
likewise find out convenient inlets or pores in the same, and by them nimbly
pervade the whole mass; and that with so much more of ease and expe^ition, by
how much more subtle and active they are, than those of ^ire? True it is, that
we can discern no such Particles flowing from magneticks, no such Pores in
Marble, but how great the Dullness or Grosness of our senses is, comparatively
to the ineffable subtility of many of Natures Instruments, by which she
brings admirable Effects to pass, we need not here rehearse. (2) As for the
other Argument desumed from the F^ustulation of a Loadstone, we Answer; that
the single Virtues of the single fragments, are nothing else but so many Parts
of the Total Virtue: nor being taken singularly, are they equally potent with
the whole; only they are like the Total, because in the whole Loadstone they
follow the ductus or tract of its Fibers, that run parallel each to other, and
conjoyn their forces with that Fiber, which being in the middle, stands for the
Axis to all the rest. But, in each Fragment, they follow the same ductus or
Grain of the F^bres, and one Fiber must still be in the middle: which becomes
an Axis, and that to which all the circumstant ones confer and unite their
forces.

The EIGHTH; that the Magnetic Virtue, Art. 10. A Pa^alleli^me of the
Magnetique Virtue, and the Vegetative Facul^^ o^ Plants.
both existent in the Loadstone, and transfused into Iron, seems by a lively
Analogy, to resemble the Vegetative Faculty or soul of a Plant; not only in
respect of the Corroboration of the force of its median Fiber, or Axis, by the
con^erence of the forces of all the circumstant ones thereupon, as the centrall
parts of a Plant are corroborated by the circumambient: but also, and
principally, in respect of the situation, Ductus, or Grain of its Fibers; which
run meridio^ally, as those in Plants perpendicularly, or upward from the roots
to the tops of the spriggs. For, as in the Incision or Engr^ffing of the shoot
of one tree, into the trunck or stock of another, the Gardener must observe to
insert the lower extreme of the shoot, into a cleft in the upper extreme of the
stock, as that from whence the nutritive sap and vegetative influence are to be
derived unto it; because, if the shoot were inverted, and its upper extreme
inserted into the stock, it would necessarily wither and die, as being in that
praeposterous position made incapable of the influx of the Alimentary juice and
vital Faculty, both which come from the root upward to the branches, and
cannot descend again from them to the root: exactly so, when we would dispose a
Loadstone in conformity of situation to the Earth, from which it has been cut
off, or to another Loadstone, a quondam part of it self; it is not every way of
Apposition, that will be convenient, but only that, when it is disposed in a
direct line, respondent to the same Ductus or situation of its Fibers,
according to which it was continued to the Earth, before its separation. Nor is
this mere Conjecture, but a truth as firm as the Earth it self, and as plain
as sense can make it; it being const^ntly observed, that what situation a
Loadstone had in its Matrix, or mineral bed, the very same it shall strongly
affect, and strictly observe ev^r after, at least, while it is a Loadstone, i.
e. until time or Fire have destroyed its Verticity. And, as for the Use
thereof; it is so ^ruitfull, as to yield us the most probable Reason in
General, for sundry the most obscure among all Magneticall Apparences.

Art. 11. (...) of the (...) re^^pect and name* are Enemies: and th^se of a
Contrary respect and name, Friends.
(1) Forasmuch as the Loadstone ever affects its native situation, and that its
Northern part did, while it remained in its matrix, adhaere to the Southern
parts of the same magnetique vein, that lay more North, and its Southern part
did adhaere to the Northern part of the magnetic vein, that lay more South:
therefore is it, that the North pole of a Loadstone does never affect an union
with the North pole of the earth, nor its South pole direct to the South pole
of the Earth; but quite contrary, its North pole converts to the South, and its
South to the North. So that whenever you observe a Loadstone, freely swimming
in a boat of Cork, to convert or decline one of its poles to the North of the
Earth; you may assure your self, that that is the South pole of the Loadstone:
and e contra.

Art. 12. (...) is di^^ected into two pieces, why the ^oreal part of the one
half, decline ^^njunction with the Boreall part of the other; and the (...) of
one with the Aust^^ll of the other
(2) From the same and no other Cause is it also, that when a Magnet is
dissected or broken into two pieces, and so two new poles created in each
piece; the Boreall pole of the one half shall never admit Coition with the
Boreall pole of the other, nor the Australl extreme of the one fragment affect
conjunction with the Australl extreme of the the other: but contrariwise, the
Australl end shall septentrionate, and the septentriona^^ Australize. The same
also happens, whenever any two Lo^^stones (...) applied each to other; the
Cause being General, viz. the Native (...) or Grain of the Magnetique Fibers:
which is inverted, whene^^^ the Boreall part of a Loadstone is applied to the
Boreall part of the Earth, or of another Loadstone; or the Meridionall part of
a Loa^st^ne be converted to the meridionall part of the Earth of another
Loadstone; as the Ductus of the Fibers in a shoot of a Pl^nt is inverte^, when
the upper extreme thereof is inserted into the upper part of a s^o^k. This
considered, when we observe the Animated Needle (...) Mariners Compass, freely
converting it self round, upon the pin, ^hereon it is aequilibrated; that end,
which directs to the Nor^^ pole of the Earth, must be the South point of the
Needle, and viceversally, that must be the North cuspis of the Needle, which
con^rontet^ the South of the Earth. And, when praesent a Loadstone to a
magnetified Versory, that part of the Loadstone must be the North pole, to
which the South cuspis of the Needle comes; and that, to which the North point
of the Needle approaches, must be the South of the Loadstone. The same also may
be concluded, of the extremes of Irons, when a Loadstone is applied unto them;
for, that part of an Iron bar, which laid meridionally, has respected the
North, must have been spirited by the Southern influence of the Earth; and e
contra: and among our Fire Irons, the upper end must have imbibed the Northern
influence of the Earth, and the Lower the Southern; contrary to the assertion
of some of our Magneticall Philosophers.

The NINTH; the Analogy of the Earth to the Loadstone, Art. 13. The Fibers of
the Earth extend from Pole to Pole; and that may be the Cause of the firm
Cohaesion of all its Parts, conspiring to conserve its Sphericall Figure.
and other magnetically inspired bodies, being so great, and the Cause thereof
so little obscure; it may seem a justifiable inference, That the Terriestriall
Globe does inwardly consist of certain continued Fibers, running along from
North to South, or from South to North, in one uninterrupted ductus: and
consequently, that since the middle Fiber is as it were the Axis, whose
opposite extremes make the two Poles, in case the whole Earth could be divided
into two or more great parts, there would instantly result in every part or
division, a special Axis, two special Poles, a special Equator, and all
other conditions as formerly in the whole Globe; so that the septentrionall
part of one piece would conjoin it self to the Austrine part of another, and
the septentrionall parts reciprocally avert themselves each from other, as the
parts of a Loadstone. And this we may understand to be that mighty and so long
enquired Cause, why all the parts of the Terrestrial Globe do so fi^mly
cohae^e, and conserve the primitive Figure; the Cohaesion, Attractive Virtue,
constant Direction, and spontaneous Verticity of all its genuine parts, all
whose Southern Fibers do magnetically, or individually conform and conjoyn
themselves to the Northern, and their Northern to the Southern, being the
necessary Causes of that Firmness, and constancy of Figure. Impossible, we
confess, it is, to obtain any ocular Experiment of this constitution of the
Earths internal Fibers; the very Cortex of the Earth extending some miles in
profundity: but yet we desume a reasonable Conjecture thereof, as well from the
great similitude of effects wrought by the Earth and other Magneticks, as the
Experience of Miners, who frequently observe, and constantly affirm, that the
Veins of subterraneous Rocks, from whose chinks they dig Iron oar, do
always tend from South to North; and that the Veins of eminent Rocks, which
make the Giant Mountains upon the face of the Earth, have generally the same
Direction. And though there are some Rows or Tracts of Mountains, that run
from East to West, or are of oblique situation; yet are there always some
considerable intercisures among them, from South to North: so that that can be
no sufficient argument, that the interior Fibers of the Earth, which are truly
and entirely magneticall, and subjacent under those Mountainous rocks, do not
lie in a meridionall position, or conform to the Axis of the Earth.

The TENTH; that since the observations of Miners ascertain us, Art. 14. Reason
of Magneticall Variati^n, in diverse climates and places
that the Ranges or Tracts of Rocks, in the Cortex or accessible part of the
Terrestrial Globe, do for the most observe a praecisely Meridionall situation,
and tend from South to North, and sometimes (i. e. in some places) de^lect
toward the East and West, with less and greater obliquity; and that our Reason
may from thence, and the similitude of the E^rth and Loadstone, naturally
extract a Conjecture, that the Fibers of the Earths Kernel or inaccessible
parts, though for the most they tend praecisely from the South to the North;
may yet in many places more and l^ss Deflect toward the East and West: we need
no longer perplex ou^ minds with enquiring, Why all Magnetiques, and especially
the Versory or Needle of the Sea-mans Compass, being horizontally
aequilibrated, do^ in some places point directly to the North and South, and in
others deflect toward the East and West, with more and less of obliquity; which
Navigators call (for distinction of it from the Depression, or Inclination,
formerly explicated) the VARIATION of the L^adstone, or Needle. From the
Mariners Tables (though they are (...) of discord, as to the degrees of the
Needles Deflection or Variation from the true Meridian, in several parts of
the Earth) we learn, that the Needle does exactly conform it self to the Axis
of its great ^^^pirer* the Earth, without any sensible deflection at all, in
the Island Corvus, one of the Azores, in the Island of the Trinity, in the
pro^^^tory of the Needles, near the Cape of Good-hope, in the (...) Hercul^um,
Syllaeum, the Thracian Bosphorus, the (...) Vienna, and diverse other places.
But in others, (...) England, it (...) somewhat toward the E^st, yet (...), so
that in some countries its Variation exceeds not 1.2. or ^* degrees at most,
and in others it amounts to n^ less than 40, ^r 5^* Again there are other
meridians, in which the Declination of the ^^mpass is toward the West; as
frequently upon the Orien^all (...) of (...) Northern America; on the
Occident^ll coast of Nova Z^^b^a, an Goa; the Eastern side of Africa; in our
Mediterrane, at Naples, (...) sundry other places. Nay, oftentimes in the same
Meridian, and in (...) degrees of Latitude, it has been observed, that the
Needle (...) not vary at all, and vary both Eastward and Westward* for, though
in the Island Corvus the Declination be insensible, where the L^titude is of
about 40 degrees; yet on this side of it, in the Latitude of 20 degrees ^he
Declination amounts to 12 degrees Eastward: and beyond it, in the Latitude of
46 degrees the Declination toward the West, arises to 8 degrees; and farther
off, in the Latitude of 55 the Westward Declin^^^on equals 24 degrees. So
also, in the Island E^ba, at one promonto^^* the Needle deviates toward the East
on^y 5 degrees; at another prom^^^ory, 8; and at a third, as high as 20. which
being duly perpended, ^oth soon detect the unadvisedness and incircumspection
of Those, (...) have referred the Declination of the M^gnet to the Deviation of
the Asterisme, Ursa Minor, or Pole of the Ecliptic from the poles of the
World; and attempted to explain it by imagining some certain Magnetic Rocks,
which being situate on the East side of the (...) Pole of the Earth, constitute
a special Magnetic Pole, (...) the Versory Needle is generally deflected.
Much more (...) was the invention of Dr. Gilbert; who supposing that the (...)
Virtue of the Earth was more powerfully impressed upon (...) from the Extant or
Eminent parts thereof, and especially (...) Continents: makes out the cause of
the Magnets indirection, or Variation, thus. If the Needle be placed in the
middle betwixt two vast Continents, as in the Azores, which have Europe to the
East, and America to the West; it suffers no sensible Distraction to either
part: but, if it be brought nearer to the Continent of Europe and Asia, it must
be invited and deflected toward the East; and nearer to the Continent of
America, it shall deviate as much toward the West. For the same Cause also,
upon the Western coast of Africa the Declination is toward the East; and on the
Oriental, toward the West: and betwixt them both, as at the Cape of Good-hope
none at all. And yet this subtle Theory of Dr. Gilbert is more the^ suspected
of Imperfection. For, since that, on the Western coast of America, and of Goa,
the Declination of the Needle is Westward; and not only on the Oriental side
of the Meridionall America, and chiefly about the streights of Megellan, but
also on the Oriental side of the Septentrionall America, as at Virginia, the
Declination teaseth not to be, in the same manner, toward the East; absolutely
contrary to His Hypothesis: therefore has the incomparable Father, Kircher, to
his own immortal honor, and our greater satisfaction, advised us, to leave
the Attraction of adjacent Continents, and have recourse only to the diverse
Positions of the interior Magneticall Fibers of the Earth, over which the
Magnet, or Needle stands; considering that they have their situation sometimes
exquisitely Meridionall, sometimes more and less oblique, and tend in some
places in longer, in others in shorter tracts. For, it is no difficult
conception, the Virtue of the Earth is impressed upon the Needle from the
magneticall Fibers and Veins, that are nearest, i. e. directly subjacent
thereunto; and disposed thereby into a situation respective to the Ductus of
those perpendicularly subjacent Fibers: so that whatever be the Direction of
the Needle; i. e. either without all Declination, or with some, more or less,
in one part toward the East, in another toward the contrary pole of the
heavens; still may we suppose it to be exactly respondent to the Ductus, or
Direction of the Fibers of the Earth, that perpendicularly lie underneath it.
Nor is this merely Petitionary, or excogitated only for the solution of this
grand Magneticall Problem, as the Former of Gilbert seems to have been; but
founded upon a Parallel Experiment: for, if you place several Bars of Iron
excited, upon the ground, so that one may lie exactly according to the
Meridian, and all the rest in several degrees of obliquity, until you come
almost to make an Aequinoctionall line with one; and then gently and at
requisite distance, move an invigorated Needle, equilibrated upon a pin, over
them; you shall observe the Direction of it to be varied to more and less
obliquity from the Meridian Bar, respectively to the situation of each of the
other Bars, over which it is directly held. Now, if you suppose the Magnetique
Fibers of the Earth to have the same Virtue upon the Needle, as, if not much
more than the subjacent Iron Bars have: you have attained the bottom of the
Mystery, and that one of the greatest in Nature.

Art. 15. The De^rement of Magneticall Variation, in one and the same place, in
diverse years.
The ELEVENTH and last; that as the Conversion of the inspired Needle is no^
exactly meridionall in all places of the Earth, but siding more or less ^oward
the East, in some Topicall meridians, and toward the West, in others: so also
is not the Declination thereof, though in one and the same place, constant to
the same degree, at all times, but admits considerable Variation, and that in a
few years. For, Mr. Burrow^, in the year 1580, making an exact observation of
the quantity of the Needles Declination toward the East, at Limus, near London,
found it to amount to no less than 11. degrees 15 minutes: and afterward, in
the year 1622. Mr. Gunter, at the same place, observed it to be diminished to
only 6. degrees, and 13 minutes: and Gellebrand, in Anno Dom. 1634. in the
same place, found it to come yet lower, and not to exceed 4 degrees 6 minutes:
So that, in the meridian o^ London, as our Noble Countryman, Sir. Ke^elm Digby
has w^ll remarked, the Declination of the Needle Eastward has been mo^^
Diminished in the latter years than in the former. The like De^^^ase of the
Variation of the Needle has been taken notice of also in France, at Paris by
Mercennus, and at Aix, by Gassendus. And therefore we may praesume, if the
Needles continue, in the same manner, and at the same rate, to lessen their
Declination, that within a very few years, with us here in England, and other
adjacent Countries, they will have no Declination at all toward the East, and
perhaps wheel about toward the West, and every year more and (...) approach
the contrary point of the Equator.

Art. 16. The Cause thereof not yet known.
Now, as for the Cause of this truly stupendous Effect of Magneticks;
Grandamicus, indeed, thinks it best solved, by charging it only upon the
E^^ors of observation, not upon any Mutation of the Axis of the E^rth, which
would of necessity vary all Caelestiall observations, no ^^ss than Magneticall
ones: enforcing this His opinion from hen^^* that the best of Astronomers are
frequently not only subject to* but guilty of great Errors, in their
operations to find out the true General Meridian Line, of the Altitude of the
Sun, of the poin^ of the Heavens that is vertical to this or that place, where
they use their instruments, etc; the certain knowledge of all these particulars
being absolutely requisite to make a true compute of the Degrees of the Needles
Variation. But, the Observators nominated being all eminent Mathematicians,
well understanding the seve^^ll Causes, that might betray them into
in^ertitude, and as well how to praevent or avoid them all; and each one setting
about the work, with all possible care and circumspection: and it being very
improbable, that they all should fall into one and the same delusion: the
Ingenious, we hope, will excuse us, if we incriminate ^randami^^^ Himself, with
much of temerity, and somewhat of injustice, (...) detractring judgment of
His; and assent to their more (...) and reasonable one, who referr this
sensible Declination of Dec^^^^tion in the Magnet, to some certain indigenary
Cause, or Dispo^^^^on proper to those Places and Countries, where such
observation ^ere made. But, what indigenary and particular Disposition th^^
(...), which should thus vary the Magneticall Variation, in the (...) of a few
years; is a Problem indeed, and such as seems reserved ^or the exposion of
Elias. Kircher and Gassendus, we acknowledge, have attempted most laudably, in
supposing the Magneticall Fibers, that lie more distant from the Axis of the
Earth, or nearer to the superfice thereof, not to be so firmly cohaerent each
to other, but that they may be emoved, evolved, and separated, by some
subterraneous Cause or other, and so exchange their more oblique, for a less
oblique, and at length for an absolutely direct or truly meridionall
situation; as the Fibers of the Muscles of Animalls are observed sometimes to
suffer a certain Revulsion, or change of situation, under the skin, for
several Causes: and that this Locomotion and Decrement of obliquity of the
superficial magnetic Fibers of the Earth, may be the sole Cause of the like
Decrement of obliquity, or Declination of the Needle, in one and the same
place, in diverse years. But, forasmuch as this Supposition is irreconcilable
to our Ninth observable praecedent, touching the Cause of the firm Cohaesion
of the parts of the Earth, and the Constancy of its Sphaericall Figure, from
thence resulting; and that neither Kircher nor Gassendus tells us, what
subterraneous Cause that should be, which might emove and translate the
Magneticall Fibers of the Cortex of the Earth, from a more to a less indirect
situation (which in justice they both ought to have done:) we shall only
applaud the ingenuity of their Conjecture, and return to our former judgment,
That the true Cause of the Decrement of the Magneticall Variation is yet in the
bottom of Democritus Pit; and He, who shall be so happy to extract it from
thence, shall have our vote, to have his statue set on the right hand of that
of Gilbert, in the Vatican.

There ye^ remains a Difficulty, which being left unresolved, Art. 17. No
M^gnet has more ^han Two Legit^mate Poles: and the rea^ons of Illegitimate
ones.
is of importance enough to make the intelligent and wary Reader somewhat
costive in his Assent even to the chiefest and most Fundamental of our
Praecedent observables, concerning the Reason of Magneticall Verticity. And
that is, That some Loadstones have more than Two Poles* such as that Tripolar
one of Furnerius, of which both Kircher and Gassendus make singular mention.

Concerning this, therefore, we say; that in every Loadstone there are two, and
but two true and Legitimate Poles: and that all others apparent in them, either
at the Equator, or betwixt it and either of the Genuine Poles, are spurious or
Illegitimate; arising either from some Node or Knot growing laterally on to a
Magnet (such as is commonly observed to interrupt the direct progress of the
Fibers, or Grain of Trees, and of stones) or from an irregular and horned
Figure of the stone it self, in respect of either of which the Magnetic Virtue
cannot be commodiously united at the two Genuine and directly opposite Poles,
but is distracted obliquely to that Prominent Node, or Horn-like Protuberancy.
For, if either the Node or horns of a Loadstone, which cause it to have more
than two Poles, be artificially cut off, and the remainder of the stone be
polished; a Needle, or the Filings of steel, thereunto applied, shall never be
perpendicular erected at any part thereof, but only at the Artick and
Antarctick points; nor shall the stone dispose it self otherwise than
conformably to the Meridian* both which are the most c^rtain Discoverers of the
true Poles of a Loadstone. Those Illegitimate Poles, therefore which sometimes
(though very rarely) are found in a Loa^stone, are as it were the oblique and
Pr^eternaturall parts of it, obtaining the reason of Poles only by Accident.
Which yet hinders not, but that many times, from the imperfection of the stone,
it may come to pass, that the two Legitim^te Poles of the same Loadstone,
though ^xactly polished, and reduced to a perfect Sphere, may not exist in the
Ext^emes of its Diametre* for, unleses the Magnet be Uniforme in subst^nce and
Virtue, the Poles thereof cannot be directly opposite each to other.

Art. 18. The Conclusion* Apologeticall, and (...) Advert^^^^ment, that ^he
Attracti^^ and Directi^^ Act^^ons o^ (...)
And thus, in a natural Method, and with as much succinctness, as the copious
subject would be^re (according to our engagement^ have we enquired into the
Cau^^ of the Two General Faculties of the Loadstone, the (...) and (...) with
the most considerable Phaenomena's arising from either, or both of them.
Wherein, if we have been so happy, as to afford but the l^^st of satisfaction
to others; we shall account it no small (...) to Ourselves, and think our
studies thereby more th^n sufficien^^^ compensated. If not, we shall yet
consolate ourselves with this (...) we are not the First, who have fallen short
of the Readers Expectati^^^ ^n the Discussion of this singularly Abstruse
Argument: which is a thing so highly Admirable, that Aphrodisaeus (initio
Pro^lem.) affirmed ^he Nature thereof to be understood only by Him, that
created it; and ^alen de therica ad Pison.) termed the Attractive Virtue
thereof wh^^ Divine. To which we shall add also this; that the Hypothesis, of
the ^ontinued Ductus of the Magnetic Fibers of the Earth, especially (...) the
Kernel, or Interior substance thereof, from the South to the North Pole ^upon
which we have erected the solutions of sundry great Magne^^call Apparences) is
subject to much less of Improbability, than that o^ ^ilbert and Grandamicus,
that the Magnetique Virtue is a simple, or Imma^^^iall Quality; than that of
De's Carts, that the Magnetique Aporrhaea's consist of streated or Screwed
Atoms, passing through the Earth, by contr^^^ and diversely figurated insensible
pores, issuing forth at either po^e, and ^^eeling about interchangeably to the
opposite pole; than that of Sr. (...) Digby, that the Magnetique streams glide
along from either Pole an^ Hemisphere of the Earth, by Attraction to the
Equator* or, in truth ^^an any other hitherto excogitated and divulged.

But* before we pu^ an end to this Chapter; it is requisite to advertise you o^
a Confider^^^^* omitted in the beginning of it; which is, th^^ though we (...)
the Virtue Magnetic to be (in General) Twofold* Attractive (...) Directive;
yet is that Distinction to be admitted, no^ in an Absolute (...) Respective
intention, or only ((...)) in order to our more ^^stinct Comprehension of the
immediate; and particu^ar Reasons of (...) respective Magneticall Effects,
which ot^erwise must have wanted (...) advantage of order in their
consideration. For, we are fully (...) of the truth of that Assertion of
Grandamicus (Nova Demonstra^^ ^^mobilit. Terrae* cap 5. Sect. 2.) that the
Attraction and Dire^^ion or (...) and Polarity of Magneticks, are caused by one
and the sam^ (...) which being conferred upon them, by the infinite Wisdom and
(...) of the Creator, in order to the Conservation of the Earth, and all its
genuine parts, in that position in the Universe, and that disposition among
themselves, in which they are best supported, and most conveniently perform
Actions conform and proper to their Nature; may be yet termed Attractive,
insomuch as it Unites Magneticall Bodies, violently separated; and Directive,
insomuch as it Disposes them in a due and commodious situation. And so,
notwithstanding the Actions and Motions of Magnetiques seem exceeding Various,
and in some cases, plainly Contrary; yet are they to be deduced from one simple
principle, one and the same General Virtue, and they all may be conveniently
explic^ted by the same Common Reason.

The Fourth Book.
CHAP. 1. OF GENERATION AND CORUPTION.
SECT. I.
THat Nature, Art. 1. The Introduction.
or the Common Harmony of the World, is continued by Changes, or the
Vicissitudes of Individualls, i. e. the Production of some, and Destruction of
other Things, determined to this or that particular Species; and that there
must be one Catholic Matter, of which all things are Elemented, and into
which they may be again, by Dissolution, reduced: are Positions, to which all
men most readily prostrate their assent. But, What that First and Common matter
is; How Concretio^s are Educible out of it; and How Reducible at length into
it, after the Privation of their Specificall Forms: are Quaestions, whose
Beginnings are more easily known, than their ends. However, forasmuch as we
have endeavored, in our immediately foregoing Book, to determine the First of
them, together with the possible Emergency of all Qualities (whereof either our
sense, or Reason can afford us any measure of cognizance) and the Reasons of
the Perception of them by Animals, from Atoms, so and so Configurated, and so
and so Disposed in Commistion: it now nearly concerns us, to attempt the most
hopeful Decision of the other Two that so we may not seem to have thus long
discoursed of the Principles, and Affections of Compound Bodies, while we
remained wholly ignorant of the most probable ways both of their Origination
from those Principles, and of their Reversio^ into them again, when they have
lost the right of their former Denominations, and suffered to the utmost of
their Divisibility.

Art. 2. The proper Notions of Generation and Corruption.
By the term, GENERATION, we ought praecisely to understand that Act of Nature,
whereby she produces a Thing de novo, or gives Being to a Thing, in some
certain Genus of Bodies Concrete: and consequently, by its Contrary,
CORRUPTION, that whereby she Dissolves a Thing* so that thenceforth it cease
to be what it was. For, when Fire, a stone, a Plant, an Animal, or whatever is
referrible to any one determinate kind of Bodies Compound, is first produced,
or made, and begins to be so, or so Denominated; it is truly said to be
Generated: and contrariwise, when a Thing perishes, and loses the right of
its former Denomination; it is as truly said to be Corrupted. And this is that
which Aristotle (1. de Generat 2.) frequently call's Generatio (...),
Generation Simple and Perfect; so to praevent that Confusion of Generation with
Alteration, into which many of his Praedecessors had oft^^ fallen, to their own
and their Disciples no little disquiet. For, (...), Alteration can be accounted
a Generation only improperly, of secundum quid; forasmuch as by Alteration a
Body is not produced de novo, but only acquires some new Quality, or some
Accidentary Denomination: and Philosophers accordingly define it to be
Progressionem Corporis ex una qualitate in aliam, a Progression of a Body from
one Quality to another, as when water is changed from cold to hot by fire.
Again, every Mutation requires a subject to be Altered; and that subject must
be something Compound, complete, and already constituted in some determinate
Genus of Beings: But, of Generation strictly accepted the only subject is the
First and Universal matter, which being in it self destitute of all Form
Aristole does therefore subtly call simpliciter Non-ens, simply, or
determinately Nothing; forasmuch as he frequently inculteth, that Generation is
made [(...)*] ex N^n ente simpliciter. Because had He ommitted that adverb
simpliciter, his Reader might justly have understood Non ens absolute Nothing
Absolutely; and so have accused him of openly contradicting his own
Fundamental Axiom, Ex nihilo nihil fieri, that nothing can be made or
^enerated of Nothing.

This being praemised, to praevent the danger of Aequivocation; Art. 3. Various
opinions of the Ancient Philosophers, touching the reason of Generation: and
the principal Authors of pacti.
we observe First, with Aristotle (3. de caelo 1.) that among the Ancient
Philosophers, some held, that Nothing is Generated, nothing Corrupted; as
Parmenides and Melissus: Others again, that. All things are Generated and
Corrupted; as Hesiod and Heraclitus. Secondly, that of Those, who admitted
Generation, and consequently Corruption, some conceived, that Generation is
made by the Access of a Form to Matter; and that that Form is a certain New
substance, absolutely distinct from that of the Matter, and together with it
constituting the Compositum, or whole resulting from the Commistion of Matter
and Form: of which sect Aristotle Himself deserves to be in the Chair, because
in order to his Assertion of this Opinion, He supposes a Threefold substance,
the Matter, Form, and Composiitum arising from their Commistion. But, Others
though they concede, that Generation, indeed, consists in the Accession of a
Form to Matter; yet will they not allow that Form ac^eding, to be substantial,
but only a certain Accident or Modification of the Matter it self: so that
according to their theory, in Generation there superveneth upon Matter some
certain Quality, of such a Condition, as that by reason thereof a Thing obtain
s a certain Being in Nature, and acquireth some determinate Denomination,
respective to that Genus of Bodies, to which its Nature does refer it. And in
the Catalogue of Philosophers of this persuasion, Aristotle nominateth as
Principalls, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Democritus, and Leucippus; all which He
sharply taxes of Confounding Generation with Alteration, and of inferring,
that as well Generation as Corruption arises, not from the Transmutation of
Principles, but only from their [(...)] Concretion and Secretion: which is not
only inconsistent, but contrapugnant to His own great Hypothesis, that the Four
Elements, or Catholic Principles of Generation, are so Transmutable, both
secundum substantiam (at least, according to the Comments of all his modern
Expositors) and secundum Qualitate^, as to their substance and Qualities, as
that from their Commistion, Alteration, and Corruption, a certain New and
distinct substance does arise, which is the Form of the Thing so produced. For,
having supposed for a Groundwork, that the Four Elements are not the First
Principles; it could not stand with his advantage, not to have assumed also,
that the Elements may be so Transmuted, as that the more General and Common
Matter does still remain: and that the same, upon the perdition of the
Elementary Forms, may put on a New Form, that is substantial; and that very
thing, by which the resulting or Generated Body is specified, and entitled to
such a Denomination. But, as for Empedocles, and the rest enumerated (to whom
we may add also Epicurus) it is well known that notwithstanding they all
admitted the Four Vulgar Elements, as readily as Aristotle Himself, yet would
they by no means hear of their Transmutability either as to substance, or
Qualities: unanimously decreeing, that in their Commistion each of them is
divided into particles most minute, which yet retain the very same substance
and qualities, that they had before, as that every particle of Fire does still
retain the substance and quality of Fire, namely Heat; and that every particle
of Water does likewise constantly conserve the substance, and quality of Water,
viz. Moisture; and so of the other two: so that it is most evident, They would
have, that in Generation there is only a [(...)] Concretion of the insensible
particles of the the 4 Elements, but no Transmutation of any one of them,
either with the Perdition of their own, or the Adeption of a new substantial
Form; both which are praesumed by Aristotle.

Art. 4. The two great opinions of the same Philosophers concerning the manner
of the Commistion of the Common Principles, in Generation; faithfully and
briefly stated.
But this great Difficulty, about the Generation of Things from the Commistion
of the General Principles, soon loses it self in a Greater, which concerns the
Manner and Condition of their Commistion, and whose consideration will best
instruct us as well what is the main Difference among Philosophers, touching
this most weighty Theorem, as what opinion can best deserve our Approbation and
Assent. Concerning this, therefore, we find two necessary Remarks (1) That
there are Two different Kinds of Commistion, whereof the one is, by Aristotle
(de Generat. 1. cap. 10.) termed (...), Composition, and by others, (...),
Apposition: the other is called, in the Dialect of the Stoics, (...)
Confusion, and in that of Galen, (...), Coalition, or Temperation. The Former
is when those things, whether Elements, or others, that are mixed together, do
not interchangeably penetrate each others parts, so as to be conjoined per
minima; but either themselves in the whole, or their parts, only touch each
other superficially: as in the Commistion of the Grains of wheat, Barley, Rye
and other Corn. The Latter, when the things commixed, are so seemingly united,
and concorporated, as that they may be conceived mutually and totally to
pervade and penetrate each other, per minimas parts, so as that there is no
one insensible particle of the whole mixture, which has not a share of every
ingredient; as when Wine and Water (that we may use the Example, as well as
Conception of Aristotle) are infused together into the same vessel. Now the
Stoics and Aristotle are equally earnest to have this Latter way, or manner of
Commistion, viz. (...), Confusion, to be that, according to which the Elements
of Principles of Bodies are commix't in Generation: But Empedocles, Anaxagoras,
Democritus, Epicurus, with all their Sectators, allow none but the Former, or
(...), Apposition; with very solid arguments (among which the easy separability
of Wine from Water, either by a sponge, or Cup of Ivy, is not the least)
asserting, that the (...) of Elements, as also of all other things, is really a
mere (...), Composition of their small particles, though apparently, or
according to the judgment of sense, it may pass for a (...), or Confusion.

(2) That, when either the Elements themselves, or any other Bodies more
Concrete, as Water and Wine, are mixed together; they may reciprocally divide,
dissect, and resolve each other into either very small and insensible
[moleculae] masses, which yet are each of them composed of multitudes of Atoms
concreted; or most exile particles, i. e. Atoms themselves: and where the
resolution is only into insensible Masses, there may the Commistion be
accounted Perfect; but, where the parts of each ingredient are so far resolved,
as to be reduced quite down to the first Matter, Atoms, there is the Commistion
most Perfect.

Now, upon this Distinction depends the whole Controversy betwixt Aristotle and
the Stoics, on one part, and the Atomists, on the other, about the Manner of
the Commistion of the Common Principles in Generation: Those vehemently
contending for their total Concorporation, or Unition per minimas parts, so
that every the most minute particle in the whole mistum, must be of the very
same nature with the whole; These strongly asserting, that no Mistion of
Elements, or Temperation of Principles, goes further than a mere Apposition, or
superficial Contingency of their several particles, so that the particles of
each ingredient must still retain the very same nature they had before
commistion, howbeit they may seem to be totally Concorported, or Confused, in
regard they are reduced to such Exility, as that each single one escapes the
discernment of the sense.

These two ^o highly repugnant Opinions being thus rightly stated, Art. 5. That
of Aristotle and the stoics, refu^ed: and Chrysippus sub^erfuge, convicted of
3 Absurdities
it follows, that we uprightly perpend the Verisimility of each; that so we may
confer our Assent upon the more ponderous. If we look no further than the
Commmon Notion, or what every man understands by the Term, Mistion; it is most
evident, that the things commixed ought to Remain in the Mistum; for if they do
not remain, but Perish, both according to substance and Qualities, as Aristotle
and the Stoics hold, then is it no Mistion but a Destruction: and since the
propriety of this Notion cannot be solved by any other reason, but that of the
Atomists, that the particles of things are in commistion only apposed each to
other, without amission of their proper natures; what Consequence can be more
natural and clear than this, that that their opinion is most worthy our Assent
and Assertion? (2) Though Chrysippus attempts to conserve the integrity of this
Common Notion, by a sub^lety, saying; That the most minute particles of things
mixe^, do so remain entire both as to substance and Qualities, as that they
reciprocally penetrate each other, and become mutually Coextended; and that
thence it comes to pass, that in the whole Mistum there is none the smallest
particle, which is not mixed, or which does not partake as well of the
substance, as Qualities of every ingredient (...)* ^et does He not only fall
short of his design, but also further en^ang^e himself, and subvert other more
manifest Notions. For, f^^m that his Position it necessary follows. (1) That
two Bodies are at once in one and the same place, both mutually penetrating
each others dimensions, or without reciprocal expulsion (2) That a pint of
Water, and a pint of Wine commixed, must not fill a quart, but that both are no
greater than one, i. e. be both contained in a pint together: forasmuch as it
supposes, that the particles of one have no other Ubi, but what is posse'st by
the particles of the other. (3) That a very small Body may be Coextensive, or
Coaequate to a very great one; as that a spoonful of Water may be Coaequate to
a But of Wine: since it supposes, that, both being commix't, there is no part
of space in the vessel including them, which does not contain somewhat of the
Water as well as of the Wine. Now, all these things being manifestly Repugnant,
and yet naturally Consequent upon Chrysippus Position: it is no less repugnant,
that the particles of things commixt should remain, by mutual Penetration, and
Coe^^ension.

Art. 6. Ar^st^tles twof^ld ^^vation of the (...).
(3) Nor, indeed, has Aristotle Himself been more happy than Chrysippus, in his
invention of a way, to remove or palliate the gross repugnancy of his opinion,
to the proper importance of the term, Commistion; as may easily be evinced by a
short adduction of it to the test of reason. That He might defend his Doctrine
of the Remanence of things commixed, notwithstanding their reciprocal
Transubstantiation; and at the same time avoid those sundry manifest (...), or
Incongruities, to which that doctrine (...) subject: He excogitated Two
sophistical subter^uges. The one, that when two diverse things are commixed, in
very unequal proportions, so as the one is very much praevalent over the other
(as when one single ^rop of Wine is instilled into ten thousand Gallons of
water) in th^^ case there is no Mistion, in strick acceptance; but an absolute
Ex^olution and Transmutation of the species of the weaker into that of the
stronger, (of the species of the Wine, into that of the Water.) The Other, that
when the things commixed are so exactly equal in qu^^^ity or Virtues, as that
one is not the least praevalent over the other; o^ when the one praevails upon
the other but little: in both these cases* though each put on the nature of the
other, by reciprocal t^ansmuta^^on, or that which is a little inferior be
altered from its own nature into that of the Superior; yet is not that
Transmutation of both, a Generation of either, or the transmutation of the one,
a Generation of the other* but only of some Third thing, which is middle
betwixt, and common ^o both.

But* there is neit^er of these, which may not be called a snare, more justly
than a subter^^^^. For, as to the First; were He living, and in the Schools, we
sh^^ld only demand of him, if after the instillation of one single drop of
Wine into 10000 Gallons of Water, a second drop should be supe^^nfused, and
after that a third, a fourth, and so more and more successively* till the mass
of Water were augmented to ten, a hundred, a thousa^^fold: of what Nature would
the whole mixture of Wine and Water be? He, doubtless, would Answer Us, that
the whole would still b^ Water, though to one measure of Water 10000 measures
of Wine were superaffused drop after drop; since, according to His own theory*
it always must remain mere and simple Water (other^^^^ the first ^^op of Wine
could not be transpecificated, or be converted into the ^^ture of the Water)
into which even the very last drop of Wine wa^ ^^^used: or else He must teach
us when, i. e. from what particular drop of Wine instilled, the whole Aggregate
or Mass of both l^quo^^ beg^^ ^o put off the nature of Water, and on that of
Wine. And, who is so (...) ^ither by nature, or praejudice, as not to
apprehend, that the Reason is (...) same for one, as for the other; for ten
thousand ^^ousand Gallons, (...) ^or one single Drop of Wine? Now this being
Absurd, as f^r beyond palliation, as pardon; is it not much better for Us to
say, (...) drop of Wine be infused into so large a quantity of Water, it is
(...) into very exile particles, each whereof does still retain the nature of
Wine, but so commixed and adhaering to the incommensurably more dense and
numerous particles of the Water, as that they seem to vanish, though really
they still subsist the very same, as before commistion? That Two drops being
infused into the ^ame Water, the particles thereof becoming doubly more
numerous, would be contingent and cohaerent to more particles of the Water?
That, if ^en, a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, a hundred thousand, etc.
Drops of Wine be successively superaffused into the same Water; the particles
of the Wine would at length amount not only to an equal, but a greater number
than those of the Water: and consequently so praevail over them, as ^o change
their Virtue, and subdue them into the Appearance of Wine?

And as to the Other; we might very lawfully Except against it, as altogether
Unintelligible (for, who can understand, How the Inferior Mistile can be
transmuted into the Nature of the superior, and yet not be the very same thing
with it?) but, least we appear all severity, we shall wave that cavil, and
insist only upon the most important part of the Assertion. Aristotle says,
That from the Commistion of two diverse things, a certain Third thing is
Generated, or Produced, which is of a Nature Median betwixt, and Common to Both
those things commixed. Now, Whether is it His meaning, that the Resulting
middle and Common thing does participate of the Extremes of Each mistile: or,
that it arises from the Destruction of both Mistiles? For the Text will endure
no third interpretation. If the Latter; then do not either of the things mixed
Remain, and so there can be no Mistion: expressly contrary to His own
Assumption, and the tenor of that Common Notion, for the praeservation whereof
He excogitated and designed this Subterfuge. If the Former, as seems most
genuinely inferrible from the Adjectives, Medium and Commune; then our Enquiry
is, How, and in what respect, that Middle and Common thing comes to be
participant of the Extremes of each Mistile? In the Wine (that we may retain
his own Instance) there was Matter, there was Form, there were Qualities; and
likewise in the Water: shall we therefore conceive, that the Middle and Common
thing produced, is participant of all, i. e. Matter, Form, and Qualities of
Both the Mistiles; or only of those of one of them?

(1) For the Matter; He cannot deny, that the Mistum contains the whole Matter
of Both: because neither the Matter of the one, nor of the other can be
destroyed. And since the Matter of each has Parts, the smallest of which is
Extense or Quantitative, and so must possess a proport^onate part of space in
the Continent; therefore we demand, whether are the Parts of the Matter of the
Wine existent in the very same places, with the Parts of the matter of Water;
or in distinct places by th^mselves? If He should say, as the supposition
implies, that the parts of Both do exist in one and the same place; He would
ruin himself upon that Impossibility of the Coexistence of Two Bodies in one
place: and if that they are in distinct places; then must it follow, that they
only touch each other superficially, and so are not mixed by mutual
Penetr^tion and Coextension (as He affirmed) but by mere Apposition, or
Composition. (2) As to the Forms; Aristotle cannot but admit, that the Forms of
both Wine and Water do survive their Commistion, and exist in the Mistum* or
Middle and Common thing resulting from them; because, otherwise, there would be
a plain Corruption, not a simple Alteration of the things mixed, and
consequently Mistion ought to be defined rather Mis^ilium Corruptorum, than
Alteratorum Unio: Besides, if the Forms perish, ^he Emergent Form must be
absolutely New, and so not participant of ^he Form of each Mistile. But, if He
reply, that Both Forms are Unit^d and coexistent in the whole matter of the
Mistum; then must every the smallest particle of the matter of each have both
the Form prop^^ to it self, and the Form of the other also, and so the whose
matter must have two whole distinct Forms at once: which is an Absurdity (...)
below the concession of Aristotle's subtility, and whether or no hi^ Sectators
will defend it, we leave to themselves. To elude this Dilem^^. He, indeed, has
determined, that the Form of the Mistum is one on^^* and that neither of the
Praeexistent Forms, in Act, but both in (...). But, alas! this is a poor shift
for so great a Philosopher; for (...) ^he praeexistent Forms of both Mistiles
be not Actually in the Mistum, then are not the Mistiles only Altered, but
wholly Corrupted: (...) can i^ enter into the thoughts of any sober man, How
the Resulting (...) should contain the Praeexistent ones, in Power. For, if the
Result^^^ Form is capable of being changed again into the praeexistent one^*
from which it did result; as when Wine and Water commixed, ^re again separated:
that argues of necessity, that the Form o^ the Mistum is not a New Form (as
He assumes) but one Composed of the two praeexistent* ones commixed.

(3) And l^stly, (...) for the Qualities; neither ought Aristotle to deny the
Remanence of (...): for, since in them consists the chief Capac^ty o^ Power
of ^^^overing the last Forms; if they perish, how can they be in^e^vien^^ (...)
^he recovery of the Forms? Necessary it is, therefore* that the (...) of things
commix't be only interchangably Refracted, not Ab^^^shed. And thus have we
demonstrated, that Aristotle, as well as the ^t^icks, engulfed himself in an
Ocean of bottomless Diffic^ties, an^ ^r^econcilable Incongruities; while He
sought to propugne that unre^^onable Opinion, of the Mutual Confusion, and
Transmutation of (...) things commixed in Generation. For a Collatera^ Remark*
be (...) to reflect upon this great Example, when you would e^force, How (...)
burden lye's upon those shoulders, which take upon them to support an (...):
and how weak the Arms of the most Giant (...) are found (...) they strive to
bear up against the stream of Truth.

Art. (...)
Having detec^^^ (...) sundry Difficulties, that wait upon the Doctrine of
Aristotle* ^ouching the Origination, or Emergency of a Form, in a thing (...)
from diverse things commix't; let us proceed to Another (...) same Cha^ter and
enquire whether there be no^ also (...) Difficulty inseparable from his
Doctrine of the Es^ence (...); that so at length we may the better (...)*
W^ether the Form of a thing Generated from Elements, or other more compound
Bodies commix't, be a substance (as Aristotle contends) or only some certain
Quality, or Accident (as Democritus and ^picurus assert.) But, first, we are to
advertize, that from this Discourse of ours, against the substantiality of
Forms Generated, we exempt the Rational Soul of Man; for, that being an
Essence sepa^^ble from the Body, and subsisting entire and complete after
separation (as we intend, if God shall be pleased to grant us health, and the
world vacation from public cares, to demonstrate at large, in a singular
Treatise) may therefore be most justly termed a substance, o^ Form
substanti^ll: as intending only to examine the reasonableness o^ th^^ opinion,
by the Schools imputed to their Master Aris^o^le; that the Forms of things are
substantial, and wholly distinct (...) Matter. The Quaestion (and indeed a
very Great one) is, Wherein that substan^e, or Form, which Aristotle affirm's
to arise, de novo, in Generation, lay hid before Generation? His sectators
un^n^mously t^ll us, that it was contained in the Matter, not in Act, but only
in Power, or Capacity: and we demand again, if it were not Actu^lly contained
in the Matter, how could it be Actually (...) ^^om thence? They reply, that it
is educed out of the M^tter only by the Power of the Agent. But, this is a
shameful Desertion o^ the Quaestion, which is not about the Power of the
Agent; but, How the ^orm of a thing, which themselves assume to be a subst^n^e,
i. e. a real and self-subsisting Entity, and so clearly Distinct from the
Matter of the Mistum, can yet be Educed out of that very Matter? When they say,
that the Form is conce^led in the Power of the M^tter; if they would but permit
us to understand the Form to be a certain portion of the Matter, and as it were
the Flower, o^ pu^^r part thereof, which should afterw^rd, in Gener^tion, be
attenu^ted, refined, sequestered from the grosser m^ss; and then be again
conjoined to the same, and as it were Animate it: then, indeed, might the
Eduction of a Form, as a real and substantial Being, be easily conceived, and
assented to. But, ^his they expressly prohibit, lest they should incur a double
Contradiction: the one, in ^onceding the Matter to be Corruptible; the other,
in allowing the Form to be indistinct from Matter. Forasmuch, therefore, as
they protest against that Interpretation of the Text; and yet are peremptory,
that the very substance of the Form educed, wa^ before eduction potentially
comprehended in the very substance of the Matter: they give us the trouble of
still pressing them to explain How, or after what manner, the substance of the
F^rm was Potenti^lly contained in that of the Matter? And here they fly to
their accustomed refuge, an obscure Distinction, saying; that the Power of the
Matter, in respect to the Form, is (...) Eductive, forasmuch as the Form may
be, by ^^rtue o^ (...) Ag^nt, educed out of it; (2) Receptive, forasmuch as it
rece^v^s that same Form educed. And so they conclude, that the M^tter does
c^ntain the Form in both these Powers, or double Capacity. But, this will not
blunt the edge of Curiosity. For, as to the ^^rst, viz. the (...) Power; it is
manifest, that to contain a thing by an (...) Power, imports no more, nor less
than this, to have Actually in it self that, which is capable of eduction from
it. Thus a Purse, wherein ten pieces of money are actually contained, may well
be said to contain them by an Eductive power; because He that has the purse,
may at his pleasure Educe them from thence: but, if the Purse did not actually
contain them, He that wanted money, might starve before He could prove, that
they were contained therein by an Eductive power.

And therefore we may set up our rest in this Conclusion; that as a piece of
Gold cannot be educed out of an Empty Purse: so does not (...), o^ Exforme
Matter (so themselves determine e it to be) contain a Form, by an Eductive Power.

As to the Other member of the Distinction, the Receptive Power; it is also
mani^^st, that to contain a thing by a Receptive Power, is no other than to be
in a condition of Receiving it: but, this Capabili^^, or Power Receptive comes
much short of being sufficient, that any thing should be actually educed from
that, which has only such a power of entertaining it; since otherwise the
prodigal need not fear the exhaustion of all the money in his purse, because
it is capable of more, when that is gone. Which being most grossy Absurd; it
cannot be less Absurd to conceive, that the Form of a thing may be educed from
the matter thereof, because it is contained therein by a Receptive Power.
Indeed, if they would allow the Form to be, not a substance, but a certain
Quality, species, or modifi^ation of a substance or Matter; then might we
understand how it might be contained in the Power of the Matter; because the
sense would be no more than this, that the Matter is capable of being so
changed and disposed, as to be put into such a Mode, or Form^ by the same
reason, as the species, or Image of Mercury may be s^id to be contained in the
power of a piece of wood, or be e^uced out of it; insomuch as the wood is
capable of being formed ^^to the statue of Mercury, by the hands of the
statuary.

But, while they make the species or Image of Mercury, to be a New subst^^ce,
absolutely distinct from the wood, which is the substance, (...) Matter of that
Image; and in General discriminate the Figu^e* or Form of a thing, from the
substance of the thing it self (...) we are to be excused, if we do not at all
understand them, in ^ore than this, that they endeavor to assert what
themselves do no^* nor cannot understand.

Art. 8. That the (...) of a thing, (...) certain (...)
But, as for (...) other Philosophers, formerly nominated; if you please to
(...) your attention to the summary of their theory concerning the (...)
Argument, we doubt not but in the conclusion you will (...) with us in this
judgment, that They speak ^at leas^ bo^^ much more intelligibly and
satisfactorily. They deny not* tha^ Generation is indeed, determined to a
substance^* (...) the thing produced or generated, is a substance. Nor that
(...) ^^neration there always arises a Form, by which the (...) generated is
specified; because Generation supposes (...), and specification imports a
Form. Nor, again, that (...) ^orm is really a substance, i. e. a certain most
tenuious, most spiritual, and so most active part of the Body, such as we h^ve
often hinted the soul of a Plant or Brute Animal to be. But the points which
they declare against, as manifestly unreasonable, are these Two: (1) That such
a Form is a New substance, or formerly not Existent; because it is unavoidably
necessary, that that most tenuious, m^st spiritual, and most active portion of
the matter should be somewhere praeexistent, be^^re it was copulated to the
grosser and less active part of the mass, and affected it with such a
particular mode, as specifies the mistum: (2) That that which is properly
called the Form of a thing, is ought else but a certain ^uality, or
determinate Manner of the substances exist^ng, or special Modification of the
matter thereof. For, it being unanimously decreed by them All, that every thing
is generated from an Aggeries of Matter, or Material Principles, coalescing in
a certain Order and Position: they therefore determine, that the thing
generated, or Concreted, is nothing but the very m^t^r^al Principles
themselves, as convened and coalesced in this or that determinate Order and
Position, and so exhibited to the cognizance of our senses, under this or that
determinate Form, Species, or Quality. And lest we should delude our selves,
by a gross apprehension, that the tenu^ous and more agile part of the b^dy is
on^y confused^y blended together with the gross and less agile part; Empedocles
and Anaxagoras tell us praecisely, that the Form of the whole, or ^uality by
which the Body is made such as it is, does yet result from as well the order
and situation of the tenuious parts among themselves, and of the gross^r among
themselves, as of the tenuious and grosser con^unctively, or one among another.
And this they illustrate by the similitude of an Hou^e. For, as an House is
nothing but Timber, Stones, Mortar, an^ other materials, according to such or
such a reason and order disp^sed an^ contexed together, and exhibiting this or
that Form; and ^s there is nothing in it, which before the structure thereof
was not found in the wood, quarry, river, and other places, and which after its
demolition (whereby its Form perishes) does not still exist in some place or
other: so is a Horse ^for example^ nothing else but those material Principles,
or exile Bodies, of which after a certain manner connected among themselves it
is composed, both with this determinate Conformation of Members, and this
interior F^cu^ty of Veget^tion, and in a word, with this particular Form,
^u^lity, Species, or Con^^tion, which denominates it a Horse* when yet the
Principles of which ^oth its Grosser members are coa^unated, and its tenuious
and spiritual subst^nce, the soul, is contexed, were fo^merly ex^stent in his
progenitors, in gr^^s, in Water, Aer, and other Concretions; and the Form also,
so ^oon as the Co^positum is dissolved, vanishes, as well the tenuious as
grosser particles returning again to aer, water, earth, or other Bodies, as
they were before their Concretion, or Determination to that particul^r species
ofthings, by Gener^tion.

But, Demo^ritus, Epicurus, Art. 9. (...).
and Leucippus are somewhat more full and perspicuous in their Solut^on of this
Problem, declaring ^1^ That, when a Thing is Generated, multitudes of Atoms are
congregated, commixe^, c^^posed, disposed, and complicated after such a
dete^minate manner, as that ^^om thence does necessarily result a body of such
a particu^ar species, ^pparen^e, and consequently of such a respect^ve
denom^nation. (2) That in su^^ a Body there is no substance, which was not
praeexistent* it being im^ossib^e that New Atoms which only constitute
C^rpore^l (...) should ^e created: but only that (...) certain D^spositi^^
(...) of the Atoms, eternally praeexistent, is made, (...) s^cha Form (...),
which is nothing really distinct from, but is the very Atoms themselves, as
they are thus, and no otherwise ordered and composed. (3) That the Form of a
thing, considered abstractly or by it self, is therefore only a mere Quality,
Accident, or Event, of which the Atoms, which compose that Body or substance,
are naturally capable, when thus consociated and mutually related: whether we
understand it to be the Form of the whole Compositum, or of that most subtle
and active part of the substance commonly called the Soul, or specifical Form*
V. G. of an Horse) the same being (not a New, or freshly created substance, as
Aristotle, and the Schools upon his Authority conceive, but) only a certain
Contexture of the most subtle and moveable Atoms in the composition. (4) That
out of the infinite stock of the Universal and First Matter, uncessantly moving
in the infinite space, when such Consimular Atoms meet together, as are
reciprocally proportionate or respondent, and mutually implicate each other by
their small Hooks and Fastnings; then are generated certain very small Bodies,
or masses, such as being much below the discernment of the sense, may be
accounted Semina Rerum, the seeds ofthings: differing from the Homaeome^ical
Principles of Anaxageras in this, that though very hardly, yet at last they may
be dissolved, and reduced to the single Atoms, of which at first they were
composed* whereas the Homoeomera of Anaxag^ras are Irresolu^le, and First
Principles. (5) That these Moleculae, First Masses, or smallest Concretions of
Atoms, are the Proxime and Immediate Principles of ^ire, Water, Aer, and of
other things more simple, such as the Chym^sts conceive their Three Catholic
Principles, Sal, Sulphur* and Mercury to be: from which afterward congregated
and comm^^t into greater mas^es, ari^e variou^ kin^s of Bodies, respectively to
the various m^nners of the^r commistion, disposition, and concretion* as
Animals, V^getables, Minerals. ^6^ That from the Dissolution of Bo^ies composed
of diverse sorts of ^uch First M^sses of Atoms, ^uch as Animals, Plants,
Minerals, and each of their several species; diverse Bodies of more simple
C^mpositions may be Generated, according as the small masses or Complications
of Atoms, separated, by dissolution, from them, shall be more or less
Consimilar, and convene again in this or that order and position, or particular
species; as when from wood dissolved by Fire, are generated Fire, Smoke, Flame,
Soot, and Ashes. And this is the Summary of the Atomists Doctrine concerning
the essence of Forms: which that we may conveniently illustrate, let us a while
insist upon that most opportune instance of the Generation of those diverse
things, Fire, Flame, S^^oke Soot, Ashes, and Salt, (...) the Dissolution of
Wood.

Let us conceive (1) That Wood is a Compound Body, made up of various
Moleculae, Art. 10 An illu^^r^^^on there^f, by a praegnant and o^por^un^^
Ins^^nce. viz. ^he Generation ^f ^he, (...).
or small masses of Atoms: (2^ That those small masses of Atoms are such, as
that being congregated, commixt, and according to such a determinate manner
disposed, they must in the whole composition, retain the species or Fo^me of
Wood; but being di^located, s^parated, and after another manner again connexed
and disposed, they must exhibit other less compound Forms, or species of
Bodies: (3) That in the Concretion there are exis^ent multitudes of spherical,
most exile, and most agile Atoms, such as, when they are expeded from the
^etters of the g^osser mass, and fly away together in great numbers, and
consociated, are comparated to make and exhibit the species of Fire: (4) That
of these Igneous particles is generated Flame. Whose Clarity and Splendour
arises from the Abjection of other dissimilar and impure parts, formerly
commixt with the Igneous particles. Whose tendency Upwards, and succeeding
Disapparence arise both from the force and pernicity of the Igneous particles
in their exsilition, and the pres^ure or urgency of the ambient Aer. Whose
gradual Attenuation, and conicall Figure arise from hence, that the Igneous
particles, in respect of their roundness, exility, and superlative mobility,
evolving and expeding themselves from the Concretion the soonest of all others
contained therein, and in swarms diffusing themselves through the environing
aer, on all sides, do create a Light, which is by degrees so exhausted, in
regard of the speedy avolition of the igneous Atoms composing it, that it
dwindles or consumes away to a cone or sharp point, which is also much more
rare then the basis, where the igneous particles are most dense and agminous.
Whose Dilatation from its base to some degrees, and Tremulation or Vndulation
arise from the copious, but indirect emption of the igneous particles,
disengaging themselves from the grosser parts of the mixture. Whose
Obnubilation by some smoke commixt with it, is caused by the many Fuliginous
particles, that the Igneous ones carry off with them, as they fly away. Whose
faculty of Pungency, Penetration, and Dissolution of most bodies objected,
consists in the transcendent subtility of the Igneous particles, and in the
pernicity of their motion, as we have largely declared in our praecedent
Discourse of the Nature of Heat. (5) That the Fume, or smoke issuing from wood
in combustion, together with Flame, is much more simple than the wood it self,
but yet compounded of diverse particles, some whereof are Watery, others Earthy,
others Salt, others Fuliginous, as appears by the adhaerence of the soot to the
Chimny, by the praecipation of the earthy faeces of soot to the bottom of a
vessel of Water, and the extraction of Salt from thence by a dissolution of
soot in warm water, and the Denigration of things thereby. (6) And lastly, that
what we have conc^ived of Flame and Smoke, may be equally reasonable, if
applied also to the remaining Ashes of wood burned, they being likewise
composed of various particles or small masses both of Salt and Earth; and the
particles of Earth being again composed of Mud and Sand, or such as that of
which Glass is made. And when we have perpended the verisimility of these
Conceptions, we shall be fully convinced; that Wood is a thing composed of
diverse sorts of small bodies, or minute masses of Atoms; and that the Form
thereof does consist in the Congeries, Concretion, complexion, and determinate
Disposition of them all; as also that the Fire, or Flame issuing from ^t in
combustion, is a thing likewise consisting of various sorts of particles
contained in the Wood, and which being separated, and again consoc^ated
(according to the Consimilarity or likeness of their natures) and concreted
among themselves, obtain another Disposition, and Form, and so exhibit the
species of a New body.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. That in Corruption, no substance perishes; but only that determinate
Modification of substance, or Matter, which specified the thing.
FRom Generation (^s in the Method of Nature, so in our disquisitions concerning
Her) we pass to CORRUPTION; which is no more but the Dissolution of the Form,
i. e. the determinate Modification of the matter of a thing, so that it is
thereby totally divested of the right of its former Denomenation. For, since it
is most certain, that in Generation, there does arise no such New substantial
Form, as Aristotle dreamt of, and most men have ever since disquieted their
heads withal: it can be no less certain, that neither in Corruption can any
such Form, as ever was substantial, perish or be annihilated. Which verily that
we may most commodiously enforce, resuming our late Instance of the Generation
of Fire, Flame Smok, etc. from the combustion of wood, we shall to our
praecedent remarks there thereupon, superad this observation; that when wood
perishes by Fire, and so is resolved into diverse other Bodies, it is not
resolved into any other, but those very same things, which were really
praeexistent and contained therein; and consequently, that nothing thereof
perishes, but only that determinate Connection and situation of its parts, or
that special manner of their existence, (you may call it Form, Quality,
Species, Accident, or Event) in respect whereof it was wood, and was so
denominated. A strange Assertion you will say, that there is really existent in
wood, Fire, that there is Flame, that there is Salt, that there are all those
diverse things into which it is resoluble by corruption. And yet the Truth much
transcends the strangeness of it* the difficulty, at which you are startled,
consisting only in Name, not in the Thing it self. For, if by Fire you
understand burning Coals or Flame actually ardent and lucent; and if by Salt
you conceive a Body sapid, really and sensibly corrading the tongue: then,
indeed, we shall confess that there is no such Fire, nor Flame, no such Salt
existing actually in wood: But, if you b^ the names of Fire, and Salt,
understand (as the tenor of our Dissectation, both directs and obliges you
to understand) the seeds, or small masses, or first Concretions of Fire and
Salt, such which ar^ so exile, as that each of them singly accepted is very
much beneath the perception and discernment of the most acute of senses; but
ye^ when multitu^es of them are sequestered from the whole mass, and are again
congregated and freshly complicated together, the seeds o^ Fire by themselves,
those of Salt by themselves; then do these actually burn and shine, and those
actually make a Sapour, sharply affecting and corrading the tongue: we see no
reason, why you should wonder at our tenent, that both Fire and Salt, viz. that
very Fire which burns and shines in the wood, that very Salt which may be
extracted from the Ashes thereof, were praeexistent in the wood. Certainly, you
cannot but admit as highly consentaneous to reason; that in a vapor to what
rate soever attenuated, there are contained the seeds of Water, or the first
concretions of Aqueous Atoms; which though singly existent they are wholly
imperceptible, yet nevertheless are they really particles of water: for as much
as they want only the convention and coalition of many of them together, to the
discovery of their nature in sensible masses; for of many of them condensed are
made very small drops of water, of those drops assembled together arise greater
drops, of those rain is generated from that rain arise whole streams* and many
of those streams meeting together swell into great and impe^uous torrents. And
if this be so easily, why should that be so hardly admittible?

But to desert this Example, Art. 2. En^^rce^ent o^ the ^ame Th^sis, by an
illustrius Example.
and address to another so competent and illustrious, that it takes off all
obscurity as well as difficulty from our conception; it is well known, that
silver is capable of such exact perm^stion with Gold, as that though there be
but one single ounce of Silver admixt by confusion to 1000 ounces of Gold: yet
in the whole mass there shall be no sensible part, wherein somewhat of that
small proportion of silver is not contained. Now, you cannot expect that each
single molecula, or seed of silver should appear to the sense, so as to
distinguish it self, by its proper color from the small masses of Gold:
because each molecula of silver is surrounded with, and immersed among 1000
particles or small masses of Gold. Nor can you believe, that the silver is
wholly unsilvered, or Changed into Gold; as Aristotle affirmed, that a drop of
Wine, infused into a great quantity of Water, is changed into Water: because
the skilful Metallist will soon contradict you in that, by an ocular
demonstration. For, by Aqua Fortis poured upon the whole mass, He will so
separate the silver from that so excessive proportion of Gold, as that there
shall not be left inhaerent therein so much as one the smallest particle
thereof; and in the superfice you may plainly discern multitudes of very small
holes, (like punctures in wax, made by the point of the smallest needle) in
which the moleculae or small masses of the silver were resident, before its
sequestration from Gold. Why therefore, according to the same reason, should it
not be equally probable, that the seeds, or particles of Fire are so
scatteringly diffused through the substance of wood, as that being surrounded
and overwhelmed with myriads of particles of other sorrts, they cannot
therefore put on the appearance proper to their nature, and discover themselves
to be what really they are, until being by the force of the external fire
invading and dissolving the compage of the wood, set at liberty, and disengaged
from their former oppression, they issue forth in swarms, and by their
coemergency and consimilarity in bulk figure and motion being again
congregated, they display themselves to the sense in the illustrious Form of
Fire and Flame, and proportionately diminish the quantity of the wood; which
thereupon is first reduced to Coals, and a^terward, the separation and
avolation of more and more particles successively being continued, to Ashes,
which containing no more igneous particles, can maintain the combustion no
longer.

The like may be said also of the Salt, diffusedly concealed in Wood. Art. 3.
An Exper^ment demonstrating that the Sal^ of Ashes was praeexistent in Wood;
and no^ produ^ed, but only educed by Fire.
For, insomuch as each single particle of Salt ambuscadoed therein, is blended
among, and as it were immured by myriads of other particles: it is impossible
they should exhibit themselves in their genuine Form, while they remain in
that state of separation or singular existence; which they must do, till the
compage of the whole mass or Concretion be dissolved. And would you be, beyond
all pretext of doubt, convinced, that they yet retain their proper nature,
amidst such multitudes of other particles; be pleased only to make this easy
Experiment. Take two pieces of the same Wood of equal weight, and steep one in
water, for two or three days, and keep the other from all moisture; then by
fire reduce each of them apart to Ashes, and by Water a^^used thereunto, and
boiled to a lee, extract the Salt from the Ashes of each: this done, you shall
find the Ashes of the dry piece to have yielded a quantity of Salt
proportionate to its bulk, but those of the wet one very little, or none at
all. And the Reason is only this, that the water in which the one piece was
macerated, has exhausted most part, if not all of the Salt, that was contained
therein. Now this Example we allege to praevent your falling upon that vulgar
conceit, that the Salt of Ashes is produced only by the Exustion of the Wood:
since, according to that supposition, the macerated piece of wood would yield
as much of Salt, as the Dry. This considered, it remains a firm and
illustrious truth, that all the particles of the Fire, Salt, Smoke, etc.
educible from wood, were really praeexistent therein, though so variously
commixt one among another, as that notwithstanding each of them constantly
retained its proper nature entire, yet could they not discover themselves in
their own colors, proprieties, and species, till many of each sort were
dis-engaged from the Concretion at once, and assembled together again.

Art. 4. The (...) sense of three G^neral Ax^^ms, deduced from the precedent
doctrine of the Atomists.
Now such are the Advantages of this Theory above that of Aristotle, that
besides the full suf^ragation of it to the Common Notions of Generation and
Corruption, of substance, Form, etc. it assists us in the exposition of Three
General Axioms, which though drawn into rules by Aristotle himself, are partly
inconsistent with, partly unintelligible from his doctrine.

The First is, si aliquid corrumpitur ultimum abire in primam Materiam, That
when any thing is corrupted, it is at last reduced to the First matter: which
does expressly contradict His grand thesis, that the Form of a thing is a
substance, which begins to be in Generation, and cease to be, or is
annihilated in Corrupt^^n; for, had He spoken conformably thereto, He must have
said, that when the Compositum is dissolved by Corruption, it is partly reduced
to matt^r, partly to Nothing. But, if the Form be not substantial, and that
what is Corrupted, is composed of no other substantial parts, but those which
are material; as we have assumed: then, indeed, does the Axiom hold good, and
we may with good reason say, that when any thing is Corrupted, it is reduced to
matter, or the material parts, of which it was composed, as wood dissolved by
fire, is reduced to Fire, Smoke, Soot, Ashes, etc. of which it did consist. And
forasmuch as by that Adverb, Ultimum, Finally, He gives us the occasion of
Enquiring, An in Corruptione detur resolutio adusque materiam Primam? Whether
or no in Corruption there be a Resolution even to the First matter? we cannot
but observe, that the manner of that ultimate resolution may be much more
easily comprehended, according to our assumption, than according to His own.
Because Our First matter is Atoms, and the second matter certain small masses
of Atom^, or the first Concretions, which we therefore, observing the phrase of
^picurus and Lucretius, call Semina Rerum, the see^s of Things, such (...)
those whereof Fire, silver, Gold, and the like Concretions are composed* and
so, if the Resolution proceed to extremity, i. e. to Atoms, or in^^soluble
particles (as in some cases it does) then may it well be said, that the
resolution is made to the First Matter; but if it go no farther then those
^^all masses of Atoms (as most commonly it does not) then can we just^^ say no
more, than that the resolution is made only to the second matter.

The Second is, Corruptionem Unius esse Generationem al^erius, that the
Corruption of one thing is the Generation of another, which cannot consist with
truth, if understood in any other sense but that of our supposition^ For,
since, Corruption is nothing else but a separation and exsolution of the pa^ts,
of which a thing was composed: we may conceive, how those parts so separated
and exsolved, may be variously convened and commixt again afterward, as to
constitute New Concretions, and put on other new Forms. Not that they were not
formerly existent, as to all their substantial parts: but only that they were
not formerly existent in a state of separation from others, nor coadunated
again in the same compage, and after the same manner.

The Third, Id quod semel Corruptum est, non posse idem numero naturae viribus
r^stitu^, that what is once Corrupted, cannot by Natures power be again
restored numerically the same: which is to be understood in this sense. As a
Watch, or other Artificial machine, composed of many several parts, may be
taken in pieces, an^ easily r^^omposed again into the very same numerical
Engine, both as to matter and Form; the Artificer recollecting the divided
parts thereof, and so disposing them, as that each possesses the s^^e pl^ce
and position, as before its dissolution: so likewise might the same N^tural
Comp^situm, V. G. a piece of Wood, be, after the separation and e^so^ution of
all its component parts, again recomposed numerically the very same, both as to
m^tter and Form, in case all those dissolved parts cou^^ be recollected,
reunited, and each of them restored to its former pl^ce and position. But,
though all the various parts thereof remain, yet are they so scattered abroad
into so many and so various places, and commixt (perchance) with so many
several things, that there is no Natural Power that can recollect and restore
them to the same places and positions, which they held before their disunion
and dissolution. And, therefore, if any man shall say, that such or such a
thing, dissolved by Corruption, is capable of being restored again the same in
specie; we ought t^ understand him no otherwi^e than thus: that some of the
parts of that thing may so return, as that being conjoined to others, not
numerically the same, but like unto those, to which they were formerly
conjoined, they may make up a body ex^ctly like the former, in specie or of the
same Denomination; as when the C^rcase of an Horse is corrupted, some parts
thereof are converted into Earth, some of that Earth is converted into Grass,
some of that Grass e^t^n by another Horse, is again converted into Seed,
whereof a third Hor^e is generated. And thus are we to conceive the endless
Circulation of Forms.

As for the Principal CAUSES of Corruption, Art. 5. The General I^testine
Cau^es of Corrupt^^n, chiefly Tw^: (1) the interception of ^^anity among the
(...) partic^es of B^dies. (2) ^^e ^ential Gravity and in^eparable Mobility of
Atoms
(omitting the consideration of such as are External, or invading from without,
in respect they are innumerab^e; and of that Internal one also, the intestine
war of Elements in every Concretion, of which Aristo^le has such large
discourses, and the Schools much larger) the theory of Epicuru^ instructs us,
that they are only Two. The First and G^and one is the Intermistion of Vacuity
among the solid particles of bodies* in respect whereof all Concretions are so
much more easily Exsoluable, or subject to Corruption, by how much more of
Vacuity they have intercepted among the solid particles, that compose them:
according to that D^stich of Lucretius.

Et quam quaeque magis cohi^et res intus Inane,
Tum magis his rebus penit^s tentata labascit.
The other is the Ingenite Gravity* or natural and inamissible propensity of
Atoms to Motion which always inciteth them to intestine commotions and
continual attempts of exsilition. So that where their Connexions and
complications are but lax, and easily exsoluble, as in all Animals, all Plants,
and some Metals, there do they sooner and more easily expede themselves, and so
in short time totally dissolve the Concretions, which they composed. But, where
they are bound to a more lasting peace, by more close compaction, and
reciprocal complications, as in Gold and Ad^m^nts; there their inhaerent
propensity to motion is so suppressed, as that they cannot diseng^ge themselves
each from other, without great difficulty, and after many hundred years
continual attempts of evolution, convolution and exsilition. Which is the true
Reason both why Gold is the le^st Corruptible of all things yet known* and why
it is not wholly Incorruptible, but obnoxious to spontaneous Dissolution,
though after perhaps a million of years, when after innumerable myriads of
convolutions, the Atoms which compose it, have successively attained their
liberty, an^ fly off one after another, t^^l the whole of that so closely
compacted substance be ^i^solved.

Art. 6. The General Manners, o^ Ways of Generation and Corruption.
From the Causes, our thoughts are now at length arrived at the MANNERS, or Ways
of Generation an^ Corruption* and fin^ them to be of Two sorts, General and
Special. Concerning the General we ob^e^ve, ^^at according to the do^trine of
Epicu^us, (who^e great praehe^inen^e in point of Verisimility and Concordance
throughout, has ma^e us prae^er it to that of Aristotle, which we have am^ly
convicted of manifest Incomprehensibility, and self-contradiction) things are
generated either immediately of Atoms themse^ves convened together and
concreted, and resolved again immediately into Atoms; or immediately of
praeexistent Concretions, and resolved imm^^iately into them ag^in. Of the way
how the Former is effected, we have said enough, in the second chapter of our
D^scourse against Atheism. A^ to the Latter, be pleased to unde^stand, in a
wor^, that all Generation is caused by either (1) A simple Transposition of
pa^ts of the same numerical matter, Or (2) an Abject^on of some pa^ts of the
old* or pr^^xistent matter, or (3) An Accession of new parts. For, howbeit all
these three General w^ys of Generation are mostly so concurrent an^ commixt, as
that one is hardly found without the association of the other two: yet when we
consider ^ach of them in special, and would determine which of them is
praedomin^nt over the others, in the generation of this, or that particular
species of things: it will be necess^^y, that we allow this Discrimin^tion.
First, the^^^ore, those things ^re s^^d to be generate^ [(...)] by a mere
T^ansposition of parts, which are observed to be spontaneous in their
Pro^uction; as Frogs engendered only of mu^ or sl^^e, Worms from putrid Chees,
etc. because from the very ^elf-s^me praeeist^nt matter, only by a various
transposition of its parts, and succeeding re^uct^on of them to such, or such a
determ^n^te order and situation, ^o^ething is generated, of a nature absolutely
new or qu^te different from what that m^tt^r formerly had. An^ ^^ther also are
we to refer those Transmuta^^^^^ of ^lements, of which Ar^stotle and the
Sc^ools have such frequent and high discourses: because, when Aer is conceived
to be changed into Water, or Water transformed into Aer; all the mystery of
those reciprocal metamorphoses amounts to no more, than a mere putting of the
parts of the same common and indifferent matter into different modes, and the
interception of more or less of Inanity among them, as we have frequently
demonstrated. Secondly, such things are conceived to be generated [(...)] by
Addition or Accession, which are not spontaneous in their original, but of
seminal production, and specificated by the univocal virtue of their seeds:
because in Propagation, rightly accepted, a very small quantity of seed,
pervading a greater mass of matter, does ferment, coagulate, and successively
appose more and more parts thereof to itself, and conform the same into the
species of that thing, from which it was derived, and impraegnated with the
idea of the whole and every part thereof. And this Difference includes not only
all Augmentation, which is a kind of Aggeneration, and consists only in the
Apposition of new matter or substance, and that in a greater proportion than
what is decayed or exhauste^: but also every Composition whatever, such as is
the Insition or Inoculation of Plants. Thirdly, such things are said to be
generated [(...)] by Detraction which arise from the Dissolution of others, and
subsist only by Excretion or Separation; as Fire, Smoke, etc. are derived from
the Dissolution of wood, and other combustible substances, to which they were
formerly commixt; and Wax from the separation of Honey, together with which it
was blended in the Combs. And, as for the Contrary, Corruption, ^tis easy to
deduce it from the contrary ways of disposing matter.

And here again the incircumspection of Aristotle manifestly discovers it self;
who multiplies the General ways of Generation, Art. 7. Inadver^^^cy of
Aristotle in making Five General (...) of Generati^^
to a superfluous number: expressly teaching, that every simple Generation
arises from (1) either Transfiguration, as when a statue is made of molten
metal; or (2) Addition, as when Vegetables or Animals are Augmented; or (3)
Ablation, as when a statue is hewn out of Marble, all such parts being cut off
and abjected, as were superfluous to the perfection of the Figure designed; or
(4) Composition, as in the structure of a house of various materials composed,
according to the rules of Architecture; or (5) Alteration, when a thing is
changed as to matter, as when Ashes are produced out of wood combust. When
notwithstanding, had not his accustomed diligence been laid asleep, or
judgment perverted, he must soon have perceived, that his Transfiguration,
Addition, and Ablation are really the very same with the Transposition,
Adjection, and Detraction of our Epicurus; and that Composition is necessarily
referrible to Addition, and Alteration to Transposition.

Concerning the Special modes, or ways of Generation, Art. 8. The special
Manners of Generation, innumerable; and why.
we need advertise you of only two Considerables. (1) That each of the three
General ways, newly mentioned, is so fruitful in possible variety, as that the
special subordinate ones, whereof it is comprehensive, are (if not infinite,
yet) absolutely innumerable, ineffable, incomprehensible. For, if the Letters
of our Alphabet, which are but 24 in number, may be so variously composed, as
to make such a vast diversity of words, which cannot be enumerated by fewer
then 39 c^phers, viz.

295232799039604140847618609643520000000.

(Tantum Elementa qu^unt, permutato ordine solo)

What Arithmetician can compute the several special ways of composition,
whereof that incomprehensible variety of Figures which (as we have frequently
assumed) Atoms may bear, is easily capable?

Art. 9. All s^^ts o^ Atoms, not indi^fe^ently co^peten^ to the Constitution of
all sorts of thing.
(2) That, as the Image of Mercury cannot be carved out of every stone, or every
piece of wood; nor words fit for reading, or pronunciation arise from every
commistion of Letters: so, in Natural Concretions is it impossible, that all
things should be made of all sorts of Atoms, or that all Atoms should be
equally accommodate to the constitution of every species of Concretions. For,
though Atoms of the same figure and magnitude may, by their various
transposition, adjection, ablation* compose things of various forms or natures:
yet are they not all indifferently disposed to the composition of all things,
nor can they be connected after one and the same manner, in diverse things.
Because, to the composition of every thing in specie, is required such a
special disposition in the Atoms, which compose it, as that they must appose to
themselves such other Atoms, as are congruous and suitable to them, and as it
were refuse the society and combination of others that are not. And hence is
it, that in the Dissolution of every Concretion, the consimular or like Atoms
always consociate together, and expede themselves from the Dissimilar and
incongruous.

CHAP. II. OF MOTION.
SECT. I.
CErtainly, the Great Galilaeo did most judiciously and like himself, Art. 1.
Why the Nature of ^otion which d^s^rved to have been the subject of the first
speculati^^* was res^rved to b^ the Argum^nt of the Last, in this Ph^siology.
to lay the foundation of his incomparable Enquiry into the most recondite
mysteries of Nature, in the Consideratin of the Nature of MOTION, and severe
Examination (that we may not say, subversion) of Aristotle's Doctrine concerning
it. Because, Motion being the Heart, or rather the Vital Faculty of Nature,
without which the Universe were yet but a mere Chaos; must also be the noblest
part of Physiology: and consequently, the speculation thereof must be the most
advantageous Introduction to the Anatomy of all other parts in the vast and
symmetrical Body of this All, or Adspectable World. Again, if Motion and Quiet
be the principal modes of Bodies Existing, as Des Carts (in princip.
philosoph. part. 2. sect. 27.) seems strongly to assert* if Generation,
Corruption, Augmentation, D^minution, Alteration, be only certain species, or
more properly the Effects of Motion, as our imme^^^tely praecedent Ch^pter
clearly imports; and that we can have no other Cognizance of the conditions or
qualities of sensible objects, but what results from our perception of the
Impulses made upon the organs of our senses, by their species thither
transmitted: assuredly, the Physiologist is highly concerned to make the
contemplation of Motion, its Causes, Kinds, and Universal Laws, the First link
in the chain of all his Natural Theorems. And, truly, this we our selves had
not endeavored, had not our firm resolution to avoid that ungrateful
prolixity, which must arise from the frequent Repetitions of the same Notions,
in the solution of various natural Apparences* and our design of insensibly
praeparing the mind of our (...) the gra^ual insinu^ti^n of all both C^uses
and Effects o^ (...), as they stood in relation to this or that particul^r
sensible (...), and principally to Visibles, and the Grav^tation of Bodies: not
only inc^^ed, but by a necessity of Method almost constrained us, to make that
the He^, or Fringe, which otherwise ought to have been the First Thread in this
raw and loosely contexed Web of our Philosophy.

Nor, indeed, can we yet praevent all Repetitions; for, our praesent Th^orem
being Physicomathematical, and such as must borrow some light, by way of
Reflection, from ^^ndry observables, occasionally diffused upon several of our
Discourses praecedent: we need not despair of a Dispensation for our
Recognition o^ a few remarkable passages, directly relating thereunto, and
especially of these Three Epicu^ean Postulates, or Principles.

Art. 2 An Epicurean Principle* of ^un^amental concern to mo^ion.
The FIRST, that (...) Adam or Radical and Primary Cause of all motion competent
to Concretions, i^ the inhaerent Gravity of their Materials, A^oms* whether the
(...) be moved spontaneously, or violently, i. e. by it self* or another. The
Reason of its spontaneous or self-motion may be thus conceived. While Atom^
^re, by their own inamissible propensity to motion, variously agitated and
^umultuous in any Concretion; if those which are more movea^^^ and agile then
the rest, so conspire together in the course of their tendency, as to discharge
their united forces upon one and the same quarter o^ (...) body containing
them, and so attempt to disengage themselves towar^^^ ^t region: then do they
propel the whole body toward the same region, transferring the rest of their
le^s active associates along with them. It being h^^hly consentaneous, that
motion may be expressed first in the singular Atom^ themselves, then in the
smallest masses, or ^nsensible Combinations of Atoms; and successively in
greater and greater, till the sensible parts of (...), and at length the whole
bodies themselves participate the motion, an^ undergo manifest agitation: as
Lucretius (in lib. ^^) has with lively Arguments asserted.

Art. 3. (...).
And this, certainly, has far a stronger claim to our assent, than that
fundamental Position of A^istotle; that the First Princ^ple of motion in any
thing, is the very Form^ of the thing moved. For, unless He shall give us
leave, by the word (...), to understand a certain tenuious Contexture ^f most
subtle and most active Atoms, which being diffused through the body o^ mass
consisting of other less subtle, and in respect of their greater compaction
together, or (...) close reciprocal revinction, less active Atoms; does, by the
impression (...) its force or Virtue motive, upon the whole, or any sensible
part thereof become the Principle of motion to the whole body: we say, unless
he (...) be pleased to allow us this interpretation, we shall t^ke the liberty
to (...) that it is absolutely incomprehensible. For, that the Form of a
thing, accepted according to His notion of a Form, should be the Proto-cause
or (...) of its motion; is unconceivable; since, according to the tenor (...)
Aristotle's doctrine, the Form must be educed out of the Matter, or power of
the Matter, that constituteth or amasseth that thing: and consequently* (...)
the Form must owe as well its very Entity or Being, as (...) only to the
matter it self; which yet He describe^ to be something (...), nothing) merely
Passive, and devoi^ of (...). How, therefore, can it appear other than a (...)
Contradiction to any man, whose intellect is not eclipsed, by reason (...) of
its proper Organ; that that Matter, which in (...) of Moving, should
nevertheless be able (...), and potent Activity, upon the Form, supposed to be
absolutely distinct from matter? Doubtless, the Form does not derive that
Motive Virtue from the Qualities inhaerent in the matter: forasmuch as those
Qualities, as even the Aristoteleans themselves furiously contend, are but the
mere Results of the Power of the matter. Nor from the Efficient; because ^hey
account the Efficient to be a Cause merely External, and to transfuse nothing
of it self into the thing Generated; but only to display its Efficiency, or (to
speak in their own dialect) to execute its Causality upon the matter. Again, it
being necessary, that all that Virtue of Moving, which is in the Efficient,
should depend solely and wholly upon its Form; and that Form also ought, by
equal reason, to be educed out of the matter: They lose themselves in a round
of Petitions, and still reduce themselves to the same Difficulty, How it is
possible, that the matter should give that Faculty of Mot^on to the Form,
which it self never had.

The SECOND; that in General there is no other but Local motion* Art. (...)
Wherein that we may plainly and briefly instruct you, how far Epicurus differs
from Aristotle, Plato, and some other Philosophers; give us leave to
commemorate unto you.

(1) That Aristotle putting a difference betwixt [(...)] Motion and Mutation,
is not sufficiently constant in his doctrine: sometimes making Mutation to be
the Genus, and Motion only a certain species thereof; and sometimes, by
inversion of the tables, making Motion the Genus, and mutation a species
thereof. For, ( in 5. physic. cap. 2.) stating Mutation betwixt two Terms, a
quo, and ad quem, the from whence and to what; He assigns unto 4 distinct
Modes, or Manners; the first, ^ subjecto in subjectum; the second, ex non
subjecto in non subjectum; the third, ex non subjecto in subjectum; the fourth
ex subjecto in non subjectum: and thereupon infers, as of pure necessity, that
since nothing can be changed according to the second mode, therefore must
mutation according to the third, be Generation; according to the fourth, be
Corruption; and according to the first, be Motion, which is always either from
Quantity to Quantity, or from Quality to Quality, or from Place to Place.
Whereas, in another place ( viz. ^. Physic. 1.) He positively teaches, that
Motion is a certain Act, to which that p^sseth, which is in Power; and so makes
the species thereof to be not only those motions, whose terms on either side
are Positive, or (in his own phrase) Contrary, as are those which concern
^uantity, Quality, Place: but those also, whose each term is Privative, as are
those which concern substance. And hereupon He seems to have grounded that
memorable Division of Motion ( lib. de praedicam. cap. de motu.) into six
species, viz. Generation, Corruption, Accretion, Diminution, Alteration, and
Lation or Loco-motion: whereof the first two are according to substance; the
second two, according to Quantity; the fifth, according to Quality; and the
Last, according to Place.

(2) That Plato seems constantly to accept Mutation for the Genus, and motion
for one species thereof: subdividing motion into two species, Lation and
Alteration. Forasmuch as in one place ^viz. in Polit.) He terms the Conversions
of the Celestial bodies, Mutations: and in another ^ in Phaed.) he takes
Alteration for mutation; saying most eloquently in the person of Socrate^ (in
the^^.) Illu^^e ^overi appellas, du^ quidpi^^ locum ^ loco mutat, aut in ^ode^
^onvertitur? Tho. ^quid^m. Socrat. illa ergo una sit species motus. A^* cum in
eodem quidem p^rs^at; sed senescit tamen, aut ex albo fit nigrum, ex molli
durum, aut alteratione quapiam alterum ^vadit* an non ^ideri (...) motu^
spe^^em ne^esse est? Tho mihi quidem videtur. Socra^. (...) id igitur; duas,
inquam, esse motus species, Alterationem, and (...), Circulationemve? etc.

(3) That most other ^hilosophers, insisting in the steps of Plato constitute
only two kinds o^ Motion; only in this they differ from Him, that what He calls
[(...)], (...), or Circumlation* They c^ll [(...)] Transition, or motion
Transitive: and what ^e names [(...)] Alteration, They denominate [(...)]
Mutation or [(...)] Motion Mutative* as Empiricus (2. advers. physic.) (...)
observed.

(4) That Epicuru^ ((...) the same Empiri^us, in the same place, attesteth) is
chief of those Physio^^^ists, who accounted the Motion of Transition as the
G^nus* and (...) or Alteration as only the species thereof. And this upon
(...). Forasmuch as Alteration is nothing else but the consequen^ o^ (...),
whereby Atoms, or the insensible particles of Concretions (...), decede,
concur, complicate, and change their former positions, (...) ^ender the
sensible parts o^ whole of them other than they (...). Which being considered,
we are only to advertise farther* that (...) Argument of our praesent Enquiry,
is not Motition as it is proper to (...), as they either concur to the first
constitution of a body, or are (...) at the dissolution thereof; in which
respect it may comprehend (...) and Corruption: nor as they concur to the
Augmentation of a (...) constituted, or fly off from it, and by their
decedence (...), in which respect it may comprehend Accretion and Diminution:
(...) they are variously transported, and so conduce to affect the same bod^
(...) diverse Qualities; in which respect it may include Alteration. (...)
concerning Motion under all these Terms and relations, we have (...) discoursed
already, in places to which those considerations did (...) refer themselves.
But, our subject is Motion a^ proper to a body (...) which sensibly changes the
Place of its whole, or some sensible part. (...) motion plainly distinguishes
it self from (...) that in motion (...) whole Body, V. G. of a man, or some
sensible part thereof, as his (...) ^oot is translated from one place to
another: but in Mutation only (...) insensible particles of a body, or any part
thereof, change their positions (...) places, though the whole, or sensible
parts thereof remain qu^et.

^
The THIRD* (...) Motion or Loco motion (for, the common Notion, (...), so soon
as he hears the word motion (...) more intelligibly and properly defined by
Epicurus, (...) the migration of a body from place (...) be Actus entis
potestate, quatenus est tale. For (...) one; so nothing can be more (...)

(...) enough to furnish you with patience, (...) of Aristotle, in that his
aenigmatical Definition; we advise you to reflect upon the whole syntax of
those conceptions, from whence He seems to have deduced it. Know, therefore,
that He conceived, that there are some things, which always possess, and
in^missibly retain the perfection due to their nature, [(...)]
Perfec^i-habit^one, or (as his Expositors commonly render it) Act^ solum, in
Act only: and others ^gain, which are not indeed, without some perfection, but
such as they are c^pable of losing, and may at the same time acquire another;
so that they may be said to be [(...)] both in Act and Power together. For, He
admits nothing to be merely in Power; because He would not allow, either that
matter can exist without Form; or that any thing in nature can be altogether
without some perfection. Now, those things, which are only in Act, must,
according to His opinion, be no other but the Celestial Bodies* insomuch as
they alone seem constantly and in^missibly to posses^ their Form, nor can
their substan^e or m^tter ^e ^onceived, to h^ve a Capa^^ty of ^eceiving any
other Form wh^tever. But, those which are both in Act and Power at once, are
all sub^un^ry Bodi^s, insomuch ^s their substance, or matter so stands possessed
of so^e one Form in Act, ^s that it still remains in a Capacity of being
d^vested of that ^orme, and in^^sted with a new one; and the whole Compositum
^o has it^ certain Quantity, certain Quality, certain Place, and whatever
other ^if there be any other) perfection requisite to its particular nature, as
that it may notwithstanding be totally deprived thereof, and obtain another.
Know also, that He uses the word, (...), sometimes for the perfection already
acquired; sometimes for the very manner of its acquisition, in which ^ense it
is a certain Action, and so comes to be called [(...)] an Energy; This being
praesupposed; He infers, that Motion is [(...)] an Act, according to the
posterior mode: understanding it to be as it were the Way, or manner, whereby
the perfection is acquired, or the Acquisition it self: which is also a certain
perfection, but competent to an Entity, or moveable, not as it has a
perfection, which it loses; but as it has a Power to that, which it
receives. And hence is it, that He resolved to define Motion to be the Act of
an Entity in Power, a^ it is such.

Which notwithstanding all the light this our most favorable Descant, Art. 6.
Emperi^^^ his ^^^ections against that D^finition of Epic^rus: and (...) of each
or any other can cast upon it, is yet much inferior in Perspicuity to tha^
most natural and familiar one of Epicurus; that Motion is the migration or
Remove of a body from one place to another. Nevertheless, to verify that
unhappy proverb, that n^ Truth can be made so plain, as not to be impugned;
Empericus ^2. advers. physic.) has charged it with sundry Imper^ections. As

(1) That it does not comprehend the motion of a Globe, or wheel circumvolved
upon its Axis* forasmuch as a wheel, when circumgyrated upon its Axe, is
sensibly moved, but not removed from one place to another. But to this we may
readily Answer; that though the whole wheel be no^ removed out of its who^e
place, yet are the Parts of it sensibly transferred from place to place* the
superior descending to inferior, while the inferior ascend to su^erio^ places,
the right hand parts succeeding into the places of the left, as ^^st as the
le^t ^^cceed into those of the r^ght, and all parts successively ^hi^t^ng their
particular places. And upon this distinction of Place into Tota^ and Part^^^*
was (...) that some Philosophers have Defined motion to be Migrationem de loco
in locum, vel totius corporis, vel partis ipsius; or as Chrysippus and
Apollodorus (apud s^obaeum, in Eccl. phys.) Mutationem secundum locum, aut ex
toto, aut ex part. Nay, even Plato Himself seems to have had an eye upon the
same Difference, when He said, that Local motion was conjunctly Lation, or
Circumlation.

(2) That likewise the point of that arm of a Compass, which is fixed in the
Center, while the other is moved round, in the description of a Circle; is
moved, but not removed out of its place: as is also the Hinge of a door, while
the door is opened or shut. But, this Objection must soon yield to the same
Response, as the former: since it is manifest, that the parts of the point of the
Compass, and Hinge change their Partial places.

(3) That there is a certain sort (He adds, Admirable) of motion, to which the
importance of Epicurus Definition does not extend; which is thus made. Let a
man, in a ship under sail, walk, with a staff in his hand, from the for^^astle
to the poup of the ship; and with just so much speed, as the ship is carried
forward: so that in the same space of time, as the ship is moved a yard
forward, the man and the staff in his hand may be moved a yard backward. This
done (says He) doubtless there must be a mo^ion both of the man and his staff;
and yet neither of them shall be moved into new place, either as to their
whole, or their parts: because both must remain in the same parts of the Aer,
and Water, or in the same perpendicular line extended from the man's head to the
bottom of the Sea; or, what is the same thing, they shall still possess the
same Immovable space. But, this so admirable Difficulty lies open to a double
solution: for it may be Answered. (1) That in this case, the Thighs, Legs, and
feet of the man walking upon the deck of the ship, must be alternately moved
into new places; because, as often as each of his feet is referred from the
Anterior to the Posterior part thereof, it must be moved twice as swiftly, as
the ship is moved from the Posterior toward the Anterior: since it is
absolutely necessary, that the double velocity of one foot should compensate
that space of time, in which the other foo^ rests, while the ship is
constantly carried forward in one uniform tenor of motion. And, therefore, his
^eet may be conceived to be alt^rnately moved from place to place; after the
same manner, as a man, sitting on a wooden, or standing Horse, does move his
legs alternately forward and backward: the trunck and upper part of his body
rema^ning unmoved, or still keeping the same Center of Gravity. (2) That the
Trunck of his body also must be moved from place to place; and also his ^ead,
and the staff in his hand: because, at every step, all of them must be somewhat
elevated, and again depressed, or let down. For, in progression, the feet of a
man cannot be alternately moved forward, but at every time the one foot is set
plainly upon the ground, the trunck and so the head and arms, must sink a
little downward; in regard of the Distension of the muscles o^ that thigh and
leg: and again when the other leg is advanced, and the leg upon which the whole
body rests the while, is elevated upon the toes, to cas^ ^he body forward;
the trunck, head and shoulders are lifted a little upward^ ^n respect of the
bodies inclining to a new Center of Gravity. For, it is most true, what
Galilaeo has most subtly Demonstrated, that a man goes, because he falls:
since he could not advance forward, while he kept his body a^quilibrated upon
the same Center of Gravity; but falling ^orward at each s^^p, he sustains
himself with the fixing another foot upon ^ new Center of Gravity.

(4) That if we suppose an Individual, or smallest thing to be turned round in
the same place; there will be motion, but no change of place, either as to the
whole, or any part thereof. And we Demand, whether by that Individual He means
minimum mathematicum, or Physicum? If Mathematical, the supposition is not to
be admitted: because, what is merely Imaginary is not capable of motion. But,
if Physical; then admitting the supposition, we Answer; that the reason of the
motion of an Individual moved round in the same place, is the same with that of
the motion of a Globe or wheel upon its Axis. For, such a body is not said to
be Individual, or smallest, because it has no magnitude or parts designable by
the mind; but because there is no force in nature, that can divide and resolve
it into those par^s: and therefore, since it is not a mere point, but contains
parts superior, inferior, etc. the whole cannot be moved, but some parts must
succeed into the places deserted by others; and consequently there must be
Loco-motion. Though this also be of the number of such Events, as can hardly be
effected by the power of Nature; forasmuch as such a physical Individual being
either permitted to its own liberty, would move sponta^^ously in a direct line,
not a circular; or impulsed by another, could not be so exactly circumvolved in
a Circle, as not to deflect somewhat, more or less, to one side or other. And
thus have we Resolved all the Difficulties, by Emperi^us, objected to the
Definition of Motion, given by Epicu^u^.

But yet we have not ascertained our Reader, that there is such a thing as
M^ti^n in the World and therefore, Art. 7. That t^ere is motion; contrary ^o
the Sop^^sms of Parmenides, Mel^ssus, Zeno, D^^do^us. and the Sce^ticks.
that we may not seem to be merely ^^titionary, in begging that at the hand of
another man's charitable Belief, which the stock of our own Reason is rich
enough to afford us: we shall bri^fly touch upon that ^uaestion, An sit Motus,
Whether there be any Motion in Nature: Especially, forasmuch as it is very well
known, that among the Ancients there was a notable Controversy concerning it.
For, some, as Heraclitus* Cratylus, Homer, ^mpedocles and Protagoras (as Plato
[ in theat.] notes at large) affirmed, that All things in the universe are in
perpetual Motion: and others, of which number Parmenides, Melissus and Zeno
were the Principal, (as Aristotle (1. physic.) particularly records) Argued, on
the contrary, that All things are in perpetual Quiet, or that there is no
motion at all.

Now as to the Former; our Quarrel against them is not so great, as that of
Ar^stotle was: forasmuch as it carries the face of very great probability that
They intended no more than this; that All sublunary Bodies are in perpetual
Mutation of their Insensible Particles, not Loco-motion of their sensible
Parts, or Whole; or, more plainly, that all Concretions uncessantly suffer
those irrequiet Agitations, or intestine Commotions of their insensible
particles, from which those sensible Changes, Alteration, Augmentation,
Diminution, Generation, and Corruption, are by slow and insensible degrees
^ntroduced upon them. And thus even Aristotle Himself interprets their opinion;
saying ( in 8. phys. 3.) they held, that All things are moved [(...)] verum id
latere experientiam sensuum, that that motion falls not under the observation
of the senses. Which is no more, than what Epicurus, or any man else, imbued
with his excellent principles, might have asserted.

And as for the Latter S^ct; neither does our Choler boil up against them, to
that height, as did Sextus Empericus his, when ( in 2. advers. p^ysic.) H^
could not be content ^o nickname them [(...)] the standers; but so far obeys
the impuls^ o^ his passion, as to fly out into opprobrious language, and brand
them with the ignominious character of [(...)] Unnaturael Philosophers. And our
Reasons, why we look not upon them with so oblique and (...) an eye, as the
Vulgar use to do; are these.

(1) Experience does (...) clearly Demonstrate, that there is motion; as that
no man can deny (...) he must, at the same instant, manifestly re^ute himself
with the motion of his tongue. And such is the constant verity of Epicurus his
Logical Canon, concerning the Certitude of our senses, as to the information of
our (...); as that every Philosopher, nay every man ought to allow them to be
ju^g^s in cases of sensible Objects: and consequently to conclude, with
Arist^^l^; ad mentis imbecillitatem debet referri si quis arbitretur omnia
quiescer^, and dimisso sensu, rationem requirat. And, certainly, whosoever
seriousl^ impugnes, what the evidence of sense confirms; is so easy an
Adversary, as to deserve our smiles, rather than our Anger.

(2) Diverse have app^^hended, that those Philosophers, who seemed to impugn the
being of Motion, did not oppose it in a serious, but purely Paradoxical humor,
and an ambition of showing themselves so transcendently acute, as to be able to
^^dubitate Truths even of the most manifest Certitude. Nor are They, indeed, to
be understood in that gross sense, which is so generally passant among Vulgar
Authors; forasmuch as it is much mo^e probable, that P^rmenides and Melissus,
when they laid down for a maxim Esse omnia unum Ens immobile, so intended
Nature, or the All of things, as that they held it, or at least some certain
Divine Virtue constantly dif^used through, and an^mating the vast mass of the
Universe, to be God, or the Supreme Being; whose propriety it is to be
Immovable, as being Ubiquitary and All in All. And, that Zeno himself, the
Prince of Antimo^^^ts, had some such (...); may be naturally collected, as well
from the Contents of that Book, commonly adscribed to Aristotle, concerning
Xenophanes, Zeno and Gorgias: as from those very Arguments He alleadge^ against
motion* t^^ ^mportance of them all declaring, that his supposition was, there
could (...) no motion, if as well motion it self, as Place and (...) did
consist of In^ectiles, or Indivisibles. Likewise, as for Diodorus, (...)
fervently addicted (...) the Eristick, or Contentious Sect; manifest it is,
that (...) grand scope in his whole Discourse against motion, was only to
evince, that a good W^t cou^^ not want Arguments wherewith to invade and
s^^gger the (...) of (...) thing, than which nothing can be more certain.
Lastly, as for the Pyr^honeans, or Scepticks; the design of all their stra^a^^^
against motion, (...) to have been only this innocent one: to insi^^^^^ that no
knowle^^e is exempted from Doubts; and tha^ the mind of (...) does detect the
sophisme; for, since the word Esse, to Be, is, according to common
signification, con^^nient as well to things Permanent, as Successive or Fluent;
and according to a peculiarly accommodate signification, competent only to
things Permanent: it is understood in the former sense, when the Quaestion is,
(...) where it is, or where it is not? and in the latter, when the subsumption
is, But neither where it is, nor where it is not: according to which reason,
^ou Doubt, Whether a thing Be, while it is moving. Which considered, when it is
Enquired, whether a moveable be moved in the place, where it is, or in that,
wherein it is not: we are to Distinguish thus; it is moved in the place,
wherein it is Transiently, and moved in the place wherein (...) not
Permanently. And, to your Quaestion, Whether a thing be no^ in a place, when it
passes through a place? We Answer likewise, that it is in a place Transiently,
not Permanently. Nor ought this Language to ^o^nd strange, since nothing ought
to be conceived to be in any other ma^^er, than what the Nature thereof does
praescribe: and such is the Nature of Motion, that is should be conceived to be
[(...)] a Passing through, not [(...)] a Permansion, or staying in a place.
Lastly, (...) the Arguments of the Scepticks; they are all grounded upon the
(...) Difficulties as those of Zeno and D^odorus: and therefore must subm^t
(...) the same Resolutions.

SECT. II.
Art. 1. (...)
BEing thus praepared (...) Considerations of the most Genuine Notion* most
adaequate Definition, and Primary Cause of Motion in all Concretions* and an
(...) assurance, that there is such a thing as Mot^on in the world* the (...)
degree to which our Enquiry is to advance, ^s the (...) Gener^l and (...) KINDS
thereof* among which, the First we meet with, (...) common Distinction of
motion into Natural and Violent.

A Natural motion, (...) Aristotle ^8. physic. 4.) is that, whose Principle is
Internal; and a (...), that, whose Principle is External: so that, accordingly*
that Bo^^ (...) be said to be moved Naturally, which is moved (...), which is
moved by another. But, for as much as Aristotle (...) much amuse us, while he
ever and anon (...) be moved by another, and yet not be moved (...) may be said
to be Natural or Violent, in (...) that some more easy and familiar Notion is
(...) of those Contrary Terms, Natural and (...) more convenient for us, to
understand a (...) which is made either of Natures own accord, or with^^^ (...)
Violent to be that, which is made either Prae^^^ (...) Repugnancy. Thus, the
Progressive motion of (...) made of Natures own accord; and yet if (...) a
steep hill, leap, or run, the motion is to be accounted Violent, because though
it proceed from an Internal Principle, the Soul of the Animal, yet is it not
performed without some Repugnancy, either internal or external. On the
contrary; when a Bullet is shot through the aer, the motion thereof is violent,
because against the nature of the Bullet, and not performed without some
repugnancy, either internal or external: and yet if the same Bullet be rolled
upon a smooth plane, the motion thereof is Natural; because though it be caused
by an External Principle, yet is it performed without any Repugnancy either
internal or External.

But, that we may take the matter in a higher key, Art. 2 The (...) deduced
from the (...) Epicurean P^^^cip^e of mo^^on, (...)* and (...) consid^ra^le
Conclusions extracted from thence.
reflecting upon that so often inculcated Epicurean Principle, That all the
motive Virtue of Concretions is originally derived from the mobility inhaerent
in, and inseparable from Atoms, which compose them; let us observe, that
forasmuch as that essential mobility of Atoms does neither cease, but is only
impeded, when Concretions themselves begin to obtain a sensible Quiet; nor is
produced anew, but only acquires more liberty, when Concretions begin to be
moved: we may thence justly infer, that just so much motive Force is now, and
ever will be in the World, while it is a world, as was in the first moment of
its Creation. Which really is the same with that Rule of Des Carts princip.
philosoph. part. 2. art. ^6) Deum esse Primariam omnis motus Caussam; and
candem semper motus quantitatem in universo perseverare. And Hence may we
extract these notable Conclusions. (1) That, because look how much one Atom,
being impacted against another, does impel it, just so much is it reciprocally
impelled by it; and so the Force of motion ^oth neither increase, nor decrease,
but in respect of the Compensation made, remains always the very same, while it
(...) executed through a free space, or without resistance: therefore, when
Con^retions, likewise mutually occurring, do reciprocally impel each other;
they are to be conceived, to act upon, or suffer from each other, so, as that,
if they encounter with equal forces, they retain equal motions on each side,
and if they encounter with unequal forces, such a Compensation of the tardity
of one, is made by the supervelocity of the other, as that accepting both their
motions together, or conjunctly the motion still continues the same. Which also
is the same with that Third Law of Nature, registered by Des Carts (princip.
philosoph. part. 2. art. 4^.) Quod unum Corpus, alteri fortiori occurrendo,
nihil amittat de suo motu: occurrendo, vero minus forti, tantum amittere:
quantum in illud transfert. (2) That forasmuch as Atoms constantly retain their
motive Virtue even in the most compact and hard Concretions; therefore can
there be no Absolute Qui^t in Nature: the Atoms uncessant striving for liberty,
causing perpetual Commotions in all things, though those Commotions be
intestine and insensible as we have often said. Which considered, Heraclitus
seems to have been more reasonable, in his Denial of all Quiet, but to the dead
( apud plutarch* 1. placit. 23.) than most have hitherto allowed: He
understanding by the Dead, not only Animals deprived of life, and consequently
of motion; but also all other things Dissolved, since then, and only then, the
intestine Commotions of their Component Particles, or Atoms* cease. (3) That
Motion is not only much more Natural than Quiet, in the G^^eral* but also
always Natural, in respect of its Original, forasmuch as it proceeds from
Atoms* which are moved by their own Nature, or essentia Gravi^^* and ^ometimes
Violent, but ever so only at second hand, or from the nature of Concretions, as
they moved with a certain Repugnancy. And this Rule has also (...) is moved
per Accidens, because it is an Accident to him; and likewise his soul is moved
by Accident, because it is only a Part of him. Again, when He teaches, that
whatever is moved, is moved by Another; that ought to be understood of that
thing, which is moved per se: for, from hence it is, that when in the series of
particular movents, He would have us to come at length to one First Movent,
which is Immovable, or which is not moved by any other; we are to understand
that Primum Movens to be Immovable per se, since it may be moved per Accidens.
Thus, when a stone is moved by a staff, the staff by the hand of a man, the
man's hand by his Soul; the soul, indeed, is the First movent and Immovable:
but, understand it to be so, per se, because it is at the same moment moved per
Accidens, i. e. when the hand, arm, and whole body, which contains it, is
moved. Moreo^er, He declares, that whatever is moved per se, is moved juxta
Naturam, according to Nature; such as he affirms that only to be, which is
endowed with a soul: yet will He not admit, that what is moved by Another,
should always be moved Praeter Naturam, Praeternaturally; but sometimes
Unnaturally (as a stone, when it is thrown upward) and sometimes Naturally (as
a stone, when it falls Down again.) Now, if you hereupon Demand of Him, What
that is, which makes a stone fall Down again; He shall Answer, that what moves
it Downward, per se, is the Generant it self, or that which first Produced the
stone: and that which moves it downward, per Accidens, is that which removes
the impediment or obstacle to its descent, as the hand of a man, or other thing
supporting the stone. And, if you again enquire of him, What is the Difference
betwixt the Upward and Downward motion of a stone, how one should be Violent,
and the other Natural, since, according to his own Assertion, both are Caused
by another: His Return will be, that the Difference lies in this, that the
stone is not carried upward, of its own Nature, but Downward; as having the
Principle of its Descent, inhaerent in it self, but not that of its Ascent. If
you urge Him yet farther; since the stone has in it self the Principle of its
Motion, why therefore is it not moved only by it self, but wants Another, or
External Motor? His Answer will be: that there is a Twofold principle of
motion, the one Active, the other Passive; and in the stone is only the
Principle Passive, but in the External Motor is the Active. When yet it may be
farther pressed; that since according to his own Doctrine, the Passive
principle is the matter, and the Active the Form: as to the matter, that
cannot be the principle of its motion Downward, no more than of its motion
upward; and as for the Form, if that be neither the Active principle, nor the
Passive (as he will by no means admit) certainly there can be none. Which for
Him to allow, were plainly to destroy his own great Definition of Nature,
wherein He acknowledges it to be the Principle of Motion. But, alas! these are
but light and venial Mistakes, in comparison of those gross Incongruities that
follow.

When Aristotle comes to handle the Species, Art. 4. (...) or Aequanility, ^he
(...) ^haracter of a Natural motion^ and (...) want of uni^ormity, of a (...).
or sorts of Natural Motion, you may remember, that He first Distinguishes
Natural motion in Direct and Circular; and then subdistinguisheth the Direct
into (1) that which is from the Circumference toward the Center, or from the
Extrems toward the middle of the world, which He calls Downward; and (2) that
which is from the Center toward the Circumference, which He calls Upward:
assigning the former, or Downward motion, only to Heavy things, to the Earth
simply, to Water and mixed things, Secundum quid; and the Upward (...) be. What
then, must that External Principle be, as Aristotle contends, the very Generant
of the thing moved? Certainly, that's highly Absurd; since the Generant is
absent, and perhaps, long since ceased to be in rerum natura: and nothing
either Absent, or Nonexistent, can be the Efficient of a Natural Action, such
as motion is. If you will have, that to be moved by the Generant, signifies no
more than to receive a Virtue or Power of moving it self, from the Generant*
then while you endeavor to save Aristotle from the former Absurdity, you
praecipitate him into a gross Contradiction of his own Doctrine: for, since the
Generant it self ought to be moved by its Generant, and that again to be moved
by its Generant, and so upward along the whole series of Generants, till you
arrive at length at some First Generant, from whence that Virtue was first
derived; you bring Aristotle to allow a First Generant, which impugns his
fundamental supposition of the Eternity of the World. Nay, if you admit God to
be the Author of the First Generant, it will then follow, that God must be the
Cause of this particular motion, and not the First Generant, no more than the
Last. Finally, is that the Cause, which only removes the Impediment to a Heavy
bodies Descent? Neither is that Reasonable; for, as Aristotle himself
confesses, such a Cause is only a C^use by Accident.

Seeing, therefore, Art. 5. ^he D^wnw^rd motion (...) Inanimates, derived from
^n External Principle, contrary to Aristotle
that the Downward motion of a Heavy Body does not proceed from any Intern^l
Principle, nor from either its Generant, or that Accidental one, which removes
the Impediment to its Descent, in the supposed Capacity of an External: let us
proceed to enquire, Whether there be not some other External Cause, whereupon
we may reasonably charge that Effect. Which that we may do with the more both
of order and plainness; it is requisite, that we first remember, how
Philosophers constitute dive^s sorts of Violent, or Externally-caused motion.
Empericus (^. advers. physicos.) makes 4 distinct species thereof, viz.
Pulsion, Traction, Elation, Depression. And Aristotle sometimes superads a
fifth, namely Collision; sometimes disallowing Empericus his Division, affirms
that the species of motion, made by an External principle, are Traction,
Pulsion, Vection, and Volutation: upon good reason reducing Elation and
Depression to either Traction or Pulsion; forasmuch as a body may be elevated,
or depressed by either ^raction or Pulsion. But, yet He has left us rather a
Confusion, than logical Discrimination of the species of Violent motion; for,
Collision and Pulsion are one and the same thing; and Vection may be performed
either by Pulsion or Traction, insomuch as the thing movent does not forsake
the thing pulsed, or drawn, but constantly adhaereth unto it: and as for
Volutation; it is both Pulsion and Traction at once, as may be easily conceived
by any man, who seriously considers the manner thereof. Nay, Traction it self
may be justly reduced to Pulsion; forasmuch as the movent, which is said to
Draw a thing, does, indeed, nothing but Impel it, by frequently reiterated
small strokes, either directly toward it self, or to a lateral region: and yet
notwithstanding, for pla^nness sake, and the cleerer Demonstration of our
praesent thesis, we judge it convenient, to conserve the Common Notion, and to
determine, that all Motion impressed upon one body by another, is performed, in
the General either when the movent Propels the moveable from it self, or
Attracts it toward it self. For, albeit the movent sometimes propels the thing
moved from another body, or attracts it to another* yet can it not possibly do
that* but it must, at the same time, either Avert it, in some measure, from, or
Adduce it toward it self. Nevertheless, it is not to be denied, but Pulsion is
always the Chie^ Species* and for that consideration alone is it, that
Pro^ection (which is only Impul^^on, or, as Aristotle emphatically calls it, a
more Violent motion) is generall^ a^cepted as synonymous to Violent motion; and
that Philosophers seldo^ or never Exemplify Violent motion, but in
Projectills, whether they be projected upward, or downward, ^^anve^sly,
obliquely* or any way whateve^*

^
These things considered^ (...) follows of pure necessity, that the Downward
motion of Heavy Bo^^es, being caused (not by any Inte^nal, but) b^ an ^xternal
Force impressed upon them* must be effected either by Impulsion, or by
Traction. B^ Impulsion it cannot; because, in the case of a stone
throwneUpward, ther^ (...) nothing External, that can be imagined to impel
(...) Down again* (...) attained the highest point of its mountee, unless (...)
should be the (...) and i^ its Descent did proceed from the impul^^* (...) from
below upon the upper part of the stone^ (...) projection of the stone upward,
during its Ascent, the motion thereon ^ould, in every degree of its remove from
the pro^^cient* be Accelerated (...) same proportion, as its Downward motion is
Accelerated* in ever^ ^^gree of its descent; but Experience testifies, that ^ts
upward motion (...) and more Retarded, in every degree of its remo^^ from the
projici^^^ and therefore it cannot be, that the Downward motion thereof should
be ^^used, nay not so much as advanced by the Aer. Which thing ^as^endus (...)
Epist. de proport. qua Gravia decidentia a^celerantu^ (...) ^^monstrated; and
we our selves, out of him, (...) the 9 Article of our 2 (...) concerning
Gravity and Levity, in the 3. Book. praecedent. Wha^* (...), can remain, but
that it must be by ATTRACTION? (...)* because no other Attractive Force, which
might begin and continu^ (...) Downward motion of a stone, can be imagined*
unless it be that Mag^^^^que Virtue of the Earth, whereby it Draws all Terrene
Bodies to an (...) it self, in order to their, and its own better Conservation*
(...) Conclude, that the Cause of the Downwar^ motion o^ all (...), is the
Magnetique Attraction of the Earth. Nor need we adferr other ^^guments, in this
place, to confirm this Position^ in respect we have (...) made it the chief
subject of the 2 Sect. of our Chap. of Gravity (...); whether we, therefore,
remit our unsatisfied Reader.

^
From the Cause of (...) Downward motion of Heavy bodies, let us advance to the
Acceleration (...) them, in every degree of space, through which (...) reason,
why we should at all enquire (...) upward mo^ion of Light bodies, in every
degree (...) as we know of no man, but Aristotle, that (...) motion of Fire,
and Aer is slower in the beginning* and gradually (...) and swifter in the
progress. And so short was (...) proving that his s^^gular conception, by
Experiment, as he ought; (...) assumed ^t upon (...) credit of only one poor
Argument, which is (...).

(...) and other things of the like light and aspiring (...) Caelo. cap. 8.)
were Extruded and Impelled (...) descending and crouding toward the (...)
force, as some have contended; and we^e (...) spontaneous tendency of their own
inhaerent (...) moved more swiftly in the beginning, and mo^e slowly (...)
their motion* but Fire, and Aer are more (...) beginning (...) more and more
swift in the progress of their Assent; therefore are they not moved upward by
the Extrusion and Impulsion, but spontaneously, or by their own Levity.

And to Confirm his Minor proposition, that Fire and Aer are Accelerated in
every degree of their Assent; without the suffrage of any Experiment, He
subjoyns only, that as a Greater quantity of Earth is moved downward more
swiftly, than a less; so is a Greater quantity of Fire moved upward more
swiftly than a less: which could not be, if either of them were Impelled, or
moved by an External Force.

But, this is, as the Former, merely Petitionary; for, why should not a Greater
quantity of Earth, or Fire be moved more swiftly than a less, both being moved
(as we suppose) by External force, in ^^se the External force be proportionate
to the quantity of each? Doubtless, the force of the ambient Aer, extruding and
impelling flame upward, is alway^ so much the greater, or more sensible, by how
much more Copious the ^^re is; as may be evinced even from the greater Impetus
and waving motion of the flame of a great fire: though it cannot yet be
discerned, whether that Undulous or waving motion in a Great flame be (as He
praesume^^ more swift and rapid, than that more calm and equal one observed in
the flame of a Candle. Tha^ (you will say) is enough to detect the incircumspection
of Aristotle, in assuming, upon so weak grounds, that the motion of Light
things Ascending, is accelerated in the progress, and that in the same
proportion, as that of Heavy things Descending is accelerated: but not enough
to refute the Position it self; and therefore we think it expedient, to superad
a Demonstrative Reason or two, toward the plenary Refutation thereof. Seeing it
is evident from Experience, that a Bladder blown up is so much the more hardly
depressed in deep water, by how much nearer it com^s to the bottom* and a
natural Consequent thereupon, that the bladder, in respect of the Aer included
therein, beginning its upward motion at the bottom of the Water, is moved
toward the region of Aer so much the more slow^y, by how much the higher it
rises toward the surface of the Water, or lower part of the region of Aer
incumbent thereupon; and that the Cause thereof is th^s, that so much the fewer
parts of Water are incumbent upon the bladder and aer contained therein, and
consequently so much the less must that force of Extrusion be, whereby the
parts of Water bearing downward impel them upward: we may well infer hereupon,
that if we imagine that any Flame should ascend through the region of Aer; till
it arrived at the region of Fire, feigned to be immediately above the region of
Aer; that Flame would always be moved so much the slower, by how much the
higher it should ascend, or by how much the nearer it should arive at the
region of Fire. Because Fire and Aer are conceived to be of the same aspiring
nature: and because the same Reason holds good, in proportion, for the decrease
of Velocity in the ascension of Flame through the Aer, as for that of the
decrease of velocity in the ascension of Aer, included in a bladder, through
Water. And, as for Aristotle's other relat^ve Assertion, that a Greater quantity
of Earth is moved more swiftly Downward, than a Less; manifest (...) without*
nay (...) E^perience does (...) inhaerent in bodies account^^ Heavy, and that
every body must therefore ^all down so much the more swiftly and violently, by
how much the more of Gravity (...) possesses. H^ving thus totally subverted
Aristotle^ erroneous Tenent* that the (...) of L^ght bodies Ascending, is
Accele^a^^d in every degree of their A^^^ntion: it follows, that we apply our
selves to the consideration of the (...) of the motion of Heavy bodies (...) in
every degree (...) Descention. Whe^ein the First obs^^v^abl^ o^^urring, i^ the
(...), or that it is so, which is easily proved from hence, that in all ages
(...) been observed, that the motion of (...) things Descendent* (...) the
beginning, and grows swifter and swi^^^^ (...) toward the end* (...) that in
fine (...) becomes highly rapid* (...) that the (...) or impression made upon
the Earth* (...) down from (...) high, is always so much the greater or
strong^^ by h^w much the (...) ^he place is from which it ^ell.

^
The Second, (...) the (...) or Cause of that velocity Increasing in (...) which
though enquired into by many of the Ancients, seem^ (...) been (...) by none of
them. For (1) albeit Aristotle (...) was so wary* as (...) explicate his
thoughts concerning it; yet ^o^h hi^ great (...) Simpli^^^^ tell us ^ in
Comment. 87.) that it was H^s opinion* that a (...) other thing ^alling from on
high, is Corrobo^^ted [(...)] a Totalitate propria, and has its species ma^^
more and mo^^ (...)* as it comes nearer and nearer to its proper (...)* and so
(...) degree of Gravity acceding to it in every ^egree of its (...) to the
Earth, it is accordingly carried more and more sw^ftly. But, (...) that
Simplicius has not expounded, how the (...) ston^ can (...)* how it can be
Corroborated, or acquire more and more (...) its species; or how that
additament of fresh ^ravity should (...) judge you, whether He has done
Aristotle (...) Author of that Opinion, which instead of (...) ^he (...) much
more obscure than before. Besides, we have the (...), that a descending body is
not carried the more ^w^ftly* by re^so^ (...) any access or additament of
Gravity: a stone (...) ounce (...) as speedily down, as one of an hundred poun^*

^
(2) Others (...) as the same Simplicius commemorates) who (...) the Cause (...)
the Decrease of the quantity of the Aer (...) the s^o^^* (...) that by how much
the higher a stone is, by so (...) and so much the greater Resistance to the
motion (...) much the greater quantity of the Aer resisting (...) consequently
the resistance of the Aer growing (...) of the stones descent, the velocity of
its (...) proportion thereunto. And this after (...), sinking in deep water*
more slowly (...) near the bottom. But, though we adm^t, (...) stone
Descending* yet we (...) to m^ke any sensible difference of (...) And, would
you have an Argument to (...) one fathom; (...) fall the same (...) fathoms,
observe again with what velocity it passes the last, or tenth f^thom. This
done, consider, sin^e in the latter case, the velocity shall be incompa^ably
greater, than in the former; whether it be not necessary, that that great
au^mentation of velocity in the stone, while it pervadeth the t^nth fathom of
space, must not arise from some other, and more potent C^use, th^n the
resistance of the inferio^ (...)? For, in both case^, the stone carries the
same proportion of weight* and in the lowest f^thom there is the same quantity
of Aer, and consequently the same measure o^ resistance. And, if you weigh the
stone, first in some very high place, ^n^ afterward in a low, or very near the
Earth; surely, you cannot expect to find^ ^t heavier in the low place in
respect of the lesser quantity of A^r ^ub^ja^ent, than in the high, in respect
of the greater quantity of Aer there (...) it. Lastly, as for their Argument
desumed from the slower sink^ing of weights in deep, than in sh^llow (...)
thereof (...) same with that of the more diffi^ult depression of a (...) Aer,
near the bottom, th^n near the top of the (...) explained.

(3) A third ^onceipt there (...) (imputed to Hipparchu^, Art. ^
by the (...) Simplicius) which comparing the Downward motion of a stone, (...)
by its own proper Gr^vity, with the Upward motion of the (...), caused by an
External ^orce impressed upon it by the (...) infers, that as long as the force
impressed praevails over the stones Gravity, (...) long is the stone carried
upward, and that more swiftly in the beginning, because the ^orce is then
strongest, but afterward less and less swiftly, because the same f^rce impressed
is gradually debilitated, until the stones proper Gravity at length getting the
upper hand of the force impressed, the stone begins it motion Downward; which is
slower in the beginning, because the Gravity does not yet much praevail, but
afterward grows more and more sw^ft, because the Gravity more and more
praevails. But this leaves us more than half way short of the Difficulty; for,
though it be reasonable to assume, that a certain Compensation of Velocity is
made in both (...). that the Decrease of Velocity toward the end of the Upward
motion, is made up again by the Increase of Velocity toward the end of the
Downward, and that in proportion to the degrees of space: yet forasmuch as the
motion of a stone falling down is constantly Accelerated, not only after it
has been projected Upward, but also when it is only dropped down from some high
place, to which perhaps it was never elevated, but remained there from the
beginning of the world, as it often happens in deep mines, the earth ^^derneath
the stones near the surface of it being (...) cannot the stones Gravity,
gradually praevailing over the Impressed Force, be, as Hipparchus concludes, the
Cause of it^ (...) of its Descent.

These Reasons thus deluding our Curiosity, ^
let us have (...) formerly asserted Position, that All terrene (...) are
Attracted by the magnetique Virtue of the Earth. (...) that the magnetique
Virtue of the Earth is (...) afar off: and thereupon infer, that the (...)
therefore more rapid near the earth, than far from (...) took Virtue seems to
be greater, and so the (...) truth nearer the stone (...) and plausible to our
first thought: but insatisfactory to our second. For, if it were so, then ought
the Celerity of the stones motion, in one fathom near the Earth, to be the same
whether the stone be let fall from the altitude of only one fathom, or from
that of 10, 20, an 100 fathoms, when we exactly measure the spa^^ of time, in
which it pervades the one fathom near the earth, in the former case, and
compare it with that space of time, in which it pervades the same lowest
fathom, in the latter. It may be farther observed, that, whether a stone be let
fall from a small, or a great altitude, the motion thereof for the first fathom
of its descent, is always of equal velocity, i. e. it is not more nor less
swift for the first fathom of its descent from the altitude of an 1^^ fathoms,
than from the altitude of only two fathoms: when yet it ought to be more swift
for the first fathom of the two, than for the first of the hundred, if the
Attraction of the Earth be more vehement near at hand, than far off; in a
sensible proportion. We say, in a sensible proportion; because, forasmuch as
the magnetique rays emitted from it, are diffused in ^ound from all parts of
the superfice thereof, and so must be so much the more dense, and consequently
more potent, by how much less they are removed from it: therefore must the
Attraction be somewhat more potent at little than at very great distance; but
yet there is no tower or praecipice so high, as to accommodate us with
convenience to experiment, whether the power of the Earths magnetique rays is
Greater, to a sensible proportion, in a very low place, than in a very high.

And yet notwithstanding, nothing seems more reasonable than to conceive, that
since the magnetique Attraction of the Earth is the true Cause of a stones
Downward motion, therefore it should be also the true Cause of the continual
Increment of its Velocity, during that motion. But how it should be so; there is
the Knot. Which that we may undo, let us first resume our former supposition (
in the 2. Sect. of our chap. of Gravity and Levity.) that a stone were situate
in any of the Imaginary spaces; considering that in that case it could not of
it self be moved at all: because, holding no Communion with the World (which
you may suppose also to be Annihilated) there could be, in respect thereof, no
inferior place or region, whereto it might be imagined to tend or fall; nor
could it have any Repugnancy to motion, because there would be no superior
region, to which it might be conceived to aspire or mount. Then let us suppose
it to be moved by simple Impulsion, or Attraction, toward any other part of the
Empty, or Imaginary spaces; and without all doubt, it would be moved
thitherward, with a motion altogether Equal or Uniform in all its parts:
because there could be no Reason, why it should be more slow in some parts of
its motion and more swift in others, there being no Center, to which it might
approach, or from which it might be removed. Suppose farther, that, as the
stone is in that motion, another Impulse, equal in force to the former, whereby
it was first moved, were impressed upon it; then, assuredly, would the stone be
moved forward more swiftly than before, not by reason of any Affection to tend
to any Center, but because the force of the (...) impulse persevering* the
force of the second impulse is superadded unto it, and the accession of that
force must so corroborate the former, as to augment the Velocity of the stones
motion. And hence comes it, that to move forward a bo^^ already in motion, does
not only prolong, but accelerate the motion the^^of. Imagine moreover, that a
third impulse were ^^^^ntinent^y superadded to the second* and then would the
motion be yet more swift than before; the Increase of Velocity of necessity
still responding to the multiplicity of Impulses made upon the body moved. This
may be familiar to our conceptions, from the Example of a Globe set upon a
plane; which may be emoved from its place with a very gentle impulse, and if
many of those Impulses be repeated thickly upon it, as it moves, the motion
thereof will be so accelerated, as at length to become superlatively rapid.
Which also seems to be the Reason, why a clay Bullet is discharged by the
breath of a man, from a Trunck, with so great force, as to kill a Pidgeon at
20, or 30 yards distance: the Impetus or force impelling the bullet, growing
still greater and greater, because in the whole length of the trunck there is
no one point, in which some of the particles of the man's breath successively
flowing, do not impress fresh strokes, or impulses upon the hinder part of the
bullet. The same also may be given, as the most probable Cause, why Long Guns
carry or shot, or bullet farther than short; though yet there be a certain
determinate proportion to be observed betwixt the diametre of the bore, and the
length of the barrel or tube, as well in Truncks, as Guns: experience assuring,
that a Gun of five foot, musket bore, will do as good execution upon Fowl, with
shot, and kill as far, as one of ten foot, and the same bore; and consequently
that those Gunners are mistaken, who desire to use Fowling pieces of above 5,
or 6 foot long; These considerations premised, we may conceive, that when a
stone first begins to move downward, it then has newly received the first
impulse of the magnetique rays emitted from the Earth: and that if after the
impression of that first impulse, the Attraction of the Earth should instantly
cease, and no new force be superadded thereunto from any Cause whatever; in
all probability, the stone would be carried on tovvard the Earth with a very
slow, but constantly equal and Uniform pace. But, because the Attraction of
the Earth cease not, but is renewed in the second moment by an impulse of
equal force to that first, which began the stones motion, and is again
renewed in the third moment, in the 4, 5, 6, etc. as it was in the second,
therefore is it necessary, that because the former impulses, impressed are not
destroyed by the subsequent, but so united as still to corroborate the first,
and all combining together to make one great force; we say, therefore is it
necessary, that the motion of the stone, from the repeated impulses, and so
continually multiplied Impetus or Force, should be more swift in the second
moment, than in the first; in the third, than in the second; in the fourth,
than the third, and so in the rest successively; and consequently, that the
Celerity should be Augmented in one and the same tenor, or rate, from the
beginning to the end of the motion. Art. 12. That the Proportion, or Ration of
Celerity to Celerity, increasing in the descent of Heavy things; is not the
same as the Proportion, or Ration of Space to Space, which they pervade
contrary to Michael Var^ the Mathematician*


The Third thing considerable in this Downward motion of Bodies, is the
PROPORTION, or Rate, in which their Celerity is increased. Concerning this, we
know of no Enquiry at all made by any one of the Ancients; only Hipparchus, as
has been said, thought that in the General, the increment of Velocity in
things falling down, was made in the same reciprocal proportion, as the
Velocity of the same things projected upward. But, about 90 years past, one
Michael Varro, an eminent Mathematician (in tract. de motu.) depending merely
upon Reason; would have the Problem to be thus solved. What is the Ration, or
Proportion of space to space, the same is the Ration of Celerity to Celerity;
so that if a stone falling down from the height of four fathoms, shall in the
end of the first fathom acquire one degree of Velocity, (...) and of the second
two, in the end of the third three, in the end of (...) fourth four: it will be
moved twice as swiftly in the end of the second ^athom, as in the end of the
first, thrice as swiftly in the end of the (...), and four times as swiftly in
the end of the fourth^ as of the first. (...) this Proportion is deficient,
first in this; that though the increment of ^^lerity, or of its equal degrees,
may be compared with the equal mo^^nts or parts of space: yet can it not be
compared also with the equal ^^ments o^ parts of Time, without which the
myst^ry can never be (...). And therefore Aristotle did excellently well, in
Defining (...)* and Slow, by Time* determining that to be swift, which (...)
deal of space in a little time; and on the contrary* that to be (...) pervading
a little of space in a great deal of time. Again, (...) suppose the theorem to
be explicable by equal moments of times (...) such as are the respites or
intervals betwixt the pulses of our (...) and that a stone falling down does
pervade the first fathom of (...) the first moment: then, if it pervade the
second fathom twice as (...) as the first (as Varro conceives) it must
necessarily follow, that (...) second fathom must be pervaded in the half of a
moment; if the (...) whom he percurred thrice as swiftly as the first, it must
be pervaded in (...) third part of a moment; and if the fourth fathom be
percurred four times (...) swiftly as the first, it must be pervaded in the
fourth part of a (...) And, because, if you conjoyn the half, third, and fourth
part of a mome^^ ^ou shall have a whole moment with one twelfth part of a
moment; it (...) necessary, that in the second moment, three fathoms (very
near) must (...) percurred: which indeed is very far from truth. For* because,
if we (...) after the same method, so that the fifth fathom be percurred in the
(...) part of a moment; the sixth in the sixth part of a moment, (...) so
successively; out of these fragments of time we shall not be (...) to make up
another whole moment, until it be after the stone has (...) the eleventh
fathom, or thereabout; and so in the third moment (...) fathoms shall be
pervaded, nor shall we again be able to make up (...) whole moment, until after
the stone has pervaded the 31 fathom (...) so in the fourth moment, it shall
pervade 20 fathoms, nor shall (...) able to make up another complete moment,
unt^^ after the stone (...), near upon, the 84 fathom, and so in the fifth
moment, 53 fath^^s shall be percurred, etc. so that proceeding (...), near
upon; you shall consequently, in a very short time, (...) it up to Immensity:
as is manifest from the short progress (...) numbers, 1.2, 4, 11, 31, 84, etc.
Which is impugned by easy (...), and not defensible by any Reason whatever.

^
This the brave (...) well considering, and long laboring his subtle and active
(...) explore a fully satisfactory Solution of this dark (...) most happily to
set up his rest in this. First, He defines Motion (...) Accelerated to be that,
which receding from quiet, does acqu^^^ (...) of Celerity, not in equal spaces,
but equal (...) upon Grounds partly Experimental, partly (...) that the
moments, or equal Degrees of Cele^^ty (...) or equal degrees of Time, or (more
plain^^ (...) the same proportions as the Times; so that (...) of time pass
during the motion, so many degrees (...) by the thing moved. That the equal
(...) continently in single moments of time, do increase in each single moment,
according to the progression not of Unities, but of Numbers unequal from an
Unity: so that if in the first moment of time, the stone fall down one fathom,
in the second moment, it must fall down three fathom, in the third five, in the
fourth seven, in the fifth nine, in the sixth eleven, and so forward. And,
because those Numbers, which they ^^ll Quadrate (viz. One is the quadrate of an
Unity, Four the quadrate of a Binary, Nine the quadrate of a Ternary, Sixteen
of a Quaternary, and) are made up by the continual addition of unequal number^
(for, three added to one, make four; five added to four, make nine; seven, to
nine* make sixteen* nine to sixteen, make twenty five; eleven to twenty five,
make thirty six, etc.) thereupon He infers* that the Aggregates of the spaces
percurred from the beginning to the end of the motion, are as the Quadrates of
the times: i. e. assuming any one particular moment of time, so many spaces are
found pervaded in the end of that moment, as are indicated in the quadrate
number of the same moment. For Example, when in the end of the first moment,
one fathom of space is pervaded; in the end of the second moment, four fathom
shall be pervaded* (viz. three being added to one) in the end of the third
moment, nine fathom (five being added to four) in the end of the fourth moment,
sixteen fathom (seven being added to nine) and so forward: so that,
accordingly, the spaces pervaded from the beginning to the end of the motion,
are among themselves in a Duplicate Ration of moments (as Geometricians speak)
or equ^l Divisions of Time; or, all one as the Quadrates of moments are one to
another.

Galilaeus, we said, herein relied partly upon Experience, Art. 14 (...)
partly upon Reason. First, therefore, for his Experience; He affirms, that
letting fall a Bullet, from the altitude of 100 Florentine Cubits (i. e.
according to exact comparation, 180 feet, Par^s measure, and thirty fathom of
ours) He observed it to pervade the whole space, and arrive at the ground, in
the space of five seconds, or ten sem^seconds* and according to such a ration,
as that in the first semisecond, it fell down one cubi^, in the second
semisecond, four cubits; in the third semisecond, nine cubits, in the fourth
sixteen; in the fifth twenty five; in the sixth 36; in the seventh, forty nine;
in the eighth, sixty four; in the ninth, eighty and one; in the tenth the whole
hundred. And though the good Mersennus afterward found a bullet to pervade the
same altitude in a much shorter time; nay, that in the space of five seconds, a
bullet fell down through the space not only of one hundred and eighty foot,
but even of three hundred* i. e. of fifty fathom: yet does He fully consent,
that the Acceleration of its motion arises exactly according to Galilaeos
progression by the Quadrates of unequal numbers. So as that if in the first
semisecond, it descend one semi-fathom* in the second semisecond, it shall
descend four semifathoms, in the third sem^second, nine semifathoms, etc. And
Gassendu^ likewise, though he wanted the opportunity of experimenting the
things from a Tower of the like altitude; found notwithstanding, from different
heights, that the proportion was always the same; as Himself at large declares
(...) qua gravia decident. accelerantu^^ (...) you doubt to find it so your
self, if in a Glass Tube, near upon two (...) ^^ng, divided into an hundred
degrees, or equal parts, (...) either cut in, or inscribed upon papers (after
the manner of those usually starcht on to Weather-glasses, to denote the
several degrees) and not perpendicularly erected, but somewhat inclining, you
let fall a bullet, and exactly observe the manner of its descent, and rate of
Acceleration. For, Heavy bodies are, indeed, moved more slowly in Tubes
inclined, than in such as are perpendicularly erected; but yet still with the
same proportion of Acceleration.

Secondly, for His Reason, it consists in this; that, if the Increment of
Velocity be supposed to be Uniforme (and there is no reason, which can persuade
to the contrary) certainly, no other proportion can be found out, but that
newly exposed: since, with what Celerity, or Tardity soever you shall suppose
the first fathom to be pervaded it is necessary that in the same proportion of
time following, three fathoms should be pervaded; and in the same proportion of
time following, five fathoms should be pervaded; etc. according to the
progression of Quadrate Numbers. This, that Great man Ioh. Baptista Ballianus
(whom Ricciolus often mentions ( in Almagesto novo) but never without some
honorable attribute) has demonstrated diverse ways in lib. 2. de Gravium
motu.): but the most plain Demonstration of the verity thereof, yet
excogitated, we conceive to be this, invented by Gassendus.

Art. 15. The same Demonstrated.
Understand the Lines LAB and ACI making a rectangular Triangle, by their
meeting at the point A, to be so divided, on each side, into equal parts, at
the points DEFGHIKL: (being continued, they may be divided into many more) as
that the Lines drawn both betwixt those points, and from them to the points
MNO, divide the whole space KAL into Triangles perfectly alike and equal each
to other. This done, Assume the point o^ Apex A, for the beginning of Time, the
beginning of space, and the beginning of Velocity: All which are to be here
considered in the motion, as beginning together with it. First, then we may
account the equal parts of each Line, AB, AC. for the parts or equal moments of
Time, flowing on from the beginning: so that AE may represent the first moment,
EG the second, GI the third, IL the fourth. Secondly, we may account those
equal Triangles, for the equal parts of the space, which are pervaded from the
beginning: so that Another perpendicular Line PQ. being drawn apart, and
representing the fall of a stone, thro^gh sixteen fathom, the triangle ADE, may
refer the first fathom P^, which is percurred in the first moment; the three
next triangles may refer the three fathoms RS, which are percurred in the
second moment; the five following triangles, the five fathoms ST, which are
pervade^ in the third moment: and the seven following, the seven fathoms, which
are pervaded in the fourth moment. Now from hence it is manifest, that the
Aggregate spaces carry the same proportions, as the Quadrates of Times: when,
the Triangle ADE (or space PR.) is one, as the Quadrate of AE, that is of one
Time, is one: and the Aggregate AFG (or PS) is four: as the Quadrate AG, of
two, is four: and the Aggregate AHI (or PT) is nine: as the Quadrate AI of
three, is nine; and the Aggregate AKL (or PQ.) is sixteen, as the Quadrate AL
of four, is sixteen.

Thirdly, we may account the Line DE for the first degree of Velocity acquired
in the end of the first time; insomuch, as the first time AE is not individual,
but may be divided into so many instants, or shorter times, as there are
points, or particles in the line AE (or AD) so neither is the degree of
Velocity individual, or wholly acquired in one instant; but from the beginning
increases through the whole first time, and may be repraesented by so many
Lines, as may be drawn parallel to the Line DE, betwixt the points of the Lines
AD and AE: so that, as those Lines do continually increase from the point A to
the Line DE; so likewise does the Velocity continually increase from the
beginning of the motion, and being represented what it is in the intercepted
instants of the first time, by the intercepted Lines, it may be represented
what it is in the last instant of the same first time, by the Line DE drawn
betwixt the two last points of the Triangle ADE. And because the Velocity,
thenceforward continuing its Increase, may be again signified, by Greater and
Greater Lines continently drawn betwixt all the succeeding points of the
remaining Lines, DB and EC; hence comes it, that the Line FG, does represent
the degree of Velocity acquired, in the end of the second moment: the Line HI.
the Velocity acquired in the end of the third moment; and the Line KL. the
velocity acquired in the end of the fourth moment. And evident it is from
hence, how the velocities respond in proportions to the Times; since, by reason
of the Triangles of a common angle, and parallel bases, it is well known, that
as DE are to EA, so FG to GA: HI to IA, and KL to LA. Thus, keeping your eye
upon the Figure, and your mind upon the Analogy; you shall fully comprehend,
that in the first moment of Time, the falling stone does acquire one degree of
Velocity, and pervades one degree of space; that in the second moment of Time,
it acquires another degree of Velocity, which being conjoynd to the former,
makes two, and in the mean while three spaces are pervaded; that in the third
moment, it acquires another degree of Velocity, which conjoined to the two
former makes three, and in the mean while seven parts of space are pervaded;
and so forward. You shall fully comprehend also, that the Celerities obtain the
same Ration, as the moments of Time: and that the spaces pervaded from the
beginning to the end of the motion, have the same Ration, as the Quadrates of
the moments of Time; which we assumed to Demonstrate, out of Gassendus. But
still it concerns you to remember, that we here discourse of that Motion, which
is Equally, or Uniformly Accelerated; or whose velocity does continually and
uniformly increase, nor is there any moment of the consequent time, in which
the motion is not more swift, than it was in every antecedent moment, and in
which it is not accelerated according to the same Reason. For, the want of this
Advertisement in chief, seems to have been the unhappy occasion of that great
trouble the Learned Jesuit Petrus Cazraeus put Gassendus to, in his two
Epistles, De Proportione, qua Gravia decidentia accelerantur.

Art. 16. The Physical Reason of that Proportion.
And this kindly conducts us to the Physical Reason of this Proportion, in which
the velocity of bodies Descending is observed to increase. For wholly excluding
the supposition of the Aers assistance of the Downward motion of a stone, by
recurring above, and so impelling it downward; and admitting the Magnetic
Attraction of the Earth to be the sole Cause of its Descent; unto both which
the considerations formerly alleged seem to oblige us: it is familiar for us
to conceive, that the Increment of its Celerity, according to the proportion
assigned, arises from hence. While in the first moment, the earth attracts the
stone, one degree of Celerity is acquired, and one degree of space is pervaded.
In the second moment, the attraction of the Earth continuing, another degree of
celerity is acquired, and three equal spaces are pervaded: one by reason of the
degree of celerity in the mean while acquired, and two by reason of the degree
of celerity formerly acquired, and still persevering, as that which is doubly
^equivalent to the new degree in the mean while acquired; because it is
Complete and entire from the very beginning of the 2d moment, but the other is
only acquiring, or in fieri, and so not complete till the end of the second
moment. Then, according to the same Ration, in the third moment another degree
of celerity is acquired, and five spaces (equal) are pervaded; one by reason of
the new degree of celerity in the mean while acquired, and four by reason of
the two former persevering, i. e. two in each moment praecedent, or one of a
duplicate aequivalency to the new one not yet complete. Then, in the fourth
moment another degree of celerity is acquired, and seven spaces are pervaded;
one by reason of the fresh degree in the interim acquired, and six by reason of
the three former per^^vering, i. e. two in each praecedent moment. And so of
the rest through the whole motion, computing the degrees of increasing
Celerity, by the ration of Quadrate Numbers.

Now, many are the Physical Theorems, and of considerable importance, Art. 17.
The Reason of the E^ual Veloc^ty of B^dies of very d^ffe^^n^ weig^ts, falling
from the same altitude; inferred from the same The^^y.
which might be genuinely deduced from this excellent and fruitful
Physicomathematical speculation; and as many the admired Apparences in nature,
that offer themselves to be solved by Reasons more than hinted in the same:
but, such is the strictness of our method, and weariness of our Pen, that we
can, in the praesent, make no farther advantage of it, than only to infer from
thence the most probable Reason of that so famous Phenomenon, The equal
velocity of two stones, or bullets, the one of 100 pound, the other of only one
ounce weight, descending from the same altitude; experience constantly
attesting, that being dropped down together, or turned off, in the same instant,
from the top of a tower; the Lesser shall arrive at the ground, as soon as the
Greater. For, this admirable Effect seems to have no other Cause but this; that
the Lesser body, as it contains fewer parts, so does it require the Impulses
or strokes of fewer Magnetical rays, by which the attraction is made: and such
is the proportion of the two forces, as that each moveable being considered
with what Resistance you please, still is the force in the movent equally
sufficient to overcome that resistance, and a few magnetique rays suffice to
the attraction of a few parts, as well as many to the attraction of many parts.
So that the space being equal, which both are to pervade; it follows, that it
must be pervaded by both, in equal or the same time. Provided always, that the
two bodies assumed, be of the same matter; for, in case they be of diverse
matters, as the one of Wood, the other of Iron or Lead, that may cause some
small Difference in their Velocity. We say, some small Difference; because, if
we take two Globes of different materials and weights, but of the same or equal
diameters, as (V. G.) one of Lead, the other of Wax: we shall be very far from
finding, that the Heavier will be carried down more swiftly than the Lighter,
in a proportion to the excess of its Gravity. For, if one be ten times heavier
than the other; yet shall not the Heavier therefore, both being turned off, in
the same instant, arrive at the ground ten times sooner than the Lighter: but,
at the same time as the heavier, arrives at the ground, from the altitude of 10
Fathoms; the lighter shall come within a foot of the earth; so far short does
the lighter come of being nine fathoms behind the Heavier. And the Cause, why
the Lighter Globe of Wax, is carried so swiftly, is the same with that, why a
bullet of Lead of only an ounce weight, is carried down as swiftly as another
bullet of 100 pound. And, what though the Globe of Wax be as great in
circumference, as the other of Lead, and somewhat greater; yet seeing still it
has fewer parts to be attracted, it therefore requires fewer magnetical rays
to its attraction with equal velocity to the heavier. But, the Cause why it is
carried somewhat, though very little, slower than the heavier; is to be derived
chiefly from the Aer resisting it underneath, the Aer being more copious in
proportion to the virtue Attrahent, in respect of the greatness of its Ambite,
or Circumference: and thence is it, that Cork, Pith of Elder, straws, feathers,
and the like less compact, and so more light bodies, fall down much more slowly.

From this Experiment, and the Reason of it, Art. 18. Gravity Distinguished
into Simple, and Adjectitious.
we have an opportunity of observing and easily understanding the Distinction
of Gravity into Simple and Adjectitious: the Former being that, which is
competent to a body though unmoved, and whose quantity may be exactly
determined by the balance suspending the body in the aer; the Latter being
proper only to a body moved, and vanishes as soon as the body attaineth quiet,
and whose measure is to be explored both from the quantity of the simple
gravity which the body bears during its quiet, and the Altitude from which it
falls. Thus, assuming two Bullets, the one of an ounce, the other of 100 pound,
Simple Gravity, according to the Scales; the Adjectitious Gravity of the Lesser
bullet, acquired by the increment of its velocity during its descent, must be
less proportionably to its simple gravity, than the Adjectitious gravity of the
Greater bullet, acquired by the increment of its Velocity during its Descent,
in the same time, and from the same altitude: because, the space and time of
the descent of both being equal, the proportion of the acquired gravity of each
must be respondent to the proportion of the simple gravity of each. So that if
in the end of the fall of the Lesser bullet of an ounce weight, the
Adjectitious Gravity of it shall amount to 10 ounces: the Adjectitious gravity
of the Greater of 100 pound weight, shall, in the end of its fall, amount to a
thousand pound; nor can the Acquired Gravity of the Lesser ever equal that of
the Greater, unless it fall from a far greater Altitude.

Art. 19. The R^^e of that superlative velocity, with which a Bullet would be
carried, in case it should fall from the Moon, Sun, or region of the ^ixed
stars, to the Earth: and (...) each of those vast heights, to the (...) of the
(...).
Here, perhaps, you will Demand our opinion, concerning that admirable because
superlative Velocity, which Galilaeo and other Mathematicians conceive that a
bullet would acquire in case it should fall to the ^arth from those vast (we
might have said Immense) heights of the Moon, Sun, and region of the Fixed
stars. Of this, therefore, we say in short; (1) That, in this case,
Mathematicians are wont to suppose, that there are the same Causes of Gravity
and Velocity in those sublime places, as are observed here with us below, or
near the surface of the Earth: and if they be not, certainly our Description
and Computation must be altogether vain and fruitless. For, if the Cause of
Gravity, and consequently of the Velocity be the Attraction made by the
magnetique rays transmitted from the Earth; forasmuch as those magnetique rays
must become more Rare, and fewer of them arrive at a body, by how much farther
it is removed from the Earth: though, perchance, a bullet might be attracted
down from the region of the Moon (and if so, the motion of the bullet would be
very slow, for a good while, in respect of the very few magnetique rays, that
could arrive to that great height) yet from that far greater height of the
region of the Fixed stars, a bullet could not be attracted at all, it being
impossible that any magnetique ray should be transmitted so far as half way
thither. (2) But, supposing that the magnetique Virtue of the Earth did extend
thither; and that a bullet, from whence soever falling, should begin its motion
with that speed, and proceed according to the same degrees of Acceleration,
which we observe in a stone, or bullet falling from a very high tower: then
must it of necessity acquire that incredible Velocity, which our Mathematicians
describe. To Particular; conceding the Distances or Intervals betwixt the Earth
and each of those Caelestial Orbs, which our modern and best Astronomers
generally assign; a bullet would fall from the body, or rather the Limbus of
the Moon, to the Earth, in two hours and an half; from the Limbus of the Sun,
in eleven hours and a quarter: from the region of the Fixed stars, in 39 hours
and a quarter. And so, if we imagine the Earth to be perforated to the Center,
since a bullet would fall from the superfice thereof down to the Center, in 20
minutes, or the third part of an hour: the same bullet coming from the moon,
would pervade the same space from the superfice of the Earth to the Center of
it, in one minute and twenty seconds, or the third part of a minute: coming
from the Sun, it would pervade the same semidiametral space of the Earth, in
seventeen seconds: and coming from the region of the Fixed stars, it would
percur the same semidiametral space of the Earth, in five seconds. So
incredibly great would be the Velocity of a bullet falling from such vast
Altitudes. And this we think sufficient* concerning the Downward motion of
Bodies, accounted Heavy.

SECT. III.
THe Remnant of our praesent Province consists only in the consideration of the
Upward motion of Heavy Bodies PROJECTED: concerning which the principal
Enquiries among Philosophers are (1) What and whence is that Force, or Virtue
motive, whereby bodies projected are carried on, after they are separated from
the Projicient? (2) What are the Laws of their motion. Direct, and Reflex?

Concerning the FIRST, therefore, we observe, Art. 1. What, and whence is that
Force, or Virtue Motive, whereby Bodies Projected are carried on after their
Dismission from the Projicient.
that Aristotle (in 8. physic. cap. ult.) and most of his Sectators confidently
affirm, that a stone thrown out of a sling, an arrow shot from a bow, a bullet
discharged from a Gun, etc. is moved only by the Aer, from the time of its
separation from the sling, bow, or Gun: and the manner of that mo^ive activity
of the Aer upon the thing projected, They thus explicate. The Aer (say they)
which is first moved by the Projicient, together with the moveable, does, at
the same time, both propel the moveable, and impel the Aer immediately beyond
it, which being likewise moved, does in the same manner propel the moveable,
and impel the aer immediately beyond it; and that aer being thus moved, does
again impel both the moveable and the aer next beyond it: and so consequently
the next aer impels both the moveable and the next aer beyond it, until the
propulsion and promotion being gradually debilitated, and at length wholly
overcome, partly by the Gravity of the thing moved, partly by the Resistance of
the occurring Aer, the motion wholly cease, and the thing projected attaineth
quiet.

And that Others contend, that the Body Projected is carried forward by a Force
(as They call it) Impressed; which they account to be a Quality so communicated
unto the body projected, from the Projicient, as that not being indelible, it
must gradually decay in the progress thereof, and at length wholly perish,
whereupon the motion also must by degrees remit its violence, and at length
absolutely vanish, and the thing projected again recover its native quiet. But,
lest we trifle away our praecious moments, in confutin^ each of these weak
Opinions, against which the Reason of every man is ready to object many great
absurdities, especially such as the praecedent theory will soon advertise him
of: let us praesently recur to the more solid speculations of our master
Gassendus in his Epistles ( de motu impresso a motore translato) and
praesenting you the summary thereof, without further delay satisfy your
Curiosity, and our own Debt of assisting it.

First we are to determine, that nothing, remaining it self unmoved, can move
another. For, since our Discourse concerns not the First Cause of all motion,
God, whose Power is infinite, who is in all places, who can, only by the force
of his Will, create, move, and destroy all things; manifest it is, that nothing
Finite, especially Corporeal (and such only has an interest in our praesent
consideration) can move another thing, unless it self be also moved at the same
time: as Plato well observed in his saying, Neque est Dissicile modo, sed etiam
plane impossible, ut quidpiam motum imprimere, sine quapiam sui commotione,
valeat: (in Timaeo.) And the Reason is this; whatever does move, does act; and
e converso, whatever does act, does move; Action and Passion (as Aristotle, 3.
physic. 3) being the same with motion. Again, the movent and Moveable ought to
be together, or to touch each other, because, whether the movent impel,
attract, carry, or ^owle the moveable: necessary it is, that still it should
impress some certain Force upon it: and force it can impress none thereupon,
unless by touching it. And though it does touch it, yet if it discharge no
force of motion upon it, i. e. remain unmoved it self: there shall be only a
mere Contact reciprocal, but no motion, and as the one, so shall the other
remain unmoved. Therefore, that the one may move the other: it ought to have
that vigor or motion first in it self, which it does impress upon the other:
since if it have none, it can give none. Even sense demonstrates, that by how
much more vehement motion the movent it self is in, at the instant it touches
the moveable, by so much the farther does it always propel the same: and thence
our Reason may necessarily infer, that the movent must it self be in some small
motion, in the same instant it gives a small motion to another. Moreover,
though Aristotle (in 8. Physic cap 5.) subtly Distinguishes three Things in
motion, viz. the (...) ut quod, as (V. G.) a man, the Movens ut quo, as a
staff: and the Mobile, as a stone: and thereupon magisterially teaches, that
the stone is moved, and does not move; that the staff is moved, and does move:
that the man does move, and is not moved: yet is it not ^^ident, how far short
He comes, of thereby Demonstrating the immobility of the First Movent, to which
He praetended. For whereas He urges, that otherwise we must proceed to
Infinity; that binds not at all: because the movens ut quod, the man is moved
by Himself: and sense declares, that the man must move his Arm, or Hand
together with the staff, which if you suppose not to be the movens ut quo, (the
stone b^^ng not moved thereby) but the mobile it self: is not the movent it
self ^^so moved? Suppose also, that the man's Arm, or Hand is the move^^ (...)
quo, nay if you please, that his whole Body, or the Muscles, or Nerve, or
Spirits, are the movens ut quo, and deriving the motion from his very Soul,
suppose that to be the movens ut quod: yet truly can you not ^^^ceive, that
the Soul, it self remaining Immote, does move the Arm, o^ ^and. Nor is the Soul
it self then moved only by Accident (as when ^ mariner is carried by the
motion of his ship) but also per se, as w^^^ the mariner moves himself, that he
may move the Oar, that it may move the ship, in which himself is carried. For,
as a ship, in a calm sea, ^ould not be moved it self, nor the mariner be moved
with it, by Accid^^^* in case the mariner himself wanted motion, whereby to
impel his ship^ so neither would the body be moved, nor the Soul be moved
therew^^^ by Accident, unless the soul be first agitated within, with a motion
wh^^^by the body is moved. Conclude, therefore that nothing can be (...), but
the Projicient must not only Touch it, either immediately, ^^mediately by some
Instrument; but also Propel it with the same (...), wh^^^with it self is, in
the same instant, moved.

It is moreover ^^^^ssary, that the movent be moved, not only in a point, or so
far as that point of space, in which it first touches the moveable: but also
that a while cohaering unto the moveable, it be moved along with it: so as we
may well conceive them to be made, by that Cohaesion, as it were one and the
same body, or one entire moveable, pro tempore; and consequently, that the
motion of both the movent and moveable is one entire motion. For, what motion
is in the moveable, so long as it remains conjoined to the movent, is in a
manner a certain Tyrocinium, in which the moveable is as it were taught to
progress foreward in that way, which the movent has begun, upward, downward,
transverse, oblique, circular, and that either slowly, or swiftly, and
according as the movent shall guide and direct it, before its manumission or
dismission.

Thus, when a man throws a stone with his hand, you may plainly perceive, how
the motion thereof begins together with that of his hand: and after it is
discharged from his hand, you cannot say, that a new motion is impressed upon
the stone, but only that the same motion begun in the hand is continued. And,
therefore, it seems also very unnecessary to require the impression of any new
and distinct Force upon the stone projected, by the projicient, which should be
the Cause of its motion after its Dismission: seeing nothing else is impressed,
but the very motion to be continued through a certain space; so that we are not
to enquire, what motive Virtue that is, which makes the Persevering motion, but
what has made the motion, that is to persever. In the moveable, certainly,
there is none but a Passive Force to motion; nor can the Active Force be
required in any thing but the movent: and should we, with the Vulgar, say, that
there is an Impressed Force remaining, for some time, in the thing moved, or
projected; we could thereby understand no other than the Impetus, or motion it
self.

Here might we opportunely insist upon this, Art. 2. The Manner of the
Impression of that Force*
that motion is impressed upon a thing moved, only in respect, that the thing
moved has less force of Resistance, than the movent has of Impulsion: so that
the movent, forcing it self into the place of the moveable, compels it to
recede, or give way, and go into another place. But it is more material for us
to observe; that when a thing projected is impelled, it is first touched by the
projicient only in those parts, which are in its superfice or outside and that
those outward parts, being pressed by the impulse, do drive inward or press
upon the parts next to them; and those again impel the parts next to them, and
those again the next to them; till the impulse be by succession propagated
quite through the body of the thing projected, to the superficial parts in the
opposite side, and then begins the motion of the whole, the parts reciprocally
cohaering: as has been formerly explained, in the example of a long pole, or
beam of wood. Which being percussed, but with a very gentle or softly stroke,
that one end has all its parts so commoved successively, as that the stroke
may be plainly perceived by a man, that lays his ear close to the other end:
which could not be if the impulse were not propagated from parts to parts
successively, through the whole substance of the beam. To which it is
requisite, that we superad this observable also; that by reason of the force
made by Contact, and that short Cohaesion of the moveable to the movent, there
is created a certain Tension, or stress of all the parts of it, toward the
opposite region: and of that by that means, all the parts of the thing
projected, are disposed or conformed as it were into certain Fibers, or direct
Files; of all which the most strong and powerful is that, which being trajected
through the Center of Gravity in the thing projected, becomes as it were the
Axis to all the circumstant ones. Our eyes ascertain, that unless the Center of
Gravity be in the middle of the thing projected, or directly obverted to the
mark, at which the thing is thrown; the thing instantly turns it self about,
and that part, wherein the Center of Gravity is, always goes foremost, and as
it were carries the rest of the parts, as that which is the most Direct and
most Tense of all the Fibers. And this cannot be effected, but with some (more
or less) Deflection from the mark, at which the force, according to the Center
and Axis of Gravity, was directed; forasmuch as the Center of Gravity, wherein
many Fibers concur, makes some Resistance, and detorting the Fibers, inflecteth
them another way, and so a new Axis is made pro tempore, according to which the
Direction of all the parts in their motion afterward is determined. Hence is
it, that, if you would hit a mark, either with a sling, or stonebow, you must
choose a stone, or bullet of an uniform matter and composition: or, at least,
turn the heavier part of the body to be thrown, forward; because otherwise, it
will Deflect more or less, to one side or other according to the position and
inclination of its Center of Gravity. Moreover, whether soever the thing
projected does tend, all the Fibers constantly follow the Direction of the
Axis, or are made parallels thereunto; so that as often as the Center is
changed, so often does the Axis, so often do all the Fibers change their
position, and follow the Center. Which we insert chiefly in respect of the
motion of Convolution, or Turning of a thing projected immediately after its
Dismission; and of the Curvity of that Line, which is thereby described,
whether ascending, or descending. But these are only Transient Touches, or
Hints; that we might easily intimate, why a motion once impressed, is continued
rather this way, than that: and why Feathers, Sponges, and the like Light and
Porous bodies, are incapable of having quick and vehement motions impressed upon
them; because they consist of interrupted Fibers, and such as are not Dirigible
with the Center of Gravity.

Art. 3. That all Motion, in a free or Empty space, must be Uniform, and
Perpetual: and that the chief Cause of the Inequality and Brevity of the motion
of things projected through the Atmosphere, is the magnetique Attraction of the
Earth.
Here we ask leave, once more to have recourse to that useful supposition of a
stone situate in the immensity of the Imaginary spaces. We lately said, as you
may remember, that if a stone placed in the empty Extramundane spaces, should
be impelled any way, the motion thereof would be continued the same way, and
that uniformly or equally, and with tardity or celerity proportionate to the
smartness or gentleness of the Impulse, and perpetually in the same line;
because in those empty spaces it could meet with no cause, which by Diversion
might either accelerate, or retard its motion. Nor ought it to be Objected,
that nothing Violent can be Perpetual; because, in this case, there could be no
Repugnancy or Resistance, but a pure indifferency in the stone to all regions,
there being no Center, in relation whereunto it may be conceived to be Heavy or
Light. And, therefore, the condition of the stone would be the very same, as to
Uniformity and Perpetuity of motion, with that of the Caelestial Orbs; which
being obnoxious to no Retardation, or Acceleration, but free from all
Repugnancy internal, and Resistance External, constantly and inde^inently
maintain that Circular motion, which was, in the first moment of their
Creation, impressed uopon them, by the Will of the Creator; and that toward one
part, rather than any other. Let us now farther consider; seeing that if upon
some large horizontal plane you should place a smooth Globe, and then gently
impel it; you would observe it to be moved thereupon equally and indefinently,
till it came to the end thereof: why may you not lawfully conjecture, that if
the Terrestrial Globe were of a superfice exquisitely polite, or smooth as the
finest Venice Glass; and another small Globe as polite were placed in any part
of its superfice, and but gently impelled any way, it would be moved with
constant Uniformity quite round the Earth, according to the line of its first
direction; and having rolled once round the Earth, it would, without
intermission again begin, or rather continue another Circuit, and so maintain a
perpetual Circulation upon the surface of the Earth? Especially, since there is
no Difficulty (...) discourage that conjecture; forasmuch as look how many
parts of the small Globe, during the motion thereof, tend toward the Center of
the Earth, just so many are, at the same time, elevated from it: so that a full
Compensation being made in all points of the motion, the same cannot but
perpetually continue, and in the same equal tenor, there being no Declivity,
whereby it should be Accelerated, no Acclivity, whereby it should be Retarded,
no Cavity, whereby after many accurses and recurses, or reciprocations, it
should be brought at length to acquiesce. Moreover, in order to our grand
scope, let us suppose, that the space, through which a stone should be
Projected, were absolute Inane, or such as the Imaginary spaces; and then we
must acknowledge, that it would be carried in a direct and invariate line,
through the same space, and with an Uniforme and Perpetual motion, until it
should meet with some other space, full of magnetique rays, Aer, or some other
resisting substance. But, here with us, in the Atmosphere, because no space is
Inane (sensibly) but replete as well with Aer, as with millions of magnetique
rays transmitted from the Earth; and so a stone Projected must encounter them
in every point of space through which it moves: therefore is it, that it cannot
be moved either in a direct Line, or equally, or long. For, since multitudes of
magnetique Rays must necessarily invade and attach it, as soon as it is
discharged from the Projicient; though at first setting forth it break through
them, and so is scarce at all Deflected: yet because more and more magnetique
rays freshly lay hold of it in every part of space, renew the Attraction, and
so more and more infringe and weaken the force of its motion; hence comes it,
that in the progress it does by little and little Deflect from the Line of
Direction, moves slower and slower, and at length sinking down to the Earth,
thereon attains its quiet. Hereupon, when men shall Demand, what is that Cause,
which weakens and at last quite destroys the Virtue Impressed upon a thing
Projected; rightly understanding, by the Virtue Impressed, the motion begun by
the Projicient, and continued by the Projectum: the Answer is manifest; viz.
That it is the Attraction of the Earth, which first opposes, after gradually
refracteth, and in fine wholly overcomes the motion impressed, and so
determines the Projectum to Quiet. Hence also may we learn, that All motion
once impressed, is of it self Indelible, and cannot be Diminished, or
Determined, but by some External Cause, that is of power to repress it.

Art. 4. That, in the Atmosphere, no body can be projected in a Direct line;
unless perpendicularly Upward, o^ Downward: and why.
This considered, you may please to observe, that through the Atmosphere, or
spaces circumvironing the Terrestrial Globe, being so possessed by the Aer and
swarms of Magnetique Rays, no body can be projected in an absolute Direct: or
perfectly straight Line, unless perpendicularly upward or downward. For, if the
projection be made either obliquely, or parallel to the Horizon; the projectum
suddenly begins to Deflect from the mark at which it was aimed, and so
describes not a straight, but crooked line. Not that the Deflection or Curvity
is sensible, at a small distance, especially if the motion be vehement, such as
that of an Arrow shot from a Bow, or Bullet discharged from a Gun: but, that
in every point of space, and time, the thing Projected is attracted somewhat
Downward; and there is the same Reason for its Deflection in the first, as
there is for its Deflection in the second, third, fourth, or any following
point of space, and instant of time, though the greater opposition of the Force
impressed makes that Deflection less at the first. Nor ought it to incline us to
the contrary, that Archers and Gunners frequently hit the mark, at which they
levelled, to some certain distance: because, that Distance is commonly such, as
that the Deflection therein is not sensible, though it be sometimes an
hairs-breadth, two, three, or four, sometimes an inch below the mark.

Art. 5. That the Motion of a stone pro^ected upwards obliquely, is Composed of
an H^^iz^^tal and Perpendi^ular together.
Further you may observe, that when a stone is projected, or a bullet shot
upward, yet not p^^pendicularly, but obliquely; the motion thereof is to be
considered, not as simply perpendicular, or simply Horizontal, but as mixed, or
composed of an Horizontal and Perpendicular together: of a Perpendicular,
forasmuch as the Altitude thereof may be measured by a Perpendicular line; of
an Horizontal, forasmuch as it is made according to the Horizon, and the
Latitude thereof may be taken by the plane of the Horizon. But, because by how
much the more it has of the perpendicular, so much the less it has of the
Horizontal; so that the Altitude of it may amount to fifty feet, and the
Latitude not exceed one foot: therefore is it manifest, that the crooked Line
described by this Compass motion, cannot be Circular; and Galilaeo (Dialog. 4.)
has demonstrated that the Line is Parabolical, or such as Geometricians
describe in the ambite of a Cone, when they so intersect it obliquely from one
side at the base, that the motion of the intersection is made parallel to the
other side left whole, for the Area of each resegment is the Geometricians
Parabola: and the crooked ambite of the Area, is a Parabolical Line, and
frequently taken for the Parabola it self. We remember also, how Galilaeo, upon
consequence, and among other remarkables does observe; that of all Projections,
made by the same force, the Longest, and in that respect the most Efficacious,
is that, which is made to an half-right Angle, or by aiming at the forty fifth
degree of Altitude; in respect of the more prolix Parabola which is described
by the Pr^jectum, aimed at that altitude: since at all other altitudes the
Parabola must be shorter; the superior Altitudes being less, and the inferior
more open than is requisite.

Now this Composition of a Perpendicular and Horizontal motion may be most
conveniently Demonstrated unto you, thus. Art. 6. Demonstration of that
Composition.
Being in a ship, under sail, if you hold a Ball in your hand; the motion of
the ball will be only Horizontal, viz. That, whereby the ship does carry you,
your hand, and the ball in it. If the ship stand still, and you throw the ball
directly upward; the motion of the ball will be only Perpendicular: but if the
ship be moved, at the same instant you throw the ball upward; then will the
motion thereof be Compound, partly Perpendicular, partly Horizontal. For, the
ball shall be carried obliquely, and describe a Parabolical line, in which it
ascends and again falls down again; and in the mean time, it shall be promoved
Horizontally. The Perpendicular alone, your self may discern with your own eye:
because, the horizontal is common both to the ball and your eye, and when as
well the ball, as your eye is promoved, therefore does it always appear
imminent over your eye, and in the same perpendicular: but, for the Horizontal,
He only can deprehend it, who stands still on the shore, or another ship not
carried on at the same rate, as that wherein you are.

Herein there occur Two things, not unworthy our admiration. Art. 7. That of
the two different Forces, impressed upon a ball, thrown upward from the hand of
a man standing in a ship, that is under sail; the one does not destroy the
other* but each attain^ its proper scope.
The One is, that though there be two diverse Forces or motions impressed upon
the Ball, at the same time: the one from the Vibration of your Arm, the other
from the horizontal Translation of the ship: yet does neither destroy the
other, but each attains its proper scope as fully, as if they were impressed
apart. For, the Ball ascends as high, when the ship is moved forward, as when
it stands still: and whether it describe a Direct, or a semiparabolical: and
again, it is as much promoved Horizontally, when you divert it upward by
projection, as when you hold it still in your hand and so it be carried only
by the motion of the ship: and consequently whether the motion thereof describe
a Direct line, or a whole Parabola. Only this you are to note: that a greater
Force is required to the projection of a Ball from the foot to the top of the
Mast, when the ship moves forward, than when it lies at anchor: because that
semiparabolical line, which the Ball must describe in the former case, is
shorter than that perpendicular one, which it must describe in the latter: and
however the vibration or swing of your arm may seem to you to be equal in both
cases, yet is that vibration or force, whereby the ball is carried upward to
the top of the Mast, when the ship is in motion, really greater than that,
whereby the same ball is carried to the same height, when the ship lies quiet:
because, in the former case, there is superadded to the force of your arm, the
force which is impressed both upon you and your arm (without your
apprehension) by the motion of the ship. This you shall plainly perceive, if
you only drop down a ball from the top of the Mast, without any swing or
motion of your arm at all. For, seeing that the ball does always fall at the
foot of the mast, in the same distance from it, as it was in the instant of its
dimission from the top; whether the ship be moved, or quiet: necessary it is,
that some force be impressed upon the ball by the motion of the ship, or the the
same motion, whereby both the Mast it self, and your hand are affected, at the
instant of its dimission; since it must describe a semiparabolical line, longer
than that Direct one, which it would describe, if it fell down the ship being
quiet. And hence comes it, that if you project a ball from the Poop to the Fore
Castle of a ship, under sail, and back again from the Fore-Castl^ to the Poop;
you shall impress a greater force upon it, in throwing it from the Poop to the
Fore-Castle, than back again from the Fore-Castle to the Poop: because, in the
former case, the force or seconding impulse of the ship must be superadded to
the force of your arm in projection, and so make it the stronger; and, in the
latter case, the contrary force of the ship does as much detract from the force
of your arm, and so make it the weaker. And though the ball be carried over
equal spaces of the Deck of the ship, in both cases: yet shall it not be
carried through equal spaces in the Aer.

Art. 8. That the space of time, in w^i^h the ^all is A^cending from the F
(...) the Top of the M^st; is equal to that, in which it is again Descending
from the top to the ^oot.
Hence may it be Demonstrated, that the space of Time which the ball is
Ascending from the foot to the top of the Mast, is Equal to that in which it is
Descending again from the top to the foot. For, were it not so, when the ball
is projected in a line perpendicular and parallel to the Mast, the ball would
not ascend and descend always at the same distance from the Mast, but would
either desert it, or be deserted by it, the ship being in motion. Whence it
follows also, that in what proportion the velocity of the ball Ascending does
decrease; in the same proportion does the velocity of the ball again Descending
encrease^ so that the motion of the ball must be of equal velocity, when it is
removed from the plane of the ship, one fathom ascending, or descending, and
likewise at the altitude of one foot, ascending or descending. Again, forasmuch
as the force of your arm, projecting the ball, is still equal; but the force
superadded thereunto by the motion of the ship, may be more or less vehement,
according as the s^^p is carried with greater or less speed: thence it follows,
that the ^arabolical lines described by the ball, are respectively Greater or
Less, and the motions of it through the Aer more or less swift. (...), yet all
are performed in Equal Time; because the times of them all are equal to the
same time, which is due to the simple Assent and Descent, and with the same
proportion of parts.

Art. 9. (...).
The Other, which deserves our admiration, is this; that notwithstanding, of the
twofold motion composing the Oblique one, that which is Perpendicular, is
Unequal, the Velocity thereof being as well diminished in the assent, as
augmented in the descent, so that; in equal moments of time, less spaces are
pervaded in the assent, and greater in the descent: yet is that motion, which
is Horizontal, plainly Equal in all its parts, or of equal velocity throughout;
so that equal spaces of the Horizon are pervaded in equal times. The truth of
this is constant from hence; that if (the ship being equally moved on, and the
ball being projected in a line parallel to the Mast) the foot of the Mast shall
pervade twenty paces, or an hundred foot of horizontal space: the ball shall be
horizontally (i. e. toward that region, to which the ship tends) promoved, not
more swiftly or slowly in one pace or foot, than in another, but equally in
all: for, otherwise, it could not be always imminent over the same part of the
ship near the Mast: nor therefore consist in the same line, or distance from
the Mast: which yet it constantly observes. But this easily deceives, that at
the end of the balls ascent, or beginning of its descent, the motion is
slowest: but then are we to observe, that the Devexity, or Conformity of it to
the Horizon is the Greater, as when it comes lower, where the motion is more
rapid, the Devexity is less, and its conformity to the Perpendicular greater:
so that the whole Inaequability does consist in the Assent and Descent, or
Perpendicular motion of the ball: while in the mean time there is a perfect
Aequability in its Horizontal advance, or promotion. From hence we collect:
that since a thing Projected is moved unequally, insomuch as it tends upward or
downward: and not as it progresseth parallel to the Horizon, or Ambite of the
Earth: therefore is it, that the upward and downward motions are both to be
accounted Violent: but the Horizontal, or Circular, Natural: Equality, or
Uniformity being the inseparable Character of Natural, and Inequality of
Violent motion.

Thus far have we treated of that Returning or Reflex motion of Bodies,
whereby, being violently projected upward, Art. 10. The Reason and Manner of
the Reflection or Rebounding motion of Bodies, diverted from the line of their
direction by others encountering them.
they revert or fall down again, by reason of the magnetique Attraction of the
Earth: and it now remains only, that we consider the Reasons of that other
species of motion Reflex or Rebounding, whereby Bodies, being also violently
moved or projected any way, are impeded in their course and Diverted from the
line of their Direction, by other bodies encountering them. Concerning this
Theorem, therefore, be pleased to know, that among all Reflections, by way of
Rebound or Resilition, that is the Chiefest, when a body projected, and
impinged against another body, is returned from thence directly, or in the same
line toward the place, from whence it was projected: which always happens, when
the Projection is made to right Angles, or in regular line, such as that in
which a Heavy body descends upon an horizontal plane. And all other Reflections
are in dignity inferior thereunto, as such whereby the thing projected does not
rebound in a direct line toward the same point from whence it was projected,
but to some other region by other lines: according as it is projected in lines
more or less oblique. Because, with what inclination a body falls upon a plane,
with the very same inclination does it rebound from the plane (especially a
Globe, and such as is of an uniform matter, and consequently has the Center of
magnitude and that of Gravity coincident in the same point) so that by how much
the more oblique the projection is, and how much the less is the Angle made of
its line with the line of the plane, (called the Angle of Incidence) so much
the more oblique is the reflection made, and so much the less the Angle made of
its line, with the line of the plane continued (called the Angle of Reflection)
and that so long, as till the line of projection shall become parallel to the
plane, and so, no body occurring to or encountering the projectum, no reflection
at all be made.

Art. 11. That the ^mersi^n of a weight appen^^d to a (...) the perpendicular,
(...) which it had ^^duced it self, in Vibration; (...) a R^flexion (...)
betwixt (...) Reflection at all, and the Least Reflection assignable; and the
R^le of all other Reflection whatever.
Know moreover, that betwixt No Reflection at all, and the Least Reflection that
is possible, there may be assigned as it were a certain Medium; and that is the
Emersion or Rising up again of a weight appensed to a thread or Lutestring,
when performing a vibration or swing from one side to the other, it ascends
from the perpendicular Line, to which by descending it had reduced it self.
For, in that case, no ^^^lecting body does occur, a simple Arch is described;
and y^^ ^here is as a certain Procidence or falling down to the lowest point of
the Arch, so also a certain Resilition or rising up again from ^he lowest point
of the Arch, toward the contrary side. Again* having conceived a direct line
touching the lowest point of the Arch, so as that the weight suspended by a
string, may, in its vibration, glance upon it with its lowest extreme, and
only in a point touch the horizontal line; you shall have on each side an
Angle mad^ from the Arch and the line touching it, which is therefore called
the Angle of Contingence: and because Geometricians demonstrate^ that the Angle
of Contingence, which truly differs from a right line, is less than any
Rectilinear Angle, however acute; therefore may each of those Angles be said to
be Median betwixt the right line, and the Angle either of Incidence^ or of
Reflection, how small soever it be; and consequently, the Emersion of the weight
in Vibration may as justly be said to be Median betwixt the smallest Reflection
and none at all. However, this Emersion seems to (...) the Rule of all
Reflection whatever; for, as in the Vibration of a weight appensed to a string,
and describing a simple Arch, the A^gle of its Emersion is always equal to the
Angle of its Prociden^^: so in Projection describing an Angular line, the Angle
of Reflection is always ( quantum ex se est) equal to the Angle of Incidence*
We say, quantum ex se est; for otherwise, whether it be sensible, or not,
because so long as the Projectum is transferred, it is a^ways somewhat
depressed toward the earth, for the reason formerly alleged; thence comes it,
that the Reflection can neither be so strong or smart as the Incidence, nor make
as great an angle, (...) arise to as great an altitude. Which we insinuate,
that we might not insist upon this advertisement; that the Aequality of the
Angle of the Reflection to that of the Incidence, may be so much the less, by
how much the less the projected body comes to a spherical figure, or does
consist of matter the less uniform.

Art. 12. ^he ^ea^^n of the Ae^ualit^ of the Angles of In^iden^e and R^^l^xi^n.
For, to attain to that Aequality of the Angels of Incidence and Reflection,
necessary it is, that the body projected be exactly spherical, and of Uni^orm
matter, and so having the Center of Gravity, and the Center of magnitude
coincident in one and the same point; as we have formerly intimated: it being
as well against Reason, as Experience, that bodies wanting those conditions
should arise to that aequali^^ which that we may the better understan^, let us
consider, that (...) in a Globe, or Ball Falling down, we regard only that
Gravity* which it acquires in its descent, from the magnetique Attraction of
the Earth: so in a Globe, or Ball Projected, we are to regard only that
Impetus or Force, which being impressed upon it by the Projicient, supplies the
place of Gravity, and in respect whereof the Center of its Gravity may be
conceived to be one with that of its magnitude. Let a Ball, therefore, be
projected Directly or to right Angles, upon a plane; and, because, in that
case, that Fiber must be the Axis of its Gravity, whose extreme going foremost
is impinged against the plane: thence is it manifest, that the Repression must
be made, in a direct line, along that Axis; the parallel Fibers in equal number
on each part invironing that Axis, and so not swaying or diverting the ball
more to one part than to another, by reason of any the least disproportion of
quantity on either side. Then, let the same Ball be projected Obliquely against
the same plane; and because, in this case, not that middle Fiber, which
constituteth the Axis of Gravity, but some one or other of the Fibers
circumstant about it, must with one of its extremes strike against the plane:
therefore is it necessary, that that same Fiber be repressed by that impulse,
and by that repression compelled to give backward toward its contrary extreme,
and thereby in some measure to oppose the motion begun, which it wholly
overcome, and so the ball would rebound from the plane, the same way it came,
if the Fibers on that side the Axis of Gravity, which is nearest to the plane,
were equal in number to that are on the farther, or contrary side of it: but,
because those Fibers, that are on the farther side, or on the part of the
Center and Axis, are far more in number, and so the^e is a greater quantity of
matter, and consequently a greater force impressed, than on the side nearer to
the plane; therefore does the begun motion persever, as praevailing upon the
repression and renitency of the Fiber impinged against the plane, and since it
cannot be continued in a direct line, because of the impediment ariseing from
the parts cohaerent, it is continued by that way it can, i. e. by the open and
free obliquity of the plane. But, this, of necessity, must be done with some
certain Evolution of the Ball, and with the contact of the Fibers posited in
order both toward the Axis and beyond it; and while this is in doing, every
Fiber strives to give back, but, because the farther part does yet praevail
over the nearer, therefore does the nearer part still follow the sway, and
conform to the inclination and conduct of the farther, and all the touched
Fibers change their situation, nor are they any longer capable of returning by
the same way they came, because they no longer respect that part from whence
they came. We say, with the Contact of the plane by the Fibers posited toward
the Axis and beyond it; because, since in that Evolution or Turn of the Ball,
the extreme of the Axis touches the plane, yet nevertheless no Resilition, or
Rebound is therefore caused, in that instant; and if there were a resilition,
at that time, it would be to a perpendicular, as well the Axis, as all the
circumstant Fibers being erected perpendicularly upon the face of the plane:
but the Resilition there must be beyond it, because the force of the farther
part of the Fibers does yet praevail over that of the nearer. For, the Force of
the farther part does yet continue direct and entire; but, that of the nearer
is reflected, and by the repression somewhat debilitated: and therefore, the
Resilition cannot be made, until so much of Repression and Debilitation be made
in the further part, as was made at first in the nearer. And that must of
necessity be done, so soon as ever the plane is touched by some one Fiber,
which is distant from the Axis as much beyond, as that Fiber, which first
touched the plane, is distant from the Axis on this side: for, then do the two
forces become equal, and so one part of the Fibers having no reason any longer
to praevail over the other, by counter inclination, the Ball instantly cease
to touch the plane, and flies off from it, toward that region, to which the
Axis and all the circumstant Fibers are then, i. e. after the Evolution,
directed. Now, because the Ball is, after this manner, reflected from the
plane, with the same inclination, or obliquity, with which it was impinged
against it; it is an evident consequence, that the Angle of its Reflection must
be commensurable by the Angle of its Incidence: and that each of them must be
so much the more Obtuse, by how much less the line of projection does recede
from a perpendicular; and contrariwise, so much the more Acute, by how much
more the line of projection does recede from a perpendicular, or how much
nearer it approaches to a parallel with the plane.

Art. 13. Two Inferences from the praea^ses* viz. (1) That the oblique
Projection of a Globe against a plane, is composed of a double Parallel: and
(2) That Nature suffers no diminution of her right to the shortest way, by
Reflection.
From these Considerations we may infer Two Observables. The One, that the
oblique projection of a Globe against a plane, is composed of a double
Parallel, the one with the Perpendicular, the other with the plane: for, the
Globe at one and the same time, tends both to the plane, and to that part
toward which the plane runs out forward. The Other, that Nature loses nothing
of her right, by the Reflection of bodies; forasmuch as she may nevertheless be
allowed still to affect and pursue the shortest, or nearest way: for, because
the Angle of Reflection above the plane, is equal to that Angle, which would
have been below the plane, in case the plane had not hinderd the progress of
the line of projection beyond it, by reason of the Angles Equal at the Vertex,
as Geometricians speak; therefore, is the Reflex way equal to the Direct, and
consequently to the shortest, in which the ball projected could have tended
from this to that place.

Art. 14. Wherein the Aptitude or Ine^^itude of bodies to Refle^ion does
consist.
Here, to bring up the rear of this Section, we might advance, a discourse,
concerning the Aptitude and Ineptitude of Bodies to Reflection; but, the dullness
of our Pen with long writing, as well as the Confidence we have of our Readers
Collective Abilities, inclining us to all possible brevity, we judge it
sufficient only to advertise, that what we have formerly said, concerning the
Aptitude and Ineptitude of Bodies to Projection, has anticipated that
Disquisition. For, certain it is, in the General, that such Bodies, which are
More Compact, Cohaerent, and Hard, as they may be, with more vehemence, and to
greater distance, Projected: so may they, with more vehemence, and to greater
distance Rebound, or be Reflected; provided, they be impinged against other
bodies of requisite Compactness, Cohaerence, and Hardness. And, the Reason, why
a Tennis-ball does make a far greater Rebound, than a Globe of Brass, of the
same magnitude, and thrown with equal force; is only this, that there is not a
proportion betwixt the Force impressed by the Projicient, and the Gravity of each
of them; or betwixt the Gravity of each, and the Resistance of the Plane. Which
holds true also concerning other bodies, of different Contextures.

CONCLUSION:
Ingenious Reader,
I Have kept you long at Sea, I confess, and (such was the Unskilfulness of my
Pen, though steered, for the most part, according to the lines drawn on those
excellent Charts of Epicurus and Gassendus) often shipwrackt your Patience.
But, be pleased to consider, that our way was very Long and taedious; insomuch
as we had no less than the whole of that vast and deep Ocean of Sublunary
Corporeal Natures, to sail over: that our passage was full of Difficulties, as
well in respect of those sundry Rocks of Incertitude, which the great Obscurity
of most of those Arguments, whose discovery we attempted, inevitably cast us
upon; as of those frequent Mists and Foggs, which the exceeding Variety of men's
Opinions, concerning them, surrounded and almost benighted our judgment
withal: and chiefly, that if by the voyage your Understanding is brought home
not only safe, but enriched, though in the least measure, with that inestimable
Wealth, the Knowledge of Truth, or what is so Like to Truth, as to satisfy
your Curiosity as fully; as I have reason to congratulate my self, for the
happiness of my Care and Industry, in being your Pilot, so must you to esteem
the adventure of your Time and Attention compensated with good Advantage. And,
now you are on Land again, give me leave, at parting, to tell you; That all the
Fare I shall ever demand of you, is only a Candid sentiment of my Good Will and
cordial Devotion to the Commonwealth of Philosophy. Which, indeed, does so
strongly Animate me on to enterprises of Public Utility, though but to those
in the Second Form of Scholars; that I can be well contented, not only to
neglect opportunities of Temporal advantages to my self, while I am employed in
the study, how to contribute to the Intellectual promotions of others; but also
to stand in the number of those Active and Free Spirits, who have, through want
of Abilities only, miscarried in their well intended Endeavors for the benefit
of Learning; rather than in the list of those Idle, or Envious ones, who having
more of Wit, than of Humanity, and wanting nothing but the Inclination to do
Good, have buried their Talents, and lest the Republique of Arts and Sciences,
to suffer in the want of such means of Advancement, as their Capacities might
easily have afforded unto it.

It Is the Custom of the Multitude, you Know, always to estimate the Counsel of
Designs only by their Success; and never allowing for Impediments or sinister
Accidents, to account the Goodness of an Undertaking to consist wholly in the
Felicity of its Event: but, such is the justice of Wisdom, that it consigns a
Reward to a good Intention; and decrees a Laurel to be planted on his Grave,
who falls in the generous Attempt of any noble Discovery, as well as one to be
placed on his Head, who shall be so much beholding to the Favor and Assistance
of his Fortune, as to Accomplish it. This I put you in mind of, not out of
Arrogance, as if I challenged any thing (...) due to me, besides a lively
Resentment of my constant and sincere Zeal to the Increase of Knowledge; but,
to possess you more fully with the Equity of my Expectation, which aims at no
other Reward, but what Detraction it self dares not dispute my Right unto, and
much less tha^ what, I presume, your own Charity would, if I had referred my
self thereunto, have readily assigned me.

But, lest I seem to prevent you in your Inclination, or to Extort that from
you by force of Argument, which as well your own innate Candor, as judicious
Aequanimity, had sufficiently praepa^ed you to offer me of your own accord; I
resign you to your Peace, and the undisturbed enjoyment of those Pleasures,
which usually result from the memory of Difficulties once overcome: Having
first assured you, that your benign Acceptance of my Services, and Pardon of
my Misfortunes (so I may call all such Errors, whose praecaution was above the
power of my humble judgment) in this Voyage; may prove a chief Encouragement
to me, to adventure on a Second, without which this First must be Imperfect;
and that is for a Description of the Nature of that Paradise of the World, that
bright shadow of the All-illuminating and yet Invisible Light, that Noble
Essence, which we know to be within us, but do not understand because it is
within us, and cannot understand without it, the Humane Soul; and that, so soon
as Quiet and Physic shall have repaired those Decays in the Weather-beaten
Vessel of my Body, which long Sitting, frequent Watchings, and constant
Solicitude of mind have therein made.

In the meantime, I conjure you, by your own Humanity, to remember and
testify, that in this my Conversation with you, you have found me so far from
being Magisterial in any of the Opinions I praesented; that considering my own
Humor of Indifferency, and constant Dubiosity (frequently professed, but more
expressly, in the First Chapter of this Work, and 1. Art. of the 1. Chap. 3.
Book.) it has somewhat of wonder in it, that I ever proposed them to Others:
nor* indeed, can any thing solve that wonder, but my Hope^^ thereby secretly to
undermine that lofty Confidence of younger Heads, in the Certitude of Positions
and Axioms Physiological; and by my declared Skepticism even in such Notions,
as my self have labored to assert, by the firmest Grounds, and strongest
Inducements of Belief, to reduce them to the safer level of

Quo magis quaerimus, magis dubitamus.

FINIS.

