THE CHARTER; A Comical Satyr.

Writtten by an Unknown Hand.

Rumpatur quisquis rumpitur invidia. Mart. Epig. LONDON: Printed for Alex.
Banks, Anno Domini 1682.

The Charter: A Comical SATYR.
Fire! Fire! Fire! Help, All Is in Flames!
Pray come, for the Lords sake of Three Names!
Sons of Committee Men and Sequestrators,
Old Rebels, and new Associators;
Call the Cashiered Officers, and Justice,
(Whose Mettle like to be eat with Rust is,)
Step to the Synagogue, and Jenkins Pew,
Call all the Gentiles and the Jew;
For such Wild-fires are amongst us thrown,
(Worse then the Jesuits) 'twill burn's quite down;
A damned Fire-ball called Quo Warranto
Will bring all our hopes to Acheronto.
AS Sampson's Strength up in his Hair was tied,
Rebellions Strength was in the Charter hid;
Late in a Trumpet Treason every Punk
Could speak; now't must be whispered through a Trunk;
By Charter, Brother Traitor we could free,
Now there is no Privilege for Perjury:
Next time my Lord, beware the Medal-house
Though we'd be damned for it, we cannot save your souse;
We Have done as much for you as men could do,
Ventured our Souls, and lost our Charter too.
And is that all? Come, ben't crest-fall'n, make shift,
And bear up, I Will help you at a dead lift;
Something may yet be done, though we daren't touch
On Meal-Tub Plots lest caught in the Bolting-hutch.
How says your Lordship, (for your Honor's free)
Capital Member of our Company;
And you know well it is out of Fashion,
For Tradesmen to sink in Desperation;)
Methinks, though we broke at State (for Sins,)
We may drive our old Trade of Cony-skins,
And Kid-knapping? Sell Brock and Dog skin-Muff,
And country Captains Cheat with Horse-skin-Buff?
We must employ our Talents, still, devise,
A hundred Prod'gies, and Prodigious Lies;
The Hook of Popery will not take small
Fish now, (fie on it) The French have quite marred all,
The Whore of Babylon, and Antchrist.
He has ground to powder and spoiled our Grist;
Who would have thought that Unchristian King
Would stop our Mouths with such a Christian thing?
But yet we will sigh, and groan, and shake the head,
In time Rebellion may be brought to Bed,
With good Midwifery, and the good Wives aid,
To whom such Tales as these must still be said;
How a Child spoke as soon as born we'll tell;
(Perhaps before, to ears that could hear well;)
Tell Nothern-men how Six Suns did appear
At once in the South; to Southern, Eight Moons there.
Then for a touch of Prophecies we will say,
The Isle O Brazeel but the other day
Appeared to a good Master of a Ship,
Where an old woman that gave Death the slip
E're since the Deluge, told him, that the Time
Of the Saints Government was now at Prime;
Down goes Baalam, Ashteroth and Dagon,
Down goes Bell, and then up goes the Dragon.
But now let us gybe the Sail, and catch the Wind,
And make a Tack to fetch you up behind.
There was a time (they say) since the world stood,
You had a Charter never to be good.
Have you forgot your Routs and Ryots, when
You forced the best of Kings, and best of Men
To fly from's Royal Palace, and betake
Himself to Forest-shelter, and the brake?
When the Divine Magicians of your Town
Changed you to Wolves and Dogs to hunt him down?
Have you forgot how you the Queen did force,
And Highborn Issue to a sad Divorce
From their Royal Father? Have you forgot
How you made the Crown and Miter go to pot?
First Clamor, then Petition, Last you bring
Rebellion, a complete Sin-Offering:
Say Obediah, tell me if you please,
Had you a Charter for such Tricks as these?
Once more Beloved; Have you forgot when Drums
Beat up for Bankrupt and Religious Thrums?
When Hungry Levites, and starved 'Prentices
Sallied from their dark Cells and Penthouses,
And like the Plagues of Egypt spread all over,
Some for to stench us, all for to devour?
Have you forgot how you did Stab the King
And Church, with Bodkin, Thimble, Spoon and Ring,
And like the Indians prostitute your selves,
For the Develish Idol of your Cause and Elves?
Say Annanias, tell me if you please,
Had you a Charter for such Tricks as these?
Surely the Act of Amnesty is spilt
On those claim Pardon, will not renounce the Guilt;
A Realm divided against it self cannot stand,
Nor City, if by such as You 'twere manned;
In vain are Oaths and Witnesses, if the Shreive
Can pack a Jury, that will not believe:
The Pope and Conclave sure have changed their Nests,
And took their Quarters up within your Breasts;
Their High Prerogatives to you resigned,
Can Damn the Innocent, and Saint the Fiend;
Or else your Conscience and Religion
Are inspired with Mahomet's Pidgeon,
A Race of Chequer-work that is intertext
With the worst Christian and worst Jew mixed,
A kind of circum-uncircumcised kind,
Can Swear the Body, and not Swear the Mind;
(As Senators (for to get in) must Swear;
Then keep their first vow, to depose the Heir;)
And all this's done by virtue of the Bull
Of Magna Charta, and a Tub-pulpit-full.
Sons of Oedipus, we know you enough,
The mark of Cain is graven on your Brow;
Not for the Churches, nor for the Crown-Land,
But for the Twelve Apostles it is you stand.
St. Paul for London, St. Peter for Rome,
Judas for the Suburbs till the day of Doom;
It Is not the first time you have showed your Liege,
How you hate Idols, but love Sacrilege;
It Is hard to say, to whom we are most in Debt,
To the Jesu, or to the Judas-it;
Lions and Unicorns support our Arms,
But these are the Beasts that do support our Harms.
Now to the Quo Warranto we must plead,
Help P. W. T. lend's all your aid,
For if that be lost, we are all Bewrayed.
O Divine Charter, It would burst our heart,
If the Ark from Israel should thus depart!
But don't bring Pleas as vast as the Book of Martyr.
To Obstruct Justice, and prolong your Charter;
Speak to the point good Brother, what can say,
To keep this Charter ever and for ay?
Please You my Lord, our Charter 's Sacred made
By Grants so many, none can it invade;
Of Twenty Kings and Senats has the Seal.
The Pope had more before he did Rebel
Against the Law of God and of the King,
He was confiscate for the self-same thing;
The Law's the rule of Peace, it does not jar
^^'t self, 't has no Repugnance, nor War.
If Kings themselves cannot give their Crowns away,
Then Kings by Law cannot Themselves betray.
Look you Brother, here you have misused
Your Charter, and the Known Laws abused;
Ryots and Routs, You that should them suppress,
You have promoted to a great excess;
You have picked Juries, packed them for your Cause,
And this destroys the Fundamental Laws;
You that should Schism and Faction quell, support
Unlawful Meetings, and to them resort;
What shall I say of Oaths? You Allegiance Swear
To day, to morrow would expel the Heir;
Whose Crimes beyond all Presidents go,
Forfeit their Chattels, and their Charter too.
To this we answer, Let the sinner die,
A Tooth for a Tooth, and Eye for Eye;
Let the Transgressors of the Law be lasht,
But do not let the Law it self be dashed;
Things that have Sanction of long time, and great
Authority, should not be lightly set.
In days of old, when Subjects Innocence,
Virtue and Goodness did oblige their Prince;
The greatness of the Monarchs mind was such,
They thought good Subjects could not have too much;
But yet they never intended public wrong
By private Act, that is but an ill-tun'd Song;
They used their Charter merely to support
The Government, You to betray the Fort;
And 'twas not Sodom's sins, But 'twas the Men
Cast Town and Charter in the Sulphrous Fen;
Your Oracle has spoke, and 'tmust be so;
Carthago delenda est, down 'tmust go.
Where now do all our learned Chaldeans keep?
Be all our Soothsayers and 'Strologers asleep?
In The Blazing Stars Praedictions was a Flaw;
Or You said Antichrist for Anti-Law.
Often men of Art by Figure take that Scope
To mean the Charter, when they named the Pope;
Well, there is no help for it now, she must be stripped,
That Is caught a Whoring, and severely Whipped;
The doubt of Tyrany late turned your Maw;
How do you like this Governing by Law?
When Lunaticks are in their Frantic fits,
It Is the best expedient to reduce their Wits.
Son of a Slave, is it not enough to cheat
Fools of their Money, but you must defeat
Them of their Souls? Duties to their GOD and Prince?
Was this the Trade you're bound to 10 years since?
Sell your Pole-davis, pack up your false Ware,
And be content to cheat your Chap-men there;
You never were 'Prentice to a Statesman sure!
Say some Great Knave, (to draw thee to this Lure,)
Should stroke thee on the addle head, and cry;
Come honest Tom, (thou know better than I)
We Are like to have sad times you see;
Religion groans, and bleeding Liberty;
The honest Subject he must be disgraced,
And every sober Officer displaced;
We cannot keep Feast nor Fast for the Nations good,
But all is misconstru'd and misunderstood;
The Plot is vanished, and the Duke appears;
Tom, have not we cause for Jealousies and Fears?
Perhaps thou sigh'st then till thy Buttons Crack,
And (as thy Soul was torturing on the Rack,)
From the vesuvus of thy Smoking Zeal,
Thou bellowst forth this lamentable Peal.
'Ah! My dear Lard! Happy the Womb that bore
'An heart so Noble, Israel can deplore
'In such sad times as these, when Woes us shroud,
'That Moses will conduct us in a Cloud!
'VVe are all grieved with Extremities,
'And Pharaoh's deaf to all our Plaints and Cries!
'Our Wills with Bridle, and our Mouths with Bitt
'Are held by force, our Sanbedrims shall not sit;
'We cannot stoop down to Baal; Saints that have right
'To Judge the Earth are Ravished of their might;
'Our Hands are Fettered, and our Hearts complain,
'That Freeborn Spirits should be thrall'd in Chain;
'These, and ten thousand grievances we have;
'But you must save poor dying Souls from Grave.
'Sweet Lord, But Orpheus, who should take the pain
'To bring Euridice from Hell again?
How, drooping? (quoth my Lord?) hold up good Tom,
Of my Spirit of Sulpur take a Dram;
Though at a Slight or two, wer'e almost gone,
He Is a poor Juggler, that han't more tricks than one,
I Will call my familiar, -- Presto appear;
He comes, -- and whispers in my Ear.
Courage Mounsieur, and do not be dismayed,
From Pluto's Councel-Board, I Will still bring aid;
Stand but your ground, and doubt no overthrow,
Whilst there is a Fury in the deep below;
A thousand ways, a thousand VViles we will try,
In Town must set the Stygian Company;
Whose Country Factors must retail their Wares
From House to House as do the Scotchmen theirs:
Complain of Taxes in time of Wars;
In peace of Trade, and evil Counselors;
Invetrate Lechers when their Lust departs,
To keep the Sports up, they must use new Arts.
We must the Crowns Prerogative impair,
The Negative Voice in the Commons declare;
Slight all the Kings Alliances, disgrace
Foreign Ambassadors in every place;
Say that Been Hadu Otor's scarce half manned
(Though wiser far) than all our Knaves in the Land;
We are all Brethren, and we now must Plow,
With all our Heifers, Might and Main must bow;
Every new Moon a new Parliament cannot
Re-mind the Folk; that they are the Government;
We shall have one at last I Am sure, and then
We Will make such Senators shall make Us Men:
The Tide may turn, States have their Ebb and Flow,
And we may catch them when the Water's low;
Children must be provided for, and Wars
May hap, ( Crowns themselves are not free from cares;)
Then Money must be had, our Silver Coin
Shall buy good part of Pharoahs Golden Mine;
We are all Tradesmen now, and what we give
'T shall be but Bartring for Prerogative;
Fetch the Addressors up, and scour the Coast
Of all the Tories and Abhorring Host;
Hang up the Judges, and Grand-Juries clap
Close in Goals, that stood in the Royal gap;
Dawn but that day, (quoth Tom) and we will Sing,
A Headless Council, and a Headless King.
Hold quoth my Lord, too fast, now you ramble;
(Quoth Tom) to keep pace we'y' I must Amble.
Bless me my Stars! Can such as these men be
The Bulwarks of our Church and Liberty?
Send them to the Morocco in Exchange
For's Estriches and Lions, they are Beasts more strange.
The French it is said, Fees any one that is rare,
Pray Cross the Waters, and to him repair;
If there be any Spirits that excel
You in Sedition, they must come from Hell.
We know the Idol of your Charter's dear
To you, as Laban's Gods to Rachel were
In her pollutions, which she slily hid,
Because all search there Modesty forbid;
But your pollutions in your Charter Reign,
And hope it shall your Wickedness maintain.
No Time, no, nor Authority can give
Such Sanction as to make Corruption live.
But Master Ignoramus, make right view;
And sure it is not your Charter squints, but You;
There Is no such thing as the Kings Friends shall bleed,
And's Mortal Enemies for Treason freed.
You're fine Fellows to Judge th'Twelve Tribes; I fear
By Magna Charta you will scarce sit there:
Cabbage twice boild's stark naught, and the discourse
(You know) in Pulpit still the same, is worse
Consider Rabby (You are wise and Sage)
Rebels and Jubilees thrive but once an age:
Alas you know it was but the other day
With Drum and Trumpet, Fool and Knave, this Play
Was Acted to our cost of lives and Ore,
Pack up your Nawls, we will be deceived no more:
Grant some great Lord or two did chance to jar,
(With Cedars well as Shrubs, such Chances are;)
But yet methinks, the Twigs should grateful be
To the Root that gave them all their Bravery.
Malice never want's for Mischief, and Revenge
Is dearer much to Mortals, than the Fringe
Of Heaven; The Soul of Body and 'State;
And every Nerve's employed to serve its Hate.
The Cunning and the Crafty must be bought,
The Young and Sportive; they are easy caught;
The Discontented must be left alive,
With hopes of his ambitious Retrieve;
Sticks of all sorts and sizes it must get,
To make the Flame, and to increase the heat;
And still Religion makes the Oven red,
Or else quite spoild's the Batch of Ginger-bread.
Then crawls the Insects forth, their Kingdoms come,
Still where the Carrion is those Creatures rome,
And buzzing up and down the Town they cry,
For Liberty, and for the Truth we will die.
What Snake-hair'd Jury with Infernal Brand,
Broke loose from Hell thus to Inflame the Land?
Take a Survey of all the World beside,
Subjects are Slaves, each English seems a Dride;
If Heaven should bid a Subject to implore
What Bliss we want, he could not ask for more;
Oh the unhappy State of Happiness!
They enjoy more that do enjoy much less;
Rome in it is Pomp and Pride could never show
Men of that bulk of Wealth in England flow;
And every Cottager lives frank and free
As Jove, Here Is a perpetual Jubilee:
Hear one great truth an English Poet Sings,
We have one Emperor, and a Million Kings.
To the KING.
Celestial Prince, descended from above,
With Goodness, and the Wisdom of great Jove;
Hovring the Doves with thy Seraphick Wings,
Still Shielding Church and State from Serpents Stings,
Accept the Addresses of our Humble praise
It Is all the Incense Men to God can praise.
When Civil War three Kingdoms did inthrall,
You were the Savior that Redeemed us all,
And raised miraculously from their Graves,
Three Soul-sunk Nations that were Slaves to Slaves;
Mean Thanks do mighty favors quite disgrace,
But dull Ingratitude becomes the base:
How Justly may thou let thy Thunder fly?
Both Giants and Pigmies doomed to die.
What, will they War with Jove? in vain, in vain;
Whom the Gods have Crowned, in spighr of Worms shall Reign;
Repent proud Dust before it be too late,
Strike Sail; my Muse shall be your Advocate.
Hear great Apollo, Phoebus lend thine ear
To an unpolisht Muses humble Prayer.
She lifts no Phaetontick Palm on high;
Lo, her request is veiled with modesty;
Thou that art goodness Essence, Thou that keeps
Clemency waking that she never sleeps;
Look on the Errors of Mortality
With the Kind Aspect of your God-like Eye.
Though they have sinned (and certainly a Sin
To death, had it against a bad Prince been,)
And their Transgressions in an high degree,
Are aggravated to sin thus against Thee;
My poor Muse begs, (although their Sins be great,)
That Thou would not Forget, to forget.
To the DUKE
And Thou Great Hero of loud Flames first rate
(Still partner of your Royal Brothers Fate)
Who baffle Mischief, and her Dart despise,
And stand the firmer, for her Batteries;
Whilst Envy toyls her self quite out of breath,
You undisturbed can smile the Wretch to death.
Malice is now in a Consumption grown;
To see her self mistook in You alone;
Still the more venom that You on they throw,
Still You the Taller, and more Lovely grow;
Can walk the Fiery Furnace, and no Hair
Singed, no smell of Fire, no impair:
Fond men! To hope they can destroy whom Jove
Preserves by Wonders and peculiar Love:
Well may they droop their Heads, and Necks incline,
As Tulips Frost-bit with a Northern wind;
To Prudence still and Piety you are Just,
And will forgive, whom none will wish to trust.
To the LORDS.
You of the Constellation that maintain
Your Starry Glories from Apostate Stain;
You whose chaste Loyaly for ever streamed
To the Royal Lamp of Honor whence You beamed,
You shall for ever share the Muses Praise,
Whilst Helicon has Drops, Apollo Bays.
To the GENTRY.
Come Brothers of the Minor Stars, that are
No wandering Planets, but fixed in Your Sphere;
You that hvea vowed to be so true
To Charles, that to your selves you be so;
(And sure I am your Oath will not be broke,
You Will bow to Destiny, before the Yoke)
We must not praise nor thank our selves, that is vain,
That were but Champarty (You know) in grain;
But we will so Loyal and so Faithful live
That Church and Crown's Fees us no thanks shall give.
To the Common Council and Court of Aldermen.
And You brave Citizens, so Rich and wise,
(The Boons of Heaven due to Loyalties)
Heaven marks them who from Allegiance stray,
(With Children, Wits, or Fortunes quite awry.)
You that hold the Rains, curb the head strong Jaws
Of Asses kicked at Governors and Laws;
You know That Trade does still most profit bring,
To them are true to God, and to their King;
Long may you live, and may the Town and Court
Be happy in the prayers of my poor heart;
May no King want such Citizens I pray,
Nor Townsmen Prince, like him they now enjoy.
Livery-men.
But You that are now of the new Livery,
And Old Leven, look for no thanks from me;
Keep to your Gods; On damned Bradshaw call,
Implore the shades of Ireton and Noll;
To come improved from Hell, and be so good
To set cracked men with Plunder up, and Blood;
The Rabble shall no longer rule this Town,
Rebellions Charter now must go down, down:
But yet we will beg the King that he would please
To give another on good terms as these.
Countries over grown with Beasts of Rapine, be
Tied to destroy the common Enemy,
And bound by Charter yearly to afford
So many Fox or Wolf-skins to the Lord:
London, once bounded in Walls, is now boundless
Grown from a City to a Wilderness;
More and worse vermin lurk in 't's Holes and Dens,
Than Wolves in Tory-Land, or Frogs in Fens:
If they renew their Charter, may they pay
A Rebels head for Quit-rent every day,
And a Whores Liver, till the Town be found
Honest, and (like the Loyal Country) sound.
Now we have done, we have not done; what is there?
See how the Mutinous women appear!
Nip Insurrections in the bud; Drums beat
A parl, and let us with the Females treat;
What would the good wives have? Forbear slaughter!
Then quoth the Amazons, we will keep our Charter;
And thus pleads first a Mouse-trap-makers Wife;
Before we will loose our Honor, we will loose Life;
Honor than Food or Raiment prized more high;
For It we will live, and for It we will die
Farewell Charter, Farewell Gentility.
Next comes a bouncing Butchers Wife in the Van,
With a Cow-killing Pole-ax in her Hand,
D'y' think we will loose our Charter? And be styled ^ro,
As Fish-women be in Bore-Land, and well so?
Master Punch Kills an Ox, and Twenty Sheep
Each week in the year, and I the Stall do keep;
Shall all this Blood (besides a Freemans Wife)
Now loose it is Honor? By my Butchers life,
For our Noble Charter we will stand and fall,
For if we loose our Arms, we then loose all.
Then spoke a Chandlers Wife with Ale-stuft-Lungs,
As big as Tun, foaming at all her Bungs;
Do You think I Will sit at Bar all day for the Fees
I get by Porters Penny Bread and Cheese,
And see the Slaves, like Clowns in Sussex, come,
And cry Dame where is your Husband? at home?
Shall double Drink place to Feeling so give?
Shall't be Madam Creswell, and not Mis Keeling?
Quoth Mistress Fough, 'twould be a stinking life,
If I were not Master Gold-Finders Wife;
If farewell Charter, farewell to all
The Nobility of Pin-makers-Hall,
Stand to your Arms both Life and Limb shall go
To save our Honor, and our Charter too.
A Reverend Matron, in whose Loyal Face,
Was every touch of Modesty and Grace,
Hearing their Grievances, ventured the Crowd,
And thus she spoke, and thus their Ears they bowed;
'Dear Sisters of the Livery, appease
'The boisterous bellows of your passions cease,
'You know that oftentimes untimely fears
'Unform the Men, and them transform to Hares,
'And Jealousy's our Sexes cursed Spell,
'Transforms us Angels to the Hags of Hell.
The last old Charter which you so deplore,
Was granted to us in the days of Yore,
And many an odd thing was in it; 'twas done
When the Land with Popery was overrun,
And now by Law it is so repugnant found,
That the Law it self is in that Charter drowned;
But there is another in the Mint for you,
According to your hearts desire, New, New;
Not after the old Superstitious Fashion;
But New, according to the Reformation:
For we that were but Mistresses before,
Shall now be Masters, Lords, and something more;
Moreover, it is provided, all the Geese
In London shall have two Ganders apiece;
Double manned; And if that be not Satis,
You shall have your Boys on Sundays Gratis,
This said, they shout, and made the Welkin ring;
Cried, Damn the old Charter, and God save the KING.
FINIS.

