AN ACCOUNT Given to the PARLIAMENT BY THE Ministers sent by them to OXFORD.

In which you have the most remarkable passages which have fallen out in the
six Months service there, diverse Questions concerning the Covenant of Grace,
Justification, etc. are briefly stated.

Particularly, there is presented two Conferences, in which the Ministers
together with the truth, have suffered by reproaches and falsehoods in print and
otherwise.

The chief points insisted on in those Conferences are,

1. Whether private men might lawfully Preach. 2. Whether the Ministers of the
Church of England were Antichristian. Both which Questions were disputed,
Objections answered, and the Truth confirmed. 3. And lastly, Diverse of M.
Erbury's dangerous errors which he broached and maintained, are recited and
refuted.
We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by F. K. for Samuel Gellibrand at the Brazen- Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

TO The Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in High Court OF
PARLIAMENT.
WHen you descended so low, as to make choice of us to Preach to the learned
University and famous City of OXFORD, we durst not perform blind obedience,
we consulted God and our consciences, our friends and Brethren; we looked upon
the service as a task par animo Alexandri, and our friends looked upon our
obedience to your Orders, tanquam obedientiae prodigium. We considered that
GOD does usually make use of weak instruments in great and high services, that
all the glory may be ascribed to God alone, to whom all the glory is due,
because he works all our works in us and for us. We came hither with
selfe-denying thoughts, being confident that God who called us to a new
service, would give us new abilities, and raise our spirits as high as our
work. We know each impotent creature moved by the instinct of nature, does
adventure upon its own particular hurt for the general good. Philosophy has
taught us that we must not love what is good upon private grounds, with respect
to our own particular interest, or private good; and experience tells us, that
great things have been brought to pass by weak and inconsiderable means. We
are ashamed to be outvied by the gallantry of that noble Queen, who with
resolution above her sex cried out magnanimously, If I perish, I perish: we
resolved therefore to run any course (and deprive our selves of that sweet
content we took in more retired employments, more suitable to our abilities)
that the public might be more furthered, and God more honored, though we had
perished in the work: Naz. Orat 20.
this is (as Nazianzen speaks) the law of Martyrdom, neither to seek danger,
nor fear it.

It is now requisite that we should in this our last month, give you some
account of this half years service; our enemies will assure you, that we have
been true to our principles, and you know we were sent to bear witness to the
truth. We must needs subscribe to that zealous expression of Zuinglius, Quas
non oportet mortes praeligere -- imo in quam profundam inferni abyssum non
intrare, quam contra conscientiam attestari? It is more desirable to go to
hell, then to witness any thing against our conscience. Anno 1253.
Matthew Paris relates a story of one that was not afraid to speak the truth
upon his deathbed. The Friars, says he, and the Prelates are all Heretics;
the Friars for not reproving the Prelates, and the Prelates for conferring
Benefices upon unworthy persons. We have spoken as if we had been upon our
deathbeds, sure we are, they will not pronounce us guilty of the Friars
Heresy.

The corruptions of men do many times by an overruling providence prove the
occasions of fulfilling the promises of God; lies are made subservient to
truth, and envy to charity, by the wise disposal of the God of Heaven: a sweet
experiment whereof we his despised servants have met withal in the result of
the ensuing conferences, touching which we find men of different minds. Some of
deep judgment and (as we hope) good affections, do much wonder why the
Ministers sent down by the Paaliament to Oxford, would condescend to dispute
with men who have not skill either to discern the strength of others
arguments, or the weakness of their own answers, much less the sufficiency
of answers given to their reasons for satisfaction. It will be requisite
therefore to lay down the grounds and reasons which moved the Ministers then
present, to yield to any such private meetings at their first coming to Oxford.

The truth is, they found the University and City much corrupted, and diverse
hopeful men in both, very much unsettled; they perceived that it was not
possible to instruct, convince, reform, and settle even ingenuous men, unless
there were some private exercise allowed in which they might have some freindly
conference, without any wrangling debate, with these unsettled but hopeful men.

It was far from the intention of the Ministers upon the place, Romans 14. 1.
to receive such as were weak in the faith to doubtful disputations,
notwithstanding they knew themselves obliged to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and durst not please themselves, no nor others, any further then might
make for edification. They did not think themselves too high for communion and
fellowship of ordinary saints, much less did they conceive themselves Lords of
the peoples faith; they knew that the ablest Ministers may be established and
comforted by the experiments of grown Christians, Romans 1. 11, 12.
for even the Apostle himself desires, Modeste significans se non minus
paratum esse consolationem and aedificationem ex eorum fide capere, quam ex sua
ipsius praebere. Dickson in loc. and D. Selater on Romans 1. 12.
that he and his Romans might be comforted together by the mutual faith of one
another; and therefore however it would in a rational way have seemed more for
their advantage to have admitted none to the meeting but prudent and well
accomplished Christians, and more agreeable to reason, to let every one bear
his own burden, and to converse with those only who are not burdensome, but
helpefull because strong Christians, yet they did know it is their duty to help
others and deny themselves, to support the weak, and bear with their
weakness, and not seek to please themselves, but Christ, Romans 15. 1.
who commands them to bear the infirmities of the weak, and forbids them to
please themselves, Romans 15. 1. and hereupon though they foresaw that this
exercise would load them with unpleasing burdens and censures, yet they
resolved not to please themselves, but to pleasure even weak Christians for
their good to edification, (...) Christ pleased not himself.

Moreover the Ministers were assured that there were some weak Christians, who
would be very willing to give them a private meeting, but would by no means be
persuaded to repair to the Parish-Churches, the constant place of public
meetings; now the Ministers thought fit that these weak brethren for whom
Christ dyed should be tenderly respected, and not given over as lost sheep.

Besides there were some of the University who had been taught that there were
certain vacuities in the Moral law, that Christ was a Priest after the order
of Aaron, Vide Tertulliani Apologet. Minut. Foel. Plinij Ep. etc. Conventus
bonorum non est factio sed Curia,
that a constellation of Gospell-graces and sincere obedience to the whole
Gospel make men capable of the pardon of sin, and do as conditions qualify
believers for justification, etc. The Ministers therefore are not ashamed to
profess that the intent of their meeting was not only to satisfy scrupulous
men, and resolve cases of conscience, a service of no mean concernment, and
such as could not be performed in a satisfactory way without a conference; but
they desired to set up a kind of Catechism Lecture, by way of conference, and
that the rather because they knew all that stood in need of catechizing, would
not brook the ordinary way of catechizing by Question and Answer, the first
being esteemed more friendly and familiar, and this latter accounted (by men as
proud as they are ignorant) too Magisteriall.

The Ministers saw it necessary to lay down the first principles of the
doctrine of Christ, namely the foundation of repentance from dead works, and
faith toward God, and accordingly they did clearly explain the doctrins of
justificatio^ and Regeneration, they did set open the treasures of the covenant
of Grace, and show unto the people by what means they might get an interest in
Christ; by what evidences they might clear that interest, and how they might
improve it to their best advantage, Therefore seeing they have this Ministry
they faint not, but renounce the hidden things of dishonesty (which might put
them to shame) not walking in craftiness nor handling the word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth they have commended themselves
to every man's conscience in the fight of God, 2 Cor. 4, 1. 2. And that the
Gospel which they have vindicated may not be hid, they published Propositions
or Theses to the world, which they did assert and evince by undeniable
Arguments at their several exercises from the 4th of September till the 12th
of November.

You may please further to understand; there were several Rules for the better
regulating of these meetings.

1. That the Ministers deputed to state the point and keep order, should begin
and conclude the exercise with prayer.

2. That the Principlall question should be propounded a Week before it was
stated and determined, that every one might upon mature deliberation deliver
his judgment, or experiments for the edification of the company that met.

3. That such Questions only should be propounded as did tend to the clearing
of some weighty point of faith, worship, or obedience, that all niceties and
subtilties might be waved, and that Truth which is according to godliness
manifested and maintained.

4. That nothing should be begun or carried on in that meeting through strife
or vainglory, but all proceedings should be in lowliness of mind and
brotherly love, that they might in honor prefer one another and show that each
did esteem another better then himself.

5. That no man should be interrupted, unless he seemed tediously impertinent
to him who was appointed to keep order.

6. That none should advance this or any other private metting in opposition
to, or contempt of public Ordinances, but every one be careful to benefit
himself by this exercise, that he might be the better prepared for all solemn
worship, service, and ordinances in public.

The Apostles made it their business by teaching from house to house, in
private to prepare Christians for public worship, and to unite them that they
might with zeal and steadfastness continue, 1. In the doctrine delivered by the
Apostles: 2. In all Christian fellowship. 3. More especially in that inimate
fellowship or communion in breaking of bread. 4. In prayers, Act. 2. 4^. The
Ministers intended by this exercise to unite the godly Citizens and Scholars,
1. that they might be established in the doctrine delivered by the Apostles to
the Saints: 2. united in all bands of Christian freindship and communion: 3. be
prepared for the holy communion of the body and blood of Christ, and in a word,
for all offices of piety and charity; and when they were made more profitable
hearers, and worthy communicants, we did not doubt but all that lived and
conversed together in City or University (for whose benefit the exercise was
intended) would upon all occasions be kindly affectioned to one another, and
watch over one another with a godly and freindly jealousy, provoke one another
to piety, and upon every good opportunity according to their several abilities
instruct, admonish, reprove, exhort, encourage, comfort recover, support,
relieve, serve one another in love and prudence, as their several nrcessities
should require; this was the dangerous design of the Ministers sent from the
Parliament, which they are not ashamed by these presents to publish to the
world: which was to nourish, continue, and increase communion between the
Saints, that there might be a spiritual and happy exchange of gifts, graces,
and experiments between Ministers and strong Christians, that both might be
better enabled to bear the heaviest burdens and the manifold infirmities of
weak Christians. If Ministers spend their strength in resolving perplexed
cases, clearing obscure points, in cateching the ignorant, confirming the
unsettled, comforting the distressed, reducing the seduced, sure this is the way
to be helpers of the peoples joy, and furtherers of their own account, this as
rhey humbly conceived, was the best way to put every member of Christ's body
into its proper place, that has in these times of distraction been dislocated
or disjoynted, that there may be no heresy nor schism, or as little as may be,
but (by that which every joint supplyeth according to the mutual
serviceablenesse and effectual working in the measure of every part) the whole
body may be increased by the edification of it self, M. Rogers his 5 Treatise
and 13 Chapt.
and every part in love, every part growing up in all things into Christ, who
is our head, our life, our all, Ephe. 4. 15, 16.

In the works of Reverend M. Roger now with God, we read that in the year
1588. that memorable year, some devoted Christians (that were diligent
frequenters of public Assemblies with the people of God) met also in private,
and did by conference unite themselves, and so strengthen one another against
their corruptions, that the devil himself and all their enemies were never
able to dissolve that happy union; but let our Theses speak for us.

Quest. 1. Concerning Justification, what it is?

1. It is the gracious sentence of God, 1. Romans 8 1. 3. 34.
2. Wherein he freely forgives all the sins of believers. 2. Rom 3. 24, 25, 26.
Gal^. 2. 16. and cap. 3. 22. Act. 3. 38, 39.
3. And accepts their persons as righteous, 3. Romans 4 5, 6, 7.
4. In and for the righteousness of Christ. 4. Romans 5. 19 Gal. 2 20. Ephesians. 1. 6.
5. Given to them by God. 5. Romans 5. 15, 16. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Concerning the forgiveness of sins.

Quest. 2. Whether all the sins of believers past, present, and to come, are in
Justification at once and in one sentence pardoned?

1. By that sentence whereby a believer is declared righteous in the sight of
God, for and in the righteousness of Jesus Christ bestowed on him, his sins
are freely remitted unto him, and he stands discharged in the sight of God from
the guilt of them, and from the condemnation which the law pronounces against
them, Romans 4. 6. Hebr. 8. 12.

2. Guilt of sin may be considered two ways, 1. As it cleaves to sin and
imports a deserving of punishment, and this is every where, where sin is;
even in the godly themselves, Psalm. 143. 2. Psalm. 130. 3. 2. As it redounds to
the person, actually subjecting him to the curse.


3. Though every sin whatsoever be in its own nature damnable, and so might
bind the person under wrath and the curse, yet no sin does actually subject any
person under wrath and the Curse, but that which is committed while he is under
the law, and before he is under grace, for it is the law which works wrath,
Romans 4. 15. Romans 6. 14. Romans 8. 1.

4. Sin cannot properly be said to be pardoned to a person before it be
committed, for where sin is not, guilt is not; and where guilt is not on a
person, it cannot be said by a pardon to be removed from him: but the sins of
an unregenerate man when he is justified are actually pardoned, that is, the
obligation of the person under wrath by reason of these sins is taken off from
him, and he translated under grace; and the sins which he commits after
regeneration so far forth as they have any kind of guilt in them, so far forth
they may be said to be still forgiven to him, Mich. 7. 18. Psalm 51. 9.

For understanding whereof we may note,

1. That as sin is damnable in it self, so where it continues to be, it would
continue to damn, if the pardon once given, should not likewise be continued
to the person to whom it is given. Now these are two things and two acts of
grace; to Justify a person, and to continue the Grace of Justification to him;
for God might (if such had been his pleasure) pardon sin past, and leave a
sinner under the power of sin in case he committed it afterward, to bring a new
guilt upon him unto death, as of it self it is apt to do: so that as a stone in
a building is of it self apt to fall downward, and so would do if the building
should not continue, so sin in a justified person is apt to condemn, and would
condemn him as well as any other, if God should not continue to justify, or
multiply to pardon Isay 55. 7.

2. We may note that God may be considered two ways, 1. As a Judge proceeding
against Male factors according to the law which inflicteth a curse, Romans 4* 15.
2. As a father proceeding against offending children with anger and
displeasure; so the Lord may be angry with his own people, Esaias 64. 8, 9. Exodus
4. 14.


An unjustified person sinning is an enemy under the curse of God as a judge, a
justified person sinning is a son under the anger and displeasure of God as a
father. So that there is a guilt subjecting the one to a legal curse, and a
guilt subjecting the other to a paternall displeasure.

If then it be asked in what sense justified persons may and do ask pardon of
sin committed by them after justification; we answer.

1. In regard of legal condemnation, so we daily ask the continuance of the
pardon already granted; for it is one thing to pardon, and another to continue
to pardon, or to preserve to a person that interest in a pardon once
pronounced, which he if he were left to himself would by every sin after
forfeit and cast away, 2 Samuel 7. 25. Heb. 8. 12.

2. In regard of paternall displeasure, so we daily ask the recovery of his
gracious and fatherly countenance toward us, and the removal of that anger
which our sins might justly provoke against us, Psalm. 51* 9, 12. Psalm. 6. 1.

3. In pardon is considerable, 1. The general sentence once pronounced in a
man's first translation from nature to grace. 2. The particular application of
that grace with respects to particular sins, as they are daily or occasionally
committed. In which sense Remission already granted in the covenant of grace is
by believers sued forth and pleaded with respect to their daily sins, and
Christ's continual interceding for them, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Hebr. 7. 24, 25.


4. Sin is said to be forgiven two ways, 1, In the court of the Judge, which
is in our first translation from nature to grace. 2. In the conscience of the
sinner reading his own pardon, and in this sense we daily pray for more full
revelation and manifestation thereof to us.

Quest. How may a man know that he is justified?

Res. 1 The Spirit does testisie in the written word that all.

Gal. 3. 6. Joh. 1. 12.
Who believe in Jesus Christ,

Ephesians. 6. 24. 1 John 4. 16. 19.
Love him in sincerity,

1. Joh. 3. 14.
And the brethren for his sake,

Romans 8. 15, 16. and cap. 10. 13.
Call upon God in Christ's name,

Romans 8. 13. Galat. 5. 24.
Mortify the deeds and lusts of the flesh,

Romans 8. 1. Gal. 5. 25.
Walk in and after the Spirit, are justified.

2. The Spirit does work all saving graces in our hearts which are parts of
Sanctification, Romans 8. 30.
evidences of Justification, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the fruits and earnest of glory. Ephesians. 1. 14.


3. The Spirit does when and as he pleases, 1 Cor. 2. 9. 12.
freely discover those graces (which he has wrought in our hearts) to our
consciences, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19.
and so does witness together with our conscience, Ephesians. 3. 17. 18, 19.
that we are the sons of God, and move us to cry, Romans 5. 15.
Abba, Gal. 4. 16.
father.

4. Every sincere Christian ought humbly and thankfully to receive this
testimony of the Spirit when it is vouchsafed unto him. Gal. 4. 5, 6.
Romans 8. 15.
1. Joh. 5. 9. 10.


Quest. Of the use of the Law to believers.

1. The law was given to man in his innocence as a Covenant of life and
righteousness, requiring perfect and perpetual obedience under the pain of a
Curse, Gal. 3. 10.

2. The law by the fall of man became weak and unable to justify, Romans 8. 3.
so that none could have been saved if the Lord had not been pleased to make a
Covenant of grace.

3. Since the fall of man the law was published again, and added to the
Covenant of grace, not as a part of it, nor as a supplement to it, but as a
useful instrument to further and promote the purposes of the Gospel, Galat.
3. 19. Exodus 20. 2, 3. Take it thus then.

First, Negatively, the use of the law in the time of grace is not to justify
or save men, Romans 3. 20. Galat. 2. 21. and 3. 21. neither yet was it published
purposely to condemn and destroy men, because condemnation was in the world
before, Romans 5. 14.

Secondly, Affirmatively; but the of it is,

1. To be a means and instrument to drive men to the grace which is revealed
in the Gospel, by showing men their sin, misery, and weakness, Romans 3. 20.
Galat. 3. 22. under the curse of the law.

2. As a rule of life and obedience to those that are justified; that having
received life, grace, and love, to do Gods will, they may hereby be directed
to the knowledge thereof, 1 John 5. 23.Jam. 2. 10. 11. 1. Joh. 3. 4. Matthew. 5.
17, 19. Romans 3. 31. for though grace does dispose us to do the will of God,
yet the law sets forth to us what that will of God is.

1. Righteous persons then are delivered from the law as a Covenant of life;
from the curse and condemnation thereof; they expect life from a better
covenant, Galat. 3. 13. c. 6. 14.

2. From the occasional provocation of the law, that it does not provoke lust,
and cause sin to be the more busy and working in us, Romans 7. 13.

3 From the slavish bondage of the law compelling to outward duties, out of
fear, without love and delight, Romans 8. 15.

But they are not delivered from the law as the rule of a holy life, or from
the commanding power of the law; for the creature must be subject to the will
of the Creator, which will is signified to us in the law; for the law is holy*
just, good, spiritual, Psalm. 19. Romans 7. 12. 14. and we are called unto
holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. therefore we are to learn that holiness whereunto we
are called out of the law, which is holy and good.

Quest. How a regenerate and sanctified person may be distinguished from a
civil man and the most close hypocrite?

We have formerly heard of the testimony of the Spirit as he is a Spirit of
Adoption, now we desire to hear something of the work of the Spirit as he is
a Spirit of regeneration and sanctification.

Answ. Ephesians. 1 12.
God in Christ by the Holy Ghost, working by the Tit. 5. 5, 6.
word of truth, does in due time Romans 8. 10, 11, 13.
mortify the lusts, beget and quicken the souls of all the Acts 26. 18.
Colos. 1. 12. 13.
Elect to a spiritual life, and Romans 5, 2.
translate them from a state 1 John 5. 1, 18.
of sin to a state of grace and holiness, that they may live by Philip. 3. 20.
faith and love, and have their conversation in Heaven.

Quest. Whether there be any more then one Covenant of grace.

Ans. 1 God has made a Covenant of grace with all the elect in Jesus Christ. 2
Cor. 6. 16, 18.


2. This Covenant is 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. Acts 15. 9, 11. Gal. 3. 8, 9, 14. 16, 17.
one and the same for the substance of it both to Jews and Gentiles, though in
regard of the different manner of dispensation it is called sometimes first and
second, sometimes the old and new Covenant; the Luviticall dispensation did
consist in temporary and carnal ordinances, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
which were but shadows of these heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5.
which are more clearly revealed by a more excellent ministry to the children
of God, dispersed abroad in several Nations throughout the world. This clear
dispensation since Christ is unchangeable, and in regard of these several
respects forementioned the Covenant administered unto us is said to be a better
Covenant established upon better promises. Heb. 8. 6.


All that are actually brought under this holy Covenant have their minds
enlightened to know God, their consciences purged, hearts purified, and wills
subdued by the fear of God, they trust not to their own merits, live not after
their own lusts, fall not from the state of grace again, but live in sincere
conformity to the perfect and spiritual law of God.

The success of our Christian conferences, The success.
whether more private or public, was undeniably great.

1. Some that scrupled the lawfullnesse of Infant Baptism* were reduced and
established by a private conference, when we were engaged to treat of another
subject in our more solemn meetings.

2. Diverse that are not fully of our mind in point of Discipline, and some that
were directly contrary, did ingeniously acknowledge that after a fair debate
they received much satisfaction in some maine points of doctrine; others did
gratefully confess that they were now convinced that the Ministers intentions
were pious, and that their endeavors did effectually conduce to the
advancement of Christianity, and gave us great thanks for our pains.

3. Diverse Scholars, and some of them fellows of Houses, did bless God that
ever they saw those Ministers in Oxford, which the Parliament sent down, and
that they had the happiness to be admitted unto free conference with them;
yea, they hoped that Oxford would be like Athens of old (...), and yet not like
those envious Athenians who sacrificed for none but themselves and their
neighbors of Chios: for they perceived that there was now a spirit of
comu^nion shed abroad upon Christians in a visible way of heavenly partnership.
In a word, God was pleased to bless these exercises with admirable success to
the envy of some and setlement of others: Mr. Erbury was (as we are assured)
much offended, whether because his Auditory decreased, or his errors were
refuted, we shall not now examine, and he stirred up the spirit of the
Parliament Soldiers against the Ministers sent down from the Parliament, and
so did passionately serve the grand malignants in their master-plot; which was
to incense the Soldiers against the Ministers.

The first time that Mr. Erbury was observed to come to our meeting, he brought
with him a company of soldiers, who did rather affront and oppose then dispute,
and Mr. Erbury would not keep at all to the question which was in hand, nor
would he observe any rules, he would neither speak pertinently nor briefly, he
told us that he did not acknowledge that Christ had any Church on earth, and
therefore denied Independent Congregations to be Churches, and the Ministers of
those (as well as of Presbyteriall) congregations, were by him denied to be
true Ministers of Christ, and has himself renounced the title, though not the
pay and salary of a Minister.

Xerxes destroyed all the Temples of the Grecians, because they seemed to
overthrow the infiniteness of God, by circumscribing him within the walls of a
Temple: we will not examine whether Mr. Erbury does conceive that Christ and
his Spirit will be too much stinted and circumscribed if any Church or
Ministry be acknowledged. Only we cannot but wonder that he should be
entertained, mustered, paid as a Minister by them who account all Ministers to
be covetous for taking any temporal reward for such spiritual service as may
in their judgment be performed by any Saint or member of the Church or Army.

This Gentleman, we know not how else to style him, professing that he
exercises neither as a gifted man nor Minister, (now the Ministry is contemned
and vilified) undertook to prove demonstratively, that the Ministers of
Independent as well presbyterian Congregations are unchristian, and so by
consequence Antichristian; after he had made a loose and cloudy speech in which
he had so audaciously abused and perverted the Scripture, he did complain that
an hour or two was not sufficient for him to explain his opinion and urge his
Arguments: his unum magnum was* That there were no Apostles now, and therefore
no Ministry; he was desired to prove his consequence, but could not; he talked
much of the sealed book, that the Saints and Christ made one perfect man, at
last he fixed upon that text, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. from whence he concluded that
God gave five sorts of Ministers, and where there were not all five there were
none. It was answered that Apostles, etc. were extraordinary Officers, but
Pastors and Teachers were ordinary Officers to be continued in the Church for
the making of Saints by the blessing of God upon their ministry, nay for the
edefying and perfecting of Saints, all Saints, for the edefying of the whole
body till we all come not only into the unity of the faith, but to the
perfection of the fullness of Christ, and therefore no Saint is so perfect or
excellent a scholar or disciple, but he may be taught by the Ministers of
Christ; for though there be a great deal of variety in regard of those
several degrees of perfection, which are to be found in several Saints, yet the
highest perfection of the most accomplished Saint here below, is said to be
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. who gave Pastors
and Teachers, verse. 11 to bring the Saints to the highest perfection attainable
in this life, verse the 12. Finally, it was made most clear and evident to
Master Erbury and all the company, that Christ did not only make promises to
the Apostles themselves, but to such as were to succeed them in their ordinary
Ministry, that is, to such as were to teach and baptize even unto the end of
the world, Mat. 28. 19, 20. And when enquiry was made who were the successors
of the Apostles, the answer was that the Elders were the successors of the
Apostles because the Apostle when he was to take his leave, Act. 20. sent to
Ephesus for the Elders of the Church, verse 17. and recommended the oversight
of the Church to them, acknowledging that the Elders were Bishops or overseers
of the Holy Ghosts making; here is, if we may so call it, a kind of
resignation, a most manifest recommendation of the people to whom he had
preached, to the care of the Elders, when Saint Paul was to see their faces no
more, Acts 20. 25.

There was something else objected about the order of the Corinthian-Churches
from the 1 Cor. 14. And to that objection there were very many satisfying
answers given: some of them shall be related; First, it is evident that the
Apostle does rebuke the disorders in those Churches which did manifestly tend
to confusion, though caused or occasioned by such as did pretend to Revelation,
1* Cor. 12. 26.
verse 26. How is it then brethren? when ye come together, every one of you
has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an
interpretation; let all things be done unto edifying. The Apostle does declare
that he who pretended a revelation was to be tried and judged by the Prophets,
verse 29. for the spirits of the Prophets, are to be subject to the Prophets,
verse 32. Moreover it is manifest that the Apostle does not press the
observation of this order, as a mere prudential matter, but presses it as one
of the commandments of the Lord which does oblige even Prophets and spiritual
men, verse 37. If any man think himself be a Prophet or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the
Lord.

Finally, there were these four points distinctly proved; First, that diverse
amongst the Corinthians were endued with the gift of Prophecy, which was as
extraordinary as the gift of Tongues or Miracles, and no argument taken from an
extraordinary example and an extraordinary gift does prove that ungifted men
are authorized to Preach or Prophecy in an ordinary course. Secondly, diverse
among the Corinthians were enriched by Christ in every thing, in all utterance
and in all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. but sure every Saint is not enriched in
utterance, and all knowledge. Thirdly, it is most manifest, that every Saint
did not ordinarily preach or prophecy amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12. 29.
Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all teachers, are all workers of
miracles? and verse 30. Have all the gifts of healing? etc. all the Saints did
not teach, but only they that had the gift of teaching, even as all did not
work miracles, all did not interpret, no more then they did all speak with
tongues. Fourthly, it is most evident that they only did teach, whom God set or
appointed to teach in the Church, and God did set some, not all to teach in the
Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Every member is not an eye, for where then were the
hearing? verse 17. Now God has set the members every one of them in the body,
even as it has pleased him, verse 18. and every member must be content with
its place, and observe that order, which God has set; The Saints may find
themselves work enough if they prepare for hearing, and hear as they ought,
and practice what they hear, and therefore they should not take the work of
Preaching upon them which is sufficient to take up the whole man, but leave it
to them whom God has appointed to give themselves wholly to prayer and
preaching. It was also declared unto them that Reverend Mr Cotton of
New England, was now brought to see their opinion (which was once his own) to
be an error, and subscribes to our judgment with a great deal of ingenuity
and sweetness in his Book of the Keys, the 20th page. The opponents were not
able to reply any thing to these answers, but desired to know when we would
meet again: we told them that we could not meet until that day three weeks,
because the monthly Fast was to be observed upon the next week, and the fifth
of November the next week after; whereupon it was desired by some of Master
Erbury his adherents, that our next question might be to this effect.

Whether there was any Ministry committed to the hands of select persons in the
Church of Christ?

When we came to the place of meeting and the question formerly agreed upon at
the last meeting was red, which was to be the subject of the present
conference, it was decried by the Soldiers, who denied that to be the question;
yet we are most assured that it was resolved upon to be then disputed. It was
desired that we might read the Theses, in which the question was fully stated,
because they did give much light to the clearing of that question which they so
much desired, at length after much importunity it was yielded to, that we
should read them, which was done as follows.

1. Almighty God has and will have a Church on earth unto the end of the
world. Matthew. 26. 18. 28. 20.
2 The Father has committed unto his Son Jesus Christ, Mat. 28. 19. 1 John 5.
7.
the second Person in the blessed Trinity, both John 1. 1. 1 John 5. 20.
God and 1 Timothy 2. 3, 5. Luke 1. 35.
man, Mat. 28. 18. John 5. 22. 27
all power and judgment over this Church, and has appointed him to be a Psalm.
45. 6.
king, a Psalm, 110 4.
priest, and a Act. 3. 22.
prophet thereunto, 1 Cor. 15. 24.
so long as the Church shall continue here on earth. 3 The Lord Jesus does not
only teach his Church inwardly, but has also appointed external ordinances,
viz. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
preaching the word, and administration of Sacraments for the edifying of his
Church to the Mat. 28. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 26.
end of the world. 4 For this preaching of the word, and administration of
Sacraments, Christ has Romans 12. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11.
appointed some select persons, unto whom he has 2 Cor. 5. 18.
committed the Ministry of Reconciliation. 5 Of these some had a more Mar. 16.
15.
large commission, reaching to all Nations as the Apostles; others were
appointed as 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors and Teachers, to Act. 20. 27, 28. Col. 1. 7. Revel. 2. 1, 8.
some more particular and special places. 6 These Pastors and Teachers are
Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 3. 1.
officers of Christ's appointment, Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 5. Heb.
13. 7, 17.
distinct from the flock whom they teach and take care of, as the several
names which are given them in Scripture do import, viz. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Pet. 5.
1, 2. Tit. 1. 7. Ezekiel. 33. 7. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Heb. 13. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Rev. 2. 1.
Heb. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 12, 16.
Elders, Stewards, Watchmen, Overseers, Ministers, Rulers, Ambassadors, men
that must give an account, who are therefore as persons entrusted, to give
themselves wholly unto this work. 7 These Officers thus instituted are to
continue in the Mat. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Tit. 1. 9. Act. 20* 28. 1 Pet. 5.
2.
Church so long as Christ has a Gospel to be preached, Sacraments to be
administered, Saints to be perfected, a body to be edified, gainsayers to be
convinced, a flock to be fed, that is to say, unto the end of the World. 8
Notwithstanding this public office and ordinance of Christ for the
edification of the Church, Genesis 18. 19. Joshua 24. 15. Titus 2. 2, 3, 4.
there lies a duty upon private Christians within the bounds of private
Christians, to teach and build up one another, as parents their children,
masters their servants, and one Christian another in their communion one with
another.
After the Theses were read, some of the Commanders said, that they did not
differ from us in them, and therefore would have us to prove our call: we told
them that although we were ready to do that, yet since this was the Question
agreed upon on both sides, and Mr. Earbury for his part embraced it, and we
had stated it in our Theses, we could not yield to the altering of it: but by
the clamours, reproaches, and uncivil language and behavior of some present,
we were born down, and another Question was yielded unto, which was,

Whether those that are called Ministers, had any more authority to Preach in
public, then private Christians which were gifted; whereupon (since the
Soldiers would have it so) one of our company undertook to prove, that they
had no authority to Preach, what ever we had.

His argument was this, They that had authority to Preach, have such names and
titles (importing an office and calling) which are given to Preachers in the
Scripture: But they had not those names, and titles that are given to Preachers
in the Scripture: therefore they had no authority to Preach.

The minor being denied, it was thus proved, The names and titles that are
given to Preachers in the Scripture are such as these, viz. Pastors, Teachers,
Stewards, Watchmen, Ambassadors, Overseers, Ministers, Rulers, and such as
must give an account, etc. But these names and titles did not agree to them:
therefore they had no authority to Preach.

The major was denied, this was undertaken to be proved by the parts, and first
it was proved that Pastors and Teachers were names and titles given to
Preachers. Ephesians. 4. 11. was produced for the proof of it, he gave some
Apostles etc. some Pastors and Teachers, these name and titles of Pastors and
Teachers were given here to Preachers and men in office, and not to gifted
brethren, as appears by the connection and scope of the place.

First, it was answered, that this place did not prove the thing, for then
Preachers must be Prophets and Apostles, etc. also.

To this was replied, that that did not follow in regard Prophets and Apostles
were extraordinary officers, and pro tempore for the first planting and
founding of the Church, and therefore though Preachers were not Prophets and
Apostles, yet they were Pastors and Teachers, and were ordinary officers and
to continue in the Church.

Secondly, it was said, there was no such distinction of extraordinary and
ordinary in the Scripture, and that the answer was not sufficient;

It was replied that we read not the word ordinary; neither, yet it follows not
that therefore there were not ordinary; neither read we the word Trinity, yet
it follows not that there are not three Persons.

Thirdly, another said, they did not preach as men in office, but only as
gifted brethren, and therefore though those names did agree to men in office,
yet that did not hinder but that they might be Preachers in another capacity.

It was replied, that did imply a contradiction, to preach publicly, and yet
to be a private man; in regard that to preach employed a public office and
mission, Romans 10. 14. so that for any man to take upon him a public office
which was not an officer did usurp; as if a common Soldier should do the work
of a Colonel without a Commission or a call, though he be never so skillful,
shall be thought to usurp; and a Barrister though he be more able then the
Judge on the bench, yet must not take upon him the Judges office before he is
called to it as well as qualified for it. Every man must use his gifts in his
own sphere and compass, a Pastor in a public way, and a private man in
private ways of edification; each member of the body according to its own
measure, Ephesians. 4. 16. But they were not out of their station in this, as a
private man should be in the work of a Magistrate, Judge, or Colonel, because
they find that private men in Scripture have taught publicly without an
office, and therefore they may do so too; for proof hereof was produced the
example of those, Acts 4.

It was answered, that it does not appear, that they who preached were private
men, Philip who was named was an Evangelist, the rest might be Elders in office
at Jerusalem there used to be Apostles, Elders, and Brethren; and if all were
dispersed but the Apostles, then Elders as well as private Brethren: beside,
whoever they were, in probability they had instructions and commission from the
Apostles to do what they did, and so they did it not without a mission;
however, the case was extraordinary, and it does no way follow, if where no
officers are to do a work, private persons being furnished with more notable
gifts, then any now ordinarily are, may endeavor to propagate the Gospel where
it was not at all* therefore in ordinary times of the Church where officers are
who are furnished with greater abilities and a special call, others should
take their work out of their hands, and do that in a constituted Church which
others did where there was no Church at all, nor officers to gather one.

But Apollo preached, Acts 18. 26. true, But how prove they he was no
Minister? he is called so in express terms, 1 Cor. 3. 5. They prove he was
none because he was ignorant, and instructed by Aquila and Priscilla. But did
he well to preach being ignorant? yes, he was able to make out Jesus Christ,
being eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, If so, then the argument that he
was not a Minister because ignorant, falls to the ground; To this nothing was
replied that we could call to mind.

But they might all prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14. 31. It was answered, that
that was clearly meant of the Prophets amongst them, who were officers, and had
an extraordinary gift, of prophecy by revelation given them, verse 30. and not
of every one of the people at large, 1 Cor. 12. 29. Ephesians. 4. 11. No, it was
not extraordinary, for they were to speak to edification, exhortation, and
comfort. As if extraordinary officers might not speak to those ends.

It was further answered, that the text in the Ephesians. was not exclusive of
others, and therefore others might preach though not enumerated, for elsewhere
others were mentioned, namely helps governments, 1 Cor. 12.

It was replied, first, that though there was mention made of helps and
governments, which many did interpret of ruling officers, Ephesians. 4. speaks of
officers designed for preaching of doctrine, though all officers might not be
set down here, yet none ever questioned whether all for doctrine were not set
down. Secondly, that this must be a full enumeration of all officers for
preaching, for the Apostle mentions, the gifs Christ gave to his Church at his
Ascension, and if here were not all, then Christ at the time of his Ascension,
did not give all gifs sufficient for his Church, which could not be imagined:
whereupon in the opening of that place four particulars were observed; first,
the time when Christ received and gave these gifts to men, Psalm. 68. 18. at
the time of his Ascension when he led captivity captive, it being an expression
taken from triumphs of Conquerors after great victories, it was their custom
then to give gifts and largesses to the people: so Christ ascending into
Heaven, and leading the devil, hell, and death, as it were in triumph, having
destroyed them and delivered his people from their power, at that time gave
gifts unto his Church. Secondly, the gifts given were Apostles, etc. which were
officers for the good of his Church. Thirdly, the end to which they were given,
the perfecting the body of the Saints, etc. Fourthly, the time how long they
were to continue, till we all come, etc. that is, to the end of the world,
while there shall be any that must be brought into the unity of the faith and
of the knowledge of Christ and to be perfected in him, which always will be as
long as the world does last, so that Christ at that time when he led captive
all his enemies that did oppose him in his state of humiliation, received gifts
and gave them to men, that it might appear that in spite of all those enemies
he would provide such gifts and officers, as were necessary for his Church. Now
the Apostle reckoning up those gifts in particular, and pointing out the ends
for which they were given, and the time how long they were to last, it cannot
be supposed that either Christ did not then receive and give all gifts
necessary, or that the Holy Ghost in enumerating those he received and gave,
should not enumerate all, so that they who are not within the number of those
officers there mentioned, are none of the gifts given to the Church at the time
of Christ's ascension for the end specified, and therefore there must be some
other time when Christ gave those to the Church who are only gifted brethren,
for those ends of perfecting the Saints, the work of the Ministry, the
edifying of the body of Christ; or else it must be acknowledged that themselves
not preaching by way of office according to their former answer, cannot have so
good authority to preach in public as they have who are the Officers designed
by Christ. Thirdly, whereas it was answered, that in the very same chapter the
members are said to edify one another, the reply was this, by edifying, was
not in faith and knowledge by preaching, but it was edifying in love, for so
the words are, verse 16. it was answered by Master Earbury, that those were
given ex abundanti, though the works they were to do were in other hands
before.

This being a begging of the question it was further said, all are not
Apostles, etc. and that private men were not allowed to do the works of
Apostles and Evangelists, and therefore not of Pastors and Teachers, if some
parts of the text were exclusive, so were others; it was added that then it
will follow if Christ had never given Apostles, Prophets etc. yet the Saints
might have been perfected the body of Christ edified, and all brought into the
unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, which seems very
strange to us.

We were ready to have pressed other arguments, to prove that private men have
no authority to preach, but the multitude of Soldiers in a violent manner
called upon us to prove our calling, whereupon it was thus argued.

They who were qualified, approved, called, ordained according to the mind of
Christ, are the Ministers of Christ.

But some Ministers in the Church of England are qualified, approved, etc. Ergo
some Ministers in the Church of England are the true Ministers of Christ.

The minor was denied. In the proof of which he began with qualifications,
which were set down, 1 Timothy 3. Titus 1. They who have the qualifications there
set down, are qualified according to the mind of Christ: but some Ministers in
the Church of England have those qualifications: Ergo it is true, that some
Ministers in the Church of England are qualified according to the mind of
Christ: The minor was denied.

It was demanded what qualifications were wanting; the answer was made by
Master Earbury, that it was one qualification that Ministers must be no
strikers, but all the Ministers in England are strikers.

The reply, Master Reynolds, Master Harris, Master Wilkinson are no strikers,
therefore all are not. Master Earbury said, they are, and all are strikers,
which he labored to prove thus,

They who destroy the communion of Saints, and inflict temporal punishments
upon spiritual weakness are strikers: but all the Ministers of England do so:
Ergo.

Both propositions were denied, first the major, because the Apostle in both
places means it of fighting and striking according to the usual acception of
the word, and of outward violence: secondly, the minor was denied, with this
confirmation, they that have faith and love do not destroy the communion of the
Saints, but many Ministers in the Church of England have true faith and love,
Ergo.

It was answered by Master Earbury, that the Ministers of the Church of England
had not Gospel faith, and love, Ergo.

It was said to that by one of the Ministers, that he himself had a saving
justifying faith, of the same kind with that of Abraham, therefore he had a
Gospel faith. But it was said by Mr. Earbury, that we had no Gospel faith
because no rivers of living water nor gifts of the Spirit flowing out of us.
Answer, Whatever faith he understood by that, yet surely they had faith and
love enough to keep them from destroying the communion of Saints.

It was added by Master Earbury, that the Ministers of the Church of England
allow parish Churches, therefore they destroy the communion of Saints; Answer;
absurd enough, yet this was said to it, communion of Saints is either real,
mystical and spiritual, between the members of Christ's body mystical, and
which no believer can be an enemy unto, let him be in a parish or any other
relation; and external, in some or other Church way of communion in the
ordinances, concerning which true believers who all hold spiritual communion,
might differ and yet be no ways destroyers of the communion of Saints.

But how inflicters of temporal punishments? and that all of them, since
Ministers inflict no penalties at all? answered, why their principles are such,
they approve of punishment for errors and heresies, therefore they destroy the
communion of Saints, This was looked upon as a mere odium and reproach, cast
not only on the Ministers, but much more on the Magistrates, as enemies of the
communion of Saints, and therefore fitter to be answered by the Magistrate then
a Minister.

Mr. Earbury said also, that the Ministers of England did set up societies,
viz. Presbyteries, which did destroy the communion of Saints; It was answered
that all Ministers did not set up presbyteries, and secondly, they that did,
did not destroy the communion of Saints. Master Earbury said also that they did
allow of an Ordinance of Parliament for the punishment of errors and heresies,
and therefore they did destroy the communion of Saints; It was answered, we
know of no such Ordinance, and therefore could not be said to allow of it.

After Master Earbury had denied the qualifications of Ministers, because
strikers, another would needs have them disabled because covetous, and that all
of them: how so? they who take other men's goods from them by fraud and
circumvention under pretense of giving them something for it which was worth
nothing, are covetous; but so do all the Ministers of England by receiving
Tithes, ergo all are covetous. Answer; we did now conceive that our opposites
had it in design to lay us as low as they could by disgraceful speeches and
reproaches, because they could not beat us down by strength of argument. We
apprehended the arguments, or rather reproaches, that the Ministers of England
were all strikers and covetous* to have as little weight as charity in them.

After this we proceeded to the second branch of the argument, That there were
some Ministers in the Church of England approved of according to the mind of
Christ; That there must be a proof and approbation of Presbyters, appeared, 1 Timothy 3. 10. Let these also first be proved, etc. And that many Ministers in the
Church of England had undergone sufficient trial, was proved thus: They who
have been examined and approved by those who are Ministers of Christ, able to
examine and approve them, and designed to that purpose, are approved according
to the mind of Christ: but some Ministers in the Church of England have been
thus examined and approved, etc. Ergo.

The minor was denied upon two reasons;

First, that they who examined and approved them were not able to do it (though
as was urged they had understanding and knowledge in the arts, languages, and
Scripture) because they had not the Spirit.

This was thought a very strange and unchristian charge, and indeed a reproach
upon all the Ministers of England, many of which have been, and many are such
eminent and glorious lights, and instruments of good in the Church of Christ.

Secondly, that they who examined and approved any of the Ministers of the
Church of England, were not Ministers themselves, therefore could not approve
others. Reply; They who were themselves qualified, approved, called, and
ordained according to the mind of Christ* were lawful Ministers; but they
that approved Ministers in the Church of England were such; Ergo. It was said
this was idem per idem in a circle. It was returned thus, that indeed the same
thing that was proved at first, was proved again by the same argument, because
the same thing was denied, which was denied at first; yet this was no circle,
in regard that he was forced by the answerer, denying that which was the first
mayn question, to use the first mayn argument again; for he who denies those
to be Ministers of Christ who approved and ordained us, denies us to be
Ministers of Christ who are approved and ordained by them, and it is but one
and the same question, and therefore there can be no medium used to prove their
Ministry to be true, but the same which was used to prove ours to be true.

After much time spent in the former debates, and it now grew late in the
night, some notwithstanding were still very importunate to have the Conference
carried on unto that branch of the former Argument which concerned the Call of
the Ministers: whereupon one of the Ministers spoke to this effect.

That unto a Minister two things were required: Qualifications fitting him for
the service; and a Call separating him thereunto.

The qualifications are, 1 Piety of life. 2 Abilities of learning and
ministerial gifts, whereby he might be a workman who need not to be ashamed.
That in both these respects, notwithstanding any thing which had been spoken,
no man could take any just exception against very many Ministers in the Church
of England, who are well known to be eminent in both.

The Call is tvvofold, Inward, from God; and Outward, from man.

The Inward call is when a man so qualified with piety of Life, and abilities
of Learning, is by the secret work of God on his heart moved to desire the
office of a Minister, and to devote himself to serve the Lord and his Church
in that employment. And that all the Ministers of the Church of England are
destitute of this call we dare likewise challenge any man to make good.

The Outward call is, when a man thus qualified, moved, and inclined by God
unto such an office, is separated, designed, and authorized by men thereunto
likewise.

This is considerable either as in Ecclesia constitua, a Church settled; or as
in Ecclesia Restituenda, a Church to be Reformed.

In a settled constituted Church this outward call is by Imposition of the hands
of the Presbytery, upon due and mature examination and approbation of the
person so qualified, with prayer commending him to God, who has fitted and
inclined him unto that service; and this call the Ministers of the Church of
England had in Collegio presbyterorum.

But it was objected, That we had this our Ordination from Antichristian and
wicked men, who cannot do any thing for Christ.

To this Answer was made: 1 That no man was able to affirm, that all they from
whom the Ministers of the Church of England received their Ordination to the
Ministry, were wicked or Antichristian. And that we could with much more
confidence affirm, that many of them from whom our Ministers received
Imposition of hands, were men fearing God.

2 Dato sed non concesso, supposing, though not granting, that they were such,
we further answer in these three Assertions.

First, That some evil men may, and always have de facto been, Officers and
Ministers in the Church. In the Church of the Jews Hophni and Phinchas; in the
days of Christ, Scribes and Pharisees; in the family of Christ, Judas; in the
Churches of Christx, envious and perverse Teachers, Phil. 115. Act. 20. 29, 30.

Secondly, that the wickedness of such men did not null or evacuate their
Ministerial acts: for our Savior would have the Scribes and Pharisees heard
while they sat in Moses chair, Mat. 23. 2. and the Apostle was glad when men
preached Christ, though it were out of envy: and Christ's commission did as
well authorize Judas, as any other, to preach the Gospel, and to Baptize, Mat.
10. 5. John 4. 2.

Thirdly, that if the principal acts belonging to the ministerial function of
such men, namely, Preaching and Baptizing, or administering Sacraments, were not
nulled nor made void by their personal wickedness, then consequently no other
act comprised within the same office or commission, could be thereby made void.
So that if Judas had been an Apostle, when Christ sent his Apostles to Ordain
Elders in the Church, his Ordination, notwithstanding his personal
wickedness, would have been as valide, as his Preaching or Baptizing formerly
had been. [The Leaprosie of the hand does not hinder the growing of the corn
which that hand sows. Whatever arguments Austin uses in his Writings against
the Donatists, to confirm the Baptism of Heretics, are valid to confirm the
Ordination of the like men.] So that though they were neverso wicked,
heretical, or Antichristian Ministers, through whom the Ministry appointed by
Christ, has by mean conveyances descended upon us, yet this does not at all
void our Ministry. [A River which has a pure fountain, may run through many
impure channels, and yet becoming pure again, is no way prejudiced by the
impurity of the channels through which it passed. The Word, Sacraments,
Ministry, are Christ's own, an continue to be His still, what corrupt hands
soever be the instruments of conveying them.]

Finally, if we should take for granted upon the principles of the Donatists,
that the Ordinations of Heretics or other wicked men were void, and so there
were no ordinary way for continuing a succession in the Ministry, but that
upon the universal corruption of instruments, visible succession were
interrupted: yet in Ecclesia restituenda, an unusual and extraordinary call in
the Church it self, so reforming would be in that exigent and extremity a valid
and sufficient designation of men in themselves duly qualified for that office.
And even so the first Reformers of the Protestant Churches were called out unto
the service of those Churches in the work of the Ministry, the Reformation
whereof they had by their zeal and labors so much promoted. For the
dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, by the Ministers of the Gospel, being
a work necessary and perpetual, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1
Cor. 11. 26. where ordinary means of continuing them are impossible to be used,
unusual and extraordinary may take place. [The ordinary course of Circumcision
was to be on the eighth day, but this course being not so well observable in
the case of Isreal's travel through the Wilderness, it was at last observed in
an extraordinary manner, to wit, after forty years, Josh. 5. 2, 7.]

And the equity of this will the more appear if we consider that in this case,
the Church does not do more then she may do, only something, which ordinarily
should be done, is left undone, for want of such officers unto whom the doing
of it did belong. For Election of men to this service may be by the Church her
self, though formal ordination by imposition of hands be only by officers. And
the Churches Election alone in this exigent would be a valid call, where
imposition of hands were impossible to be obtained, because where and when
officers do do it, the Church may be said to do it by her officers: and where
there are no officers to do it, the election of the Church does vertually
comprize the act of the officers. [The Apostle says, that unto principalities
and powers was made known BY THE CHURCH the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.
10. and yet the Church did it not but by the Preaching or Ministerial works of
her officers.]

It shall not need to add here what Mr. Beza says of the first Reformers,
That they were a Deo extra ordinem excitati, rebus ita collapsis, ut ordinariae
vocationi nullus esset locus relictus, That they were extraordinarily raised up
by God, the state of the Church being so corrupted that there was no place left
for an Ordinary Call.

So then upon the whole matter we affirm, That we are lawful Ministers of the
Gospel, having by Ordination received Imposition of hands in Collegio
presbyterorum, and our first Reformers (besides the like Ordination, which the
wickedness of Instruments could not invalidate) were by the Election of those
Churches (unto the Reformation whereof they had so eminently concurred) called
out unto the same service. This was the substance and sense of what was spoken.

Thus far this day, the report whereof might well have been spared in this
juncture of businesses of higher concernment, had not the partial and uncivil
(not to say uncharitable) reports of some enforced so much from us, we rather
choose to ask pardon for saying so much, then for saying so little, and so many
of us as held our selves at this debate silent, do conceive that we need no
Apology for so doing with wise men; and for such whom neither our speech nor
silence, our presence or absence, our mildness nor earnestness can please,
we are not at leisure to give any account of our selves to them, Tu linguae,
ego ourium sum dominus.
theirs be their tongues, ours our ears; we go forward in our intended
narration.

Master Earbury was assured by his followers that he had gained the day, and
therefore now he was the only Minister, or rather Apostle in the World;
whereupon he began to gather some people together, as if he intended to
build, plant, or gather a Church; but first he thought fit to dig at the
foundation of the true Church of Christ, which we must needs confess was the
best way to overthrow it, and make good his grand assertion that Christ has no
Church on earth. Mr. Earbury therefore upon the eleventh of December, at a
public meeting before diverse of the City of Oxford, endeavored to prove this
proposition, That the fullness of the Godhead, the same fullness of the Godhead
which is in Christ, dwells bodily in the Saints, in the same measure, though not
in the same manifestation as it dwelt in Christ whilst he was here below in
the flesh.

For the proof of this damnable doctrine, he alleged (as we are informed)
these places of Scripture, 1 Samuel 16. 13. compared with Heb. 2. 11, 12. and
Psalm 22. 22. Coloss. 1. 27. Coloss. 2. 9, 10. John 17. 21, 22, 23, 24. Ephesians.
3. from v. 14. to the 19. 1 Cor. 12. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Zach. 12. 8. Mark, the
Scripture does not only say we shall bex one with God as Christ is, but it
says more, we shall be as God. But (says he) it will be objected, That God
has anointed Christ above his fellows, Heb. 1. 9. I answer (says he) this
place is meant of being anointed with the Godhead: but be it known to you,
Christ has no more of the Godhead then we have, and therefore is not anointed
in greater measure then we are, but only in a greater manifestation; and if we
believe this, we shall do greater works then ever Christ did; that Text then,
Heb. 1. 9. is meant only of the manifestation of the Godhead; For as the soul
is as much in the little finger, as in the head, so is there as much of the
Godhead in the least member of Christ, as there is in Christ himself. I do,
says Master Earbury, remember another Text that is urged by some to overthrow
the doctrine which I have delivered, which you may read in the third Chapter of
John* v. 34. 35. but the objection being specially grounded upon the 34 verse,
may be answered out of the 35 verse, for says Master Earbury, whatever God
has given to the Son he has given to the Saints, and if the Saints saw this
they would never ask any thing any more of God, because all things are given to
the Saints, and God loves the Saints as he loves the Son, John 17. 23. True it
is, that all Kingdoms, Countries, and people arex given to Christ, Psalm 2. 7,
8. but it is as true that they are given to the Saints, Revel. 2. 26, 27.
whatsoever the Son has received of the Father, the Saints have received
likewise, they have received the same power, the same glory, but they do not
see it. Nay, whatsoever is spoken of the Son is spoken of the Saints, for the
Saints are the Son; and this is manifest, says Mr. Earbury, and then produced
two places of Scripture to prove it, Revel. 3. 9. Revel. 21. 7. We are now
heirs of all things as the Son is, and we shall know it, and men shall know it,
and come and worship at our feet: therefore let this be the ground of our Faith
and Hope, for Christ is not shut up in Heaven, but Christ is in us the hope of
glory.

Master Earbury does as you see positively deliver these blasphemous errors,
and yet when he was admonished by one of our brethren, he said, he did not
deliver any thing dogmatically, for he did only enquire into the Truth of
things as one that was to seek. To which it was replied that, First, he did
urge Scripture to prove his opinion. Secondly, that he said his Exposition was
manifest. Thirdly, that he pressed the people to receive his Exposition, to
build their hope upon his interpretation, and to believe the Scriptures in his
sense. Fourthly, to encourage them to receive his interpretation, he assured
them that if they would believe his doctrine, they should do greater things
then ever Christ did, and men should come and worship at their feet. Fifthly,
he was advised to deliver practical points to the people, and not to teach
any thing for truth concerning which he was not fully persuaded in his own
mind. Sixthly, our brother desired him to enquire of those who were able to
resolve him in those things of which he doubted, and not to enquire of a
company of unsettled people, for by that means he might bring them also to doubt
of most of the principles of the Christian faith.

Moreover, December. 11.
upon the eleventh of December, Master Earbury took upon him to prophecy of
greater shakings yet in England and Scotland, as well as Ireland. In Scotland,
says Mr. Earbury, they think to preserve themselves, but you shall see and
they will feel greater shakings yet, even mighty Earthquakes; but if the Lord
teach you this doctrine which I have now delivered, it will keep up your
spirits. Remember that it is not only God that gives you strength, but God is
your strength, and you shall walk upon God himself as upon high places; believe
it, we are filled with the same Godhead, with the same glory that Christ is,
and we are one with the Father as he is.

These Notes were communicated to one of our company by a Captain; whereupon,
one of our brethren preached just the contrary doctrine, and proved that it was
a fundamental Article of the Christian Religion, because Christ has built his
Church upon this fundamental confession or acknowledgement, as upon an
immovable Rock, Matthew. 16. 16, 17, 18. Simon Peter said, Thou art Christ the
son of the living God; and what said Christ? upon this Rock will I build my
Church. This is the great Article so often disputed and cleared in primitive
times by the Apostles for the conversion of Jews and Gentiles. That Jesus
Christ who took our nature of the blessed Virgin, is the true Messiah the son
of the living God, God equal with his Father, nay the same God (though not the
same person) with his Father, God by nature and yet Man by nature; perfect God,
and perfect Man, both natures the divine and humane being inseparably united in
the person of the son of God, the second person of the glorious Trinity. This
truth was made evident by the whole series of the book of the Acts of the
Apostles, and therefore it is not sufficient for us to acknowledge that Christ
is in some sense God and Man, but we must believe this truth as it is revealed
and declared in the Scriptures, because the Scriptures are the doctrinall;
foundation, and Christ the personal foundation. We are built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. ye must walk, says the Apostle, as ye have
received, and be built up in Christ, and established in the faith as you have
been taught, Coloss. 2. 6, 7. Diverse of Master Earbury his Auditory were
startled with this Sermon: two of them came to Mr. Cheynell, and told him that
he had delivered Doctrine contrary to what they had been taught by a very
precious man Mr. Erbury; Mr. Cheynell told them they were to examine which of
those contrary Doctrines was agreeable to the scriptures; For he that preaches
contrary to M. Erbury his opinion is not to be condemned, if Mr. Earbury his
opinion be contrary to the word of God: whereupon they desired Mr. Cheynell to
give M. Erbury a meeting, that the point in controversy might be fully
discussed in the presence of them who had heard both Ministers preach. M.
Cheynell offered to meet at Mr. Mayors house; and put off his other business
that he might fulfill his promise; but contrary to expectation, Mr. Erbury
desired to be excused; whereupon Mr. Cheynell wrote to M. Erbury to meet him
any where else, if he desired a more private meeting, or to meet him at the
Scools if he desired a more public disputation: Mr. Erbury refused to write an
answer or declare his opinion under his hand, yet signified his desire to
confer with Mr. Cheynell; upon this answer Mr. Cheynell were to his Quarters,
and after conference with him, did both beseech and admonish him before an
Officer of the Army to study those points better, and to consult some that were
able to give him satisfaction in them: for if he consulted none but unsettled
men, he did not take the right way to be settled. Mr. Erbury replied, that God
did reveal the mystery of Christ to babes, and conceal it not only from worldly
wise men, but from those that were spiritually wise, as if any man could be
spiritually wise without the knowledge of Christ: surely this was as vain as if
he had said Christ will save babes, and damn those that are spiritually wise,
for no man can be wise to salvation who is ignorant of the saving mystery of
Christ, and certainly that is the mystery our Savior speaks of, Matthew. 11. 25.
26. Master Erbury after this admonition preached to diverse of the City in an
high and daring way, He took that portion of Scripture, 1 Kings 4. 25. for his
text, and preached to this effect, as we are credidly informed.

They are much deceived who say we deny the Godhead of Christ, for Christ is
nothing else but God [he means God the Father] manifested in our flesh.
Christ is anointed with the Spirit, that is, the power of God, Isay 61. 1. Luke
4. 18. He has anointed me, me; what Christ as a distinct person from the
Saints? no, Christ and all the saints; For it is but simply understood to look
upon Christ as distinct from the Saints, because Christ and the saints make one
man; He is the head and we the Members, He and we make one perfect man. The
Saints have the same anointing that Christ had, and therefore as Christ was
sent to preach, so are they, and indeed the only preaching and teaching from
God is in the Saints. It is not the wisdom of this Nation that can invent to
send Preachers abroad: but when God has broken the Nation and their Forms,
they set up a new Form, but there will never be any true teaching till Christ
does appear in the Saints they only have the only oil, Isay 61. 3. 4. and
therefore they only shall build the old waste places. What is become of those
Preachers that had their Orders from the Bishops, and so from the Pope? There
is not one to be found in the North and in Wales, they are gone to far
Parsonages from whence Malignants have been thrown out; You may see what a
blessed Reformation we have now at this day: the saints shall build these old
wast places, not men in holy Orders (they will not accept of 20 by the year)
but the saints shall build them, the saints, not those who call themselves
Ministers, but those whom the people shall call Ministers, Isay 61. 6.
Isay 61. 6. Priests and Ministers because they shall have a double portion of
the spirit, verse 7. double to that which the Priests had under the Law, or
Ministers heretofore under the Gospel, and it shall be acknowledged that God is
in their flesh, verse 9. mark, a double portion in their land, that is, in
their flesh. It is by providence that we speak now, for the world seeks to
hinder us; but the Law shall go forth of Sion, Micha 4. 2. Sion, that is the
place where God dwells; where is that but in the saints? The Law then shall go
forth from the Saints: what Law? not the Commandments, but the Law of the
spirit shall go forth out of the saints, even the Law of the spirit of life in
Christ; The word of the Lord shall go forth, that is, Christ himself, Revel.
19. 13. that is, there shall be an appearance of Christ in the Saints. Kings
shall bow down and lick the dust Psalm. 72. 9 10, 11. under whose feet? why, the
feet of the Son and of the Saints, (as we shall show hereafter) and then there
shall be peace. Now there is a war amongst the Saints, Independants against
Presbyterians, and they against the Rebaptized, but when God shall appear in
our flesh, there will be no vexing of one another. My dear friends, be sure
that where there is a destroying spirit in the Saints, there is no appearance
of Christ; for this is nothing but the appearance of Antichrist and of the
Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning. I am afraid to call them Saints
who have the spirit to make a man an offender for a word, who have an intent to
catch men and imprison them, nay bring them to death; to take advantage of a
man's weakness, this is not the spirit of Christ, this is the spirit of
Antichrist, for the Saints shall not hurt in all the holy mountain, not a Jew
though he curse Christ Jesus, nor a Turk that makes a scoff of the Son of God.
It is a strange hypocritical nation this; we have prayed these eighty years
for the conversion of the Jews, and yet we will not suffer a Jew to live
amongst us: I fear the blood of the Jews cast out of this nation, and
abominably butchered, is not yet washed away, this is a mere mockery, there
must not a Papist nor a Malignant be suffered to live amongst us. We pretend to
Christ and we have not the spirit of Christ within us, for a destroying spirit
is the spirit of Antichrist. Dear friends be not angry if the spirit of
Antichrist appear in you, for it was in Christ's own Apostles in three things.

First, a spirit of Prelacy or pride; the poor Fishermen dispute who should be
greatest.

Secondly, a spirit of conformity; because one did cast out Devils and did not
follow them, they forbad him.

Thirdly, a spirit of cruelty: suppose men will not own Christ, will ye
destroy them? are you of the spirit of James and John, of a destroying spirit?
Christ came not to destroy any man's liberty or life, therefore a destroying
spirit is the spirit of Antichrist. Consider what is said of the Beasts in the
Revelation, the Dragon was under Popery, another Beast under Episcopacy, and
the next Beast is that of these times, his appearance is lowly yet, but he
speaks like a dragon, bonds, banishment, blood. Note, first, his pride, he
speaks high things. Secondly, the spirit of conformity, you must receive a mark
in your head, and be of their opinion; and a mark in your hand, practice as
they do. Thirdly, a spirit of cruelty to vex those that will not conform, they
must have no liberty of conscience, nor liberty of Trade. Many Saints have been
hanged, as Barrow; and it may be some in these days may be put to death, and
it will be a wonder to after ages why they were so. The four plagues of Babylon
are death, that is a dead spirit; famine, that is, want; they are ever
complaining of this want and that want, they are afraid of this sin and that
sin, they want this grace and that grace; this is a sign that we have the
spirit of Antichrist in us, we do not see our fullness and praise God for it,
we have all the fullness of the Godhead in us and do we complain? Yet M.
Erbury thought fit upon another day to enlarge himself upon that Text, he
preached on before in the presence of diverse Citizens, 1. Sam. 16. 13.

Christ, says Master Erbury, is nothing else but the anointed of the Lord,
anointed with the Godhead, and so are the Saints, for Christ and the saints
make one anointed. Habak. 3. 13. all the Godhead is in us as it is in him,
though this be not manifest, yet we have for the present the same glory that
the Son has, John 17. 22. Dear friends, Christ was anointed with the Spirit
also, but what is the Spirit? The Spirit is the power of God and the appearance
of Christ. All power is in God, now when that power of God shall act and come
forth, then it is the Spirit. therefore the Spirit is the coming forth of the
power of God. Secondly, the Spirit is the appearance of Christ, for Christ is
called the wisdom and the power of God, so then the coming forth of the power
of God is the Spirit and that Spirit is Christ, for Christ and the Spirit are
both one. Friends, we have an ignorant blind devotion, we pray to Son, Father,
and Spirit, and know not what the spirit is, but the scripture tells us that the
spirit is the power of God, and the appearance of Christ, Luke 1. 35. chap. 24.
49. the power of the most High, that is, the spirit, Acts 2. 4. 2. Cor. 13. 4.
compared with 1 Pet. 3. 18. the spirit then is the coming forth of the power of
God, and therefore we must not look upon the spirit as a person in the Godhead:
poor people are miserably puzzled about this, and therefore I will show it out
of the scripture. There is but one God and that is the Father, in whom all
power is. 2. When this power comes forth, it is the spirit. 3. All the power of
God comes through Christ, and therefore Christ is called the power of God, nay
the spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45.

In their divinity yonder, they will say, the Father is not the Son, the Son is
not the Spirit, but I say that Christ is the spirit, that is, Christ in his
appearance is the Spirit, John 14. 16, 17 18. The spirit shall come, that is, I
will come and comfort you, the power of God shall appear in me, so then the
other comforter that he would send was not another third person, but the power
of God appearing in Christ, therefore let us not be cheated in the beginning of
our Religion; read 2. Cor. 3. 17 18. The Lord Christ is that spirit, that is,
he in whom the power of God is, the 18. verse. is best translated in the Margin
of your Bibles of the Lord the Spirit, Christ then is the Spirit. Beloved, that
we may be in a maze no longer, let us know God aright as he is.

1. There is one God.

2. As there is one God, so we read that there is the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit. Now these three are not three persons in the Godhead, but they are
several appearances of God unto men. As God is in himself and of himself, so
he is the Father.

3. As God comes forth in the man Christ Jesus, as the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him that is the Son.

4. God coming forth in power is the Spirit. We do not by this deny the Godhead
of the Son, but show what we hold of the personalities, they are but the
inventions of men. The Spirit is nothing but the power of God in the man
Christ, and therefore Joh. 17. 3. there is no mention of a third person. And in
the Book of the Revelation there is no praise given to the Spirit, but all to
the Father who sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, to the man Christ Jesus,
in whom God dwells bodily, as he does in the Saints. Now then this is that I
drive at, that as soon as we know Christ in us, and that we are anointed in
him, then the spirit of the Lord shall come upon us, that is the power of the
power from on high, there will be the appearance of Christ in us; this is plain
to me, I trust it is so to you. We shall have the appearance of Christ (as
David had) in our sufferings, sayings, songs.

1. In our sufferings, for our sufferings are as David's were, the sufferings of
God: our sufferings are as Christ's were, most from God, Matthew. 26. 38. Mark 14.
33. why did Christ take some Disciples to pray with him? why, because he was
afraid to pray alone; and he prayed the same words thrice, because he was
amazed and could not go forward, but prayed the same words over and over; and
it has bin so with me when I had the spirit of bondage. You talk much of a man
crucified at Jerusalem some hundred years ago; it is no such great matter to
know that Christ suffered at Jerusalem, but to know that we suffer as the Son,
that our iufferings are the sufferings of God, there is the mystery: I dare not
say any more, for the time is not yet come to speak the truth; only thus, David
filled up what was before, and we fill up what is behind of the sufferings of
Christ, Col. 1. 24. Rev. 12. 11. all our sufferings are the blood of the Lamb.

2. In our sayings as David, Psalm. 22. 22. Hebr. 2. 11, 12. John 8. 28. Psalm.
71. 17. David never went to School and he knew hidden things.

3. In songs, Christ did sing in David, we must sing in Christ we set up our
selves when we do not speak and do things as the power of God, and in the
appearance of Christ; we shall be as mopish as Saul if the Godhead do not
appear in us, etc.

It was as we conceived high time to call Mr. Erbury to an account, after so
many fair warnings given him and so many foul errors preached by him, both to
Scholars and Citizens; but because Master Erbury his followers were as
confident as he was, that no man was able to disprove or refute him; one of
our company undertook that Task, and offered to do it in the public Schools,
the fittest place for Scholars to dispute in, but Master Erbury desired that
the meeting might be at the University Church upon Monday the 11 of January at
two of the clock in the afternoon, because some of his followers were unwilling
to meet at Schools: They met accordingly; Mr Erbury desired leave to explain
himself; and began much after this manner:

Friends, and Fellow Soldiers, and you gentlemen Scholars, I am come hither
this day to answer a public Charge, and a private Challenge, etc. Whereas it
did appear indeed that M. Erbury his Adherents made the Challenge; but that
was not insisted on, Master Erbury had fair leave to proceed in his Apology. He
said that it was not his custom to speak any thing dogmatically, for he did
proceed in all his Lectures by way of inquiry. How true this Apology is may
appear by the extracts of his three sermons before: and if it had been true,
yet it is no Apology; for this is to be a mere Sceptique, and the ready way to
teach his Auditors to question all things, and hold nothing. But Master Erbury
was not ashamed to own this deceit, for he presently added that he spoke not as
a Minister to them, for he had renounced his M^nistery long since in the
presence of the Bishops, nor did he speak as a gifted man knowing the mystery
of Christ, but as one that was to seek, and therefore (said he) we are now
upon a way of enquity, we are seeking out David and the King, according to that
Prophecy, Hosea 3. 5. For I find that Christ is a mystery hidden, not
manifested by the Prophets or the Apostles, for the Apostles, says he, did but
see Christ in a Glass darkly; but we, says he, behold the glory of God
shining in the man Christ, the face of Christ, that is, the person of Christ,
and we have Christ in us the hope of glory, and that is indeed The mystery,
Coloss. 1. 27. Christ as without us is not the mystery, but Christ as in us,
Christ as born in us, suffering and rising in us, for our sufferings are the
filling up of Christ's sufferings, Coloss. 1. 24. Now though Paul knew Christ
suffering in him, yet Paul confesses that he had not attained to the
resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. 10. 11. This mystery then was manifested
only in part to the Apostles, and primitive Christians: but ever since the
Apostles ceased, this mystery has been a sealed book, as you may see, Revel.
5. 1. 2. 3. He that sits upon the Throne is God, even the Father God himself.
The book is sealed with seven seals, that is, perfectly sealed, and no man in
Heaven or Earth, or under the earth, is able to open this Book, but this Book
shall be opened again when Christ shall come in his spirit in the Saints,
Revel. 10. 1. 2. this little book contains the mystery, Christ in us the hope
of glory; And when the seventh Angel does begin to sound, the mystery of God
shall be finished, Revel. 10. 7. Now this mystery is nothing else but Christ in
the Saints, that is, Christ is not a distinct person from the Saints; for the
Saints and the Son make one perfect man, Ephesians 4. 7. 8. 9. 12. 13. Master
Erbury had many other excursions before he came to the question: to which it
was replied, but we shall give you a brief account. Master Cheynell desired to
know of Master Erbury what that mystery was, which Master Erbury was better
acquainted with then the Apostles, or primitive Christians; whether it was the
mystery of faith and godliness, a mystery necessary to salvation; if it were
necessary to salvation; then sure it was sufficiently revealed to the primitive
Christians: but if it be not a saving mystery says Master Cheynell let us
never trouble the people with it. 2. Master Cheynell desired to know how Master
Erbury came to open that book, which no man in heaven or earth can open. 3.
Master Cheynell asked him whether the seventh Trumpet had yet sounded. 4.
Whether Master Erbury had any new revelations which were not contained in the
Scripture. 5. Whether he made himself an Apostle, a Prophet, or of some higher
order, because he pretended that there would be no Ministry till new Prophets
and Apostles were sent to gather the people of God dispersed abroad and
intimated that he himself knew more of the mystery of Christ then the Prophets
or Apostles. Master Erbury would not give any positive answer to any of these
questions; for he said they were ensnaring questions: To which Master Cheynell
replied, why then our meeting will be to little purpose, if you will neither
explain or vindicate your doctrine; But the truth is, Master Erbury saw he had
overshot himself in these elaborate extravagancies, rather then expositions;
for if he had said that the seventh Trumpet had not yet sounded, then it would
have followed:

1. That the mystery which Master Erbury pretends to be so well acquainted with
is yet sealed, and not revealed to Master Erbury, or any other.

2. Master Erbury by his exposition of Revel. 10. and Ephesians. 4. compared
together, does overthrow his own opinion and confirm ours, if the seventh
Trumpet has not yet sounded; for by both places laid together, if Master
Earbury his exposition be solid, Pastors and Teachers must be continued in the
Church, till the mystery be finished, and therefore till the seventh Trumpet
has sounded, Revel. 10. 7. But the mystery, says Master Earbury, will not be
finished till Christ and the Saints are made one perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
13. Therefore there is still need of Pastors and Teachers in the Church if the
seventh Trumpet has not yet sounded, and Master Earbury has but deluded the
people in pretending to declare a secret to them, which will not be declared
till the seventh Trumpet has sounded. Master Cheynell did likewise desire them
to observe that Master Earbury did intimate that God the Father only is God of
himself, and that the Saints are equal to Christ; but enough of that anon;
After many circumlocutions Master Earbury did at length descend to the
question, and laid down this Thesis, The Saints have the same fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in them, in the same measure though not in the same
manifestation, as it does in Christ: but the Godhead shall be manifest in the
same manner and measure in the Saints as it is in Christ.

Mr. Earbury endeavored to prove this proposition by the 14 of John from the 2
verse to the 20. From the 2 and 3 verses he raised this observation, That
Christ ascended that he might receive the fullness of the Godhead for himself,
that so he might impart it unto us; because he went to prepare a place for us,
that he might come again and receive us to himself that where he is we might
be also: but Christ's mansion was in the Father, verse 10. therefore our mansion
is to be in the Father, and the fullness of the Godhead is to be imparted to us
as it is to Christ. For the Father is the Godhead, and we are to be in the
Father, and the Father to dwell in us, as he dwelt in Christ, and Christ in the
Father.

To this exposition there were these exceptions taken by our brother.

1. Christ had the fullness of the Godhead before his ascension, and therefore
Christ did not ascend that he might receive the fullness of the Godhead.

2. If the Godhead were imparted to any Saint, that Saint would be as Christ
is, truly God.

3. The Saints are not in the Father, as Christ is in the Father; for the
divine Persons are (...) quia (...), they are in one another because they have
one and the same infinite essence, they are all three one and the same God.

4. The Father is not the Godhead, because the Father if we speak properly, is
the first Person, the Godhead is the nature of all three Persons.

His next Argument was taken from John 14. 12. The Saints have a greater power
then ever Christ had, for every one that believes in Christ may do greater
works then ever Christ did.

Our brother answered, that the speech was limited, they should do greater
works then these, that is, greater then the miracles which Christ's speech
referred to, and therefore Master Earbury did ill to interpret the Text, as if
the words were to be simply and universally taken, when it is evident that they
are to be restrained quoad materiam subiectam; for Christ did satisfy the
justice of God for the sins of all the elect, which no Saint could ever have
done. M. Earbury was asked whether he would acknowledge that Christ satisfied
Gods justice for the sins of all the elect? but he would not answer yea, or no,
but said that M. Cheynell endeavored to entrap him. M. Earbury said that the
Apostles gave the Holy Ghost, which was a greater work then ever Christ did. M.
Cheynell desired him to prove that the Apostles gave the Holy Ghost as Christ
did, by their own immediate power, or prove that Christ did not give the Holy
Ghost. M. Earbury replied, that Christ did not give the Holy Ghost before his
ascension; and so retreated to his first hold, as if Christ had ascended, that
he might receive such a fullness of the Godhead as did enable him to give the
Holy Ghost. Our brother desired them who were accquainted with the Socinian
controversies, to observe that M. Earbury had not his revelation from Heaven,
but Poland: and desired M. Earbury to consider that Christ satisfied for the
sins of the elect before his Ascension

M. Earbury his next proof was taken from John 14. 20. 21. Joh. 17. 5. 21. 22.
from whence he collected that the same fullness of the Godhead was given to the
Saints which was give^ to Christ, for the Saints have the same glory because they
are one with Christ, perfectly one with him, as the Father is one with him, and
therefore the fullness of the Godhead dwells in them. The same glory which
Christ asks for in the 5 verse, he gives to the Saints verse 22. of the 17 of
John, there is the same union between Christ and the Saints, which is between
Christ and this Father, verse 21. 23. the same love verse 23. I say the same
love, says M. Earbury, speak in as high a measure as you will, I will prove
the same measure, nay there is a higher measure of love expressed to the
Saints, then to Christ, though in a mystery, there is the same love and the
same union, that is, an union of love. Many answers were given to this Argument
which need not be repeated. To that concerning union with Christ, it was
answered to this effect, That the union between Christ and the Saints is
either a mystical union by faith, or a moral union by love, or a glorious
union by a beatificall fruition. And because M. Earbury pressed the word (as:)
one with the Father as Christ is one; our brother answered, that there was a
received distinction among Divines, sicut veritatis, sicut aequalitatis, sicut
similitudinis. (As) does sometimes note only the truth of a thing; and so the
union between Christ and the Saints is a true union, a real though a mystical
and spiritual union. 2. (As) notes no equality in that place of John, though
it may note a similitude, so the proportion and distance be observed between
creatures and their Creator. Finally, M. Cheynell told him that the
interpretation smelt too strong of Poland, when he intimated that there was
only an union of love, between the Father and Christ, for there is also an
union of nature; but there is not an union of nature between God and the
Saints: the saints are joined to Christ by faith, and are therefore one spirit
with him, 1 Cor. 6. 17. but they are not one God with him.

Then M. Earbury insisted very long upon Coloss. 2. because that Chapter does
explain the mystery of God even the Father, and of Christ, verse 2. though the
Spirit that is the power of God (as we said before) even Christ, who is the
wisdom of God, and the power of God does manifest himself, Joh. 14. 21. The
Father is the eternal God, God in himself and of himself greater then all,
and highest of all: the Father is the Godhead, and he fills the man Christ with
all the fullness of the Godhead, Coloss. 2. 9. For Christ has all given to him
as the Saints have; and as there is the fulness of the Godhead in Christ, so
is there also in the Saints, For they are (...) verse 10. which is rendered
complete, now the Saints are not complete till they are filled with all the
fullness of God Ephesians. 3. 19. filled with love, for God is love, and that love
wherewith we are filled is God: filled with Christ the wisdom of God, and with
the spirit the power of God, with those three that are in Heaven: this is the
mystery and it is incomprehensible, for the love of God to Christ and the
Saints is Incomprehensible.

We fear that you would be tired out, if all that was objected against this
exposition should be related; but it must be observed, first, that when M.
Earbury speaks of God, he says, [God even the Father] and when he mentions the
Father, he says, the Father is God himself, the eternal God etc. whereby he
does intimate, that Christ is not God of himself, the eternal God, equal to
his Father. Our brother therefore took exceptions against these expressions,
because they seemed not to drop from M. Earbury, but to be affected since they
were so often repeated. M. Cheynell offered to prove that Christ is God by
nature, God of himself equal to his Father. M. Earbury replied, dear Sir, you
are not to dispute, but to answer what I object; whereas indeed M. Earbury was
to have been respondent, and did make a Speech instead of a Supposition for the
explication of his Thesis, and therefore M. Cheynell should have had free
liberty to have disputed, and M. Earbury was engaged to answer his arguments,
but when that would not be permitted, and M. Earbury desired our brother to
consider, that that phrase God by nature, was no Scripture phrase. Master
Cheynell replied, Sir, now it appears that you are not so well read in
Scripture as you pretend to be, you may read the expression, Galat. 4. 8.
Gal. 4. 8. and though you will not give me leave to dispute* yet suffer me to
expound the place, and show the ground of my Exposition: The Apostle shows in
this place

1. That religious service must be performed to none but to him that is God by
nature, from hence it will follow, that if Christ be not God by nature, we
ought not to perform religious service to Jesus Christ.

2. The Apostle shows that they are ignorant of God, who perform service to
them who are not Gods by nature.

3. M. Cheynell showed that Christ was God by nature, subsisting in the form of
God, and was God equal to his Father, and proved it from Phil. 2. 6. (...),
subsisting in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God. He
who is in the form of God, and without prejudice to the Father equal to him
must needs be God by nature, the self same God (though not person) with the
Father; and therefore an Independent God, God in himself, God of himself, the
eternal God. It is robbery to make more Gods then one, It is robbery to make
the Saints equal with God, but it is no robbery to make God the Son equal
with God the Father, because Christ is God by nature, but no Saint is God by
nature; the fullness of the Godhead, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells, and
dwells bodily, that is, really, (for body is opposed to shadow) in the person of
the Lord Jesus. And therefore it is evident, that the same fullness of the
Godhead which is in Christ, is not truly and really in any Saint. The
Congregation received this exposition with a general shout and acclamation;
but M. Cheynell desired them to forbear, and told them that if he could not
entreat them to be silent, he would silence himself and proceed no further,
least such testimonies of approbatio^ might give offense or cause disturbance.
2. Desired the company to take notice that M. Earbury called the Spirit, the
power of God, almost as often as he had occasion to mention the Spirit, which
expression did too plainly declare that M. Earbury held correspondence with
the Socinians in their heretical opinions. M. Earbury professed that he never
read any of their writings, and yet when M. Cheynell distinguished between the
spirit and the graces of the Spirit, a little after, M. Earbury forgot himself,
and said, that was a Polandisme, conceiving that the spirit was by that
distinction, imprisoned in Heaven, and he began to tell a story of some cast
out by a Synod for such expressions: and when M. Cheynell did distinguish
afterward between Christ considered as a glorifiedman, and as the Lord of
glory; M. Earbury said, glorified man was one of the Polonian expressions: let
the Reader judge whether M. Earbury never read any of the Polonian Writers. 3.
Our brother desired M. Earbury to deal plainly and clearly with him; whether
he did acknowledge and believe three Persons and one God? our brothers question
was grounded upon M. Earbury his mention of three in Heaven, and yet his
frequent confounding of the Son with the Spirit; for sure if the Son be the
Spirit, as he does commonly preach, there cannot be three in Heaven, for the
Son and the spirit are but one as he conceives; nay, there will be but one in
Heaven, for the Son is nothing but the wisdom of the Father, or the power of
the Father, and so there will be no more divine persons in Heaven, but the
Father only. Besides, M. Earbury saying, that the Father is the true God, and
God is love, and the Son is wisdom, and the spirit is power, M. Earbury seemed
to put off his Auditory with a Trinity of Attributes, instead of a Trinity of
Persons, and consequently to make many Threes in Heaven, for justice, mercy,
eternity, will make another three in this sense. But M. Earbury said, that he
came not thitherto be catechized; but it was easy to reply that he came
thither to explain himself, and satisfy the Congregation, which could not
possibly be done unless he would give positive answers to pertinent questions.
M. Earbury told us, that the fullness of the Godhead should be revealed more
clearly hereafter in the flesh of the saints at the sound of the seventh
Trumpet, but it was more clearly revealed in the Prophets, then by the
Apostles, becasue the Apostles were most taken up with writing about Faith and
particular things, yet John the Divine wrote clearly of it, 1 John 3. 2. and
therefore he pronounced all them to be Antichristian, who did not believe that
there is the same fullness of the Godhead in Christ and all the saints, which
he conceived to be very clear from the 1 John 4. 2. 3. that is, says he,
whosoever denies that Christ is in us, is Antichrist, for by flesh is not meant
the humane nature, says M. Earbury, but the coming of Christ is the
manifestation of the Godhead in the flesh of Saints, for Christ himself is the
Spirit with God. Our brother was here forced to lay open M. Earbury, and
declare that M. Earbury conceived that Christ was man before the world was, and
therefore though he came into the world to be made of a woman, yet he came not
to be made man, but to be made flesh. Hereupon Mr. Earbury charged our brother
with revealing of secrets, and said, that he had delivered himself to that
purpose in a private Conference. Our brother replied, that he had not spoken a
word about that Argument, if M. Earbury had not led him into it, by his
perplexed discourse, and pronounced such a censure upon all men, that are not
of his mind, as to say, they are Antichristian.

Master Earbury insisted much upon Ephesians. 3. 19. That ye may be filled with all
the fullness of God; See learned M. Bayne his Annotations upon the Ephesians.
which our brother said, was to be expounded by John 1. 16. of his fullness we
have all received grace for grace. Diverse are said in the Scripture to be full
of the Holy Ghost when they are sufficiently enabled to perform the duties
which belong to their present estate and are growing up toward that fullness,
which all the Saints shall enjoy when God is all in all.

But M. Earbury seemed most confident when he came to urge his arguments, taken
out of the Book of the Revelations.

The first was drawn from Revel. 2. 26. The Saints have the same power over
the nations to crush and break them that Christ himself has. The answer was,
that the Saints did not overcome by their own strength, but by the strength of
Christ. Christ does overcome, and we triumph, we have a share in that victory
which Christ gains by his own arm, John 16. 33 True says M. Earbury, but the
Son has no power of himself, he has all from the Father, and so have the
Saints, and the Saints have the same power that Christ has.

Our brother denied this bold assertion, Bold assertion.
because the Saints are not Omnipotent, nor has the Father given power to the
Saints to quicken whom they will, nor have the Saints life in themselves, as
the Son has life in himself, and the Father in himself, John 5. 21, 26.

His next argument was taken from Revel. 3. 21. The Saints have the same
honor, worship, throne, glory, that the Son has, nay the same with the
Father, and therefore they have the same Godhead.

Our brother answered, that hard and obscure places of Scripture should be
expounded by plain places. But it is clear that all men ought to honor the
Son even as they honor the Father, John 5. 23. and it is as clear that the
Saints are not to be honored as the Father is, whom M. Earbury acknowledges
to be God of himself, highest of all, and greatest of all: to give that honor
to the Saints, which is due to the Father is Robbery and Idolatry, and to
maintain that it is due to the Saints is loud blasphemy. There was another
answer given more direct to that very Text, Revel. 3. 21. our brother observed
a distinction of Thrones expressly mentioned in the very Text; The Saints shall
sit with Christ in his Throne; but Christ sits with his Father in his Fathers
Throne: Christ therefore must be considered as a glorified man, and so the
Saints shall sit upon the same Throne that Christ sits on as a glorified man:
but if Christ be considered as the Lord of Glory, as the same God with his
Father, so he sits upon the same Throne with his Father. Now though Christ
promise that the Saints shall sit with him in his Throne, yet he does not say,
that they shall sit down in his Fathers Throne as he himself does who is in
the Father, and one God with the Father. Nothing is more clear in Scripture
then that no man save he that is God-man is to be advanced to the right hand of
the Majesty on high, above all that is named in the world to come, Ephesians. 1.
20, 21.

His third argument out of the Book of the Revelation, was grounded upon
chapter 21. 7. They who inherit all things have the same fullness of the
Godhead in them which Christ had who was heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2.

Our brother answered, that Christ is the natural Heir of God, that we are the
adopted Heirs of God. Christ is Heir of all things by nature, because he is God
by nature, but the Saints are Heirs by free grace; whatever blessings they
enjoy from their election to their glorification, proceeds from free and rich
grace, as they are elected, so are they called, justified, sanctified, and
glorified by free grace. And the first Chapter to the Hebrews does put a
distinction between Christ and the Saints, as is evident by the work of
Creation, v. 2. his satisfaction, v. 3. his eternal generation, v. 5. we must
not say to a Saint as God does to Christ [Thy Throne o God endures for ever,
verse. 8.

M. Erbury promised us three Arguments more and threatened to draw them up into
form.

His first Argument was taken from Isay 61. 1. to 7. They who are anointed as
Christ, are to preach the Gospel to the World, and whom the World shall own as
the only Ministers of Christ, and shall honor as the Son, they have the
fullness of the Godhead in them: but the Saints are anointed with the Godhead,
etc. therefore.

There being but one clause of the major pertinent to the point in hand, M.
Erbury was desired to prove that the saints were anointed with the Godhead.

Mr. Erbury endeavored to prove it by this Argument. They who know all things
are anointed with the Godhead: but the Saints know all things, therefore the
Saints are anointed with the Godhead.

Our brother showed that this was a fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter: The answer was, that the Saints do know all things suo modo, that
is, all things necessary to salvation, but they do not know all things simply
and universally, because they are not omniscient. They who are omniscient are
anointed with the Godhead; but etc. The Saints are not omniscient, therefore
they are not anointed with the Godhead; the contrary you see follows from that
medium. M. Cheynell therefore made it evident that unless [by knowing all
things] was meant that they were omniscient, the major was false; if he took
those terms in one sense in the major, and another in the minor, it was a false
Syllogism, consisting of four terms, as may appear to the eye. They who are
omniscient are anointed with the Godhead. But the Saints know all things
necessary to salvation, therefore the saints are anointed with the Godhead.

M. Erbury said that Omniscient was no scripture-terme, our brother desired him
to prove that the Saints knew as much as God knows, or take some other
medium; for though it was impossible to prove the proposition denied, yet he
might find out some more probable medium. Mr. Erbury tried diverse other ways
but could not conclude, and therefore our brother being almost quite spent,
concluded the exercise as he began with prayer.

We shall not stand to make general observations upon all Mr. Erbury's
dictates, but the design is evident, the Magistracy and Ministry of this
Kingdom are both aimed at, because godly Ministers preach up the power of
Magistrates, and prudent Magistrates countenance pious Ministers who were
ordained (by a College of Ministers separated from Rome and Antichrist, by a
professed subjection to Jesus Christ) and set apart to preach the Gospel of
Christ, by which all discerning Christians know, Antichrist has been much
weakened, and will in time be quite overthrown. Nay, it is clear that all
welgrounded policy for the affairs of this life, is grounded upon Religion; for
God, and so godliness under God by his ordinance heaps all blessings upon the
wisest, and wel-built State, it does uphold and maintain all Common-weals in
an happy order, and makes a land to become the land of Immanuel; now the
Christian religion cannot be upheld without a Christian Ministry; for if a
Ministry had not been necessary, Christ would not have instituted it; being
necessary, Christ will continue it, for Christ will not be wanting to his Churh
in things that are necessary for its edification and increase; the Ministry
then being instituted, and therefore necessary, must be maintained; for no
Christian or company of Christians must presume to abolish an Institution of
Jesus Christ. The end of the Ministry is to work upon the conscience for the
restraint of sin, and to beget such graces as do incline both Governors to
rule, and inferiors to obey according to the word; finally to nourish justice
and charity, temperance and fortitude, amongst all sorts of men, and therefore
the Ministry does in its order by Gods blessing much serve for the preserving
of Common-weals, the glorifying of God, and the saving of souls. They then that
are enemies to the Ministry, are enemies to the welfare of States and Churches.
When Mr. Erbury can prove that the saints are equal to Jesus Christ, we will
acknowledge that the saints may both preach, and ordain Preachers.

We were bold upon such sad considerations as these, to write this following
Letter to our Noble and more victorious then triumphant General.

May it please your Excellency,
TO take these few lines into your saddest thoughts: We are commanded to give
an account to the Parliament of the state of this University, and City, Mr.
Erbury does publicly deliver diverse blasphemous errors in this City, such as
these, That the fullness of the Godhead does dwell in the Saints in the same
measure, though not in the same manifestation as it does in Christ; and that
the Godhead shall be after the same manner in the saints, as it is in Christ;
the Saints shall have the same worship, honor, Throne, glory, that Christ
has, and a more glorious power to do greater works then ever Christ did before
his Ascension. He will not acknowledge That Jesus Christ is God of himself,
God by nature, and the same true God with the Father; the truth is, we are not
able to recount all his errors and blasphemies, but he has been dealt with,
first by Letter, secondly, by Conference he was admonished in private, and
(when he would not cease to seduce diverse godly persons of this City who are
committed to our care by both Houses of Parliament) he was publicly refuted in
the University Church. Colonel Ingol^by has been made so sensible of his
intolerable insolen^e, that he has (as we are assured) casheered him, and yet
he continues in the Garrison; we make our address to your Excellency before we
make any complaint, or give up our account to the Parliament (which must be
done within this month) that your Excellency and we that are so deeply
entrusted, may both give up our account with joy. The rest of our brethren are
of our judgment, but are not now present with us. Nay, it is granted by all in
our Assembly, that none are to be tolerated, whose errors are contrary to the
common principles of Christianity, and we do thankefully remember when we
received such noble entertainment at your Quarters, that you did zealously
declare your judgment against a licentious spreading of damnable doctrings: We
recommend this weighty business to your care, and you and your Army to God as
it becomes

Your Excellencies humble servants, H. Wilkinson. F. Cheynell. Hen. Langly. H.
Cornish.


Upon the receipt of this Letter, his Excellency returned this gracious and
satisfactory answer,

Gentlemen,
I Cannot but acknowledge this as a very good respect to me and this Army, to
give me Cognizance of what you apprehend touching M. Erbury, before you make
more public addresses, as likewise of your fair and religious carriage to him,
in admonishment and reasonable debate with him; I hope I shall take care to
prevent your further trouble in this matter; and therefore have sent to him to
appear before me; I should be unwilling to be found one, who should either
countenance any member of this Army, disturbing the civil peace and power
(under whose protection we all are) or maintaining such Errors as impeach a
greater power and sovereignty, to which all men (who profess themselves
Christians) must acknowledge themselves subject: And this is all, that at this
time I shall trouble you with, with this further desire; That in such cases as
these (if any hereafter happen) you would continue the same love and respect
unto me, which is, and shall be very much acknowledged by,

Northampton. Jan. 30. 1646. Your very affectionate friend, T: FAIRFAX.


We humbly conceive it altogether needless to give any farther account of the
University in regard the Visitation approaches, and therefore we shall not
anticipate their work.

As for the City, we must needs say, we have found among many of them much love
and respect; we can speak it, (and we desire to do it to Gods glory) he has
given us some evident pledges of our Ministry among diverse, who have been so
far wrought upon, that they have in a public manner renounced and abominated
that bloody Oxford-Oath, which they had formerly taken, desiring upon a Fasting
day to be humbled for that sin in a special manner, and also that the
Congregation would be earnest with God in prayer for a pardon for them. Others
both in the University and City will acknowledge, that God by us his weak
contemned servants has began that great and glorious work of grace in their
hearts, so that we have had the lot of Paul in Athens, some mocked, others
slighted him, but certain clave to him and believed, Act. 17. 32. 34.

Thus have we faithfully and truly given you an account of the most remarkable
passages which have fallen out since our coming to Oxford, in which you may
easily see how unjustly we have been scandalized, how the truth has by some
been blasted, how Heresies have been fomented, and we trust, in some measure
refuted: And now we hope that the premises may present both advantage and
opportunity to both Houses of Parliament to consider seriously of some
expedient, for the speedy preventing of the farther spreading dangerous
errors, and the promoting of our covenanted reformation, as in all parts of
the Kingdom, so especially in this University.

FINIS.

