It Is Felony.


Thou are mine.


It Is but a Cheat.




THE Cheating Solliciter CHEATED: BEING A True and Perfect Relation of the LIFE
and DEATH OF RICHARD FAR. WITH An Exact Character of his Wench, Mrs. ELEANOR
CHADWICK.

Both Executed at Tyburn, the 12th. of April, last past.

-- Vt rem faciam rem,
Si possim recte, si non quocunque modo rem.
LONDON, Printed for T J 1665

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Richard Far.
SInce Example has so great an influence upon the Lives and Actions of Men, as
that we find they are more wrought upon thereby, than by the grave and sober
Counsels, Instructions, and Precepts, even of the most Wise and Learned. And
seeing that preceding Generations, have been careful to Communicate to their
Posterity, an Account of the Lives, not only of the Good and Virtuous, and of
such as have done great and eminent things for their Country; but also of the
most Flagitious and Criminal: As by the smooth and beautiful Draughts of the
One, to allure to the love and practice of Virtue: so by the ugly, dreadful and
frightly Aspects of the Other, to deterr from the commitment, of Vice. I cannot
but think, that I shall perform, both an acceptable, and serviceable Work to my
Country, in exposing this subtle Gamester, and tracing him through all the
Maenders, Intrigues and Mazes of his Life, to the shameful and deserved Period
thereof at Tyburn. And by his Example, convince the secure and presuming
Offender, that wicked Actions, though of never so fine and curious spinning,
though contrived and executed with the greatest privacy, cunning and disguise
imaginable, shall yet certainly have their proper and natural Effect, and sad
Catastrophe: And that wronging the Innocent by Tricks ahd Cheats; and taking
from them what they have by Power and Violence, are but Two Ways, that lead to
the same Wood. Not is it the least Benefit, that I conceive a Publication of
this nature may do to the Public, by informing the weak and simple of the
Abuses and Cheats put upon others, and thereby (as it were) fore-arming them,
to preserve themselves from the like. But to my Work.

RICHARD FAR was born in Warwickshire, near Killingworth; his Father a Tanner,
of honest fame and reputation: his Mother suspected, and somewhat tal'kd of in
her Youth; but too too visibly a Partaker with her Son, now in her Age. Her
Husband and she parting upon Discontent (whereof she is conceived to have given
the Cause) she came up to London, bringing with her this her Son Richard, then
a Boy, of about Nine or Ten Years of Age: Where they lived together (most about
Covent Garden) in mean Condition; she, in the nature of a Chair-woman, working
for her Living: and her Son plying up and down Streets, as a Link-Boy, toward
his; and going to and fro on Errands for People, to whose Houses his Mother did
resort. This loose and unfixed kind of Life, must needs have begotten in him an
ill habit of Mind; which being improved by the strength of his natural Parts, a
sharp Wit, a quick Apprehension, and a solid and deep Judgment; but above all,
a most tenacious Memory (whereby whatsoever he either read, or heard discoursed
in Company, he made his own) did exactly square and fit him for the carrying on
of his mischievous Contrivances, with such continued impunity. Nor was he a
little beholding to his manner of Speech (whether natural, or designed and
artificial, I cannot affirm) which being slow and drawling, but smotth and
oily, did give him a more easy admittance into the acquaintance and
familiarity of those he had Design upon: And it has been observed, by Persons
that have had much Converse and Controversy with him, that he had so full and
complete a Command over his Passions, as that nothing could provoke him in
Company to Anger, or move him from his close and reserved Guard: Yet was he of
a most implacable and revengeful Spirit (for he has sometimes attempted a
private Stabb, where he could not otherwise obtain his will) And it is
notorious, by too many surviving Instances, in and about the City, that
whosoever was so hardy, as (in prosecution of his own, or his Friends right) to
enter Contest with him, he seldom left him, till either quite ruined, or so
weakened, as that he had better have sat down contented with his first Loss.
Nay 'twill appear, by many Particulars in this Relation, that where he could
come to place his Engines, so as to have full hold, he would do his work at
first so thoroughly, as to leave them in an absolute incapacity of helping
themselves, or hurting him. And indeed it will seem no wonder, if to the
consideration of his natural Parts, and what he must needs have acquired in so
many years practice (wherein he ran through all the Courts and Prisons about
London) we shall add those petty advantages of a Conscience that boggled at
nothing, and Instruments that would both do and swear whatsoever he would have
them.

By this employment in errands and other petty businesses for Gentlemen, having
gotten good clothes on his back, and a little money in his pocket; he next gets
him a wife, Elizabeth Forest a Tailors daughter in Charles street, sometime
servant to Mis Stanier, on whom he played this last notorious prank, for which
he was hanged.

His wife being a plain woman (not squared for his intended designs) he soon
grew weary of her. Left her. She for her livelihood turnned Landresse to
Gentlemen, and among the rest to Mr. Skipwith; by which when Far perceived she
had gotten a little money, he would then live with her again, and by what she
had scraped together, and some further assistance of her Masters, he took a
little shop ('it was indeed a cellar) in Hearts street, where he sold chandlary
ware and band strings, and made periwigs for Gentlemen, and here he committed
his first fact that was taken notice off and by it stockt himself to a capacity
of doing many more.

One Sarah that used to go up and down to sell or dispose of Rings, Jewels and
the like, came (as she used to do) to Farrs house with her Basket, (which she
commonly carried a bout which her) and in it a box of Rings belonging to one Mis
Baker of about forty or fifty pound value. Far made a shist to nimme away the
box and Rings. She mist them not till she came where she intended to dispose of
them, then she went back, taxed Far; he denied and forswore them. But at
length it was discovered by one of the rings that was found at a Goldsmiths,
who confessed that he bought it of Far; who was thereupon apprehendded, and
committed to the Gatehouse, where he lay about 6 weeks (a very good school for
so apt a scholar.) from thence he was removed to Newgate in Order to his
trial; the Goldsmith was ready to have sworn against him, but Sarah, who
should have prosecuted him had a freak came into her head, ran out of the
Court, saying she would not be guilty of taking away any man's life. So he was
acquitted; of which he made so good use, by his fair tongue, that many believed
him innocent. And Mr. Skipwith having at Farrs motion bought of one Halfepenny
2 or 3 Tenements in Phoenix Alley by Long Acre, put him into possession, and
sealed him a lease of them (the credit of which he so exceedingly improved to
his further Rogueries) and took lodgings with him, and removed his goods
thither, some loose, most in trunks. Mr. Skipwith being diverted by business,
and often (being for aweek or fortnight together) at his brothers in
Hartfordshire, Far had his opportunity to do as he pleased; he took away out
of his chamber first such things as were loose which Mr. Skipwith took little
notice, as thinking they were laid somewhere else. Afterward he got a false
key to his desk, where all the keys of his trunks were, which he ransakt of
the best and choicest goods. And when Mr. Skipwith mist them and asked Far
about them, He told him, that Mr. Stanton the upholster had (amongst the things
that he laid claim to as Mis. Rays) taken away out of his trunks, wherein were
the things he mist, and advised him to sue him, offering himself a witness both
to the fact, and also to the value of the trunk. Mr. Skipwith hereupon went to
the Upholster, demanded his trunk, and had it sent home. When he opened it:
Far (having called some neighbors for witnesses) was present; The trunk was
empty, excepting some few things of no value. Far thereupon prayed them to
take notice that the Lock of the trunk had been taken of, for the nails were
not clincht, on the inside and indeed himself at the robbing of the tru^k had
so drawn off the lock, and when the upholster came to seize Mis. Rays goods,
purposely clapped it in amongst them for adisguise and cloak of what he had done;
pressed M. Skipwith again to sue him. But he began now more to suspect Far then
the upholster, which Far perceiving, and knowing that the consequence of it
must be the discovery of him, he cried whore first, and by way of prevention
clapped an Action of 120 pound debt upon him, and while he was in the custody of
the Baylies removed all his other goods. Hereupon Mr. Skipwith took out a
warrant against him, took also with him two Constables and two Beadles to
execute it. They found most of the goods in the house; a watch, a silver
bottle, a pair of silkstockings, and some jewels about him. They had him
before Justice Peaps, who committed him to Newgate. The first sessions he got
his trial put off; but was to remain in prison without bail; yet within
tendayes he prevailed with his keeper to go out with him: he served a warrant
upon Mr. Skipwith, and swore felony against him before the said Justice: The
next sessions Far came to trial: Mr. Skipwith, the two Constables and two
Beadles swore the goods were found about him: But he so ordered his business by
cross oaths that he was acquitted; having his liberty he continually vexed him
with fresh suits and informations for the space of 3 or 4 years, insomuch that
the Gentleman to be rid of such a rascal betook himself for some time to
travel.

I made mention a little before of Mis. Ray a midwife; I shall now give a
Relation of that affair. Mis. Ray by will made Mr. Stanton her Executor and
Far overseer of her will. The Executor finding Far to be knowing and thinking
him to be honest, entrusted him to manage the whole business.

He seizd upon all the goods and removed them to his own house, and
intentionally wholly to his own use; And Mr. Stanton the Eexecutor was forced
to get them from him by Replevy, and in removing of them Far designedly clapped
Mr. Skiwiths trunk, which he had robbed, amongst them, and some few things of his
own. Whereupon to ground his vexatious Actions at law, and not prevailing with
Mr. Skipwith to meddle, he went, and in his name laid claim to several goods
as his, which did indeed belong to Mis. Ray, and had them delivered unto him,
and did from himself and otheers create so much trouble to the Gentleman, that
he had better to have given 200 pound then have been made Executor.

Now being weary of his wife and able to live without her, and having found out
one (Mis. Chadwick) fitter for his purpose and of a more suitable temper, found
out this way to be rid of her. He prevailed with her (partly by Threatenings and
partly by suggestion of great benefit to themselves by it) to swear her self
with child by a Gentleman he had some controversy with; she went with him to a
Justice to swear it, but when the Justice understood what it was she was about
to swear, he told her of the Danger she brought her self into; (for it was when
Olivers Act against adultery was in force) whereupon she recoyled and would not
do it: But her husband took advantage of what she had confessed, though it is
thought she was no way guilty, and turned her out of Doors to shift for her
self: refusing also to keep the Child.

Mr SK. Sold his Houses to the Mr of the Goat-Tavern in Smithfield; whom Far
foon finding to be a Person, somewhat better able to deal with him, faceth
about, and places his Artillery against a more easy Fort; one Mr. Durwin, a
Glazier, in the Cole-Yard, near Drury Lane, his ancient and real Friend, and
good Benefactor. He forgeth a Lease to himself, from Mr. Skip. at an easy
Rent; offers and sells this Lease to his said Friend Durwin; a good pennyworth
(if he could have made his bargain good) delivers Possession, and Mr. Durwin
comes, and lives in it. Not long after, the head-Landlord comes to demand the
Rent of the Tenant in Possession, together with all the Arrears due from Far;
he tells Far of it, but nothing o^ redress from him. The Tenant not paying
it, his Goods were seized on by the Landlord, his Fine paid to Far utterly
lost, and himself ejected the House. Upon this hard measure, he sues Far upon
the Covenants of his Lease; but (Impar Congressus) Far was too hard for him;
and being provoked, turned upon him, and never left, till (after his Estate was
almost consumed in Law) he got him a Prisoner into Newgate, where for grief he
dyed.

Nor was he much kinder to his Relations after hi^ death; for he endeavored,
by a forged Deed, to have Cheated the Widow of some Tenements, in the said
Cole-Yard; and did really Cheat his Daughter (by a Trick) of 1^ Pound, in ready
Money, besides household Goods, and wearing Apparel.

And it is worth the remembering, the whilst M^ Durwin lived in the House, Far
forged a Deed of Sal^ to himself, of the Fee simple, from Mr. Skip. and brought
a Gentleman, a Draper in Fleet Street, to see it, with intent of buying it (and
no doubt but Far would have sold him a Pennyworth, rather than no^ taken his
Money) But the Gentleman enquiring of Mrs. Durwin, what Rent she paid, and many
other Particulars, raised in her a jealousy of Farr's intentions, so that she
asked the Gentleman, if it were so; who saying Yes, the Woman presently cried
out, O Lord! Sir, the House is none of his, etc. Whereby she disappointed Far
of his Project: And this was it, that did principally provoke him, to deal so
mischievously with her Husband, her self, and Daughter.

These late Troubles of his, as they did really add to his Experience; and his
success in them (faming him to be A Cunning Fellow in the Law) much further him
in the Employment, which he afterward took up, and practiced, to the ruin of
so many Families, I mean that of a Solliciter: So did the great expensiveness
of them, bring him to a low ebb in his Pocket, whereby he was forced to content
himself, for the present, with an Employment of a lower Orb. For now did he
enter himself a Soldier in Barkstead's Regiment; though at the same time (as
Captain) he commanded a Company of Privateers ( Anglice Night-Thieves) having
made a Convenience, to go in and out of his own House, at any time, without
either noise or notice: And he was the only Man, that disposed of what was
gotten, either by sale or pawn, for which he had brokeage, and the lickings of
his fingers to boot; and this trade of receiving and disposing stolen Goods,
it is thought he used to his last. He also sold Bottle-Ale, and if he liked his
Chapman, would help him to a Cure for his Concupiscence; and by these means,
and freedom from Lawsuits, he got Money into his Pocket, and put himself into
an handsome Garb. And now if any Wrangling, Controversy, Lawsuit, or Business
of Difficulty, arose among the Neighborhood, who but Mr. Far for a
Solliciter? If (as the livelihood of that end of the Town depends much upon
Lodgings) any Person, having taken a large House, wanted Hangings, and other
Furniture, who but Mr. Far for a Broker? If any wanted a sum of Money, upon
good security, who but Mr. Far for a Procurer? Now did he appear in his
Plush-Coat, and sometimes with his Pantaloons and Muff: Now had he his variety
of Shapes and Apparel, suitable to the Designs he intended: Now did his Friends
(and Strangers, that knew him not) Court; and his Enemies, that knew him, stand
in awe, and fear him.

And if it be true (which is, by the frequent Observation of many, grown into a
Proverbial Maxim) That there is no Man, but has in his Lifetime, some (at
least one) Opportunity to promote himself: So this certainly was that very
point of time, wherein this Person might have laid the Foundation to himself,
of a better Life, and more happy Death. But he had so much of the Fate of a
Knave upon him, that he knew not how to be honest, though never so much to his
own advantage; so that in the whole course of his Employment, he never was
entrusted by any, whom he did not Cheat; never came to the acquaintance of a
plain, and honest-meaning man, whom he did not circumvent; never had an
Adversary, whom he would not venture Soul and Body to destroy; nor a Friend,
whom he would not for Money sell and betray, as will clearly appear by the
following List.

Farr's Wife having been Servant to Madam Staneir, as is before said, Far
thereby became acquainted with her, was welcome to her House and Table, did
business for her; in which time she lost many things, which she either did not
presently miss, or little suspected Far to have been the Thief: Till at
length, he stole from her a little Bitch, that she brought with her out of
France, (for which she had a great love and fancy) and would not restore her;
whereat the Gentlewoman was very angry, forewarned him her House, and called
in the Money she had lent him: He, in requital, forged Bills of her hand, for
Money due to him; arrested her no less than four several times, by Bill of Mid.
in one day; and not satisfied with this, indicted her for her Life, for Words
spoken against the then Powers; but she was acquitted.

One Mrs. Andrews, who lived then in St. Martins-Lane, having spoken to him,
to help her to 100 Pound, he promised to do it, but would not except any less
Security, than a Judgment of all she had; which she yielded to: He brought
with him a Warrant of Attorney, and two of his Accomplices to witness it, and
prevailed with her to seal it; telling her, That he would go with her
presently to the Gentleman, that would pay the Money: He carried her to a
House, where he had designed before, that the Gentleman should not be within;
so they parted, and appointed to go again next day: But Far came to her no
more, till he came with an Execution, and seized all she had, to her utter
ruin.

The like he did by one Mrs. Manly, to whom having promised the loan of 50
Pound (upon the same security that he had from Mrs. Andrews) he came to her,
and told her, That his Money did not come in as he expected; but, that he might
not disappiont her, he had there a Lease of a House, which cost him, and was
worth 300 Pound, upon which she might easily borrow 50 Pound (but engaged her
not to mortgage it for more) The poor Gentlewoman, little suspecting him
(living then in such a Garb, and making such a bustle in the World) upon
receipt of his Lease, sealed his Warrant for Judgment: But when the went to
borrow the 50 Pound, and enquiry was thereupon made into the Lease, she found
the House as he said, and the Lease to be real, but the House taken at the
highest rack Rent, and so the Lease not worth a farthing: She thereupon upon
went to seek out Far, who would not be spoken with, till he came, and took
away all in Execution, which broke the poor Woman's heart.

In the same nature did he serve the Lady Anderson, and Dr. Charlton's Lady,
when her Husband, in the late Troubles, was beyond Sea; and many others; which
having effected by the same means, and in the same manner, I shall forbear the
Particulars, lest it should seem repetition; and, for variety sake, give you
one of his Tricks, somewhat more Comical.

Wanting a sum of Money, he set his Wits to work, and framed his Plot thus: He
habits himself like a Country Grazier, comes into a great Inn in Smithfield,
asks for the Master of it, and calls for a Flaggon of Beer, to drink with him.
When the Innkeeper came, he asked him, Whether such a Man (naming a great
Lincolnshire Grazier, that used to Inn there) were yet come to Town: The Man
replied, No: At which Far seemed to wonder; for he said, he parted with him
upon the Road, but two Nights before; and that both their Cattle were coming up
together; and that he came before, only because he was to have a great Trial,
as on the Morrow. By and by in comes Chad. ( Farr's Friend, and one of his
Swearers, till convicted for Perjury) habited like a Drover. Quoth Far, How
now Dick? What Is the best News? Are my Cattle come? He, bare-header, and with
a long scrape, answered, No Sir; The great py'd Ox is fallen lame, so that we
were forced to stay at such a Place (naming a Town on the Road) Why then (says
Far) my Cattle will not be here to Night: No, says Chad. It Is well if they
get them here soon enough for to Morrow Market: At that Far stamped, and swore
he knew not what he should do, for he wanted Money to prepare for his Morrows
Trial (which he pretended to be of great Consequence, and that therefore he
must retain the greatest Council he could get) Far then asked, Whether his
Friend (naming the Grasier) was come: Chad. replied, No; He stays to come
along with the Cattle, for he has some of his fallen lame too: At which Far
seemed exceedingly discontented, as not knowing what to do. Whereupon the
Innkeeper believing, from their discourse, and the behavior of Chad. to his
supposed Master, that he was really a great Grazier, and could not have less
than 5 or 600 Pounds worth of Cattle coming up; asked him, What Money would
serve his turn: He said, 20 Pound: The Innkeeper prayed him not to trouble
himself then, for he would supply him so far as 20 or 30 Pound went: Which
Far, with great acknowledgement of the Civility, accepted; and promised to
repay it on the Morrow: The Innkeeper fetched him 20 Pound, and Far received
it, and went away, as being in haft upon his business; saying to Chad. Come
Dick, go you along with me, for I shall have occasion to send you on an Errand
or two: So away they went; but the Innkeeper heard no more of his Grazier.

Being at Mr. Durwins (formerly mentioned) in Ploenix-Alley, there came in one
Mr. Hollinsby, a Blackwel-Hall Factor; who, in discourse, was telling him, That
a Customer of his, a West-Country Weaver, had a Parcel of Says to sell, and
that he would sell them a Pennyworth, and would take half his Money down, and
half at six Months end. Far told him, He would help him to a Customer, and
desired, they might be sent into his House, and laid in the Belcony Room, one
pair of Stairs, and he did not question, to give an account of them, by next
Morning. The Goods were accordingly sent in, and laid where he ordered, himself
being then not at home. Far conveys away the Goods, into a Vault, or
Common-Shore, that he could go into, out of his Cellar; breaks a Pane of Glass
out of the Belcony Door, and sets the Door open (as if some Thief had, by
breaking the Glass, put in his hand, and opened the Door, and stole the Says
away) When Mr. Hollinsby, and his Country Chapman, came next Morning, Far
pretended himself Robbed, and so Cheated the poor Man of his Goods, nor could
he ever get a farthing satisfaction.

About this time also, a young Gentlewoman, upon some discontent and
difference, by his advice, withdrew her self (with what of her most rich Goods
she could take with her) from her Friends, to Lodgings, which he provided for
her, in Blackmores-Alley; where, when she had continued for sometime, he
persuaded her to remove to other Lodgings, which he had taken for her, more
private and convenient, whereunto she consented; and he, under color of
removing her Goods to the said new Lodgings, conveyed them all away, leaving
her nothing but her Smock, and an under-Petticoat, and never came near her
afterward.

He coming in the Garb of a Gentleman, to Mr. Newman, a great Builder in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, took of him one of his Houses there, and lived in it
paying him the first Quarters Rent punctually, but afterward would not pay
any: When he was run three Quarters behind, his Landlord thought it time to
look after him; and having heard something of his former manners, did not care
how soon he was rid of such a Tenant; he therefore sues him for his Arrears of
Rent, and also seals a Lease of Ejectment against him. but Far alters the
Month of Mr. Newman's Acquittance, which he gave him for his first Quarters
Rent; and at the Trial, had his Witnesses to swear, the alteration of the word,
by Mr. Newman himself, when the Money was paid; and so Mr. Newman lost his
three Quarters Rent, his Charges, and was overthrown in his Ejectment, as
having sued before his time. Far, knowing there was no staying in the House
for him, takes away the Lead out of the Belcony, and the Leaden Pipes, and
sells them; finds a Tenant, of whom he takes a Fine, and lets it at a small
Rent, and so leaves him in the House, to lose his Fine, and answer for the
waste he himself had done.

He, with one of his Accomplices, coming into a Coffee-house, sat down at a
Table, where was other Company; Far drew out his Watch, pretending to see what
a Clock it was: A Gentleman sitting by, asked him, What it was a Clock; he
thereupon gave him his Watch to look: When he had seen, Farr's Friend took the
Watch from him, as if he also would see, what time of the Day it was, and with
it went away: Far taking no notice thereof; and the Gentleman questioning
nothing, for that he presumed him to be Farr's Friend and Acquaintance (as
indeed he was) The Man being gone, Far asked the Gentleman for his Watch: He
replied, That his Friend had it: Far said, He was no Friend of his, nor did he
know him; and told him, He must look for his Watch from him; took witness of
the Bystanders, That he had delivered the Watch into his hands; sued him for
the Watch, and recovered the value of it: And this very Watch, was afterward
found at a Place, Pawned by Far himself.

A Woman living near St. Giles's Church in Holborn, was, by a forged Deed of
his, ejected her House, and her Goods seized on, whereupon the poor Woman
hanged her self.

He having had some dealing with one Mr. Tailor, and received some Money for
him, and paid it again, by his Order; desired then to have a general Release
from him, which the Man was willing to do: But Far, instead of a Release,
presented him with a Warrant of Attorney, for a Judgment for 40 Pound; which
the unwary Man sat his hand to, and a while after was taken in Execution, and
forced to pay the Money.

He played his Pranks very severely upon one Mr. Alexander, then the King's
Shooemaker; with whom he having some small Concern, went and made Complaint to
the Green-Cloath, and desired liberty to sue him: He had granted him an Order
to summon in Mr. Alexander, which he never did; but he, and Chad. whom he
brought with him, making Oath, that he had summons, and that he did
contemptuously disobey the same, he had liberty granted him, to sue him; which
he did; and, by the help of good Witnesses, who swore treble the Debt, had
Judgment; which Mr. Alexander satisfied, but neglected to see Satisfaction
acknowledged upon Record: So that Far, some time after, served the Execution
upon his Goods, when he was out of Town, and his Wife was forced to pay it a
second time. He served it also a third time on his Person; but he then chose
rather to go to the Gatehouse, than pay the Money into hands, whence there was
no hope of Redemption; and there continued a Prisoner till Term, and then was
discharged: But Far durst not appear for his Ears.

A Friend of Farr's, being sued by one Mr. John Wotton, a Country Man, upon a
Bond of 100 Pound, employed Far as a Solliciter. When Far heard, that Mr.
Wotton was come to Town, in order to his Trial; he, and his trusty Friend Chad.
went to him, to his Inn, pretending to make an end of the Business, but
intending only to have a certain knowledge of his Person; and when the Business
came to Trial, Far and Chad. swore the Bond satisfied; and so Mr. Wotton lost
both his Money, and his Charges.

Another Roguery he acted (beyond humanity) against one Mr. Green, an ancient
Man, living in Covent Garden, and a single Man, and well to pass: For when he
was just upon the point of Dying, and not sensible, Far came with an Execution
(which all men believe to be forged) and took away all his Goods, but the very
Bed he lay upon; and for this was never so much as questioned.

One Project he made a very frequent and beneficial use of, which was this:
When any Man, whom he knew, dyed in such a Condition, as that the Widow, Heir
at Law, would not administer or meddle, but leave what there was, to be divided
amongst the Creditors; he would be sure, by a forged Bond, to make himself a
Principal Creditor; and as such, take out Letters of Administration, and get
into his hands what he could, and never part with a farthing to any of the
other Creditors.

And another way he had, of somewhat a more abstruse and mysterious reach, viz.
He would combine with a poor Fellow to be Arrested, for some small
inconsiderable matter; and upon pretense of not being able to get Bayl, turn
himself over to Ludgate; where, upon pity to the Condition of the Man, and the
smallness of that against him, they would take any slender Security, for his
true Imprisonment, and let him go abroad: Then would Far, having a Bond of
the Person for that purpose, enter privately an Action against the Prisoner, to
a considerable value; and then the Prisoner would run away, and his Security
not be found; and so Far would bring his Action against the Keeper, and his
Swearers to attest the Bond, and recover the Money.

There is one Mrs. Lewis, now a Prisoner to Ludgate, a sad Instance of his
mischievous malice: For having pawned to her diverse Goods, to the value of 15
Pound, he afterward caused one of his Agents, to bring an Action of Trover
against her, for the said Goods, as his, and so fetched them out of her hands;
for which she beginning to vex him by a Suit, he forged a Bond, of a
considerable sum, and arrested her; never leaving, till he brought her to the
Place and Condition wherein she now is.

The like Cheat (and Revenge after it) did he put upon one Mr. P. a Goldsmith,
with whom he did often deal (as Broker) both for buying and selling. Passing by
his Shop, he observed a rich Locket of Diamonds, of good value: He told Mrs. P.
who for the most part kept the Shop, and was then in it, That he knew a Lady
would buy the Locket, and at a Price had it delivered to him, to show the Lady:
He got it pattern'd exactly, by a Locket of Bristol Stones; and took his
opportunity to come, when only the Apprentice, a young Lad, was there, and
delivered it to him, in presence of a Gentleman, whom he brought with him, to
witness it, bidding him to carry it in to his Mistress; who receiving it, took
not so much notice of it at first, as to perceive the Cheat, but soon after
did; but to little purpose, for Far was gone: And being afterward taxed, he
denied the thing stoutly; So the Goldsmith sued him, but to no effect; for
observe what a Freak Far finds out, to supersede him in his Prosecution.

Mr. P. one of the King's Trumpeters, having lost his Trumpet, which he much
valued for its goodness, spent much money and time in looking after it, but
could not retrive it. Far hearing of it, repairs to him, and told him, He knew
where his Trumpet had been: The Gentleman glad thereof, went presently with
him: He directed him to this Mr. P. his House, where he made demand of his
Trumpet: The Goldsmith denied his having any such thing: Whereupon the
Trumpeter went to the Place, where he had left Far, and his Friend, expecting
the issue; and told Far, what the Goldsmith said: Far answered, That he saw
it in his hands at such a time, and so did that his Friend; and that, if he
would have the Goldsmith, by a Warrant, before a Justice, they would both swear
it; and they were as good as their words. The Goldsmith, fearing the dangerous
Consequence (not only to his Estate, but his Life also) of having to do with
such Swearers; gave the Gentleman Satisfaction for his Trumpet, and let fall
his Sure against Far for his Locket.

He also put the Change upon a Jewellers Apprentice (his Friend) in
Crutched-Fryers; taking away a very large Diamond, and leaving a Bristol Stone
in the room of it.

When he was a Prisoner in the King's Bench in Southwark, he observed a pretty
Garden-house to stand empty; he thought it pity it should want a Tenant, and
resolved on this Plot: He went to the Landlord, in a very gentile Garb; and
told him, He had taken much notice of such a House, and had a great mind to
build himself one exactly after that pattern; and desired, That he might have
the liberty, to bring a Carpenter, go take a just measure of the scantling. The
Gentleman could not deny so small a Civility; but told him, that he should do
it when he pleased. He thereupon went to a Carpenter, and told him; That he was
about to buy a House hard by; desiring him, to go along with him, and give him
his estimate of it. The Carpenter went readily with him; they call upon the
Landlord, and so go to the House together. The Carpenter took an exact account
of the Butts and Bounds of the House in writing, as Far had directed him:
Which Far having received from him, got a Lease drawn, at a very low Rent,
upon consideration of a large Fine in the Lease, mentioned to have been paid:
And you may be sure, he wanted not for Witnesses to attest it: Demanded shortly
after Possession of the House: At which the Landlord seemed to be startled, as
knowing of no such Contract, as Far laid claim to: Whereupon Far sued him;
his own Instruments swore the Lease, and the ensealing and delivery thereof;
and the Carpenter swore the probable Circumstances of their Discourse, etc. So
that Far recovered Damages against the Landlord; who, by this time,
understanding what Far was, chose rather to compound the Business to his own
loss, than run the hazard of losing his House, and further mischief.

He also Cheated one Mr. Pore, Cellar-Keeper at the King's Bench, of Five
Pounds, which he borrowed of him; and for his Security, left with him a Tru^k
of Writings, which he said was of 1000 Pound value, and a Watch. The Old Man
satisfied with this Depositum, bad him lock it up, for he should not desire to
meddle with any thing there; only desired, He might have his Money again
honestly; which Far promised: But in locking up the Trunk, slipped out the
Watch, leaving only the Writings, which were of no concern or value. Pore could
not get his Money; therefore resolved, and brake open the Trunk before Witness
(and it is well he did so, otherwise Far would have had one fling at him) found
no Watch, nor any thing more than waste Paper: And I conceive he had but a bad
bargain, for Five Pound goes a great way in that Commodity.

And a man would have thought, that Far would not have thus disobliged One,
that was like to be his so near Neighbor; but he spared none that he could
reach.

For there was one Mr. Ivy, of a good Family, and bred a Clerk, and (though at
present things were not over-plentiful with him) Heir to a good Estate in
Reversion. This Person did Far make use of, for most of his writing business
(whether he were privy to the ill use made of them by Far, I cannot say) and
there was a great intimacy, and seeming friendship between them: Yet when he
was dead, Far, like an ungrateful Villain, forcibly entered his House, seized
all the Goods, turned the Widow and Children out of Doors: And being
afterward, by Mrs. Ivyes Friends, Indicted, produced at his Trial a forged
Bill of Sale, and some of his Witnesses to swear it, and so was acquitted: But
in revenge, arrested the Widow in feigned Actions, to a great value, and run
her into the Counter, where she continued for some time, till bayl'd out by
Friends, who knew there was nothing real against her.

There is a common Report about the Town (but I must say, I cannot find it
confirmed to my satisfaction) That having understood, that a Gentleman of his
Name, living in Essex, a Moneyed Man, and a frequent Purchaser, was now in
London, upon a Purchase, and so might be probably thought, to want the supply
of a little Money, for the present Deposition: He went, in his richest habit,
with a Footboy at his heels, to a Scriveners Shop in Cornhill, and desired to
speak with the Gentleman; who coming, he with a kind of careless and generous
frankness, told him, That he understood he was a Person that could supply his
present Occasions, which required 200 Pound, to make up a greater sum, he was
to pay; but withal, That he should not give any other Security, than his own
Bond. The Scrivener told him, That he did not use to lend such a sum, but upon
better Security, than one single Man's Bond: Far presently replied, Sir, It may
be so; but I conceive, if you had knowledge of me, you would not scruple my
single Bond, for a greater matter: My Name is Far, I live in such a Place; if
you please to take the pains to enquire, I will pay the Charge (throwing him
down a Piece of Gold) and for your Civility, in supplying my present
Convenience, shall not be unworthy. The Scrivener, willing to be getting, very
officiously promised, to give him his answer within three days; and the next
day rid over to the Place, where he told him he lived; and first enquired of
the Innkeeper, where he set up his Horse; who told him, That Esquire Far was
a very wealthy Man, and moneyed; that he owned almost their whole Town, and was
continually purchasing more; and that he heard, he was upon a great Purchase
now, and that he was gone to London. The Scrivener hearing this Story, so
agreeable with that Far had told him, was pretty well satisfied; but yet made
farther enquiry in the Town, and found them all agreeing, and so he came home.
On the Day appointed, Far came for the Money, and had it, only upon his own
Bond. When the Money became due, the Scrivener went to Esquire Far, to demand
it; but to no other effect, than to find that he was Cheated; and that he was
not the Man who had his Money. In some short time after, he heard of this Far,
and what a kind of Person he was; and after a long inquisition, found him a
Prisoner in the King's Bench.

About the same time, he Cheated another Scrivener, on the backside of the
Exchange: To whom he came, and told him, He had occasion for 100 Pound; that
his Name was R. Green, a Merchant, living in such a Place; and for his
Security, nominated two other Merchants, viz. one Mr. Williams, and one Mr.
Richardson, Persons of good account; and told the Scrivener where they dwelt;
and bid him, in his enquiry, be private and modest; telling him, That at
present they were both out of Town (for he had chosen the time of their
absence, as most conducing to his Design) that he should only satisfy himself,
as to their Capacity; and that himself would take care to bring them, when come
Town. The Scrivener enquired, and found the two Gentlemen to be beyond
question. Far, within three or four days, called upon him; and had for
answer, That he might have the Money, upon the Security propounded: Whereupon
Far, about two days after, brought two Persons (of his own Gang) habited like
Citizens of good rank, who personated Mr. Williams, and Mr. Richardson; and as
such, they sealed and delivered the Bond, together with Far, and had the
Money. When the Money became due, the Scrivener hearing nothing of the
Principal, went to the Security, who were surprised at the thing, knowing
nothing of it; and the Scrivener soon found that he was Cheated, but could not
find by whom; till long after, seeing him, as he looked through the Pillory,
against the Exchange, Agnovit Faciem, he taxed him with it, but Far denied it;
and 'twas hardly worth the Scriveners while, to endeavor to prove it, he being
then a Prisoner.

In the same kind did he Cheat a Lady, lodging at Mr. Appletrees in
Covent Garden, of 50 Pound.

He also Cheated a Country Lace-man, at the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate, of
near 40 Pounds worth of Lace; which having chosen out, he desired the Man to
go with him, and he would pay him his Money: So he had him to an Alehouse, on
the backside of Black-Horse-Alley, by Fleet-Bridge, and called for a Pot of
Drink; telling him, He would go fetch him his Money presently: Took the Lace
with him, but returned no more. The Man found him some time after, when he was
a Prisoner; and pleading Poverty, got of him Five Pound, for his Forty, and
gave him a Discharge. And I think he fared better, than most that had to do
with him.

He put a handsome Trick upon one in Barbican, thus:

Pretending to go a Journey into the Country, he packed up, in a Trunk, most
of his best Apparel, both Woollen and Linen; and sent for a Porter, to carry
the Trunk into Aldersgate Street, to the Carriers: When the Porter came, he bid
him take notice of what he put into the Trunk, for fear it should any way
miscarry; which the Porter did: Then he sent away the Porter, to buy a Cord;
and when he was gone, unpack'd the Trunk of the Clothes, and filled it with
Rags, Brickbatts, and Pieces of Wood, and locked it up. The Porter returning,
corded up the Trunk, and so away with it he went, and Far with him. When they
came to the Inn, the Carrier of the Place (whither he pretended he would have
sent it) was gone out of Town the day before, and would not come again till
next Week. He therefore ordered the Porter, to take the Trunk, and go with
him; and so he carried it to one whom he knew in Barbican; and desired, That he
might leave it there till next Week, that the Carrier came to Town, and then he
would come for it; the Man let him leave it. The next Week, Far, taking the
same Porter, went for the Trunk; but pretended, That he had present use of
something that was in it; and therefore, in presence of the Porter, opened the
Trunk; which being so differently fraught, from what the Porter saw it filled
with at first, he called to the Man of the House, told him, That his Tru^k was
opened, and his Goods taken away, and that Rubbish left in the room; the Porter
justified the same. The Man (as he had good cause) pleaded ignorance, but it
little availed him; for Far brought his Action against him; and by Mrs.
Chadwicks, and another of his Swearers Oaths, together with the Porter's,
recovered against the Man 20 Pound, besides Costs of Sure.

In the same manner almost, he served a Watch-maker, in Lombard Street. He, in
company of two more, whom he brought with him, upon Design, left with the
Watch-maker, his Watch, to be mended; and within a short time after came for
it. The Watch-maker had fixed it, and offered it to him: He told him, That was
none of his Watch, described his to be one of a far greater value. The
Watch-maker being confident, that was the Watch he left, would give him no
other: Whereupon he sued the Watch-maker; and brought his two Agents, to swear
the delivery of such a Watch, as Far claimed; and so recovered treble the
value of the Watch.

He also showed a kind of a slippery Trick to one Mr. Boucher: To whom he
brought a Man, that sold him a Suit of Tapestry Hangings, for 15 Pound: A while
after he brought another Man to him, who laid claim to the Hangings, and said,
They were stole from him; and that, if he would not deliver them, he would
indite him. Far also told him, That the Person of whom he had them, was a
Stranger to him, nor did he know how to find him, or where to enquire after
him. The Man therefore, for fear of a worse thing, returned the Hangings, and
lost his Money; but afterward understood, that the Hangings were really
Farr's, who had thus Cheated him.

A Man would think, that all these successful Villainies could not but have made
him rich; but he was very profuse in his Expenses, and in his Law-Sutes could
not be sparing (for a good Cause may be starved, much more will a bad and weak
One call for strong support) so that it does appear, that he was but meanly
moneyed: For being worsted in a Suit about his Covent Garden Houses, he was
shopp'd in the Fleet, upon an Execution but of Threescore Pound; which he could
not, or would not pay, till he found out a Trick to do it by, in this manner.

It has been formerly intimated, that he generally practiced Brokeage between
Buyer and Seller; and that very frequently for Goods stolen, and indirectly
come by. Being therefore now a Prisoner in the Fleet, the Parties that had
robbed Mr. L. Mercer in Lombard Street, came to him, and desired him, to
dispose of such things for them; he undertook it, and dealt with an Old
Gentleman (a Physician) then a Prisoner also in the Fleet, and a miserable
penurious Man, to lend him 120 Pound upon the Goods, which he did; and the
Goods, packed up in Hampers, were set up in his Chamber, and put under his Bed.
Far having fingered the Money, went to the Warden of the Fleet, paid off his
Execution, and so had his liberty of going abroad. He went to the Person
robbed, and told him, That he thought, he could do him some service toward the
recovery of his Goods. Far had a Bond sealed to him, for Thirty Pound, payable
upon the receiving of the Goods. The Mercer, with some Friends, went and
procured the Lord Chief Justice his Warrant, and came, with Far, to a Tavern,
hard by the Fleet. Far told them, He would not appear himself, but gave them
punctual directions to the Chamber; whither they went, with a Constable (the
Warden giving leave) and found the Goods, and seized them; So the poor Old Man
lost his Money, and soon after his Life for grief: A strange Man, to carry his
Life in his Purse.

A while after, the Merchants came to call their Factor to an account for their
Money: He told them, He had no Money, were not the Goods seized on? At which
they grumbling, he bade them be gone, while they were well, or else he would
pay them with a Halter.

This Money (with the 30 Pound of the Mercer, which was duly paid him) set him
a clear board.

And now Mounsieur L. Mountebank appears upon the Stage afresh, where his first
Patient is

A young Merchant, or wholesale Dealer in Stuffs: To whose Warehouse he went,
in a very Gentile habit; told the Gentleman, That he was newly come from Cadiz,
and that he had occasion for some of his Commodities; and that if he had to
furnish him, he should bestow near 1000 Pound with h im before his departure:
but for the present, looked out, and ordered to be sent into his House, about
100 Pounds worth. The Merchant sent in the Goods, and his Servant with them.
When he came to Farr's House, he was conducted into the Dining Room, which was
very completely furnished, and hung with Tapestry. Far comes to him, with his
Footboy behind him, whom he presently, upon fight of the Man, bade go to his
Mistress, for the Key of his Closet: The Boy (as instructed) brought word, That
his Mistress was gone over the Water, to give a visit to a Lady, whom he named:
VVhereat Far stormed, and seemed much discontented; and after near an hours
stay, very complementally told the Young Man, He was very sorry, that he was
forced thus to disapoint him, but he saw how it was; and therefore entreated
him to come about Eight of the Clock next Morning. The Young Man was very well
satisfied, and went his way: The next Morning he came at the hour appointed,
but Far would not be spoken with, and so came three or four Mornings, and lost
his labor; Then the Master came, but 'twas all one, no Mr. Far would appear;
till, by frequent coming he made a shift at length to meet with him at home: He
railed at him, called him Knave, and Cheat, and the like; and told him, He
would make him an Example; and away he went for a VVarrant for him. Far
thereupon sent for two of his Friends, who, by his Order, went and fetched a
VVarrant for the Merchant, with which they staid, till he came with his
VVarrant and Constable, and then delivered it to the Constable, who must
execute it; and instead of carrying Far, carried the Gentleman before a
Justice; where Farr's two Friends swore flat Felony against him, as having
taken away such and such Goods out of Mr. Farr's House, upon which he was
committed to Newgate; whither sending for Friends, and advising with them, he
was counseled (and took their Counsel) to endeavor to make an end; for that
it would be dangerous, if the Fellows should come in, and swear the same at his
Trial, as they had before the Justice. So the Gentleman sent some Friends to
Far, who confidently persisted in the same Story, as his Friends had sworn,
That the Gentleman had robbed him, etc. And the Conclusion was, the Gentleman
lost his Goods, and Far caused his Friends to forbear Prosecution.

He had insinuated himself into the acquaintance of Mrs. Ray, the Midwife, so
far, as that she entrusted him with all her Business, when living; and when
she dyed, left her only Child to his care and tuition, with what she had to
leave him: But Far most villanously laid claim to all her Goods (which were
very good, and the Furniture of her House rich) as his; and produced a forged
Deed of hers to that purpose, and left her Child to the Parish.

He did his endeavor to have Cheated one Mrs. Wilson, an Apothecaries VVidow
near the New-Exhange, whose Husband (when living) he had helped to the buying
of Hangings, and other Upholstery, for furnishing his House; which Mr. Wilson
paid for, in a short time after the delivery; But after he was dead, Far came
to the VVidow, and told her, He had a Bond of her Husbands of Threescore Pound,
and that there was Thirty Pound of it unpaid. The Woman knew that her Husband
had discharged that Debt long ago, and therefore refused to pay him: Whereupon
he sued her, and put her to a great deal of Charges, and would without doubt
have made her pay it (for he had forged a Bond) but that the Gentleman, who
solicited her Business, understanding what Far was, had scraped together so
many of his Rogueries, which he would have produced at the Trial, and the
Business of the Pillory, for Forgery, did then, in the very Nick, fall upon
him, that he forbear farther prosecution for the present: And I conceive the
Gentlewoman is now out of his reach.

One Mr. Labbey, a Frenchman (now his Majesty's Shooemaker) did formerly (as
Foreman, or chief Journey-man) manage the Trade for a Woman, whose Husband was
gone into Turkey. The Woman wanting Money to carry on her Business, was
supplied by Far with Nine Pound, upon her own, Mr. Labbey's, and Mr. Labbey's
Friend's Bond, for payment of Ten Pound at three Months end. Before the
expiration of which time, the Woman, and Mr. Labbey, went into Holland, and
there stayed about a Year. When the Money was due, Far (knowing he had now a
fit subject and time for his Knavery) went to the third Person, who was
Security, and demanded the Money. The Man unwilling (as he said) to pay Ten
Pound, for which he never so much as drank, desired him to continue the Money,
till the Principal should return, which would be in a short time. Far was
presently at his Quid dabis? Two Angels appeared, and for that time removed
him; but his Visits afterward, in this kind, were so frequent (always shaking
the Rod over the poor man's back, in case he began to be hidebound) that in the
three Quarters of a Year, that he forbear him, he drew from him as much as the
Principal Money came to; and at last arrested him, and put him to a great deal
of Charge: And though the Man would have paid the Principal Money, yet Far
(finding him an easy and unskillful man) would not make an end, under the
forfeiture of the Bond, which was Twenty Pound. Hereupon the Man writ a
pitiful Letter to Mr. Labbey, who, upon receipt thereof, came over. So soon as
Far heard of it, he arrested him, kept him, till he made him pay what Fees the
Officers would ask, and gave new Bond, with other Security, for payment of 15
Pound within three months. Three days before the money was due, Far came to
Mr. Labbey, and told him, That the money would be due on such a Day: Mr. Labbey
told him, He hoped to be ready for him at the time, having most of it by him.
Far (finding too much meat upon the bone to be laid aside so) desired to drink
with him: Mr. Labbey went with him: Far asked, If he had a Pair of Shoes that
would fit him: Mr. Labbey fetched him a Pair, but they were much too bigg; yet
Far took them, saying, He loved to go easy in his feet; and told Mr. Labbey,
He would have them Shoes, and would give him three weeks or a month after the
time, for payment of the money; which Mr. Labbey with thanks accepted (but if
this had not been voluntarily offered, could and would have paid in the money
on the day) But the very day after the money was due, Mr. Labbey, and his two
Securityes, were arrested; then Far came to them, and would have tampered, to
have added the other Five Pound for Charges, and so have made it 20 Pound, and
continued it. But Mr. Labbey had too much of him already, and with what he had
by him, and help of some Friends, made a shift to get rid of this Knave, by
paying even what he pleased to demand: So that this Nine Pound, did in a Year
and Quarters time, swell to at least 50 Pound. Far having thus shorn him
close, almost to the skin, lets him run, not out of any kindness, but only that
he might seize him again, when his fleece was new grown: And that this was his
intent is clear; for not long ago meeting him, he asked him of his health, and
enquired of the Woman his former Mistress; and being answered slightingly, he
told him, He had not done with him yet, for he had a Bond of his for Forty
Pound, which he had lent her, and that he must pay it: At which Mr. Labbey was
much startled, fearing a Trick. And doubtless he had had it upon him, but that
very suddenly thereupon, he was sworn his Majesty'd Shooemaker, and so Far
durst not arrest him. But Mr. Labbey could not think himself safe, till he saw
him hanged, and put up into his Coffin; so great a dread had his Villainies
imoress'd upon him.

While he was a Prisoner in the Fleet, at the Suit of one Mr. Chambers, of whom
we shall have further occasion to speak hereafter, he played a most treacherous
part, to one of his acquaintance, and fellow-Prisoner, Mr. Wotton: Who having
some Goods, lying in a Place, where he feared they were not very safe, told
Far of it, (who could go abroad, but this Wotton could not) Far thereupon
told him, That he would (if he pleased) remove them to his House, and there he
should have the use of a Room, to lay them in; which Wotton accepted of, and
thanked him. So Far went and took all his Goods, and sold them, putting the
money into his own Pocket, and brought with him to Wotton a Key, as of the Door
where the Goods were locked up; but that Key was all that Wotton could ever get
for all his Goods.

Now also was it, when one Diamond a Weaver in Spittle-fields having served him
with some Process out of Chancery, at the Suit of Mr. Alexander formerly
mentioned, he in revenge got a Warrant to search his House for stolen goods, and
taking a Constable with him, broke open his doors, and under pretense of
searching in the Bed, clapped his own Watch between the Sheets, and a while
after, upon a more exact search found it there, and thereupon took the Man out
of his house, had him before a Justice, swore felony against him, and got him
committed to Newgate, where the poor man was clapped into Irons, and so lay all
night: but the next morning some friends of his went to the Justice, and
informed him of the whole business, who there upon took Bail for him, and the
next Sessions, Far not prosecuting, he was discharged.

About this time also did he most brutishly ruin a young man, whose name was
John Chambers, by Trade a Grocer, who having been arrested and thrown into the
Counter, had taken of all the things that were then brought against him, only
there stood entered in the Book against John Chambers, (not this man, but the
Silk-throster, Farrs great Antagonist) and Action of 500 l. at Farrs suit: This
young man therefore sent for Far, and desired him to certify that he was not
the person, that so he might be discharged: Far privately, when no body was in
presence, would confess that he was not the man, but would not do it before
any witness, unless the man would give him 10 l. which rather than do, he
turned himself over a Prisoner to the Kings Bench, which was his utter undoing.

Then also did he by his friend Chadw. lay a bait for a Gudgeon that bit, and
was upon the hook, but proved not to be worth the catching. Chadwick had told a
young man (he was acquainted with) that he could help him to 50 l. upon
security, which the young man propounded, and the other accepted: Far (then a
prisoner in the Fleet) was the man that should lend the money. At a time agreed
on, the principal, with his two friends came to the Fleet; Far told them, that
being a Prisoner he would not have it known that he had any money, (for that he
should never be free then from borrowers) bad them go to an Alehouse in
Fleet-yard, and he would come to them: They did so, he followed, and then told
them, that he expected the money to have been brought before that time, but
'twas not yet come; however, since they were all there together, he advised
them to seal the Bond, and let the Principal keep it till to morrow, and then,
if he came, he should not miss of the money: This was done, and so they parted
for that Night: The next morning the man came accordingly; Far desired him, to
go to the Place they were at the last Night; he, with two of his Beagles, whom
he had gotten ready, followed; they fell to talk and discourse, making no
mention of the money; till at length the man desired Far to dispatch him: Far
prayed him to let him see the Bond; which having fingered, he clapped it up into
his Pocket, and went his way: The man followed him, but could obtain nothing
but ill words. This Bond had certainly been put in sure some time after, but
that both Principal and Security proved leaky Vessels, and sunk before they
came to be boarded.

Nor was his Roguery confined to England only; for one Mr. Marlow, whom, by
continual Vexations, he had almost ruined, did, to preserve himself, go with
his Family, to live in Virginia, where he had the good hap to thrive, and grow
wealthy: Which Far hearing, he forged a Bond of his for 50 Pound, came to a
public Notary, and had it certified under his hand; and by proving it by the
Oaths of two of his Creatures, before the Lord Mayor, had it avouched by the
City Seal. This he sent over, by one Mr. Guyard, Master of a Ship, bound for
Virginia; who knowing nothing, but that the Bond was real, and the Debt justly
due, did, according to his trust, sue the said Marlow, and recover of him the
said sum of money. But so great was the outcry against him by the Planters,
that he durst not come on shore afterward, for fear of mischief. And the
Brother of this Marlow, sometime after coming for England, found out Far, and
ran him through the arm: He thought (be-like.) he was too much a Rogue, for him
to run the hazard of being hanged for him.

He once borrowed of Mr. T. P. a great Usurer, 80. Pound, and being (when the
money was due) sued for it, he, by the Oath of Chad. and another, proved the
money paid, and the Bond satisfied.

Having gone thus far without any remarkable check or control, at least any
such as might seem to bear a proportion with the wrongs and injuries which he
had done, I am persuaded he began to think, that nothing was either dishonest
or difficult that had profit at the end of it; and in this persuasion fell upon
a young Gentlewoman, into whose acquaintance (and some knowledge of her
affairs) he had scrued himself by means of his Mrs. Chadwick, and whom, being a
Widow, young, unacquainted, and (as he thought) un-allyed in the City, he
pitched upon as likely to fall an easy Prey to his ravenous desires. Her
husband was (living) Captain of a Ship, and left her in good condition, about
500 l. of money in her Purse, and above that value in Goods, Jewels, Rings,
etc. She lodged (when he first came to be acquainted with her) near New Market,
living upon the use of her Money, the disposal of which she entrusted to a
friend, upon whose death Far would have succeeded in that employment, but the
young Gentlewoman did not like him so well, as to trust him with that
commodity. He (seeing his game before him) pressed forward toward a nearer
acquaintance; she (for fear of him, of whose pranks she had heard some
whispers) as industiously shunning it; insomuch that she resolved, and did
remove her lodging. He had his Spies upon her, who observed amongst other
things a large and heavy Trunk to be removed; and since she would not come to
hand, he resolved to try another way, laying his foundation upon this Trunk.

Having found our her new Lodging, he took out a Warrant against her, and being
apprehended, carried her before a Justice, swearing against her, that she had
feloniously stolen out of such a house (her former Lodging) a Trunk worth 500 l.
belonging to him: whereupon she was committed. She thereupon sent to a
Brother-in-law of hers, one Mr. Betts a Broad-weaver in Spittle-fields, who
entreating the company of his Friend and Neighbor Mr Chambers, they went to
the Justice, and informing him of the truth of the matter, prevailed with him
to accept of Bail, so they bailed her. Far prosecuted her by way of Indictment
upon a Trespass, at Hicks's Hall, where the Trunk being produced in Court, and
she proving her property to it, and the goods within it, the Court ordered them
to be re-delivered her. Upon this, Far (though the Gentlewoman owed him
nothing) upon pretense of a Debt, resolved to lay an Attachment upon the Trunk,
as they were carrying it away; and to this purpose, had his Officers ready at
the Hall-Gate. This being understood by the Gentlewomans Friends, they procured
another Trunk, as like the real one, both in size and shape, as they could get,
and conveyed it into the House, by a Backdoor; where they filled it with
Rags, Straw, Brick-batts, and such like Lumber; and for garnish, put in a Pair
of Horns, and a Rope and Butter; corded it up, and sent it out by a Porter.
Far standing ready, with his Officers, seized the Trunk, laying his Attachmnet
on it; so it was deposited into the hands of an Officer belonging to the Court,
till Judgment should be passed upon it; which (no defense being made by the
other side) was soon obtained; and then the Trunk was opened: A goodly sight to
see. The real Trunk was at Night conveyed a way in a Coach.

This Disappointment, with the Affront in the manner of it, so desperately
enraged Far, that he let fly freely at them all; and first for Mr. Chambers,
whose youthful and sprightly activity, he thought to have been chiefly
instrumental in this Affair. And as Mr. Chambers has cause enough to wish, he
had never seen Farr's face; so had Far no cause of triumph over Mr. Chambers:
For though this last Prank against Mrs. Staneir hanged him, yet was he finely
prepared and fitted for it, by Mr. Chambers.

And first he arrested Mr. Chambers, and sued him, in the Name of one George
Farebanck, for 80 Pieces of Gold, pretended to be left in the hands of Mr.
Chambers, by the said Farebanck, as his Security, for being Bayl for Mrs.
Reynolds. This (though Mr. Chambers neither knew the man, not to his knowledge
ever-saw him, or had one Penny-left with him, upon that account, by any one
whatsoever) was sworn by Far, Chadwick, and his Wife; and Mr. Chambers cast in
90 Pound, besides Costs of Suit, and was forced to pay it every farthing.

Then he brought an Action of Trover against him in the Exchequer, for the
Trunk, and 1000 Pounds worth of Goods in it, at the Suit of the said Farebanck.
The two Chadwicks swore, his having confessed, That he had once the Trunk in
his Possession: Whereupon Mr. Chambers, not denying it, pleaded Justification,
and proved the right and propriety to the Trunk and Goods, to be in Mrs.
Reynolds, by 65 Witnesses; and so the Verdict went for him, against the
Plantiff.

Next he sued him, by Bill of Mid. upon a forged Bond of 300 Pound. The
Witnesses were H. Smith, T. Sandys, and L. List. At the Trial, Chambers proved,
by the Keepers of Newgate, that Smith had been convicted for Felony; and that
Sandys had been a Prisoner there: He also proved, That he never had had any
Dealings with Far; So that the Witnesses being looked upon as insufficient,
and the Circumstances looking strongly toward Forgery, the Jury found now also
for the Defendant. The like did they afterward, when he was sued, upon a
forged Bond, for 500 Pound: To which were Witnesses, Chadwick, his wife, and
Sandys.

Mr. Chambers encouraged by these Successes, and finding thereby, that his
Adversary was mortal; and having hit him in the very Vitalls (by invalidating
the testimony of his Swearers) set upon him in the Offensive, and brought his
Action of 500 Pound against him, for wrongs and injuries done to him (for Far
had omitted no means whereby to undo him) He also industriously and diligently
made enquiry into the manner of his passed Life, and made re-search into the
nature and quality of those Persons he used for his Witnesses; and thus
provided, brought his Business to Trial, and obtained a Verdict for 400 and odd
Pounds. Then Far (upon his own, Mrs. Chadwicks, and Smith's Affidavit, That he
had not sufficient notice of the Trial) moved for a second Trial, which was
granted, and he thereupon cast, as in the former. Then he moved (upon many
Affidavits, That he was surprised, and his Witnesses not ready) for a third
Trial, but could not obtain it; so Judgment was entered up: But he had a Salvo
for that, for he forged a Release, under the hand and Seal of Mr. Chambers,
which cost much time and charge to disprove, but at last 'twas done, and so the
Judgment confirmed.

Therefore, to counterpoise this Judgment, he sets up a new Engine, by forging
a Warrant of Attorney, to confess Judgment for 300 Pound. And this being a
matter of so great danger; and a thing, whereby an evil-minded Rogue may undo
an honest Man, before he is aware of him: And this very Particular, having been
prevented, not without extreme diligence, and indefatigable industry, when
'twas then upon the brink of Execution; It being also full of delightful and
useful variety, through the whole menage of it; And lastly, the very Business
that brought him to the Pillory, and made his Followers and Partakers use their
Heels, to save their Ears; I shall give you as full and particular account
thereof, as the designed brevity of this Discourse will allow.

Far brought with him one (who said his Name was John Chambers) to Mr. Smith,
a Scrivener in Sea-Cole-Lane; and desired to have a Warrant of Attorney, for a
Judgment for 300 Pound, from the said John Chambers, to Richard Far, drawn
up: Mr. Smith drew it, and the pretended John Chambers sealed and delivered it;
It was witnessed by Mr. Smith's Man, T. Lane, and two others; The Judgment was
confessed by one Mr. Birch, and entered by one Mr. Leyton, of the Common Pleas?
Execution was made out, and carried to the Office for Seal; Mr. Woodruff, one
of the Clerks of the Office, knowing Mr. Chambers, and so much of the Business
between him and Far, as that 'twas most unlikely (almost impossible) that
Chambers could owe him any Money, at least such a sum, sent to Chambers; who
coming, saw his danger, and therefore went to work to prevent it. By the Writ
he found out who was the Attorney, and with him saw the Warrant, and thereby
the Witnesses Names, and the Scrivener (as indeed the Attorney, that entered up
the Judgment, had done before, for his own satisfaction, which he had from the
Scriveners Man, who told him, That he saw Jo. Chambers sign, seal and deliver)
Chambers, with some Friends and Neighbors, who came to be assistant to him in
this Exigence, went to the Fountain-Tavern without Newgate (having prevailed
with Mr. Birch, and Mr. Leyton, the aforesaid Attorneys, to place themselves in
a Room next adjoining, that they might hear the discourse, and so be fully
informed) Mr. Chambers went for the Scrivener, and desired, That he would bring
his Man with him, for that there was some Business to be done, that would
require both their presence; so they went both: When they came, after
salu^ation, and some little discourse, one of Mr. Chambers Friends asked the
Scriveners Man, Whether he knew one Mr. Chambers? He said Yes: They asked him,
How long? He said, His first knowledge was about a Month ago, for then he was
there, and sealed a Writing to Mr. Far: They asked him, Whether he could know
him again, when he saw him? He answered, He thought he should: Then they asked
him, What kind of Man he was? He described one very tall, light brown hair,
etc. in all Particulars quite different from Mr. Chambers: Being asked, Which
of the Company was most likely to be the Man? He answered, There was none tall
enough: It being then told him, That Mr. Chambers was the Man: He answered,
That could not be, for he was most unlike him, of any in the Room.

The Attorneys herewith satisfied, went with Mr. Chambers to the Lord Chief
Justice Bridgeman; who, upon hearing Mr. Chambers Complaint, told them, That he
should not command them to forbear Execution, but (if they would take his
advice) he thought it most safe for them, That when Mrs. Chadwick, who
solicited the Business (for Far was now a Prisoner in the Fleet) came to them
for the Execution, they would do well to apprehend her, that so full enquiry
might be made into a matter of so dangerous consequence, and evil president.
Which Advice, the Attorney concerned, followed, seized Mrs. Chadw. when she
came, carried her before a Justice, by whom she was committed to Newgate. Far,
by frequent Messengers, importuned the Attorney for his Execution; threatening
(in case of refusal) to sue him for the Debt. Whereupon Mr. Chambers, at the
desire of the Attorney (who did not desire to fall under the hands of so
dangerous a Fellow) be sought his Lordship, to vouchsafe a hearing of the
Cause, privately in his own Chamber: My Lord granted it, and sent a Tipstaff
for Far, from the Fleet: His Lordship asked Far, Whether he would consent to
have the Business heard before him there: Far pretended, He was not prepared
(his Witnesses being absent) at the present: His Lordship asked him, If that
Chambers were the Person intended in the Judgment: Far desired his Lordship's
excuse, giving him a reason why he could not do it without prejudice: Whereupon
his Lordship told him, He had known many Debtors ashamed of their Creditors,
but never before a Creditor ashamed of his Debtor: So they were dismissed, and
the Business referred to Term. About three or four days before Term, Far came
to his Lordship's Chamber, with three or four Affidavits, desiring to have his
Witnesses sworn: His Lordship reading the Affidavits, and finding Cause to
suspect, what upon Trial he found true, refused to swear them: So they went to
some other Justice, and were sworn. Two days after, Chambers waited on his
Lordship, with an Affidavit, to which his Lordship swore him; setting forth,
That he never had any Concern with Far, never received or had any Money from
him, nor owed him a farthing; prayed a day for hearing, and that Evidence might
be given Viva Voce, not by Affidavit. On the first day of the Term, Sir William
Wild made the motion for Chambers, adding something of his own knowledge
concerning Far: His Lordship thereupon appointed a day, wherein he would be at
leisure to search into the bottom of the Business. On the day appointed, Far
appeared, with the Affidavits of all his Witnesses (whom he had lodged hard by,
and upon refusal of his Affidavits, did produce) They were Mr. Smith the
Scrivener, his Man T. Lane, Mr. and Mrs Chadwick, Leonard List, T. Sandys, T.
Lilly, J. Fimis, and some others: Chambers had many Witnesses there also,
amongst the rest, some of the Under-Keepers of Newgate, to testify what they
knew of Far, and most of his Witnesses. Upon opening of the Case for Chambers,
by (then Sergeant, now) Judge Keeling, and a short Reply of Farr's Council, his
Lordship took the Breviats of both sides, and fell to Examination of the
Witnesses, beginning with the Scriveners Man, whom he called out from the rest
of the Gang: He swore modestly and indifferently what he knew, whereby a shrewd
guess might be made, how the Business was contrived: His Master could not swear
any thing to the purpose on either side. The rest swore to a hairs breadth,
only Sandys blunder'd into a Contradiction; and I told you before of the
Keepers of Newgate being in Court. When it came to be inquired, How this Money
came to be owing? Far said, 100 Pound lent, and 50 Pound promised, to take off
him from witnessing against Chambers, in a Cause in the Exchequer: This was
sworn by Mrs. Chadwick, and another; but his Lordship trapp'd them in the
Circumstances; and by the testimony of Chambers Witnesses, and his own Oath
(then administered) found out the whole Villainy, annulled the Judgment,
ordered Chambers to enter into Recognizance of 300 Pound, to prosecute Far, at
the King's Bench, for Forgery, next Term: And that the Matter (being so foul)
should be specially recommended to the Lord Chief Justice of that Bench.
Chambers indicted him: Far demurred, his Demurrer was overruled, and
Judgment passed against him, to stand in the Pillory (with a Paper, containing
his Crime, on his head) in Westminster Pallace-Yard, and at the Old-Exchange,
which was accordingly executed.

Whilst he stood at the Exchange, he saw Chambers looking on him, and therepon
pulled out a Latitat (which he had purposely provided, to remove him out of his
sight) threw it to an Officer, and bade him arrest Chambers, which he did; but
he (knowing Farr's Mrs. Chadwick went, and entered an Action of 500. Pound, to
which he also put in Bayl, and returned. then Mrs. Chad. fetched a Warrant for
him, and three or four more of his Friends there present, whom she knew, and
saw rejoicing, had them all before a Justice, and swore the Peace against them:
By which a Man may see of what a shrewd Spirit they both were, and how ready
witted she was at her business.

Chambers proceeded to prosecute his Witnesses, and convicted 11 of them, some
of Forgery, some of Perjury, and one of Barratry; and by this so weakened him,
that as he had his belly full of him, so he had but little stomach to attempt
any thing else of moment upon others; lying close, till time and privacy should
wear out the memory of these miscarriages: But for present subsistence, and to
keep his hand in ure, he did play some petty Pranks, which I shall relate; only
first tell you, that a little before this great Trial with Chambers, he twice
indicted the forementioned Mrs. Reynolds, once for Felony, another time for
Trespass, and this last had laid so firmly, as doubtless to have hit her, had
not an eminent Citizen (accidentally present in this Court) upon hearing the
Evidence, voluntarily offered to be sworn in the Case, for that he feared there
was foul Play; and being sworn, related, how being upon Business in Guild Hall,
he heard the whole Contrivance of this Affair, and did verily believe, that he
then saw some of those faces (pointing to the Witnesses) amongst them. The
credit of this Witness, and the slender account that could be had of the other,
prevailed with the Jury to acquit her.

And having heard, that Mr. Betts, Brother in Law to this Mrs. Reynolds, had a
Friend beyond Sea, who had left with him a Trunk of wearing Apparel, and other
things; he learned the Man's Name, and forged a Bond to himself, from the
Person, for 20 Pound (though the Man were an absolute Stranger to him, and
never had a Penny Concernment with him in his Life) and then attached the Goods
in his hands. Mr. Betts thought it not his Concern, to spend money, in
defending another Man's Suit, and therefore, without Opposition, let him
proceed to Condemnation. When he came to look over the Goods, he pretended,
That the Clothes had been worn, and the other Goods imbezzled and detrimented,
and so would not take the Goods in specie, but demanded the Money they were
appraised at, which was (by Chad. and another of his Companions) 25 Pound. The
Man, little imagining himself in any danger, other than to deliver the Goods,
never looks after him: So Far, by help of the two Men's Oaths, obtains
Judgment against him for 25 Pound, takes him in Execution, runs him into the
Counter, and forces him to pay down 25 Pound into Court. Far was so civil, as
to take out but 20 Pound, which was his (pretended). Debt, leaving Five Pound
in Court, which afterward, the Man that owned the Goods had paid to him: But
Mr. Betts could never get any part of the Money back again.

And, that a Man may see, that his Condition altered not his Nature; being
arrested, by one Mr. Williams, a Bailiff, at Mr. Chambers Sure, because Mr.
Williams would not take such Bayl, as he would have him; he; and Mrs. Chad.
swore Felony against him, viz. That he had picked his Pocket of Three Pound:
He also complained to the Knight Marshal (and made Affidavit of it) That
Williams had taken Five Pound of him, for one days attendance; both Lies, and
both so proved.

But being now a Prisoner to the King's Bench, and his business but little, one
Esquire Ba. sometimes of Grayes-Inn, now a Prisoner, entrusted Far to do his
petty Businesses abroad, as receiving and paying small sums of Money, wherein
he was punctual and true (a small Balt he would not bite at) But at length,
being entrusted by the Gentleman, to go and borrow some Money, upon a Diamond
Ring, which the Gentleman accounted worth 50 Pound; he brought the Gentleman
only Four Pound, and said, He could get no more upon it: This supplying the
Gentleman's present Occasion, he was contented; but having often desired, to
have the Ring redeemed, could never to this day retrive it; nor would Far
confess where it was; but without doubt he had sold it, to its value, and put
the Money into his Pocket. The same Trick he served him in another Diamond
Ring, valued at 200 Pound, but dipped only for 20. Pound. Far told him, A Friend
of his would lend him the same Money upon it, at common Interest, not at the
Brokers rate, which would be something saved in the Year: The Gentleman prayed
him to do it: So he fetched the Ring from where it was, but the Gentleman could
never hear of it afterward.

But the slyest Trick of all was this: The Gentleman keeping his Chamber in
Grayes-Inn, Far came and told him, That the Door was broke open, and stood so:
The Gentleman prayed him to see that the Goods in it were safe, and to put a
Padlock on the Door: Hereupon Far did indeed open the Door, removed all the
Goods, Hangings, etc. and sold them, and put a Padlock upon the Door, as he had
order, carrying the Gentleman a false Key to it. When Far was convicted, the
Gentleman sent to him about his Rings, but could get nothing of him, but that
he would tell him: Nay, he had a Note sent him about them under the Gallows,
just before his Death, but would not give any satisfactory answer. Hereupon the
Gentleman sent to have his Chamber opened, but found the Key false to the Lock,
so they broke open the Door, but found nothing but the bare VValls.

These Rings and Goods (I question not) stock't him, and enabled him to creep
again into the World, and to take up his old employment with his former
confidence: for now having liberty of going abroad, gotten money into his
Purse, and the mark of the Pillory almost worn out, he had credit enough to put
a shrewd crick upon one Mr. Jay a Cornish man, his fellow Prisoner in the
King's Bench, who wanting friends in the City to be security for him to go
abroad, Far told him, that if he would give him counter security, he would
procure him two substantial Citizens, upon whose security, he should have
liberty. They agreed upon a Judgment with Defeizance upon Jay's estate, which
is about 50 l. per annum. Far got the writings drawn, the Gentleman read it,
and it liked him very well. When he came to seal, Far by a trick changed this
Judgment with Defeizance for one absolute of the same size and form. The
Gentleman satisfied with his first reading it, Signed, and sealed, and
delivered, And had not Farrs troubles fallen upon him, Jay had before this time
found the effects of his unwariness; for Far would in a short time have
leavyed it upon is Estate.

And now on went the best Clothes again, and in them, with a a long Perriwig, a
Band with a Lace on it worth 20 l. and a Muff, he came to a Gentlewoman living
near Shooe-lane, who had a House that stood in Fetter-lane to be let, and
agreed with her for the House for 5 years, paying 16 l. or thereabouts, per
annum: Then he set Workmen to work made great stone steps at the door, pulled
down the old Doors and Windows, after the modern mode, putting up larger and
higher new Doors, with a large oval window below, laid the Hearths above stairs
with marble, putting up stately Chimney pieces, and in all things made it fit
for the entertainment of any person of quality, but the poor Workmen (who
thought him by his garb to be some great person, when indeed a Prisoner in the
Kings Bench at Chambers Suit) were never paid one penny for either labor or
stuff. When the House was fitted, he was upon some old account put in the
Fleet, but removed himself again to the Kings Bench: But he quickly had a
Customer for his House, and let it to a very honest man for a good fine, and
convenient rent, pretending a Leaf Parol from the head Landlady, and doubtless
he had those would have proved it, or ruined her, if he had been at liberty.
But now being dead I think she is well cleared of a quarelsome Customer.

Now getting again his liberty, he grew so confident, that whereas his former
attempts were most of them upon such, from whose weakness or obnoxiousness he
might hope for success, but now he slies high, and sets upon one, where he was
sure not to meet with any such advantage: I mean Mr. Johnson an Attorney of
Cliffords-Inn, to whom he brought a Bond of 200 l. for payment of 100 l. to be
put in Suit, and (as they say it is usually done by wary men) desired his note
of the recept of it: So when Mr. Johnson was intent upon his business, and
looking over his Papers, Far pilfer'd away the Bond, and in order to his
father design, Mrs. Chadwick and another make affidavit, that Mr. Johnson had
falsely and treacherously sold the said Bond to the Defendant, the person
therein concerned, and so commenced his suit against him, and had he lived,
this Term it had come to Trial. When Far was Convicted, and his papers looked
over, this very Bond, and the foresaid affidavit about it, were found wrapped up
together. There was also found near 40 Warrants for Judgments against several
men, amongst the rest, two were there in pickle against his old friend
Chambers; but they were by special order of the Lord Chapter Justice, all secured.

And now I come to the business of Madam Stanier, the last, (and indeed deepest
and most presumptuous undertaking of his life) and such an one, as (I think)
was scarce ever acted under color of Law; wherein, if desiring to be
particular, I be also large, I hope for the matter sake, I shall not seem
tedious.

He had, without doubt, long designed an attempt upon her, but set it not on
foot till August 1664. And then he caused his Mother Eliz. Far to seal a Lease
to him of the house wherein Mr. Stanier lived in St. Martins-lane in the Fields
(to which house the said Eliz. Far had not the least title, or any color
thereof.) In Michaelmas Term following, Mrs. Chadwick got S. S. Clerk to Mr.
Jobson Attorney in the Common Pleas, to draw a Declaration against one Richard
Pelar, as a casual Ejector* pretending it was only to eject an ill Tenant that
Mr. Far had in a small Tenement of his, in St. Martins-lane, of about 4 l.
per. an. for non-payment of Rent: A true Copy of which Declaration ought to
have been left with Mrs. Stanier, but that would have spoiled the plot.
Therefore Mrs. Chadwick, by Farrs direction, falsely made affidavit, before
Judge Tirrel, that she had left a true Copy of the said Declaration at the said
House; and that on the 11 th. of February, she went to the said Robert Stanier,
to know if he would defend the title of the said House, and that he answered,
he had notice of the said Declaration, but would not make any defense thereto.
Upon this, Far by a Motion in the Court of Common Pleas, obtained a Rule, That
unless Mr. Stanier, the present Possessor of the said House, or some other, did
show cause within 14 days why Judgment should not pass, it should be entered.
Mr. Stanier having no knowledge nor notice hereof, made no defense, and so
Judgment was obtained by default, and thereupon a Writ of Possession made by
the said S. S. directed to the Sheriff of Midd, dated Feb. 13.1664. On the 6th.
of March following, Far (with one Auson a Bailiff, and 3 or 4 of his
followers) did, by virtue of this Writ, break open, and forcibly entered the
said House; and the better to accomplish his intended Villainy, arrested Mrs.
Stanier by Bill of Midd. in an action of 100 l. debt (whereas she owed him not
a farthing) and violently forced her out of her House into a Coach, and
so-carried her away to Newgate. They also turned out of the House one Mrs.
Plummer, who lodged there. At night Far fell to his work, sending away all the
Money, Jewels, Plate, Rings, and other things of value and small bulk, by Mrs.
Chadwick, the Beds, Hangings, Pewter, and other more bulky goods by a Porter
(whom afterward they accidentally met withal, and he was an useful witness
in the case) to the value of I 100 l. and and in Bonds, Bills, and other
writings, to the value of 2000 l. Mrs. Stanier was detained in prison all
night; but in the morning came to her one Mr. Messarvy her Kinsman, with a
friend or two more, and bailed her out; And then (as it was but high time) went
about securing the goods that were in the House out of Farrs hands; And by
Petition to the Lord Chief Justice Hide, setting out the whole matter of fact,
obtained from his Lordship, on the 8th. of March, to send Mr. Cheiny one of his
Tipstaffs, for Far (who still continued in the House) to come before him. Far
would not open the Door, nor be persuaded to come to the Tipstaff, upon
pretense, that 'twas but a Trick, to get him out of Possession. Whereupon Mr.
Cheiny went and fetched my Lords Warrant, and a Constable to execute it: Upon
sight whereof, Far came down, and opened the Doors, but would not let any one
go into the House, for fear (as he pretended) they should re-enter, and keep
Possession; but indeed his fear was, lest it should be discovered, how he had
robbed the House. Coming before my Lord Chief Justice, he told his Lordship,
That he had a good Title to the Hotse, and had by Law obtained Possession: My
Lord told him, He would not dispute that then; but he was sure, he had no
color of right by Law to the Goods, and therefore he would not trust them in
his hands: VVhereupon Far told his Lordship, That there was not a farthing
worth of the Good touched: His Lordship then made him this Proposition, viz.
That he should let Mrs. Stanier go again into the House, and have all her
Goods, and he should have security, that Possession of the House should be
re-delivered to him, at the end of one Week, after the beginning of Easter
Term next, in case the Judgment obtained, by default should be, by the Court
of Common Pleas, upon Examination, confirmed and allowed: To this he consented;
but when he should have performed it, took the Key of the Door with him, and
went his way. Upon the Oaths of several of the Neighbors, that the Goods were
carried away by Night, the House was ordered to be broke open, and was found
empty: VVhereupon my Lord issued out his VVarrant, for the apprehension of
Far; and being brought before him, and examined by him, was, by his VVarrant,
committed to Newgate. His Lordship also granted his VVarrant, for the searching
of Farr's House, in Turnagen-Lane, near Snow-Hill, where Mrs. Chadwick was, and
denied entrance: VVhereupon the Constable Mr. Audley, broken open the House,
and apprehended her (who was also committed to Newgate) And here were found
many of Mrs. Staniers Goods, as 13 rich Stone Rings, Linen, Hangings, etc. and
many of her VVritings. Her Pewter, marked with a Coat of Arms, Far had
changed, and sold at one Mr. Griggs; pretendingn to him, that he had it for a
Debt. The Goods thus found, were, by order of the Lord Chief Justice,
inventory'd, and at the Trial (where Mrs. Stanier did, by clear Evidence, prove
her property to them) were, by Order of Court, restored. But there is yet
wanting about 150 Pound in Money, about 110. Pound in Plate, a Neck-lace of
Pearl, valued at 350 Pound, with some Rings, and other Goods. Mr. Messarvy,
before mentioned, being, by the Lord Chief Justice, bound in a Recognizance of
40 Pound, to prosecute, had (by advice of a Council) an Indictment drawn
against Richard Far, and Eleanor Chadwick, for having, on the 6th. of March,
etc. felloniously broken, and forcibly entered, the Mansion House of Robert
Stanier Esquire, his Wife being then within, and put her in fear of her Life;
and stealing the Goods, etc. according to the Inventory of them in Court
produced. Which being sufficiently proved, Far would fain have made it to
have been but a Cheat; but being not able to make out any Title, either to
House or Goods, but the Right to both, proved to be in Mrs. Stanier, Judgment
passed upon him, and Mrs. Chadwick, according to the Indictment, without
benefit of Clergy. Far begged heartily and pathetically to be Transported, or
otherwise disposed of; and not to be so severely dealt withal, as to be cut
off, for this his first Fault (as he called it) My Lord told him, That he had
had warning enough by the Pillory, etc. but he would take no warning; that he
deserved this long ago, but now must not hope to escape it. Mrs. Chadwick laid
claim to a great Belly, but by a Jury of VVowmen 'twas found otherwise.

One thing I shall here observe; that 'twas at this very Sessions 7 years ago,
that Far indicted Mrs. Stanier in the same place for her life, himself
swearing against her, that she had spoken treasonable words against the then
powers.

But let us now follow him to his journeys end; after he was condemned, he was
much pressed to confess where the rest of Mrs. Staniers things were, but could
not be prevailed with. Nay to one, who discoursing with him as to his future
condition, urged the Doctrine of Restitution, he answered, they needed not to
grudge him those things which he must pay so dear for. When the Ordinary or
Minister came to perform his Office, he seemed very penitent, and did receive
the Sacrament; and upon the motion of one of the Keepers, he desired his Wife
might be sent for, for a reconciliation; when she came he asked her
forgiveness, which she willingly granted, but withal said, that that vile
woman (Mrs. Chadwick) she thought was the chief instrument of estranging his
affections from her, and was hardly hardly brought to forgive her, but at last
she was persuaded to do it.

Far Wife brought down her Son with her, and desired her Husband to remember
him, and do something for him; he answered he was poor, and had nothing to
leave, only he pulled off a small gold Ring from his finger, and gave him that.

He was very willing to have saved Mrs. Chadwick, for the next day after
sentence, he desired that a skillful Midwife or two might be sent for, alleging
that he was sure Mrs. Chadwick was with Child, for he had that morning laid his
hand upon her Belly and felt the Child move, but the Midwife, when she came,
found her not with Child.

He left with Mr. Jackson the Keeper 5 l. to be disposed of as he directed,
viz. 50 s. in a Supper, 20 s. to be drank among the under-Keepers, 10 s. to the
Ringers, and 20 s. he left the Ordinary to preach a Sermon at his interment:
And being asked what Text, He first named, Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord. The Ordinary thinking that not a suitable Text, He named 2ly. Lord lay
not this sin to their charge. Or 3ly. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish.

He also left with the Ordinary 20 s. for the Executioner, in lieu of his
clothes, for he had nothing under his Gown but a vermilion Wastcoat, and a pair
or linen Drawers.

When they went to Execution (many thousands from all parts of the City coming
to see them) Far and Chadwick were put in a Cart together, he was in a purple
colored shagg Gown, she in a black Gown, a black hood with a white Sarcenet
hood under it. Near St. Giles's Church, she was observed to give away a couple
of Rings which she had in her Bosom. And a while after he espied his old
Adversary Chambers following the Cart on Horseback, at which he fell into
passion, and desired he might be taken out of his sight, taxing him as the
chief instrument of his death; so Chambers rid forward out of his sight. When
he was under the Gallows, and tied up, he repeated over again how he would have
his Legacies disposed; and then turning to Mrs. Chadwick, he said, My Dear,
do thou forgive me? she answered, Yes I do forgive thee with all my heart,
though thy acquaintance has cost me very dear. With that he reached to have
kissed her, she also bending forward to meet him, but the Halters Chambers
asking Far some Questions about himself, Mrs. Chadwick pulled him by the Arm,
and would not let him enter into discourse; so careful was she of him, even to
the last. When the Cart was ready to be drawn away, Far crying out, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit! Oh give me of the Water of Life! Oh gixe me of the Water of
Life! He pulled up his Legs from the Cart, hanging himself some little space
before the Cart drew away When they were dead, they were cut down, and put in
two very complete Elm Coffins, full of Hinges; and so, in a Coach, which, by
the Coachman, and a Footman, being in Livery, appeared to be some Gentleman's,
they were brought to Newgate Lodge, and from thence carried to Christ Church,
where they had appointed themselves to be interred, close by each other.

But there being gathered together so great a Multitude, and confused Rabble,
the Ordinary thought not fit to preach, giving the 20 s. to his Wife, who (I
think) poor Woman, had need enough of it. But as things have happened, I think
she has no great cause of sorrow, for his former unkindness.

And now having brought them to their Graves, by a bare Relation of Matter of
Fact; I shall leave them there, quietly to rest, covered with the Dust, without
any railing Reflections: Only,

Disce tu Lector.
Raro antecedentem scele stum
Deseruit pede paena claudo.

FINIS.
There is now newly Published, an ingenous Book, written by a Person of
Quality, Entitled, Europae Modernae Speculum: Or, a View of the several
Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, Seigneuries, and Commonwealths of Europe,
in their Site, Government, Policy, different Interest, and mutual Aspect, one
toward another, from the Munster Treaty, in the Year 1684. to this present,
1665. Also,

An Exact Survey of the Affairs of the United Netherlands, especially as to
their present Difference with England. Both sold by T. Johnson, at the
Golden-Key in Cannon-Alley, near the Great North Door of St. Paul's


