ANTHOLOGIA HISTORICA

Containing fourteen CENTURIES OF Memorable Passages AND Remarkable Occurrents,
Collected out of the English, Spanish, Imperial, and Jewish Histories, and
several other Authors and Writers.

Published by John Chetwind Master of Arts, and Prebend of Bristol.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for P. C.
1674.

John de Serres, French Hist. Preface p. 1.
HISTORY is the Theater of Man's Life, The Testimony of Truth, The Recorder of
Justice, The Register of Honor, The Trumpet of Fame, The Controuler of Times,
The Rendezvous of diverse Events, The School of good and evil, And the Sovereign
Judge of all men and all exploits.

To the Right Honorable the Lady Gerard Baroness of Gerard Bromeley. And to
the Right Worshipful Walter Chetwind of Ingestree, and William Chetwind of
Ridgely in the County of Stafford Esquires.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
I Have made bold to prefix your Names to these following Collections, that I
might hereby testify my grateful resentment of your kindness and respects to
your poor Kinsman, who being one of the meanest Branches of that Stock in which
you flourish as the most prosperous top-Boughs, has found what he has sought,
shelter and influence, enjoying the Honor to be your Ladyships Chaplain, and
by the friendly furtherance of your Worships to his Honorable Patrons, his
Dignity and Benefice, for which he humbly returns his most thankful
acknowledgments in this Paper Present. Being fully persuaded it will not be
unacceptable both for it self, which contains most useful and delightful
passages of former and latter Ages, both Foreign and Domestique; as likewise
for the sake of the Collector of them, who as he has had the Lot to be your
poor Relation, so has the happiness of your favorable respects, and shall
make it his study, that he may not unbeseem the one, or undeserve the other.
And shall add no more but his hearty Prayers for your present and future
felicity, and that he is

Your Honors and Worships Much Obliged Servant, John Chetwind.
Bristol Jan. 16. 1673/4
To the READER.
THou have here presented to thy view in these following Centuries of
Historical Collections, the memorable Occurrences of former and latter Ages,
faithfully related out of Authentic Historians and other Writers: And what
have layen scattered in many and voluminous Authors in several Languages
brought together in the English Tongue, for the pleasure and benefit of all
sorts. Wherein thy advantage is consulted both as to the expense of time and
money. If thou have read Histories thou will hereby have thy Memory refresht.
If thou art unacquainted with them thou will hereby be furnished. Art thou a
Statesman? here are Maxims, Principles, and Practices of Government. Art thou
a Soldier? here are Military Stratagems and Warlike Artifices. Art thou a
Gentleman or Lady? here is abundant furniture for Discourse and Converse. Art
thou a Preacher? here are instances and examples of Divine Justice against most
sort of Transgressors. So that whatever thou art, thou will here meet with what
will both pleasure and profit thee. And I am very confident, that upon trial
thou will never repent, either thy cost in buying, or thy pains in reading. And
wilt find more real and useful Content in perusing of six Leaves of these
Miscellanies, than in sixscore of the most delightful Romances. It Is probable,
that with no great pains I might as Valerius Maximus of old, and Camerarius of
latter time, have reduced these Stories to their several Classes: But I have
purposely left them without any Coherence, that the Variety of them might
render them more delightful. I need not tell thee, that the Collecting of them
has been a work of time and pains, but I can assure thee, that the pleasure I
took in them did abundantly countervail, and made both the Reading for them,
and the Writing of them an incomparable delight, the most of them being such of
which it may be truly said Decies repetita placebunt.

I have no more to trouble thee with, but my hearty wish is that others who
have more time and leisure than my constant Ministerial Employment will allow
me, may be provoked to do the like by other Histories, and thereby they will
gratify all such who are well-willers to Ingenuous Studies, and abundantly
recompense the pains of him that pretends to them.

October. 27th. 1673. John Chetwind.

ERRATA.
FOr Argentina read Argentangina page 10 line 21 for Galatius r. Gataker p. 19
l. 18 for coin r. corn p. 22 l. 12 for one hand. 1. our hands p. 41 l. 10 for
Castle r. Cabinet p. 43 l. 12 for Rutelo r. Rutilo p. 47 l. 15 for Presbyters
r. Presbytery p. 57 l. 27 for Viner r. Veiry p. 59. l. 15 for him to r. him not
to p. 75 l. 11 for Anacnon r. Anacreon p. 76 l. 9 for Manent r. Manant p. 69 l.
21 for Magadaschur r. Madagascar p. 86 l. 8 for Galaleo r. Galatea p. 89 l. 27
for that Senate r. the Senate p. 106 l. 6 for Armentanus r. Armentarius p. 110.
l. 4 for humor r. tumult p. 11^ l. 5 for Hussicks r. Hussites p. 126 l. 26 for
Isavon r. Isadore p. 134 l. 17 for Gyone r. Gyrone p. 135 l. 7 for when r.
where p. 138 l. 15 for disgracing r. disobeying p. 148 l. 3. for Care r. Cane
p. 152 l. 15 for design r. desire p. 153 l. 3 for Oxford r. Orford p. 163 l. 2
and 6 for Kingsston r. Kinaston p. 165 l. 1 for never r. near p. 167 l. 19 for
Stratly-head r. Strathy-head p. 172 l 19 for saying r. showing us p. 174 l. 12
for Bodao r. Bodua p. 175 l. 15 p. 176 dele l. ult. for Ossa r. Offa p. 191 l.
29 and 31 for Huns r. Nuns p. 195 l. 30 for Antaff r. Antaff p. 199 l. 15 and
22 for Pope Alexander the 20 t. 2 p. 206 l. 21 for Vayeur r. Vayeux p. 210 l.
12 for peccast r. peccant p. 214 l. 10 for Chicses r Choyces p. 215 l. 29 for
keeping r. kissing p. 219 l. 9 for ronounce r. renounce p. 221 l. 5 for Pecard
r. Picard p. 236 l. 9 for Fawlour r. Fawtour p. 172 l. 24 for Pamphiticum r.
Pamphilice p. 278 l. 1. for Star r. Stare p. 29^ l. 7.

IMMANUEL. Historical Collections.
Century I.
ANaxagoras finding Perides ready to

Josiahs Death immediately went before the Babylon: St. Austins Death before
the destruction of Hippo, the City he was Bishop of: Elisha was the Chariot of
Israel.

Jacob on his Stone, and Jonah in the Whales Ahab on his Bed, and
Nebuchadnezzar on his Throne.

The Devil appeared to a dying man, and Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin:
and he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

The Romans where they Conquered any though of strange Religion, and built
Temples to them: They never differed with any but the Christian Religion; and
the Reason is, that diverse Lies may dwell together. Herod and Pilate were made
friends, but there is no accord between a Lie and the Truth.

Cajus Caligula, though none broke forth into more audacious contempt of the
Divine Majesty, yet was most dasterdly timorous, hiding himself under a Bed
when he heard it Thunder.

custom, that when the Emperor of Constantinople was Crowned, two Masons came
in the sight of all the people, bringing in their Hand, Marble stones of
several Colors, saying, Let the Emperor command what sort of Marble he will
have his Monument made of.

Peter Martyr persuading the improvement of good examples, tells a story of a
deformed man married unto an uncomely woman, who being desirous of handsome
children, bought many beautiful pictures, and desired his Wife daily to look
upon them, by means whereof their children were fair and lovely.

Calvin was in Heaven, he would never come thither to be there with him.

Nauplius on the Cepharean Rock made show of a false fire to the Grecian Navy
in their return from Troy. The Papist does the like, making show of Miracles
amongst those rush Candles that they give us to seek the Church by, as the
Cynick did his man in the Market place at Midday. But how poor a matter! since
infidels work Miracles, witness the Egyptian South-sayers and false Prophets:
Yea, Vives himself a learned Papist speaking of their Golden-Legend, which is
the History of their Miracles, says, That he which made it had an Iron Face
and a Leaden Heart. Christ indeed in the Churches infancy did Miracles: But
what need Truckles when the Child can go? Herbs new set require a watering pot,
which having once taken root need no such farther labor. And therefore as
Austin in his 22d. Book of the City of God observes: He which seeks them now is
Prodigium magnum, since the Glory of Miracles is not Nota Ecclesiae, sed
Doctrinae, a note of the Church but Doctrine: Yet the Protestant Truth and
Church, though they plead not Miracula, yet they want not Mirabilia, as 1.
Luthers Conquest in Life, and Peace in Death. 2. The French Protestants
flourishing after the Parisian Massacre, In Anno 1572. 3. Rochel relieved by
Fish never seen in that Coast before, 1573. 4. Geneva's preservation in the
midst of powerful Enemies. 5. Queen Elizabeth's long and peaceable Reign and
Death. 6. Deliverance from Gunpowder Treason.


But it is the word of Truth which the Protestant rests on, and not Miracles,
which are but false signs.

Romans dedicated the first Day of the new Year to a double-faced Idol called
Janus. The Idol is gone, but the Moral is still useful, teaching us then to
look both backward to what is past, and forward to what is to come: Which if we
do, looking backward, considering Gods mercies, we have reason to say, Thou
crownest the Year with thy goodness. If we look forward, considering our own
wickedness, we have need to cry, Lord spare us this year also.

Scipio, who being procurator Purveyor for the City of Rome in a time of
Dearth, being to set Sail homeward with Provision, it being very turbulent
weather, the Pilot loath to venture, would have persuaded him to stay, but he
commanded him to set Sail, and said, N^cesse est ut came non ut vivam.

The Persians had a Law, that if a man were accused and found guilty, he should
not straightway be condemned, but after a diligent enquiry of his Life and
Conversation: And if the number of his praiseworthy deeds did countervail the
contrary, he was fully quit of the trespass.

Caligula having made a ridiculous expedition, Cockleshells, and fill their
H^lmets, and for this demanded triumph, as though he had conquered the Ocean.

Claudius the Emperor was full of courtesy lantius triumphed he accompanied
him, and going to the Capitol gave him the pre-eminence.

Domitian the Emper^ur put to Death Salustius Governor of Britain, for that he
called some Lances or Spears he had invented by his own name Lucul ians.

Lucius King of rittain sending to Pope Eleutherius Roman and Imperial laws,
received this answer from him, That he had the old and new Testament, and out
of them might compose his Laws to govern his people by.

Julian the ^p st^t^ in despite to Christ, sent Alipius to repair Jerusalem,
but terrible flaines of fire issuing ou^ of the earth, when they laid the
foundation, enforced them to leave the enterprise.

The Turks have four Divan, or Judgment viz. Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday:
The Officers meet all by break of day, dine in the Judgment-House, and give
account to the King, who many times comes privily to a little Window which
looks into the Divan-House to observe secretly what is done.

The Grand Signior sending forth a Bashaw or Governor of a Province, always
sends with him a Companion, which has always a free liberty to go in and out,
and talk to him at his pleasure to spy his Actions, and to give the Grand
^ignior intelligence what is done.

Turk all except the Great Aga never speak, but standing, looking down with
their hands cross to ^^ew and do him reverence.

Gray. Seraglio. Turks fear not to buy the Clothes of those who dye of the
Plague, and use them as though the Disease were not infect^ous, affirming that
their end is written in their foreheads, and a vain thing therefore to think ^o
prevent it.

Turkish Sultanaes or Ladies like those Blackamore Maidens best, and give the
greatest price for them, who are most ill-favored, because they think that on
the sight of their Deformities their own Beauties are better regarded.

Tur^ish Ladies that are kept for the King never see any men, save Blacks,
except the King: And when they are sick the Ph^sician feels their pulse, but
never sees them.

Turk seldom speaks at his meals; but when to grace an Aga or chief Officer
standing by him, he throws a Loaf of Bread at him from his own Table, and
this is held for a singular Grace and Favor.

Turks at their Privies, because God and Mahomets names are written in it.

The Great Turk is Heir to all great ones,

There Is no Office among the Turks during Vizier or Chief Officer dies in his
Bed. Whence they have this Proverb, That he that is greatest in Office is but a
statue of Glass.

The Turkish Bashaw, though they become Turk, yet they have no freedom by it,
but still remain slaves as others, and thereby their servitude is rather
increased than lessened; and the Children which such beget on Sultanaes, never
come to preferment as such who are born of their slaves.

Among the Tur^s every man may not bear life and conversation; and above all,
that drink no wine.

The Turks pray five times every day, and six viz. Friday, and always wash
before they enter into their Moschs or Churches.

Amasis King of Egypt, when he perceived he had been formerly a subject
himself, commanded a Vessel to wash his feet in to be made of pure Gold, and
afterward to be new molten and cast into the form of an Egyptian Deity: which
done, it immediately was with great devotion worshipped by them; whom the King
asking why they so ^orshipt what was but now a dishonorable Vessel? They
answered him, Because now it had a Divine shape. He presently infers, That
though formerly he had been an inferior Subject as they were, yet now being
advanced to the Royal Dignity, suitable honor and respect was due to him.

Boschier. Academ. p. 19. Amasis King of Egypt renounced the Friendship of
Polycnates, fearing lest his great prosperity would have an answerable
destruction, as accordingly it had. He that never had any cross in his life,
dyed on a cross. And St. Ambrose refused to stay in his house, that boasted he
never knew adversity.

Idem ibidem. 33. Cleopas King of Egypt, to furnish himself to build a Pyramid,
prostituted his own beautiful daughter.

Boschier. Timotheus the Milesian Musician asked a double salary from those who
had before another Master.

Idem. Hamilcar made his Son Hannibal, being then but Nine Years old, to swear
before the Altar to revenge him upon the Romans, as soon as he was able and fit
to wage War.

Bosch. p. 140. Amadaeus Duke of Savoy, being desired by

Idem p. 194. Trajan the Emperor heard and adjudged a Pliny takes notice of as
his principal prai^e.

Id m. Boschier in his penitential Sermons relates of Aqua and Panis vita
Carnis, but afterward advanced changed his Diet, and t^en said, Aqua Panis
vita Canis. And a third there was, that being low, preached exceeding ^harply
against the Pride and Vices and Sins of men in power, but afterward advanced,
changed his note, and answered one that admired at it, by profaning of that
Scripture, When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child.

Bonaventure sitting at Table with, and looking exceeding earnestly on a
beautiful woman, and being asked by her Husband why he so looked, answered,
That he admired at the excellency of the Creator by contemplating the beauty of
his Creature; and if Mortals were so amiable, how lovely should we be at the
resurrection! On which Boschier makes this animadversion, That it was an
Example rather to be admired, than imitated, suitable to the golden age, and
not our present iron age of the World. p. 46.

^oschier sharply taxing the sinister practices of Advocates, gives an account
of many instances, as of Demes the Orator whom Plutarch mentions, that took Ten
alents, that he might be silent; and of Demosthenes, that when the Milesians
sent to Athens to crave aid, at first meeting vehemently opposed it, but being
bought over, the next meeting counterfeited himself ill with the Squinzy, in
Latin called Angina, but one that perceived the fraud, answered, it was not
Angina but Argentina; not his own Disease but their Money had stopped his mouth:
As likewise of a famous Lawyer at Millain, whose Tricks the Duke
understanding, in a disguise advised with him, how he might pay less than a
thousand Ducats, which he pretended he owed by bond to another. The Lawyer
answered, he would warrant to delay it for Ten Years, upon which the Duke
condemned him to the Gallows which he well deserved.

Scru. 4. p. 268. St. Jerome reports that Plato, after he had to Athens, and was
the chiefest Master, yet traveled to Egypt and Italy, to seek Archilaus of
Tarentum to be his Scholar.

Idem. 379. Charles the 7th. King of France made a Decree,

It was a prudent Course of the Emperor Augustus, who commanded all his
Governors in the East, that if they received not his Letters within t^enty
days of the date, they should esteem them of no value. Because between the
writing and so late receiving, that might fall out, that might require contrary
directions.

Bosch. p. 41^. Philip of Macedon being willing to delay a

Eloquence has a powerful force to persuade Pisistratus obtained the Athenian
Monarchy, and bewitched the People to a parting from their beloved Freedom. Our
Savior mollified the Servants that were sent to take him. And Pyrrhus was so
powerfully persuasive, that the Romans commanded their Ambassadors not to speak
with him but by an Interpreter, having had experience that those whom they had
formerly sent returned his Advocates.

Demetrias having received a great many Petitions into his Lap threw them all
into the River, which so enraged his people, that they revolted from him to
Pyrrhus, and so he lost his Kingdom

Alexander being about to condemn a Pirate asked him, Why do thou trouble the
Seas? He ans^ered, And why do thou the whole World? I with one Ship seek my
adventures, and therefore am called a ^irate; thou with a great Army warrest
against Nations, and therefore art called an Emperor. So that there is no
difference between us but in the name. The consideration of which so prevailed
with lexander, that he dism st the Pirate without inflicting any punishment
upon him.

Bosch 19. Sermon. p. 421. Bosch. Sermon 21. p. 488.

Friars came that wa, whereof the one was the Popes Confessor, to whom she
confessing herself, the other standing by saw twenty Toads come out of her
Mouth, and go out of the Church. But she still concealing her Adultery, the
Friar supposing she had made a full Confession, absolved her. But she having
dealt deceitfully, he again saw all those Toads reenter, and besi^es them a new
one greater and bigger than the former; by which last they conceived was meant
^he abuse of the Sacrament added to her other sins; upon which the Friars
returning to convert her, found her strangled and dead. She three days after
appears to them and acknowledges that she was now tormented for her not
confessing.

Idem 5^3. Boschier relates of a man that when he went

Bosch. 23. Sermon. p. 539. Pericles an Athenian Governor as often as he put on
his Robes would admonish himself to Freemen, Grecians and Athenians.

Bosch. Acad. p. 55. One desirous to have bought Nobility of Maximilian the
Emperor; He answered him, I can make thee richer, but none can make thee Noble
but thy own Virtue.

Idem. p. 56. Paul names Christ by some of his Titles five hundred times, and
Ignatius is reported to have the name jesus written in his Heart, when he
was dead, in golden Let^ers.

Idem. Paphnutius is reported to convert a Harlot by this means pretending love
he desired to be brought into the most private room she had, which she brought
him into, but still he found fault and complained to her that he was afraid
some Eye would see him; to which she answered, None can see thee here but
only God. To which he r^pl^ed, And do thou think that God sees thee, and yet
vvilt play the Harlot? Which he so enforced, that it prevailed upon her to a
change.

Idem Com. Tertia p. 39. Philosopher concerning the contempt of life, made the
Milesian Virgins hang themselves, and prevailed with so many, that nothing
could restrain them, till they were threatn^d to be left hanging naked in the
sight of all. And Cleombrotus reading Plato concerning immortality, threw
himself headlong down a precipice, that he might enjoy it.

Idem p. 12^. French Noble man, when he was a Youth promised his
Schoolmaster, that if he came to be Bishop, he would prefer him. He afterward
advanced, forgot his poor Schoolmaster, who to mind him of it meets him in
Paris streets at Noon with lighted Torc^es, and being asked why he did so, he
answered, Because he seemed to him to see nothing, but to have lost the Eyes of
compassion. Idem p. 163.

Phryne a Boeotian Harlot, being promised by Praxyteles her Paramour and a most
excellent Carver, free leave to choose the most exquisite Statue was in his
Shop, not knowing without his instruction which was best, suborned one to
come and acquaint him that his House was on fire, and so his statues all in
danger, which he hearing and hastening home, again and again enquired whether
the Statue of Cupid were safe, whereby Phryne discovered that that was best,
and so made choice of it. Bosch. p. 184.

After the great overthrow the Romans had Cannas, where were fifty thousand
slain, when Terentius Varro brought back the Remnant of the Army, the Senate
m^t him and congratulated him only for this, that he did not despair of the
Roman Commonwealth.

When Thrasippus had not reviled only but spit Pisistratus the Athenian Tyrant.
He went to Thrasippus the next morning, and entreated him not to kill himself,
but forgave and still used him as a friend. Idem. 16.

Codras an Athenian, the Philaeni Carthaginian Brethren, Curtius a Roman, Butas
and Sparc^us Lacedaemonians, all these freely gave up their lives for the good
of their Country.

ulius Caesar wept at the sight of Pompeys Head, never destroyed any that were
hot in Arms against him, restored his vanquished Enemies to their dignity and
honor. Theodosius counted it a benefit to him when any that offended him asked
him forgiveness, and was then readiest to forgive when he had bin most highly
injured. Cha^les the fifth Emperor banished a Noble Counselor for advising him
to burn the City Gaunt that had rebelled against him.

Quo quisque est major magis est placabilis ira,
Et faciles motus men's generosa capit.
-- satis est prostrasse leoni. Bosh. p. 290
Abbot when he should have read Porta patens esto; nulli claudaris honesto.
read it thus: Porta patens esto nulli, claudaris honesto. And that famous in
our English History.

Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est. Which having the point placed after
Nolite forbad, after Timere prescribed the Kings Murder.

A Countryman seeing the Archbishop of Collen riding in a Military Equipage,
guarded with Troops of Soldiers, and smiling at it, was asked the reason: He
answered, That he could not but smile at the simplicity of St. Peter, who
living so mean and poor himself should have such Lordly and Military
successors. To whom the Archbishop replied, that as a Prince he was so
attended, but in the Church he behaved himself as an Archbishop. To whom the
Countryman returns, I desire your Lordship would resolve me, When my Lord the
Duke shall be in Hell for his pride, what will become of my Lord the
Archbishop?

Bosch. Ibid p. 287. God many times brings his by evil, unto good. Israel
through the wilderness into Canaan. Job through extremity of misery to a
heightened happiness. Joseph by the malice of his Brethren and treachery of his
Mistress to Dignity and Honor. Jason sick of an Impostume, and given over by
his Physicians, in war against his Enemies received a wound that cured him.
Hamans persecution was Mordecai's advancement. Themistocles banishment by his
Countrymen made way for Xerxes favor and preferment by him.

Idem p. 327. Pambo came to a learned man and desired him the first verse, I
said I will look to my ways that I offend not with my Tongue, Pambo shut the
Book and took his leave; saying, He would go learn that point. When he had
absented himself certain Months, he was demanded by his Teacher, when he would
go forward; he answered, he had not yet learned his old Lesson.

Bishop Lakes Sermon. 51. p. 93. Huartus in his Trial of Wits, reports of a
Noblemans Page in Spain that being distracted of his Wits, imagined himself to
be a King: In which conceit he so pleased himself, that when he was cured, he
was displeased with the Physician that restored him to his right mind.

Idem ibidem p. 97. Carneades a great Orator having one day prevailed in Court
by his great Eloquence, would come the next day and as strongly maintain the
contrary cause.

Butterfield against Burton p. 120. Dionysius having composed a Tragedy sent it
to Philoxenus the Poet for his approbation; who sent it back scored and
cancelled quite through, as being all naught. And when a bragging Painter
showed a Picture to Apelles, which he said was made in a days time, Apelles
answered him, I thought no less.

Procopius tells us that near the Pole where the Inhabitants have Night for
diverse Months, they at the end of such a Night, when the Sun uses to render it
self to their view, get up to the top of the highest Mountains, desiring to
have the view of that desired Creature; which they no sooner see, but they
adorn themselves in their best attire, and with mutual joy and embraces,
congratulate its appearing, saying, Behold the Sun the Sun appears, and so
they meet and feast one another.

Antigonus, when Thrasillus the Cynick Philosopher Talent, he answered, that
was no request for a Cynick: Thus neatly shifted himself and withheld his
Charity. But Alexander dealt otherwise; who when he had assigned to his friend
Perillus Fifty Talents to place his Daughters, and Perillus had told him Ten
would suffice. He replied; True for thee to take, but not for me to give.

Galatius good Wife p. 14. Dr. Boys in his Postills relates a story of a Mass
but when he heard the Saints Bell, would say to his Wife, Pray thou for thee
and me: And that this Merchant dreamed that he and his wife were dead, and that
when he knocked at Heaven gate for entrance; St. Peter suffered his wife to
enter but thrust him out, saying, Thy wife shall enter for her self and for
thee.

Idem p 52. St. Austin reports of himself that in the heat he, I did rather
desire to have my Lust satisfied, than extinguished.

Coninvus relates concerning the Battle of Mont Le Chery, that many lost their
Offices for flying away, that were bestowen on others that fled Ten Leagues
farther.

Idem. Pilate by wearing Christ's Coat without a Se^m, is reported to appease
the wrath of angry Caesar.

Boys Fest. p. 71. Pliny relates of two Goats meeting on a narrow Bridge, who
did not Vim sed viam facere, not make away, but make way one for the other; as
Mutianus an eyewitness tells the story, the one lying down on his Belly
suffered the other to pass over his Back, and so both escaped the danger of
drowning. And in the time of the Gothish Wars a Roman Soldier and a Barbarian
fell into the same Pit, whose necessity made them Friends, and to consult the
relieving one the other.

Stilpho Megareus a great Philosopher in his Age, that he was exceedingly given
by nature to Wine and Women, but he so tamed his unbridled affections by good
Discipline, that no man could ever justly charge him with either.

Idem p. 10. Themistocles intending to sell a Farm, caused the Crier to
proclaim that it had a good Neighbor.

Boys 3d. part Fest. p. 14. A Reverend and Religious Archbishop of Mentz,
having been a long time depraved, and at last deprived of his Dignities and
Offices by two corrupt Cardinals his Judges, and a false-hearted Advocate his
familiar friend, out of the bitterness of his spirit made this appeal from them
unto the Lord of Heaven. God knows (unto whom all things are naked) that I am
unjustly condemned: Yet I will not appeal here from your Sentence, for that I
know ye shall sooner be beli^ved though speaking false than I shall in speaking
truth, and therefore I receive this heavy censure for the Rebellions of my
youth and my otner offenses. Nevertheless I appeal from your judgment to the
Judge eternal and only wise, which is Christ Jesus, before whom I summon you.
The Cardinals fell into a laughing and said, that if he would go before, they
would follow. It happened that the poor Bishop having withdrawn himself into a
Monastery dyed within a year and a half after. And the Cardinals hearing
thereof in a scoffing manner said one to another, that they must go seek the
Archbishop. Now within a few days after, one of them was most bloodily slain,
and the other grinding his Teeth eat up his hands and died: And lastly the
Judas that betrayed him, the false Adv^cate placed in his room was so mortally
hated of all men for his Sedition and Cruelty, that being assaulted in a
Monastery he was there butchered, and his Carcass cast into the Town Ditch,
where lying three days, all sorts of people both men and women used all manner
of despite upon it.

Boys Festival part 3. p. 112. Albertus Duke of Saxony was wont to say, that he
had three wonders in one City, namely, Three Monasteries; for the Friars of the
first had Children and yet no Wives. The Friars of the second had a great deal
of coin, and yet no Land. The Friars of the third abounded with Money, and yet
had no Rents.

Idem p. 141. Alexander saw the dead Corpse of Darius, and Julius Caesar the
Head of Pompey, and Marcus Marcellus Syracuse burn, and Scipio Numantia
spoiled, and Titus Jerusalem made even with the Ground; they could not abstain
from weeping though they had been mortal Enemies.

Boys on the last Psalm p. 19. Boys Preaching on the Fifth of November at Paul's
Cross desired his Auditory to join with him in this prayer. Our Pope which art
at Rome, cursed be thy Name, perish may thy Kingdom, hindered may thy Will be as
it is in Heaven so in Earth. Give us this day our Cup in the Lords Supper, and
remit our moneys which we have given for thy Indulgence as we send them back
unto thee; and lead us not into Heresy, but free us from Misery. For there is
the infernal pitch and sulphur for ever and ever. Amen.

Idem ibid. p. 21. Pericles a Heathen, rejoiced on his Deathbed, Athens had
ever worn a mourning Gown through his Occasion.

It is reported of Archbishop Cranmer that

Holy Bradford said of the Popish Prelates Christ, that they could not mean
honestly, that make so much of the Wife, and so little of the Husband.

Boys ibid. p. 16. A Captain sent from Caesar unto the Senators Rome, for the
prolonging of his Government abroad, understanding as he stood at the Council
Chamber Door, that they would not condescend unto his desire; clapping his hand
on the pummel of his Sword, Well said he, seeing you will not grant it to him,
this shall give it to him. So when the Citizens of Messana despising Pompeys
Jurisdiction, alleged ancient orders and privileges of the Romans in old time
granted unto their Town, Pompey answers them in his Choler, What do ye prattle
to us of the Law, that have our Swords by our sides? A Turkish Argument, who
account the left hand most Honorable, because the Sword hangs on that side, by
this the Nimrods of the World decide differences.

Idem p. 55. Castellanus, who having been a Protestant, and turning to the
^opish Religion, was stricken with a Disease unknown to the Physicians; the one
half of his Body burning as hot as Fire, and the other being so cold as Ice,
and so miserably lamenting ended his life.

Boys Postills prop. Psalm. p. 56. Toxaris saw his Countryman Anacharsis in
Athens, he said unto him, I will at once show thee all the wonders of Greece,
and showed him Solon, in seeing whom thou see all, even Athens it self, and
the glory of the Greeks.

Idem p. 104. Gideon sle^ forty Elders of Succoth, and had his own forty Sons
all but one murdered by Abimel^ch. The Egyptians slew the Israelites Male
Children, and lost their first born. Haman was hanged on the same Gallows he
set up for Mordecai. Bajazet the first was carried about by Tamberlain in an
Iron Cage, as he intended to have done by him. Maxentius was overthrown on the
same Bridge which he built to have intrapped Constantine. Pope Alexander the
sixth was poisoned, in the same Wine he provided to have poisoned another.

Idem p. 17^. It is reported of the zealous and learned Martyr John Mollens,
that he never spoke of the name Jesus, but instantly Tears dropped from his
Eyes.

The Popish Clergy deal with the Laity as Philistines did with Samson, pull out
his Eyes, and then being blindsold ma^e pastime at him; as it is reported of
Cardinal Cajetan, who coming into Paris and seeing the blind people desirous of
his blessing, he turned to them and said: Because this people are willing to be
deceived let them be deceived, and so gave them his blessing in the name of the
Devil.

Boys ibid. p. 121. Daily experience witnesses the Worlds Vicissitude: Darius
born of a servant. Tangrolopia ^amberlain a Shepherds son. ^^lligis Archbishop
of Mentz the Son of a Wheel-wright. Sir Francis Drake a poor Vicars Son. Joseph
from the prison, and David from the sheepfold advanced to the Crown. Others
from great Estate brought to Misery; as Ham^n, Nebuchadnezer, Bajazet, Darius,
and Belesanus once a victorious ^aptain, but before his Death a most distressed
and blind beggar.

Id. p. 132. Luther in his Table talk, cites this Fable. beasts, and amongst
them the Swine. Now when all the dainties were brought in, the Swine asked if
Brewers grains might be had: Even so when God in his Gospel offers all
Spiritual excellencies, Worldlings like the Swine root after Crowns and Ducats:
And what says he, shall a Cow do with a Nutmeg?

Luth. Colloq. Men's. p. 7. Ailbertus Bishop of Mentz reading by chance in the
Bible, one of his Council coming in, asked him what his Highness did with that
book; the Achbishop answered, I know not what this Book is, but sure I am, all
that is written therein is quite against us.

Idem p. 11. Mathias de Vai, an Hungarian Divine was complained upon by a
papistical Priest to a Friar, that was brother to the Governor or Vayvod of
Buda; both being summoned, and the one accusing the other, the Friar could not
reconcile the controversy. At last the Friar told them he knew a way to
discover the truth of this cause, and commanded that two barrels of Gunpowder
should be set in the midst of the market place at ^uda, and said to the
parties, Sit upon the barrels and I will set fire to them, and he that remains
alive his Doctrine is right. Mathias de Vai leaped upon one of the barrels, but
the Priest shrunk away. The Friar pronounces the faith of Mathias right;
fineth the Priest and his Accomplices, Licenseth Mathias to preach his Doctrine,
and himself turns Protestant.

Luther col. p. 24 Luther relates a Story of one whom he knew Erford, who
having parted with his Estate to his Children, on condition they should
maintain him; He coming unexpectedl^ to Dine with one of his Sons who had a
Goose on the Table; his Son espying his Father, puts the Goose under the board.
The Father Dines, goes his way, the Son stooping to take up the Goose, it was
turned into an ugly Toad, which leaped unto his Face and stuck fast, and before
night killed him.

Idem Col. p. 71 Albertus Bishop of Mentz had a Physician Protestant, but
turned Papist, using these words: I will for a while set Christ behind the
Door, until I am grown rich, and then I will take him to me again. But the
same Night he was found in his Bed with his Tongue torn out of his Mouth, and
his Neck wrung in tvvane. Luth. Col. p. 79.

Luther reports that he being at Rome, a great Cardinal died, and left behind
him great store of Money. Before hi^ Death he made his Will, and laid it in a
Chest: where his Money was. And after his Death the Chest was opened, and
therein by the Money was found written in Parchment these words: Dum potai
rapui, rapiatis quando
I scraped together while I could
That you should do so too I would. Idem p. 82.


Vienna having made a great Feast, in the midst of his Jollitry spoke these
words: If God would leave me my Riches, and suffer me to live but a thousand
years to take my pleasure, I would willingly leave to God his Heaven. Idem p.
81.

Luther, that the Prince Elector George begins to be Covetous, which is a sign
of his Death very shortly. When I savv Dr. G. begin to tell his Puddings
hanging in the Chimny, I told him he would not live long, which fell out
accordingly.

Luth. Col. p 87. Luther compares the Emperor Charles the Fifth in respect of
Church Livings to a pretty Dog he savv at Lints in Austria, that was taught to
go with a Hand-basket to the Butchers Shambles for Meat. Now when other Dogs
came about him, and would take the Meat out of the Basket, he would set the
Basket down and fight lustily with them: but when he savv they would be too
strong for him, then he himself would snatch out the first piece of flesh,
lest he should lose all. Idem p. 88.

Aristotle being not able to understand the reason of the ebbing and flowing
of some part of the Sea, call himself into it, saying, Quoniam ego non possum
capere te, tu capies me.

Dr. Boys Festival Psalms. p. 7.

IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century II.
A Country Farmer coming to Erfart would Corn at the rate of the Market, but
said he would carry it home, and give it rather to the Mice; going home, he
found an innumerable Company of Rats and Mice about his House, that had
devoured up all his Corn, and the next day following, going to see his ground,
newly sown, he found all his Seed eaten up, and no harm done to his Neighbors:
Luther upon the relating of this Story, adds this strange expression: Three
Country Farmers God be praised have lately hanged themselves.

Luther Coll. Men's. p. 83. A Courtier is a strange Creature, that loses great
deal by the Bread, a good deal by the Breath of others: Many times his
cloathts, Hair, complexion, Skin, yea his Soul is not his own, living at the
devotion of another Nemo suos (haec est aul ae natura potentis)
Sed Domini mores Casarianus habet.


Courtiers (says Guivar rise late, come late to the Temple, Dine late, Sup
late, go to Bed late, and repent last of all, if at all.

Boys Festival Psalms 1. part p. 158. Tarantula are cured with music^, which
dissipates the poison, and who are not perfectly cured when they hear music
will dance.

Boys Festival Psalm 2 part p. 13. Brera a Village called Hyborn by reason of
an Earth quake, in the Year 1583. was overwhelmed and covered with earth, so
deep, that at this day it is a Corn field, which Earth came from a Mountain
above a mile distant from the place.

Idem p. 9. Eusebius reports, how an Idiot, an illiterate person disputing with
a subtle Philosopher, an egregious Enemy to the Faith, brought him to
acknowledge the power of God in his word, and to give place to truth. Many
Bishops affected the Victory, but none could effect it until it pleased God by
a Babe to perfect his prayer.

Idem p. 16. Romes Faith was sometimes famous through the World, Romans 1.8. But
new Rome is so far unlike Old Rome, that we may well exclaim as the Poet Heu
quantum haec Niobe Niobe distabat ab illa! How is the faithful City become an
Harlot!

Idem p. 45. A people in India called Pandorae, have white youth like old men,
and in their elder Age black Hair like young men: And Hermogenes is said to be
in his Childhood an old man, and in his old Age a Child. And Naturalists
observe that the She Wolf has an early defect in procreation, beginning with
five, and the fifth year having but one, and ever after barren.

Idem p. 62. It Is Fabulously reported, that the Ghost of Jerome appeared to St.
Austin when he was writing a Treatise concerning the fullness of joy which is in
Gods presence, saying, O Austin, Austin, what do you mean, can you measure the
Waters, Isaiah 40.12. Remember that Scripture, Eye has not seen etc. I pray
continue your good courses of life, be steadfast and abundant always in the
work of the Lord, that you may hereafter on Gods holy Hill enjoy that to the
full, which in this Earthly Tabernacle you can know but in part.

p. 82. The Jews that bought our Savior for thirty Jerusalem, their sometimes
Habitation, from the Turks the now possessors of it, who have so vile an esteem
of them, that if any of them will turn Turk, he must first turn Christian; so
dreadful a thing it is to despise the proffers of Grace.

Boys Festival Psalm. 2 part p. 110. Matilda or Maud the Empress was Daughter
of a King, viz. Henry the First, Mother of a King, viz. Henry the Second of
England, and Wife of a ^ing, viz Henry the Fourth Emperor of Germany. On whom
was made this Epitaph.

Ortu magna, viro major, sed maximae prole,
Hic jacet Henrici Filia, Nupta, Parens.
Fabius was called by Plutarch the shield of the Romans; so some Princes have
been what all should be, the shield of the Christians. Such were Theodosius,
Arcadius, John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, and our excellent Princess Queen
Elizabeth, for whom if Plutarch were living, he would be much troubled to find
a Parallel.

Idem ibidem p. 146. Jesuits may be fither called Jehusites. Jesus was meek,
Jehu furious, a man of blood: so they who have though their Eyes lifted to
Heaven, yet their hand on Earth, and their hearts in Hell.

Idem p. 149. One comforting a widow, that had lately lost her Husban^, told
her that he was and an unthrift and unkind. She answered, though he were a bad
Husband, yet be was an Husband. So the Commodities of Government are so great,
that a bad Husband to a Commonwealth is better than none. Hence that true
Observation; Better living where nothing is lawful, than where every thing.

Ibid. p. 14^. Lactantius reports of Arcesilaus that having Philosophers one
against another, in fine contemned them all, and instituted a new Philosophy of
not Philosophising. So Worldlings and Atheists expending the differences of
Christians, and matters of Religion, have resolved to be of no Religion.

Dr. Boys Dominical Eples. winter part p. 8. There is a sweet Harmony between
the Prophets and the Apostles. As Numenius said, Plato was Moses translated.
Ascham says, Virgil was Homer. So is the New Testament an exposition of the
Old. The difference which Zeno puts between Logic and Rhetoric, that Divines
put between the Law and Gospel. The Law being as the Fist shut, the Gospel like
the hand open. The Gospel is the Law revealed. The Law the Gospel shadowed.

Idem ibid. p. 13. Ptolomey wondered at the agreement of the Interpreters, who
though kept apart, yet agree both in sense and words. How much more may we at
the wonderful consent of the Prophets, and Apostles. and Penmen of the
Scriptures, writing in several languages, times and places?

Idem ibidem p. 13. Evangelists in citing the Old Testament, do not always
relate the precise Text, but many times keeping the sense, they alter the
words. But on the contrary, Heretics and Atheists use the words but altogether
change the sense. They bring not their conceptions to the Scriptures, but the
Scriptures to them, first make their Sermon, and then look their Text.

Idem ibid. p. 15. Jerusalem, in all ninety nine times, and yet notwithstanding
Jerusalem was destroyed. O what a bragging would the Pope have made, if Christ
had bin but once at Rome?

Luth. Col. p. 106. Luther relates of himself, that being at prayer,
contemplating how Christ hung on the Cross and suffered for his Sins, there
appeared suddenly on the wall a bright shining Vision, and therein appeared
also a glorious form of our Savior Christ, with his five wounds steadfastly
looking upoh him, as if it had bin Christ himself corporally. Now at the first
sight, he thought it had bin some good Revelation, yet presently recollected
himself and apprehended it some juggling of the Devil. For Christ appears unto
us in his word, and in a meaner and more humble form; like as he was humbled on
the Cross for us: Therefore said he, I spoke to the Vision in this manner; A^ay
thou confounded Devil, I know no other Christ, than he that was Crucified, and
who in his word is pictured and preached to me; whereupon the Image vanished,
which was the very Devil himself. And in like manner said Luther further; A
Gentlewoman, a Virgin not far from my House at Wittenburg, lay very sick, to
whom also appeared a Vision after this sort following. She beheld as she
thought a glorious form of our Savior, which she was ready to have worshipped
and fall down before; but I being sent for presently repaired to her, and saw
the Vision also, as in the form of Christ. I admonished her seriously, that she
should not suffer her self to be deluded by the Devil; whereupon she raised up
her self, and spit upon the face of the Image, and instantly the Image was
changed into a great ugly Snake, which slid to the Gentlewomans Bed, and bit
her by the Ear, so there stood drops of blood upon the Ear which trickled down,
and thereupon the Snake vanished. This I beheld with mine Eyes, said Luther,
with diverse others that stood by.

Luthers Col. p. 144. Luther relates that Dr. carlstade was promoted Doctor of
Divinity, eight years before he read in the Bible; and that afterward
conferring the degree of Doctor on One at Wittenburg made this Speech. Here I
stand and do promote this Man, and I know I do not rightly therein, and that
thereby I commit a mortal Sin, but I do it for the gain of two Gilders which I
get by him.

Idem p. 151. Imperial Assembly was held at Auspurg; William Duke of Bavaria
asked Dr. Eccius, whether the Protestants Doctrine might be confuted by
Scripture. He answered, No, but by the Fathers it might.

Idem p. 152. John Prince Elector of Saxony at the Diet at Auspurg would not
intermit the hearing of Gospel, notwithstanding the Emperors command to the
contrary, telling the Emperor that he could no less want Gods word, than his
meat and drink.

Idem p. 219. Eislebin, having in a great Dearth suffered much want, and spent
all her provisions, went with her two Children to a ^ountain to drink, and
going, prayed that God would preserve hers in a time of Dearth. Upon the way a
Man met her, questioned with her whether she thought to get something to eat
also at that Fountain; she said Yea, why not, for all things are possible to
God. He that fed the great multitude of the Israelites forty years with Manna
in the Wilderness, can also preserve me and mine with drinking of Water. Now
as she continued thus steadfast in her mind, the Man said unto her, (doubtless
an Angel) Behold, seeing thou are in belief so confident, go Home, and thou
shall find three bushels of Meal, which she according to his word found when
she came Home.

Idem p. 225. Luther relates out of the lives of the Fathers Hermit, who had
led a strict Life, and fell deadly sick: Another Father and a young Brother
went to visit him, a Murderer ran after them and stood at the Hermits door, and
hearing of the Holiness of the Hermits Life being thereat astonished, said, Ah!
in such manner also should I have lived. The Hermit answered him and said, Yea,
thou should have done so and lived as I have, if thou intendest to be saved;
and with these words gave up the Ghost. No^ the young Brother seeing the soul
of the Hermit carried by the Devil, he wept bitterly: These going away, the
Murderer followed them sorrowing for his Sins, but going ^eedlesly, fell and
broke his Neck and dyed. The young Brother saw the Angels carry his Soul, at
which he joyfully laughed. Now when the old Father saw the young Brother behave
himself so strangely, he asked the reason; the young man told him what he saw.
Thus the first shall be last, and the last first.

Luthers Coll. p. 228. Prince John the eldest Son of George Elector of Saxony,
lying at the point of death, his Father comforted him with the Doctrine of
justification by Faith, and that he should forget his own works and trust only
on Gods mercy and Christ's merits, and banish ^ut of his thoughts the invocation
of Saints. Now the Son being therevvithal refresht, asked his Father, why he
did not cause the same Doctrine to be preached openly through all his Countries.
His Father answered, Loving child we must say this only to those that are
dying and not to the sound and healthful.

Idem p. 229. Austria a Monastery, which in former times was very rich, and so
continued as long as it willingly gave to the poor: But when it forbear to
give, it became poor. It fell out that not long since a Poor man came thither
and desired an Alms, which was denied him; and he demanding a reason, why they
refused to give to one that asked in Gods name, the Porter answered him, we are
become poor; whereupon the poor man said; the cause or your poverty is this,
you have had in this Monastery two Brethren, the one you have thrust out, and
the other is gone secretly away of himself. For after the one Brother (Date,
give you,) was put out and cashierd, the other Brother ( Dabitur, it shall be
given,) left it himself.

Luther Coll. p. 231. A Bavarian with great devotion prayed unto Leonard an
Idol set up in the Church: behind which Idol stood one and answered him and
said, Fie on thee, Bavarian; and in that sort he was oftentimes repulsed, and
could not be heard. At last the Bavarian displeased, went away and said, Fie
upon thee Leonard.

I knew says Luther a Friar sitting upon the Monk upon the Stool should not
read his devotions; whereupon the Friar made the Devil this answer: Purgo meum
ventrem and celo deum omnipo^entem.
Tibi quae infra, Deo quod supra.


I ease my self and worship my God; my devotions go upwards, and they are Gods;
my excrements downwards, and they are thy share.

p. 240. June the 9th. 1532. in a great Drought, Luther Prayer obtained a Rain,
which continued a Fortnight.

Luther, how soundly will our Gentry and Farmers in Germany pay for this before
an Hundred and Fifty years come to an end, but afterward God will restore them
again and beat down Popedom.

Luthers Coll. p. 24^. Persia laid Siege to a City that had offended him, the
Bishop that was therein went upon the Wall, lift up his Hands to Heaven and
prayed, whereupon immediately the Eyes of the Horses in the whole Army were so
pestered with an innumerable company of Flies stinging them, that with their
Riders they ran away, and so raised the Siege.

Idem p. 245. Friar that lived in the same Monastery with Luther, used daily to
conve^ himself into a private Corner to pray. Now as he became wearied and
tired therewith, he asked God if such his continued prayers and devotions so
long a time might suffice, whereupon he heard a voice that said Read mihi
mediam Lunam, Solemn, and Canis iram. by which was signified Cor the Heart.

Luthers Coll. p. 246. Julian, as he rose, spoke these words, Ah sweet Jesus!
am not I worthy to suffer for thy sake?

p. 247. It was a brave resolution of Henry Prince of Saxony, who when his
Brother George sent to him, that if he would forsake his Faith and turn Papist,
he would then leave him his Heir. But he made him this answer, Rather than I
will do so and deny my Savior Jesus Christ, I and my Kate each of us, with a
staff in one hand, will beg our Bread out of his Countries.

Idem p. 248. The Church is watered with the Blood of Martyrs: Truly said
Luther; it would grieve me sorely if I should carry my Blood into the Grave.
Idem p. 268.

Luther relates a story of a young man he Erfort, that tempting his Mothers
Maid, the Maid acquainted his Mother. She with a pretense to school her Son,
lays her self in her Maids Bed, and was gotten with Child by him of a Daughter,
which being bred abroad, and when grown up brought home, the young man knowing
not of it married her, so that she was his Daughter, Sister and Wife. The
University was consulted with, they concluded, advising the Mother to repent
her wickedness, that seeing the married couple knew nothing of it, to avoid
greater offense, they should continue together.

Idem p. 257. Galaton painted Homer Vomiting, and all the rest of the Poets
greedily swallowing up what he had Vomited, and Aelian reckons all other
Poets but his Apes.

contention between Chrysostom on the one part, and Theophilus cyril and
Epiphanius on the other, about the burning or not burning of Origens Books. All
good men, yet they grew so hot, that because Chrysostom would not consent to
the burning, Theophilus and Cyril would hardly acknowledge him a lawful Bishop.
And Epiphanius in bitter chiding fell to such choler as he said he hoped he
should not die a Bishop. To whom Chrysostom answered as eagerly again, that he
trusted that he should never return alive into his own Country of Cyprus: Which
chiding words were not so bitter in sound as afterward they proved true
indeed; for both Epiphanius dyed before he came home to Cyprus, and Chrysostom
being put out of his Bishopric ended his life in banishment.

Bishop Cooper Lincoln Sermon. p. 56. Constantine the Great, having assembled the
council of Nice for the suppression of Arrius Heresy, in which there met 318.
Bishops; when the Bishops put up Bills of complaint, the one against the other,
he would not read them but burnt them all before them, exhorting them to mind
the matter about which they came: yet afterward by pernicious flatteries was
turned against the truth and banished Athanasius.

Idem p. 213. Augustus hearing that the goods of a Merchant debt, were set
forth to Sail, he sent to buy his pillow, saying, That he thought it had some
rare virtue in it to procure sleep, seeing he that owed so much could sleep on
it so quietly.

It is reported of Caesar to his great commendation, Pompey, he had in his
custody a Castle, wherein he found diverse letters written by many of the
Nobles under their own hands; sufficient evidence to condemn them: but he
burnt them all, that no monument might remain of a future grudge: Thus does God
cancel and annihilate the sins of his penitent servants.

Rogers penitent Citizen p. 70. Achon a Cretian an excellent Archer, when
Serpent had taken away his Son, he with his Arrow killed the Serpent, but did
not hurt his child.

Idem p. 113. Aristotle being reproved for giving an alms man not his manners.

Idem p. 155. Themistocles, when he heard that Miltiades honor in the
Marothenian battle; he could not sleep because he came short of his glory. And
Caesar seeing Alexanders statue, wept that he had done so little himself.

Rogers penitent Citizen p. 150. Church and seeing it full of Images made of
Wax, demanded what might be the cause of such an unwonted sight: Answer was
made, that those whom those Images did represent, were certain persons, which
were saved from drowning by calling on our Lady. Nay, then quoth he again,
where be the Images of those I pray you, that called upon our Lady, and were
drowned notwithstanding?

Moss of Usury p. 99. Minister knowing he had Usurers in his congregation,
whilst he was preaching asked his Auditors this question, whether there was any
Usurer amongst them: No man answered. He asked again, whether there were any
Jakes f^rmer amongst them: One rising up said, Yea, I am the man: Whereupon he
answered, behold how vile an employment the Vsurer's is, that he is ashamed of,
whereas the other counted it no disparagement to own his.

Moss p. 148. Usurer dying, the Minister of the Parish refused to bury him; his
Friends though very importunate could not persuade. It came into their minds,
that the Minister had an Ass that usually carried his Masters Books after him
to the Church. Now they supposing the Ass would carry what burden he had to
the Church, as he carried his Masters Books, desired the Minister to agree to
this, that the Usurer might be laid upon the Ass, and that where the Ass laid
him he might be buried. He was contented. The Ass feeling an extraordinary
burden on his back wringing him, wincing and kicking be ran to the Gallows that
stood near by and there cast down the Usurer.

Turnbal Ps. 15. p. 51. Philip of Macedon being told that one Nicanor Courtier,
but neglected by him, had spoken reproachfully of him, he sent him a large gift
to relieve his Indigency. Whereupon Nicanor every where talked very honorably
of the King, which made Philip say, You may see that it lies in our selves to
be well or ill spoken of.

Sir William Maurice common Right, preface. Agesilaus surprised by the Athenian
Ambassadors at play with his children, asked them if they had children or not:
if they had, he feared not their censure; if they had not, he desired them to
suspend it till they had some.

Morris, preface. Xenophons expedition though with little effect Alexander the
Great to a braver and more successful invasion of Persia.

Idem ibid. The Spartans set a Mulct on that Musician his Harp; and the Lycians
suffered none to propose a new Law, but with an Halter about his Neck, that if
the reason thereof were not approved, he might forthwith be hanged for offering
novelties.

Maurice common Right, p. 1. Independency is like the Boranits or Tartar Lamb,
though it seems to creep low toward the ground and bear wool like the Sh^eps
clothing, yet destroys all Verdency, and suffers nothing to grow or prosper
near it.

Idem p. 9. Fathers in which something erroneous may not be observed, who are
like the Birds hatched at Grand-Cair by the warmth of an Oven, which have
every one some blemish.

Idem p. 12. Agefilaus sent Tissaphernes his thanks, that by the breaking of a
sworn league he had set the Gods on his side.

Idem p. 15. Jews were in the Sunshine of prosperity, then the Samaritans would
claim to be their Bbrethren. But if once they were under a Cloud or Tempest,
the other would not own their Kindred.

Idem p. 16. Examples, emulation, approbation of good men very prevalent:
Antigonus called Zen^ his Theater, and Aeschines never did better than when he
spoke in the presence of Philip. Cato kept the whole Theater in order.

Idem p. 21. Ludovicus Vives tells of one that going over Bridge in the Night,
fell down dead the next day at the apprehension of the great peril he was in.

Idem p. 64. When Aristippus bought a Fish at an nigh rate Market, and another
blamed his profuseness. He asked what the other would have given for it: Who
answering, such a small price: Aristippus replied, this is proportionably no
more to me than that is to you.

-- In Rutelo nam
Luxuria est, in Ventidio laudabile nomen.
Morris p. 75. Amphions music brought together and laid Stones for building
the Walls of Thebes; but the Independent Builders are so long a knocking, that
they break them to pieces, and are like the Italian Musicians, that were
admitted to sound their Airs before Sultan Achmet, who were so long in tuning
their Instruments, that he thought this their best music, and sent them away
with contempt and indignation and frustrated of their rewards.

Idem p. 77. Praetextatus a Heathen told Damasus the Pope, Make me Bishop of
Rome, and I will be a Christian.

Plants beaten to Powder or burnt to Ashes, will not only retain the Virtue,
but the least warmth will raise this Dust into the visible form and figure of
the Plant, and the Salt extracted from the Ashes and set in Lie in the coldest
Night, though frozen, will fix it self and configurate it self to the perfect
shape of the Herb.

Idem p. 92. condition the Independents brought the Nation to, might be
denominated Reformation, only as that Stone found on the banks of Meander is
called the sober Stone, because being cast into a Man's bosom it makes him stark
mad.

Idem p. 94. Cecillius Pasius with much confidence and exultation comes to Nero
and told him. That it was revealed unto him in a Dream, that within his ground
in Africa was hid a stupendous mass of Treasure, not stamped but in Bullion
reposited there of old by Dido coming from Tire. This being over lightly
credited, and without deliberation considered of the Orators and Poets, making
it the subject of their declarations and recital to the people; the Galleys
were sent to fetch it, but returned empty of any thing but shame and obloquy.
And as Tacitus observes, the expectation of Riches was among the causes of the
public Poverty. A clear Emblem of the late pretended Reformation.

Idem p. 94. Cardan relates of a Man in Milain, who VValls, yet when the Duke
hearing thereof sent him peremptory command, never to go out of the Gates
during Life: He that before had no inclination to do so, yet soon died of grief
to be denied the Liberty of doing it.

Idem p. 98. Mahomet by breaking a Pillar in the Hippodrome Constantinople,
filled the ^ity with Serpents which before were never seen there. The
Subverters of Government have so dealt with the Church.

Morris Com. Right p. 166. Upon a deliberation in the Conclave of sending
Nuntio into a certain Kingdom, One being commended for his Wisdom, it was
replied, That a Wiseman was not fit, because he could not imagine what such a
people designed.

Idem p. 206. Prayer which is the Salt of all duties, spreads Mercury is joined
to all Metals; being to them as Parmenio was to Alexander, without whom he
could do nothing, and like Themistocles in the Honor of the battle of Salamin,
in all accounts the second, who ever be the first.

Idem p. 232. Rome her former praise because of present corruption, or her
present corruptions, because of former praise-worthiness is equally irrational.
It Is no argument, because Jordan falls into the dead Sea, that therefore it
never had fresher Streams. Neither is Rome like the bird of Phineus, that
whatsoever she has touched must be afterward polluted.

Idem p. 269. Christians as to matters of Religion, must not be so qualified as
Guevar prescribes courti^rs, To receive injuries and give thanks. Nor
principled to that slavish subj^ction, as were the Persian Lords, who when they
received sentence of death from the Prince, returned him thanks that he was
pleased to remember them.

Idem p. 295 Galvano tells of a Tree in Mindanao, whereof that side that looks
toward the East is a sovereign Antidote, that which looks toward the West is
deadly Poison. So interessed men esteem things good or evil, as they stand in
aspect upon their own interest.

Idem p. 295. Nation, that having a pure River running through their Country,
yet abhor to drink of it, because it passes through their Enemies Land; and of
the Peguans, who because Dogs teeth are white, do therefore make theirs black.
Such folly do they show that reject the good, which appears in evil and
erroneous Persons.

Idem p. 427. In the Consulship of Julius Caesar and Bibulus, sway and honor
from the other, they dated writings, Julius and Caes^r being Consuls, no
mention being made or Bibulus.

Idem p. 452. Most men are like the Herb Baptist, which gently, yields sweet,
it hardly an unsavory smell; like the Colossus at Tarentum, which will move
with your finger, not wag with all your strength, and symbolize with the
Camels, which mends her pace with music, not by blows. Gentle instruction is
more effectual than rigid censure.

Morris com. Right. p. 456. The Snakes in Syria sting all Forraigners,
Inhabitants. The Hedghog has sharp prickles without, but is smooth and soft
within. So are men engaged in Parties favorable to their own, but earnest
against all others how good soever.

Vir bonus est Sejus sed Christianus.

Idem p. 450. As the River Hipanis is sweet in the Spring, but bitter falling
into Exampius: So what is odiously resented may be amicably meant.

Idem p. 463. Subjects works contrary effects. As Myrrh that stops a bleeding
Vein, makes a sound to bleed; and Trefolium laid to a wound made by a Viper
heals it, but put to whole flesh causes the same pain that the stinging by a
Viper does. One man's physic is another man's poison.

Idem p. 485. Hunters lay looking Glasles for the Panthers, that staying to
behold themselves, they may the better overtake and destroy them. Satan fills
men with the sight of their own supposed worth, that thereby as he did the
Pharisees, he may pervert them.

Idem p. 498. resentment of things, as they clash with their proper interests,
than formally as they check with Gods truth: So that Father gravely told the
Emperor, who reproved him for observing his Son with no more Reverence, That
he, viz. the Emperor had more respect to his Sons Honor, than to the Glory of
the Son of God, whom he suffered to be dishonored by Heretics Thus Demetrius
left the other Idols which to him were Gods, to shift for themselves; but Diana
which brought great gain merited the engagement of all their power in the
defense thereof; So the Pope in the Tax of the Apostolical Chamber rates the
absolution for falsifying his Apostolical letters at seventeen Groats, but
Incest with a man's own Mother, is taxed but at five Groats only.

Idem p. 527. Water confined in its proper Channel runs pure, and is fit to
cleanse other things, but if it overflow its banks, it contracteth filth and
bears down all before it; so Fire restrained within the Harth, is of necessary
use and comfort; but if it gets up into the top of the Chimney, it puts the
whole House in danger. Too much power is always a treacherous and ensnaring
thing, especialiy in some professions. Like Helena of old, and Brunhall of
latter times, it ruins all that court it, and is li^e Sejanus his Horse, which
whosoever mounted fell unfortunate.

Morris Com. R. p. 527. Small things especialiy tending to Evil must
regarded.: A small Needle may prick mischievously, and small things may be
great in Consequences: A great Oak is vertually in a small Acorn: A Huge Sum
may be confirmed by a small earnest. There was a Golden imperial Crown at
Constantinople called Ovata, made up and formed only out of the impost laid
upon Eggs that were sold. If the Serpent gets in his Head, he will easily get
in his whole body. Idem p. 510

Ministers should be like the Fish called Lucerna, whose tongue, Pliny says,
does shine as a Torch.

Id^m p. 536. Eye is a Corporeal Soul, and what the understanding is in the
Soul, that the Eye is in the Body, this apprehending sensible, that
intelligible things: the Mind being the Eye of the Soul, and the Eye being the
Mind of the Body. The Mind the Glass of Art, and the Eye of Nature. The Sun the
E^e of the great world, and the Eye the Sun of the lesser.

Morris Com. Right. p. 316. word and Sacrament are like two Needles touched
with the same Lodestone, which move alike and turn togecher to the same point.
Two Viols set to the same tune, touch one, the other is touched also; and
therefore the distinction of a converting and confirming Ordinance has no
weight or worth in it, but was stamped as Leather money instead of Silver in the
straits of Indigence, for want of better bullion, and is not sterling.

means may be sometimes profitable, and the enjoying hurtful: As the ground
about Armagh grows barren by being manured. The Nerve grows drier by Rain.
Cinnamon-Trees are killed with Water. Improsperous Trees rooted up and lying
above ground a little while take the earth more kindly, and imbibe the moisture
more plentifully. The Life is in the blood, yet it is often drawn to preserve
Life. The Life is maintained by food, and yet that is often withdrawn to
preserve Life. Impure Bodies the more fed the more harmed. The Ancients cured
most Diseases by fasting.

Morris Com. Right. p. 335. Though moral actions of natural men are Sins;
sometimes falling Stars make a greater blaze than the fixed; as Alchymy Lace
has a more glaring luster than Silver: yet notwithstanding men are bound to
perform them, and Ministers to press People to them There being sundry duties
as a kind of Isthmus between nature and grace, as the Twilight is an effluence
of the rising Sun.

Idem p. 347. Who set Duty and Privilege by the Ears, cause contest, which is
one Man's duty and another privil dg, as the two Germans contended, which was
the better Religion, Dr. Martins, or Dr. Luthers.

Idem p 367. Pittacus made a law, That he which offended drunk, should have a
double punishment, the one for his offense, the other for his drunkenness: so
he contracts a double guilt that neither comes to the Sacrament, nor is
qualified to come.

Idem p. 386. Fire mollifies and hardens Steel, according to the varieties and
intentions of heat. Rhubarbe if gently decocted purges, if overmuch it
binds: so in Purgative Discipline a little may do much and too much nothing.

Idem p. 409. Figtree becomes more fruitful by having a wild Figtree planted
near it. Good men by an Antiperistasis grow more in love with holiness, by
seeing the evil of wicked men that live near them.

Idem p. 415. Parables like Spectacles help some to see, and others see the
worse for them. They are like the infusions of Borage, whereof the first
extractions are cordial, but if too much be drawn, forth it is feculent, and
like the Pyrhite stone, which may be gently cut and formed, but pressed too
hard burns the fingers.

Morris C. Right, p. 443. Hypocrites take up Religion as a complement in
Conformity to others rather than Conscience, looking, quo itur non quo eundum;
like some Boats in the Danow, only row with the current; as the full-bellied
Otter swims only with the stream: like Mercury whose influences are borrowed
from those greater Planets he is in conjunction with, or as the inferior Orbs
are carried about by force of the Superior, and dance to the Tune, and keep
Time according to the Music which the Spears make.

Idem p. 4^7. Some to their own Fancies pretend Gods Honor. As in that Famous
Tower in the Isle of Pharos, the ambitious Architect ingraved thereon in Marble
this inscription, Sostratus of Gnidos built this which he covered over with
plaster, inscribing the same with the name of the Founder Ptolomy
Philadelphus; that the Plaster soon wasting, his name might be legible to
posterity.

Idem p. 531. Moderata durant. Severus told some, who condescension, that his
sovereignty though less absolute, yet would be more safe. And when a Beotian
Senator asked a Carthaginian Ambassador, how long the Peace should last? That,
says he, will depend upon the conditions you give us; if just and honorable
they will hold for ever, if otherwise no longer than till we have power to
break them.

Idem p. 532. Presbytery may be a Bar to Popery, yet corruption of Presbyters
may not be so. The Liquor which was sweet in the Wine is sharp in the Vinegar,
and that which is pure in the top may have dregs in the bottom. The verdant
juniper-Tree gives a cool shadow, but being inflamed yield the hottest Coal The
Basis may be the same in several medicines, but the addition of other
Ingredients may change the nature and operation.

Id m p 547. Independent may by accident introduce Popery. As Constantine by
removing the Legions and Colonies from the Northern Frontiers to the Eastern,
made way for the I^undation of barbarous Nations, and his translating his
imperial Seat from Rome to Constantinople, left Rome exposed to their Fury. So
digladiations about Discipline have laid open Doctrine to destructive wounds;
the discountenancing learned Champions has bin the leaving of it without a
guard.

Morris Com. Right p. 548. pride and lust makes him worse than other
Creatures. For Animals of the same kind live quietly together, and unite
themselves against their adversaries. The fierceness of Lions is not
quarrelsome amongst themselves. Serpents sting not ^erpents, neither are
Sea Monsters or Fishes cruel to any save those of different kinds.

Idem p. 550. Men had rather be still in the dark, than have light only to see
the Instruments of their misery. A Horse is surprised with Horror if he trace
the footsteps of a Wolf, and the Inhabitants of Bengala are so afraid of a
Tyqer that they cannot endure to hear him named. King Ethelred having when
young been beaten with a wax-taper would never after endure the sight of any.

Idem p. 554. Some men are like a Top that will go no whipped, or like the
Walnut-tree that bears best if it be basted. Others are like Memnons Statue,
that only sounded when the Sunbeams darted on it; or like the Swan, the Emblem
of the Hypocrite, having white Feathers and black Flesh, which never sings but
in a Favonius or favorable Zephyrus; others are like Swallows, which only come
amongst us in a warm Summer, or like the little ^ine, have one color in
Summer, another in Winter.

Idem p. 558. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century III.
UNity in all things a great preserver: thy Pumice stone swims when whole, but
sinks when broken into parts.

Idem p. 556. Sand contained in a Vessel has one general figure in the whole
Mass conformable to the Continent, yet every grain is incoherent with the
other; so is it with Sectaries: They are all Separalists, agree not amongst
themselves, though when they come against the public, like Themstocles and
Aristides going on an Embassy, they lay down their Enmities to be afterward
reassumed.

Idem p. 584. Arguments are as light as Mizaldus, of whom Aelian reports, they
were constrained to hang Lead at his heels, lest he should be blown away with
every puff of wind.

Idem p. 619. Doctrines may be right truth, though not rooted in the Scriptures
brought for them, as it might be right Ivy (as Nieremberge tells us) that grew
out of a Stags Horn, and a right blade of Corn, that sprang from a woman's Nose,
yet neither was natural to that place.

Morris C. R. p. 619. Thales gazing on the Stars fell into the water,
Sarcasme, That had he looked upon the water, he might have seen the Start, but
beholding the Stars he could not discern the water.

Idem. p. 646. It Is truly applicable to Independency in order government, what
that ingenious Painter did in reference to Englishmen. Who when he painted the
inhabitants of other Countries in their proper habits and peculiar fashions, he
limn'd an English man with a piece of Cloth under his arm and a pair of
sleeves in his hand, as constant to no garb, and ready for any.

Idem p. 648. That Censure of Chemistry is applicable to Independency:
Principium est jactare, medium decipere, Finis mendicatum ire.

Idem p. 694. Some professors of Christianity are like one Cedars, that bears
fruit, but no flowers. Others like another kind that bears flowers but no
fruit. Some like the plant sentida that seems withered, but if you touch it,
moves it self; and others like that plant at S^mbrero, which above ground is
Verdant, and the Root but a Serpent.

Idem p. 670. word to all other Ordinances is as the Sun to all other Stars,
which though they have proper special influences, yet all have their light from
it. Or as some Philosophers think of the Soul of the World, which quickens and
actuares all particular forms in their specifical operations.

Idem p. 680. Bias sailing in the same Ship with ungodly men, they calling to
the Gods when a Tempest rose; he persuaded them to hold their peace, lest the
gods should know they were there.

Camrrariud, Oprra subus. p. 40. Caesar wondered at Alexander, who only regarded
to get Kingdoms, but took no care to keep them since.

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri. Hence Scipio being Censor
would not have the usual prayer, Dii augete Remp. sed conservate, that the gods
would enlarge, but preserve the State. And when the Grand Signior enters the
Mosch, the chief Priest minds him, that what was gotten by Justice and warlike
virtue, must by the same art be preserved.

Camerarius p. 42. Diogenes being asked what Beasts biting was most venomous;
he answered of wild Beasts the slanderer, of tame beasts the flatterer.

Idem. p. 44. A Preacher that will please God must be thus Teach orderly, have
a ready wit, be eloquent, have a good voice, and a good memory, know when to
make an end, be sur^ of his doctrine, venture the loss of all, patiently suffer
himself of all to be abused.

Luther Men's. Col. p. 284.

A Preacher that will please the World must Be learned, have a fine
d^liverance, use neat and quaint words, be a proper person, which women and
maids may love, must not take but give money, and Preach such things as people
willingly hear.

Idem p. 284.

Luther advises Erasmus Albert, that when Elector of Brandenburgh, he should
not order his discourse according to the Elector, but according to the
unlearned. If I, says he, should regard Philip Melancthon, and other Learned
Doctors, I should do but little good. I speak to the simple plainly, but when
we Learned ones come together, we make it so finical, that God himself wonders
at us.

Luth. Men's. C. p. 285. When thirty Articles of Horrible Vilanies were
publicly read against Pope John the twenty third in the Council of Constance,
on which he was deposed; He said, Ah! I have offended far above all these, in
that I departed from Rome, and went over the Alps; meaning, that he had
submitted himself to their censure.

Idem p. 304. Valentinian Son to Pope Alexander the Sixth, being taken in Spain
by the King of Castile, and about to be Executed, desired first to make his
confession. A Friar being sent in, he killed the Friar, put on his habit, and
so escaped.

Idem p. 304. Adrian the Pope caused two Cities to be drawn in one Table, viz.
The place of his birth with this Motto, I have planted; and Lovain where he
commenced Master of Arts, with this Motto, I have watered under both Cities.
The Emperor was pourtraied with this Motto, I gave the blessing thereto; for he
made him Pope. Another Writ under, Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God did nothing.

Luthers Men's. Col. p. 305. Dutchmen travailing to Rome, each of them unknown
to each other, confessed themselves to the same Priest, who gave each of them a
Leg of that Ass that Christ rod to Jerusalem on, but with this injunction, to
keep it secret, till they came into their own Country. Now one of them coming
to the borders of Germany bragged of his relic to his four Comrades, who had
each a Leg. They said with great admiration, Lord, had that Ass five Legs!

Idem p. 315. Luther compares the exposition of the Scriptures Fathers and
Ancients, to the straining of Milk through a Coal-Sack, which must needs spoil
and make the milk black.

Idem p. 337. Frederick the Emperor inviting a Conjurer dinner, by art Magic
produced that the Conjurer got feet like an Ox, and on his hand claws. The
Conjurer begged leave of the Emperor to show his skill, which granted, he
caused a Tumult to be raised without the VVindow, out of which the Emperor
looking, he had on his Head a mighty pair of Horns, grafted so, that he could
not pull in his Head again. Then said the Emperor to the Conjurer, Release me,
thou have won.

Idem p. 391. The Emperor Charles the Fifth in the hearing Luther had these
words of Fabius and Ecchius. My Brother greatly esteems them, but does he
think that they should defend the Christian Faith? Yea surely, the one every
day is drunk, the other is a haunter of Whores, and is a mere Idiot. Idem p.
408.

Italy there was a particular Order of Friars, called Fratres Ignorantiae.
These were forced to take solemn Oaths, that they would neither know, learn, or
understand any thing at all, but should answer all Questions with Nescio. It
were well if many others were not worthy of that Title.

Idem p. 415. Friar in the Pulpit at Hildesheim gave St. Paul the Lie, and
said, that we ought not to believe him, because he said, Rejoice with them that
rejoice, etc. At that instant uttering those words he fell down stark-dead. And
a Popish Minister at Kunwald on Trinity Sunday was struck to death by Thunder,
who had made a Vow against the Gospel to oppose the same, and said if the
Gospel be Gods Word, so should the Thunder destroy him.

Luthers Col. Men's. p. 413. Persius is fabled to hold and throw Gorgons Head
before his Enemies, and thereby to get the Victory, so Christians may hold and
cast Christ before all Satan's instigations, and th^reby shall prevail.

Idem p. 439. Gentleman in Germany having buried a fair Wife, some few Nights
after she appeared to him, who asking her what she was, she answered I am your
Wise, he replied she was dead and buried; she said true, by reason of your
Swearing and other Sins, I died; but if you would take me again and abstain
from your Sins, and one common Oath you use, I will be your Wife again; he
said, I am content, whereupon she stayed with him and brought him Children. Now
it fell out that the Gent^emen having Strangers to Supper, his Wife being gone
up to fetch some Banquetting-stuff, and staying somewhat long, he swore his
accustomed Oath, whereupon she vanished that instant. They going to see after
her, found her Gown which she wore half within the Chest, and half without, and
she was never seen afterward.

Idem p. 386. In Saxony near unto Halberstadt, there was Kilcrop, (so the
Saxons call Changelings,) who sucked the Mother and five other Women dry, and
besides devoured very much. This Man was advised, that he should in his
Pilgrimage at Halberstadt make a promise of the Kilcrop to the Virgin Mary, and
should cause him there to be rocked. This advice the Man followed, and carried
the Child thither to be rockt. But going over the River being upon the Bridge,
another Devil that was below in the River, called, Kilcrop, Kilcrop; then the
Child in the Basket, which never before spoke one word, answered Ho, Ho. The
Devil in the Water asked farther, whither art thou going? The Child in the
Basket said, I am going toward Halberstadt to our Loving Mother to be rocked.
The Man being much affrighted thereat, threw the Child with the Basket into the
Water, whereupon the two Devils flew away together and cried, ha, ha, ha,
tumbling themselves one over another, and so vanished.

Luthers Col. p. 387. Luther compares Carlslad, and Erasmus to Hollow Nuts that
have no good, but being cracked with ones teeth, foul the mouth and fill it with
dust.

Idem p. 367. Pope Gregory, intending to fish in a deep Pond in Rome near to a
Nunnery, the Water being let out, found more than 6000 Skuls of Children.

Idem p. 454. Maximilian the Emperor discoursing of the State of the present
Government, said, Things are like to go well when the Spiritual Government is
in the hand of a drunken Fool, and a nasty Priest, meaning Pope Julius, and the
T^mp^ral with a Goat-climer meaning himself, who took great delight in hunting
VVild Goats.

Idem p. 457. ^iet of Auspurgh, certain Princes discoursed of the riches and
advantages, of their principalites. The Prince of Saxony said, he had store of
Silver Mines that brought him in great Revenues. The Prince Palatine of the
Rhine extolled his Vineyard and Wine. Eberhard Prince of Wittenburgh said,
Indeed I am but a poor Prince, and no way to be compared to you, yet in my
country I have a rich and precious Jewel; namely, that if I should ride astray,
and be left alone, yet I could securely sleep in the bosom of every one of my
Subjects, who are all ready to venture all for my service. Which when the other
two Princes heard, they answered, that in truth it was the most precious Jewel
and wealth.

Luthers Coll. Men's. p. 459. Ernestus Prince of Lunenburg complaining to Luther
of the immeasurable drinking that was at Courts, Luther replying, that Princes
ought to look thereto. Ah Sir, said he, we that are Princes do so our selves,
otherwise it would long since have gone down.

-- Manent exempla regentum In Vulgus -- When the Abbot throws the Dice, the
whole Convent will play.

Idem p. 459. Alphonsus King of Aragon besieging Cajeta, City, answered, God
preserve me from so doing: I would not practice such Tyranny for the whole
Kingdom of Naples, were it worth ten times more than it is. And Frederick
Prince of Saxony being persuaded to besiege Erfort, and told that the taking of
it would not cost the life of five men; he answered, that the life of one man
to be there lost was too much.

Luther Coll. Men's. p. 462. Maximilian the Emperor said of himself that he was
King of Kings, because his Subjects would obey him no farther than they
pleased. That the French King was King of Asses, the King of England King of
men.

Idem p. 463. Antwerp caused to be wrought in a fair and rich piece of Arras
the battle fought before Pavia, in which the French King was taken Prisoner,
and offered it as a present to the Emperor, Charles the fifth, he refused to
accept of it, saying unto them that he rejoiced not at the miseries of other
Princes and people.

Idem p. 465. John Prince of Saxony had six Pages attending on him in his
Chamber, that every day read to him six hours out of the Bible.

Idem p. 467. Charles the Fifth Emperor read the Protestant confession at
Auspurgh, he openly spoke these words, I would wish that this Doctrine were
taught throughout the world. Prince George likewise expressed his liking of it,
had it come from the Pope, but he would not receive it of a runaway Friar.

Idem p. 468. Luther not long before his death sent a fair Glass to Doctor
Justus Jonas, and therewith these following Verses, Dat vitrum vitro Jonae
vitrum ipse Lutherus,
Se similem ut fragili noscat uterque vitro.
Idem p. 471.

Tamerlain when he laid Siege to a City or Fort, first erected a white Flag,
thereby offering Peace, the second time a red to signify blood, Thirdly, he
showed them a black Ensign, denoting devastation and destruction.

Idem p. 488. When Darius King of Persia propounded Alexander, he refused to
accept thereof; Then Parmenio his chief Counselor said, If I were Alexander,
I would accept of it. Alexander replied, so would I if I were Parmenio;
intimating that what becomes one does not another.

Idem p. 488. Luther relates this Law-case: A Miller had Ass, which ran out of
his Yard, and came to a River side, where he went into a Fisherman Boat that
was in the River, and would drink thereout, but the Boat being not tied, swam
away with the Ass, insomuch that the Miller lost his Ass, and the Fisher his
Boat. The Miller thereupon complained of the Fisher, in that he neglected to
tie his Boat fast, the Fisher accuses the Miller for not keeping his Ass at
home, and desired satisfaction for his Boat. Now the question is, what the Law
is? Who was in fault? Took the Ass the Boat away, or the Boat the Ass?

Luther Coll. Men's. p. 496. Demosthenes persuading the Grecians against Philip
of Macedon did them harm by this false argument, Who has an evil cause has no
good Fortune; since the greater Knave the greater Luck.

Idem p. 449. Hebrew tongue is necessary for a Divine, for though the New
^estament be written in Greek, yet it is full of the Hebrew kind of speaking.
Hence it is truly said, the Hebrews drink out of the Fountains, the Grecians
out of the Streams, the Latins out of Pits.

Idem p. 502. Luther passing a Censure on himself, Erasmus, Carlstad and
Melancthon, thus expresses himself, Res and verba Philippus, Verba sine re
Erasmus, Res sine verbis Lutherus, Nec res nec verba Carolastadius.

Idem p. 510. Jew resolved to be baptized, but would first go to Rome: Luther
dissuaded him from going, fearing lest he should be scandalized by the
wickedness he would see there. But the Jew went and when he had sufficiently
seen abominable practices, he returned, and desired to be Baptized; For says
he, I will willingly serve the God of the Christians, whom he said was a
patient God that could endure and forbear, notwithstanding such wickedness and
villainy as Rome was full of.

Idem p. 518. Candia was very much infested with Robbers. Venetian State set
forth a Proclamation, that they would receive to favor all such, that should
come in, and bring wi h them the Head of ano her, by which means one Wretch
killed another, and he Island was rid of those Vipers.

Idem p. 524. All things are not every where to be spoken. Luther relates this
Fable. The Lion called into his stinking Den many Beasts, and asked them how
they liked his Royal Palace. The Wolf answered, it stinketh; the Lion killed
him. The Ass answered it smelt very well; tha ^ion killed him. But the Fox
being ask^, answered, I have got such a Cold, I smell nothing.

Luthers Men's. Col. p. 532. John Huss in the year 1415. as he was to Constance;
said, This day you roast a Goose, but a hundred years hence you shall hear a
Swan, Him you shall not be able to roast nor overcome. Huss signifies a Goose,
and Luther a Swan. Now ^uther began to oppose the Pope 1515. and died peaceably
in his Bed, 1546.

Idem p. 534. Fleta reports, it was ^he Honor of the Judges of England about
Edward the first's time, Nec prece, nec precio, nec premio. Such as Joshua was,
to be wise and valiant, and to resolve as Luther did to despise while doing
their duty all opposition; who when news was brought to him, that both Pope and
Emperor threatened his Ruin, answered; Contemptus est a me Rom^nus favor and
fervor.

Boltons 4 last things Eple. Just is blessed, the Name of the Wicked shall
rot, of whom it may be said, what of Pope Boniface the eighth, He entered as a
Fox, he reigned as a Lion, and went out as a Dog.

Mr. Boltons life. Bolton before his Conversion hearing Mr. Perkins, whose
plain and sound Doctrine meeting in him with a curious Palate, and unsanctified
Heart, quite turned his Stomach against tha^ good Man, and pronounced him a
barren empty Fellow, and a passing mean Scholar. Though Keckerman and Bishop
Abbot pronounce him, Doctissimum Theologum, A most Learned Divine. Ibid.

Mr. Bolton was an eloquent Preacher, his Christ to boot. As Austin did hearing
Ambrose for his Eloquence.

Ibid. Dr. Rainold of CCC. when his Physicians Skeleton, persuading him to
destroy the substance for the accidents, his Life for his Learning. He with a
smile ansvvered them out of the Poet Juvenal.

Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere caussam.
Nor yet for love of life lose that dare!
Which is the cause I live, my Industry.
Mr. Boltons life. Constantine the Great did so honor the Paphnutias, though,
disfigured by the loss of his Eye, that he often with delight did kiss the
hollow of that Eye, which was lost for the cause of Christ.

Ibid. Mr. Bolton dying, told his Children that comforts that are in Christ,
answered, I am by the wonderful mercy of God as full of comfort, as my Heart
can hold, and feel nothing in my Soul but Christi, with whom I heartily desire
to be; and looking upon some that were weeping, said, Oh what a deal of do
there is ere one can dye.

Ibid. Polycrates had sent Anacnon five Talents, the care and fear of losing of
them kept him two Nights from sleeping: He returns them the third day, saying,
they were not of that vvorth as to be so disturbed and disquieted about them.

Mr. Boltons 4 last things. p. 39. Nicostratud a skilful Artist, because he
stood gazing on a curious piece of Work, and asking him what pleasure he could
take in standing as he did, gazing on that Picture. Nicostratus answered, Had
thou mine Eyes, thou would not vvonder, but rather be ravished as I am at
the inimitable art of this rare and admired piece.

Idem p. 98. Bolton relates that he knevv a Man that all his life time was
given to swearing, who on his Deathbed swore as fast and as furiously as he
could, yet desired the standers by to help him to Oaths and to svvear for him.

Idem p. 227. at Millain, who having got his Adversary at an advantage, held
his Dagger at his breast swearing he would kill him, except he would deny and
blaspheme God. Which he doing, he immediately killed him, adding this horrid
Speech, That this was a right and heroic revenge, that did kill the Body, and
damn the Soul.

Idem p. 238. In the year 1572 One Barns and Mathers Herle in a bloody
practice, to deliver the Duke of Norfolk, then Prisoner, and to kill certain of
Qu. Elizabeth's privy Counselors. But Herle being chief in Villainy opened the
project. When Barns was brought to Examination, and found Herle to be his
accuser; he smiling upon him laid, Herle, thou have prevented me; If thou had
stayed but one hour longer, I should then have stood in thy place the Accuser,
and thou in my place to be hanged.

Bp. Carlton. Thanks. Rev. p. 30. Stukely an English Rebel, was furnished by
Pope with 800 Italian Soldiers for the invasion of Ireland, but was diverted
by Sebastian King of Portugal, who prevailed with him to go with him to the
Wars of Mauritania, where in the Battle, where three Kings, Sebastian, Mahomet
and Abdulmeleck were slain, he was likewise killed, receiving too honorable an
end, for so dishonorable a life. Idem p. 36.

evidently and miraculously manifested himself for the protection of Qu.
Elizabeth of blessed memory, insomuch that her greatest Enemies were enforced
to acknowledge it. As one Creighton a Scots Jesuit, sailing into Scotland, to
carry on a design against her, and being taken by Dutch pirates, having Papers
about him, which contained practices of the Pope, Spaniard, and the Guises; he
tore those Papers and threw them into the Sea, but they were by the force of
wind blown back into the Ship, and brought to Sir William Wade, who with
singular skill joined them together, and found out their contents. Insomuch
that Creighton himself acknowledged it a Miracle. And when the Spanish Armado
was defeated, Don Pedro Waldus confessed, that now he perceived that Christ
was turned Lutheran.

Idem p. 76. -- and 4^. Gentleman in Surrey, that had Land worth two hundred
pounds per annum, which he kept in his own Hands, but running out every year,
he was necessitated to sell half of it to pay his Debts, and let the rest to a
Farmer for one and twenty years. Before that term was expired, the Farmer one
day bringing his Rent, asked him if he would sell his Land? Why says he, would
you buy it? If it please you says the Farmer. How, says he, that is strange!
Tell me how this comes to pass, That I could not live upon twice as much being
my own, and you upon one half thereof, though you have paid, Rent for it are
able to buy it. Oh Sir said the Farmer, but two words made the difference. You
said Go, and I say Come. What Is the meaning of that, said the Gentleman?
Replies the Farmer, you lay in Bed, or took your pleasure and sent others about
your business; and I rose betimes and saw my business done my self.

Trenchfield Counsil to his Son. p. 133. When Archimedes the Mathematician had
skill made Hiero King of Scicily draw a huge Ship along with his little Finger,
which an infinite number of his Subjects with their joint strength were not
able to stir, from that day forward the King resolved that Archimedes was to be
believed in whatever he said: So simple Persons will ever believe that wizzard
that has once hit right.

Aulus Posthumous Albinus being Consul, Roman stories in Greek, desired his
Readers to bear with his imperfections, because says he, I am a Roman, and
therefore the exact knowledge of the Greek Tongue is not to be expected. Cato
told him this was but trifling to entreat pardon, when he might have bin
without fault. For who compelled him to do that, for which he thought fit to
crave pardon.

Exam, of Sr. Chr. Heydon. p. 115. When Phocas was Emperor, a Holy Man at
Constantinople was in his prayers earnest with God to know why he was advanced:
He received after many days importunity, this Divine voice by way of answer,
Because I have not found any worse.

Bp. usher de statu Christian, Eccl. p. 27. practice and experience be an
excellent way of improvement, yet not the only necessary. Lucullus is said to
come into Asia an excellent General, that went from Rome an unexperienced
Soldier. The same is storied of the Lord Deputy Mount joy. And a person of
late without any experience of Navigation by reading and study at the first
Essay happily and discreetly guided a Ship to the East Indies.

Education of Gentlemen. p. 7. Spirits not instructed to useful employments
fall to trifles, as Turning, Watch making, and the like. There was one
presented to Alexander, who by many years practice had obtained the dexterity
of throwing a small Seed through a needles Eye. The King for a just reward,
gave him a Sack, full of those seeds. But Matthew Huniades the warlike King of
Hungary, was more severe with him, that brought him a Wooden Coat of Male,
wherein was not one Ring vvanting, a work of fifteen years, for he commanded
him to Prison for fifteen years more, to expiate for so much time and parts
spent in so fruitless an Employment.

Education p. 13. Cyrus and Darius great captains and wise families and
Monarchy, because they educated their Children after the fashion of the Medes,
that is, amongst their wives and Women, who never suffering them to want any
thing, nor to be contradicted, their delicacy made them slothful and languid,
the slavery and flattery of them about them rendered them haughty and
imperious, so that they could neither labor with cheerfulness, nor command
without arrogance; that made them contemptible as effiminate, this odious as
insolent.

Idem p. 16. Iginhartus relates of Charles the Great, that education of his
children and grandchildren. His Sons first to the Study of the liberal Arts,
and when grown to some strength, to riding, hunting and the Wars. His Daughters
to spinning and all other huswifery. And Suetonius tells us, that Augustus wore
the cloth spun and made by his wife, Daughters and Grandchildren.

Idem p. 17. Monsieur de Rhodes thus describes the education Henry the Great of
France; his Grandfather would not permit him to be brought up with that
delicateness ordinarily used to persons of his quality, well knowing that
seldom lodges other than a mean and feeble spirit in an effeminate and tender
body. Neither would he allow him rich habiliments, nor to be flattered or
treated like a Prince, because all those things are causers only of vanity, and
rather raise pride in hearts of children, than any sentiments of generosity:
But he commanded he should be habited and educated like other children of that
country, that he should be accustomed to run, to leap, to climb the rocks and
mountains, that by such means he might be inured to labor. His ordinary food
was course Bread, Beef, Cheese and Garlic, and he often went barefoot and
bare-headed.

Discourse of Education, p. 18. Cato though he kept a Master expressly for his
Son in his house, yet did himself also frequently teach him; so did Augustus
his Grandchildren Caius and Lucius. The Great Theodosius used frequently to
sit by Arsenius, whilst he taught his Sons Arcadius; and Honorius; to whom also
he commanded such respect to be given by them, that surprising them once
sitting and Arsenius standing, he took from them their Robes, and not till
after a long time and much entreaty restored them.

Idem p. 23. Alexander the Great built up Stagyra for Aristotle's sake, and
spared Lampsacus for Anaximenes. Augustus bestowed great honors upon the
person and country of Apollodorus, and forgave Alexandria to gratify Areus his
master in Philosophy.

Idem p. 28. Memorable is the Piety of Marcus Aurelius Instructors; he made
Proculus Proconsul, and took Junius Rusticus with him in all his expeditions,
advised with him of all his public and private business, saluted him before
the Praefecti Praetorio, designed him to be second time Consul, and after his
death obtained of the Senate publicly to erect his Statue. Carolus Magnus
honored Alcuinus; Otho the Third, Gerbertus, for whose sake he gave to the
Church eight Countyes to be disposed of by his appointment; Rufus made
Lanfrancke Archbishop of Canterbury, and Laur. Medices greatly enriched Joh.
Argyropilus and Marsilius Ficinus his educators.

Discourse of Education p. 29. Augustus Caesar kept Posidonius his Instructor
Caesar desired before his departure to receive some good rules from him, for
the better governing himself: The Philosopher answered, That when he perceived
himself angry he should before he undertook any business repeat over the
Alphabet; Augustus considering his prescription, replied, That he perceived he
had still need of him, and so refused to dismiss him, but gave him an apartment
in the Palace, better and nearer to himself, increased his Revenues, and kept
him with him as long as he lived.

Idem p. 31. Education though most times it is, yet is not always successful
for good. Nero was not rectified by Seneca and Barrhas two excellent
instructors. Cicero's Son to the stupidity of his Nature added drunkenness, and
returned from Athens and Cratippus as he went. M. Aurelius provided fourteen of
the most approved Masters to educate Commodus, yet could not rectify his
froward and barbarous humor, sucked from and encouraged by his Mother, who at
the time of his conception was in love with a Gladiator.

Discourse of Education p. 17. Dionysius in his youth having indulged himself
the liberty of debauchery, and finding too late the inconvenience, and
endeavoring to oblige himself to the strict rules of temperance, was answered
though perhaps untruly, that he could not safely do it, for if he relinquished
his drinking, he would fall into a consumption; so in his own defense he was
forced to continue in his sottishness.

Idem p. 58. Prince of late times, being by a servant of his tempted to
uncleaneess, showing him all things prepared for the purpose. The Prince opened
the door and commanded the officious Ruffian to give him place and secrecy,
which he had no sooner done but the Prince shut the door against him, and
forbad him ever to come again into his presence.

Idem p. 59. Cardinal Borromeus in his Book against Balls Dances relates; That
when he a young man at the University, and his companions with great
importunity prevailed with one of their Professors, a grave and wise person to
go along with them to a Ball; he having observed the actions and circumstances
thereof, told them with great astonishment, that it was an invention of the
Devil to destroy Souls, by corrupting the very Being and Essence of Christian
virtues. When a Servant lights a Torch, we give him strict charge not to it
carry amongst Flax or Straw or the like. Why then do not Parents forbid their
children to frequent those places, where is more danger of kindling another
manner, of flame? To have their Imaginations swelled with the presence of
Ladies in their trim, and under a full Sail, when the blood is chafed, and the
mind set upon pleasure, is not drinking cold water but poison to one
overheated.

Idem p. 70. A Child that delights in tormenting and of Caligula, that let her
Nails grow to scratch her companions and play-fellows) is of an evil,
perfidious and untoward nature.

Idem p. 91. Indian Brachmans of old, if they disliked the Indoles of their
children, would abandon them in the woods to the wild Beasts; and the
inhabitants of Magadascur, expose all their children that are born upon a
Friday.

Idem p. 94. Persons though sometimes they verify that Proverb soon ripe, soon
rotten, as Hermogenes the Orator was heard at twelve years old with admiration,
at 24 with laughter; yet not always. For many we read, that began exceeding
timely to appear accomplished, did continue so: As Bellarmin, Perron, Tasso,
John Picus Mirandula, Scaliger, Grotius, Lipsius, Tostatus, and many other for
Scholars: Augustus Caesar at Nineteen, and the Great Cosmo Medicus at Seventeen
years of age took upon them the management of their affairs, and carried them
on with honor and success.

Discourse of Education p. 101. Manutius in his preface to his Paradoxes, tells
us of one Creighton a Scotchman, who at twenty one years of age (when he was
killed by the order of the Duke of Mantua) understood twelve Languages, had
read over all the Poets and Fathers, disputed de omni scibili, and answered
extempore in Verse. Ingenium prodigiosum, sed judicium defuit.

Ibid. p. 102. Men in age make greater progress in learning children. Julius
Scaliger began not to learn Greek, till forty years old, and then mastered it
in a very few Months, as he did French: And Gascon in three. Peter Damianus
learned not to read till Man's estate, yet proved an eminent Scholar; and Baldus
entered so late upon the Law, that they told him he meant to be an Advocate in
the other world.

Idem p. 108. Lewis the Eleventh desired his Son might understand Latin than
Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare; it seems he had but one trick in
King-craft, and that a very mean one. More Latin might have taught him and
others, and not to have needed that so base and so unworthy of a Prince, as it
did those great Monarchs, who were practiced in it, Julius, Augustus and the
rest of that Family; whereof Nero to his dishonor wars the first that stood in
need of borrowed eloquence, Seneca making his speeches for him. Hannibal,
Caesar's great Captains, great Scholars; Alexander slept with Homer under his
Pillow.

Idem p. 111. Passions moved make men eloquent. Seneca Orator declare most
eloquently the day his Son dyed: Polus the Actor, that he might the more vively
represent the grief of a Father upon the Body of his deceased Son, brought in
an Vrn the Ashes of his own Son new dead.

-- Facit indignitio versum. Archilochus and Hipponan two very bad Poets, for
spite to be revenged on two persons that injured them, invented those Dogrel
sorts of verses, Iambicks and Scattazons, whose force they so well applied,
that their adversaries made away themselves so Love transports, as a Smith of
Antwerp refused by his Sweetheart turned and proved a most excellent Painter.

Idem p. 125. memory seldom accompanies a great wit, and good judgment, yet
sometimes it does, as in Monsieur Pascall, who when a Youth at School could
repeat all Ovids Metamorphosis and Justin's History by heart. Mr. Oughtred in
his old age had Ovid and Virgil fresh in memory.

learning though a great embellishment and of excellent use, yet must give way
to the study of Divinity and practice of piety. Albertus Magnus five years
before his Death desired of God, that he might forget all that he had learned
in those Studies, that he might entirely give himself up to Devotion. Monsieur
Pascal a man most eminent in all sorts of humane knowledge, yet ten years
before his Death, he distasted them and professed that nothing besides Religion
was an object worthy an ingenuous man's study, because those studies produced no
consolation in time of affliction: and therefore though there were some
advantage in them as to converse with men; yet we might not prize them above
their due value: And that if it were better to know and undervalue, than be
ignorant of them, yet it were better be ignorant than know and overvalue them.
Petrarch in his old age left Helicon for mount Olivet, and the Cardinal Perron
though formerly a great Poet and Orator, yet kept not so much as any Book of
humanity in his Library.

Discourse of Education p. 114. Foreign Education usually perverts Youth,
Eteocles would not give Hostages to Antipater of the youth, but of grave men.
And the Persians when wanting a King they sent for some of the Royal family,
then Hostages at Rome, were afterward displeased, and cut them off, as not
agreeing with the manners and custom of the Country.

Disc. Educ. p. 194. The neglect of their Pens have ruined many, Civility, the
Author of Galaleo: For going to present to the Pope a petition, by a mistake he
delivered a Copy of Licentious verses writ by himself, whereby he lost the
Popes favor, his own Reputation and all hopes of farther advancement.

Idem p. 228. Augustus advised Tiberius not to be offended with peoples
speaking ill of them; It suffices says he, that we can secure our selves from
their doing us harm. When one said he was a Tyrant, he answered, Were I so, he
durst not have said it: To one calling him dwarf, Well said he then I will get
higher Shoes.

Idem p. 247. Prelate, that a Courtier at Rome ought to have a Thousand Ducats
Rent, Two thousand in his purse, and be a thousand Miles from his Kindred.

p. 268. That Courtier is happy that has opportunity given him of showing his
prudence and valor. Sejanus by one action of saving Tiberius Life with the
hazard of his own obtained that Reputation, that he governed the whole Empire,
and had almost settled it upon himself, through the great confidence Tiberius,
though otherwise a very jealous Prince, had in him.

Discourse of Education p. 277. Calvin's name was so odious to the Papists, that
they would not name him. Hence in their Spanish expurgatory Index, p. 204. they
give this direction; Let the name of Calvin be suppressed, and instead of it,
put studiosus quidam; and one of their Proselytes went from Mentz to Rome to
change his native Name of Calvinus into the adopted of Baronius

Bp. Morton Cath. Appel. Ep. d^dic. It was Stapletons advice to the Duke of
Parma, when Governor of the Low Countries, in reference to the divisions in
point of Religion then on foot, to cut all knots of Argument with Alexanders
Sword, and to beat them down with Hercules Club, rather than to labor to
appease and moderate them by the Harp of Apollo. To repress them by violence,
rather than moderate them by Judgment.

Mortons Appeal. pref. Some Parents and Nurses with their milk Life, do
ordinarily transfuse some insensible seed of their own hereditary infirmities,
which in time grow upon their Children, and become both sensible and dangerous
unless they are purged out; so it must be acknowledged of St. Gregory, and
Austin whom he sent into England, and that together with the substantial
Doctrine of the Christian Faith, his Scholars and Converts might receive some
few of his infirmities and superstitions, which like hereditary diseases
increasing with time and growing stronger, ought not therefore to be still
cherished, because hereditary. Id. p. 5.

The Devil appeared unto one Secundello a Deacon in the likeness of our
Savior, and said unto him, I am Christ, Go forth, and do Cures, and heal
Diseases: he being seduced with this delusion did so, and putting his hand upon
the infirm in the name of Christ, they were immediately healed: and he returned
stuffed with pride and vain glory.

Mortons appeal p. 18. Caesar, that he therefore disclaimed the Title of a
King, that thereby he might more plausibly and popularly execute all
monarchical and Kingly power and Authority. The Pope styles himsejf Servo
Servorum, The Servant of Servants that thereby he may Lord it over Gods
Heritage. And notwithstanding this Title of Humility, yet the Book of the
P^ntifical Ceremonies, does require that all Mortal Men of whatsoever State or
Degree, when they come first. into the Popes presence, must kneel thrice and
also kiss his feet.

Idem p. 35. -- 159. Platina relates, that P^pe Sabinian commandded first the
lighting of Lamps in the day time in Churches, for this reason, ut Horae
distinguerentur officii gratia, that the Hours for Divine Offices might be
distinguished and duly observed. And so we read in our English Histories that
King Aelfrid (who divided the natural day into three eight hours, viz. One for
his bodily refreshment, one for his studies, and the third for the affairs of
his kingdom,) measured hi time by the burning of Wax-tapers; Clocks, and
Watches, and Hour-glasses, being not then invented.

Idem p. 57. Binius relates that some Donatifsts, who in contempt threw the
Sacramental bread unto Dogs, were by those Dogs fallen mad set upon and eat up
themselves. And in St. John's College in Cambridg, Dr. Whitaker being the
Master, one Booth a Bachelor of Arts, and an excellent Scholar, who in contempt
had taken the Sacramental bread, and thrown it over a Wall, not long after,
threw himself Headlong from the battlements of the Chapel, and died within
four and twenty hours after.

Idem p. 132. Pope Alexander in the behalf of Ferdinand Portugal, thus decrees
concerning India. Upon our mere Motion and Liberality, (says, he) and from the
fullness of our Apostolical Authority, we give unto you, all the Islands and
Lands, as well those which are found out, as those which shall hereafter be
discovered in India, from the North-Azores unto the West, to you and your
Heirs for ever. And this upon no better Truth or Title than the Devil promised
the Kingdoms of the World to our Savior.

Bp. Mortons appeal. p. 155. The Popish VVriters, though confessing some Popes,
as John the twelfth to be sceleratissimos and Monstra, most Wicked Monsters;
yet style them of good and godly Memory. Because say they, we herein respect
not what they did, but what became them to have done. By which reason, like
honor of blessed Memory, belongs to Jeroboam among the Kings, Balaam among
the Prophets, and Judas among the Apostles.

Idem p. 159. Books of accounts belonging to Christ-Church in Canterbury, do
testify that there being three several Offerings in that Church, One to
Christ, another to the Virgin Mary, a third to Thomas Becket: The Oblation to
Thomas Becket, communibus annis, did amount to eight hundred, or a thousand
pounds; To our Lady two hundred pounds; To our Savior sometimes five Marks,
sometimes twelve Marks, and sometimes Hoc anno nihil, This year Nothing.

Bp. Mortons appeal. p 242. ministering the Eucharist to Infants was defended by
St. Austin, and Innocent the first, and was practiced by the Church almost six
hundred years together, yet at length was left off, and rejected as a fond and
unwarrantable custom.

Idem p. 244. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century IV.
ZEno being asked how a man might be wise, dead, viz. by reading, understand
and know the acts of the Ancients.

Don Pedro Men. Imp. Hist. preface. The Trophies of Miltiades stirred up
Themistocles. Homer wrote of Achilles provoked Alexander, and Alexanders
History did Julius Caesar to great exploits.

Ibid. Philosophy Rhetoric, Mathematics and Astrology Rome, and a long time
it was e're Physic was admitted.

Ibid. Sylla having overthrown Marius, made himself Dictatour, and seized on
Rome; nevertheless before his death, he deposed himself from his Dictatorship
and left it at liberty. Pompey followed Sylla's faction and Caesar Marius.

p. 4. The greatest civil war that ever was in Pompey and Caesar, in which
were engaged all the Roman Senators and Soldiers, and lasted five years. It
was waged in Italy, France, Spain, Epirus, Thessaly, Egypt, Asia and Africa.
The whole Roman Empire not sufficing the ambition of the two Commanders, Pompey
not enduring an Equal, nor Caesar a Superior.

Imperial History p. 6. judge that lawful in themselves, which they condemn in
others. Pompey would not allow Caesar to stand for the Consulship, being
absent, though he himself had it before he was of lawful age.

Idem p. 7. Caesar coming to the River Rubicon, which the Senate commanded him
not to pass with his Army, is reported to use these words, If I forbear, it
will be the beginning of my disgrace; and if I pass, it will be to all Men
Mortal: Yet preferring his own honor before public good, using these Words,
Jacta est Alea, the Lot is Cast, past the River and began the Civil War.

p. 8. Pompey having raised a new raw unexperienced Army, his Old Legions being
in Spain, under Patricius and Afranius two inexpert Captains, Caesar being in
suspense which to attaque first, at last resolved to go into Spain, saying, Let
us go first against the Army that is without a Captain, and then against the
Captain that is without an Army.

Caesar disguised, with three Servants entered a Brigandine intending to cross
the Sea, but coming down he River to enter the Sea, it was so troublous and
tempestuous, that the Master not daring to pass farther would have returned.
Then Caesar discovered his face and said, Fear not, ^hou carriest Caesar and
all his Fortunes.

p. 12. Pompey worsted Caesar at Dirrachium, but Victory: On which ^aesar said
to his Friends, Of a truth this Day had ended our Wars, if our Enemies had had
a Captain, that had known how to use his Victory.

p. 13. Caesar commanded his Horsemen fighting with Pompey's Cavalry, who were
nice and effeminate Gentlemen, to strike them no where but in the face, which
they not able or willing to endure, presently retired and lost the Day to
Caesar. Pompey, flying toward Egypt, had his Head smitten off in a Boat, by
the command of the King of Egypt, which Caesar wept at, when it was showed unto
him, and put to Death those that did it.

Imperial History p. 15. Afranius one of Pompeys Captains, and Juba
Mauritania, rather than fall into Caesar's Hands, determined to dye, fighting
the one against the other, Juba slew Afranius, and afterward commanded his own
Slave to kill himself, and so died desperately. p. 18.

Caesar returning to Rome had four triumphs granted him, one for France, the
second for Egypt, the third for Pontus and King Phraaces, which he conquered so
quickly that he wrote of it, veni, vidi, vici, I came, I savv, I conquered. The
fourth for Juba. As for his Conquest of Pompey, he refused because it was over
a Romm Citizen.

Ibid. p. 18. Caesar being in great danger in his last War in Spain against the
younger Pompey, was ready to have killed himself, but recovering the day, he
said of it, That in other Battles he fought for his Honor, but in this for his
Life.

Idem p. 19. Caesar was counseled to have a Guard always about him; He
answered he would have none, for he would rather dye once, than live in
perpetual care and fear.

p. 21. Caesar in the fifty sixth year of his age was slain in the Senate,
seventy of the chief Senators conspiring his Death; he having the Night before,
when a question was asked, what Death was best, answered, The sudden and not
propensed. His Wife dreamt that Night that he lay dead in her Lap, and Spurina
warned him to have heed to the Ides of March, and a Note was given to him going
to the Senate, discovering the conspiracy, which he began to read, but was
interrupted and died with it in his hands.

p. 23. When Marcus Antonius made the Funeral Oration for Caesar, who was slain
forty and two yearrs before the Birth of our Savior, he showed his bloody Robe
to the People, which so enraged them, that they ran with burning-brands from
the fire of Caesar's burning, and set on fire the Houses of Brutus and Caffius,
two principal Conspirators, and slew in their rage one Elius Cinna, mistaking
him for Cornelius Cinna one of Caesar's Murderers, though he was his Friend. And
observable it is, that all Caesar's Murderers within three years died, and not
one of them of a natural death.

Imperial History p. 26. Augustus Caesar shut Janus Temple three Universal
peace, which had bin but twice shut before from the foundation of Rome; and in
the forty and second year of his Reign, the last time that he shut Janus
Temple, Christ was born.

Idem p. 49. Tiberius though most unchaste himself yet was punisher of
unchastity in others. In the eighteenth year of whose Reign Christ was
Crucified; whom Tiberius would have had the Senate admit into the number of the
Gods, but they refused.

p 59. Tiberius, desired that he might be put to present Death; he answered,
No, I am not yet so much your Friend.

p. 60. Caligula was the best Servant, and the worst Lord in the World; He made
a Bridge three Miles over an Arm of the Sea, covered it with Earth and built
Houses on it, and burnt such an infinite number of Torches in the Night he lay
there, that the darkness of the Night was expelled; whereupon be bragged, that
he had made of the Sea, Land, and of the Night, Day. He commanded himself to be
worshipped as a God, yet was so afraid of Thunder, that he would creep under a
Bed to hide himself: He wished all the Roman People had but one Neck, that he
might destroy them all at one blow. He gathered a great Army and marshalled
them on the Sea coast, and commanded them to gather Cockle-shells, for which he
demanded Triumph, and was killed by Conspiracy in the year of our Lord God
sixty three.

Imperial History p. 70. Nero, though most cruel by Nature, yet feigned
Clemency, insomuch that a warrant being brought him to sign, for the putting
one to Death; He said, he would that he could not write.

p. 85. When Agrippina was told that her Son Emperor, but that he should kill
his Mother. She replied, Let him have the Empire, and then kill her and spare
not; which he accordingly did, and viewed his Mothers Womb in which he lay.

Idem p. 89. In the days of Nero, the City of Laodicea wast, and destroyed with
an Earthquake.

p. 90. In the days of Nero, it was more dangerous rich, than to commit
offenses: Few were punished because of their misdeeds, but many lost their
lives because of their wealth.

Idem p. 91. When Nero espoused Sporus, whom he castrated, Wife. One hearing of
it, said, It had been well for the World, that Nero's Father Domitius had
never bad but such a Wife.

Idem p 94. Nero set Rome on fire, and in six Days Nights would not suffer it
to be quenched; so that of fourteen Parts, ten were burned; and the while got
up into a high Tower, where delighted with the sight, He sung verses out of
Homer concerning the burning of Troy. He raised the first persecution against
Christians, whom he covered with Wild Beasts Skins, and then set Dogs at them.

p. 94. Otho when his Army was discomfited, to avoid effusion of more Roman
blood, slew himself, and when he was burned, diverse slew themselves for love of
him.

Imperial History p. 112. Vitellius coming into the Fields, where the dead
Bodies that were slain, taking part with Otho, lay unburied, his Soldiers and
Captains holding their Noses: He reproved them, saying, that there was not a
sweeter smell in the World, Than the smell of an Enemy being Dead, especially a
Citizen. He banished Astrologers and Mathematicians, because they had foretold
he should not reign above a year. He was excessive in his prodigality, and most
bloody in his cruelty. He put to Death two young men, only because they had
interceeded for their Father, whom he had condemned to Death.

p. 115. Vespasian was made Emperor against his Will, and forced to accept of
it with drawn Swords by his Soldiers, who threatened otherwise they would
immediately kill him: He was a good Prince, lived seventy nine years died in
his Bed. For his health he used frictions, and fasting one day every month
without eating any thing. Id. p. 117. 129.

Titus was called Deliciae humani generis, Night having given nothing that day,
he said to his Friends, Heu! diem perdidi: and when two great men had conspired
his Death, he freely forgive them without punishment.

Domitian delighted in catching Flies, and evil himself, yet he severely
punished evil Governors: He commanded himself to be called God and Lord. p. 136.

When a Battle was fought in Germany, between Saturninus, and Appius, who was
Domitians General, Appius got the Victory, the News whereof was brought to Rome
the same day.

An Astrologer told Domitian of his Death. Emperor asked him, whether he knew
his own: He answered he should be killed and eaten with Dogs: the Emperor
commanded him to be killed, and his Body to be burned; while which was doing,
there fell a great shower of rain, put out the fire, and the Dogs and came, eat
him.

Imp. Hist. p. 139. Nerva was an excellent Prince, released the Christians from
Banishment: John the Divine came then from Pathmos to Ephesus. He made poor
men's Sons to be brought up at the common charge, and swear that no Senator of
Rome by his command should be put to Death, which Oath he performed: He was
wont to say, that he remembered not that he had done any thing, but that he
might giving up his Empire, live privately without fear. He chose Trajan merely
for public good to succeed him.

p. 144. Trajan being reproved, for his too much familiarity with his Subjects;
he answered, that be desired to be such an Emperor toward his Subjects, as he
would wish they would be to him, if he were a Subject.

p. 144. Nobles of Armenia presented Trajan with a very fair Horse, that coming
into his presence, kneeled upon both knees, and bowed his Head to the ground.

Imperial History p. 150. Trajan lay at Antioch, a terrible Earthquake
overthrew the City, and all his Palaces; so that he was fain to keep in the
Field in Tents for many days.

Id. p. 15I. Trajans Ashes were set up upon the top of a Pillar in the
Ma^ket-place at Rome, which was of one whole Stone, containing 140 Foot in
height.

Id. p. 154. Jews when bound to keep the Law, upon every light occasion became
Idolaters, and now the Law is abolisht, most obstinately persevere in it. Idem
p. 1611

A certain Roman Knight camc to entreat a favor Trajans hand; the Knight being
Old, had a gray Beard, and was full of w^ite Hairs, and failing of what he
desired, within a few days after, he came again with a new petition to the same
effect: But in the mean time he had dyed his Beard and Hears, and looked young
again, which being noted by the Emperor, he to jeer him therewith, answered, I
would be glad to do you the pleasure you require, but there are but a few days
past since I denied it to your Father, which desired the same: Wherefore it
seems to me a matter unjust to grant that to the Son, which I would not to the
Father; and the Old Knight departed with shame.

Imp. Hist. p. 158. It having not rained in Africa for five years Adrians
coming it rained plentifully, which made him double welcome. He rebuilt
Carthage, and afterward Jerusalem, and died of wilful abstinence, using this
saying; Turba Medicorum interfecit Regem, The multitude of Physicians killed
the King.

p. 61. 1691. Commodus intending to put to Death several Names down; his
Concubine Marcia lighted upon the List, and finding her own name, she wi^h
others contrived and procured his Death with poison and stabbing. p. 179.

Pretorian Soldiers had rebelliously slain Pertinax, they openly proclaimed
the sale of the Empire to him, who would give most, and Didius Julianas bought
it of them; but after seven months was slain by the contrivance of that Senate.

p. 189. Audentius upon the death of Caracalla being proffered the Empire
utterly refused it and would not by any persuasions be brought to accept of it.

p. 208. Heliogabalut turned the day into night, and the night into day. He
rose from his Bed about Sun setting, and laid himself to sleep about day
breaking; and ordered that business which should be done by day should be done
by night, and what was to be done by night, should be dispatched by day.

p. 210. Alexander Severus would admit no Officers in his Court, that were not
honest and of good fame, and would not suffer any to buy places of Judicature;
and to know how his Officers discharged their trust, he had certain secret
Honest men that were to watch, and report their Carriages to him. He
apparelled himself decently, but never costly: He never gave Office for favor,
but desert; and when his Mother told him, that his overmuch familiarity tnade
his reign of less Reputation; He ansvvered, true, but thereby more firm and
durable. In his Wars, he did eat no other meat, than what the relt of his Army
did, and had often in his Mouth; Do not that to another, which thou would
not to be done to thy self.

Imp. Hist. p. 223. Macedonius slaying Ticus, who was set up Emperor against
Maximinus, brought his Head to Maximinus, who put him to a cruel death for
murdering his Sovereign, and being a Traitor to his Friend.

Idem p. 230. Philip by the same means he got the Empire, Soldiers putting him
to death, which he made use of to put Gadienus to death.

Imperial Hist. p. 245. In the time of Galienus, there were thirty usurped the
name and Ensigns of the Empire; and none of them dyed a natural death, but
were most of them slain by the Soldiers that set them up.

p. 255. In Galienus time the Sun shone not in many days. Many Cities were
overflowed with the Sea, and in one day there died in Rome five thousand
Persons. But the Emperor swallowed up with sensual pleasures regarded it not;
and when the whole kingdom of Egypt was lost, he answered, And what then,
cannot we live without the Linen Cloth of Egypt?

p. 257. Zenobia would never lie with her Husband after she was with Child.
Neither twice till by natural signs she knew whether she had conceived or no.

p. 265. Aurelianus slew forty Men in one day, and in all nine hundred with his
own hands; Besieging Tyanea, he threatened after destruction, not to leave a Dog
alive, but being terrified with the apparition of Apollonius, he only put to
death Heraclemon, that betrayed the City to him, judging him not likely to
prove faithful to him, who was a Traitor to his own Country, and gave his
Soldiers liberty to kill all the Dogs, but not the Men.

Pedro Men. Imp. History p. 275. Aurelianus being about to sign an edict
against the christians, a Thunderbolt fell so near him, that all men thought
he had been slain, notwithstanding which, he persisted in his persecution, and
was murdered by his own Servants.

p. 278. Tacitus the Emperor chosen by the Senate on the entreaty of the
Soldiers, was so temperate, as in his diet, so in all things that he would not
allow his Wife the Empress to wear any precious stones or jewels of any great
price.

Id. p. 278. Carus the Emperor was slain by a ^hunder-bolt Tent. Anno Dom. 287.

Dioclesian by an edict commanded his Foot kissed by those that came to salute
him.

p. 300. Probus the Emperor having brought the Empire posture, was heard to
say, That he would speedily take such a course, that there should be no more
need of any Men of War. This Speech was so distasted by the Soldiers, that
they conspired and procured his death.

p. 290. Dioclesian being but a common Soldier, was VVitch that he should be
Emperor when he had slain a Boar. He therefore afterward killed many but was
not Emperor till he had slain Aper, who had treacherously killed the Emperor
Numinanus.

Idem p. 296. Dioclesian and his Colleague, after they had Empire, and betook
themselves to private Lives: and when afterward Dioclesian was importuted
to resume the Imperial Diadem; He utterly refused it, protesting that then he
began to Live, when he began to Live private.

Imp. Hist. p. 302. Galerius Armentanus was smitten with Lice, and slew some of
his Physicians for not curing him, and being apprehensive that his punishment
was for persecuting the Christians; He recalled his Edicts against them, and
desired their prayers for him, but died of that disease.

p. 306. Constantine being ready to fight with Maxentius, and in doubt, was
encouraged by a Vision of a Cross in the Air with this Word spoken in Greek, In
this sign thou shall overcome; who accordingly having obtained Victory, forbad
any for hereafter to be put to death on the Cross.

p. 309. Maxentius intending to entrap Constantine, caused a false Bridge to be
made over Tyber, but being worsted by Constantine, fled and perished by the
falling of that Bridge into the River.

p. 309. Licinius being unlearned himself affirmed that Learning was a public
pestilence.

p. 319. Constantines Wife Fausta, being denied in her unlawful suit by Crispus
Constantine's Son by a former Wife, accused him to his Father, as intending to
ravish her, on which he put him to death, but afterward understanding his Sons
Innocence, he justly revenged his Sons death with hers.

p. 312. Constantine to beautify Bizantium now Constantinople, World of what
was precious or stately.

p. 314. At the Council of Nice, wherein were Bishops, when diverse Bishops
accused one the other; He concealed their Complaints, and persuaded them to
Unity.

Imp. Hist. p. 316. Arrius the Author of the Arrian Heresy, draught his
Entrails gushing out.

p. 318. Julian the Apostate intended to extirpate the Christian Religion not
by cruelty but policy, by gifts: And preferments, forbidding them Schools and
Learning and all advancement, except they would forsake their Religion: And
having promised his Gods to sacrifice Christian blood, if he returned Victor
over the Persians; He was wounded by an Arrow shot from an unknown hand, and
killed and dyed, crying out, O Galilean thou have overcome.

p. 332. Valentinianus the first it rained perfect Wool in great abundance.

Id. p. 339. Jovinianus in Julians time gave up his Offices, because he would
not deny his faith, and being on Julians death chosen Emperor, he refused till
the whole Army acknowledged themselves Christians. He was stifled by the smoke
of Charcoale.

Idem p. 335. Valens the Emperor being a Negromancer, enquiring of the Devil,
who should succeed him, was answered, One whose name began with a ^ Th.
whereupon diverse whose names began with that Letter were put to death by him.

p. 342. Maximus having usurped the Empire, that he might entrap Gratianus,
caused a report to be spread, that Gratianus Wife with a good Company of
Soldiers was come to see her Husband, and to go with him into Italy, and
sent a Messenger with counterfeit Letters to advertise him of it. After this
he sent one Andragathius a subtle Captain, to the end he should put himself
into a Horselitter with some chosen Soldiers, and go to meet Gratian,
feigning himself to be the Empress and so to surprise and kill him. The cunning
Champion performed his business, and at Lions in France, the Emperor came forth
to meet his Wife, and coming to the Horse-litter was taken and so killed.

Imperial History p. 344. Theodosius, because the Citizens of Thessalonica
humor slain their Magistrates, which he had appointed over them, caused his
Soldiers to put to Death seven thousand of the common people, without making a
difference, Faulty or Faultless. For which act of cruelty St. Ambrose, when the
Emperor came to Millain and would have entered the Church, forbad him and
excommunicated him; the good Emperor obeyed the excommunication, and for eight
Months, till on his Repentance, he was restored, forbeared the public
Assemblies, and by the Bishops injunction published an edict, that none
condemned by the Emperor should be put to Death within thirty days after the
Sentence passed.

p. 355. Alaricus marching toward Rome with a purpose destroy it, there came a
Monk to him, who admonished him that being a Christian he should desist. To
whom Alaricus answered, I let you to understand Man of God, that I go not of my
own will against Rome. But I assure thee, that there daily appears unto me a
Man that does urge me and importune me thereunto, saying, Get thee to Rome and
destroy it, even to the ground.

Id. p. 364. Theodosius the second being reproved for giving so many condemned
Malefactors their pardon; He answered, I would to God I could raise again those
that I have put to Death.

Id. p. 385. Pulcheria the daughter of Theodosius the second, marrying with
Martianus an ancient Captain, took security of him, that they should both live
chaste, for she was resolved to keep her Virginity inviolable, which Martianus
accepted of, and they both observed.

Imp. Hist. p. 388. Attila King of Hunnes called himself the terror of the
World and scourge of God.

Id. p. 388. Ecius a most valiant Roman, that vanquished Attila King of Hunnes
in a Battle, in which fought on both sides a Million of Men, was by Valentinian
suspecting him, unjustly slain. Valentinian asking Proximus a discreet and
noble Courtier, whether he had not followed the best counsel in so doing, was
answered; Whether Ecius was slain with reason or without reason I dare not
determine, but this I can affirm, that by killing him thou have with thy own
Left hand cut off thy Right: In which he was a true Prophet.

Id. p. 393. Attila having razed Aquileia and intending for Rome, Valentinian
the Emperor sent Leo the Pope with many Senators to entreat him to spare the
City, which he doing and being demanded by his favorites, why he did it; He
answered, That he durst not deny the Popes demand. For whilst he stood talking
with him, he thought that he saw two Old Men with unsheathed Swords threatening
to kill him if he denied it, and therefore he durst do no other.

In the reign of Anastasius the first, who Eutichean was slain with a
Thunderbolt, One Proclus made a great many such burning- Glasses, that being
set upon the Wall and Turrets, set on fire the Ships and Engines that were in
the Harbor.

p. 415. Anastasius being dead, Amantius an Eunuch Soldiers to make
Theocratinus Emperor, and to that end delivered to Justinian (who till
seventeen years old was a Neat-heard in Thrace) a vast sum of money to be
distributed amongst the Captains, which he taking, dealt with them for
himself, and so obtained the Imperial dignity.

Imp. Hist. p. 419. Narses a valiant Captain, having recovered Italy from the
Goths, and having governed it twelve years, being calumniated by Justin, who
succeeded his Grandfather Justinian, was commanded home and a Successor sent
him, and Sophia the Empress added this taunt, that she would have him to come
home to spin Wool with her Women in Constantinople. He enraged with this scorn,
replied that he would twist her such a Web, that she should never untwine, and
so called in the Longobeards that overcame and possessed all Italy. p. 442.

Albinus King of Lombardy, having caused his Wife Queen Rosamond to drink Wine
at a public Banquet out of her Fathers Scull, she in Revenge plotted and
procured his Death.

p. 445. Baras Hormisda's General being vanquished by the Romans; Hormisda
sent him in disgrace a VVomans Garment. Upon which Baras rebelled against him,
and was the occasion that Hormisda was deposed, and Cosroes set up in his
place.

Idem p. 453. Mauritius slain by Phocas, who had murdered in his sight, two
Sons, three Daughters, and his Empress, had foretokens of his Death. At noon
day in the Market of Constantinople there appeared a Man to the Emperor, in
the habit of a Monk holding a Sword in his hand and said with a Loud Voice, The
Emperor Mauritius shall die by the Sword; and then vanished. He likewise in his
sleep dreamt, that a Soldier named Phocas had murdered his Wife, Children, and
afterward himself, and being troubled, he asked his Brother what Phocas was, he
answered, a Coward, then said the Emperor he is cruel and a Murderer, which
accordingly came to pass. Mauritius at his death often repeated, Just thou art
O Lord, and righteous is thy Judgments.

p. 458. Cosroes King of Persia having Conquered Jerusalem, Christ's Cross,
which the Empress Helena had left there, and kept it fourteen years, but it
was restored to Heraclius by his Son, and Heraclius the Emperor entering
Jerusalem carried it with great joy upon his shoulders.

Imp. Hist. 471. Heraclius the Emperor, who in his old age, virtues of his
youth, and in whose time Mahom^t sprung up, is reported to dye of a strange
disease called Priapismus.

p. 471. Rodwaldus King of the Lombards, falling in Love with a Noblemans Wife,
being taken with her, was slain by her Husband.

The Emperor Constans the second having Rimoaldus the Son of Grimoaldus King of
Lombardy in Benevent; The Son distressed sent to his Father by one that was his
Nurse-father for relief; who being intercepted by the Emperor, was commanded
by him to go to the Walls of the City, and to tell Rimoaldus that his Father
was not able to assist him, and therefore he should yield. Who being brought
bound before the Walls, told Rimoaldus, that his Father would have him be of
good cheer, for this day he arriveth at the River Satrico, and within these
three days will be here with an infinite Army. I can say no more, I am in the
Enemies hand, who begin to Murder me, I recommend unto you my Wife and
Children. Having said these words, the Emperors Soldiers killed him presently.

p. 480. Leoncius surprised his Master Justinian the second, and cut off his
Ears and Nose, and banished him into Pontus, and took the government and
Imperial Title to himself, Anno Dom. 696. Leoncius having reigned three years,
Tiberius rebelled against him, and served him as he had served Justinian. He
banished one Philippicus, because he had reported that he dreamt an Eagle pitched
upon his Head. Justinian recovering dealt so by him, and slew both him and
Leoncius; and as often as he would have wiped his Nose, if he had had one, he
caused some of those that had been followers of Leoncius to be slain, and
fearing Philippicus because of his dream, and intending his destruction, he
enforced him to stand upon his guard, and fighting with him was slain, and lost
his Kingdom to him.

Imp. Hist. p. 495. Irene Mother to Constantine the sixth being put by her
government by her son come to age, out of desire to rule surprised her Son and
put out his Eyes, and took upon her the government of the Empire.

Leo the Emperor fighting against Cramas Bulgaria in a great battle; the two
Princes happened to meet, and the Emperor slew with his own hands the Bulgarian
King.

p. 52^. A Cardinal named Swinesnout, Os porci, in the Ludovicus Pius Emperor
was chosen Pope, and because it was a very unseemly name for so High a dignity,
by a general consent it was changed, and he was called Sergius the second.
Hence arose the custom of the Popes altering their names after their election
to the Popedom. Imp. Hist. p. 538.

The Emperor Theophilus of Constantinople Captain called Theodosius would usurp
the Empire after his death, but a few hours before he died, himself caused that
Theodosius his head to be smitten off.

Lotharias the first having reigned fifty years, Empire, and professed himself
Monk: In his time Pope Joan an English Woman held the Papal dignity two years.

p. 544. In the reign of Lewis the second Emperor, Anno dom. 878. in the City
of Bressia in Lombardy for three days it rained blood so fresh and perfect as
if it had been of a Bull or other beast newly killed.

Basilius Emperor of Constantinople riding on Stagg.

Imp. Hist. p. 553. Emperor Arnulph besieging the Duke of Spoleto in Benevent,
the Duchess corrupted a Chamberlain to give him a sleeping Potion, which the
Emperor taking awaked not in three Days and three Nights; afterward finding
himself ill, he returned home and died of the Lowsy disease.

p. 558. Otho the fourth Emperor about nine of the Clock in the Morning, there
appeared in the Element a great Flaming Fire, like to a burning Torch, which
continued a great while, and the light being vanished, there appeared in the
same place the likeness of a Serpent. The Emperor was poisoned by a pair of
perfumed Gloves, given him by the Widow of Crescentius, whom he too
familiarly conversed with, and whose Husband the Emperor had caused to be put
to Death.

Imp. Hist. p. 595. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century V.
HEnry the second Emperor was persuaded County Palatine of Rhine called
Amigunda, with whom undiscovered and unknown to any till his death, he lived
most chastely, both of them observing Voluntary Virginity, without having any
carnal knowledge the one of the other.

Idem p 199. Amigunda wife to Henry the second Emror Adultery cleared her
Innocence by undergoing the trial of Ordalio, viz. by going blindfold and
barefooted over certain plates of fire-hot Iron.

p. 600. Zoe the Wife of Romanus Argyrophilus Emperor Greece, procured her
Husbands death by the hands of Michael Paphlagonus, with whom she lived in
Adultery, and afterward married him, and he became Emperor.

Idem p. 601. Pope Gregory the fifth in the Order concerning Election of the
Emperor, decreed, That besides the Golden Crown, he should receive from the
Pope, he was to be Crowned with two others, one of Straw in the City of Minzo
in Lombardy; the other of Lead in the City Millain.

Imp. Hist. p. 603. Henry the fourth Emperor fought in ranged Battles with
Ensigns displayed sixty two several times, and for the most part had the
Victory. He was excommunicated by the Pope, and to abtain his absolution came
three days together barefooted to the Gates of the City Canusium, where the
Pope was, and with much difficulty obtained it; but was afterward
excommunicated and so dyed, and was removed when he had been buried from a
Monastery to a profane place.

p. 608. Rodulphus that was chosen Emperor in opposition to Henry the fourth,
being dead was buried by his Servants with the Ensigns and Ornaments of an
Emperor; Some asked the Emperor Hen. 4. why he suffered him to be buried with
such Honor, since he was a Tyrant, and his Enemy. He answered I would to God
that all mine Enemies were buried like him, with those Ensigns and Ornaments.

p. 620. Hildebrand otherwise called Pope Gregory the seventh was a Negromancer
and Inchanter, and had poisoned seven of his predecessors to make way for his
own advancement to the Popedom.

p. 622. Conrade the Emperor having distressed Winspurg favor, that the Women
which were in the Town might freely depart, and have to their own use
whatsoever they could bear upon their backs. Whereupon they used a commendable
deceit, which was, that as they went forth of the Town each of them took her
Husband, and those that had none took their Children, and Brothers, and so
coming into the Fields set them at Liberty. Which the Emperor commended, and
was well pleased with.

Imp. Hist. p. 643. Fulco King of Jerusalem was killed with his Horse falling
while he was hunting.

p. 648. The Emperor Conrade passing to Jerusalem, hunger, and many perished,
falling sick and dying of the Lime or Chalk, which the Greeks put into their
Meal.

p. 650. In the year of our Lord one thousand one France, Johannes de
Temporibus, who had lived three hundred sixty and one years, and had been an
Halbardeer to the Emperor Charles the Great.

p. 652. Millain a great City in Lombardy, was utterly razed and wasted, and
sowed with Salt by Frederick Barbarossa.

Idem 663. Andronicus who had treacherously slain his Master and Pupil, Alexius
Emperor of Constantinople, being apprehended by the people of Constantinople,
that rose against him, had one of his hands cut off, and one of his Eyes put
out, and was shamefully carried through the Streets and so put to Death.

p. 672. Frederick Barbarossa going in Summer by Swimming to refresh himself in
a River, was carried down by the stream, and drowned the tenth day of June,
1198.

p. 673. Henry Palsgrave who was chosen in Opposition to Frederick the second
Emperor, besieging Vlmes, an Arrow shot at Random out of the City hit him,
which was supposed to be invenomed, of which he died within a few days.

p. 718. Othocarus King of Bohemia being necessitated to do his homage to
Rodulphus Emperor, who when Earl of Habsperge had received his pay, desired
that it might be done in some secret place, and thinking that the Emperor would
have performed what he requested, forasmuch as the Emperor staid for him in a
close Tent, he came, and kneeling down before the Emperor to do him homage, the
Tent was so artificially made that it fell open in such manner, that he was
seen by the whole Army, wherewith he was much grieved, and being provoked by
his Wife, he rebelled against him and was slain, Anno 1277.

Imp. Hist. p. 736. The Duke of Saxony in a throng at the Coronation Albert the
first Emperor, was smothered to Death.

Id. 746. Henry the seventh Emperor was poisoned Friar in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and died the same day.

p. 756. Hunipert Daulphin of Vienne sold the Country Daulphin, and the City of
Vienne to the French King, and became a Friar, having first given to the Poor
all the money he sold it for, which he laid up in Heaven.

Id. p. 774. Gunther Earl of Zwarzenburgh, being chosen Emperor in opposition
to Charles the Fourth, was poisoned by his Physician, who being to give him a
purging Potion, and taking but the Assay of it, died together with him the same
Morrow after.

p. 775. The Papal Court which had sojurned in France, seventy years and
somewhat more, and the most part in the City of Aviginon, returned to Rome in
the year one thousand three hundred seventy six.

p. 778. Powder and Gunns were first used in the Wars of the Venetians, one
thousand three hundred eighty two.

Anno Domini 1556. Charles the Fifth, the Warlike and glorious Emperor of
Germany, gave up the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, and his other Kingdoms
to his Son Philip, and lived two years retiredly before his Death, in the
company of Religious men providing for Eternity.

German Soldiers under Nadustus Governor of the Fortress in Buda, agreed,
their lives and goods saved, to give up the Castle to Solomon the great Turk,
and that the Captain might not hinder them bound him, and delivered the Fort,
which the Turk entering and understanding their Carriage, set Nadustus at
Liberty, and contrary to his word, which he thought not fit to keep with such
unworthy Soldiers, caused them to be slain.

Imp. Hist. p. 861. Emperor Sigismund warring against the Hussicks and their
valiant Captain Ciska, received two grievous overthrows: and twice his army
stricken with a panick fear, fled and dispersed without striking one stroke or
sight of Enemy.

Imp. Hist. p. 806. The Romans had a Law that no man should name in any public
work, and Phidias in Athens was put to death for carving his own and Pericles
Image in the Shield of Pallas.

Mariana, Hist. d' Espanna, Pref. The first founders of Rome kept the name
Valerius Soranus for disclosing of it was put to death.

Idem, p. 18. In Hercules promontory near Cades by the Seaside, there are two
Wells, the one of fresh the other of salt water. The fresh ebbs and flows with
the Sea, the Salt clean contrary.

Idem, p. 29. In Spain a Temple was built to Hercules, in sacrifices were
performed not with prayers or pleasant words, but with Curses and Execrations
and railing speeches at him. The occasion of which was this: Hercules coming to
Lyndus, and finding a man plowing with a Yoke of Oxen, one of which he desiring
to buy the Countryman refused to sell, and Hercules took by violence. The
Countryman not knovving how otherwise to revenge himself, fell a cursing and
railing at him, which Hercules heard with a great deal of laughter and mirth.
Which the Lyndians perceiving, after Hercules death they made him a God, this
Countryman his Priest, and appointed such Ceremonies at the sacrificing of
Oxen supposing to please Hercules by it.

Mariana, p. 27. Carthaginians banished Hanno a most worthy person, who had
done them great services, not for any fault, but that he was of greater Wisdom
and Industry, than the state of ^ Free City might well bear; and because he
was the first Man that tamed a Lion, and therefore they judged it not meet to
commit the Liberty of the City to him, who had tamed the fierceness of savage
Beasts.

Id. p. 46. Carthaginians in their Navigation, having discovered a fruitful
Country, some stayed, the rest returned, and acquainted the Senate; who to
prevent the removal of the Citizens thither, put to death all the discoverers.

Id. p. 49. Hannibal coming to the banks of the River Ebrus, in his march
toward Italy, there appeared to him in his sleep a Man of goodly presence,
who told him that he was sent from God to guide him into Italy, and therefore
bid him follovv him without looking back. He saw likewise a Serpent throwing
down with a Torrent of Water, all that was before him. Hannibal asking the
young man, what all these things signified, was answered, That he ought not to
search the secrets of the Fates, but to follovv that way that God had opened to
him.

p. 66. At the Battle of Cannas, there were so many Roman Gentry killed, that
the Rings taken of their Fingers filled three bushels and a half.

Mariana, Hist. de Espan. p. 71. Servilius Galba and Aurelius Cotta being
Consuls, contended who should go for Spain, and when the Senate could not
resolve, Scipio being asked, made answer, That neither pleased him, For one had
nothing, and the other nothing would satisfy him; esteeming both Poverty and
Avarice inconvenient in a Governor.

Id p. 103. Metellus being asked by a Centurion what shirt knew his secrets he
would presently burn it.

Id. p. 103. Sertorius trained up a Do to come to his hand, as Mahomet did a
Pigeon to his Ear, and and persuaded his followers that he received divine
directions by her.

Id. p. 119. In a Battle between Sertorius and Pompey, Brother of one side that
killed his Brother tha^ came of the other side: Which when he perceived, he took
care for his Brothers funeral exequies, and as a revenge upon himself, fell
upon the same Sword he killed his Brother with and so died.

Id. p. 120. Sertorius to show the excellency and strength of Unity, commanded
a Soldier to pull off the Hairs of a Horses tail by one and one, which he
easily did, but all together could not. His saying was, That an Army of Hearts
with a Lion to their Captain, was better than of Lions with a Heart to their
Captain.

Idem p. 121. Perpenna vanquished and brought to Pompey, he commanded him
presently to death to prevent discovering his Confederates, and burnt all the
Letters from Rome to Sertorius, that no enquiry might be made concerning them.

p. 122. Caesar at the Battle of Munda, said, he then fought for his Life, at
other times for honor and glory.

p. 130. Cicero cleared Popilio a Tribune of Soldiers being accused of
Parricide, which ^opilio afterward in the Triumvirate killed Cicero, that had
before delivered him.

p. 132. Era of Caesar began at the first year of Augustus government of
Spain, thirty eight years before Christ's birth.

Id. p. 133. Lucius Piso governor of Spain, being tortured to confess his
Confederates, endured the first days Torments, but fearing himself for the
second, as he was going to the Rack slipped out of the hand of his Leader, and
dashed his head with that violence against a Wall that he died immediately.

Mariana, Hist. de Esp. p. 147. The Emperor Trajan having conquered the
Parthians, though dying in his return was ordered a Triumph for his Ashes after
his Death, an honor never vouchsafed to any either before or after him.

p. 153. Severus dying at York used these words, I Empire peaceable to my Sons,
which I found troublesome, and it will be firm to them if they be good, but if
evil, not durable. This was likewise his saying, I have been all things, but it
profits nothing.

p. 157. Caracalla to be like Alexander whose virtues Head aside, inclining
toward his left shoulder.

p. 158. Alexander the Roman Emperor successor to Heliogabalus, would not
commit the Government of any place to any one, before he had published his Name,
to see if any could justly find fault, neither would he sell any Offices, for
he said, He that bought must needs sell. And having necessity to raise money,
he laid his impositions on curious and vain Arts and Trades, whereby he
relieved his own Wants and suppressed their Vices: he caused ^urinus to be
choked with smoke, who had sold the promises of his favor.

Mariana p. 159. Osset near Sevil, in the Reign of Theodoselus about the year
five hundred and fifty, the Font though shut and sealed and guarded, yet the
Thursday before Easter did fill of it self with Water, no one knowing whence it
came; and about the year five hundred seventy two in Spain, Easter was observed
the twenty first of March, and in France the eighteenth of April; on which
latter day the Font was so filled, and thereby prognosticated the right of the
Observation, and a future Victory to the French against the Spaniard.

Mariana, Hist. p. 218. 225. Luvigildus having heard of some Miracles done by
the Catholics in the defense of their Religion, being an Arrian himself, asked
an Arrian Bishop why the Arrians did none; the Bishop answered that he himself
had healed both deaf and blind; but what to avoid Ostentation, he had done in
secret, he would hereafter do publicly: and thereupon agreed with a
Counterfeit Knave to pretend himself blind, and to lay himself in the way, as
the King and he should come by, and then to seek his help which he did. The
Bishop put his hands upon him, but instead of a pretended recovery, he left him
really blind. The pain and trouble of which made him discover the Knavery to
the great prejudice of the Arrian Interest.

Idem p. 235. St. Ildephonsus Archbishop of Toledo, having Helvidius, and
another that denied the Virgin Mary's perpetual Virginity, was rewarded the
Night before the Feast of the Annunciation, with the appearance of our Lady,
who brought with her from Heaven, and put upon him with her own hands a
Garment, in which she commanded him to celebrate her Feast and her Sons.

Idem p. 266. Sancho Major King of Navarre going to Moors in Spain, left in
charge a principal Horse, which he much loved, with his Queen. Her eldest Son
Don Garcia begs this Horse, but she being told by a Nobleman, that if she gave
him, the King would be much displeased, refused to give him. Her Son takes
distaste and resolves revenge, and most wickedly contriveth and accuses his
Mother of Adultery, and draws in his younger Brother to consent with him. The
King enraged, claps his Queen in Prison, and issues out a Proclamation, that
if none would undertake to vindicate her, she should be burnt alive. The King
had a bastard Son called Don Ramiro, he undertakes his Mother in Laws defense,
and enters the list, but by the endeavors of a Holy man, the Sons confessed
their wickedness. The King and Queen pardon them, but on this Condition, that
Don Ramiro the Kings Natural Son should inherit the Kingdom of Arragon, which
was the Queens inheritance, whose Loyalty to her, though not born of her, did
well ^^serve it.

Mariana p. 398. contest there was in Spain, in the time of King Alonso the
sixth, concerning the Gottish and the Roman Missal, which should take place.
The Vulgar were for the former, as the Antienter, confirmed by the approbation
and usage of Isavon, Ildelonsus, and Julian, three famous Saints; the Kings,
Nobles, and Bishops for the latter, to ingratiate themselves with the Popes,
who then grew great. But when the debating of it by Arguments could not decide
it, they on both sides resolved to put it first to the trial of two Champions
in a single Combat, and afterward to the trial of fire, throwing in both
Missals, out of which the Roman leapt, but singed and scorched; the Gottish,
though continuing in, yet remaining entire and unhurt. In both which trials the
Gottish prevailed. However the King concluded, that both were acceptable to
God, that the Gottish should be used in Ancient Moharabique Churches, the Roman
in the most and rest of the Churches, of Toledo and Spain. Hence that proverb,
Alla van Leyes do quiere Reyes.

Id. p. 444. Jayme King of Arragon cut out the tongue Gyone, for revealing to
the Pope, what he had discovered to him in his secret confession.

Id. p. 627. Jews King of France sent to the Church Toledo these relics:
viz. part of the wood of the Cross of Christ, one of the Thorns of his Crown of
thorns, part of the milk of the blessed Virgin, of the purple garment was put
on Christ, of the Towel which our Savior girded himself with when he washed his
disciples feet, of his winding Sheet in which he was buried, and of his
swaddling clothes used in his Infancy.

Mariana p. 6^2. Alonso King of Castile being troubled at the barrenness of his
Queen, and desirous of Succession, resolved to be divorced from her, and sent
Ambassadors to obtain Christian daughter to the King of Denmark who being sent
to Toledo the Queen appeared to be with Child; with which the Kings mind being
altered, the Lady Christian instead of marrying the King, was married to Philip
the Kings Brother, the thoughts of which disappointment shortened her days.

Id. p. 637. Mariana observes concerning Coelestines resigning the Popedom,
That his successors marvelled, all Praise but none Imitate him.

p. 711. Alonso Perez de Gusman being governor of Tirifa, and besieged by the
Moors, who had taken a Son of his, and threatened to kill the child, except he
yielded the City, was content to see his child murdered, rather than to blemish
his faith to his Prince, that had entrusted him.

Id. p. 710. Law of Philip the fair King of France were accused and convinced
of Adultery.

Idem p. 750. Alonso King of castile besieged Algizira, the Moors made use of
Guns, and powder to defend themselves, which is the first that we read of the
use of them in History. In which year a Child was born in Cerdera, with two
Heads, and four legs, whom they buried alive through a Superstitious fear, that
thereb they might avoid the ill Omen they apprehended.

Donna Maria Coronel not being able to endure the absence of her Husband, chose
rather to lose her life than to suffer her self to be overcome with evil and
dishonest desire, so that one day affected with lascivious motions she quenched
the heat of her Lust, by thrusting up into her body a burning stick: A woman
worthy of a better lot, and of great praise, not for her fact, but invincible
desire of preserving Chastity.

Mariana 2. part. p. 28. In the time of Pedro the Cruel there was a Citizen of
eighty years old condemned; a Son of his, of eighteen years, offered willingly
to be put to death to excuse his Father, which the Cruel Tyrant in stead of
pardoning him for his rare Piety accepted of and put him to death, a horrid
spectacle of abominable Cruelty. The same Tyrant caused a Priest to be burnt,
that came to give him warning of Gods displeasure, and another of his principal
Officers, for dealing faithfully and plainly with him.

Id. p. 57. 70. The Bishopric of Burges being void, the Chapter being divided,
they made choice of one of the Canons, whom they esteemed a Holy and good man,
to whom they referred the nomination of the Bishop, who accepting that charge,
without respect to any of the Competitors pronounced himself Bishop, which the
whole Chapter was well pleased with, and confirmed him accordingly. Ibid. p. 87.

Peter King of Portugal commanded all his Stewards to buy nothing upon trust,
but to pay ready money and the just price: He took away and kept the Wife of
another man, who fled into Castile and wore in his Hat a pair of Horns of
silver for a show of the Kings fact, and his own affront.

Id. p. 89. Pope having excommunicated Pedro King of Castile for his cruelty,
commanded an Archdeacon to give the King notice, who fearing the Kings
savageness, durst not adventure but used this device: He put himself into a
light Boat and came up the River to Sevil, and staid at the side of the place,
when the King usually rid forth, and waited his coming, which succeeded to his
desire. The King coming near, he asked the King if he would hear any news out
of the Levant, for he would tell him marvailous things, which he never heard
before. The King came near to hear him, and he gave him notice of the Popes
Bull, and immediately betook himself to flight. The King drew his Sword, leapt
into the River, came so near as to strike the Boat, swam his Horse till it was
tired, and was fetched off with a Boat.

Mariana, Hist. de Esp. 2 part p. 94. Islands of the Canaries called del Hiero,
there is no other Water, but what does distill and drop from the Leaves of one
Tree.

p. 136. An Infant of eight Months old, at the beginning troubles of Portugal,
about the year 1385. in Ebora heaved it self up in the Cradle, and in a loud
voice said three times Don Juan King of Portugal.

Idem p. 138. Tamerlane besieging Beritus, they held ^ut first day, but
yielding the second, they sent out the young Boys and Girls clothed in white
with green Boughs in their hands, who falling down on the ground begged mercy,
but this barbarous Tyrant commanded his Horsemen to ride over them and so
killed them all. A certain Geno^ay advised, that he should show mercy, and that
he was a Mortal man. To whom Tamerlane answered, Do thou think I am a man,
no, I am the scourge of God, and the plague of Mankind.

Idem p. 191. Vincent Ferrer a Dominick Friar of Valencia, Miracles, converted
8000 Moors and 35000 Jews: Who preaching in his vulgar Tongue, strangers
understood him as if he had spoke to each in his own Language; a singular gift,
and since the Apostles only granted to him.

Idem p. 195. There were Laws made in Castile that the Moors should wear a
piece of blew cloth in form of a Crescent; the Jews a round piece of yellow
cloth, and Priests Concubines a piece of red cloth, whereby they might be known
to be such.

Id. p. 197. Pay of a Horseman by the day was twenty Maravedes, and of a
Footman ten. A Maravede is a brass coin, of which six make an English penny.

Id. 198. Henry King of Castile entering upon the government of his Kingdom
found his revenue so extremely exhausted, that having been one day in the Field
catching of Quails, he returning found nothing prepared for his breake-fast;
asking his Steward the reason, was answered, that he had neither money nor
credit to buy what was necessary. The King marvelled at and commanded him that
he should upon a pledge buy him some flesh and dress it with his quails, for
his breakfast. Which done, his steward waiting on him, there arose several
discourses, amongst which one was, that his Grandees and courtiers fared
otherwise, and that the Archbishop of Toledo and other chief Courtiers did by
turns feast one the other, and that night they were all to Sup at the
Archbishops. The King in a disguise went to see what past, where he saw most
plentiful provisions, and heard their discourses of each ones revenues, what of
their own, and what of the Kings rent. The King resolved to remedy these
disorders, and gave out the next morning, that he was sick and intended to make
his Will. The Courtiers came to the Castle, in which the King lay, who had
given order then, when the Courtiers were entered, their retinue should be kept
forth, which was accordingly done. The Nobles waited in the Hall a greet space;
about noon the King comes in Armed with his Sword drawn, and sitting down with
an angry Countenance turns to the Archbishop, and asked him and the rest how
many Kings they had known in Castile. One answered, three, others four, and who
knew most five. The King replied, and how can this be, since I that am so young
know Twenty. And you are they to the great impoverishment of my Kingdom, and
dishonor to our Person, but I shall take care that your reign shall not be
long, and that you make no longer a scoff of me: and with this calls for the
Executioners of Justice with their Instruments, and six Hundred Soldiers that
were in readiness. They being all amazed, the Archbishop fell on his Knees and
begged pardon, and so did all the rest, and promised amendment. The King gave
them their lives, but not their liberties till they had given up all the
Castles they were entrusted with, and an account of the Kings rents which they
had received. A Notable deed, that humbled and kept in awe his great Subjects.
This Princes saying was, I more fear the curses of my people, than the Arms of
my Enemies. His Queen was the Daughter of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, by
Constance the Daughter of King Pedro the cruel, and himself the Grandson of
Henry the Bastard Brother of the same King Peter.

Mariana, 2 part p. 200. John King of Castile being dead, the whole nobility
proffered and were very importunate with his Brother Ferdinand, to accept the
Crown, but he refused it, and caused his Brothers Son John the second, a Child
of twenty two Months old, to be proclaimed King.

Idem p. 202. Leagues distant from Girona a City in Spain, in the year one
thousand four hundred and twenty, there opened two Mouths of Fire, which burnt
those that came within two stones throw of them; and near to these issued forth
a stream of black Water of a stinking savor, which fell into the River, killed
the Fishes, and the savor of it was so strong, that it reached to Girona.

Mariana, 2 part. p. 239. VVoods in Spain, near Guadalajar were frozen to
death, and not long before it snowed forty days together.

Id. p. 291. Alvaro de Luna, who had bin thirty years favorite to John King of
Castile, fell at last into disgrace, was condemned and beheaded. A Witch had
told him, that he should dye in Cadahalso. Now the King had given him a Country
so called, which for that reason he would never enter into, not minding that
Cadah^lso signifies a Scaffold, on which indeed he ended his days.

Id. p. 340. About the year one thousand four hundred Country called Bojano,
sunk with an Earthquake, and remains a standing Lake of Water, in which
disaster there perished thirty thousand Persons of all sorts.

p. 350. And in the year one thousand five hundred Eclipse of the Sun that
lasted a whole day.

Id. p. 741. A great Commander of the Moors in Malaca, wounds, yet bled not
till a bracelet of Gold, which he wore on his Arm was taken off, and then the
blood abundantly issued out. It Is supposed that the Bracelet had a stone taken
out of a Beast called which has a marvailous Virtue to restrain blood. p. 677.

Bolongue a part of the Wall (...) with a mine, so that both those (...) and
those without could see under, yet fell down again and settled in its own place.

Id. p 682. Island of Britain was the first National Church in the whole World
of Christians. For though the Gospel was Preached in many other Nations
privately long before, yet of all Nations it was the first that with public
approbation of Prince and State received the Profession of the Christian
Religion under King Lucius, about a hundred and fourscore years after Christ,
which it retained in great sincerity, for the space of a hundred years, till
the reign of Dioclesian, who began his reign, Anno Dom. 288.

Bp. Godwins lives of the Bishops. p. 35. Augustine the first Arch bishop of
Canterbury being dead, and leaving Laurence a Virtuous man his successor, upon
the death of Ethelbert a good Prince, Eadbald his Son succeeding, a Vicious
person, that married his Fathers Wife, and renounced the Christian Religion;
the Archbishop Laurence being hereby discouraged, determined to go into
France, and the night before the day of his intended departure, he caused his
bed to be made in the Church of his Monastery, where after many tears and
sighs, he recommended to God the miserable estate of his poor Church, and so
fell a sleep. It seemed unto him that St. Peter came to him, and first
expostulated the matter with him, and then reprehended him, and lastly whipped
his naked body, so terribly, as when he awaked finding it more than a dream, he
was all gore blood. He went immediately to the King showing him his wound, and
related the occasion: on which the King being terrified, he renounced his
Idols, put away his Incestuous wife, was baptized and built a Church in the
Monastery of St. Peter, and the Archbishop continued in his pastoral charge
till his death, which was February 3. Six hundred and nineteen.

Bp. Godwin p. 50. Honorius the fifth Archbishop of Canterbury, province into
Parishes, that so he might appoint particular Ministers to particular
congregations. He died Anno dom. 653.

Godwin p. 52. Theodore a Grecian, born in Tarsus of Cilicia Paul's Country,
was the seventh Arch bishop of Canterbury, a learned man, brought great store
of books, both Greek and Latin with him. He erected a School at Greekeslade,
or Greeks slade in Wiltshire, so called of the Graecians his Countrymen that
taught and studied there, and removing thence, are supposed to lay the
Foundation of the University of Oxford. He sat Archbishop, twenty two years,
died six hundred and ninety, being eighty eight years of age; unto which time
he would often say that he thought he should live; for that in a dream it had
been so signified unto him many years before.

Id. p. 54. Cuthbert the eleventh Archbishop of Canterbury was the first that
got liberty from the Pope of making Coemeteries or burying places within Towns
or Cities, for before within the Walls none were buried.

Id. p. 57. Athelred, who was eighteen years Archbishop of Canterbury all the
Monasteries of England were destroyed by the Danes, so as for the space of
ninety years after Monkery ceased throughout England, yea in the North-parts
there was not seen either Monks or Nuns in two hundred years after, till about
the middle of the reign of William the Conqueror. Married Priests every where
inhabited Monasteries, whence a long time after with much ado they were hardly
ejected. This Athelred died in the year of our Lord eight hundred eighty nine.

Bp. Godw. p. 60. Odo the two and twentieth Archbishop of Canterbury divorced
King Edwin from his Queen, excommunicated his Concubines, and caused one of
them, whom the King doted most unreasonably on, to be fetched out of the Court
by Violence, burnt her in the forehead with a hot Iron, and banished her into
Ireland. After his death, which happened in the year nine hundred fifty eight,
Elsinus Bishop of Winchester that could never brook him in his life, by
bribery and corrupt means obtained election, and coming thither spurned at his
Tomb, despightfully using these speeches: Now at last (says he) thou art dead,
old Dotard, and much against thy will have left thy place to a man worthier of
it than thy self. Our stories report, that the next night Odo appeared to him
in his sleep, threatening a speedy and fearful vengeance of this insolency.
According to which prediction it fell out, that traveling to Rome for his
Pall, upon the Alps he was so oppressed with cold, that he was constrained to
put his feet, wherewith he had so contumeliously disgraced his predecessor,
into the bellies of his Horses, and yet at last to die with cold.

Idem p. 63. Dunstan the 23d. Archbishop of Canterbury, Somersetshire, brought
up in the Abbey of Glastonbury, being commended by Athelm his Uncle to the King
was entertained at Court, till for a Miracle as the Monks call it, which was
then imputed to Conjuration, he was driven thence with much disgrace, and
applied himself to the service of Elphege Bishop of Winchester, who earnestly
persuaded him to be a Monk, which he could not away with, till falling
dangerously sick and apprehending it a Judgment for disgracing his Uncles
persuasion, and then in great have he professed himself a Monk in Glastonbury,
where leading a strict life, as to outward appearance, he grew famous and was
called by King Edward to Court, where he had a diverse reputation, sometimes
accounted too familiar with fair Women, sometimes a Conjurer, but by most a
virtuous person, a bitter Enemy of married Clergym^n, and a great Promoter of
Monkery, ruled all at his pleasure under King Edmund, and Elred, but King Edwin
could not brook him, which Dunstan perceiving, got away into France, and lived
there in Banishment, but by Edgar that succeeded, was recalled and promoted to
the Bishopric of Worcester, then of London and after of Canterbury, where he
sat twenty seven years enriching Monasteries, and persecuting married Priests,
and dyed May the 19th. 988. and was shortly after Canonized for a Saint.

Bp. Godwyn p. 65. Edwin the Son of King Edmund the day of his Coronation, rose
from the Feast and went immediately to his Chamber, where a beautiful Concubine
attended his coming, Dunstan that had gotten some inkling of the business, that
he went about, followed him boldly, and forced him not only to leave that
enterprise for that time, but also to forswear the Company of that Woman for
ever.

Id. p. 64. In the year one thousand and twelve, it happened Danes to be
disappointed of certain tribute, which they claimed as due unto them, for want
whereof they spoiled and burnt the City and Church of Canterbury: The Monks and
People thereof, Men, Women, and Children they tithed, putting nine to the
Sword, and letting go a tenth only, so that for 804. that were suffered to
escape 7236 went to Pot. Elphege then Archbishop they kept in Prison, and put
him to Death at Greenwich.

Id. p. 66. Agelnoth the 29th Archbishop of Canterbury Rome to fetch his Pall,
bought an Arm of St. Austin Bishop of Hippo, for an hundred Talents of Silver
and a Talent of Gold, and bestowed it on the Church of Coventry.

Godw. p 67. Robert surnamed Gemeticensis, a Norman, being Edward the Confessor
made Archbishop of Canterbury, and not enduring that any should bear so great
Sway as himself at Court, fell to devising how he might overthrow Emma the
Kings Mother, who only seemed to overtop him: He began therefore to beat into
the Kings head, (who was a mild and soft natured Prince) how hard a hand his
Mother had held upon him, when he lived in Normandy; how likely it was that his
Brother came to his Death by the practice of her, and Earl Godwyn; and lastly,
that she used the Company of Alwyn Bishop of Winchester more familiarly than
was for her Honor. The King unadvisedly crediting these Tales without debating
the matter seized upon all her goods and committed her to Prison in the Nunnery
of Warewell, banished Earl Godwyn and his Sons, and commanded Alwyn upon pain
of Death not to come forth of the Gates of Winchester. The Queen made the best
Friends she could to be called to her answer, but the Archbishop so possessed the
King, that other trial of her Innocence might not be allowed than this. She
must walk over nine Plow-shares red hot, in the midst of the Cathedral Church
of Winchester: If either she performed not this kind of purgation, or were
found any thing at all hurt, she and the Bishop should be esteemed guilty; if
otherwise, the Archbishop was content to undergo such punishment as they should
have endured. This purgation the Queen performed, and acquitted her self and
the Bishop of the Crimes objected. The King greatly bewailed the wrong done to
his Mother, asked her forgiveness on his knees, restored her and the Bishop to
their goods, and former places; and to make some satisfaction for the fault
committed, would needs be whipped by the Bishops there present, and receive
three stripes from his Mother, who clearly forgave and forgot the wrong done
her. Emma and Alwin to show themselves thankful gave each of them to the
Monastery of Saint Swithins nine Manours in remembrance of the nine
Plow-shares. This gift the King Confirmed and gave two of his own. The
Archbishop doubting the success of this matter under pretense of sickness kept
himself at Dover, and as soon as he heard how the World went, as well knowing
England would be too hot for him, he got to the Abbey of Gemetica, where he was
bred up and there shortly died.

Bp. Godw. p. 70. Upon the flight of Robert Gemeticensis Stigand
Archbishopric, without the usual Ceremonies, and with it held Winchester;
raised the Kentishmen at Saxons comb, who carrying green boughs in their hands,
William the Conqueror was in the midst of them before he was aware, and easily
granted the Kentishmen to be governed by their Ancient Laws, but bore a grudg
against the Archbishop, by whom he would not be Crowned, and against whom he
underhand procured Legates from Rome, who deprived him, and he was likewise
clapped in the Castle of Winchester, and hardly used, even well near famished;
which usage was to make him confess where his Treasure lay. But he protested
with Oaths, that he had no money, yet after his Death a little Key was found
about his Neck the lock whereof being carefully sought out, showed a Note or
direction of infinite Treasuries hid under ground in diverse places: He died in
the year 1069.

Lanfranck descended from Carus the Emperor, was born at Papia in Lombardy,
being brought up in all good Learning till he came to Man's Estate, when he
determined to travail, through France he came into Normandy, robbed by the way,
he got to Becco, where for a maintenance he first read Logic, afterward
admitted to be Monk and soon Priour; when he was called by Duke William to be
Abbot of St. Stephens in Care, and thence by the said Duke now King of England
to be Archbishop of Canterbury, unto whom the Pope afforded his Pall with
extraordinary Favor. For at his first coming, he rose up unto him and met him,
and told him, he yielded him that honor not of duty, but because he had heard
of his excellent Learning: He governed for eighteen years laudably, save one
Action which was this, persuading the Conqueror passing by his Eldest Son
Robert to settle the Crown of England on William Rufus, who afterward, though
advanced by him, banished him, but was recalled and died 1089.

Bp. Godwyn. Anselm professed himself a Monk in the Abbey of Becco in Normandy, in
which he was Prior and Abbot for seventeen years. He came into England upon the
invitation, and earnest design of Hugh Earl of Chester then very sick, and for
the fame of his Learning and Piety was entertained with great respect by all.
King Rufus himself, besides many verbal favors offered him the Archbishopric
of Canterbury, that he had kept void four years, verily hoping that a man given
to contemplation would have refused it. But Anselme accepted, and the King
would have retracted, showing him the burden of so weighty a calling; but
Anselme kept his hold and was consecrated the fourth of December. 1093. The King
immediately fell out with him, and for naming Urban Pope, before the King had
acknowledged him, charged him with high treason, and convened all the Bishops
and Abbots of England to Rochingham Castle, where the business being proposed
by the King, they all forsook their Archbishop, save Gundulphus Bishop of
Rochester: he was banished, and at Dover plundered of all he had, went to the
Pope at Lions, who at first stuck to him, till bought by Rufus's Gold he
deserted him. The Pope dies, and so did Rufus, whose death was miraculously
signified to Anselm being in France. A paper was put into the hand of his
Chaplain, no man knew how; in which was written Gulielmus Rufus occisus est.
Henry the first recalled him, but again banished him and again recalled him, and
he died at Canterbury, April. 21. 1109.

Bp. Godw. p. 80. Henry the first having disposed Bishoprics and given
investiture and possession by delivery of the staff and ring; Anselm refuses
to consecrate such Bishops, or to repute such Bishops, who had been
consecrated. Pope Paschal the second is appealed to, who would not yield one
jot unto the King. For when the Kings Ambassador told him that his Master would
as soon lose his Crown as this Privilege; The Pope answered, yea let him lose
his head, if he will, while I live he shall never appoint Bishop, but I will
resist him what I may. This contention cost him twice three years banishment,
but at last by the Importunity of Adela Countess of Bloys the Kings Sister, he
was not only permited to return, but had all his revenues gathered in his
absence, and his Estate restored to him. After which he lived two years, and
was a bitter Enemy of the married Clergy, not only expelling them out of
Monasteries, but deprived them of their promotions, confiscated their goods,
pronounced them and their Wives Adulterers, and forced all that entered into
Orders to vow chastity. He writ many learned Tracts, and was for the Integrity
of his life and conversation admirable. In Honor of whom the Pope ordained
that the Archbishop of Canterburies place in all general Councils should be at
his own right Foot, using these Words: Includamus hunc in Orb nostro tanquam
alterius Orbis Papam.

Id. p. 81. Radulphus the 35th Archbishop of Canterbury Rome to complain of the
injury done him, by sending Legates into England, alleging it to be the
privilege of the Archbishop of Canterbury to be Legatus Natus, and none other
to be admitted without special License. This allegation the Pope allowed and
the Archbishop returned contented, who for being more delighted with jesting,
and merry Toys, than became the gravity of his age or place, was surnamed or
rather nicknamed Nugax: He died October. 20th. 1122.

Bp. Godw. p. 82. In the year 1122. William Corbel being Archbishop,
Convocation was called by him at Westminster, wherein John de Crema the Popes
Legate, inveighed most bitterly against the Marriage of Priests, and was the
next Night taken in Bed with a common Strumpet: In this Synod more Canons were
made against the Marriage of Clergymen, but the King set them all to a yearly
Pension, or took present large Sums of Money ^o dispense with them. King Henry
dying that preferred this Archbishop, he was content to betray his Daughter
Maud the Empress, and contrary to his Oath, to join with Stephen Earl of Bloys,
whom he Crowned with his own hand, but with such fear and terror of
Conscience, that the consecrated Host fell out of his hand in the middle of
Mass, by reason of his trembling and fearful amazedness.

Idem p. 83. Theobald Abbot of Becco a Norman born, a wise and virtuous Person,
was chosen Archbishop in a Convocation held in London, 1138. by his suffragan
Bishops, consecrated by Albert the Popes Legate, received his Pall at Rome from
Innocentius the second, who confirmed to him and his Successors for ever, the
Title of Legatus Natus, resisted the Popes intrusion of vvorthless Persons into
dignities, and was therefore much troubled: St. Bernard writ to the Pope for
him: Ep. 111th. In the third year of his Consecration a Council was summoned
at Rhemes, vvhereto he was called: Henry Bishop of Winchester, King Stephens
Brother and Legate endeavored to circumvent him; he dealt with the Pope not to
dispense with his absence, and with King Stephen to forbid his passage. Yet
go he did, and was at the Council in good time. The King follovving the advice
of his Brother, seized upon his Estate and banished him the Realm: He
Interdicts the King and Kingdom, came home, and lived privately, till by
Intercession of Friends he was restored and grevv in great Favor with the
King, and was the chief means of concluding the final peace betvveen him and
Maud the Empress at Wallingford in the year 1152. He summoned a Council, where
King Stephen would have constrained the clergy to have made his Son Eustace
King: The intent was espied before, Letters were procured from the Pope
forbidding the Clergy to meddle in it, yet the King prosecutes his design,
shuts the Doors upon the Clergy, and thought by force to compel them. The
greater part yield, but the Archbishop stole away secretly, took his Barge,
rowed down the Thames, got beyond Sea, and by his absence dissolved the Synod.
King Stephen being dead, H. the second restored him to all, which he enjoyed
till his death, which was 1160.

Bp. Godw. p. 86. Hugo the Popes Legate coming into England, Convocation was
summoned at Westminster, where Richard Archbishop of Canterbury being sat at
the right hand of the Legate, Roger Archbishop of York coming in, would needs
have displaced him, which when the other would not suffer he sat down in his
Lap. All vvonder: The Servants of Canterbury dravv him by violence out of his
ill chosen place, threvv him down, tare his Robes, trod upon him, and used him
very despitefully: He in this dusty pickle goes and complains to the King,
who was at first angry, but when he heard the truth, laughed at it, and said
he was well enough served.

Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, sleeping at his manor of Wrotham, there
seemed to come to him a terrible Personage, asking him, who he was: and when
the Archbishop was silent he told him; Thou art he who have destroyed the
goods of the Church, and I will destroy thee from off the Earth; this said, he
vanished: The Archbishop gets up, took his Journey to Rochester, by the way
told this Vision, and immediately was taken with a cold and stiffness, and
being hardly got that Night to Halling, a House of the Bishop of Rochester,
extremely tormented with the Colic, the next night dyed. Febr. 16. 1183.

Id. p. 96. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century VI.
THe Saxons called in by the distressed Britains as their Friends, in a short
time proved their suppressing and supplanting Enemies, driving them out of
their Ancient habitations, except Cornwall and Wales.

Speeds Maps. Eple. Harald made a Law, that if any VVelsh-man Offditch with any
weapon, he should forthwith have his right hand cut off.

Id. p. 3. Elfrid King of the West Saxons reduced Country to that peaceable
frame from notorious Robberies, that in the very High ways he commanded
bracelets of gold to be hung up, to mock the greedy passengers, while none were
found so hardy, as to take them away: Which he effected by dividing his land
into shires, and then into hundreds and Tithings, making each hundred and
Tithing responsible for their Inhabitants.

Id. p. 3. England was divided into Parishes in the year six hundred thirty
six, by Honorius the fifth Archbishop of Canterbury, and there are twenty and
seven Bishoprics, and nine thousand two hundred eighty five Parishes.

Speed p. 5. Mottingham in Kent, in the year 1586. the fourth day of August the
ground began to sink, and three great Elmes growing thereon sunk, and a Hole
was left fourscore yards in compass, and a line of fifty fathoms plumm'd into
it does find no bottom.

Id. p. 7. Beckets Tomb for glory, wealth, and superstitious worship,
equallized the Pyramides of Egypt, or the Oracles of Delphos; yet now with
Dagon is fallen before the Ark of God. 161.

The Conqueror for his pleasure inforested thirty miles in Hampshire, and
pulled down thirty six Parish Churches. In which Forest his two Sons, Richard
by a Pestilent air, Rufus by a shot, and his Grandson Henry son of Duke Robert
by hanging in a bough, as Absalom came to their untimely ends.

Id. p. 13. Canutus to convince his flatterers set himself by the Sea side, and
commanded it to retire, but that disobeying, he acknowledged God the only
governor, and gave up his Crown to the Rood at Winchester.

Maud the Empress was carried in a Coffin from Winchester to Gloucester, and so
to Oxford as dead to escape her Enemies.

The men of the Isle of VVight brag that they happier than their neighbors, in
that they never had Monk that wore Cowl, Lawyer that cavilled, nor Foxes that
were crafty. In which Isle in the year 1176 it rained a shoure of blood for two
hours.

Id. p. 15. Sir Fancis Drake in two years and ten months world.

Speeds Maps p. 15. Henry Holland Duke of Excester and who Edward the fourth
his Sister, was seen to beg his bread in France.

Main Amber near Pensans in Cornwall is rock, which mounted on others of meaner
size, has so equal a poyse, that a man may move it with a push of his finger,
but no strength remove it.

Id. p. 21. At Dunster in Somersetshire a great Lady husband so much pasture
ground in common by the towns side, for the good and benefit of the
Inhabitants, as she was able in a whole day to go about barefooted.

Id. p. 23. At Calne in Wil^shire in the year nine hundred Synod was held by
Dunstan against married Priests in an upper room. The floor fell down, only
Dunstans chair stood, whereupon the married ^ri^sts lost the day, though it was
done by device.

Id. p. 25. Salisbury Cathedral there are as many Windows as days, cast marble
pillars as hours, and Gates as months in the year.

Ibid. Edward the third King of England was born in Windsor Castle, and after
had at the same time John King of France, and David King of Scots Prisoners in
it. In the Chapel of which Castle lies interred Henry the sixth, and Edward
the fourth Kings of England, whom living, the whole land could not contain.

Finchamsteed in Bark-shire in the year one thousand one hundred, a Well boiled
up with streams of blood, and fifteen days together continued that spring,
whose waters made red all other where they came, to the great amazement of
beholders.

Speeds Maps p. 27. Army of Mice so overrun the Marshes in Dengry Hundred in
Essex, near unto South-Minster, that they shore the grass to the very roots,
and so tainted the same with their venomous teeth, that a great Murrain fell on
the cattle that grazed on it.

Colchester, Lucius, H lena and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress
and Emperor in the World was born. Id. p. 31.

A Fish in all parts like a man was taken Oxford in Suffolk and for six months
was kept in the Castle, whence afterward he escaped, and got again into the
Sea.

Id. p. 33. Betwixt Oxford and Aldebrough in the County Suffolk, in the year
one thousand five hundred fifty and five, in a time of great dearth a Crop of
pease grew in the rocks without tillage, or sowing, so that in August there had
been a hundred quarters gathered, and so many more left blossoming, where never
grass before grew, or Earth was seen on the hard solid rock.

Id. p. 33. Between January and July in the year one died in Norwich of the
plague fifty seven thousand five hundred and four.

p. 35. Breakespear an Englishman born at Langley H^rtfordshire, known by the
name of Pope Hadrian the fourth, whose stirrup was held by Frederick the
Emperor, was killed by a Fly that flew into his mouth.

p. 39. Before the Civil Wars between Lancaster York, in the year one thousand
three hundred ninety and nine, the River Owse near Harwood in Bedfordshire
stood suddenly still, and went not forward, so that men passed three miles
together on foot in t e depth of the Channel, and backward the V^ater swelled
to a great height.

Speeds Map p. 41. Offa's Leaden Tomb in t e River Owse like some fantastical
thing appears to them that seek it not, but to them that seek it, it
remains invisible.

Id p. 49. Askridge in Buchingamshire was great resort to the blood supposed to
flo^ out of Christ's side, brought out of Germany by Henry the Eldest ^on of
Richard King of the Romans, which was afterward discovered to be clarified
Honey colored with Saffron.

Id. p. 43. Lands of Condemned Persons in some parts of Glocestershire, fall to
the King only for a year and a day, and then revert to the right Heirs.

Id. p 47. Herefordshire near Richards Castle there is a Well called Bonewell,
wherein a^e continually found little Fishes Bones, but not a Finne seen, and
being wholly cleansed will notwithstanding have again the like, whether
naturally produced, or in Veins thither brought, none knows.

Id. p 49. Marcley-Hill in Herefordshire in the ^ear one thousand five hundred
seventy one, moved it self in three days four hundred Yards, without any stay,
overturned Kingston Chapel, and turned two w^ves near a hundred paces from
their usual Paths.

p. 49. In the year one thousand four hundred sixty urification of the ^irgin,
there was a great Battle fought by James ^ut^er Earl of Ormond, against Edward
Earl of March, betwixt Ludlow and little Hereford, before which B^ttel on the
same da^ appeared in the Firmament three Suns, which after a while united into
one.

Sp. M. p. 49. The Citizens of Coventry having offended Privileges infringed,
and themselves oppressed with many heavy tributes: Whose Wife the Lady Godiva
pitying their Estat^, incessantly sued to her Husband for their peace, which
he granted on this condition, that she would ride naked through the Streets of
the City at Noon day, which she accordingly performed, letting down her Hair
which covered her Body.

p. 53. At Newingham Regis in Warwickshire, there Spring against the Stone,
green Wounds, Ulcers, and Impostumes,: The Water of which, if drunk ith Salt,
loosene^h, if with Sugar, binds, and turns sticks that fall into it into
stone.

Sp. M. p. 53. Nobleman come into the Manor of Okam in Rutlandshire, he
forfeiteth one Shoe of the Horse he rides, as an Homage to the Lord Harrington
Lord of it.

Sp. M. 59. Henry the second at the siege of Bridge-North had been slain with
an Arrow aimed at him, had not Sir Hubert Sinclere received it, by stepping
betwixt the shaft and his Sovereign, and so lost his own Life to save his Lords.

Sp. M. p. 71. Pitchford in Shropshire in a private man's Yard, there is a Well
whereon floateth a thick Scum of Liquid Bitumen, which being clear off to day,
will gather the like to Morrow, a lively emblem of our in-being corruption.

Sp. M. p. 71. Edgar being in Chester and the Homage of eight other Kings, who
rowed his Barge from St. John's to his Palace, himself holding the Helm as
their Supreme.

p. 73. Trees are reported to float in Bagmeere in Cheshire, only against the
death of the Heir of the Breertons, and after to sink and disappear till the
next like Occasion.

Steingrave a little Village in Yorkshire, some seventy years since was caught
a Fish called a Seaman, that for certain days fed on raw Fishes, but espying
his opportunity, escaped again into his Watery Element.

p. 81. There are certain Fields near Whitby in Yorkshire,

Speeds Maps p. 81. On Christmas day one thousand one hundred Oxen-hall in the
territory of Darlington, in the Bishopric of Durham, the ground heaved up
aloft like unto a high Tower, and so continued all that day unmovable, until
the Evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that made all the
Neighbor dwellers sore afraid, and the Earth swallowed it up, and made in the
same a deep Pit, now called Hell-Kettles, which is there to be seen at this day.

There are two Catadupes or Waterfalls in Can never Kendale in Westmorland, by
which the Neighbor Inhabitants prognosticate what Weather; when that which
stands North sounds clearest, they expect fair Weather, when that on the
South, they expect Mists, Rain, and foul. p. 81.

The Scots at Sollom Moss in the time of King James the Fifth, for despite
that Oliver Sinclere the Kings Favorite was made General, gave over the
Battle, and yielded themselves to the English, for grief whereof the King
shortly after died.

Speeds Maps p. 87. Isle of Man, never go out of Doors but gird themselves with
their Winding-she^t^, to show that they are mindful of their Mortality.

Id. p. 91. Garnsey has no venomous Creature in it, and therefore when a
Controversy arose to which it should belong, Ireland or Scotland, it was
adjudged to Ireland.

Id. p. 94. Edmund Earl of Richmond Father to King Henry the Seventh, l^ing
interred in St. David's quire, saved the Church from defacement in the days of
Henry the eighth.

Id p. 101. Rock or Cliff upon the Seaside of the Island Barry, near the South
East Point of Glamorganshire, is heard out of a little Chink the noise as it
were of Smiths at work; one while the blowing of Bellows, then the strokes of
Hammers, and sound of Anvils, the noise of Grind- Stones, hissing of
Steel-gads, and the Flames of a Furnace.

Id. p. 105. Henry Beauclerke King of England kept his Elder Brother Robert
Curthose Duke of Normandy Prisoner in Cardiff Castle the space of twenty six
years.

Id. p. 105. Newton in Glamorganshire about a hundred Paces from Severn, there
springs a Well, where at the flowing and fullness of the Sea c^n hardly any
Water be gotten, but at the Ebb and fall of the Tide it walloweth up amain.

Id p. 105. The Monastery of Lantony in Monmouthshire solitary and amongst Hill
s, that the Sun was not seen to shine there, but only between the Hours of one
and three.

Speeds Map. p. 107. Near Brecknock is a hill called Cadur ^rthur, North east
rock whereof, whatever, if not stone or of a Metalline nature, that is cast
down, will by the wind and air be thrown back again, and blown up.

p. 109. The River Levinney in Brecknock shire passes Loesavathan and mixeth
not his water with it, in which Mere sometimes stood a great City.

Id. p. 109. At Rashader Gowy in Radnorshire, the Wye falls with a great
noise, and there is a Market kept on the sabbath day.

Id. p. 111. The Salmon coming up the River to get up policy: he bends
himself backward and takes his tail in his mouth, and with all his strength
unloosing his circle on a sudden, as a lath let go mounts up before the fall of
the stream.

Speeds Maps p. 113. hills in Meri^^^ethshire are so high and their tops so
near, that sheepheards on the tops falling at odds in the morning, and
challenging the field for fight, before they can come together to try out their
quarrel the day will be spent, and the heat of their fury shut up with their
sleep.

Id. p. 117. bell in Denbigh town hall was caused to toll twice by the shaking
of the earth, and no harm, or hindrance at all either done or taken.

Id. 119. Winefrids Well in Flintshire is reported to rise from the place on
which St. Winefrids head fell, being cut off by one that would have ravished her.

Id. p. 121. Lomund, a famous Lough or lake in Scotland, the waters rage most
in the fairest and calmest weather.

Sp. Maps p. 132. Scotland the Virginities of all new Wives were the Landlords
prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that half a Mark should be paid for
redemption.

Ibid. Solinus reports that the Irish were of old so given to War, that the
Mother at the birth of a man-child, feeds the first meat into the Infants
mouth upon the point of her Husbands Sword, and since their being Christians,
at baptizing their Infants, they dipped not their right Arms under Water, that
so as they thought, they might, give a more deep and incurable Wound.

Id. p. 138. The Old Irish at every change of the Moon, worshipped her, bowed
their Knees and made their Supplications, and with a loud voice thus spoke unto
the Planet, We pray thee leave us in as good Estate at thou find us.

Id. p. 135. In Ireland in the year 1331. in a great famine June, there came to
Land such a mighty multitude of great Sea-Fishes called Thurheads, such as in
many Ages had not been seen, by which they were greatly relieved.

Id. p. 139. William Marshal Earl of Pembroke being tossed Sea, vowed to erect an
Abbey where he ^anded, which he did and called it, De Voto.

p. 41. In the year 1316. there was so great a Famine Ireland, that they took
up the dead Bodies out of their Graves, and in their Sculls boiled their Flesh
and fed upon it, and the Women did eat their own Children.

p. 143. Irish in Vlster were accustomed in Controversies and solemn
protestations to swear by St. Patricks Staff, which Oath they feared more to
break, than if they had sworn by the Holy Evangelists.

p. 146. Socrates the Night before he was to die would learn Music, because he
would die learning something

Trojans having saved themselves by Flight, and having put into the Thufcan
Sea, anchored near to the River Tyber, whose Wives being extremely Sea-sick, by
the Counsel of the L^dy Roma set Fire on their ^hips, which necessitated their
sta^, and occasioned thereupon the building of Rome.

peeds preface to his History. Isle of Great Britain, from the ^izards point in
Cornwall to Stratly-head in Scotland, is six hundred twenty and four Miles; The
breadth from the Lands end in ^ornwall to the Island Tenet in Kent is three
hundred and forty Miles; In all which Island the Corn s wn soon shoots up, and
slowly ripens, caused by the overmuch moisture of the soil and air, by the
endeavors of whose English Natives eight Nations have been converted to the
Christian Faith.

Speeds History p. 156. swim with their Face and fore parts downward, whereas
men do the contrary, as if the impression of modesty were not to leave a Woman
after death. Margaret Wife to Maximilian Emperor chose rather to die than to
have her Thigh cured, which was broken with a fall from a Horse.

Id. p. 182. Caesar bearing the Office of Quaestorship in Spain, and naturally
disposed for great affairs, was thereto the more invited at the sight of
Alexanders Portraicture in the Temple of Hercules at Gades, where beholding it,
he fell into a sudden dislike of himself; and as Alexander seeing Achilles his
Tomb, being filled with an ambitious and honorable emulation, sighed, and
said, Have thou at my years achieved the Conquest of the whole World, my self
hitherto having done no memorable act.

Id. p. 183. Sceva who at the siege of Dyrrachium stood Caesar came to his
rescue, that he had two hundred and thirty Holes made in his Shield, was a
Britain.

p. 184. Caesar having twice suffered Shipwreck on the British Coasts caused
his Ships to be drawn on Land.

Id. p. 186. Caesar in fifty Battles that he fought, went Conqueror in all
saving one, being laborious, courageous, industrious in Contriving, and quick
in dispatch.

Speeds Hist. p. 188. Augustus Caesar, in the forty second year of whose reign
Christ was born, it being the year from the Worlds Creatior, 3927. erected an
Altar in the Capitol to the Hebrew Child, with this Inscription, The Altar of
the first begotten Son of God. And after Christ's death, Tiberius wrote to the
Senate to have him consecrated amongst the Roman Gods, but they refused, saying
that the Doctrine of Salvation should not need the allowance and approbation of
men.

p. 191. Caligula having marshalled his men as to battle upon the Ocean
Shore, after the sounding of the Trumpets as to sight, commanded them to gather
Cockle-shells, which he called the spoil of the Ocean and demanded triumph for
it.

Idem p. 192. Caligula wished that all the people of Rome had but one neck that
he might have the glory of giving the bravest blow, that ever was given,
wherein so Infinite multitudes of men might be killed with one stroke.

Speeds Hist. p. 192. Claudius the Emperor honored Plautius with his presence
in his Triumph for Britain, giving him the right hand ascending the Capitol:
Christ will do much more for his Soldiers, make them like him, glorify them
with him.

Sp. Hist p. 194. The Emperor Claudius caused his own death speech which fell
from him in his wine, That it was fatal for him first to hear the Lewdness of
his wives, and then to punish them; which Agrippina hearing, to prevent her own
death, hastened her husbands by giving him poison in a Mushrom.

Id. p. 196. Nero set Rome on fire and sung to his Harp Troy, and laid the
blame of it on the Christians.

Bodao the British Lady and famous Warrior speech to her Soldiers, secretly
held a Hare in her lap, which having told them that their Enemies would fly
like Hares, she let go: And her Army not knowing the deceit, construed it as an
Ominous and lucky sign of Victory.

Speeds Hist. p. 199. Nero was an excellent Musician, and so prodigal garment
twice.

Astrologers and Star-gazers are a kind of unfaithful, to hopers deceitful, and
in a Commonwealth always forbidden, yet always retained.

Id. p. 202. Galba while a private man seemed more than a private man, and held
capable of the Emp^re, if he had not been Emperor.

p. 202. Chrysanthus Bishop of Constantinople reserved to himself of all his
Ecclesiastical revenues but two Loaves of bread every Lords day.

p. 206. Vitellius dedicated the dagger that Otho his Competitor killed himself
with, unto Mars in his Temple at Coleyn, as the lucky instrument of his
advanced Estate.

p. 209. Vitellius the Emperor commended his own Temperance in a set letter to
the Senate, though they knew him an extreme glutton, having no less than two
thousand dishes of fish, and seven thousand dishes of fowls served to his Table
at one supper.

p. 209. Officers and Soldiers saluted Vespatian Emperor, which title when he
resolutely gainsayed and refused, they with drawn Swords threatened him his
death. He proved an Excellent Prince, and by his touch is reported to cure a
lame man, and with his Spittle to open the Eyes of the blind.

p. 211. Titus was an excellent Prince and worthily called Deliciae humani
generis, was a great enemy to Promoters, Pettifoggers and extorturs of penal
laws, which as Caterpillars to courts of penal Laws, which as Caterpillars to
Courts of Justice, he caused to be whipped out of Rome.

Titus at his death lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, Life should be taken from
him, that except one Offense, (viz. his murder of Aulus Cinna through
jealousy of his familiarity with Berenices his Paramour) deserved not to die.

Speeds Hist. p. 212. Agricola having Conquered Scotland, sent Domitian, who
received the News with a cheerful countenance and a grieved heart.

p. 215. Domitian bought certain Slaves for money, attired them and dressed
them as Captives of Germany and Triumphed for them.

p. 215. Domitian put to death Salustius Lucullus, Britain, because he had
devised and made certain Spears and Lances for service, which he caused to be
called Lucullians. And this Domitian held it a matter of suspicion, who thought
every memorable act done by another, did pluck a feather from his own Plume.

p. 216. Trajan investing any Praetor in giving him Sword, commanded him to use
the same against him if he violated Law or Equity.

Idem p. 217. Adrian destro^ed Jerusalem and built another City not far from
it, and called it Aelia, from whence the Jews were utterly banished, and it was
forbidden to them to look toward that Soil or City, no not through the Chink
of a Do^r. And upon a Gate that leads toward Bethlem, he caused a Swine to
be engraven, a Beast by the Law counted unclean.

Id. p. 219. Antoninus Pius published an Edict in the favor of the Christians,
that whosoever should accuse any for such, he should suffer the same punishment
he intended to have brought upon the accused.

Id. p. 221. Antoninus Pius it is recorded that in his Youth, he did not any
thing rashly, not in his age any thing negligently. His usual Speech it was,
that he had rather save one Subjects Life, than kill a thousand Enemies.

Ibid. Emperor Aurelius in his Wars against the Quades, suffered great
extremity for want of Water. When upon command given, the Christians in his
Army prayed unto God and obtained a plenteous shower of Rain, which refreshed
his Army, and Thunder and Lightning which overthrew the Quade^, on which the
Emperor made favorable Decrees in the behalf of the Christians, and called
that Legion the Lightning Legion.

Speeds History p. 221. The Papists make miserable, absurd applications
Scriptures to build the Babel of their power by. Thus, God made a greater and a
lesser Light: Therefore the Pope is as much greater than the Emperor, as the
Sun is bigger than the Moon. Christ said to Peter, Kill and eat: Therefore the
Pope may excommunicate, depose and kill Kings. Peter said, Behold two Swords:
Therefore the Pope has both Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdiction. God said to
Jeremy, he should Plant and Transplant: Therefore the Pope may dispose and
transpose Kingdoms at his pleasure. Domini sunt Cardines Terrarum: Therefore
the Cardinals are the Lords of the Earth.

Id. p. 223. Commodus having enrolled many for death, Martia lighted upon the
List and discovered to others, she being herself one prescribed; who to save
their own Lives, with Poison, stabs and strangling made him away.

Id. p. 225. The Praetorian Soldiers sold the Empire to Didius Julianus and in
five days killed him. Much wiser was Audentius, who was so far from giving any
thing for it, that being chosen Emperor by the Soldiers, he utterly refused it.

Albinus to record the Story of his Life, he willed him to write of those who
were already dead, whom he need not flatter.

Id. p. 228. Bassianus (who slew his Brother Geta in his Mothers Arms) so
longed for the death of his Father Severus, (whose dying Speech was, I was all
things and am nothing) that he slew his Physicians because they dispatched him
no sooner, as he did the great Lawyer Papinian, for refusig to excuse the
murder of his Brethren in his Pleas at the Bar.

p. 232. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century VII.
JVlia Mother in Law to Caracalla the Emperor Veil discovered her naked
breasts and beauty, which was great. Whereat the Emperor casting his lascivious
Eye, said, bewraying his affection, Were it not unlawful, I should not be
unwilling. To whom she replied that all things were lawful to him that made
laws for others, but was subject to none himself.

Speeds Hist. p. 231. Caracalla sending to Maternus to assemble live and when
die. Maternus returned him word, that Macrinus the Prefect of his Praetorium
went about to murder him: which letters coming to Caracalla, at what time he
was busy at his disports; he delivered them to Macrinus to read, who finding
himself accused stirred up one Martial a Centurion (whose brother Caracalla had
killed) to murder him, which he did accordingly.

Id. p. 232. Heliogabalus was the Monster of prodigality and luxury, every
Supper costing a thousand pound, never wearing the same garment or Jewel, or
using Concubine twice. Inviting some chief Citizens to a feast he strowed all
the Room with Saffron, saying, Such cattle were worthy such litter. Near the
Sea no fish was eaten, in the Inland country no flesh, whole meals made of the
tongues of singing Birds, and brains of costly creatures. His saying was, that
meat was not savoury, whose sauce was not costly. He provided, fearing the
worst, silken Halters and golden Knives to make away with himself. And at last
with his Mother was slain ignominiously by his own Guard, saying, The Bitch and
her Whelp must go together.

Speed, p. 234. Alexander Severus, though a heathen, yet approved the
Christians and their precepts, and writ about his Palace, and caused to be
proclaimed that Golden rule of Christ, Not to do to others what we would not
have done to our selves; and so respected Christ that he would have had him
consecrated amongst the heathen Gods: and when certain Vintners and Victuallers
laid claim to a place whereunto the Christians resorted to pray; he thus
decided it, that it was much fitter that God should there be worshipped than
belly-gods pampered.

p. 235. Alexander Severus preferred none to offices on the suites of others,
but for their own worthiness: in regard whereof he caused Turinus one of his
Courtiers (who took money of diverse with promise to procure the Emperors favor
in their suits) to be put to death by smoke; the Crier proclaiming that he had
sold smoke, and therefore with smoke he should die.

Sp. p. 235. Maximinus a giant-like man from a shepherd Imperial dignity,
devoured forty pound weight of flesh and drank six gallons of wine daily,
became a hateful Tyrant: when he besieged Aquileia, the Citizens Wives cut off
the hair of their head to make bow-strings to resist him, and was at that siege
killed in his Tent by his own Soldiers.

p. 287. Julius Philippus Caesar was a man of that laugh in all his life.

Speeds History p. 241. Valerianus Emperor being taken by Saporis Persia, was
kept seven years in Prison, and made the footstool, on whose back and neck the
King treading got up to his Horse.

p. 244. Aurelius Marius a blacksmith made Emperor Sword of his own making.

p. 246. Aurelianus the Emperor is reported to have slain with his own hand
nine hundred men in several fights.

Tomyris having vanquished Cyrus and all his Host, and filling a Vessel with
their blood, did cast into it the head of Cyrus, saying, Blood thou have
thirsted, now drink thereof thy fill.

Id. p. 249. Aurelianus the Emperor being about to sign an edict against the
Christians, a Thunderbolt from Heaven struck into his presence, and so near his
person that all accounted him to be therewith slain; but he not taking warning
was shortly slain by his own servants.

Speeds History p. 249. Claudius Tacitus Emperor a great favorer of learned
men, commanded the works of Tacitus the Historian to be carefully preserved in
every Library throughout the Empire, and ten times every year to be transcribed
at public Cost; all which notwithstanding, many of his works are since
miscarried: Whereas God has safely by his own care preserved entire the Holy
Scriptures. p. 250.

Bonosus of whom Aurelianus said, that he was Non ut Viveret, sed ut biberet,
aspired to the Empire, but fearing Probus, hanged himself; whereupon 'twas said
that a barrel was hanged not a man.

Probus saying, that he would shortly bring it to pass that the State should
need no more Soldiers, was thereupon by some of his own Army, conspired
against and treacherously murdered.

p. 252. Constantius Chlorus having landed his men Britain, fired his Ships
lest they should think of a retreat; so did William the Conqueror.

Speed p. 25. Dioclesian the raiser of the tenth persecution, edict commanded
his Foot to be kissed, a practice since imitated by his Successors in cruelty
and pride, the Popes of Rome.

156. Constantius Chlorus Emperor Father of Constantine wealth of the Land
should be dispersed into the Commons hand, than to lie locked in the Princers
Coffers. And so every way free from all Superfluities, that on Festival days
and entertainment of Strangers, he was wont to borrow Plate of his Friends to
furnish his Table and Cupboards.

Id. p. 257. Constantius Chlorus to try his Officers, commanded Sacrifice to
the Idol Gods, pretending to discourt all such as refused; but contrariwise
those that obeyed he put from him with this reproof, That he that is disloyal
to his God, will never be true not trusty to his Prince.

p. 258. Constantine in his Expedition toward Rome, being doubtful what God to
invocate, casting up his Eyes to Heaven, had the sign of the Cross presented to
him, wherein were Stars as Letters so placed, that visibly might be read this
Sentence in Greek In this Sign thou shall overcome.

Speeds Hist. p. 259. Maxentius framed a deceitful Bridge over Tybur to entrap
Constantine, but joining Battle and overlaid and retiring, fled himself over
the same Bridge, which falling under him he and many more were drowned.

260. Constantine intending to build a City at Chalcedon in Asia, whilst they
were measuring out the Circuit, an Eagle scouping at the Line, flew with it
over the Sea toward Bizantium in Thrace, to which place the thing seeming
Ominous, he transferred his new Foundation, and there built Constantinople. p.
261.

In the famous Library at Constantinople, in Manuscripts, there were the Gutts
of a Dragon 120 foot long, on which Homers Iliads were written admirably in
Letters of Gold.

p. 261. Julian the Emperor first a Deacon, after a Apostate, yet was otherwise
highly commended for his many good qualities, so temperate that he never had
any War with his Belly, so chaste that after the Death of his Wife he never
regarded Women, and would not see the Persian Captive Ladies, nor suffer
Cooks or Barbers in his Army, as being Ministers of Intemperance. As for
Stage Plays he never but once a year permitted them in his Court, and then he
says of himself, he was similior detestanti quam spectanti.

Id. p. 265. When Delphidius the Orator inveighed against Nocens esse poterit
quisquam, si negare sufficeret, Who can be guilty if it be enough to deny?
Julian replied, And who can be innocent if it be enough to accuse?

Id. 265. Julian in despite of the Christians, would Jerusalem, and set men on
work to that purpose, but was frustrated by terrible Earthquakes and
Fireballs, that hindered his proceedings; and forms of Crosses shining as the
Sun, fell on the Garments of the Jews.

Ibid. From above the Porch of Entrance into one Julian regained, the Wreath of
Laurel reserved as an Ornament of the place, fell in a wonderful manner on his
head, which filled him with hopes of conquering the Persians, against whom
(having vowed a Sacrifice of Christians if he returned,) going with confidence
was slain by a Lance, from whose hand none knew, and dying cast his blood into
the air with these words, Vicisti Galilaee. His usual saying was, Turpe est
sapienti cum habeat animam, captare lauds ex corpore.

Speeds Hist. p. 266. Valentinian the Son of a Rope-maker in the days of Julia
laid down his belt (that is) his Command in the Army, rather than he would
renounce his faith, and was shortly after chosen Emperor, in whose days St.
Jerome reports, that it rained Wool from heaven, so perfect and good that no
better grew upon the sheep the natural producers of it.

p. 371. Severa Valentinians wife commending the beauty of Justina to her
husband, occasioned his marrying of her, who taking two wives himself, made a
Law, that others might do so likewise.

p. 272. Maximus the Usurper, seeking the life of Gratianus the Emperor caused
letters and reports to be brought to Gratian, that his Empress was on her
journey to visit him, and withal sent forth a Caroch stuffed with Soldiers,
and with them a desperate Captain named Andragathius. Gratian rejoicing at his
wifes approach, prepared himself to meet her, and opening the letter thinking
to embrace his Empress was by the Command of Andragathius treacherously
murdered. But Andragathius, after Maximus was overthrown by Theodosius, his
state being then desperate, cast himself headlong into the Sea, and made an end
of his wretched life.

p. 233. Theodosius in a great danger overlaid by Eugenius Arbogastus, upon his
earnest prayer, God raised a violent tempest, which so sorely beat upon his
Enemies, that he got a glorious Victory.

One Constantine a common Soldier was Emperor only for his names sake.

p. 280. Theodosius having cruelly destroyed the Thessalonians, Millain would
have entered the Church to have communicated with other Christians, but was
resisted and forbid by St. Ambrose, in which estate the Emperor stood for eight
months, and then with great humility and submission acknowledging his offense
was absolved and again received into the congregation.

Speeds Hist. p. 275. Theodosius being very passionate, and thereby Law that
thirty days should pass betwixt the sentence of death and the execution of the
Malefactor; and to suppress his hasty Choler, his usual manner was to recite
the Greek Alphabet before he uttered any speech savouring of that humor.

p. 275. Pelagius was a Britain whose heretical opinions were these.

1. That man without the grace of God was able to fulfill all the Commandments.
2. That man in himself had free will. 3. That the grace of God was given unto
us according to our merits. 4. That the Just have no sin. 5. That children are
free from Original sin. 6. That Adam should have died if he had not sinned.
p. 279. Saxons, he that abandoned or lost his shield in battle, was debarred
from their public sacrifices and Assemblies, the greatest disgrace that could
be; for shame of which many destroyed themselves.

Id. p. 289. The Germans were a warlike Nation; their dowry at their Nuptials,
a Tent and a Spear, and their Men usually met at their Feasts and Counsels in
their armor, and for any to return alive from the Battle in which the Prince
was slain, was a perpetual Infamy.

p. 289. Women taken in Adultery among the Saxons, Hair cut off, were turned
stark naked out of their Husbands Houses, and that in presence of their own
kindred, then were they scourged with Whips through the Town, without
regard of birth, beauty, age or wealth, and never after could get any other
Husbands.

p. 289. Vodine Bishop of London, feared not to tell Vortigerus, that for
Marrying Rowena a heathenish Lady, Daughter to Hengist, he had endangered both
his Soul and his Crown. Which words were so ill digested, that they shortly
cost the Bishop his Life.

Speeds Hist. p. 290. Ethelburga the Wife of King Brithrich the Saxon, having
poisoned her Husband, fled into France, where being for her beauty prostered by
King Charles the Marriage of himself or his Son; she making choice of the Son,
had neither, but was thrust into a Monastery, whence committing Whoredom, she
was expelled and died in great misery.

Id. p. 328. Ino King of the West Saxons, gave over his Rome, professed
Religion, and there died. Sibba King of the East Saxons turned Monk. Ossa
likewise put on a Cowl and went to Rome. Osith Wife of King Sighere, and
Keneswif Wife of King Ossa entered Religion. No less than eight Kings of the
Saxons gave over the World and became Votaries.

p. 309. 11. Paul's in London was a Temple of Diana, and St. Peter's in
Westminster was a Temple of Apollo.

Id. 311. Etheldred commonly called St. Audry, wife to Egfrid King of
Northumberland, and before to Tombert a Noble man, lived with them both and
with her last husband twelve years, yet continued a Virgin, and having got
leave to depart from her husband professed her self a Nun.

p. 317. Vortimer ordered his tomb to be built in the Isle of Thanet to the
terror of the Saxons, whom he had often Conquered. As Scipio ordered that his
tomb might be so set as to overlook Africa, as a terror to the Carthaginians.

331. Uter Pendragon being deeply enamoured on Igren the beautiful wife of
Gorlois Duke of Cornwall, and having often in vain attempted her chastity, at
last by the help of Merlin obtained his desire; for Merlin so new molded the
shape of King Vter, and printed in his face the features of Gorlois, that
without suspect, Igren entertained him, in which bed of deceit the famous
Arthur was begot.

Id. p. 333. Careticus King of Britain flying from Gurmund Chichester, certain
Sparrows being caught, and fire fastened to their feet were let fly in the
Town, which lighting upon straw and other matter fit for flaming, burnt in a
short space the whole City.

Speeds Hist. p. 388. Colman and Wilfrid disputing about the time Easter before
King Oswy, Colman urged the Example of St. John, Wilfrid of St. Peter, to whom
Christ had committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; which the King hearing,
concluded this controversy thus: I will not gainsay such a Porter as this,
lest when I come to the Doors of Heaven, I find none to open to me having his
displeasure.

p. 348. Redwald King of the East Angles after the Samaritans, in the same
Temple erected an Altar for the service of Christ, and another for Sacrifices
to his Idols.

p. 350. A Ruffian being sent to Murder Edwyn, King Northumberland, and drawing
his Sword: Lilla the Kings Servant wanting wherewith to defend his Master, put
himself between the King and his Sword, and so lost his own to save his Masters
life.

Edwyn's care was such for waifaring passengers, Springs, where he set Basins
of Brass, both to drink and wash in.

p. 351. Oswald King of Northumberland having sent for Aidan a Scottish Bishop
to instruct his Northumbrians, whereas Aidan could not speak the Language, the
King himself was Interpreter at his Sermons, and gave his words in English, as
he spoke them in the Scottish ^anguage.

p. 353. Oswald upon a solemn Feast day, seeing many Poor at his Gates, sent
them the Delicates for himself prepared, and commanded the Charger of Silver to
be broken and divided amongst them. Bishop Aidan much rejoicing thereat, took
the King by the right hand, and prayed that it might never consume, as after
his death it did not, but was shrined in Silver and reserved in St. Peter's
Church in Bambrough.

p. 354. VVulphere a Saxon King killed his two Sons for being Christians, but
after repenting of his inhumane Murder, became a Christian himself, and
converted his Heathenish ^emples into Christian Churches.

Id. p. 157. Osw^ne King of Deira gave Bishop Aidan a goodly Gelding with rich
and costly Trappings, which, as the Bishop rode to Preach, a Poor man demanding
his Alm^s he having nothing else to give, alighting gave to him. The King
blaming him for it, Aidan replied, Is the brood of a Beast dearer in your sight
than this Poor man a Child of God? The King laying aside his Sword, fell at the
Bishops Feet, and craved forgiveness. At which Aidan weeping, said, I never
till this time saw an humble King. And surely his Life cannot be long, for his
People are not worthy to have such a Prince to govern them.

Speed. p. 355. Boniface an Englishman in the year six hundred Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, that the English Nuns wandering in Pilgrimage under
show of devotion lived in pleasure and wanton Fornications, through all the
Cities of France and Lombardy.

p. 360. Ethelbald King of the West Saxons, which Ethelwolf, for setting Judith
the Daughter of the King of France, and then his Wife in a Chair of Estate by
him, contrary to the Law of the West Saxons, afterward against the Law of God
and nature, took the same Judith his Mother for his own Wife.

p. 369. The Huns of Colding^am to avoid the barbarous Danes, deformed
themselves to their lascivious Eyes, by cutting off their upper Lips and Noses.

p. 373. Aelfrid King of the West Saxons worsted by the Danes, disguised
himself in the habit of a common Minstrel, and in person repaired to the Danes
Camp, where he saw their negligent securities, learnt their design, and showing
himself to his people, who thought him dead, gave the Danes a great overthrow

Danes having brought their Pinnaces to Wear in Hartfordshire, King Aelfrid
divided the stream, and so made the River unnavigable.

p. 375 Aelfrid a learned man and a great favorite of learning, divided the
natural day into three Taper which he distinguished by burning of a Taper in
his Oratory. Eight hours he spent in study, eight hours in provision for
himself, repose and rest, and eight hours in the affairs of his Kingdom. He
made a Law that all men of ability should breed up their children to learning,
till they were fifteen years old, preferred none to Offices but such as were
learned, and was the Founder of the University of Oxford, and died in the year
901.

Speeds Hist. 376. Edward the elder King of England lay at Austlin, and Liolin
Prince of Wales at Beethslay, intending a Parley, Liolin refused to come down,
or to cross the Severn; whereupon Edward took Boat and entered the River
toward him, which when Liolin saw and knew who he was, he cast off his rich
Robe and entered the River toward him, breast-high, when clasping the boat, he
submissively said, Most wise and sage King, thy humility has overcome my
Insolency, and thy wisdom triumphed over my folly. Come get up on my neck,
which I have, fool as I was, lifted up against thee, so shall thou enter into
that land benign mildness has made thine own this day. And after he had taken
him on his shoulders, and carried him to land, he would needs have him sit down
on his rich Robes, and so putting his hands jointly into the Kings did him
homage.

p. 378. Elfleda King Edwards Sister, having born Ethelred one daughter, her
travail in childbed was so grievous, that ever after she forbear the nuptial
embracements of her husband, alleging that it was an over foolish pleasure,
which broug^t after so great pains.

Speeds History, p. 378. Ethelstan being jealous of Edwin his Brother, Tackling
or Oars, one only page accompanying of him, that his death might be imputed to
the waves, whence the young Prince overcome with Grief cast himself headlong
into the Sea. p. 379.

Edburg the eighth daughter of King Edward, in her childhood had her
disposition tried, and her course of life disposed by her Father in this
manner. He laid before her gorgeous apparel and rich Jewels in one end of a
Chamber, and the new Testament and books of Princely instructions in another,
wishing her to make her choice of which she liked best. She presently took up
the books, and he her in his Arms, and kissing her, said, Go in Gods name
whither he has called thee; and thereupon placed her in a Monastery at
Winchester, where she Virtuously spent her whole life.

Id. p. 380. Elfrid a Noble man intending to have put out King Aethetstons
Eyes, his Treason being known, was apprehended, and sent to Rome, where at the
Altar of St. Peter, and before Pope John the tenth, he abjured the fact, and
thereupon fell down to the earth, so that his servants bore him to the English
School where within three days after he died; the Pope denying him Christian
burial, till he knew Aethelstans pleasure.

Speeds Hist. p. 380. Athelstan by the instigation of his parasites, especially
his Cup Bearer, having exposed his Brother without Oars and Tackling in a
Pinnace, whence he threw himself into the Sea; this Cup Bearer chancing on a
Festival, to stumble with one Foot, and recovering himself with the other,
pleasantly said, Ye see how one Brother helps another. Upon which Speech the
King calling to mind, and laying to Heart the death of his Brother, forthwith
commanded execution to be done on his Cup Bearer the procurer of it.

p. 381. Aethelstan having conquered Constantine King Scots, and Howel King of
Wales, presently restored them to their former estate, adding withal this
princely saying, That it was more Honor to make a King than to be a King.

Id. p. 381. Antaff King of some part of Ireland, warring Aethe^stan, disguised
himself like a Harper, and came into Aethelstans Tent, whence being gone, a
Soldier that knew him, discovered it to King Aethelstan, who being offended
with the Soldier for not declaring it sooner, the Soldier made this answer, I
once served Antaff under his pay as a Soldier, and gave him the same faith I
now give you; if then I should betray him, what trust could your grace repose
in my truth? Let him therefore die but not by my treachery, and let your care
remove your Royal self from danger. Remove your Tent from the place where it
stands, lest at unawares he assayl you. Which the King did, and a Bishop
pitching in the same place, was that Night with all his retinue slain by Antaff
seeking the Kings life. p. 381.

Aethelstan going into Scotland, turned aside to visit St. John of Beverley,
where praying for his prosperous success, for the want of a richer Jewel,
offered his Knife, vowing to redeem it at his return with a richer present,
which accordingly he did.

Ibid. Hugh King of France ^^^t to Aethelstan the Sword of Constantine t^^
^reat, in the Hilt whereof all covered with ^old was one of the Nails that
fastened Christ to the Cross.

Speeds Hist. p. 381. Edmund interposing himself between his Sewer, and another
to part a Fray, was with a thrust through the body slain at ^uckle Church in
Glocestershire.

p 387. Edred the twenty eighth Monarch of the Englishmen, submitted his Body
to be chastised at the pleasure of Dunstan of Glastonbury.

p. 385. Edwy the twenty ninth Monarch of English, the day of his Coronation,
in the sight of his Nobles sitting in Counsel with shameless and unprincely
lust, abused a great Lady his near Kinswoman, whose Husband he slew to enjoy
her more securely.

p. 385. Edgar enacted a Law against excessive drinking, ordaining a size by
certain Pins set in the Pots, with penalties to those should drink beyond the
mark: he likewise imposed a Tribute on the Welsh-men of 300 Wolves yearly,
which being paid three years, in the fourth year there were none to be found,
and so the Tribute ceased.

p. 387. Edgar having heard a daughter of a VVestern beauty, came to Andover,
and commanded the Damsel to his bed. The Mother brought her Maid servant
instead of her daughter, who hastening to rise in the morning to her work, was
detained by the King, who perceiving the deceit, chekt her deceivers and kept
her for his Concubine.

Edgar being told of the beauty of Elfrida, Ordgarus Duke of Devonshire, sent
Ethelwold a Courtier to see her, who minding to get her for himself,
discommended her to the King, and by his leave married her. Edgar afterward
perceiving that he was abused, invited himself to hunt at Ethelwolds Part,
who suspecting the Kings meaning, persuaded his wife so to dress her self as
might conceal her beauty, but she contrarily set it forth to the utmost, so
that the King entangled with it, killed Ethelwold and too^ Elfrida to wife.

p. 388. Edgith the daughter of Edgar a veiled Nun Wilton being sharply
reproved by Bishop Ethelwold, for her too Curious attire, roundly ansvvered
him, That God regarded the Heart more than the garment, and that sins might be
covered as well under Rags as Robes.

Speeds Hist. p. 38^. Council at VVinc^ester, when there could be no agreement
concerning the Marriage of Priests, the business was referred by the Council
to the Rood placed on the Refectory Wall, where the Council sat. They
praying to him, he returned this answer, God forbid it should be so, God
forbid it should be so; You judged well once, and to change is not good.

p. 391. Dunstan in the shape of a beautiful Woman, he pulling her Nose with
hot burning Pincers, spoiled a good face.

Ibid. Ethelred gave secret Commissions to destroy all the Danes on Saint
Brices day, which accordingly was done in the year of our Lord one thousand and
two.

Id. p. 394. Swain the Danish King demanded a great composition for the
preservation of St. Edmunds Monastery, the Inhabitants refusing to pay, he
threatened spoil to the place, and the Martyrs bones; in the midst of which
Jollity, he suddenly cried out, that he was struck by St. Edmund with a Sword,
being in the midst of his Nobles, and no man seeing from whose hand it came;
and so with great horror and torment on the third of February ended his days.

Id. 396. Ethelred, when his Mother had procured the death of King Edward, his
brother, made such Lamentation for it, that his Mother beat him with a Taper of
Wax that stood before her, and that so sorely, that he could never after well
endure the sight of a Taper.

Edmund Ironside and Canute the Danes after Counsel of a Captain put the trial
of their quarrel to their own single combat, in a little Island called Alney
near Gloucester, where after some trial of their valor, they came to an
agreement and divided the Kingdom between them.

p. 401. Duke Edrick after many false and treacherous deeds, having contrived
Edmund Ironsides death, (which was effected by thrusting into his body, as he
retired to a place for natures necessity, a sharp Spear) and having cut off his
Sovereigns head, he carried it to Canute, with this fawning Salutation, All
hale thou now sole Monarch of England, for here, behold, the head of thy
Copartner, which for thy sake I have adventured to cut off. Canute, though
ambitious enough, yet grieved at so disloyal a Fact, replied and vowed, That in
reward of that service the bringers own Head should be advanced above all the
Peers of his Kingdom, which high Honor while this Wretch expected, soon after
by the Kings command, his Head bad fare^el to his Shoulders and was placed on
the Highest Gate to overlook London.

Speeds Hist. p. 401. Osbright a Viceroy of Northumberland forced the Lady of
Beorne Bocador a Nobleman related to the King of Denmark, who flying to him to
revenge his Cause, he sent Hungar and Hubba, whose Father Lothbroke following
his Hawk in a little skiffe, was carried into England, taken as a Spy, carried
to King Edmund, who preferred him, and delighted in him for his skill in
Hawking. Which the Kings Faulconer Birrick envying at, murdered him in a Wood;
which murder being by Lothbrokes Spaniel discovered, Birrick was put in
Lothbrokes Boat without Oar or Tackle, and driven into Denmark, accused King
Edmund as the cause of his Murder, which enraged Hungar and Hubba to invade
England.

Id. p 398. Canutus established a Law, that Women marrying within a year after
their Husbands death, should lose their Joyntures.

Id. p. 401. Canutus gave great Jewels to Winchester Church, whereof one is
reported to be a Cross, worth as much as the whole revenue of England amounted
to in a year, and unto Coventry he gave the Arm of St. Augustine, which he
bought at Papia for an hundred Talents of Silver, and one of Gold.

Speeds Hist. p. 402. Gormo Father of one Canute slain before Dublin, so
exceedingly loved him, that he swore to kill him that brought him News of his
Sons death; which when Thira his Mother heard of, she used this Policy to make
it known to him. She prepared mourning apparel, and laid aside all princely
State, which the Old man perceiving, he concluded his Son dead, and with
excessive grief ended his own Life.

p. 403. Hardicanute King of England was a great Epicure, dainties four times
every day, which caused in the Commonwealth a riotous looseness: Subjects
being apt to praise their Sovereigns Virtues, but to imitate their Vices.

Id. p. 406. King Edward the Confessor having married virtuous and beautiful
Lady, Egitha Daughter of Earl Godwyn, abstained her Bed, saying on his own
Deathbed, That openly she was his Wife, but as to secret embracing as his own
Sister. Which undue neglect of Marriage-right, the Simplicity and Superstition
of those times Canonized him for.

p. 411. Dane made good Stamford-Bridg against all King Harolds Army, and with
his Axe slew forty of his Men, till at last the Danish Soldier was slain with
a Dart.

Id. p. 415. Tosto and Harold the Sons of Earl Godwyn falling out: Tosto
secretly hyed himself into the Marches of Wales, and near the City Hereford at
Portaslith, where Harold had a House then in preparing to entertain the King,
he slew all his Brothers Servants, and cutting them peice-meal into Gobbets,
some of their Limbs he Salted, and cast the rest into the Vessels of Mead and
Wine, sending his Brother word that he had furnished him with powdered Meats
against the Kings coming thither.

Speeds Hist. p. 413. Pope Alexander the 20. to encourage William the Conqueror
to invade England, sent him a consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and one of the
Hairs of St. Peter, and cursed all those that should oppose against him; by
which he was so encouraged that, Landing his men in England to cut off all hope
and occasion of return he fired all the Fleet.

p. 415. William the Conqueror at his arrivage from Sea in England, his feet
chanced to slip, so that he fell into the mud and bemired his hands, which
accident was presently construed as a lucky presage, one of his Captains
presently saying, as Caesar did on the like occasion landing in Africa, that
now he had taken possession of the Land of which he should shortl^ become King.
As accordingly it came to pass, after he had slain Harold at Battle Abbey, for
mangling whose dead body he cashiered a common Soldier out of his wars and
wages for ever: unto which Abbey erected in memory of his conquest he granted
large privileges, and amongst others this, that Malefactors flying thither
should be secured harmless, and if the Abbot chanced to come by any place where
any Malefactor was to be Executed, he might deliver him.

Speeds Hist. 416. 18: 33. Jews King of France having procured the death of
William Longspee Duke of Normandy, was intercepted by the Normans, and detained
Prisoner till he had agreed to these Articles, viz. That young Richard should
succeed his Father in that Dukedom, and that thenceforth, when the King and
Duke should confer together, the Duke should be girt with a Sword, and the King
disabled either of Sword or Knife. To which King Jews bound himself by Oath.

Speeds Hist. p. 423. Robert Duke of Normandy, Father to William the Conqueror,
going to Jerusalem on pilgrimage, and falling sick by the way was born in a
litter on the Saracens shoulders, when he desired a Christian Pilgrim, whom he
met to report what he saw, which was, That he was born to heaven on the Devils
back.

p. 423. William the Conqueror at first held a hard hand on the Englishmen. He
instituted the ringing of the curfue Bell at eight of the Clock at night, when
he commanded all the English to put out the fire, as a means to keep them in
greater subjection. Yea the Natives themselves became as strangers, shaving
their beards, and rounding their hair, and in garments, behavior and diet,
fashioned themselves to imitate the Normans. It being a shame in those days
even amongst Englishmen to be an English man.

Id. p. 427. William the Conqueror demanding how it came to pass, that he
should conquer England in one day, when the Danes were so many years about it?
Fretherick Abbot of St. Albans answered, That long peace had converted the
riches of the land, which should have maintained Soldiers, to the revenues of
the Church, whereby the land was weakened. The Conqueror replied, That since
the Clergy is so rich that thereby the land is enfeebled, out of thine own
mouth will I condemn thee, and begin with thee first; and immediately took all
the land that lay between Barnet and London-stone from him.

Id. p. 429. The Monks of Ely being to pay seven composition to the Conqueror,
when they came to pay, there wanted a groat, upon which he made them pay a
thousand Marks more for their peace.

Speeds Hist. p. 429. William the Conqueror in Normandy being belly, and
keeping his bed more than he was used; Philip King of France hearing of it,
said, Oh what a number of Candles must I offer when our Cousin goes to Church,
I think a Million will not suffice. The Conqueror being told of it, said, Our
Cousin of France shall be at no such charge, but after this my Childbed I will
find him Candles and light them my self, and immediately entered France and
Fired all before him, and burnt the City of Naunts, in whose walls was enclosed
an Anchoret, who might but would not escape, holding it a breach of his
religions vow to forsake his Cell in that distress.

p. 432. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century VIII.
RObert Duke of Normandy in a battle encountered his own Father William the
Conqueror and unhorsed him, but knowing him by his voice, humbled himself, and
secured his Father from further danger.

Speeds Hist. p. 430. William the Conqueror imprisoning his brother Odo, who
was both an Earl and Bishop of Bayeux, said, he did it not as his Brother was a
Bishop but as he enjoyed a secular honor.

William the Conqueror dying, hearing the great Bell ring Prime to our Lady,
lifting up his hands, said, I commend my self to that Blessed Lady Mary Mother
of God, that she by her holy prayers may reconcile me to her most dear Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, and with these words yielded up the Ghost.

p. 434. William the Conqueror no sooner dead but was forsaken and left naked
by all his followers, none taking care to bury him; till a poor Country Knight,
one Harluins, undertook to carry him to Cane, where fire happening at his
entrance, all left the Hearse, and being about to be interred, one Asceline Fits
Arthur forbad him burial in that place, which he alleged was sometimes his
Fathers House, till compounded with, and when he was put into the grave, his
body breaking, drove all away with the intolerable stench.

Speeds Hist. p. 434. Rufus besieging Rochester, commanded that siege that
would not be counted a Niding, a word of such disgrace, and so distastful to
the English, that multitudes seemed rather to fly than to run to it.

p. 438. Henry the youngest Son of William the Conqueror Robert and William, in
great want of water sent to Duke Robert, who courteously supplied him; at which
when Rufus was displeased, Robert replied, Do thou esteem of water more than
of a Brother, having no more than him and me? In which dissension Henry escaped.

Id. 439. Malcolme King of Scots besieging Alnwick English Knight unarmed, only
having a light Spear in his hand, on the top of which he bare the Keys of the
Castle, came riding into the Camp, where being brought to the King, couching
his Spear, as though he intended to present him with the Keys, ran him into
his left Eye, left him dead, and through the swiftness of his Horse escaped.
Hence some say came the name Percy.

p. 440. Rufus having notice by a messenger of the siege of Main a City in
Normandy, the King answered, he would take advice what to do; but thy subjects,
said the messenger, are in distress and cannot be delaied: whereat the King
swear his wonted Oath, by St. Lukes face, that if they could not they should
not, and that he would not turn his back till he were with them, and thereupon
commanded to break down that Wall that he might go forth the next way to the
Sea, leaving his Commission to his Nobles to follow, but the Seas and Winds
being rough, his Pilate misdoubting hazard, desired him to stay till the Sea
and Elements were calmer: he replied, Have thou ever heard that any King has
been drowned, therefore hoyse up thy Sails I charge thee and be gone.

Speeds Hist. p. 441. Rufus his Chamberlain bringing him a pair of new Hose,
and he demanding the price, was answered, that they cost three shillings. Away
base fellow (quoth ^e) are t^ese beseeming a King, bring me of a Mark price.
His Servant went and brought a pair of no greater cost, but told him they were
of the rate appointed; with which the King was well pleased.

p. 442. Two rich Monks outvying one another, Abbacy, another poor sober Monk
standing by, Rufus asked him, what he would give to be made Abbot; he replied,
nothing, for I entered my profession to be Poor. And on him the King conferred
it, as most worthy of it.

Id. p. 442. In the last year of King Rufus, Earl Godwyns were drowned by the
Sea, now called Godwyn Sands, and a Well of Blood rose up out of the ground at
Finchamsteade near Abington in Barkeshire.

Id. p. 443. Rufus dreamed that the Veins of his Arms broken, and abundance of
Blood lay on the Floor. And a Monk dreamed that the Crucifix spurned the King
to the ground, of whom Rufus said, Well, a Monk he is, and can dream as Monks
use to do for gain, give him a hundred shilling lest he should think that he
dreamed bootless.

Ibid. Rufus hunting in the new Forest which his depopulated, was accidently
shot by Sir Walter Tyrrel, and being slain was laid in a Colliers Cart drawn
with one Horse, which Cart broke in a dirty way, and there lay the Spectacle of
earthly Glory, pitifully begoared, and filthily bemired.

Id. p. 443. Henry Beauclerke after he was King, his first work was to reform
his Court and Household, cashiering all nice and effeminate Wantons, and
enacting a Decree against his Courtiers Rapines, Adulteries and Robberies,
punished their Thefts with death, and their Lechery with the loss of their
Eyes, and other parts peccant.

Speeds Hist. p. 445. Robert Duke of Normandy being chosen King of Jerusalem,
hearing of the death of Rufus, refused that, in hopes to have England; for
which his neglect of divine appointment, it is said God never prospered him
after: for his Brother Henry Beauclerk conquered Normandy from him on Saturday
the Vigil of St. Michael, being the same day forty years that William the
Conqueror set foot on English ground for his Conquest. God so disposing that
Normandy should be subjected to England, that very day wherein England was
subjected to Normandy. He likewise put out his Eyes and kept him Prisoner in
Cardiff Castle twenty six years, where for grief conceived at the putting on of
a fair new Robe (too little for the King, and therefore sent in kindness to the
Duke to wear) grew weary of his life, as disdaining to be mocked with his
Brothers cast cloths, and cursing the time of his unfortunate Nativity, refused
thenceforth to take any sustenance and so pined himself to death.

Sp. p. 445. 447. 452. It is reported of Henry Beauclerk, that detaining Robert
against his conscience, that he stood more in fear of men, whose favors he
cunningly labored to keep, than of God, whom he meant to please, as he
thought, in building an Abbey for his satisfaction.

p. 447. Robert de Beliasme delighted in cruelty, an Thumbs in his child's Eyes,
and put out the balls thereof.

Id. p. 448. Guimundus the Kings Chaplain grieving that Beauclerk bestowed his
preferment on unworthy persons, being on Rogation day to read that lesson of
St. James, It rained not on the earth III years and VI months; it, he purposely
read it rained not one one one year and five one months. All men laughing and
wondering, the King chid him and asked the reason; Marry (quoth he) I see you
bestow your preferment only on such as can read so, which the King considering
preferred him, and was after more careful in his other Choices.

Speeds Hist. 448. Prince William Son to the Beauclerk, Richard his base
Brother, his Sister the Countess of Perch with many others, to the number of
one hundred and sixty persons perished by shipwreck coming from Normandy. Of
whom a writer speaks, that God suffered not those unnatural wantons (being
Sodomitica labe fere omnes infecti) to have Christian burial, but were
swallowed up by the Seas, when her waves were most calm, the Mariners in their
drink striving to out-sail the Kings Ship dashed against a rock.

Id. p. 449. Beauclerk and the Pope at Gisory had an enterview, where two
youths of the Kings company, Sons of the Earl of Mellent, gravelled the
Cardinals in disputing, who had nothing to say, but that there was more
learning in the VVestern parts than they had thought.

Id. p. 449. Henry Beauclerk died at St. Dennis, and was thence conveyed to
Roan, where he was emboweled, salted and wrapped up in a Bulls hide to avoid
the stench, which was so intolerable, that the Physician who took out his
brains was poisoned therewith, and presently died: whereupon it was observed,
that other Kings killed men in their lives, but this when he was dead.

p. 452. Henry Fits Empress razed and cast down one thousand one hundred and
fifteen Castles, raised in the time of King Stephen.

452. Maud the Empress to escape her enemies hands Coffin as dead, bound fast
with Cords, and so carried in a Horse-litter from the Devizes to Gloucester, and
after being close girt in Oxford by King Stephen, she clothed her self and her
followers all in White, and so in the Snow deceived the Sentinels and got safe
to Wallingford.

Speeds Hist. p. 461. King Jews of France cast the Popes Bull, Vacancies of
all Cathedral Churches in France, into the fire, saying, That he had rather the
Popes Bull should roast in the fire, than his own soul fry in Hell.

p. 463. Eustace the Son of King Stephen having Monks of Bury of their Corn
and provision, being set at Dinner, the first bit he put into his mouth drove
him into a Frenzy, whereof he shortly after died.

p. 465. Henry the second besieging Bridgenorth, had Hubert St. Clare cast
himself between death and the King, taking the arrow in his own bosom to
preserve his Sovereign. As Sejanus bare the ruins of a banqueting house with
the peril of his life from the Emperor Tiberius.

p. 466. Henry de Essex Standard Bearer to Henry the second, abandoning the
Royal standard, was challenged for it by Robert de Montford, and in single
battle at Reding vanquished, was thereon shorn a Monk, and shortly after died.

Id. p. 465. Henry the second and Queen Elianor being Crowned at Worcester,
laid their Diadems on the high Altar; as Godfry of Bulloigne would not wear a
Crown of Gold at Jerusalem where Christ wore a Crown of Thorns.

466. Henry the Second crowning in his lifetime his Eldest Son, and at the
feast carrying the first dish; The Archbishop of York saying in pleasaunce to
the young King, Rejoice my fair Son, for there is no Prince in the world has
such a Servitor attending on his Table as you. The unnatural young man
answered, why wonder you at this? My Father knows that he does nothing that
misbecomes him, that his Father was royal born but of one side, but our self
are Royal born both by one side and other.

p. 470. Henry the second for the death of Becket submitted voluntarily to this
Penance; he went three miles barefoot, so that much blood issued from his
feet, and received by way of discipline 80 lashes at the hands of Bishops and
Monks on his bare flesh.

Speeds Hist. p. 476. Henry the Son of Henry the second, who deathbed the
Father fearing danger to himself, would not come to see him, but sent his ring
in token of reconciliation: he keeping the ring with many tears, and confessing
his fault, at the approach of his death would needs be drawn out of his bed and
laid upon another strewed with Ashes, where he departed in a most penitent
manner.

p. 478. When Jerusalem was first recovered by Christians, and when it was
after fourscore years lost from the Christians, a Frederick was Emperor, and
Urban was Pope, and Heraclius was Patriarch.

p. 479. When Henry the Second by the opposition Richard was fain to abandon
Ments in Main, he uttered these words against his Son; That since he had taken
from him that day the thing that he most loved in the world, he would requite
him, for after that day he would deprive him of that thing in him which should
best please a child, viz. his heart, and finding his Son John in the Catalogue
of the Conspirators against him, he bitterly cursed the hour of his birth,
laying Gods curse and his own upon his Sons, which he would never recall for any
persuasions of the Bishops and others.

p. 479. Henry the second being dead, all his attendants fell to spoiling, and
left him naked, of whom one says, Surely these Flies sought Honey, these
Wolves a Carcass. They followed not the man but the spoil. And when King
Richard met his Fathers Corpse, the Corpse fell fresh a bleeding.

p. 480. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln Visiting the Nunnery of Godstow, finding a fair
Herse-cloth over Rosamunds Tomb, thought the Hearse of a Harlot no fit spectacle
for a Quire of Virgins to contemplate, and therefore he caused her bones to be
cast out of the Church, as unworthy for her unchaste life to have Christian
burial. But the chaste Virgins gathered them up, put them into a perfumed bag,
and buried them, laying a fair gravestone upon them inscribed with these
verses.

Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa mundi non Rosa munda.
Non redolet sed olet quae redolere solet.
Qui meat hac oret, signumque salutis adoret,
Vtque tibi detur requies Rosamunda precetur.
Speeds Hist. p. 480. Morgan natural Son to Henry the second born of the body
of the Lady Blewet, being elected Bishop of Durham and going for Consecration
and a dispensation because of his Bastardy, the Pope advised him to own himself
Blewets Son, but he answered, That he would not renounce his Ro^al blood for
any promotion.

p. 480. Maud the Empress was the daughter, wife, Henry, which is expressed in
this distich made of her.

Ortu magna, Viro major, sed maxima prole,
Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, nurus.
Speeds Hist. 481. Richard the first, though himself had rebelled Crown,
cashiered all those that had forsaken, and retained those who had stood
faithful to his Father, though against himself, and made use of them in all his
affairs.

p. 485. Rhese ap Griffith Prince of Wales coming as Oxford to Visit King
Richard, because the King came not forth to meet him, returned back into his
own Country without once saluting of him.

Ibid. When the Emperor gave three thousand Richards ransom to make Silver
Censers through all the Cestertian Order, they refused the gift as part of an
accursed spoil. p. 489.

Celestin Crowning Henry the Emperor, held the Crown between his feet, which
the Emperor stooping low, he put upon his head, and presently with his foot
struck it off, and dashed it to the ground; but the Cardinals catching of it up,
put it again on the Emperors head.

Sp. H. p. 485. Henry de Pumeroy having fortified St. Michael's Mount in
Cornwall against King Richard, in behalf of Earl John, hearing of the Kings
return out of Captivity died of fear.

Id. p. 489. Richard the first sitting at Dinner at Westminster, receiving
advertisement of the siege laid to Vernveil by Philip of France, swear that he
would not turn his face till he had gotten thither with his Army; whereupon he
caused the wall to be bored through, and never rested till he had removed the
siege.

Id. p. 489. Richard to release the Bishop of Beauvoys, whom he kept Prisoner,
calling him his Son; The King sent the Habergica and Curace of the Bishop to
the Pope, with this question, See if this be thy Sons Coat. The Pope replied,
that he was no Son of his, nor of the Church, but the Son of Mars, and should
be ransomed at the Kings pleasure.

p. 499. King Richard the first, out of Covetousness Treasure, of which he was
proffered a great part, but would have all, went to assault a Castle where he
received his deaths wound.

Speeds Hist. p. 491. Whilst King Richard warred in France, one Fulco a French
Priest came to him, and told him he had three very bad daughters, which he
wished him to bestow in Marriage, or else Gods wrath would attend him. When the
King denied he had any daughters. Yes (quoth the Priest) thou cherishest three
daughters, Pride, Covetousness and Lechery. The King replied, My Pride I
bequeath to the haughty Templars, and Hospitallers, my Covetousness to the
white Monks of the Cesteaux Order, and my Lechery to the Priests and Prelates,
for therein they take their greatest Felicity.

Id. p. 492. A Monk at Swinstead Abbey presenting King John with an Invenomed
Cup, whereof the King commanded him to be his taster, became the diabolical
instrument of his own and his Sovereigns destruction.

Id. p. 516. William Marshal Earl of Pembrook, famous Ireland had this Epitaph
made on him.

Sum qui Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solemn
Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem.
William Longspee Earl of Salisbury upon point of death would not receive the
Sacrament in his bed, but on his bare knees on the ground, which he bedewed
with his tears. The like devotion is reported of King Henry the eighth. On
William Longspee was made this Epitaph.

Flos comitum Wilielmus obit, Stirps regia, longus
Ensis Vaginam coepit habere brevem.
Speeds Hist. p. 524. Henry the third, the same day he set sail from England,
did himself in person visit the poor and feeble, and dealt large Alms, not
refusing to kiss the sick and leprous.

p. 527. Parelions together with the Sun in the year one thousand two hundred
thirty and three in the month of April, appeared from Morning till night about
the parts of Hereford and Worcestershire.

529. Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent was articled against to King Henry the
third that, he had stolen out of the Kings Jewel-house a precious stone of
wonderful value, whose virtue was to make him that wore it invincible in
battle, and that he gave that stone to Liolin Prince of Wales the Kings Enemy.

Speed. p. 528. Liolin Prince of Wales being threatened that if he lived not
quiet, King Henry the third would soon abate him, answered, I more fear the
Almsdeeds the King gives than all the men of War he has, and the whole Clergy
put together.

p. 530. In a great famine in the reign of Henry the Albaldestea in
Cambridgshire, while as yet the corn was green, plucked the ears in the common
field to sustain their lives, whereat the owners call on the Priest to curse
all such; but one in the Company adjured the Priest in the name of God to
exempt his Corn in the sentence, saying, That it pleased him well that the poor
driven with famine had taken his Corn, and so commended that which they had
left to God. The Priest compelled by the importunity of the rest was entered
into the sentence, when by a terrible interrupting tempest of thunder,
lightning, wind, hail and rain all the Cornfieldsd about were desolated, as if
they had been trodden down with Horse and Cart, and no kind of beast or fowl
would feed upon the Corn thus laid; but that honest and compassionate hearted
man found all his Corn and ground though intermixed with theirs, altogether
untoucht and unharmed.

p. 532. In the year one thousand two hundred thirty brought before King Henry
the third seven Jews, who circumcised a child, and purposed in contempt of
Christ and Christianity to have crucified him at Easter at Norwich

Speeds History p. 532. Richard Earl of Cornwall brother to Henry the third,
there were thirty thousand Messes provided in the Cookery only, and of all
other things incredible plenty, and yet the next day there was no sign of it.

p. 537. Ingetram or Coucy a great Lord in France, whose daughter Alexander
King of Scots had Married, was by the stumbling of his Horse in a ford cast out
of his Saddle, and pitched into the depth of a River, while his foot hung fast
in the stirrup, his Sword at the same time falling out of his sheath, and
running of him through did most strangely end his life by a triple death.

537. Pope desiring to come into England, was denied by Henry the third, it
being said, That the Pope was like a Mouse in a Sachel, or a Snake in ones
bosom, who did but ill repay their Hosts for their entertainment.

Id. p. 538. Marshals successively Earls of Pembroke, died issueless, which
Matthew Paris attributes to the Judgment of God upon them for their Fathers
iniquity, who detained from the Bishop of Firning certain Manours, violently
taken from him. 539.

Popes extortions in England in the days of Hen. the third were exceeding great
and heavy: Insomuch that a Cardinal truly told the Pope, that England was to
the Pope as Balaams Ass, which being so often wrung, spur-galled and cudgelled,
it was no marvail that now at length she opened her mouth to complain: And for
themselves and the Roman Court, they were like Ishmael, every man's hand against
them and theirs against every man.

Id. p. 539. Walter Clifford a Baron of the Marches of Wales, made the Kings
Officer to eat the Kings Writ, Wax and all.

Speeds Hist. p. 540. The Pope having lain sometimes at Lions, Cardinal Hugo at
his going away made a Sermon of Farewell to the Citizens, wherein amongst other
benefits, which the Pope's abode in that City had brought them, he told them
this was a principal, That whereas at their coming thither, there were three
or four VVhore-houses in Lions, now at their departing they left but one, but
indeed that reached from the East Gates of the City to the West

p. 540. At the Marriage of Alexander the King of Scots to the Lady Margaret,
Daughter to King Henry the third, there was given by the Archbishop of York,
and spent all at one meal six hundred Oxen.

p. 541. When Grosted Bishop of Lincoln had written sharp Letter to the Pope
concerning the abuses of his Court; The Pope in a rage swore by St. Peter and
St. Paul, that he could find in his heart to make that doting Prelate a mirror
of Confusion to all the World; but some wiser Cardinals advised him to hush the
matter for fear of stirring Coals; especially since it was known, that there
would be a departure from the Church.

Id p. 543. Richard Earl of Cornwall being chosen Emperor, at his accepting of
it had this Expression; Let me before I depart hence die and be burnt with the
fire of Hell, if I do accept the Empire for ambition or avarice, but only to
restore the Empire to a better estate, which God grant, and to govern them, who
have willingly chosen me for their Lord, in a most just and honorable manner.

Id. p. 541. Richard Earl of Cornwall when elected King of the Romans, is
reported to possess so much ready coin, as would every day for ten years afford
him an hundred Marks on the main stock.

Id. p. 545. Cedunt Togae Armis. Henry the third intending to suppress his
rebellious Barons made choice of Oxford as his place of Residence, and banished
thence all the Students to the number of fifteen thousand.

Speeds Hist. 549. Simon Earl of Monfort a powerful Rebel Henry the third,
Richard King of the Romans, and both their Eldest Sons yielded to him by
composition.

p. 549. A cup of Gold of ten pound weight cost Henry the thirds days.

Edward the first while Prince, warring in holy land, being wounded by a
Saracen with an envenomed Knife, the Lady Elianor his wife gave a rare example
of conjugal affection, and her immortal memory does justly impart glory to the
whole Sex. For when no Medicines could extract the poison, she did it with her
tongue, licking daily, while her husband slept, his rankling wounds; whereby
they perfectly closed, and yet herself received no harm.

p. 552. When Charles King of Sicily fell off from holy war, Prince Edward
hearing of it solemnly swear, that though all should forsake him, yet he and
his Lacquey would enter Ptolemais, which he did though better attended. p. 553.

Edward the first being in his return from holy land in the court of Charles
King of Sicily, and hearing first of the death of his Son and heir, and after
of his Father; He much more sorrowed for his Fathers death than his Sons:
whereat King Charles greatly marvailing, had of him this answer; The loss of
Sons, is but light, because they are multiplied every day, but the death of
Parents is irremediable because they are no more to be had.

Id. p. 554. coronation of King Edward the first, for the more celebration of
the great Feast and honor of so Martial a King, there were five hundred great
Horses let loose, every one to take them for his own, who could.

Speeds Hist. p. 554. Chair in Scone, where the Kings of Scotland were used to
be Crowned, which Chair by King Edward the first was transported to
Westminster, was written this Distick.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inv^niant lapidem, regnum teneatur ibidem.
Id. p. 558. Cassan King of Tartars gloriously slew an hundred thousand Turks
in a battle upon the Plain of Damascus, and was baptized thereupon, as
acknowledging the Victory to come from the Son of God.

p. 560. Robert Bruce intending to seize on the Crown of Scotland, and being
accused to King Edward the first denied it, and had time and warning to escape.
For an Earl sent unto him Twelve Striveling pence and a sharp pair of Spurs,
presently upon his departure from the Kings presence, which he wittily
interpreted to be a symbol of flight, according whereunto, he escaped from
London, shooing his Horses backward, that he might not be followed by the
Prints in the Snow.

Id. p. 560. Robert Bruce after his seizing the Crown of Scotland, English,
that he was sometimes naked and hungry without meat or drink, save only water
and roots of Herbs, and his life perpetually in danger, and yet trusting in
God, he never forsook himself, but recovered his Kingdom.

p. 5^2. Edward the first dying in his march, yet bones through all Scotland,
as a terror to them, and to send his Heart to the holy land with one hundred
and forty Knights and their retainers, because being hindered by his home Wars,
he could not fulfill his vow in going personally thither, providing thirty two
thousand pound of Silver, which upon pain of eternal damnation, he appointed
should not be expended on any other use.

Speeds Hist. p. 563. The Countess of Buquahan Sister to the Fife, whose Office
it was to Crown the Scottish King in her Brothers absence, had stolen from her
Husband with all his light Horses to set the Crown on Bruces head, being taken
by Edward the second was set in a wooden Cage made Crown-wise on the Walls of
Barwick Castle for all to wonder at.

561. Scots at Bancksborn obtained a famous Victory over the English under
Edward the second by this stratagem. Before their Battalions they dug
certain Trenches three foot deep, and three foot broad, which having fixed
sharp stakes in them with their points upwards, they covered so with hurdles,
that foot men treading warily might pass but not Horse, in which King Edward's
Cavalry were intrapped and so miserably slain, and the battle lost.

Edward the second having put to death Thomas Earl of Lancaster, a Courtier of
mean birth being condemned, many potent Favorites pressed the King on his
behalf. The King brake forth into these most vehement words. A Plague upon you
for cursed whisperers, malicious backbiters, wicked Counselors. Entreat you
for the life of a most notorious Knave, who the longer he lives the more
Villainies will he commit, and would not speak a word for the life of my near
kinsman the noble Earl Thomas? He shall therefore dye the death he has
deserved.

Id. p. 569. Isabel rose in rebellion against King Edward the second her
husband, Adam de Olton Bishop of Hereford her bosom Counselor at Oxford chose
this Text, My head my head aketh, 2 King. 4.19. On which he delivered to them
the reason of the Queens coming with an Army, concluding more like a Butcher
than a Divine; That an aching and sick head of a Kingdom was of necessity to be
taken off, and not to be tampered with by any other Physic.

Speeds Hist. p. 574. The Commission sent to put Edward the second death was a
witty but wicked Amphibology, being written and left uncomma'd; in these words,
Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est, which being comma'd after Timere was
a command, after Nolite was a prohibition, and so occasioned the death of the
King, and the Ruin of those that did it.

p. 579. Edmund Earl of Kent by the practice of his Enemies was condemned to
death for endeavoring to set at liberty his brother King Edward the second,
who was dead before, and had his head stricken off at Winchester Castle Gate,
having stood from noon till five at night, and none found to behead him, till a
base wretch of the Marshalsea was sent and did it.

p. 579. Edward the third in his Minority being overruled Mortimer, things went
much to wrack, on which was made this Rhyme.

Long beards heartless, painted Hoods witless,
Gay Coats graceless make England thriftless.
Edward the third had spoiled the Abbey of St. Colmes in Scotland, the whole
Fleet as a punishment for that sacrilege was battered with a tempest, and some
of them perished. At another time the like sacrilege being perpetrated, the ship
in which the sacrilegious goods were, sunk into the bottom without any Tempest.

Id. p. 581. Edward the third, and Philip of Valois had brought two mighty
Armies of an hundred thousand men apiece into the Field to face one another, by
the mediation of Jane of Valois Sister to Philip and Mother in Law to Edward,
they withdrew and struck not a stroke.

Speeds H. p. 585. matters many times occasion great effects. Edward the third
King of England dancing with the beautiful Lady Joan Countess of Salisbury, her
Garter falling off, the King took it up; at which the Nobles smiling, the King
seriously said, it should not be long before there should be Sovereign honor
done to that Silken Tie; whereupon he instituted the honor of the Garter, whose
Motto is, Honi soit qui mal y pense.

p. 588. black Prince at the battle of Cressy being overpressed and in danger,
the Lords that were with him sent to his Father to come and succor him. Who
made this answer, Let them send no more to me for any adventure that may befall
while my Son is alive; But let him either vanquish or dye, because the honor of
this brave day shall be his, if God suffer him to live.

p. 590. King Edward the third besieging Callis, the Enemy turned forth fifteen
hundred of the poorer sort, whom the good King turned not back, but relieved
them with victuals and money, and suffered them safely to pass through his Camp.

Speeds Hist. 591. Henry Earl of Lancaster at the taking of the Brigerack by
assault, had permitted every Soldier to seize any House, and to convert the
same and what was in it to his own proper use. A certain Soldier named Reeth
having broken into a House, where the Moneyors had stowed all the Moneys of the
Country, not thinking that the Generals pleasure was that so great a Treasure
should be converted to a private use; He acquainted the General with it, who
answered, That the House and all therein was his, according as he had first
proclaimed, let them be worth what they would. And when the Soldier again told
him of the great Treasure there found, He replied, What tellest thou me of the
greatness of the Treasure? Go take and enjoy. For to give and then to take it
back again is child's play. I have once said; and my word being once passed
cannot with honor be revoked.

Speeds Hist. p. 592. Edward the third, that he had always fair weather in his
passage into Erance and foul weather in his return.

p. 593. Henry Pecard Lord Mayor of London at one time feasted four Kings, viz.
of England, Scotland, France and Cyprus.

p. 594. tempest that destroyed many horse and men in Edward the third's Army,
occasioned him to incline to agreements of peace, which before he was utterly
averse to.

p. 595. Edward Son to the Earl of Cambridge married the daughter of the King
of Portugal, but afterward neither would the Earl leave his Son behind, as
suspecting the Portugals Faith, nor the other entrust his daughter to the Earl,
so that they remained disjoined in body, however united in Ceremony.

Wat Tylers Companions in an holy outrage burning the Savoy, threw one of their
fel^ows into the flames, because he had thrusts piece of stolen pla^^ into his
bosom.

p. 607. Richar^ the second entered Scotland, the Sc^ts had so retired
th^mselves and all their goods, that when the English came they could see no
quick then left but Owls.

611. A Monk bestows this Epitaph on Wicklif Instrument, Churches Enemy,
Peoples Confusion, Heretics Idol, Hypocrites mirror, Schisms broacher,
Hatreds sower, Lies Forger, Flatteries sink, who at his death despaired like
Cain, and stricken by the horrible judgment of God, breathed forth his wicked
Soul to the dark mansions of the black Devil -- Whereby Gods children may learn
not to regard while they live, the malice, nor to expect after their death
ought else but the slanderous rancour of the wicked.

Speeds Hist. p. 622. A Galthrop or engine with three sharp points Henry the
fourths bed, but he espied it, and so prevented the danger.

627. A Friar Minor being asked that he would Richard were alive, and present;
he confidently answered, that he would fight for him till death against any
whatsoever, which cost him his life, being drawn and hanged in his Friars weeds.

Id. 627. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century IX.
Danbury Church in Essex the Devil appeared in the habit of a Minorite, to the
incredible astonishment of the Parishioners. For at that time there was such a
terrible tempest with lightnings, and thunder and great fireballs, that the
vault of the Church broke, and half the Chancel was carried away.

Speeds Hist. p. 628. Bedford and Bickleswade in the year one thousand four
hundred and three, sundry Monsters of diverse colors in the shapes of armed men
were often seen to issue out of the woods at Morning and at Noon, which to
suchs as stood far off seemed to encounter one another in most terrible manner,
but when they drew near nothing was to be found.

p. 629. Nero though generally hated while he was alive, yet twenty years after
his death, an obscure fellow feigning himself Nero, was so backed and
countenanced by the Parthians and others, that not without much difficulty the
Romans could get him into their hands.

Speeds Hist. p. 629. Henry the fifth supposing his Father dead, Crown that
stood by him; his Father reviving, enquired for it, which when he brought, the
Father said, Oh Son with what right I got it God knows, who forgive me the sin.
Howsoever it was got, said the Prince, I mean to keep it and defend it with my
Sword, as you by Sword obtained it.

p. 631. Henry the fifth, though while Prince was wild, and Companion of
riotous persons, yet coming to the Crown the first thing he did was the
banishment of all such his old Companions ten miles from his presence.

Speeds Hist. p. 637. Archbishop Arundel having in a synod condemned Oldcastle
Lord Cobham for an Heretic, and enacted that the holy Scripture should not be
translated into the English tongue, shortly after, his tongue grew so big in
his mouth, that he could not speak, or swallow, but in horror lay languishing
till he was starved to death.

p. 638. The Dolphin of France understanding that Henry the fifth intended to
invade France, sent him in scorn a Tun of Tennis Balls. But the King returned
answer, that the Balls he should play, the Gates of Paris should not be rackets
strong enough to beat back, and afterward most gallantly made good his words.

p. 640. Ziska that famous Bohemian Protestant, commanded that when dead his
skin should be made the cover of a Drum to terrify his Enemies.

Speeds Hist. 645. Henry the fifth having vanquished the French at Azincourt,
returning thanks to God at Paul's in London, would not have his broken Crown nor
bruised Armor bore before him.

p. 646. Jews the eleventh of France being persuaded to demolish the Tomb of
the Duke of Bedford, who had been Regent in France, and was buried at Roan,
answered, That it would be dishonorable to disturb him dead, who when alive
made all France tremble.

p. 676. Walter Earl of Athol conspired the murder of James the first King of
Scotland, in hopes of the Crown; and Crowned he was, as his Sorcerers had
foretold him he should be, but not with the Crown of the Kingdom, but of Red
hot Iron clapped upon his head, being one of the tortures by which he ended at
once his wicked days and designs.

p. 672. controversy between Henry the sixth and Richard Duke of York was
debating in the Parliament, a Crown which hung for garnishment in the middle of
the roof where the Knights and Burgesses met, as likewise a Crown, which for
the like Cause stood upon the highest Tower of Dover Castle, fell down, which
was vulgarly construed to portend the translation of the Crown from the
Lancastrian to the Yorkest, which soon after came to pass.

p. 683. On Candlemas day in the year one thousand Mortimers Cross, where
Edward Earl of March, afterward King Edw. the fourth, was victorious, there
appeared in the Firmament three Suns, which suddenly joined in One. Which
occasioned to use as his device, The Sun in his brightness.

Speeds Hist. p. 684. One Walker a London Grocer for words spoken learn his
Book, that he would make him Heir of the Crown, meaning his own House, having
that sign, was therefore in the eighth day of Edward the fourths Reign beheaded
in Smithfield.

p. 684. Edward the fourth being ready to join battle, fight might forthwith
depart, but if any Soldier abiding, should seek to fly or turn back, he should
be slain by his next fellow, and the slayer to receive a great reward besides
the stipend of a double pay.

p. 687. Ralph Percy being slain, taking part with Henry the sixth died with
these words, I have saved the bird in his breast, meaning his Oath made to King
Henry.

p. 687. Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick spent in his house in London six Oxen
every day.

p. 689. Henry the sixth, when certain Ladies presented themselves before him
in a Mask with their hair loose, and their breasts uncovered; He then a
Bachelor and able of Marriage, immediately rose up and departed the presence,
saying, Fie, Fie, forsooth you are to blame.

p. 689. Henry the sixth lay Prisoner in the Tower, a Ruffian intending his
death, wounded him in the side with a Sword, whom being restored to his Estate,
he freely forgave; and another striking him in the face, he punished only with
this reprehension; Forsooth you are to blame to strike me your anointed King.

Sp. p. 697. Henry Holland Duke of Excester and brother in Law to Edward the
fourth, was driven by him out of England into Burgundy, where Comines writes,
that he saw him running barelegged after Burgundies train, begging his bread
for Gods sake. And the Countess of Oxford had nothing to maintain her, but the
Charity of others and her own needle.

Speeds Hist. p. 968. Edward the fourth hunting in Arrow Park Thomas Burdet
Esquire, among other game killed a white Buck, that Burdet highly valued;
whereupon Burdet wished the Horns in his belly, that wished the King to kill
it. For which his words being interpreted as though he wished them in the Kings
belly, he was condemned and beheaded at Tiburne.

p. 700. An old Prophecy that a G. should reign after E. occasioned the death
of George Duke of Clarence, who on pretended Articles of Treason was condemned
in Parliament, and by his own choice, drowned in a But of Malmsey.

p. 701. The Lord Chamberlain Hastings having been Counsel to imprison and
behead the Lord Gray at Pomfret, had his own head stricken off by the command
of Richard Protector at London the same day. He was warned that morning by the
Lord Stanley to fly; his Horse twice or thrice stumbled going to the Tower,
though he told one Hastings a Pursuivant, whom he met not above two hours
before his death, that he was never more merry nor in greater surety.

p. 705. Lambert Symnel who was set up as Richard Duke of York the second Son
of Edw. the fourth to claim the English Crown, after a terrible Battle fought
in his quarrel, was taken, and by King Henry the seventh put first into his
Kitchen to turn the Spits, and was after advanced to be Falconer, in which
Office he lived and died.

Richard the third being (as Galba) reckoned a good Prince, but a bad Man, was
unnaturally born, his Mother being cut, with his Feet forward and Teeth in his
Head. He was contented that Doctor Shaw in a Sermon at Paul's cross should
proclaim his own Mother an Adulteress, and his two elder Brothers Bastards,
that he might thereby strengthen his Title to the Crown; by which dealing,
together with the wicked Murder of his two Innocent Nephews, he became so
hated, that after his death the White Boar his Cognizance was torn down from
every sign, that his Memorial might perish, as did the Moneys of Caligula,
which were all melted by the decree of the Senate.

Sp. Hist. p. -- 706-725-737. tempest that drove Philip King of Spain into
England, threw down the Golden Eagle from Paul's steeple, which in its fall
battered and broke down the Black Eagle in Paul's Churchyard, which accident
was held omin^us to the Imperial Family. This King Philip the Emperors son
shortly after dying. As that lighting which struck the letter [C] out of
Caesar's name in his statue, whence it was gathered that Caesar should live but
a hundred days and then be called a God, Aesar in the old Hetrurian Language
so signifying, which accordingly happened.

Sp. p. 76. A Cornish Smith being executed for a treasonable insurrection in
the time of Henry the seventh, comforted himself with this at his Execution,
that he hoped thereby his name and memory should be everlasting.

p. 754. The Earl of Kildare being at Hay with the Tower at Shuffleboard, when
a Mandate was brought for his Execution, seeing the Lieutenant stricken into a
su^dain sadness, said, By St. Bride Lieutenant, there is some mad game in that
scrole, but fall how it will, this throw is for a huddle. But the Lieutenant
applying himself to the King Henry the eigth had a Countermand, and the Earls
life was saved.

p. 775. When the Pope held out his Toe to be k^st Wiltshire, sent Ambassador
from Henry the eighth; a Spaniel of the Earls caught his toe in his teeth: the
Ambassador scorning to kiss after his Dog, lost that especial favor proffered
to him.

Speeds Hist. p. 782. Ecclesiastical Benefices in England is eight thousand
three hundred and twenty seven. In Wales nine hundred and five. In all nine
thousand two hundred thirty and two.

predictions foreshewing a great deluge, Prior Bolton of St. Bartholomews in
London was so fearful, that he built him an house upon the height of Harrow
hill, storing it with provisions necessary to keep himself from drowning.

p. 785. Oliver Sinclere a man of mean extraction, but favorite to King James
the fifth of Scotland, was by him declared General; The Scots Nobility out of
disdain forbear to fight, and gave up themselves Prisoners to the English. For
grief of which the King shortly after died.

Edward the sixth was born of the Lady Jane Seymour, her womb being cut and her
life lost to save his; on whom were made these verses.

Phoenix Jana jacet nato Phoenice; dolendum
Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas.
Speed. Hist. p. 892. Scotland is only set up in time of most extreme danger,
unto which all men are to repair, that are between sixteen and sixty.

p. 832. hundred forty eight, one Boyer Mayor of Bodwin in Cornwall, having
been active in a Rebellion; Sir Anthony Kingston Provost Marshal sent word to
him he would visit him at Dinner, but before he sat down commanded the Mayor
to cause a gallows to be set up, and the Table taken away he willed the said
Mayor to accompany him to the place, and saw him hanged ere he departed.

Id. p. 832. In Cornwall dwelt a Miller, who had been doer in the Rebellion,
who knovving his danger willed his Man to take the name of his Master if any
enquired for him. Sir. Anthony Kingston Provost Marshal came to the Mill,
enquired for the Master; the Man in his name presented himself, and was
straight commanded to the Gallows. The Servant then seeing the danger of death,
confessed he was not the Master but the Man. Well said the Knight, Thou can
never do thy Master better Service, than to hang for him, and thereupon trust
him up a the next tree.

Speeds Hist p. 833. The Lord Edward Seymor Protector condemned Felony, for
coming Armed into the Kings Counsel, neither by himself nor learned Counsel
demanded his Clergy, which would have saved his life.

p. 838. When Cranmer and others urged King Edward the sixth to let his Sister
Mary to have Mass in her house, the King having answered all their arguments,
and they not taking Nay, burst forth into tears and sobbing, desired them to be
content.

Speed. p. 839. Mary was so affected with the loss of Calice, that she was wont
to say, that the loss of Calice was written in her heart, and might there be
read when her body should be opened.

p. 856. head of the Admiral Chastillon murdered in the Massacre at Paris, was
embalmed and sent by the Queen of France as an acceptable present to the Pope.

856. Con O Neale surnamed Bacco cursed all his Posterity, in case they learned
English, sowed wheat, or built them houses.

p. 863. Story a bloody persecutor in Queen Mary's days, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth was entrapped at Antwerp where he had got a Commission to search for
English books all ships that came in, by one Parker an English Merchant. Whose
Ship Story searching for Heretical books, was clapped under Hatches, brought into
England, and there executed for a Traitor.

Speeds Hist. p. 87. Elizabeth told Doctor Reinolds of CCC. that her reading of
Seneca de Clementia had done her much good, but some would persuade her, it had
done her State as much harm.

p. 874. England was divided into Parishes by Honorius of Canterbury in the
year of our Lord 636, and there are 9285 Parishes under 27 Bishops, whereof two
are Metropolitans, Canterbury and York, in manner following.

Canterbury.
Bishoprics. Shires. Parishes. Canterbury. Kent. 256. Rochester. Kent. 98.
London Essex. Middlesex. Hartfordshire part.
623. Lincoln. Lincolnshire. Leicestershire. Huntingtonshire. Bedfordshire.
Buckinghamshire part. Hartfordshire part.
1255. Chichester. Sussex. Hertfordshire part
250. Winchester. Hampshire. Surrey. Wight Isles. Garnsey. Isles. Jersey.
Isles.
362. Salisbury. Wiltshire. Barkeshire.
248. Excester. Devon. Cornwall.
604. Bath and Wells Somerset. 388. Gloucester. Glocestershire. 267. Worcester.
Worcestershire. Warwick part.
241. Lichfield. Coventry. Staffordshire: Derby. Warwick part. Shropshire
part.
557. Hereford. Herefordshire. Shropshire.
3^3. Ely. Cambridgshire. Ely Isle.
141. Norwich. Norfolk. Suffolk.
1121. Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195. Peterborough. Northampton. Rutland.
293. Bristol. Dorset. Glamorgan.
236. Landaff. Monmouth. Brecknock. Radnor.
177. St. David's. Pembrook. Caermerden.
308. Bangor. Carnarvan. Anglesy Isle. Merioneth. Denbigh part.
107. St. Asaph. Denbigh part. Flintshire part.
121. York. Province. York. Yorkshire. Nottinghamshire.
581. Chester. Cheshire. Lancashire. Richmondshire. Cumberland part. Flintshire
part.
256. Carlisle. Cumberland part. Westmorland.
95. Durham. Durham. Northumberland.
135. Soder. Isle of Man. 17.

1084. So that the total number of the Bishoprics in England are twenty seven,
of the Shires fifty and two, and of the Parishes nine thousand two hundred
eighty and five.

Speeds Maps p. 6. Basham in Sussex Earl Harold taking Sea for his delight in a
small Boat was driven upon the coast of Normandy, where by Duke William he was
detained till he had sworn to make him King of England after Edward the
Confessors death, which oath being broken the bastard arrived at Pensey, and
with his Sword revenged the perjury at Battle in the same County, where King
Harold with sixty seven thousand nine hundred seventy and four English men lost
their lives, the Conqueror thereby recovering full possession.

Id p. 9. Surrey is compared unto a homespun frize cloth, with a costly list,
for the Outverg does much exceed the middle it self. In this Shire are Oaking,
Oateland, Nonsuch, Richmond, four stately Palace^ of the Kings, besides Lambeth
the Archbishop of Canterbury his house, and Ocham that gave breath to William
of Ocham.

Id. p. 11. In Hamptshire there sometimes stood a great Silvester, that now is
so demolished, there is no sign left of it.

Southampton that was the ancient Clausentium, Edward the third was fired by
the French, under the conduct of the King of Sicelies Son, whom a Countryman
encountered and struck down with a Club, he crying, Rancon, that is, Ransom,
but the Countryman neither understanding his Language nor the law of Arms,
laid on more soundly, saying, I know thee a Francon and therefore shall thou
die.

Id. Falmouth bay in Cornwall is so wide that an hundred Ships may therein ride
at Anchor by themselves apart; so that from the tops of the highest Masts, they
shall not see each other, and lie most safely under the Winds.

Speeds Maps p. 21. Trajan was hastening against his Enemies, a poor Widow met
him and desired Justice against the Murderer of her Son. The Emperor answered,
that at his return he would do her Justice: but says the Widow, what if thou
should not return? he replied, his successor should. That would not avail
him. He alighting heard her cause and did her right.

Boschier 5 part Accad. Peccat. p. 255. Hermits house left a Chest, which they
saw not. The Hermit went after them with it, with which they were so moved that
they restored what they had taken.

Id. Ibid. p. 280. Abbot travailing fell into the hands of plunderers, who
dismounted him, and took away his Horse, which done, he offered them his whip,
telling them it might serve their turn to beat up his Horse which was slow. The
Thieves riding to a River, their Horses would not go forward, which made them
mind the good Abbot, whom they had wronged, and returning back gave him his
Horse. But that man fared worse, who having some part of his garments taken
from him, run after them, threatening them that they should answer it at the day
of Judgment, but they deriding him, who threatened them with what they thought a
great way off, took away the rest of his cloths from him.

Id. p. 28: One Eginhartus a Counselor to Charles the Emperors daughter, and
she with him, they enjoying by stealth their unlawful pleasures. One morning
when he was to go away from the Princesses Chamber, the Pavement being all
covered with Snow, he was afraid by his footsteps to be discovered; to
prevent which, his Mistress took him on her back, and carrying of him in that
Posture, met her Father, who yet forgave them both, and gave her to this
Counselor for his wife, since she had been before his Harlot.

Id. p. 291. Alexander the Patriarch of Constantinople Secretary having stolen
his goods, and ^ying away was taken by Thieves; his Master redeemed him for a
great Sum, and being returned, he used him kindly; so that it grew into a
Proverb, Nihil utilius quam Alexandro malefacere. The same is reported of
Archbishop Cranmer. Abuse the Archbishop, and he will ever be your Friend.

Diego Salazar a Spanish Captain, having Conquered an Island in the Indies, and
taken an Ancient Indian Woman, whom he sent from him to carry letters to
another Governor; she being gone, he sent after her a very fierce Mastive, whom
the Woman seeing run at her, she sat down on the ground, and thus bespoke him
in her language: Good Mr. Dog, good Mr. Dog, I carry these letters to the
Governor; and then added, good Mr. Dog do me no harm. The Dog coming to her
stood still, did her no harm, only heaving up his leg, pist on her. The
Spaniard knowing the nature of the Dog, took it for a Miracle, and so would not
kill her, but saved her alive.

Boschier Ibid. p. 299. Romans that none should make a public feast before he
had provided for the necessity of his neighbors. And of the Egyptians that
every five years each family should be searched to see what course they took to
maintain themselves.

Adam fifteen years after the Creation, begat Cain and Calmana, and fifteen
years after Abel and Delbora. And when Abel being an hundred years old was
killed. Adam mourned for him an hundred years, and had resolved never more to
know his Wife, but that God particularly willed him, and he had thirty children
more, and lived nine hundred and thirty years: and, as the other Patriarchs,
before the flood did eat no flesh, and survived Cain, who was slain by Lamech
in a Bush taken for a beast. And to perpetuate the knowledge of Arts and
Sciences, Adam and Seth made two pillars, the one of Brass, the other of Stone;
as likewise Tubal Cain, and Tubal foreseeing that the World should be burnt and
drowned, erected two pillars more, one of Brick to defend the Fire, the other
of Marble to defend the Water, and thereon did grave the Arts and Sciences by
them invented.

Grafton Hist. p. 3, 4, 5. p. 11. The Tree under which Abraham entertained the
Angels, continued till the i am of Constantius

Id. p. 21. London was built three hundred fifty and six Rome, in the time of
Eli the high Priest.

Graftons Hist. p. 36. King Locrine, Brutus Son, kept Estrildes his secret cave
at London, and when he went to her, gave out that he would make a secret
sacrifice to the Gods. On her he begat Habren, whom Gwendolin his Wife together
with her Mother threw into Severn and drowned, and from the childs name
commanded the River to be called Habren, as the Welsh now call it, and by
corruption Severn.

p. 39. Bladad who founded Bathe, having made himself VVings, and intending to
fly with them, fell on the Altar of Apollo, and bruised himself and therewith
died.

Id. p. 47. Rivalio King of England it rained blood for three days
continually, which bred an innumerable company of Flies, and after was followed
with a fearful pestilence.

Id. p. 49. Malmutius gave privilege of Sanctuary to Temples, Cities, Carts,
and the four Highways, which are called The Fosse from Totness to Lincoln.
VVatlingstreet from Dover to Cardigan. Erming street from St. David's to
Southampton. Kickneld street from Worcester to Tinmouth.


p. 54. 57. Brennus besieged the Capitol, the Ganders awakened the VVatch and
saved it: On which accasion, the Romans long time after held a feast of Ganders
the first day of June.

p. 59. Brennus had robbed the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, his Army was
destroyed by an Earthquake and hailstones, and Brennus in despair slew
himself.

p. 59. Morindus King of Britain was slain by a Sea Monster, whom he rashly
would needs encounter with; in the year of the World three thousand six
hundred fifty two.

Archigallo King of Britain being deposed, Elidurus was substituted King in
his place, who when he had reigned five years, finding his Brother by chance in
a VVood, restored him again to his Crown.

Grafton p. 63. Ptolomeus Philodelphus King of Egypt being Testament translated
into Greek, released freely a hundred thousand of the Jews, that were captive,
gave great gifts, and sent to Jerusalem for seventy Interpreters; who coming to
him in seventy days finished it, and were richly rewarded, every one having
given them three suits of apparel, two talents of Gold, and one Cup of one
Talent of Gold, and sufficient furniture for all their journeys and expenses.

p. 63. In the days of Eldadus King of Britain, Rome, with four feet, four
hands, four eyes, as many ears and both Natures.

Id. p. 65. From Adam to Christ are three thousand birth one thousand six
hundred and seventy three; so that the World has endured five thousand six
hundred thirty and six.

Grafton p. 74. Lucius the first Christian King, in the year of Christ one
hundred and eighty, appointed Westminster to be a Sanctuary.

Id. p. 83. Severus the Emperor built a Wall between Tine and the Sea, which
was one hundred twenty two miles long.

Id. p. 84. Donald the third King of Scots a cruel Tyrant, never laughed but
when he heard of the discord and slaughter of his Nobles.

p. 87. Austin and his Mother praising God for his Conversion, sung the Hymn,
Te Deum, answering mutually.

p. 92. Vortiger having procured a guard of an hundred Picts to attend King
Constance, he made them drunk, and laid open to them his own poverty, and by
secret ways let them know his mind to have the King removed, whom they
wickedly slew, and Vortiger for so doing put them all to death, and usurped the
Crown.

Grafton p. 95. Hengist the Saxon begged of King Vortiger so much ground as an
Ox hide would compass, which being granted, he cut the Hide into small thongs,
and with the same measured out a large circuit of ground in Lindsey, long after
named Thong Castle.

p. 96. Vortimer caused his Sepulcher of Brass, made spirewise to be set in
that Port in Kent, where the Saxons were commonly wont to arrive, and his dead
Corpse to be laid in it to terrify the Saxons; of which Saxons King Arthur in
one day with his own hands slew 140, and Edolse at Stonehing with a stake ^o
and got safe away to his Castle.

p. 99. 160. 106. In the Monastery of Bangor, in the year five Monks, that
lived by the travail of their hands; of whom one Etherfrid King of
Northumberland killed twelve hundred at one time, when they came to pray for
the good speed of the Brittans.

Grafton p. 109. Pope Gregory writing an answer to Austins goods that were
given to the Church should be divided into four parts. One to the maintenance
of the Bishop and his household, the second to the Clergy, the third to the
amendment of Churches, and the fourth to the relief of poor people and works
of mercy.

p. 114. Kenneth Keir King of Scotland commanded all Juglers, Minstrels and
scoffers to be banished as Vagabonds, or else to find some honest occupation to
live by.

p. 116. Elsteda the daughter of King Oswy, was gigen by her Father to God with
twelve Manors, on which to build twelve Abbeys.

Grafton p. 122. Glazing was first brought into England by Bennet a Monk about
the year six hundred.

p. 122. Tiberius the Emperor beheaded one that had found out the Art of making
Glass malleable, saying, That that Art would make Gold and other Metals of no
value.

p. 123. Wilfred being deposed from the Archbishopric of York applied himself
to the Saxons, and taught them fifteen years, and instructed them in the Art of
Fishing.

p. 124. Ino King of the West Saxons one Brightwoldus after he had been a long
time dead was restored again to life, and told many things of great wonder to
many men, whereby he caused great Alms and deeds of charity to be done.

Id. p. 127. Eugenius King of Scotland caused the Acts of his Ancestors to be
committed to writing, and that Historiographers should be found at the common
cost. Grafton p. 128.

Before the Danes came into England in the Brithricus King of the West Saxons
in the year 779 as men walked in the streets, Crosses like unto blood fell upon
their clothes, and blood like drops of Rain fell from Heaven.

p. 130. A grant of Land made by Athelstan in this Athelstan give unto Paulan,
Odham and Rodham as good and as fair as ever they mine were. And thereto
witness Maud my wife.

p. 147. When Dunstan held Ethelred being an Infant Font, he defiled it with
his ordure: Whereon Dunstan swear by God and his Mother, this child will be
unkind to God and his Church.

Id. p. 160. When Seward, Earl of Northumberland being Flux, saw that he should
die, he caused his Armor to be put upon him, and so Armed and sitting in a
Chair, said, Thus it becomes a Knight, or man of honor to die, and not lying
in his bed as another mean man.

Grafton p. 181. Edward the Confessor was the first King of England, that used
by his touch to cure the Kings evil.

William the Conqueror had three Horses Battle Abbey Field.

Id. p. 191. Hide of Land contains five yards, and every yard contains four
Acres. An Acre contains forty perches in length and four in breadth. And a
Knights fee con aineth eight Hides, which amount to one hundred and sixty
Acres, and is accounted a Plough Land.

Grafton 2. Vol. p. 16. Leofricus Duke of Mercia in the time of Edward the
Confessor adorned the Church of Coventry with great riches of Gold, Silver and
Jewels, insomuch that Robert, William the Conquerors Chaplain, being made
Bishop thereof, took from one beam in his Church the value of five hundred
Marks.

Tempest in the year one thousand and ninety, in the reign of William Rufus
blew down six hundred houses in London.

p. 23. William Rufus warring in Normandy, when by his command, an Army of
twenty thousand men were gathered together at Hastings in Sussex ready to be
transported; he sent then word that every man paying ten shillings might return
home, as meaning to corrupt therewith Philip the French King to desert his
brother Robert which accordingly was done, and thereon Robert was fain to sue
for Terms of Peace.

Id. p. 25. Rufus Bishoprics were bought and sold in England, as other
Merchandises, also Priests used bushed and braided-heads, and blazing clothes,
shining and Golden Girdles, and gilt Spurs, and many other enormities
uncontrouled.

Grafton 2. Vol. p. 28. In the year one thousand one hundred and England two
Moons, on Maunday Thursday, the one in the East, the other in the West; and in
the year one thousand one hundred and fifty six, were seen two Suns, and in the
Moon a Red Cross, about which time in Italy appeared three Suns by the space of
three hours in the West, and in the year following three Moons, whereof the
middle had a Red Cross overthwart, noted as a token of the schism among the
Cardinals, about the election of Alexander the third, that endured twenty
years. As also in December in the year one thousand and two hundred in the
reign of King John, were seen in the Element about ten at night within the
Province of York five Moons, One in the East, another in the West, a third in
the South, another in the North and a fifth in the middle. Hail fell as big as
Hens Eggs, and Spirits were seen flying in the Air like Birds, with fire in
their bills setting houses on fire, as they flew. And the last of October one
thousand three hundred twenty and one, the Sun for six hours together appeared
as red as blood. And in the year one thousand two hundred sixty and one in the
reign of Henry the third, the Thames was frozen so hard that men rode over on
horseback.

Grafton 2. Vol. p. 36. 51. 92. 98 138. 201. Becket's Kindred both men and women
were banished for his offense by Henry the second.

p. 68. Becket on Christmas day did excommunicate Robert de Brocke for cutting
off the tail of one of his Horses the day before.

p. 71. Alexander trod upon the Emperor Fredericks neck, the Quire
blasphemously sung this verse, Thou shall walk upon the adder and the Basilisk,
and shall tread down the Lion and the Dragon.

p. 79. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century X.
HEnry the second King of England never Tax or tribute on his Subjects, in all
his reign, and yet when he died left nine hundred thousand pounds in his
Treasury.

Grafton Vol. 2. p 81. Robin Hood, and little John, who is reported Thieves,
lived in the time of King Richard the first.

p. 85. Four hundred Jews at York in the time of Richard the first cut their
Master veins and bled themselves to death.

p. 87. In the year one thousand two hundred twenty Cathness in Scotland burnt
their Bishop, because he cursed them for not paying Tithes for which cause, the
King of Scots hanged four hundred of the chief doers, gelded their children,
and disinherited the Earl of that Country.

Id. p. 119. A Jew falling into a Privy at Tewksbury on Saturday, for reverence
of the day which is their Sabbath would not be taken forth. The Earl of
Gloucester hearing of it, commanded that he should not be taken out on the Lords
day, for reverence of the Christian Sabbath, and on Monday morning he was found
dead.

Grafton Vol. 2. p. 119. Isabel, Edward the seconds Wife, was returning with an
Army into England, had they not been driven by a Tempest to a contrary Harbor,
they had all miscarried, their Enemies waiting at the Port they intended to
land at.

p. 20. Edward the third tempted the Chastity of the beautiful Countess of
Salisbury, and had an honorable repulse.

p. 214. Edward the third having straightened Calice by a Twelve-months siege,
proffered mercy to all, except six, which should come forth with Halters about
their necks, and be left wholly to his dispose; they coming, he commanded them
to be beheaded, but upon the earnest intercession of his Queen, and Nobles, he
forgave them, who had all voluntarily proffered themselves to that danger to
save their people.

p. 286. Edward the third took Sir Eustace of Richmond Prisoner with his own
hand, and for his valiant behavior in the encounter, he set him at liberty,
and gave him a rich Chapelet of Pearls to were in remembrance of him.

Grafton Vol. 2. p. 291. Sir James Audely having behaved himself valiantly
Poytiers, the Black Prince gave him five hundred Marks a year, which he
presently gave his four Esquires: the Prince hearing of it confirmed his gift,
and gave him six hundred Marks more for himself.

p. 299. John King of France and Edw. the 3d King of England being together at
Mass, when the Pax was proffered to be kissed, both refused to kiss first, and
so instead of kissing the Pax they kissed each other.

p. 316. In the year one thousand four hundred and Thames flowed three times in
one day, of which Grafton gives the reason to be great Winds, Rains, and Frost.

p. 441. At the Council of Constance was assembled Bishops, Abbots, and Doctors
three hundred forty six, of Noble men five hundred sixty four, of Knights and
Esquire; sixteen thousand besides Servants, which not accounting, the Townsmen were
reckoned forty five thousand persons.

Id. 444. In the reign of Henry the fift^, there was a Parliament at Leicester
against the Temporalties of the Clergy, That that which was devoutly given and
disordinately spent might be employed to better purposes. But the Clergy by
moving the King to the Conquest of France, waved the force of the bill, so that
it was laid asleep.

Id. p. 445. October being Friday, was fought the battle of Agincourt, where
the French had six times the number of the English, and were so confident
before hand, that they had in their thoughts divided the spoil, but received, a
most terrible overthrow through Gods assistance, and the English Valor, and
the Policy of sharp stakes pitched in the ground before the Archers to break
the force of the Horsemen.

Grafton. Vol. 2. 454. Henry the fifth being in France, heard that his Son,
afterward Henry the sixth, was born at Windsor, not fancying the place, he
spoke these prophetical words. I Henry born at Monmouth shall small time reign
and get much, but Henry born at Windsor shall long reign and lose all. But as
God will, so be it.

p. 490. Jews Duke of Orleance was owner of the Castle of Coucy. His Constable
was the Lord of Cawny, whose wife, the Dukes Paramour, had a child, not certain
which was the Father. Whereon Cawny and his wife being dead, a Controversy
arose, the next of Kin to Cawny claiming the Inheritance, which was four
thousand Crowns per annum. This controversy depending in the Parliament of
Paris, the child then eight years old, though instructed by his Mothers
Friends, both to save his Mothers credit, and to enjoy so ample an Inheritance,
to own himself as Cawnies child, yet being asked, answered openly before the
Judges. My heart gives me, and my noble courage tells me, that I am the Son
of the noble Duke of Orleance; more glad I am to be his bastard with a mean
living, than to be the lawful Son of that Coward Cuckold Cawny with his four
thousand Crowns Inheritance. The next of Kin had the Estate, and the young Duke
of Orleance took him into his Family, who after proved a most Valiant and
fortunate Warrier against the English in the days of Henry the sixth, and is
commonly called the Bastard of Orleance.

p. 530. Henry Beauford Bastard Son of John of Gaunt Winchester was made
Cardinal, and by his Bulls Legantine gathered so much treasure, that he was
truly called the rich Cardinal, but not the learned Bishop or virtuous Priest.

Grafton Vol. 2. p. 524. Margaret daughter to James the Fourth King Scotland
married to Jews Dolphin of France, was of so nasty a complexion and stinking
breath, that her husband, after the first night loathed her company, for grief
of which, she soon after died.

p. 575. Francis Duke of Britain was in treaty of Marriage with Isabel
daughter of James the fourth King of Scots, his counsel advised him against it,
because she had little Wit or Womanhood. He answered, being enamoured on her
fair face, that it was enough for a Woman to judge the difference between the
Doublet and Shirt of her husband, and to know him in the dark from another man.

p. 575. blind came to St. Albans, and gave out that at that Martyrs shrine he
had his sight restored to him. Humphrey the good Duke of Gloucester being there,
sent for him, who reasoning with him asked him what color his Gown was? The
blind man readily answered, not only to that, but to many other colors in the
Room. Away Fellow, says the Duke, thou wast never born blind, that can
presently distinguish bet^een colors, and commanded him to be set openly in
the Stocks.

Grafton Vol. 2. p. 598. Beauford Bishop of Winchester lay dying, he used these
words: Why should I die having so much riches? If the whole realm would save my
life. I am able either by Policy to get it, or riches to buy it. Fie, will not
death be hired, will Money do nothing? I had hope to have worn a Triple Crown,
but I see the world fails me, and I am deceived. I pray you all to pray for
me.

Id. p. 599. When the stout Earl of Warwick heard that slain in the beginning
of a Battle, and some began to fly, he came to King Edward the fourth, and
alighting off his Horse slew him with his Sword, saying, Let him fly that will
for surely I will tarry with those that will tarry with me.

Grafton Vol. 2. p. 654. When Henry Earl of Richmond was presented Henry the
sixth; He observing his Towardliness, said to those that were about him; Lo,
surely this is he to whom both we and our Adversary leaving the possession of
all things, shall hereafter give room and place.

692. Henry the sixth, that good, but unfortunate London, apparelled in a Gown
of blue Velvet, taken by Edward the fourth and committed to Prison.

p. 702. King Edward the fourth called before him an Widow, which was wealthy,
and pleasantly demanded of her what she would give him toward his great
charges. By my troth said she, for thy lovely Countenance thou shall even have
twenty pounds. The King looking scarcely for half the sum thanked her, and
lovingly kissed her. Whether the Flavor of his breath did so comfort her stomach,
or she esteemed the kisses of a King so precious a Jewel, she swore
incontinently he should have twenty pounds more, which she with the same Will
paid that she offered it.

Id. p. 719. Banister that had been Servant to the Duke of Buckingham, betrayed
his Master the Duke to Richard the third, whether for fear or covetousness
uncertain; but sure it is, that shortly after his Son and heir waxed mad and
died in a boar-sty. His eldest daughter before of excellent beauty was stricken
with a Leprosy. His second Son miserably deformed and lame in his limbs. His
younger Son drowned in a puddle. And he himself in his extreme old age found
gulty of a Murder and saved by his Clergy, and never had one farthing of the
thousand pounds King Richard promised. King Richard saying, That he that would
be untrue to so good a Master, would be false to all others.

p. 825. Cords a French Commander so sore longed to gain Calice from the
English, that he would commonly say, that he would gladly lie seven years in
Hell, so that Calice were in the possession of the French.

p. 882. In the year one thousand four hundred twenty English Merchants that
had been before restrained, were received in the City of Antwerp with general
procession: so glad was the Town of their returning, by whom they had much gain.

Grafton Vol. 2 p. 922. Some Frenchmen taken before Calice in the Henry the
eighth of England, were sold in open Market. A Cooper of Calice bought one of
Bulloigne, and had of his Prisoner a hundred Crowns for his Ransom. When the
money was paid, the Frenchman prayed the Cooper to see him safe delivered, and
to conduct him out of danger; who, hereupon all alone, went with the Frenchman
beyond the Causey, and then would have departed, but the Frenchman by force
took the aged Cooper and carried him to Bulloigne, and made him pay two hundred
Crowns for his Ransom.

Id. p. 982. When Cardinal Campejus came into London, Wolsey sent him twelve
Mules with Trunks stuffed with trash. Two or three of these overturned in
Cheapside, and discovered the Cardinals Furniture, to the great disgrace of the
Cardinal, and laughter of the Spectators.

p. 1026. wolsey was articled against, amongst other, this was one, that having
the French disease, he came into King Henry the eighth his presence, and
breathed on him with his venomous breath.

Thomas More Lord Chancellor of England, was a merry and pleasant conceited
Gentleman, and that not only in his prosperous but adverse estate. Insomuch
that being sent Prisoner to the Tower, one of the Officers demanding his upper
garment, as his Fee, meaning his Gown; He answered, he should have it, and took
him his Cap, saying it was his uppermost garment. And going to his death at the
Tower gate, a poor woman called to him and besought him to declare that he had
certain evidences of hers, in the time he was in Offce, and that he would
entreat that she might have them, or else she were undone. He answered, Good
woman have patience a little while, for the King is so good to me, that within
half an hour he will disburthen me of all businesses, and help thee himself.
Also when he went up the Stairs of the Scaffold, he desired one of the Sheriffs
Officers to give him his hand to help him up, and said, When I come down again,
let me shift for my self as well as I can. When the Executioner asked him
forgiveness; he said, I forgive thee, but I promise thee, thou shall never have
credit in striking off my head, my neck is so short. And when he should lay
down his head on the block he having a great gray beard, stroaked it out and
said to the Executioner; I pray you let me lay my beard over the block lest you
should cut it.

Grafton Vol 2. p. 1226. Ninus made an Image of his Father Belus, Privilege,
that whoever being guilty bed to it should have no hurt, which was the first
occasion of Idolatry. The Devil seeing the curiosity of people, who from Ninus
example did worship the Images of their dead Friends, hid himself in those
Images and gave answers to the people, and said t ey were Gods, and commanded
reverence to be done to them.

Fructus Temporum, part 1. Sibylla Delphica before the Wars of Troy, Virgin
without man's Seed.

Idem part 1. When Ferren had killed his Brother Porren, revenge killed him
with her own hands.

Id. D. 4. Cambyses fley'd a Judge for bribery, and made sentence, to sit on a
seat covered with his Fathers skin.

Id. part 3. E. 3. Pamphiticum was divided, for Alexander in his expedition
against Darius, as the red Sea was for the Israelites.

Id. part 3. E. 7. Regulus would not afford his Enemies peace but upon very
hard Terms, whereby being driven into despair they enforced themselves and
worsted him.

Curandum imprimis ne magna injuria fiat Fortibus and miseris.

Idem part 3. E. 8. Romans in four hundred and forty years never had one years
peace and rest, but always War.

Id. Ibid. Scipio Nautica among other good Counsels he gave to the City of
Rome, these were two. First, that Carthage should not be destroyed, that
thereby the Soldiers might be employed, and the great ones kept from divisions
and Factions. The other was, that the Theaters and shows should not be
permitted in Rome to the corrupting of their youth.

Fructus Temp. part 3. F. 2. Suns appeared in heaven toward the East part of
the World, in the time of Julius Caesar, the which by little and little were
brought into one body; betokening that Asia, Africa, and Europe should be
united into one Monarchy.

Id. Ibid. At Christ's birth a Well of Oil sprang beyond Tiber by Rome, and ran
all day, and a Golden Image fell down, which when Romulus had put up in his
place, he said of it, That it should not fall till a Maid bore a child.

Id. part 4. F. 7. When Herod had put to death many of his Emperor hearing of
it, said, He had rather be Herod's Hog, than his Child, for he killed them and
spared his Pigs.

Id. Ibid. In the time of Theodosius there was a child Emons from the Navel and
upwards, two bodies, and below one. Which lived two years, and then one died
three days before the other. Such another was born in Scotland and lived twenty
seven years.

Fructus Temp. part 4. I. 3. About the year four hundred forty and nine woman
bore seven children at a birth, of the which one was afterward made King of
Lombardy.

Id part 5. N. 3. When the Emperor Justinian told Pope John nature, he should
go into Banishment. The Pope replied, I desired to come unto Justinian a
Christian Emperor, but to me it seems I have found Dioclesian the persecutor
of Christians, but I dread not thy malice and fear not thy threatenings. Then
the Emperor humbled himself, fell down to the ground and asked mercy and
absolution.

Id. part 5. N. 5. Tiberius the second Emperor was exceeding charitable,
insomuch that his wife chid him for his liberality; but be answered, that he
put his treasure in ^eaven, and trusted in God he should never want. He going
by his palace in Constantinople, saw in a marble pavement a Cross graven, and
thought it should not be trod upon, and commanded the stone to be removed, and
found under it an inestimable treasure in Gold.

Fructus Temp. part 5. N. 5. Mahomet trained a Dove to pick meat out of his
Ear, which he gave out to be the Holy Ghost, and taught a Camel to obey his
beck, which he bred up secretly, and having writ his Alcoran in letters of
Gold, he tied it about her neck, and let her at liberty into the Fields, and
when none else could come near her, she suffered Mahomet to take the book, and
fell down on her knees and lickt his hand, as formerly she had been taught.
Which the Vulgar took as a Miracle, and so received the book, believing it sent
from heaven.

Id. part 5. N. 7. Sergius his first name was Os Porci Swines snout, of which
being ashamed, he changed it, and ever since his Successors h^ve so done.

Id part 6. O. 6. The seven Electors of the Roman Emperors Expressed in these
ensuing verses.

Episcopi
Moguntinensis, Treverensis, Coloniensis,
Quilibet Imperii sit Cancellarius horum.
* Rhenis *Saxoniae
Et Palatinus * dapifer, Dux * portitor ensis,
* Brandeburgensis
Marchio * Praepositus Camerae, Pincerna Bohemus.
Hi statuunt dominum per omnia saecula summum.
Id. part 6. P. 7. Calixtus chosen Pope, having taken Pope Benedict, his
opposer, caused him to ride before him through the City of Rome on a Mule, with
his face toward the tail, and holding it in his hand as a bridle, and after
cast him into Prison.

Id. part 6. R. 6. Epitaphium Henrici filii H. 5. Imperatoris.
Omnis honoris honos, decor and decus urbis and orbis,
Militiae splendour, gloria, lumen, apex.
Julius ingenio, virtutibus Hector, Achilles
Viribus, Augustus moribus, ore Paris.
Fruct. Temp. part 7. S. 3. Pope Gregory, when Legate, convented a Simony, and
said openly before all the people, since the Bishop denied it, and none could
prove it, Let man's Judgment cease for it is deceivable, and let God dispose of
it. For certain it is, that the Dignity of a Bishop, is the gift of the Holy
Ghost, and whosoever bu^es a Bishopric sins against the Holy Ghost. Then if
thou Bishop did not sin against the Holy Ghost, say openly before all people,
Gloria patri, filio and Spiritui sancto. And many times he began to say it, but
could never speak Spiritui sancto. He was deposed from his Bishopric, and
afterward could speak it well enough.

Id. part 7. R. 3. John Comin was slain by Robert Bruise King of Scots, before
the Altar at Dunfrees, whose blood in the stones cannot be washed away.

Id. part 7. X. 3. Boniface the eighth Pope, entered as a Fox, lived as Lion,
died like a Dog.

Fructus Temp. part 7. X. 6. Henry the seventh was poisoned by a Friar in the
Sacrament.

Id. part 7. Z. 3. Roger Mortimer was Prisoner in the Tower, he made a great
Feast to the Lieutenant apd all his Officers, at which he gave them in their
drink a sleepy potion, that they slept two days and two nights, and in the mean
time he made his escape.

Id. part 7. Z. 3. Halidon hill besides Berwick there were slain in one battle
of the Scots thirty five thousand seven hundred and twelve, and of the English
but fourteen.

Id. part 7. A. 5. In the time of King Edward the third, there pestilence over
most part of the World, and from that time all that ever have been born have
two cheeks teeth less than they had before.

Id. part 7. B. 4. King Richard the second in the year of his displeasure
against London, removed the Courts and Terms from Midsummer till Christmas unto
York.

Fructus Temp. part 7. E. 2. Eleven persons were pressed to death on London
bridge by the throng of people, that came from meeting King Richard the second
in his return from France.

Id. part 7. E. 4. Thomas of Woodstock the good Duke of Gloucester death at
Calice, by the command of Richard the second, between two feather-beds.

Id. part 7. E 4. In the year one thousand four hundred thirty government of
the Church, The Pope, The Council, The Neutral: and an Holy maid in Holland
called Lidwith lived only by miracle not eating any meat.

Id. part 7. H. 8. The nine Orders of Angels are thus reckoned, Angels,
Archangels, Principates, Potestates, Virtues, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim,
Seraphim.

Polychronicon fol. 3. Caspian hills are seven thousand paces in length, but in
breadth little more than a Cart-way.

Id. f. 8. India the men have many wives, and when the husband dies, the
fairest and best beloved is buried with him, which they esteem as the highest
honor and preferment.

Id. f. 10. Lanthorn with a candle lighted swimmeth and floateth, but if the
light be quenched it sinketh: nothing that has life will sink, as was tried by
Vespasian, who threw in two men bound together and yet they swam.

Alexander intending to make War upon the Amazons, they writ to him, that they
much wondered at him. For if he were vanquished, he should have great shame, and
if he were Conqueror he should have no Credit. With which letter he was so
convinced, that he forbore to meddle with them, sent for the Queen, kept her as
his Concubine forty days, and sent her back with child by him.

Polycrhonicon fol. 17. Shadow of Mount Athos reaches seventy miles in length.

Id. f. 20. Bellerophons Image with his Horse made of Iron weighing fifteen
thousand pound weight, hung in the midst of a Temple in the air without chains
or supporters, only by the strength of Adamant, or Loadstones, that were in the
Vaults and Arches, that drew the Iron so every, way, that it might not move
upwards nor downward, nor sidewards, but hang always in the middle,

Id f. 23. The Albestone when once set on fire, can quenched or diminisht.

f. 23. In the North of Ireland is the land of Life, die till they are carried
out.

Id f. 35. In the Isle of Thule the six Summer months day, and the six Winter
months it is night.

Polycron. f. 41. The Isle of Man was Judged to Britain from Ireland, because
Venomous creatures are found therein.

Id f. 44. In Bohemia there is a beast called Boaz that Horns, but has a large
bag under his Chin, wherein he gathers water, and in running heateth scalding
hot and spouteth out on the Hunters and Hounds that pursue him, and scaldeth
them full sore.

A Maid the same day she was to be married Man, and shortly after married a
wife.

Id. f. 49. William the Conqueror, there were in England forty five thousand
and two Parish Churches.

Id. Ibid. Hannibal said of the Romans, that Ranulph of Chester says of
Englishmen, that they could not be overcome but in their own Country.

Idem. f. 56. space between the hands stretched out, which we call a Fathom, is
the just length of the body.

Polycronicon f. 57. Africa there are some men, that if they praise any thing,
it withers and decays.

Id. f. 58. Trevisa tells of one Roger Bag a very old man in Wotton
Underhedge in Glocestershire, that never spat or coughed in all his life.

f. 58. Thessaly and Athens, an Oracle was given, that the party whose Duke
should be slain should have the better. Codrus King of Athens disguised
himself, and went into the midst of his Enemies, and so willingly occasioned
his own death to get the Victory to his people.

f. 85. Sardanapalus tomb by his own appointment was written, So much I had as
I eat and drank.

Id. f. 86. Licurgus having established his Laws, bound Lacedaemonians by an
Oath, not to alter them till his return, and feigning a voyage to Apollo
Delphicus went into Crete and there died, and commanded his body to be thrown
into the Sea, that so his bones might never be carried back, and his people
never change their Laws.

Id. fol. 86. Romulus began his reign in the beginning Olympiad. Now the
Olympiades are the space of time between the games that were celebrated by the
Graecians on the mount Olympus, every fifth year, and began in the first year
of Joathan the Son of Josias King of Judah, and in the year of the World three
thousand one hundred eighty and three.

Polycr. f. 87. Tarpeja Covenanted with the Sabines to betray Tower, in which
her Father was, for the Jewels the Sabines wore on their left hands, but they
entering cast upon her not only the Jewels but the Shield they bore in their
left hands, and so pressed her to death with the weight of them.

Id. fol. 88. Nummus that signifies money, has its name Numa the second King
of the Romans, who first coined it.

Id. f. 89. Cyrus divided the great River Euphrates by Babylon into four
hundred and threescore Chanells, and so made a passage for his Army up the
River into Babylon, and took the City that suspected no entrance that way.

f. 94. Crafts-man thinking to pleasure Phalaris the Tyrant of Sicily, had
invented a brazen bull, and presented it to him. The Tyrant commanded him to be
first tortured in his own device, and so justly rewarded his wicked Wit.

Polycr. fol. 95. Darius got the Kingdom of Persia by his Horses first neighing
at the Palace gate. He having commanded his groom to have his Horse cover a
Mare at the same place the night before.

Id. f. 98. Athens when a Woman was impleaded, because she had poisoned her
husband and his Son, who had cruelly slain a Son she had by her former husband,
being unwilling to condemn her, respited the Judgment for an hundred years.

Id. fol. 100. Cynegiris a Knight of Athens having laid hold with his right
hand on a ship of the Persians, had that hand cut off, then he held it with his
left, and when that was cut off, took hold of it with his teeth.

f. 102. Sophocles when his children accused him of Dotage, rehearsed before
the Judges his Tragedy he had made of Oedipus, and was acquitted with Honor.

Id. fol. 103. Socrates being angry with his Servant told beat thee, if I were
not angry. And when his Wife having chid long with him, threw down piss upon
his head, he answered, I wist well that rain would follow thunder. When he was
old, he would ride on a Hobby Horse, and play with his children, and was at
last put to death for affirming and writing that there was but one God.

Polycr. fol. 107. Democritus put out his own Eyes for these reasons. First,
his sight did interrupt his holy thoughts. Secondly, he could not see Women
without temptation. Thirdly, that he might not see wicked deeds to vex him.

Id. f. 106. When the Gauls under Brennus entered Rome, Senators in their Robes
sat at their doors, whom the Soldiers took for so many Gods, till Papirius
struck one that played with his beard, and then they killed them all.

Id. f. 108. Diogenes lived in a Tub instead of a House, Sun and from the Wind.
When Alexander willed him to ask what he would, he only desired him not to
stand between the Sun and him. He used to carry a dish to drink in, till he saw
children drink out of the palms of their hands, and then threw away his dish as
superfluous. When one day he was gathering Coleworts, Aristippus told him that
if he would flatter Dionysius, he need not feed upon Coleworts; and he
answered, If thou would eat Coleworts, thou needst not flatter Dionysius.
When one Lentulus spat in his face, as he was pleading; Diogenes wiped his face
and said, They are foully mistaken, that say, thou have no mouth. When one
looking on him, told him he had wanton Eyes, his Scholars were angry, but he
pacified them, saying, Such I am by kind, but I allay my self by virtue. And
when a foul and deformed man showed him his fair House, he spat in his face and
told him it was the foulest place he saw. And when he died he ordered himself
not to be buried, but cast into the field; and when his friends told him the
Birds and Beasts would eat him, he bid them put a staff by him; and when they
replied, he could not then use his staff to drive them away; Neither, says he,
shall I feel them when they come.

Polycron. f. 109. Syr^cusans desired Dionysius death, only one old Woman
prayed for his life, which he wondering at, asked her the reason, she answered,
When I was young we had a Tyrant thy Grandfather, and desired his death, and
had a worse thy Father, and after, thy self the worst of all. And therefore I
pray for thy life lest a worse come after thee.

Polycr. p. 110. When Dionysius took away the Golden garments Images were
adorned with; he said that such clothing was too heavy for the Summer, and too
cold for Winter.

Id. Ibid. M^rcus Curtius went into an open Cliff of Earth to save his City
from the pestilence. And then the Earth closed and the pestilence ceased.

Id. Ibid. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century XI.
TOrquatus a Roman General slew his own Son, though he had gotten the Victory,
because he had fought against his Fathers command.

Polycronicon f. 110. Molossos came to Athens, Domosthenes pleaded against
them, but the next day they bribed him with money to hold his peace, so that
the third day Demosthenes came forth wrapped about the neck with woollen cloth,
and said, he had the Squinancy. But one said it was not Angina, but
Argentangina, The Silvery. And afterward it so appeared; For when he asked
Aristodemas what he had to plead for them, he answered a Talent. Demosthenes
replied that he had more to hold his tongue.

Id. f. 111. money to a Woman to keep, and ordered the money not to be
delivered but to both together. After one of them coming for it, the woman
delivered it. The other Sues her, and the woman was like to have paid it again,
had not a Lawyer standing by, perceived the deceit, and required them to come
both together and they should have it.

Id. Ibid. Philip King of Macedon sent to the Athenians, peace with them, if
they would deliver to him ten of their wisest men, which he would name: which
when the Citizens were willing to have done; Demosthenes dissuaded them, by the
Fable of the Wolves sending to the Sheep to proffer them peace if they would
give up their Dogs.

Id. f. 111. Bees sat on Plato's Lips, while he lay in Cradle, which
foreshewed his great Eloquence; and the night before Plato was sen^ to be
taught of Socrates, Socrates dreamt that he had a Swan to be laid on his Knees.
He chose a place called Academia, that was unhealthful, for his Schole. When he
was angry he therefore forbore to beat his Servant. One day Plato seeing
Fishermen sitting on a cliffe by the Sea side, he asked them, What have you?
They answered, All we have taken we have not, and what we have not taken we
have. They had been lowsing themselves. The busying his thoughts to resolve
this question, hastened his death.

Polycronicon fol. 112. Though a Strumpet lay b Zenocrates all night, Chastity.
And when he saw one led to be hanged, he laughed and said, The great Thieves
punish the less. And when Polemus came in drunken into his School, Zenocrates
left discoursing on the subject he was on, and converted his speech to the
matter of Sobern^ss and patience, whereby Polemus became Sober and Virtuous.

Id. Ibid. Alexander had received letters, that Philip his Physician was hired
by Darius to poison him; he showed Philip the letters, and yet afterward took
Physic from him.

Id. f. 117. Slaves in Tyrus conspired together and slew their Lords, and
married their Wives, only one hid his Master and saved him. Then the Slaves
agreed that he who saw the Sun rising on the morrow first should be King. The
good Slave told his Master; who advised him that when the rest looked East, he
should look West, which he did, and so first saw the Sun beams shining upon the
highest Tower, and was thereupon acknowledged King.

Id. ibid. Alexander charged one Dionidas for robbing at Sea; he replied, That
what he did at Sea Alexander did at land; he was called a Pirate, Alexander a
Conqueror.

Id. Ibid. Darius sent Alexander a Purse full of money, a ball and a scourge:
Intimating that he should go home and play at Tennis, or else he would whip him
thence.

Id. Ibid. When Alexander being drunk had condemned death, he appealed: To
whom, said Alexander? The Noble man replied, From thy self drunk, to thy self
sober. Whi h answer pacified Alexander, and saved his own life.

Id. f. 120. Lysimachus being cast by Alexanders command Lion, wrapped a cloth
upon his hand, which he put into the Lions mouth, and so killed the Lion and
saved himself.

Polycron. f. 120. When Alexander lay dying, his friends Empire; he answered,
(...), To the worthiest; and when he was dead, strangers sorrowed for him, as
for a Father; when they who were about him rejoiced, as if he had been an
Enemy. He reigned twelve years, and died when he was aged three and thirty.

Id. fol. 123. When Pyrrhus his Physician came to Fabritius reward; Fabritius
sent this Physician bound to Pyrrhus with letters that discovered his
treachery. Of Fabritius it was said that the Sun could be sooner turned out of
his course than he out of his honesty.

Id. f. 124. When the Carthaginians being extremely weakened, craved peace of
Marcus Regulus, he proposed such unreasonable terms, that they being desperate,
enforced themselves, overcame Regulus and all his Army, took him Prisoner, and
after sent him to Rome for exchange of many Carthaginians. But he coming
thither, dissuaded the exchange of so many young men for him an old man, and
because of his Oath returned to Carthage, where they closed him in a ^ree,
pared off the Lids of his Eyes, and made him stand waking till he died.

Id. f. 126. Saguntum besieged by Hannibal and brought to great distress,
rather than yield, was set on fire by the Citizens, and all they had with
themselves consumed in it.

Id. f. 127. Hannibals Soldiers fighting, there happened to be a great
earthquake, that threw down Hills and Cities; but they were so intent on their
business, that they wist not of it.

Id. fol. 127. Mithridates so used himself to poison in his youth, that in his
old age, when he would have destro^ed himself with poison, he could not.

f. 136. Crassus fighting against the Parthians was overcome and taken by them,
who melted Gold and poured it in his throat, saying, Thou Roman art athirst for
Gold, now drink thy fill.

Polycron. f. 138. When Christ was carried in his Infancy into Egypt, the
Idols of the Egyptians fell down as Dagon did before the Ark.

Id. f 145. Augustus coming to Rome, one calle^ him Tyrant. He answered, If I
were so, thou durst not call me so.

Id. 147. One coming to Rome that was very much Augustus, the Emperor sent for
him and asked him, whether his Mother had never been at Rome? The stranger
answered, No; but his Father had.

f. 147. Nero made an Heaven an hundred foot high, Pillars of Marble, imitating
the Sun, Moon, Thunder, Rain, but all was suddenly thrown down by a stroke
from Heaven.

Id. fol. 155. Longinus the Soldier that pierced Christ's side Converted and
died a Martyr.

Id. Ibid. Tiberius was wont to say, that a Shepherd sheer, not swallow his
Sheep; he would not change or remove his Officers, saying, Empty Flies bite
worse then full.

f. 149. An old man being in peril of doom came to Augustus and prayed him of
help; he appointed him a noble Advocate. The old man then cried out, O Caesar
when thou vvast in peril at the battle of Actium I sought none to fight for
thee but I did it my self, and shevved him his wounds: then Caesar came and
pleaded for him.

148. Augustus Caesar had bought a Popinjay, a Pie and a Star at great prices,
that had been taught to say, Hail Caesar Conqueror. A poor Cobbler took a great
deal of pains to teach a Chough; which not learning, he was wont to say,
Heu! olsum and operam perdidi, Alas I have lost my travail and cost. The Bird
at last learning as Caesar passed by, he saluted him; but when Caesar answered
he had enough of such already, the Chough added; Alas I have lost my travail
and cost: then Caesar gave a great Price for him.

fol. 148. Greek Poet having many times made Verses in the praise of Augustus,
and received no reward; The Emperor at last ma^e him some Verses and gave to
him, which the Greek Poet reading, applauded and proffered him money; at which
the Emperor commanded the Poet to have a great reward.

Polycron. f. 148. Jews flying from Jerusalem to the Romans, having swallowed
Jewels of Gold, it being espied, was the death of many of them; the Romans
killing them in expectation to find Gold in their bellies. Id. 158.

Jerusalem was taken by Vespasian, a Heyfer, that was to be Sacrificed, brought
forth a Lamb. The Brass Gate that twenty men could hardly open, opened of it
self. Armies of men and Chariots were seen in the Air; and a voice heard in the
Temple, Let us go hence. One Ananias for four years cried continually, Woe,
Woe, etc. And the last day, when it was taken, went upon the Wall and cried,
Woe to Jerusalem, and Woe to me also, and was smitten wit^ a Stone and died.

Id. 159. Vespasian dying would not sit, or lie, but standing.

Polycron. f. ^50. The Philosopher Secundus enjoined himself silence, and
forbore to speak for many years together, and though brought before the Emperor
Adrian, yet kept silence, and so did to his death.

162. Antoninus Pius was wont to say, that he life, than kill a thousand
Enemies.

Id Ibid. When Constantine gave great gifts to the Voice was heard, saying,
Hodie Venenum infunditur in Ecclesiam. This day poison is poured into the
Church.

Id fol. 1^1. Eugenia daughter to Philip a Noble Roman and called Eugenius, and
made Monk, and after Abbot. A Woman named Melencia cast a lecherous eye on him
and would have had him lie with her; which when he refused, she desamed him,
saying, that he would have forced her; she was brought before her own Father,
then as Judge, and discovered her self. Her Father turned Christian, and
Melencia was killed with lightning.

Id. f. 163. Narcissus a Christian was accused of foul crimes by three false
witnesses, which wished if what they charged him with, were not true, the first,
that he might be burnt; the second, that the Kings Evil might destroy him; the
third, that he might be blind. The two first had what they wished, which the
third seeing and repenting wept himself blind.

Polycron f. 164. Origin at eighteen years old would have gone to Martyrdom
with his Father, but his Mother hid away his cloths. He afterward kept School,
and thereby maintained his Mother and all her Children. He gelded himself, writ
four thousand Volumes, when be said well, no man better, when ill, no man
worse. He held that the Devil at length should be saved, alleging this
Scripture, God shall not be wroth for evermore.

Id. fol. 165. The Emperor Licinius called Learning a common Pestilence.

Id. f. 176. Athanasius being pursued and like to be taken Boat and met his
pursuer. Who asked whether he sa^ Athanasius, he answered that he went that way
just now. The pursuer went forward, and so Athanasius escaped.

Id. 173. The Bishops assembled at the Council of Nice by the command of
Constantine, to compose the differences in Religion, they put up bills of
Complaint the one against the other, but he commanded them to reconcile
themselves amongst themselves, and burnt all their bills, saying, That if he
saw any of them commit Adultery, he would cover it with his own Mantle, that
men should not have occasion to speak evil of Religion.

Id. 173. When Sapor King of Persia had besieged the Nisiben two months, the
Snouts of his Elephants and his Horses Ears were so pestered with gnats and
great Flies, that they threvv down all that was upon them, and disparcled his
Host. Id. ibid.

Julian the Apostate his Steward, pissing in scorn upon the Vessels of the
Church, said, Lo Vessels Mary's Son is served in. Immediately his mouth served
him instead of his lovver part for the avoiding of his execrements. His Master
Julian endeavored to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, but what was built on
the day was thrown down at night.

Ibid. Theodosius the second, the Devil appeared to the J^ws in the likeness of
Moses in the Island of Crete, and promised there, that he would lead them dry
foot to the land of Behest. Many of them were drowned, and others turned to
the faith.

Polycron. fol. 180. Attila besieged the City Tricasove, where Saint Lupus
was Bishop, at his Prayers all the Host was stricken blind. And when the
Saxons set on the Britains, Saint German the Bishop, commanded the Soldiers
to cry all together, Hallelujah thrice, whereon the Saxons fled without
striking stroke.

Id f. 181. 184. Medard Bishop of Noviodunum and Geldard Episcopus
Rothomagensis were twin-brethren born in one day, made Bishops in one day, died
in one day, and Canonized for Saints in one day.

Id. f. 186. Werburga daughter of VVulphinus King of Mercia, a Menchion or
Nun buried in the Nunnery of Hamberge, lay whole and unputrified three
hundred years.

Id. 209. Ricoldus Duke of Prisons being persuaded VVulphrun to be baptized,
having one foot in the font asked the people, whether more of his predecessors
were in Paradise or Hell. When it was answered in Hell, he drew his foot out of
the water and would not be baptized, saying, it is better to follow the more
than the less.

Id. f. 217. Charles the great who was eight foot of stature, sitting at meal
with his Master Alcuinus a Scot, who sat before him on the other side of the
Table, asked his Master, how great difference and space there was between a
Scot and a Sot; his Master answered, but the breadth of a Meat-board.

Id. f. 220. When Jews the mild had advanced one Frederick Vtrecht, sitting at
meal with him, he gave the Bishop good Counsel, at which the Bishop took
boldness, and asked him whether that Fish was to be tamed at head or tail. The
King answered at head. Then said the Bishop. Reform thy self, and put away thy
Wife Judith with whom thou incestuously live. The Emperor took it in good
part, but his Wife hearing of it, hired two Ruffians that killed him. In this
Emperors time a Damsel at Toulouse lived three years vvi^hout Meat or Drink.

Id. fol. 223, 224. Sergius commande^ the dead body of his predecessor Formosus
to be taken up, his ^ead to be strick^n off, and his body to be cast into the
River. Which body, Fishers found and brought into St. Peter's Church, and Images
did it reverence at it is coming in.

Polycron. f. 232. Edgar King of England, there was a Woman born in Gascoigne
having two bodies from the Navel upward, being but one downward.

Id. f. 238. Silvester the fourth, being a Frenchman, formerly called
Gerbertus, a great Negromancer, covenanted with the Devil for the Popedom, till
he said Mass in Jerusalem not thinking of a Chapel in Rome so called, where he
fell sick, and ordered his body to be put in a Coffin, and buried, where the
beasts that drew the bier should abide of th^mselves. The beasts carried him to
St. John of Laterans. Where his Tomb by sweating and rattling of his bones gives
warning of the Popes death.

Id. f 244. Lupoldus was sent by the Emperor Conradus to his Empress with a
letter, importing that when the letters were read, the young man that brought
them should be put to death the same day. The young man in his journey lodged
at a Priests house, who read the letter, and instead of dying that day put in,
should marry our daughter, which accordingly he did.

Id. f. 248. A Woman of Berckley in Glocestershire having Arts, as she sat at
a feast, a Crow that she kept creked louder than she was wont. The Woman then
said, O my Saul is come to sorrow this day, sent for her Children, confessed her
sins, and wished them to bind her in her Coffin with Chains, and if she ^ay four
days to bury her, but she was fetched by the Devil out of the Church, set upon a
Black Horse and carried away with terrible cries.

Id. fol. 257. A Citizen of Rome named Lucianus having Eugenia, after his
Wedding dinner went to the Fields, and being to play put his Ring upon the
Finger of an Image that stood by: when he had done his play, coming for his
Ring he could not get it off. At night Bedding his Wife, something between him
and his Wife lay by him, and said, Lie with me, I am the Goddess Venus thou
have Wedded this day, and so did many nights. At last his Friends, applied
themselves to one Palumbus a Priest, that was a Negromancer, by whose means he
got his Ring, and afterward heard no more of his bedfellow.

Polycron. f. 247. In the Province of Apul^a was an Image of Marble with an
head of Brass, and had a Garland, on which was Written, The first day of May I
shall have a head of Gold. A Saracen Prisoner understood what it meant, and
came the first day of May, and took notice of the shadow of the Image in length
and breadth, and found under the shadow a great treasure, with which he paid
his ransom.

Id. fol. 258. Patronus an Anchorite in an Abbey of Scotland. The Abbey was on
Fire, and he might have escaped, and would not go fourth, but was willingly and
wilfully burnt. But says Trevisa the Translator of Polycronicon, God grant he
be not damned for his blind devotion.

fol. 258. Oliver a Monk of Malmsbury in his youth, arrayed himself to fly as
Daedalus did, but fell down and lamed himself in his thighs, all his life
after: Which he imputed to his neglect or forgetfulness in not making himself a
Tail.

Id. 260. Walter Bishop of Hereford in the time of William the Conqueror, fell
in love with a Sempster of that City, and when he could not prevail b words, he
would have forced her, but she ran him into the belly with her Scissers of
which he died.

Id. 262. Johannes de Temporibus who was Esquire to Charles the great, died in
the days of King Stephen of England, when he had lived three hundred sixty and
one years.

Id. When the Physicians and Prelates persuaded Jews of France to make use of
a Woman in his return from the Holy land, because he was so far from his Queen
and sick for want of that Evacuation: He answered them, That he had rather dye
than live in spouse breach, and so put himself in Gods hand and was suddenly
made well.

Polycron. f. 285. When one brought King Jews a Bull from granted to the King
to have the first benefice in every Cathedral Church in his realm; He threw the
Bull in the fire, saying, That he rather would that tha^ should fry in the
fire, t^an his own Soul in Hell.

Id. 285. When King Richard the first of England had chased the King of Cyprus
from place to place; The King proffered to yield himself, so he might not be
put into Irons; which King Richard granted him, but instead of Iron he put him
into Chains of Silver.

Id. f. 294. Stephen Procurator of Angeow, under King Richard the first,
consulted with a Negromancer, who sent him to enquire of a Brazen head, that
had a Spirit enclosed. He enquired, shall I never see King Richard? the Spirit
answered, No: How long shall my Office endure? to thy lives end, said the
Spirit. Where shall I die? in Pluma. Hereupon he forbad his Servants to bring
feathers near him, but he prosecuting a Noble man, the Noble man fled to his
Castle called Pluma, and Stephen following was there killed.

Id. f. 296. Albericus Earl of Northumberland not contented with his own
estate, consulted with a Friend, which told him, he should have Graecia,
whereupon he went into Greece, but the Graecians knovving of it Robbed him of
what he had, and sent him from them. He after being weary of Travail came to
King Henry into Normandy, who gave him a Noble Widow to Wife, whose name
was Graecia.

Id. f. 296. The Epitaph of Richard the first King of England.
Viscera Carleolum, Corpus Fons servat Ebardi,
Et Cor Rothomagum Magne Richard tuum.
In tria dividitur unus, quia plus fuit uno.
Non superest uno Gratia tanta Viro.
Polyc. f. 299. London said Mass in Paul's Church, fell so great thicknes^ of
Clouds and darkness with thundering and lightning and stink, that it was
intolerable; so that the people went all out of the Church, and left the
Bishop and his Servants alone. Id. f. 302.

Luelline Prince of Wales was taken and beheaded English in the time of
Edward the first, on whom his Countrymen made this Epitaph.

Hic jacet Anglorum Tortor, Tutor Venedorum,
Princeps VVallorum Luellinus, regula morum,
Gemma Coaevorum, Flos regum praeteritorum,
Forma Futurorum, Dux, laus, lex, lux populorum.
Ansvvered by the English.

VVallornm jacet hic Princeps Praedoque Virorum,
Proditor Anglorum, fax livida, secta reorum,
Numen VVallorum, Trux, dux, horrenda Piorum,
Fax Trojanorum, Stirps Mendax, Causa Malorum.
Saint Edmund of Canterbury was like the Olive Tree, which yields the
Sweetness of it is Oil to others, but keeps the bitterness in it is own rind;
so was he hard to himself, and easy and gentle to others.

Polycr. f 304. Pope Boniface the eighth, was taken by William de Longaret a
Frenchman, and set upon a vvild Horse without Bridle, and his face to the
tail, and so killed with riding and hunger.

f. 310. In the reign of Edward the third, about the Lubeck slept continually
by the space of seven years, and afterward he avvoke and lived a long time.

Henry the fifth King of England erected two Houses of Religion, the one called
Zion, the other Charter House, the River Thames parting them; in which he was
perpetually prayed for: For when they of Zion rested, Charter House Monks
began, and so enterchangeably, the Bells giving notice from one to the other.

Id. fol. 333. Constantine King of Britain made a law, that every Prince
should give the tenth part of his possessions to the building and maintaining
of Churches, the which law he first executed, and after with a Pick-axe with
his own hands brake the ground of St. Peter's Church in Westminster, and bore
twelve Baskets full of earth out of the Foundation on his own shoulders.

Fabian Hist. 1. part p. 55. Lotharius King of France having taken Cramyris his
Eldest Son in battle who had rose in Rebellion against him, as an example to
all disobedient Children, he enclosed him and his wife and Children in a House,
set it on fire, and burned them in it.

Id. p. 91. Fredigund wife to King Chilperick resting on her bed, her husband
passing by with a little wand, struck her upon the back, the Queen not looking
up, and supposing the King gone a hun^ing said, Landry, why strikest thou me
thus? the King hearing these words made semblance as though he had not heard
them, but she perceiving it was the King, for fear co^trived and procured his
death the same day as he came from Hunting. Id. p. 109.

Brunchild the wife to Segebert the fourth Son of Lotharius the first King of
France, having stickler in the French affairs, and the death of no less than
ten Princes, was at last by the King and Peers of France condemned to be tied
to a Wild Horse-tail by the hair of her head, and so to be drawn till she was
dead, which accordingly was done.

Id. p. 131. Clodoveus Son of Dagobert King of France, in a great dearth caused
the Church of St. Dennis, Plates of Silver, to be covered with lead, and the
Silver given to the relief of the poor.

Id. p. 151. Aelfrid King of the West Saxons being naturally disease that
might hinder his lust, but not unfit him for the managing he affairs of his
Kingdom. And he accordingly had the disease called Ficus.

Fabian Hist. 1. part p. 216. A noble man named Hebert having invited Charles
the simple King of France to his Castle, there treacherously murdered him.
Jews the fifth his Son long time after attaining the Crown intends revenge.
Having convened his Nobles, amongst which Hebert was one, a Messenger brought
him a letter, which while he read and smiled, his Nobles asked, what that
letter imported; he told them that a Kinsman of his in England had acquainted
him, that a husbandman inviting his Lord to dinner treacherously slew him, and
desired to know of him what such a one deserved, and since they were thus met
he desired their opinion. They all and Hebert amongst them adjudged him to a
shameful death. The King turning to Hebert told him: Thou art the man, who have
treacherously slain my Father, and therefore I Judge thee out of thy own mouth,
and accordingly he was immediately executed.

Id. p. 237. King Edward Son of Edgar being slain by his buried in VVimborn,
she intending to Visit him by way of Pilgrimage, could not by any means make
the Horse she rid on come nigh the place of his burial.

Fabian Hist. 1. part p. 255. Robert Duke of Normandy being chosen King of
Jerusalem, hearing of the death of his Brother William Rufus King of England,
minding to succeed him, refused Jerusalem, but as Authors say, for that refusal
of providence never prospered after.

Id. 319. Philip the Eldest Son of Jews Son of Philip King of France, being a
youth riding through the streets of Paris for his disport, a Hog suddenly
started up; which frighted his Horse, so that he threw him off with so great
Violence, that he died that night.

Id. p. 332. Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople, when VVestern Princes about the
year one thousand one hundred and fifty, went against the Saracens, sold them
Meal mingled with lime, whereof many of the Christian Army perished.

341. King Henry the second returning out of Ireland, VVhitsunday he was taking
horse, suddenly appeared unto him a Man of pale and wan color barefoot in a
white, Kirtyl and said, Sir King, Christ greeteth thee well, and commands
thee strictly, that no Market or servile work be holden upon the Sunday in the
lands of thy Lordship, out take what belongs to the dressing of meat, and if
thou so do all shall prosper with thee. The King bad the Knight that held his
Horse ask him whether he had dreamed this. The man replied, whether I have
dreamed or no, take thou heed of my saying; that if thou mend not thy life thou
shall shortly hear such things, as shall make thee sorry to thy lives end. This
spoken the man suddenly vanished, and the King not amending himself was
unfortunate ever after.

Fabian Hist. p. 349. H. 2. Regis Angli.
Sufficit hic tumulus cui non suffecerit Orbis,
Res brevis est ampla cui fuit ampla brevis.
Rex Henricus eram, mihi plurima regna subegi,
Multiplicique modo Duxque Comesque fui.
Cui satis ad Votum non ^ssent omnia terrae
Climata, Terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
Qui legis haec, pensa discrimina mortis, and in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
Quod potes instanter operare bonu^, quia mundus
Transit, and incautos mors inopina rapit.
Id. p. 356. Epitaphium Frederici Imper.
Si probitas, sensus Virtutis, gratia census,
Nobilitas ortus possent resistere morti,
Non foret extinctus Fredericus qui jacet intus.
Fabian Hist. 2. Vol. p. 53. Greenwich near London, a Lamb was yeaned, having
two perfect bodies with all their members, but one head.

Id p. 99. Switzerland was delivered of a Child, that from the Nav^l upwards
had two complete bodies, and downward was but one; and another woman bore a
Child whose head and face was like a Man, and all the rest of the body like a
Lion.

Boniface the eighth minding to get the Popedom, hired one of the Chamberlains
to Coelestine the fifth, who was a good and holy, but simple man, in the dead
of the night to speak in a reed and say, Coelestine, if thou will be saved
renounce this Pomp of the World, and serve me as thou did before. He having
often heard the voice took it for a Divine warning, resigned the Popedom, and
would have retired into the Wilderness. But Boniface fearing his restoration
held him Prisoner, and so used him that he shortly after died.

Id 158. The three wives of the three Sons of Philip France, which wives were
Sisters, Daughters to the Duke of Burgoigne, were at one time accused of
Spouse-breach, the two eldest convict, and the youngest was cleared; the two
wives put in Prison and the two paramours hanged. The youngest was restored to
her husband Charles, after King of France, but from him afterward divorced,
because her Mother was Godmother to her husband.

Fabian. Vol. 2. p. 163. 189. In the third year of the reign of Philip the
France, the Provost of Paris having in his Prison a Picard a man of great
riches, which was judged to be hanged; The said Provost being hired thereunto
with great Sums of Money, took another Innocent Man, and put him to death
instead of the said Picard. Which being after made known to the Kings Council,
the Provost was put to the like death. Id. p. 188.

Air; one in the East the other in the West: Out of which at Noontide appeared
two Hosts of men to issue forth; what came from the East appeared White, the
other Black, which encountered each other, and the White that seemed at first to
be Victorious, at last was worsted, and so it disappeared.

Id. p. 245. death of Gregory the Eleventh were chosen two Popes. Urban the
Sixth by the Italians, and Clement the Seventh by the French. Which double Head
of the Romish Synagogue continued by several Elections thirty nine years.

Fabian. p. 262. Arnan in Britain kept by the English, the Commander of the
French hung a Purse and fifty Scutes of Gold on a Spears End, with promise
that who first entered the Town should have the said fifty Scutes of Gold,
which so encouraged the Soldiers, that within four hours they entered and took
it.

Id. p. 277. England in the twelfth year of Edward the Third, and in the year
of our Lord one thousand three hundred thirty seven, it was Enacted that no man
should wear any manner of Silk in Gown, Coat or Doublet, which could not spend
of good Rents an hundred pound by the year.

Id. p. 214. When John King of France was Prisoner in England, the three
Estates of Languedock ordained that no man should wear any Furs of any great
price, and that women should leave their rich Attire off their heads, and wear
neither Pearl nor Gold upon them, nor Silver upon their Girdles, so long as the
King remained Prisoner, and also that all manner of Minstrells for that season
should be put to silence.

Fabian. p. 284. Charles King of Navar being a man of great Age and very
feeble, was by Counsel of Physicians sowed in a sheet washed with Aqua-Vitae to
revive heat in him: He that sowed the sheet taking a Candle to burn off the end
of the thread, suddenly the Aqua-Vitae inflam^d and so burnt his flesh, that
he shortly after died with it.

p. 361. Certain Noblemen disguising themselves in Linen Pitch, and colored
with Oil, entered into the presence of Charles the seventh of France, to make
him disport by Torch-light, which Garments suddenly took fire, and the
disguisers after much torment, with great difficulty, by running into waters,
saved themselves.

Fabian. p. 363. Henry the fourth doing his devotions at St. Edwards Shrine
was suddenly taken sick, and so carried into the Abbots Lodging, where
enquiring what the Chamber in which he lay was called, it being answered,
Jerusalem: He presently replied, I know I shall now die, it being foretold him
that he should die in Jerusalem, and so he did.

p. 389. William Mandevil a Weaver of Abington having raised a Commotion
against King Henry the sixth, give out in a vaunting manner, that he would make
Priests-heads, as cheap as Sheeps-heads and sell three for a penny, but was
himself taken, Hanged, Drawn and Quartered.

Id. p. 422. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century XII.
THe English and French fighting, one named Bonsapriest a French Knight, for
fear fled and hid himself in a Covert of Bushes till the fight was ended; two
English men, their party having the worst, fled into the same Cov^rt, by whom
the Knight perceiving that the French had the better, he became so Courageous,
that he forced the said Englishmen to become his Prisoners, and with them
entered the French Host, and bare a Countenance as if he had won them in the
aforesaid fight, but when his demeanor was known, he was had in great
derision, and by the chief Captain deprived of his Prisoners.

Fabian. p. 429. In the year of our Lord one thousand four Lions in the Tower
died, which had continued a long season there.

Id. p. 454. In the year of our Lord one thousand four Robert Chichley, who had
been twice Lord Mayor of London, who by his Will appointed that on his mind day
a good dinner should be provided for two thousand four hundred poor men, and
two pence a piece to be bestowed on them.

Id. p. 436. Charles the eighth of France having concluded a Marriage between
his daughter Magdaline and Ladislaus King of Bohemia, while the Bride with
great Pomp was conveyed toward her intended Husband; he was taken suddenly
with sickness and died.

Id. p. 478. Jews the eleventh King of France Warring against Charles Duke of
Burgoigne, committed the charge of his Army to John Balna Priest and Cardinal,
whereat the Temporal Lords disdaining, the Earl of Damptmartin in their name
said to the King, Most Sovereign Lord, it has pleased your Highness to commit
to a Spiritual man the charge of this Host, and he not fearing God has taken
it upon him, to the effusion of Christian blood; wherefore may it like your
most noble Grace to send me a Temporal man to visit his Diocese, and to take
the charge of his Flock, which is as fit for me as the other is for him. Of the
which the King made game, but did as to him seemed best.

Fabian. p. 486. Charles the eighth of France being troubled with the Leprosy,
he commanded to be brought before him all the cunning Musicians, that by their
Melody he might be eased; but when he had assembled a hundred and twenty, yet a
few Shepherds Pipes were to him more solace than all the other, and therefore
commanded them every day at a certain distance from the place he lay to play to
him.

Fab. p. 491. One Mr. Dominick Physician to King Edward conceived of a Son.
This Physician when the Queen was in travail, vvaited in the second chamber,
that he might be the first that might bring tidings to the King of the birth of
the Prince. And when he heard the child cry, he called secretly at the Chamber
door to know what the Queen had. To whom it was answered by one of the Ladies,
Whatsoever the Queens Grace has here within, sure it is that a Fool stands
there without. And so confused with that answer, he departed without seeing the
King for that time.

Fab. p. 496. One William Colingborn Esquire being condemned Rhyme on King
Richard the third, The Cat, the Rat and Lovel our Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog,
was put to a most cruel death; for, being hanged and cut down alive, his
bowels ripped out, and cast into the fire, when the Executioner put his hand into
the bulk of the body he said, Lord Jesus yet more trouble? and so died to the
geat sorrow of much people. Id. p. 519.

Richard Hakendies wife was taken up in Saint Mary Hill Church London whole and
entire, that had lain in the ground more than one hundred and twenty years.

Fabian. p. 530. Middleston with two bodies, two heads, four Arms and hands,
one belly and one Navil; on the one side two legs, and two feet, on the other
one leg made of twain, and a foot with nine toes. It lived four days, and the
one part died before the other.

Id. p. 556. Emrods and Mice we read of 1 Samuel 6.5. were made by the
Astrologers directions and were Telesmatical signs; of the efficacy of which
Hali gives an experiment, practiced upon a Saracens Servant, who having been
stung with a Scorpion was cured by his Master with a stone of this kind
engraven with the figure of a Scorpion. The mightiest of this sort of Operators
was Apollonius Tyaneus, who got himself a great name by travailing about, and
making Telesmes, who coming to Antioch made one against the Northern Wind and
set it upon the East gate of the City, and caused an Image of a Scorpion to be
molten in brass, and set upon a pillar in the midst of the City, and the
Scorpions vanished out of all their coast. A like to which was set up in
Henopos a City of Syria Apamia. And when in the upper region of Grand Cairo,
the Crocodiles were mischievous, the Talismans cast a leaden Crocodile, which
written upon with an Egyptian charm they buried in the foundation of the
Temple: this for a long time defended the people, but when that leaden Image
was melted, the Crocodiles returned to their own malice, And the Fortune of
Byzantium stood with one foot in a ship of Brass, a Telesme erected against the
dangers of that Tempestuous Sea, and while it stood entire stilled the rage:
But some parts thereof being broken off and conveyed away, the Sea begun to
be as unruly as before; the cause thereof being curiously enquired into, and
discovered, the broken pieces were sollicitously searched, found out and put
together again, and forthwith the Winds and Seas obeyed: and that it might be
certainly known, that this indeed was the cause, why the Ships could not
safely arrive, the pieces of the brass were again taken away, and thenceforth
whatsoever Vessels touched upon the coast, were driven back by the Violence of
the Winds; they therefore made the Ship to be most carefully repaired. These
Consecrations, for so they are also called, were more usually but not only
practiced in the East. For Gregory of Tours reports, that at the repairing of a
bridge in Paris there was found the Images of a Serpent and Dormouse in Brass,
and that at the taking away of these, the Serpents and Mice came up in great
numbers. Such were the Serpentina Columna, and the Statua Equestris ahenea in
Constantinople, the destruction whereof has been followed with most fearful
and periodical mortalities. So that these Telesmes were the Ancient rite of
Averruncation. That in case a City or Country should be infested with any
plague either of disease or noxious creature, the Talismans were consulted, and
desired to erect an Image of the plague under a certain influence of Celestial
Configurations. And this was the cause why the Philistin Astrologers gave
counsel that Golden Images should be made of the Hemorrhoids and Mice that
marred the land, to give glory to the God of Israel. The Astrologers had
perceived that God had been pleased with the brazen Serpent, which Moses the
Talisman (so they would account him) set up upon a Pole in the Wilderness
against the Fiery Serpents; which was the first occasion not given but taken of
all these Telesmatical practices. And the God of Ekron was called Beelzebub, a
God of Flies, not because it was the privilege of the Jewish Sacrifices above
the Heathen, that never any Fly was seen in the slaughterhouse of the Temple,
but because the Ekronites being pestered with noisome Flies, to avert this
Nuisance, the Astrologers set up the Image of a Fly Telesmatically endued. The
people finding the benefit of this (...) made it a God. The Israelites
themselves did as much to the brazen Serpent.

Rowland. Judicial. Astrol. condemned. p. 130. An Astrologer calculated the
Nativities of two Twin brethren, and told their Parents that they should both
be fortunate, because he perceived they were born under a Fortunate Planet;
which proved contrary. For these, grown men and wanting means, betook
themselves to Robbing on the High ways; who for so doing were both taken,
committed to Prison, the next Assize brought to their Trial, convicted,
condemned, and judged to be hanged. All this while their fortunes were equal,
but contrary to the prediction of the Astrologer unfortunate: but when they
were brought to Execution and ready to be turned off, a Reprieve saved the
youngest, who had his pardon and afterward became an Honest man. The eldest
with the loss of his life satisfied the Law.

Id. p. 186. An Astrologer foretold that one Donello Forobosco Thief should be
hanged. Who came something nigh in his prediction, for he being a notorious
Robber was condemned to be hanged, and coming to the Gallows, when the
Executioner came to put the noose about his neck, he flung Ginny Pepper in his
Eyes, leapt off the Ladder, made toward the Sea, which was nigh the place of
Execution, and endeavoring to swim to save himself, the Cramp took him and he
was unfortunately drowned.

Rowland. Jud. Astr. cond. p. 186. prediction of King Henry the sevenths death,
that it should happen such a year. The King hearing of it, sent for him and
asked him if he were an Astrologer, and could tell Fortunes. To whom he
answered, Yes. The King again asked him if he never did forsee by his Art, that
there was eminent danger that much about that time should hang over his head,
meaning the Astrologer: to whom he answered, No. The King replied, Thou art a
foolish figure-caster, for I am more skilful than thou art, for as soon as I
saw thee, I instantly prophesied thou should be in Prison before night, which
thou shall find true, and sent him thither; but he had not been long in
custody, but the King sent for him again, to know if he could cast a Figure to
know how long he should be in Prison. To whom he still ans^ered, No. Then the
King said, Thou art an Illiterate fellow, that can not foretell either good or
bad that shall befall thy self; therefore I will conclude, thou can not tell
of mine, and so set him at liberty, giving him many disgraceful words.

Rowland. Jud. Astr. condemned. p. 18^. Zonaras declares that the day in which
Julian the Apostate died, a certain man lying the night in a solitary place by
himself, saw a heap of Stars in the Element, which he said, did express these
words, Hodie Julianus in Persia acciditur. And the time being noted, it was
known that he died that day. Id. p. 18.

An Astrologer foretold a Prelate, that he fall. Therefore the Prelate, that he
might be more safe, knowing the Astrologer to be a learned man, would never go
higher than the lowest Room of the House, would never dine or sup but on the
ground, when he went to bed would lie on the ground, hoping by this wariness to
change the position of the Stars that did threaten him; but it was in vain. For
a while after, News was brought him that he was deposed from his Bishopric,
who instantly cried out, Now the Astrologers prediction is come to pass, for
indeed I can fall no lower.

Id. p. 188. Biron Marshal of France was told by a Wizard, Burgundian should
be his death. Upon which prediction he gave express command, That no man of
that Nation should come nigh him: but all would not help, for he found the
prediction true by the loss of his head, which a Burgundian cut off that was
his Executioner.

Idem p. 188. Cuffe an excellent Grecian and Secretary to Essex, was told
twenty ears before his death, that he should come to an untimely end, at which
Cuffe langhed, and in a scornful manner entreated the Astrologer to show him in
what manner he should come to his end; who condescended to him, calling for
Cards, entreated Cuffe to draw out of the Pack three which pleased him, who did
so, and drew three knaves, who by the Wizards direction laid them on the table,
with their faces downward, and then told him, if he desired to see the sum of
his bad fortunes to take up those cards; Cuffe as he was prescribed took up the
first Card, and looking on it, he saw the portraicture of himself, Cap-a^pe,
having men compassing him about with Bills and Halbards; then he took up the
second, there he saw the Judge that sat upon him; and taking up the last Card,
he saw Tyburn the place of his Execution, and the Hangman; at which he laughed
heartily, but many years after being condemned for Treason, he remembered and
declared this Prediction.

Rowland. Jud. Astr. cond. p. 189. Bacon made a Head to speak, and Albertus
Magnus made a Statue of the perfect shape of a Man, which with Wheels and
other Engines, which he had cunningly and artificially wrought in it would
speak and pronounce words as distinctly, as if they did proceed from a man
endued with sense and reason. This Statue when Thomas Aquinas was sent into his
chamb^r where it lay hid, heard it speak very Artificially, which when he
heard, and looking for it, and finding of it, and viewing it very seriously, at
last struck it with a Club and broke it all to pieces, which when Albertus saw,
he cried out and said; Thomas, thou have destroyed the work of thirty years
labor and pains.

Id. p. 199. The Images of Pasquil and Morphirius, in Rome, were Statues of
stone, on whose breasts Verses, and no Libells, but true bills of the Popes and
Cardinals Villainies were usually fixed. But Pope Adrian would have had them
flung into Tyber, if Suassanus the Ambassador of Charles the Emperor, who
favored them, had not prevented him, who said to his Holiness, That if they
were flung into Tyber, the Crocodiles and Rats, and other Monstrous Serpents,
would catch them and sting them. At which in a rage, he said, He would have
them burnt: To which the Legate replied, If you burn these Images, their ashes
will be blown into other Countries; so that the people will take occasion to
reverence those ashes for the writings sake, and it will come to pass, that
they being dispersed through the world, the sins of Rome will generally be
known to all Nations. At this answer, his Holiness was perplexed, and seeing he
could do no good, either by drowning or burning, he bid them stand in the
Devils name.

Roll. Jud. Astr. cond p. 200. Penda King of Mercia though a wicked Pagan
himself, yet had two most virtuous and holy Daughters, Kineburgh and Kineswith.

Gulielm. Malmsb. p. 14. Ethelred and his brother Alfred had encountered the
Danes a whole day, being parted by night, early the next morning the battle was
renewed; and Alfred engaged in fight with the Danes, sent to his brother to
speed him to their help; but he being in his Tent at his Devotions refused to
come till he had ended. Which being finished he entered the battle, relieved his
staggering Host and subdued his Enemies.

Id. p. 23. Johannes Scotus was killed by his Scholars with their Pen-knives at
Malmsbury; and was thereupon esteemed a Martyr.

Id. p. 24. Rollo Captain of the Danes, had at his Baptism received great gifts
from Charles King of France; he was admonished to kiss the Kings foot, he
instead of kneeling down took the Kings foot up in his hand, and heaving of it
to his mouth, threw the King backward; at which the Danes laughed, but the
Frenchmen were offended, and Rollo excused it by his Country Fashion.

Id p. 26. Edgar had killed Earl Ethelwold, his Son casually coming where his
Father lay dead, the King asked him, how he liked that Hunting: He answered,
well O King, for that which pleases thee, ought not to displease me. The King
was so pleased with that answer, that ever after he had him in great esteem.

Gulielm. Malmsh. p. 33. An Emperor casually hearing a misshapen Priest Mass,
despised him for his deformity; but when he repeated these words, It is he that
has made us and not we our selves; he checked himself, and took so great liking
to the Priest, that he preferred him to the Archbishopric of Colen, who
proved a worthy Prelate. He excommunicated a Nobleman that had taken a Nun out
of a Monastery, and kept her as his wife. This Archbishop lying on his
Deathbed, many came to him for his Benediction, and amongst them this Nobleman
sent to him, who hearing his name, said, If he shall forsake that woman, he
shall be absolved, if not, the same day and hour that I die the next year shall
he. Which accordingly came to pass, he and his Concubine being smitten and
killed with Thunder.

id. p. 38. One of the Henrys Emperor having a Clergyman Concubine, one day
Mass being celebrating, the Emperor sent to him to sing the Gospel, which he
refusing, the Emperor banished him; and he providing to be gone, was by the
Emperors Commandment brought back again, who commending him for his reverence
to God, that he more feared Gods displeasure, than his threats, promised him
the next Bishopric that fell in his gift.

p. 44. Mogunce at a solemn Mass, the Abbot of Fulda claimed by ancient custom
to fit next the Emperor, which the servants of the Archbishop denying, there
arose a fray in which much harm was done, and some blood shed, but all being
pacified, when singing of Mass they came to that Verse, Hunc diem gloriosum
fecisti, there was a loud voice heard in the air, Hunc diem bellicosum ego
feci; which while the generality trembled at, the Emperor boldly answered: Thou
author of all mischief have made this day troublesome, but I through Gods Grace
will make it acceptable to the poor. And the Mass being ended, caused it to be
proclaimed, that all the provision of Victuals that was provided for himself
and his Courtiers, should be given to the poor, which was accordingly done.

Gulielm. Malmsb. p. 44. Edmund a woman was born in the Confines of Normandy,
with two bodies above the Navil, and one below; one did laugh and eat and talk,
the other did weep, was hungry and silent: The one died three years before the
other, which by the weight and stench of the dead was at last suffocated.

Id. p. 48. Etheldretha, Wiburga, Virgins, King Edmund, Archbishop Alphege,
five English Saints whose bodies being de^d did not consume.

Id. p. 49. Edith the Daughter of Edgar having been dead, when they intended to
have removed her to a more Honorable place, they found her all putrified
excepts her Thumb, which Dunstan seeing her often cross her self with, prayed
might not corrupt, and her belly, and quae sunt infra ventrem; at which some
wondering, the Virgin appeared to one in his sleep, and told him that those
parts did not putrify as others, hiving not been abused by gluttony or
wantonness.

Id. p. 51. Fulco Earl of Anjou in his old Age minding Religion of those days,
went in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and having bound his servants by Oath to do
what he should require, was by them drawn naked to Christ's Sepulcher; the
Pagans looking on, while one drew him with a wooden Yoke put about his neck,
the other whipped him on the naked back; he in the mean time saying, Receive O
Lord a miserable, perjured and Runaway servant, vouchsafe to receive my soul O
Lord Christ.

Id. p. 55. In the days of William the Conqueror in Nantes, there were two
Priests of intimate but vicious acquaintance, who made this agreement between
them, That he of them which died first, should within thirty days appear to
the Survivor, that so they might know whether Epicurus that affirms the Soul
to vanish into air, or Plato that maintains it immortal were in the right. Not
long after one of these Priests dies, the Survivor expects him, and after
t^irty days the dead Priest appears, who asking the Survivor whether he knew
him, was answered, Yes, and that he was not troubled at his present appearing
as at his long absence. The dead Priest replied, That his present coming could
nothing advantage himself who was condemned to eternal torments; and when his
friend answered that he would give all he had to the poor and Monasteries, and
fast night and day to relieve him, he replied, It would be in vain, Gods
sentence being irreversible. But that thou may learn by it, behold some part
of my misery. He held out his hand sanioso ulcere stillantem, and behold, says
he, this is one of the least of my miseries, and the other replying, that that
seemed but a small thing; he sprinkles three drops of it, one on each Temple
and the third on his Forehead; which with burning heat entering, left three
holes; upon which the living Priest witnessing the greatness of his pains by
his crying out, the dead replies, Lo, this is a document of my miseries, and
shall be, except thou neglect it, a singular help to thy safety, wherefore
whilst thou may change thy mind, change thy habit and become a Monk. At which
when he answered nothing, he adds, Here wretch read these letters, and withal
held up his hand engraven with black Characters, wherein Satan and his Angels
return their hearty thanks to the Churchmen of that time, who indulging
themselves in all sorts of pleasures through their idleness and neglect of
Preaching, had sent a greater number of Souls to Hell, than in former Ages had
been. Upon this the dead Priest disappeared, and the living repented of his
wicked life, and shore himself a Monk at St. Melanius.

Gulielm. Malms. p. 55. Henry the Son of Henry the fourth Emperor, quarrel of
the Pope rose against his own Father; but when his Father being dead he himself
was Emperor, he then maintained the same quarrel about investiture of Bishops
against the Pope which his Father before did.

Id. 64. Godfry the first Christian King of Jerusalem Crown for Honor, when
Christ wore a Crown by way of scorn: and when dying he was demanded whom he
would nominate his Successor, he would not name any; only answered in general,
He who should be worthy. Id. p. 81.

Herbert surnamed Losing having bought of William Rufus the Bishopric of
Thetford, and for his Father the Abbey of Winchester, a Po t of those days
made on them these verses.

Surgit in ecclesia Monstrum genitore Losinga,
Simonidum secta Canonum virtute rejecta.
Petre nimis tardas, nam Simon ad ardua tentat,
Si praesens esses non Simon ad alta volaret.
Proh dolor! Ecclesiae nummis venduntur and aere,
Filius est Praesul, Pater Abbas, Simon uterque.
Quid non speremus si nummos possideamus?
Omnia nummus habet, quod vult facit, addit and aufert.
Res nimis injusta, Nummis fit Praesul and Abba^.
Id. p. 72. Roger the Son of Tancred Prince of Antioch being taken in a battle
by the Turks, and required to give up his Sword, he answered he would not to
any but the Commander in chief as being his equal, who holding out his hand to
receive the Sword, Roger striking at him with all his might, cut off his head
and then run himself through to avoid slavery.

p. 85. Henry the first King of England, when extreme long hair was in fashion,
a Soldier of Quality that took great pride in his hair, dreamed that one had
strangled him with his locks; awaking, he cut off what was superstuous, and by
telling his dream, and by his example prevailed with many for a time to
moderation.

Gulielm. Malms. p. 99. Herfast Chaplain to William the Conqueror, Learning,
but greatly conceited, coming in great Pomp to the Abbey of Becco Lanfrank; the
Abbot to refell the man's pride, caused an A B C to be laid before him, whereby
he being provoked, labored and procured from the Conqueror Lanfrank,
banishment out of Normandy: He coming to take his leave, happened to ride upon a
lame Horse, which moving the Conqueror to laughter occasioned the reversment of
his banishment.

p. 136: Dunewulph was made Bishop of Winchester Alfred, who had been formerly
a Swinebeard, and had then entertained the King unknown, in the nature of a
servant.

Will. Malms. p. 138. Elphegus Bishop of Winchester having in one Monks
Priests, viz. Dunstan, Ethelwold, and Ethelstan, prophesied that the two first
should be Bishops, and the third an Impious Apostate, which accordingly came to
pass.

Id. p. 138. The Monks and Clergy of Durham being met Ethelred to choose their
Bishops, they being divided, it happened to be present one Edmund, a man of
comely presence, but mean literature, who in a jesting manner said, Choose me
and make me Bishop: they accepting this, though spoken in jest, as a Heavenly
designation, agreed all in the choice of him, who proved above what was
expected, a profitable Pastor.

Id. p. 157. VVa^stan Bishop of Worcester in the time of William the
Conqueror, a man of great simplicity and integrity, when he was persuaded
instead of Lambskins to wear Catskins, answered, That he had never heard sung
Cattus Dei, but Agnus Dei, and therefore would not change; and when in his time
the Church which Saint Oswald had meanly built was more stately re-edified, all
the rest rejoiced; he was sorrowful, and being asked the reason, answered, That
former Holy men were careless of stately walls, but careful of Christian souls;
but we neglect them, and for our own glory raise magnificent structures.

Id. 159. Walter Bishop of Hereford in the Reign of William the Conqueror,
attempting to force the Chastity of a woman, who being a Semster was out of
pretense of cutting out work brought into his chamber, was by her with her
Scissers thrust into the belly, with which he died.

Id. p. 163. Remigius translating his Sea from Dorchester in Oxfordshire to
Lincoln, having built his C urch, and intending to consecrate it, procured
from the Conqueror his Royal Edict to convene all the Bishops of England to
that solemnity; only Robert of Hereford refused to come, and declared the cause
that he knew by the stars, that that Church should not be consecrated in the
lifetime of Remigius, which accordingly came to pass, he dying the morrow
before the solemnity was to be performed.

VV. Malms. p. 165. A Barbarous Dane taking away a costly Hersecloth Ethelred,
and striking the marble of her Tomb with a Pickax, intending a farther
violence, a small piece of the broken Marble flew up into his Eye and killed
him. He falling dead, his Companions left him, and the rest of the Sepulchers
untoucht.

Id. p. 167. When Titus was reproved by his Friends for liberality, he made
this noble answer, That it was not fitting that any Suitor should go sad away
from the presence of an Emperor. And when Trajan was blamed for being too
courteous and affable, he answered that ^e would so carry himself being Emperor
toward his subjects as he would have them toward him, if they were Emperors
and he a Subject.

W. Huntingd. 174. Huntingdom gives Constantine the Great this best of Princes,
in the end puffed up with prosperity, to the middle sort.

Id. 177. Genserick besieged Hippo, St. Austin the Bishop thereof that he might
not see the destruction of his City, died the third month of the siege.

Id. Ibid. The Saxons and Picts joining against the Britains, the Britains
implored the aid of Saint German, who coming to them undertook the Conduct of
the Army, and when the battles were on joining, he commanded all his Army to
cry out three times, Allelujah, which was no sooner the third time pronounced,
but the enemies fled, and left a most glorious but bloodless Victory to the
Britains.

Id. 178. Cedwald King of Mercia, there was a great fight between Birds: and in
the days of King Henry the second in Normandy near Roan, above a thousand
Birds were found dead before the battle; wherein Henry the King of England fled
and left a most glorious but bloodless victory to the Britains.

H. Huntingd. f. 178. Cedda Bishop of the West Saxons had excommunicated a
noble man for his unlawful Marriage; King Sigebert notwithstanding went to this
noble man's House, and dined with him; whereat the Bishop being offended, told
the King that he should die in that House, which accordingly came to pass, the
same noble man conspiring against him, and killing of him.

Id. f. 191. William Rufus in the sixth year of his reign sick, gave freely the
Archbishopric of Canterbury to Anselm, and other preferments to others, but
being recovered, repented his goodness and became worse than before, and
extorted from Robert Bluet, to whom he had given the Bishopric of Lincoln,
five thousand pound.

Id. f. 213. Godfry Duke of Bovillon fighting against the Infidels in the time
of the Holy Wars, cut off an Infidel in the middle, so that one part fell into
the ground, the lower part was carried by the Horse he sat on into his arms.
At the sight of which, he astonished hastily fled.

H. Hunt. 7. f. 215. In the reign of Henry the first, in a Council Anselm,
where the Clergy of England were forbid to marry, a course though some thought
holy yet by others judged dangerous, lest whilst they aspired after a Purity
above their strength, they should, as after they did, fall into abominable and
unnatural filthiness.

Id. 217. Queen Mawd the wife of King Henry Commendation left her.

Prospera non laetam fecere nec aspera tristem,
Aspera Risus ei, Prospera error erant.
Non decor effecit fragilem, nec sceptra superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
Thus in English.

When prosperous not o'rejoy'd, when crossed not sad,
Things flourishing made her fear, adverse made glad.
Sober though fair, lowly though in throne placed,
Great and yet humble, beautiful yet chaste.
Stephen immediately before his fight at Lincoln with Robert Earl of Gloucester,
bastard brother to Mawd the Empress, as he was offering, the VVax-Candle broke
in his hand, and the Pix fell down and broke, and the Sacrament fell out, which
was apprehended as a foretoken of the Kings discomfiture in battle.

H. Huntingt. f. 224. Ethelward King of the West Saxons and Monarch of
England, in the year of our Lord eight hundred fifty and five, gave unto God
for the Maintenance of his Worship the tenth of all his land.

Roger Hoveden. f. 232. Pleasures undo men at any time, but to meet them at
first i^ most danger. Craesus counseled Cyrus, if he meant to hold the Lydians
in Slavery, he should then teach them to sing, and play, and drink, and dance
and dally, and that would do it without his endeavor. Ovids Fable of Argus
points to this. Wherein compare the Devil to Mercury, his Pipe to pleasure.
Argus to man, his hundred eyes to our care, his falling asleep to our security,
Io to the Soul, his transformation to the curse of God. The moral is this. The
Devil with pleasure, pipes man into Security and steals away his Soul, and
leaves him to the wrath of Heaven. This ruined Anthony in the midst of his
fortunes, and Hannibal after a long and glorious War. The smoothest stream is
most dangerous for depth. Pleasure is most pleasing Company, but like a Thief
trains us from the Road and then robs us.

Felthams Resol. p. 3. When Philip of Macedon was capering indecently prisoner;
Demades thus bespoke him, Since fortune has made you like Agamemnon, why will
you show your self like Thersites?

Id. p. 22. We can never be quiet till we have conquered the fear of death. The
sight of Cyrus Tomb struck Alexander into a dumps. But when grace prevails,
death has lost his terror. Aristippus told the Mariners that wondered why he
was not as the^, afraid in the Tempest, That the Odds was much, for they feared
the ^orments due to a wicked life, and he expected the Reward of a good one.
And it was cold comfort that Diogenes gave a lewd liver, that being banished,
complained that he should die in a foreign soil, Be of good cheer, wheresoever
thou art, the way to Hell is the same.

Feltham Resolves. p. 42. Philip asked Domocratus if he did not fear to lose
his head, he answered no; For if he did, the Athenians would give him one
immortal. This was Ovids comforter in his banishment.

Quilibet hanc saevo vitam mihi finiat ense,
Me tamen extincto fama perennis erit.
Plutarch tells us of a poor Indian that would rather endure a dooming to
death, than shoot before Alexander, when he had discontinued; lest by shooting
ill, he should mar the fame he had formerly gotten.

Id. p. 47. Themistocles that streamed out his youth in Wine and Venery, being
so dainty, changed into virtuous and v^lorous, told one that asked him that the
Trophies of Miltiades would not let him sleep. Tamerlain constantly read the
gests of his noble progenitors, as glorious examples to enforce his own
vertu^s. Brave men never die, but like the Phoenix, from their preserved ashes
others spring like them.

Id. p. 48. Paedar^tus the Lacedemonian, when he could not be admitted for one
of the Council of the three hundred at Sparta, went away without any
discontent, and said, He was heartliy glad that the Republique had three
hundred better men than himself.

Feltham. Res. p. 59. In the year one thousand five hundred ninety VVittenburgh
executed by hanging an Alchymist, that had deceived him and many others. The
Alchymist was a Goldsmith in Moravia of base and low, extraction, but of so
goodly endowments of mind and body, that by his deportment, he seemed to every
one of a nobler descent. And that he might maintain the reputation of himself,
he called himself George Honaver the Son of a Moravian Baron, and that through
dissolute living, falling into his Fathers displeasure, he resolved to travail
till his Fathers anger should be allayed: Which was true of the Son of the
said Baron. He discoursed with great freedom concerning many things he had seen
in his travails, but especially that he had the happiness to find the
Philosophers Stone, that others had long in vain sought after, only in his
present estate he wanted materials to experiment his Art. The Duke wrought upon
by his fair words, supplies him liberally. The Impostor sets to work and builds
his Furnaces, and blows his coals, and raises up a great expectation of the
Golden issue: but charge expended, and the time promised expiring; the Impostor
under pretense of furnishing himself at a neighbor town with more materials,
he with a servant, whom being sent by the aforesaid Baron in the quest of his
Son, he had won to his purpose, fairly betake themselves to their heels. The
Duke understanding that his pretended Baron was not returned, the third day
suspected him fled, and immediately sending after him with the prom se of three
hundred crowns to his apprehender; he was shortly taken, laid in prison, till a
coat of Gilt Leather with an Iron Gallows was provided for him, in and on
which at Stutgard, he and his man ended their days.

Merc. Gallobelg. p. 97. Anno 1597. Tiberius fifty thousand Romans were hurt
and slain at one time by the fall of a Theater.

Fox Acts and Mon. p. 50. James the Brother of John to the Tribunal seat,
seeing him condemned and led to execution, being moved in conscience, confessed
himself a Christian, and so desiring and receiving forgiveness of James, was
beheaded together with him.

Id. p. 52. Polycarpus being persuaded to deny Christ, answered, Fourscore and
six years have I been his servant, yet in all this time has he not as much as
once harmed me: How then may I speak evil of my King and Lord, that has been
so good to me?

Id p. 60. God requires holy Worshippers, this the Heathen knew. Hence that law
in cicero, Ad Deos cast adeunto, Pietatem adhibento. Qui secus faxit, Deus
ipse vindex erit. They thought God provoked by the devotions of wicked persons.
Hence Bias sailing which dissolute companions, who in a Storm called on their
Gods, as the Mariners in Jonah, advised them to hold their peace, lest the Gods
should know that they were there.

Camerar. Op. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 1. To gain and preserve Dominion, Prudence
Prowess must unite. Caesar is pourtrayed standing on a Globe, having in his
left hand a Book, and in his right hand a Sword, with this Motto, Ex utroque
Caesar. Scipio his prayer was not Augete but Conservate Rempublicam.

Id. c. 2. De mortuis nil nisi bonum Suidas relates that one honor of a Famous
VVrestler, struck in despite a statue set up in the memorial of him, and the
statue fell down and killed him. Sylla is therefore justly condemned for
disturbing the bones of Marius, and lest his own should be so served,
commanded that he when dead should be burnt, whence grevv the custom of
burning the dead.

Id. c. 4. Jews the eleventh of France gave his Physician Crowns a month, and
Charles the ninth gave another in five years space six hundred thousand Crowns,
of whom no good is recorded, but that he let the King to swear. Alexander
gave Aristotle for describing the natures of living creatures eighty Talents,
which amounts to four hundred and eighty thousand crowns. And to Xenocrates a
Philosopher fifty Talents, which he returned. Octavia Augustus his Sister gave
Virgil, for one and twenty verses in the end of his sixth Aenead, concerning
the death of her Son Marcellus, above fifty thousand Crowns. And Thaddaeus a
Florentine Ph^sician had ten thousand Crowns for curing Pope Honorius the
fourth.

Camer. cent. 1. cap. 4. Antiochus the Son of Seleucus was ready to die for the
love of his Mother in law Stratonice; Erosistratus his Physician perceiving it
by his pulse, told his Father there was no hope of his life. He asking why?
Erosistratus replied, He is in love with my wife. To whom Seleucus, And will thou indulge as much to save his life? He replies, it was for another. O that
it were for my Stratonice, says Seleucus. Erosistratus replied, Be you then
his Physician. He then gave him Stratonice, and his Physician sixty thousand
crowns.

Ibid. employment, the Preserver of life. Hence Cato tells us, that it was the
praise of a good man to be Bonus Colonus. The Censors punished him that was
otherwise Scipio Nasica standing for the Aedileship was rejected, because he
asked a young man his Competitor whose hands were hardened with Country labor,
whether he went upon them. Frederick the second Emperor made a law, that all
husbandmen should be secure and unmolested by his Soldiers: and Cyrus, and
Xerxes did the like, saying to his Officers that he sent them against Armed men
not Shepherds and plowmen. Which was observed by Charles the fifth Emperor, and
Francis the first of France, who Warring one upon another in Piedmont for
twelve months together, yet took both care for the Security of the Husbandmen.
The same we read observed by Belesarius and Attilas in their Wars. And the
Turks to this day are so strict observers, that the least injury to such proves
capital.

Idem Ibid. cap. 4. Simon Lignosius a Ligurian and General of Genoway Fleet,
having taken the City Chio, forbad all his Soldiers to enter into the
Inhabitants grounds, Orchards, or Vineyards. His only Son presuming on his
Fathers indulgence, contrary to his Fathers edict brake into a Vineyard, and
carried away some clusters of Grapes. His Father understanding of it, commanded
and caused him to be whipped through the City, having the Grapes hanging about
his neck. A memorable example of Fatherly affection giving place to military
prudence and discipline.

Camer. Cent. 1. cap. 4. Treachery though it be sometimes acceptable, yet the
Traitor is always hateful. When a King of Thrace, who had deserted Pompey and
went to Caesar, supping with him, was large in recounting what Service he had
done unto him. Caesar turning to another Prince that sat by him said, I love
the Treason but hate the Traitor. Demonice that betrayed Ephesus to Brennus,
and Terpeia that betrayed the Capitol to the Sabines, were both over-pressed
with the Gold and Silver Chains and Jewels they bargained for: and Rhomilda was
thrust on a Stake, who betrayed her husband to Cacanus on promise of Marriage
with him.

Ibid. Selymus the Father of Solomon the Magnificent, having hired and employed
a Physician Jew to poison his Father Bajazet; when the Jew demanded his price,
having done his work, Selymus commanded his head to be struck off for his
reward.

Ibid. p. 62. Crantzius reports, that when Charles the fourth Emperor waging
War against Philip Duke of Austri^, perceived his Adversary too strong for him:
he sent for three of his Adversaries Captains, and promised them a large reward
to betray their M ster and to fight him into a retreat, which they accordingly
did, and coming to the Emperor, he paid them what was agreed, but in false
Coin, which was but the twentieth part in value: which when they perceived, and
complained of, the E^peror told them with many threatening, that false coin was
good enough for false knaves.

Id. Ibid. Philip of Macedon though he often made use treacherous to their own
party, yet never loved them: and when some of them complained that his
Macedonians called them Traitors; He replied, that the Macedonians were a
Rustic and uncivil people, that call all things as they are.

Id. Ibid. When Solomon the Magnificent Turk besieged Buda, the Governor
Nadastus being resolved to stand it out, his Soldiers having conditioned for
their own safety, seized and bound their Governor and delivered him and the
Castle. The Turk seeing their perfidiousness, destroyed them and freed him. The
same Solomon having promised one of his daughters with a great dowry to one
that betrayed Rhodes to him, when the Traitor expected performance, the Turk
told him that since he was a Christian and his daughter a Mohammedan, they would
not agree except his baptized Skin were fleyed off and a new one come, and then
he should enjoy his promised spouse. And so commanded him to be fleyd and
ro^led in a Bed of Salt, of which he miserably died.

Camer. Cent. 1. p. 62. Canstantine though then no Christian, yet had great
respect for, and preferred to honor and trust about him such as were. To try
whose sincerity, he promulged a Decree, That who vv^uld not Sacrifice to his
God, should be deprived of their honor. Some to continue his favor complied,
others preferred Christ's service and refused; Those he rebuked and discarded,
these he praised and retained, as judging them like to prove unfaithful to him,
who were faithless to God. Theodoricus an Arrian beheaded a Deacon, whom he
respected being Orthodox, because to please him he turned Arrian.

Id. Ibid. successful. We read of places freed from a close siege by casting of
Bee-hives from the vvalls on the besiegers. Prusius by Hannibals counsel
obtained a notable sea-victory, by casting earthen pots filled ^ull of venomous
living creatures into his Enemies ships, which the pitchers breaking so
molested them, that they could not make that resistance which otherwise they
should. God sent not Lions and Bears, but Flies and Lice and Frogs,
contemptible creatures to pull down Phar^o^s pride. And Pliny reports in his
eight Book and twelfth Chapter of a City in Spain undermined by Rabbets,
another in Thessaly by Wants, a thiry in Africa destroyed by Locusts. And that
the inhabitants of the Island Gyaros were driven away by Mice, and of Aurelia
in Italy destroyed by Serpents.

Camer. Cent. 1. c. 8. Consilium malum consultori p^ssimum. Cominaeus
Balvensis, being Crudelitatis Minister to Charles the eleventh of France,
having persuaded and directed the building and framing of horrid prisons,
Fetters, and implements of restraint, ^as himself cast and kept fourteen years
in the first that was perfected. So Perillus in his Bull, and Aruntius
Paterculus in his Horse of Brass, were both burnt, which they invented to
torment others. Who digs a Pit falls in himself. Griphus King of Egypt made his
Mother, and Mithridates made his Wife drink that poison they had prepared for
them. Marius a Roman Usurper in the i am of Galienus was slain the third day of
his Empire wit^ a Sw^rd of his own making. A great Gun at Paris at the first
discharge breaking in pieces in the year 1477 killed the maker of it, and
fourteen more, and he Bullet slew a Fowler seting Nets for Birds. Pope
Alexander the sixth and his Son both drank and the Father died of the poison
they prepared for others.

Camer. Cent. 1. c. 9. Phryne a beautiful Curtisan sitting amongst other Ladies
like her self but all painted, to discover them, commanded (being mistress of
the sport) to do as she did, who dipping her hand twice in fair water washed her
face, which they doing, the water discovered their Paint.

Id. c. 10. The Queen of Sheba to try Solomon, brought into his presence young
Boys and Girls all in the same habit. Solomon commanded water to be brought,
and each of them to wash their f^ces, which the Boys rubbed soundly, the Girls
but touched, and thereby he discerned them.

Id. c. 10. Lacedaemon, taking it in ill part that a young man did him no
reverence, received of him this reason: Because he had begotten none that might
honor him being old.

Id. Ibid. Snakes are generated from the marrow of a man's backbone. Plutarch
relates that Cleomenes being crucified by Ptolemy, those that watched the body
saw a Snake folded about his head. And when Charles Martels Sepulcher was
opened, there was no body found, but a Serpent. There is likewise a Monument in
Germany of a noble man, who died in his prime, and could not be persuaded to
have his Picture drawn in his life, but consented that after he had been some
da^s buried, they should pourtray him as they found him; which was his face
half eaten with worms, and many Sna^es about the spine of his back. Bees from
Oxen, Waspes from Horses, and Beetles breed of Asses.

Id. c. 11. Jews the eleventh of France is reported to

Heylin Cosm. Eple. The worlds Age from the Creation to Christ's Ber^aldus was
three thousand nine hundred twenty eight years; to Melanction, 3963. And to the
Flood one thousand six hundred fifty six.

Id. Proem. The Ark rested on Ararat, which is a part Caucasus, which is in the
confines of Tartary, Persia, and India, as appears first by the exceeding
numerousness of those people in the days of Ninus and Semiramis. And secondly,
because the Scripture tells us that they came from the East to the Plains of
Shinar. Genesis 11.2.

Id. Ibid. The world divided into thirty-parts, nineteen Idolaters, Six Turks,
Jews and Saracens; And of the other five, Two of the Greek Profession, Three
Romanists and Protestants.

Id. Ibid. Alladius Sylvius one of the Kings of Latium, of the Race of Aeneas,
to make himself more terrible, studied a way to imitate Thunder, and was killed
at last by a real Thunderclap.

Id. p. 39. Romans of the honor of Consulship, that when Maximus died in his
last day, Caninius Rebilus petitioned Caesar for the remaining part of that
day: Of whom Tully, O vigilantem consulem qui toto consulatus sui tempore
somnum oculis non vidit! And when Cecina was by the Senate degraded, on the
last day in which he should have resigned, Roscius Regulus obtained the office
from Vitellius for that days remainder, Magno cum irrisu accipientis and
tribuentis.

Id. p. 40. Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus twice was chosen from the Plough to be
Dictator, rescued the common wealth from their dangers, and returned to his
privacy.

Id. p. 42. Theodatus the Gottish King of Italy warring against the Greek
Emperor, and being desirous to know aforehand his success, was willed by a Jew
to shut up a certain number of Swine, and to give some the name of Goths, the
other of Greeks; which done, and going to the Sties, they found the Hogs of the
Gottish faction all slain, and of the Grecian half unbristled. Whereon the Jew
foretold that the Goths should be discomfited, and the Greeks lose a great part
of their strength, which accordingly so fell out.

Heylin Cosm. p. 64. Narsis having governed Italy victoriously seventeen Envy
of Sophia the Empress recalled, with this message: That she would make the
Eunuch (for so he was) come home and spin with her Maids. He returned her this
answer; That he would spin her such a Web, that neither she nor all her Maids
should ever unravel. And thereupon opened the passages of Italy to the
Lombards, who held Italy two hundred eighty six years.

Id p. 64. Alboinus the first King of Italy of the Lombards, Cunemundus King of
the Gepidae, made a drinking Cup of his Scull. Rosamund daughter of that King
he took to Wife, and being one day merry at Verona, forced her to drink out of
that detested Cup, which she so stomached, that she promised one Helmchild, if
he would aid her in killing the King, to give him both her self and the Kingdom
of Lombardy. This when he consented to and performed, they were so hated that
the^ were fain to fly to Ravenna unto the protection of Longines the Exarch,
who persuaded her to dispatch Helmchild out of the way, and to take him for her
husband, to which she willingly agreed. Helmchild coming out of the bath called
for drink, and she gave him a strong poison, half of which when he had drunk,
and found by the strange operation how the matter went, he compelled her to
drink the rest, and so both die^ together.

Id. p. 64. Cunibert the fourteenth King of Lombardy was a great lover of the
Clergy, and as lovingly requited. For being to encounter with Alactis Duke of
Treat that rebelled against him, one of the Clergy knowing that the Kings life
was chiefly sought by the Rebels, put on the Royal Robe and thrust himself in
the head of the Enemy, where he lost his own life and saved the Kings.

Heylin. p. 65. compass was devised and contrived about the year thirteen
hundred by one John Flavio an Italian, a native of Amalphi of the Kingdom of
Naple^.

Id p. 71. Samnites having enclosed the Romans in the straights of Abrusso
called Caudae furcinae; they sent to Herennius a man much reverenced for his
Age and wisdom, to know what they should do with them. He returns that they
should send them home and without dishonor. Being sent to again, he returned
they should put them all to death; but they spoiled them and sent them home,
which instead of winning them over to be Friends, provoked them to return and
subdue their Country. It being a sure rule as to powerful enemies, Either not
strike or strike home.

Id. p. 72. The people of Apulia and Calabria in the Naples have a disease
peculiar only unto them, occasioned by the biting of a Serpent called a
Tarantula, not curable but by Music only.

Id. p. 73. Charles Cardinal of Lorrain being to go by Rome, desired the King
to let his Jester go with him. But the Jester would not go fearing the Sea. The
Cardinal to encourage him told him they should sail under the Popes blessing.
To whom he replied, I have often heard that the Pope has power in Heaven,
Earth and Purgatory, but never that he had power over the Sea: and therefore
would by no means be persuaded to adventure the voyage.

Melandri Joca seria. p. 75. The Pope that he might congratulate Charles
Lorrain for his great zeal against the Lutherans, sent him his letters of
thanks, and withal the picture of the Virgin with Christ in her Arms, being
Michael Angelo's most curious Masterpiece. The Messenger in his journey fell
sick, and lighting upon a Merchant of Lucca, who pretended himself a retainer
to the Cardinal, though he was for injuries received a most bitter Enemy to
him, delivers the Popes letter and present to him to present to the Cardinal,
who undertakes it, and being arrived at Paris, gets a ^imner that bore ill will
to the Cardinal to draw a Picture of equal bigness, in which instead of the
Virgin Mary were pourtrayed the Cardinal, the Queen his Niece, the Queen Mother
and the Duke of Guise his wife, all stark naked, their Arms about his neck,
and their Legs twisted in his: this being put in the case of the other with the
Popes l^tters, were delivered to one of the Cardinals Secretaries, while he was
with the King in Council. But returning having read the letter he reserved the
opening the case till the next day, where having invited those Ladies, and many
Nobles, and Cardinals, they found themselves miserably deceived and
disappointed and exceedingly ashamed.

Id. p. 39. IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century XIII.
THE posterity of Seth invented the science Celestial Bodies, and to the end
that their inventions should not be defaced by the general destruction by fire
and water, which Adam had foretold; they made two pillars, the one of Brick,
the other of Stone, and ingraved in them both the things they had invented,
that the Brick might outstand the fire, and the Stone the water. That of Brick
is in the Country of Lycia to this day.

Josephus Jewish Antiq p. 6. The demonstrations in Astronomy had never
Antediluvian Patriarchs, had they not lived at least six hundred years: For the
great year is accomplished in that number.

Id. p. 8. The Jews who descended from Isaac are Circumcised Arabians, who are
descended from Ismael, the thirteenth year, as he was.

Id. p. 17. We may not marvel that the Israelites passed Red Sea, since not
long time ago, (God thinking it good) the Sea of Pamphilia divided it self, to
give way to Alexander King of Macedon's Soldiers, having no other way to
destroy the Empire of Persia.

Josephus p. 52. Jephtae Sacrificed his Daughter for a Burnt-offering, which
oblation of his was not conformable to the aw, nor acceptable to God.

Id. p. 120. Samaritans who were transplanted from Persia into the Land of
Israel, as often as they find the Jews in prosperity, call them their Cousins,
but if they perceive their fortunes to be on the declining hand, they abjure
their consanguinity, and renounce any lawful parentage or amity, and say they
were planted in the Country, and drawn thither from a foreign Nation.

Id. 244. and 304. Alexander meeting Jaddus the high Priest fell prostrate on
his face, and adored not him, but God, who in that likeness had formerly
appeared to him; and encouraged him to the Conquest of Persia, and received the
Jews with much favor, when all his Soldiers intended, and supposed he did so
to their destruction.

Id. p. 286. Law was translated by the seventy Interpreters, Ptolemy took great
pleasure in the reading of it, and asked of Demetrius how it came to pass that
neither Poet nor Historiographer had made mention of it, notwithstanding that
in it self it was so admirable: To whom Demetrius gave this answer, That no man
was so hardy to touch that work, by reason that it was Divine, and every way
admirable; assuring him also that certain men t at had set their hands thereto
had been punished by God for so doing. As Theopompus, who intended to reduce
certain Contents of that Law, had been distracted for more than thirty days,
and that having some intermission, he appeased God by prayer, conjecturing what
was the cause of his malady. Moreover he was certified by a Vision that
appeared to him in his sleep, that this inconvenience befell him, because he had
too curiously searched into Sacred and Divine matters, and had intended to
communicate the same with profane men, from which enterprise since he had
defisted he recovered his right wits again: He likewise insinuated further,
That Theodestes the Tragic Poet intending to make mention in some of his
Poems, of a History written in the sacred Scriptures, was stricken blind, and
acknowledging the cause thereof to proceed from his audacious presumption: he
was restored to his sight after he had appeased Gods displeasure.

Id. 294. Hircanus with other Nobles that wished him Ptolemy to a Banquet or
Feast, the other Nobles to put a trick upon him, laid all their bones on the
Table before Hircanus, and suborned Tryphon the Kings Jester to say to the
King, See wha^ store of bones are before Hircanus. Hereby you may conjecture
how his Father has fleeced Syria, as he has bared these bones of flesh. The
King laughing, asked Hircanus how he came by so many bones before him? Not
without cause said he O King; for Dogs devour the flesh with the bones as these
do, but men cast away the flesh and eat the bones as I do, because I am a man.

Joseph. p. 301. Jews on a Sabbath day not resisting the stopping their mouths,
were buried in a Cave that they might not violate the Sabba^h. But Matthias
instructed them better, and afterward prevaile^ with them to make resistance
and fight with their Enemies, if assaulted on the Sabbath day.

Id. p. 30^. Antiochus, and continued so three years, and was then restored to
its former use, and was solemnly dedicated by Judas Maccabeus the Son of
Matthias, and a Festival instituted for eight days, which our Savior observed;
notwithstanding it was instituted without Divine appointment: which Feast was
called the Feast of Lights, because as Josephus conjectures, so great felicity
began to shine as a light contrary to all hope.

Joseph. p. 309. Polybius writes that Antiochus Epiphanes was taken away by a
violent sickness through Gods justice, for that he would have spoiled the
Temple of Diana in Persia; but Josephus charge it on the Sacrilege he
committed in the Temple at Jerusalem: This he did, the other he only intended.

Id. p. 311. Eleazar Judas Brother seeing a huge Elephant Royal Trappings, and
supposing that the King Antiochus was upon the same, he ran against him with a
mighty courage, and after he ^ad slain diverse of them that were about the
Elephant, and scattered the rest; he thrust his sword into the belly of the
beast and wounded him to the death, so that the Elephant falling upon Eleazar
slew him with the weight thereof.

Joseph. Ant. p. 312. Onius the Son of the high Priest, seeing that Antiochus
had slain his Uncle Menelaus, and given the Priesthood to Alcimus, who was not
of the race of the Priests, and so transferred this honor into another family:
fled unto Ptolaemaus King of Egypt, where he obtained a place in the
Heltopolitan Scignory, and in it built a Temple like unto that which was at
Jerusalem. In the mean time Alcimus the intruder, intending to beat down an old
wall in the Temple, was suddenly stricken, lost his speech, fell to the ground,
and after enduring many torment^, died miserably, having enjoyed the
Priesthood four years. Id. 313. 315. 3 2.

Judaea there were three Sects.

1. Pharisees, who affirm some things not all things directed by Destiny. 2.
Essenes, that affirm all things so governed. 3. Sadduces that deny destiny, and
affirm all things to be governed by man's own dispose.
Id. p. 329. Tryphon being a private man, flattered the people and made show of
moderation, and by such allurements drew the Army to make, him King. But having
the Kingdom, he showed his wicked and malicious nature. Id. 339.

Hircanus opening David's Monument, drew three thousand Talents out of it and
destroyed the Temple at Garizim, which Samballat by Alexanders permission built
in favor to his Son in law Manasses brother to the high Priest Jaddus. He
heard a voice in the Temple, that signified to him that his two Sons had at
that instant vanquished Antiochus. He left the Pharisees who brought in their
traditions to be observed, and joined with the Sadduces, who allow nothing but
what was written, reigned honorably thirty one years, and was honored by God
with three great gifts, of Government, Priesthood and prophecies.

Id 335. 36. 39. Ptolemy Luthurus obtaining a Victory in Judaea, commanded his
Soldiers where they quartered to kill men and women, and to chop them into
pieces, to boil their flesh and eat it, that thereby they might be more
terrible to their Enemies.

Id. p. 342. Pompey having taken Jerusalem entered into Sanctum Sanctorum, and
although he found a Table of Gold and a sacred Candlestick, and other Vessels
and odoriferous drugs in great quantity, and two thousand Talents of Silver,
yet he touched nothing thereof, through reverence that he bore to God, and
caused the Temple to be purged, and commanded the Sacrifices to be offered
according to Law. But Crassus dealt otherwise, who shortly after took away
eight thousand Talents of Gold from the Temple, and a Wedge of solid Gold that
weighed three hundred pound, which was enclosed in a Woodenbeam, and none knew
of but Eleazar a Priest, who gave it him upon his Oath, which he falsified to
redeem the rest, and the ornaments of the Temple. Crassus was suddenly after
slain in Persia.

Joseph. p. 355. 356. Herod the great was the Son of Antipater Idumean, and was
made Governor of Galilee, when he was but fifteen years old, and being accused
before Hircanus, he appears with such a train that the Sanhedrim durst not
question him, but acquitted him. He won Cassius favor by money, and is made by
him Governor of Coelo-Syria, and is promised the Kingdom of Judaea, marries
Hircanus grand child Mariamne, by his daughter Doris, is made Tetrarch by
Antonius, accused by a hundred Jews to Antonius, who were slain for their
labor. His broth^r Phaselus being taken prisoner by Antigonus, to avoid his
hands dashed his brains out against a Stone. Herod goes to Rome and by Caesar
Augustus and Antonius means is by the Senate declared King, when he intended to
have demanded it for his wives brother Alexander, whom he after put to death.
After his return to Judaea the house wherein he had solemnly feasted,
immediately after the Guests were gone out fell down doing none any harm. His
brother Joseph was slain by Antigonus. Herod takes Jerusalem, and bribes An any
to put Antigonus to death, in whom ended the Asmonean Family, which had
continued in rule one hundred and twenty six years. He honored the Pharisees,
because when condemned to die by the Counci^, one Pollio a Pharisee foretold
that he should escape and punish them all. Herod makes Ananel high priest, and
afterward displaceth ^im and puts in Aristobulus in his p^ace, and afterward
causes him to be drowned, and restores Ananel, and counterfeits great sorrow
for his death. Alexandra certifieth Cleopatra of it, who accuses him to
Antonins. ^erod going to clear himself, commanded one Joseph whom he lest his
deputy, that if he miscarried, he should put Mariamne to death. Joseph lets
Mariamne know this charge, which put her into a Sullen that cost Joseph his
life presently, and afterward her own. Hircanus his wives Grandfather is by
Herod's command put to death. Upon Antonius his defeat he repairs o Caesar,
acknowledges his Friendship and assistance to Antony, gives him eight hundred
Talents, and is approved and confirmed in his government by him. Before he went
he gave his brother Pheroras the like charge about Mariamne, which he likewise
discovers to her, to the increase of her discontent and hastening her ruin,
who was put to death by her husband Herod, who immediately after falls little
better than mad, and desperately sick. He puts his Mother in law Alexandra
to death, builds two Castles in Jerusalem, makes money of all his Silver and
Gold Vessels, and buyeth Corn with it, and relieves the poor; removes Jesus
from his Priesthood, and places Simon in his room; builds the Palace in
Jerusalem and Caesarea, and in it erects a Theater and Amphitheater; sends
his Sons Alexander and Aristobulus to Rome to Caesar; builds a Temple at
Panica, and builds anew the Temple at Jerusalem; during the building of which
Temple, it is reported that it never rained by day but by night, that the work
might not be interrupted. Herod sails to Rome, brings home his Sons by
Mariamne, and by Salomes procurement hates them, marries them, accuses them
before Caesar who reconciles them. He builds Antipatris and a lofty wall about
Jericho, and called it after his Mothers name Cyprea, and a watchtower, and
called it by his brothers name Phaselus, as likewise the Temple of Apollo at
Rhodes through greediness of honor. He was cruel to his own people, that he
might be liberal to strangers. He was always fortunate abroad but most unhappy
at home in the intestine differences in his own family. In hope of a great
purchase, he opens David's Sepulcher, but found no money, and took thence
precious attires and ornaments of Gold, and sent two men into the inner part of
the Sepulcher, where David's and Solomon's bodies lay, who were lost, fire coming
forth and consuming them. After which time his house began to decay, Antipater
his Son practicing against Mariamnes Children. Caesar is offended at Herod, but
is again reconciled to him, and gives him leave to try his Sons. Which he did
in a Council at Beritum, where they were condemned to die, and were strangled
at Sebasti. Herod had nine wives; by a Samaritan he had Archelaus that
succeeded him, and by Cleopatra a Woman of Jerusalem he had Herod and Philip
the Tetrarchs. Herod would have compelled the Pharisees to swear obedience to
him, who would not, but Phaeroras his wife pays their fine, hoping by their
means to obtain the Kingdom for her Sons; whereupon he cast off his household
Servants that were of the Pharisees faction, and requires Phaeroras to put
away his wife. Antipater, whom Herod had joined with him in the government,
conspires against his Father, is accused, condemned, and cast into Prison, who
was convinced to have prepared poison for his Father, which being given as a
Trial to a condemned Malefactor presently killed him. Herod fell sick of a
terrible, painful, burning sickness in his intrails, with a Canine appetite, an
ulcer in his bowels, a furious Colic. His members rotted and were full of
crawling worms, a perpetual Priapisme with an intolerable stench, a violent
convulsion of his Nerves and shortness of breath. Apprehending his death, he
sent for the Nobles of the Jews upon pain of death to come to him, shu^ them up
in the Hippodrome, and commanded his Sister Salome and his brother Alenas, that
at his death the Soldiers should kill them, that so he might not die without
Lamentation; but Salome and Alenas discharged them, and sent them home unhurt.
Six days before he died he caused his Son Antipater to be slain. He reigned
after the Romans appointed him King, thirty and seven years. He died after
Christ's birth one year and lived sixty, and left his Kingdom to Archelaus.

Joseph. Antiq. from. p. 370. to 450. When Herod assaulted certain Thieves, who
Caves, there was an old man amongst them with his wife and seven Sons, who
being required by them that he would suffer them to go and submit themselves,
took up the entry of the Cave, and as his Sons advanced themselves to issue
out, he slew them; so that having massacred them all, and afterward his wife,
and cast their dead bodies down the Rock, he reviled Herod to his face, refused
his proffered pardon, and threw himself down headlong after them, preferring
death before servitude. Joseph. Antiq. p. 377.

Caesar and Anthony made Trial of their Titles in the Actian War, and in the
seventh year of the reign of King Herod, there happened such an earth quake in
the Country of Judaea, that diverse beasts were slain, and many men overwhelmed
with the ruin of their Houses, and perished to the number of ten thousand.

Id. 391. viz. when Pontius Pilate was governor, was Jesus a Wiseman, if it
be lawful to call him a man. For he was the performer of diverse admirable
works, and the instructor of those who willingly entertain the truth. He drew
unto him diverse Jews and Greeks to be his followers. This was Christ, who being
accused by the Princes of our nation before Pilate, was condemned by him to the
Cross, yet did not those that followed him forbear to love him, notwithstanding
the ignominy of his death. For he appeared unto them alive the third day after,
according as the Divine prophets had before testified, and diverse wonderful
things were done by him; and from that time the race of the Christians, who
have derived their name from him, have never ceased.

Id. 466. Decius Mundus a Roman Knight proffered Paulina, a beautiful, but
chaste Lady, for one nights free enjoying her, but was refused; She afterward
by the contrivance of I Will the Priest of Isis, who pretended to her that their
God Anubis desired familiarity with her, was prevailed with to take her lodging
in the Temple, and there entertained Mundus instead of Anubis; which he
bragging of to her, she informs her husband, who complained to the Emperor
Tiberius of the abuse, who hanged the Priest, destroyed the Temple, and threw
Anubis Statue into Tiber, and banished Mundus. Id. p. 468.

Four Jews dwelling in Rome, and expounding Law, had prevailed with Fulvia a
noble Lady, and wife to Saturnine, to become a Proselyte, and to send Purple
and Gold to the Temple at Jerusalem; which they received and converted to their
own use: This being discovered, and complaint made to Tiberius, he commanded
all the Jews to depart ou^ of Rome, so that Multitudes suffered for the offense
of four.

Joseph. Jews Antiq. p. 4 8. Vitellius showed the Jews great favor, came to
Jerusalem, restored to them the custody of the Priestly Vestments; sent Pontius
Pilate to Rome and removed Caiaphas from his Priesthood, and advanced Jonathan
the Son of Ananus to that dignity.

Id. p. 463. Philip the Tetrarch Reigned thirty seven years, and behaved
himself very peaceably; he made his ordinary abode within his own Dominions. He
walked being accompanied with a small number of his chosen servants, and had
that seat carried after him, wherein he was accustomed to sit, and do justice:
And therein sat he, to the end, that if any one presented himself and required
his assistance, he might without delay do him right; for on the first motion
the seat was placed in that path wherein the Plantiff met him, and being seated
thereon, he examined the cause, punished the guilty, and absolved the innocent.

Id. p. 471. Herod the second having put away the Daughter of Aretas King of
Arabia his lawful wife, and taken Herodias who was his Brother Aristobulus
Daughter, and his Brother Philip's wife, Philip yet living was discomfited by
Aretas Soldiers, and his Army quite overthrown; diverse of the Jews were of the
opinion that God justly punished him for the death of John the Baptist, whom
Josephus commends for his virtue, and ascribes his death to Herod's fear, lest
his Subjects being allured by his Doctrines, and persuasions should be drawn to
revolt.

Id. p. 471. Herod's progeny is related by Josephus, that we number of
Children, nor any other humane force can be available without the fear of God;
considering that within the space of one hundred years all Herod's Line which
was very numerous was extinguished, a very few excepted.

Joseph. p. 471. Agrippa the Great the Son of Aristobulus, Herod's Son by
Mariamne, married Cypros the Daughter of Salamso, the Daughter of Mariamne by
Herod, which Salamso was the wife of Phaseolus, the Son of Phaseolus Herod's
Brother. Agrippa had by his wife Cypros three Daughter, Bernice, Mariamne, and
Drusilla: and two Sons, Drasis that died young, and Agrippa; so that Agrippa
the Great and his wife were both the Grandchildren of Herod the Great.

Id p. 471. Agrippa the Great riding with Cajus Caligula death of Tiberius his
Uncle, and Cajus his Succession, and was complained of by his Coachman to
Tiberius, who kept him six months in chains in Prison; he was told by a German
conjecturing from the sight of an Owl, which sat over his head, of his future
prosperity, and death within five days he should again see that Bird. When
Cajus came to the Empire he released him from Prison, and created him King of
Judaea, and had the Tetrarchy of Philip and Lysanias given him, and a Chain of
Gold as heavy as the Iron one he wore when he was in Prison.

Id. 478. Tiberius was exceeding dilatory in all his proceedings: He 1. Delayed
Ambassadors, lest if he dispatched them quickly, he should be troubled with
them again. 2. Delayed to exchange his Officers, because Flies full fed bite
less than hungry; In two and twenty years he sent but two Governors into
Judaea, Gratus and Pilate. 3. Delayed to give judgment, and to execute
Prisoners, lest they should be too suddenly delivered from their fears and
torments.


Id. p. 474. Herodias Sister to King Agrippa, envying her Brothers advancement
to be a King, provoked her Husband Herod against his will, and persuasion to
seek from Cajus a Kingdom: Upon which he goes to Cajus, but was prevented by
Agrippa's informations and accusations, and was banished into Lions in France;
Cajus understanding that Herodias was Agrippa's Sister, gave her what was her
right, but she refused, and accompanied her husband. God punished Herodias for
her envy against her Brother, and plagued Herod in that he so lightly listened
to the persuasions of a foolish woman.

Joseph. p 479. Cajus Caligula Governed the Empire the first directions,
behaving himself graciously toward all men, whereby he obtained the good
liking of the Romans, and the favor of his Subjects; but in process of time
the greatness of his Estate made him surpass the limits of humane condition,
and challenge to himself the Title of Divinity, whereby he Governed all things
in contempt of God.

Id p. 480. Cajus commands Petronius to set up his Statue, Jews importunity and
a miraculous rain in a great drought, he writes to the Emperor, entreating his
forbearance; But Cajus was resolute, and refused Agrippa's Petition, though he
had willed him to ask what he pleased, and commanded Petronius for his
disobedience to kill himself; but e're his Letter came to Petronius his hand,
other Letters certified him that Cajus was dead.

Joseph. p. 483. Cajus Caligula being odious to God and man Pride and Tyranny,
was slain by Chereas and other conspirators, and Claudius who f^^d and hid
himself, and by the Soldiers against his will and the Senates mind, and all
men's expectation made Emperor. He being desired by the Senate to resign the
Imperial Dignity, would not. He confirmed Agrippa in his Kingdom, and gave to
Herod, Agrippa's Brother, the Kingdom of Chalcis. This Herod married Bernice
Agrippa's Daughter, about the forty third year after Christ's birth.

Id. p. 506. Agrippa having been highly honored by Claudius, returns into his
Kingdom, and as soon as he came unto Jerusalem, he offered his Sacrifices of
thanksgiving, which he had vowed, without omitting any thing that was commanded
by the Law; He caused diverse Nazarites to be poll'd, and offered in gift that
chain of Gold which Cajus had given him, commanding that it should be hanged up
in the Temple over the Chamber of the Treasures, to testify to those which
should behold the same, that as he was, so the highest estates are subject to
alteration, and that God can raise men from obscurity unto a happy fortune.

Joseph. p. 507. Silas King Agrippa's General by too much reviving the Kings
miseries, and ripping up his own deserts, was therefore grown into the King's
displeasure, and sent Prisoner into his own Country; the King after pacified,
sent to release him, but he continuing in his sullen humor was left in Prison
Id. p. 509.

Agrippa was courteous to the Jews, magnificent expenses and building, and was
visited at Tiberias at one time by four Kings, and the Lord of Pontus, but
afterward apparelled in a Robe of Silver, that in the morning while he made an
Oration to the people, reflected the Sunbeams, he shined in such a sort that
all that beheld him were seized with reverence and fear; whereupon the people
saluted him as a God, saying, Be merciful unto us, hitherto we have feared thee
as a man, henceforth we acknowledge thee more than mortal. Agrippa reproved
them not, nor rejected their detestable flattery; looking up he perceived an
Owl, and knew it was a presage of his misfortune, and being suddenly seized
with a horrible and violent griping of his belly, turning to his friends he
spoke; Behold, says he, whom you esteemed a God condemned to die, and destiny
shall convince you of your false speeches, but I must willingly entertain what
God sends. After his death he was reviled, and the Statues of his Daughters
abused, by those of Sebasti and Caesaria to whom he had been bountiful.

Id. p. 522. Megubizus King of Adiabina gave unto his Izates a Country called
Caeron, which brings forth abundance of most excellent Amomun. In this place
was the remainder of the Ark in which Noah was saved, during the Deluge,
whose remnants says Josephus were to be seen to this day. Id. p. 514.

Theudas a Magician about forty eight years after Christ persuaded many people
to take all their goods and substance, and follow him to the flood Jordan. For
he said he was a Prophet, and told them that the River should divide it self
into two parts upon his commandment, and yield free passage. But Fadus the
Roman Governor set upon them, slew many, and took many prisoners, and amongst
them Theudas whose head was cut off and carried to Jerusalem.

Joseph. 518. When Cumanus governed in the year forty nine after Christ, in the
Feast of the Passover a certain Roman Soldier by showing his privy members and
baring his buttocks provoked the Jews into a sedition, whereby twenty thousand
Jews lost their lives, and Cumanus to cease the sedition was enforced to cut
off the Soldiers head, that had given the provocation.

Id. p. 519. Agrippa the Son of Agrippa, in the twelfth year of Claudius reign
had ad Philips and Lysanias Tetrarchies given to him, and married his Sister
Drusilla unto Azizus King of the Emissenians, but shortly after Felix governor
of Judaea seeing of her was enamoured, and by a Magician called Simon persuaded
her to forsake her first Husband, and to marry himself, which she renouncing
the Jewish Religion quickly did, and ^ad by him a Son named Agrippa. Who in
Tiberius his time was ^ourned in the fire of the Mountain Vesuvi^^.

p. 521. Bernice daughter of Agrippa the great and Herod Agrippa's brother,
after his death married Polemon King of Cilicia, who was contented to be
circumcised for her love, but abandoned Polemon, and forsook the Religion of
the Jews; whether converted by Paul's discourse, which she heard to be a
Christian, is uncertain.

Id. p. 521. In the time of Felix Government, an Egyptian Jerusalem, who
termed himself a prophet, and incited the common people to follow him to Mount
Olivet, situate five furlongs from Jerusalem, telling them, that thence he
would make them see the Walls of the City fallen to the ground, by which way he
promised them entry. Felix being informed, set upon them, and slew four
hundred, took two hundred, but no man knew what became of the Egyptian. And
afterward Festus slew many that were seduced to follow an inchanter into the
Wilderness.

Joseph. p. 522, 23. Between Festus death and Albinus that succeeded Ananus the
high Priest who was a Rast and Head strong man, and a Sadducee, supposing he
had a liberty to do what liked him. He therefore sat down upon the Tribunal
and caused James the brother of Jesus who was called Christ to appear before
him with certain others, and accusing them for transgressing the Law, and
blaspheming against God, and caused them to be put to death. They who were men
of upright Conscience were displeased; and sent secretly to the King,
beseeching him to prohibit Ananus, that hereafter he should not commit the like
offense. For which cause Albinus threatened to punish him, and King Agrippa
dispossessed him of the Priesthood.

Joseph. p. 524. mischief, many times do us good; as Jason the Thessalian (who
being assaulted by his Enemy, who intended to kill him) had an Imposthumation
opened that saved his life. Joseph. Wars of the Jews Ep.

Judas an Essaean having prophesied that Antigonus should be killed at Straton,
the day being come in which his prophecy should be accomplished, seeing him at
two of the Clock in the afternoon at Jerusalem, which was six thousand furlongs
from Caesaria, cries out, Oh happy were it for me to be dead, since the truth
dies before me; which having spoken, he sat down pensive until such time
that it was told him, that Antigonus was slain by Aristobulus appointment in a
place under ground, which was called the Tower of Straton.

Id. p. 562. Antipater, Herod's Father, being accused by Aristobulus before
Caesar, casting away his ve^ure showed the number of wounds he had received,
said it was not needful to use words to ^rove what affection he had born to
Caesar, for ^is very body would show it, though he held his peace, which so
prevailed with Caesar, that ^e made him governor of Judaea.

Joseph. p. 571. Antigonus having got Hircanus the high Priest power, with his
teeth bit off his Ears, ^o the end that if hereafter he should chance ^o get
loose he might be no more high Priest, for none might offer Sacrifice, that
wanted any member of his body.

Id. p. 576. A certain young man feigning himself to be Alexander Herod's Son by
Mariamne, whom Herod had put to death, deceived many where ever he came, but
especially at Rome, is discovered by Caesar, who condemned him to the Galleys,
and put to death him that counseled him.

Id. p. 614. Two Miles from Ptolemais there is a little River called Beleus
having adjoining to it a place of the compass of an hundred Cubits, being a
round valley covered with Sand like Salt, which when many Ships coming together
take away for balast, so that they empty the place of it, that place is
presently after covered with the like Sand again, for there are winds, which as
it were upon purpose carry this Sand from the higher places round about
thither, and whatsoever is within the Hollow is presently changed into Crystal,
or Glass. And if any of this be cast again into the brink of the place it is
again turned into ordinary Sand.

Id. 618. Simon a Chief among the Seditious, seeing himself encompassed so by
the Scythopolitans, that there was no possibility of escaping; that his Enemies
might not insult over him, beholding his family with compassion mixed with rage
killed his Father, Mother, Wife and Children, and at last thrust his Sword up
into his own body up to the Hilt.

Id. 695. Josephus when Iotapata was taken, leapt into a Cave, where there was
forty principal men, who being proffered life by Vespasian refused it, and
could not be persuaded by Joseph from killing themselves, but casting lots, who
should be killed first, the Lot falling last upon Joseph, and his fellow; when
the rest had dispatched one another, Joseph persuaded and prevailed with his
Surviving fellow, and so they both were preserved and yielded themselves.
Joseph is carried to Vespasian and foretells him of his being Emperor.

Joseph. p. 660. Hebron there is an exceeding great Turpentine Tree, which is
a^rmed to have endured ever since the Creation of the World.

Id. p. 691. A Jew having fled out of Jerusalem to the Romans, being discovered
to rake after Gold in his excrements, having swallowed some to escape the
Seditious, was the occasion that two thousand Jews were immediately slain for
the hope of finding Gold which they were supposed to have swallowed.

Id. p. 729. Titus exhorting his Soldiers to assault Jerusalem Expression. That
the Soul of him that dies in War is presently received into the pure aerie
Element, and from thence placed amongst the Stars in Heaven; and the good and
valiant Ghosts do always assist their posterities: but all that die in peace by
diseases, their Souls are kept in the bowels of the earth, notwithstanding they
are just and pure, and are forgotten, and their memory extinguished.

Id. p. 727. One Artorius a Roman Soldier being on East porch of the Temple,
that was on fire, called to one Lucius that stood below, and told him that if
he would catch him in his Arms, he would make him heir of all his Inheritance.
Lucius willingly endeavored to do it. Artorius cast himself down upon him, and
escaped with life, but Lucius on whom he fell was bruised upon the pavement and
so died. Id. p. 733.

Siege of Jerusalem compelled by famine, killed her own Son and eat him. Id. p.
739.

Temple was burnt against Titus Will, on the tenth of August in the year of
Christ seventy two, the same day it was formerly burnt by the King of Babylon,
being one thousand one hundred and thirty seven years, seven months and fifteen
days after it was first built by Solomon, and after the rebuilding in the time
of Haggai six hundred thirty nine years and forty five days.

Joseph. p. 736. Prodigies forerunning the destruction of the City and Temple
were.

1. A Comet like a Sword hanging over the City. 2. A light shining about the
Temple and Altar all night. 3. A Cow brought forth a Lamb in the midst of the
Temple. 4. The Brazen Gate in the Temple opened of it self. 5. Chariots and an
Army in battle array encompassing the City. 6. A Voice heard in the Temple that
said, Let us depart hence. 7. A plain Countryman called Jesus for seven years
and six months crying Woe against the City, and last crying Woe to himself was
^ill'd with an Engine. p. 739.
A Roman Horseman being taken by the Seditious, slain, was brought by him where
the Romans might behold him, and a Veil before his Eyes where he meant to
behead him: but whilst he drew his Sword, the Horseman fled to the Romans.
Titus would not put him to death because he had escaped his Enemies, but
cashiered him as unworthy to be a Roman Soldier, who had suffered himself to be
taken.

Id. p. 741. There were ninety seven thousand Jews taken prisoners, and eleven
hundred thousand perished in the siege and destruction of Jerusalem, which had
been five times since it came into David's hand spoiled before, and then was
utterly ruined.

Id. p. 744. Between Arias and Raphanias two Cities in Agrippa in Syria there
runs a River, that is called Sabbaticus, because that when it flows it is
full of Water and runs with a swift stream, yet having flowed six days, on
the seventh day it is so dry, that you may see the bottom.

Id. p. 749. The Castle of Massada being built by Herod Fort and furnished with
provision for many years, having Wine and Oil and Dates that had continued
good and sweet for one hundred years, having within it nine thousand and sixty
men besides women and Children, was besieged and so distressed by the Romans,
that they had no hope of escape, and therefore by an unanimous consent there
were chosen ten men, who should kill all the rest, who having dispatched
them, they cast Lots whose turn it should be to dispach his surviving
fellows. The man on whom the Lo^ fell, having killed them, fired the palace,
and killed himself. Only two women and five Children that hid themselves in a
vault escaped, and gave the Romans an account of what had happened.

Joseph. p. 761. Writings among the Greeks are modern, there being no writer
among them before Homer, who did not write himself, but left his verses to be
sung by rote, whence there comes to be so many contradictions in them. But the
Egyptians, Chaldaeans, and Phaenicians, are truly venerable. Yea so ignorant
were the Greeks of strange affairs, that Ephorus a chief writer among them
concludes the Spaniards to be inhabitants only of one City.

Id. 765. 768. lake of Gennesaret is thirty furlongs broad and an hundred long,
the water sweet and good, and very cold, the River Jordan passing through the
midst of it, and ends in Asphaltites, which water is salt and steril, in
which what is weighty swim^. It is five hundred and eighty furlongs long, and
one hundred and fifty broad, full of B^tumen. In it stood Sodom and by the
banks fruits grow, which to the eye seem as other fruit, but if you handle them
they fall into ashes and smoke.

Id. p. 689. Appion gives this Ridiculous reason from Sabbath was derived; for
says he, When the Israelites had ^ravailed for the space of six days, there
grew certain inflammations in their groins, by reason whereof they rested on
the seventh day: being ^^fely arrived in Judaea, they call the seventh ^ay
Sabbath, because the Egyptians call Saba^osis an Ulcer that grows about the
groin.

Joseph. against Appion. p. 783. When Appion charged the ^ews that they Asses
head in their Temple, and worshipped it most religiously; Josephus replies,
That were that true which he reports, yet an Egyptian as Appion was, should
not have spoken against them for it; seeing an Ass his head is of no less worth
than a Goat, and other brute beasts, which they honor for Gods.

Id p. ^8^. Moses was the Antientest Lawmakers, long Lycurgus, Solon or
Saleucus, and the Greeks confess that in time past, they wanted the name of
Law. This Homer can wi^ness, who in all his works never names this word Law,
for the people of those times were not governed by Laws but by Indefinite
sentences, and the Princes pleasure, using customs but not written, and
altering and changing them as occasion served.

Id. p. 791. Divine Plato, a man of most virtuous life, yet is almost
continually scoft at by his Countrymen, and brought in as a Vice in a Comedy.
Of which I suppose this may be one Reason, That Plato knowing that Players and
Poets brought in the multitude of Gods, affirms that Poets are not to be
admitted in a Commonwealth, and sends Homer away, lest by his ^ables he
should destroy and deprave the true opinion of God.

p. 796. Josephus affirms the Jews to have been always jealous and wary
against any innovation in their Laws of Religions: which as warrantably done by
them, he justifies by the instance of others. Plato commands his Citizens not
to admit any strangers or foreign custom into their City; and the Athenians
most severely punished any that should speak the least word against their Gods,
and Socrates was put to death for s^earing by a strange Oath, which he said a
Demon taught him. His accusers alleging that he corrupted young men and
contemned the Laws and Religion of his Country. And they put to death
Anaxagoras, for saying the Sun which they worshipped was a Fiery stone, and
would have given a Talent to have Diagoras killed, who derided their mysteries.
And the Scythians slew Anacharsis for attributing too much to the Grecian Gods.

p. 797. Apollonius Captain of Syria coming to Jerusalem rob the Treasury;
there appeared certain Angels on Horseback with weapons in their hands, and
shining with fiery flames, which so daunted the Heathen, that he fell down
astonished, and on his recovery acknowledged his sin, and craved the Prayers of
the Hebrews for his restoring, which was by Oneas the high Priest readily
granted, whereby his life was preserved.

p. 802. Thomas Becket born in London, the first Englishman Archbishop, was
brought up in the University of Oxford, Paris, and Bononia, perferr'd by
Theobald to be Archdeacon of Canterbury, and by him so effectually commended
to King Henry the second, that he first made him Chancellor of England for four
years, at what time he lived like a Courtier, not like a Clergyman. The
Archbishop dying, the King prefers him to be Arch Bishop by the choice of the
whole Convocation of the Clergy, no man gainsaying save Gilbert Foliot Bishop
of London; he was consecrated on Whitsunday 1 6^. being not fully forty years
of age; he imme^iately alters his course of life, became grave and austere, and
in outward show devout, resigns the Chancellor ship, and told the King he could
not serve the Court and the Church. He was a vigorous challenger of the Land
belonging to his See, and a most strenuous defender of the privileges of the
Clergy in opposition to the Customs of England set down by Henry the Kings
Grandfather. To which notwithstanding, he and the rest of the Bishops met at
Clarendon, swear observation, but disliking what he had done, the Archbishop
procured the Pope to absolve them of this Oath; but fearing the Kings
displeasure, he endeavored to escape beyond Sea, but was taken, carried
prisoner to Northampton, tr^ed for Treason, appealed to the Pope, yet sentenced
by his own suffragan Bishops; but the night after makes an escape, gets to the
Pope, who placed him in the Monastery of Pontiniac^, and there excommunicates
his suff^agan Bishops; thence the King by threatening otherwise to expel all the
Monks of that Order out of hi Kingdom, gets him banished, and sends all his
kindred and well-willers out of England. Becket had got the French ^ing and the
Pope to back him, but Lucius the Antipope dying, and Barborossa the Emperor
being no friend to the Pope, the King and Emperor treated to deal with the
Cardinals, to choose another Pope, which the Pope fearing, first made the Kings
of England and France friends, and then used the mediation of the French King
to make up the difference between the King and Becket, which after two or three
attempts in vain, Becket still adding in his submissions to the King, Salvo
Honor Dei, which the King justly disliked, because whatever displeased him, he
would affirm was against Gods Honor, yet at last were made friends, and the
Arh-Bishop sent home, but not fully restored, till he behaved himself quietly a
while at Canterbury, which he promised; but contrarily he immediately
excommunicates the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London and Salisbury,
and all that had any hand in the young Kings Coronation; they complain to the
King, who was exceedingly troubled, and cursed the time that he made him
Arch-^ishop or sent for him home, and withal added, that it was his chance ever
to do for unthankful men, otherwise some or other would have made this proud
Pri^st an example to all such troublesome p^rturbers of his Kingdom and State;
four Knights hearing these word, resolve to kill him, come to Canterbury on
Innocents day, and after ^hey had treated with him to be pliable to the Kings
pleasure, but to no purpose, at evening they enter the Church, and on the steps
going up to the Quire they killed him: The Monks immediately bury his body,
which was afterward taken up and laid in a most sumptuous shrine in the East
end of the Church at Canterbury. The Pope hearing of this Massacre
excommunicates the authors and consenters; The King was fain to purge himself
by Oath, yet could not be absolved before he had done this strange Penance.
First he should pray devoutly at the shrine of this new Martyr. Secondly that
he should be whipped in the Chapter House, receiving of every Monk one lash.
Thirdly that he should maintain two hundred Soldiers for the space of one year
at Jerusalem; and lastly, revoke the declaration published at Clarendon, that
originally gave the occasion of this murder. All this (such were those times)
the King was fain to perform.

Bp. Godw. lives of the Bps. p. 95. Giraldas Cambrensis speaking concerning
Baldwin the fourt^ Archbishop of Canterbury gives him this Character, that he
was a better Monk than Abbot, Bishop or Archbishop; for which cause the ^ope
in a certain letter greeted him thus; Urban the Servant of the Servants of God
to the most fervent Monk, the zealous Abbot, the Lukewarm Bishop, and careless
Archbishop greeting. This Bishop would needs attend King Richard the first
into the Holy Land, and died at the Siege of Acon, and gave all his goods to be
divided amongst the Soldiers.

Id. p. 1^0. Richard the first being taken Prisoner by Leopald Archduke of
Austria, at what time the Sea of Canterbury was void, effectually by his
letters endeavored and prevailed, that Hubert Walter, who had waited on him in
his Wars in the Holy land, and was then Bishop of Salisbury might be advanced
to the Archbishopric. While his Pall was fetching from Rome, he went to
Merton and professed himself a Monk, He prevailed for a quarter part of the
Revenues both of Clergy and Laity for one year, which with the Plate and
Ornaments of the Church then sold were to pay the Kings ransom, being 150000
Marks. The King at his return made him Lord Chancellor and Chief Justice of
England, and Governor of all his dominions, who being before Archbishop and
the Popes Legate, wanted no Authority that was possible to be laid upon him. In
two years after his preferment, he gat^ered to the Kings use, 1100000 Marks,
devized the ^ssize of Bread, Weights, and Measures, for Wine, Oil, and Corn,
was a great Housekeeper, bu^lt a Monastery at Derham in Northfolk where he was
born, Walled and Moated so as the Water encompassed the Tower of London,
increased the Revenues of his Sea and procured diverse privileges to it, built a
Chapel at Lambeth by the Monks of Canterburies consent hardly obtained, and
that not without this express condition, that no Bishops should there be
Consecrated, nor Abbot admitted, nor Order administered. He lived twelve years
Archbishop, both beloved of Prince and people, blamed for nothing but ambition
in holding so many places of power. Which temporal Offices on the Popes
command, he laid down diverse years before his death, which happened July 15th.
1205.

Id. p. 105. John and the Monks of Canterbury rejoiced at Huberts death, of
whom it seems they stood in some Awe; the King when he first heard of it, used
this expression, Methinks (quoth he) I am now indeed King of England. But the
Event declared they had no great cause of Joy, for upon a difference amongst
the Monks, who had made two Elections, the Pope voiding both imposed upon the Sea of Canterbury one Stephen Langton, a man of great worth, had he orderly
entered. The King forbad him entrance into England, the Pope hereon interdicts
the whole realm, during the time of which, all divine service cea^ed except
baptism, auricular Confession and administration of the Lords supper to such as
lay at point of death, and at last particularly excommunicates the King
himself, which he little regarded till he perceived the French King ready to
Invade him, and his own Subjects to desert him. Whereupon he was necessitated
to comply with the Pope, to resign his ^rown and take it from him, paying a
yearly pension of a thousand Marks, and at last was poisoned by a Monk. Having
first admitted the Archbishop into his Land and restored him his revenues, the
Arch bishop calls a Convocation at Osnias, whither came a young man showing the
marks of wounds in his hands, feet, and side, professing himself to be Jesus
Christ, and was accompanied by two Women whereof one professed herself the
Virgin Mary, the other Mary Magdalen. But this Counterfeit Christ was for his
pains really crucified. Presently after he translates the bones of Becket with
so great expense at the solemnity, that neither he nor four of his successors
were able to recover the debt it cast his See and Church into. He first divided
the Bible into Chapters in such sort as we now account them, and died July the
ninth 1228.

Bp. Godw. p. 108. In the Reign of Henry the third many Italians benefices in
England, which being much spitted at, certain mad fellows took upon them by
force to thresh out their Corn, every where, and gave it away to the poor, as
also to rob and spoil them of their money and other goods. It was done so
openly and so boldly, as it was manifest some great men were at one end of the
business. The Italians after that time were not so eager upon English
benefices. Id. p. 111.

Offa the Son of VVazmund a petty King of Saxons, who was founder of Warwick,
was tall of stature and of a good constitution of body, but blind till seven
years old, and then saw, and dumb till thirty and then spoke.

Sir Rich, Baker Hist. p. 8. Ethelred the Danes invaded the Land under Hungar
and Hubba, the Nuns of Coldingham, to avoid the barbarous pullution of the
Pagans, deformed themselves by cutting off their upper Lips and Noses.

Sir Rich. Baker p. 12. Athelstan imposed as a Tribute on the Prince of
North-VVales to pay three hundred Wolves yearly, which continued three years,
and in the fourth there was not one Wolf to be found.

Id. p. 16. Aelfrid hunting found a Child in an Eagl^s Nest, which he n^urished
and advanced and called it Nesting.

Id. p. 17. Canutus, a Law was made in the ^arliament at Oxford, that upon the
Sabbath day all public Fairs, Markets, Synods Meetings, and all secular
actions should be forborne, unless some urgent necessity should require. Also
that a Woman Convict of Adultery should have her Nose and Ears cut off. Also
that a Widow marrying within a year after her Husbands decease should lose her
Jointure.

p. 23. Canutus gave a Cross to Winchester Church worth as much as the whole
revenues of the Kingdom for a year.

Id. p. 23. Hochetidus which signifies scorn and contempt, remembrance of
Hardi-Canutus death, being the last of the Danish Kings that Reigned in England.

Id p. 25. Edward the Confessor was the first that cured Evil by the touch.

p. 26. William the Conqueror landing first in England battle his Armor was
put on reversedly, both things which a weak spirit would have interpreted as a
bad Omen, he did as a good; as that by his falling he took possession, and his
Dukedom would be turned into a Kingdom.

p 32. The Saxon way of making Knights, was this. Evening confessed himself to
the Priest, then he continued all night in the Church watching, and applying
himself to his private devotions the next morning he heard Mass and offered his
Sword upon the Altar: after the Gospel was read, the Sword was Hallowed, and
with a benediction put about his neck; lastly he communicated the mysteries of
the blessed body of Christ, and from that time he remained a perfect Knight.

p. 36. Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury would swear he had not one Penny upon
the earth, when under the earth, as after his death, was found he had hidden
great treasures.

Sir R. Baker. p. 40. William the Conqueror, Gawins body was found, who was
fourteen foot long, and was King Arthurs Sisters Son. Such a Mortality, that
tame Fowls for want of some to tend them turned wild. And a great Lord sitting
at a feast was set upon by Mice, and though he were removed from Land to Sea,
and from Sea to Land again, yet at last was devoured by them.

Id. p. 42. William the Conqueror dying at Roan in Normandy, his death was
known the very same day at Rome, which are a thousand Miles asunder.

Froissard relates this story. There was in the time of Edward the third of
England a Knight in France named Corasse, who could tell any thing was done all
the World over, either the very d^y or within a day after, which he did by the
means of a familiar Spirit called Orthene, who brought him continual
intelligence for diverse years together, till he lost him upon this occasion. He
had hitherto only heard the Voice, but now had a great mind to see the shape of
his Intelligence. The Spirit promised him that the next thing he saw when out
of his Bed, should be himself. The Knight rising saw the first thing two straw;
tumbling one over the other; but desiring his familiar that he might see him in
such a shape that he might take more notice of him, the next morning looking
out of his VVindow he saw a most lean and deformed Sow, which he setting his
Dogs at, the Sow vanished, and his Spirit Orthone never came more.

Id. p. 44. King William Rufus trusted not to the prayers Peter.

p. 51. In the Reign of William Rufus a Tempest London six hundred Houses; and
six beams from the Roof of Bow-church in Cheapside were driven so deep into
the ground, that not above four foot remained in sight, and yet stood in such
rank and order as the Workmen had placed them upon the Church. Also Earl
Godwins Lands were swallowed with the Sea, and now are called Godwin sands.

Id. p. 58. King Hen^y the first forbad the wearing of Hair in England, then
much used.

Ba^ler, p. 59. Thomas Archbishop of York falling desperately sick in the time
of Henry the first, his Physicians told him that nothing would do him good but
to company with a Woman. To whom he answered, that the Remedy was worse than
the disease, and so to keep his Virginity lost his life.

p. 60. Henry the first there was an Earth qua^e in Lombardy that continued
forty days, and removed a Town from the place where it stood a great way. A
Pig was farrowed with a face like a Child. A Chicken hatched with four Legs.
The Sun so eclipsed that the Stars were seen. Gerard Archbishop of York
sleeping in his Garden after Dinner never awoke.

Id. p. ^2. Roger a poor Curate accidentally dispatching Mass with great
celerity before Henry Beauclarks, the Soldiers were so pleased with it, that he
took him to be his Chaplain, and after made him Bishop of Sarum. He built five
Castles, viz. Sarum, Devises, Sheburn, Malmsbury, Newark, and had taken from
him in ready coin forty thousand Marks.

p. 71. Requerius a wicked Minister in the time of King Stephen of a more
wicked Abbot, with his wif^ crossing the Seas the Ship in the midst of the
stream would not stir, the Mariners astonished cast Lots, which fell upon
Requerius, and so did again, and again, whereupon they put him and his wife and
what he had out of the Ship, which presently as eased of her burden, sailed
away. Id. p. 73.

In King Stephens time there appeared two Boy and a Girl, clad in Green, in a
stuff unknown, of a strange language and of a strange diet, whereof the Boy
being baptized, died shortly after, but the Girl lived to be very aged, and
being asked from whence they were, she answered of the Land of St. Martins,
where there were Christian Churches, but the Sun did never rise. But where that
Land is and how she came into England she knew not.

Sir R. Baker, p. 73. Sir VVilli^m H^wkesford Knight, one of the Justices under
Edward the fourth, who dwelt at Annory in Devonshire, a man of great
Possessions, fell into such a degree of Melancholy that one day he called unto
him his keeper, charging him with negligence in suffering his Deer to be
stolen, and thereupon commanded him that if he met any man in his Circuit at
night, that would not stand or speak, he should not spare to kill him whosoever
he were. The Knight having thus laid his foundation, and meaning to end his
doleful days; in a certain dark night conveyed himself secretly out of his
own house and walked alone in his Park. The Keeper in his night walk, hearing
one stirring, and coming toward him, asked who was there, but no ans^er made,
he willed him to stand, which when he would not do, the Keeper shot and killed
him, and coming to see who it was, found it to be his Master. Id. p. 300.

IMMANUEL. Historical Collections. Century XIV.
HEnry Earl of Essex having let fall and lost the Kings Standard was shorn a
Monk, and put into the Abbey of Reding, and his lands seized to the Kings use.

Sir Rich. Baker, p. 76. Henry the second of England and Jews of France met
between Tarwin and Arras, there suddenly happened a Thunderbolt to lig^t
between them, which made them break off their Conference, and at another
Meeting the like accident again happened.

Id. Ibid. Beckets Horses Tails, after that fact all their Children were born
with Tails like Horses, and t^is continued long in their posterity.

Id. p. 82. Henry the second there came into England thirty Germans Men and
Women who called themselves Publicans, who denied Matrimony, the Sacraments and
other Articles, who being obstinate, the King commanded to be marked with a hot
Iron, and whipped, which they took patiently; the Captain called Gerard,
singing, Blessed are ye when men hate you: when they had been whipped they were
thrust out of doors in Winter, where they died with cold and Hunger, no man
daring to relieve them.

Sir. R. Baker. When Richard the first had made Hugh Pudsey Durham, and for a
great sum sold him the Earldom; he said merrily amongst his Nobles, Do not ye
think me a cunning man that of an old Bishop can make a young Earl?

Id. p. 90. When King John in a pursuit of love to a Robert Fitz-water, called
Maud the fair, had received a repu^se, she not consenting to the Kings lust, he
is said to send a Messenger to give her poison in a poched Egg, whereof she
died.

Id. p. 101. When Jeffry Fitz Peter Justitiar of England lived kept King John
in some awe; the King hearing of it, swear that he was now at length King of
England, and with great rejoicing said, Now when this man comes to Hell, let
him salute the Archbishop Hubert, whom certainly he shall find there

Idem p. 103. King John hanged up twenty and eight Welsh pledges for the
falseness of their Friends.

Id. p. 103. Jew refusing to lend King John Money, the King caused every day
one of his great teeth to be plucked out by the space of seven days, and then
he was content to give the King ten thousand Marks of Silver, that the one
tooth which he had left might not be pulled out.

p. 106. John by the Monks Historians is represented as an Atheist, for saying,
that after he was reconciled to God and the Pope, never any thing prospered
with him. And that having killed a fat Buck, should say, See how this Deer
prospered, yet never heard Mass: and that sending for aid to the King of
Morocco, he promised to turn Mohammedan.

Sir Ri. Baker, p. 109. John's time there fell Hailstones as big as Goose Eggs.

109. Simon Tharvey a great Scholar, for his pride in learning became at last
so utterly ignorant, that he hardly could read a letter in the Book.

Id. p. 110. Matthew Paris relates, that in the time of King John a Maid in
^eicestershire being exactly watched, was found in seven years not to eat or
drink, but only that on Sundays she received the Communion, and yet continued
full and in good liking. Id. p, 131.

Simon Montford gave King Henry the third Lie to his face, and that in the
presence of all the Lords, of whom the King stood in fear, for passing on the
Thames, and suddenly taken with a terrible storm, he put on shore on the next
stairs, which happened to be at Durham house, where Montford then lay, who
coming down to the King, told him he need not fear, the danger was past. No
said the King, I fear not the thunder so much as I do thee.

Id. p. 133 Edward the first being Prince, and playing young with a friend at
Chess, in the midst of his game without any apparent occasion he removed
himself from the place where he sat, when suddenly there fell from the roof
of the House a great Stone, which if he had stayed in his place but never so
little, had beaten out his brains.

138. Edward the first calling a Parliament at Salisbury, Edward the third at
another called but four Bishops and five Abbots.

Id. 133. 185. John Earl of Warren being called on to show Land, drew out an
old rusty Sword, and then said, He held his Land by that, and by that would
hold it to his death. Id. 146.

Edward the first prohibited Sea-coal to be burned in London, and the Suburbs,
for avoiding the noisome Smoke.

Sir Rich. Baker, p. 147. Synod in Edward the firsts da^s, it was enacted that
no Ecclesiastical person should have more than one benefice with cure of Souls.

Ibid. Edward the first it chanced at Gascoin, that as the King and Queen sat
in their ^hamber upon a Bed talking together, a Thunderbolt coming in at a
Window behind them, passed betwixt them, and slew two of their Gentlemen that
stood before them.

p. 148. Edward the second, a Parliament ordained by reason of a dearth, that
an Ox, fatted with grass, should be sold for fifteen shillings, fatted with
Corn for twenty. The best Cow for twelve shilings. A fat Hog of two years old
for three shillings and four pence. A fat sheep shorn one shillings and two
pence; unshorn, one shilling and eight pence. A fat Goose two pence halfpenny.
A fat Capon two pence; a fat Hen one penny. But after this law provisions grew
so scarce, men not willing to sell, that the law was quickly reversed.

Id. p. 160. ^dward the third, and Philip de Valoys their Armies stood encampt
one against another, a Hare starting out before the head of the French Army
caused a great shoot to be made, whereupon they who saw not the Hare, but only
heard the shoot, supposing it to be the onset to the battle, disposed
themselves to fight, and fourteen Gentlemen for enconragement sake, were
Knighted, called afterward Knights of the Hare. The Armies withdrew and never
struck stroke.

Id. p. 171. When Edward the third had taken and sunk Sail of French ships, the
French men leaping into the Sea, the French Courtiers being not willing to be
Messengers of such bad news, set on the Kings Jester to give notice of the
overthrow. Which he did thus. Oftentimes he repeated in the Kings hearing,
Cowardly Englismen, dastardly Englishmen, faint-hearted Englishmen. The King at
last asking the reason, the Fool replied, Because they durst not leap out of
their ships into the Seas, as our brave Frenchmen di^; by which the King first
understood of the overthrow.

Sir Rich. Baker, p. 172. Joan second daughter to King Edward the Proxy to
Alphonsus King of Castile and Leon; but passing into Spain died by the way, and
King Alphonsus met her instead of celebrating her Espousals, to solemnize her
Funeral.

Ibid. Hastings Earls of Pembroke, it is memorable that for many generations
together no Son ever saw the Father. The Father being always dead before the
Son was born.

Id. p. 210. Richard the second, an Image of Wax made by Negromancy, spoke
certain words. viz. The head shall be cut off, lift up aloft. The Feet shall be
lift above the head.

Id. p. 222. Henry the fifth being Prince, coming to rescue one of his Servants
that was endited, was resisted by the Lord Chief Justice, whom he struck in the
face. For which the Lord Chief Justice committed him to the Fleet. The Prince
suffered himself to be led to Prison. The ^ing his Father hearing of it, was
exceedingly pleased, that he had a Judge of such courage, and a Son of such
submission.

p 234. H^nry the fifth Crowned his Queen, the Coronation Feast was all of Fish
because in Lent.

p. 251. William a^ Seven Oak in Kent was taken up an Infant of unknown
Parents, but by Charitable people was Baptized, and brought up, and bound
Apprentice in London, and came at last to be Mayor of the City. 255.

In the time of Henry the fifth seven Dolphins Thames, whereof four were taken.

Ibid. The Earl of Salisbury Montacute was so terrible France, that his very
Name frighted an Army of forty thousand from the Siege of a Town; The Soldiers
issuing out and crying, St. George of Salisbury.

Id. 286. In the Reign of Henry the sixth in his eighteenth Lions in the Tower
died. In the twenty second year a deep River near Bedford stood still, and for
three miles was dry. In his thirty sixth year it rained Blood.

Sir Rich. Baker, p 286. At a Sergeants Feast kept in the Reign of Edward the
fourth, the Lord Treasurer was placed above the Lord Mayor. The Lord Mayor
presently departed with the Aldermen and the rest, without tasting the Feast.

Id. 253. Edward the fourth sent a score of Cottswold and five Rams as a
Present to the King of Arragon, which have there so increased, that it has
proved a great detriment to England.

Id. 256. Within the space of half a year one Parliament Edward the fourth an
Usurper, and King Henry the sixth a lawful King. And another Parliament
Proclaims King Edward a lawful King, and King Henry an Usurper. So uncertain
and unstable are all humane affairs.

Id. p. 304. Boots and Shoes were of such length, than they were fain to be
tied up to their knees; insomuch that Laws were made to restrain them, that
they should not be made above two inches.

Baker. p. 310. Henry the seventh being before by law attainted, when he was
Crowned King, it was resolved by all the Judges, that the possession of the
Crown takes away all other defects.

p. 341. Oxford entertained King Henry the seventh at his Castle at Heningham,
and at the Kings going away, the Earls Servants stood in their Livery ^oats and
Cognisancies ranged on both sides to make the King a Lane, whereupon the King
called the Earl to him and said, My Lord, I have heard much of your
Hospitality, but I see it is greater than it is spoken, these hansome Gentlemen
and Yeomen that I see on both sides of me are sure your Menial Servants; at
which the Earl smiled and said, It may please your Grace, that were not for
mine ease. They are most of them my retainers, and are come to do me Service at
such a ti^e as this, and chi^fly to see your Grace. Whereat the King st^rtled a
little and said, By my faith my Lord I thank you for my good cheer, but I may
not endure to have my Laws broken in my sight; my Attorney must speak with you
about this. And it is part of the report, that it cost the Earl for his
composition fifteen thousand Marks.

Sir R. Baker, p. 356. Pope Alexander the sixth died of poison by accident. In
the two and twentieth year of Henry the seventh, he went to supper in a
Vineyard near the Vatican, when his Son Valentinus meaning to poison Adri^n
Cardinal of Cornelle, sent thither certain Flagons of Wine infected with
poison, and delivering them to a Servant that knew nothing of the matter,
commanded him that none should touch them but by his appointment. It happening
the Pope coming in before supper and being dry, called for drink, his own
provision being not yet come, the Servant that ^ad the poisoned Wine brought it
to the Pope, and while he was drinking, his Son Valentinus came in and drank of
the same; whereby they were both poisoned. The Father died, the Son outlived
it, though with long languishing.

Sir R. Baker, p 356. In the twelfth year of Henry the seventh at N^eds in
Bedsordshire on Bartholomew day, there fell Hailstones that were measured
eighteen inches about.

p. 360. James the fourth of Scotland intending to War against England, as he
sat in his Chair, an old man of a Venerable aspect and clad in a Blew Garment,
came to him, and leaning on the Chair where the King sat, said, I am sent unto
thee to give thee warning not to proceed in this War thou art about, for if
thou do, it will be thy ruin. Which said, he pressed through the Company,
vanished out of sight, and could not be heard of more. But the King would not
be diverted, and was in the year one thousand five hundred and thirteen slain
at Hodderfield.

p. 372. VVoolsey had a thousand people in his household, whereof some were
Lords and Knig^ts. Baker, p. 402.

Henry the eighth one Pavier Town-Clark of Lond^n hanged himself. Of whom
Hollingshed reports, that he had sworn a great Oath, that if he thought, the
King would set forth the Scriptures in English, rather than he would live to
see that day, he would cut his own throat.

p. 405. Thomas More Lord Chancellor of England, his Father at the same time
being a Judge of the Kings bench: He would always at his going to Westminster
go first to the Kings Bench and ask his Fathers blessing, before he went to sit
in Chancery. p. 406.

Anne Bullen condemned and going to Execution Privy Chamber to her, and said
unto him, Commend me to the King, and tell him he is constant in his course of
advancing of me, for from a Private Gentlewoman, he made me a Marquess, from a
Marquess a Queen, and now he has left no higher degree of Worldly honor, he
has made me a Martyr. Id. p. 408.

Richard Read Alderman of London refusing Assessment, was sent a Sol^ier into
Scotland by Henry the eighth, and there taken Prisoner.

Id. p. 426. In the eighteenth year of Henry the eighth, proclamation made
against all unlawful games, so that in all places, Tables, Dice, Cards, and
Bowls were taken and burnt, bu this order continued not long, for young men
being thus restrained fell to drinking, st^aling Conies, and other worse
misdemeanors.

Id. 424. About the fifteenth year of Henry the eighth England whereof this
Rithme was made, Turkeys, Carps, Hops, Pickerel and Bare,
Came into England all in one year.


The six Articles on which the Martyrs were death in the times of Henry the
eighth, and Queen Mary, were these following. They were condemned that held, 1.
That the body of Christ was not really present in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper after Consecration. 2. That the Sacrament might not truly be administered
under one kind. 3. That Priests entered holy orders might marry. 4. That vows of
Chastity entered into upon mature deliberation might not kept. 5. That private
Masses were not to be used. 6. that Auricular Confession was not necessary in
the Church.


p. 426. Morgan who gave sentence against the Lady Jane Gray, fell mad, and in
his raving cried continually to have the Lady Jane taken away from him, and so
ended his life.

p. 459. Henry the eighth on Tuesday in Easter week, William Foxly Pot-maker
to the Mint of the Tower of London fell asleep, and could not be waked with
pinching and burning till the first day of the next Term, which was full
fourteen days, and when he awaked he was in all points as if he had slept but
one night, and lived forty years after.

Id. p. 428. Edward the sixth at Middleton stony eleven Miles from Bristol, a
woman brought forth a Child which had two perfect bodies from the Navil
upwards, the Legs for both the bodies grew out of the midst where the bodies
joined, and had but one Issue for the Excrement of them both. They lived
eighteen days and were women children.

Id. p. 448. When the Duke of Northumberland went London in defense of the Lady
Jane, he said to the Lord Gra^, See how the people press to see us, but not one
says the Lord spend you. p. 451.

Queen Elizabeth while her Sister lived, being asked what she thought of those
words of Christ, This is my body, whether she thought that was Christ's body in
the Sacrament, after a little pause, is reported to make this answer.

Christ was the word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And what the word did make it,
That^ believ^ and take it.
Which served her turn to escape that snare, which by a direct answer she could
not.

Sir R. Baker, p. 459. Queen Mary being resolved to restore what alienated from
the Church by Henry the eighth, when it was told her that it would be a great
diminution to the revenues of the Crown, she answered she more valued the
Salvation of her Soul, than a thousand Crowns.

Id. p. 463. Ridley and Latimar suffered, at Oxford Gardener would not go to
Dinner, though the old Duke of Northumberland invited him to dine with him,
till after four of the Clock, and the reason was, because he would first hear
that they were burnt: and as soon as word was brought, he said, Now let us go to
dinner, where sitting down and eating merrily he fell into such extremity, that
he was taken from the Table, and carried to his Bed, where he continued fifteen
days without voiding any thing by Urine or otherwise, which caused his tongue
to swell in his mouth, and so died.

Id. p. 463. Starton for a Murder was hanged at Salisbury in a silken Halter.

Id. p. 463. Cranmer was burnt, and his whole body consumed, yet his heart
remained untoucht with the fire.

463. Mary's days there died for Religion five Bishops, one and twenty
Divines, and of all sorts of men and women two hundred seventy and seven.

p. 469. Tob^cco was first brought into England by one Ralph Lane in the year
one thousand five hundred fifty six, the twentieth of Queen Elizabeth.

p. 529. Lopez being executed for Treason against Elizabeth at Tyburn,
professed that he loved the Queen as well as he did Jesus Christ, which was
cause of laughter to them that knew him to be a Jew.

Id. p. 553. Peter Bourchet a Gentleman of the Temple, supposing it lawful to
kill those who were Enemies to the Gospel, assaults Hawkins the famous Mariner
instead of Hatton and wounds him, for which he was sent to the Tower, where
taking a brand out of the fire he struck out the brains of one of his keepers
called Hugh Langworth, for which fact he was condemned of Murder, and his right
hand cut off, and nailed to the Gallows, and himself thereon hanged.

Baker, p. 564. It Is reported of Sir Thomas Cheyney Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports, that his Pulse beat three quarters of an hour after he was dead, as
strongly as if he were alive.

Id. p. 577. In the third year of Queen Elizabeth a Mare Foal with two Heads
and a long Tail growing be^ween them. A Sow farrowed a Pig with two bodies,
eight feet, and but one head. A man-child was born at Chichester having Arms
and Legs like to an Anatomy, the breast and belly monstrous big, about the neck
a great Collar of flesh and skin growing like the Ruff of a shirt. Id. p. 577.

Richard Heydock of New College in Oxon, a Dr. of Physic pretended to Preach
in his sleep, was by King James discovered to be a Mountebank.

Id. p. 591. Sunday the twenty fourth of October one thousand six hundred and
three, an Exemplar Penance was imposed on Sr. Pechsal Brocka^ Knight, which was
to stand at Paul's Cross in a white Sheet holding a stick in his hand, having
been formerly convicted before the high Commissioner for many notorious
Adulteries with diverse women.

Id. p. 602. Bernard Calvert of Andover, rode from St. Georges Church in
Southwark to Dover, from thence passed by Barge to Calice in France; and from
thence returned back to St. Georges Church in the same day, setting out about
three of the Clock in the morning, and returned about eight of the Clock in the
evening, fresh and lusty.

Sr. R. Baker, p. 605. Francis Michel a chief assistant to Sr. George
Montpesson, was degraded and made to ride with his face to the Horse Tail
through the City of London, in the year one thousand six hundred twenty and one.

Id. p. 605. Charles the first went into Spain, Gondamer lying here Ambassador,
received three hundred pounds of one Lady to be Groom of the Stool when the
Princess should come, and of another a round sum to be Mother of the Maids, and
of diverse others the like for other places.

p. 605. George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury Deer, the Arrow glancing killed
a man.

Id. 615. In the fifth year of Queen Mary, within a Notingham so great a
Thunder happened, that it beat down all the Houses and Churches thereabouts:
many were hurt, and five or six men were slain, and yet their flesh and skin
not perished; and Hailstones fell fifteen inches about.

Id. p. 466. In the second year of the Reign of King James, a strange Accident
happened to the terror of all Murderers, which was this: One Anne Waters enticed
by a lover of hers, consented to have her Husband strangled, whom they buried
secretly under a Dunghill in the Cow-House, whereupon the man being mist by his
Neighbors, and his wife making show of wondering what was become of him; it
pleased God that ^ne of the Inhabitants of the Town Dreamed that his Neighbor
Waters was strangled, and ^uried under the Dunghill in the Cow-House; and upon
declaring of his Dream, search being made, the dead body was found; The wife
was apprehended, confessed the Fact, and was burned.

Id. p. 614. April in the Parish of Standish in Lancaster, a Maiden Child was
born having four Legs, four Arms, two Bellies joined to one Back, one Head with
two Faces, the one before, the other behind like the Picture of Janus.

Sr. R. Baker, p. 615. June in the Parish of Christ's Church in Hamptshire, one
John Hitckil a Carpenter lying in bed with his wife and a young child, was
himself and his child both burned to death with a sudden Lightning, no fire
appearing outwardly upon him, and yet lay burning for the space almost of three
days, till he was quite consumed to ashes.

p. 615. Sea broke into Somersetshire and Glocestershire, and drowned eighty
Persons, and did twenty thousand pounds worth of hurt; at which stoud, Hares,
Foxes, Dogs, and other several Beasts of several kinds and natures, getting up
to the top of the Hills in the midst of the waters, were peaceable together.

p. 611. The twenty seventh day of May one thousand rich Merchants Daughter of
Antwerp came to a most fearful and lamentable End; she being invited to a
wedding, and inending to show her self in her greatest gallantry, sent for two
Landresses to dress her Ruffs (then greatly in Fashion) who bringing them home
as well dressed as possibly they could, yet not to the satisfaction of her
foolish curiosity, she in great rage began to swear, curse and ban, and t
rowing the Ruffs on the ground, wished the Devil might take her when she wore
any of them again. In which time by Gods permission, the Devil in the shape of
a Gallant Suitor came to her, and questioning the cause of her rage, she told
him how she was abused in setting her Ruffs: He undertook to please her, dressed
them, who liking them put them on, and looking in the Glass was very well
pleased, but while she was so doing the Devil kissed her, and writhing her neck
killed her. Great preparations were made for her Burial, and when four men went
to move the Coffin, they could not, then six tried, but could not, they opened
the Coffin, and instead of the body, which was gone, there was seen sitting
therein a black Cat, very lean, and deformed, setting of great Ruffs, and
frizling of Hair, to the great fear and wonder of all the beholders, and
in^tance of Go^s displeasure against Pride and fantastical Curiosity.

Peter Stubs, Anatomy of Abuses, p. 44. February one thousand five hundred
seventy eight, eight Citizens of Swaben, whose names were Adam Giebens, George
Kepel, etc. being the Lords day, would needs go to a Tavern, and so came to the
house of one Anthony Hage a pious person early in the morning and called for
store of all sorts of Wine. The Host told them they should have none till
Divine Service were past, and counseled them to go to Church. But they all
(except Adam Giebens) told him they loathed that exercise. And when the good
Host would give them none, and commanded his Servants they should not, he went
to Sermon. They fell to Swearing and Cursing, and wishing the Devil should
break their necks if they went thence till they had Wine: straightway the Devil
in the shape of a young man appeared, bringing in his hand a Flagon of Wine,
and demanding why they caroused not, and drank to them, saying, Good Fellows be
merry, ye shall have Wine enough, for you seem lusty lads, and I hope you will
pay me well, who inconsiderately answered, they would pay him or else they
would gage their necks, yea their bodies and Souls. Thus they continued
swilling, till they could hardly see one another. At last the Devil their Host
told them they must pay the Shot, whereat their hearts waxed cold. But the
Devil comforting them, said, Be of good Cheer, for now you must drink boiling
Lead, Pitch and Brimstone with me in the pit of Hell for evermore. Hereupon he
made their Eyes like Flames of Fire, and as broad as Saucers. Then began they
to call for mercy, but it was too late, and e're they could speak again, the
Devil prevented them, brake their necks and threw horrible Flames of Fire out
of their me^^^^. Thus all these (except Adam Giebens who counseled them to
hear the Sermon, and gave an account of the whole passage) miserably perished;
and are thus recorded as a terrible instance of Gods severe displeasure against
profane drunkards.

Stubs Anatomy, p. 78. The fourth day of July one thousand five Varlets called
at an Inn, and sat swilling so long in the Town of Nakershofew in Almain, till
they were as drunk, as Sw^aes; Then one of them pouring forth Wine, carowsed to
his Fellow, the other pledging him, asked to whom he should drink, quoth this
Varlet, drink to God. This done, he asked his Companion of which wine God
should pledge him, of the new or of the old. He answered, of whether thou will.
Then he taking the new Wine in his hand filled the Cup therewith, and reaching
forth his hand as high as he could, as though God should have pledg^d him
indeed, said these Words, God I would f^in know what Wine thou love best.
This new Wine is good enough and too good for thee, if thou had sent better
thou should have had better, but such as it is take it, pledge me quickly,
and carouse it off every soap as I have done to thee, if not, thou do me
wrong. Having thus stretched forth his arm with the Cup of Wine, and withal
having uttered forth these w^rds, the Lord proceeds in Judgment against him,
causing his arm to stand steadfast and unmovable, so as he was not able to pull
it to him, nor to stir his body out of his place, and in this Agony he remained
a long time after, his Countenance not changed, but rolling his Eyes to and
fro, fearful to behold. And as for breath there was none perceived to come
forth of him, nor yet to speak one word he was not able, and yet for all that
seemed to every one to be alive. After this the people assayed to remove him
from that place, but they could not by any strength. In the end they tied
Horses to him to draw him thence, but they could not do it. Then they assayed
to burn the House, and him withal, but no Fire would once take hold of the
House. Wherefore when they saw all their ways and devices to be frustrate,
persuading themselves that God had made him a spectacle to all drunkards, they
surceas^d their enterprises any further, and wished the will of the Lord be
done. And in this place and Case stands this blasphemous vill^in to this day.
The other drunken Beast his Companion they hanged upon a Gibbet before the door
of the same House, as he well deserved.

Stubs Anatomy of Abuses, p. 79. A young man dwelling in Lincolnshire, being
swearer and his usual oath was, Gods blood, lying on his death bed, the people
perceiving nigh his end, caused the Bell to be tolled for him, which he
hearing, rusht up in his Bed vehemently saying, Gods blood he shall not have me
yet. With that his blood gushed out, some at his Toes end, some at his Wrist,
some at his Nose and mouth, some at one joint of his body, some at another,
never ceasing till all the blood of his body was strained forth. -- And another
dwelling in Congliton in Cheshire, whose common oath was to swear by Gods
Arms, had his Arm hurt by a Knife and could not be healed by any means, but
it rankled, festered, rotted, fell away piecemeal, and through the anguish of
it he lastly died. -- A woman likewise in London coming into a shop to buy
certain Merchandise, forsware herself; and the excrements which naturally
should have descended downwards, came forth at her mouth and she died miserably.

Stubs Anat. of abus p. 98. The Lacedaemonians sending their Ambassadors Corinth
to conclude a peace, they coming thither and finding the people playing at
Dice, and Cards, and other unthrifty games, returned back ^e infecta saying, it
should never be reported that they would join in league with Dice-players and
Gamesters -- Alexander Severus made a Law that banished all gamesters out of
his dominions and conficated their goods, and they were counted as mad m^n ever
after. And in England, Richard the second forbad all kind of gaming, and namely
Dice-playing. Henry the fourth ordained, that every Dice-player for every time
playing, should be imprisoned six days. Edward the fourth ordained, that who
kept gaming Houses should suffer imprisonment three years, and forfeit twenty
pounds, and the players two years and forfeit ten pounds. King Henry the
seventh made a law that every Dice-player should be imprisoned all day, and the
Keeper of the Dicing house to forfeit for every offense, six shillings eig^t
pence, and to be bound to recognizance to good behavior. King Henry the
eighth, that he that kept Dicing Houses should forfeit forty shillings, and the
players to forfeit six shilling and eight pence.

Mr. Stubs Anatomy, p. 133. January being the Sabbath day in the year one
thousand five hundred eighty three, there resorted an infinite number of
people, men, women and Children to the Bear Garden in London, and all being
come together and mount^^ upon their Scaffolds and Galleries, in the midst of
their Jollity the whole building and frame of Scaffolds, (not one stick
standing) fell down, so that near three hundred persons were wounded, lamed,
bruised, crushed, almost to death, and seven killed outright; and a little
before when multitudes were met at a Playhouse, the earth did so shake and
quiver as though all would have fallen down; whereat the people being amazed,
leapt down from their places, whereby many had their Legs, Arms, and Backs,
shrewdly maimed.

Stubs Anatomy, p. 134. Mr. Stubs who Printed his Book in the year wonderful
signs and dreadful tokens, as Earthquakes, the removing of earth from place
to place, viz. M^rcley hill in Herefordshire. The Sea overflowed their banks to
the destruction of thousands. Elements to send forth flashing Fires, and to
rain down Wheat: wonderful Eclipses, and dreadful Conjunctions of Stars and
Planets, such as not the like read of this thousand years. Comets and blazing
Stars, Fiery Drakes, men fighting in the air. Many ugly Monsters, and fearful
misshapen Creatures born both of men and Beast. All which God meant for men's
amendment, yet the generality then and so now remain impenitent.

Stubs, p. 141. In the Diet at Augusta, a dispute arising what Nation was most
ingenious, whether the Italians, Spanyard, Germans, etc. A certain Spanyard and
German being present agreed, and made a bargain that he of them that could most
ingeniously steal should receive from the other twenty Ducats. The Spaniard
undertook to take away Eggs from a Bird sitting in her nest, and not disturb
the Bird. The other bid him show his skill, and he would then let him see his.
They therefore went forth of the City, and chose Judges with them. The Spaniard
having found a Bird sitting on a Tree puts off his Silken garments, his Chain
of Gold, his Sword and Dagger and his other ornaments, and lays them down by
the Tree, and so climbs up to the top of it: at which the German running, takes
up and goes clean away with them, the Spaniard in vain looking on him from the
top of the Tree. The Judges pronounce the German more witty and ingenious than
the Spaniard.

Otho. Meland. Joca Sena. p. 18. China have an especial care for the timely
marrying their Children before they are debauched, insomuch that while their
Children are infants, the Parents will solemnly contract them. And in their
Marriage they have this custom, that the Husband brings a Portion to his Wife,
in the presence of the Friends of both parties, which she immediately gives to
her Parents, for their care and cost in breeding, which if they have need the
Parents may spend, if not, they give again to the daughter to give to her Sons,
or spend at her pleasure. So that amongst them, he is held to be most rich that
has most daughters.

Juan Gonccales. Hist. de la China. p. 44. In the Provinces of China near
Tartary, they custom. Their Law requires all men and women to marry by such an
age, or else to profess Religion and live single. Now those that can match
themselves may, but for those that cannot they have this Provision. The
Governor and Viceroy in each Province appoint a certain time and Chief City,
at which, and to which, all those who are willing to marry may and do come both
men and women, where twelve principal men are appointed Judges, before whom
they present themselves, who take their names and qualities of their persons,
and substance wherewith to endow their Wives, and then of the number, and if
they find more of the one Sex than t e other they cast Lots, and the
supernumeraries are reserved to be first provided the next year. Six of these
Judges divide the men into three parts. The very Rich, the Indifferent, the
Poor. The other six Judges the mean while divide the Maids into the Beautiful,
the indifferent, the unhansome. Which done, the Judges give the beautiful to
the very rich, and they give what the Judges appoint to them. The indifferent
rich to the indifferents hansome, who pay nothing for them. And the unhansome
to the poor men with the money the rich paid divided by equal portions. Thus in
one day they are all Married, though paradventure not all well contented.

Id. p. 46. China besides his Queen, makes choice of thirty Concubines of the
most beautiful Ladies in his Kingdom, who live in the Royal palace while he
lives, and when he dies takes this care for them, that after his obsequies are
past, his successor does cause these thirty Concubines to be most curiously and
rich arrayed, and then placed in a large Hall, so veiled that none may know
them or see their faces. Which done there enter into the Hall thirty of the
Principal Noble men, whom the dea^ King nominated in his Will, either according
to their age or nomination, and each of them takes one of those Ladies so
veiled and acc^utred by the hand, and so leads her to his own house, and there
keeps her for his VVi^e, and highly respects her, having a yearly constant
allowance out of the Royal Palace, for her honorable maintenance.

Goncales Hist. de la China, p 46. Julius the third being in the heat of Summer
walking in his ^hamber without his Gown and Robes; two Cardinals coming to
Visit him, drew back, but he called them into his Chamber and told them that
their Robes must needs be a great burden to them, who had walked in the Sun,
since he could not endure his in the shade, and therefore commanded them, and
compelled them, though unwilling, to lay aside theirs, and to walk with him in
Cuerpo. Having thus walked a little while, the Pope asked them, What would our
Romans say, if they should see us thus walk through the streets of the City?
They ansvvered, They would esteem us Rogues and hardly suffer us to pass from
them without ignominious usage. To whom the Pope replies, Behold my Brethren,
how much we are beholding to our Garments, that defend us from Injuries and
procure to us so great an esteem of Holiness!

Melander. p. 33. When Tecelius was sent by Pope Leo the Indulgences into
Germany, a certain Saxon Carrier came to him and asked him if he could grant
him pardon, for not only those sins he had already, but those he should commit
thereafter, and told him if he could, he would give him ten Crowns. The Monk
paused upon it, and told him it was a difficult case, but yet if he would give
thirty, his power from Pope Leo did extend to pardon, which was done. Tecelius
rejoicing at the purchase he had made, returning with his moneys this Carrier
way-lays him, Robs him, and went into the town Tecelius was going to: who being
come, accuses him to the Magistrate, the Carrier pleads, that he had his
pardon and so produces the Popes bull that he had from Tecelius. The
Magistrate gives Credit to it. Tecelius has the worst of it: and is laughed and
hist from the bar with contempt and disgrace.

Otho Meland. Joca seria. p. 55. Hemingius a worthy Divine relates this Story
of a Woman that being grievously troubled with sore Eyes applies her self to a
Scholar for remedy, and promises him, if he could cure her, a good reward. The
Scholar though utterly ignorant, yet out of hope of the reward undertakes it.
He takes a piece of paper and therein writes Characters never before seen or
heard of, and under them in great Letters,

The Devil pull out thy Eyes, and fill the holes with Dung.

This Paper fo ded up, and sowed in a Cloth, he commands the Woman to wear
about her neck, she obeys and was cured. About a year or two after the Woman
had a great desire to see what it was she wore, opens the bag, causes the
Paper to be read, is exceedingly displeased at it, throws away the Paper and
her distemper in her Eyes again returns.

Otho Mela. Joca seria. p. 91. Jacobus Latomus who had written against Luther
being near unto death, caused to be called to him some of those they call
Magistri Nostri at Paris, and said with grief and deep sighs; I have therefore
called you together, that I might testify unto you that the Doctrine of
Luther, which you so furiously persecute, is the true Doctrine of Christ, the
Apostles and the Church, and that which you defend is wicked and divelish, and
that for writings, which against my conscience knowingly and wittingly I have
put forth, I am a damned wretch. When they amazedly beheld him, some of the
wiser sort advised him not to despair of Gods mercy, though he judged he had
done amiss. He discourses to them concerning the banishments, punishments, and
death, that through his means many had suffered: adds, In vain do you labor to
comfort me, for I am sure I am damned; and with this word ended his wretched
life.

Otho Meland. 107. In the year one thousand five hundred twenty brethren, whose
names were Thomas and Leonard Schykers living near a City called Mullegas, met
on the seventh of February at the House of their Father, with other of their
Opinions, being Anabaptists, and having spent the night in Enthusiastical
discourses and gestures, early in the Morning Thomas commanded his brother
Leonard to kneel down before his Father, and the rest of the Company who
advised him that he would not do any thing unfitting, he replied, nothing could
be done there but what was the Will of the heavenly Father, and suddenly
drawing one his Sword cut off his Brothers head; which done, while the company
astonished were lamenting, he ran forth into the street and cried, The day of
the Lord is at hand, and that great things were done that Morning, and the will
of the heavenly Father was done. The fact being divulged, he was apprehended,
condemned, and therefore justly executed.

Id. p. 124. Inn keeper of a considerable estate, who had only one child and
that a daughter, entertained a stranger into his service, who was poor but
industrious, and having obtained the good Will of his Masters daughter, but
being poor, though otherwise respected by his Master, could not gain her
Fathers consent. The Host, wife and daughter going to the Baths, left the
administration of his House to him. It happened the first night to come a
Merchant, whom he killed, buried in the Stable, sold his Horse and cloths, and
took all he had, no one living besides himself conscious to it. The Master
returning found all things to his good content. Not long after, he shows his
Master a Letter, which he pretended was sent from his Friends, which acquainted
him that his Father was dead, and they had sent him eighty Crowns to furnish
him with Horse and other things for his Journey, to look after what estate was
left him. He d^sired leave to go, and tell, his Master that he would not buy a
Horse, nor carry so much money with him, but left it with his Master, and said,
he would rather live in that City than any where else. He goes, returns, and
feigning things concerning what was left him, he puts the rest of his stolen
money into his Masters hands, who hereby was persuaded to gra^ifie his
daughters desire, and gave way for her to marry him; and his Father in Law
dying, enjoyed all his goods, and living in good repute for many years, and
arrived to the chiefest Magistracy in that City; but being perpetually
tormented with the terror of his own conscience, being one day sitting amongst
his brethren the Magistrates in judgment on a Murderer, he having given his
Sentence to the Condemnation of him, he arose, acquainted them with his Murder
and Theft, and desired the same Sentence to be passed against him. They
supposed him distempered with Melancholy, but he replied, That though they
judged him innocent, and as to other gross offenses he was faultless, yet of
this he was guilty, and if they would send, they should find the b^nes of the
Merchant in the Stable. They sent, found him so, and condemned him, who went
most willingly to his Execution, where with the other he was beheaded.

Otho Meland. p. 128. A Silesian Noble man having invi^ed guests, Dinner come,
his provisions ready, his Guests excused themselves; at which being provoked to
passion, he brake forth into these Words, Let all the Devils come if no man
will. This spoken, he went to Church and heard the Preachers Sermon. But being
there, behold, the Guests he wished for came in monstrous and strange shapes on
Horseback, and bid a Servant of the Noble man's go tell his Master that his
guests were come. The Servant full of consternation goes to the Church,
acquaints his Master, who consults the Minister, and by his advice all his
Family went forth of the House, and forgot a Child lying in the Cradle, which
they brought not with them. The Devils began to keep revel-rout, to look out of
the Windows in the shapes of Bears and Wolves, of cats, and men, to hold
forth the Cups of Wine, and dishes of meats. These when the neighbors and
Minister and others saw, Oh said the Father where is my poor infant?
Immediately one of the Devils took up the Child in his Arms, brought him to
the VVindow, and showed it to them. The amazed Noble man being sollicitous for
the Child, had a Servant that feared God, whom he asked what he should do? the
good Servant replied, I will commit my life into Gods hand, and in the name of
God go in, and by his help bring forth the child. His Master bad him go, and
God go with thee and help thee and confirm thy courage. The Minister and people
praying to him, the Servant went in and coming before the Chamber in which the
Devils were, he fell upon his knees and commended himself to God, and opened
the door and saw the Devils in horrible shapes, sitting, standing, walking,
creeping, and all running toward him cried out, Ho, ho, fellow, what do thou
here? He notwithstanding being encouraged by Divine assistance, thus bespake
the Devil that had the Child in his Arms, Deliver me the Child. To whom he
answered, No by no means, the Child is mine, bid thy Master come and fetch it
himself. To whom the Servant said, I discharge the duty of my place, in which
God has set me, and know that what I do in my office, will be acceptable to
God. And therefore by virtue of my office, and by the help and in the name and
power of Jesus Christ, I take from thee this Infant and restore it to his
Father, and so took the Child and carried it from him. They answered nothing,
but crying our, Oh Knave, Oh Knave, leave the Child or we will tear thee in
pieces; he not regarding their threats came away and brought the Child safe to
his Father. The Devils after a few days disappeared, and the whole family
returned quietly into the House.

Otho Mel. p. 129. ex Sell. in Genesin. When Tecelius came into Mesnia with the
Indulgences, preaching in the Morning, he promised his Auditors that in the
afternoon he would show them a most excellent and rare Relic, to wi^, a Quill
of the Angel Michaels Wing, which the Devil in the contest with him, mentioned
Rev. 12. pulled out. The Schoolmaster of the place hearing this Impudent lie,
and dining with Tecelius at the Ministers House, who having laid his case in
which his Quill was in the VVindow, the Schoolmaster took it out privily, and
filled the case with Coals. Tecelius returning to Preach and magnificently
speaking of his relic, when he opened the case, found the Quill gone, and
Coals in the Room. The Devil helped him at this loss to invent this lie.
Friends, says he, I promised you to show the Quill of St. Michaels wing, but
have mistaken the case, and instead thereof have brought that in which are some
of the Coals with which that glorious and blessed Martyr Saint Lawrence was
broiled to death on a Gridiron.

Otho Melander. Joca seria. p. 184. Hatzfeld in Hassia a bold and daring Tailor
that having killed a Priest was excommunicated and forced to flee his Country,
he going to Rome for absolution from the Pope, feigned that he had killed two,
and paying the price, obtained the Popes letters of pardon for the murdering
two Priests. Returning with these home, he made his brags, that he had ^et one
Priest to kill, for which he was already pardoned, and that should be the next
that affronted him, which being blown abroad, all the Priests of the
neighboring Diocese stood in great fear of offending this bol^ Ruffian.

Id. p. 285. In the Court of Charles the fif^h Emperor, chastity of a Lady of
Honor: A Capital Crime to be expiated for the terror of others, with no less
punishment than death. The offender therefore was ca^t into prison to be
beheaded the next day. Where through fear and dread of death, he was so changed
in countenance and Hair, which was turned White, that when he was brought
forth the next Morning, none of his familiar acquaintance knew him. The Emperor
suspected deceit, and that another person was substituted in his place, but
upon search finding him to be the same, being amazed at so strange an
alteration, his displeasure was turned into pity, and judging him to have
suffered enough already, he forgave him the offense, and spared his life.

Id. p. 187. When King Henry the eighth had upon the intercession of his Nobles
pardoned a Murderer, who shortly after committed the same offense, and was
again interceeded for, the King being extremely troubled, answered, This
Villain killed the first man, but I have killed the second. And commanded him
presently to be executed as he well deserved.

Id. p. 188. fight against the Persians a contention arose between the
Arcadians and Athenians, who should fight in the first place; The Athenians are
commended, that in that common danger of their Country, they parted with their
right, and said, Place us where you will, we shall behave our selves Valiantly.
So the Duke of Wirtenburg (when in a convention of Princes a dispute arose
about the order and place of their sitting) he nobly said, Place me behind the
stove if you please, so we effect what we meet about.

Otho Meland. Joca seria. p. 214. Saxony made great preparations for War
against a pious Bishop of Magdeburg; The Bishop not regarding his defense,
applied himself to his Episcopal function in the Visiting and well governing
his Church. And when it was told him, that the Duke was upon his march against
him, he replied, I will take care of my Churches and trust God to fight for me.
The Dukes Espy understanding this answer, gave his Master an account of it, who
hereon dismissed his Army, surceast his Expedition, and said, He would not fight
against him, who had God to fight for him.

Idem, p. 250. Bavarian Priest being ignorant of the Latin tongue, pronounced
the words in the form of Baptism thus: Baptiso te in Nomine Patria filia and
spiritus sancta. Whence arose a great controversy, whether the Child were
rightly baptized, or should be again: which Boniface Archbishop of Ments
commanded. But Vigilius Bishop of Salisbury and other held it sufficient. Which
contention grew so high that Pope Zachary in the year of our Lord seven hundred
forty five, was fain to determine, an^ concluded the baptism good.

Otho Mel. p. 400. A VVestphalian Noble man delighting in the Minister, who was
a bandsome and pleasant companion, usually invited him to his House. But being
to go from home for some time, and being gone some half mile from his House, he
commanded his Servant to return and in his name to require his Lady not to
invite or entertain the Minister, much less to go to his House till his return.
The Servant returns, but considering the proness in all to do what was
forbidden them, he bethought himself of another message, and so coming to her,
told her, That his Lord had sent him to ^er to desire and require her not to
play with or meddle of a great Mastiff that went about the House. The Lady
displeased and admiring at this message, bid him tell his Master, that he need
not send such a Message, since she never had any such thought, but however she
would obey his pleasure. While she was musing of the strangeness of this
prohibition, the Dog accidentally comes in place, whom she feeds and strokes,
and at last grew so familiar with, that at last she sat down upon his back.
The Dog being a surly Cur turns back, bites her by the Arm, the anguish of
which put her into a feavour, and that makes her keep her bed. When her Lord
returning, found her ill and, condoling her sickness, she told him she might
thank him and his foolish message for it. He denying that he sent any such
questions, calls his Servant who gave him an account why he changed it, and
convinced his Master that he did wisely in so doing, as he might and did
perceive, by her doing in this what she was forbid. His Master was satisfied
and commended his Servants prudence.

Otho Meland. Joca seria. p. 612. IMMANUEL. Legendary Stories. Century I.
POpe Gregory passing through Forum Trajani, goodness of that Heathen Emperor,
was moved with compassion over his Soul, and hereupon went into St. Peter's
Church, and there praying earnestly for him, had this answer; I have heard thy
prayers, and have releast Tra^an his Eternal torments, but beware for the time
to come, thou pray no more for Souls that are damned.

Bosch. 5 part Acad. Peccat. p. 255. Boschier relates that an Angel appearing
to a Hermit, when there came by a spruce Gall^nt perfumed, the Angel stopped his
Nose and said, that the young man's Soul smelt worse than a Carrion Carcass. And
out of Hierom concerning Hilarion, that when one brought him young pease as an
offering, which was given him by a Covetous griper, Hilarion cries out, Do
thou not smell the stinking scent of Covetousness? cast them to the beasts and
see if they will eat them, which they did, and the beasts refused them.

Idem, p. 50. John Gualbertus a noble Florentine on good Friday met one that
had killed his brother, whom he having at his advantage intended to have
killed, but he craving pardon for Christ's sake, who on that day was crucified,
Gualbertus heart was so mollisied, that he put up his weapons, and told him
that he would esteem him hereafter as a Brother. After which, he immediately
going into the Church of St. Miniat near Florence to do his devotion before the
crucifix, the Crucifix visibly and with noise inclined it self to him, and
bowed his head, which miracle so prevailed on him, that he professed himself a
Monk in the said Monastery. Id. p. 277.

^licas reports that when Zeno the Emperor had deflowred a Virgin, the Mother
of the Maid earnestly prayed to the Virgin Mary to revenge that Injury; but the
Emperor being a most liberal Prince, the woman was thus answered, We desire to
revenge the Injury, but Zeno's right hand will not suffer me. Id. p. 362.

Boniface it is reported that being but a Lad, he gave away to the poor all his
Mothers Corn; she coming into the Granary, and perceiving of it, was exceeding
angry, but Boniface praying unto God, immediately the Granary was again full.
And of St. Joscias that retiring with his Companion to the Sea side, having
only one loaf, which being begged he gave away and comforted his Companion with
this, that they served that God, that fed ^ll the Creatures, and behold two
ships full ^den with Victuals were driven ashore to them.

Id. p. 366. Simonides having buried a dead body whom shore, was admonished by
him, that he should not Sail the next day. He did not; but saw his company
drowned. The ^^me Simonides being to Sup in a House ready ^o fall down, was
sent for to speak with two strangers, with whom going to speak the House fell
down and killed all the rest.

Id. p. 369. Boschier relates of one that going through pray for the dead,
where once his Enemies about to set upon him were affrighted away with the
appearance of them as Armed to defend him: and of another that was lighted home
by four Torches, two going before and two behind, who having brought him home,
told him, They were of those for whom he prayed.

Bosch. ibid. p. 369. Grafton reports that he saw the Cheek tooth Hens Egg,
and did weigh ten ounces; the Scull of which man, he was credibly informed,
would hold five pecks of Wheat, and the Shin bone was six foot in length and of
a marvailous greatness.

Grafton Hist. p. 6. Moses being a Child spurned Pharaohs Crown. The Magicians
counseled Pharaoh to put him to death, which Pharaohs daughter prevented by
excusing him as done through Childishness, she putting burning Coals toward
his mouth, which he licked with his tongue, whence he had his imperfection in
his Speech.

p. 24. Athelstan with a stroke of his Sword clave a stone an Ell deep which
stood near to the Castle of Dunbar. He having first prayed that God would give
some token, that the Scots ought to be Subject to the English.

Grafton p. 148. Guy Earl of Warwick being revealed in Vision to King
Athelstan, and found at Winchester City Gate in a Palmers Weed, upon the Kings
Entreaty he encountered in Hide Mead with Colebrand the Danish Giant, and then
retired himself to his Hermitage, where he lived many years and sought his
relief at his Wives Gate, unknown to her amongst the poor, which she daily
served.

Id. p. 150. Methuselah had lived near five hundred years, God said unto him,
Build thou an House if thou will, for yet thou shall live five hundred years.
And he replied, For so little time, as five hundred years, I will build no
House, but rested under Trees and Hedges, and so slept as he was wont to do.

Fructus Temporum part 1. Dioclesians daughters having killed all their
Husbands were put into a Ship, and half a years provision with them, and came
into Albion, where accompanying with Devils, they brought forth Giants, o^ whom
was Gogmagog and Lanherigan.

Fructus Temp. part 1. Rheuben of the Tribe of Issachar and Ciborea Judas
Iscariot. Hs Mother dreamed the night he was begat, that she should bring a
Child, that would be a Traitor to his King and Country. The Child being born
they put him into a Vessel into the Sea, which carried him to the Isle of
Scariot, and was taken up by the Queen of that Country and nourished as her
own, but after for killing that Queens Son was fain to fly, came to Jerusalem,
and was entertained by Pilate, who sending him to Rheuben his Fathers Garden
for Apples, which he gathering and not as^ing leave, killed his Father that
resisted him. Pilate gave judas what Rheuben had, and Ciborea his Mother to be
his Wife, whom he using unkindly, she bemoaned the death of her Husband, and
exposing her Child unto the Sea, whereby Judas understood she was his Mother,
at which being greatly troubled in Conscience, and hearing of Christ's Preaching
and miracles, followed him in hopes of ease, was entertained by him, and
afterward proves his betrayer.

Fructus Temp. part. 4. q. 1. Rochester having abused St. Austin whom Greg^ry
sent into England by casting dirt and guts upon him, S^. Austin prayed that all
the Children that should be born in that City, might have long tayls, which
accordingly happening, Adlebrit King of Kent entreated Austin, and he by his
prayers procured a Remedy.

Id. part 5. M. 4. Benedict the ninth, after he was dead appeared in a horrible
shape. His head and his Tail were like an Ass, and the rest li^e a Bear, and he
said, Be not afraid, for I was a man as you are, but I t^us appear because I
lived wickedly as a beast when I was Pope.

Id. part 6. q. 2. Edward the Confessor King of England was a great rev^rencer
of John the Evangelist, and one day coming from his devotions, a Pilgrim met
him, and begged his Alm^s. The King gave him a Ring from his Finger. Many years
after two ^ilgrims coming from Jerusalem were accosted by another, who asking
them whither they traveled, they answered to England. Whereupon he took them a
Ring and willed them to give it to King Edward. They enquiring who he was, he
answered, John the Evangelist, and that they should tell the King that on
Twelfth day in Christmas he should die, and he happy in Heaven with him, and so
he disappeared. These Pilgrims being then but twelve miles from Jerusalem laid
them down to sleep, but awaking found themselves in England, delivered the
Ring, did their Message. And the King died the same day he was forewarned of.

Fructus Temp part 6. q. 7. St. Bernard was Canonized by Pope Alexander,
Miracles, that because of the great multitude of people, his Abbot forbad him
to do any more, and he obeyed and did no more.

Id. part 7. S. 3. The Water in Jacobs Well is of several Colors. pale as
Ashes, other three green as Grass, three months red as Blood, and three months
clear as Water. And among the Garamantes is a Well all day so cold that no man
can drink thereof, and all the night it is so hot that no man can touch it. In
Macedonia is a Well that extinguisheth burning brands, and kindles such as are
qu^nched. In Thessaly are two Rivers, sheep who drink of one shall be white, of
the other black, of both speckled. Near the Alps is a Well called Novacris,
that runs at Summer and is dry at Winter. In little Britain there is a
Well, the Water of which if it be taken in a Fugle Horn and poured on a Stone
near to it, though the weather be never so fair and dry, yet it will Rain
immediately. In France is a Well, the water of which is good for men and naught
for women, and so cold that by fire it cannot be made hot. In Sicily there are
hot baths, whose waters make Thieves and perjured persons blind if it touch
their Eyes. And in Ireland there is a Lake, into which if you put a pole or
stake, what is above water will continue wood, what in the water will be stone,
what still in the ground will be converted to Iron.

Polycronicon fol. 14, 17, 19, 20, 29, 30, 36. Decius the Emperor, in the year
of our Lord two hundred fifty four, the seven sleepers began to sleep in the
mount Caelius, and so slept two hundred years, and rose about the last of
Theodosius, and were known to sleep to long by the old moneys they had about
them.

Polycronicon f. 67. Leo the sixth, when a Woman on Christmas day kissed his
hand, he was assaulted with temptation to uncleanness, he thereupon cut off his
hand, and had i^ again by miracle restored.

Id. f. 180. Cunebertus King of Lombardy consulting with one of his
Secretaries, how he might kill his Knight Aldo, was troubled with the humming
of a great Fly, whose foot he cut off with a Knife. Aldo suspecting nothing,
coming to Court was met by a halting man, who said, Beware Aldo, if thou come
to Court the King will kill thee. Whereupon he fled to Saint Romans Church, and
took Sactuary, and when the King asked him why he did so, Aldo told him that he
was warned by a halting man, that he would kill him. The King perceived it was
an Evil Spirit, whose foot he had cut off in the shape of a Fly, and recovered
Aldo to grace.

Id. fol. 216. Of Adhelme Bishop of Sherbone, it is written that flesh, he took
upon him this Martyrdom, that he would hold with him in his bed a fair Maid as
long as he was saying the Psalter from the beginning to the end. The same
Adhelme having said Mass at Rome, he put back his Chesible, supposing his
Servant had been there, to have took it, and the Sunbeams held it up from
falling. And baptizing a Child that was Fathered on Pope Sergius, he demanded
of the Child which was but nine days old, if Sergius had begotten him, and the
Child answered that the Pope was Innocent.

Id. f. 213. Charles the Son of Pipin King of France, having poss^ssions, after
his death an Angel showed Eucherius Bishop of Orleance, how for so doing he was
tormented body and Soul in Hell; then by the warning of Eucherius, the Abbot of
Saint Denis and Pipinas his Priest went to Charles his grave, and turned off
the ^tone, and saw a great Dragon fly out of the grave, but there was no body
found.

Id. f. 215. When the Pope had commanded St. Bennets to be restored to the
Mount Cassin, the Monks of Florence wept and fast^d, and prayed, that the body
might abide with them, and their prayers were heard so, that the messengers
that were sent for it were stricken stark blind.

Polycron. f. 218. Gingulphus of Burgogne left his Wife because of her
spouse-breach, and was afterward slain by the Clarke that kept her. When he
was dead many miracles were done by him, but his wife spoke evil of those
miracles, and said, When Gingulphus my husband does miracles, my Arse shall
sing, and so afterward as often as she spoke, her lower end would sing with a
foul noise.

Id. ibid. Rollo the Dane besieged Cornutum a City in Italy the Citizens
trusted not in their Walls nor in their strength, but they took our Ladies
Smock that Charles the bald had brought, with other relics, from
Constantinople, and set this Smock upon a Pinnacle as if it were a banner, the
Enemies made game and shot at it, and were immediately smitten with blindness,
and the City thereby delivered.

Id. f. 228. Dance in St. Magnus Churchyard at Christmas night, the Priest
offended at them, though his daughter was one of the Company, prayed that they
might continue so doing for twelve months, and accordingly they did, without
meat or drink or rest.

Id. f. 247. When William the Conqueror would have Wulstan of his Bishopric of
Worcester to have placed in a Norman, VVulstan took his pastoral, and pitched
it in the hard stone at St. Edward the Kings feet, that lay there in his grave,
that none but himself could take it out, saying, A better man than thou art
took it to me, and I take it to him again. Take it away now if thou can.

Id. f. 273. Geoffrey Plantagenet Earl of Anjow Father Henry fitz Empress King
of England, came of the Children of a Countess that was married only for
fairness of body. She would seldom come to church, and then would not stay the
Mystery of the Mass, which her Husband taking notice of, appointed four Knights
to hold her in the Church; whereupon she threw of the mantle they held her by,
and left two sons that were under the rightside of the mantle, and with two
other Sons that were under the left-side, flew out of the church window, and
was never seen more.

Polycron p. 294. Columbus having knowledge in Astronomy, strait for want of
victuals together wi h his whole army, and foreseeing an Eclipse of the moon
within few days to happen, threatened the Indians he would send infinite
plagues amongst them, if they did not speedily ^c^^re them, in token whereof
they should at such a time see the moons light taken from them, which they at
first slighted; but when they saw that the moon began to be darkened, and grow
so more and more, and being ignorant of the Cause thereof, they not only sent
them supplies of victuals, but threw themselves at Columbus feet and asked
forgiveness.

Rowland. Judicial Astrol. p. 48. House for fear the Roof should fall upon his
head, resolving to lie in a Tent. But that resolution lasted not long, for he
durst not trust himself there, for fear the cross Pales should fall on his
head. Then he resolved to lie under some Tree, but then he doubted lest in a
windy night, the Tree should fall on him. He durst not go into a Town lest the
Tyles should crack his crown; so that whatsoever place he went into, he was
fearful of himself: at last walking in the heat and putting off his Hat having
a bald head, a Bird with a Shellfish in ^is claws let it fall and so beat out
his brains.

Id. p. 189. Chrysostom that he affirms that in the East, in a City called
Seth near the Ocean, there was a Society of men Twelve in number, Students in
Astrology, who learning out of Balaams prophecy Numb. 24.17. That a Star was to
appear, gave themselves from year to year, to observe the Heavens, and to wait
for its appearance, and for continuation of that observation did at the death
of any of the twelve, chose another in his room, by which at last they saw this
Star.

Id. p. 303. When the body of St. Martin was removed Turon for fear of the
Danes, and placed at Antisiodorum by the body of Saint German, many Miraculous
cures were wrought, and many gifts were offered, whereupon a contention arose,
whose the profit should be, those of Turon claiming all, those of Antisiodore
claiming a part, both from the prerogative of the Church and the dignity of
Saint German. To end this Controversy a Leper was placed all night to watch
between St. Martin and St. German, and the next morning that side of the body
which was toward Saint Martin was made perfectly whole, when the other part
remained as it was; but being turned the next night toward Saint Martin was
likewise recovered. And the men of Turon had the whole gain. Gulielm. Malmsb.
p. 24.

Gregory the sixth being the occasion of shedding blood, when he lay on his
death bed, there was a great debate among the Cardinals whether he should be
buried in St. Peter's Church with the rest of the Popes. He understanding of it,
and having in a large discourse cleared himself, told them, that since his and
their judgment might be mistaken, they should refer it to Divine determination,
and therefore says he, Set my body. Antecessorum meorum more compositum,
before the gates of St. Peter's Church, fast shut and bolted, and if God will, I
shall enter the gat s opening of themselves, then bury me there, if not, then
do what seems to you best. They doing accordingly, the gates opened of their
own accord, and they buried him in the Church with his predecessors. Gulielm.
M^lmsb. p. 48.

Berinus Bishop of the West Saxons having taken ship and that under Sail,
having forgot his fardels went out of the Ship, and walked on the Sea to land,
and returned again with them.

Gulielm. Malms. p. 136. Swithun Bishop of Winchester restored a Woman's eggs,
that were broken by his workmen on the bridge, by making the sign of the Cross.

Id. p. 137. Birastan Bishop of Winchester using to sing the Mass for the rest
of t e dead, one night ending all he added these words, Requiescant in pace,
and was answered by the voices as it were of a great Army out of the graves,
Amen. This Birastan dying suddenly, had little honor done him, till after
Athelwold that succeeded him, watching before the Saints relics, he appeared
to him with Berinus and Switi^un telling him that he was in glory with them,
and therefore should have more respect and a better opinion amongst men Id. p.
138.

Robert Lotharing Bishop of Hereford was at court Wiliima the Conqueror,
VVulstan (being then fallen sick at Worcester) or something in his likeness
appeared to him, and audibly uttered these words. If thou will see me living,
hasten to Worcester before I die. He having got leave of the King, made have
toward Worcester, but the night before he reached it, VVulstan appeared to
him, and told him that he had done what love required, but it was in vain being
dead, but bid him provide for himself to come shortly after, and that it was no
vain fancy, he should know by the token of his love that should be given him.
He going to Worcester, interred the Bishop, and after coming away, the Prior
brought him as a present St. Wulstans Cap with Lambs furr, which he was used to
wear when he traveled, by which being warned, he carefully prepared himself
for his own death, which happened in June after, VVulstan dying the midst of
January.

Gulielm. Malms. p. 163. St. VVereburg the daughter of Ulfere King of Mercia
professing Chastity in a Nunnery at Chester, when her Country Farmer told her
that with all his care, he could not keep her Corn Fields from being destroyed
with Birds, she commanded him to go and shut them all in a House. He astonished
with the strangness of the command, thought at first that she had but jested,
but perceiving she was in earnest, goes into the Fields and commands the birds
in his Mistr^ss name to follow him, who presently all obeyed, and he shut them
in, but withal made bold with one of them for his Supper. His Mistress coming
very early the next morning, rebuking them for their rapine, commanded them to
be gone. But they sensible of the loss of their fellow refused, and by their
complaining as they might, signified their grief. She mistrusting some reason,
examining her Farmer understood from him that he had eaten one of them, she
caused him to bring the bones to he^, and making a sign of the Cross with her
hand, flesh, and skin, and feathers, and life returned, and the whole company
joyfully departed with their restored fellow. W. Malms p. 164.

Fridswide being a Saxon Kings daughter, and earnestly pursued by a King, who
desired her in marriage, fled from him into Oxford, he following her was no
sooner entered the Gates but on her prayers was smitten blind; and on his
entreaties to her upon her prayers was restored. Hence it was that following
Kings were along time after afraid to enter that City.

Id. p. 166. Romans in their rage in the tenth year of Brethreck King of the
West Saxons cut off and put out the tongue and E^es of Pope Leo, and drove him
from h^s seat, who was after by divine grace restored to his speech, sight, and
place. H. Hunting. p. 197.

Harold and his sister Queen Edgith unknown to the King, had ga^hered a vast
s^mme of Money, v^z. four pence of every Hide of Land, they persuaded the King
Edward the Confessor to go into his Treasury to see this money, who coming
thither, and seeing the devil sitting upon it, a^kt him what he did there, he
answered him, that he there watched his own money. The King conjuring him to
tell how that Money came to be his, was answered, because it was unjustly taken
from the poor; whereupon the King ordered the money to be restored, which was
accordingly so done. Roger Hoveden. f. 256.

Ignorant Priest having with much difficulty and many Mistakings sumbled over
those three Names Shadra^b, Mesech, and Abednego, when they again occurred in
the same chapter, in stead of venturing on them any more, makes use of this
Periphrasis, viz. the three Gentlemen aforesaid.

FINIS.

