THE Chimney-Sweepers SAD COMPLAINT, AND HUMBLE PETITION TO THE CITY of LONDON,
FOR Erecting a new CROSS in the room of that Stately and Beautiful MONUMENT
Voted down by the Long-lived Parliament, defaced and utterly demolished by the
hands of a tumultuous multitude of Factious SECTARIES. Also the Learned
Conference between the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the Company, upon
several occasions at their private meetings at Chimney-sweepers-hall in
Old-street. With the Declaration and Resolution of the Maidens and merry Lasses
of London to stand and stick to them in all things that shall be advantageous
to their Occupation.

LONDON, Printed for John Johnson, 1663.

The Learned CONFERENCE BETWEEN The Master, Wardens and Assistants of the
Company of Chimney-sweepers, upon several occasions at their private meetings
at Chimney-sweepers-hall in Old-street.
UPon the seveal meetings of Mr. Black, Mr. Smut and Mr. Broom, Master and
Wardens, with the Assistants of the Company at Chimney-sweepers-hall in
Old-street, (being richly clothed in their black Robes and Hoods of the same)
was a learned Conference before they agreed upon the Petition, the substance
whereof was as follows, viz

Black. Gentlemen and Brothers of this noble Society, the chief cause of our
Assembling togather at this time is, to declare the sad condition all the
brethren of our once slourishing Occupation are in at this present, and the
great burden and heavy pressure we have lain under for many years, since the
stately and beautiful Monument of Cheap-side-Cross was defaced and demolished;
therefore our design is to consult of a speedy way how to procure another
Cross erected in the room of that rich Ornament, that so we may (after our
great and intolerable sufferings) enjoy a constant place of standing, that our
Occu^ation may once again fl^urish and we with our W^ves and Fa^^lies be
pre^erved from inev^table ruin.


Smut. Truly for my part, I shall soon declare my opinion, and if you w^ll
adhere to me, I know no way better then to draw up a Petition, and present to
the City of London, who are best able to perform the work, and (knowing what a
grace it is to the City, will doubtless effect it.


Broom, I faith brother, that is the direct way to a Cows thumb

Black. I tell you Brothers, that will do the feat, I know they will hasten the
work, for it was a stately Ornament to this famous City.

Assistants. We all app^ove of that way, as the only Remedy to cure our present
malady; but when this is effected we are at a loss, if we do not get a Patent
to hinder the Coffeemen from sweeping their own Chimneys [which now is their
constant practise] saving the Sut to mix with that hellish Berry to color
their cursed liquour, which is a great hinderance to those of our Occupation,
who are deprived of their vailes which they sold to the Dyers, and gained a
fine benefit, it being very good both for the Dying of Blacks, and all manner
of sad Colors.


Black. I approve well of your design, but cannot condisend to it at present;
for in the first place. let us procure a constant place of standing erected,
and then you need not doubt of a Patent to prevent such black-burn'd souls from
abusing us; for I have an old Master, that is a Cook to a noble gentleman, would
lick his fingers to see me thrive, he will stand my friend, so that I value the
getting a Patent to plague such Vermin, no more then I value a whift of
Tobacco, or the waging of a Dogs tail. But what says the Journey-men to the
business propounded.


All. We say, we are so far from withstanding it, that had we a thousand hands
more then we have; we would subscribe the Petition, and give your Worships
thanks for contriving so good a way for the advancement of our occupation.


Black: Gentlemen we are so careful of your good, that (seeing your
willingness) we shall with all expedition bring the bu^iness to a period; But
what witness shall we get to prove our great sufferings, if we are examined
about the pre^^^^es.


Broom: Marry I think if we can get the Trumpeter upon the Standard in
Cheap Side, none can be better; for he has stood Centry eve^ since, and beheld
all passages both in the City and Subburbs, and can well tell what trading we
have had since the demolishing that stately Monument.


Trumpeter: Indeed I can well tell what you have undergone since the loss of
that Famous Ornament, whose glorious Golden Beams did give light in the darkest
night, and whose demolishing has been so great a trouble and grief to me, that
I never enjoyed the Comfort to sound my Trumpet since; yet have I stood and
watched the City round, viewing all passages day and night, where instead of
hundreds of your Occupation, who used formerly to rise every morning out of the
tops of Chimneys like break of day now I can see but one, two or three in a
fortnight, so that you must of necessity have a dead time of Trade, though my
Water-bearers have ever since had full employment.


Black: I hope you will be pleased, what in you lies to assist us in our design.

Trump. If your design take effect, I shall not be backward, but will promise
to assist you, to which end and purpose I intend to lock up my Conduit for a
month, and make my Water-Bearers (who have had employment enough) turn
Laborers to assist you gratis in this work; in the mean time Farewell.


Black: Come Clark draw up the form of a Petition according to the directions
in this paper.


Mr. Collier the Clark drew up the Petition and delivered it to Mr. Black
Master of the Company; who returned it back again, and commanded him to read it
over in open Hall; the Copy whereof is as follows, viz.

To the Honorable ever Famous, and Renowned City of LONDON. The humble
Petition of the Mr. Wardens, and Assistants with the rest of the Brotherhood
of the noble Company of Chimney-Sweepers.
Humbly Shows.
THat the stately, rich and golden Monument of Cheapside Cross was not only a
graceful O^nament to this Famous City; but also a piece of that excellent
worth, that its fame was spread through the whole world, no Cross being
Comparable with it for richness and beauty.

That it was a place b^ which our Occupation was much advanced, we having
libe^ty to wait the^e every morning for employment, whether the London Lasses
and Virgins of the City repaired upon all occasions (knowing it our constant
standing) to make clean their Chimneys, and sweep the sut and dust out of all
their private Corners, whereby we enjoyed not only good wages but man^ a good
Breakfast of beef, bread, and beer, before their Mrs. were up, in such plenty,
that our Trade was as beneficial as most Occupations about the City.

That this Famous and stately Monument in the late unfo^tunate war, was by the
Vote of a long-lived Parliament ^ef^ced, pulled down and utterly demolished by
the hands of a tumultuous multitude of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other
factious Sectaries; whose sole delight is in nothing more then the destruction
of all who will not submit to their Heritical and damnable Opinions.

That by the loss of this rich Monument, this Famous City has not only been
much dishonored, but our Occupation totally destroyed, we having never since
been capacitated with a place of constant standing whereby we might be ready
upon call of the merry London Lasses to do their druggery as formerly, but were
forced to wander up and down like Hackneys day af^^^ day, and week after week
to little or no purpose, being looked upon like so many walking Spirits; by
which we and our Familyes have been utterly undone, through want of employment
to defend them against the sury of Cruel hunger and cold. Our sufferings being
so intolerable that we (without a speedy remedy) can expect nothing but utter
destruction.

In tender Consideration of these our great Grievances, our humble desires are.

First, that some trusty Messengers may be employed to discover and find out
those persons who were Abettors, Fomento^s, and Contrivers of this horrible and
unparalled Villainy, and all those who have, or had possession of the Gold,
Lead, Iron, Stone, or other materials belonging to the said Cross; that the may
be forced to restore twofold toward the rebuilding the Cross that shall be
erected in the room of that Famous Monument

Secondly, That a monthly Tax may be Levied on all Anabaptists, Brownists,
Antinomians, and other Sectaries, (who were the Original cause of the
demolishing thereof) to carry on this great good and happy work.

Third, that all those who are well-wishers to the honor and Credit o^ this
Famous City, will freely contribute to the rebuilding of this stately Ornament;
for the payment of all Artists, workmen and Labourours who shall be employed in
the work.

Fourthly, That the work being finished, we may again have the freedom as
formerly, to take up out standing there for the advancement of our Occupation,
and the preservation of our Wives and Families from utter ruin

And we as in Duty bound shall ever pray, etc.

The Petition being read, there was a great shout made by the whole Fraternity;
and great applause given to the Clark.

In the Intrim came a Declaration with the Resolution of the Maidens of London,
which was presented to Mr. Black, who gave it to the Clerk to read in open
Hall, the Copy whereof was as follows, viz.

We the Maidens and Virgins of the Famous City of London, having heard of the
design in hand by those of your noble Occupation) do declare, that we are
fellow-felers of you^ great sufferings, and are sorrow for the burden you have
undergone; and that we are willing to condescend to, and help forward with your
design according to our powers, notwithstanding the weakness of our Sex,
always provided that you be in readiness upon call to sweep cleanse, and brush
away the Sut, dust and Cobwebs, which (through your absence) has ingendered in
our Nooks and private Corners; And we shall according to our abilities
contribute quarterly (out of our wages) toward the propogating that good work;
our selves confessing that we have been at a loss, through your want of a
constant standing, whereby you have been forced to keep at a distantial posture
from us; we being compelled with great pain and labor to look you in
Pick-hatch, Rotten-row, and Old-street. Therefore we beseech you to go on and
prosper, and our hands and hearts (who are well wishers to your Occupation)
shall attend you, as persons who are of such yielding spirits to stand or fall
with you in so good and just a cause,

Signed by many thousand Maids in and about the City of London.

This being read they appointed a day for signing the Petition, at which time
they intend to appoint the most eloquent Orators of that Occupation to deliver
the Petition, till when they adjourned and departed to their own Habitations.

FINIS.

