THE JUSTIFICATION OF THE Independent CHVRCHES of CHRIST. Being an Answer to
Mr. EDWARD'S his BOOK, which he has written against the Government of
CHRIST'S CHVRCH, and Toleration of CHRIST'S Public Worship; BRIEFLY DECLARING
That the Congregations of the Saints ought not to have Dependancie in
Government upon any other; or direction in worship from any other than CHRIST
their HEAD and LAVV-GIVER. By KATHERINE CHIDLEY.

1 SAMUEL 17. 45. Thou come unto me with a Sword, and with a Spear, and with
a Shield, but I come unto thee in the name of the Lord of Hoasts the God of the
armies of Israel, whom thou have defied. IVDGES 4. 21. Then Iael, Hebers wife
took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly
unto him, and smote the nail into his temples and fastened it into the ground,
(for he was fast asleep and weary) and so he died. LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM
LARNAR, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Golden Anchor,
near Pauls-Chaine. 1641.

TO The CHRISTIAN READER; Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is, and has been (for a long time) a Question more enquired into than
well weighed; Whether it be lawful for such, who are informed of the evils of
the Church of England, to Separate from it: For my own part, considering that
the Church of England is governed by the Canon Laws (the Discipline of
Antichrist) and altogether wants the Discipline of Christ, and that the most
of them are ignorant what it is, and also do profess to worship God by a
stinted Service-Booke. I hold it not only lawful, but also the duty of all
those who are informed of such evils, to separate themselves from them, and
such as do adhere unto them; and also to join together in the outward
profession and practice of Gods true worship, when God has declared unto them
what it is; and being thus informed in their minds of the knowledge of the will
of God (by the teaching of his Son Jesus Christ) it is their duty to put it
in practice, not only in a Land where they have Toleration, but also where
they are forbidden to preach, or teach in the name (or by the power) of the
Lord Jesus.

But Mr. Edwards (with whom I have here to deal) conceiving that the beauty of
Christ's true worship, would quickly discover the Foggy darkness of the
Antichristian devised worship; and also that the glory of Christ's true
Discipline, grounded and founded in his Word, would soon discover the
blackness and darkness of the Antihristian Government (which the poor
people of England are in bondage unto) has set his wits a work to withstand
the bright coming of Christ's Kingdom (into the hearts of men) which we are
all commanded in the most absolute rule of Prayer to petition for; for the
turning aside whereof Mr. Edwards has mustred up his forces, even eight
Reasons, against the government of Christ, which he calls Independent; and
has joined unto these eight, ten more; which he has made against Toleration*
affirming that they may not practice contrary to the course of the Nation
wherein they live, without the leave of the Magistrate, neither judges he it
commendable in them to ask the Magistrates leave, nor commendable in the
Magistrate to hear their petitions, but rather seeks to stir up all men to
disturb their peace, affirming most unjustly, that they disturb the peace of
the Kingdom, nay, the peace of three Kingdoms, which all the lands under the
Kings Dominions know to be contrary, nay I think most of the Kingdoms in
Europe cannot be ignorant what the cause of the disturbance was;

But this is not the practice of Mr. Edwards alone, but also of the whole
generation of the Clergy; as thou may know, Christian Reader, it was the
practice of the Bishop of Canterbury to exclaim against Mr* Burton, Doctor
Bastwicke, and Mr. Prynne, calling them scandalous Libellers, and Innovators
(though they put their own name to that which they write, and proved what they
taught by divine authority) and this has been always the practice of the
instruments of Satan, to accuse the Lords people, for disturbing of the peace,
as it has been found in many Nations, when indeed the troublers be
themselves and their fathers house. But in this they are like unto Athalia
crying treason, treason, when they are in the treason themselves.

But for the further strengthening of his army, he has also subjoyned unto
these his Answer to six Reasons, which he says, are theirs, but the form of
some of them seems to be of his own making; all which thou shall find
answered, and disproved in this following Treatise.

But though these my Answers are not laid down in a Schollerlik way, but by
the plain truth of holy Scripture; yet I beseech thee have the patience to
take the pains to read them, and spare some time to consider them; and if
thou find things disorderly placed, la^our to rectify them to thine own
mind. And if there be any weight in them, give the glory to God; but if thou
feast nothing worthy, attribute not the weakness thereof to the truth of the
cause, but rather to the ignorance and unskilfulnesse of the weak Instrument.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, KATHERINE CHIDLEY*

THE Answer to Mr. EDWARD'S his INTRODVCTION.
Hearing the complaints of many that were godly, against the Book that Mr.
Edwards has written; and upon the sight of this his Introduction, considering
his desperate resolution, (namely) that he would set out several Tractates
against the whole way of Separation. I could not but declare by the testimony
of the Scripture it self, that the way of Separation is the way of God, who is
the author of it, Deuteronomy. 32* ^. 1 King. ^. 53.
which manifestly appears by his separating of his Church from the world, and
the world from his Church in all ages.

When the Church was greater than the world, then the world was to be separated
from the Church; but when the world was greater than the Church, then the
Church was to separate from the world.

As for instance;

When Caine was a member of the Church, then the Church was greater than the
world; and Caine being discovered, was exempted from Gods presence; Genesis 4* 14.
15. 16.
before whom he formerly had presented himself: Genesis 4. 3.
but in the time of Noah, when the world was greater than the Church Mat. 24.
38. 39. 1 Pet. 3. 20.
then Noah and his Family who were the Church, were commanded to go into the
Arc Gen* 7* 1.
in which place they were saved, when the world was drowned. Ver. 21, 22, 23.
yet Ham being afterward discovered, was accursed of his Father, and Shem was
blessed, and good prophesied for Iaphat.

Afterward when the world was grown mightier than the Church again, then
Abraham was called out of Vr of the Caldeans* both from his country and from
his kindred, and from his fathers house Genesis 12. 1.
(because they were Idolat^rs) to ^^^ship God in Canaan.

Moreover, afterward Moses was se^^, and his brother Aaron, to deliver the
children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt when Pharaoh vexed them, Exo. 3. 7*
8* 9. 10. Chap. 6. 26. 27.
at which time God wrought their deliverance, And 12* ^2.
separating wondrously between the Egyptians and the Israelites, and that which
was light to the one, was darkness to the other.

Afterward, when Cerah and his Congregation rebelled against God, and were
obstinate therein Number 16. 12, 13 14.
the people were commanded to depart from the tents of those with (...) Ver.
21. 24, 25, 26.
were the children separated from the parents, and those who did not separate*
were destroyed by fire, Ver. 35.
and swallowed by the earth, Ver. 31, 32, 33.
upon the day which God had appointed Ver. 5.
as (...) Noah's time, who repented not* were swallowed by wate^

Moreover, when God brought his people into the promised Land, he commanded
them to be separated from the Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 5. 26. 27.
and not to meddle with the accursed things. And for this cause God gave them
his Ordinances and Commandments; and by the manifestation of their Obediance
to them, they were known to be the only people of God, Deuteronomy. 28. 9. 10.
which made a real separation.

And when they were carried captive into Babylon a^ any Ezza. 1. Hag. 1. 2, 3.
4. 8. 12. 14.
time for their sins: God raised them up deliverers to bring them from
thence: and Prophets to call them from thence Ier 51. 6.
and from their backesliding. Ier. 3. 12. Hos. 11, 7.
And it was the practice of all the Prophets of God, (which prophesied of the
Church under the New Testament) to separate the precious from the vile, and God
has declared that he that so does shall be as his mouth, Jer. 15. 19.

And we know it was the practice of the Apostles of the Lord Jesus, to declare
to the people that there could be no more agreement between believers and
unbeleevers, than between light and darkness, God and Belial, as Paul
writing to the Corinthians does declare, when he says, Be not unequally yoked
together with unbeleevers; for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness, and what
concord has Christ, with Belial? or what part has he that believes Christ
made so great a difference between the world and the Church, that he would
not pray for the world; yet would die for the Church, which was given him out
of the world; and without a Separation the Church can not be known from the
world.
with an Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for
ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people;
Wherefore come out from among them, and by ye Separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 1
Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Moreover, they are pronounced blessed, which read, hear, and keep the words
of the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ; Rev. 1. 3*
among which sentences, there is a commandment from heaven for a total
Separation. Rev. 18. 4.


These things (in brief) I have minded from the Scriptures, to prove the
necessity of Separation; and though the Scripture be a deep Well* and
contains in the Treasures thereof innumerable Doctrines and Precepts tending
to this purpose; yet I leave the further prosecution of the same, till a fitter
opertunity be offered to me, or any other whom the Lord shall indue with a
greater measure of his Spirit.

But Mr. Edwards, for preparation to this his desperate intention, has sent
these Reasons against Independent government, and Toleration, and presented
them to the Honorable House of Commons; which Reasons (I think) he would have
to be get a Snake, to appear (as he says) under the green grass; for I am
sure, he cannot, ^ake the humble petitions of of the Kings subjects to be a
Snake, for petitioning is a way of peace and submission, without violence or
venum; neither can it cast dirt upon any government of the Nation, as he
unjustly accuses the Protestation Protested, for that Author leaves it to the
Magistrate, not undertaking to determine of himself what government shall be
set ever the Nation, for the bringing of men to God but leaves it to the
consideration of them that have authority,

And whereas Mr. Edwards grudges that they preach so often at the Parliament;
in this he is like unto Amaziah, who bid the Prophet Amos to flee away into the
Land of Ju^^a, and not to Prophecy at Bethel, the Kings Chapel, and the
House of the Kingdom. Amos 7. 12. 13.


And though Mr. Edwards boast himself hear, to be a Minister of the Gospel,
and a sufferer for it, yet I challenge him, to prove unto me, that he has any
Calling or Ordination to the Ministry, but that which he has successively from
Rome; If he lay claim to that; he is one of the Popes household; But if he
deny that calling* then is he as void of a calling to the work of the
Ministry, and as void of Ordination, as any of those Ministers, whom he
calls Independent men, (which have cast off the Ordination of the Prelates)
and consequently as void of Ordination as a macanicall trades man.

And therefore I hope that Honorable House that is so full of wisdom (which
Mr* Edwards does confess) will never judge these men unreasonable, because
they do Petition, nor their petitions unreasonable before they are tried, and
so proved, by some better ground, then the bare entrance of Mr. Edwards his
Cavit, or writ of Ne admittas, though he says he fo^ched it from heaven; for I
know it was never there, Neither is it confirmed by the Records of holy
Scripture, but taken from the practice of Nimrod, That mighty Hunter before the
Lord, Genesis 10. 8, 9.
and from the practice of Haman that wicked persecucuter, Ecster 3. 8. 6, 6.
and from the evil behavior and malicious speeches, and gesture of wicked
Sanballet, Neh, 6.
and Tobias, who were both bitter enemies to God, and sought to hinder the
building of the walls of Jerusalem.

But the Prophet Haggai, reproves not only such as hindered the building of
the Lords House* but also those that were contented to live in their seyled
Houses, and suffer the Lords House to lie waste, Hag. 1-

AN ANSWER To Mr. EDWARD'S his BOOK, Entitled, REASONS against the
Independent GOVERNMENT in particular CONGREGATIONS.
Mr. EDWARDS,
I Understanding that you are a mighty Champion, and now mustering up your
mighty forces (as you say) and I apprehending they must come against the Host
of Israel, and hearing the Armies of the Living God so defied by you, could not
be withheld, but that I (in stead of a better) must needs give you the meeting.

First. Whereas you affirm, That the Church of God (which is his House and
Kingdom) could not subsist with such provision as their father gave them:
which provision was (by your own confession) the watering of them by
Evangelists, and Prophets, when they were planted by the Apostles, and after
planting and watering to have Pastors and Teachers, with all other Officers*
set over them by the Apostles and their own Election, yet notwithstanding all
this provision, the Father has made for them, it was evident (say you) they
could not well stand of themselves, without some other help.

This was the very suggestion of Satan into the hearts of our first Parents;
for they having a desire of some thing more then was warranted by God, took
unto them the forbidden fruit, as you would have the Lords Churches to do when
you say they must take some others besides these Churches and Officers, and
that to interpose authoritatively; and these something else you make to be
Apostles, Evangelists, and Elders of other Churches, whereas you confessed
before, that these are the furniture of Christ's Kingdom; and we know their
authority was limited, within the bounds of the Word of God: as first, If any
of them would be greater, he must be servant to all. Secondly, they were
forbidden to be Lords over Gods heritage. Thirdly, they were commanded to teach
the people, to observe only those things which Christ had commanded them.

And whereas you seem to affirm, that these Offices were extraordinary and
ceased, and yet the Churches have still need of them: You seem to contradict
your self, and would feign cure it again, in that some other way which you
say, you have to supply the want of them, but this other way you have not yet
made known: You presuppose, it may be by some Sinods and Councels, to make a
conjunction of the whole.

If you mean such a Counsel* as is mentioned* Acts 15. 4. 22, consisting of
Apostles and Elders with the whole Church: then you have said no more than you
have said before, and that which we grant, for this is still the furniture of
the Kingdom; but if you intend that your Counsel should consist of an army
of Archbishops Diocesan Bishops, Deanes, Suffragans, with the rest of that
rabble, which be for their titles names of blasphemy, and such as were bred in
the smoke of the pit. I deny that any of these be ordained of God, for they
have no footing in his word; therefore indeed these are a part of the fruit of
the forbidden Tree, which the Churches of God have taken and eaten; and this
seeking out inventions of their own, after that God made them righteous, has
brought them into a state of Apostasy, even as Ieroboams high places and
Calves did the people of Israel; which may plainly appear by the Churches of
Asia. If these be that some other supply which you mean and have produced to
help the Churches, and Cities of God (as you call them) to determine for those
Churches and Cities the cases of Doctrine and Discipline in stead of those many
Ministers which, you conceive them now to want, it tends to make (as they have
now done) a conjunction not only of all the Churches professing one faith into
one body; but also of all the Armies of the Man of Sin, and so to confound
the Church and the world together, which the Ministers of the ^^^. 15. 19.
Gospel ought to divide, by separating the precious from the vile*

And whereas you affirm, The Independent Congregations now have but few
Ministers;

It is very true, for indeed they are but a few people, and a few hands will
feed a few mouths sufficiently, if God provide meat.

But whereas you affirm, That those Congregations may have no Officer, at all
by their own grounds, and yet be independent.

I think, they conceive by those grounds, the Office only of Pastor, and
Teacher; but not that the Church of God has need at any time of the help of
any other, then God has given and set in his Church, which be all the Officers
that are before mentioned, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers; and to have recourse to any for counsel, help, or assistance,
either of Church or Ministry, which is not of Christ's own, were very
ridiculous. For it is recorded, Ephe. 4. 11. 12. That he gave these for the
gathering together of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ, being so gathered; The time they must
continue is, Verse 13. 14, 16. Compared with 1 Cor. 12.
till all the Saints be in the unity of faith. The reason wherefore they were
given, was to keep people from being tossed too and fro with every wind of
Doctrine. And these are they, by whom all the body is coupled and knit
together, by every joint for the furniture thereof, according to the effectual
power, which is in the measure of every part, and receives increase of the
body unto the edifying of it self in love. And this is according to the
promise that Christ made, Matthew. 28. 19. 20. to be with his Ministers in
teaching his people to the end of the world.

And thus you may see Mr. Edwards, you cannot gather from our own words, that
we have need of the help of any other Churches* or Ministers, to interpose
(as you unjustly affirm) as it may plainly appear by Mr. Robinsons own
words in the Justification of the Separation, page 121. 122. These are his
words; It is the Stewards duty to make provision for the family; but what if he
neglect this duty in the Masters absence? Must the whole family starve, yea and
the wife also? Or is not some other of the family best able to be employed for
the present necessity? The like he says concerning the government of a Ship,
of an Army* and of Common wealths; alluding to the Church of Christ. And
further expresses, that as a private Citizen may become a Magistrate, so a
private member may become a Minister, for an action of necessity to be
performed, by the consent of the rest, etc.

Therefore it appears plainly by all that has binsaid, that the Churches of
Christ may be truly constituted according to the Scripture, and subsist a
certain time without Pastor and Teacher, and enjoy the power of Christ amongst
themselves having no dependancie upon any other Church or Churches which shall
claim Authority or superiority over them.

And thus much for your first Reason.
NOw in your second Reason, which runs upon the calling of the Ministry, you
affirm, That the government of the Independent Congregations is not of divine
institution.

Which I utterly deny, and will prove it, by disproveing the following
Instances by which you affirm to prove it.

Whereas you affirm, That their Independencie forces them to have Ministers
without Ordination.

I Answer, it is a plain case by the foregoing Answer, to your first Reason,
that you speak untruely, for their practice is there made known to be
otherwise; and if you will still affirm, that they have not power so to
practice, you will thereby deny the truth of the Scriptures; for the Apostles
were commanded to teach the Churches, to observe all things whatsoever Christ
had commanded them. But Christ commanded the Apostles to ordain Elders in
every Church by election; therefore the Apostles taught the Churches to ordain
Elders by Election also. And whereas you bid us produce one instance (if we
can) for an ordinary Officer to be made without Ordination, it is needless;
for we (whom you call Independent) strive for no such thing, as you have proved
it plainly out of Mr. Robinsons Book, Apol. Chap. 1. 18. to which I send you
to learn better.

Further, you allege, That if they be ordained, it is by persons who are not
in office.

Now if you mean, they have no office because they are not elected, ordained
and set apart by the Clergy to some serviceable, admini^^ation; I pray you
tell me who ordained the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists to their work or
Ministry? If you will say they were ordained of God, I will grant it, and do
also affirm that God has promised the supply of them, to the end of the
world, as before has been mentioned, from Ephe. 4. As also, it appears by
Paul's charge to Timothy; 2 Timothy 2. 2. That what things he had heard of him,
among many witnesses, the same he should commit to faithful men who should be
able to teach others also: but I verily do believe, that as Titus, so Timothy
heard of Paul that Elders must be ordained by Election in every city, and that
Titus was as much bound to communicate the things unto others, which he had
learned of Paul, as Timothy was, and Timothy (we know) was to teach faithful
men, and those faithful men were to teach others those things that they had
heard of Timothy, among which things Ordination was one, as it was delivered to
Titus; and we are not to doubt of Timothius faithfulness in the declaring of
this part of his message more than the rest, but if those to whom Timothy
delivered it, were not faithful in the discharge of their duty: but that in
due time the Ordinances might possibly grow out of use, as the Churches* did by
little and little apostate; yet that hinders not but that it was still written
in the Scripture* that the generations to come might recover again the right
use of the Ordinances when God should by his Spirit direct them to know the
same.

Moreover* I affirm, that all the Lords people, that are made Kings and
Priests to God, have a free voice in the Ordinance of Election, therefore they
must freely consent before there can be any Ordination; and having so consented
they may proceed to Ordination, notwithstanding they be destitute, of the
Counsel or assistance of any neighbor Church; as if there were no other
Churches in the Land, but only one company of believers joined together in
fellowship, according to Christ's institution. The promise made in the 14th. of
John 12. 13. is made unto them, where Christ said. The works that he did they
should do ^s^; and that whatsoever they should ask in his name, that he would
do for the^, that the Father may be glorified, and that the Spirit of truth
should ^^ide with them for ever. And that he should teach them all things, and
bring all things unto their remembrance, as it is said in the following verses
of the same Chapter. This (you may see) is the portion of believers, and they
that have this portion are the greatest in the world, and many of them are
greater than one, but many joined together in a comely order in the fellowship
of the Gospel, according to the Scriptures, are the greatest of all and
therefore have power to ordain, and to bless their Ministers in the name of
the Lord. Thus the lesser is blessed of the greater.

Now Mr. Edwards, I hope you will confess, that you spoke unadvisedly, when
you affirmed, The maintenance of Independensie, was the breaking of Gods
Ordinance, and violating of that Order and constant ^^y of Ministers recorded
in the Word.

To this I Answer, that if the Church do elect one, he must be elected out of
some more, and those that are not elected, may be as able to bless the Church
in the name of the Lord, as he; therefore one of these who are not elected,
being chosen by the whole Church, to bless him in the name of the Lord, whom
the Church has ordained, is the hand of the whole (who are greatest of all,
and so a sufficient Officer for that work which he is put a part to do.

Thus you may see (Mr. Edwards) that we do not hold Ordination extraordinary
and temporary; neither do we hold it the least of Gods Institutions, for we
have respect unto them all; But that nothing in matter of Order has so clear
and constant a practice as this (as you do affirm) and also say, the whole
frame of Church and Discipline, has not so much ground in the word for it as
this. I deny, and do affirm, that not only this, but all Gods Ordinances
have as much ground and footing in Gods Word also.

Yet notwithstanding you say, that Calvin confesses, that there is no express
precept concerning the imposition of hands: Has the imposition of hands no
footing in Gods Word? and yet has not all the form of Gods Worship so much
footing as it? Here Mr. Calvin and you, will now pin all the form of Church
and Discipline, upon unwritten verities.

Further, you rehearse confusedly, the opinion of Zanchius to strenghen yours
who (say you) would have the example of the Apostles and ancient Church, to be
more esteemed of, and to be instead of a command.

I pray you, how do you know it to be their example, if it be not written?

And whereas you allege, that Zanchius says, it is no vain Ceremony but the
holy Spirit is present to perform things inwardly* which are signified by this
Ordinance outwardly.

I have granted you that already, where I affirm, that the Church having the
Spirit of God has power by an instrument of her own choosing, to bless the
party to his work in the name of the LORD; and I am also bound to believe,
that God will accompany that his own Ordinance (which is performed by them
outwardly) with his own Spirit inwardly, to furnish the party (so blessed by
them) with the knowledge of the Scripture, which is able to furnish the man of
God to every part of his duty. And thus you may see, that we have not departed
from Christ's way, nor gone any other way, in things concerning his House and
Officers, then he has directed.

And whereas you demand for what cause Paul left Titus at Cr^^te? I answer,
that I have told you before, that it was to communicate the things unto others,
which he had learned, whereof Ordination was one. And no doubt but he
declared the same to faithful men, that they might teach others also,
therefore he was there employed in preaching of the Gospel, as well as if he
had gone preaching with Paul.

The next thing you go upon, is the trial of the gifts of Ministers, and this
you attribute to them which have the greatest measure of the Spirit, for you
say, Examination belongs to the most skillful, and they who have most
authority.

All these things are well allowed of by us, for who has a greater measure of
the Spirit than believers? and who has more skill than he that has been
trained up in the School of Christ? and has learned this Lesson to be
obedient to his Master Christ in keeping of all his commandments? and who has
greater authority upon the earth then they that are visible Saints? and what
makes men visible Saints? if not the manifestation of their obedience to God
the Father, and Christ his son, in the practice of all his Ordinances, and
not to have some other Presbyters present with them, to assist them, (as you
affirm) for by these other Presbyters, I know not yet who you mean.

And whereas you say, that the Church may be led into errors, or kept in a low
estate by unfit Pastors and Elders.

I answer, It is a clear truth; as woeful experience teaches us, who live
here in the Land of England.

And whereas you affirm, that visible Saints cannot ordain Officers, because
they have no gifts of prayer.

I Answer, Here you make prayer the Ordination of Ministers.

And whereas you say they are not able to conceive prayer.

Here you give the holy Ghost the lie: for Believers have received the Spirit
of adoption to cry Abba Father,

But say you, they cannot conceive prayer according to the action in bo^^.

Here you would seem to make believers, which have the Spirit of God, to lead
them into all truths, more void of common reason, then men that have but gifts
of nature.

Again, you say, they have not gifts to make public exhortation, and
admonition.

To which I answer, If they had first knowledge to feel the want of a Pastor,
and also diverse able men out of whom to elect and ordain a Pastor, then they
out of whom this person is chosen, are able to exhort, and to admonish: for he
that has not the gift of teaching, may have the gift of exhortation: again,
the man that undertaketh to teach others, ought to be taught by God, and
likewise to be able by sound Doctrine to withstand the Gainesayers, but a man
may give good exhortations, (and that publicly) that is not able to withstand
the Gainesayers by ^ound Doctrine. By this you may see, the Church of God can
never be without some Ministers, except it be (according to that spoken by
Zacha^iah) in the day of very small things indeed, when God shall take away
their Ministers by death, prison, or exile: for seeing the Churches were
planted by Ministers of Gods own ordaining; therefore they were not without
Ministers in the very beginning: and still the Churches are planted by the
Ministerial power of the Lord Jesus, which cannot be exercised without fit
instruments; Yet that they must want the word preached, or Sacraments
administered, till they have Pastors and Teacher in Office, is yet to be proved,
but that page of Mr. Robinsons, which has been alleged before, is sufficient
for this present purpose against you, even to prove that the family must not be
unprovided for, either for the absence or neglect of a Steward.

But now you seem to insinuate an affirmation, or a supposition, I cannot well
tell whether, That a ruleing Elder may be destitute of the gift of discering,
and seem to imply, that if he be destitute, then all the Church must be
destitute, if there be no more Officers then be.

Here you would feign make the ruling Elders, the eyes of the Church, and then
all the rest of the body must be blind, and so unfit to have any hand in
election, and also void of the Spirit of Grace to discern the gifts by,
though it has been proved unto you before, that she is the greatest of all,
having the Spirit of God to lead her into all truth, being the Spouse of
Christ, and endowed with all his riches, gifts, and donations.

And thus you still deny the Authority, and ability of the Church giving to the
persons in office all power and deserning. But this is indeed according to
your practice here in England, but not according to the mind and Spirit of God.

And for the neighbor Churches Counsel, I deny not, but that it may be
embraced, and the Saints have cause to praise God for any helps of Gods
ordaining. But if they want the help of a neighbor Church to Counsel them,
or neighbor Ministers to direct them: yet if they be a Church of Jesus Christ,
they have (as has been said before) power among themselves to elect and
ordain their own Officers; as also the Spirit of discerning* whereby to try
their gifts, and yet be far from falling into that evil, which they
complain against in the Episcopacie (namely) for one man to have the sole
power of Ordination.

By all these particulars, you may clearly see all your pretended proofs and
former assertions disproved, as I promised you, in the entrance of this my
answer to your second Reason.

So that these two first Reasons, being (as I conceive) the greatest Champions,
which you have sent out in this skirmage, are now both slain, and made void
of all the life that ever was in them, for, they were made most of
suppositions, and of things that appeared unto you by likelihood, without any
ground from the Scriptures: and of some other thing than Gods Word allowed: and
of some trivial affirmations which were not grounded upon any truth of Gods
Word.

Now, these two being thus turned aside, by one of the meanest of all the Army
of Jesus Christ, you may justly fear, that all the rest of your soldiers will
run away wounded.

IN your third Reason, * You say it is not to be thought, that Christ would
institute such a Government of his Church which affords no help; nor allows
no way or remedy for innocent persons that are wronged.

Which thing I grant to be very true; but touching the means and helps which
you plead for, that is, some other Synods to appeal unto, I tell you I know
not what Synods you mean. But this I affirm that there are no larger Synods
to be kept to settle Church differences, then the coming together of the
Ministers, and Brethren, as it is mentioned in the 15th. of the Acts, which I
have garnted you in my Answers to your former Reasons.

And whereas you strive for appeals:

I Answer, It is the rule of Christ, that if one brother do Matthew. 1^* 15. 16.
17*
trespass against another; and if the brother offending will not be reclaimed
by the private admonition of the brother offended, he is to be admonished by
one or two other brethren with him; but if he will not hear them, the brother
offended is to tell the Church; and if he will not hear the Church, then he is
not to be accounted a brother but as a Heathen man and a Publican; if not as a
brother, then out of the fellowship: then if the wrong be any personal injury,
as oppression, or fraud, or any other sin of these natures, the Law is open,
where he may appeal for Justice to the Magistrate in any part of the Kingdom,
wherever he lives; but if it be a matter of scandal; as if he should be a
drunkard, or incontinent, or the like, then he has sufficient remedy, when
such a one is cast out of his society. By this you may see, the way of
government given by Christ Jesus, the King of peace, is the way of peace and
righteousness.

And whereas you affirm, That if the controversy touching Circumcision,
should have been ended in the Church of Antiochia, then parties must have
been Judges.

Here, you would seem by this to make the whole Church of Antioch leavened
with the Doctrine of Justification by Circumcision, which to do is a very
great slander, as it appears by Paul and Barnabas opposing them there, and
that Churches sending Paul and Barnabas to have the Churches advise at
Jerusalem concerning Acts 15. 1. ^^.
this matter.

But whereas you affirm, That the Church of Antiochia, judged it unequal to
decide the case among themselves:

I answer, That they judged it unequal, is more than is expressed in that
place: but if that should be granted, it will make against you, for their
reason in sending the matter to Jerusalem, was, because the parties were
members of the Church of Jerusalem, as it appears by Acts. ^5. 1. 5. 24. The
first verse shows, that they were men of Judea; the 5th. verse proves that
they were Believers* The 24th* verse declares, that they went out of the Church
of Jerusalem unto them. And by this you may see plainly, that this Chapter
(above all the Chapters that I can find) proves Independencie upon your own
ground; that the Church of Antiochia judged it an unequal thing for them to
judge the members of the Church of Jerusalem. And by this you may perceive, how
you have either erred, not knowing the Scriptures or else you have done worse
in laboring to darken the truth by evasions, or false glosses.

Thus much for your third Reason.
IN your fourth Reason you affirm, That the light and Law of Nature, with
right reason, is against the Independancie of particular Churches* which is an
unjust affirmation as has been plainly proved before in the Answer to your
third Reason.* But a few words concerning this Reason.

You say it is found necessary, in bodies natural, that the particular members
do join in one, for the good of the whole, and that the whole being greater
than a part, the several parts should be subject too, and ordered by the
whole: All this I have granted you freely* already in the Answer to your second
Reason; where I have plainly proved unto you, that the hands of the Church are
ordered by the whole body, in the Ordination of the Ministry: And this is
according to the very Scripture it self, for the holy Ghost speaks so, in 1
Cor. 12. Comparing the Church of God to 1 Cor. 12.
the natural body of a man; and therefore when the hand lanceth the foot, it
cannot be said properly to be the action of the hand alone, because the hand is
set a work, by the body; neither can the body set the hand a work, if it be
destitute of the power, for the motion of the body comes not from the hand*
but the motion of the hand from the body; and thus you may see I have granted
your comparison. And the nearer politic bodies do go to this Rule; the more
orderly they are guided; for as all the cities and country of England, make up
but one Kingdom, and all the people in England ought to be subject to one
King; so all the Independent Congregations in England, and out of England,
(that are guided by the Laws of Christ) make up but one Kingdom spiritually
to him that is their King.

Now concerning Armies; though I be very ignorant in these things* yet thus
much I conceive, that all the Armies, that belong to the Kingdom ought to be
under the banner of their own King; even so all the particular Congregations
of Christ, are to be guided by the Laws of their own Captain Christ, who
rides before them with his garments dipped in blood, and they follow after him
riding upon white horses, Revel. 19. 11, 12. 13, 14.

We read also in the Scripture of another army, which were gathered together
against the Lord, and against his Christ: And this army (I conceive)
consists of those Locusts, which ascended out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.
And these, as I told you before, are Archbishops, Diocesan Bishops, Deanes,
Prebends, etc. and the rest of that rabble; and these also have a King over
them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, who is said to be the great
red Dragon the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12. 3. 9. and 20. 2. who gave unto this
army his power and throne, and great authority, Rev. 13. 2. Therefore, to any
Counsels that are held, or Canon Laws that are enacted by any Captain of
this army, the Churches of Christ ought not to submit, though they should be
commanded, by any Statute Law of the Kingdom; for those Statute Laws are not
according to Christ's Rule, but ought by all Counsels of State to be repealed.

And whereas you say, It is alleged by the Separation; that hold
Independancie, That the Magistrate of Leyden cannot govern in Delph:

This I hope you will grant; for I am sure the Magistrates of Coventry cannot
execute their office in Shrewsbury, neither can the one Town choose Magistrates
for the other: and this still proves Independencie, for either of these may
choose their own, and guide their own at all times, except they forfeit their
Charter.

Now whereas you say, the people allege for themselves, that the Law of
nature teaches them to make a Covenant; though there be neither precept nor
practice of it in the word.

I suppose you misconster their sayings, for the text alleged in
Thessalonians 4^ does not prove that brotherly love was never written of in the
Scripture; but that it had been so sufficiently taught of God by written
precepts, that it needed not to be written again. Besides, I am able to prove
by the Scripture, that there is both precept and practice for a Church
Covenant: the which I will answer you in the Answer to your 6th. Reason, where
you beg the Question.

Concerning what is asserted by some Divines of Scotland, That in such things
as are alike common to the Church, and Commonwealth, and have the same use in
both, and that whatsoever natures light directs the one, directs the other
also.

You know (by what has been formerly spoken) I have fully assented unto it.

I also agree with Amesius, as far as he agrees with the truth; but to agree
with you in that falsehood, that the Government of independent Churches, is
against the light of nature and right Reason, that I have denied, and disproved
sufficiently already.

Thus having answered every particular thing in this Reason, that has not
been answered already, I proceed to the Fifth.

IN your 5th. Reason you affirm, That there be many Rules in Scripture, that
do require the combination of Churches into Synods; for proof whereof you
say, that Amesius confesses, the Rules and Commands to be such as these; Let
all things be done to edification, decently and in order, Cor. 14. 26. 40. and
follow after the things which make for peace, Romans 14. 19. So Phil. 4. 8. And
you conclude that Synods a^e found to be for edification, peace, and order. But
you have brought no Scripture yet that proves it* and I know all Scripture is
against it, therefore I deny it. And as for the Scriptures alleged (as you
say) by Amesius, they are such as were spoken to particular Congregations: and
in the particular Congregation of Colosse, Paul beheld a comely order,
notwithstanding there were no Synod, consisting of any but only the members
and Ministers of that Congregation, Col. 2. 5.

And as for commands, which you say are some general, and others particular;
Here you labor by evasions to turn away the truth; for you your self know*
that every particular command reaches not to the general, though a general
command reach to every particular. Now if you can show us in the Scriptures any
general command, that all the Churches should, or an example that all the
Churches did gather a Council of some Ministers out of every particular
Congregation, to make Decrees o^ Laws to impose upon the whole, then you will
speak speak something to the purpose, but as yet you have not spoken one word
that proves any such thing.

And whereas you allege that Scripture, That the Spirits of the Prophets must
be subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32.

I Answer, That that is given to particular Congregations; and therefore not to
all in a Province or Nation, and so not to Synods: And Paul never sought to
win credit nor obedience to Orders established by himself, (as you say) for
he never made any other Orders, nor taught the people any other thing than what
he had received of the Lord Jesus, as it is plain in 1 Cor. 11. Be ye
followers of me (says he) as I am of Christ, and in the 23. verse of the same
Chapter, I have received of the Lord (says he) that which I have delivered
unto you. Paul also writes unto these Corinthians, (whom he had converted unto
the faith) to be followers of him, 1 Cor. 4. ^6. in ver. 17. he shows them,
that therefore he sent Timothy unto them, to the end that Timothy should put
them in remembrance of Paul's ways in Christ, as Paul had taught every where in
every Church. Here you may see Paul brings not the Example of the Synod before
them, nor lays upon them any Decree or Command, to practice otherwise than he
himself had learned in Christ; yet I hope you will not deny, but that this
Church spoken of, was a Church of Christ as well as the Church of Colosse.

Now the next thing to be considered is, that which you allege of Paul's
submission, to the practice of what was agreed upon, by the common consent of
James, and the rest of the Elders, Acts 21. from. 18. to 27.

The Reason why they counseled Paul to do the thing, was, because of the
information that the Jews had then against Paul* that he taught the people to
forsake Moses, Acts 21. 21. Now I hope you will not deny, but that this was a
false affirmation.

The thing wherein they conceived he transgressed was, by bringing in Trophimus
an Ephesian, (as they thought into the Temple) because they saw him with him in
the city.

This was but their supposition, as it appears in the 29 verse of this Chapter.

Now what the Elders counseled Paul to do, in respect of giving offense to
the Jews, was no injunction to any to follow the same example, except it were
in the same case.

Now Paul himself was a Jew, and taught all men that Christ was come to
fulfill the Law, and not to destroy the Law; therefore he condescended to
circumcise Timothy because his mother was a Jew, and the Jews knew his father
was a Grecian. Act. 16. 1. 3.
But Titus a Grecian was not compelled to be circumcised; yea, though there
were false brethren crastily crept in, to spy out their liberty; Paul gave not
place to them, no not for an hour, Gal 2. 3 4. 5.

Now the things that the Elders counseled Paul to do, was to purify
himself, with them that had a vow, and to contribute with them; and the reason
wherefore they counseled Paul to do this, was, that it might appear to the
Jews that Paul was a Jew, and not an uncircumcised person, for the Jews knew
that it was a sinful thing to bring into the Temple any uncircumcised person
in heart or flesh, Ezekiel. 44. 7.

Now Paul in all this did nothing but what was commanded in the Law, as
purifications and vows, etc.

Moreover, this counsel of James and the Elders unto Paul, was not general to
the believing Jews; neither was it generally or particularly to the Gentiles,
but particularly to Paul, and the rest with him, because of the false report
which the Jews had received of him.

And as this Counsel was not general, so it was not perpetual, but served to
put an honorable end to the Law, which Christ came to fulfill, and not to
destroy.

By all this it appears, it makes nothing for any counsel that you plead
for, to establish any unwritten verities; for such counsels are the counsels of
darkness: because they are not according to the Law and the Testimony, it
appears there is no light in them: therefore they are not of authority to
bind any particular member of the Church, much less the general, as you say
they are.

But seeing you confess, that no Synod can say* It seems good unto the holy
Ghost and to us; it plainly appears that your counsels presume without the
counsel of the holy Ghost. But you may see, that the Church of Jerusalem did
nothing without the counsel of the Spirit, neither determined of any thing,
that was not written in the Scripture. So the Churches of God now ought to
presume to do nothing but what the written Word allows them; being taught the
true meaning thereof by the Spirit that God has given them.

Moreover, the counsel of Jerusalem imposed nothing upon the Gentiles for a
Law, but counseled them to abstain from some necessary things, which would be
either offensive to the Jews, or sinful in themselves, Acts 15. 29. 20. 28.
29.

Now seeing the Church of Jerusalem has done nothing, but by he counsel of
the written word, in forbidding things sinful in themselves and offensive to
their brethren, it appears to be plainly against your Synods, and dependencie
in government, which in cases difficult, do establish things which have no
footing in Gods word; neither have they, by your own confession, in their
Counsels any one, who is immediately and infallibly imspired by the Spirit, and
able of himself to satisfy the controversy, they being by your own
confession inferior to Paul and Barnabas; And Paul and Barnabas might teach
nothing but what was taught in the Law and the Prophets. And therefore, by this
it appears you have not grounded any affirmation or supposition upon Gods
word; for the proving either of your Synods or dependencie.

Thus much for your fifth Reason.
IN your sixth Reason you affirm that the government of the Church by Synods,
is no where forbidden by God in the new Testament, either directly, or by
consequence.

But I do affirm the contrary, and prove it thus;

That whatsoever Government is not commanded by God is accursed, and that is
plainly manifested in the New Testament* Rev. 22. 18.

But your government by Synods is not commanded by God, and therefore it is
accursed* as it will appear in the following discourse.

Whereas you say, that all the Ministers are greater than one:

I have already proved, that the Church of Christ is greater than all the
Ministers. See the Answer to his second Reason against Independencie.


You say Synods appoint no other office or Officer in the Church, which Christ
has not appointed.

Me thinks you are strangely put to your shifts* that dare not tell the world
what you mean by your Synods. But if you mean the Council or Convocation
that used to sit at Paul's, I have told you already they are none of the
Council of Christ, neither has he appointed that council or any other
council, to make, or ordain, either Officers or Offices for his Church,
therefore so to affirm is blasphemy, for he himself is their Lord and
Lawgiver, and has instituted every particular Ordinance in his Church, that
the Church has need of, therefore it is (as has been said already) against
the Law and light of nature* and contrary to edification, order, peace,
pureness, loveliness, for any to decree for, or injoyne upon, the Assemblies
of the Saints any other practice but those that the Apostles have taught, which
they themselves had learned from the Lord Jesus: but as for you Mr. Edwards, it
appears plainly that you do not understand nor see the form of the Lords
House; which causes you to call upon any to produce a particular word, or
rule, for the order of Gods worship, what must be performed first, what second,
what third, what fourth, and so of the rest; and that no Ordinance, and part of
worship may be in another order. Further, you challenge them if they can, to
show a particular word or rule out of the New Testament, for their Church
Covenant, which you say, is the form of the Church.

You also inquire for the form of Excommunication, and Ordination, and
gestures in the several Ordinances of God. And this you say they are not able
to do, but only in general rules.

I have told you already that general rules reach to every particular, and
that is no more than you seem to know already: for you have confessed, that
there are general rules to teach every one of these particulars, which you
could not choose but acknowledge; otherwise you would have made Christ not so
faithful in his house as Moses. But the more you know, the greater is your
sin, in that you labor to turn away the light; and you are still repairing
of those thresholds, which have been set up by Gods thresholds. If I had any
hope therefore that you would be ashamed of all that you have done, I would
show you, though not all that I see, yet what I am able to express of the
form of the house of God, and the pattern thereof, and the Sea Ezekiel. 43. 11.
going out thereof, and the coming in thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof,
and the Laws thereof and write it in your sight, that so you may keep the
whole fa-shion thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them.

As for the Ordinance of Election, Ordination, and Excommunication etc. I have
declared already the form to them that have their eyes open to see it. But
they cannot see the form of the house, that have not repented them of the
evils that they have done therefore I will cease to strive with such persons,
for they may live and stay long enough, and be of no Church of Christ.

Thus much for your Sixth Reason.
IN your 7th. Reason you say, That consociation and combination, in way of
Synods, is granted by themselves, (and you produce for your Authors these
four; Christ on his Throne, Examination of Prelates Petition, Syons
Prerogative Royal, and the Protestation Protested; which Authors, if the Reader
please to examine shall fina^ clear against you) That which you have gathered
here from these Authors is, that they grant that one Church should be content
that matters of difference and importance should be heard by other Churches, as
also to be advised and counseled by other Churches, etc.

I answer, though all should confess, that it is profitable to have the
counsel of their brethren and neighbor Churches in doubtful cases, yet this
will be far from proving the lawfulness of your Synods; as may appear by
the Authors that your self has here alleged, for they intend no such
Consociation, nor Combination, which you have mentioned: but seeing your self
would have something which you cannot prove, you would beg of others to grant
it or prove it for you.

Concerning the Orders, or Decrees of the Church of Jerusalem ( Acts 16. 4)
they were not such Decrees as were alterable, but such as were warranted by
God, and a perpetual Rule for all the Churches of the Gentiles.

You need not tell me what Amesius speaks of the parts of Discipline, as if
any of the Separation, held it to consist all in Excommunication; for I have
told you already, that they have seen the form of the Lords house, and have
respect unto all his Ordinances, and do not take one for all.

Neither is it granted you, that admonitions and reproves, and decreeing of
Excommunications should be by Officers of other Churches, toward members of
any Congregation, though in the same constitution; the contrary most evidently
appears, even by the practice of the Church of Antioch, who brought the
matter to the Church of Jerusalem, which concerned the Church of Ierusalems
members, neither may any of the Churches now be subject to the censures of
other Congregations, except they must be subject to humane Ordinances; but in
case, both the members, and the Church, be obstinate in any known sin, then
are the Churches of God bound to admonish her, and reprove her, and reject her;
as if the Church of Antiochia had found the Church of Jerusalem all leavened
with the Doctrine of Justification by circumcision; then had the Church of
Antiochia power to admonish, reprove, and reject the Church of Jerusalem, and
not have communion with them, if they persisted obstinate in that evil; for
the Church of Antiochia was not inferior in power to the Church of Jerusalem.

Thus much for your seventh Reason.
IN the beginning of your Eight Reason you say they grant and confe^se, That
Churches of one constitution ought to withdraw from; and ^enounce communion and
fellowship with a Congregation or Church that is fallen into sin, as false
Doctrine, and evil discipline, etc.

I answer, I have granted you, that in the conclusion of the answer to your
7d^. Reason, if the Church stand obstinace in sin, and will not be reclaimed.

But that they should be complained on to Syn^ds and Classes, and subject to
their censures, that is but a question of your own begging, and remains for
you to prove, and denied of me.

The next thing you would know is the diference between excomm^^ication and
reje^^ion, and would seem to make them both one*

To which I answer, Titus had power to reject a person, Tit 3. 10.
but we do not read that he had power of himself to excommunicate that
person.

A wicked man may be said to reject God when he rejects his Word. So Saul
rejected God, (1 Samuel 15. 23. therefore God rejected him from being King, verse.
26. but did he excommunicate God? So the people of Israel rejected God 1 Samuel
8. 7. and 10. 19. Did they therefore excommunicate God?

Here Mr. Edwards, you may see that Excommunication is more than rejection, as
it also plainly appears by Paul's words, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. where he delivers
unto them the form of Excommunication, in these words; When ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that such a one
by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ be delivered unto Sat^an, etc. Here Mr.
Edwards, you may plainly see the form of this part of the Lords house; This
you see Paul had determined before; and also that Paul's spirit was together
with the Church in the action doing; yet Paul took not upon him that power of
himself, but committed the action to the Church who had the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as he himself testifies, which plainly proves, that the Church
had the power that Paul had not; for though Paul was a good Counselor, yet he
was no executioner in that action, but as a member for his part. Here Mr.
Edwards you may see the difference between rejection and excommunication; a
man in rejecting the Law of God, may be said to reject God, and he that adds
to, or diminishes from the Laws of God, rejects God, in rejecting the
counsel of God, which injoynes him neither to add, nor diminish: but you by
pleading for your unknown Synods and ungrounded dependencie, reject the
counsel of God; and so do all those, that assist you in it.

The next thing you affirm is; That this government of Independencie (which I
have proved to be Christ's government) overthro^es the Communion of Saints.

To which I answer, This appears to be contrary by that which has been said
already; as for example, the difference between the Church of Antiochia, and
the Church of Jerusalem; turned to good, because they undertook not the
authority to determine the case themselves, as has been said; because it was
against the members of the Church of Ierasalem: and this increased union and
communion in both Churches, as we may plainly see, for Peter communicated unto
them what God had revealed unto him: and Paul and Barnabas declared what God
had done by them. James calls from^ back to consider what Peter had declared;
and backs it with the Scripture, manifesting how it agreed with the words of
the Prophets, as you may read at large, in Act. 15. Thus you may see what
sweet Communion was between these Churches that were both Independent.

Now, whereas you say (...) be in a Christian Commonwealth, or Nation.

I do affirm it may stand with Christ's Church in a Commonwealth, as may
plainly appear in the three first Chapters of the Revelations, which
testifies that there were seven Churc^^s in Asia, and these seven Churches were
compared to seven g^^den Candlestickes, Rev. 1. 20.
and every Candlestick stood by it se^^, and held forth her own light, as
appears by those several m^^sages, which were sent to those seven Churches;
for had they had a dependencie one upon another in respect of power, then one
message would have served unto them all; and what sin any of the Churches or
Angels were guilty of, would have been laid unto the charge of all the Churches
and Angels; but we see it was otherwise* As for instance; there was none
charged for Rev. 2. 20.
suffering the woman Iezebel to teach the people; to commit for nication, and
to eat things sacrificed to Idols, but the Angel of Tbyatira; by this you may
plainly see there was not one Angel set over them all, nor one Synod
oppointed to judge and correct them all, which is the thing you labor for. Yet
it cannot be said that the Independancie of these seven Churches hindered their
communion, either with Christ their head, or one with another: neither was it
any disturbance to the Commonwealth or Nation wherein they lived.

And here you cannot say that I have eyaded, but have answered you directly, to
these your doubts, and suppositions, and to many of your ^ffs, which have
been, your spies sent out in this Scout; And moreover, I will answer all your
many Reasons as I come to them (though they be joined in battle with these) I
mean your following Reasons against Toleration; and also batter, or drive
back your answers which you have made to the Six Reasons, which you say be
theirs, and yet neither this Scout, nor the joined, nor the subjoyned forces,
shall be able to discover what strength is on my side, although they be formed
by you in battle array.

Now I have proved the Independent Government to be Christ's Government; I will
also prove in my Answers to these your following Reasons, that the Independent
Congregations perform Christ's public worship, and therefore ought to be
tolerated, and maintained in the practice thereof.
IN the beginning of your first Reason against Toleration, you grant, that the
Scriptures speak much for Toleration, and bearing with one another in many
things, both in matters of opinion and practice, and the Scriptures you quote
are very pertinent to this purpose, but always provided, they are to be
understood as spoken properly to particular Congregations, and not unto any
whole Nation.

But to stand for the Toleration of the maintenance of Heresy, and Schism, is
not the Toleration that we plead for (as far as has been yet made known)
but rather your insinuation: for I have declared unto you already in the
driving back of the first Scout of your Army, That God has provided a way and
means to purge every Congregation of his from all such persons that do
offend, whether it be in matters of Faith or Order. Neither do any that stand
for Christian liberty condemn them for cruelty, or that it is against charity.

For if we compare the Church with one man or a few then it will easily
appear, that the one does outweigh the other: and you say, Calvin says, It
is cruel mercy which preferres one man, or a few, before the Church: To these
words of Calvin I do fully agree unto, for they are of the same nature with my
former Answers to your Reasons against Independancie, where I have proved
against you, that the weight and power Ireth in the Church and that the Church
is above the Ministers, and that the Ministers have their power by the Church
to exercise in the Church, and not the Church by the Ministers.

The next thing to be considered in this your Reason, is your peremptory
affirmation, but grounded upon no Scripture, (namely) That to set up
Independent and separated Churches, is a Schism in it self, and that it will
make great disturbance in the Church, both to the outward peace, and to the
faith and conscience of the people of the Kingdom.

Now that it is a Schism in it self, I deny, and prove the contrary thus;

God has commanded all his people to separate themselves from all Idolatry ^ 2
Cor. 6. 14, 15. 16. 17.
and false worshipping Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. 12.
and false worshippers Chap. 18. 4.
(and therefore it is no Schism) except you will make God the Author of
Schism) and this is according to the Prophet Esaiahs words, Esaias 1. which is
the first Lesson that every one ought to learn; even to cease to do evil.
But I hope it will not be denied but that they are to learn another lesson,
which is, to learn to do well: but to do well is to keep all Gods
Commandments, and to obey God rather then men.

Now Gods commands to his people, is, that they learn to know the form of the
house (as I have told you before) and all the Ordinances of the house, and to
do them, Ezekiel. 43. 11. but the Ordinances of Christ's Kingdom under the
Gospel, (amongst the rest) are Doctrine, Fellowship, breaking of Bread, and
Prayer; which Ordinances the Saints continued steadfastly in, and are commended
for their constancy in the same, Acts 2. 42 and that in every particular
Church or Congregation, though there were diverse in one Nation, and yet I hope
you will not affirm it was any disturbance to the Nation (otherwise th^n
Christ has showed shall ever be, that the seed of the Serpent, shall persecute
the seed of the Woman) for Gods people are said to be a peaceable people and
the Lord himself has said that he has set them in the world as Lambs among
Wolves. Now there must needs be a disagreement between Lambs and Wolves but
the Lambs are not the cause thereof. By this you may see that Separation is
not a Scisme, but obedience to Gods Commandment.

And for any Magistrate to give way for men to separate, from the worship of
the Kingdom established by Law (if that worship be not according to Gods Law)
is the Magistrates duty; and the Magistrate shall partake of no sin in so
doing because there is no sin committed. Therefore the Magistrate ought not
to forbid the practice of Gods Worship; when he has power to command it; for
he is set up for the practice of those that do well, and for the punishment of
evil ^oers.

And therefore you did well, when you admonished the Parliament in your
Epistle, to cast out of the way all stambling blocks, and to break See the 3.
and 4 leaf of his Epistle.
down all Images, and Crucifixes; and to throw down all (...), and remove the
High places; and to break to pieces the brazen Serpents which have been so
abused to Idolatry and Superstition. So then you grant, that much may be done
(as it seems by your speech) and yet if there be not a full reformation, even
to the throwing down of the High places, it will prove a blemish to the
reformers.

You say, he that does not forbid, when he has power, he commands. Reason. 1.
Page 23.


But I hope you doubt not but the Parliament has power, and therefore
whatsoever they do not forbid (by your own ground) they have or do command.

But in the Protestation, they have not forbidden Gods Worship, which is
according to his Word; but they have Protested (and have enjoined others so to
do) to maintain and ^^^end the Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine
of the Church of England, against all Popery, and Popish Innovations, within
this Realm etc. And in the Interpretation of their meaning of the said Oath,
they bind us neither to the ^^t form of Worship, Discipline, or Government,
nor any Rites or Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

Now if we must withstand Popery, and Popish Innovations, then we must needs
withstand such dependencie as makes up a whole Nation a Church both good and
bad, without separating the precious from the vile, and also such Synods or
Counsels that decree, and make Laws, and impose them upon any Church to keep,
having not the Word of God to warrant them; for these are Popish Innovations,
and to be withstood by us, according to our Oath.

And truly Mr. Edwards, you might have asked the independent Ministers a
question in private, (for you knew where to find them) and not have propounded
so silly a question before the Parliament, when there was none there to answer
you.

Your Question is, Whether it be fitting, that well meaning Christians Page 23.
should be suffered to go to make Churches?

To this I Answer, It is fitter for well meaning Christians than for
ill-meaning Christians, for well-meaning Christians be the fittest on the earth
to make Churches, and to choose their Officers; whether they be Tailors,
Felt-makers, Button-makers, Tent-makers, Shepherds, or Ploughmen, or what
honest Trade soever, if they are well-meaning Christians; but illmeaning
Priests are very unfit men to make Churches; because what they build up with
one hand, they pull down with the other.

Futuher you seem to fear the s^reading of Heresies, if there be not a
bi^drance of these Assemblies.

But you should rather fear that your own glory would be eclipsed by their
gifts and graces; for they are not men of so mean parts, as you would make
them: but are able to divide the Word of God aright by the spirit that God has
given them. Therefore I would wish you rather to let your heart bleed for your
self and for the evils that you have done. For Christ will never suffer any
to perish for whom he died.

Thus much for your first Reason.
IN your second Reason you say, the Toleration desired will not help to beale
the Schisms and Rents of your Church.

To which I answer, that if your Church be not the Church of Christ, it will
not heal it indeed, for though the Prophets would have healed Babel, it could
not be healed.

You say that Ministers and people will not submit to the Reformation and
Government settled by Law.

It is very like so, if it be not free from Innovations of Popery, because they
are sworn to the contrary.

But you say many doubts will arise in the peoples minds, that the Government
of your Church is not ordered according to the Word of God.

To this I answer; If you mean the Church of Englands Government, established
by the Canon Law. I think it is out of doubt with the most, for they that
understand but little, do see and know that that Government is vain and
Popish; and that is the reason (as I conceive) why so many refuse to conform
to it: and if you fear that that will prove so great a division, you may do
well to counsel the Magistrates, to expel all such Government, and to reject
all such Synods and Counsels, and to labor to understand the mind of God,
and to set up his Government over Believers in the Kingdom of England.

And whereas you say, that many of the people who yet be not in this Church
way, are possessed with these principles (of the Independent way) and much
looking toward it:

I say it is pity they should any longer be led about by the way of the
Wilderness.

2. You do affirm, that the minds of multitudes of Professors in England,
and especially in the City of London, are upon all occasions, very apt to fall
to any way in Doctrine or discipline, that is not commonly received by the
Church.

I answer, Indeed the Proverb is verified upon them. The burned child dreads
the fire; for they have been so long deceived by your false glosses, that now
their eyes being a little open, the light appears very sweet unto them; yea,
although they see men but like trees, as the blind man, when his eyes began to
be opened, who had been blind from his birth.

The third thing which you have laid down in this Reason, is; That the
Ministers will not be tied, from preaching those points in public, nor from
speaking of them in private.

To which I answer, I hope they will not indeed, for it were their great sin,
if they should not declare Gods whole Council, so far as he has revealed it
unto them.

But if they would (you say) the people both men and women, are s^ strangely
bold and pragmaticall, and so highly conceited of their way as the Kingdom of
Christ and the only way of Christ, that out of those principles, they would be
drawing many of their friendship and kindred; and many would (say you) come
unto them.

I answer, that this (I hope) you count a virtue, for it is the property of the
Sheep when they fare well, to call their fellows* But Hogs will not do so.

The fourth thing to be minded is (that you say) Liberty, the power of
government, and rule, to be in the people, are mighty pleasing to flesh and
blood, especially in mean persons, and such as have been kept under.

To which I answer, that they that have been kept under, have been kept under
by the tyranny of the Man of Sin; This you confess to be especially the
poor, upon whom those Taskemasters have laid the greatest burdens. Therefore
for them to affect liberty is no wonder.

And whereas you say they would have the power and Rule:

I answer, It is not any power or Rule which is pleasing to the flesh (as you
speak, thinking them to be like those Priests, Whose god is their belly, whose
glory is their shame, who mind earthly things) but it is the power of Christ
which they stand for, as they are members of the Churches of Christ; to which
Churches Christ the King thereof has given all power in spiritual things.

And that the Church of Christ consists of mean persons, is no wonder; for
we have learned, that the poor receive the Gospel, and you know you have
granted, that it stands with the light and Law of Nature, That the liberty,
power, and rule, should be in the whole, and not in one man or a few; so that
the power must rest in the body* and not in the Officers, though the Church be
never so poor.

Now the fifth thing you mind in this Reason is, That Tolleration will be made
use of to strengthen their way.

And you also conclude, it will be granted, that the ablest Ministers could not
answer them, and therefore were content they should have a Tolleration.

You do very well to fear the worst, but you had done better if you had armed
your self against them, and answered the Scriptures, they bring by Scripture:
But it is a plain case, you could not do that, and therefore your fear was
just; but if you were a wellminded man, or a wellmeaning Christian man, you
should not have feared the coming of the truth to light, nor have been afraid
of reformation, because it would work to your greater divisions, and rents,
for Christ came not to set peace upon the earth, (as I have told you before)
but the seed of the Serpent will be ever playing his part.

Thus much for your second Reason.
IN your third Reason you affirm, That Tolleration will breed divisions, and
Schisms, disturbing the peace and quiet of Churches, and Towns.

I answer, I have told you already, we plead for no tolleration that shall
disturb the peace of Churches or Towns.

Moreover, you say, it will not only do so, but it will also breed divisions
in families between husband and wife, brother, and brother.

To which I answer, There was a division in the first Family that ever was, and
brother rose up against brother* but Tolleration was not the cause of it; but
the malice of Satan in the seed of the Serpent, as it has been, and is now
at this day.

And this is according to Christ's words, Luke 12. 52, 53. which says, That
there shall be five in one house, two against three, and three against two,
etc. and in Matthew. 10. 34, 35, 36. Think not (says he) that I come to send
peace into the earth, I came not to send peace, but the sword: For I am come to
set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother,
and the daughter in Law against her mother in Law, and a man's enemies shall be
they of his own household; and moreover, in Luke 21. 16. our Savior does
declare, that we shall be betrayed, both by parents, and brethren, and
kinssolkes, and friends. Now if Christ may be said to be the Author of evil,
then you may say that Toleration of true Religion is the cause of this division.

Again you say, (O how) this will occasion disobedience.

To this your Lamentation I answer. O that you would remember the rule 1 Timothy 6.
that every servant ought to count his Master worthy of all honor; and in the
judgment of charity believe, that persons professing the Gospel will learn
that lesson.

Next you say O! how will this take away that power and authority which God
has given to Husbands, Fathers, and Masters, over wives, children, and
servants.

To this I answer, O! that you would consider the text in 1 Cor. 7. which
plainly declares that the wife may be a believer, and the husband an
unbeleever* but if you have considered this text, I pray you tell me, what
authority this unbeleeving husband has over the conscience of his believing
wife; It is true he has authority over her in bodily and civil respects, but
not to be a Lord over her conscience; and the like may be said of fathers and
masters, and it is the very same authority which the Sovereign has over all
his subjects, and therefore it must needs reach to families: for it is granted
that the King has power (according to the Law) over the bodies, goods, and
lives of all his subjects; yet it is Christ the King of Kings that reigns
over their consciences: and thus you may see it takes away no authority which
God has given to them.

The next thing you say is, that they cannot be certain, that their servants
and children sanctify the Lords day.

To which I answer, that indeed unbeleeving Masters take as little care of
this* as they that have given liberty to profane the Lords Day; but believing
Parents and Masters, may easily know (if their children or servants be of any
Congregation) what their life and conversation is, and therefore this can
hinder no duties, or works of Families (as you falsely affirm) nor cross the
good and peace of Familes.

By this you may see, that this your groundless affirmation, is no good Reason
against Toleration.

And therefore the Court of Parliament (to whom you submit for judgment) may
easily see that good members both for Churches and Commonwealths, may issue
out of such Families, that live under Christ's government, and that such
Families may be good Nurseries, both for Church and Commonwealth.

Thus much for your third Reason.
IN your fourth Reason you do affirm, that there will be great danger of
disputes amongst you about Government and Worship, and Doctrine, and practices
(in the Conclusion) you say, it will be about a question where Saints go when
they die, whether to heaven or a third place.

I Answer, This is a question I never heard amongst the Separates, (or any of
those whom you call Independent men), but amongst the Papists of Rome, and
England.

The next thing is, about sitting with hats on to break bread?

I Answer, this may be a question indeed, but not to breed division; for it
may be as lawful for one man to sit covered and another uncovered, as it may
be lawful for one man to receive it sitting, and another lying in bed. But if
any man list to be contentious, the Churches of God have no such custom.

Thus much for your Fourth Reason.
IN your fifth Reason you affirm, that the Ministers of the Kingdom, can have
little assurance, of the continuance of their flocks to them, if such a
toleration be granted, but that the tolerated Churches will admit them into
fellowship, and increase Churches out of their labors: and that they should
do little else but spend and be spent.

To this I answer, that if you were the Ministers of Christ, as you would be
taken to be, it might be your comfort, joy, and glory, for it was the Apostles
work to gather the Saints, and to travel in birth of children; and they did
not grudge that they were added unto the Churches of Christ, but took care for
them being so added, for the care of all Churches lay upon them, and therefore
they were as Fathers, and Nurses, unto them; and the Gospel admits of no such
theft as to steal away members from other Churches: but if men draw near to
the truth (which never* were members of any Church) and offer themselves to
join unto us; we may admit them upon good experience of their life and
conversation, for those members that traveled from one Church to another, were
commended unto those Churches by Letters from the Church where they were
members, or else they could not have been admitted: and thus you may see the
way of the Gospel admits of no such disorder.

Now whereas you say* that this Toleration upon any light occasion of demanding
dues; or preaching against any thing they like not, opens a wide door, and
will invite them to disert their Ministers.

I answer, by demanding of that which you call dues; you may indeed give just
occasion, for you may demand for due, that which is not due; as all the Priests
of England do. Likewise by preaching of Doctrine, you may give just occasion*
if you justify the wicked, and condemn the just, and make sad the hearts of
those whom God would not have made sad; and then if your people fly from you,
you may thank your selves; but concerning what you count to be your due, I
will declare hereafter. For this see the Reply to his Answe to their third
Reason for Toleration.


Thus much for your fifth Reason.
NOw in the beginning of your sixth Reason, you say, that liberty will be an
undoubted means and way of their infinite multiplication and increase, even to
thirty fould.

Truly I think you are afraid, as Pharaoh was, least the Lords* people should
grow mightier then you.

Next you say, if the Parliament could like to have more of the breed of them,
and have a delight to have multitudes exempted from the Ecclesiastical Laws
of the Land, etc.

I answer, it is no disgrace to the Parliament, if they should so delight*
though never Parliament before had done the like.

Moreover, you say, they have increased within this nine months, without a
toleration, therefore (you conclude) they would multiply much, if they had a
toleration, in many, if not in most Towns and Parishes; and ^ou say it cannot
be helped.

All this I grant may be; although they have not a Toleration, I think they
will increase; for the Taskemasters can lay no heavier burdens upon them, then
they have laid already: but though they should increase, it will not be
unprofitable, for the increase of believers will be the strength and* glory of
the Kingdom; for they will in all lawful things, be subject to the Kings
Majesty their* dread Sovereign, and to all the wholesome Laws of his Land,
and therefore it will be no danger to have (as you say) swarms of them.

Thus much for your Sixth Reason.
IN your 7th. Reason you affirm, that it will be very pre^udiciall dangerous
Page 29.
and insufferable to this Kingdom, for Saints two, or three, or more, to
gather* and combine themselves in Church Fellowship, having one ^^ power from
Christ their immediate head: without expecting warrant from any Governors.

First* whereas you say it will be prejudicial:

I answer, It can prejudice none in the Kingdom, except it be the Priests, and
it will be but of a little tithes, which they dare not in conscience pay,
because those Jewish Ceremonies are ceased* and if they have not Toleration,
that will be all one (in that respect*) for they will rather suffer, then do
any thing against conscience.

Now whereas you say it will be dangerous, and insufferable to the Kingdom,
both these I deny; for if they were offensive people, two or three or a few
could do but little hurt. But they have been proved to be a peaceable people
and the suffering of such has never been dangerous to any Nation* but the not
suffering of such to live quietly in a Land, or to pass quietly through a land,
has brought Judgments upon such Lands.

Now whereas you seem to imply, that they should ask leave of the Magistrate,
to gather and combine themselves into visible Churches, etc.

I answer, I do not read that any ever asked leave of the Magistrate for such
a thing; nor to perform any of the parts of Gods Worship or Discipline: and
yet you confess that these independent men do petition, to the Parliament for
liberty. For this see his Book page 5 5.
Now I pray you Master Edw^rds, would you have Magistrates, and Kings, and
Princes to have more power over their subjects then over their bodies, estates,
and lives? would you have them be Lords over their consciences? I pray you
where must Christ reign then? Must he sit at the Magistrates footestoole? and
take what power the Magistrate will give him? (I mean spiritual power of
gathering and making Churches) and such Laws as the Magistrate will give him
leave to have, to rule over them by? Here you thrust Christ into a narrow
corner; for you would feign force him to give his glory to some other, and his
praise to some graven Image, of your own devising, which he has said he will
not do. Esaias 4 2. 8.


But methinkes it were fitter for men of ^our coat, to ground the Government
of Christ's Church, upon (...) written Word of God, and not upon Statute Laws,
nor Canon Laws, which you call Ecclesiastical; for it will be no
disparagement to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, for Christ's Church to be
governed by Christ's own Laws.

The next thing is, you say, the Oath of Supremacy was appointed by Page 30.
li^. 30. 31.
Law for Ecclesiastical persons to take.

Me thinks that was a good consideration, for Ecclesiastical persons have
been in all ages ready to tyrannize, over Kings and Emperors.

But now you ask the independent men (as you call them) a question; but before
you come to the question, you lay down an affirmation or a conclusion;
(namely) That these independent men give power to the Churches.

To which I answer; If they should do so, they were very ignorant, and very
presumptuous, for Christ has given power to the Churches, and all the
Ministers that do administer in the Churches, must have the power by the
Church.

But say you, they give that power to the Churches, which the Papists give unto
the Pope.

I answer, if they do so they are blasphemers for the Papists acknowledge the
Pope to be the head of the Church: which title all men ought to give only unto
Christ.

But now to your question; which is, whether they will take the Oath of
Supremacy, or do acknowledge in their prayers, The King Defender of the
Faith? etc.

To which I answer, This Ooth you say, was ordained for Ecclesiastical
persons* and I hope these Ecclesiastical independent men (if I may safely so
call them) will ever, both acknowledge, and maintain, that the King is supreme
over all the Land* therefore over the Church of the Land, though it consist of
the Clergy, as it appears by that Oath which you say was appointed for the
Clergy*

But whether they do acknowledge the King, defender of the Faith, etc. which
is the later part of your Question?

To this I answer. It is out of all doubt, that these men do desire from their
heart, (as well as all the Lords people) that the King may defend the Faith of
Christ Jesus, and daily make their prayers and supplications to God for him,
and that in conscience, and obedience to God, being commanded in his Word so to
do* for they know it is a duty laid upon them; for prayers and supplications
must be made for Kings, and all them that be in authority; 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
but (...) can make axceptable prayers, but the Saints, for the prayers of the
wicked are abomination unto the Lord Pro. 15. 8.
But that all Kings have been defenders of the Faith of Christ, I deny; for
there is but one Faith, ^ph. 4. 5.
and those that do maintain that true says of our Lord Jesus Christ, lawfully
have that title given them; and none other may lawfully have it but they.

You will happily say, Queen Mary was not a Defender of the Faith. But I say
unto you, if the Crown of England give unto Kings and Queens that title;
Queen Mary had as much right to the title as Queen Elizabeth. etc.

Secondly, you say* they hold that the imposition of lawful things, does make
them unlawful, (which you say is a strange paradoxe.) Page 31. lin. ^^.


I answer the imposition of lawful things do not make them unlawful, if he
that imposes them have authority so to do: as for example; the i^^osition of
an Oath is very lawful; but if it be imposed by him that has not authority,
though it make not the Oath unlawful simply in it self, yet it makes the use
of it unlawful, at that time, both to him and to me.

But as for forms of prayer: which (you say) they do confess to be for
order, and lawful in themselves, yet unlawful, being imposed.

I say, not as you say, they say, for I know no form of prayer lawful in it
self, for any of the Lords people to tie themselves unto; nor that ever was
imposed upon any by Christ, or his Apostles; (We read in 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2. that
all manner of prayers must be made unto God; and amongst other, supplications
must be made for Kings, but there was no form of words given by which we must
pray for any: and we are commanded to pray with the Spirit, and to pray with
understanding;) but we are commanded to avoid an evil manner of praying; that
we should not be like the Hipocrites; which love to stand and pray in the
Synogogues, Matthew. 6. 5
nor that we should make vain repititions as the Heathens, which think to be
heard for their much babbling: Ver. 7. 8.
and as also we are forbidden an evil manner of praying; so we are commanded
by God what manner to use, as it is plain in Matthew. 6. 9. Matthew. 6. 9.


The manner is that we must in our prayers acknowledge God to be our Father.

And secondly, That he is in heaven.

Thirdly, we must give glory to his Name.

Fourthly, we must pray for the coming of his Kingdom.

Fifthly, we must pray that the Lords Will may be done, both in Ver. 10.
earth and in heaven.

Sixthly, we must pray for all things necessary for this life, Ver. 11.
which is there set forth under the name of daily bread.

Seventhly, we must pray for the forgiveness of our own Ver. 12.
sins; and we are also put in mind, that as we would have our own sins
forgiven, so we should forgive others; if they acknowledge their offenses,
according to that in Luke 17* 4* If thy brother trespass against thee seven
times a day, and seven times a day, end say it repents him, etc.

Eighthly, we must pray against temptations to be delivered from Ver. 13.
the evils thereof.

And lastly, we must conclude with thankesgiving acknowledging the Kingdom to
be the Lords and all power, and glory to be due unto him, not only for that
present time, but for ever.

Here you may see we are taught the manner how we ought to pray, but we are
tied to no form of words, yet we are to believe that this is a perfect Rule,
and that we may sufficiently ground all the petitions we need to put up from
this very rule.

As for Example.

As we desire to acknowledge God to be our Father, so we ought to desire, that
others would do the like.

And whereas we ought to pray for the Kingdom of God to come, we are not to
limit it to this, (that Christ may come to rule in us only) but that-he may
rule as a King in the heart of all his chosen.

Neither ought we alone to acknowledge praises but we ought to desire that
praises to God may be acknowledged by others also, and that they may grant the
Kingdom, and power, and glory to be his, not that he should be a King only to
rule in the hearts of men, but also that he may rule and govern the actions of
the bodies of men in his outward worship: as we are commanded to glorify God
with our bodies and souls, and the reason, is because they are his, 1 Cor. 6.
20. Now, if our bodies and souls be Gods, then it must needs be granted* that
it is in spiritual worship: for in all civil things it has been
acknowledged already, that both bodies and lives are our sovereign Lord the
Kings; in whose Land we dwell.

Now if there were any form of prayer for men to bind themselves unto, it
would have been showed, either in this Scripture, or in some other; which
thing you have not yet proved.

That they were not tied to this form of words is plain by another
Evangelist, which does not use the same words, but adds some, and leaves out
other some; and also the whole form of thankesgiving, is left out by Luke, (
Luke 11. 2. 3. 4. Compared with Matthew. 6. 9.) and to seek the help of any
book but the Bible to teach men to pray, is to disable God which has promised
to give Believers his Spirit, whereby they shall cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15
and that that Spirit should lead them into all truth, and bring all things to
their remembrance Ioh. 14. 26.
Therefore a form of prayer for men to tie themselves unto, cannot be
sufficient and pleasing to God though it were never imposed by any.

Thirdly, you lay another slander upon us, as though we should affirm, that
Christian Princes, and Magistrates, who are defenders of the Faith have no more
to do in and about the Church, then Heathen Princes.

This is not true, for we know that Christian Princes, and Magistrates ought to
be members of Christ's Church; and so being they may be Officers in the Church;
And if they be Defenders of the Faith, they be such as defend the pure worship
of God, manifested in his Word, as also the true professors thereof, and that
against all tyrannical power that shall attempt to suppress either it or
them, as the good Kings of Judah and Israel did, by slaying the Servants and
Prophets of Baal who had slain the Lords people.

But Heathen Kings cannot be said to be members of the Church of Christ before
they know Christ, and then they become Christian Kings. Therefore, to vent upon
all occasions, such principles as you see we hold, and maintain, is not (as
you say) dangerous and insufferable, neither are the people.

But you say further, that the people for a great part of them are heady and
refractory, and proud, and bitter, and scornful, and dispisers of authority,
and that they will not suffer public prayers to be prayed, but that by their
gesture and threatening of the Ministers, they have labored to hinder the use
of them: And these people (I gather from your own words) are the professors in
England, and especially in the city of London; and it is very like to be so;
because they were there at the time of your service; (for neither the Separates
nor Semiseparates (as you call them) use to be there at the time of your
service (for ought I know:) and these Professors you have also called Idle, and
busibodies, tatlers also, as it is said, 1 Timothy 5. 13. very wanton in their
wits (say you) affecting novelties in Religion, and liking of points that are
not established nor commonly held, and these you say are many of the
professors* For this see the third part of his Answer to their second Reason
against Toleration, page 30.
And in your second Reason against Toleration, Page 24. (you say) that the
minds of multitudes of the Professors in England, and especially in this
city, are upon all occasions very apt to fall to any way in Doctrine or
Discipline that is not commonly received by the Church, etc. But I tell you, you
ought not to blame any for withstanding any thing in Gods worship, which is not
grounded in his Word: Neither (if the whole body of the worship there tendered
be the invention of man) ought any of them to be blamed for opposing such a
worship; because it is according to their Protestation.

Yet I justify none that will oppose disorderly, as either by casting up of
hats, or threatening the Minister, or any the like unseemely behavior; for I
judge it better for them to depart in peace, if they have not faith in the
action performed

But methinkes (Mr. Edwards) you have foulely missed it, in that you have thus
vilified your brethren, to call them by the names of those mockers which ( Paul
testified) should come in the last time, that should be heady* and high minded,
and proud boasters, and dispisers of authority; for such as these have not the
power of godliness, (and by this you make your Church a foul Church, and
defile shrewdly your own nest, and make it appear to all men that you live in
a Cage of unclean birds) and therefore you are commanded from such to turn
aside; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
if the fear of God be in your heart.

Moreover, You say, you fear they will not tolerate the Government established
by the Ecclesiastical, and civil Laws; and you would feign father the cause
of this your fear upon Separates, and Independancie, whereas you cannot be so
ignorant, but that you must know, that the government established by Law may
stand without the leave of Separates, for they have neither power to give
toleration, nor to prohibit toleration, for, or against any thing.

But you say, you would rather pray against toleration, than prophecy of the
woeful effe^ts of it.

I answer, if you can make such a prayer in a time acceptable, then sometimes
such prayers will be accepted which are not grounded upon Gods Word.

But of the wofullest effects of toleration, you have prophesied already; in
that you say, they will withstand your Doctrine and your dues, For this see his
fif^ Reason against Toleration. page 28. lin. 12. 13.
and that will be a woeful effect indeed! when you shall be driven, to cry
out, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, for in one hour is so great wealth
come to desolation.

Thus much for your Seventh Reason.
IN your Eight Reason, you affirm, That these Independent men, where they have
power, as in New England, will not tolerate any Churches or Government, but in
their own way.

In using the word these, you carry the matter so darkely, that I know not whom
you mean, for you have named none.

But you seem to say, they be men that have power in New England.

I answer, Indeed it may happen to be so; That there may be some men there,
that take upon them authority, to bind men's consciences, as you and all your
fellows do here. But if it have been so, I think it was, because they had
(here in England) taken upon them an oath of conformity, (as you have sometimes
done;) and because the tyranny of the Prelates was so mighty, against all good
men, that they were feign to go away privately, and so had not time or
opportunity publicly to disclaim this their Oath; and then there might be
fear, that upon complaint made for disorder committed there, in suffering the
liberty of the Gospel there which could not be admitted here, they might have
been sent for back by their Ordinaries, and so have been committed* to some
stinking prison, here in London, there to have been murdered* as diverse of
the Lords people have been, of these late years, as I am able to prove of my
own knowledge; and if they have banished any out of their Parents, that were
neither disturbers of the peace, of the Land, nor the worship practiced in the
Land, I am persuaded, it was their weakness, and I hope they will never
attempt to do the like. But I am still persuaded, they did it upon the same
ground, that having knowledge in themselves, that their former Oath, might be a
snare unto them, if they did not hold still some correspondencie with the
practice of England, even till God should open a way or means for them to
seek free liberty for all, by the approbation of authority.

The next thing you mind against them is, that they would not admit liberty,
to some of their brethren, which were godly Ministers* though they did approve
of them, as being against Ceremonies.

To this, 1. I answer, that it is strange that any man should send to ask
their liberty. 2. It is much more strange to me (if it be true, as you say,
that these men were against Ceremonies) that there should be any difference
between them, and the Ministers in New England.

But it seems (by your speech) they would have gone in a middle way, which
presupposes to me, that they are so far from being against Ceremonies, that
are already invented, that they would have set up some invention of their own.

The next thing you charge some of them with, is, That they would not admit
into fellowship, those that would not enter into their Covenant, and profess
faith, and submit to their Church Orders, though they would be of their Church

Me thinks you have strange evasions, but I pray you answer me to these two
questions: the first is, how men of years of discretion, may (by the rule of
Gods Word) be admitted into fellowship, and not profess their faith.

Secondly, how men may be accounted, to be of the Church, and not submit unto
the orders of the Church: Seeing that the Apostle Paul had these two things to
rejoice in; the beholding of the Saints steadfast faith, and comely order, in
the Church.

But you say, that these men who would feign have a toleration in this great
kingdom, will not allow any in their small particular Congregations.

Truly (Mr. Edwards) It were good for you to labor to understand the mind
and will of God for your self, and have charity toward your brethren; and
hope well, that they have so much knowledge, of the Lords will, that they will
not plead for such an absurdity, as to set up one Church, within another, and
so make a schism. But the Toleration they plead for, is that Gods true
worship, may be set up in the Kingdom* by those that understand what it is;
and that by the sufferance of the Governors; and that it should be settled in a
peaceable way; which would be far from disturbing the peace of three
Kingdoms, (as you invectively speak;) but to set up a Congregation in a
Congregation, would be confusion, even as to set up one Kingdom* within
another.

The next thing you charge them with, is, that they are partial; (by a
supposition of your own:) for you say, it is ordinary for men, when they are
not in place, nor have no power in Church or Commonwealth; and hold also
Do^rines and principles contrary to what is held and established; to plead for
Toleration; but when the same men come to have place and power (say you) they
will not tolerate others; and you say, that you do believe that these are the
men, which now endeavor a toleration.

To this I answer, you may do well to let this belief of yours be no Article
of your faith, because it stands upon no ground; for though a man may hope the
best, and fear the worst; yet he may believe nothing but what he has proof
for. But I do believe that all this is your evil surmising, (to think, that
if they had power in their hands to settle a Government, they would tolerate
none but their independent way,) as it may plainly appear by the Protestation
Protested, which you quote here for your Author, for though the Protestor
declare what he would have for the Churches of the Saints; yet he does not take
upon him to determine, what Government or rule, shall be set up in the Land, to
bring men out of darkness to light, but leaves that to the judgment of them
which have the power, even the King and Parliament.

Thus much for your Eight Reason.
IN your ninth Reason you affirm, that toleration may he demanded, upon the
same grounds, for Brownists, Anabaptists, and Familists, and others, who
profess it is their conscience.

To which I answer; That seeing you plead for them, I may well hold my peace.
But I think the Familists will not ask liberty for toleration if they be as
(I do conceive) of the Sect of the Libertines mention in the Acts.

But, say you, these may be pleaded for upon better grounds then
Semi-Separates, and the Reason you say is, because they deny the truth of your
Church.

Answer, I do believe, those (whom you call Semi-Separates) do deny the truth
of your Church also; (though not in all respects) and so far as they be
Separates, they must needs deny the Church from which they Separate.

But you here demand, whether Papists may not petition and have hope* for
toleration, seeing it is their conscience.

To this I answer, I know no reason why they may not petition and hope to
speed also, seeing they have many friends in the Kingdom.

Further, you add, that if one sort may have an exemption from the Religion
established, why not others?

I answer. There may be many reasons given, why those may not have freedom (of
any great resorts in the Land) which have often attempted, by plots, and
treachery to ruinate the Land.

The next thing you affirm, is, if ever the door of toleration, should be but
a little opened, there would be great crowding in.

To this I answer, That the more good men do embrace the whole truth of God,
the better it will be, but there have been too many crowders and creepers in
in all ages; and we may justly fear it will be so still; for the Text says,
in the 2 Pet. 2. 2. That many shall follow their destruction, and some of them
shall do it through covetousness, who shall with fained words make
merchandise of the Lords people (as is plain in the next verse) whose
destruction sleeps not. But who these creepers in be, appears by the 15.
verse of this Chapter, That they were they that loved the wages of
unrighteousness as Balaam did: But if any one so do, his last end shall be
worse' then his beginning.

Thus much for your ninth Reason.
IN your Tenth Reason, you affirm, That the first principle of the Independent
way, is, That two or three Saints wheresoever, or by what means soever they
do arise; separating themselves from the world into the fellowship of the
Gospel, are a Church truly gathered: for this you quete Mr. Robinsons
Justification, page 221.

But in that page there is no such thing written, as I can find, but seeing it
comes so near the truth, we need not to contend about it. For I do
affirm, that a company of Saints, Separated from the world, and gathered into
the fellowship of the Gospel (by what means so ever it be, that matters not,
so it be by the teaching of the Son of God, according to that in Heb. 1. 1.)
these Saints (I say) separating themselves, and being gathered into the
fellowship of the Gospel (though they combine themselves without the warrant
of the Governors) are a true Church, and have right to all Gods Ordinances,
not only Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Rev. 21. 27. and 22, 14, 15.
to admit men into fellowship, but also to admonish, to reprove and to cast out
of their society all obstinate offenders amongst them that do transgress,
either against the first or second Table; having (as has been said before)
the Spirit of God to guide them, and wisdom from above to judge of persons,
and causes, within the Church, though they have nothing to do to judge those
that are without.

And this does not make way for Libertisnime, for Heresies and Sectaries (as
you say) neither does it make men to run from their own Ministers, because
they restrain them from sin, or keep them to Gods Ordinances, (as you do
affirm) for if any separate for any such cause, they shall not be received
into fellowship, nor justified of any of the Lords people.

But the way of the Gospel, as has been plainly proved, is not to live
without Gods Ordinances, nor to live at liberty (as you say) except you mean
the liberty wherein Christ has set them, and commanded them to stand fast,
because he has made them free, Gal. 5. 1. By this you may see the Saints are
called into liberty; but not a liberty to sin (as you would insinuate) but to
be freed from the yoke of bondage, which is the tyranny, or tyrannical
government of the Canon Laws, either of Rome or England.

But you say, all heretics, Sectaries, or libertines will count themselves
Saints, as well as the Independent men; and the reason you seem to give for
this, is, because the Ministers, and Magistrates of the Kingdom, shall not have
power to determine who be Saints. Page 34.


Now let all men judge what a weighty argument this is, who is he that knows
any thing and knows not this, that the Priests in England which are the Bishops
creatures, do generally justify the wicked, and condemn the just, and are not
these meet men to judge Saints? they justify none that will not be
conformable, and yield unto the traditions which they have invented, in their
Councels and Convocations; though they have not one title of Gods Word to
warrant them; Furthermore, they condemn all that will not submit, to their
devised worship, even in all the traditions thereof: and this is the
dependancie which they have brought all men unto, both high and low, even to be
subject to their wills, which is a Law.

But now touching the Magistrate, you would seem to infer that he should
have no more power than a Priest.

It is plain, the Priests have no power, but what they have by permission, and
sufferance* though they have dependancie upon the Pope himself, but the
Magistrate has power given him of God by whom he is set up, for the praise of
those that do well and for the punishment of evil doers, and has the same
rule given him (whereby to judge them) that God has given to his Church;
especially Christian Magistrates, notwithstanning they are opposed, yet they
have power given of God; as you may read in Acls 7 35. This man Moses whom
they forsook saying, who ma^e thee a Prince and a Judge, the same God sent for
a Prince and a deliverer: and this is he which was as a God unto Aaron; when
Aaron was as the mouth of Moses to the people, Exodus 4. 16. Now if you Priests
could have proved your selves as Aaron, then you might have been assistants to
Godly Magistrates to deliver the Lords people out of the hands of Tyrannical
Princes; but contrariwise, you add afflictions as Pharaohs Taskemasters Exodus
5. 17.
did; even you (Mr. Edwards) when you say the Lords people are wanton-witted
and idle, when they desire to have liberty to serve God.

And thus you sit in the consciences of men; judging zeal to be hypocrisy;
but the time will come, when every work shall be brought to judgment.

And now drawing near to an end of this Answer to your tenth Reason (which is
the last of this your joined army) it is good to look back a little, and
consider what has been said.

You have spoken much for Dependencie; but upon whom you do depend, I cannot
tell;

You labor to bring men into doubts, by your suppositions, but you do not
make any conclusion, which is Gods way, that men fearing God, may expect a
blessing when they walk in it, but you cry out for Dependencie, upon Councels,
and Synods, and Churches; I pray you what Dependencie has the Church of
England upon any other Church? for I suppose you will say, that all the Land is
but one Church.

If you say, that you have Dependencie, upon the Church of Rome; I do believe
you; for the Bishop of Canterbury has said so much, in his book, where he
confesses, Rome to be as leprous Naaman, and England to be the same Naaman
cleansed.

Now that it is the same, may easily be proved, by diverse of your own Authors.
But you in your Epistle, affirm, it is not cleansed, in that place, where you
say, that there is yet Altars and Images, brazen Serpents, abused to Idolatry,
with diverse other things, which you would have purged out.

By this it appears, that it is the same with Rome, in the very nature of it*
though not in every Circumstance, and this (for any thing can be discerned) is
the Dependancie, for which you plead: even the Dependancie and affinity,
between Rome and England.

Therefore you should rather have said, That in the belly of this Dependancie,
does lurk all liberty, and heresy, and whatsoever, Satan, and the corrupt
hearts of men have a pleasure to broach. For in that way, it is too common, for
men to broach their own pleasures; for their Religion is made of men's
inventions.

Thus much for your 10th. Reason.
YEt furthermore, (for addition to these ten Reasons, you add a Question; Page
34.
your Qeustion is, what these men would have in this Toleration, Whether the
number of five or six Congregations only, and no more? Or whether the number
shall be left undetermined, and be free to multiply? etc.

For answer to this, I do affirm, that the number ought not to be limited,
for the Churches of the New Testament were free, to multiply, not only in
greatness, but also in number. I say they were left free by God; for the
Apostles were not limited, from constituting Churches wheresoever men were
brought to believe in Christ.

But say you, it is their principles to break one Church in two or three.

I answer, I know no man that holds any such principle.

But say you, it has been so at Amsterdam, Roterdam, and London.

To this I answer, I deny not, but that there may be offenses taken, and
sometimes given, which may cause men to depart one from another (as Paul and
Barnabas did) sometimes about persons, and sometimes about things; and woeful
experience teaches all men, that brethren are apt to fall out by the way; and
that Joseph knew very well, when he admonished his brethren to the contrary.
Genesis 45. 24.
But though some should be offended, and could not be reconciled, (as the
Scripture says, a brother offended, is harder to be won than a strong city
Pro. 18. 19.
) yet the departing of such a brother, (or breth^en) cannot make that Church
two Churches, yet notwithstanding this may sometimes tend to the further
spreading of the Gospel, even as the departing of Paul and Barnabas did. Not
that I justify the practice of any that are not apt to bear, but that God
does sometimes, bring good out of evil, (as it was in the selling of Joseph,
Genesis 50. 20.
by turning it to his own glory, and the good and comfort of his people.

Therefore you need not to marvel. which shall be the state approved by the
Magistrate; because that properly, there remains but one entire state, (in
such cases of division, as you have before mentioned.) By all this it appears
that it is none of our principles to break one Church into two or three.

But you say, if the number be left undetermined, there may be many Churches in
a Town.

For answer whereof, I must tell you, that I read in the Scriptures of no more
Churches in a town, but one, as in Jerusalem where there were many Converts,
yet I read but of one Church.

Now this was in the first plantation of the Gospel, but what they might
increase to afterward, the Scripture is silent in, for any thing I know.

But that there may be two or three in one place (as you say) that seems unto
me to be confusion, except they should meet in one place for consultation,
which may very well be, for God is the God of Order and not of confusion.

And I never read in the Scripture, that two Churches met together in one
place, for the practice of public worship.

But say you; we may have, every where, three or four men; of an opinion
differing from others, to go to make a Church.

To this I answer, If you mean (by every where) in every Town of the Land, I
say, although it should be so, (and though there be six towns in a Parish)
yet it will be no no confusion; for the fewer they are together the less
ground will there be of fearing them.

But touching divisions and subdivisions.

If any such thing happen, it is but that which we have bin told on before. The
Apostles words are these, They went out from us, because they were not of us,
etc. 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
and if evil minded men, that crept in departed from Christ, Ioh. 6. 66. 67.
we need not to think much, that such creepers in, should depard from us
also; yet the disorderly going away of any (as I have said before) does not
make them a Church which go away disorderly.

And thus I have given you an answer to your second tenth Reason, I pray thee
(good Reader) take notice, that here I acknowledge an ove^sight (in taking Mr.
Edwards his eleventh Reason, to be a second tenth Reason) it was through my
neglect, in not looking into his Errata.
for in your Book you have by your style made it a Reason, though you seemed
at the first entrance into it to make it but a question.

But before you conclude the whole, you subjoyne to these, the Answer to five
or six things (which you would make to be their reasons) and you say that they
are continually alleged, by them for their toleration, in this Kingdom.

THe first Reason (you say they bring) is, that toleration is no more, then the
French, and Dutch enjoy, who live among us.

Indeed that is a very good reason, for methinkes it stands with equity, that
Natives borne, should have as much privilege as Strangers.

But you would seem to alter the state of the case, in six respects.

First, That the French and Dutch Protestants have nothing, nor desire nothing,
as contra distinct to the Protestants of France and Holland.

I answer, if the Protestants of France, and Holland, have liberty of their
conscience, and be not at all burdened, with Jewish, Popish, or Heathenish
Observations, but may be free there, to worship God, according to his Will,
revealed in his Word, then they that are here (amongst us) need not to seek
more liberty, and I am sure the Independent men will ask no more.

Secondly, you say, that this liberty, was granted, by our Pio^s Princes, in
the times of persecution to the Protestants.

Here you cross your first respect, for if these Protestants were persecuted
in France, then it is certain their Religion was different, from the state of
their own Nation; for you say they could not enjoy their Religion at home.

Furthermore you add, that it has been kept ever since, for a refuge to the
persecuted Protestants.

To which I answer, The very like may be said of the liberty granted to the
English Church in Amsterdame, which has been a refuge for the Protestants
which have been persecuted out of England ever since.

But (you say) we may enjoy our Religion in this Land, and that by the
authority of the King and Parliament.

If it be so: I pray you what is the meaning, of the bleating of such cattle,
as your self? which cry out daily to the King and Parliament* for the
suppression of the Lords people; and for the hindering of their meetings.

Thirdly, you say, The French and Dutch Churches will willingly be joined in
Government, and in one way of discipline with the Kingdom, if there be a
Reformation.

Indeed if you had not added a great If, here you had told a loud untruth, but
if this were performed, that there were a Reformation, according to Gods Will,
I doubt not but the Independent men would do the like.

Fourthly, you say these Churches do not hold our principles, but do admit of
appeals in great businesses.

I answer, I have told you already, and I now tell you again, that I admit of
appeals also, such as the Scripture warrants, and I have declared at large
what appeals they be. For that read the Answer to his third Reason against
Independancie.


Fifthly, you say, they be strangers different in Language, and have little
acquaintance with you (keeping themselves for the most part among themselves)
and therefore (say you) there will be the less danger of drawing away the
people.

I answer, if they differ so little from you, as you would make the world
believe, there were small cause of danger, or Schism, if they will willingly
be joined (as you said before) in Government, and in one way of discipline with
the Kingdom.

Further, you add, that they vent no principles, against your Church, and
Government.

I answer, Indeed* if they should never open a mouth to speak, yet their
practice makes them different from you, both in worship and government; and yet
it may be upon better considerations, they may draw nearer to the rule
hereafter^; but for my part I leave them, as being partly ignorant of their
practice.

But you say, they will not admit your people to be members of their
Congregations.

Answer, Indeed I do not know that ever they have refused any; but this much
I know; that some English people, that have the French, and Dutch tongue, have,
and do go thither to hear; but that any should desire to go thither to
hear, that have not the language, were very absurd.

Sixthly, There, is (say you) a great reason, and necessity, of allowing them
Churches and places to preach, and be by them^^lves, and the reasons you yield,
are (1) because many of them understand not English at all, and (2) for the
benefit of strangers of their own Religion.

To which I answer, The very same may be said concerning the English Churches
in Holland.

But further you add, that they may well be allowed some Discipline among
themselves, in respect they maintain all their own poor.

Methinks (Mr. Edwards) there should be much more reason, that the English
Protestants, or Separates, should be tolerated, for the same cause, for they
maintain all their own poor also. And furthermore, they maintain the poor
of the Church of England; yea, in every parish where their dwelling houses
stand, they pay to the poor weekly, as well as any other man.

They also pay their money for the maintenance of the Visited Houses in the
Parishes where they dwell.

Nay, furthermore, they pay also their money for the maintenance of the Priests
of England, (the more is the pity) and so I fear the Dutch and French do
also, yea though the Priests are as Popish as they were in Q^eene Mary's time.
And this is well known to all Landlords that do let them houses, for if they
know them to be Separates, and that they will not, have to do with the Priests
in the pay meant of that they call dues, they make their Tenant pay the more
rent, for if the Tenant will not the Landlord must. And by this you may see,
their burdens are double to other men's; in that they must maintain their own
poor and their own Ministers, and the Church of Englands also.

And by this you may see* that you have not (in the least) altered the state of
the case, between the Dutch, and French, and us, in the causes before
mentioned.

Therefore this their first reason for toleration lies yet unanswered by you.

FOr answer to their second Reason, which (you say) is that they seek no more
then is granted them, in Holland; your answer to it is this,

That if that be a good ground, then Jews and Anabaptists may have a
toleration also.

To this I answer, For my part I speak for my self, and I suppose, that they
may say as much for themselves (in these late respects, which you have
mentioned) as the Separates do, for they maintain their poor, and their
Ministers, and the poor, and the Priests of the Church of England, as well as
we. And I think they are persecuted and hunted also; but I will leave them to
plead for themselves.

Further, you add, That such a Toleration is not fit, neither in Divinity, nor
in policy.

I answer, I know no true Divinity that teaches men to be Lords over the
conscience; and I think it is no part of Godly policy, to drive the Kings
subjects out of the land, because they desire free liberty to worship God in
the Land according to his will; the States of Holland are counted politic,
and yet they esteem it the Strength of their Kingdom, to grant free liberty
of conscience.

Secondly, you say, there may be a toleration for us in Holland, with much more
safety to the government established, then can be here, because the people
understand not our language; and also have little, or no relation to us of
kindred and friendship, etc.

I answer, I must say to you, as I have said already, that there was never any
danger to a Kingdom, to suffer the Lords people to live quietly, and enjoy
their liberty.

Thirdly, you say, The people of the Holenders are generally industrious, and
mind their business, and keeping to what is established by their Laws, not
troubling their heads so much with other points of Religion.

By this one may easily perceive your mind (Mr. Edwards) with the rest of your
fellows, and also know, that you are naturally derived from Rome, in that you
would have all men, to content themselves, with an implicit faith*; and to take
for granted, what government your Laws allows, and what worship your
inventions have hatched; and not to search the the Scripture at all.

Further you add here, that the people in England are not so, especially in
this city of London and great Towns, you say many of the professors, are more
idle, and busie*bodies, tatlers also, as it is said, 1 Timothy 5. 13. very wanton
also in their wits, affecting novelties in Religion, etc.

Now truly (Mr. Edwards) if you were of my mind, and were a member of such a
Church, that had such members in it; you would be so far from fearing, of
being beguilded of them, that you would be very glad to have such birds taken
out of your nest. But you are so far from observing the rule of Christ (
Matthew. 18. 15.) that is to tell your brother of his fault between him and you
that you rather walk with slanders and elamours, vilifying your own mothers
sons; so that every good man may be ashamed of you.

Fourthly, you say, that Holland tolerates us and many others, but it is more
upon grounds and necessity of worldly respects, because of the benifite of
exsise toward the maintenance of war.

Now (Mr. Edwards) you have utterly overthrown your own Argument, laid down
in the beginning of your answer to this their second Reason, for then you said,
it was against the rule of policy; but now you say it is their policy.

And whereas you would make the case different between England and Holland.

I answer, It is not different at all; for England has the Subjects purses to
maintain wars as well as Holland; and though it be not in exsise for
victuals, yet it is in some other ways from which the subjects of Holland are
freed.

The next thing you affirm, is; That your riches and strength, stands in one
way of Religion.

To which I answer, I think (if I could understand your mind herein) you
mean the riches and strength of the Priests: for I am sure the riches, and
strength of the Kingdom, may stand best with Toleration, as it may appear,
partly by what has been said already, for you have heard that the Lords people
(whom you thus persecute) maintain their own poor.

And it will also be made appear, that they pay Scot, and Lot, in the
Kingdom, in all civil respects, and are all as true subjects to the Kings
Majesty, and are ready to do him all faithful service with their bodies, and
estates, as any in the Kingdom.

But I confess that toleration would be neither riches nor strength to the
Priests, for it is sore against the peoples will* that they pay them any thing
now; and it will be no wonder when it shall be made to appear, what the
Priests wages i^, See the Reply tothe sixth part of his Answer to this their
following Reasou.
but that shall be done hereafter.

THeir third Reason you say is, That if they have not liberty to erect some
Congregations, it will force them to leave the Kingdom.

For answer whereof, you do affirm (in the first place) that there is no
need of a toleration for them; neither that they should leave the Kingdom for
conscience, and that you say will appear by the Reasons and principles which
they do agree to, which you say are these;

First, that they hold your Churches true, your Ministers true, Ordinances
true: Further you say they can partake with you in your Congregations in all
Ordinances, even to the Lords Supper.

To which I answer, Indeed here you would make the Readers believe, that they
had opened a wide gappe, (if they should take your affirmation, without your
provisall) but you come to help your self handsomely, in that you say their
condition was, that it must first be provided, that scandalous and ignorant
persons must be kept back, and Ceremonies must be removed.

Methinks, this is a mighty great mountain, that stands between them* and you,
and therefore you have small cause, to ask them wherefore they should desire,
to set up Churches? fortill this mountain be removed, they may be true to
their own principles, and not go from their word, and yet never communicate
with you, either in worship, or government.

For first, If you keep out all scandalous persons, out of all the Churches in
England, from the Sacraments, and all ignorant persons; truly then your
Churches will be as empty as ours.

Secondly, If you should remove away all your Ceremonies, (which is the second
part of your reformation,) you could not tell how to worship; for your whole
form and manner of worship is made of invented Ceremonies.

But if you can procure such a reformation, to have your Church all consist of
persons of knowledge, fearing God, and ^ating covetousness, and void of all
other scandalls (so far as we can judge by the Scripture) and that the
Ceremonies may be removed, and we enjoy (as you brag) all Gods Ordinances
with you, as well as in our own Churches, then you shall hear, what I will
say to you, as well as the Independent men.

But till all this be done, you see there is still good reason, for good men,
either to desire liberty, or to leave the Kingdom.

Further, you say, some of them could take the charge of Parochial Churches
amongst you, upon the Reformation.

I Answer, Indeed such a Reformation, which you have formerly mentioned, will
hardly stand with Parochial Churches.

But you say, they could yield to Presbyteriall Government, by Classes and
Synods; so they might not be enjoined to submit to it, as Jure Divino.

To which I answer. It seems (by your own confession) that they do deny the
Presbyteriall government by Classes, and Synods, to be from God, as it
appears, in that you say, they will not submit to it, as Iure Divino, and
therefore you have overthrown your self (in all this your reasoning) with
your Synods and Classes also; so that still there remains good grounds to
seek a Toleration, that the Saints may grow into bodies even in this Land.

But to grow into one body with you (as you would have them) while your
Churches body is like a Leopard, and all bespotted, (as appears by your words)
were very absurd; for you ^^^e affirm, that the best of your members* even the
Professors, especially of London, and of the great Towns in England; are very
f^^le; yet I hope you will confess, that they are the best of your members;
then if it be true (as you say) that you must remove in your Reformation, all
ignorant and scandalous persons* by your grounds, you should have but a very
few to make a Church of as well as we. For you must remove also all your
Professors, which you say are so scandalous.

Therefore, I should rather counsel you to repent of all your evils that you
have done, and be reconciled to God the Father, and Christ his Son, and
separate your selves from all your wickedness, and even come and grow up into
one body with us.

Secondly, you say, Seeing your Churches, Ministers, and Ordinances be true,
the erecting of new, and withdrawing from such Congregations, can never be
answered to God.

I answer, Here you take for granted that which you cannot prove, and it is
your wisdom so to do, for by that means; you may make simple people believe*
that you are very right, except a few defects, which no man shall be freed
from, while he is in this life.

But now to the point; and first, touching your Churches and Ministers, which
you say be true, and you also say, the Independent men would grant them to be
true, upon a Reformation, such as the Word requires.

I tell you for answer, that this your juggling will not help you, for no man
is bound to take your bare word, therefore it is good you make proof of that
which you have said.

But before you go to prove your Churches true, declare unto me what Churches
you mean? for I ever took the whole Land of England to be but one Church, (as
it stands established by the Canon Laws) and that all the Parishes in the Land
make up but one entire body, therefore what is amiss in one Parish, all the
whole are guilty of, and it will be laid to the charge of the Archbishops, who
are the Metropolitanes, or chief Priests over the Church of the Land. Seeing
it is so, you must stand out to maintain your Church, and you need not to
trouble your self about your Church-es for I know no dependancie you have upon
any, except it be Rome, according as I have told you before in the conclusion
of my answer to your first tenth Reason against Independencie. Therefore this
is the Church that you must maintain, even the Church of England, established
by the Canon Laws, consisting of Archbishops, Diocesan Bishops, with all the
rest of that erew; for this is indeed both your Church and Ministry, which does
appear by your own ground, because you affirm, that in this part lies all
the power: but (by your own grounds) the whole body of the Land. (I mean of
the Laity (as you call them) has no power at all to reform any abuse:
therefore this Clergy must needs be your Church; and thus you make your selves
the head, and body, and all the rest of the Land the ^ayle to follow after you.

Now if you can prove this to be a true Church, which has neither ground, nor
footing in Christ's Testament, you will work wonders: but indeed such wonders
have been wrought by you; for all the world* has wondered, and run after the
beast, saying, Who is like unto him? and who is able to make war with him? as
you may plainly see in the 13. of the Reveation. Rev. 13.
Therefore they that do justify such a Church; are such as have been
deceived by her false miracles, even by the fire which she has made to come
down from heaven.

I pray you did not fire come down from heaven in Queen Mary's time, and
devour the Saints in Smithfield; if you understand heaven in that place, as I
understand it (to be the seat of the Magistrate) you must grant the same, for
they are called Gods, and the children of the most high.

For your forefathers did (as Pila^ did) wash their hands from the blood of the
Saints, and of the innocent, and turned them over, for their sentence of
condemnation, to the Secular power, which you made your horns, and your heads
pushed them forward to execute your bloody cruelty; and thus you may see that
fire came down from heaven, in the sight or apprehension of men for most that
beheld it thought it was just, because it was the sentence of the Magistrate.

And by this all men may see, that you of the Clergy are the Whence the Church
of England is derived. Whence the Church of Rome is derived.
Church of England, and that this Clergy came from Rome, and that therefore
your Church is derived from Rome.

Now if you would know whence the Church of Rome was derived; I conceive that
her power was derived from the beast with seven heads, which rose up out of the
sea, as you may read of in the thirteenth of the Revelations, for there both
those beasts are mentioned* and also the Image of the first beast, which the
second beast has caused to be made, which is even here in England amongst us;
and you may see I have proved unto you already what it is; as you may also read
in the 15. verse of that Chapter, it was that to whom the beast gave a spirit,
and also he gave it power that it should speak, and cause as many as would not
worship the Image of the beast, to be killed, and has not this Image caused
abundance to be killed in England, and has not he caused all to receive his
mark, or his name, or the number of his name; and they that have it not, may
neither buy nor sell, as it is apparent by the testimony of the Scripture it
self, and woeful experience.

And is not this Image the Church that now you ^leade for? which consists of
all the Priests of England; if it be not, I What the Image of the first beast
is.
pray you tell me what it is?

But if this be it (as it appears it is) then these are your Ministers also;
and then it has been proved plainly, whence this your Church and Ministry
came. And that any of understanding should grant this Church, and Ministry to
be a true Church and Ministry, would bewray great ignorance in them.

Further you add, that they acknowledge the Ordinances to be true.

In this I do believe you upon your bare word, for it is a truth, if you mean
Gods Ordinances which you have amongst you.

As first, you have the Scripture but you wring it and wrest it, according to
your own devices, and make of it a nose of wax, and a leaden rule to lean
which way your mind leads you; and though you ought to take that reed or
rod in your hand, at all times (if you were Gods messengers) to measure both
the Temple and the Altar and the worshippers, ( Rev. 11. 2, yet you have not
learned that skill, (for your Church and Ministry holds no correspondencie
with that measuring line.) but contrariwise you have taken that golden cup* and
filled it full of abominations; ^ay, you have hacked it and mangled it to
pieces, and made it into little lessons, which you call your Epistles and
Gospells and they are Dedicated to your Saints, upon your Saints-Dayes; and
thus you may see though you have the Scriptures (which is the Word of God) and
take upon you to unfold the mysteries thereof, yet in stead of that, you darken
the truth by false glosses.

Secondly, you have the Sacraments, even baptism, and breaking of bread: but
you pervert them both, to your own destruction; nevertheless they still
remain Gods Ordinances, even as the golden vessels, were Gods vessels, when
they were in Babel though Bels^azar made them his qua^^ing boules* yet still
they remained to be Gods vessels. Even so did Circumcision remain Gods
Ordinance thou^h it was with Ierobo^^. The like may be said of Baptism* it
still remains Gods Ordinance, though it be carried away with back^sliding
Antichristians (even the Apostate fallen stats) and so you may read in the
eleventh of the Revelation, ver. 2. that the court must be left out, and be
unmeasured; and the reason was because it was given to the Gentiles, even to
them that should tread down the holy city for 42. months; this court we
know, belonged to the Temple (as you may read in the 42. of Ezekiel) and had in
it the Ordinances belonging to the people. And although you have Baptism, and
the Lords Supper they will not sanctify you; though they may be sanctified to
the use of them amongst you which are Gods people, according to the election of
grace.

And though you have some of Gods Ordinances, amongst you; yet you have added
unto them many Ordinances of your own devising, which does utterly debar the
Lords people, which have knowledge of them, from communicating with you in any
worship.

As for example,

How shall any man partake with you of the word preached in your assemblies but
he must needs partake also with the false calling of the Priest, by which it is
preached, for none else are suffered to preach amongst you, (by your leave or
approbation,) but they that preach by that false power.

And who shall receive the Sacraments with you, and not justify your devised
Service-booke? for all your things are administered by that. And as all the
Lords Ordinances ought to be sanctified by the Word of God and prayer: So on
the contrary you labor to sanctify your things, by the stinted servicebooke;
and therefore the withdrawing from you, may be answered to God.

Further you bear the world in hand, that you have but something amongst you
wanting yet, that were to be desired, and therefore you say there is no cause
to leave the Kingdom, nor for private men to set up true Churches.

Answer, Indeed If your Church and Ministers could be proved true (which you
see is a thing unpossible) then it had been needless (as you say) to leave
the Land; but neither is your Church nor Ministers true, nor can the Ordinances
be had amongst you without sin: and that this is the judgment of the
Independent men, is plain by your former confession; Where you affirm, they
will not hear of growing into one body (or communicating) with you before a
Reformation; neither submit to your Classes or Presbyters, as Jure Divino,

But in the next place you say, the setting up of divided Churches, would be to
the scandal of all the Churches, and not the giving of scandal to one
brother, but to ten thousands of Congregations.

Truly (Mr. Edwards) you overshoote yourselfe (in that you make your self
such an apparent dissembler) for you would make men believe, that you desire to
keep your Church and brethren unspotted, and yet you your self with your own
tongue, have most foulely scandalized the chief members of your Church, making
them so foul a people, that they ought not to be communicated with. In the
Second Part of his second Reason against toleration, page 24. In his sixth
Reason against toleration page 29. and the third part of his Answer to their
second Reason for toleration.


Further, your words imply that so long as a man is not put upon the practice
of that which is unlawful, he may bear.

I tell you again that your whole manner is unlawful, and therefore all the
Lords people, as they desire to be blessed and to be found walking in Gods
waves have cause to separate from your Church* and to practice Gods Ordinances
among themselves, as well as they who are separated already, (which you here
you call Brownists) and the grounds and causes be so great, that they may well
be justified.

But you would have conscious men to consider Mr. Robinson, concerning
circumstantiall corruptions; you say, he shows it is not an intolerable evil,
for evil men be suffered in the Church, etc. yet you confess he affirms it
to be an evil.

Two things are here to be minded.

First, that you would still please your self with this, that you have a true
Church (though corrupted) which has been proved contrary.

Secondly, that you would justify your Church by the sins of others.

But you know what Mr. Robinson says, That the government instituted by Christ
is not only neglected or violated in the Church of England, but the plain
contrary to it is established by Law.

But you say, now supposing your Reformation, it will be otherwise with
England, then when he writ.

But (you may see) it is very plain, that the cruelty, and wickedness, of
the Church of England has increased ever since that time.

You say there is but something neglected, and you would make it the want of
some Law to suppress evil men.

To which I answer, That your Canon Laws be evil Laws, and your Lawmakers
evil men, and therefore it could not stand with their principles to make Laws
to suppress evil men.

Thirdly, you say, that they (whom you call Independent) live in and are
members of such Churches, and yet they think it unlawful, to forsake them.

I pray you, have any of them told you, that their Churches be like the Church
of England? you must make proof thereof, for in this I will not take you upon
your bare word.

Further, you say they want some parts of Government and Officers, appointed by
Christ, more matertally than will be in your Church, upon a Reformation.

I answer, I have plainly proved to you: that Christ's Church has his
Government, and Officers; but your Church has neither Christ's Government nor
Officers. But what it will be upon the Reformation* I cannot tell.

But you say, they must want the Ordinances, or else they must have them with
instruments without ordination.

I answer This is untrue as has been proved at large, in the answers to one
of your former Reasons against Independancie.

But you say you would have them hear with the defects in your Church, and
wait till God give you more light.

I answer I know no^e that interrupteth you, for we will neither meddle with
your Idols, nor with your Gods if you would but suffer us to worship our God,
after the way that you call heresy.

The next thing you say is that they tell you that something may be omitted for
a time, and that affirmatives bind not always and that the exercise of
Discipline may be forborne for a time, when it will not be for edification to
the Church, but for destruction; and therefore you question them for not
incorporating themselves into your Church, though something were more there to
be desired, yet you say, there will be nothing contrary put upon them (nor
quite another thing.)

Now that something may be omitted for a time, that may plainly appear; for a
man that has brought his gift to the Altar, and there remembers that his
brother has ought against him, must leave the offering of his gift, and go
and be reconciled to his brother, Matthew. 5. 23. 24.

Now that affirmatives bind not always, is plain; for they bind not always
in cases of impossibility, but in such cases God accepts the will for the
deed.

Further, whereas you say, the excellency of discipline may be forborne for a
time, when it is not for Edification of the Church, but for destruction;

I say, true discipline, (being rightly used) is always for the edification of
the Church, and never for destruction.

And whereas you affirm, that there is nothing contrary put upon us by you,
(or quite another thing;)

I answer, we know you have none of Gods Ordinances, without some other thing
to accompany them.

Fourthly, you say, that they may safely be members of your Church in the
Reformation of you.

I answer, You might well have spared this your vain repetition till you had
obtained a Reformation.

But the Reason you have heard alleged for their first going away granted in
a letter from Rotterdam. that reason still remains ( though you say it is
ceased) and will remain till the Reformation, you have formerly promised*

But say you, that practice they judge themselves tied to, is founded upon a
false principle (namely) that the power of government is given by Christ to the
body of the Congregation.

I answer I have told you before, (in the reply to the second part of this your
answer to their third Reason) and I now tell you again, that you make your
Priests the head and body both; but Christ has given the power to the Church
which is his body, by whose power every Officer, and member thereof, does move,
and do their several Offices.

Fifthly, There is, say you a medium, between persecution and a public
Toleration; a middle way, say you, between not suffering them to live in the
Land, and granting them liberty.

I Answer, This is a very true thing, for Pharaoh would have been willing,
that the children of Israel, should have stayed in Egypt, and made him brick,
but he would not suffer them to go into the wilderness, to offer sacrifice.
But if Pharaoh had been willing to have succored the children of Israel, he
would have commanded his taskemasters not to lay burdens upon them, that they
could not bear; but he did not do so, and therefore their bricke-making
turned to persecution, even as your injunctions and penal Laws do here in
England, and you bind them up with a pretense of his Majesty's command, which
makes the burden very mighty.

By this it is plain, that no good man can live in England without
persecution, even at this day.

But you would have them to have a third way, for you say persons may live in
the Land, and enjoy their Lands and liberties, and not be compelled to
profess, and practice, things against their conscience.

I pray you (Mr. Edwards) bethink yourselfe now, how untruly you speak and
whether you do not look one day to give an account, for your words; for you
know that no man can live in this land, and enjoy his lands and liberty, but he
shall be forced to worship according to the custom of the Nation. Nay,
children that be but sixteen years of age, though ignorant, and scandalous in
their lives, are forced to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, though it
be to their utter condemnation.

Further you add, that if upon petition to the Parliament, the Papists should
have the Statutes repealed, which injoyne them to come to your Church, yet say
you, the granting the Papists a public toleration, for their Religion, would
be quite another thing, in as much as you say though the Papists were the first
in p^t^tioning for the former, yet they move not for the latter.

For answer to this* I tell you;

First, That for granting the Papists public exercises will not much cross
your principles, for they and you are natural brethren.

Secondly, for that they move not for the latter (as you say:) They need not
for they enjoy it without moving and till this Parliament, none has disturbed
them for many years.

But further, you add* that so you judge that the Independent men may live in
the land freely, and enjoy their liberties and estates, (but you have your
clause whereby you still cross all your own tale; your clause is that it must
be) by coming to your Churches, and enjoying the Ordinances.

Whereas you say so you judge, it presupposes that the Papists do come to
your Churches, by what comes after, that it must be by coming to your
Churches, and enjoying the Ordinances.

Indeed the Papists may come to your Churches, and enjoy your Ordinances, for
first they were their Ordinances; for when you apostated from Rome, you carried
the Romish traditions with you, even as your forefathers in their apostacy
from Christ Jesus, carried some of his Ordinances with them; so you retain
something of Gods to make your own ware pass in sale, and have patched you up
a bundle of worship borrowing ^lso some Jewish and He^^henish Ceremonies to
make up your pa^ke; and will you be so kind to suffer men to live in the land,
if they will but submit to this worship and promise them they shall never be
compelled, to profess or practice any more? Indeed you are very liberal but
it has been often said already, (and you have said it yourselfe) that the
Independent men, cannot of conscience communicate with you before a
Reformation: Therefore if this be the medium you have (between leaving the
Land and toleration*) even that they must submit to your worship, you might
have bequeathed this Legacy to some that would accept of it, and give you
thanks for the Lord has bequeathed liberty to his S^^^ts and Servants, and
has purchased it at a dear price; even that they should be freed from all
Egyptian bondage; and has commanded them to stand fast in that liberty,
wherein he has made them free: and whether they must obey Gods commands, or
your counsel be judge your self.

Six^^y, you say, If the former answers will not satisfy, but that they must
needs be in a Church fellowship, as now they are then (you say) you you will
show them away, according to their own principles of a visible Church.

For answer whereof I must tell you, that fallacies, and false conclusions upon
men's words, (without bringing their conditions) can satisfy no man concerning
the matter in hand; but it may satisfy all men of your evil mind, that you
still labor to turn away the truth as it may appear; by the way you here
have chalked them out, to walk in; which is

That because it is their principle (say you) that a few Saints joined together
in a Covenant, have power; therefore you imply that there should never need a
greater addition to them. Page 43. lin. 16* 17.


This you may know crosses the whole Scripture as the very prophesies of the
Church under the New Testament that is to say, that a little one shall become a
thousand, and a great one a strong Nation, Esaias 60. 22. and that they should
grow up as the Calves of the stall, Mal. 4. 2. not only in greatness, but
also in number: and Rev. 7.
especially when the Lamb overcommeth, that is even when the Saints overcome,
by the blood of the Lamb, and the word Rev. 12. 11*
of their testimony, not esteeming their lives to the death.

Therefore you might have saved your schollership, when you went about to teach
them, to make Churches in houses, and also to come to your Church, to the Word,
Prayer, and Sacraments* for they have not so learned Christ; to come one part
of the day to worship before the Idols, and to stand another part before God,
for if they should do so, the Lord says, ( Ezekiel. 44. 13.) they should not
come near him, neither to do the office of the Priest, nor to come near the
holy things, but that they should bear their shame, and their abomination.

Further, you might have saved your labor in teaching them, to make family
Church es: for God has directed them what to do in their Families.

And it is not the practice of Gods people, to shut out from their prayers, and
holy duties, them that are of their Family* for God gave his Law to Abraham for
another end (namely) that he should teach it his Family, and by so doing,
train up members in his family, for Christ's Family.

Further, you might have spared your care taken to show a way for maintenance,
for those men among us, that are scholars bred, for if you can find no better
maintenance for them, then to come and be Lecturers amongst you (as you would
have them) and to live in hope of the gifts of the dead; that is no good
provision: for, for want of those shoes* men may go long barefooted* seeing
they cannot (by your own confession) do that of conscience till there be a
Reformation. But you might rather have persuaded your Parish Priests to have
bequeathed some of their large revenewes unto them: for whether they have
Parsonage or Vicarage their pole money comes in so thick to them and their
followers, that it would make any sober minded man or woman to wonder how they
can consume it: for besides their ordinary tithes or maintenance* which is the
principal, they have many other petty aues, which they require of every one of
the Kings subjects, and they are not so reasonable as his Majesty, which is
contended with pole money from his subjects, from 16. years old, and upward,
but they will have a share out of him that is borne without life (as it will
plainly be proved) for if a dead child be borne into the world, they will be
paid for reading a dirge over it, before it shall be laid in the earth, and
they will be apt to infer, that that their dear brother is departed in the
faith, though it be the child of thieves and murderers, and the like.

Further, they will yet have another patrimony for the birth of that child,
for before the mother dare go abroad, she must have their blessing; that the
Sun shall not smite her by day, nor the Moon by night; for which blessing of
theirs, they must have an offering, and the like they require for all the
children that be borne into this world, though there live not one of six to be
men or women.

But for as many of them as do live, they enlarge their Revenewes, for, if
they live to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, then they must pay
their offerings yearly to the Priest, though the bread and wine be provided at
the parishes charge.

Further, if they live to enter into the state of Matrimon^, then they must be
joined together by a Priest, for which work of his he must have a large
Offering.

And these men be not content to take money where there is money (as the King
is) but they will have these (which they call dues) of him that lives of the
very alms of the Parish, whereas the King takes not a penny of any that
receive alms.

Then if we consider their exa^^ion how they oppress the people, by their
cruel forcing of them to pay so much as they demand, (though it be contrary to
all Law or equity) it will cause us to wonder at the hardness of their hearts
for rather then they will abate any thing of what they demand they will force
poor people even to pawn their clothes; for I am able to prove that they do
demand of poor people before they can have a child (that is but fourteen, or
fifteen years of age) buried in one of the out-Church-yards of the great
Parishes (which land is the free gift of the dead, for the help of the poor,
even as Creplegates new Churchyard, or Algat^s, Ros^mary lane, or White
Chapel; Mile-in green, (or others the like;) before (I say) they can have
such a child buried there, it will cost the poorest parent, seven or eight
shillings: Nay, I have known when they have distrusted payment, that they have
affirmed, that they would not bury them, except they had their money paid
before hand: Nay, when any poor man brings out of the remote places of the
city any Corpse to Bedlam (which is the cheapest place that I know) ye when all
things else is discharged, even as, Bearers wages, Grave^^^gers wages, and the
ground paid for also; yet they must be constrained to have a twelve-penny
Priest, to say something over the grave, and he will grudge if he have not more
than a snilling (though he say but a few words without the book) when
(perhaps) all the people that be'left alive in the Family, be not worth a
shilling.

Furthermore, If any poor man have a necessity to work, upon one of their
Saints-dayes, then Mr. Paritor must come, and have a grote, for citing him to
the Court, but if he appear not, he must be Presented, and for not paying
Fees, he shall be Excommunicated, and he shall never be blessed in again, but
(though he be the poorest man in the Kingdom) the price of his blessing will
be a noble at the least: but if he happen to die an Excommunicant, then his
friends must give money to absolve him after he is dead, or else he shall not
be buried in the consecrated Earth: but if his friends will go to the Office,
and give but a matter of five pound for his Absolution, after he is dead; then
he shall be buried in the Consecrated ground; and they will also affirm he
died in the Faith of Christ, ye though he were excommunicated for notorious
sin, and lived and died* obstinately in it.

It is a plain case therefore, that these men are a greater plague to this
Land* then the natural Locusts of Egypt, for they ate up the green things,
but these eat up both green and dry.

Nay, further, I conceive they are more prejudicial to the Common wealth, than
the Frogs that came up upon the Land of Egypt, for they entered into the Oven,
and into the Kneading Trough: and we read not that they ascended higher than
the Kings bed, and the beds of his Servants; but these are exalted above the
Chimney tops, to catch a Smoke-penny from every poor man's house.

Thus you see the mighty Revenewes of the Priests: If I had but time to tell
you of the things which I know (even of the extent of their Revenewes) what is
gained unto the generality of Priests, by granting of Licenses to Midwives, and
to Schoolemasters, with diverse of their own Officers, such as Paritors,
Sumners, and Pursevants, with a number of that Rank, which have strange names
that I know not, It would (as I said before) make all men wonder, how it is
devoured* for they must be freed from all taxations, and have their houses rent
free, and many times eat their bread at other men's tables, and yet (for the
most part) they die poor men, and far in debt, and leave behind them, both
wives and children, destitute of Calling and Maintenance, which is a plain
case to me, that the hand of God is upon this Generation, in cursing that which
they would have blessed. And therefore I will confess that I was overseene (in
the entrance into this Discourse) when I moved you to persuade these men to
bequeath some thing to their brethren, (that are Scholars bred;) for I did not
consider, that though they received much, yet they had but little to give,
because it is not blessed for increase: but I should rather have comforted you,
with giving you knowledge, that God has provided maintenance for his
Ministers; as well as for his People, that they need not bow to you for a
morsel of bread; for God taught his Apostles to work with their hands, as
Paul says, that his hands ministered to his necessities, and those that were
with him; Acts 20. 34. not that Paul might not receive of the people carnal
things, for he declares the contrary in another Scripture, and I hope, all the
Lords people will confess that the labourer is worthy of his hire, and that it
is their duty to make them partakers* of their carnal things, of whom they
receive spiritual things.

Further, you are careful to have them sober, and peaceable, and not to preach
and speak against what is established by Law Page 45.


Indeed (I must tell you) in my judgment, no man can make way for a true
Reformation, except he declare what is evil, before he show what is good.

Further you say, you suppose subscriptions will not be enjoined to forms of
Government and Discipline.

Here you seem to yield that your forms of Government and Discipline be not
of God; then if there be no injunction, none will obey, but if injunctions,
none will obey for conscience; for what good man can yield to an injuction that
is not of God, so then, (you may see) your injunctions have been the way and
means to breed and bring forth a world of hypocrites, as one may easily see by
the Timeservers of your Church.

But you say, that without a toleration we may enjoy in a secret way our Church
fellowship.

Indeed (M. Edwards) we have learned that lesson already* for Christ has
taught us, that we shall fly into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 14
and that the earth shall help us Verse 16.
but sometimes it proves to the danger of our lives, and always to the danger
of our liberty; as it may appear by the practice herein London, for though we
meet never so privately, and peaceably, yet such Cattle as your self* are
always bleeting in the ears of your Parish Officers, and Constables, with
your other Officers, even till you move the Lord Major himself to be your
drudge, and as your horn, which you push forward for the destruction of our
bodies, when he has laid violent hands on them, for it is evident that it has
been to the loss of some of their lives; and this is the liberty we have in
this Kingdom and all through the instigation of you Priests.

But you say, though some of the more sober and conscientious Ministers and
people could use it better, yet the Brownists and Anabaptists, and weak
brethren would be apt to scandal: and therefore to avoid scandal, you would
i^si^^ate that we are bound to neglect the whole form of Church worship.

I told you before, and I tell you now, that you are afraid to have your own
glory ecclipsed and by this all men may see, (and by all your formers answers
also) that you would have us to enjoy in this Kingdom, neither Ordinances, nor
conscience.

The next thing you lay down, is the judgment of an ancient Father; But
indeed he is as sound in the faith as your self, for he would have men to
join to Churches that have no power. Page 46. li. ^^.


And this being the sixth answer that you have given to their third reason, you
entreat them to lay all your six together, and to consider s^^ly, whether God
require, unless they have a toleration to leave the Kingdom to run many
hazards, and dangers, when as they may enjoy, so much at home, without a
Toleration, as you say you have opened to these six answers.

To ^ch I answer, when they are laid all six together, they make but a piece of
an answer to one of their Reasons, and this piece of your answer is stuffed
full of falicies, as has been already proved, and may further appear, by the
conclusion of all here, when you say they may have so much at home, for it has
been proved already, that they can have nothing at home, either in respect of
liberty, or worship; (but what they must have by stealth;) for when they would
enjoy the Ordinances of God, which are Jewels, which you would have none to
have but your selves, that so you might seem glorious; If any (I say) will
presume to borow the Jewels, and carry them away, you will pursue after them;
and you know it was the practice of the Egyptians of old, for they would have
suffered the Israelites to have gone away empty, and left their cattle behind
them, so that they might have had nothing with them to have offered sacrifice
withal; and I pray you were not the Southsayers the cause of this? by
withstanding Moses and Aaron, against the children of Israel, even by the false
Figures which they cast before the eyes of Pha^aoh, to harden Phar^ahs heart,
even as you Priests do at this day.

And thus I have laid together your six Reasons, and weighed them; but one
truth is sufficient to over weigh them all.

But yet you have also a seventh Answer which is by it self: and it is this,
That if they will not be satisfied (say you) without setting up Churches; it is
better they should get out of the Kingdom.

Besides, you would have all others that be of this mind, to leave the Land,
and go to New England, that cannot be satisfied, but that they must erect
Churches to the disturbing of the peace of three Kingdoms.

Truly (Mr. Edwards) you show your self a bloody minded man, that would have
the Innocent suffer for the faults of them that are guilty. Was not the sending
of your Masse-bookes into Scotland the cause of the disturbance? and has it
not appeared plain enough to the Parliament and to the Scots, before the
Parliament sat, that the Bishops and Priests were the cause of the
disturbance? I doubt not but you have read both the Scottish Intentions, and
their Demands, with their Declarations, which have plainly manifested, who and
what was the cause of the disturbance, it was not the meeting of a handful of
the Lords people, which ever sought and do seek the good and welfare of the
three Kingdoms, with the life and happy reign of their Sovereign Lord the
King, who always sue unto God for the peace of the Kingdom, in whose peace
they may enjoy peace: but contrariwise, it plainly appears, that it was you
and your Fathers house which caused this variance.

But say you, it will be no great harm for many of them to go away.

I answer, It is like you apprehend the Judgments of God coming upon you, and
you think to be eased, by driving out the Lords people in haste.

Further, you say, you would rather go to the uttermost parts of the earth to
live in a mean and hard condition, rather than you would disturb the peace or
good of three Kingdoms.

For Answer, to this I must tell you, I would you had considered this before
you had done it. But now seeing God of his mercy has reconciled them again,
it may be the wisdom of you and your fellows, to depart unto Rome, that Gods
true Religion may be set up here in England without Popish Injunctions, that so
the last error be not worse than the first; for you say, It is better that one
perish than Unity; therefore (in my judgment) it is better that they should
run the hazard, who have occasioned the strife.

Further, you plead for your self and for hundreds of your brethren, that you
have borne the brunt of the times, and yet you do profess that you will
submit to what is established by Law, because you hope it will be blessed and
glorious.

I tell you, you are even like Isachers Ass, and so are the rest of your
fellows, even willing to stoop down between two burdens, because ease is
good: for the Law indeed makes every thing seem glorious; but for any brunt
that you have borne in these last times; I think it has not over-loaded you;
for I have not heard that you have been at two pence cost, to maintain the
Lords people in prison; and therefore you are very unlike to Obadiah, for
instead of hiding of the Lords people, you cry out upon the Parliament to have
them hunted; and this is a great brunt indeed, (if it be well considered) and
it is doubt it will cost you dear, (by that time you have paid your reckoning)
except God give you repentance.

But you further express, that you would not set up true Churches against a
true Church.

I answer, neither would these Independent men, I hope, for those things which
God teaches his servants to do, be not against the truth, but for the truth,
neither can they be any cause of Divisions, or heart-burnings, between either
Ministers or People.

And thus you may see, and behold, that your seventh Answer (to their third
Reason) that you have now left alone, is a Noune Adjective in respect of
proving any thing that you brought it for.

YOu say their fourth Reason is, that if the Ministers and Churches be not
tolerated, they are afraid that in time they shall draw most of the good people
out of the Land after them.

And for answer to this, you say, you suppose they rather hope than fear it;
and that, (say you) plainly shows, they have a good conceit of themselves,
and of their own way.

For answer to you, I say, that this your Answer is but a Supposition, neither
do I know whether it be their Reason, for methinks it sounds somewhat like
Nonsense, but your Supposition will not prove them to have a good conceit of
themselves, neither of any way of their own; for it is the way of the Lord
Jesus Christ, that they plead for.

Secondly, you say, you fear too, but not as they do, but your fear is,
least toleration should draw away many good people.

I pray you trouble not your self, too much, for if there be no toleration,
the good people will fly from you, and stand a far off, and wait for the
Reformation which you have all this while promised.

But now at last you seem to make a doubt of any Reformation at all, when you
say, If the Ceremontes and Liturgy stand in full force * which presupposes,
that you conceive they will stand Page 48. lin. 14.
still; but no doubt, but if they be settled by Law, they will seem glorious to
you, although they are in themselves Romish Traditions.

Further, you add, if these stand in force, and Churches tolerated, they will
make brave work in a short time.

I answer, you are so fearful least the Lords people should enter into the
city of promise, that it is very like you never intend to enter in your self;
and that makes you gather up your hopes, in the midst of all your fears:
setting a work your confidence, that God will preserve many judicious, and
advised Christians from your way; and therefore you counsel them, to whom you
speak, to let them be well shipped, and a Reformation in Government and
Ministers; and then you say your fear will be over.

Truly methinkes you patch your matter together very disorderly: for you have
many times said, that upon a Reformation they would communicate with you.

But now you would have them well shipped, which I think is the Reformation Page
48. lin. 20.
which you desire: as may appear by the confused speech which you make
afterward; for you say; When there is a Reformation amongst you in Government
and Ministers, that fear is over with you; and your Reason is, because when
that which first bred these men What it is that bred the Separates.
is taken away, which (say you) was the violent pressing of Ceremonies, and the
casting out of good Ministers; and many notorious persons being suffered in the
Church of England without all censures, shall be removed; many (say you) will
not be bred, and others will be satisfied, and some godly painful Ministers
of the Church of England would out-preach them, and outlive them.

To this I answer, you seemed in the beginning of your Answer, to make them
proud persons, or conceited of themselves But now methinkes, I hear you boast
very much of your self, and others of your Church.

But I think it may be very true: for you cannot choose but out-preach them, if
you preach them out of the Kingdom.

And it is very like you may outlive them also; if you can but banish them
into some hard country, or else get them into some stinking prison, as you and
the rest of your Fathers house have done very lately.

But further you add, that you and your fellows, will compare with them for
all excellencies and abilities.

Me thinks it had been more credit for you to have given your neighbors
leave to speak.

But now you have advanced your self, you labor to cast them down, for you
say, you knew many of them long before they fell to this way, but you have not
seen any of them better, nor more profitable, for you say, whilst they were in
the Church of England, they preached often, and now seldom.

I Answer, it is very like they dare not tell such as you when they preach,
that cry out to the Parliament to disturb their meetings.

Further, you say, they go looser in their apparel and hair.

I answer, I know some indeed that have been constrained to change their
apparel for fear of persecution, and (it may be) the hair you were offended
at, might be some Perriw^gge, which some of them have been constrained through
fear to put on, to blind the eyes of the Bishops Bloodhounds, when they have
come to take them.

Further, you exclaim against them, that they take less care for public
things that concern the glory of God, and the salvation of men's souls.

I answer, if their care be so little, you may wonder, what makes them to take
this pains, and care, to travel out of a far country, to sue to the
Parliament, by humble petition, for freedom of conscience, and liberty for
Gods public worship, which are things most concerning the glory of God, and
the salvation of men's souls.

Further, you accuse them, that their spirits are grown narrow, like their
Churches, and that they grow strange, reserved, and subtle; further, you say,
in a word, they mind little else, but the propagation of their Independent
way.

For answer whereof I say to you, that it is no marvel though their spirits
grow narrow, toward such an Adve^sarie as your self, and great cause they
have to be strange toward you, and reserved and subtle also.

But whereas you say their Churches be narrow:

I say they are even like the way to ^e^v^n or the gate that leads unto life,
which is so narrow, that such as you can hardly enter in thereat.

But if their greatest care be (as you say) to set up the Independent way Page
49. ^ 9. 10.
(which is the way of God:) This still crosses your former slander of them,
that they little mind the public good, and salvation of men's souls. But that
this is true (namely, that they mind little else but the propagation of their
Independent way) you bring the Protestation Protested to witness, which
Testimony makes them peaceable men, because they desire to meddle with no man's
business but their own.

And if they mind little else but to set up the Independent way, then it will
also cross your following speech, ( which you say, you speak from your
conscience and experience) that never any of them, had so large a spirit for
good, after they fell into that way, nor tookesuch care (you say) for the
propagation of the Gospel, and preaching the Word to men without

I tell you, indeed if they did not take care to preach the Word to men
without, they would never come to preach amongst you, much less would they
then sue for liberty so to do, (as the Welsh Ministers have done) if they had
not a desire to inform the ignorant, in those truths that God has revealed to
them.

And therefore you may see in your accusations against them, you are proved a
very slanderer, and have taken upon you the office of Satan, the old accuser
of the Brethren.

But you conceive God never honored them so much afterward.

But seeing it is but your conception, it matters not; for if they were active
for God, and did famously and worthily before they entered into the way of God,
I am sure they could not but be more active afterward; for when a man is in a
Journey (especially if he know or conceive himself to be out of the way) he
goes on heavily till he meets with some directer, either to inform him that
he is in the right way, or to direct him how he shall get into it; and being
settled in his right way, he goes on more cheerfully, and actively than he
could do in the time of his doubting; even so it must needs be with these men,
as I said before.

Again, you say, that the men that hold those principles of Separation, God
did never honor much.

I answer, it seems you think Gods thoughts are as your thoughts, and because
you seek for the praise of men and have it, and a few men honor them: and
because Christ's flock is a little flock* therefore you imagine they are not
honored of God, which is very carnal reasoning.

^. But as you have slandered the men all this while; so now you here slander
their way (and principles) which way is the way of God, and whose principles
are Gods truths; yet (you say) there is such a malignitie cleaves to it, even
as does to the Episcopacie. This is a very great slander, to compare Godswayes
to the ways of Satan, in saying there is such a malignity cleaving to it,
which alters men's spirits, and makes their hearts worse; and yet you here
confess, that many of them continue good in the maine.

Thus much for your Fourth Reason.
YOu say, their fifth Reason is, That this is no other but envy in the
Ministers, that makes them against Toleration, because they fear their people
will desert from them, and come to us, being so pure in Ordinances, and
Churches; and thus you say the Protestation Protested speaks.

Your answer to this Reason is,

1. That it is not out of envy, but you hold their practice sinful and
unwarrantable to separate from your Churches, and to erect such Congregations,
and therefore you say, you speak against it, and that you here promise to make
good in a following Discourse.

For answer to this, I must tell you, that it is not your denying it to be out
of Envy, that will clear you, for there is nothing appears more plainer,
than that envy against the truth, and the Professors thereof, was the cause of
your writing against Toleration.

And that it is through fear your people will desert, is plain, by your own
confession in your Fourth Reason; where you say, that if the Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, stand in force, and Toleration be granted, they will make brave
work in a short time* and yet you hope some judicious Christians (as you say)
will be kept from their way.

But in that you here say, you hold the practice sinful and unwarrantable

You have made that part of your judgment known already before; but your
judgment was grounded upon no true Principle; and therefore it has been
already proved to be emoneous.

And whereas you say, you will make it good to be sinful in a following
Discourse:

I answer, If you can but make men believe this, you will work a wonder. But I
know it is impossible, for you to make good your promise, and therefore I
cannot expect performance.

Now to clear your self.

2. You say, it cannot be counted envy in Ministers, to be unwilling to have
their flocks, and people fall from them.

I answer, By so saying, you rather confirm their Reason than remove it,
(namely) that it was your fear of the de^erting of your people.

But for you to insinuate, that the people that be called out of a way of
sin, and brought into the way of grace, and liberty* be stol^^^ away, and
tempted away by strangers (as you would make it) concluding that it is as
tolerable for children to forsake their parents, renouncing the (...) that bare
them, and the ^^pp^s that gave them suck* throwing dirt in the face of father
and mother, as it is for a man to forsake Idolatrous worship; this is an unjust
comparison, and crosses the whole tenor of the Scripture.

Now you would make this your own case, for you allude to your spiritual
chidren, who (say you) are the fruit of your labors.

I pray you, how can you count the Parish of St. Elens your spiritual
children, seeing you are there but an hireling; and as you have not begotten
them to the Faith, so you have not taken the charge of them, to watch over them
as a Spiritual Father, and you will only preach to them so long as any will
pay you wages, but no longer; how then have you converted them to God? from
what have you converted them? or what have you converted them too? have you
turned them from serving dumb Idols, to serve the living God? I have heard of
no great change of them, nor of any other where you have preached; you found
them in the Church of England, and you found them Christians, (in your own
judgment) and you know they were baptized, when you came to them; and in the
same Church where you found them, there you leave them; I pray you, how have
you begotten them to God? you found them under a false power, submitting to a
false worship, and you justify them as men begotten to God, and you justify
their standing there. Thus do you sow pillowes of flatteries under their
elbowes.

But you need not to fear any man's coming to steal your Disciples away by
night, as the Jews gave out falsely of Christ's natural body, for that was but
a lie; therefore let no man presume to lie by their example.

But you say therefore you ought to watch against us, (and ought not to sleep)
least they should be stolen Page 50. lin 23. (...) lin. 29.
away.

I answer, so did the Jews watch the natural body of Christ and yet he by his
power raised himself, and also departed from them; even so by the same power
will he raise from the death of sin, many that are amongst you, and will
cause them to separate themselves from your false worshipping, and from you
that are false worshippers, and he will tell them where he feeds his sheep,
and causes them to lie down at noone. Cant. 1. 7.


Neither can you clear your self by saying, you ^i^ty them, and love them,
and would not have such a sword as a toleration put into their hands (as you
are pleased to say) to hurt them, though some amongst them (say you) might
perhaps use it better.

I pray you fear not this, (which you here call an error on the right hand)
but rather fear your Church, if (as you say) your Liturgy and Ceremonies
stand still in force, which (you say) were the causes that bred the Separates.
Page 48. l. 23, 24.


I tell you, if the sa ne cause remain you may justly fear, it will take the
same effect; you have also as great cause to fear the profaneness and
Atheism, which is seated in the hearts of most of your people, but only that
you bless your self, in hope that all ignorant and scandalous persons shall
be driven out. But I pray you tell me, whither do you intend to drive them? if
you leave them any where in the Land, they will be still of your Church: except
you will make you a new Church: But if you should drive them out of the Land,
you would leave many places of the Land uninhabited; for the generality of the
people (in most parts) be ignorant, and profane; and thus you may see your
self in a great straight, and therefore you have great cause to fear.

Further, you say, the Author would intimate that the honest souls are with
them, and would be for their way; but as for those that are against their way
and Toleration, they are not such honest souls.

If this Author be the Protestation Protested, you have wrested his words, for
he has not said they are not such honest souls neither has he entered into
judgment against any.

But further, (you say) you would have them know that the honest souls are not
only with them: for in the Church of England (say you) there ever have been,
and are honest Ministers and people, that have rejected our way, and any that
fell to it, nay the greatest Nonconformists, and most able in that way (you
say) have written the most against our way, and labored upon all occasions to
preserve the people from falling to us.

For answer whereof, I must tell you, that the Ministers, and people, were
never the honester for 'rejecting of that way, (which has been proved to be
the way of God) though they were the greatest Nonconformists in the world: for
it is not our way properly, but the gift of the Father, which he has given us,
to walk in; and surely, it is no sign of honesty to commend the Saints in
their infirmities, or to condemn them in their works of piety; I say, it is
no sign of an honest soul to speak evil of such a holy way: I tell you, I
take Hugh Latimer to be an honest soul, though he have declared both by word
and writing against such as you; and affirmed, that a lay man fearing God, is
much more fit to understand the holy Scripture, then a proud and arrogant
Priest; yea, then the Bishop himself be he never so great and glistering in
all his pontificalls: and such honest souls (though they are not of the
Clergy, but of those whom you call the Layetie:) are the fittest men on the
earth to make Churches, and to choose their own Ministers (as I said before)
though they be Tradesmen; and such as these have dependancie upon Christ
alone, whose way is properly the sincere way of God. And as for any that have
writ against this way (or against those who walk uprightly in it*) it will not
make much for their account, for that part of their work shall burn (as well
as yours) though they may be saved: and as for these Authors which here you
bring, which have been so careful (as you say) to keep the people from
falling into that way; I have read some of their books, and found the most of
them, prophecy sad things against he Church of England, except she repent.

THeir sixth Reason (you say) is, that they are good men, and men of great
gifts, and therefore they should be tolerated to have such Churches, it is
pity they should leave the Land, and we loose their prayers.

Indeed (Mr. Edwards) this may be some other, man's Reason, on their behalf,
but I hardly believe, that they lived so far from good neighbors, that they
must thus set forth their own praise.

But for answer to this Reason, in the first place; you say, the better men
they be, and the more able, the worse, to set up separated Churches.

To this I answer, that I ever conceived by the Scripture, that those that
Christ ordained, to plant his Churches were good men, as it was said of
Barnabas, that he was a good man Acts ^^^ 24.
and the very like was said of Stephen Acts 6. 5. ^. 10.
and therefore me thinks you are shreudly mistaken.

But further, you say, they will the more endanger the peace of the Kingdom,
and make the Schisms greater.

I answer, If it be good and able men that endanger the peace of the Kingdom,
you may do well to persuade the Parliament, to keep still in your Church, all
the dumb and drunken Priests: for they are bad enough, and unable to do good,
and yet of my knowledge, they are very able to disturb the peace, and to breed
strife, and to bring Gods judgments upon the Land, which is able to make a
greater Schism than you are a ware of.

Secondly, you say, for their prayers, you have the benefit of them, as well
when they are absent, as present, and some of them have sa^ (say you) they
prayed more for England when out, of it than in it.

Indeed if they did so, they did well, for that was their duty; but I suppose
you (for your particular) had little benefit of those prayers, and that,
because God has hardened your heart, even against them, and all good men.

Thirdly, For these their prayers you have rewarded them with an accusation
(namely) that they left the Kingdom, when it was in greatest danger, and in
most need of help, and provided for themselves to keep in a whole skin.

I answer, if they did evil in it, that evil is to be passed by; for it is
very probable, that they did know that the GREAT CANONS were already made, and
that they were mightily charged, and overcharged, as it may appear by their
shivering in pieces: but if they had held to have been shot off; they might
easily perceive, that they might beat holes in their own skins, as well as in
other men's, and they seeing the plague before hand, might be borne with to hide
themselves.

But you say you stood without them here in the gappe, and prevailed with God.

I answer, It may be conceived, that they prevailed with God, who praye*d so
much for England, when they were out of it, for God will not hear sinners,
Ioh. 9. 31.
therefore you cannot expect that God should hear you, so long as you justify
the abominations of your bespotted Church; and you know Moses prevailed for
Egypt, when he was out of the city. * Exodus 9. 29. 33.


But you say it is better to want their company, than to buy it at so dear a
rate as a toleration* and you say you question not, but the King donte will do
well enough without them.

Is it possible, that you should enjoy the benefit of the prayers of those
that you so much slight, and set so little by their company, that rather then
they shall have liberty, to worship God in a peaceable way (by your will) they
should depart the Kingdom, when it is proved, by the Word of God, that Gods
servants are the strength and glory of the Kingdom: for even as the Prophets
were the Charets and Horsemen of Israel, so are they that fear the Lord* a
support to the Kingdom and Commonwealth wherein they live.

But as for your Kingdom of Priests, it shall neither stand without them, nor
with them, for though the Prophets sought to heal Babel, yet it could not be
healed, for your horns shall be knocked off; and methinks I hear the decree
gone forth, that your Kingdom is divided, and therefore you have need, to set
down your resolution, that it shall not long stand, but the Kingdom of
England may safely stand with Toleration.

Fourthly, you say for this Objection* of being good men, you will answer it at
large in another Tractate, wherein (you say) you shall mind men of many
dangers that may arise to them from good and eminent men; and further, you say
you will fully show what little strength is in that Reason, and clear also
many things in reference to that Objection.

I answer, when I see this performed, I will take it into consideration, and
then you may hear more of my mind; in the mean while, I rest in the
Scriptures; which satisfy me, that good men ever bring a blessing.

The next thing you bring is this question (namely) whether Page 52.
conscientious men, who agree with you in the maine in points of Doctrine, and
practice, may be tolerated, and spared, in some things wherein they differ from
that which is commonly received.

Indeed you have made diverse answers to this already for it was before your
own question, in some of your Reasons alleged against them, where you
affirm, that you justify much, both bearing and forbearing, and have also set
the Counsel of ancient Fathers before them, to teach them to hear with others
both in points of Doctrine and practice; wherein they may something differ from
that which is commonly received.

But here further, you add a more large answer, That you still say it is your
judgment* that there should be bearing in many differences of opinions and
practice, so as Christians ought not to judge nor censure one another, nor
refuse communion and fellowship, by ^ot admitting men into their Churches, and
to the Ordinances.

You have seemed (all this while) to be afraid least they should admit too many
into their Churches, and now you seem to say, it is the fault of the
Independent Churches to deny* communion to many Saints* for some differences in
judgment, about Church Government and Orders. Now if this be true (as you say
it is) they are so far from stealing away your members* that they will not
receive them into fellowship, if there be differences in judgment, When Stephen
Gardener harped upon unity, unity: yea Sir (said Latimer) but in Verity, not
in Popery: better is a Diversiti^* ^^^^ ^^ Unity in Popery.
for which you here seem to blame them* and therefore I think you would have
them open the mouths of their Churches wider, even as wide as yours. But the
Scripture has declared, that the gates of the holy city, are of an equal
wideness, for they are never shut, Rev. 21. 25. and yet they are so well
watched by the Angels of God, even the Ministers of Christ Jesus, that there
shall be no unclean thing suffered to enter in thereat, etc. Rev. 21. 27.
Here you may see if any of you attempt to come in (who are so ignorant and
scandalous and spotted (as you say they be) they shall not be suffered amonst
us; for indeed they are fit for no society, but the society of your Fathers
house: yet (I say) if any of these do creep^ in, it is through the neglect of
the Portor, which the Lord has set to watch, or else it must needs be by their
cunning transfiguring themselves to be that which they are not.

But (you say) you would not have men forced to change their minds, and
opinions, by casting them violently out of the Ministry and Church, which (you
say) was the practice of many in these late times, and has caused, so many
Schisms and strifes amongst you. Page 52.


Well, here all men may take notice, that it was the cruelty of the Clergy,
that caused the Shismes and strifes, by forcing men to change their minds, and
not the practice of the Separation (as you here acknowledge) therefore in this
confession you have crossed the tenor of many of your other arguments, as that
the Separates have caused strife in the three Kingdoms, and that they had made
the rents and Schisms, which now you acknowledge to be done by them (that
force men to change their minds) which are the Clergy of England.

Further, you say, that you approve not of such practices, but desire to be a
follower, and lover of the ways of peace and communion, with any who agree in
the maine, and have something of God and Christ in them.

I answer, if you approve not of such practices, I hope you will not hereafter
be an occasion to move Magistrates to force men to change their minds, and so
justify your self in that you condemn in others, for you confess your
self, that though these Independent men's spirits be grown narrow (even closed
up from you) yet they continue good in the maine; Page 49. lin. 31. ^.
and then sure they have something of God, and of Christ in them.

You say further, that the practice of the ancient Fathers, that pleaded for
bearing, are infinitely pleasing to you.

I answer, if they be infinitely pleasing to you, I hope you will never be
unpleased again, with any of the Lords servants, about keeping of days, which
you say was the diffierence between these Fathers Page 52. lin. 33. 34.


Moreover, you seem to infer, that because Siprian (whom you confess, erred
in the point of rebaptizing) would not condemn them, who were of a contrary
opinion: that therefore men may be tolerated in their differences of opinions.

But here you have brought an erring Father (by your own confession) to
persuade us to keep communion with those that are contrary minded; but the
Apostle exhorts us to labor to be of one mind, that we may walk by one
rule, but if any be otherwise minded, we ought to wait till God reveile
further, and not to force him to be of our mind, till he has faith in
himself, grounded upon the Word of God. But that ground which you have (that
men should be tolerated in their differences of opinions) is built upon the
sayings of this Father Ciprian.

But presently you come with your provisall, which has quite altered the Case,
your provisall is (they may be tolerated) so long as they keep communion with
the Church, and submit to the Discipline and orders, and be peaceable, and not
speak against what is established by common consent nor practice to the
scandal and contempt of the Magistrate and Church.

I answer, this is but even a crossing of your own speech again, for this
constraining of men to yield to whatsoever is established by common consent, is
but a forcing of men to change their minds; which you said before, was the
cause of Schisms and strifes, and though you approve not of it in others, yet
(it seems) you could freely practice it your self, as may plainly appear by
what you speak hereafter, which is the very same thing which you have often
spoke already; that is, If a few men (half a dozen, or half a score) refuse
communion with your Church, and vent opinions every where, to the disturbing of
the Kingdom, and drawing disciples after them, though they were Ministers of
gold, and had the tongues of men and Angels, they should not be tolerated.

Now you have struck up the stroke, but it will not serve your turn; for this
your vain insinuation ( that they disturb the Kingdom and draw Disciples
after them,) ha^h been many a time disproved already, because it has been
oftentimes repeated by you, to fill up your matter; nay your own words have
disproved your self* where you say, they will not receive them into fellowship
except they be of their minds. For this see his eigth Reason against
Toleration. page 32. lin. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.


But further (you say) you would have us to read Calvin upon that subject, in
his last Epistle to Felerius: The matter you say is this, that if He would not
be reduced into order, the Ministers should tell him, that he is not to be
accounted as a brother, because he disturbed the common discipline.

What the Disciscipline was that he disturbed I cannot tell, but you say it was
a Discipline that was common, which makes it appear to me, that it was like
your Booke-worship or your Common Prayer-booke, which is common as far as the
Pope has any pre-eminence or jurisdiction; and that you confess this Common
Discipline, was not the Discipline of God, neither a Discipline that you
approve of, appears by your own words.

That you judge it not of God, appears here in your following words; where you
grant this to be the authority of men, and that it is not to be sought after
it: etc. and you know the things that they decreed was, that he that would not
submit to the Synod must be put out of his place; and you say, that you would
not have any cast out of the Ministry, or Church, because it breeds Schisms
Page 26.
and by this it appears, that you allow not of this manner of Discipline, and
by this one may also plainly see, that you are made all of contradictions, as
it may plainly appear in the very next words following, where you conclude,
that the authority of men is not to be sought, when the Spirit of God
pronounces of such, etc. and here you quote the 1* Cor. 11. 19. where you
would make Paul an author of casting men out of their places, because they
would not yield to the Synod. I pray you has Paul in this Chapter discoursed
of any such thing? was not the controversy here about long hair, about which
Paul says the Church has no such custom of contention; and does not Paul
himself put the thing to be judged by the Church? in the thirteenth verse,
where he says, Judge in your selves, Is it comely that a woman pray unto God
uncovered? and further, in the 14th* verse, Does not nature it self teach us,
that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him? and was not this Doctrine
grounded in the Law and Prophets, and confirmed and established by God long
before the Apostles time? yes surely it was, and therefore it will not serve
your turn, to prove that Synods may decree Customs, for the Church of God;
but it will serve your turn to prove what you desire, that is, a dependancie
between Rome and England, and that the Bishops of Rome and England by their
Synods, should make all their shavelings to crouch and submit, and bow to their
injunctions; for your own practices prove it, by your very submitting, be it
never so contrary to the Law of God, and of Nature it self* if it be but
confirmed by a Synod; and therefore it appears that it is your malignity of
spirit, which causes you to write as you do.

But you say you do it from a zeal;

But I tell you, it is a zeal against Gods glory and the good of his Church,
and against the preservation of purity of Doctrine, and holiness of life,
even at the best like unto the zeal which Paul had, before he knew Christ,
when he went with Letters from the high Priest, to pe^secute the Church of God,
and when he was their Pursevant, to enter into houses, and to hale men and
women to prison Acts 8. 3.
if Paul should have said for himself, as you would now plead for your self,
that peace could not stand with toleration, and therefore it was meet to
disturb their meetings, it would not have served his turn, for if God had not
stricken him down in the way he should never have seen the Lord Jesus (but to
his confusion) though he was a man every way as well informed as your self.

Yea, ^e might have pleaded as well as you, that he did it not out of passion,
but that he had thoughts of the Church way before; for you may know that Paul
was a member of the Church of the Jews, which was erected by God, and was
zealous for the Law, and mighty in knowledge being brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, Act. 22. 3^
and also a free borne Roman, Ver. 2^.
and yet he neither knew Christ, Ver. 8.
nor what Christ would have him to do, Ver. 10.
but he thought other ways of himself, or else he would not have persecuted
the professors of the truth, but that he imagined there was evil in the
practice of the truth; even as you say you apprehend evil in the practice of
Independancie, though they see it not that practice it, because (say you) they
are engaged in it, but it was ignorance in Paul, so to think, and so (at the
best) it is ignorance in you. Therefore you have no need to say, that you see
more evil in it, then the Independants can do, but you should rather have
said you seem to see, for you cannot see an evil where none is.

But you wish that the Independent Ministers, would consider what has been
written.

I answer, Indeed (for my part) if their considerations be as mine, and though
they consider it as I do, without partiality, yet they will find nothing in
it, to persuade them to lay aside all thoughts of setting up separated
Assemblies (which has been plainly proved to be the way of God) much less
that they should come, and grow into one body, and join in one way with you,
so long as you have so foul a body ( which you confess you have) and your way
so contrary to the way of Christ, being indeed away of your own devising.

And touching the counsel of Mr Calvin to this purpose.

I say, If he should counsel, as you counsel, it would be to me but a as
blast of breath; for we are to take the council of the holy Ghost, by the
mouth of Paul, which bids us follow him, as he follows Christ.* 1 Cor. 11. 1.


But you would have us to consider, what Paul requires in a Pastor, of which
things you say, this is not the least, that he ought not to be selfe-willed;
that is (say you) to be adicted to his own proper judgment.

I answer, I have considered this text already, and do conceive, that this
rule of Paul is broken by the Pope of Rome, and the Popes of England, which are
adicted to their own wills, and set up their own proper judgments for a Law;
which evil and error Paul saw in his time, when he said, the mystery of
iniquity began then to work. * ^ These. 2. 7.


Moreover, I do acknowledge that it is a virtue in a go^d Pastor from his heart
to fear contentions, and not to differ from his brethren, ^nlesse it ^e in
cases greatly necessary, but what is all this which you have said to the matter
in hand, you know Paul spoke to the Churches planted in the order of Christ's
Gospel, and not by the order of the man of Sin, and therefore it will not help
you to call them again, to consider what they may enjoy in your Church, for I
have proved it plainly before in my reply to your Answer to their third
Reason, that a Saint of God can enjoy no thing in your Church without sin,
and therefore what you think you have showed before in your three first
Reasons is nothing at all; for though you say it is but some circumstances that
be wanting, about the manner and form of Discipline. I tell you you want the
substance, even Christ to be the head of your Church, and have made you a head
of Archbishops and Lord Bishops, which head is full of leprosy.

But here you have brought Mr. Calvin to cross you shrewdly, and you would
have us to believe him; and indeed with my heart I believe it, whether Mr.
Calvin speak it or no; you say he affirms that the Scriptures express the
substance of discipline; this is very true; but in another place you say, that
Calvin said, there is no express precept concerning this matter: ^or this see
Reasons against Independancie, page 5. lin. 12. ^^.
And the like you rehearse presently in your next words for you say he
affirms, that the form of exercising it, must be ordained by the Ministers
for edification, because it is not prescribed by the Lord.

Does not Clavin and you both cross your selves here? has Christ indeed
written in his Word the substance of Discipline and not the form? you would
make (indeed) the substance of discipline without form, and void, even as the
earth it self was, when darkness was upon the face of the deep: so you would
have men conceive there is a substance, but they must have no rule to know
where to find it; for you say, the form of exercising it, is not prescribed.
Here you would make Christ wanting to his own house, for we know that Moses
had the form of the house, as well as the substance of the house, and the
form of every Ordinance, with every, circumstance that was to be used, in and
about Gods worship, and the form was given unto Moses by God himself and
Moses had not power to alter any thing in the form, neither had any of the
Ministers which came after him: but the wicked Priests did alter the form, and
Apostated from the truth of those Ordinances taught by Moses; even so the
wicked Antichristians apostated from the form of wholesome words given by Paul,
which was to follow him as he followed Christ.

And also from the rule of our Savior Christ given to all his Apostles, that
they should teach the people what he commanded them, ( Matthew* 28. 20.) And this
(you may see) was not only in substance but in form also, for Paul expresses
to the Corinthims, the very form of breaking of bread, which he had received
of the Lord Jesus; 1 Cor. 11. 23.
and by this you may see you have given the holy Ghost the lie, even as Calvin
also, affirming, that the form of exercising it, is not presribed by the Lord;
and therefore I would have you* (Mr. Edwards) to take the Counsel your self,
that you give unto others, for it is very good counsel.

First, that you please not your self in your own Opinions.

Secondly, that you be not so adicted to your own judgment, but remember the
danger that Calvin lays down here, that a man being wedded to his own
Judgment, so soon as ever an Ocation offers it self, will be a Schismaticke;
and I have told you already, that this was the first occasion of Schism and
Apostacy, from the truth of the Gospels worship, that being dark in their
minds, and judgeing the substance of Gods worship to be without form; and as
they them selves (so presuming) took upon them to prescribe a form
themselves, so they being wedded to their own judgment, did Schism from the
truth of the Scripture.

Thus you say you have delivered your own soul.

But to whom, or from what you have delivered it, I cannot tell.

But you say further: you hope the brethren, will withdraw their petitions,
that they may not be read in the honorable house of Commons, but, if they
should be read (you say) you hope the House will cast them out. For this see
his Book page 55.


I Answer, That they should withdraw their Petitions, is but one of your vain
hopes, for they had more need now to petion then ever they had, both to God
and men* seeing such a Goliath as you, musters up so many forces against them.

But the later of these your vain hopes, does manifest the malice of your
heart, in that you hope the house will cast their pe^itions out?

Are you so void of true piety toward that Honorable House? or judge you that
House so void of common Reason? being as they are indeed the very Eyes of the
whole land; the Ears of the whole land, and the Tongue of the whole land; yea
the hand and power of the whole land: being so as I conceive in my simplicity,
would you have them, I say to be blind of one eye? and to look upon the
Petitions and complaints of some of the people of the land, and not upon all?
would you have them so partial? would you have them also deaf of one ^are?
that they should not hearken to the cries and petitions, and complaints of all
the Kings subjects, one as well as another? would you have them also so
defective in their tongue, that they should not be for the praise of them that
do well, as well as for the punishment of evil doers? nay, seeing they are
called Gods, Psalm. 8^. 1. 6.
would you have their hands so shortened, that they should not once stretch them
forth, to support and help the poor afflicted members of Jesus Christ? Then
indeed you would have them very unlike unto Moses, even as unlike as your
selves are unto Aaron.

Would you have this House to exercise their power upon persons before they
have made due trial of the cause? (by hearing witnesses speak on both sides:
truly (Mr. Edwards) if you would (as it appears plain it is your mind,)
then I will submit to the judgment of both the Houses of Parliament, whether
you be not a man void of common Reason; for he is a fool that judges a matter
before he know it.

And you are not only void of Reason your self, but you would have the
Parliament to be like you; for if the Parliament should judge a man before they
hear his cause, they would be like the Court at Lambeth, which were used to
sit in the high Priests Hall, judgeing matters without due trial.

Further, you say you are persuaded, that it will never be said of this
Parliament, that they opened a door for Toleration.

For Answer to this, I must tell you, that I conceive, they may receive a
Petition, and yet not open a door for Toleration; I mean for such a
Toleration as you here speak of, for setting up Churches against Churches, for
that is not the Toleration that we plead for, but your evil conclusion.

And therefore you may pray, if you will, that that door may be kept shut.

And we will pray also that all doors may be kept shut, that will let any
evils into the Kingdom in process of time, least that any succeeding
generations, should have cause to write in their Chronicles of this Parliament,
as it was written of Naaman the Syrian; that is (as you say, (it will be said
of them) but they granted a Toleration.

Moreover, we desire nothing at their hands, that may cast a dark shadow upon
their glorious light.

But that which we desire, is liberty of conscience to practice Gods true
worship in the land wherein we were borne, which will be no blemish to any
Christian Magistrate to grant, nor for any Counsel of state to establish.

And therefore you should not have concluded this your Discourse against
independancie, and against Toleration, before you had offered it to the trial
before some lawful Committee chosen by the Parliament, to hear both you and
them; and then if you could have maintained your Church of England (which you
plead for) with your Synods, and Counsels, Ceremonies, and Booke-worship,
Canons, and Sensures, Citations, Degradations, and Excommunications, with your
Absolutions, to be founded upon the substance of that Worship and Discipline,
which you say Calvin affirms, is expressed in the Scriptures* then you might
with the more show of honesty have admoninished the Parliament, to have cast
out their Petitions, but till then you may lay your hand upon your mouth, and
never for shame affirm, that the granting of Toleration unto us (to worship
God, without molestation) will be setting up Churches against Churches.

Neither ought you to have concluded against them* before you had proved their
way of worship to be contrary to the word of God, or not to have footing in his
word (as yours has not) for except you had done this, you have small cause to
rejoice in your thoughts, in respect of the accounts that you are to give about
this coutraversie; for your contraversie can be conceived at the best, to be
but* the contraversie that Paul had, when he went unto Damascus which was a
Contraversie against Christ Acts 9. 4. 5.
though Christ in his rich grace pardoned him, when he had smitten him down,
and driven him out of himself* and made him to confess, that he knew not
Christ, in these words (where he says,) LORD WHO ART THOU* and further
acknowledged that he knew not the will of Christ? by asking him (with these
words) WHAT WILT THOU HAVE ME TO DO? thus you may see, though the controversy
was against Christ, yet Paul was reconciled to God the Father, by Jesus Christ
the Son, and endued with the holy Ghost, which made him a Minister of the New
Testament, which all his humane learning could not do.

And Paul might have boasted that he was stirred up by the Spirit of God,
against the way of Christ, as you boast, that you are stirred up by Gods Spirit
against the way of Separation. But that would not have justified Paul, much
less shall it justify you; for Paul did that he did out of a zeal to
maintain the Law of God. But yours is to maintain the Law of Sin, even the
Law of Satan. Paul persecuted those that he did conceive to be evil; but you
persecute those that you acknowledge good men, and such as have been active
and famous for God.

And therefore you have no need to boast of the Spirits enabling you all
along, and that above your own strength (as you declare) for it may plainly
appear (unto all men of understanding) that it was the very spirit of delusion.

And therefore, you may justly expect Censures and Reproaches (as you say you
do) because your way in this action was not pleasing to God.

But for my part, instead of censuring you, I would rather reprove you; and
admonish you, rather than reproach you, and pray that God might turn you. And
if God would be pleased to give you that reward of your labor, which he gave
unto Paul, even to strike you down, and to make you to hear his voice, and
learn to know him, and what he would have you to do; then it would turn much
to the praise of God, and to the comfort of your poor soul, if you be a
chosen vessel unto him, ( which is the thing you pretend you aim at) and then
you shall be sure to gain truth, and love and peace, and holiness in all your
after discourses, when you shall speak with a new tongue, and express the
language of Canaan.

And now (Mr. Edwards) for conclusion of the whole, I do here affirm, that if
upon the sight of this Book, you shall conceive that I have either
misconstrued your words, or accused you without ground (necessarily drawn from
your own speeches) or that I have mistaken the sense of any Scripture, that I
have quoted in this Book* or that I have not answered you directly to the
point (by any oversight) Then choose you six men, (or more, if you please) and
I will choose as many, and if you will we will agree upon a Moderator; and try
it out in a fair discourse, and peradventure save you a labor from publishing
your large Tractates, which you say you intend to put out in Print against the
whole way of Separation; and if it can be made appear that (in any of these
particulars) I have missed it, I will willingly submit, But if you overcome me,
your conquest will not be great, for I am a poor worm, and unmeete to deal
with you.

But if you do give another onset, before you accept of a parse, (seeing I
have offered you conditions of peace) the world will judge you an unreasonable
man, and you shall never have the day.

But if you will (say your quarrel is only against those Ministers, that
justify your Church and Ministry, and worship) and can prove that the Minsters
of Holland and New England do generally justify the Church of England, and
the Ministry of the Church of England, and the worship instituted by the
Church of England: I say if they thus far justify you, (as I have here
specified) then will I freely acknowledge (when I hear them speak it) that I
was mistaken concerning them (yet the case in controversy stands still to be
tried between you and me) but I do otherwise conceive of them for the present,
because I am credibly informed, that they do, generally and publicly,
renounce the power by which they were called to their office of Ministry, in
and by the Church of England; some of them affirming that they have stood
Ministers too long under such a false power; others confessing here in public,
that it was their sin, that they had not revealed so much to the people
before they went away, with many the like expressions, which I can prove, if
we come face to face, which makes it apeare to me (for the present) that
though they preach in the Assemblies met together by public authority, yet
they judge themselves to be Ministers sent of God to separate the precious from
the vile, and that though they have not an outward mediate calling (seeing they
have cast it off, because it was false) yet they have an inward immediate
calling, as all the Ministers of God had in former time, which were able to
unfould the Mysteries of the Scripture, though they had neither calling by man,
nor by the will of man but by the holy Ghost.

And I hope these men, (of whom I speak) will never return to serve God
before the Idols, nor preach for wages, as Balaam did, but still stand fast in
the liberty wherein Christ has set them; Seeing they cave have off the
grievous yoke of Antichrist, separating between the precious and the vile,
fitting men for the Lords building, that so they may go up to Jerusalem by
troops.

This is my charity toward them, though I know them not by face, and I think
I may boldly say that none of them knows me.

Esaias 41. 21. Stand to your cause, says the Lord, bring forth your strong
reasons, says the King of Jacob.
Esaias 5-8. Take counsel together, yet it shall be br^ught to naught, pronounce
a Decree, yet it shall not stand, for GOD is with us.
FINIS.

