(...) A CRY against a Crying Sin: OR, A just Complaint to the Magistrates,
against them who have broken the Statute Laws of God, by killing of men merely
for Theft.

MANIFESTED In a Petition long since presented to the Common Council of the
City of London, on the behalf of Transgressors.

Together with certain Proposals, presented by Col. Pride to the Right
Honorable the general Counsel for the Army, and the Committee appointed by
the Parliament of England, to consider of the inconveniences, mischiefs,
chargeablenesse, and irregularities in their Law.

JER. 5.4, 5, 6. Therefore I said, surely these are poor, they are foolish,
for they know not the way of Jehovah, nor the Judgment of their God.

I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them, for they have
known the way of Jehovah, the Judgment of their God but these have altogether
broken the yoke, and burst the bonds*

Wherefore a Lion out of the Forest shall stay them, a Wolf of the evenings
shall spoil them, a Leopard shall watch over their Cities, every one that
goes out thence shall be torn in pieces, because their transgressions are
many, their backsliding are strong.

HOSEA 5.10, 11, 12. The Princes of Judah were like them that removed the bound
I wi^^ pour out my wrath upon them like water, Ephraim is oppressed and broken
in judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandment. Therefore
will I be unto Ephraim as a Moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.

HOSEA 8.12. I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were
counted as a strange thing.

Printed at London for Samuel Chidley dwelling in Bow Lane, at the Sign of the
Chequer. 1652.

The Preface.
THis little Book reflecteth upon all those who have broken the Statute Laws
of God, by killing of men me^rly for Theft, Let such sinners who are the
Judges, or Executioners of such overmuch Justice, be ashamed, and confounded
for defiling the Land with Blood; if they hold on this their wonted course, now
the light of lawful Liberty breaks forth; Will not the Land spue them out?
for the earth cries against this sin, which cannot be cleansed in an ordinary
way without the blood of him that sheddeth it; This is one of the abominations
of the time, for which the Saints ought to mourn.

It is long since this following Petition was presented to Tho. Andrews
Esquire, the then Lord Mayor, and to the Aldermen, and Common Counsel, but had
they done but their duties, I had no need to print and publish these Books in
Red Letters, and present the same to them in the midst of their jollity, and
to the learned Judges of the Land, yea to the Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, and Goal delivery, at the Sessions at Newgate, before whom I
appeared, to put them in mind of their duty, and of the Law of God, which they
had forgotten, and rested too much upon an arm of flesh; yea, if they had done
what they were bound in conscience to do, and had observed that most righteous
Law to which they were sworn, it would have saved me a labor of going to the
Counsel of State, General Counsel of the Army, or the Parliament. Now seeing
little fruit yet appear, for the establishing of the Laws of God in this
Nation, (for the lives of men are taken away merely for unvaluable Trifles) I
am once more pressed in spirit to publish the same in manner and form
following, thus sounding an alarm against the workers of iniquity, that they
may rep^^t, and turn from their evil ways; so delivering my soul, and
clearing my self of that bloud-guiltinesse which lies upon others, and
^specially upon rich men, who are called to weep and hewle for the miseries
that shall come upon them* For the bread of the needy is the life of the poor,
and be that de^rou^eth him of it is a Murderer; and the Scripture says, Thou
shall take no ransom for the life of a Murderer that is guilty of death, but
he shall surely be put to death: but I hope that some righteous men will take
the matt^r into serious con^ideration; these our endeavors tending not only to
the g^od of those Transgres^ors who have not deserved death by the Laws of
God, but also of those who put them to death unjustly, left the Justice of God
take hol^ upon those who are the Causers of it, and that the like ^^nishment he
inf^icte^ j^stly upon them, which they inflict upon ^ther^ unjustly. And indeed
I do admire that men who prof^sse to be governed by Gods Laws, and stand
against Tyranny, should have a ^inger in such a work* Surely such men though
they pretend never so much Religion* are not f^t to pray, not to be pray^d
with; For when they stretch forth their hands, God will ^ide his eyes, and
though they make many prayers, he will not hear them whose hands are full of
^i^ud.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common
Counsel assembled.
The mo^^n^^ll Petiti^n of many Inhabitants of the City of London, in the
^ehalfe of many thousand Transgressors.
(...)
THat for as much as the righteous God exacteth no more of sinful man then his
iniquities deserves, no Magistrate is to punish a wicked man for his iniquity
beyond the rule of ^quity; That seeing it is evident that whatsoever is good is
of God, and the contrary of Abadon, and that no man's will though great is good,
unless it be correspondent to the will of him who is greater then the greatest
nor the Law of any Authority whatsoever, unless it be according to the Law of
him who is higher then the Highest. Therefore when great ungodly men have by
their own wills, and inhumaine Laws for many years, destroyed not only the
Righteous for conscience sake, but also the wicked undeservedly, this was
iniquity to be punished by the Judge, though done by Judges themselves, who by
their overmuch Righteousness, and overmuch Wickedness, the people abetting
them, has brought death and Destruction upon this Land, and the hand of the
Lord is stretched out still against this sinful Nation, and unless they
repent they shall surely perish.

That the head of this Land is the sinful City of London, who instead of
bringing forth monthly good for the healing of the Nation, does bring forth
that which tends to the destruction thereof; Gray hairs being sprinkled here
and there upon them, and they not aware, for they consider not how many are
destroyed every Month by the Law of man, contrary to the Law of God, who has
declared, that if a Thief be found breaking through (the Sun being risen upon
him) and be smitten that he dye, blood shall be shed for him, Exodus 22* 3. from
whence it appears that those are guilty before the Lord, who take away the
life of any man merely for Stealing, when the Lord requires that he should
make ^ull resticution out of his Estate, or if he have nothing, that he should
be sold for his Theft: But contrariwise their lives are taken away merely for
Stealing, and commonly many though found notorious Thieves, yet have been
discharged with little or no punishment either in Person or Purse, to the great
damage of those who have lost their goods, and to the imboldening of the
Malefactors, and the want of the due execution of the Law of God upon them, and
not setting them in a way to make restitution to the Owners, tends to the
utter destruction both of their Bodies and Souls.

Therefore our desire is, That ye would take these things into serious
consideration, and (in your wisdoms) take such a prudent and effectual
course, that in the execution of Justice the remedy may not ^e worse then the
disease, like those who kill their wounded Patients, and wound themselves, but
that punishment may be equalized proportionable to the Offenses, that the
Prosecutors, or Executors of the Law man have no cause to repent, and that one
Witness may not rise against any man for any iniquity, but that at the mouth
of two or three Witnesses the matter may be established; and that ye would by
no means make the wills of any men, or any human Laws whatsoever any rules
for you to walk by, further then you see them agreeable to the holy Will and
Word of God, and that ye would according to your power, seek to remove the
dishonorable badges of infamy from off your sinful City and Nation, though
never so ancient, familier, common, and customary, and that ye would address
your selves to the Parliament for we obtaining of these things.

And your affectionate Petitioners shall pray.
Here follows a Letter written to Thomas Andrews, the Lord Mayor that then
was.
Right Honorable:
I Hope your Lordship has not forgotten our Petition in the behalf of
Transgressors, Christ made Intercession to God for Transgressors, who were
guilty of eternal death before God, we make intercession for men who are not
guilty of temporal death before men; Diverse Petitions have bin promoted in the
behalf of Saints, and it was a very good and acceptable service, this is for
sinners whom it may be God will call eff^ctually, For Christ dyed for the
ungodly, and received gifts for the Rebellious. I have written this enclosed
Paper to further the Petition, I desire that my Council may be acceptable unto
your Honor, so long as it is agreeable with Gods Word, and if it be agreeable
to your Lordships affection, I hope you will assist in it according to your
power, and prosecute it with all your might, and make haste and not delay to
keep the righteous Judgments of the God of Judgment, who has promised to be
for a Spirit of Judgment to him that sits in Judgment.

Right Honorable, you may be pleased to remember what I said, I know no friend
of mine that is guilty of theft, what I have done is in conscience to God, and
compassion to my Native Country, and in tender respect to your Honor, that the
heavy Wrath of God may not fall upon you and the whole Nation; at least that
some of the Rods of God may be taken away, or that some o^ his Judgments may
be stayed, I desire to be a good example to the (...) ^en, that they may clear
themselves of blood gu^l^^nes^e* I desire your Lordship again to consider
seriously of t^is enclosed Writing, I have showed it to just men and they
^^^^ove (...) your Lordship in your wisdom may take Cou^^^^l of (...) men, and
of the ancients concerning this mat^^r, and ^^^^te what they say thereunto; But
above all search (...) Scripture, for whatsoever is not according to that has
no light in it; and it is a Maxim in Law, that all Laws which are not
according to Gods Law and pure reason, are v^yd and null, and if so, then not
binding to a Citizen, or to any other under Heaven, and so are no rules for me
to walk by* but it is the Word of God, which is binding and y^^ is not bound.

Honorable Sir, I am Your Lordships humble Servant. SAMUEL CHIDLEY.
London Bridge June ^5 th 16^9.
Certain Reasons of weighty consideration in reference to the Petition to the
Common Councel^ in behalf of Transgressors.
ALthough there be ground sufficient enough in the Petition it self to ^ince
that no Malefactou^s life should be taken away merely for Theft, when the Lord
requires that satisfaction should be made out of his Estate, and if he have
nothing, that he should be sold for his Theft, yet because of the ignorance and
hardness of men's hearts, and their cruelty and revenge, I shall for their
regulation propose some things to their consideration.

To take away the life of any man only for Theft as aforesaid, is iniquity,
because it is against the rule of equity; it is not good because not of God, it
is not correspondent with his Will, it has no agreement with his most
righteous Law, but is in humane, Bloody, Barbarous, and Tyrannical, and
provokes the God of Judgment to execute his Judgments upon the Nation that
abetteth the same; yea it tends to their utter destruction, to destroy men by
the Laws of men, contrary to the Laws of God, consider I say, how contrary it
is to the rule of equity, the blessed and righteous Law of God.

According to the rule of Equity, there is required life for life, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for
woun^, st^ipe for stripe, Exodus 21.23, 24, 25. It is not life for eye, but eye
for eye; not eye for tooth, but tooth for tooth; so that if a man require more
it is iniquity, Prove. 30.6. Therefore if a man put out his neighbors ey^,
st^ike out his tooth, and bruise his hand, but does not kill, he ought not to
be killed for this, but must ^oose his eye, and his tooth, and as he ha^h done
to his neighbor, so it must be done to him, as it is written, breach for
breach* eye for eye, tooth for tooth, as he has caused a ^lemish in a man, so
shall it be done to him again; and he that kills a Beast shall rest^re it,
and he that kills a man shall be surely put to death; and the sam^* Lord
says, ye shall have one manner of Law as well for the Stranger, as for one of
your own C^untry, Levit. 24.17, 18, 19, 2^, 21, 22. The Lord of Life has
expressly declared (and it is known to all men living) that the life is more
then meat, and the body is more then raiment, Luke 12.22. If then the life be
more then meat, no man's life should be taken away for meat, much less for
ra^ment, which is inferior; and all things necessary for the temporal life
and body of man are comprehended in these terms, food and raiment, Deuteronomy.
10.1^. 1 Timothy 6.8.

The God of the Spirits of all flesh has declared plainly, in his most just
and righteous Law, That if a Thief be found breaking through (the Sun being
risen upon him) and be smitten that be dye, blood shall be shed for him, Exodus
22.3. And he ^enders this reason, for he should make full restitution, and if
he have nothing, he shall be fold for his Theft; and the Lord has not said that
he that steals food, or raiment, shall be put to death, or that his blood
shall be shed; But whose sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,
Genesis 9.6. So then it appears, that it is murder by the Law of God to kill a
man merely for Stealing, when the Lord says he should make full restitution,
and if he have nothing, he shall be sold (not killed) for his Theft; and
amongst his statute Laws has stated particular cases in this, as well as in
other things, and made them so plain that mean capacities may decide
controversies of this nature.

And as there is no precept nor consequence in the Word of God for this unjust
practice, so there is no president in Israel, but many in England, the more is
their misery: but as their ancient Father Austin says, That man is miserable
who is not sensible of his misery, which may well be applied unto this sinful
and miserable Nation, who are not sensible of the dangerous consequence of this
one deadly evil amongst the rest; how unjust a thing it is to kill a man for
stealing xiiij d. let all men reasonable judge, for so is the Law of this Land,
according to which the people are forced to prosecute the Thieves; but in King
Salomons time men did not despise a Thief in some case, Prove. 6.30. And he
who^ is greater then Solomon, even the Lord Jesus Christ who is the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, has not given the least hint that he^ that steals
food or raiment should be killed, but he that ^ad^th into Captivity, shall go
into Captivity, and he that kills with the Sword, must be killed with the
Sword, Revel. ^3.10. But concerning These it is said, let them that stole
^^eale no more, he does not say let him be hanged, but rather let him labor
wi^h his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to distribute to him
that needs, Ephesians. 4.38. And it is expressly commanded, That he that will
not work, nei^^^r should he eat, 2 These. 3.10. Many precepts, president^, and
propositions may be brought to confirm the premise^, ^ut this is enough at
this time. A word to the (...) is su^^icient.

A Letter written the 11. of December. 1651. by SAMUEL CHIDLEY, To the Right
Honorable, the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and Goal Delivery of NEW
GATE.
Right (Worshipful and) Honorable,
ALthough I know not any of my acquaintance to be guilty of Theft: Yet I seek
to save the lives of the so siner^ whom God would have preserved: And I coming
down to this Judgment Seat, it being as free for me a^ another to see justice
done; and observing your proceedings from the beginning hitherto, how in many
things you go against the very letter and equity of the Law of the only
Lawmakers, by whom, and by which your selves must be judged* caused me to call
to mind, how that Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged always
understand Judgment.

Right Honorable, I am sorry to see you go on still in your wonted course, of
arraiging men for their lives merely for Theft. I have observed that the
persons who are arraigned before your Honors, are poor laborers, and such
creatures who stole things of a small value, peradventure for mere necessity,
yet you arraigne them for their lives, when the Law of God requires their
preservation in such a way, that they may make satisfaction, and not (if
disabled) to force them into a necessity of stealing again, but they are great
sinners indeed, who rob men of their precious lives. And the worst of men are
such as despise and destroy Thieves that steal, merely to satisfy their
hunger: It seems some of the Thieves you will press, for not holding up their
hands at your command, or for not answering to that interogatory Guil^y? or not
Guilty? Consider I pray you, how circumstantiall these things are: The weight
of Trials depends not hereupon (as I humbly con^eive.) For its possible that a
Murderer, when he is arraigned may want his hands, and another may be dumb; yet
you may proceed to Judgment against him, if sufficient evidence come in, and
that the jury, who are judges in matters of Fact, (and if they will, in matters
of Law) find them guilty, surely you must take no ransom for the life of a
Murderer, though he cannot, or will not hold up his hand at the Bar, or say
that he is Guilty: for by the Law no man is bound to a^cuse himself, therefore
the guilty person is not bound to say he is guilty, and if he should say, not
guilty what is he the better?

This is my opinion, which I humbly leave to the serious consideration of this
Honorable Bench: I would to God that you would try such men by the Laws of
God, who cast themselves upon God and the Country* And oh that you would put
the judgments of God in execution! seeing you are his Stewards; all Laws
being subordinate to Gods Laws, as the Country is to God himself, then your
tranquillity would be lengthened. Consider what I say in the fear of God, for
life is above liberty and estate. The Jewel of one man's life, all your estates
cannot balance. I took notice of a passage of the Lord Chief Justice Rolls,
and it was we I observed, how that the Thieves are honest before they come in
Goal, and there they become naught; and learn to lie, by saying not guilty,
when they had confessed it before. If it be so, then great pity it is that
they should not be in such a place, where they may be put in a way, and course,
to make satisfaction according to the direction of the wisdom of God, By whom
Princes and Nobles, yea, all the Judges of the earth are said to rule: So
leaving these conscientious Dictates to your serious thoughts, I subscribe my
self,

Your Humble Servant, Devoted to the fear of God, and service of the
Commonwealth, according to the Law of God, and not otherwise; Samuel Chidley.
Sessions 11. December. in the year of Christ, 1651.

This Letter was delivered unto the Bench about the third hour of the day,
where when Mr. Chidley was called, he made answer, and came to the Board, and
the Letter was there publicly owned by him, as his own handwriting, which he
would stand by and justify, it being (as he said) a discharging of his
conscience, as a testimony before them all, which he left to their serious
consideration; whereupon he was commanded by the Bench to depart, and was put
out of the Court, he speaking in the justification of the Statutes of God to be
right, and the Precepts of men to be wrong, in taking away men's lives for such
trivial matters.

After he was put out, they gave Sentence against the Prisoner at the Bar, who
was arraigned for stealing, and would not hold up his hand, nor plead, but
besought them that the Letter might be read publicly, that all the Bench might
hear, and then, says he, afterward I will plead whatsoever comes of it,
whether I live, or dye; but they would not hearken unto him but proceeded, and
by the Recorder M. Steel, who was their Mouth, gave Sentence against him,
which was to this effect; That he should go from thence to the place from
whence he came, and be led into a dark room where there was no light, and
should be stripped naked, only his privy members covered, and his head covered,
and his arms to be stretched forth, both on the one side and on the other, as
far as they could be stretched, and that he should be laid along on his back,
and have as much weight laid upon him, as he was able to bear, and more; And
the next day he should have only three morse^s of Barly-bread, without any
drink, And the day following three draughts of the kennel water-running under
Newgate, as much as he could drink, and so to remain in that condition from
day to day till he dyed.

Psalm. 119.126, 127, 128. It is time for thee LORD to work for they have made
void thy Law; Therefore I love thy Commandments above gold, yea, above fine
gold. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts, concerning all things to be right,
and I have every false way.

To the Right Honorable the Council of State. The humble Petition of Samuel
Chidley.
SHOWS,
THat your petitioner setting the fear of the LORD of Lords before his eyes,
and advancing the Judgments and Laws of the God of gods in his heart before
the precepts of frail man, was moved in zeal to his most sacred majesty, to
discharge his conscience in the best and most peaceable way he could devise,
and accordingly has given testimony of the truth, at the Judgment seat before
the Sessions in the Old Baily, the eleventh of this month, as may appear unto
your Honors by the printed relation hereunto annexed; yet notwithstanding they
proceed according to the usual Custom, which is against the Law of God, the
good things contained in the Solemn League and Covenant of the Nation, the
Oath of every Freeman of London, Reason it self, the witness of Conscience
well checked, or rightly rectified and the whole Creation of God:

My humble desire is, That this Honorable Council would be pleased in their
prudence to take such a speedy course that the condemned persons yet alive (who
are not guilty of death by the Laws of God, Nature, or Equity) may be
repreeved till the Parliament of this Commonwealth has heard and determined
the matter; So shall you find much comfort: Jehovah will be with the good.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. SAMVEL CHIDLEY.

To the Right Honorable the general Council for the Army, the humble
Proposals of Samuel C^idley.
Shows:
THat for as much as the LORD of Lords has anointed you to be the Heads of the
Forces, which he has mustered up, for the destruction of that Generation of
sinful men, who are compacted together, as one man, to establish iniquity by
there Laws, which they have set up in direct opposi^ion to the LAWS of GOD,
and have made use of the Kings of the Earth (as their Horns) to protect them
in the exercise of their bloody Cruelty; and seeing THE LORD OF HOSTS has in a
great measure subdued your enemies, and that your Swords are not returned
empty, It concerns you (Right Honorable) to testify your thankfulness by
yielding obedience unto THE STATVTES-LAWES OF GOD, which at this day in the
maine fundamental parts thereof are trampled upon, by those who have a form
of godliness, and deny the power thereof in their practices; as may appear by
their putting of men to death for trivial matters, contrary to the LAW of GOD;
for Gods LAW says, If a Thief steal, he shall make restitution ^ut of his
estate; and if he have nothing, he is to be sold for his Theft, but not killed.
Now although my soul abhorres the sin of Th^ft, i^ deserving the punishment
of eternal death before God (how much more the crying sin of Murder?) And
though I know not any of them, and (for ought I know) not one of them knows
me, yet because I see no man valiant for God, nor stand to make up the gap, I
(for want of a better) ^m moved in zeal for Gods glory, to cry out against the
irrational and irregular proceedings of men, who set up or maintain a Flag or
Standard of Defiance against their own consciences, and THE MOST RIGHTEOUS
LAWS OF THE ONLY LAWMAKERS; and this I have endeavored to do in such ^
peaceable way, that my transaction of this business for God may not savor of
any bitterness of spirit in me, against the persons of those me^ or contempt
of their lawful authority, who sit in Judgment, and do err therein* (as I
humbly conceive) but seeing God has said, he will mag^if^e his LAW, and make
it HONORABLE, And that it has been a usual course with him to make choice of
weak instruments, to make his truth known; I therefore upon this account was
resolved to put forth my self, and engage my heart in this business, the
consequence whereof, when accomplished, will be more then I will speak of at
this time; And although I Endure some reproaches for it, some saying; What a
Theife is this to attempt such a work? and that none but Thieves would do it,
ye^ I am led forward by such a spirit, as (I hope) will so carry me upon the
wings of his providence in the managing hereof, that I shall not be discouraged
(notwithstanding humane frailty,) And because I have a seasonable opportunity
to acquaint your honors with this business, and to crave your assistance, I
desire you in the first place to consider my Printed Papers, wherein I have
showed my dislike of putting men to death for stealing, and for the further
amplification and enlargement thereof, I desire you to consider of these
Positions.

1. THAT GOD IS THE ONLY LAWMAKERS; and that his LAW is the ancientest and the
best that ever was, or can be possibly invented by any Parliament, to which all
men are bound under pain of damnation: and that whatsoever Laws and
Proceedings are opposite thereunto in the smallest measure, are unjust, and the
executioners thereof do sin; and by how much the greater the Precept is, by
so much the more do they offend, that violate the ^ame.

2. GOd has no where given liberty, but has prohibited, that the life of any
Man should be taken away for stealing, and has manifested, he would have their
lives preserved, therefore to take away their lives is A SIN, A CRYING SIN;
yea, (I may say) its A NATIONAL SIN, for which, God has, and will visit them
with his arrows of of indignation; yea, the people are so blinded with this
^orrupt Custom, that they know it not, neither will they understand, but
think they do well, and that they shall have peace, though they walk on in
darkness, while the foundations of the earth are out of course.

Obj. And wereas they object, That it is the Law of the Land to put Thieves to
death for stealing to the value of 13d. ob.

I Answer, That no Law is to be observed, if it be against THE LAW OF GOD,
especially in the taking away of men's lives; yea, God was so far from
commanding such Thieves to be put to death, that he requires their blood, at
the hands of them that shed it, though done in the very act of breaking
through, if the Sun be risen upon them.

3. THe putting them to death is expressly against the Law of God, because it
disableth them for ever making satisfaction to the owners of the goods, yea,
such is the corruption of the Laws and Customs of this Land, that he that
discovers the Theif is bound over to prosecute him, though is ^e to the taking
away of his life; and after he has done that, the owner shall sustain damage
nevertheless, and he can have no more then the life of the Thief; And some
men are so ignorant, cruel, hard-hearted, and revengefull, that they will take
away the lives of the pe^tty Theeve^ in revenge, taking an opportunity upon the
advantage of the Law to exercise their bloody cruelty upon them.

And such is the corruption of the Laws, that if the Theife steal to the
value of 13 d. ob. he shall be hanged, as Judge Byron in his cases has
declared; and sometimes their lives are taken away upon a single evidence,
whereas there ou^ht to be two witnesses to prove every fact; and one witness
ought not rise up against any man to put him to death; So GOD has said, whose
WORD is a LAW amongst SAINTS, though Sinners cast the same behind their backs.

4. THis Law of putting poor Thieves to death for sealing, that are not able
to make restitution out of their estates, is against GODS LAW, because in such
case^ GOD has said they shall be soled for their Theft, Now though they are
worth some what while they are living, yet when they are dead they are worth
nothing, yea a living Dog, is better then a dead Lion; men would rather in such
cases bury dead men, then buy them, and how unjust a thing it is to put them to
death, seeing the APOSTLE says, Let them labor with their hands, let all
rational men judge. The APOSTLE says, they should labor with their hands, no
says the Bench, they shall be hanged, tie up their hands, and he that has
bene^it of Clergy, and can read his neck verse, burn him on the hand; by thi^
he is disabled for the present that he cannot labor with his hand; and if he
would, he is forced into a necessity of Stealing again, if no man will set him
on work, which thing men will be cautions to do, to one that carries such a
brand of infamy upon him.

5. THis murdering Law is the cause wherefore many murders are committed by
Robbers in the act of stealing, for the Thieves know its a hanging matter to
steal, and its no more to commit murder, and then for safety of their lives,
and (...) Theft they commit Murder, for fear least the party should come and
witness against them, to the taking away of their lives.

6. THis Law is the cause wherefore many Thieves escape, because they find that
the remedy would be wo^^^ then the disease, for if they prosecute them, they
shall be put to a great deal of expense and charge, and peradve^^ure the Thief
shall lose his life, and the parties their goods, whereas if there were a way
for restitution by them, there would be (...) prosecution of them.

Obj. But it is objected, What shall we do with them?

Ans. I answer; He that has (...), if the Theft be found in his hands, is to
forfeit (...); if he have made it away, he is to forfeit fourfold, are his
estate i^ to be taken to satisfy the debt.

Obj. But what if he have no estate, it may be he is some poor^ rogue that is
worth nothing?

Ans. I answer, He must be sold for his Theft.

Obj. But who will buy him, no body will be troubled with him?

Ans. I answer; either the party who has sustained the damage is to take him,
or he may be set on work in our own Country, by Land or by water, being
chained up, they might work in Mines, heave Coal^* and earne three or four
shillings a day, or row in Galleys, or be put in Work houses, for to punne.
Hemp, or other servile imployment^. And why cannot we put them to it here, as
well as the Hollanders there, til they have made satisfaction) and not put the
Thieves in such places, which is a hell on earth; where they learn to be worse
then ever they were before, or they may be transported to some of our own
Plantations, where some that have been in the like condition transported, have
soon become honest, and being very ingenuous have been able to teach the
Planters, which makes the Merchants to prize the Thieves far above the
ordinary Vagrants, or other persons that are taken up by the Spirits in the
(...) because they want that ingenuity that the Thieves have, for generally the
wittyest rogues are the greatest Cut-purses.

Obj. But would not this be great ^yranny, that men should be sold as slaves?

A^s. I answer to that; They are not sold for ever, but only for their Theft,
and its a worser slavery, and a great tyranny indeed, to take away their live^.

Obj. But what if they run away?

Ans. Then they contract upon themseves a double deb^*

Obj. But what if they will not work?

Ans. They must not eat, and before such a one will dy^ for hunger, doubtless
he will eat the flesh, of his arm, and before he will eat his own flesh it
may be he will work, hunger will break through stone walls, and if any thing
f^rce him to work, this will, for his bel^y requires it of him; bu^, if he will
perish let him perish, his own blood is upon his own head, and the
Commonwealth is discharged of it.

Such c^u^ses as these would be a means to terrifye the Thieves, and suppress
Theft for many of them would rather ^e hanged; but if a man would be hanged, he
must not have His desire, unless the Law requires it, so though Thieves cause
to dye against the Law of God, rather then to live according to it, they must
be kept alive notwithstanding, and set hard at work to earne their bread, and
the overplus must pay for their Theft; and then if any (as I hope many) will
be converted in this their captive condition, O how will they bless the time
that ever such compulsion was us^d, whereby they learned to know themselves,
and to remember their Creator: and he that is an isntrumental means of
converting one poor Sinner, shall have no cause to be sorry for it in the day
of Account.

ANother abuse in the proceedings of the Law of this Land is that whereas GODS
LAW requires that the Witnesses should be Executioners of death on their
Mal^factor, a Condemned Executioner does it, who is the notoriousest Rogue that
can be found, and one that knows nothing of the business, whether he, whom he
hangs be an honest man, or a knave; he will hang a Martyr as well as a Thief,
but doubtless he has a check of Conscien^e as well as his Masters, else why
will he ask them forgiveness before he turns them off? Now all that can be
alleged, for the Hangman is, He does but his Office, he is but an Executioner
of the Law, and Sentence. And the like the Judges do allege for themselves,
Alas, (^ay they) what can we do, we are but the Executioners of the Law of the
Land, and till the Parliament alter the Law, we must observe our ordinary
Rules; Why do you come to us? what would your have us do? we have no power!

But Judges ought to be men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness,
and such as will observe GODS LAWS, and judge according to HIS STATVTE BOOK,
and by THE LAWS OF GOD. No Executioner ought to inflict death upon any man,
unless he in the execution of him be satisfied in his own Conscience, that
the man ought to dye, else he is a Murderer after a manner, though the Offender
deserves death; yet if a man be not convinced of it, he ought not to put him
to death, by any command whatsoever, and if the Witnesses will not do it, they
must be severely dealt with.

This is my opinion, which I humbly submit to the consideration of those who
have more understanding then my self.

^. ANother abuse which I find in the pro^eedings of the Law, is in the
Pressing men to death, because they will not hold up their hands at the Bar,
or say they are guilty, or not guilty, upon which circumstantiall N^^ety, they
Condemn them to be Pressed in such a Tyrannical manner, that the very sentence
it self is enough to terrify the poor Creatures, and make them op^n their
mouths to confess their own guiltiness, or else to lie against their own^
consciences.

Obj. But it is objected, That they are pressed to death within half an hour at
the most, and that they are not kept in such a lingering condition, according
to the sentence?

Ans. I answer; If they put them to death before their t^me, herein they go
bey^nd their Commission; but indeed the Executioners do^ it ^^t of compassion
to the Condemned to dispatch him out of his torment; something like to a
Physician, that will give his Patient something in pity, to rid him out of his
pain, because he believes he must dye, and cannot escape his fit of
sickness, so making more has^ then good speed.

Now the proceedings against such Malefactors, who will not hold up their
hands, and plead, it without examination of Witnesses, yet they will take his
life away Pro confess^; b^^ by what Law I know not, unless a Law of
Antichrist; I am sure such precepts came neither from Mount Sion, nor Mount
Sinai; these have out-^tripped H^r^d, and P^ntius Pilate, the Gentil^s that
knew not the Law, did not compel men to lie, by saying not guilty, when they
were guilty; nor to go against the Law of Nature, to accuse themselves by
con^essing their own g^il^* but of all cruelty there is none li^e that of
Antichrist, the Man of Sin, and that Beast with seven Heads, and ten Horns,
spoken of in Revel. 13. and they exercise it upon their own brethren, even the
Members (...) their Church. Thus the crowned Loenus in the midst o^ ^gyptian
darkness are a plague to the men of the earth.

But the way to try a Th^efe is to examine the witnesses, and if they prove
matter of fact, the Judge is to decla^e* how much he must pay, and to command
that Law to b^ put in execution; that his estate should be seized, and if it
will not satisfy, he must deliver up his person, not so much as to loose a
limb, or any member of his body, but to go immediately to the Workhouse, or
place where he may be safely kep^ with sufficient food, and work enough, as
much as he is able to do, and ply it constantly early and late every day
(Lords day excepted and to have sufficient time to sleep and rest; and when
they have wrought out their Theft, then to be free^ (...) if, they steal again
to serve them in the same kind: as if the Thief st^ale a 100 li. he should pay
20^ li. if it be found with him, but if he have spent the money he shall pay
400 li.

If this course were well followed, Tyburne would lose many Customers, for it
would much abate the number of Theev^s, and Murderers.

My desire i^, That your Honou^^ would move the Parliament to put GODS LAW in
execution concerning this thing, and what it is I have declared before.

It has been desired tha^ Laws should be drawn up from GODS WORD, for the
Government of this Nation, but unless the Parliament will be pleased to
confirm them, what are we the better? ordinary men cannot impose, all they
can do is only to propose, only God has declared, His Testimonies must be
bound up, and his Law sealed amongst his Disciples. But others do take upon
them to make Laws besides, and contrary to THE LAWS OF GOD; Moreover, if the
Parliament should countenance such a thing that certain men should b^ appointed
to draw up Laws according to THE LAWS OF GOD, it will a^ke a great deal of
time; and it is a work that the wisest and holiest men in the world, will find
too great for them to undertake to do without errors, unless they were
infallibly inspired by THE HOLY GHOST. Moses was in the Mount with God forty
day^s and forty nights, and neither eat nor drank; and forty days and forty
nights after that likewise; Neither do we read, that he saw sleep with his eyes
in all that time; and after he wrote the Laws and Precepts for all Israel,
with the Statutes and Iudgem^nts, He was therein guid^d by the immediate
direction of the spirit of God infallibly, and how long he was writing them we
know not, but they are very full and brief, and very sufficient for the
Government of that Nation, Neither had any Nation such an excellent Law as
Israel had, Neither was there so excelle^^ a Government amongst any people, as
amongst the people of the Iew^, so long at they forsook not the Law of the
Lord, nor cast aside the word of the Holy one of Israel; their chief City was
called the City of Righteousness, the faithful City, righteousness lodged in
it; their Judges and Counselors were Gods, and Children of the most High,
because the word of God was committed unto them, Now it may be it will be a
long time before the Parliament will establish THE LAWS OF GOD, or give way for
Laws to be imposed upon this Nation, which are suitable thereunto; and when
such a work is set upon, it will be long before it be accomplished, for
whosoever takes it upon them, must devote themselves wholly to the work, and
when they have used their best endeavors, a wond^r it will be if the Laws
they draw up, with manner of proceedings, will be so perfect that they need no
amendments, in respect of matter and form; and a long time will be spent in
debate, before such a work be admitted to be attempted; And therefore I humbly
conceive, that it is mere, that this business concerning the preservation or
the petty Thieves should be concluded now with all speed, being out of
controversy, and afterward to do the rest according as time, and opportunity
will afford. For this does concern LIFE which is above Person Name, Liberty,
and ^state: And THIS THING being done will render the Antichristian Priests and
lying Lawyers, the basest of men, who have lived upon the souls and bodies of
men, and have not bad the fear of God before their eyes, but have made their
belly God and their glory is their shame, end shall be destruction and their
unless they repent. And as a testimony of the truth of God, in this
particular, I set to my hand this 31 of December. 1651.

SAMVEL CHIDLEY.

A Letter written to the Regulaters of the Law, appointed by the Parliament,
and sent, and presented to that Committee.
Honorable Gentlemen:
FOr as much as you are appointed by the Parliament to consider of the
Inconveniences* Mischeifes, Chargeablenesse, and Irregularit^es in your Law,
and that you have pro^essed your willingness to receive whatsoever persons
have to offer in relation thereunto: I hold it meet to present you with these
enclosed papers, which p^radventure may be a means to shorten your seven
years tedious work, and wherein you may observe that I have endeavored to
discharge my conscience before all* witnessing against that hateful sin of
putting men to death merely for Theft* although THE GOD OF NATURE does teach a
contrary Lesson: But who is so blind as those that will not see? Surely
covetousness is the roo^ of all evil, and gifts destroy the heart^, an^ blind
the eyes of the wise, and pervert the judgment of the righteous, and men in
the greatest places, are the greatest unbeleevers, for they have not so much
faith as to trust GOD with their substance, but use indirect means to make
uncertain riches certain; as may appear by their putting Thieves to death
for stealing.

Now when I found so little fruit in the Magistrates of the City of London, as
you may see by my printed relations, I was sorry that my endeavors produced no
better effect amongst them, whose Predecessors have always been very forward
to put the Laws of man in execution, though they were never so ridiculous, and
contrary to reason and Religion.

I sent, and went unto others, whom it likewise principally concerned, even to
those who are called the learned Judges of the Land, and declared my judgment
to as many of them as I could meet with, that they might not suffer their mouth
to cause their flesh to sin, by pronouncing unjust murdering sentences.

I went down also to the Sessions, but I could gather no Grapes of Thorns.

And after I had delivered a Letter to the Lord President Bradshaw, to be
presented unto the Council of State; I remembered that the Officers of the Army
were men professing great things, for the advancement of Gods glory; so I
presented some Humble Proposals to those Honorable Gentlemen, which were well
resented by them, a Copy of which I have sent you here enclosed with this
Petition, which should have been presented to the House, but some of the
Members conceived the business to be proper for you t^ take Cognizance of,
because you are appointed to consider, and make Report of the evils of your
Law, for reformation thereof; therefore you ought to cry out against Murder
before you do any thing else, for this concerns men's live^* the best of your
actions herein in my judgment having been at the most but a Tything of Mint,
Anis, and Cummin* and you have neglected Mercy, one of the weighty matters of
the L^w, for I am verily persuaded, that it was in your powers to have put a
stop to the murdering of those men which were hanged at Tiburne the last
Sessions, for stealing five shilling^ and six pence; I hoped that you would
have gone to the root, and not cropped only the Branches of wicked Laws; I am
angry, and grieved at the heart, that you should so dally in Gods matters* as
not to acquaint the House with such a gross, unnatural, inhumane practice of
the Law, as killing of the petty Thieves. I desire the LORD to give you
repenting and relenting hearts, for doing his work so negligently, to value
men's lives no more; for it is a sin, and shame, that the ^and should still be
defiled with more blood, and how you can answer it in the day of Account, for
not pre^enting such mischief when you knew how to do it, and had an
opportunity in your hands, I know not; in my opi^ion, if you follow your work
never so close, if you omit this business of weight, you will make a long
harvest of a little fruit; no doubt but the time will be long before you have
swimmed through the Ocean Sea of your troublesome Laws, for what is the Chafe
to the Corn? or the heap of Ashes to the spark that is hid under it? May not
the Parliament by the West Wind of their Legislative Power, blow such
combustible stubble away? You sit as Refiners, but time is precious, and dross
is not worth the labor of refining, and a leaden Law is too heavy for an
honest heart, and we ought not to think that such a Law, because it is a Law,
will be a sufficient excuse to the Executioners thereof, so long as it is
Idolatrous, profane, rebellious, bloody, Adulterous, Theevish, lying, and
covetous; certainly that Law cannot be good, that force^h all men to prefer
the meanest thing before the greatest; (that is,) a little wicked Mammon with
an Idolations badge upon it, before a man's precious life; Solomon esteemed m^re
of a living D^gge, then those who have killed men merely for stealing, have (or
had) of living men. Now if God do touch your hearts, and make you thoroughly
sensible of the abominations of the time, and set you in a thou^^ing posture,
that you may bewail your neglect in suffering the poor Thieves to be put to
death, when it was in your power to have prevented (...); then you may the
better go on, like Iosiah's men, whom he set to spy out the abominations in
the Land, and set up a sign, wheresoever you ^inde a bone of Haman-gog
unburied, and go on, and let the Nation know the Idolatry, and Superstition of
their Law, and its profaneness, and the Sabbath-breaking thereof, the
rebellion of their Law, the Murder of their Law, the Adultery of their Law, the
thef^ of their Law, the lying of their Law, and the covetousness of their Law,
and lastly, the uncharitableness of their Law, which is the end thereof, and
so I end.

Yours (and the Commonwealths Servant) in all lawful things. Samuel Chidley.
From my Mothers house in Soper Lane London, Febr. 25. 1651.
READER,
WHere are they that are valiant for the Truth, and will do the work of the
Lord diligently? If thou have any spark of love or zeal to maintain the
wonderful Statutes of God, which my soul keeps; I charge thee, as thou will
answer before the Tribunal Seat of Gods eternal vengeance, That thou hinder
not the publication of this to all persons who have an ear open to hear,
neither conceal this precious Truth, which will maintain him, that maintains
it, and bring him into more acquaintance with God. For doubtless the standing
for the Statutes and Judgments of the holy and blessed God, is a most blessed
work, and the establishment thereof in this Nation will work a more blessed
Reformation then ye^ has been, or shall be spoken of at this time.

FINIS.

