THE CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLE AND Peaceable CONVERSATION Of the People (of God)
called QUAKERS, With Respect to the KING AND GOVERNMENT Once more Asserted.

Published by Reason of some late Reflections cast upon them, Especially by the
OBSERVATOR Dated the 22d July 1685.

With a brief Testimony against all Plots, Conspiracies, and Rebellion.

As being Inconsistant with true Christianity.

Printed in the Year, 1685.

EVER Since the great God of Heaven and Earth has made us sensible of the
knowledge of his Truth in the inward Parts, and the powerful opperation of it
to Regenerate and Renew our Minds, change and purify our Hearts, and
Illuminate our Understandings: we have been careful to keep our Consciences
void of offense toward God, and toward Men, and to follow peace and ensue it;
delighting to do good to all, but to hurt none. This we have in our Lives and
Conversations manifested amongst our Neighbors and Country Men, having been
enabled thereto by the Grace and Spirit of God; which taught the true
Christians in the primitive times, to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World. And has taught
us the same lessons in this Age.

We have been very evilly treated, and variously proved and tried since we have
been a People, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and in many other places
beyond the Seas within this thirty odd years; under various Governors and
Governments. And we have undergone many and grievous sufferings through the
assistants of God, with much Meekness and Patience without Resistance; yea,
without a thought or desire to avenge our selves, or to lift up a Hand against
those that has Plowed long Furrows upon our Backs. But instead thereof have
desired the welfare of our Enemies and Persecutors, according to the precepts
and example of Christ Jesus.

We have from time to time publicly asserted and declared, not only by our
words but by our lives and practices that our principles are for the promoting
Love, Peace, and good will amongst all Men; being indeed the natural fruit and
effect of true Christianity, or the Christian Religion.

Notwithstanding which we still suffer under the Notion and denomination of
evil doers, though hitherto through the grace of God we have kept our integrity
and walked in innocence and in in offencecisness toward all Men; and a little
Christian kindness and Charity in the Observator, would have restrained his Pen
from Rendering us to Magistracy, and the whole Nation as a party in Conspiracy
and Rebellion. We have given him no occasion to account us of the Number of his
Trimmers, viz. Sometimes of one side, Sometimes of another; or any thing to
save from suffering: we go right on our way in fair weather and fowl, through
Briers and Thorns; though we are often stripped of our fleece, and clothed with
stone Dublets, we mean Prisons.

We have no shelter but our Innocence, which he seems desirous to disrobe us
off that we might be devoured with Speed, if God did not incline the hearts of
his Superiors to believe better of us; and to do us more Justice. We as a
People should be concluded guilty when any particular Person that may be
reputed of us, does any thing that is evil, this is not to do as he would be
done by.

We do affirm in the sight and presence of God, that we Conspire with no Man,
with no Sect, nor sort of People against the King his Peace and Government;
neither have we ever contributed as he injuriously says, we have to the
raising any Storm in the Nation, Privately, or Publicly; therefore the
Observator has wronged and abuse Us.

Having no just ground for his Unkind Inferences against us, we are and have
always been for things that make for Peace in the family in the City; in the
Province, Country, or Kingdom where we dwell. We are redeemed out of the Spirit
of Strife, Violence, Wars, and Contentions, Plots, and Conspiracies, and so are
Dead to those things; we do believe and declare that those things are
inconsistant with the Christian Religion, the powerful effect thereof known in
the hearts of Men, does really lead them to love their Enemies, and to pray for
them that dispitefully use them, etc. then who can such hate and conspire
against?

But further the Observator for a Colorable proof of his Inselences against
the Quakers, Speaking of the late D. of M. Declaration, says, A Quaker Printer
was the Man chosen to dispatch it at the Press, to which we say, that we are
innocent in the matter we know nothing thereof; neither of the Quaker chosen,
nor the chusers of him: nor of the Declaration it self but by Report. We have
no hand in spreading and promoting such things which tends to stir up Wars,
Insurrections, and Violence, to the destroying men's lives; these things are
against our peaceable principle of love and good will which we have to all Men.
And we do solemnly declare, that if any that has walked amongst us, do have,
or shall do such things, they are in our esteem false Brethren, deceitful in
their Profession, unfaithful to God and Man; Hi^ocrites, and Deceiptful
Workers, and were either never truly of us, or are fallen degenerated and
Apostatized from the love and fear of God and good will to Men, which is the
true ground of our Religion; and such are evil doers and ought to bear their
own Burden.

But we hope if such should be found that has the name Quaker committing evil
things, no just men will judge it equal, that we as a People should be charged
guilty thereof; in so doing no Society of men can be innocent.

We do declare we know no Printer amongst us guilty of meddling with the said
Declaration, neither can we be privy to any such thing, nor have we any
Correspondency or Confederacy with any such Persons, or matter in any thing
that tends to the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; neither do we
trouble the King and Government otherwise then by Application in humility,
laying before them our great sufferings. Endeavoring to persuade them by
Council, Testimony, Exhortation, and Conversation, that we are peaceable and
free from the very inclination of raising Storms, or Commotions, in the Nation,
Country, or Kingdom, where we dwell.

We have not Suffered as busiy bodies or medlors with other men's Matters, or as
stirrers up of Rebellion, or as having any hand therein; and we hope it will be
manifested to all that we are free from such things. And that the unkind
Observator will fail in his endeavor to cause the innocent to suffer with the
guilty.

Our constant Practice has been to obey Magistracy, and to show forth
obedience to every ordinance of men (that tends to the praise of them that do
well, and to the terror of those that do evil) for the Lords-sake, for the
Truths-sake, even in all things Relating to the things of a man; not for fear
of punishment, but for Conscience Sake: we believe it our duty and ornamental
to our Profession. Being bound by the law of God written in our hearts thereto,
and all that are and have been faithful to the same, are and have been found
therein, and in the consiant practice thereof; and no cause has been found
against us but in things relating to God, about Forms, Fashions, and Ceremonies
of Religion, Church, and Worship, and herein we shere with the Righteous, with
the truly Conscientious in all Ages; whose choice was always rather to obey
God then Men, suffer for well doing rather then wrong, violate or destroy and
make ship wrack of Faith and a good Conscience, as might be demonstrated at
large.

Now as we have always bore witness against Cruelty, Violence, and
Persecution, purely about Religion, or the form and manner of Worship, and the
destroying men's Libertys, Lives, and Estates in this World; about the
understanding or misunderstanding of the things of the World to come. We say,
as we have asserted these things to be inconsistant with tru^ Religion, and
Christianity, and Contrary to the nature thereof; so always we have and do
affirm and declare, that where men's Opinions and Principles about Religion,
leads them to Covenant, Conspire, Plot, and Contrive Mischief, and Rebellion,
under what name or pretense soevever; and if they are but found making any
steps thereto, though they do not effect the same, they are evil doers. Such
being indeed a Scandal and Reproach to true Christia^ity, which never taught
nor led any to consult the hurt, or to rise up with violence against King,
Prince, Ruler, or Governor of the Kingdom, Country, Province, or City where
they dwell. Though such Kings, Princes, Rulers, or Governors, where Heathens,
or Infidels, hereby the Primitive Christians were taught and enabled to suffer,
but not to Rebel: and true Christianity is now the same, and teaches the same
lessons to the true professors thereof.

For the true Christian sufferers knows right well, that it is the prevailing
of the Spirit of Darkness, Ignorance, and Enmity, in the hearts of their
Enemies and Persecutors; that causes them to Hate Revile and Persecute them as
it did their Captain Christ Jesus; so cannot hate, but pray for and pity them
as Creatures Captivated and blinded with the Spirit of Error and Ignorance, as
the poor Jews were, who slew Christ and Persecuted his Followers, and all for
want of knowing of them: as it is writter, If they had known him, they would
not have Crucified him; Fat^er forgive them they know not what they do, etc.

So if those who persecute Christ in his Members now, did but know him and
them: and their innocent design and business in the world; which is to bear
witness to the truth and the Spirit of it, which has made them free from the
Spirit of this world, which lusts to Envy, Hatred, Violence, and evil Will.
They would not endeavor to spoil and ruin them for their love and good will,
in telling them what the Lord has done for their Souls, and how they may Come
to enjoy the same.

We have no base Selfish interest nor design to carry on, we cannot be privy
to, nor active in any hurtful design, or Conspiracy against any of our
Neighbors, nor any man: much less against the King, or the Peace of our
Country, we are not troublesome to the Magistrates, neither do men find cause
against us save in matter of our God.

Our endeavor has been (ever since God opened our understandings, and
separated us from the diverse sorts of Worships and Worshippers that are and
have been in these Nations) to walk Circumspectly not as Fools, though
accounted so, not as Seditious Sectaries though reckoned amongst them, not as
dissturbers of the peace, though we have been dealt with as such. Indeed we
have had great cause to know and be assured of something that is better then
House or Land, Goods and Liberty; that are Made willing to expose them all to
loss and ruin, rather then sin against our knowledge that God has given us;
rather then break Christ's Commands and precepts: rather then disobey his
Doctrine which he his Ministers, Disciples, and Followers not only taught but
practiced in ages past, and he does and will enable his followers in this age
to do the same, clothing them with zeal for his name; and with love, meekness,
and Gentleness toward all which in time may quench the wrath and Rage of men,
and provoke them to love and good works; and also make them confess and
acknowledge that God is with us of a Truth. The which till the Lord bring it
pass, we are willing in peace and patience to wait, and quietly to bear the
wrath and rage of men against us.

For we firmly believe and assuredly know that where ever men are found
Seditious disturbers of the Peace, or in the practice of violence and cruelty,
under the Notion and Profession of the Christian Religion; such are certainly
deceived and bound under the Chain of a false Opinion, and they have not the
love of God nor their Neighbor planted in their hearts, and are far estranged
from that Royal law of Christ Jesus, as ye would that men should do to you, do
so to them likewise; in whomsoever this love to God and their Neighbor is
wanting, and the breach of this law is found, they are of some private
Oppinion, and are prone to use violence and endeavor to impose their oppinions
by force upon others, when they have power and opportunity in their hands; from
hence has risen much Trouble, Wars, and Bloodshed in this and many Nations,
which we desire God to prevent for the future.

For we do affirm all such things are contrary to the nature of Christ and
Christianity, his Doctrine and Example teaches no such things, the tenor of
his Gospel is Peace on Earth, and good will toward men; love not only your
Friends but your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, do good to all, follow peace with all Men.

In this the Christian Religion excels all the Religions in the World; the love
of God is the foundation and topstone of this Religion, and the true Christians
has it shed abroad in their hearts, and where this is wanting in the hearts of
men professing and talking of Religion, though they may have a zeal for the
formallity thereof, yet they have not Acceptance with God therein.

Those sayings of Christ, With what Judgment you Judge, you shall be Judged;
with what measure you Meet, shall be measured to you again, has been and shall
be witnessed a great truth; Infallible and Universal.

Therefore it concerns all especially those that profess God, Christ, and the
Scriptures, to take heed what Judgment they give, and what measure they meet,
God will not be mocked, he is just and righteous in all his ways, and doings;
such as men sow they shall reap Sooner, or Later. Vengance is the Lords and he
will repay it, and he knows how to succor and support those that truly fear
him, and works Righteousness in all Nations; and those are sincere in heart to
God and true to what they know of him, though it be but a little and under many
clouds and weaknesses, they are and shall be accepted by him, through the Son
of his love: under whose hand and power we have resigned up our selves and our
innocent cause, assuredly knowing that he will plead it in the hearts of our
Enemies, and make them in some measure sensible thereof, and that as we abide
in his fear which is the beginning of all true wisdom; and in the participation
of his love, we shall be a blessing to our Nation, and the Children unborn
shall call us happy; when they shall hear of our love and faithfulness to God,
the King and our Country, and of our patient Suffering for well doing, then
shall they praise God on our behalf, and say of a truth, God was which us and
did unhold us by the arm of his Power.

So with hearty prayer to Almighty God, that the King and those in Authority
may see and behold our Innocence and Love toward Him and all Men; and our
tenderness of Conscience and fear toward God, and incline their hearts to d^^l
with us accordingly. However we pray for the King, and the prosperity of our
Country, heartily desiring that Peace, Love, good Will, and good Neighborhood
may ab und therein, and (...) ^ivisions, Heats. Annimosities and evil designs
one against another may be extinguished and come to an end amongst all our
Neighbors, and Country men, the which we earnestly desire and Remain friends
of God and all men.

From and in behalf of the People of God called Quakers.
London dated the 27th 5th month 85.
The End.

