THE PETITION OF THE MOST SUBSTANTIAL INHABITANTS OF the City of London, and
the Liberties thereof,

TO THE LORDS and COMMONS FOR PEACE*

Together with the Answer to the same.

AND The REPLYE of the Petitioners.

LONDON, Printed for EDWARD HUSBAND, Anno Dom. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS now assembled in the High Court
of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the City of London, and the
Liberties thereof.
SHOWS, THat the present sense of our miseries, and apprehension of
inevitable ruin both of the Church and Commonwealth, make us to become humble
suitors to this Honorable Assembly (the likeliest means under God for our
relief) to consider our distressed estates, and to provide a speedy remedy for
our present and future evils, earnestly desiring you to weigh the care and
Judgment of our Predecessors, who by a known Law, settled and preserved our
Protestant Religion, our Liberties, and Properties, with a right understanding
between King and Subjects, which produced peace and plenty in our Streets.

And to reflect with serious thoughts upon our present distempers, violating
Religion by Papists and Sectaries, engaging our Nation into a Civil, Bloody,
and Distructive War, invading our Laws and Liberties, endangering all our
Lives, and utterly disinabling us to relieve our distressed brethren in
Ireland: We beseech you likewise to consider the effects of cont^nued Wa^re, as
the destruction of Christians, the unnatural effusion of blood; Fathers
against Sons* Brothers by Brothers, Friends by Friends slain; then famine
and sickness, the followers of civil War, making way for a general
confusion, and invasion by a foreign Nation, while our Treasure is exhausted,
our Trade lost, and the Kingdom dispeopled. These things weighed and enlarged
by your wisdoms, we doubt not will be strong motives in us to desire a speedy
Peace, and a happy Accommodation.

Wherefore we humbly crave, that (not lending an ear to any fomenters of these
present Wars, under what pretense soever, nor remembering ought that may
increase Iealousies, or continue divisions between his Majesty and his Houses
of Parliament) you will speedily tender His Majesty (according to His Royal
intimations) such Propositions for Accommodation, as He may with Honor and
Safety to the whole Kingdom accept. For effecting whereof, we shall be ready
to assist you with the best and utmost of our abilities, and whilst you
endeavor Peace, we shall send up our Prayers to Heaven for the blessing of
peace upon you, and all those that desire it.

An Answer to the London PETITION.
You Gentlemen and Citizens,
BOth you and your request are welcome to Us, and cannot fail of a kind
reception here, where your former merits, and your present good intentions are
so well known. It is natural in the Patient to seek cure of his disease, and
to move the Physician to use his best skill, and it is commendable in you under
your sufferings to apply your selves to Us for ease; and we hope it is not
mere impatience urges you to seek things impossible, or unjust: your prayers
for Peace are Honorable, so was Jacobs wife for children, yet when she cried,
give me children or I dye, she was to blame* for she sought that of Jacob,
which Jacob had no power to give, and she sought the same with such violence,
as Jacob ought not to have heard. But we will only conceive, that without all
impatience, you seek of us Peace, so far as we can procure it, and not
absolutely, for it depends not so much upon us, as the King, and it is not in
us to draw the King to a Peace, except His Majesty be as inclinable to it, as
we are. And we will conceive also that you seek not Peace nakedly, except it
come along with Truth, Righteousness, and Honor, and of such a Peace we are
as zealous as you can wish us to be; and for other Peace, if we should wholly
submit to the Kings party, without all conditions for future security, such a
submission to that Party would be no redress but an increase of your present
sufferings. We are entrusted in this by the whole Kingdom, and that trust we
must not break upon the solicitation of any part of the Kingdom: you are a
considerable part of London, but you are not whole London, and London is a
considerable part of this Kingdom, but it is not the whole Kingdom, and we,
according to our trust, must look upon the whole Kingdom: but it may be, that
you see more than the whole Kingdom, and may out of that sight offer some
thing to us for the ease and relief of the whole Kingdom; in this we will not
gainsay you, it is possible that some clear way and form of a just, safe,
and honorable Accommodation may be opened, and discovered to you, which has
not yet been found out by us; if this be so, we desire you cordially, and in a
friendly manner to communicate your apprehensions, and understandings of this
affair to us, and by our sudden and full embracement thereof, you shall soon
find how dear, and precious the face, the very name or sound of Peace is to
us: in the mean time we desire you to rest assured, that if there be any
defect in us, it must needs be in point of understanding, it cannot be in point
of affection. No men living can be in affection more devoted to safe Peace then
we are. And further, we desire you not to censure us of any defect at all, no,
not so much as in understanding, except you can reveal to us some better way,
then we have hitherto assayed. No Accommodation can be, but we must leave
something to the King upon trust, and if the Accommodation be even, the King
will not deny some trust to us; but in this, help to advise us how far we
shall trust the King, and how far we shall trust the Kings party; were the
King utterly disingaged from all parties, perhaps we would wholly trust the
King, and desire no trust at all to be left in us from His Majesty: but we see
in the Kings party, some that have a strange power in His affection, yea a
greater power far than we have, and yet they are known to be deeply enraged
Papists, violently engaged Delinquents, and if you would wholly put your selves
and the Kingdom into the trust of such a party, we are bound to withstand it,
as much as we can. The King protests to hate Popery, and disavowes all thoughts
of Arbitrary Rule, yet we know all, how far He is addicted to Papists, and
malignant haters of Parliaments: and since we cannot submit to the King, but we
must submit to His Party, who He preferres before us, what advantage is it to
us, whether He be in heart the self same, as His party is, or not? The truth
is, we and the Kings party are so diametrically opposite in Religion and State
both, that he cannot protect both, if they are His friends, we are his enemies;
if we are his friends, they are questionless his enemies; if he shield them
from our justice, he must expose us to their injustice; either they must judge
us, or we them, no middle way can be safe, nor deserve the name of
Accommodation; it must prove inevitable confusion in the end. Many years we
have already strugled together, and they have all the while found more favor
from the Court then we; but now we are more implacably exasperated by blood,
one against the other, and they will not lay down Arms before us; nor ought
we before them; and if both lay down Arms together, yet little safety will be
to us; for our religion and profession will bind us truly to perform, but
theirs will bind them to betray us; and since they are greater in the Kings
favor, and are loose from Oaths, when we are discountenanced, and our hands
are tied from defense, what equality of Treaty is there? We will speak now to
you, as we would to the whole body of England; if you prefer their cause and
being before ours, speak it out more plainly: if you wish better to us, and
think better of us, be wary of such Accommodation, as may render us upon
unequal terms into their hands. You will say we have received other
Petitions with more favor, when they have more concurred with us in their
Votes, we confess and justify it: for when the people have encouraged us by
Petitions, answering to our Votes, and have invited us to be more hardy in
searching their wounds, fearing our too much tenderness in their own case, we
could not but resent a better disposition and capacity of cure, then now we
take notice of in such contrary Petitions, as seem to express a distrust of
us, though indeed your professions be clean contrary. Yet to deal plainly
with you, and all other Petitioners: we love not to be solicited at all by the
people in any case whatsoever, except when we do manifestly fail of our Duty,
either out of too much fear, or too much presumption. Howsoever for the
present go peaceably home, and if you think us worthy of that trust which you
have hitherto reposed in us, leave to us to consider of this your Petition with
all its circumstances, and assure your selves, we will condescend to the more
hazard, and depart something the more from our own due in our demands from
His Majesty, for your sakes. And if you prefer your own Judgments before
ours, proceed to advertise us lovingly and fairly, wherein we may do you more
good, or how we may draw nearer to a prudent Accommodation, and impart more
particularly your open sense thereof. Howsoever we desire you to address your
selves to His Majesty, in the same manner as you have done to us, unless you
condemn us as more indisposed to peace then His Majesty is; and let your
request be, that in this valuation of His Party, and His Parliament, He would
be equally pleased to condescend, and depart from His former rigor of Terms,
as you expect from us, or else we must pronounce you in this unequal. And for
the sum of all, let your desired Accommodation be such, as shall maintain us
to be the Kings legal Parliament, and a legal Parliament to be the Kings
highest Court of Judicature, and the highest Judicature of the King fittest to
determine all public disputes, and best disposed to mercy, as well justice;
and policy, as well as Law: and without more ado your wished Accommodation is
perfected, and agreed upon.

The REPLY of the London Petitioners to the late Answer to their PETITION.
WE perceive, those Arts which first caused, are the fittest means to continue
this common calamity. If the People (of honest affections generally, but weak
reason, and so easily abused, and made to advance private ends with a public
conscience,) yet at last faithfully instructed by the sense of miseries, begin
to grow wiser, the great contrivers of these sad divisions, evidently discern,
the Kingdom is in danger to be restored to happiness, unless their long
exercised malice, can still prevail under specious pretenses, to keep up that
unfortunate misunderstanding between King and Subject.

No sooner had we, being the most considerable persons in the City (after too
long patience, and a most just apprehension of pressures howrely growing upon
us, so that of late, every new Vote has been looked upon as a new affliction,)
taken such courage to our selves, as humbly to express our unwillingnesse to
be longer active in our own unhappiness, and to sue unto you for remedy, being
desirous to receive those great blessings of Peace and Plenty, and true
Religion established by Law, from no other hand: but presently under-agents are
employed to continue (if it be possible) the distractions of this Kingdom, and
stifle our honest intentions in the womb. Alderman Penington seizes upon our
Petition, and commits one to Prison, (because it seems he was better affected
to the quiet of his Country, then was convenient for his ends,) notwithstanding
not any thing in the matter of it, was against any known law, and the manner of
it had been so often countenanced by both your Houses. Out of these
considerations, we the Citizens animated by innocence, and a necessary care to
prevent our otherwise unavoidable destruction, with sober courage, and honest
stoutnesse recover our Petition.

Next the Lecturers undertake the work, and turn all the spiritual militia
into weapons of the flesh, exhorting us to fight against the King in the fear
of God, and under the mask of Religion preaching down peace and holinesle. Yet
these virulent declamations prevail not with us, who were more conscionably
instructed, then to believe, we cannot express our love to God, unless we
maintain enmity with men; and who by sad experience have found the bitter
fruits of their so much cryed-up reformation; wherein the sons of peace are
become the loudest Trumpets of War.

This policy being now worn out, and the journey-men-Rebells at a stand, it
concerns the masters to take the ruin of the Commonwealth into their own
managery. An answer is cast out, which seems to carry in it the authority of
the House, but presents really the subtilty of those, who have hitherto
craftily abused the Peoples affections into those miserable distempers. Their
words are softer then oil, but poison of Aspes is under their lips; for the
design of it is by a seeming meek compliance with us, who from our souls
desire and sue for peace, to send us away, contented to engage our selves in a
most unnatural War. It is full of Sophistry, and such eloquence, as is
described in Catiline, (the firebrand of his Country) which was first to
disturb a state, unable to compose and settle it.

We and our request is said to be Welcome. Certainly both ought to be so
really, and deserve to be entertained with the greatest thanks and alacrity by
all honest men, as aiming at the public interest, and common good of the
Kingdom. What ever Astronomers feign of the Celestial bodies, it is to be
feared, many inferior Orbs in a State have particular contrary motions to that
of the whole. If a kind reception were truly meant, what can be the cause, we
should meet with such opposition, such difficulties in the access? It requires
no deep understanding to look through the matter: it costs nothing to give good
words, and you manage this affair very prudently, if instead of a grant, you
can satisfy us with a complement. But your Petitioners are wiser, then to
desist upon empty Courtship, when our suit is of so high concernment, as the
Kingdoms preservation.

It is commendable in us, to come as patients to their Physician.] What do
they deserve then, who hinder us from seeking a remedy for our distempers? He
who forces sickness upon us, may thereby hasten his own death. We must not out
of impatience seek things impossible, or unjust.] Our request is neither vain,
nor wicked; it desires both what can, and what ought to be done. It is very
easily effected: if you withdraw the fuel, a fire is soon extinguished; so if
you, I do not say, correct, but even not foment ill humors, the Wound will
heal of it self. The Subject is in so ready a way of recovery, do but apply
the Great Charter, and the Petition of Right, and he is restored to Health and
Strength; that is, take not our estates from us by force, and without our
Consent, and we ask not Peace, engage the Kingdom in War if you can. We
expect not Physic from you, only prescribe us a good diet, that is, let us
live by certain and known rules, and we shall not want letting blood. If Peace
be to be compassed by these means, the desire of it cannot be unjust.

Your Prayers for Peace are Honorable, so was Jacob's wife for Children, yet
when she cried, give me Children, or I dye, she was to blame, for she sought
that of Jacob, which Jacob had not power to give.] There is great difference
between Rachells impatience, and our humble request, addressed to you as the
fittest means under God to convay unto us the fruits (not of the womb, but) of
good Government, Peace and Plenty. That we live, it is the bounty of God, that
we are destroyed, may be the fault of men. We desire no more, then what good
Patriots may, and ought to perform, that you would be pleased, not to neglect
those means, which most probably will conduce to the Kingdoms preservation.

And she sought the same with such violence, as Jacob ought not to have heard.]
There was not any thing in our addresses, which could make this observation
pertinent. But the doctrine is so reasonable, we could wish, you had declared
it sooner, as being forced to take notice, the contrary position was once
taught, and made the rule of former actions; That some things must be done to
satisfy the People. We cannot be ignorant of the many tumults, dismissed with
thanks, though they (as Jacob with God) did even wrestle with you for
blessings. This clear opening your selves against violent Petitioners, will
satisfy the world in the innocence of those Members, who absented themselves
from the House out of this consideration.

Peace depends not so much on us, as the King, and it is not in us to draw the
King to a peace:] We humbly desire you not to be wanting in your duty; and we
have had frequent testimonies of His Majesty's peaceable inclinations. His
withdrawing His forces from our City, after great advantages, clearly
demonstrates, He came up to London with an army, not so much to fight, as to
appear in such a condition, as you might without loss of Honor consent to a
peace. We must remember with what cheerfulness He entertained the Messengers
of peace at Colebrook, how gracious a Reply He returned to the Message, without
any mention of former unkindnesses, and such indignities, as private men could
hardly have digested. After this, though provoked with new injuries, and most
unreasonable imputations of breach of Faith, and delight in blood; as if He
were only sensible of our misery, He seeks to continue the Treaty by a message
from Reading, ending with the same gracious close as that from Colebrook. This
as yet has not been thought worthy any answer.

We will conceive also that you seek not Peace nakedly, except it come along
with truth, righteousness and Honor. With truth;] we readily embrace this
limitation, as being persuaded the breach of peace in the Church, by Sectaries
unpunished, we wish, we could not say countenanced and encouraged, has begot
and nourisht War in the State. Therefore to deal plainly, if you mean by
truth the Protestant Religion established by Law, (to which you know His
Majesty conformes in constant practice even beyond the strictness of most
Subjects,) let the Penalties by Act of Parliament appointed be indispensably
exacted from all offenders: If you mean some of your own private opinions,
speak them out clearly, and I doubt not but the Kingdom will entertain peace,
without that which you call truth. With righteousness, with Honor.] It is
very obvious, how Peace and Righteousness may kiss each other, but how
without forfeiture of this, any can take up Arms against their Sovereign, (to
whom they have sworn allegiance) we cannot comprehend. It is no diminution of
your honor to provide for the Kings, (as you are obliged by oath) and to yield
Him all those rights, with which the Law has invested Him. These are no hard
conditions: If you like them, you will have no reason to prolong our miseries
by civil dissentions; if they displease, confess it roundly, and we are
confident, we shall have no long war.

If we should wholly submit to the Kings party, without all conditions of
future security.] You are required to submit to the King, not to any of your
fellow Subjects. There cannot be greater security, then the Laws of the Land,
(and such only your Ancestors claimed) the benefit of which you shall enjoy,
and by which only you are to be tried. If you challenge security of any higher
nature, and think not your selves safe, till you have all the power in your
selves, we make no doubt all well-affected People will clearly discern, this
is nothing else, but under the name of free Subjects, to take upon you the
Power of Kings. We humbly desire you to inform us plainly, what provisions you
will have made for your safety, and to open your selves in this point, whether
there can be any possible security in Monarchy. Under this form much must of
necessity be committed to the trust of one. If therefore you will not entertain
peace, as being unsafe to you, because there is a possibility this one may
fail in performance of trust, you clearly tell us, this Kingdom shall not be
quiet, till you have changed this ancient, and well founded Monarchy into a
popular State, and till the supreme disposal of all is placed in you. By this
the people will understand at last what it is they fight for.

We are entrusted in this by the whole Kingdom.] This must be meant of the
House of Commons, and by the same Logic that the King is denied His Rights,
the Lords may loose theirs, and this might breed an under-civill War between
Your two Houses. The trust committed to you by the people, who are the third
estate, cannot give any power, to entrench upon the other two, or either of
them. The performance of this trust is to be regulated according to the Laws,
so that if You do any thing against Law, you are accomptable for such actions,
and the people is no way concerned in it, as having no legal authority in such
a case. It is not possible, the People should give unto you, what they had not
in themselves, a Privilege to break the Laws.

You are but a part of London, and London but a part of the Kingdom.] It is
very true; so the Porters were but a part, the women were but a part, and the
beggars were but a part, all which had the happiness to think as you did, and
so deserved thanks for it. We challenge no greater Privilege then was allowed
to them, to present our desires; to approve or disallow belongs unto you,
according as the greatest reason shall direct. Yet thus much we shall take the
boldness to say, though you chance to affect war, you must give us leave, to
love and pray for peace, and not to engage our Estates or Persons, (for such
right in this case the Law gives us) if we conceive it an unreasonable war;
for we shall be unwilling to contribute a part, only that we may bring the
whole in danger. And it may be necessary to tell you, we are much the best part
of London, and London much the most considerable part of the Kingdom, and we
have great reason to presume, that the most to be valued in other parts also,
will second our desire, though you perhaps may have different apprehensions of
their affections. For indeed the causes of liking and disliking war, are not
the same in you, and the rest of the Kingdom. You sit in the midst of us
encompassed with safety, whereas others are exposed to the hazard. Their Hay,
their Corn, their Household-stuffe, their flocks of Sheep, and herds of
Cattle, and Horses are subject to the plunder, which makes them disrellish
those distractions. It is no marveile, if the active men amongst you find in
war a more pleasing taste, since they have put themselves into good preferment
by several commands, and the Kingdoms misery, is become their patrimony. So
while their trade flourishes, they have no deep sense of the universal decay
of ours in several callings. We do not much wonder, if men that stand upon
the shore, delight in tempests, as often as the wrack is to be shared amongst
them.

But it may be that you see more then the whole Kingdom.] This is a pretty
kind of Rhetoric, to endeavor to baffle our reason, by pressing on our
modesty. We compare not with others, (though we might tell you, in some things
we that are standers by, might perhaps see more clearly, then you, who are
playing your game:) whether in this cause our understanding be weaker or not,
it concerns not us to determine; since this we know, we are bound to practice,
according as that informs us in our duty, and that God (however some
undervalue the spilling of Christian blood) will call us to a severe account;
and most miserable is he, who shall be found guilty of shedding the blood of
his brethren unjustly.

You shall soon find, how dear and precious the face, the very name or sound
of Peace is to us.] Many days are not passed over since the name would not be
entertained with patience. You know who said, I like not dawbing; and that
other expression, I hate the name of Accommodation. Certainly it was less
cunningly carried. But it seems, it was believed the people was irrecoverably
mad, and that they would never be weary of misery; or at least, that they were
so much in your power, that he which should dare to mention Peace, should
suffer the injuries of war. This part would have been better acted then: It
would have given much more satisfaction, if you had embraced the name of Peace
with all cheerfulness, and broken of the thing by perplexed disputes, and
sending unreasonable propositions. Now it will be a work of greater
difficulty, to overruled our understandings, since we have evident grounds to
suspect your affections. We heartily wish, we may prove false Prophets, but we
cannot command our fears (which work naturally, and make judgment of the
future by what is past,) from presaging, you will keep up the war still, but
in a more plausible way; and under a seeming desire of Peace (having perceived
the disadvantage of your open error,) use unfit means to effect it, by
proposing unreasonable conditions, so hoping to avoid the envy, and yet
preserve to your selves the benefits of these divisions.

The sense of the following discourse is this, No Accommodation can be, because
something must be left to the King upon trust, and something to you.] It will
be very easy to assign the bounds of these several trusts. It is done to our
hand; for His Majesty requires no new trust to himself, nor will He deny an
old trust to you; the Laws and Customs of this Land determine both. But He
must not be trusted, because he is not utterly disingaged from all parties.
Here is a plain Declaration, what the issue is likely to be. As long as the
King has any power left, so long you will suspect his Faith, and the people
must be miserable, so long as you please to be fearful. Certainly, the
meanest understanding can quickly apprehend this to be a most seditious
principle, and all true lovers of their Country, will look upon it as the
seed-plot of Rebellion to all ages. For all men cannot be preferred, and
pretenses will never be wanting of a King's engagement to a party, as often as
ambitious persons, who think they have equal deserts, find they have not
equal preferment. Such men commonly, when they cannot attain to great
offices, in the discharge whereof, they promise to the people some
extraordinary good, they out of indignation, manifest their abilities in
hurting the State. You object to the King, He has a party. Alas! this is His
unhappiness, and your fault. He desires and ought to have the whole. But if
you will obstinately persist in this lay-Schisme, and admit of no condition of
Reconciliation, except He will remove those servants, which in His afflictions
He has found honest and faithful to Him, and prefer you in their places, He
has small encouragement to bestow such favors, (not yet deserved by you) and
cannot satisfy His conscience in such an ill requital of their tried Loyalty.

The next is a stale calumny against Papists and Delinquents. Though reason be
not less concluding, because old and often repeated, yet slanders loose their
credit by time, because most men can confute them by experience. His Majesty
has fully satisfied the world in this point; and the most considering part
even of the people, having long time in vain expected proofs, are now grown
more stayed in their belief, then to be led away by a bare confidence, and
boldness of defaming.

We and the Kings party are so diametrically opposite in Religion and State,
that He cannot protect both.] The same justice may govern both, if you will
return from whence you are swerved, and submit to the common rule of Law,
which ought to be the measure of our actions. We most earnestly beseech you,
(that we may not perish, while we are detained in generals,) you would be
pleased to tell us, what Religion you would have. If the public form of
worship, established already, and sealed with the blood of many Martyrs herein
can be no ground of difference; they profess and practice it, and will become
suitors to you, that you will severely punish all persons whatsoever that
transgress against it: If you mean some other Religion, (as you do, if there
be any real disagreement amongst us) let us know what it is, perhaps the
Kingdom will renounce their old faith, and like your Creed better. However,
let not the people be blindly engaged to fight against their King in defense of
their own, and His Religion, and to maintain that, which He and they approve
off, and only you dissent from.

If they are His friends, we are His enemies; if we are His friends, they are
questionless His enemies.] It becomes not us to decide, who are His friends,
who His enemies, nor to publish our thoughts, which may perhaps be guided by
that common notion, to fight for, or against; to endeavor to preserve, or
destroy. Friendship and enmity here are not to be taken for affections, but for
a civil virtue orvice, and to be understood in a law notion. They only are to
be esteemed His friends, who are obedient to Laws; and transgressors, His
enemies. So that a King is enemy to none, as not punishing out of hatred, but
justice. That some men have found more favor then others* (we may guess at
the cause of your discontents, by this frequent complaint) can be no just
ground to disturb a State. The Kingdom will never be free from Rebellion, if
Subjects may be allowed to give law to the Princes courtesies.

Either they must judge us, or we them, no middle way can be safe.] The trial
of this Land is well known, which is per judicium parium, by verdict of Pears,
it being a way of proceeding equally indifferent to all; where none have cause
to fear wrested explications, or obscure consequences, verdicts being brought
in, in capital causes, according to evident and known law. We make no
question all uninterested persons will quickly be satisfied in the present
difference, in case of Treason, which can be the only subject of this debate,
(and yet this seems to be the maine ground of distance.) For certainly our
Laws have provided for the trial of it, and the House of Commons never
heretofore challenging a power of judicature, and the Lords not using to
censure any in this nature under the degree of Baron, therefore it undeniably
appears, they are to be referred to the ordinary trial of the Kings Bench.

They will not lay down Arms before us, nor ought we before them.] Clear
satisfaction has been offered you by His Majesty in this point, that the
Arms should be returned to those hands, in which they are by law entrusted.
The King is invested with the sole power of trayning, arraying, and mustering,
it being most consonant to reason, as well as grounded on law, that he which is
bound to Protect, should be enabled to compass that end.

Little safety will be to us, for our Religion and our profession will bind us
truly to perform, but theirs will bind them to betray us.] Of all men living
we should least have expected, you should make advantage of this argument; the
breach of Faith in your Soldiers being most infamously notorious. Witness
Farneham Castle, where after hands shaken with two of your Captains, and time
given upon the reputation of Gentlemen and Soldiers, to draw up Propositions
of surrender, the Commanders being retired, and the Soldiers forbid to shoot,
you brook in upon them against the laws of Truce, took them all Prisoners
and plundered them, not affording any benefit of the former agreement* witness
Winchester, where after composition set down in writing, you against it, robbed
them, stripped them and killed many in cool blood, insomuch that some of your
Commanders, more sensible of honor, openly exclaimed against your barbarous
cruelty, scarce to be paralelled amongst the stories of Germany. witness
Yorkshire, where, after the Gentry had very prudently settled a peace and
security in that County, by mutual covenant not to injure each other, the Lord
Fairefax is bitterly reproved for breaking your Privileges, by presuming to
agree to the happiness of His Country, when the House, or rather the Committee
had resolved to engage the whole Kingdom in misery, and he is accordingly
commanded not to regard his promise. The truth is, (and you have declared it to
the world in print) that you might persuade him not to be honest, you tell him
plainly he was not wise, and therefore injoyne him not to stand to that
Covenant which was made with so much disadvantage: witness Mr Marshall, and Dr
Downing. The King in extraordinary mercy pardoned and dismissed 300 prisoners
(though guilty of high Treason, and taken in actual hostility against him,)
only taking security (at least as he then thought it was, having not yet
learnt, that the Religion of that party, is not capable of laying any
obligation against Interest) for their future innocence by oath, they swearing,
never after to bear Arms against His Majesty. These being returned are
satisfied in conscience, they swore unlawfully, as binding themselves not to
advance the good cause, and for this consideration, as also it being taken in
their own defense, their lives being endangered upon refusal, (so that being
now safe they were again free) they are formally absolved from their Oath by
these two City Popes, and preached into new and perjurd Rebels. Good God that
these men in so short time, should be guilty of so many public violations of
Faith, (one of which, even amongst the ancient Heathen, would have stained an
age,) and yet that all the people are not yet undeceived! It cannot be, but all
such as have any sense of true piety* will upon full information detest these
foul proceedings, and abhor that Religion, which is made but an Art to
dispense with honesty.

Certainly you cannot believe, that you Religion binds you truly to perform:
men of such persuasions could not so grossly equivocate themselves into
disloyalty, and raise an Army to desttroy their King in His own defense.

If you prefer their cause and being before ours, speak it out more
plain^y.] We most humbly thank you, and shall (if necessity require it) make
use of this freedom. The rule by which our liking will be guided, is this, we
shall acquit that party, which does not entrench upon Our Liberty, by
imprisoning any of us without cause, and maintaining the Legality of it, and
professing to measure it according to pleasure, so that, if they think it
convenient to do so, it shall be a crime to question it; Our property, by
taking our Estates from us without our consents; our Religion, by committing
our most painful and conscientious Professors, and public thwarting our long
believed Preachers by new Sectaries, with great care and cunning planted in our
several Congregations.

We love not to be solicited by the People in what case soever, except when we
do manifestly fail in our duty.] Your minds are much changed of late* you did
love it dearly. And such care has been taken, to entertain you with this your
delight, that, least good affections should not be able to show themselves for
want of understanding, (as commonly your well meaning friends were defective in
that part) your sense has been put into their papers, and you have lent them a
head, that they might express their good hearts. It cannot be so sudainly
forgotten, that when reason formerly has gainsaid proposalls, the affections
of the people have been judged the fittest measure of votes.

Here is yet a possibility of failing by this confession, and so you have
overthrown the strongest, and most popular argument of your innocence, the
authority of the doer. If we, or any part of the Kingdom shall conceave you
fail of duty to your Sovereign, you have by this granted us full liberty to
solicit you when we think fitting.

We desire you to address your selves to His Majesty, in the same manner as
you have done to us, unless you condemn us, as more indisposed to peace then
his Majesty is.] We have had frequent evidences of His Majesty's peaceable
inclinations, in His many Messages continually by you rejected, and we have
observed how long and how much he has suffered formerly, that He might have
prevented (if malice could have been wearied) this unnatural War. We thought
a Petition to Him for Peace not so seasonable, because He out of His
detestation of the effusion of His Subjects blood, had Himself (in His Message
from Nottingham) even sued to you for it. We extremely wonder, We should now be
put upon this course, for which formerly you have punished others. It was then
a crime to think of making any addresses to His Majesty, and the authors have
suffered for it, before it was known what they meant to have desired.

Concerning the matter of the Petition you would frame for us, (that art has
formerly done good service, and must not now be forgotten) that He would depart
from his former rigor of terms, we must freely acknowledge, we have not yet
met with any harsh proposalls from His Majesty, and we believe, if any such
were, they would have been named, you not using to dissemble any advantages,
nor to be over nice in respect to His Regal dignity. What ever conditions have
come to our hands, seem as reasonable in sense, as mild in language.
Notwithstanding he has been frequently tempted to use harsher expressions, by
that freedom you have taken of accusing him, in such words, as we should count
it incivility to use toward our equals. Too often they were so below the
respect due to a King, that they were unfit to be given to a Gentleman.

Inbriefe, that you may not flatter your selves with an opinion, we shall
easily be put off with generalities, which signity nothing, we shall take some
pains in this business, which so highly concerns us, and with our utmost
care, and all due respects, descend to particular Propositions, such as we
according to our apprehensions shall conceave reasonable.

And that we may (as much as in us lies) remove all those rubbs out of the way
to an happy accommodation, which some with design and study purposely cast in;
we shall for the present make one Proposition, which carries in it much
equality, and (if we mistake not) will take off all exceptions, which seem to
stand betwixt us and happiness in this agreement: That is, that as His Majesty
does readily consent to all the rights, which belong to both Houses; so you
would with as much forwardness, grant what ever rights belong unto him: and
that time may not be wasted in doubtful disputes, while the Kingdom lies at
stake, that you would make the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH (acknowledged by all
to be happy and glorious) the measure by which to determine them. This we
conceive a more equal way, then for two of the Estates (especially when the
major part by fear of tumults and Armies is absent) to judge by no rule but
their own votes of the Rights of the third: to whom if it may be allowed to be
sole arbitrary Judges both of Justice and Policy, both of what is due to you,
and fit for you, both from King and Subjects, the accommodation that is left
can only be this; that, so you may have all that your selves desire, you are
contented to endure peace, and such an one indeed you had hard hearts, if you
would not accept.

If this appear more reasonable, we shall not need to trouble our selves with
those involved conditions by you prescribed, the meaning whereof we doubt in
some, the truth in others.

That you are the Kings Legal Parliament. That the two Houses are distinct
parts of the Parliament, we acknowledge, and the King never denied it. That you
have not the power of the whole in right (though it has been executed upon us
in fact) you your selves must confess, unless you will say, that you can make
an Act of Parliament without the King. Wherein we desire you to declare your
sense plainly. If you shall not pretend to this, we request the Subject may not
suffer under illegal names, that is, that an Ordinance of either or both
houses, may not have the virtue or power, since you will not justify the name
of Law in it.

That you are the Kings highest court of Judicature.] We conceive, the House of
Commons, and much more the Committee, has power of accusing only, not of
judging; This belongs to the House of Lords (an appeal being made from an
inferior Court, and writs of error being legally exhibited) who are presumed to
pass sentence according to the known Law, and not according to reason of
State, Because this would place an arbitrary power in them, and enable them to
overthrow (the birthright and inheritance of every English man) our Laws by
Policy. Since there cannot be imagined a more absolute power, and government
according to bare will, then to determine the same action right or wrong, as
they shall please to call it necessary or convenient.

That you are fittest to determine all public disputes.] If it be understood
in relation to Laws, the only allowed rules of decision, it is granted without
any inconveniences. If you will maintain it in the largest sense, which the
words may seem to bear, we are confident, the people will abhor the
Doctrine; for by this rule you must maint^ine, it is in your power to depose
not a King only, but Monarchy it self, if this chance to be the subject of
your disputes.

That you are best disposed to mercy, as well as justice.] We desire you to
express these words in plain English, and to tell us clearly, whether you do
challenge to your selves a right of pardoning whom you please (which yet has
been acknowledged this very Parliament a prerogative only belonging to the
King.) But if this be the meaning, we shall less wonder, that persons highly
corrupt, and most known offenders in public offices, have been protected from
your Justice, by the Prerogative of your mercy, and that Policy should so far
overruled Law, that it should be delivered, for sound State Doctrine, that
former faults ought not to be looked upon, if the party accused has done good
service for the present.

If this free opening our apprehensions find a gracious acceptance, and (as is
by us infinitely desired) prosperous success, we shall render you our most
humble and hearty thanks; if our further endeavors shall be necessary, we
will not be wanting to our own and the Kingdoms preservation.

FINIS.

