OF EPISCOPAL Confirmation: IN TWO DISCOURSES.

By B. Camfield, Rector of Aileston near Leicester.

(...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Hebr. LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswel,
at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas, Lord Bishop of Lincoln, my much
Honored Diocesan.
My Lord,
AFter I had received your Lordships Command for Preaching, which it became me
neither to resist nor dispute; debating with my self what Subject were most
proper to insist upon in such an Assembly; I determined at last upon this of
Confirmation, which for many years has been much in my thoughts, those
excellent words of the Learned and Reverend Dr. Hammond, having long since left
in me a very deep impression; De Confirm. Praef. 7, etc.
That since the Faith it self once delivered, and the two Sacraments of the New
Covenant, instituted by Christ himself, and strictly commanded unto all; there
is nothing which can more strongly oblige to a sincere, perpetual, and durable
obedience unto the Evangelical Law; nothing from the diligent and prudent
administration whereof more plentiful Fruits may be hoped by the Christian
Church; and nothing, lastly, whose neglect or overly performance (pro forma and
ex opere, ut aiunt, operato) seems more pernicious and destructive unto piety.

When therefore I had digested my Meditations and Collections upon this
Argument into the ensuing method, (which is the only thing almost peculiar to
them) I could not easily be diverted to any other Theme, had Time permitted a
longer deliberation; though to some this might seem (as matters fell out) the
less opportune by reason of your Lordships absence, necessitated by those
Infirmities of Age and Bodily Indispositions, which then with a more than
ordinary violence arrested your person, to your own regret, undoubtedly upon
this account, no less than our unhappiness.

Among the Hearers notwithstanding it met with a candid entertainment and
general welcome; and so I hope it may do when it comes thus abroad into the
world, (enlarged and attended with another practical Discourse to the same
purpose) on no other design than to promote a common good.

And I am the rather moved to Print it at this juncture of time, because over
and above the usefulness of the particular subject, it contains a most
convictive evidence and demonstration on the behalf of Diocesan Episcopacy,
(which some have spitefully renewed their old grudge and quarrels against) and
the possibility of exercising Discipline in a Diocesan Church, did not the too
culpable neglects of many among us add too keen an edge to that exception.

Now that it may show it self with the greater confidence of success, as it was
penned and uttered in obedience to your Lordships injunction, so the Author of
it most humbly betakes himself to your Lordships Patronage, craving a benign
and favorable reception from your Paternity, of this small Present and Pledge
of that great Observance, which is ever due from,

Your Lordships In all Filial Duty and Service, Benj. Camfield.

TO THE Courteous Reader.
THE Argument here treated of deserves sufficiently for its own importance and
usefulness, as is declared abundantly in the ensuing pages. Nor may I arrogate
any thing to my self in the handling of it, after so many worthy persons,
unless perhaps the perspicuity and methodicalness of the digestion and
management; and that in such a manner, as both to recommend the thing from its
most proper Topics, and direct withal to the most succesful administration
and observance of it. But that which more peculiarly instigated me to this
publication, was the deep sense I have, not only of the too great neglect, and
general need of Confirmation among the people, and the seasonableness of
persuading them earnestly, in these fickle and uncertain times, with purpose of
heart to cleave unto their Religion: but the necessity also which Episcopacy it
self appears to be in of some further Confirmation against the fresh and
virulent Assaults of troublesome and malevolous Dissenters, who seek to lay the
foundations of a strange kind of disagreeing Union among English Protestants in
casheering that Prelacy, which has obtained not only here, but (until within
little more than one Century) throughout the whole Christian Church, from the
very first plantation of it. Of which there is not I think any single proof or
instance more clear and evident, than what is hereafter suggested; The custom
of the Churches, as S. Hierom words it, for the Bishop to go forth to those,
who were baptized a far off in lesser Cities by Priests and Deacons, to lay
hands upon them for the invoking of the Holy Ghost.

Episcopal Confirmation, as it has been derived from the Apostolical Age, and
practiced successively in the Christian Church, is unto me a most undoubted
evidence and confirmation of Diocesan Episcopacy, and so I hope it may prove to
all others, who will but have the patience impartially and coolly to examine
and consider of it.

But if upon our manifold sins and provocations, the Divine Nemesis shall so
far overtake us, as to permit dissatisfied and humoursom men once more to
overturn our present Establishments, we may firmly conclude upon former
experience, that after diverse Revolutions when their own Giddiness has tired
them in the eager pursuit of Phanatic Innovations, there will be no fixation at
last, but by returning again in a more sober temper to what has been so rashly
and impetuously destroyed by them.

I will add nothing more now, but hearty prayers to God Almighty, that he would
succeed these and all other great endeavors by his blessing, for the settling
of us (if it be his Heavenly Will) upon such peaceable principles, as may not
sever us from the Communion of Saints in that truly Catholic Church of Christ,
which we retain in our Creed. And hereunto every understanding and orderly
Christian will readily subjoyn his most affectionate and zealous Amen.

Errata.
Ep. to Reader p. ult. l. 3. r. good endeavors. p. 2. l. 9. speaks) p. 3. l.
24. their r. those. p. 6. l. 15. (...). p. 8. l. 7. (...). p. 9. l. 12. (...).
p. 17. l. 17. loose. p. 19. marg. Circa A.D. 400. p. 25. l. 1. dele by. l. 7.
would have. p. 34. l. 3. our own nation. p. 37. l. 22. (...). l. ult. this. p.
38. l. 28. marg. ipsae. p. 42. l. 17. (...). p. 43. l. 10, 11. managed. p. 45.
l. 1. (...). p. 46. l. 28. to be observed. p. 47. l. 22. audibly. p. 55. l.
ult. and p. 56. l. 1. we are confirmed. ib. marg. Melchiadis. p. 57. l. 13.
(...). p. 64. l. 17, 18, 19. dele c.c.c. p. 67. l. 24. Spalato. p 76. l. 29.
principal. p. 85. l. 11, 12. charitable. p. 87. l. 2. Secondly, the heart. p.
88. l. ult. (...). p. 89. l. 1. (...). l. 10. they were both. p. 91. l. 15. to
be Christians. p. 92. l. 17. plausible. p. 94. l. 5. panes. p. 102. l. 15.
(...).

Contents p. 1. l. ult. obsignation. p. 2. l. 24. as well. p. ult. l. penult.
general motives, dele and exhortations.

A Discourse of CONFIRMATION: DELIVERED At the Primary Visitation of the Right
Reverend Father in God THOMAS, L. Bishop of Lincoln, Held at S. Martins
Leicester, Sept. 22. 1679. And since enlarged.

With a short Appendix thereunto.

Insolentissimae insaniae est, existimare non recte fieri quod ab universa
Ecclesia fit. D. Aug. ep. 118. OF Episcopal Confirmation.
Heb. 6.2. Of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands.


THE Apostle, in the foregoing verse^ mentions the Principles of the Doctrine
of Christ. The Margin has it from the Greek, the Word of the beginning of
Christ; or by an easy transposition, which our Translation follows, the
beginning of the Doctrine of Christ; (...), as Camerarius glosseth it; Sermonem
qui in Christo rudes inchoat, as Erasmus and Beza render it, the instruction
which initiates novices or beginners in Christ. The same which in the precedent
chapter he calls the first principles of the Oracles of God; Chapter 5.12. Chapter 6.1.
and here again by a known Figure, the foundation, that is, the rudiments of
Christianity, Haec omnia pertinere ad initia Neophytorum satis aperteque
Scriptura testatur. D. Aug. de fide and operibus, c. 11.
or the Christians A, B, C; the chief elements whereof he thus enumerates; Of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, the Doctrine of Baptisms
and of Laying on of Hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of Eternal
Judgment.

I will not now trouble you with the several Opinions among Expositors about
the distinct way of reckoning of them up. If we take them as they lie most
obvious to our view, B. Tailors Discourse of Confirmat. p. 45.
then (as a right reverend and learned Author speak, ( Here are six fundamental
points of S. Paul's Catechism, which he laid as the foundation or the beginning
of the Institution of the Christian Church; and amongst these Imposition of
Hands, (which the Apostles used in confirming the Baptized And that here it
must be so understood, he proves distinctly, p. 46, 47, 48.
, and invocating the Holy Ghost upon them) is reckoned as a part of the
foundation. And therefore they who deny it, says he, dig up foundations. And
when S. Paul calls it the Doctrine of the Laying on of Hands, it does not only
appear to be a lasting Ministry because no part of the Christian Doctrine can
be changed or abolished, but hence also it appears to be of Divine Institution.
For if it were not, S. Paul had been guilty of that which our Blessed Savior
reproves in the Scribes and Pharisees, and should have taught for Doctrines the
commands of men; which because it cannot be supposed, it must needs follow,
that this Doctrine of Imposition of Hands, or Confirmation, is Apostolical and
Divine.

But upon a stricter examination of the words, the chief stress of all seems
unto me, I confess, to be laid upon the two foremost heads, (wherein S. Paul
elsewhere sums up the whole counsel of God Acts 20.21. and that agrees well
enough with his (...). 2 Timothy 1.13.
) namely, Repentance from dead works and faith toward God: which certainly
includes fidelity and obedience to his commands, as well as belief of the
Creed, whereof the two concluding branches are those last specified, the
resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment; (which the same Apostle in like
manner particularly refers to, when he professes his hope Godwards before the
Governor of Caesarea, Acts 24.15.) And then the words of the Text (there being
no particles of connection between them) may fitly enough be read by way of
apposition hereunto, Vide Calv. in loc.
as in a Parenthesis (the Doctrine of Baptisms and of Laying on of Hands) not
so much to intend the recital of two other different heads of Christian
Doctrine, as the time when account was given and taken of this Catechism, viz.
at Baptism, which in their first Ages was commonly dispensed to the Adult, and
at Confirmation after Baptism by the Imposition or Laying on of Hands: q.d. The
foundation of Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God, being the
Christian Doctrine, an account whereof was given and taken at Baptism and the
Laying on of Hands. The Doctrine delivered and professed at Baptism and the
Laying on of Hands, Mr. W. Par. and Annot. ^^^ford, in loc. 1675.
as a late worthy Paraphrast has it. Or (as he speaks more at large) The
principles of Religion, whereof public confession was made at Baptism by
Converts, and at the times of Imposition of Hands by those that had received
Baptism in their Infancy.

First, we have here Baptism, the door or entrance of Christianity, called
Baptisms, (...) in the plural number, perhaps because many were baptized at
once: or put for the singular, Lib. de side and operibus c. 11.
as chap. 9.23. (so S. Augustine reads it, Lavacri Doctrinae:) or else with
reference to the threefold mersion then made use of, (...), one Baptism, though
in this one were anciently used many mersions or washings The Reference of
Aquinaes and others to a Triplex Baptismus, Fluminis, Flaminis, Sanguinis,
seems too much strained. And so also the Duplex Baptismus, Joannis and Christi,
which some here discourse of.
. And then Imposition of hands for Confirmation, but previous thereunto
Instruction in the first elements or principles of Christian Doctrine, by a
plain and practical Catechism, such as that which is appointed by our Church to
be learned by every one, before they be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop.

For whatever low and contemptible thoughts some may have of our Church
Catechism, it is certainly most agreeable to the Apostolical pattern here set
before us; viz. the foundation of Repentance from dead works and Faith toward
God; that is, the sum of our Engagements as we are Christians, or the vow of
our Christianity, to forsake the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; to believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith, (among which are the Resurrection of
the dead, and Eternal Judgment) and to keep God's holy Will and Commandments,
and walk in the same all the days of our Life; showing thus all good fidelity
toward that God in whom we believe. This is nothing else you see but a
Paraphrase upon Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God: and so it
appears to have been designed by the Church. You may observe it manifestly in
the Questions and Answers touching Baptism.

Q. What is required of persons to be Baptized?

A. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the Promises made to them in that Sacrament.

Q. Why then are Infants Baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?

A. Because they promise them both by their Sureties; which Promise when they
come to age themselves are bound to perform.

In which words it is most evident, that Repentance and Faith are declared to
be the importance of the vow and promise made at Baptism. And so the Church
Catechism, which in the main branches of it is nothing else but a plain Comment
upon the Contents of this vow and promise, corresponds exactly with that in the
Apostles Age the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ then propounded to
beginners; or the milk for babes, as our Apostle also calls it, chap. 5.12, 13.
that sincere milk of the word, which they should hunger and thirst after, 1
Pet. 2.2.
to grow thereby; (...).

But I will say no more of this, designing only the choice of the Text to
ground a Discourse about Confirmation upon, for the better preparation of those
who should have been confirmed by our Right Reverend Diocesan in this his
Visitation, had it pleased Almighty God to have permitted him health and
strength to have come in person among us, according to his good and pious
intentions.

And now I had thought to have diverted wholly from this subject (as less
pertinent and agreeable) unto something else; but that I really fear, the long
disuse of this sacred performance among us, may occasion in some too great
ignorance or indifference about it, if not aversation from and disgust against
it. And therefore I will hope your favor, while I proceed upon the same
Argument, that though we are so unhappy at the present, as to be deprived of
the blessing, we may yet keep alive among us the Christian desires of embracing
all opportunities for the obtaining of it.

I shall forbear to make any further Apology, but for method sake digest what I
have to offer unto your thoughts concerning this matter under these five heads:

1. In the general, of the Names whereby it is known.

2. Of the Scripture paterns and grounds for it.

3. Of the Ceremony used in it, the Imposition of the Bishops hands.

4. Of the Qualification of the persons addressing to it.

And 5. Of the important usefulness of the whole Rite and Action.

Of each of which now by Gods help with your patience briefly in order.

And first in the general, of the Names whereby it is known and called. And
here, 1. we should take notice of that before us in the Text, (...) or (...),
the imposition or laying on of hands; so called from the Rite evermore
attending the Ministration of it, the Apostles first, and after them Bishops
laying on their hands on the parties confirmed by them. Of which I purpose to
discourse more particularly afterward by it self, and therefore wave the
further prosecution of it in this place.

Secondly, it is also called among the Ancients (...), or (...), or (...),
Perfection; ((...), Dionys. Areap. Post fontem superest ut perfectio fiat,
quando ad invocationem Sacerdotis Spiritus Sanctus infunditur. De Sacr. l. 3.
c. 2.
D. Ambros.) the person confirmed being looked upon as a perfect or complete
Christian, when he has thus actually taken the Engagements made in his name at
Baptism, upon himself, and received the strengthening supplies of the Spirit,
Albaspin. not. in can. 77. Council. Elibert.
as well as his new birth. And none was reputed a perfect Christian, or
communicated with as such, till his Confirmation -- So the Author of the
Imperfect Work on Saint Matthew, under the name of S. Chrysostom, tells us,
(speaking of not giving holy things unto dogs) That the holy grace of the body
of Christ is to be given to them only, Hom. 17.
(qui ^amper Baptismum facti sunt filii Dei, and per manuum impositionem) who
are already made the Sons of God by Baptism, and by imposition of hands; that
is, baptized and confirmed: it is Childrens bread. And so we have it in our own
Rubric; that None shall be admitted to the holy Communion, until he be
confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be confirmed. Both agreeable to the 48
Canon of the Council of Laodicea; A.D. 364.
(...); Persons after Baptism must be anointed with the Heavenly Chrism or
Unction, that they may be partakers of the Kingdom of God -- For so I am to
tell you,

Thirdly, that it is also familiarly named among the Ancients (...), Chrism or
Unction; ((...) in Dionysius; h. e. De Ecclesiae Hierarch. Catech. 3.
Perfectivum seu consecratorium chrisma; (...), in S. Cyril; Divini Chrismatis
unctio, and Chrisma Ecclesiasticum, De gub. Dei, l. 3.
in Salvian.) And this name possibly might arise from the gift of the Holy
Ghost here conferred, (that is, an additional measure of his graces, as we
shall see afterward) whose operations are in the sacred Scriptures resembled
unto oil, the oil of gladness; Psalm. 45.8. Heb. 1.9. 2 Cor. 1.22 1 Jo. 2.27
from whence in the New Testament Christians are said also to receive an
unction, or anointing. From which phrase of unction and allusion thereunto, it
came to pass very early in the Church, that the Ceremony of Anealing or
Anointing with oil was practiced both in Baptism and Confirmation. And as our
blessed Lord and Savior is called Christ, from his being plentifully anointed
with the Holy Ghost, most visibly in his descent upon him after his Baptism; so
may we with propriety (as some conceive) be named Christians, from our being
anointed with the same Spirit; A. D. 170.
((...). Theoph. Antioch. l. 1. ad Autolych.)

But however this appellation of Chrism is frequent (as I said) among the
Ancients; yet it seems not peculiar unto Confirmation, Anointing having been
used also at Baptism, as I intimated; and both Baptism and Confirmation are
perfect and entire enough without it, since we never read that the Apostles
used it in either of them. And therefore that Ceremony, Dr. Ham. de Confirm. c.
2. sect. 2.
as it was freely at first taken up in the Church, so upon the same Christian
Liberty doubtless is as freely to be omitted.

Fourthly, it has also been called Consignatio, consigning or sealing;
(Signaculum Dominicum, Epist. 73.
by S. Cyprian;) the Lords sign, or signature, or seal; (Signaculum spiritale,
by S. De Sacram. l. 3. c. 2.
Ambrose) a spiritual sign, signature, or seal. And thus probably it was named
from the custom of signing the confirmed party with the sign of the Cross at
his anointing -- Inscripta oleo fronti signacula, Cassand. Schol. ad ^ymn. Prud.
as Prudentius the Christian Poet, who lived about S. Jeroms time, has it.
Unless we should rather choose to refer it to a more spiritual sealing with the
Holy Ghost, the seal and assurance of the Christians inheritance, by whom we
are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13. (...). Euchol. Graec.
and 4.30. And the Apostle writes thus to the Ephesians, (as an excellent
person observes) who well understood his meaning, by remembering what was done
to themselves by the Apostles but awhile before, Acts 19.6. B. Tailor of
Confirm. p. 55.
who after they were baptized did lay their hands upon them. And so they were
sealed, and so they received the Holy Spirit of promise; of which more by and
by.

Fifthly, that which is now become most familiar among us, and properly enough
denominative of the thing intended by it, is (...) or (...), confirmation; the
design of it being to confirm, corroborate, and add strength to our first
Christian Profession; ((...), Constit. Apostol.) And by Gods blessing in answer
to the prayers made on our behalf unto our Christian graces, and ability of
living answerably to that good profession; (Tunc omne baptisma legitimum
Christianitatis nomine confirmatur, as it is in an old Ordo Romanus.) In Ossic.
Sab. Pasch.
So that it is a Confirmation on both parts, both on Gods and ours.

1. We confirm and re-establish our Baptismal Covenant in our own names,
seeking grace and strength afresh from God to fulfill and accomplish it. And,

2. God confirms the blessing of his Covenant unto us, by the kind reception of
his peculiar Minister, blessing of us from him and in his name, and thereby
assuring us of his grace both to assist and reward us.

And upon the same account, Sixthly, it is called (...), Obsignation; being
thus, a novation or renewing of the Covenant, Stipulation, and Promise on both
parts made, as it were under Hand and Seal. In that famous story which Eusebius
reports from Clemens Alexandrinus, ^. D. 200.
of the young man committed to a certain Asian Bishop by S. John the Apostle,
whom after instruction he both baptized and confirmed; his Confirmation is
expressed under the name of (...), Eccles. Hist. l. 3.23.
the Seal of the Lord; as elsewhere in him, (...), L. 6. c. 43.
to be sealed by the Bishop is to be confirmed.

Hereunto therefore the Reverend and Learned Dr. De Confirm. praef. 8, 9
Hammond not unfitly accommodates that Text of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.19. The
foundation of the Lord stands sure, Id. Annot. in loc.
having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his. And let every one that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Where the word (...),
translated Foundation, may import (says he) as well a Covenant, a Bill of
Contract, a Bond or Obligation, a Pledge or Pawn, (from (...) pono) somewhat
delivered as a security to another; and so refers to the Covenant of God
through Christ, which is here said to be (...) firm and stable, and that
firmitude demonstrated by its Seal annexed, (...), (which seems also to relate
plainly to a Bill or a Bond;) and because such Seals had their Inscription on
both sides, agreeable to the condition of the persons contracting, accordingly
there is here added a double print and inscription upon the Seal, (Signaculi
gemina facies, duplex epigraphe.)

1. Ex part Dei, on God's part, the image of the Divine Promise and Covenant,
that he will be faithful and constant in the owning of his Servants. The Lord
knows them that are his. Whereas he will say unto others, 'I never knew you.
And,

2. Ex part hominis, on Man's part, the express image of his duty. Let every
one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity: that is, every one
that writes himself Christian, and expects Salvation from the Gospel Covenant;
every one that gives up his name to Christ, and hopes for reward from him, must
remember that he is bound by a severe and indispensible Law, to renounce all
dishonesty, impurity, impiety, and to lead a godly, righteous, and sober life,
Tit. 2.12. to cleanse himself from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Now both these together make the sealing of the Gospel Covenant complete; and
Confirmation is the first time of our personal and public claim to this
Covenant, and the ratification of it.

But thus much of the Names whereby it is known, Mr. Ham. L'Estrange, Alliance
of Divine Offices, p. 248. Dr. Ham. de Confirm. p. 80.
most of which are thought by some to have been derived from 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.
Now he which establishes (or confirms) us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us is God; who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of his
Spirit in our hearts; (...). -- It is certainly the imparting of some spiritual
(...) or Gift, to the end we may be established or confirmed. In order to which
S. Paul longed so much for a prosperous journey to visit the Romans, chap.
1.11, 12. (...).

I proceed now, Secondly, to speak more particularly of the Scripture paterns
and grounds for the thing it self.

There are among the Fathers who conceive this Rite of Confirmation
sufficiently figured out and pointed to in the eminent descent of the Holy
Ghost upon our blessed Savior after his Baptism, in the form of a Dove
overspreading him, Dr. Ham. de Confirm. p. 143. (...). Cyril. ^atech. 3. ^d. p.
171.
S. Matthew. 3. -- And afterward in the descent of the same Holy Spirit upon the
Apostles at Pentecost, sitting upon each of them, Acts 2. Of which Eusebius
Emissenus (or as some think, Eucherius Lugdunensis, who died about the Year of
our Lord 454) thus speaks in his Homily upon Pentecost; Vide Hieron. Dialog.
adversus Luciferian.
What now the Imposition of hands in the confirming young Christians does give
to every one, that then did the descent of the Holy Ghost in the Congregation
of Believers bestow upon all. But I shall not insist on either of these.

Bishop Tailor having enlarged first on the example of Christ at Jordan, Of
Confirm. 1.
pleads very strongly for the grounding of it upon that noted Text of our
Saviors to Nichodemus, S. John 3.5. Unless a man be born of water and of the
Holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. The most easy,
intelligible, and clear sense of which words he makes to be this; Unless a man
be baptized into Christ, and confirmed by the Spirit of Christ, he cannot enter
into his Kingdom; that is, he is not perfectly adopted into the Christian
Religion, or fitted for the Christian warfare. And this he contends to be
consonant to the whole design of our blessed Savior, and the analogy of the
New Testament. And to the same sense S. Cyprian most evidently glosseth upon
the place; Ep. 72. quae est ad Stephunum.
(Tunc enim plene sanctificari, and esse Dei filii possunt, si Sacramento
utroque nascantur, cum scriptum sit, Nisi quis natus fuerit ex aqua and
spiritu, non potest intrare in regnum Dei.) But I shall wave the urging of this
also.

We have an undoubted and remarkable instance of Apostolical practice for it,
Acts 8. where Philip the Deacon having preached the Gospel at Samaria, and
thereby won many Converts, and baptized them, the Apostles at Jerusalem hearing
of it, send forth two of their own number, Peter and John; Who (says the
sacred Text, ver. 15. etc.) when they were come down prayed for them, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost: and then laid their hands on them, and they
received the Holy Ghost. It pleased God that those admirable Gifts, called
there the Holy Ghost, should not ordinarily be conferred on the Baptized, but
by the Apostles hands, thereby to strengthen the Authority of those his
Witnesses, and by the same means promote the unity of the Church, through the
reverend esteem of those chief Ministers, as Grotius well notes. In locum.


In this story now we have,

1. The persons confirmed, the baptized Samaritans, who had believed and been
instructed aforehand in Philip's doctrine.

2. The Ministers of Confirmation, Peter and John, the Apostles sent from
Jerusalem on that very purpose.

3. What they did in Confirmation. Having heard of their faith in receiving the
Word of God, and their baptism in profession of that faith, they prayed for
them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, and laid their hands upon them.

4. The consequent effect thereof, they received the Holy Ghost, that is, the
more plentiful effusions of the Holy Ghost in his gifts and graces, which in
that beginning of the Christian Church were miraculous and extraordinary;
whereas the promise of the same Spirit holds good still in some due proportion,
unto the Christians of all Ages to the worlds end.

Those (says S. Ep. 73. quae est ad Jubaianum.
Cyprian) who believed in Samaria, had believed with a true faith, and were
baptized in the Church, which is but one, and to which alone it is permitted to
give the grace of Baptism, and to lose sins. And therefore having obtained a
legitimate and Ecclesiastical Baptism, ought not again to be baptized; but that
only which was yet wanting to be done unto them by Peter and John, that by
prayer and imposition of hands the Holy Ghost might be invoked and poured forth
upon them: Circa A.D. 250.
which now also (says he) is the custom observed among us, that they who are
baptized in the Church, be offered to the Governors of the Church, and by our
prayer and imposition of hands obtain the Holy Ghost, and be consummated (or
perfected) with the Lord's Seal or Signature -- Where we see he applies the
Apostolical pattern to the custom retained still by the Church in Confirmation,
the practice whereof in his days he does well describe, and intimates also the
requisiteness of it after Baptism, though never so legitimate, when he calls it
Id quod deerat, That which was yet wanting.

Again, anoher instance we have Acts 19. where we find S. Paul confirming those
who were taught and baptized before at Ephesus, ver. 6. When Paul laid his
hands upon them (says the Text) the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke
with Tongues and prophesied. (They were baptized, says Grotius on the place by
some other Christian; but God, to commend the Apostolical office would not
communicate those gifts of the Holy Ghost, until the hand of some Apostle had
touched them. And though he be not bound to this or any other observance, yet
such was the method of his ordinary dispensation then among them.) Here now we
have 12 persons first taught, and then baptized in the name of Jesus Christ,
and then afterward by the imposition of the Apostles hands receiving the Holy
Ghost, manifested according to the special way and exigency of those first
times, in his visible and extraordinary gifts. And to this S. Paul himself
seems to refer, touching these Ephesians confirmed by him, (as upon occasion I
before in part suggested) Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.

Nor ought any to be offended or prejudiced, because we find not the like gifts
of the Spirit continued now in the Church: The Holy Ghost (says S. De Baptismo
l. 3. c. 16.
Augustine) is not now given by Imposition of hands with temporal and sensible
miracles, as it was at the first for the commendation of the Faith, and the
enlargment of the beginnings of the Church; who now expects it? etc. But we are
now to understand that after an invisible and hidden manner Divine Charity is
inspired into their hearts by the bond of peace -- And thus as the Apostle has
it to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. chapter 12. There are diversities of gifts, but the
same Spirit -- Not the same gifts now as then, yet the same spirit still.

To these instances of Apostolical practice therefore S. Augustine and S.
Jerome, Circa A.D. 203.
do both freely appeal for the justifying of this sacred custom, (as S. Cyprian
you heard before did) and that without any color for the imputation of
Montanism in the case, as some have fondly pleased themselves to imagine.

The Disciples prayed (says S. De Trinit. l. 15. c. 26.
Augustine) that the Holy Ghost might come upon those, on whom they laid their
hands. Which same custom the Church does also now observe in her Governors or
Bishops.

And then for S. Dialog. advers. Luciferian.
Jerome: Do thou not know (says he) that this is the custom of the Churches,
to lay hands afterward on the baptized, and so to invocate the Holy Ghost?
Do thou demand of me, Where is it written? I answer, In the Acts of the
Apostles: and, were there no Scripture Authority at all to support it, the
consent of the whole world might in this supply the room of a Precept; for
there are also many other things observed by Tradition in the Churches, which
have taken to themselves the Authority of a written Law; as the threefold
immersion in Baptism, etc. -- This it is true he speaks in the person of
Luciferianus; but then he brings in Orthodoxus making a Reply by way of
Acknowledgment to the same; I do not indeed deny this (says he) to be the
custom of the CHurches, that the Bishop go forth to those who were baptized
afar off in lesser Cities by Priests and Deacons, to lay hands upon them for
the invocating of the Holy Ghost --

Deservedly therefore does our Church refer us to the same Apostolical warrant.
Upon whom, after the the example of the holy Apostles we have now laid our
hands. So in the Prayer at Confirmation. -- (the Fathers of the Primitive
Church taking occasion, and founding themselves upon the said acts and deeds of
the Apostles.) So in the necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christian
man, p. 42. -- For as much as it has been a solemn ancient, and laudable
custom in the Church of God continued from the Apostles time -- So in King
James's Canons, Can. 60.

I have purposely omitted to instance further in S. Paul and Barnabas, and
others, visiting several Churches, and confirming the Souls of the Disciples in
them, exhorting them to continue in the Faith, and with purpose of heart to
cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11.23. and 14.22. and 15.32. Because we have not the
like express mention there of any imposition of hands, though it may be we
might with probability enough suppose it.

These Instances now of Apostolical Practice do give light unto, Heb. 6.
and receive further light from, what we have before us in the Text; where,
after the mention of the doctrine of Baptisms, we find Laying on of hands;
(Nempe Episcoporum in confirmatione Neophytorum, says Anselm) viz. of Bishops
in the confirmation of new Disciples -- Imposition of hands (says S.
Chrysostom) whereby they received the Holy Ghost. And Theophylact, in like
manner, referring particularly to the story of S. Paul's laying on his hands
upon them at Ephesus, Acts 19. (...). Hom. 9. in Ep. ad Hebr.
-- By Imposition of hands (says S. Ambrose) it is believed that the Spirit
may be received; which is wont to be done after Baptism by the Bishop, for the
Confirmation of Unty in the Church. -- Whereunto may be an^^^ed the 38th.
Ca^ranze ^^^ma ^^bert. ^oncil.
and 77th. Can^^ of the Council of Eliberis or Elvira, about the time of Pope
Sylvester the first (...) A^^ 316.
, which require the Bishop should persect or confirm by his Benediction, those
who had not been baptized in his presence. ^irca A.D. 200.
-- And Tertullian long before having spoken of Baptism adds, (Dehinc manus
imponitur per benedictionem, De Baptismo c. 6. and 8
advocans and invitans Spiritum Sanctum) Then afterward the hand is laid on by
way of Benediction; Id de Resurrect. Carn. c. 8.
calling to and inviting down the Holy Spirit. And again says he in another
place: The Flesh is washed, that the Soul may be without spot: the Flesh is
anointed, that the Soul may be consecrated: the Flesh is signed, that the Soul
also may be defended: the Flesh is overshadowed by the Imposition of hands,
that the Soul also may be illuminated by the Spirit, etc.

And the same way the generality of modern Interpreters (whatever have been
their practice) still inclines. I will instance in some of greatest name and
eminence among the Reformed and Protestant Churches, the rather because this
Rite of Confirmation has been unhappily decried and declamed against as a
Relic of Popish Superstition to be abandoned and rejected by us.

The Apostle (says Calvin, on the place) calls the solemn Rites or stated days
of Baptizing by the name of Baptisms; and he joins Imposition of hands with
Baptism, because as there were two Orders of Catechumens, so there was a double
ceremony. For those without the Church did not come to Baptism before they had
made Confession of their Faith: in these therefore Catechism was wont to
precede. But the children of the faithful, because adopted from the womb, and
by right of promise belonging to the Church, were baptized Infants; but their
Infancy being past, after they were instructed in the Faith, they did also
offer themselves to Catechism, which was in them after Baptism; but then
another symbol was added, namely Imposition of hands. This one place therefore
(says he) does abundantly testify,
that the original of this Ceremony flowed from the Apostles; though afterward
it was turned into Superstition, as the World does commonly degenerate from the
best Institutions to Corruptions. Let us therefore know (says he) that it was
instituted by the first Authors to be a solemn Rite of Prayer, as S. De
Baptismo l. 3. c. 16.
Augustine also calls it. They designed indeed by this symbol to approve the
Confession of Faith made by Youth, but thought of nothing less than to rend
asunder the force of Baptism. Wherefore the pure Institution is this day to be
retained, but the Superstition to be corrected. And this place (thus
understood) makes for the approbation of Infant Baptism: For why (says he)
should that Doctrine be called in some the Doctrine of Baptisms, and in others
of Laying on of hands; but that these later were instructed in the Faith after
Baptism, so that nothing else was remaining but to lay hands upon them? -- And
again, in his Book of Institutions; This was the custom of old (says he) that
the children of Christians, Lib. 4. c. 19. 4.
after they were grown up, were presented before the Bishop to fulfill that
Office which was required of the Adult at their Baptism: for these sat among
the Catechumens, till being duly instructed in the mysteries of Faith, they
were able to make a Confession of the same before the Bishop and People -- They
were examined by the Bishop according to a certain and common form of Catechism
which they then had;
and that this action, which otherwise deservedly ought to be grave and holy,
might have the more reverence and honor, the Ceremony of Imposition of hands
was also added. And thus the Child (by his Faith being approved) was dismissed
with a solemn benediction. Of this custom (says he) the Ancients do often make
mention -- Such an Imposition of hands therefore (says he) as is done barely
in the room of Benediction I commend, and would this day restored to a pure use
-- And then again, 5, etc.
after a passionate Invective against the Corruptions of the Romanists, who had
defaced the substance of the thing, and instead of a true Confirmation
introduced a feigned Sacrament, he concludes with most earnest desires for the
restitution of the primitive Right, in such words as these; But I would to God
that we retained the custom which I intimated to have been among the Ancients,
13.
before this Abortive Counterfeit of a Sacrament was brought forth. Thus far
Mr. Calvin.

The Apostle (says Beza) numbers up five heads of Catechism, viz. the
profession of amendment of Life, (i.e. repentance from dead works:) the sum of
faith concerning God: the compendious explication of Doctrine that was wont to
be delivered to the unlearned, especially at Baptism and the Imposition of
hands, (i. e. says he, when they met together to baptize Infants or Adult
persons, and also when they came together to impose hands upon any:) the Head
of the resurrection of the dead and of the future judgment -- And in his
shorter notes he calls them The Heads of Catechism, which contain indeed the
chief matters of all Evangelical Doctrine, but were delivered in few words, and
summarily to the unlearned, viz. the profession of repentance and faith toward
God. The Articles of which Doctrine as they are called, were indeed required of
those without the Church, at the appointed days of Baptism; but from the
Children of all the Faithful, baptized in their Infancy, when hands were laid
upon them. Among which Articles two (here) are expressly reckoned up, namely the
Resurrection of the Flesh, and Eternal Judgment. Thus Beza.

This Doctrine, Schol. and Observe. in loc.
says Piscator, (viz. of Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God)
was wont to be delivered to the Catechumens before they were baptized, or
confirmed in the Christian Faith by the Imposition of hands -- When Children
have been taught the Doctrine of Repentance and Faith, they are to make
profession thereof before the Church, and to be confirmed by the Imposition of
hands. Although we think (says he) th s Imposition of hands to be matter of
free observance, as having indeed Apostolical example, but not a Precept from
Christ. (Where we see he grants the Example roundly enough to be Apostolical,
however he would have it left free to conform unto, or to neglect it.) Again
(says he) At the first sight there seem to be six Heads of Doctrine distinctly
reckoned up; but if one shall more accurately weigh them, they may be referred
to four, or to three: For the third and fourth (viz. of Baptism and Imposition
of Hands) seem not here to be propounded as peculiar Heads of Doctrine, but put
among the rest to declare the Circumstance of Time, wherein these Fundamentals
were wont to be propounded unto Beginners, namely, at that time when the Adult
were admitted unto Baptism; and also, when those who were Baptized in their
Infancy, and afterward instructed in their Childhood, were wont by the Church,
to be confirmed in the Christian Faith, by the Imposition of Hands. Thus
Piscator.

Then the Leiden Divines, in their Synopsis purioris Theologiae, Dis. 47.
tell us to the same purpose, that, It is probable this Doctrine of Imposition
of Hands, is referred to that care of the Ancient Church, whereby Children
instructed in Catechetical Doctrine, before they were admitted to partake of
the Lord's Supper, were presented to the Church, to answer concerning the
Faith, and commended by Prayers unto God, the Rite of Imposition of Hands being
added thereunto, which was a Gesture of those that pray and bless, even from
the time of the Patriarchs.

Next, For the Lutheran Churches, none can speak better than their famous
Chemnitius, whom Bellarmine so far honors, as to acknowledge, that he does of
all others most accurately describe the Order of Lutheran Confirmation.

Our Divines (says he) have often shown, Exam. Council. Trident. part 2 de
Confirm.
that the Rite of Confirmation (unprofitable, superstitious and Anti-scriptural
Traditions being once removed from it) might be used piously, Id. Loc. Theolog.
part 3. de number. Sa^rament.
and to the Edification of the Church, according to the consent of Scripture
after this manner, viz. That those who have been baptized in their Infancy,
(for such now is the State of the Church) when come to years of Discretion,
should be diligently instructed in a certain and plain Catechism of the
Doctrine of the Church; and when they seem competently to have understood the
Principles of it, should afterward be presented to the Bishop and Church; and
there the Child that was baptized in his Infancy should,

1. Be admonished in a short and plain manner concerning his Baptism, (viz.
with, what, how, why, and into what he was Baptized: What the whole Trinity in
that Baptism conferred upon him, and Sealed to him; namely, the Covenant of
Peace and Grace; and how there was then made an Abrenunciatiation of Satan, a
Profession of Faith, and Promise of Obedience.)

2. The Child himself should before the Church make a proper (or personal) and
public Confession of this Doctrine and Faith.

3. He should be questioned about the chief Heads of Christian Religion; and
where he less understands any thing, be more rightly informed.

4. He should be put in mind, and declare by this Profession, how he differs
from all Heathen, Heretical, Fanatic, and profane Opinions.

5. There should be added a grave and serious Exhortation out of the Word of
God, that he would persevere, and by going forwards, be farther confirmed in
the Covenant of Baptism, and that Doctrine and Faith. And then,

6. Public Prayer should be made for those Children, that God by his Holy
Spirit would vouchsafe to govern, preserve, and confirm them in this
Profession: Whereunto without Superstition, may be added Imposition of Hands.
Nor would that Prayer be vain:
For it leans upon the Promises concerning the Gift of Perseverance, and Grace
of Confirmation.

Such a Rite of Confirmation (says he) would contribute very much Profit to
the Education of Youth, and of the whole Church; For it would be agreeable both
unto Scripture and purer Antiquity. Thus Chemnitius.

But before either Calvin or Luther, there was one famous Waldo, of whom the
Waldenses are named, who did more early dissent from the Corruption of the
Roman Church: And they, in their Confession, exhibited to Vladislaus, King of
Hungary, 1504. speak thus remarkably of this Rite of Confirmation,

We do profess with a Faith taken out of the Divine Scriptures, Confess.
Waldens. de Confirm.
that in the Times of the Apostles this was observed, whoever being come to the
Ripeness of Years, had not received the promised Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
received them afterward by Prayer and Imposition of Hands for the Confirmation
of Faith. The same we think also of Infants. Whosoever being baptized, has
come over to the true Faith, which he resolves to imitate indeed amidst
Adversities and Contumelies, in that manner, that a new Birth, and Life of
Graces, may seem discovered in his Spirit or Temper: Such an one ought to to be
brought, and set before the Bishop or Priest; where being questioned of the
Truth of Faith, and the Divine Commands, and also his own good Will, Settled
Intention, and Works of Truth, if he shall witness by his Confession, that all
these things are so: He is to be confirmed in the Hope of Truth, already
attained, and farthermore to be helped by the Churches Prayers, that an
Increase of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, may accrue unto him for the
Establishment and Warfare of Faith. Lastly, by Imposition of Hands to confirm
the Promises of God and the Truth, in the Power of the Name of the Father, and
of his Word, and of the Holy Spirit, let him be joined to the Churches
Communion -- And again, Apolog. part 4. de Baptism. puerorum.
in their Apology to the Marquess of Brandenburgh, 1532. speaking of Children
that have been Baptized, they add -- When they shall have come to Years of
Discretion, and now understand the Account of their Faith, and begin to love
Christ in good earnest, we bring them to the Profession of these things, even
whatsoever they have attained to by the help of their Parents, or Godfathers,
or by the Ministry of the Church, that they may themselves of their own accord,
and most freely own and profess all these things before the whole Church, to
their own Salvation, in the celebration of the Rite of Imposition of Hands;
which being done, they are confirmed: And there is forthwith given them full
Power and Right to communicate of the Body and Blood of Christ, with the
Faithful. Thus they, who are called Waldenses or Picardi.

And to what you have heard from them, give me leave to add the Form of
receiving the Baptized and Catechized Youth among the Bohemian Brethren, who
sometimes go under the same Name (a Remnant of the Slavonique Church, and the
Eminent Disciples of Wickleff, Huss, and Jerome of Prague) as it is described
to us by their last Bishop, the Excellent Comenius.

The Young ones, Ratio Discip. ordinisque Ecclestin unitate Frat^um Bohem. p.
46.
(says he) having been taught the Heads of Religion at Home, by their Parents
and Sureties, or at School, by their Masters, are publicly delivered to the
care of their Pastors in the Church, before the Receiving of the Lord's Supper,
most usually at the time of Pastoral Visitation, after this manner:

1. The words of Christ, Matt. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. are
read, with a short Explication of them.

2. The Youth of both Sexes, appointed thereunto and preexamined by the Pastor,
are placed in order in the middle of the Church.

3. Then they are asked, whether they will renew the Covenant they entered into
with God at Baptism.

4. This being consented to by them, the heads of that Covenant are explained
according to the form prescribed by the Apostle to Titus, chap. 2.11, 12, 13.
Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live righteously, soberly, and godly
in this present world, looking for the blessed hope, etc. And they are
commanded openly before the Church to renounce the World, the Devil, and the
Flesh, etc.

5. Next a profession of the Faith is required of them, so that they all repete
aloud the Apostles Creed.

6. Then, on their bended Knees, saying after the Minister, they pray unto God
to forgive the Sins of their Youth, and strengthen them by his Holy Spirit,
unto all the good purpose of his Will; which also the whole Assembly does,
praying for them. After which Prayers,

7. There is declared to these young Disciples, and the whole Church
Absolulution, and the Right of the Sons of God, in participating the Supper of
the Lord.

And lastly, there is added the Apostolical Rite of Imposition of Hands, with
the Invocation of the Name of God upon them to strengthen (or confirm) the hope
of his Heavenly Grace -- Thus the Bohemian Brotherhood, the most exemplary for
good Order among all the Reformed Churches abroad.

Unto these now I could easily superadd many other Testimonies; but I will
close them all with three or four of our Nation; and those such as cannot be
suspected of casting any favorable Eye upon a Brat of Popery or Prelacy, as
some have pleased unequally to yoke them.

Mr. Hanmer, and Mr. Baxter, above twenty years since, have written each of
them, a Particular Treatise upon this Argument of Confirmation: Finding no such
way, it seems, to extricate themselves and others out of the Confusions into
which the Times were then fallen, as by returning back, in part, to what had
been too rashly discarded together with the Church of England. And the later of
them understands that Text of St. Mr. Baxter of Confirm. p. 102. 119.
Paul, 2 Timothy 1.6. ( I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of
God which is in thee, by the putting on of my Hands) of the Apostolical
Imposition of Hands after Baptism, for the giving of the Holy Ghost, rather
than the Ministerial Ordination and Gift.

Dr. William Gouge, in his Commentary on the Text, tells us, that Ordinary
Cases, wherein Imposition of Hands was used, were,

1. Blessing Children, by our Savior, Mark 10.16.

2. Setting men apart to the public Function of Ministers of the Word, 1 Timothy
5.22. and Deacons, Act. 6.6.

3. Deputing Men to some special Work, Acts 13.2. And,

4. Confirming such as had been instructed in the Principles of Religion.

This last particular (says he) (meaning Confirmation) is not expressly set
down in Scripture, but gathered out of it, by the Ancient Orthodox Fathers, and
with a Joint-consent afterward by most Divines, not Papists only, but
Protestants also.

And of the same Judgment those of the late Assembly, so called, who put forth
the English Annotations, Assembl. Annot. in Loc.
declare themselves to be ( Laying on of Hands) which (say they) is usually
called Confirmation, which stood, 1. In examining those who had been Baptized,
what Progress they had made in the Doctrine of Christianity: And 2. In praying
for them, that God would continue them in the Faith, and give them more Grace,
strengthening them by the Holy Ghost. Now when the chief Pastor or Pastors of
the Church (say they) prayed for them, they laid their Hands upon them; whence
the Apostolical Constitution was called laying on of Hands. So St. Augustine,
and so most of the Fathers with one Consent.

And here now were a fair occasion to wonder, that so Reverend and Divine an
Assembly, as that was reputed, should utterly cast off a thing so well
established, and never so much as consider of it in their Directory. Vindic.
of. Liturgy. p. 38.
That the defaming and casting out of this so blameless and gainful an Order,
should be necessary or useful to any Policy, save only, to defend the Devil
from so great a Blow, and to sustain and uphold his Kingdom, I never yet had
any Temptation or Motive to suspect or imagine, Mr. Ham. L' Estrange Alliance
of Divine Offices, p. 262.
says our Pious and Learned Dr. Hammond -- And There is not any thing wherein
the late pretended Reformers amuse me more than in this particular, says
another worthy person.

Nor do I know what Account to make for them, unless this may pass for one,
That they practiced against known and avowed Principles; T. C. p. 174.. 2.
as T. C. formerly stuck not to aver of Mr. Calvin himself, That as well as he
allowed of Confirmation, he put it out of the Church of Geneva, where he was
Pastor.

But this may suffice abundantly to have spoken concerning the Scripture
Patterns and Grounds, which we have for this Sacred Appointment, as they are
expounded and handed down to us by most unquestionable Authorities.

I pass on, Thirdly, to the Ceremony used in it, the Imposition of the Bishop's
Hands: And here I shall offer a few words:

1. Of the Ceremony it self: And,

2. Of the Special Minister concerned about it.

First, Of the Ceremony it self, Imposition of Hands, according to the
Scripture Warrant, without either Crossing, or Anointing, with Chrism made of
Oil and Balsom, or boxing on the Ear or Cheek, as is used among the Papists.

This laying on of Hands, is a most natural, unaffected, and Ancient Ceremony
of Prayer and Benediction, as we find it used, first, in the Old Testament, and
from thence derived into the New.

Manuum impositio ex Hebraeorum more, ad Christianos venit, usumque habuit in
omni Precatione. Grotius Not. in Cassand. ad Artic. 9. -- (...). Clem. Alex.
Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. (...). id l. 1. c. 5.

Under the Old Testament, we find it used first of all, by the Father, in
blessing of his Children, and admitting them to part of the Inheritance. Thus
when Jacob blessed Ephraim, and Manasses, the Sons of Joseph, He laid his Hands
upon them and prayed, Genesis 48.14. -- And, by way of special Imitation of his
Paternal Benediction, we find it used in the New Testament, by our Blessed
Savior, St. Mark 10.16. (which Grotius well notes farther, upon St. Matthew.
19.13. to have been according to the Jewish Custom, it being usual among them
to bring their Children to those that were any way eminent for Sanctimony of
Life, Est hoc quoque de veteri Sacramento, quo Nepotes suos ex Joseph, Efrem
and Manassem, Jacob. Capitibus impositis and intermutatis manibus benedixerit,
etc. Tertull. de Baptism. c. 8.
to be commended unto God in their Prayers, by Imposition of Hands) -- And then
afterward, we find it used also by the Apostles in their confirming of Adult
persons that were baptized, as you have heard before from Acts 8. and Acts 19.

Calvin himself, looks upon no other Mystery, Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 5.
under the Imposition, even of the Apostle's Hands; but their signifying by
this Rite, that they did commend and present unto God, as it were by name, him
whom they laid their Hands upon. (Thus they were appointed of Old, to lay their
Hands on the Sacrifice, Caeterae parts loquente^ adjuvant; manus (prope est ut
dicam) ipse loquuntur. In demonstrandis personis atque locis adverbiorum atque
pronominum obtinent vicem. Quintil. Oaat. l. 11.
etc. And so at the Consecration of the Bread and Wine in the Holy Communion,
the Priest with us lays his Hands on the Elements.)

And therefore it is somewhat strange, that in the Heat of his Disputation
against the Romanists, he should start this idle Question: Whereas the eminent
Grace at first bestowed, is ceased, to what purpose is Imposition of Hands yet
retained? Strange, I say, it is, whenas himself, more than once, owneth
Imposition of Hands, for a Solemn Right of Prayer, and says, it was used by
the Apostles for no higher Mystery (those are his very words, non altius
subesse Mysterium cogito --) than to recommend the person prayed for
particularly unto God. Is not this therefore to make Prayer for particular
Persons an Impertinency now too, because miraculous Grace has ceased? As if no
Grace at all might be now expected, because not that eminent and extraordinary
Grace at first conferred. But stranger it is still, when we remember that he
also commends and wishes for the Restitution of such an Imposition of Hands, as
might supply the room of Benediction -- To such an Inconsistency, and
Forgetfulness of themselves, are great Men transported sometimes by their own
Passions.

Were Imposition of Hands altogether needless, and of no use, certainly St. Mr.
Hutton's Answer to Reasons against Subscript. part 2. p. 85.
Peter and John, needed not to have taken so much pains, as to come on a
fruitless Errand from Jerusalem to Samaria, to have laid their Hands on them,
whom Philip, the Deacon baptized: For they might as well have (kept at home
and) prayed in Jerusalem for them: But, to show, that the other Ceremonial
Action might also have due place; therefore is it, that they did both
accordingly.

In a Word, this Imposition of Hands, which we have found to be a fitting and
Scriptural Rite of Prayer and Benediction, especially, when (as among us, it
is) accompanied with Express and Solemn Prayer unto God for the Person, cannot
be thought an insignificant Ceremony by any, who have not first learned to
deride the Holy Scriptures themselves, or who have any value left for the
Ministers of Christ, or any Faith of God's hearing those devout Prayers, which
are made, and put up to him by his Church for others.

It is observed by some, Dr. Patrick's Aqua Genitalis.
out of Jewish Authors, that the Elevation of the Hands of the Priest, in the
Old Law, at the Blessing of the People, was Imposition of Hands; and this
Blessing called the Weapons and Armor of Israel -- And that which we read,
concerning the Benediction of Aaron and his Sons, Numb. 5.27. They shall put my
Name on the Children of Israel, and I will bless them. Junius and Tremelius,
render (imponentes manus filiis Israel, invocabunt nomen meum, and ego
benedicam eis) Laying their Hands on the Children of Israel, they shall call on
my Name, and I will bless them. Adding farther, in their Notes on the Place,
for Illustration-sake, (Duobus signis testatum facient Populo meo Gratiam meam,
quam ego pro fide mea facturus sum, Nominis mei invocatione, and manuum suarum
impositione publica and solenni) By these two Signs, they shall certify my
People of that Grace which I, according to my Promise, will conferr upon them,
viz. by their calling on my Name, and by their public and solemn Imposition of
their own Hands.

Now it is worth the Considering, that the Blessing of Christ's Ministers, Heb.
11.40. Romans 15.29. Ephesians. 1.3.
is no less Authoritative and Prolifick under the Gospel, than it was under the
Law; (it may be more) God having reserved some better thing for us in the
Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ, in whom we are blessed with
all Spiritual Blessings. It is a Blessing in God's Name, and by Virtue of his
Commission; and Christ's Everlasting Priesthood, is after the Order of
Melchisedeck, who was most famous for this Office of Blessing; which he
accordingly, not only discharges in Person for us himself in Heaven, but
Vertually upon Earth too, in and by his Ministers Benediction.

Proceed we therefore Secondly, to the Minister of this Benediction, the Person
confirming, one of Eminency and Superiority in the Church of Christ, the
Bishop, from whence it has familiarly with us been called Bishoping.

Thus we found it in the First Pattern, Acts 8. Not Philip the Deacon, but Peter
and John the Apostles, are sent to confirm the Samaritans baptized by Philip --
Philip that baptized them, says St. Chrysostom, gave not the Spirit to the
Baptized ((...)) for he had not Power or Authority so to do ((...)) For this
was the Gift of the Twelve only. And again, ((...)) This was the Peculiar of
the Apostles -- Simon Magus therefore perceiving that Power of Ministering the
Holy Ghost to be in none but them, and presuming, that they which had it, might
also sell it, sought to purchase it of them with Money, as it follows in the
Sequel of that Chapter.

Hear we, Cited by Archbishop Whitgift, and Mr. Hutton.
what the Moderate and Learned Bucer says on Ephesians. 4. The Sign of Imposition
of Hands, Bishops only, did give, and that not without reason, For whether the
Covenant of the Lord is to be confirmed to those that are to be Baptized; or
whether they are to be reconciled that have grievously offended; or whether the
Ministers of the Church are to be Ordained: All these Ministerys do best become
those to whom the chief Care is committed.

Calvin himself confesses, Instit. l. 4. c. 19. prout ante cit.
that the Ancient Usage, was for the Party to be confirmed, to be brought coram
Episcopo, before the Bishop. The Church, says St. Augustine, still keeps up
the Custom of Imposition of Hands, in suis praepositis, in her Chief Governors;
and the Business was maged a solis Episcopis, Q. 44. in N. I. De Eccles. Hier.
c. 2. In Ep. ad Hebr. Dialog. adver. Luciferian. See Mr. Hooker's Eccles. Pol.
l. 5. p. 262.
by Bishops alone -- (...), says Dyonysius, and St. Ambrose agreably, that it
was to be done, a Pontificibus, by the Highpriests; and non nisi per manus
Episcopis, says St. Hierom, By the Hands of the Bishop only, -- The Rise of
which Observation, did proceed from this Ground, (says he) that after the
Ascension of our Lord, the Holy Ghost came down on the Apostles; and it
obtained in many places, as he adds, not so much by the necessity of a Law, as
from a certain congruity and fitness, to honor Prelacy with such
Preheminencies, because the Safety of the Church, depends on the Dignity of her
Superiors, to whom, if some Eminent Offices of Power should not be given, there
would be as many Schisms in the Church, as Priests -- with us, says he
elsewhere, Bishops hold the place of the Apostles. Ep. ad Marcell. Id. in Psalm.
45.
And again, For the Fathers, the Apostles, we have their Sons, the Bishops --
And in his Comment on the First of S. Mark, (if that be his) That which is
perfected by the Bridegroom, says he, is begun by the Paranymph; whence
Catechumens (incipiunt per Sacerdotem, and chrismantur per Episcopum) begin by
the Priest, and are confirmed by the Bishop.

They are therefore to be condemned certainly of gross Partiality and
Incharitableness, Mr. Hanmer Exercit. of Confirm. p. 51.
who blush not to say, that the Bishops out of Pride have appropriated this
unto themselves.

May all the Ministers of Christ orderly discharge their proper Duties, without
either envying or invading (...), the Rights and Privileges of any whom God
has placed over them.

I will not dispute, what might possibly be allowed, in Cases of Necessity
(which excuses, as we say, what it compells unto) and were, methinks, much to
be wished for in larger Dioceses, concerning a Delegated Power, by way of
Dispensation, for the more effectual and constant expediteing of this good
Performance; as seems to have been permitted to the Ancient Chorepiscopi, and
(...), Rural Bishops, Vide Pamelii Annot. in ep. 13. D. Cyprian. Dr. H.
dissert. de Episc. l. 3. c. 8. Episcopus, vel ejus Suffraganeus can. 60. R.
Jacobi.
Suffragans and Visitors constituted by the Bishop of the City.

But it is certainly most fitting for those to impart this Solemn Benediction,
who are of chiefest Note and Eminence in the Church; and that by the Analogy of
the Apostles Rule, Heb. 7.7. Without Contradiction the less is Blessed, (...),
of the better, or greater.

Fourthly, Come we next to the Qualification of the Persons to be confirmed.

Such they must be, See Canon 40.
who are baptized and instructed in the Catechism of Christian Religion, and
come to years of Discretion, in some competent Degree to understand the same,
and give an actual and deliberate Assent thereunto.

Buxtorf observes in the Jewish Church, Synag. Judaic.
that when the Child was come to be Thirteen years of Age, the Father, having
taught him the Principles of his Religion, presented him in a Sacred Assembly,
to undertake himself to become Bar-mitzvah, a Son of the Precept, that is, as
they explain it, such an one, who takes upon himself Obedience to the Law, from
thence forward, to answer for his own Sins; and hereupon Prayer was also made
for his Improvement.

Our Church-Catechism is called (as I have suggested before) An Instruction to
be learned of every person, before he be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop:
which is appointed to be done, so soon as he can say the Creed, the Lord's
Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the Vulgar Tongue, and be farther
instructed in the Church Catetechism, set forth for that purpose -- as it is
expressed in the Office of Public Baptism. And the Title of this Office it
self, in our Service Book, is, The Order of Confirmation, or laying on of Hands
upon those that are baptized, and come to Years of Discretion -- The Preface
whereunto is highly remarkable.

To the end that Confirmation may be ministered to the more edifying of such as
shall receive it, Order of Confirm.
the Church has thought good to Order. That none hereafter shall be confirmed,
but such as can say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, and
can also answer to such other Questions, as in the short Catechism are
contained. Which Order is very convenient to observed, to the end, that
Children being now come to Years of Discretion, and having learned what their
Godfathers, and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism, they may with their
own Mouth and Consent, openly before the Church, ratify and confirm the same;
and also promise, that by the Grace of God, they will endeavor themselves
faithfully to observe such things, as they, by their own Confession, have
assented to.

And this Preface is openly to be read at that time to the Expectants: Ibid.
and then accordingly the Bishop is appointed to ask each of them.

Do ye here, in the presence of God, and of this Congregation, renew the solemn
Promise and Vow that was made in your Name at your Baptism, ratifying and
confirming the same in your own persons, and acknowledging your selves bound to
believe, and do all those things which your Godfathers and Godmothers then
undertook for you?

To which Question, every one is to answer audably in the Affirmative, 'I do --
And thereupon the Bishop proceeds unto Prayer and Benediction.

Add hereunto, Can. 59. and 61. Rubric's at the end of the Catechism.
that the Canons of our Church enjoin a special Care upon all Ministers, to
prepare those under their Charge hereunto, and to see that none be presented,
but such as shall be thus fitted for it -- And our Right Reverend Diocesan has
declared, that as de jure he cannot; so de facto he will not confirm any,
Advertisement in the end of his Book of Articles
save such only, who have been duly catechized, and by their Pastor's
Testimony, have attained such a measure of Knowledge of the Principles of
Christian Religion, as may render them capable of it.

Aquinas indeed determines, that the Sacrament of Confirmation, as he calls it,
ought to be exhibited in common to all that are baptized, Part 3. Q. 72. Artic.
8.
and at all times. The bodily Age, (says he) does not prejudice the Soul; and
even Children, dying confirmed, obtain the greater Glory, as here they do the
greater Grace. L. de Sacram.
And Contarenus grounds the Custom of giving it to Infants upon his Authority
-- But grave men among themselves mislike this Practice. Consult. ad Artic. 9.
I see, says Cassander, that it does not displease good men of both sides,
that the use of it be delayed till some Growth of Age -- And so the Roman
Catechism now requires.

The truth is, the Vtility and Benefit of this Sacred Institution exacts all
this. Some competent Growth and Understanding in the Party confirmed, Heed and
Diligence in his Prae-instruction, and all Gravity, and Seriousness in the
whole Administration. ( And to the intent that no man should think that any
Detriment should come to Children, by deferring their Confirmation unto years
of Discretion, our Church has declared it for a Truth certain by God's Word,
That Children being baptized, have all things necessary for their Salvation,
and dying before they commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved.

Let me therefore beseech those, who shall come at any time upon this Holy
Errand, to ponder well, and consider with themselves, of what weight and moment
the matter is they are going about, what they are obliged to do, and what the
Blessing is they hope to receive thereupon -- Their Business, in short, is to
declare, that they are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, but glory in his
Cross; to profess themselves upon choice, and in good earnest Christians, the
resolved Disciples, Servants, and Soldiers of Jesus Christ; to devote
themselves entirely to his Faith and Service; to take the solemn Vow and
Promise, made formerly in their Names, by their Sureties, upon themselves, that
is, to vow Repentance from dead Works and Faith toward God; to renounce the
Devil, the World and the Flesh, and give up themselves to the Belief and
Obedience of the Gospel -- This is the Work they come about; and then their
Reward is, so doing, to participate in the Prayers of the Church, and the
Blessing of the Bishop, to be promoted to an higher Form in the School of
Christ, among an higher Rank of Professors, and admitted to all the Privileges
af Adult and Complete Christians.

Now therefore, in the last place, I need not to say much more, concerning the
Importance and Usefulness of this whole Action, which all along speaks for it
self, and whereof accordingly I have suggested a competent Account already, in
treating of the parts of it. The fewer words therefore shall here suffice, and
I will little more than name the particulars, which otherwise I should have
enlarged upon.

1. This would utterly enervate the Anabaptists Plea, for Re-baptizing those
who were before baptized in their Infancy; did they every one at their
Confirmation thus explicitly take upon themselves, what was then promised and
undertaken in their Name, and so give up themselves afresh to God and his
Church. And it is, you know, part of the Charge which we leave with
Godfathers, and Godmothers at the Font, Office of Public Baptism.
to bring them, when prepared, unto the Bishop thus to do.

Nor is this, as some have surmized, any Imputation to their Baptism, as
imperfect in it self, but a Supply only to the Imperfection of their State, who
were Baptized in their Infancy, with a legitimate and true Baptism, by the
solemn renewing of the Answer, or Stipulation of a good Conscience toward God,
which ought frequently to be repeated throughout our whole Life. Praef. ad.
Paraph. in Evang. S. Matthew.
Repraesentatio pristini Baptismi, as Erasmus calls it.

And Whether the solemn Baptizing of all Infants, though the Children of
presumed Christian Parents, throughout this Kingdom, Without solemn
Astipulation, that they shall at Years of Discretion, personally ratify their
Vow in Baptism in Public, in such manner as the Church requires, be not rather
more Lawful than Expedient, I leave with all Submission, On the Creed. l. 10.
c. 50.
to the Consideration of Higher Powers, says the Learned, Pious, and Reverend
Dr. Jackson.

2. This would supercede the new modeled Examinations, set on foot by Private
Authority, before the Admission of Persons to the Blessed Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, whether by Lay Elders, in Conjunction with Presbyters, or by
Popular Congregations; and wholly silence the many fierce and unhappy Feuds and
Controversies, which have been moved on that occasion.

3. It would extremely quicken and encourage the Endeavors of all that are
concerned among us in the Prae-instruction of Youth; and whet the Learners also
to a greater Diligence and Industry, and prove a mighty Ease and Satisfaction
to the Minds of those who have undertaken in their Names at Baptism.

4. It would very much conduce to the recommending, and endearing of God's
Ministers, the Bishops of the Church, to the Affections of the People, by and
from whom they and theirs partake of so great a benefit; so as to oblige them
(if any thing can do it) never to lift up their Hand, or so much as open their
Mouth against them; never to return them Evil for Good, and requite their
Blessings with Curses and Reproaches.

5. It would highly promote the Truth and Power of Godliness and Religion, so
much talked of. It would bring good Instructions to some hopeful Effect and
Issue; and put every Sinner among us, who is not also past Shame, to blush and
hang down the Head upon the remembrance of that good Confession, which he
himself had so openly made before many Witnesses, See Dr. Patrick 's excellent
and affectionate Exhortation unto Confirmation. Aqua Genitalis Use 4. and the
Appendix.
and yet so notoriously violated and contradicted.

With what Face could he devote himself to Atheism and Impiety, who, before
God, and his Elect Angels, the Bishop, and an Assembly of Christians, has
personally vowed and promised the Belief of the Christian Faith and Obedience
unto all God's Holy Commandments? And with such a grave Solemnity, renounced
the Devil and all his Works, etc. He has the Argument of Common Justice and
Honesty, from henceforth admonishing of him continually to be as good as his
Word; to take heed of the crying Sin of Perjury, such an aggravated Perjury
especially, as this is, a Sacrilegious Perjury. He has many to rise up in
Judgment against him upon Transgression. He has suchlike Thoughts as these to
accompany him wherever he goes, that if he fails in this vowed Duty, he must at
last witness against himself, be condemned out of his own Mouth, and left
without an Apology; and if he shall presume to live in a Course, contradictory
to this Holy Profession, he can expect nothing but that cursed Doom, which with
so many repeated Woes is threatened unto Hypocrites in the Gospel.

Nor yet is this all the Help, which it contributes unto Piety and Religion:
But the the very confirming of our Sacred Vows and Resolutions, fortifies and
arms us against Temptations: And while we thus renew our Promises unto God, we
take his Yoke upon our Necks, and come under the Bond of his Covenant: And he
that hears Prayers, to be sure, will never stop his gracious and merciful
Ears against those, who, upon so good a Design, call upon him; or deny his Holy
Spirit and Blessing unto those, who are both desirous, and prepared thus to
receive it; whom therefore his Ministers, by Virtue of Authority and Commission
from him, do bless in his name It is somewhat observable that Cornelius (St.
Cyprian's Contemporary) notes of Novatian, that he therefore fell into Heresy
for want of Episcopal Confirmation. Vide Pamelii Annot. in D. Cyprian. Ep. 72.


To draw toward a Conclusion, Circa A. D. 312.
remarkable are the words of Melchiades, in his Epistle to the Bishops of
Spain, Discourse of Confirmation, p. 73.74.
concerning the Necessity and Usefulness of this Holy Rite. Take them in Bishop
Taylor's Translation -- First he starts an Objection.

What does the Mystery of Confirmation profit me, after the Mystery of Baptism?
Certainly we did not receive all in our Baptism, if after that Lavatory we want
something of another kind -- And then he sub-joyns this Answer to it -- Let
your Charity attend (says he) as the Military Order requires, that when the
General enters a Soldier into his List, he does not only mark him, but furnish
him with Arms to the Battle; so, in him that is baptized, this Blessing is his
Ammunition. You have given (Christ) a Soldier; Give him also Weapons. And, if
a Father give a Great Estate to his Son, what will it profit, if he does not
take care to provide a Tutor for him? Therefore the Holy Spirit (given at
Confirmation) is the Guardian of our Regeneration in Christ; he is the
Comforter, and he is the Defender, etc.

The same we meet with in Eusebius Emissenus; Circa A.D. 360.
or, as some conceive, Eucherius Lugdunensis, Circa A.D. 450.
whom I before quoted for deducing this Observance from the Descent of the Holy
Ghost, at Pentecost -- After which it follows -- But because we have said, that
Imposition of Hands, and Confirmation, may confer somewhat upon him, who is
already regenerate in Christ, Dr. H. de Confirm. c. 6.. 8.
some perhaps thinks with himself, what does the Ministry of him that
confirms profit me after the Mystery of Baptism? -- There is the Objection.
To which he replies, just as Melchiades did. As a Geral, whomsoever he has
taken into the List of his Soldiers, does not only set a Mark upon him, when
first received; but also furnishes him, when he is to fight, with fitting
Weapons: So this Benediction is to the Baptized Person his Accoutrement for
Fight. You have admitted a Soldier, give him also the Helps of Warfare -- And
then he adds, by way of farther Illustration -- The Holy Ghost, that descends
with a Saving Illapse, on the Waters of Baptism, bestows at the Font a Fullness,
in Order to Innocence; and in Confirmation, gives a Supply of Grace, in order
unto Growth. In Baptism we are regenerated unto Life; after Baptism, we
confirmed to fight. In Baptism we are washed; Carranza Sum. Decret. Melchiades
Papae.
after Baptism we are strengthened -- Regeneration it self, saves those that
are forthwith upon it to he received in the Peace of the Blessed Age to come.
Confirmation arms and prepares those, who are reserved to the Combats and
Fights of this World. And therefore, before the Descent of the Holy Ghost, the
Apostles are afrighted to a Denial, but after his Visitation, are armed with
Contempt of Death unto Martyrdom.

I will here annex what the excellent Bishop Tailor himself, says, concerning
the Graces and Blessings, consequent to the Worthy Reception and due Ministry
of Confirmation, because they may serve for a beneficial Recapitulation of what
has been already discoursed.

1. Confirmation (says he) is the Consummation and Perfection, Of Confirm.. 6.
the Corroboration and Strength of Baptism, and baptismal Grace: For in Baptism
we undertake to do our Duty; but in Confirmation, we receive further Strength
to do it. In Baptism, others promise for us; in Confirmation we undertake for
our selves: We ease our Godfathers and Godmothers of their Burden, and take
it upon our own Shoulders, together with the Advantage of the Prayers of the
Bishop, and all the Church on our behalf. In Baptism, we give up our Names to
Christ; but in Confirmation, we put our Seal to the Profession, and God puts
his Seal to the Promise, etc.

2. In Confirmation, we receive the Holy Ghost as the Earnest of our
Inheritance, as the Seal of our Salvation (...), says Greg. Nazianzen, we
therefore call it a Seal or Signature, as being a Guard and Custody to us, and
a Sign of the Lord's Dominion over us. The Confirmed Person, is (...), a Sheep
that is marked, which Thieves do not so easily steal and carry away. Remember,
Comment. in Cant.
says Theodoret, that Holy Mystagogy, in which the initiated, after renouncing
that Tyrant (the Devil, with his Works) and the Confession of the True King
(Jesus Christ) have received the Chrism of Spiritual Unction like a Royal
Signature; and by that Unction, as in a Type or Shadow, the invisible Grace of
the most Holy Spirit, etc.

To conclude this Enquiry (says he) the Holy Ghost is promised to all men to
profit withal. That Is plain Scripture: Confirmation, or Prayer, and Imposition
of the Bishop's Hands, is the Solemnity and Rite used in Scripture for the
conveying of that promise, and the Effect is felt in all the Sanctifications,
and Changes of the Soul. And he, that denies these things, has not Faith, nor
the True Notices of Religion, or the Spirit of Christianity.

I will only add this now in the close of all, by way of Admonition; that we
are all concerned not to disgrace so well grounded Principles, by an unsu^table
practice, lest we furnish our Adversaries with the same pretense against
Confirmation, as it is happily settled in our Church-Constitutions, which
Calvin urged against that of the Romanists (scilicet dum ita licenter contemni
patiuntur, Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 9.
tacit fatentur, non tanti esse, quanti venditant) That while we suffer it to
be so profanely contemned, we do silently confess, that it is not of so great a
Value, as otherwise we give forth, and attest it to be.

There is no cause we should doubt of the Benefit (says our Judicious Hooker)
but surely great cause to make Complaint of the deep Neglect of this Christian
Duty, Eccles. Pol. l. 5.
almost with all them to whom by right of their Place and Calling, the same
belongs. Let them not take it in evil part (says he) the thing is true,
Their small regard hereunto, has done harm to the Church of God.
That which Error rashly utters in disgrace of good things, may peradventure
be spunged out, when the Print of those Evils, which are grown through Neglect,
will remain behind.

There is no default or defect (says profound Dr. L. 10. c. 50
Jackson) in the Church of England's Doctrine or Laws, concerning Baptism or
Confirmation of such as have been Baptized in their Infancy. But I dare not
avouch so much for justifying the men unto whom the Execution of those Laws is
especially commended, whether they be of Lower, or Higher, or of the Highest
Rank, etc.

In this point, who can deny (says the Pious and Reverend Dr. De Confir. p. 81.
Hammond) but there is fit place for Reformation? -- And his Worthy and Learned
Friend, Dr. Henchman, the Late Lord Bishop of London (but when he wrote of
Salisbury) in his praeliminary Discourse to that excellent Treatise of his, de
Confirmatione, urges the matter home upon us

If these things (says he) at last, Praelim. Diatrib. H. S.
take not hold of our minds, where is the Discipline for so many Years,
designed and thought on,
and during the Oppression and Rage of the late Tyranny, promised, if ever good
day should shine upon us? Behold, our Most Gracious and Merciful God, has
commanded his Sun to shine bright again upon our Island, and calmed the Tempest
which tossed our Ship, and now calls for the performance of our Vow unto him,
the Vow which we made when we were in Trouble. Let us offer unto him this Holy
and sincere Worship, whilst we every one readily discharge our respective
Duties in this particular.

Which that we may all do, God of his Infinite Mercy, grant, for Christ his
Sake, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, (that Blessed Trinity, in
whose name we were baptized, and whose Disciples, at our Confirmation, we own
and profess our selves to be) be ascribed by us, as is most due, all Honor,
Glory, Praise and Adoration, now and for evermore, Amen.

THE END.
APPENDIX.
ALthough I have said enough to obviate most of the Common Objections against
this Sacred Rite of Confirmation, in the foregoing Pages; yet because I find
them all epitomized in the stoutest Champion of the Old Nonconformists (whose
Eructations have been licked up by the New, as Homer's were by the Succeeding
Poets) and as full an Answer to them, though compendious and Ironical, in our
Excellent Hooker, I will take the pains here for the Reader's Benefit to
transcribe both in Order.

T. C. Reply to Answer to the Admonit. p. 160.
In his Reply to the most Reverend Archbishop Whitgift speaks thus: Tell me,
why there should be any such Confirmation in the Church, being brought in by
the feigned Decretal Epistles of Popes; (But this is retracted by him, L. 3. p.
232. That it is Ancienter than the feigned Decretal Epistles I yield unto) and
no one Title thereof being once found in Scripture; and seeing it has been so
horribly abused, and not necessary, why ought it not to be utterly abolished?
And Thirdly, This Confirmation has many dangerous points in it. The First step
of Popery in this Confirmation, is the laying on of Hands upon the Head of the
Child, whereby the Opinion of it, that it is a Sacrament is confirmed;
especially, whenas the Prayer does say, that it is done according to the
Example of the Apostles; which is a manifest untruth, and taken indeed from the
Popish Confirmation. The Second is, for that the Bishop, as he is called, must
be the only Minister of it, whereby the Popish Opinion, which esteems it
above Baptism, is confirmed: For while Baptism may be ministered of the
Minister, and not Confirmation; but only of the Bishop, there is great Cause of
Suspicion given to think, that Baptism is not so serious a thing as
Confirmation; seeing this was one of the principal Reasons, whereby that wicked
Opinion was established in Popery. I do not here speak of the Inconvenience,
that men are constrained with Charges to bring their Children oftentimes half-
a score miles for that, which if it were needful, might be as well done at Home
in their own Parishes. The Third is, for that the Book says, a Cause of using
Confirmation, is, That by Imposition of Hands and Prayer, the Children may
receive Strength and Defense against all Temptations; whereas there is no
Promise, that by the laying on of Hands upon Children any such Gift shall be
given: And it maintains the Popish Distinction, that the Spirit of God is
given at Baptism unto Remission of Sins, and in Confirmation unto Strength.

Hear we now Mr. Hooker, in few, but weighty words, closing up his Nervous
Discourse about Confirmation, with a particular Retort to all these Objections.

( Thus much generally spoken, Eccles. Po^ic. l. 5. p. 263.
may serve for Answer to their Demands, that require us to tell them why there
should be any such Confirmation in the Church, seeing we are not ignorant, how
earnestly they have protested against it; and how directly (although untruly,
for so they are content to acknowledge) it has by some of them been said to be
first brought in by the feigned Decretal Epistles of the Popes: Or why it
should not utterly be abolished, seeing that no one Title thereof can be once
found in the whole Scriptures, except the Epistle to the Hebrews be Scripture,
chapter 6.2. etc. -- And again, seeing, that how free soever it be now from abuse,
if we look back to times past (which wise men do always more respect than the
present) it has been abused (as what good thing has not?) and is found at
length no such profitable Ceremony, as the whole silly Church of Christ for the
space of these sixteen Hundred Years, has, through want of Experience
imagined. Last of all, seeing also, besides the Cruelty, which is showed
toward poor Country People, who are fain sometimes to let the Plow stand
still, and with incredible wearisome Toil of their feeble Bodies, to wander
over Mountains, and through Woods, it may be now and then, little less than a
whole half-score miles, for a Bishop's Blessing, which if it were needful,
might as well be done at home in their own Parishes, rather than they to
purchase it with so great Loss and intolerable pain. There are, they say, in
Confirmation, besides this, three terrible Points.

The First is laying on of Hands, with pretense that the same is done to the
Example of the Apostles, which is not only as they suppose, a manifest untruth
(For all the World does know, that the Apostles did never after Baptism lay
Hands on any: And therefore S. Luke who says they did, Acts 8. and 19. was
much deceived) but farther also, we thereby teach men to think Imposition of
Hands a Sacrament; belike, because it is a Principle, ingrafted by common Light
of Nature, in the minds of men, that all things done by Apostolic Example,
must needs be Sacraments. (And yet the word Sacrament too, is sometimes used by
the Fathers in a very large Extent; and Bucer calls this a Sacramental Rite.

The Second high point of Danger, is, that by tying Confirmation to the Bishop
alone, there is great cause of Suspicion given to think, that Baptism is not so
precious a thing as Confirmation: For will any man think that a Velvet Coat, is
of no more price than a Linen Coife, knowing the one to be an Ordinary
Garment, and the other an Ornament which only Sergeants at Law wear?

Finally, to draw to an end of Perils, the last and the weightiest hazard, is,
where the Book it self does say, that Children, by Imposition of Hands, and
Prayer, may receive strength against all Temptation: This Speech, as a
Two-edged Sword, does both ways dangerously wound: Partly, because it ascribes
Grace to Imposition of Hands, whereby we are able no more to assure our selves
in the warrant of any Promise from God, that his Heavenly Grace shall be given,
than the Apostle was, that himself should obtain Grace, by the bowing of his
Knees to God, Ephesians. 3.14. And partly because by useing the very word Strength
in this matter, a word so apt to spread Infection, we maintain, with Popish
Evangelists (John 20.22. Acts 1.8.) an old forlorn Distinction of the Holy
Ghost bestowed upon Christ's Apostles before his Ascension into Heaven, and
augmented upon them afterward; a Distinction of Grace infused into Christian
Men by degrees, planted in them at first by Baptism, and after that, cherished,
watered, and (be it spoken without Offense) strengthened, as by other virtuous
Offices, which Piety and True Religion teaches, even so by this very special
Benediction, whereof we speak, the Rite or Ceremony of Confirmation.)

And now, by way of Overplus, I shall easily obtain pardon for translating to
the use of my Countrymen these admirable Passages of the Reverend Dr. De
Confirmat. Praef.. 10. item c. 11.. 6. subsec. 8.
Hammond.

Undoubtedly were these things, as they are holily and wisely ordained in the
Church of Christ, (either by the Apostles themselves, or after their Pattern, by
Apostolical men, the Successors of their Chair and Power) so also piously,
reverently, and constantly applied by Prelates, other Weapons of the Churches
Warfare, being in their Place and Order called in for Help, as often as there
is need; (that is to say, more particularly, and distinctly, if care were taken
by the Rectors or Curates of all Parishes, to bring those who have been
Baptized in their Infancy, and afterward instructed in the Catechism (which is
a plain Explication of the Baptismal Vow and Heads of Faith) to the Bishop, no
less eminent for his Sanctity than Honor; and they admitted hereupon, by the
Imposition of his Hand and Benediction, as also, by his Paternal Monition and
Threatening, to a solemn Confirmation of the Profession and Abrenunciation made
in their Names at Baptism; being upon these Terms only permitted to approach
the Lord's Table; and to be driven from thence, bound by the Power of the Keys,
and interdicted the Privileges of Disciples, as often as they are found in a
Crime, or manifestly guilty of voluntary Transgression; and to be redeemed from
this Shipwreck, by the Plank of genuine and solid Repentance only: If, I say we
Christians were accustomed to serve and go forward in the Camp of Christ, by
this severe, but not tetrical Law, fitted not so much for a vain and empty
Pomp, as a solemn and select Fight with Wickedness and Vice) it can scarce be
spoken or conceived, how plentiful and happy an Harvest might be expected from
this Seed-time and Tillage; what Victory against the Flesh and Devil; what
Trophies might be looked for from these Weapons of Apostolical Warfare, which
are not fleshly and weak, but mighty through God, and able to destroy strong
Holds. Whereas these Methods of our Christian Polity, having been now long
despised, and either universally passing into Dis-use, or framed only to an
empty show of Piety, and degenerating into the mere shadow of External
performance; or which is yet worse, being converted to Lucre and Avarice (as
the Archbishop of Spalado complains) we may at this day, in vain, seek for the
Church in the Church, the Servants of God in his Family, the Disciples of
Christ among Christians; Nor find any thing pious and holy; but the Shadow and
Name among the Candidates of Religion.)

Yet once more, ( By this solemn Rite, by this, neither exceeding, nor empty
Pomp of Ceremonies, the Candidate of Divine Grace is admonished, meekly,
sweetly, and constantly to bear the Gracious Yoke of the Gospel, taken from his
Suretie's Hands upon his own Shoulders: And also with a Solemn Confession in
the open Congregation professes with the Mouth his Faith (and Resolution)
before God, Angels and Men; and is moreover made partaker of the most ardent
Prayers of the Bishop; Presbyters, and whole Church: All which, whosoever can
persuade himself or others, that they are like to be vain, and of no effect, he
may, by the same Endeavor, mock at the most Holy Mysteries of Christian
Religion, as Trifles, Figments, and an unprofitable Show or Appearance only.)

I will end this Appendix, with this plain Description of Confirmation out of
the Premises.

(It is a Sacred and Apostolical Rite, of most Ancient Use in the Church of
Christ, wherein the Bishop lays his Hand on Baptized Persons, come to Years of
Discretion, and prae-instructed in the Principles of their Christianity: The
Importance of which Performance, is, that the Parties Confirmed, do then
publicly renew and ratify the solemn Vow and Promise made in their names at
Baptism, taking the same upon themselves, and acknowledging themselves bound
thereby; and the Bishop confirming, calls upon God, with the Congregation then
present, for the additional Supplies of his Grace upon them; and in the Name of
God, gives them his Paternal Benediction and Admonitions.

The End of the Appendix.
S. BARNABAS HIS EXHORTATION To those whom he Confirmed at Antioch.

BEING A Practical Discourse to a Country Audience, to prepare them for their
Bishops CONFIRMATION.

Adhuc in saeculo sumus, adhuc in acie constituti: danda opera est, ut post
haec initia ad incrementa quoque veniatur, and consummetur in vobis, quod jam
rudimentis foelicibus esse coepistis. D. Cypr. epist. 7. St. Barnabas his
Exhortation to those whom he Confirmed at Antioch.
Acts 11.23. Who, when he was come, and had seen the Grace of God, was glad,
and exhorted them all, that with purpose of Heart they would cleave unto the
Lord.


BY the Dispersion of the Christian Church, upon the Persecution that arose
about St. Stephen the Protomartyr, Divine Providence wonderfully brought about
the Enlargement and Multiplying of it. In particular, while some of them were
preaching the Lord Jesus at Antioch, The Hand of the Lord was with them, and a
great number believed and turned unto the Lord, verse 21. And when Tidings of
these things came unto the Elders of the Church, (the Metropolitical, or
Mother Church) which was at Jerusalem (as it follows, verse 22.) they sent
forth Barnabas, one of their own Number, to help, assist, and confirm them in
these good Beginnings. And how he demeaned himself among them, the Text
acquaints us, Who when he was come, and had seen the Grace of God, was glad,
and exhorted them all, that with purpose of Heart they would cleave unto the
Lord.

You see then the Occasion of the Words, and the Persons concerned in them. The
Speaker, St. Barnabas the Apostle, A good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and
of Faith, as we have his Character, verse 24. And the Hearers, the Neophites,
or young Converts at Antioch, unto whom he was sent from the Church at
Jerusalem, to confirm them in their Christianity.

And then you cannot but observe,

1. How he was affected upon the joyful sight of their hopeful Beginning; And,

2. How he endeavored to strenthen and encourage them unto an answerable
perseverance according to the same.

First, How he was affected upon the very sight of their hopeful Beginnings,
((...)) who when he was come, and had seen the Grace of God, was glad -- When
he was come, and had seen the Grace of God --) The Grace of God, he means, in
calling them by his Gospel, and adding them to his Church: The Grace of God,
conspicuous in their believing, and turning unto the Lord; turning from Idols
and Lusts to serve the Living and true God; This was that which affected our
Apostle with great Joy, to behold so many partakers of the Word of God's Grace,
and devoting themselves upon it to the Profession and Practice of Christianity:
For otherwise, than in Profession and Practice, Grace is a thing invisible, and
not to be seen by any.

Now this is the longing and delight of all good Men, especially of the
Faithful Ministers of Christ. Their Love to him, their Master, and their Love
to Souls, the purchase of his Blood makes this sight pleasant and transporting
to them. St. Paul therefore calls the Philippians His dearly beloved, his Joy
and Crown, chapter 4.1. And tells the Collossians, that, though he was absent in
Body, yet he was with them in Spirit, joying and beholding their Order, and the
stedfastness of their Faith in Christ, chapter 2.5. And St. John writes unto the
Elect Lady, That He rejoiced greatly, that he found her Children walking in the
Truth, 2 Ep. verse 4. And to his Host Gaius, 3 Ep. verse 3, and 4. That he
rejoiced greatly, when the Brethren came and testified of the Truth that was in
him, and that he had no greater Joy, than to hear that his Children (meaning
his Disciples and followers) walked in the Truth, that is, according to the
Gospel, which is called both Grace and Truth -- Here we may borrow the
Psalmist's Exclamation, Ecce quam bonum, quam jucundum! Behold, how good, and
how joyful a thing it is! Psalm. 133. To see a Society of Regular Christians,
combined together in the Bonds of Faith and Amity, and walking orderly in the
Fear of God, and Love unto all men, but more especially each unto other; thus
holding forth the Beauty of the word of Life in their Conversations, and
maintaining the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. How ravishing a Show
this is!

Erasmus, in his Preface before his Paraphrase on St. Matthew, having
recommended unto Novices the solemn Renewal of their Baptismal Covenant by an
open and public Profession thereof (which is the thing we do at Confirmation)
adds upon it ( Quam vero magnificum esset hoc Spectaculum, etc.) How
magnificent and glorious a Spectacle would this be, to hear the Voice of so
many Young ones dedicating themselves to Jesus Christ; of so many Beginners,
engaging themselves by Oath of Fidelity to him, swearing into his Words, to
believe and obey them, renouncing the World, which lies all in Wickedness,
abjuring and hissing in a manner at the Devil, with all his Pomps, and
Pleasures, and Works. To see these new Christians, bearing the Sign of their
Emperor, the Captain of their Salvation, on their Foreheads! To behold the
goodly Company of these Canditates, coming up from the Holy Laver; and to hear
the Voice of the Multitude of Adult Christians congratulating and wishing well
to them --

And, Oh that we had continual Matter and Occasion for such Divine Joy as this!
And not rather of having our Souls grieved and vexed (with Righteous Lot's) by
the graceless and wicked Behavior of those among whom we live, 2 St. Pet. 2.7,
8. Or of Lamenting (with Holy David) because men keep not God's Laws, Paul
119.136. because of such, whom St. Paul speaks of to the Philippians, with
Tears in his Eyes, chapter 3.18, 19. The Enemies of the Cross of Christ whose End
is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their Shame, who mind
Earthly things: May we all with Barnabas, see more of the Grace of God, in our
People, that we also may rejoice and be glad in and for it!

And now, that this Joy of his might be prolonged, he proceeds, Secondly,
((...)) to Exhort them all with purpose of Heart, to cleave unto the Lord;
which is the principle thing I have my Eyes at present upon. He encouraged them
to hold on as they had begun, to abide by their own Choice; and as they had
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so to walk in him, Collos. 2.6.7.
rooted and built up, and established in the Faith, persevereingly,
Perseveranter adhaerere Domino Erasm. Annot. ex animo and libera voluntate) Id.
propenso cord) Vatab. firmo proposito) Grot. non fridide, nec simulate, sed
sincero and ardenti studio) Beza.
to adhere to that Lord and Religion which they had embraced; and this
heartily, and with a free will; with a ready mind, with a firm and steady
purpose; not coldly or feignedly, but with Sincerity, and Fervor of Endeavor;
with Deliberation and Resolution of Heart; that is, as the Hebrews are wont to
express it, with the whole Heart, or with all the Heart and Soul; and so the
Syriac and Arabic Interpreters here phrase it. In a word, cordially and
steadfastly to hold fast unto Christ.

Three points I design, by God's Help, to speak briefly unto, in the handling
of these words:

1. What is included in the Duty it self here pressed ((...), to cleave unto
the Lord.

2, What farther in the manner of performance recommended, ((...)) with purpose
of Heart. And then,

3. What Arguments or Motives we may suppose the Apostle to have made use of to
enforce this (...), or Exhortation of his to them all That with purpose of
Heart they would cleave unto the Lord. Of which now in Order.

And First, of the General Expression of the Duty, (...), to cleave unto the
Lord. The Greek word signifies to abide by, or continue with, that is, to hold
on and persevere the Disciples and Servants of that Lord Jesus, whom they are
said before to have believed and turned unto.

When we at first became Christians, we do, in the Sacred Language, (...), come
over unto Christ as his Proselytes, to believe what he says, and learn what he
teaches, to observe and obey what he commands and enjoins; and and so doing by
him, as our Allsufficient Sacrifice and High Priest to be recommended to the
Divine Acceptance, in the assured Hope of Pardon, Life and Happiness. And that
we may thus come unto him, we must of necessity forsake and renounce all other
contrary Lords and Masters, whom men are wont to choose and adhere unto, Contit.
Apostol.
in Opposition to him, such as the Devil, the World and the Flesh. And
therefore our Baptismal Vow begins with an (...), (...) renun^iaveramus, (...)
haptizati sumus. D. Cyprian. Ep. 7. Cujus po^pis and deliciis jam tunc
renunciavimus, cum mel^ore transgressu ad Deum venimus, id ^e Discip. and Hab.
Virg.
or an Abrenunciation of the Enemy, Repentance, whereby we forsake Sin with its
Abetters; whereby we renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh. And then
follows our (...), or Agreement with Christ, (...), A Confession and Promise,
whereby we engage our selves to receive and profess all the Articles of
Doctrine taught by him, and vow Obedience to all his holy Laws and Commands.
Both together, make up that which St. Peter calls (...), the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, 1 St. Pet. 3.21. which he there represents as the
Saving part of Baptism. Some render it the Stipulation of a good Conscience,
consisting of a Question and agreeable Answer to it. E. gr. Q. See Dr. H. in Loc.
Do thou forsake the Devil? A. I do. Q. Do thou believe, etc. A. this I
steadfastly believe. Q. Will thou keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, etc. A.
I will -- Others name it, The Address of a good Conscience unto God, enquiring
of him as an Oracle to be guided by him, applying to him for Direction, and
undertaking faithfully to observe and perform the same, asking with those
Gospel Penitents, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Or good Master, What
shall I do to inherit Eternal Life? With Resolutions of Obedience, to set about
whatever he shall declare -- Thus in our Conversion to Christianity, we
disclaim all other Lords and Masters, as has been said, and give up our selves
entirely unto Christ, to be instructed and ruled by him only, to believe
whatsoever he teaches us; to shun and avoid whatsoever he forbids us, to
endeavor and practice whatsoever he commands us, and thus to decline and escape
that Punishment which he threatens, and to expect and look for that Blessing
and Reward which he promises. This is indeed to come over unto Christ, as his
Disciples, Servants, Subjects and Dependents.

And then (...), to abide by, to stay or continue with, or cleave unto him our
Lord, is, as has been intimated, to persevere and hold on in this Repentance,
Faith, Obedience, and good hope, patiently to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, answerable to amendment of Life; not to fall off by Infidelity, or
an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the Living God, Hebr. 3.12. Not to
relapse or apostatize by a course of Sin and Disobedience; but as we have
devoted our selves to his Faith, Fear and Service, so to persist in an
undaunted Profession of that Faith, and walk before him in Holiness and
Righteousness all our days, to live Godlily in Christ Jesus, or to have a
Conversation becoming the Gospel, according to the Holy Warfare we have
undertaken to fight manfully under our Blessed Savior's Banner, as the good
and faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ; Laying aside every Weight, and the Sin
which does so easily beset us; to run with Patience, the Race of Christian
Virtues prescribed us, Heb. 12.1. Not to look or start back, but hold fast the
Faith, and proceed in that good Course wherein we are engaged; showing the same
Diligence to the full Assurance of the Hope to the End; that we be not
slothful, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises, chapter 6.11, 12. (...), ' To continue in the Grace of God, Acts 13.43.
(...) To continue in his Goodness, Romans 11.22. (...), ' To continue in the
Faith, Acts 14.22. (...), To hold fast the Profession of our Hope without
wavering, Heb. 10.23. (...), ' To stand fast in the Lord, Phil. 4.3.

This is now to cleave unto the Lord, not to leave or forsake him; not to
depart, or turn away from him; not to quit our Standing in his Church; not to
be ashamed of him and his words; not to renounce or deny him; not to pass over
to the Enemies Side, and take the contrary part, with Renegadoes and Rebels;
but to be his constant and obedient Followers, persevering in our Christianity,
against all Temptations and Discouragements. I will add no more about the Duty
in General.

Secondly, That which is most considerable in this place, is, the manner of
performing it recommended to us, (...), with purpose of Heart, that is to say,
more at large, with a personal, sincere, deliberate, free, firm, zealous and
humble resolution of Soul.

Give me leave to comment a little upon each of the Particulars.

1. It must be a Personal Engagement ((...)) every one for himself; and
accordingly, the Apostle here exhorts all to it. Needful it is to put you in
mind of this, because there are many, who would gladly enough have the
Privileges and Benefits of Religion, and yet are backward themselves to
undertake the Duties of it. If they could be saved by what others do for them,
by the Merits and good Works of others, or by such a Christ, as shall cover all
their Sins and Neglects, with the Mantle of his perfect Righteousness, imputed
to them as theirs, so as they may have nothing else to do, but boldly to rely
upon him, and hope to be saved by him: This would please them; but they seem
not willing to concern themselves at all, in any thing of Labor and Endeavor
about it. Such as these now do miserably cheat and delude their own Souls: For
we may as well expect to be happy by Proxy in another person, as to perform our
Duty so in order unto Happiness. We must at last give an account ' every one
for himself to God, Romans 14.12. And then shall every one receive Sentence from
him, according to what he has done in the Flesh, whether good or evil; and so
every one shall then have Praise from him, or bear his own Burden, 2 Cor. 5.10.
ande. We must every one appear personally before the Great Tribunal of our
Eternal Judge, and cannot answer for one another there. And in the mean while,
we are obliged to work out our own Salvation by a Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience of our own, Phil. 2.12. God now commands all men every where to
repent, Acts 17.30. And the Just, says the Prophet, shall live by his Faith,
Heb. 2.4. Every man must believe and confess for himself: And therefore it is,
that our Creed runs in the First Person singular, Credo, I believe. Every man
must be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5. and have a Stedfastness of
his own, as St. Peter intimates, 2 Ep. chapter 3.7. Beware, lest ye also, being led
away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness. Christ must
be Spiritually formed in every one of us, that is, his Image, which is
sometimes called the New man, must be drawn upon us. My little Children, says
St. Paul, of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed within you.
Gal. 4.19. And it is This Christ in us, which is Hope of Glory. We must every
one be thus born again, and become new Creatures. The Blessed Jesus himself,
once and again avers it to Nicodemus, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be born again (or from above, as the Margin reads it) he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. And then he repeats it, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except
a man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, St. John 3.3.5. The Indefinite Affirmation here reaches every one, Except
a man -- What he says to one in this case, is said to all; and what is spoken
generally unto all, extends unto every Individual.

We cannot be Christians without our own Consent: For how otherwise can we be
espoused to Christ? 2. Cor. 5.19. And therefore Isaiah the Prophet speaks
emphatically of Gospel-Converts, chapter 44.4, 5. One shall say, I am the Lord's,
and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob; and another shall
subscribe with his Hands unto the Lord, and Surname himself by the name of
Israel.

True it is, while we were Infants, we were brought to Christ in the Arms of
those, who then undertok for us; and such who cannot come otherwise, are
welcomed by him, when so brought by their Friends, and devoted to him. Suffer
the little Children (says he) to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
such is the Kingdom of God. And he took them in his Arms, put his Hands upon
them, and blessed them. St. Mark 10. which words are excellently commented upon
in our Office of Public Baptism. We allow therefore of the charible
interposure of others, to transact in the Name of Infants for their Good and
Benefit, who are not in capacity, to mind or do any thing themselves (
Accommodat illis Ecclesia aliorum pedes, ut veniant, aliorum cor, Sermon. 10. de
verb. Apostol.
ut credant, aliorum linguam, ut confiteantur, as St. Augustine has it) The
Church lends them the Feet of others to come, and the Heart of others to
believe, and the Tongue of others to confess -- But then we do as plainly
declare, that so soon as they are able, they must themselves own and
acknowledge, stand to, and make good the Sacred Engagements, made by others for
them and in their Names: that Repentance, whereby they are to forsake Sin; and
that Faith, whereby they are steadfastly to believe the Promises of God, so as
to become obedient to his Commands upon it: All this, which was vowed by their
Sureties, in their Names, themselves, when they are come to Age, are bound to
perform.

And this is that, which every one among us, in his Catechism, is trained up to
profess, that he does verily believe himself so bound, and that, by God's Help,
he will do accordingly: And so we solemnly affirm, with our own Mouths, at our
Confirmation.

We are upon no other Terms admitted to a State of Salvation in our Baptism,
than this indispensable Obligation, so soon as we grow up, our selves to
ratify and make good, what was then undertaken and promised for us: And if
there be any, who are afterward unwilling to consent unto those Terms, or
refuse to confirm the Sacred Vow, made in their Names, they are to know and
consider, that they bar themselves of the saving Benefit of their Baptism, and
do, in effect, proclaim, that were it now to be done, they would not be made
Christians upon these Conditions: and yet they cannot be admitted upon any
other.

This I have thought convenient to warn and admonish you of in the First Place,
that every one must engage for himself, so as to make Religion his own, so as
to have a Repentance, and Faith, and Obedience, and Stedfastness of his own.
The Purpose of the Heart is a Personal Act,

2. It must be sincere and and honest. This I will give you a short Explication
of in three Particulars.

1. It must not be in Show and Appearance, or Formality only, but Cordial, and
with the Heart. (That is one Derivation of the word Sincere, from (...)) God is
not taken with the external Complements of Devotion, when the Heart is not with
him: but complains of their Hypocrisy, who draw near unto him with their
Mouths, and honor him with their Lips, while their Hearts are far removed from
him; and of such he testifies, that in vain they worship him, Isaiah 29.13. St.
Mat. 15.8, 9. That of St. John is to be extended to our Love unto God, as well
as to to our Neighbor, Let us not love in word, neither in Tongue only, but in
Deed and in Truth, 1. Ep. 3.18.

The Heart must be upright and simple (that is another Derivation, sine cera)
without mixture of contrary Designs and Intentions; as when Herod pretended a
desire to worship Christ, but meant to have killed him: or as Jezebel
proclaimed a Fast in show of Justice; but intended the Murder of Innocent
Naboth; or as when the Pharisees appeared devout in their Long Prayers and
Fastings, and charitable in their Almsgiving; but their end was only to get a
Name to themselves, have the Praise and Admiration of the Beholders, and cheat
with the greater Color, devouring Widows Houses; or as when Judas gave our
Lord and Savior a Kiss; but with a wicked porpose to betray him -- We must be
hearty and sincere in our Religion, not in show and pretense only (as the
Prophet speaks of some, Isai. 2.20.42.20. and the Psalmist of others, Psalm.
78.34, 36, 37. Dissembling in their Hearts, and lying with their Tongues) but
in Truth and Reality; not to carry on sinister and unworthy Designs, under that
Mask and Vizard, but with Integrity of Soul, and Uprightness of Intention. And
then,

3. This sincere Honesty will discover it self by the Equality and Universality
of our Faith and Obedience; not picking and choosing what points we like best to
approve of, or what Commandments we can reconcile to the Interest of our Lusts
and Humors; but embracing all God's Declarations with the same readiness of
Faith, because He has spoken them, and all his Commands, with the same
Observance, because he enjoins them. This is that which the Scripture calls
Perfection; as St. Chrysostom well notes on Genes. Hom. 23. in Genesis
6. Noah was a just man, and perfect, (...)) Then shall I not be ashamed (says
Holy David) when I have Respect unto all thy Commandments, Psalm, 119.6. I will
have respect unto thy Statutes continually, verse 117. I esteem all thy
Precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way, ver.
128. And thus it is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, They are both righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord,
blameless, St. Luke 1.6. And so it must needs be: For if that be the reason of
our Faith, because God declares the matter unto us, we must of necessity, on
the same Account, believe every thing so declared: And if that be the Reason of
our Obedience, because God commands the thing, we must upon the same account
obey whatsoever is commanded: And for us to renounce any one Article, or live
in the open Breach and Violation of any known Command, is, by way of just
Interpretation, to renounce and disobey them all, while we oppose that
Authority, and Formal Reason of Faith and Obedience, which runs through them
all alike. And so St. James plainly tells us, chapter 2.10, 11. Whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point (wilfully, and upon Choice
offend in one point) is guilty of all. For he that said (or that Law which
said) Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now, if thou commit no
Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the Law. -- If we
are only for This and that Article of Faith, or for this and that Command, it
is manifest, that we please our selves only, and do our own Will; but if we
therefore believe any one point, because God has declared it; or perform any
one Duty, because God has enjoined it: The very same Respect and Reason will
enforce upon us, (...), an Universality in our Faith and Obedience: And we
cannot be sincere without this. We trust (says the Apostle) that we have a
good Conscience in all things willing to live honestly, Heb. 13.18. We have no
good Conscience at all, if we are not in all things willing to live honestly.
We are no upright Christians, if we are not thus truly Catholic.

Our purpose of Heart then must be sincere, (...), St. Jam. 3.17. (...).
as has been said, in opposition unto Simulation and Hypocrisy, Complement
and Formality, Defect and Partiality in our Faith and Obedience; the purpose of
a good and honest Heart, as it is called in the Parable, ((...) St. Luke 8.15.

3. It must be understanding and deliberate in opposition to ignorance and
rashness.

There are many persons, (who yet would be thought to renounce Popery) for an
implicit Faith in the General, and a blind Obedience in the Lump, without
studying or considering the particular Doctrines to be believed, or the
particular Laws to be obeyed. There are many well enough reconciled and brought
to this, to disown and renounce Sin in the General, while God knows, there is
hardly any particular Sin, which they are not ready to close with upon the
First Temptation to it. And so in like manner, there are many that will, Hand
over Head, as we say, engage to the Christians (as men customarily embrace the
Religion of their Country or Education) never considering what it may cost them
to make good this Engagement in its particulars: And for want of this it is,
that afterward they fall away. We on the other side, are called upon not to be
unwise, but understand what the Will of our Lord is, Ephesians. 5.17. And our
Blessed Savior requires the Multitude that flocked after him, to bethink
themselves, how much was expected of those who would be altogether Christians,
and owned by him among his genuine Disciples. There went out Multitudes with
him, says the Text, St. Luke 14.25. etc. and he turned, and said unto them, if
any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own Life also; (if he hate
not all these in comparison of me; or if he love not me above all these, so as
upon occasion, for my sake to leave and quit all these, St. Matthew. 10.37. 'he
cannot be my Disciple. Thus much he earnestly recommends to their serious
Consideration at the very first setting out (ne magis feriant improvisa tela;
Grot. in loc.
atque ita, quod quis aggressus est temere, magno suo malo deserat, factus
(...)) that they might not be surprised with Difficulties, never before dreamed
of by them, and so basely revolt from their profession after some plauss^ble,
but rash Beginnings. To this purpose he gives them a double Similitude from
what was usual in other matters among those of ordinary Prudence and Wisdom in
the World, ver. 28. etc. For which of you, intending to build a Tower, sits
not down first, and and counts the Cost, whether he have sufficient to finish
it? Lest happily, after that he has laid the Foundation, and is not able to
finish it all that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, This man began to
build, and was not able to finish; or what King, going to make War against
another King, sits not down first and consulteth, whether he be able with
ten thousand, to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand; or
else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an Embassage, and
desires Conditions of Peace? -- Thus (says he) in effect, should you ponder
well beforehand, what the business is which you undertake when you become
Christians, what Costs and Charges, what Pains and Labors you thereby oblige
your selves unto; that you may enter on that Profession understandingly, and
with a Prospect of the worst that may afterward befall you in or for it; that
so you may go through with your Building, and finish your Warfare. In the close
of all, therefore he adds, that he might bring the matter to its due Issue,
verse 33. So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he
has, (that is, who sets not forth with this Disposition of Soul, to quit all
rather than my Faith and Service) he cannot be my Disciple.

Our Resolves you see in Religion, must not be blind and rash, but rational and
deliberate, upon a prae-consideration, both of the particulars of our
Christianity (what it engages us to believe, profess and do] and of the
several Hazards which it may expose us to. I have chosen the way of truth,
says the Psalmist, thy Judgments have I laid before me, Psalm. 119.30. That is
the right method certainly to a good and durable Choice, first, to lay God's
Judgments as distinctly as may be before our View (as the (...), panis
propositionis, or Shewbread placed on the Table under the Law) with the
Consequences attending the Observance of them, that we may say, whatever ensues
or falls out, Omnia praecepi atque animo mecum ante peregi, All this I was well
enough aware of, when I first undertook my Religion.

Those that hear the Gospel preached, and understand it not, are resembled by
our Blessed Savior to the Highway ground, where the Seed is wholly lost; and
those who do not consider and deliberate upon it within themselves to the Stony
Ground, where the Seed takes not any deep and kindly Rooting, or has not much
Earth (or Mould) to cover it; and therefore, howsoever, for the present, it may
be received with Joy, yet it dureth for a while only: For when Tribulation and
Persecution arises because of the Word, by and by (says he) these are
offended, S. Matthew. 13.

4. This Consideration and Deliberation, I have been speaking of, must not rest
there, but conclude in a free, firm, and zealous Resolution; where we have four
points more to meditate a while upon.

1. It must come up to a Resolution, that is, the actual Determination of the
Mind and Choice, according to that of the Psalmist, I have applied, or inclined
my Heart to fulfill thy Statutes always, even to the End, Psalm. 119.112. And
again, elsewhere, My Heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, Psalm. 57.8. --
Who is this that engaged his Heart to approach unto me, says the Lord? Jer.
30.21. We must not always be considering and deliberating; but bring the Matter
to some Period and Issue within our selves; and that, not only as to some faint
Wishes and Velleities, but Purposes and Resolutions of cleaving unto God: Such
as David often expresses, I said, I will take heed to my ways, I will keep my
Mouth as with a Bridle, Psalm. 39.1. I have said, that I will keep thy Words,
Ps. 119.57. I have purposed, that my Mouth shall not transgress, Ps. 17.3. etc.
How long halt ye between two Opinions, says the Prophet? If God be God, follow
him, 1 Kings 17. that is, resolve and conclude upon it, as you have all reason
to do, to serve him only.

2. This Resolution must be free and voluntary, not as upon Constraint, or of
Necessity, or a forced Put; not as a Burden imposed; but, as has been said, a
matter of Choice; and that upon maturest Thoughts about it, the cheerful
Offering of a willing mind. Such is that Service which is most acceptable unto
God: He loves a cheerful Gier, and a cheerful Servant, 2 Cor. 7.11, 12. -- 9,
6, 7. He delights in none but Volunteers, a willing People, Ps. 110.3. Such as
esteem not his Commands grievous, 1 St. John 5.3. Such as do not only take
Sanctuary in Religion, to avoid the Hand of the Avenger, or embrace Piety and
Virtue, merely to escape Wrath and Misery, Hell and Damnation; but from an
Inward Satisfaction and Complacence in the Truth, and Goodness, and Excellency
of them. Thus we found it in the Psalmist, I have chosen the way of Truth, etc.
And thus Joshua deals with the Israelites, chapter 24.14, 15. Fear the Lord (says
he) and serve him in Sincerity and Truth (cleave unto him, and that out of
Love, as he had said before) and put away the Gods which your Fathers served
(that is, all manner of Idols) and if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord
(upon these Terms) choose you this day whom you will serve -- But, whatever you
choose, I for my part have chosen and resolved already. As for me and my House
we will serve the Lord. Whereupon the People, provoked unto Emulation, answer
also for themselves, ver. 16. etc. God forbid that we should forsake the Lord
our God, he it is that bought us and our Fathers out of the Land of Egypt, from
the House of Bondage, and which did those Great Signs in our Sight, and
preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and went among all the People,
through whom we passed; and the Lord drove out before us all the People, even
the Amorites which dwell in the Land: Therefore will we also serve the Lord,
for he is our God, -- q. d. He is the God of our Lives, and of all our Mercies;
who has wrought all the Miracles we have beheld; rescued us out of cruel
Servitude; and kept us in all the way of our Travails; delivered us from most
formidable Enemies. Thus has he many ways, from time to time, obliged us to
himself; and therefore, as in all Gratitude we are bound, we are resolved also
to serve him -- Well, but Joshua is yet concerned, lest they should not be so
advised and thoughtful in this Resolution as it became them in such a Business
of Importance to be; and therefore wills them again to deliberate with
themselves about it, what they must engage on, if they would in good earnest
serve him; how they must renounce all other Masters, and abandon all their Sins
and Lusts; or otherwise he would accept of no Service from them. So it follows,
verse 19. etc. 'And Joshua said unto the People, ye cannot serve the Lord, for
he is an Holy God, he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your
Transgressions, nor your Sins. If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange Gods,
then he will turn, and do you hurt, and consume you, after he has done you
good -- That is, you cannot serve the Lord to any purpose, unless you amend
your Lives and Manners, etc. Now upon this the People again declare their
Intentions: Nay, but we will serve the Lord. And Joshua once and again
admonishes them still to the same effect, and they as often consent to his
proposal, Ye are witnesses against your selves, says he at last, that ye have
chosen you the Lord to serve him. And they said Amen to it. We are Witnesses --
Now therefore, says he, put away the strange Gods which are among you, and
incline your Heart unto the Lord God of Israel, that is, make good your own
Choice in cleaving unto him. And the People said unto Joshua, The Lord our God
will we serve, and his Voice will we obey.

3. This purpose of Heart must be sixed, firm and stable; for that indeed is
properly Resolution, obstinatio quaedam animi, a Religious Obstinacy of Mind
(if I may so speak) so as no longer to be wavering and uncertain, carried to
and fro with every Wind; not apt to receive contrary Impressions, or be
diverted and turned aside, either by Promises or Menaces from what is resolved
on. The Psalmist utters it in these words I have sworn, and am steadfastly
purposed to keep thy Righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119. And elsewhere, in a
particular Case, Lord remember David, -- how he swear unto the Lord, and vowed
unto the Mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132. that is, bound his Soul with the
strictest Bond hereunto -- The like Inflexibility we may observe, upon Trial,
Numb. 30.2.
in the Three Famous Confessors, and that before a Flaming Furnace, threatening
of them; they declare peremptorily, that whatever come of it, they will not
serve any Idol, or fall down to the Golden Image, Dan. 3. Our God, say they, is
able to deliver us from the burning Fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out
of thy Hand, O King -- but if not (be that as it will) be it known unto thee, O
King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy Golden Image, which thou
have set up -- Another remarkable Story we have of St. Paul, Acts 21, 12, 13,
14. Where neither the greatest of Dangers, nor yet the Tears and Solicitations
of his Friends are able to move or dissuade him from his Holy purpose. What
mean ye to weep, and to break mine Heart, says he? For I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus (...)
A Resolution, when it comes to this degree of Firmitude, when it arises to the
height of a Sacred Oath and Vow, an Obligation of our selves to God by solemn
Promise and Covenant, a sure and sealed Covenant (as it is Nehem. 9.38,) is of
mighty Power and Effect in Religion. For so we find it in all other matters,
when men are resolutely wicked, perverse and obstinate in any course, as the
Horse rushing into the Battle, Their Hearts fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11. Say or do what you will, there is no stopping or turning of them.
The same Fixation we should labor after in our Pious Resolutions, until we
bring our selves unto an almost unalterable Resolution and Temper (Donec bona
men's sit, Ep. 16.
quod bona voluntas est; and habitus fiat, quod est impetus, as Seneca has it.)

And if it be thus in any good measure with us, there is no question but that,

4. We shall be zealous and affectionate also in these our deliberate, free,
and firm Resolutions: For our whole Heart will be engaged in them; and all
Indifferency, Coldness and Lukewarmness, arises from nothing but the Division
of the Heart, among diverse and contrary Objects, (pluribus intentus minor est
ad singula --) Thus we are to be fervent in Spirit serving the Lord, Romans 12.
And this Zeal will show it self, especially* in breaking through all manner of
Impediments, Oppositions, Letts and Hindrances, in the way of our Bounden Duty.
Nothing will be able to stand against, or resist the Powerful Flames of it. But
if we are neither Cold nor Hot in our Religion, God, as he threateneth the
Laodicean Church, will spew us out of his Mouth. Be zealous therefore (says
he) and repent, Revel. 3. (Qui susceptus es quasi intra Os Dei per fidei
agnitionem, Salvian. de Gub. l. 4.
projicieris per Teporem) as the Devout Father glosseth upon it.

5. And Lastly, to prevent Miscarriage in all this, it will be requisite that
we add Humility of Soul unto the rest; whereby I mean a deep Sense of our own
Weakness and Infirmity, as of our selves, and the necessity we stand in
continually of Divine Aid and Help, which will prompt us to a constant
dependence upon God, and calling on him for his Grace, and Watchfulness over
our selves in the time of Temptation, lest we be worsted and overcome, lest we
should start aside like a broken Bow, and fail of performing our Holy Promises
unto God. We must beware of leaning to our own Understandings, and presuming
upon our own Strength. Let him that thinks that he stands, take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. God is to be duly acknowledged by us in all our ways;
and our Hearts and Souls are to be at all times lift up toward him for his
Succor and Blessing, (...), seasonable Recruits in the time of need, Heb. 4.13.
--

Who was more confident and presumptuous of himself than St. Peter? Though all
men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended (says he)
St. Matthew. 26. Yea, and after that our Blessed Savior had given him a Check,
and foretold his Fall more particularly, Verily I say unto thee, that this
Night, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Nevertheless, he
repeats it with a fresh degree of Earnestness and Vehemence. ((...)) 'Though I
should die with thee, S. Mark 14.31.
yet will I not deny thee: And so it seems, after his Example promised all the
Disciples -- But we know the sad Consequence, how, When the Shepherd was
smitten, the Sheep were all scatered, they all forsook him: And this
over-confident Apostle, even with a Curse and Oath, renounceth his Master. A
fair warning to us all, to lay to Heart and put in practice the excellent
Advice which our Blessed Savior a little before gave them. Watch and pray that
ye enter not into Temptation; and to pray daily, as he has taught us, Lead us
not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.

And thus now we have the particulars comprised in the Text, what St. Barnabas
exhorted them all unto, both for the matter of the Duty, and for the manner of
Performance 'with purpose of Heart to cleave unto the Lord, that is, as you
have heard, with a personal, sincere, deliberate, free, firm, zealous, and yet
humble Resolution of Soul, to hold fast, and persevere in their Christianity.

It remains only in the Third place, that I point you to some of those General
Motives and Arguments, which we may presume, this Good Man, this (...) (as his
name is interpreted, Acts 4.36.) made use of in pressing of his Exhortation
upon them all; which I hope you will every one apply to your selves, whilst I
shall little more than name the particulars.

1. Then we may suppose, that he set before them the absolute necessity of this
Christian perseverance from the very Obligation and Vow of their first
Admission and Entrance upon that Holy Profession --. And that he suggested unto
them, that all their good Beginnings would be lost and in vain, unless they
were thus followed on, and pursued by them -- That if they drew back, it would
be unto Perdition; and no Salvation of their Souls was to be hoped for, unless
they believed unto the end; no Crown, but to him that overcomes -- Nay, if
they Apostatized and Revolted, the later End would be worse with them than the
Beginning, and their Condemnation the more sad and heavy; so that it had been
better for them never to have known and owned the way of Truth and
Righteousness, than afterward unworthily to relinquish and forsake it.

2. We may suppose, he set before them the well grounded Divinity, and
surpassing Excellency of that Religion, which they had now embraced, far above
all others -- together, with the most reasonable Service therein required and
called for, which is most suitable to, and perfective of our Humane Nature,
considered both in every Individual, and as it is embodied in the respective
Societies of Men.

3. We may suppose, he represented to them the Goodness, and obligingness of
that Lord and Master to whom they had devoted themselves -- How well he had
deserved of them -- what transcendent and unparalled Love he had showed to
them, in giving himself to and for them, and redeeming of them with his most
precious Blood -- And how ready he was still at all times to stand by them for
their Help and Assistance in whatsoever he should call them to.

4. It is not unlikely, but he might bring into their View the great Cloud of
Witnesses encompassing of them round about: The many good Examples and
Presidents, both under the Old and New Testament, whom they were herein to
follow -- And then

Lastly, We may be sure he put them in mind of the exceeding and incomparable
Recompense of Reward, which would be certainly theirs, if by patient
Continuance in well-doing they looked and waited for it -- A Reward of Eternal
Life and Happiness and Glory, wherewith neither the good, nor the evil things
of this World, which are but for a moment, are worthy to be weighed --
Concluding to a like purpose, as we find St. Paul, his Brother and Companion in
that Work, does to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. ult. And I cannot conclude
better than so. Therefore, my Beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the Work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know that your Labor
is not in vain in the Lord.

Lord of all Power and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all good things,
graft in our Hearts the Love of thy Name; Increase in us true Religion, nourish
us with all Goodness; and of thy great Mercy keep us in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, we beseech thee, grant thy People Grace to withstand the Temptations of
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and with pure Hearts and Minds, to follow
thee, the only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, Forasmuch as without thee we are notable to please thee, mercifully
grant, that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our Hearts,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great Dangers,
that by reason of the Frailty of our Nature, we cannot always stand upright;
grant to us such Strength and Protection, as may support us in all Dangers, and
carry us through all Temptations, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

O God, who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass
man's Understanding; pour into our Hearts such Love toward thee, that we,
loving thee above all things, may obtain thy Promises, which exceed all that we
can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE END.
A TABLE OF THE CHIEF CONTENTS.
OF the Scope and Sense of Hebr. 6.2. page. 1. Our Church-Catechism most
agreeable to the Apostolical p. 5. Of the Names whereby Confirmation is known
and called, viz. Imposition, or laying on of Hands 7. Perfection 8. Chrism, or
Unction 9. Consigning, or Sealing 10. Confirmation 11. Obligation 12.
2 Timothy 2.19. Well accommodated by Dr. Hammond to this matter ibid. Most of the
precedent Names found in 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. 14. Other Scripture Paterns and
Grounds for it ib. Figured out, and pointed to us in the visible Descent of the
Holy Spirit. 1. On our Blessed Savior in the Form of a Dove, St. Matthew 3.
ib. 2. On the Apostles afterward at Pentecost Acts 2. ibid. Recommended by
Christ himself, St. John 3.5. as Bishop Tailor with St. Cyprian expounded that
Text 15. Undoubtedly practiced by the Apostles, St. Peter and John Confirming
the Samaritans, Baptized by Philip the Deacon, Acts 8. St. Paul the Ephesians,
Acts 19. 16. These Instances so understood and appealed unto by St. Cyprian 17.
St. Augustine 19. St. Hierom ibid.
As will as by the Church of England 20. Some other Scripture Instances glanced
at, Acts 11.14, 15. Chapters 21. This Apostolical Practice both a Light unto,
and farther Illustrated, by Hebr. 6.2. expounded accordingly by the Ancient
Fathers ib. The Additional Authority of the Council of Eliberis and Tertullian
22. The same allowed by the Generallity of Modern Expositors also ibid.
Calvinists, as Calvin 23 Beza 25. Piscator 26. Doctores Lugdun. 27. Lutherans,
Chemnitius 28. Waldenses- Confess and Apolog. 30. Bohemian Brethren, Comenius.
Ratio Discipline. etc. 32
With some of Name among our selves, Mr. Hanmer, and Mr. Baxter 34. Dr. William
Gouge ib. Assembl. Annotations 35.
Of the Ceremony of Imposition of Hands 37. Mr. Calvin 's Idle Question about
it answered from his more calm and considering self 39. The Blessing of
Ministers under the Gospel, no less Authoritative and Prolifique than under the
Law 41 Of the peculiar Minister of Confirmation, the Bishop, whence it is
called Bishopping 42. So in the first Patterns, and so confessedly, in the
Usage of the Ancient Church ib. Mr. Bucer 's Reason for it ib. Their
uncharitable Rashness condemned, who impute it to the Bishop's Pride 44. What
Supplemental Provision seems desirable upon some Necessities ibid. Of the
Qualification of Persons to be confirmed, viz. Baptism and Prae-instruction in
the Church-Catechism at Years of Discretion 45. The Preface read to that
purpose at Confirmation 46. The Question then also put by the Bishop, and
answered by all the Candidates 47. Aquinas and Contarenus of another mind; but
disliked by the later Romanists themselves 48. The Benefit of this Sacred Right
depends much upon a competent Growth of Age and Understanding ibid. No
prejudice by deferring it till then, by our Churches Declaration. ibid. A
serious Exhortation to all that come on this Errand 49. Of the great Importance
and Usefulness of this whole Transaction, in five particulars 50. Melchiades
his Epistle to the Bishops of Spain in Vindication of it 54. The same more
largely from Eusebius Emissenus, or Eucherius Lugdun. Homily on Pentecost 55.
A Summary of the Graces and Blessings consequent out of Bishop Tailor 56. A
Concluding Admonition to all persons concerned, not to disgrace so well
grounded Principles, by an unsuitable Practice, enforced from Mr. Hooker 58.
Dr. Jackson, Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Henchman 59.
Contents of the Appendix.
T C's Objections against Confirmation 61. Mr. Hooker's Answer to the same 62.
A Translation of some admirable Passages out of Dr. Hammond, De Confirmatione
65. An useful Description of Confirmation from all the Premises 68.
Contents of the Sermon Annexed.
Of the First Plantation of the Church of Antioch 72. St. Barnabas sent thither
from Jerusalem, to Confirm. ibid. How he was affected with Joy at the sight of
their hopeful Beginnings 73. How he endeavored to encourage and hearten them to
an answerable Perseverance ibid. Of coming and cleaving unto Christ in the
Scripture Sense 76. Of that purpose of Heart wherewith it is to be done 82.
Including a Personal Resolution of Soul. ibid. Sincere Resolution of Soul. 87.
Deliberate Resolution of Soul. 90. Free Resolution of Soul. 95. Firm Resolution
of Soul. 98. Zealo us Resolution of soul. 100. Humble Resolution of Soul. 101.
General Motive and Exhortations to enforce this Exhortation. 103.
FINIS.

