OF God Almighty's Providence Both in the SENDING and DISSOLVING Great Snows
and Frosts, AND The Improvement, we ought to make, of it. A SERMON, Occasioned
by the Late Extreme Cold Weather, Preached in It to his Neighbors, And now
thought fit to be made more Public, for the Common Good.

By Benj. Camfield, Rector of Aileston near Leicester.

LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

To the READER.
ST. Paul speaks of a (...), somewhat considerable that may be known of God
from the Book of his Creatures, and this with a competent degree of evidence
and satisfaction, [(...)] where men have nothing else but the light of common
Reason to guide them. For, says he, the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood [or considered] by the
things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they [ the
very Heathens] are without excuse: Because that, when they knew God, [or, by
this means might have known him] they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, Romans i. xix -- xxi. The Author therefore of the Book of Wisdom,
deservedly proclaims: Surely vain are all men by nature, who are ignorant of
God, and could not out of the good things, that are seen, know him that is;
neither by considering the works, did acknowledge the Workmaster, Chap. xiii.
i. That is, as he proceeds, who did not collect and infer his surpassing
Beauty, Power and Goodness, from the visible Prints and Images of those Divine
Excellencies to be found in the Universe.

He, says the Son of Sirach, has garnished the excellent works of his wisdom:
[(...), not only ordered but adorned them; whence the world is called (...)]
And he is from everlasting to everlasting; unto him may nothing be added,
neither can he be diminished: [ Cui summum and proprium est, semper id esse,
quod est.] And he has no need of any Counselor. O how desirable are all his
works, and that a man may see, even to a spark! [ The least of them affording
some glimmerings of his Majesty.] All these things live, [that is, exert their
respective powers] and remain for ever for all uses; [ whereto he has
appointed them] And they are all obedient [viz. to his Commands, or the Laws
which he has set them, Ps. cxix. xci.] Eccles. xlii. xxi -- xxiii.

And this he prosecutes more particularly, Chapter xliii. But I will only take
notice of what may serve to illustrate the following Text and Discourse, Ver.
xiii. to xxii.

By his commandment he makes the Snow to fall apace [ Unget, accelerat nivem]
And sends swiftly the lightnings of his judgment [that is, by which he is
wont sometimes to execute his judgments, when he makes the Creature his weapon
for the revenge of his enemies, etc. See Wisd. v. xvii, xx, xxii -- xvi, xxiv.]

Through this [or, for this same end and purpose. (...). Ejusdem judicii
exequendi causa] the Treasures [or Magazines of Heaven] are opened; and Clouds
[ charged as he pleaseth] fly forth as Fowls [ on the wing, with speed, Isa.
lx. viii.] Madidis Notus evolat alis.]

By his great power he makes the Clouds firm; [ Condensat Nubes] And the
Hailstones are broken small. [ As so many fragments or shivers of a pellucid
Rock of Crystal.]

Here follow the Order of the best Copies; for in our Translation there is a
Transposition. See Grot.
The noise of the Thunder makes the earth to tremble, [or groan as a woman in
her travail, says the Margin; puts Nature as it were into an agony and labor
by the fright of it. See Psalm. xxix. viii, ix.]

At his sight the mountains are shaken: [Psal. civ. xxxii.] And at his will the
South Wind blows; so does the northern storm, and the whirlwind.

As Birds flying he scatters the [ feather'd] Snow; And the falling down
thereof, is as the lighting of Grasshoppers, [or Locusts; which come in full and
continued Swarms or Bands, as it were, each one gently settling upon the ground.
See Prove. xxx. xxvii. Joel ii.]

The eye marvelleth at the beauty of the whiteness thereof; [ which is such, as
dazleth us to look intensely upon it.] And the heart is astonished at the
raining of it.

The Hoar-frost also as Salt he pours on the earth; And being congealed, it
lies on the top of sharp stakes, [Or, it is, as the point of sharp stakes,
says the Margin. Quasi quaedam fastigia palorum. Velut Aculeorum cuspis. We
call them, Swords and Daggers.]

When the cold North Wind blows [ Aquilonis Horrida Flabra, as the Poets
express it.] And the water is congealed into Ice, it abides upon every
gathering together of water; [that is, the Rivers, as well as standing Pools.]
And cloatheth the water, as with a Breast Plate, [or, Coat of Mail.]

It devoureth the mountains, and burns the wilderness, and consumes the
grass, as fire; [that is, it dries up the juice, and wastes the verdure of every
green thing. Penetrabile Frigus adurit. Torret hiems, say the Poets.]

A present Remedy of all, is a Mist coming speedily; a dew coming after heat,
[or, upon heat] refreshes; [that is, the warm Spring by its Mists and Dews
relieves us after a tedious Winter.]

Thus far the Son of Sirach.

And, had this come to mind, before I had transcribed the ensuing Sermon, I
would have allotted another place for it: But, since it did not, have thought
good however to recommend it here to the Reader's perusal: And that is all the
Entertainment or Trouble I design to give him.

B. C.

OF GOD ALMIGHTY'S PROVIDENCE Both in The Sending and Dissolving Great Snows
and Frosts; AND The Improvement, we ought to make, of it, etc.
Psalm CXLVII. xv, xvi, xvii, xviii. He sends forth his commandment upon
earth, and his word runs very swiftly.

He gives snow like wool, and scatters the Hoar-frost like ashes.

He casts forth his Ice like morsels. Who is able to abide his Frost, [or
cold]?

He sends out his word, and melts them: He blows with his wind, and the
waters flow.


THese words are a most elegant Description of God Almighty's providence in the
Government of the world, and disposing of the seasons of it, especially in the
sending and Removing of Great Frosts and Snows.

The Psalmist had touched, immediately before, upon the Blessing of Peace and
Plenty, which God had vouchsafed his Jerusalem. He makes Peace in thy borders,
and fills thee with the Flower of Wheat; or the finest of the wheat.] The
Hebrew has it, The Fatness of Wheat. And from hence He naturally proceeds to
the more Immediate Causes of this fruitfulness and plenty, [*See Psalm. CIV.
xiii, xiv, xv.]
(The Clouds that drop fatness) but all of them directed by the hand of Heaven,
all of them depending upon the divine Command and Influence. He sends forth
his Commandment upon Earth, and his Word runs very swiftly, etc. [ Summa
celeritate persiciuntur, quae jubet.] Vatablus.
Upon his bidding it is, that the Earth yields her increase, and Nature, with
all her Auxiliaries, is at his powerful beck.

In the Text it self we have, 1. A general Acknowledgment of God's overruling
Providence. He sends forth his Commandment upon earth, and his word runs
very swiftly. And 2. A particular Illustration or Exemplification of it, by way
of Instance, both in the Giving and Removing great Snows and Frosts, with Hail
and Ice. He gives Snow like wool; and scatters the Hoar-frost like Ashes. He
casts forth his Ice like Morsels. Who is able to abide his Frost? [or, who
can stand before his cold?] He sends out his word, and melts them: He
blows with his wind; [or, causes his wind to blow] and the waters flow.

(1.) I say, A General acknowledgment of Gods overruling Providence throughout
the world. He sends forth his commandment upon earth, and his word runs
very swiftly. [ Mandat tantum, and statim executio sequitur.] Scultetus.
He only calls, and all things answer him; he commands, and the Execution
follows upon it. Thus, at first, by the word of the Lord were the Heavens made,
and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. He gathers the waters of
the Sea together, as an heap, and lays up the Deep in Storehouses, [ viz. by
the same word of his mouth.] Let all the Earth fear the Lord, let all the
Inhabitants of the World stand in awe of him. For he spoke, and it was done; He
commanded, and it stood fast, Psalm. XXXIII. vi -- x. [see Genes. I.] His
Almighty Fiat produced all things out of nothing. And by the same are they
still preserved. Upholding all things by the word of his power, says the
Apostle, Hebr. I.iii. and so are they also Ruled and Governed, as here we have
it. He sends forth his commandment upon earth, and his word runs very
swiftly. This sending forth his commandment, is nothing else but that hidden
yet effectual way, whereby he orders all things. Calvin.
He no sooner speaks, gives out the word of order, issues out his Warrant and
Commission, but [ praesto ad parendum concurrunt omnia] all things are at hand
upon it, ready to obey him, yea, quick and nimble in their observance of him.
His word runs very swiftly. [ Verbo solo, quicquid vult, efficere potest.]
Munster.
By his word alone he can do every where, whatsoever he will.

And this (2.) he goes on to evidence and illustrate by examples; namely, by
his sudden sending of Great Snows and Frosts, with Hail and Ice, and as sudden
dissolving of them again, when he pleases. In the expressing of which he is
very Poetical. We will take the Particulars, as they lie.

(i.) He gives Snow like Wool.] [Nix aemula lanae. Vellera nivis. Virg.
He turns the moist vapors of the Air into white flakes of Snow, which descend
silently, and within a while lie a great thickness, as a Fleece of wool on the
ground, wherewith it is no less warmly clad, and nourished, and defended from
the biting winds, than the sheep is by its wool, or our bodies by garments made
of it. Thus Snow has, not only the color and likeness, but the defensive and
comforting properties of wool. It is not an injury, but a benefit to the Earth:
And Rabbi Arama said, [ Dies unus nivium prodest plus, quam quinque Dies
pluviae.] Viccars Decapla, in loc.]
One day of Snow does more good, than Five of Rain.

(ii.) He scatters the Hoar-frost like ashes.] [ Instar Cineris] that is, as
some of the Hebrew Doctors comment upon it, [ Parum hic, parum illic.] Ibid.
Here a little, and there a little; or, (it may be) as we do ashes to dry up
superfluous moisture in wet places. [Vitrea cum Terra pruina Spargitur.]
By his word the Frost comes, which he gently strews upon the surface of the
Earth.

(iii.) He casts forth his Ice like morsels. [ Tanquam Frusta.] Some refer it
unto Hail-storms, q.d. Dr. Patrick's Par.]
Sometimes he congeals the moist vapors into Ice, which he breaks, as it were,
into bits, and throws down in a violent Hail. [Lapidosae grandinis imber.]
-- Others, rather to the Freezing of the earth and waters, Dr. Hammond]
when the whole Surface is congealed into a firmness as strong as Crystal,
able to bear the greatest weight, and a multitude of pieces of Ice are
scattered on the face of the ground, like morsels of bread, without any
appearance of moisture in them: which the Poets also are wont to express after
a like manner, speaking in Great Frosts of Drinking morsels of Wine, swallowing
it down by Gobbets: [Nec hausta meri, sed data frusta bibunt. Ovid.]
And whole Rivers stopped in their course, Glacie cursus fraenantur aquarum.]
as a Horse by his Reins; and standing with a thick Crust of hard Ice over
them. Stabant jam Flumina duro incrustata gelu.] Id.
Nay, and Highways made by this means for Men and Horses, and Carriages on the
Deeps, and standing Bridges erected, as it were, over the Great Waters. As Ovid
phraseth it, speaking of the Cold upon Pontus. [Quaque rates ierant, pedibus
nunc itur, and undas
Frigore concretas Vngula pulsat Equi.
Perque novos pontes, subter labentibus undis
Ducunt Sarmatici barbara plaustra boves.]


(iv.) It is added, who is able to abide his Frost? or, who can stand before
his Cold?] such is sometimes the severity of this pinching weather; such the
extremity of the cold, that neither Man nor Beast on the Earth, nor Birds in
the Air, nor Fishes in the Rivers are able to resist the Force of it, or long
to support and endure under its assaults. -- It stupifies and benumbs all our
senses, [Non tractabile Frigus.]
and stagnates our blood, [Torpetque vinctus frigido sanguis gelu. etc.]
and turns us almost into so many petrified monuments of its rigorous fury. It
cuts off Intercourse between Country and Country; blocks up the Merchant and
Mariners in the Haven, or (which is worse) starves them abroad at Sea; It
confines the Traveller from his journeys: It clogs the Mills, that they cannot
Grind our Corn, and so produces a kind of Dearth in the midst of abundance;
Nay, it converts our very Bread, and Meat, and Drink, into Stones: It retains
the busy Husbandman within from his Field-^ork, and makes the very savage
Creatures keep to their Hideing places. -- And, though the more Northern
Climates are usually more sensible of this, as the Inhabitants of Russia and
Muscovie, who are put to all the Art they have to make Defensatives against it,
yet, whenever God pleases, he can call it also into the most temperate and
warm Regions under Heaven; as we have had of late some considerable Feeling of
it.

His hand, you see, is all along to be owned and observed in these things. He
gives the Snow. He scatters the Hoar-frost. He casts forth his Hail or
Ice. And it is his Cold too. [ Non fit ex accidente] as some of the Jewish
Expositors, not amiss, gloss upon it. It comes not by chance or accident. It is
wholly at his disposing.

And, as he sends these by his Command, upon whatsoever Errands he has for
them to dispatch, so he also recalls them, and countermands them at his
pleasure.

This therefore (v.) is superadded in the Close of all; and well it is for us,
that so it is. He sends out his Word, and melts them: He blows with his
wind, [or, causes his wind to blow] and the waters flow.

Buchanan.
[Quum libuit, molles glacies tabescit in undas:
Adspirat aura mitior, Rivi fluunt.]
To prevent the hurt and mischief, which might accrue by their tedious or too
long continuance, when the motions of Nature have a violent restraint upon them
by the Weather, and both Earth and Waters are congealed beyond the power of all
humane means to dissolve them; He issues out another Command, which as suddenly
makes a desired Thaw, and by the warm breath of a Southern Wind loosens the
Waters which were so close bound up; [Solvitur acris hiems frigora nitescunt
Zephyris. Horat.]
causes the Snow and Frost and Ice immediately to melt, and full streams to
come down upon the Valleys.

Thus he both sends and recalls these Creatures of his at his own will. And
these are remarkable Instances of his ordinary Providence, common to the whole
World, wherein all men may see, how Wise and Powerful and Good he is. There is
enough in these to make him known unto all men. If they will but open their
eyes to take notice of what is frequently done in their view. He speaks unto us
all from the Clouds above, which he exhales and raises from the Earth and
marvellously hangs in the Firmament, and dissolves into Rain or Dew, or else
into Snow and Hail and Hoar-frost, which are but Rain and Dew congealed by the
cold Air. Who covers the Heaven with Clouds, who prepares Rain for the
Earth. So the Psalmist had before expressed it, verse. viii. and here he
represents the same Divine Power turning that Vapor or Rain into Snow or Hail,
or Hoar frost and Ice, or Melting and Dissolving them again by his Winds. Thus
St. Paul and Barnabas preach to the Heathens at Lystra, Acts XIV. xvii. He left
not himself without witness in that he did good, and gave us Rain from Heaven,
and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with Food and Gladness. And so the
Prophet Jeremiah speaks of this Dispensation, as a convictive Testimony of God
unto men, Chapter XIV. xxii. Are there any among the Vanities (or Idols) of the
Gentiles, that can give Rain? or can the Heavens ( of themselves) give Showers?
Art not thou he, O Lord our God? ( the only commander and giver of Rain and
Showers) therefore we will wait upon thee; for thou have made all these things.
To which same purpose he had said also in another place, chapter X. xiii. When he
(that is God) utters his voice, there is a multitude of Waters in the
Heavens; and he causes the Vapors to ascend from the ends of the Earth; He
makes Lightnings with Rain, and brings forth the Winds out of his Treasures.
-- But this comes yet with a stronger force and conviction upon us, if unto the
Vapors, Clouds, and Rain, and Winds, we add also his Snow, and Hail, and
Frost, and Ice, as the Psalmist here does; calling upon them by name among
other of his Creatures to bless and praise him. -- Hail, and Snow, and Vapor,
and stormy Wind, fulfilling his word, Psalm CXLVIII. viii.

And there are very many remarkable passages in the Book of Job to the like
effect. Thus Eliphaz there speaks of God, chapter v. Who does great things, says
he, and unsearchable things without number. -- And then the first he gives
instance in is this, Who gives rain upon the Earth, and sends waters upon
the Fields, Ver. ix, x. -- And Job was not to be taught this Lesson. He binds
up the waters in his thick Clouds, says he, and the Cloud is not burst under
them. [That is, He keeps them a long time hanging, as it were, in those baggs,
through which they do not at length burst all at once, but distill by drops (
guttatim, as through a Cieve or Cullender) to moisten the Earth in due season]
Chap. XXVI. viii. And again, He looks to the ends of the Earth, and sees
under the whole Heaven, to make the weight for the winds, and he weighs the
waters by measure; when he made a Decree for the rain, and a way for the
lightnings of thunder. [That is, Adjusting all their proportions, and
appointing the course they shall take.] Chap. XXVIII. xxiv, xxv. -- And yet
this is that, which his friend Elihu afterward more particularly recommends to
his due observance, Chap. XXXVI. xxiv, etc. Remember, that thou magnify his
work, says he, which men behold. Every men may see it; men may behold it afar
off. Behold, God is great, and we know him not; neither can the number of his
year be searched out. For he makes small the drops of water; they pour down
rain according to the vapor thereof; which the Clouds do drop and distill upon
men abundantly. Also can any understand the spreadings (or poisings) [or
balancings, Chap. XXXVII. xvi.] of the Clouds, or the n^ise of his Tabernacle?
[That Thunder he means, which proclaims him to dwell above; of which he goes on
to treat more at large in the beginning of the next Chapter.] -- And then he
adds, Great things does he, which we cannot comprehend; for he says unto the
snow, Be thou upon the earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain
of his strength, Chapter XXXVII. v, vi. Upon which it follows, He seals up the
hand of every man, that all men may know his works, Verse vii. [which may very
well be expounded to this sense, That by his Snow and Rain he stops the Labor
of those whose business is abroad in the Fields, and makes them know, that he
disposes of the Weather as he pleases. Agreeably whereunto he adds. ver viii.
Then the beasts also go into dens, and remain in their places.] -- Again says
he, ver. x. etc. Out of the south comes the whirlwind, and cold out of the
north. [Namely by his order and appointment only.] By the Breath of God Frost
is given, and the breadth of the Waters is straightened, [that is, They are pent
and bound up so fast, that they cannot flow] Also by waterings he wears the
thick Cloud, he scatters his bright Cloud, and it is turned about by his
Counsels, that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the face of the
world in the earth. He causes it to come, whether for correction or for his
land, or for mercy [that is, either to scourge our sins with plagues, or
produce fruitfulness for the necessary sustenance of man and beast, or to
reward the obedience of his servants with some extraordinary plenty and very
healthful seasons.] See Dr. Patrick's Paraphrase.
-- And God himself, in the XXXVIII. Chapter, approves of this kind of
discourse, and takes the very same method to give Job a sensible representation
of his own tremendous Majesty, verse xxii. etc. Have thou entered, says he,
into the treasures of the Snow? or, have thou seen the treasures of the Hail,
which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle
and war [See Exodus IX. xviii, etc.]
? -- Has the Rain a Father? Or who has begotten the Drops of the Dew? Out of
whose womb came the Ice? And the Hoar-frost of Heaven who has gender'd it? The
waters are hid as with a stone; and the face of the deep is frozen. -- And
again, Verse xxxiii, etc. Know thou the Ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set
the Dominion thereof in the Earth? Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds,
that abundance of waters may cover thee? Can thou send lightnings, that they
may go and say, Here we are;] viz. ready at thy beck and call, as they are
always at mine. --

All these Meteors (as we style them) go and come at God's bidding only. He
sends forth his commandment upon earth; and his word runs very swiftly. --
Every Creature gives the word with all expedition to its next fellow. And
again, He sends out his Almighty word, and melts them, etc. He commands the
Clouds, that they rain; and that they rain not too, Isa. V. vi. He withholds
the waters, and they dry up; Also he sends them out, and they overturn the
Earth, Job XII. xv.

But I pass on now to what I principally aim at, which is, to give you those
useful and important Lessons, we are every one to take out from this matter of
common knowledge and observance.

I. Then from hence we learn, Not to attribute these notable Effects of God's
Providence to Chance or Blind Fortune; nor yet so to ascribe them to any
natural Causes, as to leave God out of our Philosophy. It Is certainly
preposterous, vain and wicked so to do; for all Second Causes necessarily
suppose the First, and depend upon him in all their motions. The whole link of
Nature's Chain of Causes and Operations is bound to his Throne, who gives
influence, and sets Rules and Measures to them all. Nay, I will add, there is
no Reasonable account at all to be given of any of these Things, which we daily
converse with, see, and behold, ( no solving of these ordinary Phoenomena)
without recourse had unto God as chief and principal.

And strange it is, that so great a part of the World should be yet stupid
amidst so many miraculous Testimonies of the Divine Being and Presidency.
Whereas, we ought certainly, as Elihu exhorts Job, to stand still, and
consider the wondrous works of God, Chapter XXXVII. xiv. and to magnify, praise,
and adore him, in and for them all, Chap. XXXVI. xxiv. We should cry out with
the Psalmist, O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world!
Psalm. VIII. And again, O Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou
made them all, Psalm. CIV. And yet again, O Lord, how glorious are thy works!
Thy thoughts are very deep. An unwise man does not well consider this, and a
fool does not understand it, Psalm. XCII. v, vi. Therefore are they all called
upon to praise God, because they afford us so much matter, occasion, and motive
so to do continually. They are the standing and universal witnesses of his
infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness in the world: They are the natural
Preachers of Divinity, whose voice is every where to be heard, declaring the
glory of God, and showing his handy work, as the Psalmist speaks particularly
of the Heavens and Firmament, with the stars of light, Psalm. XIX. There is
neither Speech nor Language, but their Voice is heard among them; Their sound
is gone out to all Lands, and their words to the ends of the world. We may say
of them therefore, God gave the Word; great was the company of Preachers, Psalm.
lxviii. And, among the other works of God, we call more particularly, in the
Benedicite, to these Meteors, to bless and praise, and magnify him for ever. O
ye showrs and dews! -- O ye winds of God! -- O ye Winter and Summer! -- O ye
Frosts and Cold! -- O ye Ice and Snow! Bless ye the Lord, praise him and
magnify him for ever. Which kind of language (by way of Address to insensible
Creatures) whoever are offended at, must first blame the Holy Penman, who set
the Copy of it, Psalm. Clxviii. viii. as I before quoted it; And again, Psalm.
Ciii ult. O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his in all places of his
Dominion!

We see, (as Clarius notes upon the Text) what occasions devout and pious men
take of praising God; and yet blockish and ungrateful worldlings, amidst all
this plenty of Instances, can think of nothing to extort and exercise their
Religion and Thankfulness.

II. We learn from hence, not to murmur and complain, or Repine at whatsoever
comes to pass; for, in so doing, we challenge God foolishly; [*Job I. xxii.]
or Impute Folly and weakness to him. We Blaspheme his Sovereignty, and call
his Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness into question.

And yet This is the Fault, which querulous mortals are, every where almost,
too prone unto. If the weather be hot, says Sabrian, we complain of Drought;
if Rainy, of Deluge and inundation; If the year be Unfruitful, of Dearth and
Scarcity; If fruitful, of Cheapness. De Gub. Dei.
-- And so, If it be cold and piercing, of Bitter Blasts and Winds, etc. --
Every one so acts and speaks, as if he himself could order things better than
they are.

But herein we do only betray our own Ignorance and Rashness, sottishness and
impiety. We judge of Things falsely, by their present appearance, and outside
only, and not by that Reference or Relation which one Thing has unto another,
and all have as parts, to the Good and Benefit of the whole.

We would, in some odd moods, have no Winter, or the least that may be of it;
and so should have but barren and unhealthful Springs and Summers too. As the
Heathen Pliny said wisely, He who prays for none but warm and serene Winters
[Non pro Arboribus vota facit] makes no Good wishes for the Trees: no, nor the
Fruits of the Earth, or the Inhabitants of it either.

Could we once see it, we are infinitely better under the Conduct and
Government of God's Providence, than we could possibly be at our own or other
men's choice.

III. We Learn from hence, to be deeply humbled in the sense of our own
Ignorance of God Almighty's works, and That Infinite wisdom and power, whereby
they are contrived and managed. The more we discern of God's Majesty in them,
the more we shall see also of our own vileness and imperfection; and how
unreasonable it is, for us to take upon our selves peremptorily to determine of
them, which are all beyond our Grasp and comprehension. When Job had spoken
sundry Great Things of God, he adds, These are parts of his ways: But how
little a portion is heard of him; but the Thunder of his power who can
understand? chap. xxvi. xiv. q.d. These are but a small parcel of his works.
For alas! It is very little indeed, that such as we, can understand of him; but
the utmost Force of his power is quite out of our ken.

But then, if we are posed in these vulgar Things, which every were affect our
Senses, how absurd and presumptuous is it for us to pry boldly into more hidden
mysteries, or take upon our selves to contradict any of the Divine Revelations
concerning them! Can thou by scarching find out God? says Zopar well. Can
thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as Heaven; what can
Thou do? Deeper than Hell; what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer
than the Earth, and broader than the Sea. Job. XI. vii, viii, ix, That is, Thou
may as as well go about to take the measure of the height of Heaven, or the
Depth of Hell, the length of the Earth, or Breadth of the Sea, as think to
comprehend the Reasons of God's Doings. Nay, all These have their certain
Bounds and Limits; but He has none.

We shall do well to make an Essay, and try our selves first with the Resolving
of the me mest of these common Instances, which are about us, before we presume
upon those, which are more Remote and Hidden. And by this very means God
himself silenceth Job, showing of him, that He, who found himself Gravel'd and
Nonplus'd in accounting for the meanest of his visible works, should nor dare
to penetrate into the wisdom of his secret Counsels; convincing him all along
of his ignorance and weakness, by showing him, how little he understood of the
most obvious Things of the world. -- And thus also our Blessed Savior deals
with Nicodemus, St. John III. Tho the wind blows, where it lists, says he,
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell, whence it comes, and
whither it goes. So is every one that is born of the Spirit. -- If I have told
you earthly things, and ye believe not; how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things?

Teach us (says Elihu, in a due sense of humane infirmity and blindness) what
we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech by reason of Darkness.
Fair (or Cold) weather comes out of the North: with God is Terrible Majesty.
Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out. He is excellent in power and in
plenty of Justice, Job XXXVII. xix. etc.

Let me here put you in mind therefore of the counsel of the wise son of
Sirach; Seek not out the things, that are too hard for thee; neither search the
things which are above thy strength; but, what is commanded thee, think
thereupon with reverence. For it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes
the things that are in secret. Be not curious in unnecessary matters; for more
things are showed to thee, than men understand. For many are deceived by their
own vain opinion, etc. Eccles. III. xxi. etc. -- And then add that of the
Author of the Book of Wisdom, What man is he that can know the Counsel of God?
or, Who can think, what the Will of the Lord is? For the thoughts of mortal men
are miserable, and our devices are uncertain. For the corruptible Body presses
down the soul; and the earthly Tabernacle weighs down the mind, that museth
upon many things. And hardly do we guess aright at things, that are upon earth,
and with labor do we sind the things, that are before us. But the things, that
are in heaven, who has searched out? And thy Counsel who has known, except
thou give Wisdom, and send thy Spirit from above? Wisd. IX. xiii. etc.

There is more edifying and useful Truth and Philosophy (which indeed should
never be made two distinct things) in saying, that God brings the Rain, and
Hail, and Snow, and Winds out of his Treasures (his to us unknown and
unsearchable Magazines or Storehouses) than in any particular reasons we can
otherwise assign of them without or besides him.

IV. We learn from hence farther, Not to expect or look for any settled or fixed
state of affairs, to last and abide long with us in a world that is continually
uncertain and mutable, liable to such variety of changes from his Almighty
Word, who presides and governs all things in it.

He trains us up, by the very course of his Providence, to look and provide
continually for Changes; even by the circular Revolution of the several Seasons
of the year, and the manifold difference, which we feel and experience time
after time in those Seasons. The Spring introduces Summer, and Summer Autumn,
and Autumn Winter; and then Winter again is succeeded by the more welcome
Spring, etc. But we have a strange Interchange sometimes of Winterly weather
with our Summers, and Summer-weather again with our Winters. -- The day is
thine, and the night is also thine, says the Psalmist; thou have prepared the
Light and the Sun, (that is, the Moon and Sun) thou have set all the borders of
the Earth; thou have made them Summer and Winter. Psalm. LXXIV. xvi, xvii. The
Heavens are thine; the Earth also is thine, Thou have made the North and the
South, Psalm LXXXIX. xii, xiii.

Which if we would allegorize, the Preacher tells us, That God has set the day
of Prosperity and Adversity over against each other, that man should find
nothing after him. Eccles. VII. xiv. That is, Nothing justly to blame or amend
in God's works; and yet be at continual uncertainty what shall befall him, that
he may live the rather in a submissive Dependence upon him, who orders all
according to the Counsel of his own Will; even all things in Measure, Number
and Weight, with the greatest Skill and Exactness, though we know it not, or
cannot give an account of it. Good is set against evil; and Life against Death:
Yea, Look upon all the works of the most High ( says the son of Sirach) and
there are two and two one against another. Eccles. XXXIII. xiv, xv. And again,
All things are double one against another, says he, and he has made nothing
imperfect: But one thing establishes the good of another, Chapter XLII. xxiv, xxv.

V. Therefore, we are from hence trained up, in the midst of our greatest
Serenity and Happiness, in our summer days of Prosperity, to be moderate and
sober; considering, how we, and all we have, and are related to, are at the
Disposal of the sovereign Ruler among the Children of men; Who sends forth
his Commandment upon Earth, and his Word runs very swiftly: who can soon
blacken our Sky with Clouds, and from thence send forth his Artillery of Snow,
and Hail, and Rain and Cold upon us. -- This also is well expressed by the son
of Sirach. When thou have enough, remember the time of Hunger; and when thou
art Rich, think upon Poverty, and Need; from the morning unto the evening the
time is changed; and all things are soon done before the Lord. -- That is, His
Word runs very swiftly. Eccles, XVIII. xxv, xxvi.

Who knows how soon our halcyon days may be turned into a Tempest, our Peace
into Troubles, our Plenty into Want and Scarcity; our Liberty into Thraldom;
our Health into Sickness; and our Life it self into the Shades of Death?

VI. By the same instances we are also cautioned against Impatience and Despair
in the time of our Adversity.

Against Impatience under that hand, which there is no controuling or resisting
of; no struggling with, or striving against; [ineluctabile fatum] that
All-commanding Hand, which wounds and alone can heal us. And then

Against Despair too in the worst of Conditions that can befall us; for there
is nothing too hard for God to alter and remove, [*Sperat infestis, metuit
secundis alteram sortem been praeparatum pectus. Informs hiemes reducit
Jupiter: Idem sumeret: non si male nunc, and olim sic erit. -- ] Horat.]
with less Trouble and Diffienlty than we speak a Word. Be the Season never so
rigorous and extreme, so that we are not able to hold up long under it, yet he
can send out his Word and dissolve all into Softness; blow upon the frozen Ice
with his south wind, and make the waters flow again out of the Rock. He can
hush and lay the stormy Tempest, or turn it into a Calm, our Night into Day,
our Calamity and Sorrow into Joy and Gladness. He can act, what to us looks
very like a Contradiction and Repugnance; make the cold and chilling Snow to
warm the Earth, and feed it with his Ice, as morsels of Bread. He can bring
sweet out of bitter to us. The same vapors he can turn (and daily does) into
contrary appearances; even into moist and fluid Rain, or into hard and stony
Ice, like Crystal, or else into soft and yielding Snow.

Let us not therefore forget the Exhortation, or Consolation, [for the word
(...) signifies both, and both indeed it is] which speaks unto us, as
children; My son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord; nor faint, when
thou art rebuked of him, Hebr. Xll. v.

VII. From hence we may learn the monstrous and unaccountable Vanity of profane
men, who can ever think to thrive in the world, without God's leave and
blessing: When as it is plain, that, not only we our selves subsist by him,
live and move and have our being in him; Live not by Bread alone, but by every
Word of God: But the very common means of our Subsistence, depend altogether
and entirely upon him; upon his Smiles, to vouchsafe, secure, and succeed them,
or upon his Frowns, to disappoint and deprive us of them, or blast them to us,
and render them ineffectual.

There are a great many things, that go to the upholding of us in the world:
And we can have none of them all, unless he please; nor any of them longer,
than he please; nor can any of them do us good further, than he please to bless
it. We too much verify the vulgar Emblem of Swine feeding upon Acorns on the
Ground, without looking up to the Tree that scatters them. We are maintained by
God's heavenly Bounty, but consider not, as we ought, the invisible Hand in the
Clouds, that dispenses all unto us. We pore only upon the Crop before us,
without thinking, how many Causes and Circumstances the Production of it is
owing to. We consider not how the Earth must hear the Corn and Grass, and the
Heavens also hear the Earth; and the God of Heaven and Earth prosper both. It Is
he, that must open the Windows of Heaven, and pour us out a Blessing from
thence, that we may have a Sufficiency or Plenty of all necessaries, Malachi
III. x.

This is the sense and importance of that excellent Psalm, [ Psalm. Cxxvii.]
Except the Lord build the House, the Workman builds in vain. Except the Lord
keep the City, the Watchman also waketh in vain. And, so in like manner, all
the rest of our toil and labor is in vain, unless he speed the Plough, and
give the increase.

Of all sorts of men in the world, the Husbandman, one would think, (and
consequently indeed all others, who are some way or other beholding to him: for
the profit of the earth is for all; the King himself is served by the Field,
Eccles. v. ix.) But of all others, I say, the Husbandman should be Religious,
whose livelihood and success does all along so visibly depend upon God
Almighty's Providence. St. James tells us of his patience, and he recommends it
for a pattern worthy of imitation. Behold the Husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive
the early, and the later rain, Chap. v. vii. -- And he should be as exemplary
for a continual devotion God-wards, who alone can prosper him.

And this has been always the Piety of good men, to utter their good wishes
for themselves and one to another, by directing them still to Heaven for the
success. Whence is that of the Psalmist, Prosper thou the work of our hands
upon us. O prosper thou our handiwork, Psalm. xc. And again, Neither do they,
which go by, say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you; we bless you in the
Name of the Lord, Psalm. cxxix.

Now, let none tell me here, that some thrive as well, who seldom or never call
upon God for it. For these are instances of his patience and long-suffering
only. But they have nothing to trust to, that so they shall. They take not the
right way and method for it. And, when Adversity befalls them, (as frequently
it does) they have the sense of their own guilt to double and increase it;
wrath with their sickness, etc. Eccles. v. xvii.


VIII. How dreadful a thing must it needs be, to provoke God to be our Enemy,
upon whom we not only have so close and near a dependence, but who is so
formidable for strength and power! He is a terrible Enemy indeed, who can, when
ever he please, cut off all Recruits and Succors from us, stop all Reliefs,
starve and pine us out with hunger and thirst, and cold and nakedness. Nay, and
he has many terrible Hosts of strong ones, whom we cannot brave it out
against, at his beck and command; Snow and Hail, and Storm and Tempest, all
fulfilling of his word; prospering and succeeding to what end soever he
commissions them. And who is able to abide his Thunderbolts, or his Frost? His
scorching heat, or pinching cold?

Now, If we are not able to stand before his cold, which is but one of that
numerous Militia, ready pressed for his service, how shall we ever bear up
against himself? As he reasons with Job upon that formidable Instance (which is
but a single Instance too of his power) the great and stupendous Leviathan in
the waters (the Whale or Crocodile) Job xli. x. None is so fierce, that dare
stir him up. Who then is able to stand before me? q.d. If one of my Creatures
is so terrible, how dangerous then must it be to provoke my Majesty! Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? says the Apostle. Are we stronger than he? 1
Cor. x. xxii. Sure we are not in our right senses, if so we do, or think. He is
wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Who has hardened himself against him,
and has prospered? Job ix. iv. And, as it follows a little after, If he will
not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers, do stoop under him. [None can ever
relieve us against him, vaunt he never so much of his prowess, or have we never
so high a conceit and opinion of him.] Verse xiii. Should not therefore his
excellency make us afraid, and his dread fall upon us? as it is, Chap. xiii.
xi. Alas! the leaf may better resist the wind, and the dry stubble the raging
fire, than any mortal contend with him, Ver. xxv. -- The earth shall tremble at
the look of him. If he do but touch the mountains, they shall smoke. -- So the
Psalmist represents the glorious majesty of that God, who decketh himself with
light as with a garment; and spreads out the heavens like curtains; who
lays the beams of his chambers in waters, and makes the clouds his chariot,
and walks upon the wings of the wind, etc. Psalm. Civ.

It Is madness in us to continue in rebellion against and defiance of such an
Enemy as he is, the Almighty Lord of so many mighty Hosts. And, upon the same
account,

IX. It must needs be our best policy and greatest wisdom, to yield and submit
our selves betimes unto him; forthwith to seek peace and reconciliation and
agreement with him, that he may be our Friend, and we his Favorites: As the
men of Tire and Sidon, we read, desired to make peace with Herod, because their
Country was nourished by the King's Country, Acts XII. xx. But, what a
contemptible thing was Herod's displeasure, had he contrived them the worst
Revenge he could, compared unto God's?

What King going to war against another King ( says our Blessed Savior)
sits not down first, and consulteth, whether he be able with Ten Thousand to
meet him that comes against him with Twenty Thousand? (that is, double his
number) or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an
Embassage, and desires Conditions of Peace, St. Luke XIV. xxxi, xxxii. But we,
alas! (such is our weakness) have not so much as Unites to oppose his Myriads,
and Thousands of Thousands, his Numberless Legions with; And he is not a great
way off from us neither, but always at hand, incompassing all our ways.
Nevertheless (such is His pity and compassion toward us) [II Cor. V. xx.
He himself makes us gracious overtares of Peace and amity. And therefore we
are strangely besotted, if we do not forthwith close with and accept them; yea,
if we do not press earnestly and speedily, that the Articles of Agreement
between us may be signed and sealed, that we may henceforward become his Allies
and Confederates.

For then we shall have as much Comfort from hence, as otherwise it speaks
dread and terror to us. Then may we at all times encourage our selves with
David, in the Lord our God; and make his name a strong Tower to betake our
selves unto for safety and security. The Blessing of the Omnipotent God of
Salvation will be then upon us. This we find to have been the Churches
Considence. God is our Refuge, and strength, a very present Help in Trouble:
Therefore will we not Fear. The Lord of Hosts is with us: The God of Jacob is
our Refuge, Psalm. XLVI. Even, the Almighty God, who Creates and Governs all
things with his word only.

This is the Use, which God makes of his Almighty power; to set up the Meek,
and bring down the ungodly down to the ground; as it is before the Text, verse
vi. and again verse xi. His delight is in them that fear him, and put their
Trust in his mercy. -- And we have evidence enough, that he is never at a loss
to succor and relieve, protect and bless his Faithful Servants, whom he
delights in; whether by means, or without means, or through unlikely and
contrary men's. [Vide Scultet. in Loc.]


[ Per media.] He can fill many Thousands with a few Loaves and Fishes only. So
Christ sent forth his word, that is, commanded those Loaves and Fishes to be
multiplied; And his word ran very swiftly; so that all the Multitude eat of
them and were satisfied, and many Baskets of Fragments were yet left.

[ Sine Mediis.] So, when the Israelites in the Desert had neither Bread to
Eat, nor Water to Drink, nor Flesh, according to their Appetite; God sent but
forth his word, and the Clouds above rained Manna, and the Rock below gushed
out Water, and the Wind brought them Quails in abundance.

[ Contrariis Mediis.] So Elias in scarcity was fed by the Raven, a Bird of
Prey bringing him Meat; And Jonah swallowed up, and preserved and cast safe on
Shore by a Greedy Whale.

Ascribe ye Power to the God of Israel, with the Psalmist: His Worship and
Strength is in the Clouds, O God, wonderful art thou in thy holy places, even
the God of Israel! He will give Strength and Power unto his people. Blessed be
God, Psalm. LXVIII. xxxiv, xxxv.

X. How well grounded is the Piety of our Church, which sends us upon all
occasions to that God from whom all good things do come, for all the Blessings
we at any time want; and sends us back again also to him with our Thanksgivings
for whatsoever we receive. Here is the Foundation of all our Collects for Rain,
or Fairweather; for the averting of Famine or Scarcity, and vouchsafing us
Plenty in the room of it. For Succor amidst Storms and Tempests at Sea. For
Healthful and Fruitful Seasons. That he would give and preserve unto us the
kindly Fruits of the Earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them, etc. -- Here
is the ground both of our Prayers and Doxologies. And this is the chief Design
of our Rogation days, whereto the Homilies then appointed are very agreeable.
The doctrine of which is, That all good things do come from God; as the Collect
also for that season does recognize.


Lastly, To conclude all, This Doctrine of Divine Providence, as it is laid
down before us, is indeed a School and Nursery of universal Virtue, with
reference to our selves, and others, and toward God himself.

I. With reference to our selves, in that all things are so managed by God, as
to train us up to the Exercise of all manner of Prudence and Forecast, and
good Husbandry, in making seasonable Provisions for a future Supply, and
demeaning our selves with all honest Care and Circumspection, that neither in
our Health, nor Estate, we suffer Prejudice through our Idleness, Sloth, or
Inconsiderateness. It reads us over the w^se man's Lecture, Prove. Vl. vi. etc.
Go to the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise: which having no
Guide, Overseer, or Ruler, provideth her Meat in the Summer, and gathers her
Food in the Harvest. -- There is no such ingenious Tutor of all sorts of
Prudence as Necessity. [Quis expedirit Psittaco suum (...)? Magister artis,
ingenique largitor, venture.] Persius.


II. Next, as to others, it trains us up to all the bowels of Compassion and
Charity, in consulting, what we can, for their Indigence and Infirmities, to
help and enable them to support themselves and Families under those pinching
Extremities, which do sometimes attend the Season of the year: With Dorcas to
make Coats and Garments for the poor Widows, Acts IX. xxxix. And, with the
hospitable Batharians at Melita, to show all possible Kindness to ship wracked
Strangers, kindling them a Fire, and taking them into shelter, because of the
present Rain and Cold. As St. Paul records that lovely instance of heathen
Goodness and Humanity, Acts XXVIII. i, ii. -- How great a Charity and
Benificence is it to contribute toward the Relief of the necessitous, in Fuel
and Cloths, and Harbor, as well as Food, to render the bitter winter
tolerable! -- And

III. It trains us up, especially, to the religious Fear and Obedience of God.

Let all the earth fear the Lord, says the Psalmist, let all the inhabitants
of the world stand in awe of him: as I quoted it before, and that from a like
Topic, Psalm XXXIII. And he takes notice, whether we make that use of our
Reason, as we should, to infer this Duty from hence, and lets us know how ill
he resents it, if we do not so. Witness that Complaint against his people for
this neglect, Jerem. V. xxiv. Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear
the Lord our God, who gives us Rain, the former and the latter Rain in its
season, and reserveth to us the appointed Weeks of the Harvest. -- That is, Who
crowns the year with his Goodness; feeds us with the Fat of Wheat; and for
the Production of that, commands the Clouds and Seasons, etc.

But, This is not all, I would here suggest; This farther offers it self to our
Thoughts. That it is highly Reasonable we should learn Obedience to Him, whose
commands all Things else so readily obey. Even, Snow, and Hail, and Ice; Storm
and Tempest, fulfilling his word.

We should therefore learn Obedience from them, that we be not Heteroclites and
Exceptions from the rest of the Creation; unto whom it might be expected, that
we, who are in a Form above them, should rather set a good Example. And we
should learn this Obedience the more, because, what in them is Necessity only,
may in us be a Virtue, and a Virtue highly to be rewarded from our Lord and
Masters Bounty. -- And still the more, because the Ties of Gratitude are upon
us. We are obliged to pay this Tribute of Thankfulness to him, whom all Things
else obey for our Benefit and Welfare, to maintain us in Health, and Strength,
and Cheerfulness, that we may do him service; And that without anxious and
diffident cares for our own Provision; what we shall Eat, and what we shall
Drink, and wherewith we shall be clothed: Si^e the Lord, we serve, is both
able and willing to supply us with all these Necessaries; Being such in power
and Wisdom, and Goodness, as we have heard him described.

Who sends his commandment upon Earth, and his word runs very swiftly: who
gives Snow like wool, and scatters the Hoar-frost like Ashes; who casts
forth his Ice, like Morsels; so that none is able to withstand his cold: who
sends out his word again, and melts them; blows with his South Wind, and
the Waters flow.

Now, unto this Supreme All-perfect Being, the Creator, Preserver, and Ruler of
the world, the Almighty and Everlasting God, who Governs all Things both in
Heaven and Earth, be ascribed by us, as is most due, All Honor and Glory, and
Praise, and Adoration, with Thanksgiving, and Obedience, for ever and ever.
Amen.

The END.
Books lately printed and sold by Ric. Chiswell.
DOctor Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England. Dr.
Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texts. Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to
the State of the Church in the three first Centuries. Dr. Sherlock's Practical
Discourse of Religious Assemblies. -- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets
Unreasonableness of Separation. -- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet, in answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion.
The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York, Octavo.
Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings. Mr. John Cave's
Gospel to the Romans: Mr. Camfield's two Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation,
Octavo. Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons never before extant. Mr. John Cave's
two Sermons of the duty and benefit of submission to the Will of God in
Afflictions, Quar. Dr. Crawford's serious expostulation with the Whiggs in
Scotland, Quarto. A Letter giving a Relation of the present State of the
Difference between the French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added,
The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protestation.
Published by Dr. Burnet. Mr. Tanner's Primordia: or the Rise and Growth of the
first Church of God described, Octavo. A Letter writ by the last Assembly
General of the Clergy of France to the Protestants, inviting them to return to
their Communion; together with the Methods proposed by them for their
Conviction. Translated into English and Examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo
Animadversions on a late Treatise entitled, The Protestant Reconciler, 8o. A
Disswasive from Revenge, by Dr. Stratford Dean of St. Asaph. Octavo. Dr. Cave's
Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church by Bishops,
Metropolitans, and Patriarchs: more particularly concerning the ancient Power
and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, and the encroachments of that upon
other Sees, especially Constantinople, Octavo. -- His History of the Lives,
Acts, Death, and VVritings of the most eminent Fathers of the Church that
flourished in the Fourth Century: (being a Second Volumn) wherein, amongst
other things, is an Account of Arianism, and all other Sects of that Age. With
an Introduction, containing an Historical Account of the State of Paganism
under the First Christian Emperors, Folio.
Books in the Press.
DOctor John Lightfoot's Works in English, in two Volumns, Folio. D. Spenceri
Dissertationes de Ratione Rituum Judaicorum, etc. Fol.

