A CHRISTIANS Sure Anchor and Comfort In Times of Troubles and Dangers.

BEING A SERMON Preached on the 16. day of June.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

(...), 6 H. 19.

Similiter quomodo Anchoram habemus Navim in Tempestate Maris, sic spes Hominem
in Tentationibus mundi sundat. Sedul. Coment in L^c^^.

It is good that a man Should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
God, Lam. ^.26.

LONNON, Printed for S. Keble at the Turks-head in Fleet Street, 1693.

A CHRISTIANS Sure Anchor and Comfort In Times of Troubles and Dangers.
Romans xii. 12. Rejoicing in Hope.


THe Condition of Man in this World is such, that he often meets with many
things which cause trouble and vexation of Spirit; and the best of Men are not
secure from such evils, but as liable as others to be afflicted with them. The
Wisdom of God sees it fit very frequently to lay heavy burdens of afflictions
upon his own Servants, to let them be entangled in the nets of wicked Men, to
be caught in the Briars of Tribulation, and to make them pass through the Fiery
Trial of Persecution: And were it not that they had a prospect of Deliverance
from such Miseries, and of a Blessed Reward, after they have patiently endured
for a while, they would sink under the weight of such Calamities: but when they
consider that the things wherein they find present trouble, and sorrow, are
designed for their Advantage another way, that they will have a speedy and a
happy end; and that God has prepared unspeakeable Joy, Rest, and Peace, to
succeed these Miseries, and to reward the Courage and Patience of those, who
bear them with Submission and Resignation to his will: These thoughts beget joy
and comfort in their Souls, and make them esteem themselves happy in those
circumstances, wherein to the Eye of the World they appear most miserable. The
hope of what is to come makes their present afflictions seem light and turns
their heaviness into Joy. The Expectation of Gods gracious Deliverance out of
their troubles, and the blessedness of a future Life which they are assured of,
does overballance all the thoughts of their present hardships and ill
treatments in the World, and makes them look on 'em as matter of Joy; and not
of grief.

Such a hope as this, which causes Rejoicing, is that which St. Paul speaks of
in this place; a hope of heavenly Felicity wherewith God has promised to
reward the good Services, the Sufferings, and Constancy of pious Christians.
With this hope he bids these Christians to comfort themselves, and rejoice in
it. And this Advice was very proper for their condition: for they had then many
Enemies and Persecutors who hated them and their Religion, and brought great
calamaties upon 'em, not suffering them to rest and enjoy a peaceable Life,
because they had embraced and did constantly profess the Doctrine of
Christianity which by the Ignorant and unconverted World was then every where
spoken against.

In this afflicted persecuted State they had need of encouragement, to make
them to persevere in the Love and profession of that Truth, for which they then
suffered. And how does the Apostle encourage them? He bids 'em Hope, He advises
'em to look forward upon the Blessedness of a Future Life, the Joys and Glories
of Eternity, and to expect them as their portion, and Reward of their
Sufferings: And so in respect of this Felicity to come, which God had assured
them of, to rejoice in the midst of all their worldly troubles, knowing that
these would not last long, and that the End of 'em would be peace.

One would have thought it a very unreasonable Exhortation, to bid those
Christians Rejoice, who had then so much Cause to be sorrowful; when they
suffered so many reproaches, underwent so many hardships, and were in all
respects so spitefully treated by their Enemies. But in the worst of times and
Conditions, Christianity has wherewithal to comfort its Professors, and make
their Hearts joyful: and this is one of those Spiritual Comforts; viz. the Hope
of Everlasting Happiness, this outweighs the heaviest burden of worldly
Calamities, and gives us a cheerful Spirit in the midst of our greatest
Sufferings. For, when we have this hope, we consider, not so much what we are
at present, as what we shall be; we are the less concerned at the Evils we
suffer in this World, because we see beyond 'em, and do expect a Blissful State
where we shall suffer no more; where we shall have no more Sorrow, and where
all Tears shall be wiped off from our Eyes.

Since therefore such a hope as this is so useful and beneficial to us in our
Christian course, I shall make it my business at this time to show you,

First, The Nature of it.

Secondly, What you must do to get it.

And Thirdly, Of what use and advantage it will be to you at all times, but
especially in Adversity, and when you are under such Trials as these Christians
heretofore were.

I. Hope (as it is a Christian Grace) is nothing else but a comfortable
Expectation of the fulfilling of Gods Promises, belonging to this life, or that
to come. Here in my Text the Apostle speaks of hope as it respects the Promises
of God belonging to a future Life.

By this Description of Hope which I have given you, the Nature of it does
appear, and also the objects and the ground of it.

As for the Nature of it, it is an expectation and earnest looking for of
something to come. For hope that is seen is not hope, (says the Apostle) for
what a Man sees, why does he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not,
then do we with patience wait for it. Romans 8.24, 25. So that it must be
something Future, about which our hope is employed.

And then for the Object of it, that is always some good thing, which we
believe we shall be the better for, and will, in some measure conduce to our
happiness for we never hope for things that will hurt us, and make us
miserable; but on the contrary deprecate all such evils, and wish they may
never come upon us. Again.

If we consider the ground of this Hope, it is built upon the promise of God,
which he has made to pious Men concerning things to come, concerning the
Felicity of a Future State; Now these Promises of God being a most sure and
certain ground, our hope that is built upon them must be so too. And herein
this Grace of Hope differs from all other expectations, which have no other
Foundation but the words or Promises of Men, who sometimes want Power, and
sometimes Will to perform what they promise: and so the hopes of them who depend
upon them must needs be uncertain. But God is powerful to do whatever he
promises, and he is true and just and will never fail nor deceive those, who
put their confidence in his word. Thy word is true from Everlasting, says the
Psalmist. He is faithful that has promised, says the Apostle So that the Hope
of Christians for Heavenly bliss is as well grounded as it can be, in that it
is bottomed upon the most sure and infallible promises of God.

Now an Eternal heavenly Life being the best thing we hope for, we are most
unwilling to be disappointed of it, because such a disappointment of the
greatest Felicity would make us most miserable. We therefore desire to have it
secured to us, and made as certain as possible: and so it is; we are as certain
of it as the Promises of God can make us; and if there be nothing of
Fallibility or deceit in them (as certainly there is not,) then are we as sure
as we can be of Future happiness, and our hopes grounded upon those promises
are most rational, certain, and full of Comfort.

Take away this hope from Men, and and what are they then but wretched
Creatures, tho they have all the felicity this World affords? for it is not all
the wealth and glory of the Earth, that can bear up Men's Spirits, and make them
comfortable, under a despair of Heaven. The thoughts of not inheriting the
Kingdom of Heaven will take away all the delight and comfort of Earthly
possessions. Whatever we have here, it is as nothing to us, if we have not hopes
of enjoying something better hereafter. Yea, when this hope of Heaven is not
quite destroyed, but only lessened or weakened by some doubts and fears; what a
trouble is this to us, and how witless are our minds, whilst those doubts and
Fears remain! my next work therefore is to show you, how to have the joy and
comfort of a sure and well grounded hope.

II. You have heard that the Promises of God are the ground of this hope of
Everlasting Life: Now, that which gives us a right to those Promises and an
interest in them, does also make us partakers of this hope. How then do we come
to have an interest in the privileges of Felicity, but by performing the
conditions upon which those promises are made. Those Conditions are proposed to
us in the Gospel, viz. Faith, Repentance and Christian Obedience: In general a
pious and Religious Life answerable to the Gospel Rules. Upon Condition of such
a Christian behavior God has promised us Eternal Life, and if we are
qualified with such a behavior, we may hope; and be confident, that God will
perform his promise of Blessedness to us.

But, because men are apt to deceive themselves with false hopes of heart, it
concerns us to know, when this hope is true and when it is false.

For our Direction and Information in this particular, St. John has given us a
certain rule, whereby to know this. Every man that has this hope purifieth
himself. 1 Ep. 3. V. 3. i. e. He lives a pure and virtuous life, abhorring the
filthiness of Vice and Impiety. For he considers that the promises of Felicity
are conditional, and that God is not bound to perform them unless they do their
Duty; and so they endeavor to discharge that by living as purely and piously
as they can, that nothing may be wanting on their parts to hinder them from
obtaining the promised happiness of the World to come. Thus a true hope is
discernible from any other, by a holy Christian conversation which always
attends it.

So that when a man reflects upon his Life, and finds that he sincerely
endeavors to please God by holy obedience, by a strict, innocent pure
conversation, and upon that, hopes to be saved, and enjoy the promised Reward
of Gods heavenly Kingdom, his hope is then sure and well grounded, he hopes for
nothing but what the Gospel encourages, and God commands him to hope for.

But, that others do hope for Heaven and the glories of it, who have not
sufficient ground and warrant for such an expectation, is certain, and commonly
to be observed. Men that do not purify themselves, nor take any care to reform
their lives, and adorn them with Christian virtues; but on the contrary indulge
themselves in all vicious impurities and Unchristian practices, even these do
hope nevertheless to be saved, and boldly lay claim to the promises of Eternal
happiness.

But tho these do so, their Claim is not just, nor their hope rational: yea,
it is not so properly Hope, as Presumption; an expectation of some good, which a
Man has no good ground nor Reason to expect. Such is the hope of all ungodly
Men, that take pleasure in Sin, and hate to be reformed, and we are expressly
told in Holy Scriptures that their Hope shall perish.

What good then can it do them to hope for that, which they are never like to
obtain, and that which it is against all Reason for them to expect. They do but
deceive themselves by such false and groundless hopes; and this is a very
pernicious way of deceiving themselves too: for when they presume they shall be
happy and go to Heaven, tho they live impiously; They go on in that
Presumption, and never take care to reform their lives; and so at last come to
a fearful end, and dye in their Sins.

And therefore such persons as are thus bold and forward to declare their hope
of Heaven, should consider the Danger of such a destructive confidence, and not
run themselves into ruin by a false and flattering hope of being saved.

Methinks it should be easy to reason such Men out of their vain Confidence,
yea, they might easily reason themselves out of it. For thus a Man might say to
himself I am told in Holy Scriptures, that there is such a blessing as Eternal
Life. I find every where that God has promised this Blessing only to them that
live piously. If then I am none of those pious ones, to whom those promises are
particularly made; how can I expect to have a share in that Felicity? If God
has promised it to none, but to such as Love and Obey him; He has not not
promised it to me who am none of that Number: And if I am none of that Number
included in the promise, I am very unreasonable to think or hope I shall be
happy with them; I am Presumptus to expect the Blessing without performing the
Duty required in order thereunto. I promise my self that I shall be happy, but
my promise is nothing without Gods promise: This I have not, therefore the
other can do me no good, I do hope, but I have no ground for my hope; and so it
can be but a vain expectation, and I shall surely deceive my self by it, and
instead of a Blessing I shall in the end meet with a miserable Disappointment.
Yea, it is yet more reasonable for me to think so; because I hope not only
without any promise of God to encourage me, but also against the Express Word
of God in his many Threatenings and Denuntiations of misery to such wretched and
Unreform'd Sinners as I am: Either God says true, in those threatenings, or he
does not: If he does, (as is most certainly to be believed) then what reason
can I have to hope, I shall be saved, tho I continue in my Sins, when God says
the contrary? Can I be happy whether he will or no? Can I force my way into
Heaven? And take possession of that glorious Inheritance? I cannot be so
foolish to think so, and therefore the result of all is this, That before I can
have a sure, and rational, and well-grounded hope I must reform my wicked life,
and resolve to serve God in Holiness and Righteousness all my days; then, and
not till then, shall I be able to hope for Heaven with any Comfort and
Assurance. After this manner therefore let us reason with our selves, and by
this means we shall perceive our Folly and Danger, in relying upon weak and
unwarantable Foundations, and in flattering our selves with vain hopes of
Heaven, while our vicious Conversations carry us directly toward Hell.

By what I have said so plainly on this point you cannot but understand, when
your hope of Heaven is true and when false; when it has good Foundation, and
when it has none. And therefore unless you are willing to cheat your selves you
cannot be deceived in this matter. Consider your lives what they are, and
thence judge of your hope: If they be good and comformable to the Rules of
Christian Piety, then is your Hope warrantably grounded; if they be wicked your
hope is vain and deceitful. It Is, true wicked men may hope for the Fruition of
a better life, but it is upon this supposition, that they first change their
manners and live Religiously: but while they remain wicked, and resolve never
to be otherwise, their trusting in God, and hoping for his mercy and Salvation,
is no Virtue, but a great Sin, it is a presumptuous dependence which God is
never pleased with. It is a piece of high Injustice to expect and lay claim to
that whereto they have no right. Let us be sure therefore to lay a good
Foundation for our hope, that in the end we may not be disappointed. It Is of
the greatest concernment to us to endeavor not to be deceived in this matter.
He that lives well may hope well; as for others, their Expectations are Vain.

III Let us now see of what use this Christian hope is to those that have it,
and what advantages men receive by it. It serves to many good purposes:

First, At all times it encourages men to serve God diligently, cheerfully, and
constantly: For when we have a prospect of so great Happiness as is prepared in
the Kingdom of Heaven, and have hope of enjoying it, upon Condition we
carefully perform our Christian Duties. We think it well worth our labor to
qualify our selves for that highest Felicity, by conforming to God's Will in
all points of holy obedience. For the hope that is set before us, we think it
not reasonable to grudge the performance of any thing that is in our power:
This makes Religious Duties more easy and pleasant to us: We set about them
with cheerfulness, when we hope for so great a Reward after we have done 'em.
Thus as a good Life encourages us to hope, so that hope encourages to persevere
in a good Life.

2. The Hope of Heaven and Eternal Joys makes men put a just estimate upon
things here below, and not to overvalue, or too much love this present World.
For, when men have such excellent and eternal enjoyments in their Eye and
Expectation, they make no great account of earthly transitory things, nor
settle their affections upon them, but passing by these lesser matters, aspire
with the greatest ardour of affection after those enjoyments wherein they are
sure of perfect Satisfaction, and of which they are never to be dispossessed.

Whereas we see other men whose hopes of future blessedness is either very
languishing, or who have none at all, to be very so licitous about the World,
to love it excessively, and to prize it as their chief Felicity. They mind not
the things of Eternity, because they want this hope to elevate their minds and
draw them off from the World. Happy then are they, who have this hope, which
makes them mind and regard most the things that are most regardable, and keeps
them from being Slaves to the World, and overprizing Vanities and trifling
enjoyments.

3dly. In all afflictions and worldly adversities this Hope comforts and
supports us: Whatever our condition be, how deplorable soever our circumstances
in the World; yet we are not dejected, we cannot think our selves unhappy,
while we have this Hope. For whatever our troubles and sufferings are, our hope
of being delivered from them, and enjoying a State of perfect Peace and
Happiness afterward, makes us bear 'em patiently and cheerfully. If we are
hated and evil-entreated in the World; if we Suffer Poverty, Shame, Reproach,
or any thing else, that the malice of wicked men can bring upon us, we are the
less moved at these things, because if we suffer 'em upon a good account, we
are sure we shall be gainers by 'em, and in that respect we can look upon 'em
as matter of rejoicing, as the Apostles and primitive Christians did who
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer in a good cause, for the Name
of Christ, and the Sake of true Religion. This St. Paul declares, Romans 5, 2, 3,
4, 5. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. And not only so but we glory
in Tribulation also, knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope; and Hope makes not ashamed.

Men who have this Hope of the Glory of God will never be ashamed of those
Sufferings, which they know are the way to it: But for the Sake of that eternal
weight of Glory, which they hope for, will rejoice in them. And thus St. Paul
advised these Christians, To rejoice in this Hope, and to be patient in
Tribulation, both which are here joined together. This was nothing but what
their Savior had done before, who for the Joy that was set him, endured the
Cross despising the shame. And unless we take up our Cross and follow him,
(When it is necessary so to do,) He tells us we are not worthy of him. To him
therefore let us look in all our Sufferings as to the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, as to the true Promiser of Heavenly Glory, and not be ashamed to
tread in those holy Steps of his which will surely lead us to a blessed
Eternity, and bring us to Sit down with him at the right hand of God. If ever
we should come to be in such Circumstances as these Christians were, when St.
Paul gave 'em this Exhortation, if we should be persecuted for Christ's Sake,
and Suffer the Hatred of the World for our adherance to the truth; if we should
be deprived of our Goods, of our Liberty, and all that we esteem of in this
World: Let us not be ashamed to Suffer, nor murmur at our Condition, but on the
contrary, rejoice and glory in such sufferings, which are indeed the shame of
our Enemies, but our glory who endure 'em. Let us hope, to the end and Comfort
our selves with the many promises of a Blessed Reward. Holding fast the
Profession of our Faith without wavering, knowing that he is Faithful that has
promised, and being well assured, that he will abundantly recompense all that
we Suffer for him, And for our light afflictions which are but for a moment,
will reward us with an eternal and exceeding weight of Glory.

Now to, etc.

FINIS.
Advertisement,
Christian Supports under the Terrors of Death. By a Divine of the Church of
England.

St. Paul 's Triumph in his suffering for Christ, with some Directions how a
Christian ought to behave himself under, and may reap Advantage by sufferings.
By Matthew Bryan. L. L. D.


