A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY at READING.

By WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL for N. DAVIS. 1644.

2. TIM. Chap. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This know also, that in the last days
perilous times shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,

Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good,

Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God;

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.


TO a discourse upon these words, I cannot think of any fitter introduction
then that wherewith our Savior sometime began a Sermon of his, This day is
this Scripture fulfilled. And I would to God there were not great occasion to
fear that a great part of it may be fullfilled in this place.

Two things are contained in it. First the real wickedness of the generality
of the men of the latter times, in the four first verses. For by men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous boasters, proud, etc. I conceive is meant, men
generally shall be so, otherwise this were nothing peculiar to the last, but
common to all times, for in all times some, nay many have been lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. Secondly, we have here the formal
and hypocritical godliness of the same times, in the last verse, having a
form of godliness. but denying the power thereof; which latter ordinarily and
naturally accompanies the former. For as the shadows are longest when the
Sun is lowest* and as vines and other fruit trees bear the less fruit, when
they are suffered to luxuriate and spend their sap upon superfluous suckers,
and abundance of leaves: So commonly we may observe both in Civil
conversation, where there is great store of formality, there is little
sincerity: and in Religion where there is a decay of true and cordial piety,
there men entertain and please themselves, and vainly hope to please God with
external formalities, and performances, and great store of that righteousness
for which Christ shall judge the world.

It were no difficult matter to show that the truth of Saint Paul's prediction
is by experience justified in both parts of it, but my purpose is to restrain
my self to the latter, and to endeavor to clear unto you, that that in our
times is generally accomplished: That almost in all places the power of
Godliness is decayed and vanished, the form and profession of it only
remaining: That the spirit, and soul, and life of Religion, is for the most
part gone, only the outward body or carcass, or rather the picture or shadow
of it, being left behind: This is the Doctrine which at this time I shall
deliver to you; and the use, which I desire most heartily you should make of
it, is this. To take care that you confute, so far as it concerns your
particulars, what I fear I shall prove too true in the general.

To come then to our business without further complement, let us examine our
ways, and consider impartially what the Religion of most men is.

We are baptized in our infancy, that is, as I conceive, dedicated and devoted
to Gods service, by our Parents and the Church, as young Samuel was by his
Mother Anna, and there we take a Solemn vow, To forsake the Devil and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous desires
of it, to forsake also all the carnal desires of the flesh, and not to follow
nor be led by them. This vow we take when we be children and understand it not:
and how many are there who know, and consider, and regard what they have vowed,
when they are become men, almost as little as they did being children: consider
the lives, and public Actions of most men of all conditions in Court, City,
and Country, and then deny it if you can, that those three things which we have
renounced in our baptism, the profits, honors, and pleasures of the world,
are not the very Gods which divide the world amongst them, are not served more
devoutly, confided in more heartily, loved more affectionately, then the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose name we are baptized? deny if you can
the daily and constant employment of all men, to be either a violent
prosecution of the vain pomp and glory of the world, or of the power, riches,
and contemptible profits of it, or of the momentany or unsatisfying pleasures
of the flesh, or else of the more diabolical humors of pride, malice,
revenge, and such like: and yet with this empty form we please and satisfy our
selves, as well as if we were lively borne again by the Spirit of God, not
knowing or not regarding what Saint Peter has taught us, That the Baptism
which 1 Pet. 3. 21.
must save us, is, Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good consciene unto God.

When we are come to years capable of instruction, many (which is lamentable
to consider,) are so little regarded by themselves or others, that they
continue little better then Pagans in a Common wealth of Christians, and know
little more of God or of Christ, then if they had been bred in the Indies. A
lamentable case, and which will one day lie heavy upon their account, which
might have amended it and did not. But many I confess are taught to act over
this play of Religion, and learned to say, Our Father which art in Heaven: and,
I believe in God the Father Almighty: but where are the men that live so, as if
they did believe in earnest, that God is their Almighty Father? where are they
that fear him, and trust him, and depend upon him only, for their whole
happiness, and love him, and obey him as in reason we ought to do to an
Almighty Father? who if he be our Father, and we be indeed his children, will
do for us all the good he can, and if he be Almighty, can do for us all the
good he will; and yet how few are there, who love him with half that affection
as Children usually do their natural Parents, or believe him with half that
simplicity, or serve him with half that diligence? And then for the Lords
prayer, the plain truth is, we lie unto God for the most part clean through
it, and for want of desiring indeed what in word we pray for, tell him to his
face as many false tales as we make Petitions. For who shows by his
endeavors, that he desires heartily that Gods name should be hallowed, that
is, holily, and religiously worshipped and adored by all men? That his Kingdom
should be advanced and enlarged? That his blessed will should be universally
obayed? Who shows by his forsaking sin, that he desires so much as he should
do the forgivenes of it? Nay who does not revenge upon all occasions, the
affronts, contempts, and injuries put upon him, and so upon the matter curse
himself, as often as he says forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us? How few depend upon God only for their daily Bread, viz.
the good things of this life, as upon the only giver of them, so as neither to
get nor keep any of them, by any means which they know or fear to be
offensive unto God? How few desire in earnest to av^yed temptation? Nay who
almost is there, that takes not the Devils Office out of his hand and is not
himself a tempter both to himself and others? Lastly who almost is there that
desires heartily and above all things so much as the thing deserves to be
delivered from the greatest evil, sin, I mean, and the anger of God? Now
beloved this is certain, he that imployes not requisite industry, to obtain
what he pretends to desire, does not desire indeed, but only pretends to do so:
He that desires not what he prays for, prays with tongue only and not with
his heart, indeed does not pray to God, but play and dally with him. And yet
this is all which men generally do, and therefore herein also accomplish this
prophecy, having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof.

And this were ill enough, were it in private, but we abuse God Almighty also
with our public and solemn formalities, we make the Church a Stage whereon to
act our parts and play our pageants, there we make a profession every day of
confessing our sins with humble, lowly, and obedient hearts, and yet when we
have talked after this manner, 20, 30, 40, years together, our hearts for the
most part continue as proud, as impenitent, as disobedient as they were in the
beginning. We make great Protestations when we assemble and meet together to
render thanks to God Almighty, for the benefits received at his hands; and if
this were to be performed with words, with Hosann'as and Hallelujahs and gloria
patri's and Psalms and Hymns, and such like outward matters, peradventure we
should do it very sufficiently: but in the mean time with our lives and
actions, we provoke the Almighty, and that to his face, with all variety of
grievous and bitter provocations; we do daily and hourly such things as we
know, and he has assured us to be odious unto him, and contrary to his nature;
as any thing in the world is to the nature of any man in the world; and all
this upon poor, trifling, trivial, no temptations. If a man whom you had
dealt well with, should deal so with you, one whom ye had redeemed from the
Turkish slavery, and instated in some indifferent good inheritance, should make
you fine speeches, entertain you with Panegyrickes, and have your praises
always in his mouth, but all this while do nothing that pleases you, but upon
all occasions, put all affronts and indignities upon you, would you say this
were a thankful man? Nay would you not make heaven and earth ring of his
unthankfullnesse, and detest him almost as much for his fair speeches, as his
foul actions. Beloved such is our unthankfullnesse to our God and Creator, to
our Lord and Savior; our tongues ingeminate, and cry aloud Hosanna, Hosanna,
but the louder voice of our lives and actions is crucify him crucify him: We
Court God Almighty, and complement with him, and profess to esteem his
service perfect freedom, but if any thing be to be done, much more if any
thing be to be suffered for him, here we leave him, we bow the knee before him,
and put a reed in his hand, and a Crown upon his head, and cry, Hail King of
the Jews: But then with our Customary sins, we give him gall to eat, and
vinegar to drink, we thrust a spear in his side, nail him to the Cross, and
Crucify to our selves the Lord of Glory. This is not the Office of a friend to
bewail a dead friend with vain lamentation. Sed quae voluerit meminisse, quae
mandaverit exequt, to remember what he desires, and execute what he commandes;
so said a dying Roman to his friend, and so say I to you, To be thankful to
God is not to say, God be praised, or, God be thanked, but to remember what he
desires, and execute what he commands, to be thankful to God is certainly to
love him, and to love him is to keep his Commandments, so says our Savior
Ioh. 19. If ye love me, keep my Commandments: if we do so, we may justly
pretend to thankfulness, which believe me is not a word, nor to be performed
with words* But if we do not so as generally we do not, our talk of
thankfulness is nothing else but mere talk, and we accomplish Saint Paul's
prophecy herein also: Having a form of thankfulness, but not the reality*
not the power of it.

If I should reckon up unto you, how many direct lies every wicked man tells to
God Allmighty as often as he says Amen, to this form of godliness, which our
Church has prescribed, If I should present unto you all our acting of piety,
and playing of humiliation, and personating of devotion in the Psalms, the
Letanies, the Collects, and generally in the whole service, I should be
infinite: And therefore I have thought good to draw a veil over a great part
of our Hypocrisy, and to restrain the remainder of our discourse to the
Contrariety between our profession and performance, only in two things, I
mean Faith and Repentance.

And first for Faith, We profess, and indeed generally, because it is not safe
to do otherwise, that we believe the Scripture to be true, and that it
contains the plain and only way to infinite and eternal happiness* But if
we did generally believe what we do profess, if this were the language of our
hearts as well as our tongues, how comes it to pass that the Study of it is so
generally neglected? Let a book that treates of the Philosophers stone,
promise never so many mountains of gold, and even the restoring of the golden
age again, yet were it no mervaile if few should study it, and the reason is,
because few would believe it. But if there were a book extant, and ordinary to
be had* as the Bible is* which men did generally believe to contain a plain,
and easy way for all men to become rich, and to live in health and pleasure,
and this worlds happiness, can any man imagine that this book would be
unstudied by any man? and why then should I not believe, That if the Scripture
were firmly and heartily believed, the certain and only way to happiness
which is perfect and eternal, it would be studied by all men, with all
diligence? Seeing therefore most Christians are so cold and negligent in the
study of it, prefer all other business, all other pleasures before it, is
there not great reason to fear that many who pretend to believe it firmly,
believe it not at all, or very weakly and faintly? If the General of an Army
or an Ambassador to some Prince or State were assured by the King his Master,
that the transgressing any point of his Commission should cost him his life,
and the exact performance of it, be recompensed with as high a reward as were
in the Kings power to bestow upon him can it be imagined that any man who
beleives this, and is in his right mind can be so supinely and stupidly
negligent of this charge, which so much imports him, as to oversee through want
of care any one necessary Article or part of his Commission: especially if it
be delivered to him in writing, and at his pleasure to peruse it every day?
Certainly this absurd negligence is a thing without example, and such as
peradventure will never happen to any sober man to the worlds end: and by the
same reason, if we were firmly persuaded that this book does indeed contain
that charge and Commission, which infinitely more concerns us, it were not in
reason possible, but that to such a persuasion, our care and diligence about
it, should be in some measure answerable: seeing therefore most of us are so
strangely careless, so grossly negligent of it, is there not great reason to
fear, that though we have professors and protestors in abundance, yet the
faithful, the truly and sincerely faithful, are in a manner failed from the
children of men. What but this can be the cause that men are so commonly
ignorant of so many articles, and particular mandates of it, which yet are as
manifest in it as if they were written with the beams of the Sun. For example;
how few of our Ladies and Gentlewomen, do or will understand, that a
voluptuous life, is damnable and prohibited to them? Yet Saint Paul says so
very plainly; She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. 1 Timothy 5.
6.
I believe this case divinely regards not the Sex, He would say He as well as
She, if there had been occasion. Howfew of the Gallants of our time do or
will understand, that it is not lawful for them to be as expensive and costly
in apparel, as their means or perhaps their credit will extend unto? which is
to sacrifice unto vanity, that which by the Law of Christ is due unto Charity;
and yet the same Saint Paul forbids plainly this excess even to women -- also
let women (he would have said it much rather to the men) 1 Timothy 2. 9.
array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and modesty, not with
embroidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel; and to make our
ignorance the more inexcusable, the very same rule is delivered by Saint Peter
also, 1 Epist. 3. 3.

How few rich men are or will be persuaded that the Law of Christ permits them
not to heap up riches for ever, nor perpetually to add house to house, and
land to land, though by lawful means, but requires of them thus much charity
at least, that ever while they are providing for their Wives and Children, they
should out of the increase wherewith God blesses their industry, allot the
poor a just and free proportion? and when they have provided for them in a
convenient manner, (such as they themselves shall judge sufficient and
convenient in others) that then they should give over making purchase after
purchase, but with the surplussage of their revenue beyond their expense,
procure as much as lies in them, that no Christian remain miserably poor: few
rich men I fear are or will be thus persuaded; and their daily actions show as
much; yet undoubtedly, either our Saviors general command, of loving our
neighbors as our selves, which can hardly consist with our keeping vainly, or
spending vainly what he wants for his ordinary subsistence, lays upon us a
necessity of this high liberality, or his special command concerning this
matter, Quod superest da^^ pauperibus, that which remains give to the poor,
or that which St. John says 1. Ep. 3. 17. reaches home unto it. Whosoever
has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up the
bowels of his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? which
is in effect, as if he had said* He that keeps from any brother in Christ
that which his brother wants and he wants not, does but vainly think that he
loves God, and therefore vainly hope that God loves him.

Where almost are the men that are or willbe persuaded the Gospel of Christ
requires of men Humility, like to that of little Children, and that under the
highest pain of damnation? That is, that we should no more overvalue our
selves, or desire to be highly esteemed by others, no more undervalue, scorn,
or despise others, no more affect preeminence over others, then little children
do, before we have put that pride into them, which afterward we charge wholly
upon their natural corruption* and yet our blessed Savior requires nothing
more Rigidly, nor more plainly then this high degree of humility, verily, says
he, I say unto you he speaks to his disciples affecting high places and
demanding which of them should be greatest* except ye be converted and become
as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Would it not be strange news to a great many, that not only adultery and
fornication, but even uncleanenesse and lasciviousness, not only idolatry, and
witchcraft, but hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, and contentions, not only
murders, but envying: not drunkenesse only, but revelling, are things
prohibited to Christians, and such as if we forsake them not, we cannot inherit
the Kingdom of heaven? and yet these things, as strange as they may seem* are
plainly written; some of them by S. Peter 1 Ep. 4 chapter But all of them by S.
Paul, Gal. 5. 15. Now the works of the flesh are manifest. which are these,
adultery, fernication, uncleanenesse, lasciviousness, etc of the which I tell
you before as I have told you in times past, that they who do such things shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God.

If I should tell you that all bitterness and evil speaking (nay such is the
modesty and gravity which Christianity requires of us) foolish talk and
jesting are things not allowed to Christians, would not many cry out these are
hard and strange sayings who can hear them? and yet as strange as they may
seem, they have been written well nigh 1600 years, and are yet extant in
very legible Characters in the Epis^. to the Ephesians. the end of the 4. and the
beginning of the 5 chap.

To come a little nearer to the business of our times, the chief Actours in
this bloody Tragoedy, which is now upon the Stage, who have robbed our
Sovereign Lord the King of his Forts, Towns, Treasure, Ammunition, Houses, of
the Persons of many of his Subjects, and (as much as lies in them) of the
hearts of all of them: Is it credible that they know and remember and consider
the example of David recorded for their instruction? Whose heart smote him when
he had but cut off the hemme of Saul's garment.

They that make no scruple at all of fighting with His Sacred Majesty, and
shooting Musketts and Ordnance at Him (which sure have not the skill, to choose
a Subject from a King) to the extreme hazard of his Sacred Person, whomby all
possible obligations they are bound to defend, do they know think you the
general rule without exception or limitation left by the Holy Ghost for our
direction 1 Samuel 26. 9.
in all such cases, Who can lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
innocent? or do they consider his Command Prove. 24. ^1.
in the Proverbs of Solomon. My Son fear God and the King, and meddle not
with them that desire change. Or his counsel in the Book of Ecclesiastes I
counsel thee to keep the Eccles 8 ^
Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God, or because they
possibly may pretend that they are exempted from, or unconcerned in the
commands of obedience delivered in the Old Testament, do they know and remember
the precept given to all Christians by S. Peter. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him? or that terrible sanction of
the same command, They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, left
us by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, who then were the miserable
Subjects of the worst King, the worst man, nay, I think I may add truly, the
worst beast in the world, that so all Rebels mouths might be stopped for ever,
and left without all color or pretense whatsoever to justify resistance of
Sovereign power. Undoubtedly if they did know and consider and lay close to
their hearts, these places of Scripture, or the fearful judgment which
befell Cor^h, Dathan, and Abiram, for this very sin which now they commit and
with a high hand still proceed in, it would be impossible but their hearts
should smite them, as David's did, upon an infinitely less occasion, and
affright them out of those ways of present confusion, and eternal damnation.
And then on the other side they that maintain the Kings righteous cause with
the hazard of their lives and fortunes, but by their oaths and curses, by
their drunkenness, and debauchery, by their irreligion and prophannesse, fight
more powerfully against their party, then by all other means they do or can
fight for it, are not I fear very well acquainted with any part of the Bible,
but that strict caution which properly concerns themselves in the book of
Leviticus, I much ddoubt they have scarce ever hard of it, When thou go to
war with thine Enemies, then take heed there be no wicked thing in thee, not
only no wickedness in the cause thou maintainest, nor no wickedness in the
means by which thou maintainest it, but no personal impieties in the persons
that maintain it. Beloved for the former two, we have reason to be full of
comfort and considence; For what is our cause? what is that which you fight,
and we pray for? but to deliver the King and all his good Subjects out of the
power of their Enemies, who will have no peace but with their slaves and
vassalls: and for the means by which it is maintained, it is not by lying, it
is not by calumnies, it is not by running first our selves, and then forceing
the people to universal perjury? but by a just war, because necessary, and
by as fair and merciful a war, as if they were not Rebels and Traitors you
fight against, but Competitors in a doubtful Title. But now for the third part
of the caution, that, to deal ingeniously with you, and to deliver my own
soul, if I cannot other men's, that I cannot think of with half so much
comfort as the former; but seeing so many Ionasses imbarqued in the same ship,
the same cause with us, and so many Achan's entering into Battle with us
against the Cananites, seeing Publicanes and sinners on the one side, against
Scribes and Pharisees on the other; on the one side Hypocrisy, on the other
profaneness; no honesty nor justice on the one side, and very little piety on
the other; On the one side horrible oaths, curses, and blasphemies; On the
other pestilentlyes, calumnies, and perjury: When I see amongst them the
pretense of reformation, if not the desire, pursued by Antichristian,
Mahumetan, devilish means; and amongst us little or no zeal for reformation
of what is indeed amiss, little or no care to remove the cause of Gods anger
toward us, by just* lawful, and Christian means; I profess plainly I
cannot without trembling consider what is likely to be the event of these
distractions; I cannot but fear that the goodness of our cause may sink
under the burden of our sins: And that God in his justice, because we will not
suffer his Judgments to atcheive their prime scope and intention, which is our
amendment and reformation, may either deliver us up to the blind zeal and fury
of our Enemies, or else, which I rather fear, make us instruments of his
justice each against other, and of our own just and deserved confusion. This I
profess plainly is my fear, and I would to God it were likewise the fear of
every Soldier in His Majesty's Army; but that which increases my fear is,
that I see very many of them have very little or none at all: I mean not that
they are fearelesse toward their Enemies, (that is our joy and Triumph) but
that they show their courage even against God, and fear not him, whom it is
madness not to fear. Now from whence can their not fearing him proceed; but
from their not knowing him, their not knowing his will and their own duty? not
knowing how highly it concerns Soldiers above other professions to be
religious, and then if ever when they are engaged in dangerous adventures, and
every moment have their lives in their hands, When they go to war with their
Enemies, then to take heed there be no wicked thing in them.

You see* beloved, how many instances and examples I have given you of our
gross ignorance of what is necessary and easy for us to know, and to these it
were no difficult matter to add more. Now from whence can this ignorance
proceed, but from supine negligence? and from whence this negligence, but from
our not beleiving what we pretend to believe? For did we believe firmly and
heartily, that this Book were given us by God for the rule of our Actions, and
that obedience to it were the certain and only way to eternal happiness, it
were impossible we should be such enemies to our selves, such Traitors to our
own souls, as not to search it at least with so much diligence, that no
necessary point of our duty plainly taught in it could possibly escape us. But
it is certain, and apparent to all the world, that the greatest part of
Christians, through gross and wilful negligence remain utterly ignorant of
many necessary points of their duty to God, and man: and therefore it is much
to be feared, that this book, and the Religion of Christ contained in it,
among an infinite of professors, labors with great penury of true beleivers.

It were an easy matter (if the time would permit) to present unto you many
other demonstrations of the same conclusion; but to this drawn from our
willing ignorance of that which is easy and necessary for us to know, I will
content my self to add only one more taken, from our voluntary and
presumptuous neglect to do those things which we know and acknowledge to be
necessary.

If a man should say unto me that it concerns him as much as his life is
worth, to go presently to such a place, and that he knows but one way to it,
and I should see him stand still or go some other way, had I any reason to
believe that this man beleives himself? Quid Verba audiam, cum facta videam,
says he in the Comedy, Protestatio contra factum non valet, says the Law,
and why should I believe, that, that man beleives obedience to Christ the only
way to present and eternal happiness, whom I see wittingly, and willingly,
and constantly, and customarily to disobay him? The time was that we all knew
that the King could reward those that did him service, and punish those that
did him dis-service, and then all men were ready to obey his Commands, and he
was a rare man that durst do any thing to his face that offended him. Beloved,
if we did but believe in God, so much as most Subjects do in their King, did we
as verily believe, that God could and would make us perfectly happy if we serve
him, though all the world conspire to make us miserable, and that he could and
would make us miserable if we serve him not, though all the world should
conspire to make us happy, how were it possible that to such a faith our lives
should not be conformable? Who was there ever so madly in love with a present
penny, as to runn the least hazard of the loss of 10000l a year to gain it,
or not readily to part with it upon any probable hope or light persuasion, much
more a firm belief that by doing so he should gain 100000ls, Now beloved the
happiness which the servants of Christ are promised in the Scripture, we all
pretend to believe, that it exceeds the conjunction of all the good things of
the world, and much more such a portion as we may possibly enjoy, infinitely
more then 10000l a year, or 100000l does a penny; for 100000l is but a penny
so many times over, and 10000l a year is worth but a certain number of pence,
but between heaven and earth, between finite and infinite, between eternity
and a moment, there is utterly no proportion, and therefore seeing we are so
apt upon trifling occasions, to hazard this heaven for this earth, this
infinite for this finite, this all for this nothing, is it not much to be
feared, that though many of us pretend to much faith, we have indeed very
little or none at all? The sum of all which has been spoken concerning this
point is this. Were we firmly persuaded that obedience to the Gospel of
Christ, is the true and only way to present and eternal happiness, (without
which faith no man living can be justified) then the innate desire of our own
happiness could not but make us studious inquirers of the will of Christ, and
conscionable performers of it; But there are (as experience shows) very few,
who make it their care and business to know the will of Christ, and of those
few again, very many, who make no conscience at all of doing what they know:
therefore though they profess and protest they have faith, yet their
protestations are not to be reguarded against their actions, but we may safely
and reasonably conclude what was to be concluded, That the Doctrine of Christ
amongst an infinite of professors, labors with great scarcity of true, and
serious, and hearty believers, and that herein also we accomplish St. Paul's
prediction, having a form of godliness, but denying etc.

But perhaps the truth and reality of our repentance may make some kind of
satisfaction to God Almighty for our hypocritical dallying with him in all the
rest; truly I should be heartily glad it were so: but I am so far from being
of this faith, that herein I fear we are most of all hypocritical, and that
the generallity of professors is so far from a real practice of true
repentance, that scarce one in an hundred understands truly what itis.

Some satisfy themselves with a bare confession and acknowledgement either
that they are sinners in general* or that they have committed such and such
sins in particular, which acknowledgement comes not yet from the heart of a
great many, but only from their lips and tongues: For how many are there that
do rather complain and murmr that they are sinners, then acknowledge and
confess it? and make it upon the matter rather their unhappiness and
misfortune, then their true fault, that they are so? such are all they who
impute all their commissions of evil to the unavoydable want of restraini^g
grace, and all their omission of good to the like want of effectual exciting
grace. All such as pretend that the Commandments of God are impossible to be
kept any better then they are kept, and thus the world, the Flesh and the
Devil are even omnipotent enemies, and that God neither does nor will give
sufficient strength to resist and over come them. All such as lay all their
faults upon Adam and say with those rebellious Israelites (whom God assures
that they neither had nor should have just reason to say so) That their Fathers
had eaten sour grapes, and their teeth were set on edge. Lastly all such as
lay all their sins upon divine prescience, and predestination, saying with
their tongues, O what wretched sinners have we been, but in their hearts how
could we help it, we were predestinate to it, we could not do otherwise.

All such as seriously so persuade themselves, and think to hide nakedness
with such figg leaves as these, can no more be said to acknowledge themselves
guilty of a fault, then a man that is borne blind or lame, with the stone or
gout can accuse himself of any fault for being borne so; well may such a one
complain and bemone himself, and say, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this unhappiness! but such a complaint is as far from being
a true acknowledgement of any fault, as a bare acknowledgement of a fault is
far from true repentance: for to confess a fault is to acknowledge, that
freely and willingly, without any constraint, or unavoydable necessity, we have
transgressed the law of God, it being in our power by Gods grace to have done
otherwise. To aggravate this fault is to confess we have done so when we might
easily have avoided it, and had no great nor violent temptation to it; to
pretend any great difficulty in the matter is to excuse and extenuate it: but
to say that all things considered it was absolutely impossible for you to avoid
it, is flatly to deny it. Others there are that think they have done enough,
if to confession of sin they add some sorrow for it; if when the present fit
of sin is past, and they are returned to themselves, the sting remaining
breed some remorse of conscience, some complaints against their wickedness and
folly for having done so, and some intentions to forsake it, though vanishing
and ineffectuall. These heate-dropps, this morning dew of sorrow, though it
presently vanish, and they return to their sin again upon the next
temptation as a dog to his vomit when the pang is over, yet in the pauses
between, while they are in their good mood, they conceive themselves to have
very true, and very good repentance; so that if they should have the good
fortune to be taken away in one of these Intervalla, one of these sober moodes,
they should certainly be saved; which is just as if a man in a quartane Ague,
or the stone, or gout, should think himself ridd of his disease as often as he
is out of his fit.

But if repentance were no more but so; how could St. Paul have truly said,
that godly sorrow works repentance? every 1 Cor 7. 10.
man knows that nothing can work it self. The Architect is not the house
which he builds, The Father is not the Son which he begets, the Tradesman is
not the work which he makes, and therefore if sorrow, godly sorrow, works
repentance, certainly sorrow is not repentance: the same Saint Paul tells us
in the same place, that the sorrow of the world works death, and you will
give me leave to conclude from hence, therefore it is not death, and what shall
hinder me from concluding thus also, Godly sorrow works repentance, therefore
it is not repentance.

To this purpose it is worth the observing that when the Scripture speaks of
that kind of repentance, which is only sorrow for something done, and wishing
it undone, it constantly uses the word (...) to which forgiveness of sins
is no where promised. So it is written of Judas the son of perdition, Matthew.
27. 5. (...) he repented and went and hanged himself, and so constantly in
other places. But that repentance to which remission of sins and salvation is
promised is perpetually expressed by the word (...), which signifies a through
change of the heart and soul, of the life and actions, (...) Mat. 3. 2. which
is rendered in our last translation, Repent for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand, But much better, because freer from ambiguity in the entrance to our
Common Prayer Book- Amend your lives for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.
From whence by the way we may observe, that in the judgment of those holy and
learned Martyrs, repentance and amendment of life are all one: And I would to
God the same men, out of the same care of avoiding mistakes, and to take away
occasion of cavilling our Liturgy from them that seek it, and out of fear of
encourageing carnal men to security in sinning, had been so provident, as to
set down in terms the first sentence taken out of the 18th. of Ezekiel, and
not have put in the place of it an ambiguous, and (though not in it self, yet
accidentally; by reason of the mistake to which it is subject,) I fear very
often a pernicious paraphrase; for whereas thus they make it: At what time
soever a Sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I
will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord; The plain
truth, if you will hear it, is, the Lord does not say so, these are not the
very words of God, but the paraphrase of men: the words of God are as follows
-- If the wicked turn from all the sins which he has committed, and keep all
my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right he shall surely live, he
shall not dye, where I hope you easily observe that there is no such word as*
At what time soever a sinner does repent, etc. and that there is a wide
difference between this (as the word repent usually sounds in the ears of the
people) and turning from all sins, and keeping all Gods Statutes, that indeed
having no more in it but sorrow and good purposes, may be done easily and
certainly at the last gasp, and it is very strange that any Christian, who
dies in his right senses, and knows the difference between heaven and hell,
should fail of the performing it: but this work of turning, keeping, and
doing is (though not impossible by extraordinary mercy to be performed at last)
yet ordinarily a work of time, a long and a laborious work (but yet heaven is
very well worth it) and if you mean to go through with it, you had need go
about it presently. Yet seeing the Composers of our Liturgy thought fit to
abreviate, Turning from all sin, and keeping all Gods Statutes, and doing
that which is lawful and right, into this one word, repenting, it is easy and
obvious to collect from hence, as I did before, from the other place, that by
repentance they understood not only sorrow for sin, but conversion from it.
The same word (...) Matt. 12. 42. is used in speaking of the repentance of the
Ninivites and how real, hearty, and effectual a conversion that was you may
see Jonas 3 from the 5 to the last verse. The People of Ninive believed God,
and put on sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them, for word
came to the King of Niniveh, and he arose from his throne, and he cast his Robe
from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes; and he caused it
to be proclaimed and published throughout Niniveh, by the decree of the King
and of his nobles, saying. Let neither man nor beast, heard, nor flock, taste
any thing, let them not feed nor drink water, but let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, yea let every one turn from his
evil way, and from the violence which is in their hands, who can tell if God
will turn and repent, and turn away his fierce anger that we perish not?

Which words contain an excellent and lively pattern for all true penitents to
follow* and whereunto to conform themselves in their humiliation and
repentance. And truly though their be no Jonas sent expressly from God to cry
unto us Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, yet seeing the mouth of
Eternal truth has taught us, that a Kingdom divided is in such danger of
ruin and destruction, that, morally speaking, if it continue divided it cannot
stand, and seeing the strange and miserable condition of our Nation at this
time, may give any considerable man just cause to fear, that as in Rehoboams
case, so likewise in ours, The thing is of the Lord, intending to bring his
heavy judgment upon us, for our great sins, and our stupid, and stupendous
security in sinning, and to make us instruments of his designed vengeance, one
upon another; peradventure it would be a seasonable and necessary motion to be
made to our King and his Nobles* To revive this old Proclamation of the King of
Nineveh, and to send it with authority through His Majesty's dominions, and to
try whether it will produce some good effect: who can tell if God will turn
and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Who can
tell whether he that has the hearts of King and people in his hand, and
turns them whithersoever he thinks best, may not upon our repentance take
our extremity for his opportunity, and at last open our eyes that we may see
those things that belong to our peace, and show us the way of Peace, which
hitherto we have not known: but this by the way, for my purpose I obs^^^e that
this repentance which, when the sword of God was drawn, and his arm advanced
for a blow, stayed his hand, and sheathed his sword again, was not a mere
sorrow for their sins, and a purpose to leave them, nay it was not only
laying aside their gallantry and bravery, and putting on sackcloth and sitting
in ashes, and crying mightily unto God, of which yet we are come very short*
but it was also and that chiefly, their universal turning from their evil
way, which above all the rest was prevalent and effectual with God Almighty,
for so it is written, And God saw their works that they turned from their evil
way, and God repented him of the evil that he said he would do, and he did it
not.

In the Gospel of S. Luke. cap. 24. The condition of the new Covenant, to
which remission of sins is promised, is expressed by the word (...)* Thus it
behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and that ((...)) Repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his name, which place if ye
compare with that in the Gospel of S. Matthew. Go teach all Nations baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all whatsoever I shall command you. It will be no
difficulty to collect, that what our Savior calls in one place (...)
repentance, that he calls in another observing all that he has commanded;
which if repentance were no more but sorrow for sin, and intending to leave
it, certainly he never could nor would have done: And as little could S. Paul
Act. 20. 21. profess that the whole matter of his preaching was nothing else
but (...) Repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: It being
manifest in his Epistles, he preaches and presses every where, the necessity of
mortification, regeneration, new, and sincere obedience, all which are
evidently not contained under the head of Faith, and therefore it is evident he
comprised all these under the name of Repentance.

In which words moreover it is very considerable, as also in another place,
Heb. 6. where among the fundamentalls of Christianity the first place is given
to (...) I say it is very considerable, that though the word may not very
absolutely be rendered repentance, yet we shall do much right to the place and
make them much more clear and intelligible, if instead of repentance we had
put conversion as it is in some of the best Latin translations: so for
example, if instead of repentance to God Act. 20. and repentance from dead
works in the Epistle to the Heb. which our English tongue will hardly bear;
we should read conversion to God, and conversion from dead works, every one
sees it would be more perspicuous and more natural, whereas on the other side
if instead of repentance we should substitute sorrow (as every true and genuine
interpretation may with advantage to the clearenesse of the sense be put in
place of the word interpreted) and read the places sorrow toward God, and
sorrow from dead works, it is apparent that this reading would be unnatural,
and almost ridiculous, which is a great argument that (...) to which
forgiveness of sins is promised in the Gospel, is not only sorrow for
sin, but conversion from sin.

And yet if it be not so, but that heaven may be purchased at easier, and
cheaper rates: how comes it to pass that in the new Testament, we are so
plainly and so frequently assured, that without actual, and effectual
amendment, and newenesse of life, without actual* and effectual
mortification, regeneration, sanctification, there is no hope, no possibility
of Salvation.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down Matthew. 3, 10.
and cast into the fire, So S. John Baptist preaches repentance; it is not then
the leaves of a fair profession, no nor the blossoms of good purposes and
intentions, but the fruit, the fruit only that can save us from the fire,
neither is it enough not to bear ill fruit, unless we bring forth good.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven, so our
Savior Matthew. 7 21. And again after he had delivered his most divine precepts
in his Sermon on the mount (which Sermon contains the substance of the Gospel
of Christ:) he closes up all with saying: he that hears these sayings of
mine and does them not (and yet these were the hardest sayings that ever he
said) I will liken him to a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand,
that is his hope of Salvation, upon a sandy and false ground when the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
it fell, and great was the fall of it.

They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
So S. Paul. Gal. 5. 24. they then that have not done so, nor crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts, let them be as sorrowful as they please,
let them intend what they please, they as yet are none of Christ's, and good
Lord what a multitude of Christians then are there in the world that do not
belong to Christ?

The works of the flesh says the same S. Paul. are manifest Gal. 5, 19, 20,
21,
which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lascivi ousnesse,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, revellings, of the which I tell you
before, as I have told you in times past, that they which do such things shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. He dothnot saythey which have done such things
shall not be saved, but manifestly to the contrary -- Such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but you are sanctified: but he says; they which do such
things, and without amendment of life shall continue doing them, shall not be
excused, by any pretense of sorrow and good purposes. They shall not inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven.

And again in another Epistle, know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor revilers shall inherit the Kingdom
of God.

In Christ Jesus (says the same Saint Paul in other places) nothing avails
but faith: nothing but a new creature, nothing but keeping the Commandments of
God; it is not then a wishing but a working faith, not wishing you were a new
Creature, nor sorrowing you are not, but being a new creature; not wishing you
had kept, nor sorrowing you have not kept, nor purposeing vainly to keep, but
keeping his Commandments must prevail with him.

Follow peace with all men and holiness (says the Divine Author of the
Epistle to the Heb.) without which no man shall see the Lord.

Saint Peter in his 2d. Epistle, commends unto us a golden chain of Christian
perfections; consisting of these linkes, Faith, virtue, knowledge, Temperance,
patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, charity: and then adds -- He that
lacks these things is blind, and knows not that he was purged from his old
sins. Let his sorrow be never so great, and his desires never so good* yet if
he lack these things, he is blind, and was purged from his old sins, but is
not.

Lastly Saint John, he that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is
pure, the meaning is not with the same degree of purity, for that is
impossible, but with the same kind, the same truth of purity, he that does not
purify himself may, nay does flatter himself, and without warrant presume
upon Gods favor, but this hope he has not; and again, Little Children, let
no man deceive you* he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous; And thus you see all the divine Writers of the New Testament with
one consent and one mouth proclaim the necessity of real holiness, and
labor together to disinchant us, from this vain phansy, that men may be
saved, by sorrowing for their sin and intending to leave it. without
effectual conversion and reformation of life, which, it may well be feared*
has sent thousands of souls to hell in a golden dream of heaven.

But is not this to preach works as the Papists do* no certainly it is not;
but to preach works as Christ and his Apostles do, it is to preach the
necessity of them, which no good Protestant, no good Christian ever denied, but
it is not to preach the merit of them which is the error of the Papists.

But is it not to preach the Law in time of the Gospel? no certainly it is
not: for the Law forgives no sins but requires exact obedience, and curses
every one which from the beginning to the end of his life, continues not in
all things which are written in the Law to do them; but the Gospel says, and
accordingly I have said unto you, that there is mercy always in store, for
those who know the day of their visitation, and forsake their sins in time of
mercy, and that God will pardon their imperfections in the progress of
holiness, who miscall not presumptuous and deliberate Sins by the name of
imperfections; but seriously and truly endeavor to be perfect; only I
forewarne you that you must never look to be admitted to the wedding feast of
the Kings Son, either in the impure rags of any customary sin, or without
the wedding garment of Christian holiness; only I forewarne you that
whosoever looks to be made partaker of the joys of heaven, must make it the
chief, if not the only business of his life, to know the Will of God and to
do it; that great violence is required by our Savior for the taking of this
Kingdom, that the race we are to run is a long race, the building we are to
erect is a great building, and will hardly, very hardly be finished in a day,
that the work we have to do of mortifying all vices; and acquiring all
Christian virtues, is a long work; we may easily defer it too long, we
cannot possibly begin it too soon. Only I would persuade you, and I hope I
have done, that that repentance which is not effectual to true and timely
conversion will never be available unto eternal salvation. And if I have
proved unto you that this is indeed the nature of true repentance, then
certainly I have proved withal, that that repentance wherewith the generality
of Christians content themselves, notwithstanding their great professions what
they are, and their glorious protestations of what they intend to be, is not
the power but the form; not the truth but the shadow of true repentance, and
that herein also we accomplish Saint Paul's prediction, having a form of
godliness, etc.

And now what remains but that (as I said in the beginning,) I should humbly
entreat and earnestly exhort every man that has heard me this day, to confute
in his particular what I have proved true in the general. To take care that
the sin of formality, though it be the sin of our times, may yet not be the
sin of our persons, that we satisfy not our selves with the shadows of
Religion, without the substance of it, nor with the form of godliness without
the power of it.

To this purpose I shall beseech you to consider, that though sacrificing,
burning incense, celebrating of set festivalls, praying, fasting, and such
like, were under the Law, the service of God commanded by himself, yet
whenever they proceeded not from, nor were joined with the sincerity of an
honest heart, he professes frequently almost in all the Prophets, not only
his scorn and contempt of them all, as fond, empty, and ridiculous; but also
his hating, loathing, and detesting of them as abominable and impious.

The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to God, Prove. 15. 8. What have I to
do with the multitude of your Sacrifices? says the Lord, Esaias the first, I am
full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed heasts, when ye
come to appear before me, who required this at your hands? Bring no more
vain oblations: Incense is an abomination to me, I cannot suffer your new
moons, nor sabbaths, nor solemn days, it is iniquity even your solemn
assemblies: My soul hates your new moons, and your appointed feasts, they
are a burden to me, I am weary to bear them; and when you shall stretch out
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers I
will not bear, for your hands are full of blood.

And again Isa. 66. 3. He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man, he that
sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs neck, he that offers an
oblation as if he offered Swines flesh, he that burned incense, as if he
blessed an Idol; and what is the reason of this strange aversion of God from his
own Ordinances? it follows in the next words, they have chosen their own
ways, and their soul delights in their abominations.

Terrible are the words which he speaks to the same purpose in the prophecy
of Amos chap. 5. v. 21, 22, 23. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies, though you offer me burnt offerings and
meat offerings, I will not accept them, nor will I regard your peace offerings.

Now beloved, if this hypocrisy, this resting in outward performances, were so
odious to God under the law, a religion full of shadows, and ceremonies,
certainly it will be much more odious to do so under the Gospel, a religion
of much more simplicity, and exacting so much the greater sincerity of the
heart, even because it disburdens the outward man of the performance of Legal
rites and observances. And therefore if we now under the Gospel, shall think
to delude God Allmighty, as Micholl did Saul, with an Idol hand somely dressed
instead of the true David. If we shall content and please our selves, with
being of such or such a Sect or profession, with going to Church, saying, or
hearing of Prayers, receiving of Sacraments, hearing, repeating or preaching of
Sermons, with zeal for Ceremonies, or zeal against them, or indeed with any
thing besides constant piety toward God, Loyalty and obedience toward our
Sovereign, justice and charity toward all our Neighbors, temperance,
chastity, and sobriety toward our selves, certainly we shall one day find,
that we have not mocked God, but our selves, and that our portion among
hypocrites shall be greater, then theirs.

In the next place let me entreat you to consider the fearful judgment which
God has particularly threatened to this very sin of drawing nigh unto him
with our lips, when our hearts are far from him: It is the great judgment
of being given over to the spirit of slumber and security, the usual
forerunner of speedy desolation and destruction, as we may see in the 29 chap.
of Esaiah, from the 9 to the 14 verse. Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye ont,
and cry, they are drunken but not with wine, they stagger but not with strong
drink: for the Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and
has closed your eyes. The prophets, and your rulers, the seers has he
covered. and after, at the 14 verse The wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Certainly this
judgment if ever it were upon any people, we have cause to fear it is now
upon us. For if the spirit of deep sleep were not upon us, how could we
sleep so securely even upon the brinke of the pit of perdition? how could we
proceed on so confidently in our mirth and jollity, nay in our crying sins
and horrible impieties, now when the hand of God is upon us, and wrath is gone
out and even ready to consume us? and if the wisdom of our wise men were not
perished, how were it possible they should so obstinately refuse the security
offered of our laws, liberties, and religion by the Kings Oath, by his
execrations on himself, and his posterity in case he should violate it, by the
oaths of all his Ministers not to consent to or be instruments in such a
violation, by the so much desired Trienniall Parliament, from which no
transgressor can possibly be secure; and instead of all this security, seek
for it by a civil war, the continuance whereof must bring us to destruction
and desolation, or else he has deceived us by whom we are taught. That a
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

Now what was the sin which provoked this fearful judgment? What but that
which I have labored to convince you of, and to dissuade you from, even the
sin of hypocrisy; as we may see at the 12th. verse: Wherefore says the Lord,
for as much a^ this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips
do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me; and their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore behold I will proceed
to do a mervailous work amongst them: for the wisdom of their wise men
shall perish, etc.

Consider Thirdly what woes, and woes, and woes our Savior thunders out
against the Scribes and Pharisees for their hypocrisy, Woe be unto you Scribes,
and Pharisees Hypocrites, and again and again, Woe be unto you Scribes, and
Pharisees, Hypocrites: Beloved if we be hypocrites as they were, Tith mint and
Cumin, and neglect the weighty matters of the Law, judgment and justice and
mercy, as they did: Make long prayers, and under a pretense devour Widows
houses, as they did; Wash the outside of the dish and platter, while within we
are full of ravening and wickedness, write Gods Commandments very large and
fair upon our Phylacteries, but shut them quite out of their hearts: Build the
Sepulchers of the old Prophets, and kill their successors, in fine, if we be
like painted Sepulchers as they were, outwardly garnished and beautiful, but
within full of dead men's bones and rottenness, we are then to make account
that all these woes belong to us, and will one day overtake us.

Consider lastly the terrible example of Ananias and Sapphira, and how they
were snatched away in the very act of their sin, and that their fault was (as
the Text tells us) that they lied unto God. Beloved, we have done so a thousand
thousand times* our whole lives (if sincerely examined) would appear, I fear,
little less but a perpetual lie; hitherto God has been merciful to us, and
given us time to repent, but let us not proceed still in imitating their fact:
lest at length we be made partakers of their fall.

God of his infinite mercy prevent this in every one of us, even for his Son
our Savior Jesus Christ's sake; by whom and with whom, in the unity of the
holy Spirit, be all honor and glory to the eternal Father world without end:

Amen.
FINIS.

