THE Rise, Growth, and Danger OF SOCINIANISME. Together with A plain discovery
of a desperate design of corrupting the Protestant Religion, whereby it
appears that the Religion which has been so violently contended for (by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and his adherents) is not the true pure Protestant
Religion, but an Hotchpotch of Arminianisme, Socinianisme and Popery. It is
likewise made evident, That the Atheists, Anabaptists, and Sectaries so much
complained of, have been raised or encouraged by the doctrines and practices of
the Arminian, Socinian and Popish Party.

By FR. CHEYNELL late Fellow of Merton College.

Vt Judai olim volebant audire Populus Domini cum essent non populus, Osc. 1.
9. jactabant patrem Abraham cum essent ex Diabolo, Job. 8. 44. Sic Sociniani
quoque titulum Christianorum sibi arrogant, and Fratres nostri Spirituales
haberi petunt, cum unum nobiscum Patrem Deum Trin-unum minime agnoscant.

Vide D. Stegman. Photinianism. Disp. 1. p. 4. 5. (...), inquit Philosophus;
parum itaque Rationales sunt Sociniani qui deteriora sequuntur.

LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord Viscount Say and Seal, etc. Peace.
NOBLE SIR,
LEarned Casaubon assures me that when the Greek Vide Annotat. Casaub. in G.
Nys. Epist. ad Amb. and Bas.

Pacem ecclesia, pacem Christi amissa^ quaerere, and turbata^ componere, and
repertam tenere curavimus Sed hujus ipsius fieri nos vel participes vel
autores, nec te^poris nostri peccata me ruerunt -- nec Antichristi ministri
sunt passi, qui Pace sua, id est, Impietatis sua unitato se jactant, agentes se
non ut Christi Episcopos, sed Antichristi Sacerdotes. Hilarious contra Auxentium.


Fathers wrote to a wicked man they were wont to salute him with that
Apostolical benediction, Grace be unto you: but when they wrote to a religious
man they used the ordinary Hebraisme, Peace be unto you, because Peace does
suppose Grace, and does comprehend all outward blessings. I am sure your very
enemies gave you this testimony at Oxford, that you were a man of Peace, but as
it follows in the Psalm, when you spoke for peace they were for war. Psalm
120. 7. All that your Honor desired was, that (as it became gowned men) they
would take up their books, and lay down their arms; that they would not
protect Delinquents any longer, but yield them up to a legal trial. You
desired that nothing might be tumultuously attempted, but all things orderly
reformed. You engaged your Honor to them that what Plate you found in places
fit for Plate, the Treasury or the Buttery should remain untouched, and most
Societies engaged themselves by a solemn promise, that they would never give
their consent that their Plate should be put to any other use then what was
suitable and according to their oath, and the intention of the Donours, their
successors having in all these respects as great an interest in the Plate as
themselves; Nay they generally confessed that they had no more power to aliene
their Plate then their Lands. In confidence of their promise you told them you
did leave their Plate in their own custody, which otherwise you would have
secured, and in confidence of your Honors promise they brought forth their
Plate, and made public use of it, even whilst the soldiers were in town*
Your Lordship found the University (as the Reverend Doctors had left it)
groaning under a kind of Anarchy; for it was thought fit by the Round-house,
that the University should be dissolved, and every man left to do what seemed
good in his own eyes. It was suggested by a Doctor well read in Politiques,
that if they did not dissolve the University, the Parliament would dissolve it*
But your Honor made it appear how much you did abhor an Anarchy, and honor
the University; you assembled those few Governors of private Colleges which
were at home, and the Substitutes of all that were absent, you consulted them
how the University might be put into its right posture: You assured them that
it was not the intent of the Parliament to change the Government or infringe
the Liberties of the University, and that though the new Statutes were justly
complained of, yet you conceived it fit that the University should for the
present be governed by Laws that were none of the best, rather then left quite
without Rule, or government; they all confessed that you behaved your self
more like a Chancellor then a soldier, for the University was not overawed
by a garrison, or overruled by a Council of war. You did not impose any
Taxes upon the University, you did not go about to persuade them that Guns were
Mathematical Instruments, and therefore they might buy guns with that very
money which was bequeathed and set apart for Mathematical Instruments; you did
not importune any Scholars to list themselves in your Regiment, nor did you
desire that Doctors would turn Commanders, or that any Commanders should be
created Doctors, or boys created Masters, lest there might be an Anarchy even
in Convocation by such a Premeditated Confusion; and yet such counsels and
practices have been suggested by some, that are none of the meanest Rank. When
I was commanded by special warrant to attend your Honor, (deputed by both
houses of Parliament for the service of King and Parliament to settle Peace and
Volumus and nos pacem, sed pacem Christi -- pace^ in qua non fit bellum
involutu^; pace^, qua non ut adversartes subjictat, sed ut a mices jungat,
Hieronym. Ep. ad Th. contra errores Ioh. Hi^ros.
truth in the University of Oxford, and to reduce the said University to its
ancient order, right Discipline, and to restore it to its former privileges
and liberties) there was notice given of a pestilent book very prejudicial
both to truth and peace, and upon search made, the book was found in the
chamber of Mr. Webberly, who had translated this Socinian Masterpiece into
English for his own private use, as he pretended; to which vain excuse I
replied that I made no question but he understood the book in Latin, and
therefore had he intended it only for his own private use, he might have saved
the pains of translating it. Besides the Frontispice of the book under Mr.
Webberlies own hand did testify to his face that it was translated into English
for the benesit of this Nation. Moreover there was an Epistle to the Reader
prefixed before the book; (I never heard of any man yet that wrote an Epistle
to himself) and therefore sure he intended to print it. Finally, he submits
all to the consideration of these times of Reformation, and the Reformers have
thought fit that it should be answered and published. I desired at the first
Intimation to decline the service, because it were better to confute
Socinianisme in Latin; but I have since considered that

1. The opinions of Abailardus, Servetus, Socinus, are already published in
English in a book entitled Mr. Wo^^ns defense against See Mr. Gatak^rs defense
of Mr. Wotte^.
Mr. Walker, and therefore if this Treatise had been suppressed, their opinions
would not be unknown, for they are already divulged.

2. The opinions being published in English without a confutation, it is very
requisite that there should be some Refutation of the errors published also,
for it is not fit that a Bedlam should go^ abroad without a Keeper.

3. If there be but just suspicion of a Design to introduce damnable heresies,
it is requisite that the grounds of suspicion should be manifested, especially
if it be such a pestilent heresy a^ Socinianisme is (which corrupts the very
vitalls of Church and State) it is fit the heresy should be early discovered
left both Church and State be ruined by it.

4. The Parliament is much blamed for imprisoning the Translatour without
cause: and it is much wondered at that his Chamber should be searched by
officers: now the cause of both will appear. The Translatour and his work were
so famous that there was notice given of his good service intended to this
Nation, upon notice given there was a search made, now upon search made the
book being found, and the Translatour apprehended, the Parliament is rather
guilty of his release then of his Imprisonment.

5. The Translatour cannot complain of the publishing of it, because (as has
been shown) he himself intended to publish it, he submits all to these times of
Reformation, and so do I, let the Reformers judge. This book belongs to your
Honor, because it is but a Prodromus or Forerunner to make way for a full
answer to Master Webberlies Translation, and therefore I present it to you, not
only because Master Webberlies book was seized on by your Lordships warrant;
but because I know your Honor has ever patronized the true Protestant
Religion, for Protestants do not place Religion in shadows and ceremonies;
and because you justly abhor all superstitious rites, whether old or new, all
judicious men will esteem you the stricter Protestant. That you may testify
your dislike of Schism as well as Heresy, you have discovered and refuted the
uncharitable and bitter error of the Brownists. You have studied Nazianzens
law of Martyrdom, neither to seek nor fear danger; the first would be
rashness, and the second cowardlinesse. (...). You are not of the sect of
(...), etc. Gr. Na. zimz Orat. 20. Elcesaita fidem in persecutione nega^dam
docebant and in cord servandam.

Aug. de Hare sibus ad Quod. vult. Deu^.


the Elcesaites whereas Eusebius and Augustine testify) taught men to deny the
faith in time of Persecution, and yet to keep it still in their heart,
forgetting that of the Apostle, that with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Romans 10.
10. You have learnt to be a good Christian, and therefore a good Subject;
Conscience will bind you to obedience, and no other Bond will hold men close to
their duty (to that Allegiance which is due by the Law of God and the Land
both) in these treacherous times. It was the wisdom of Eusebius. de vita Constable.
l. 1. c. 11.
that famous Emperor to banish all Renegado's from his Court, (...), as
Traitors against God himself, for he considered that they who betrayed God
for fear, would not stick to betray their Prince for gain. I dare say that you
are the Kings sworn servant, and all men say that in your place you do
advance the Kings Income to the highest, nay some have been bold to say that
you have less care of the subjects profit, then of the Kings. Your devotions
speak you a Royalist, none prays more heartily for the Vide Dinothuw^ d^ bell^
Ga^ico; cunde^ de be^o Belgico. Dimetr. Meteran. Hist. Belg.

P^pellinier^. Memoires de la ligue. Insidi^ sub pacis nomine latebant 1572.
Barth. (...), etc.

At saptens quondam rite ho^ pradixit Homerus. Exors ille, domus, pauperque
extorris and exlex, Quem bellum civil juvat, crudele, nefandum.

Aristop. (...). Vulpt^bus atque leves voltis confidere Mergi? (...) Mergus,
fulica, Ardea, mihi Gavia videtur esse; a Gull, or Sea. goose, vide observe.
Flor. Chr. in locum. Nulla id ratione queamus Ante lup^s quam connubio sibi
junxerit agnam. At nunqua^ recta efficias incedere Cancrum, Non facias unquam
ut lavis sict asper Echinus.

Petra Romana est Mola Asinaria, demergatur sola in profundum maris, in collo
nostro non suspendatur. Barret. d^ Iur^ Regu.


King; It is your Judgment that the Kingdom cannot be preserved without an
union between the three Estates by which the kingdom is governed, and if you
might have been heard you would have petitioned, and solicited for an happy
union between King and Parliament, only you conceive that an union between a
Court of Justice and capital Delinquents, is intolerable, and an happy union
between Protestants and Papists altogether impossible: We cannot forget how
many leagues the Papists broke in 6. years space; I reckon from 1572. to 1588.
Wise Homer and witty Aristophanes were both in good earnest when they said that
no man that had either wealth or Innocence could delight in Civil War, and
Aristophanes showed himself as good a Statesman as a Poet in his sweet lines
of Peace, where he advises all men to beware how they enter into a league of
Peace with men that are unpeaceable; and sure Delinquents and Papists are none
of the trustiest or meekest men; What (says he) shall Gulls confide in Foxes?

(...)
The Papists will certainly count us Protestants Gulls indeed (well we may be
as innocent as doves, but we are as simple as Gulls) if we confide in Jesuited
Foxes; let the woolfe and the sheep be first married, and see how they agree:
let us try whether we can make a crabbe go straight forward, or make a
Hedgehog smooth.

-- (...)
(...), etc.
If we say to the Pope as the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, Make a covenant
with us and we will serve thee, the Pope will answer like Nahash the Ammonite,
On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all
your right eyes, and lay it as a reproach upon all England, all Israel, all the
Reformed Churches, 1 Samuel 11. 1, 2. If we have lost our eyes already, let us
be avenged on the Philistines; the Lord strengthen us, as Sampson said, that we
may overthrow the pillars upon which Rome stands, so shall we be avenged of the
Roman Philistines for both our eyes. Judges 16. 28.

But there are other Philistines namely Arminian and Socinian Philistines, by
which Church and State are much endangered, and it is the business now in hand
to lay open their mystery of iniquity to the public view. We may say to
these pestilent Heretics Tacit. A^. l. 4. Vibane the 2d. did account my
worthy Predecessor S. Anselm his own Compeer, and said he was the Patriarch
and Apostolic of the other world. The Archbishop his Relat. p. 171. The like
privilege offered to this Archbishop by the English Friar Bar^^si^s; see the
large supplement of Canterburies selfe-conviction page 20. What offers were
made by Signior Co^, I leave to one more skillfull to demonstrate.
as well as to malignant Statesmen, Ita nati estis ut mala vestra ad Rempub.
pertineant; for there are no greater Statesmen in the world then the English
Arminians, and Popish Socinians; for such Monsters has England nourished as
are not to be found in all Africa. Herod and Pilate, the Roman and the
Racovian Antichrist, are made friends in England, all the Grand-Malignants,
Arminians, Papists, and Socinians are of one confederacy, all united under one
head the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Patriarch or Pope of this British
world, alterius orbis Papa as his Brother-Pope has given him leave to phrase
it, because he saw the Archbishop too proud to acknowledge his Supremacy, but
forward enough to maintain any other point of Popery, and ready to join with
him to suppress all Pure Protestants. If this Design take effect, there may
well be a reconciliation professed and established between Rome and Canterbury,
the two Popes may divide the spoil of the Church between them if they can but
agree at parting. Whether some have not endeavored to make such a
Reconciliation; whether all points of Popery almost have not been greedily
embraced in England, and that of the Popes Supremacy only rejected, more out of
pride then conscience, let the prudent judge, they have light and evidence
enough, and new evidence is daily produced. The Lord unite the King and
Parliament, that Truth and Justice, Piety and Peace may be established in our
days: so prays

April, 18. 1643.

Your Lordships humble servant, Fr. Cheynelz.
It is ordered this eighteenth day of April, 1643. by the Committee of the
House of Commons in Parliament concerning printing, that this book intit^led
The Rise, Growth, and Danger of Socinianisme, etc. be printed.

John White.



Chap. I. Of the Rise of Socinianisme.
THe Socinians have raked many sinkes, and Scribant ^ laute and accurate qui ad
hoc munus ingenii fiducta vel officii ratione ducuntur; me vero sublevanda
recordationu, vel potius oblivionu mea gratia, Commoniterium mihimet parasse
suffecerit. Vinc. Li^in. adv. Har.
dunghils for those rags and that filth, wherewith they have patched up and
defiled that leprous body which they account a complete body of pure Religion.
Ever since the world was possessed with the spirit of Antichrist some Malignant
Heretics have been ever and anon desperately striking at the Person, the
Natures, the offices, the grace and Spirit of Christ. Cerinthius and Ebion
began to blaspheme Christ, even in the Apostles time. I need say nothing of
Theodot us Byzont in us, Paulus Samosatenus, Arius and the Vide Calovium
consid. Theol. Socin. page 105. 106. and sequ. Vide Stegman Photin. Disp. 1
page 1. and 3.

Hebionei Christun^ tantummodo hominem dicunt. Vti Augustinus de Haresibus.

Eusebius. Pamph. Hist. lib. 3. cap. Gr. (...). Lat. 24.


rest; yet it will not be amiss to show wherein the Socinians have refined or
enlarged the ancient heresies, which have been long since condemned to hell.
Ostorodus would not have the name of Ebionites imposed upon the Socinians, quia
vox Ebion Hebraice egenum significat, Praef. Just. page 10. 11. it seems they
would not be counted mean conditioned men: and there are some indeed and those
no beggars (unless it beat Court) who are too much addicted to Socinian
fancies; and yet if that be true, which Ostorodus cites out of Eusebius, that
the Ebionites were so called because they had a mean and beggarly opinion of
Christ, sure the Socinians might well be called Ebionites, for none have baser
and cheaper thoughts of Christ, then they. If Ostorodus had thought it worth
while to have consulted Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history, lib. 3. cap. 24.
or Epiphanius Haeres. 33. he might have seen another reason why Epihanius
Hares. 30.
those heretics were called Ebionites.

The Socinians take it no less unkindly that they are called Arians. Ex
consensu tantum in principalibus cum Ario de Jesu Ariani Patrem and Filium and
Spiritu^ Sanctum nolunt esse uniui ejusdemque naturae at que substantiae, aut
ut expressius dicatur, essentia. August. de Haeresibus.
Christo, Arianismi jure quis argui potest? says Smalcius. It is well he
confesses that they may be called Arians who agree with Arius in the maine, I
deny that the Arians had higher thoughts of Jesus Christ, then the Socinians.
The Arians were termed (...), because they maintained that Christ was created
(...). Some Arians did acknowledge that Ariani omnes dicti antiquitus era^t,
licet sententiis inter se discordes, qui in pr^c^puum errotem cum Ario
conspirabant; nempe Filium Dei Patri consubstantialem esse negantes ^ti
Smiglecius Probat.
Christ was equal to the Father in essence and nature, though they denied him
to be of the same essence with the Father; and others of them did only say,
that the Son was unlike the Father, and were therefore called (...); yet these
also were condemned because neither of these sects would acknowledge the Son to
be consubstantiall with the Father; for if they would have confessed that the
Father and the Son were of the same essence, they would never have said that
their essence was equal, but rather that their persons were equal, and their
essence the same; for equality is ever between two at the least: therefore by
saying that their nature was equal, they employed that they had two different
natures. And they who talked of a dissimilitude of nature, must necessarily
suppose, that the Father and the Son had different natures, for a nature cannot
be said to be unlike it self: and if this latter sect by dissimilitude meant
an inequality, then they were blasphemously absurd, in fancying that there was
majus and minus in the same most indivisible, and single essence. Reverend D
Bez^, Prasatio prafixa Explicat. Val Gentilis Perfidi^ and Perjurii. Sociniani
cum Aetionis Filiu^ no^ modo (...), sed etia (...) di^unt. Stegman. Phot. Disp.
1. page 7, 8.
Beza has set this forth to the life, in his preface to the description of the
Heresy and Perjury of that Arch-heretike, Valentinus Gentilis, Ariomanitae --
in duas minimum factiones divisi sunt, nempe in (...) and (...). He disputes
the the point, whether (...) did not imply as much as (...) -- nisi voxilla
(...) (sicut de Dionysio Corinthio, Basilius ad fratrem scribit) commoda quadam
interpretatione (sed plane ut mihi videtur violenta) leniatur, Nam certe in una
eademque prorsus essentia nullus est neque aequalitatineque inaequalitati
locus, utpote quae minimum in duobus cernantur; ac proinde in hypostasibus, non
in essentia spectare aequalitate^ necesse est. (...) -- qui Filium Patri
faciebant dissimilem, se vel Arianos prodebant vel stolidos, quum in
simplicissima and singularissima natura, nempe Deitate, majus and minus quiddam
imaginarentur, page 4. and 5.

By this and much more which might be added, it does plainly appear that if
the Arians were not more Rational, yet they were more devout then the
Socinians, they had a a more honorable and reverent opinion of Christ. For the
Socinians will not acknowledge that God and Christ are equal, or like in
nature. The Socinians make Christ, (...), the Arians thought him the most
excellent of all creatures, and therefore said, that he was created before any
other creature, and used by God as an Instrument to create the rest, as Doctor
Stegman observes, Disput. 1. page 3. Finally the Arians Sociniani insuper
Filium De^ post munds occasum prorsus non regnaturum cum Ario s^mniant
Sociniani. vide Calov. de di. stinct. Theol. S^cin. a priscis haresibus. page
116.

Noc est ut Photinianum nomen su^terfugiant cum in principalibus se c^ Photino
convenir^ fateantur. D Stegman Photin. Disp. 1. page 3.


and Socinians agree in this, that both deny Christ to be consubstantiall with
the Father, and therefore though they differ in telling their tale, in
explaining their error, yet both agree in the maine, and that is ground enough
to call them Arians, if Smalcius may be Judge.

Doctor Stegman usually calls the Socinians, Photinians, and therefore entitles
his own book Photinianismus; and the Socinians do acknowledge that they agree
with Photinus in the maine, yet they say it is not sufficient ground to call
any man Photinian because he agrees with Photinus in Fundamental points; but
Smalcius tells us that Socinus was the servant of Christ, they own his
doctrine, and own the man as their fellow servants: Quid Photinus? quid alii?
nisi servi Christi? they give him and others that are as bad as he is, the
right hand of fellowship; and it is commonly conceived that Mahumetisme took
his rise from Photinianisme. I have no book about me, that fhewes so clearly
what the Photinians held, as Iacobus ad Portum Professor of Divinity in
Academia Lausannenfi, Iacobus ad Portum Orthod Fid Defen. advers^^ Ostorradium.
in its Epistle Dedicatory, Doc^erunt Christum Iesum natura esse (...), gratia
divina tamen insigniter ornatum, eumque tum demum esse coepisse, cum in utero
virginis Mariae conciperetur; ac proinde verbum Dei, vel Deum non aliter in
ipso quam in aliis Prophet is habitasse, nec ipsi (...) aut (...) unitum
fuisse, sed tantum gratia and efficacia ipsi assedisse: ipsum denique esse
(...), sed (...) and (...), non autens (...) Martin. Thalyaus Anatom. Samosat.
Glossema Samosateniorum est ejusde^ ^oloris cu^ Turcismo ac Iudaismo -- cum
Turcis quidem plus habent affini tatu quam cum Iudae^ -- Turcismus en^m ut ex
alijs errorum cento nibus, sic ex Samosatenia nismo a Mahume te est conftatus.
Pauliani a Paulo Samosateno Christu^ non semper suisse dicunt sed ej us initiu^
ex quo de Ma. ria natus est ass verant, nec eum ali quid amplius qua^ hominem
putant. Ista haeresis aliqua^ao cujusda^ Artemonii fuit sed cum defecisset
^staurata est a Paulo, and postea sic a Photino confirmata etc. Aug de Hares.
Execrandus ille Samosatenus ejus Ecolesiae conspurcator in qua primi sunt
Christiani nominati. D. Beza ubi supra.

August de Hares. Haresis Samosaten; postea sic a Photino confirmata ut
Photiniani quam P^ultani celebrius nuncupentur -- Philaster continuatim ponit
ambos (Samosatenu^ scil. and Photinum) sub singulis and propriis numeris quasi
haereses duas, cum dicat Photinum in omnibus Pauli secutum fuisse doctrinam.


ut loquuntur, ex qua infoelici haeresi postmodum Mahumetismus ortus esse
perhibetur.

Others call the Socinians Samosatenians, and therefore Thalyaeus calls his
book in which he answers the arguments of Socinus, Eniedinus, Ostorodius, and
Smalcius, Anatome Samosatenianismi, in which he shows that the Socinian glosses
are of the same color with Turkish and Jewish blasphemies; the four Professors
of the Theological Faculty at Leiden, have given a large commendation of
Thalyaeus in their approbation, printed before the book, and signed with the
hands of all the Professors, in which they with one voice vote Socinianisme to
be Recoct Samosatenianisme; Impiam Pauli Samosateni sententiam melior and
sanctior Ecclesia sub Cruce adhuc militans, ut enata fuit exhorruit, eaque mox
publico Episcoporum judicio execrata est. Scriptum illud conscriptum contra
renatum and ab infausto illo Socino ejusque asseclis recoctum Samosatenianismum
censemus pie docte and solid etc. The Samosatenians did borrow their name from
Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of the Church of Antioch, and therefore his practices
were the more abominable, because he poisoned that Church, in which Disciples
were first called Christians, with Heretical blasphemies against the Lord
Christ, as reverend Beza observes. I find in Augustine that Artimonius did
first broach this heresy, and Paulus Samosatenus did revive it; but I need say
no more of the Samosatenians, having said enough already of the Photinians, for
Photinus did confirm that heresy which Samosatenus did revive, and therefore
the followers of Paulus Samosatenus. were more commonly called Photinians then
Paulians, or Samosatenians. And though Philaster reckon Samosatenus his heresy
by it self, and Photinus his heresy by it self, yet to show that they were not
different heresies, he says Photinus did in all things follow Paulus
Samosatenus. I do not reckon up all the disorderly Heretics in order, take
them as it happens. Nestorius denied that the self same person was God and man,
he would not acknowledge that the Word was made flesh, only the Word was with
that flesh, (by an effectual Presence) which was taken of the substance of the
Virgin, Affirmabat enim (...) illi carni ex Maria prognatae nonnisi (...)
adfuisse, as learned Beza declares it in brief. If any man desire to be further
acquainted with the opinion, and the desputes about it, let him read S. Cyril,
and peruse the famous and Orthodoxe (not the spurious and surreptitious)
Ephesine Council, and he may receive full satisfaction. The Socinians are
far worse then Nestorius, for they do not only deny, that the self same
person who was borne of the Virgin, is the second person in the Trinity, but
they utterly deny that there is any second Person, or third Person which is
Consubstantiall with the Father.

Having mentioned Nestorius, I must not skippe over Eutyches, who in opposition
to Nestorius his dividing of the Person of Christ, did vainly imagine, that
the natures of Christ were mingled, and so he confounded both natures, and
their Essential properties: Yet the Eutychians did grant that there were two
natures in Christ, which the Socinians deny.

Vide Iacobum ad Portu^ Orthodox. fid. Defens. Stegman. Disput 1. page 4. 7. 8.

Calovium Considerat. Theol. Socin. Preoemial. Gloriantur Sociniani selectes
quasdam Co^fessions sua vel direct vel oblique de Deo and Christo favisse,
Samosatenum Photinum, Baliardum, Basilidianos, Carpocrat, Gnosticos,
Marcionites, Montanistas, Noctianos, Arianos, Berillum, Eutych, Donatum,
Helvidiu^ Eunomiu^, Miletium, Sabinum, Praxeam, Manichaum, Sabellium, Photinum,
and ejusce furfuris perditissimos hareticos, vide Caloviunt de D^uct, Theol.
Socin. a priscis haresibus page 106.


The time would fail me, or at least the Readers patience, should I show how
the Socinians agree with the Noetians, who maintained, that there was but one
person in the Godhead: with Macedonius, who denied the Holy Ghost to be a
Person: with the Pelagians, concerning their denial of the Image of God in
Adam before his Fall, and their maintaining of Freewill, and denial of
original sin since the Fall. In a word, how they agree with the
Valentinians, Marcionites, Cerdonians, Manichees, Apollinarists, Sabellius, the
Donatists, Sadducees, Papists, Anabaptists, Schwenckefeldians, Antinomians, and
I know not how many more of the like stamp, has been shown by others
already, and the manifestation of their errors in the ensuing Treatise will
sufficiently declare. I will pass over many things very observable, because I
would willingly discourse at large of some later passages, and subtle
inventions by which Socinianisme was introduced into foreign parts, and in
some parts established by the suffrage and subscription of too many eminent
wits, and great Scholars. But I must not in my haste forget Abeilardus, or as
Platina calls him, Baliardus, as Bernard, Abailardus, his name in our English
tongue may be Balard; he flourished Vide D. Stegman Disp. 1. page 4.
about the year 1140. he had a very ready discoursing wit, and is by some
voiced to be the first founder of Schoole-divinity; whether he maintained all
those heresies which Bernard lays to his charge, I shall not now stand to
dispute, there is some cause of doubt; Abeilard lived to make his Apology, and
if it was but an honest Recantation, he has made some amends. Learned Mr.
Gataker in his Postscript Learned Mr. Gataker his Postscript to Mr. Wotto^s
Defense, page 40. 41. Calov. Considerat. Theol. Socinian. Prooemial. p. 120.
to Mr. Wottons Defense, page 40. and 41. will direct you to Authors, from whom
you may receive better satisfaction then I can for the present give, unless I
were furnished with a better Library.

I shall not do Postellus so much honor as to take notice of him; as for
Servetus, I will not stain my paper with his blasphemies: Mr. Gataker has
shown his chief assertions in the book forecited from the 42. to the 47.
page; it is much questioned whether the Senate of Geneva did not deal too
severely with him. Samosatenus, Arius and Eutyches did all revive in that
Cerberus, he was both admonished and refuted by three learned Divines of that
age, Oecolampadius, Melanchthon and Calvin; he had time enough given him to
recant, he did stubbornely maintain his cursed blasphemies for thirty years
together, as Beza shows; Ob Beza Prafat. pra. fix. explicat. H^res. Valent.
Gen^. Calovins Consid. Theol. Soc. Prooe^ial. page 6. Michael, Servetus p^nas
luens, Anno 1553.
triginta annorum blasphemias execrabiles and indomitam pervicaciam ex Senatus
Genevensis sententia justissimo supplici^ affectum, quis non tandem nisi plane
furiosus and excors abominetur?

The Senate of Geneva were in good hope by this exemplary punishment upon
Servetus to crush this Cockatrices egg, and kill the Viper; but for all this
some under hand, and others more boldly and impudently did seduce the people.
Bernardine Ochin seemed to be an Academik, a mere Sceptik in Religion, he
questioned all things, and determined nothing; Lalius Socinus carried the
matter with such a cleanly Nonnulli Geneva iterum e favillis Serveti flammas
quasdam hareseos ipsius excitare, tum illis quoque inter alios favit Lalius
Socinus. Calov. Decas Dis. page 7.
conveyance, that he was scarce taken notice of, though he received some checks
and admonitions, yet most men thought charitably of him during his life; his
black designs were not fully discovered till after his death; this is the
Grandfather of the Socinians; but I will say no more of him yet, till I have
shown what pra^kes were played by those bold fellows, who acted those
tragedies openly upon the Stage, which Lelius composed behind the Curtain,
Valentinus Impictas Val. Gent. b^evi script^ detecta per D. 1. Calvinum vide
Valentint Gent. Pro. theses. Confession^. Libellum Antid^torum. Responsum D.
Calvini ad Question. Georg Elandratae. Eiusdem Brev. Admonit ad fratres
Polonas, nee non confirmat. istius Admonit. Simleri Epistolam Ministris in
Polonia and Russia. Theses 1. Hyperii in Acad Marpurg Assert. Doct. Cath. de
Trinitate per Alexand. Ale^^um Theses D. Beza in Pra^ect de Trinitate. B.
A^etis Histor. Val. Gent.
Gentilis practiced at Geneva, George Blandrate a Physician in Poland, and
Transylvania. Give me leave to make but two or three observations by the way,
and I shall open the practices of these impudent Heretics more fully to you.

First, the Devil has done more mischief in the Church by counterfeit
Protestants, false brethren, then by professed Papists, open enemies.

Secondly, observe that vain curiosity did betray the Churches, and make them
a mere prey to these subtle Heretics; most men have an itching desire to be
acquainted with novelties, and at that time the Churches were very inquisitive
after a more Rational way of Divinity, they began to examine the Articles of
faith, especially the Article of the Trinity, by some received Axioms of
Philosophy, and by that curiosity puzzled their reason, and lost their faith.

Thirdly, though Poland and Transylvania were grievously infected, yet the
mischief came from Italy, as reverend Beza observes, and therefore cries out,
Sa^e fatalis esse videtur P^lonis Vide Beza Pr^^^^.
Italia. Besides the flame brake out first in the Italian Church at Geneva,
though the coals were dispersed and blown too in other places. The Italian
Church had some warning given by the execution of Michael Servetus in the year
1553. but that Church was too indulgent for four or five years, yet at last
the Elders of the Italian Church, perceiving that some of their flock began to
oppose the doctrine of the Trinity, they thought fit to set forth some form of
Confession, unto which they required all to subscribe, upon the eighteenth day
of May, 1558. They all protested by that Faith whereby they were obliged to
God, that they would never purposely and maliciously directly or obliquely
oppose that Confession, or favor any Form, or Sect which did make the least
appearance of dissenting from it; and whosoever Confessi^ fidei edita in
Italica Ecclesia Genevae habetur in Explicat. perfidia Val. Gentilis page 1.
did violate this Protestation, should be held a perjured and perfidious man.
Valentinus Gentilis made no great haste to subscribe, but being called upon, he
testified his consent with his own hand. Yet not long after, he said he was
pricked in conscience for subscribing to this Form, and Ibid. page 3.
therefore contemned his Protestation, and endeavored to seduce the simple
people; whereupon he was convented before the Senate of Geneva, the points in
Controversy being rationally discussed, and Valentinus nonplust, he had
nothing to say, but that he was not well versed in the art of disputing, which
was notoriously false, for he was an acute subtle man, as appears by his
Confessions, Epistles, Replies; his sublime notions about the Essence, and
Subsistences of the Trinity and Quaternity; that one question did sufficiently
discover his subtilty, An Essentia divina ex Semetipsa absque ulla
consideratione Personarum sit verus Deus; and that Thesis of his, Deus Pater
solus verus Deus est Essentiator, hoc est Informator individuorum, nempe Filii
Spiritusque. The God of Israel (says Valentine) is the only true God the
Father of Jesus Christ; and so by opposing the Father to the Son, and affirming
that the Father only was the true God, he did clearly deny the Son to be the
true God. Clare apparet (says the Senate) quum Patrem opponis Filio and uni
duntaxat veram Deitatem tribuis, te excludere alterum, quem cum illo confers --
Facessat Vide Explicat. Prafidia Valent. Gentilis, p. 14, 15, 16.
antithesis inter Patrem and Filium ubi fit Deitatis mentio -- In comparatione
fingis duo Antitheta, Patrem opponis Filio ac si in solo Patre esset Dei
Essentia -- Filium essentiatu^ a Patre dicis, a Seipso esse neg as -- Jamsi
Essentia divina sit in solo Patre, vel eripies eam filio, vel partibilem
finges, utcunque n^nc centies concedas Filium esse verum Deum, spoliatus tamen
sua essentia titularis solum erit Deus. -- Individua tibi somnias quorum
singula partem Essentiae obtineant -- Deus Indefinite est ingenitus, and Pater
etiam Personae respectu ingenitus, filius autem respectu Personae a Patre est
genitus -- Non abstrahimus personas ab Essentia, sed quamvis in ea resideant,
distinctionem interponimus. Hoc sensu Individuos Tertullianus vocat Patrem and
Filium, non autem (ut tu stul^e imaginaris) Individua, quae sub Specie
comprehendantur. To this effect the Senate answered Valentines subtilties; I
have put it close together, that I might not be tedious, and yet manifest upon
what grounds this great wit was condemned by that grave judicious Senate.

He had one question more, which he took much pride in, namely, Utrum Essentia
concurrat in Trinitatem? to which the Senate answered, Essentia non concurrit
ad distinguendas personas, nec tamen personae sine essentia sunt -- Veteres ad
Personas tantum nomen Trinitatis retulerunt -- Quarum rerum dices esse Ubisupra
page 17.
Trinitatem? Respondes, tria concurrere, Essentiam, Filium, and Spiritum. Hinc
vero plane perspicitur te essentiam Filii and Spiritus exinanire. This conceit
of Valentinus, that the Essence, Son, and Spirit, make the Trinity, did at
once deny the Person of the Father, and the divine Essence of the Son and
Spirit; for, observe how he puts in the Essence to make up the Trinity, and so
left out the Person of the Father, and by opposing the other two Persons to the
Divine Essence, he did imply, that they had an Essence different from the
Divine Essence.

Valentine having received this full answer from the Senate, was much enraged,
but upon second thoughts, he fell to his devotions, made some show of
repentance, and seemed to be satisfied; nay, he proceeded so far as to write
to the Senate, and acknowledge that he was fully convinced by Epistola
Valentini Gentilis ad Senatu^ Genevensem habetur in Explicat. Perfidia Val.
Gent. p. 27.
the clear and solid reasons laid down by the Consistory, in their answer to
his objections: Nay, farther yet, he descended to particulars, and confessed
that they had manifestly proved, that those three grounds upon which all his
fancies were built, were all most false and absurd.

First, says he, I have offended in that whilst I affirmed, The only God of
Israel to be the Father of Jesus Christ, I considered not that by opposing the
only God to Christ, I denied Christ to be God.

Secondly, I was too rash in considering the Divine Essence out of the three
Persons, and concluding from thence, that the Essence and the Trinity of
Persons made a Quaternity: for now I perceive that the Divine Essence cannot be
considered any where, but in the three Persons.

Thirdly, I have offended, in that I said the Person of the Father was
Sophistical.

Upon these rotten ruins (says Valentine) did I build many false
consequences, which now I do abhor and detest, and profess that I believe the
doctrine of the Trinity in the sense of your Consistory; O my conscience has
been wounded for my inconsiderate answers to that excellent Divine and servant
of God John Calvin! but I have acknowledged my fault with hearty sorrow, and I
make no question but the searcher of hearts has forgiven me; I beseech you
likewise to forgive me, for I believe that the trouble of my mind will bring
forth such fruits of repentance in my future conversation, as will wipe off
this offensive blot wherewith now I am bespotted and stained, I hope the
clemency of the holy Ministers is such, that they will receive such a miserable
stray beast as I am into their fold again, and triumph at my conversion. He
proceeded farther yet, made a solemn and orthodoxe confession of Abjuratio
Val. Gentilis ipsius manu sponte scripta, et ad Senatum Genevensem missa. vide
explicat. perfidia Val. Gentilis p. 28.
his faith, and a Recantation of his errors on the 29. of August 1558. At last
having abjured his errors under his hand, the Senate in hope that his
repentance was cordial and sincere, they commanded him to walk bare-headed,
bare-legged and bare-foote through every street in the City, with a Trumpet
blown before him, and a light in his hand, then to kneel down, ask pardon of
the Senate, and burn all his heretical Doctrines with his own hand, all which
he did upon the second of September following. Behold the mercy of Geneva to
one that was but hopeful, though he had been an Heretic, a Schismatic, a
Seducer, they forgave him, and gave him leave to come forth of prison, without
taking any Sureties, because he pleaded that he was a stranger, and poor,
only they took an oath of him, that he should not depart Er^t in confinio
pagus Fargiarum ubi habitabat Gribaldus -- aderant ibidem Alciatus -- in
praefectura Gaiensi ditionis mag. Dom. Berne^sium Aretius Histor. Val. Gent.
the City without their license: but he soon brake his oath, and fled not far
off to Gribaldus and Alciatus, two of his own stamp, and faction; but he met
there with a Governor of a resolute spirit, who began to enquire into his
dangerous opinions, and being fully informed of their desperate malignancy, he
committed him to prison for a while, but not long after released him, and gave
him a fair warning, but no sooner he enjoyed his liberty, but he presently
published his opinions in print, and abused the Governor with a dedication, as
if the book had been published by the Governors consent and Authority. Not long
after he travails to Lions where he was imprisoned for the space of 50. days,
but he pretended that he did only oppose Calvin in the carriage of some
controversies, and by that means the Antichristian spirit, which reigns in
the bosom of Papists, did incline them to forgive and release him; it seems
the Papists cares not what Article of faith be denied, nor how much Jesus
Christ be dishonored, so Calvin be opposed, for by this silly shift he got o^t
twice from the Papists. Confessionem it a potuit attemper are ut a Papist is
admitteretur, solum Evangelicas Gratianopoli.
Ecclesias, and nominatim Calvinum perstringens, etc. and by that means he made
his first escape; his second escape was obtained by the self same shift.
Libellum Antidotorum and confessionem sic potuit attemperare ut judicaretur
solum Calvinum Lugduni.
impugnare, non ipsam Trinit atem ideoque solutus carceribus dimissus est; as
Aretius relates in his History of Valentine. But he was not satisfied yet,
unless he could beguile Protestants as well as Papists, he went therefore over
into Poland, and joined with Alciat, and Blandrate, in seducing the Polonian
Churches, he confirmed his Doctrines by Sophistry, some fragments out of the
Fathers, and some pieces of the Alcor^^, to show that he intended to please the
Turks, as well as the Papists, and to quarrel only with the Protestants; his
friend Alciat turned direct Mahometist being Quid interea bonus ille Hosius
Cardinalis cum suis Catholieis? nempe ridere suaviter nostros undique ad
extingue^dum hoc incendtum accurre^tes probrosis libellu lacessere, Regiam
denique Majestate^ de coercendis istis blasphemiis cogitantem arectis consiliis
provirtbus avoeare; as merito quidem: Quorsu enim Satanadversus seipsum
depugnaret? Beza Prafat. ubi supra.
led to it by his principles; but Valentine expressed himself in a more
reserved and cunning way then Alciat or Blandrate, whereupon there fell out
some difference between them, and so by Gods providence they did the less hurt
in Poland, but there they continued above two years, but at last the King of
Poland took notice of them, and intended to have published an edict against
their heretical blasphemies, but then the Antichristian spirit stirred up
Cardinal Hosius, to suggest another course to his Majesty: but God moved the
King to banish all strangers, Innovatours in Doctrine, and Perturbers of the
Peace, out of his kingdom, upon the 5. of March, in the year 1566. Being
banished out of Poland, and knowing that Calvin was dead, he thought fit to
return into the old quarters, never dreaming that he should have fallen into the
hands of the old Governor, whom he had formerly a bused in so high a nature;
but by divine providence the same person though it was not his turn, was
governor of that province, (vide supra, p. 10.) as Aretius declares, Gaium
ipsum accedens, cui ide^ adhuc praefectus (prorogat a forte ipsi extra ordinem
ejus provinciae administratione) praeerat. Valentine thought it his best
course, to put a good face upon the matter, and challenge any man to dispute
with him, but the Governor well knowing, that he had been often disputed with,
and fairly admonished, cried, Fiat quod justum est, and clapped him up close
prisoner, upon the 11. day of June, 1566. The province being under the
jurisdictio^ of the Senate of Bern, Valentine appealed from the Governor of
Gaium to the Senate of Bern, and he was brought thither upon the 19. day of
July. When he was examined, the Senate charged him with heresy, Perjury,
blasphemy, Neglecta juramuti religione ad errores abjuratos postlimini^ redibat.
Schism; and over and above that, he had joined with Alciat and Blandrate, in
seducing the simple people. To which he answered, that he had nothing to do
with either of the^, for Alciat, says he, is a Mahumetan, and Blandrate is a
Sabellian and Samosatenian; he complained that those Churches which were called
Evangelicall, or Reformed Churches, were still too much enslaved to the Pope;
and yet when he was among the Papists he saw his own confession, of that which
he called his Faith, passed current enough. Nostras ecclesias Aretii Hist. Val.
Gent. cap. 2. p 11.
damnari quasi adhuc Papatui servientes, quum interim ipse inter Papist as
constitutus posset confessionibus editis elabi. He was questioned for a book
which he dedicated to the King of Poland, in which he repeated the confession
of his faith, which was confuted at Geneva, and subjoyned his book of
Antidotes, in which he endeavors to refute certain Theses collected out of
Augustines 15. books, de Trinitate, and the 13. chapter of Calvin's first book
of Institutions, which treats likewise of the Trinity. Finally, he made some
sharp Annotations upon Athanasius, and confirmed his own opinion out of the
Alcoran. The Senate picked out all his Calumnies, Impostures, blasphemies,
heresies old and new. Wherein Valentine agreed with Arius, is shown by
Aretius, in the 8. chapter of his History; if any man desire to peruse the
determinations of Justin Martyr, Ignatius, Tertullian, Augustine in this great
article of the Trinity, he may read them at large in the same History, from the
13. to the 17. chapter. I must hasten to bring Valentine to his deserved
punishment; the Senate had treated with him, from the 5. of August to the 9. of
September, and he remained still stubborn, August. 1566:
and pertinacious in his blasphemies, and therefore the Senate pronounced
sentence of death upon him, which was accordingly executed; for he could not by
prayers, tears, arguments, entreaties, be wrought upon to change his mind: he
had a fair warning given him before, by the Senate of Geneva, if he had had
the grace to have taken it, their Charge ran high, and their Admonition was
Prophetical. Filium Dei quem praedicamus, in Diabolum transfiguras. Rescript.
Senate. Genev. habetur in Explicat persidiae Val, Gent. p. 20.
Deum quem colimus, vocas Deum Turcarum, multaque ejus generis, sed vide miser
ne te praecipitaverit tuus furor ut voces emitteres quae per jugulum redeant.

It is now time to draw the curtain and look for Socinus who most of this
while, played least in sight, till he went quite out of sight, in the year
1562. Laelius Socinus was the tutor Ortgo Socinianisma a Lalto fuit ratione
Inventiones, a Fausto ratione Dispositionis.
and uncle, Faustus Socinus was the Nephew and disciple; Laelius did
contribute materials, Faustus added Form and method to that monstrous body of
errors and blasphemies which we call Socinianisme. Laelius Socinus was borne
in the Eques Polonus in vita F Socini. Dissortatio quam eques Polonus F. Socini
ope^bus pramitti voluit. Abraham Calov. Decas Dissertat.
year, 1525. his parents were of good rank and quality, his Father was styled,
IC. torum Princeps. The life of Socinus is written by a Polonian Knight, who
was tender of his honor, who has also set forth a dissertation, which he
desires may be prefixed before the works of Faustus, or rather the notions of
Laelius digested into order by Faustus; and out of those two treatises we may
pick something to give light to the original of Socinianisme; but we are most
beholding to D. Calovius, who has handled this argument more distinctly, then
any man that I have met with, and he says that about four years after
Servetus his death in the year 1557. Laelius Socinus did underhand encourage
them who had raked in Servetus ashes, and blowed some coals that were yet
alive, and from thence raised a blacker flame. Laelius then, no doubt, favored
Valentine, for about the year 1558. Valentine began to show himself, and in
that year, the Italian Church put forth their orthodox confession about the
Trinity at Geneva, as has been already showed. Moreover the Polonian Knight
says, that Laelius did take special care of his countrymen, quodque
praecipue suos erudierit Italos: and though Laelius did I icet Tiguri apud
Helvetios sedem fixisses, ad alias tamen Europa regto^es non semelex ^urrebat.
keep his most usual residence amongst the Helvetians, yet his letters
traveled up and down the world, and he now and then visited his countrymen in
person, who were banished into Poland, and Germany; he went twice on
pilgrimage, to gain some Proselytes in Poland, first in the year, 1551. and
afterward in the year, 1557. and there he infected many of the Nobles with
his pestilent heresies, which have found such good entertainment ever since,
that Poland does to this very day (the Lord of heaven be merciful to them)
labor under that deadly disease. But it was Laelius his chief desire to
instruct his three brethren, Celsus, Cornelius, and Camillus, in that which he
called his religion; and though they lived far asunder, (Celsus enim
Bononiae, reliqui Senis agebant) yet they held such intimate correspondence,
that the seeds of this heresy were mutually cherished by their frequent
letters. But his nephew Faustus was his best Scholar, and therefore by diverse
hints and intimations best acquainted with the secrets of his art. Ingenio
Nepotis confisum plura divinanti innuisse, quam discenti tradidisse; (says the
Polonian Knight) non dissimulato inter amicos praesagio before haec atque
foelicius a Fausto orbi prodenda; and Faustus Socinus does acknowledge that he
did owe all his mysterious knowledge to his Uncle only, (for he was never
taught of God) Praeter unum Laelium patruummeum -- vel potius praeter paucula
quaedam ab ipso conscripta and multa annotata, nullum prorsus magistrum me
habere contigit. Epist. ad Maro. Sq. You may read particulars in D Calovius
(page 2. and sequ.) I need not therefore descend to particulars since the
confession is so general; only be pleased to observe that the heresy does
directly strike at the Nature, Person, Offices, Satisfaction, Sacraments of
Christ. And as the Arminians are much offended with the ninth chapter to
Veruntamen ut unicuique sua constet laus -- Me and sententiam illam in Iohannis
Evangel. Verbis explicandis, and quae ad eam asserendam vel jam dixi vel
posthac dicturus su^ magna* ex part ex Laelii Socini Senensis sermonibus dum
adhuc viveret, and post ejus morte^ ex aliquibus ipsius scriptis quae in manus
meas non absque mirabili Dei opera atque consilio pervonerun^ and hausisse and
desumpsisse non minus libenter quam ingenue fate^ or. Frag. 4. duorum S^ript.
F. Socini page 4. and 5.
the Romans, so the Socinians are as much offended with the first chap. of the
Gospel according to Saint John; it was therefore Laelius one of his
masterpieces to pervert that Scripture by a devilish gloss. I dare not give a
more gentle Epithet: Faustus does confess that his Uncle Laelius did
contribute all the stuff out of which he framed his exposition upon the first
part of the first Chapter of Saint John; Illam verborum Johannis expositionem,
and quae ad eandem adserendam produxit, sese magna ex part e Laelii
sermonibus, dum adhuc viveret, and post ejus mortem ex aliquibus ipsius
scriptis sumpsisse and deprompsisse. V. Frag. duor. script. Socin. and Epist.
1. ad Dudith. page 13. But though Laelius Soci^us carried matters thus closely,
and did all by sleight of wit and hand, yet about 3. years before his death he
was shrewdly suspected for a Seducer, his brother Cornelius was apprehended,
the rest fled for fear, Faustus his Nephew and disciple, fled quite out of
Italy, to Lions in France, Laelius in the mean time died in the year 1562. and
the 37. year of his age, as Calovius assures me: Cum Faustus aliquandiu
Lugduni in Gallia viveret, Laelius interi^s Tiguri extinctus est anno 1562.
Aetatis ejus septimo supra trigesimum. All Laelius his notes were I believe
committed to Faustus, qui patruo suo Laelio emortualis extitit, as the same
Author, de origin Theol. Soc.. 25. and therefore certainly most of his
opinions would have died with him, had not this unlucky Faustus poisoned the
world with them. For Faustus himself acknowledges that Laelius was very sparing
in opening himself, except it were in some lighter controversies. Nolebat ille
sententiam suamnisi in levioribus quibusdam controversiis omnibus aperire, ne
turbarentur Ecclesiae, and infirmi quorum maximam semper habuit rationem
offenderentur, and a vero Dei cultu ad Idola fortasse iterum adducerentur.
Frag. F. Socini Disp. de Christi natura p. 5. Observe by the way that the
Socinians do not much differ from the Papists in any point in controversy
between the Papists and Reformed Churches, unless it be in the point of
Idolatry. But indeed there was one reason more why Laelius was so wary, he knew
how it fared with Michael Serv^tus in the year 1553. and that severe example
might well keep him in awe for 8. or 9. years after, about which time he died:
and indeed Faustus seems to glance at some such reason, for he says Laelius
had observed that there was a custom which grew in request in some Churches,
ut Execrabiles haberentur quicunque adversus receptas sententias vel mutire
quide^ ausi essent, in the place forecited. Nay I can easily guess at a third
reason yet, because Laelius had in former time before he was poisoned with
Servetus his doctrines taught the same truths which are generally received in
the Reformed Churches, and if he should have retracted so many opinions, the
people would not have believed him in any thing he had taught, but would have
quite fallen off to Popery again, as he conceived: for the people had a great
opinion of his doctrine, though he was neither Doctor nor Pastor in the
Church. Neve tandem divina veritas ab eo praedicata (quineque Pastoris neque
Doctoris officio in Ecclesia fungeretur) ob auctoris non parvam (I believe it
should be, though it is printed magna^) auctoritate^ magna Christiani orbis
detrimento passim rejiceretur. Faustus Disp* de Christi natura, page 6. It was
therefore Laelius his master-plot to propound doubts and questions to such
famous men as Calvin, and others in the Reformed Churches, as if he intended to
gain some farther light (when indeed he sought for further advantage) by their
determinations. Quod tamen ut omnem offensionem vitaret addiscendi tantum
studio a se fieri dicebat: qua tamen ratione ab initio idem vere ab eo factum
fuisse verisimile est, quare etiam Discipulum semper se, nunquam autem Doctorem
profitebatur. Faustus ubi supra. Master Calvin did easily perceive his
subtilty, and therefore gave him a fair but sharp admonition about the Calends
Vide Calovium de origin Theol. Soci. page 6 sect. 16.
of January, 1552. as the Polonian Knight does confess: Si tibi per aereas
illas speculationes (says Calvin) volitare libet, sine me quae so humilem
Christi Discipulum ea meditari quae ad fidei meae aedificationem faciunt --
Quod pridem testatus sum, serio iterum moneo, nisi hunc quaerendi Pruritum
mature corrigas, metuendum esse ne tibi gravia tormenta accersas. Faustus says
that his Uncle was snatched away by an untimely death, non sine Dei consilio,
that so those great mysteries which God had revealed to none but Laelius, might
be made known unto the world. Cum statim fere post mortem ejus, eorum quae ipse
palam docere non audebat pars aliqua and literis consignari, and passim
divulgari est coepta; id quod eo vivente nunquam fortasse contigisset, amicis
ex iis quae ipse scripserat non adhuc plene edoctis, and adversus praeceptoris
voluntatem aliquid eorum quae ab ipso didicerant in vulgus prodere minime
audentibus. Hac scilicet ratione Deus quae illi uni patefecerat omnibus
manifesta esse voluit. Faustus ubi supra, page 6. and 7. I am at this great
pains of transcribing, because Socinian books are so dear, every man will
not pay a groat a sheet, the price that I am forced to, only that I may
declare the truth; so much for Laelius.

Faustus Socinus the Nephew of Laelius was borne in the year 1539, two hours
and three quarters before Sunrising on the fifth of December; so scrupulous are
some in calculating the nativity of this monster; and he himself took notice
of it in his Epistle Ad excellentissimum quendam virum; He was of no mean
parentage, his father was by name Alexander Socinus, and for his Policy,
Subtilitatum princeps, as he was deservedly styled; his mother was nobly
descended, the Polonian Knight has shown her descent, Matrem habuit Agnetem
Burgesii Petruccii Senenfis quondam Reipub. Principis ac Victoriae
Piccolomineae filiam. He studied the Laws till he was about three and twenty
years of age, and then he betook himself to the great Duke of Hetruria his
Court, where he spent twelve years, only he had so much leisure at Court, as
to write a book about the authority of the Scripture, in which he does slily
pervert the Scriptures, and lay a ground for all his heretical blasphemies.
This is all the account that can be given of him for 35. years. I do not
hear of any great brags (though the Socinians do make loud brags of him) of
his Logique, Philosophy, Schoole-divinity, the learned tongues, only he spent
some two or three years in digesting his Uncles Notes, and then thought he had
learning enough to contradict all the Fathers and Councels, and undertook to
censure all the Reformed Churches, and to dispute with the greatest Scholars in
the world: the presumption of his wit, besides the badnesse of his cause, did
betray him to his adversaries, especially in the first prizes he played, and he
was so subtle as to seem ingenuous in acknowledging such oversights as he
could not possibly conceal: Quod vero ais (says Faustus to Puccius)
supellectilem meam Hebraeam and Graeeam -- teipsum latere non potest ejusmodi
meam supellectilem non valde curtam modo, sed propemodum nullum esse; Graecos
enim fontes, ut egomet omnibus dico, leviter admodum degus^avi, Hebraeos vix
dum attigi, etc. Socin. Resp. ad Def. Puccii, page 49. And he confesses that he
made a great flourish in the world before he had any Logic, he had vapoured
against Puccius, Palaeologus, Volanus, and diverse others, he had composed a
Commentary on the first part of the first Chapter of S. John, and on the
seventh to the Romans, his Animadversions in Theses Posn. de Trino and uno Deo,
and alia quaedam Imperfecta, as he says, cum nondum Dialecticae ullam operam
dedissem, ut post hac non mireris si in meis scriptis multa deprehenderis minus
recte tradita ac conclusa. Epist. ad excellentissimum quendam virum. It was no
wonder indeed if a man that understood neither Greek nor Hebrew, nor Logic,
should give many interpretations, and draw many Conclusions which will not
hold. Now whether after the delicacies of the Court, and 35. years of his age
misspent, he was so apt to mould his stiff brains, and new-cast them into a
Logical form, let the world judge. Socinus then was not the greatest Scholar
in the world, though he thought himself able to teach all the Church, and all
the world. The Polonian Knight acknowledges that he was of an hasty cholerique
disposition, praecipitem ad Bilem natura formaverat; but it seems his heat did
evaporate at Court, In vita a^lica deferbuisse juvenilem illum Socini astum,
qui plerumque magna in magnos lapsus pr^cipitat ingenia; and yet Marcellus
Squarcialupus Socinus his good friend does often complain of him for his
rashness, etc. as Calovius shows at large: you may read plentiful
testimonies cited at length, Consid. Th. Socin. page 13. and 15. to him
therefore I refer you.

Faustus then had more subtilty then learning; when he was not able to prove
his opinions, he told his Auditors, Haec si vera non sint, verisimilia saltem
and probabilia deprehendetis. He was of a ma^ignant wit, he knew how to
disgrace truth by scoffs and slanders, he thought to affright weak spirited
men from the Protestant Religion, by telling them that they held opinions (in
particular that Christ is God) which made Christian Religion ridiculous to
Jews and Turks, Et exteris denique omnibus, but names none else. Haecque and
hujusmodi alia quaedam, quorum ansam illis dedit graeca vox Haer^tici Alogi
sive Alogiani dict^ quia (...) a Iohanne descriptum and proindeipsum etiam
Evangeliu^, secundum Iohanue^ rejiciebant. Vide Aug. de Hares. 30. Vide Petrum
Carolinum in Explicat. doctr. de uno vere Deo. p. 16. Nec non Eniedinu^ Explic.
loc. V. and N. T. page 136.
(...), ingeniose quidem (ut illis videtur) and foeliciter comminiscuntur quae
omnia -- cum ridicula magna ex part appareant efficitur (proh dolor!) ut Jesu
Christi religio -- and Judaeis and Turcis and exteris denique omnibus maxim
sit ludibrio. Explicat. cap. prim. Ioh. page 9. Our superstitious men of late
pressed us to comply with them, in hope of converting Papists from their
superstition, by conforming our selves to the self same superstition, and now
the Socinians would have us to deny Christ to be God, that we may convert
Turks and Jews to the Christian faith: as if the best way to convert men to
the Christian faith, were to deny a prime Article of our Christian faith; or as
if Jews and Turks would have a better opinion of Christ, if the Christians
should deny him to be God, and so harden them in their beloved blasphemies; and
yet Faustus Socinus says his friends did encourage him to write against that
inveterate figment of the divine nature of Christ, Hac enim ratione -- and
Iudaeos and Turcas ad Christianam religionem allici posse, qui portentosis
istis opinionibus quae Christianae fidei Axiomata esse creduntur ab ea
amplectenda semper sunt deterriti. Faustus, ubi supra, page 2.

I should tire out my Reader, if I should but reckon up the tricks and devices
of this Faustus; for he pretended just as our Translator here, to be a Reformer
of the Reformers, nay of the Reformation it self; he makes many glorious
pretenses in his book called Solutio Scrupulorum. God (says he) in this last
Age intends to make many new discoveries, and to Reform his Church more
thoroughly then ever. Luther he confesses has discovered truths enough to carry
us to Heaven; Zuinglius and Oecolampadius reformed the Church in matters of
great weight and moment; they are justly to be extolled, because they have
purged the Church from superstition and Idolatry, and caused all false worships
to be abhorred; but he does very slily intimate, that it was now left to him to
confute all errors which Luther, Zuinglius and Oecolampadius had not observed
in the Church; for says he, though the Idols Temple is laid level with the
ground, Viderem Romani quidem Antichristi regnu^ ab omnibus dirui atque
vastari, Idolorumque templ^ everti, interim tamen Christi regnum non resurgere,
e^usque templum nedum a quoquam extrui, sed ne Caementa quidem and lapides ad
illud extruendu^ ab aliquo parari. Socin. Explicat. Pri^n. ca. Ioh. p. 2.
no man has as yet set up the Temple of Christ: nay he goes farther, Nec
caementa and lapides ad illud extruendum parari; and we may truly say, Socinus
lapides loquitur, as the Comedian said; and he knows full well how to daube
with untempered mortar. He has written two other pestilent Books, in which he
has most cunningly vented his poison, one is a book which I never saw, De SS.
Scripturae authoritate, which Calovius tells is one of his most subtle pieces,
and seems to be one of his first Essays: Dominicus Lopez a Jesuit was so
taken (or mistaken) with it, as to print it in the year, 1588. The other
Pamphlet is a brief discourse, De causa ob quam creditur aut non creditur
Evangelio Jesus Christi. In this second he speaks plainer then in the former,
as they say who have read both, and they conceive that it was purposely put
forth as a Commentary upon the other; for Socinus did speak more freely still
every year then other, accordingly as he saw his Discourses entertained and
applauded by potent Abettours; he did not put his name to his Commentary upon
John, till he saw how it would take; Libuit antequam nomen nostrum prodamus
aliorum exigui hujus laboris nostri judicius cognoscere. Explic. Ioh. p. 4. And
Calovius says, he did not put his name to it till whole Churches
(Congregations I suppose he means) had subscribed to Socinus his Tenets,
Calovius de Origin Theol. Soc. p. 19. He gained very much by his feigned
modesty, he says it was his hearty desire to bring all men to his opinion, yet
such was his charity and modesty, that he would account them brethren, who
counted him an Heretic, and held his opinions to be pernicious, upon
condition they did their best, to live in obedience to Christ's precepts, and
sought in a fair way to convince him by Scripture, Explic. cap. prim. Ioh.
page 4. But though he pretended to be ruled by Scripture, it is most evident
that all his Art was to withdraw men from harkening to the plainest Texts of
Scripture which do contradict blind carnal reason. He taught the world a new
way of disputing in Divinity; we were wont to argue thus, Whatsoever God says
is true: but God says thus and thus; ergo: but he taught us to prove, That
such and such a proposition is true by the causes and proper effects first, or
else says he, it is absurd to think that God said any thing but truth, and
therefore unless it can appear by some demonstrative argument, that such a
proposition is true, we must not pitch upon that proposition, as the mind of
the holy Ghost in any Text of Scripture; what ever the words of the Text seem
to hold forth unto us, we must go look out for some other sense which is
agreeable to right Reason. Rationis lumen quo Deus nos donavit aperte ostendit
non debere nec posse corporalem poenam quam unus debeat ab alio persolvi, idque
etiam omnium gentium ac seculorum legibus ac consuetudinibus perpetuo and
maximo consensu comprobatum sit, as Socinus in his Tract Deservatore; Behold
how the light of Reason, the Laws, nay the Customs (and perchance some of them
unreasonable) of Nations must overruled God, so that God himself shall not be
believed, if he do not speak consonantly to my corrurpt reason, and our vain
Customs. It is clear and evident, that whatsoever Socinus produces against
Christ's satisfaction, or our Justification, is a mere figment of his own
brain, for he only urges some colorable arguments, which have but a show or
shadow of reason. But I shall not instance in more particulars now, because I
desire to pass on and discover Socinus his subtilty, in scattering his errors
abroad in Sarmatia, Transylvania, etc. and therefore this shall suffice for the
Rise of Socinianisme.

CHAP. II. The Growth of Socinianisme.
ILL weeds thrive apace; Laelius had sown his errors, as has been already
shown, in some five or six years, within ten years space there were whole
Congregations submitted themselves to the Socinian yoke in Sarmatia as Doctor
Calovius assures me, Intra decennium integra Ecclesiae accesserunt haeresi
ejusdem in Sarmatia, Consid, Th. Soc. Prooemial. page 65. And this Heresy did
spread so fast in Transylvania, that within twenty years after there were some
hundreds of Congregations infected, Ut vix Vide libellum Ministr. Sarmat. and
Transyl. Alba Iulia edit, de falsa et vera, etc. D. Wigandi Servetianismum.
triginta elapsis annis aliquot Centuriae Coetuum talium ibidem numeratae
fuerint. Ibid. What they maintained upon their first Apostasy, may be seen
in a Book, De falsa and vera unius Dei, Patris, Filii, and S. Sti. cognitione.
It pleased God that Franciscus Davidis the Superintendent of those new
perverted Proselytes in Transylvania, did lay some rubs in the way of Faustus
Socinus; for this Franciscus desired to know why Christ should be worshipped
or prayed unto any longer, if he were not God? Blandrate and Faustus did lay
their heads together to answer this Quere; but this same Franciscus Davidis
maintained stoutly that Invocation and Adoration were parts of divine honor
due to God alone; This happened about the year, 1578. some twenty years after
the stirs which were in the Italian Church at Geneva, ut supra. But Faustus
and Blandrate could not compose the tumults (or answer the objections) which
Franciscus had raised in Transylvania, and so Faustus Socinus was forced to
return with shame enough into Poland: But when Faustus could not do what he
would, he seemed to be content to join with the Davidians, In Brestensi Synodo
in sinibus Lithuania.
as they were called from Franciscus Davidis, as far as they would go hand
in hand with him in opposing the Reformed Churches, and he did prevail very
much in a Synod about the year, 1588. in other points also which he did
cunningly wind in, and they greedily swallow; and he prevailed very far the
next year in another An. 1589. in Synodo Lublinensi.
Synod, and within a matter of four years, as Calovius says, he brought over
all (them whom he had wrought upon, to deny the Godhead of Christ) to subscribe
to the whole body of Socinianisme: and no marvel, for though there are many
parts of Socinianisme which have no rational dependence upon the denial of
the Godhead of Christ; yet when once men come to be sofar blinded as to deny
that glorious truth which shines so clearly in the Gospel, it is no wonder if
they see nothing at all. Besides he was so wise as to strike Non exigua indiet
facta est accesis^, pracipue inobilib^^ and in aula educatis -- ut and ^
lunierum Pastorum ordine, quippe qui propensiores in nova dogmata, n^c adeo in
veritate confirmati fuerant, Calov. de Orig Soc. page 70.
in with the Nobles, and the Courtiers, with the most youthful and sharp
witted Pastors, and not only with subtle disputants, but smooth Popular
Orators, men more able to corrupt the people, witness Petrus Steinius; or
Statorius, by whose unhappy eloquence the sublimest subtilties of Socinus which
transcended vulgar capacities, were so explained and smoothed in a popular, but
plausible way, that the most refined notions were made familiar to the common
people; Infoelici Steinii suada subtiles and a rudiorum captu remotiores Socini
sensus populari ratione tradere and flexanimae orationis genio cunctis probare
poterat, etc. This blasphemous wretch did travail, ab extrema Silesiae or a in
intimam Lithuaniam, that he might spread his errors, though he did thereby
often endanger his life: he lived a long time, he was about 66. years of age
when he died; though it was long ere he began to seduce as has been shown, yet
he had 30. years time to infect a people that were too willing to be infected;
he died, as Calovius informs me, in the year 1604. Tandem anno etatis D.
calovde did. Theol. Soc a Theol. SS^i. page 73.
quinto ultra sexagesimum blasphemam exhalat animam, Aerae Christianae 1604.

Vitaque cum gemitu fugit indignata sub umbras. CHAP. III. The Danger of
Socinianisme.
LEarned Grotius may remember that there was a time when he himself thought
Socini^nisme to be very dangerous, Cum haeresis sit venenum ecclesiae, and
quidem praesentissimum, sed tamen haereseos aliqui sint gradus, ut sit hac illa
nocentior priorem aliam non reperiri haresi Socini, ad cujus etiam mentionem
pii omnes exhorreant, in his speech to the States called H. G. Pietas. Certain
all pious men may well tremble at H. Grotit Pietas, ad ord. Hollande.
the very mention of Socinianisme, at the very repeating of their basphemies.
For my part I dare not call them Christians, Error Christi Essentiam and
personam negaus fidem destruit, and Christianismum tollit. D. Stegm. Photin p 6.


because they deny the Godhead and satisfaction of Christ, they will not be
baptized in the name of the Trinity, they labor to pluck up Christianity by
the roots, and to overthrow the very foundation of Religion. I cannot but blot
out Smalcius his name out of the white roll of Christians, if it were but for
that one blasphemy, Christianus esse potest qui divinam Christi Vide Smalci^
contra nova monstra. Deum invocamus tanquam omnium bonorum solam ac primariam
causam, Christum ver^ tanquam secundariam Causam a primaria illa plane
pendentem -- a Deo quacunque bona petimus a Christ ea solum qua ad Ecclesiam
Christi spectant: Deus enim Christo ea largiendi potestate^ concessit, non
alia, inquit Socinus, Disp. de Adorat. Christi cum Chr, Frank.


essentiam negat. Small, contr. nova monstra. An error that takes away all
Prayer to Christ, and worship of him, does utterly destroy Christian religion:
but the denial of the Godhead of Christ does take away all prayer to Christ
and worship of him, ergo. This argument was urged by Franciscus Davidis and
Simon Budnaeus, but Fanstus Socinus (ut supra) was not able to give any
satisfying answer to this triumphing Reason. The Socinians are mad with reason,
if they conceive it reasonable to give Divine honor to any save God alone.
None pretend to be greater enemies to Idolatry, then the Socinians, and yet
they do clearly maintain this Idolatrous principle, namely that divine Honor
may be given to one whom they conceive to be a mere man, Christ blessed for
ever.

The Socinian Error is Fundamental, they deny Christ's satisfaction, and so
overthrow the foundation of our faith, Vide D. Stegman. Photin. Disp. 1. page 6.

Socinianismu^ Barlaus Pestem and ^verr^culu^ esse Christiana fidei dudum
cred^d^t, vianoque sternere ad (...) ejus religionis quam precioso suo sa^guine
aspersit ater^us aterni Dei silius. Vindis. C. Barlai page 8.


the foundation of our Justification; they deny the Holy Trinity, and so take
away the very Object of our Faith; they deny the Resurrection of these Bodies,
and so take away the foundation of our hope; they deny original sin, and so
take away the ground of our Humiliation, and indeed the necessity of
regeneration; they advance the power of Nature, and destroy the efficacy of
Grace. It is an Antichristian error, because it takes away the very Essence
and Person of Jesus Christ, for they deny him to be God, and so take away his
Essence; they deny him to be the second Person in the Trinity, and so destroy
his very person also. They do in effect rob him of all his offices, for if
Christ be not God, he is not that great Prophet foretold by Moses, who is
Prince and Ea quae negantur a Socintanu ad duo capita revocari possunt, (...)
seu articulum de SS. Trinitate, and (...) seu Articulum de humani geueru
Salute. vide Cal^v. Did. Th. Socin, a priscis hares. p. 111.
Author of life, Act. 3. 15. 22. ad finem, Act. 7. 37, 38. Nor can he be a
Priest able to save by the offering of himself, because the merit of his
sacrifice depends upon the dignity of his person: the offering of a mere man
cannot satisfy for so many thousands of men: and therefore the Socinians having
denied the Godhead of Christ, deny that he has given God full satisfaction.
Nor can Christ be a King, who has an heavenly and eternal kingdom by nature,
if he be not God.

It is an Anti-spirituall error, for they deny the Nature and Person of the
holy Ghost, the special grace and saving efficacy of the holy Ghost; they say,
we can understand the deepest mysteries of faith, and believe in Christ without
the special assistance of the holy Ghost.

They overthrow the very nature of Faith, for they confound faith and works;
Obedience to Gods commands is faith it self, or the very substance and Form
of faith. Fides (qua justificamur) obedientiam pr^ceptorum Dei non quidem ut
effectum, sed ut suam substantiam and formam continet. Socin. Miscl. p. 162.

They destroy the Moral Law which was delivered by Moses, by saying that is
imperfect. Christ came to fulfill (that is, say they) to make the Law perfect;
and they overthrow the Gospel, by saying that we are justified by the works of
the Law, and by their confounding of the Law of Faith, and the Law of works;
they say as the Jews say, that the great work of the Messiah is to proclaim
and confirm the Law, only they add that it w^^ his in^ent, legem Mosaicam ceu
minus perfectam perficere and locupletare, and therefore they say, Christ and
his Apostles did so often press obedience to the Law, to show that we are to
be justified by the works of the Law: and hence it is that they call our
blessed Savior, Mosen Mosissimum, as if Christ had not preached the Gospel,
the Law of Faith, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 3. 27. And by this means the
Law of Justification by faith alone without the works of the Law, which is the
scope of the Gospel, is quite overthrown.

They set open a wide gap to Atheism, by denying that the soul of man can
possibly so subsist by it self after this life, as to be capable of joy or
torment, of reward or punishment; they may when they please speak plain
English, and say, that there is neither Heaven nor Hell. Animadvertendum est
(say they) Christum and Apostolos coactos fuisse quodammodo Vide Stegman.
Disput. 56. p. 656.
hominum opinionibus, quae tunc plerunque vigebant, se accommodare, quemadmodum
satis aperte docet parabola Divitis and Lazari. Nam aliquem in inferno fuisse
and ibi torqueri, in sinu Abrahae decumbere, sunt plane fictitia, and similia
illis, quae Poetae de Ixione, Sisypho, Tantalo scribunt: hac etiam prudentia
hodie apud vulgus Christianorum in hac materia utendum, etc. I have transcribed
this out of Doctor Josuah Stegman the Reverend Superintendent of Scawenburg,
and when ever I cite Stegman briefly in the margin, I intend that learned
Author, and not Ioachimus Stegman the grand Socinian.

The Socinians desire to take us off from giving any heed to the received
interpretations of Neque Patres propterea recipiu^t, quia cum Scriptura
consentiunt; sed scripturam ^o mode in intelligenda^ censen^ quia Patres ita ex
plicarunt. Ideoque pri^s de unanimi Patru^ Concilioru^que consensu, quam de
vero Scriptura sensu sunt solliciti. Brev. Disq p. 7.
Fathers or Counsels, that so they may obtrude their own fancies and conceits
upon us as solid, and Rational, most accurate, but very moderate
Interpretations, vide Brev. Disq. p. 7. They of all men do most affect the
conduct of their own private spirit, which they call Right Reason; and though
they pretend that we are more busy in enquiring after the unanimous consent of
Fathers and Councels, then the true sense of the Scriptures, yet they do not
endeavor by this outcry to extol and enthrone the Scriptures, but to set
their own private spirit or Malle se Patribus istis, Conciliisque adh^rere,
quam Privatum, ubi v^cant, Suum de scripture sequi iudicium. I^ page 7.
judgment in the chair, which is indeed to make every man a Pope. This
conceit of theirs cannot but take well with the multitude, for every man (as
Luther says) is born with a Pope in his belly; and with a Pope in his brain
too, for every one would feign have his reason, his fancy to sit Judge in all
controversies, every man is apt to think himself infallible, and that his
Private Judgment ought to be the Public Standard. Finally, every one desires
to give a Toleration or a Dispensation to himself, that he may be allowed to
maintain such opinions and go on in such courses as are generally condemned by
the judgment of Learned and Pious men. There is another quarrel that they
pick with the Reformed Churches, and that is for extolling their Doctors too
highly, such as Luther, Brentius, Melancthon, Bucer, Chemnitius, Calvin, Beza,
Zuinglius and the rest, but they would pardon this error, if they did not
oblige other men to stand to the Judgment of these and such like Reverend
Authors; if they might have but their liberty of prophesying according to
their own private spirit or judgment they would be content, Hoe aut^m ann^^
est Ecclesi^ ejusque Doctoribus contr^versias cum alioru^ obligatione judica^di
Potestatem adscribere? Brev. Disq. cap. 2. page 8, 9.
but that the Churches pass their censures upon such as dissent from the most
received interpretations of Fathers, Councels and the Reformed Divines, though
such interpretations seem unreasonable to the Private Judgment of our acute
Socinians.

But there is a third fault greater then any of the former, and that is, that
the Reformed Divines make the Holy Spirit speaking Nimirum iudicem ipsi
Spiritu^ Sanctu^ statnunt: Saltem fine eo nullum cutquam de sacr^ judicium
concedere volunt. Quo ipso Rationis Sanae judicium ante Spiritus sancti
illustrationem plane tollitur. Disq br. cap. 30. page 9.
in the Scriptures (and shining into the hearts and minds of men by a glorious
light to enable them to understand the Scriptures) the Judge of controversies,
for by this means say they, the judgment of sound Reason is made useless and
of none effect or Authority before the illumination of the Holy Ghost: this is
an high fault indeed; we are it seems in great danger of being seduced from
the dictates of blind carnal reason to follow the light and voice of the
Scriptures, and the Holy Spirit. Besides, there is another greater danger, if
we follow the Spirit so much, we shall not be able to answer that Seraphique
Doctor, Valerianus Magnus, his book, de Acatholicorum credendi Regula Iudicio,
set forth at Prague, Brev. Disq cap. 4. Vera de judice sententia.

Itaque neg andum est nullum c^rto assequi verum.


1628. but it may be the book needs no answer, or they that follow the Spirit
and the Scriptures are not at leisure, they have better employment.

But let the Socinians speak their mind clearly, then what is it they would
have? why, they would throw the Pope out of his chair, and they would sit
there themselves by turns, that so they may be Popes round; for every man say
they has reason enough before he is enlightened by the Holy Ghost to judge of
the authority of Scriptures by Histories, and other principles, and to collect
out of the Scriptures compared, and the foresaid principles, not only all
things necessary to salvation, but many profitable truths besides, though not
so necessary. I should be very glad to learn what those other Principles are
besides the Scripture out of which we may collect truths necessary to
salvation; for this you must look into the seventh Chapter of this Brevis
disquisitio, Caterum ad sacrarum literarum anctoritatem and genuinam mentem
dignoscendam principia etiam illa quae Philosophica appellant advocanda esse.
But if a man be no Scholar, why, then those principles which are known to him
by nature, Quare qui istis sive naturali ingenii b^nitate, sive experientia vel
mediocriter instructus est, is and ^psas Scripturas sacras esse cognoscet etc.
Brev. Disq. p. 35.
and his own observation, are the Rules whereby he must examine; first,
whether the Scriptures be the word of God, and then, what is the true sense and
meaning of them; if such a man have but a good wit, a little experience (says
he) will serve the turn. Nay, he affirms that it will serve the turn, if by
the help of those good principles, his own good wit, and conference with
others, he do but hear the sum of those few things which the Socinians
conceive necessary to Quid quod princip^orum ^storum open etiam is qui s^cras
literas vel legere non potest, vel nunquam vidit, vel exstare ^^scit, etc. lb.
cap. 7. p. 35.
salvation, though he never hear or know, that there is any such book as the
book of God. Mr. Chillingworth comes very near this Disquisition-monger in
his accurate Treatise, for he says, The Scripture is not to be believed
finally for it self, but for the matter contained in it, so that if men did
believe the doctrine contained in the Scripture, it should no way hinder their
salvation not to know whether there were any Scripture or no, chap. 2. page 65,
66. I thought it had been necessary to have received those material objects
or Articles of our Faith, upon the authority of God speaking in the Scriptures;
I thought it had been Anabaptisticall to have expected any Revelation but in
the Word of God; for a Revelation, nay a supernatural revelation is necessary
to help natural reason, as the same Mr. Chillingworth acknowledges. Knot had
very unhappily branded Mr. Chillingworth for a Socinian, because he
maintains, That nothing ought or can be certainly believed, farther then it
may be proved by evidence of natural reason, (where I conceive, says Mr.
Chillingworth, natural reason Reason is in some sort Gods word says Mr.
Chillingworth. Answer to the Preface, p. 20.
is opposed to supernatural revelation) and whosoever holds so let him be
Anathema. Sect. 28. in his Answer to Knots Direction to N. N. Now let Mr.
Chillingworth say that either there is a Revelation to be expected out of the
Word, as the Enthyfiasts do, or else let him acknowledge, that God has
ordained the Scriptures as the means and instruments to reveal saving truths,
and let him teach men to depend upon the Ordinances of God, and not make men
stand at a gaze to expect a Revelation in an extraordinary way. Or else let him
speak plain, and say there is truth enough written in the hearts of every man
by nature to save him, or that it may be learnt from Philosophers writings; let
him say as Socinus does, that the substance of the promises is eternal life,
that the maine thing God looks after is practice, that Heathens and Christians
have the same practical rules written in their heart, and so if a man do but
hope for eternal life by observing these practical rules (as many Heathens
did, witness that verse of Phocylides, (...), and the Discourses of Socrates,
Plato, Hermes, etc.) he may be eternally saved; and then we shall know how
free he is from Socinidnisme. Or else let him confess, that natural Reason
being helped by a supernatural Revelation in the Word, is not able to discern
saving truths, so as to believe them after a saving manner, without the
special assistance of the holy Ghost, such assistance as is vouchsafed to none
but the Elect of God, and then I will acknowledge that he is no Socinian. But
otherwise, if either he think as he seems to think, that all the material
objects which are necessary to salvation, may be known out of some other book
then Scripture, or by some other means; and that if a man believe them merely
as truths probable by reason, and do not receive those truths as the Oracles
of God, but dictates of Reason, then sure he may be a Socinian still; nay, if
he hold a supernatural Revelation by the Word to be necessary, it being the
means which God has ordained, and so is made necessary to us by Gods
ordinance; yet if he think this outward revelation to be sufficient, without
the inward and special revelation of the Spirit, he may be a Socinian still.

But this by the way, I shall say the less of Mr. Chillingworth, when I come
to touch upon his Book; sure I am, such dangerous principles as these, will
beat green heads from the study of the Scriptures, if they be not censured
upon every occasion. I know Master Chillingworth protests that he is willing to
stand to the judgment of the Catholic Church, of this and former ages, to
the consent of Protestants, the Church of England; but if he put in the Papists
into the Catholic Church, as I believe he will; then he will say the Papists
do not agree, and therefore the Catholic Archbishop of Cant. his Relation.
page -- 150.

The Church of Rome did promulgate an Orthodoxe truth, which was not then
Catholickely admitted in the Church, namely the Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son: if she erred in this fact, confess her error.

The general Council held at Ariminum, did deny the Sons equality with the
Father; the Council at Ephesus did confound the two natures in Christ. Vide
Calovium de Consensu Patrum ante Concilium Nicenum.

Sociniani Trinitatem Cerberum, Christum Spurium, Incarnatione^ Christi
monstrum absurditatis, Satisfactionem commentum appellitant. D. Stegman. page
22. En Christianos Chillingworthianos.


Church of this age is not against the Socinians; nay the Fathers do not all
agree, and so there is not a Catholic consent of the Ancients, as Mr.
Chillingworth I beeleeve did purposely show at large in the eighteenth Section
of his Answer to N. N. that so he might wind himself out the better in this
28. Section: Nay, peradventure he will put the Socinians in for to give a vote,
if you ask for the consent of the Catholic Church of this Age, for he calls
them a company of Christians in the 29. Section; and though he says, They are
erroneous in explicating (he does not say in denying) the mysteries of
Religion, and allowing greater liberty in speculative matters, (so the
Socinians call the Articles of the Christian faith) then any other company of
Christians does, or they should do, yet for their honor he says, they
explicate the Laws of Christ with more rigor and less indulgence to the
flesh then the Papists do, and that is true, but not much for their
commendation, because they thereby disgrace the Moral Law of God, and say it
was imperfect, till Christ gave new Laws; but Mr. Chillingworth was willing to
take any occasion to commend them. Moreover if Mr. Chillingworth by the Church
of England, mean the Archbishop of Canterbury and his faction, then indeed
there will not be a general consent of the Church of England against the
Socinians. Once more, if he take in all the Arminians, and some Iesuited
Papists, that (as Vertumnus Romanus prescribes) come to Church and hear our
Common prayers, and receive the Sacrament in some Congregations in this
Kingdom, though they be of Mr. Fisher, or Mr. Flued his mind, and rank all
these amongst Protestants (for we have had strange kind of Protestants for
these twelve years last past,) then I believe there will not be a general
consent of such Protestants against the Socinians; and so Mr. Chillingworth may
oppose Socinianisme, when all these agree together to oppose it. But indeed he
has one Argument which makes me believe that he and more of that faction who
countenance many Socinian errors, do not agree with the Socinians in all
points, because Socinianisme if it be taken in all its demensions, is such a
Doctrine by which no man in his right mind can hope for any honor or
preferment either in this Church or State, or in any other. Many men do indeed
adventure as far as they dare this way, only they are afraid of thwarting
the great Design, as I shall hereafter show. I dare not excuse Mr.
Chillingworths dangerous principles, though I account him a very rational man,
yet I believe him to be the more dangerous, I dare not therefore give him that
liberty which he gives others, and cry, Quisque abundet in sensusuo, because
they are not the words of S. Paul, though Mr. Chillingworth father them upon
him, chap. 2. page 92. the words of the Apostle are, Let every man be fully
persuaded, or assured in his own mind, Romans 14. 5. I go on to show the danger
of Socinianisme. It is an Hotch-potch of Gentilisme, Turcisme, Judaisme, and I
know not what, they have put in some scruples of Christianity to make up the
mess. The Centuriatours say, that Mahomet did compose his Alcoran by the help
of the Jews, and Johannes Antiochenus an Arian: and truly Turcisme does much
savor of Iudaisme and Arianisme. Now Socinianisme is compounded of the self
same ingredients, Socinus borrowed very much from Servetus, and Servetus from
the Alcoran, as Wajekus proves, and Socinus does acknowledge, vide Antiwajek.
Soc. page 33. They say we hinder the conversion of the Turks, by departing so
far from them; whereas they agree with Turks in denying the Godhead, eternal
generation, meritorious satisfaction of Christ, in blaspheming the Trinity:
Paul Alciat, and Adam Neuser, two Socinians turned Turks; nay the Turks
discourse more solidly about the Prescience of God, then the Socinians, or
Arminians do.

The Resurrection of these very bodies was believed by Criminantur
Resurrectionem ejusdem carnis esse prorsus Mahometanam and Iudaicam, Calov.
Did. Theol. Soc. a pris. hares. p. 104.
none but Jews and Turks at first, (as the Socinians would make us believe)
and the Protestants have received it from them.

They open a gap to an Atheistical Libertinisme, by promising salvation to all
Heretics, ignorant persons, if they live but chaste, sober, just lives, and
expect eternal life, for that is the sum of the promises, and they need not
know or believe more: all the mysteries of faith are by them counted but mere
notions, speculations at best, and it is no great matter if men have diverse
and contrary opinions about them they may all fare well enough; truly I think
one as well as another, if there be neither heaven nor hell.

Socinians are not to be permitted in any Church, for they deny that there is
as yet any Triumphant Church above, nor is it necessary that there should be
any Militant Church here below. The Arminians jumpe with them in the same
Regem' sine regn^, Caput sine memoris, vitem sine ranis, Christum sine Ecclesia
somniant: ^idei articulum de Catholica Ecclesia ^sque ad finem ^nundi evertunt.
conceit, they say, Christ may be a King without a kingdom, an Head without a
body: Neque vero necesse esse credimus ad hoc ut Christus rex and caput maneat
in terris Ecclesiam veram semper esse. Their reasons are, because Christ's
kingdom does rather consist in his own Sovereign Authority, then in the
obedience and subjection of any people. Besides, if there were a necessity of
it that there must be a Church on earth, then Christ's people would not be a
free willing people, and so there would be no spiritual Church, if they are
not left at liberty, to accept or refuse Christ; sure that is a rebellious
Liberty, for a liberty to reject Christ, is a liberty to rebel.

No man they say need inquire after the true Church, much less is it necessary
that he should be a member of the true Church, Ubinam quaeso est scriptum
Christum praecepisse ut unusquisque inquirat, and norit quaenam sit vera
Ecclesia? Socinus de Eccles. These.

They would not have any marks given of a true Church, I suppose for fear
theirs should be discovered to be a false; but especially they deny, that the
pure preaching of the word is a note of the true Church, for with jeasting
Pilate they ask, What is Truth? How shall it appear, say they, that any
Church preaches the saving Truth? Nay Arminians and Socinians both tell us,
that there is no need of preaching: saving Truths are sufficiently manifested
they say, and yet it seems it is not sufficiently manifested to them, for they
cannot tell what it is. They do not see any great use of the Sacraments, they
cannot believe that the sprinkling of water upon the body, should have any
spiritual effects upon the soul; they cannot believe that our faith can be
strengthened, our pardon sealed, Christ and his benefits imparted to us by
eating of Bread, and drinking Wine. Now sure a Church that is without
Ministers, Sacraments, marks or signs of a true Church, would be but an empty
Titular Church, and to such a Church only should Socinians be admitted.

Socinians are not to be suffered in any State, for they will not show any
obedience or respect to Magistrates; they say, they have no power to punish
heinous offenders in time of peace, nor have they power to defend themselves or
the people by the Sword, in time of War. But especially, they charge the
Magistrates to beware how they meddle with good honest Heretics, for all
Heretics in the opinion of Arminians and Socinians (who speak favorably in
their own cause) are good pious men. What they say of the Law of Nations, or
of a particular State, I had rather you should read in their Writings then in
mine.

I believe your patience is already tired with this brief narration, if any
desire to be farther satisfied in particulars let them read this book.

CHAP. IV. Whether England has been, or still is in danger to be farther
infected with Socinianisme.
FArther infected I say, for it is too evident that it has been in some
measure already infected with this pestilent heresy. I know the Archbishop of
Canterbury did pretend to crush this cockatrice of Socinianisme, but all things
being considered, it is to be feared that his Canon was ordained for
concealing, rather then suppressing of Socinianisme; for he desired that none
but his own party should be admitted to the reading of Socinian books, it was
made almost impossible for any that were not of his party, to take the degree
of Batchelour of Divinity (I can say more in that point then another) or at
least improbable they should have means to pay a groat a sheet for Socinian
books.

It is well known that the Archbishop did highly favor, and frequently employ
men shrewdly suspected for Socinianisme. Master Chillingworth, to speak
modestly, has been too patient, being so deeply charged by Knot for his
inclining Spreta haud exolesce^ ejusmodi calumnia. sed agnita videbitur apud
nimis malos, aut nimis credulos, aut minus ami^os. Vind. C. Barlas p. 7.

Natural Reason (says Mr. Chilling.) then built on principles common to all
men is the last resolution unto which the Churches Authority is but the first
Inducement; in the margin. page 65.

Mr. Chill. counts himself no Socinian because he holds Supernatural
Revelation requisite to help natural Reason. Preface sect. 28. Yet he says
Scripture is not believed Finally for it self. page 65. that a man may be saved
who knows not whether there be any Scripture or no. page 66.


toward some Socinian Tenets: no man in Saint Ieromes opinion ought to be
patient in such a a case, and sure no innocent man would be patient. Mr.
Chillingworth has not yet answered -- Christianity maintained. The Protestants
do not own many of those principles which are scattered in Master
Chillingworths book, and Knot could observe that he proceeded in a destructive
way, just as the Socinians do. The Reformed Churches abroad wonder that we
could find no better a Champion amongst all our Worthies; they who travailed
hither out of foreign parts blessed themselves when they saw so much froath and
grounds; so much Arminianisme and vanity in Master Chillingworths admired
piece: What does it advantage the Protestant cause, if the Pope be deposed from
his infallible chair, and Reason enthroned that It may be humane prudence and
ordinary discretion did advise Mr. Chillingworth to use no more industry in
finding out the truth; or he has not been at leisure because of some
hindrances and^ distraction; and then he hopes that none of his errors will be
imputed to him. p. 19. Answer to the Preface.
Socinianisme may be advanced?

But I am afraid Doctor Potter may take it unkindly that I have named Master
Chillingworth before I would willingly know whether D. Potter does not take in
the Socinians into his christian world. p. 255. Why he makes the Church of
England to take part with the Jesuits against Piscator and Calvin, and implies
that Calvinisme is, as the black-mouthed Sorbonist called it, Bestiarum
Religio. p. 256, 257, 258. Edit. 2.

Mangones haresium sub praetextu moderatioris Theologia ^ n^stris ecclesiis
vere Reformat^s exierunt. Ioh. Peltius.


him; for his Grace employed Doctor Potter first, and he was cried up as a
Patr^ne of the Protestant Profession, but he sowred his Calvinisme with so much
Arminian leaven, and sweetened Popery with some such gentle Scruples of Moderate
Divinity as they call it, that the Jesuits laughed in their sleeves, and Knot
was so pleasant that he could scarce refrain from laughing openly.

That these two great Champions do vent Arminian principles is manifest to any
man that has but Remonstrantes aiunt sese cum omnibus aliis sectis, imoue
Socinianis exceptis fraternitatem posse colere, excepta Reformata Ecclesia.
Apolog. ad Censur. Prof. Leid.
peeped into their books. Now that Arminianisme is a fair step to Socinianisme
has been sufficiently proved by Bodecherus, (though he has been derided, he
has not been answered) Peltius, Vedelius Arminian^s and Socinianes in viginti
and ultra articulis per vari^s paragraphos distinctis convenire probatumdedit
1. Peltius.
and others, so that I need say no more in that point.

What Art and care has been used to propagate the Arminian errors in England,
would require a large volume, and I had laid open all their sleights and
projects (had not my books and notes been seized on) to the full: God may give
me opportunity to say something to that point yet before I finish my course.

The Church of Scotland complains of his Grace, for he first protected
Wederburn, when he fled from Scotland for fear of the Church Censures, because
this Wederburn had poisoned the young students in Divinity with Arminianisme in
the new College at Saint Andrews; his Grace made the same Wederburn Bishop of
Dumblane, that so he might be Dean of the Kings Chapel, and vent all his
Arminian errors in the Royal Chapel, in despite of all the Presbyteries.
Then his Grace chose out 24. Royal Chaplains, such as were most likely to
preach the Deanes Arminian Tenets to the State when they saw that all
preferment did run that way. I will not say any thing of Master Sydserf, Doctor
Forbes, etc. You may read the complaint at large in a book entitled Ladens.
(...), or the Canterburian self-conviction.

But that which did most mischief, was a large Declaration procured by his
Grace, but sent in the Kings name into Scotland, in which their general
Assembly was much condemned for passing any censure upon Arminians. Besides,
his Grace had two Scouts in Ireland, the Bishop of Derry, and Doctor Chapel:
Behold three Kingdoms infected at once with this deadly disease, by the
pestilent subtilty of one Archbishop.

But I shall make it appear that we have gone nearer to Socinianisme yet.
Acontius was (as learned Peltius calls him) clandestinus Socinianorum assecla;
now I have wondered often what was the reason that Acontius was new printed in
Oxford by Doctor Potters book-binder. Creature I might say, if I did affect
the language of the times. They might as well have Printed Bonfinius, for I
find him joined with Acontius, they were both sneaking Socinians, they
followed Socinus just as Nicodemus followed Christ, by stealth and in the dark.
Iacobus Acontius and Bonfinius Socini clandestini asseclae. Judicious and
learned Pareus not long before his death writ a letter on the first of March,
1613. ad N. N. in which he expresses himself after this manner. Arminium
vestrum Sociniani in Polonia express ut Suum nuper nominarunt, una cum quodam
Bonfinio and Acontio clandestinis asseclis, quorum authoritate postularunt
afratribus Orthodoxis fraternitatem, isti vero fortiter recusarunt. Acta ad me
misit Synodus Lublinensis, cui nuper postridie Natalis Domini respondi, etc.
Pareus was a man of a very peaceable disposition, willing to compose all
differences which might fairly and honestly be compounded, as appears by his
Irenicum, and therefore his judgment is to be the more valued, but you see he
does not vent his own private opinion, but declares the judgment of the Synod;
I believe that every impartial Reader will think Non n^gamus (inquiunt
Remonstra^tes) esse nonnulla ad salutem creditu necessaria pracise, sed ea
pauca esse arbitramur. Et hic etia^ (inquiunt Profess. Leyd) gentum and
spiritu^ Socinianum animadvertimus -- Paucissima ad sal^tem prorsus necessarta
sunt (inquit Socinus) nempe ut Deus and Jesus Christus divino honor colatur,
praesertim vero Chartt as erga proximum exerceatur. Quam fide^ and charitatem
putant in eo subsistere qui neget Christum esse eund^m cum Patre Deum and
Spiritum Sanctum esse personam, etc. vide Pr^fess. Leyd. Censura^ Praefationu
Re monstr. prefix. Confess. sect. 22.
this passage very considerable. The Socinians have one Principle which draws a
great party after them of all heretics, and sectaries. Nothing (say they) is
Fundamentally necessary to salvation but only Faith or obedience to the
commands of Christ, for they make faith and obedience all one, ut supra. Now
Acontius was a great stickler in this point, and therefore learned Peltius
says, this opinion did open a wide gap to let in all heresies into the Church,
and yet Acontius and the Socinians thought nothing else Fundamental but
obedience to Christ's precepts; men might deny the Godhead of Jesus Christ, and
almost any Article of the Christian Faith, and yet be Christians good enough in
their conceit. Nihilque tandem fore Fundamentale praeter istud (scil.
Obedientiam mandatorum) ex mente Acontii and Socinianorum positum. See Peltius
his Epistle Dedicatory, prefixed before his Harmony. Well might Acontius his
book be entitled Stratagemata Satanae: but sorry I am that Doctor Potter
should be thought to have such an hand in publishing of it, that it was known
in Oxford by the name of Doctor Potters Stratagems. I know Acontius does in
that book mince the matter, but the book is so much the more dangerous, and
cannot but poison young students more insensibly and irrecoverably. Besides
Acontius his pretense of moderation and charity will work much upon men that
understand not his Stratagems, they will conceive that he grew every day more
moderate and more Caspar Barlaeus Iud^os Deum Abraham^ colcre (qua^v^ constet
eos Iesum Christu^ blasphemare) pios esse posse, Deoque acceptos, itemque Dei
amicos secundum Accuratiore Theologiam dici posse statuit, uti Vedellus de Deo
Synagogae.
Accurate also, and that he complied so far with the Socinians merely out of a
desire of peace. But though the book be close and dedicated to Queen Elizabeth,
yet ever and anon he lets fall some hopes of being saved without the
acknowledgement of those mysteries which the Church has long held for
necessary Articles of faith. What did the man that was cured of the palsy
believe? why, (says he) he did believe as it was fit, that that man who is
called Jesus was from God, (mark he does not say that he was God) and in favor
with God, and hoped that he should be healed by him, and yet his sins were
forgiven. Credebat enim ut par est hominem eum qui Jesus diceretur a Deo esse
and apud eum gratiosum, itaque sperabat per eum sanitatem se posse adipisci.
Illa vero eum cognita etiam habuisse omnia quae diu pro articulis fidei
Necessariis habuit Ecclesia quam sit verisimile, cuique judicandum relinquo.
Sunt and alia multa loca quae eodem prorsus tendunt. Nay he conceives Abraham
the Father of the faithful to have been ignorant of those Heads of Divinity
which we count Articles of Faith, Fundamental Articles. Abraham, says he,
believed that he should have offspring, that in his seed all the nations of
the earth should be blessed, that Canaan should be his, Caeterum de Religionis
apicibus istis ignorare opinantur (scil. Reformati) fas non esse mirum est
silentium quin, ipsum etiam Salutis mysterium per ejus semen Tecte admodum
obscureque promittitur. I put in (scil, Reformati,) for doubtless it is a jerk
at the Reformed Churches, and so that passage forecited, Ecclesia diu habuit,
is certainly a jerk for the Nicene Fathers, Athanasius and those ancients which
required such a distinct confession of faith. You see he seems to leave it
doubtful whether Abraham did believe in Christ or no; these oblique passages
and many such in his third book especially, do show what a good mind he had to
favor them, who at that time about the year 1565. did call the Articles of
the Christian faith into question. No marvel if he wrote so warily when
Servetus had been made such an example, in the year 1553. Besides Laelius
Socinus was now dead, and Faustus not grown up to his maturity. Sabellius he
says was an Heretic for saying that the Father did not differ from the Son,
but he is not so forward to call them heretics who deny that the Son has the
same nature with the Father; he tells us that * we must believe Dr Po^ter
recites some such passages p. 117. of his own book, but will not take any
notice of Acontius.
Christ to be the Son of God, and to be made man, but he does not press us
to believe that Christ is God. We need not wonder at his moderation, when he is
very tender even about Transubstantiation, and unwilling to appear on either
side. Magna jamdudum fuit and vere tragica controversia de Interpretatione
verborum little, Accipite, hoc est corpus meum; non necesse est autem me hoc
loco utrarum sim partium aperire, tantum catenus quidem utrarumque esse me
profiteor, quod utrosque adveram Dei ecclesiam pertinere nihil prorsus dubitem,
lib. 3. --. and a little after, De verborum sententia lis est, non de veritate:
this is an excellent device indeed to help off the grossest Heretics, and say
that they only differ from us about the meaning of some places of Scripture.
Christ says he bids all come unto him that are heavy laden, and what says he,
will you of your own head say to any man that is coming to Christ, Heus tu!
frustra accedis qui hoc and illud non credas? But if you reply that Acontius
has not reckoned some points of religion which are of high concernment, and
therefore you may safely tell a man unless he believe them he cannot be saved;
he has endeavored to prevent your reply by this excuse; Si miraris inter ea
quae recensuimus cognitu necessaria non Dr. Potter might have corrected these
passages out of his own principles, because for want of clear Revelation he
frees the Church before Christ, and the disciples of Christ from damnable
error though they believed not those things which he who should now deny were
no Christian, read from p. 245. to 250. of Dr. Potters book of Charity, etc.
numerari quosdam summo quamvis loco habitos Religionis apices, evolve
diligenter, Examine says he whether those high points could be known under the
old Testament to the people of Israel, etc. This is just the Socinian Device, I
will not trouble you any longer with the unsavory discourse of that rotten
Author, whose main Stratageme was a pretended Moderation and feigned Charity.

Let us now pass on to some later Authors; Doctor Francis White was a man
countenanced by the Archbishop to write against the Sabbath, and in his
Epistle Dedicatory to the Archbishop, well knowing what would please his
Graces tooth, he says that we are beholding to the Testimony of the Bishops,
for the weightiest matters in religion, and amongst the rest he says for the
eternal Deity of the blessed Savior; It seems if the Christian world had not
given credit to the testimony of Bishops, the eternal Deity of Christ had not
been acknowledged by Christians; what if Bishops had lost their Votes, and
credit some ages since, must Christ have lost his Deity, or at least the honor
of it? Is there nothing written in Scripture concerning the eternal Deity of
Christ? this is just indeed as Tertullian says, Nisi Deus homini placuerit,
Deus non erit. This book was printed See Dr. Page his answer to that Treatise;
and a little box of Antidotes against some infectious passages in a Tract
concerning Schism.
in the year 1635. I need say nothing of that little Pamphlet about Schism,
printed not long since, because other men have said so much of it, I am
credibly informed that when the Author of it was asked by a great person in
this Kingdom, what he thought of the Socinians, he answered, If you could
secure my life I would tell you what I think; and truly he has told us what he
thinks in this little tract, viz. that Arianisme was but a Rent in the Church
upon matter of opinion; p. 9. that those passages in our public forms which
offend the Arians, are but private fancies, and therefore he desires there may
be such a Leiturgy as the Arians may not dislike. p. 10. and then the Socinians
and Protestants might join in one congregation. But must we not say that Christ
is very God of very God that he is the great God, the true God, God blessed for
ever, for fear we offend the Arians, Socinians, etc. must we not worship the
Trinity of persons, in the unity of the Godhead?

His Grace will peradventure think it long till he hear what I have to say to
his own learned book. I must confess there is good learning in that book of
his, which was printed 1624. I should do him wrong if I should deny it; and
though there are some passages which sound ill, yet I have charity enough to
put a good construction upon most of them; but if a prudent Reader will but
compare that book and the enlargement of it together, which was printed in the
year 1639. he will find a great deal of alteration in that second Edition, or
rather second book, for it is indeed another book. I shall give you a taste of
some passages in the latter book which are not in the former, that you may see
how much his Grace had altered his Religion in those 15. years.

In the 76. Page he says, the Mysteries of Faith do not contradict Reason,
for Reason by her own light can discover how firmly the principles of Religion
are true. He does not say reason by the light of Scripture, or by the light of
the Spirit, but reason by her own light can discover how firmly the Principles
of Religion are true. The Socinians lay this principle as their foundation, and
keep so close to it that they reject the weightiest Articles of the Christian
faith; because Reason cannot discover them to be true by her own light, that is
reason (ante Spiritus sancti illustrationem) before the illumination of the
Holy Ghost, as they explain themselves in their Brevis Disquisitio, cap. 3. de
Spiritu Sancto. And upon the same ground they do reject the Received
interpretations of Scripture, because Reason cannot discover how firmly they
are true. Can the Archbishop make it appear by the light of Reason, that
there shall be a Resurrection of these self same bodies; that there are three
persons and one God: that the Word was made flesh; that God was made man; that
Christ was born of a Virgin; that God justifies many thousands of the ungodly
by the obedience and satisfaction of one man; must we not believe these
Articles till Reason by her own light, without the illumination of the Holy
Ghost, does discover them to be true, and how firmly they are to be believed
because true? for that I suppose the Archbishop means, when he says, Reason
can discover how firmly these principles of Religion are true: Why do the
Socinians so often challenge us to be tried by reason, by common sense, by the
Judgment of all men, but because they conceive, Reason by her own light can
discover how firmly the principles of religion are true? I know the Socinians
do talk much of the offices of Christ, but they receive nothing from the
Scripture, concerning Christ's offices, but what is as they say agreeable to
Reason. They say likewise that it is necessary to salvation to know the
promises of God, but they affirm that it will suffice, if a man be but
acquainted with the substance of them, if he does but hope for a better life
after this, which even some Heathens did without the knowledge of Christ or his
Gospel. Reason by its own light did discover unto them that the good and great
God had prepared eternal happiness for our immortal souls: if this then be
enough (as the Socinians say it is) to receive all things as Principles of
Religion which Reason by her own light can discover to be true, (and how near
the Archbishop comes to them, let the Reader judge) then the Philosophers,
especially the Platonists, were in an happy condition, and it will be lawful
for a man to cry out aloud, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis, and he shall never
be thought an Atheist, nay shall pass for a good Christian. There was a Sermon
preached to Sir John Byron when he was in Oxford, which favored strong of this
Heathenish Divinity, and Sir John gave the Preacher solemn thanks for his
pains. Let us then Canonize the Heathens for Saints, and put Hermes,
Phocylides, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Plotinus, Cicero, Zoroaster,
Iamblichus, Epictetus, Simplicius, into our Rubrike, and let not Aristotle,
Alexander or Averroes be left out. The Sum^^ Religion is Socinian^ h^c es^, sub
spe alterius vit^ observare Mandata Dei, uti Calovi^s consid. Th So^in Prooem
p. 86.
Heathens did endeavor to keep Gods commands in hope of a better life. What
do the Socinians, or indeed Arminians require more? Now Reason by her own
light can discover that I ought to love God, better then the world or my self,
because he is the chiefest good; Reason tells me that I must do as I would be
done to; the Law of nature is written in the hearts of Heathens, the writings
of Philosophers do abound with principles of morality and good life, and
Socinus Sufficit ut s^iamus quae reverae praecipiantur vel vetentur a Deo, adeo
ut si in reliquu error occurrat nemo ob eun de^ calo excludatur. Socin, Epist.
2. ad Dudithium.
says, it is sufficient for a man's salvation to know what God has commanded
and forbidden; and if he err in other points, he shall not be shut out of
Heaven, for such errors as reason cannot by her own light discover to be
errors. In like manner the Archbishop, if he will be true to this Principle he
has laid down, must affirm that no man shall be damned for rejecting any
Articles of the Christian Faith, which reason by her own light cannot discover
to be true, and so manifestly true that they ought to be firmly believed. If
this be not Socinianisme in the highest, let the impartial Reader judge. That
the Archbishop has added this passage to his old book (perchance upon Master
Chillingworths weighty inducements) will appear if the Reader be pleased to
compare the 76. page of his new Book with the 21 page of his old Book.

There is another suspicious passage in the 25. section of the Archbishops
Relation, he descants upon a place of Epiphanius, page 185. and 186. Epiphanius
said, that in Peter were found even (...), The very Niceties, and exactness of
the Christian faith, says the Archbishop, and presently gives this reason.
For he professed the Godhead of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, page 186. How
will the Socinians triumph when they hear the Primate of all England
discoursing of the Godhead of Christ and the Holy Ghost as Niceties? I grant
the word (...), is most commonly used in an ill sense, but certainly Epiphanius
used it here in a good sense, which the Archbishop could not but see, and
therefore used the word exactness, but to gratify the Socinians he puts in
niceties, as if he had said, If you will be exact, you may say that Christ is
God, but that is but a nicety, somewhat more then needs, a man may be saved
without it; for the Arminians say Athanasius was too bold to prefixe that Proud
Preface before his Creed, Whosoever will be saved, etc. and I make no doubt but
his Grace was led much by them, he had such high thoughts of the Arminian
conceits. The Archbishop does acknowledge that in the old Latin Edition at
Paris, page 497. it is thus translated, In hoc omnes Quaestiones ^c
Subtilitates Fidei inveniuntur; therefore he might have said that all the
mysteries of Faith were maintained by Peter, though by the malice of
Anti-spirituall men even the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, and such like Mysteries
were made Questions, or at best counted subtilties, and Niceties.

Moreover when the Archbishop comes to speak of the proceeding of the Holy
Ghost from the Son, he persuades the Church of Rome to moderation, and then
lets fall a sweet bit for the Socinians to feed upon, page 25. And Rome, says
he, in this particular should be more moderate, if it be but because this
Article Filiog was added to the Creed by her self; and it is hard to add and
Anathematize too. The Socinians are apt enough to say that many of the Articles
of our faith were framed at Rome, and it seems his Grace would confirm them
in that opinion. This was added also to his new book, as will appear, if you
compare the 25. page of the new book and the 6. of the old. It is the common
practice of men addicted to the Socinian way to speak very favorably in this
point.

These I call very suspicious passages, you must not expect Demonstrations in
this point, for I know the Archbishop was too wise to speak plain, though some
of these passages Archbishops relatiion see page 309, 310, 311.
are plain enough. And I must profess that I do not believe the Archbishop
ever intended to bring in all points of Arminianisme, Socinianisme, or Popery,
but to pick out such points as might stand with the great Desig^e; he was to
humor all these three factions, that all three might join with him to
suppress Calvinisme, and then admire him as the Astolike Patriarch, Pope of
this other world of Britain, for he would not have us ignorant that Pope
Urbane the second even in a Council accounted his Graces worthy Predecessor
Saint Anselme as his own Compeere, (or fellow-Pope) and said The Arch Bishops
Relation. page 171.
he was as the Apostolic and Patriarch of the other world; so he then termed
this Island. page 171. of the new book. But I believe his Oecumenicall Grace had
such a thirst to be a Governor of this little world, and yet such a liking to
the Universal Grace of the Arminians, and the Right Reason of the Socinians,
that no man that has one dram of right reason can possibly free his Grace from
contradicting himself, and thwarting his own Design, by crying up some The
Archbishop calls Socinianisme an hor^id monster of al He^ies, page 310. Talis
non paucis Declarantium esset Theologia Sociniana in pluribus Articuli^, quam
tamen hacten^^ publiee el^gere non ausi funt propter scandalum, ide^ ab ^is qua
minus i^vtdtosa putarunt insidiose in incipientes, viam illa^ t^tissimam
tentarunt. Prefess. Leyd. Censur. Praefat. Rem. Sect. 23.
opinions which could not stand with his own Principles in his old book, and
his Plot which now and then peeps out in his new, and yet he has jumbled all
together for no other reason that can be imagined, unless it were his
Master-plot to countenance other men's opinions that they might promote his
Design, and for a copy of his countenance adore him as the Primate and
Patriarch of the Britains, whose Judgment is Final, and therefore there lies
no appeal from him to Rome or Cracovia, no not to Right Reason assisted by
Universal Grace; it seemssuch slaves he had who to satisfy his ambition and
their own, would deny both their Principles and his, that the Master-plot might
thrive and prosper. For it is observable, that our English Arminians, and
Socinians are nothing so true to their own principles, as the Ringleaders The
old Book. p. ^4. new. 121.
of these factions are beyond the Seas. His Grace both in his old book and in
his new, says that Reason and ordinary grace superadded by the help of
Tradition, do sufficiently enlighten the soul to discern that the Scriptures
are the oracles of God; here is the Socinians sound, or right reason before the
illumination of the Spirit, but to please the Arminians; Ordinary or Universal
grace comes in also, and the name of Tradition to please the Popish party; and
what all these are like to do without the special Grace of the holy Spirit, I
leave it to any Protestant to judge.

There is another Rule which his Grace holds fast in both his books, namely,
That the Churches Declaration can bind us to peace and external obedience,
where there is not express letter The old book. p. 9. The new. p. 31.
of scripture and sense agreed on. What, Sir, must there be no deduction, no
consequences allowed? must there be express letter of Scripture? there is one
Socinian rule. Secondly, when the letter of the text is express, must not the
point contained in the Text, and expressed in the letter, be accounted
Fundamental, because the sense is not agreed upon, but the point called into
question by some learned Socinian, or bold Arminian? is the sense of that place
of Scripture which has been received by so many Fathers, Councels, Reformed
Churches, Martyrs, not true, or the point not necessary, because it is now
called into question by some wanton wits that can hardly agree upon any point?
Must we then subscribe to that Arminian and Socinian principle, Nullum dogma
controversum est fundamentale? When a point begins to be controverted shall it
cease to be Fundamental? By this means we may bring in an Atheistical
Libertinisme into the Church; we shall have no more Articles of our Faith, then
the Arminians, or Socinians please to leave us. I believe we shall have a very
short Creed one of these days, if this rule be followed: for as fast as they
please to question our Articles we must part with them, especially if our great
Patriarch interpose his Authority, his Declaration must pass for the Churches
Declaration; if he say such a point is controverted and I command you silence,
it is not Fundamental now, because controverted, then we must be silent and
let the truth fall to the ground. This was the old muzle which was put upon the
Ministers mouths to make them lie still, like dumb dogs, whiles the thieves
stole away what they pleased, this and that Commandment, this and the other
Article of the Christian faith: we must it seems for Peace sake, part with our
religion, and disobey God that we may obey the Church: sure he that has the
head of a Scholar, and the heart of a Christian, will scarce have any inward
Peace if he perform external obedience in such a case.

This may suffice for a taste of the Archbishops Divinity: nor the young
Students could not but take notice of such passages, and therefore whet their
wits to maintain those opinions which his Grace countenanced. There was a great
Scholar who asked one of the Canterburian faction, what he thought of the
Primate of Irelands treatise concerning Christ's Incarnation, in which he
demonstrates that the Word was made flesh, and that therefore Christ is God and
man; the Canterburian answered, that indeed there was as much produced upon
that argument as could be said upon it, but under correction (says he) I
conceive the Primate has not cleared the point which he undertook to prove.
The men of this strain when they were at their height, began to vary their
expressions, they called Christ their great Master, or our Lord and Master, at
the highest, so that you could scarce tell by their prayers whether they did
respect Christ or their Patron most, for the Chaplains styled their Patron
their very good Lord and Master. Dr. Taylour in his epistle Dedicatory to the
Archbishop, before the sermon on the Gun powder treason, seems to affect that
expression of calling Christ our great Master; the Socinians will bear them
company in such general expressions, and some have thought of composing such a
Liturgy as might give no offense to Arminians or Socinians; that would be an
inoffensive Liturgy indeed, and they may do well to enlarge their Charity, and
make their Liturgy inoffensive to the Turks and Jews as well as the
Socinians; for any Liturgy which will please one that is a through Socinian,
will please Turks, and Jews also, if it be but warily composed, and they will
keep themselves in such general expressions as some do too much affect.

But of all that I have met with, none comes near Mr Webberly, a Batchelour of
Divinity, and fellow of Lincoln College, who has translated a Socinian book
into English, for the benefit of this Nation, and prepared it for the press.
Now they think they may own the business, they dare appear in their proper
colors, and blaspheme Christ in plain English. But because some parts of
Socinianisme strike directly at the superstition of Rome so highly extolled in
our days, and at the pomp of the Clergy, which must be maintained by the
sword (for what care they though England swim in blood, so they swim in
wealth and pleasure?) therefore Mr. Webberly tells us very honestly, that
Socinianisme was to be corrected and chastised with respect to the nature of
our climate; What need I add more? take all in a word.

There are some mysterious parts of Socinianisme that se^m Ab iis quae minus
invidiosa putarunt insidiose incip^entes viam illam suam tutissima^ tentaru^t,
ultertus Progressu^^ si pro vot^ succesiss^t -- non dubiu^ est quin Remonstr.
Soc. and in unam and eandem sectam coaluerint, etsi non in omnibus alits plane
conveniant -- public docent unu^quemque in sua fide salvari posse, etc.
Profess. Leyd. Cens. Prafat. Sect. 23.
Rational, these I think in good earnest, the men of this age have too much
doted on. Secondly, some parts of Socinianisme they qualify and chastise a
little, because there is a little too much quicksilver in them. Thirdly, some
parts they do totally reject, because they thwart the maine Design. Fourthly,
some parts of Socinianisme are instilled into the people, that they might be
made a mere prey to their Courts in times of Peace, and to their army in times
of war. Mr. Webberly, for instance, may be so far irrational as to be of
the Council of war, which no strict Socinian would allow; but then Mr.
Webberly would teach the people that they must not defend their possessions
against invading enemies, by force of Arms, because God has not given his
people any earthly possessions by Covenant under the Gospel, as he did under
the Law. Surely they have heard of Julian who boxed the Christians on one ear,
and bid them turn the other ear that they might be boxed on both sides in
obedience to their Masters command.

CHAP. V. Shows that the famous Atheists (Anabaptists and Sectaries) so much
complained of, have been raised, or encouraged by the doctrines and practices
of the Arminian, Socinian, and Popish party.
THere has been a great complaint of late that men are turned Atheists, and
surely not without cause, but let us sadly inquire into the reason. The
Socinians do deny Christ to be God to the glory of God the Father, as they use
to say, and I believe God the Father has taken it so unkindly at their hands,
that he has given them over to that cursed Atheism which reigns in the heart
of every man by nature, and is much strengthened by the profane wits of this
latter age. I remember a story of reverend Amphilochius who had been an
importunate suter to Theodosius the Emperor, that the Arians might not vent
their blasphemies so freely against the Son of God, because he was as God,
equal to his Father; but he could not obtain his request; at last the good
old man pitched upon this course, he comes to the palace of Theodosius the
great, and salutes the Emperor with all due acknowledgements and accustomed
reverence, but as for Arcadius the son of Theodosius, who was created
Co-emperour with his Father, Amphilochius passed him by without any respect or
reverence at all, and at last very familiarly strokes the young Emperor upon
the head, as if it had been some ordinary boy, and cried, God save thee good
child; At which the Emperor was extremely enraged, and commanded them to turn
Amphilochius out of doors: but this reverend man replied, I beseech your
Majesty to consider that if you are so much incensed against them who do not
honor your Son as they honor your self, what will God the Father think of them
who deny equal honor to Jesus Christ his Son, who is equal to his Father in
nature and power? The Emperor who was wavering before, was much confirmed in
his faith, by this seasonable Admonition, and presently forbad the Arians to
dispute any more against the Godhead of Christ. You may read the story at large
in Sozomen's Ecclesiastical History. Now can we imagine that God the Father
should take it less unkindly at the hands of the Socinians and all who admire
their acute blasphemies, that they deny Jesus Christ to be God? and what
punishment is fitter for such blasphemers, then that, Romans 1. Professing
themselves wise, they should become fools, and denying the Godhead of Christ,
and the holy Ghost, they should be given over, not only to deny the power of
godliness, but to deny that there is any God at all, because they did not like
to retain the knowledge of God?

1. The Scriptures do clearly show that God the Father is no more God then
Jesus Christ; But (say the Socinians) Jesus Christ is not God. Who sees not
what conclusion will follow? ergo, if they said true, there would be no God at
all.

2. The Socinians do not worship the same God with the Protestants; for we
worship the Trinity in unity, that is, all the three Persons as one God, they
say it is repugnant to common sense, to hold that the three Persons are one and
the same God, and therefore they may when they please leave it to common sense
to determine whether there be any God at all.

3. The Socinians proceed in a destructive way; now destroy all Religion, and
Atheism will be embraced in stead of Religion. Mr. Chillingworth has cleared
that point sufficiently, that Popery leads men to flat The Preface to the
Author, etc. Sect. 7, 8. 11. This is the mother, give her the child, etc. c.
2. p. 50. The doctrine of Indulgences takes away the fear of Purgatory, the
doctrine of Putgatory, the fear of Hell; the love of God will not be kindled in
the hearts of ignorant me^ by Latin service, nor by the mass if it were in
English: because some sins are made venial, the people may well doubt whether
there be any mortal; because the Pope has struck out the second Commandment,
the people may think he has Authority to strike out the first. The foundation
of all the Papists faith, the Churches Authority, is built lastly and wholly
upon Prudentiall motives;

Ac de Atheis quidem non it a fisissem crediturus unquam nisi me tenellum adhue
ipsorum agmina, summo discrimine salutu mea s^l^citavissent ante triginta
annos, quum li^^ris humanioribus operam in Gallia darem ^ Iunii sac. parallela
praefat.


Atheism: and it is plain and evident that if Papists must believe neither
more or less then the Pope thinks fit, the Pope may lead them all into
Atheism when he pleases. And how pleasing Atheism has been to some Popes, I
need not stand to declare, the Papists themselves have spoke plain enough. The
Papists have extolled the Pope above all that is called God, and therefore the
dullest Papist that can but see that the Pope is not God, will be ready to
question whether there be any God at all. If the Pope have more Authority then
God, then the conclusion will be easy: but according to the Romanists the Pope
has more Authority then God, for the Church is above the Scripture, the Pope
above the Church, he is the head of it: Let Papists though our enemies, frame
the conclusion, They who maintain the Popes infallibility, and yet cannot but
see how he takes upon him to correct Gods own Institutions, will conclude that
it is possible for God to be deceived, and then I am sure he is no God: and
whether the Pope be God, let the Papists judge.

What practices there have been by the Popish party for the promoting of the
Socinian heresies, I could show at large Libellum de SS. Scriptura Authoritate
Dominicus Lopez Societ. Jesus anno 1588. Hispali edidit D^Calovius de orig.
Theol. Soc. page 22.
if it were not too manifest to be proved. Faustus Socinus writ a most
pestilent book de SS. Scriptura Authoritate, and this book he did privately send
about in writing to his friends; Dominicus Lopez a Jesuit it seems was a
great friend of his, and the book coming to his hand he thought fit to publish
it for the common good. I need say nothing of Petavius his notes in Epiphan.
Haeres. 69. Cardinal Perron his reply to King James, lib. 3. his book of the
Eucharist. lib. 2. cap. 7. Mr. Fisher, Mr. Chilling. Answer to Knots-directio^s
to N. N. sect. 18.
or Mr. Floyd. How easily the Racovian and Roman Antichrists would be
reconciled, at least so far as to join against the Calvinists, is evident to
any understanding man. And Mr. Webberly in the Appendix or sixth Book of his
Translation, shows that the two great Articles which offend the Romanists and
Racovians are, 1. The total exclusion of all kind of good works from
justifying a man before God: and 2. The total negation of man's Freewill in
doing good. They are enemies to the grace of God, in justifying sinners freely
by faith alone in Christ, and to the powerful and efctuall grace of God in
converting and sanctifying our souls.

This is the grand quarrel, the Socinians deny Christ to be God, that so they
may deny that the blood of Christ did fully satisfy for our sins: these errors
strike directly at the Covenant of Grace, which is the foundation of all our
comfort, and if once we undermine the foundation, and reject the principles of
Christianity, it is then an easy matter to be an Atheist: for if the
Protestant religion be deserted, there is nothing in any other religion to keep
a man back from being an Atheist; for Popery, to speak strictly, is
Antichristianisme, Ideo di^unt Re^o^strantes se nolle hareses aut Athelsmu^
introducere quia no^ habent pro hare si id quod revera heresis and Atheismus
est, and abomns ecclesia qua Deum in tribus personis adorat pro heresi and
Atheismo habetur. Uedel. de Arean. Arminianismi lib. 1. cap 1 lib. 2 c. 10.
page 86, 87.
and I have said enough of Socinianisme; Iudaisme, and Turcisme, are too near
of kin to Socinianisme: let any man that doubts of this truth, read Doctor
Calovius his Decas Dissertationum, Vedelius de Deo Synagogae, and he may
receive satisfaction without reading others. And for the Arminian Atheism, I
refer you to Vedelius his book, de Arcanis Arminian. Anabaptists are justly
complained of, but from whence did they suck their poison (I mean the
Anabaptists of the last edition, (the men so much complained of) but from the
Arminians, Socinians and Papists? from the Arminians they received their
doctrine about the Fall and Free Will of man; are they not pure Armininians in
that great point of Predestination? they oppose the Reformed Churches in their
doctrine about original sin, the Socinians have taught them to deny that
Infants are conceived and born in sin, and this is the true reason why they
deny Baptism to infants, though I know they urge many Vide Brochmand. de
Peccato. c 6. 9. 1. Pelagio auxiliares m^nus prabe^t Anabaptistae etc. Colloqu.
Frank^a^t. 4 p. 230, 231. Peccatum morte Christi it a expiatu^ and ablatum esse
ut infantes naseantur omnis lab^^ expertes, ac eapr^pter lavacro Regeneration^^
nonindigeant. Smalcius disp. 2. contr. Francium peccatum originis commentum est
and fabula.
other reasons to color the business: no man need to wonder that Baptism of
Infants is neglected by all those who deny original sin, Pelagius of old,
about the year 420. said that it was a vain thing to imagine, that the sins
of infants were washed away by Baptism, because they have no sin at all, and
therefore Heaven was set open to them. The Anabaptists in the conference at
Franckendale, maintained that Infants were born without original sin, nay
without the least spot of sin, and therefore there was no need of their being
washed in the Laver of Regeneration. The Socinians tell us that Original sin
is a mere fable, a fancy. They that can go no farther then English, may read
a book of Free Will, Predestination, the first transgression; subscribed in the
Epistle or Preface after this manner, Your brethren the Anabaptists falsely so
called.

But I believe the reason why the Anabaptists are complained of at this time,
is because they are disobedient to Magistrates; for it is commonly said that
they have lately taken up Arms in rebellion against the King. I must confess
I have wondered often when I have heard of this daily complaint, because I know
that an Anabaptist does not think it lawful to be a Cutler, he thinks no sword
ought to be made, because he conceives it unlawful to use a sword. It is well
known that the Anabaptists go to Sea without any Ordnance in their ships, that
they travail without any sword by their side: But if there be any fighting
Anabaptist in these days, I suppose the English Socinians have taught the
English Anabaptists to deny those principles in practice, which they maintain
in dispute. Who are so active in all Counsels of war at Oxford, as men that
are shrewdly suspected for Socinianisme? If they deny this truth, their letters
which are daily intercepted will testify to their faces that they are not true
to their own principles. Yet I commend the Chaplains for their Design, they
would fain seize upon men's goods without force or violence, and therefore they
tell the people that they ought not now under the Gospel to fight for the
defense of their goods; and if they could persuade the people to be Anabaptists
in this point, then these Reverend Troopers and meek men of war, might seize
upon all the peoples goods, without force of Arms, and so be as true to their
Racovian principles, as the Racovians themselves, they might rob without
weapons, a whole parish might be plundered by one Sermon as well as by two
troops, if the people were but thoroughly instructed in (or as we say, beaten
to) this Conscientious slavery. All the spoil of a whole town would lie no
heavier upon the conscience of one of these Chaplains, then a rear egg upon
his stomach, for they are not ashamed to affirm that God has not given his
people any earthly goods or possessions under the Gospel, and therefore
plundering is not robbing, they do but take that from men which God never gave
them Mr. Webberly in the third chapter of his Treatise, tells us that God has
not given his people any earthly possessions now under the new Testament, they
must not regard earth but look after heaven; this is they say the
Court-Divinity; but sure the Rational Lords that have such vast possessions
should not be much taken with these raptures; if they be, it were good for the
Lords to turn Chaplains or step into a Cloister, and let their own Chaplains
be Lords in their room. How the Court-Chaplaines will maintain this Doctrine,
and not be as Anti-Monarchicall as the very Anabaptists, I profess I know not,
they might have done well to have excepted the Crown Lands; They were wont to
preach at the Court, that the Subjects have nothing of their own, but by this
doctrine they will leave the King nothing of his own; sure they mean to have
all to themselves. They must say that our King lives under the new Testament,
they will grant him to be a Christian, and therefore he must not regard earthly
possessions, etc. The King may perceive by this, what good friends he has at
Court. Nor do they stick to question the Authority as well as the possessions
or Revenues of Kings. The Anabaptists as disobedient to a Parliament as to a
King; any person or Court which has power to fine or imprison, Uide Conrad.
Heresb. de factione Monast. Theod. Strack. Hist. Anabapt. page 56.
is by them denied to be a godly person or a Christian court. It was one of the
Seditious laws enacted by that lawless faction at Munster, Magistratibus ac
Principibus nullus subjiciatur. The Socinians and Arminians think themselves as
lawless. The Si qui adeo tenera, aut sic a teneru imbutae conscientiae sinc ut
credant Christian^ nulli ne quidem Magistratum gerenti licere sanguinem
fundere, aut capital^bus suppliciis in sontes animadvertere, Remonstiantes eos
libenter tolerare paratisunt. Exam. Cens. cap. 12 page 141.
Arminians say that they can willingly bear with one that conceives it
unlawful for a Magistrate to punish any Delinquent with capital punishment,
though he do not embrace this opinion out of tenderness of conscience, but
only because he has been trained up in it from his youth. You see the
Arminians give fair quarter to the Papists and Socinians; if any man has been
nursed up in this opinion they will bear with him though his conscience be not
tender. They excuse Socinus in the same Chapter, and say that many honest men
were of this opinion before Socinus was born. The Arminians and Socinians make
a King of clouts, and put a wooden or painted sword into his hand to affright
children, for they say that he must not draw blood, no not in a legal way, for
capital offenses. The Defensio contra injustam vim qu^ sine potestate
effundendi s^ngu^nem est, non est defensio, sed defensionis larva terrend^s
pueris. Rem. ubi supra. Nam vox Gladii quemlibet defensionis modum, etiam quae
sine sanguine fi^, significare potest. Ibid.
Arminians foresaw this consequence, and are content to let it pass, they will
not alter the confession of their faith to avoid this inconvenience. In the
confession of our faith say they we use none but this general expression, the
power of the sword, and forbear to mention any Accedit quod fie^^ non possit
ut Infirmi isti in quorum gratia^ confessi^lus^t Homonymtis magistratus, and
justos magistratus tolere^t, cu^ expungant magistratu^ v^^d^eante^ justu^ (ex
officio nomine D^^^capitali supplicto impiorum ex numer^ Christia norum, and
annumerent Infidelibus and Homic^dis. Isac. Iun. Exam. Apol. R^monstrant. cap.
12. p. 311.
capital punishment, because say they we do not require all that embrace our
confession to maintain that Magistrates have power to inflict capital
punishments: whereby it appears that they do plainly equivocate even in the
confession of their faith, or rather the declaration of their opinion. Non
fidei nostrae confessionem, sed sententiae declarationem exhibemus, they use
general and slippery terms and teach all their Sectaries (the Socinians and
Anabaptists need no teaching) how to slip their necks out of so wide and loose
a collar. Reverend Iunius shows that the Arminians teach their Sectaries to
blot the name of any Prince or Magistrate out of the number of Christians and
make him an Infidel, if he punish the greatest offenders with death in a
legal way. Do any Reformed Divines maintain this seditious tenent which will
certainly ruin any State where it is generally received? Did Melanchthon,
Bucer, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, ever preach such doctrine? nay did they not
constantly oppose the Anabaptists in this very point? Nay was not the faction
of Anabaptists raised by the Devil and fomented by Rome, on purpose to hinder
the Reformation begun by those worthy Reformers? read that great Counselor
Conradus Heresbachius his Epistle to Erasmus, and there you will see the Devil
Satan ejusmodi pestes illum in finem exctavit, ne scil. R^formatio orbis
Christiani in doctrine and moribus jam a multo tempore a piis majoribus nostris
desiderata, and a Deo ter Opt. Max. tandem per Lutherum, Zuing. Melan Bucer.
aliosque Dei viros suscepta perficeretur. Arg. Epist. Heresbach Conr^dus
Heresbachtus principum Iulia Cliviae montium etc. Institutor and Consiliarius
qu^ notatu digna inter obsidendum occurrebant probe consignavit, utroque
insuper principe ju bente retulit, test Theod Strackeo.


raised them up in opposition to the Reformers. I know one of late preached
valiantly against blessed Luther, and said that Luthers book de liberate
Christiana gave the first occasion to the giddy Anabaptists to be so extra
vagant; Lambertus Hortensius indeed has a touch upon it, but he adds withal,
that though Thomas Muntzer was well read in that book of Luther, yet being an
illiterate man he did not well understand, or else did wrest that book to his
purpose; now if the book was not well understood, and worse interpreted, sure
the Interpreter was in fault, for if he had no learning he might have had some
ingenuity, or at least humility, and left the book to more learned Readers, or
candid expositours. Thomas Muntzerus Saxo erat homo ut accepi illiteratus, sed
ut apparebat, in hoc libello egregie exercita^us, and scripti interpres parum
Candidus, We must distinguish between the first tumults of Anabaptisticall
men, and Deliberate Anabaptisme. The first tumults were raised above an hundred
years since, by illiterate dreamers, such as Nicholas Storke, Thomas Muncer,
Phifer Ringus and the rest; yet Muncer at that time laid a fair foundation
Docebat Muncerus falsum esse Christu^ satisfecisse pro no bis, quicquid tande^
molles isti Scribae dicant. H Bullinger adversus Anabaptistas. lib. 1 p. 2.
for Servetus, Socinus and the rest to build upon; for he denied the
satisfaction of Christ; and what Doctrine is Fundamental if the satisfaction
of Christ be not? the Socinians make it their grand design to persuade men
that Jesus Christ has not truly and properly satisfied for our sins. The
Heresy of the Anabaptists was not backed with any strength of Argument, nor
methodically digested till Servetus and Socinus set to work, I must then look
upon Servetus and Socini Defens Tract de ecclesia sub nomine Nicolaidu: Omnes
qui Anabaptista vocantur qui in Polonia degunt, -- Belgio, Italia and c --
ideoque fraternitatem ^^m omnibus illis (se. Anabaptistis) inire satagun^
(nempe Socini asseclae) and quo minus res succedat hactenus per eos nullo medo
stat sed per illos penes quos ecclesiarum Evangelicarum regimen est and
gubernatio page 62. vide Profess. Leydens. Censuram in confession^m
Remonstrantium. Censur. Praesationis. sect. 24.

Lutherus datis ad Senatum Melhusanum literis monebat lupum hunc
perniciosissimum diligentissime cavendum esse. Bullinger adversus Anabaptist.
lib. 1 ca. 1.


Socinus as the maine pillars of Deliberate and Refined Anabaptisme. Luther
must be excused, for he was not guilty at all, it was an occasion snatched and
not given, snatched by Muncer, not given by Luther, when the Anabaptists urged
Luthers authority; for Luther did utterly disavow any such sense, as they put
upon his book, nay he abhorred their Design and opposed their faction even at
their very first rise. When Muncer was stepped aside to Melhusium, Luther wrote
against him to the Senate and desired them to beware of the woolf in a Sheeps.
skin; this was very early, in the year 1524. and upon the Lords day as
Bullinger assures me. In the year 1525. and the sixth of November. the
Anabaptists Anno 1525. in Curia Tigurina. Cyprian and the Bishops of ^arthage
Council, are cited by Anabaptists, but they were not pertinacious in their
error, as the Anabaptists now, the Arians and Donatists of old. There is no
command for Rebaptization in Scripture, nay not so much as example for it, as
the A^^baptists did themselves confess, when they saw that the place, Act. 19.
5. made nothing for them, See the conference at Frankendale, Act. 36. art. 12.

Vide Edictum Amplissimi Senatus urbis Tigurina. Bullinger adv. Anabap. lib. 1.
cap. 5. Singuli Anabaptista sufficienter nemine impediente and absquejurgiis
sententiam suam exposuerunt denuo tamen firmissimis testimoniis sacrarum
literarum declaratum est Zuinglium cum suis sectatoribus Anabaptistas vicisse.


were so confident of their own strength, that they challenged any Reformed
Minister to dispute with them; but when they were ready to dispute, one of the
Anabaptists cried out, Sion Sion, rejoice O Jerusalem, they were presently in
such a tumult that they were forced to remove to another place; yet the Senate,
Zuinglius and other learned men were so patient as to argue with them three
days together, and when the Anabaptists saw themselves confuted by the evident
demonstrations which Zuinglius produced out of the word of God, one of them had
a design beyond all the rest, he said Zuinglius was a learned man and could
prove any thing, but says he, O Zuinglius I adjure thee by the living God to
speak thy conscience, and tell the truth. I will quoth Zuinglius, thou art a
seditious clown, since milder answers will not serve the turn, I speak plain
and home. Upon the 15. day of November, 1525. the Senate made a decree against
the Anabaptists, and declared that Zuinglius had convinced them, clearly
confuted the Anabaptists, and therefore they would proceed severely against all
Anabaptists. Now about this time Servetus the great Grandfather of Faustus
Socinus, as has been shown, began to perk up, for Servetus was put to death
in the year 1553. because he had been a blasphemer for thirty years together;
so it seems he began to vent his blasphemies as soon as Thomas Muncer
himself, about the year 1523. Theodorus Serv^tus vetus ille sacrae Triadis,
id est omnis vere Deitatis hostis, adeoque mo^s^ru^ -- ne a fanaticis nostroum
te^ porum Sectis abhorrere videretur, Baptismum Infantium quoque horrendis
mod^s flagellavit and abominabilem reddere conatus fuit. Strack Epist. Nuncupat.
Strackius (being to set forth the History of the Anabaptists) slides on a
sudden into a long story of Servetus that monster of Men, and enemy of God, nay
(as he says) of the whole true Godhead in the sacred Trinity; this Servetus
that he might show his good inclination toward the fanaticall sects of these
times (says Strackius) has endeavored to make the Baptism of Infants not
neglected only, but abominated; I dare not mention his other blasphemies, at
which I think the very Devils tremble. There are so many several sects, both
of Socinians and Anabaptists, who have run away with their mouths full of
Anabaptisticall and Socinian blasphemies, that we must let them all pass for
Sectaries of Servetus Reliquos Articulos Muncer^ urgebant de Verbo Dei Subtili
non Script^, de Vi^ionibus and Reve ^ationibus, etc. Bullinger. adversus
Anabap. lib. 1. cap. 4.

The Papists allow a Divorce and the change of an Heretical wife as well as
the Anabaptists.

Johan. Angelius Werd in Synopsil Bodini de Repub. nihil a Davide Georg^o and
tal^bus optim^s Sanctorum alienum loquutus. Abominandes omnes Anabaptistas
superat blasphemus ille David Georgius. Bulling adversus Ana^ap. lib. 2. c. 14.


and Socinus, though some of them are far more dangerous then others. The
Anabaptists maintain some opinions which are as welcome to the Papists and
Iesuited party in England, as other parts are to the Socinians; the Anabaptists
did dream at first of an unwritten Word, and a very subtle one too, such as
the Pope and Jesuits dream of, and such visions and Revelations as the
Priests boast of. The Design of the Anabaptists pleased the Papists well,
because they endeavored to root out Protestant Princes and Ministers, the
Papists knew full well that no Church or State could stand without Magistrates
and Ministers. There is one Johannes Angelius who commends Servetus and says
he spoke nothing but what David George and such like Saints have delivered;
this Jesuited Politician you see has praises to spare for Servetus, one of the
most abominable horrible Anabaptists of all others, as reverend Bullinger
observes lib. 2. contra Anabaptistas. cap. 12. because there are 12. or 13.
sects of Anabaptists in his account, and Servetus was one of the worst sort;
but he says David George went far beyond even Servetus himself. The truth
is, these two were guilty of sublimed Vide Consuram Professorum Leydensium in
Confess. Remo^strantium, and Censur. Prafat. Remonstr.

In Arca A^minianorum ut in Arca N^a omnium sp^^ierum animalia, quamus is
diverse utentia pabulo, conservantur -- politic^ stratagemate Libertinis
omnibus, Anataptist^ etiam professis, aditum prabent, ut utano sibt parent ad
eos opprimendos, quos vident suis conatibus obstare. Cens. Pr^fat. Sect. 23 In
Synodo sua non obstante Confessione sus Pad^baptismum non esse creditu
necessartum statuunt, nec ministros (Anabapt.) e^ nomine dimovenaos. Cens page
305 De coena Domini error et Pontif and Luth. rejictunt, non Anabaptistarum and
Soci^ianorum. Censur. in cap 23. Confess. page 310.


Anabaptisme, deadly Socinianisme, though David George differed from Soci^us in
a point or two. Now what good friends the Jesuits are to the Socinians has
been already shown, what Patrons the Arminians are of Anabaptisme the
Professors of Leyden declare. This being premitted, let us sadly enquire
whether our late writers do incline to the Anabaptists and Socinians in the
great point about the Authority of Princes and Magistrates; For I know it is
commonly said that though the first Reformers did oppose the Anabaptists in
this point, yet the men that seem to be most zealous for a Reformation in
these unhappy days, are arrant Anabaptists in this point.

We live in an angry time, and men will speak passionately when they are
provoked, and vexed, I Personal defense is lawful against the sudden and
illegal assaults of Messengers sent from the Prince, nay if the King himself
strike at any one he may ward the Kings blows, hold his hands or the like. Dr.
Fern sect. 2. He does not condemn the people for hindering the execution of a
particular, passionate unlawful command of the King by a loving violence and
Importunity.
will not therefore take upon me to justify the angry expressions of the most
judicious writer, much less can I ever mention those bastard-Pamphlets without
indignation, which spring from a Licentious and prostituted Press. Let us
single out some that have lately studied this weighty controversy, and it may
be it will appear that they who are said to write against the King have settled
and established his lawful Authority upon surer Sect. 2. See the Book entitled
Scripture Reason, etc. The Text Romans 13. does secure a just ruling Prince from
all resistance. page ^. Magistrates must be submitted to by virtue of Gods
Sovereignty. Damnation belongs to obstinate resisters of humane laws which are
not opposite to Gods law. p. 5. 7.
grounds and better principles then those very men who pretend to write for the
King. Every man is now accounted an Anabaptist if he do not maintain Monarchy
to be Iure Divino; hear then what Dr. Fern says. We confess that neither
Monarchy, nor Aristocracy, or any other form is Iure Divino. Nay he says that
that Power or sufficiency of Authority to govern which is the ordinance of God,
is to be found not only in Monarchy, but in Aristocracy, Sect. 3. Moreover if
we consider the qualification of this governing power, and the manner
ofexecuting it even according to Monarchical government. Dr. Fern grants that
it is the Invention of man, and has not so much as Gods Permissive approbation
till that qualification or Form is orderly agreed upon by Men; in the self
same Sec. Be pleased now to hear Mr. Burroughes: However Princes may be
exasperated against Puritanicall Preachers (sai M. Burroughes) yet they are as
much beholding to them as to any people in their kingdoms for bringing people
out of conscience to obey Authority; You see here Mr. Burroughes his Sermon of
the 1. of Hoasts. page 45.
the people are pressed to obey the lawful Authority Scripture and Reason the
book set forth by diverse Ministers. The conscience is bound to obey the lawful
commands of Magistrates, Gods wrath is upon the conscience of them that
disobey. p. 8. Magistr^tes are to be maintained upon the public stock. p. 8.
read page 12, 13. and judge whether these Divines do not plead the Kings cause
better then Dr. Fern; they say that the very houses of Parliament may not
resist the Authority of the King commanding according to law. page 23. Read the
Ministers Epistle to the Reader, and their answer to the 7. Section of Dr.
Fern.
of the King out of Conscience by such as are counted Puritanicall Preachers.
In the answer to the observations printed at Oxford by his Majesty's command, I
find that Monarchy is not much younger then man himself -- that Regal Power
sprang first from Paternall, a Regal power belonged to the Paterfamilias, page
3. as if he meant only to conclude the subjection of the Kings children and
family: the Patriarchs were Patres Patriae without a Metaphor, they begat their
own Subjects. But how came diverse families to be subjected to one King or
common Father? why, reason (says he) did direct the people to choose one
common Father. p. 6. Monarchy then is grounded upon the peoples Reason, and yet
quite The Papists say that although Kings do govern by the laws of their
kingdom, yet because they are against the Catholic Religion, Subjects may
rise up against their King and kill him, this doctrine of theirs we abhor.
thorowout his book he talks as if the people had no Reason, for he tells them
that there may be reasonable motives why a people should consent to slavery, as
the Turks and French peasants have done: he teaches them how to perish with a
great deal of discretion, or else how to be safe by the benefit of slavery. p.
10, 11. The Observatour says that Regal dignity was erected to preserve the
Commonalty; It was so, says the Answerer, p. 8. and when Routs became
Societies they placed an head over them to whom they paid the Tribute of
Reverence for the benefit of Protection: What if the people be not, protected
must they pay no tribute? God send his Majesty better Protectours then this
Champion. Dr. Fern discourses just as wisely when he propounds David's rewarding
of false Ziba as a pattern to our King, he would persuade the King to trust
Papists as false as Ziba to seize upon the estates of his good Subjects; and
bestow their estates upon arrant Ziba's, men that abuse his Majesty and seek
their own ends, and when the innocence of the Subject and treachery of these
Ziba's, Papists or Pickthankes is discovered, yet the King must not reverse his
sentence pronounced in favor of the Papists though to the ruin of good
Subjects and their posterity, all this Divinity is closely involved by this
conscientious Doctor, in the 7. Section. How far the Divines of this time
differ from the doctrine of Papists is clearly shown by Mr. Mr. Burroughes
Sermon of the ^. of Hoasts. p. 41. See Mr. Bridge his Answer to Dr. Fern. The
Papists do not only hold it lawful to depose, and thus to depose their
Prince, but to kill him also, yea that a private man invested with the Popes
Authority may do thus, all which we abhor. Sect. 5. p. 32. Papists owe
subjection to a foreign State, cross centered to this of his Majesty's, in
its interest of State, and meritoriously malicious by its very Articles of
faith. The fuller Answer to Dr Fern. p. 23.

The name King does signify a person invested with different power according
to the variety of Laws in seveverall nations. See an answer to the
Observations printed at Oxford by his Majesty's command. p. 6. What the Laws
of the Kingdom and Privileges of Parliament are, the Lawyers books daily
published declare.

Nemo potest mutare Consilium suum in altertus injuriam. There would be no end
if the King should undo what he has done -- there can be no appeal from
himself to himself -- he is not to pass sentence in a private but in a
public and judicial way. Answer to the observations, page 22. Set forth by
his Majesty's command. Potestas (...) est (...)


Burroughes, Mr. Bridge, and therefore it is strange the Papists should be
counted the better Subjects. Mr. Burroughes does acknowledge the Kings
Supremacy, The King (says he) is Supreme but not Absolute, because his
Authority is limited both by the Law of God and of the Land. For we may and
ought (says Doctor Fern) to deny obedience to such commands of the Prince as
are unlawful by the Law of God, yea by the established laws of the Land; for
in these we have his will and consent given upon goood advice, and to obey him
against the laws, were to obey him against himself, his sudden will against
his deliberate will, Sect. 1. For instance, it is the Kings deliberate will that
this Parliament shall not be dissolved, or any forces levied without consent of
both houses of Parliament, as appears by two several Acts made this
Parliament. If then any take up arms either without consent of Parliament, or
on purpose to dissolve this present Parliament, they do certainly take up
arms against the King himself, (as Dr. Fern says) because against the
deliberate will of the King. If any Commissions then should be issued out in
the Kings name to any persons to encourage them to take up Arms without the
consent of the Parliament, or against the Parliament, such Commissions must be
interpreted to proceed from the Kings sudden will, which is not to be obeyed,
says Dr. Fern, against the Kings Deliberate Will. They are not the Kings
friends who advise him to send forth any Illegallcommands.

There is another answer to Dr. Fern entitled a By Law the King cannot, will
not refuse to hearken to his great Council --

Answer to the Observation page 28. and page 37. he says that by the happy
temper of our government, Monarchy is so wisely balanced, that as we are not
exposed to the dangers which attend the Rule of the many, so we may avoid the
inconveniences which might probably flow from the Atbitrary power of one. The
same Author does readily grant that Parliaments are good Helps in Government.
p. 13. ergo they are somewhat more then Counselors.


fuller answer, in which there is much Law and Logic (viz that in a Mixed
Monarchy there is a Coordinate Supremacy, and Coordinata invicem supplent) and
a great many things which the common people understand not. This Respondent
says (as Dr. Fern does) that Monarchy is not Gods ordinance, but then he tells
the people their duty in plain English, namely, that it is Gods ordinance that
men should submit without Resistance, to that kind of government which they
have by consent established, and therefore they must submit to this Coordinate
Supremacy, though it be the Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, as Saint Peter
says. page 17. Here is Submission out of Conscience for the Lords sake, to all
Legal Supremacy; what can be desired more, unless they would make the King an
Absolute Monarch? (and so give him an absolute Supremacy) which the King
himself does utterly disclaim in his answer to the 19. Propositions.

The zealous Divines of this very time do abhor the seditious practices and
opinions of all Anabaptists, who because the Church had not Christian Kings at
first, cry out with open mouth Quemadmodum Anabaptistae opinantur quod nullus
Magistratus in Ecclesia esse possit. Bulling adv. Anabapt. lib. 5. p. 157. See
Scripture and Reason set forth by diverse learned Ministers.
that the Church cannot be safe if there be any King or Magistrate in the
Church; nay they add that if a King turn Christian he must cease to be a King,
because Christianity it self is repugnant to Magistracy, and no Vide Bulling
lib. 5. cap. 2. cap. 2. Magistratum non posse neque debere curare res
religionis.
Magistrate ought to look after any thing that concerns Religion. They
maintain that Christians ought not to have any Judicial trials before
Magistrates, that no Christians ought to punish offenders with death or
imprisonment, but with Excommunication only. They would not have Heretics
punished by the Magistrate, Vide eundem cap. 4, 5. ejusdem libri. Contendunt
A^abaptista in Ecclesia unicuique libe rum esse debero ut agat and credat quod
ipsi visum fuerit, ubi supra. cap. 7.
but every man should be left to his liberty to believe what he thinks fit,
just as the Arminians and Socinians dream. I would Kings and Princes did
seriously consider that the Nulla Carnalis coercitio nulla poena err^ntibus
constituta a Deo est -- omnes in seipsum armat qui in alios quos errare credit
armatur. Par omnium in omnes Ius est. Qui sibi jus tribuit coercendi alio^,
idem aliis in seipsum Idem jus us concedat necesse est. Exam. Cens. cap. 24.
page 259.
Arminians have taught Heretics to rebel against any Prince or Magistrate who
goes about to inflict punishment upon them in a legal way; for, say they, if
the Magistrate goes about to punish an Heretic because he thinks the Heretic
in an error, the Heretics may all join together and rise up in arms against
the Magistrate because they conceive the Magistrate to be in an error; for the
Heretics have as much power to kill the Magistrate, as the Magistrate has to
execute such seditious Heretics, Par omnium in omnes jus est, is not that pure
Anabaptisme in the highest? Nay they add Lex ista de Apost^tis a
Christianisnio non agi^ nedum de Apostatis ad Iudaismum, and c -- Religionem
Suam liber am Christus esse voluit; qui ab ea deficiant, suo periculo and damno
deficiunt. Ex Censur^ cap. 24. p. 264.
farther, that though the Heretics be seditious, Reipub. Turbones, if they be
Apostates, if they turn Jews and blaspheme Christ, yet they would not have
them punished by the Magistrates: these Arminian, Socinian, Anabaptisticall
errors are justly abhorred by the Divines of this very time. There is at this
very day a great talk of Tubbe-Preachers; if there be any such, the Arminians
and Socinians must defend them as long as they keep in private, but if they
preach false doctrine Tub-preachers.
publicly, then indeed the Arminians would have them grievously punished, the
Magistrate may if it be needful (say they) make a whippe of Cords and drive
them out Nihil tamen ali^d colligetur quam ejectionem Hareticorum ex publicis
templis ad magistratum pertine^tibus licite a magistratu fieri posse, and
quidem si necesse sit flagelloe funiculis ei fini facto, ulterius aut plus
concludere nemo jure potest. At hoc jus Magistratui plena manu tribuunt
Remonstrantes; Hac ergo in part imitetur Magistras us Christum. Exam. Cens.
cap. 24. page 269. At in p^ima Ecclesia institutions cu^ ordo non est, au^ in
ejus restitutione cum ordo collapsus est, Missionem necessariam esse negant
(Remonst.) proinde came de essentia muneris Ecclesiastici, quod in verbi
legitima praedicatione consistit, non esse habendam. Ex. Cen. c. 21. p. 228 Aut
libertas hac communis esse debet and eo usque extendi quo eam quisque sibi
Concedi amat, aut vis inferenda aliorum conscientiis Exam. Cens. c. 24. p 277.
of the Temple, as our Savior did the Hucksters: Thus they abuse our Savior
and the Magistrate both in a breath, they will not allow the Magistrate to do
any more. They do not think it necessary that Ministers should expect a
Mission in the first constituting of a Church, for then there can be no order,
for order is not yet begun, nor must Ministers expect a Mission when a Church
is to be reformed, for then they say all order is quite fallen to the ground,
and therefore the Word may be lawfully preached by them that are not sent, so
the Arminians (Exam. Cens. cap. 21. page 228.) state the point. You see if
there be any Tubbe-preachers, now our Church is but Reforming, they do
punctually observe the Arminians grave instructions. The Arminians allow a
liberty of Prophesying, if any man shall persuade himself that he has
received some spiritual interpretations of the Word by the inspiration,
suggestion, assistance of the holy Ghost, and any Magistrate shall imprison
this man, because the interpretation is contrary to the Spirit of the Reformed
Divines, the Magistrate does imprison the spirit and quench the spirit, and the
Church of Rome may as well emprison any Protestant because he brings an
interpretation contrary to the Spirit of their Church, which is as the Papists
conceive infallibly guided by the Spirit. Here'snothing but Qui sibi persuadet,
a strong persuasion required to bear out this Enthysiast, though he seems to
the Reformed Divines to preach nothing but his own brainsick fancies, nay
phrensies, Sed hoc ipsum est Spiritum extinguere, authoritatem sibi arrogare,
Spiritum qui cum Spiritu nostro (by our Spirit they mean the Spirit which
enlightens the Reformed Divines) non convenit, pro insana and corrupta mente,
libidine contendendi, adeoque mali spiritus suggestione, censendi, eoque nomine
vi armata eum opprimendi -- Colloca teipsum coram tribunali Pontificio,
Reformationem dogmatum, and Articulorum variorum urgentem and orantem ne
spiritum tuum quem divinum esse credis extinguat; quid respondebis si tibi
reponat verba tua, an spiritus est quod cuique insana and corrupta men's,
contendendi libido, adeoque Remonstrantes causam nullam esse vident cur
sententia eorum qu^ Padobaptismum necessario in ecclesia Christi necessitate
seu Pracepti seu Medii retinendum aut usurpandu^ esse non arbitrantur, ut
entolerabilis in Ecclesia censenda sit, a^ proinde cur pastores isti qui eum
p^r conscientiam usurpare non audent -- proveris a^ degitimis p^storibus
Christi habendi non sint?
malus spiritus suggerit? Exam. Cens. cap. 24. page 276. Unless we have that
infallible Spirit which the Apostles had to discern spirits, the Arminians tell
us we must allow men liberty to prophesy contrary to the Spirit of the Reformed
Doctors, or else our censure of these Enthysiasts will be doubtful,
uncertain. Finally (for I am weary of this subject) they will admit Anabaptists
to be true and lawful Pastors of Christ. cap. 23. Exam. Cens. de Baptismo.
page 248. in fine. Sure this is liberty enough, the Socinians need not desire
more, the Arminians and Socinians then must patronize these Tubbe-preachers.

In the next place there is a complaint of Brownists, to which complaint I
shall answer briefly, and yet fully.

First, they are to be blamed who gave the first occasion Brownists.
of this Rent: I know between 40. and 50. years ago, there were some
followers of Brown, but in the latter end of King James his reign, the number
of Brownists properly so called was much decreased, and it was a rare thing to
meet with a Brownist; but when Bishop Land began to sit at stern, (and so he
did a while even in Archbishop Abbot his time) then the number of Brownists
began to increase; the reason was, because ceremonies began to be urged upon
the conscience with so much earnestness as if they had been necessary to
salvation: and about 6. or 7. years since when Where the eause of Schism is
necessary, there not he that separates but he that is the cause of separation
is the Schismatique. Tract concerning Schism. page 4.
the Archbishop was in his ruff, and his Priests began to surrogate it,
preaching for doctrines the commandments of men, and consequently worshipping
God in vain, Math. 15. 9. men of tender consciences (and those no weak ones
neither) began to fear, that they should transgress the Commandments of God,
by observing Traditions, Math. 15. 3. and conceived it vain, to join with them
in worship, who worshipped God in vain.

Many were prevailed with by this reason, but there were some of a moderate
temper, who if they might have the liberty of their conscience, and not be
forced to the use of any Ceremonies, would, and did, communicate even in
Parish-Churches: But the Archbishop of Canterbury began to lay on greater
burdens; Crucifixes must be set up at the East End, that was too plain; next,
the Communion Table, to color the Design, or, at least, to add varnish to it,
must be advanced into an Altar, and men must by a Tacit consent, (as we were
informed at the Visitation of Merton College) expressesome outward reverence,
by bowing toward the East, the Altar, the Crucifixe, choose which you please,
all if you will; but in no case must we be commanded to bow, and yet we must be
censured as disobedient, if we refuse to bow. This was interpreted by Rational
men an asking of our consent to bring in Popery: It was now high time to make
Protestations that we would neither bow to East, nor Host, nor Altar, for if
we held our peace we knew not what might come by Tacit consent. We were sure
that our actions would speak aloud, and how tacit soever our consent was, it
would be known to God and our conscience. I will not take this fair Hint to
tun into a long story of what censures were passed upon my self or others,
for our Protestation against this superstitious Innovation, but sure I am that
by degrees there were so many Innovations both in point of Doctrine, and
external worship, that the Papists themselves thought those of greatest worth,
learning and Authority in England, knew not well what Religion to be of, or
where to fasten. The Jesuit who wrote the directions to N. N. which Mr.
Chillingworth endeavors to answer, See Mr. Chilling. preface, Sect. 20.
began to triumph in our complyances with Rome. Hark what he says.
Protestantisme waxes weary of it self, the Professors of it, they especially
of greatest worth, learning and Authority, love temper and Moderation, and are
at this time more unresolved where to fasten, then at the infancy of their
Church. Their Churches begin to look with a new face, their walls to speak a
new language, their Doctrines to be altered in many things, etc. Mr.
Chillingworth is so vain as to call this painting of Churches the Beauty of
Holiness, Sect. 22. But to proceed, If the guides of the Church would not
endure so much as a Nominall Inconformity with Rome, if they and their
Adherents looked so like, and preached so like them, that the Papists
themselves took them for Roman Catholics; no marvel if the poor people
cried out that England was turned Babylon, and began to separate; for that is
Hookers Ecclesiast. Polit l. 5 sect. 65.
very observable which Judicious Hooker delivers in his Ecclesiastical
Polity. The people (says he) are not accustomed to trouble their wits with
nice and subtle differences in the exercises Mr Chill. Answer to the Preface.
p. 16. Sect. 22.

There cannot be any Schism in leaving Communion with any Church, unless we
are obliged to continue in it; man cannot be obliged by man, but to what either
formally or vertually he is obliged by God.

Was it not lawful for Judah to reform her self when Israel would not join?
Sure it was or else the Prophet deceives me; that says expressly, Though Israel
transgress, yet let not Judah sin.


of Religion -- and (says he) in actions of this kind, (he speaks of
adoration of the Cross, it may well be applied to adoration toward the East,
host, altar, Crucifixe) we are more to respect what the greatest part of men
is commonly prone to conceive, then what some few men's wits may devise in
construction of their own particular meanings. They then are to be blamed who
invented a few cogging distinctions to juggle with God and their conscience,
and thought to salve up all with some curious subtilties which the people
understood not. If they that should be lights of the Church gave no better
light then an Ignis fatuns, which does seduce them into bogges and ditches, if
they puzzeld the people and gave them good cause to doubt whether it was safe
to communicate or no, must the people communicate when they are perplexed with
such doubts that they cannot communicate in faith? He that doubts is damned if
he eat, Romans 14. 23. The poor people could not be resolved, and durst not be
damned; sure the Archbishop was rather Schismatic, The Archb. of Cant. his
Relation. page 149.

See Mr. Chillingworths Preface, Sect. 44. answer to the 2. Motive.

There may be just cause to depart from a particular Church in some doct. ins
and, practices, though that Church want nothing necessary to salva^ion. Dr.
Petter. 2. Edit. Sect. 3. p. 75.

There may be a necessary separation, which yet incurres not the blame of
Schism: The Archb. of Canterbury his Relation. p. 133. in margin.


in imposing such burdens upon tender Communicants, then the people in
separating from external Communion. Let Mr. Chillingworth be Judge, sure he is
no Brownist; Neither is it always of necessity Schismatic to separate from
the external Communion of a Church, though wanting nothing necessary. For if
this Church supposed to want nothing necessary, require me to profess against
my conscience, that I believe some error, though never so small and innocent,
which I do not believe, and will not allow me her Communion, but upon this
condition; In this case the Church for requiring this Condition is
Schismatic, and not I for s^parating from the Church.

Secondly, all Separatists are not Brownists; it is evident from this very
place of Mr. Chillingworth; for a man may have just cause to separate from the
external Nor can you say that Israel from the t^me of Separation was not a
Church. See the Archb. of Cant. Relat. page 149.
Communion of a Church, though he think that there are all things necessary to
salvation in that Church. But no Brownist does conceive that there are all
things necessary to salvation in any of our Parish Churches. They deny that
there is any true Church or Ministers of God to be found in any Parish of
England; or that all the Parishes taken collectively can make one Church of
God; they say our Congregations and Ministers are limbs of See the Defense of
the Churches and Ministry of England by Mr. Jacob against Mr. Johnson; the
Publishers Epistle to the Reader prefixed before the Book.
Antichrist, Babylonians, Idolaters; this Doctrine I have ever preached
against, (I preached against it even at Westminster, where they say there are
so many Brownists) and resolve to preach against it still.

3. There are some reverend and learned Ministers in this Kingdom, who are
commonly called the Independent Ministers, and these are all put down for
Brownists, if not Anabaptists, in the Oxford Catalogue, though the Arminians
Non enim si ab hisce coetibus ad alios forte discedat, protinus eos quos
deserit contemnit aut a spe salutu exclusos judicat, sed tantummodo ab
impurioribus ad puriores se confert, ut veritatem omnem saluti nostrae
aliquatenus servientem sibi cura and cordi esse ostendat, and Deo ac Jesus
Christo suo conscientiam suam probet, Say the Arminians in their Preface to
their Confession.
have no reason to censure any that go from a Congregation that is less pure,
to one that is more pure. I will therefore briefly show that these Ministers
are neither Anabaptists nor Brownists. They will not say the Magistrate is an
Head of the Church, but they say that Every Christian Magistrate is an Head in
the Church, which no Anabaptist will say. They say that the Prelates do not
hold from the Head, as all Officers of the Church should do, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
and yet they acknowledge that it is possible for a Prelate, and the Diocese
under him to hold the Head, as the phrase is, Colos. 2. 19. and this no
Anabaptist or Brownist will acknowledge. They will communicate even in a
Parish-assembly, where the Minister and people generally desire and labor by
all lawful means to procure a Reformation. They protest against Brownisme, as
a See Mr. Thomas Goodwin his Fast Sermon preached at Westminster.
bitter error, and full of cruelty; what can be desired more, to clear them
from being Brownists or Anabaptists? I heard the same man preach since with
much fervency and earnestness of spirit against the Brownists for this their
error, and among other inconveniences which arise therefrom, he mentioned
this, that upon the same ground and reason for which they chiefly make the
Churches in England no true Churches, nor the Ministers thereof, true
Ministers, they must make all those in Scotland, France, and other Reformed
Churches, (whom yet they seem to acknowledge) to be no true Churches; and so
no true Churches to have been in Europe since the Reformation but themselves,
which were a horrid opinion to enter into a man's heart.

4. Brownists do not, that ever I could learn, differ from Protestants,
concerning Civil government, and therefore See Mr. Buroughs his S^rmon of the
L. of Hoasts. p. 46. The Jesuits have ^eene the Authors and Instruments of all
tu^^ults, seditions, etc. as Dr. Potter shows, Want of Charity, etc. Sect. 1.
page 9.

The present Church of Rome persuades men they were as good for any hope of
salvation they have not to be Christians, as not to be Roman Catholics -- be
absolutely out of the Churches Communion, as be out of her Communion -- whether
she be not guilty of the same crime with the Donatists, and those Zelots of
the Mosaicall Law, let reasonable men judge. Mr. Chillingworth. c. 3. Sect. 64.
See Dr. Potter Sect. 4.


I do not know why men should cry out, that Brownists are greater enemies to
the State then Papists themselves: We have not yet forgot the Powder Treason,
and we do still groan under the Irish Rebellion.

5. If the Brownists be as bad as the Donatists of old, if they conceive that
there is no true Church but in part Brownistarum, as they conceived there was
none but in part Donati: if they should deny the Catholic Church (which they
do not) and refuse to Communicate with any of the Reformed Churches, or with
any Independent Congregation, because they will not communicate with any who
are ready to embrace communion with any Parish Church, let their error,
schism, pride, uncharitableness, cruelty, and bitterness be aggravated to
the highest, yet the Papists have no reason to complain of them; for Papists
deny the Catholic Church as directly as the Brownists can be thought to do,
they confine it to their own party; the Socinians and Arminians may hold their
peace for shame, for they both tell us, that it is possible that Christ may
have no Church at all, neither in this part nor that, he may be an Head
without a Body, an Husband without a Spouse, a King without Subjects, as has
been shown above, page 49. The Socinians say that there is not as yet any
triumphant Church above, nor is it necessary there should be any militant
Church here below. It was no error in the Donatists that St. Augustine and
Optatus did acknowledge the Donatists to be their brethren, and their Baptism
to be true Baptism, vide Aug in Psalm. 32. Con 2. Epist. 166. Et contra Donat
^post Coll. cap. ult. Optat. l. 1. Aug. contra Crese. lib. 4. cap. 4. de
Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 1. c. 10, 11. Dr. Potter does confess this truth.
Sect. 4. p. 107, 108, 109. the first edition.
they held it possible that the Church might be contracted from a larger
extent to a lesser, (as Mr. Chillingworth observes) but their error was that
they held it done de Facto, when they had no just ground or reason to do so;
chap. 3. p. 162. But the Author of the Tract concerning Schism does quite
outleape Mr. Chillingworth. It is (says he) a thing indifferent, the Church
may be in any number more or less, it may be in any place, Country or Nation,
it may be in all, and for ought I know it may be in none, page 7. Sure the
Brownist is more moderate, he says there must be a Church.

6. But the great quarrel with the Brownist is, that he would have the
Common Prayer Book taken away; To which I answer in a word, that they are not
all Brownists who desire to have that Law abrogated, by which the Common Prayer
Book is established; Mr. Chillingworth desires that there might be this trial
made between us and the Papists, That there might be some Form of Worshipping
God propounded which is wholly taken out of the Scripture; and herein says he
to the Papists, if we refuse to join with you, then, and not till then, may
you justly say we have utterly and absolutely abandoned your Communion. Answer
to the Preface. Sect. 23. May not some that are not Brownists say the same to
us, we keep our distance from you, merely because your Form of worshipping
God is not taken wholly out of Scripture, though for the present then we join
not with you, yet do not say (till that be done) that we do utterly and
absolutely abandon your Communion. The Author of the Tract of Schism would
have such a Form of service, as Donatists, Arians, Papists, all that call
themselves Christians, might join in; p 9, 10. You see he dislikes the
Commonprayer Book, and sure dislikes the best part of it, the Creeds, he is
far worse then a Brownist. Be pleased to observe that Liturgies were first
composed to expel Socinianisme, and Mr. Chillingw. desires that nothing else
should be required of any man to make him capable of the Churches communion,
then that he believe the Scripture, and that only; and endeavor to believe it
in the true sense. His Preface to the Author, etc. answer to the last Motive.

Ecclesiam nostram in omnibus audiendam esse co^sequttur duo ^ us modu, tum qua
mutaverunt pleraque in Divinis Officiis, tum qua multa retinuerunt: nam in
altero se ad Antichristum pertinere declara^unt; in altero nos esse populum
Dei, and se esse simias nostras confessi sunt. Brist. Mot Tom. 2. Mot. 23. p
242. and seq. See BP. Mortons Appeal.

Troubles of Frankford. See Dr Featleys Advertisement to the Reader, prefixed
before Ver^^m^us Romanus.


now this Author would have a Liturgy composed to let in Arianisme, or at
least to humor the Arians, and sooth them up in their Heresy, as if the
Articles of our Creed were but private fancies, and it concerned us more to
please Heretics, then preserve our Creed. But there is a learned man of a more
moderate opinion, and sounder judgment then either of the former, though they
be both very learned men, it is Dr. Featley, be pleased to hear him speak.
There is nothing (says he) in the Protestant Liturgy or Service which the
Romanists do, or by their own Rules can except at; The Confession, form of
Absolution, Prayers, Hymns, Collects, etc. are either such as the Papists
themselves use, or at least such as they dislike not; in his Annotations on
Vertumnus Romanus, p. 16, 17. Now this is the very reason the Papists brag so
much, and why some that are not Brownists take offense at our Liturgy. And this
learned Doctor tells us, that all who love the truth in sincerity, should with
bended knees humbly desire that his Majesty, and the high Court of Parliament,
would make some more certain distinctive sign between Papists and
Protestants, then monthly coming to Church, and taking the oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. Now how this present Liturgy which the Papists like
so well, can make any such distinction, let the prudent judge. I intend not to
run out into the large question, about the necessity or Antiquity of Liturgies;
but let men that are so violent in this point consider;

1. How corrupt those Liturgies are which are voted for ancient. 2. How much
Bishop Hall is forced to grant, when this question was agitated between him
and the Smectymn^ans. 3. To pass by what is said about the lawfulness of a
Set-forme, let them consider what Arguments are produced against the Imposition
of a Set-forme. 4. If it were granted that a Set-forme may be imposed, yet
those many cartloads of Arguments which are produced against this Setforme are
considerable. 5. It is confessed, that a Minister should be able to pray as
well as preach, and should give and even devote himself to prayer, he should
meditate and study how to pray. 6. It is granted on all sides that we ought to
pray according to the occasion, and how we should foresee all the wants and
straits of a Church, and compose a Set-forme for them beforehand, it concerns
them to declare. When K. James was to advise Prince Henry how to pray, he did
not think it sufficient to leave him to the Church-Liturgy, or to any prayers
composed by man; the only Rule of Prayer, says he, is the Lords Prayer: he
advised him to study the Psalms of David, because they being composed by a
King, he might collect prayers out of them most suitable to his wants, and so
he should be enabled to pray according to the occasion; he dissuaded him from
following the common ignorant sort, that prays nothing but out of books, for
that would breed an uncouth coldness in him toward God: he bids him take
heed that he be not over-homely in his expressions, for that would breed a
contempt of God: nay he counsels him farther, to pray as his heart moves him,
pro re nata, Read his (...), page 151. 152. Let these things be well weighed
and considered, and then our fierce men will not term every man a Brownist,
who desires to have that Law abrogated by which this Common Prayer book is
established and enjoined. I need not add what the Arminians and Socinians
think of Liturgies, only observe, that though the Arminians beyond Sea were
prevailed with to write something for the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
etc. in England yet they write but faintly, Exam. Censurae. cap. 21. and they
could not be prevailed with to write a word in defense of our Liturgy, they
will not admit, no not of the most received Creeds; there is (they Quare nil
dubitamus profiteri Athanasium limitem jur^ huj us pratergressum esse, quando
Symbolo suo super^am istam pr^satione^ prascripsit.
say) too much majesty in them, they call the Preface to Athanasius his Creed,
Whosoever will be saved must hold, etc. a proud Preface, for this is (say they)
to give divine Authority to humane Forms, and into the assembly of such bold
men let not our soul ever enter: you see what they think of humane Forms.
Exam. Censurae Praef. page 6. 7. and lastly, the Brownists had been in the
right if the Archbishop of Canterbury could have compassed his Design, for his
project was to root out all that would not comply, which if he had effected, he
had made good the Brownists opinion for them, for then there would have been
no true Church of God in England indeed; not a true governing Church, for his
government would have been tyranicall, not a true practicing Church, the
practices of his Grace and his adherents are sufficiently known: nor a true
teaching Church, as shall evidently be demonstrated in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. The Religion so violently contended for by the Archbishop of
Canterbury and his adherents, is not the true pure Protestant Religion.
I Intend not to transcribe overmuch out of Bishop Mountague, Shelford,
Pocklington, Dr. Potter, Mr. Chillingworth, Dr. Dowe, Dr. Heylin, etc. Their
Books are commonly The Canterburians Selfe-Conviction shows;

1. Their avowed Armini^nisme.

2. Their affection to the Pope, and Popery in the gross, cap. 3.

3. The Canterburians join with Rome in her grossest 1. dolatries, cap. 4.

4. Their embracing of Popish heresies and grossest errors, cap. 5.

5. Their Superstitions, cap. 6.

6. The Canterburians embrace the Mass it self, cap. 7.

7. Their Maxims of tyranny, cap. 8.

See the third Edition of this Canterb. Self-Conviction, with the large
Supplement which contains sundry very material passages.


sold, and I have given a taste already in the third and fourth Chapters of
some of these Authors; ex ungue leonem, as they say; there are a great many
passages collected and published already by several men, so that I am
forestalled, and by some happily prevented; there is a Book entitled
Ladensium (...) closely penned, and never answered, in which their Heresies are
filled up by dozens, There will come forth a Book very shortly, in which the
Design of Reconciling, or rather uniting Rome and Canterbury, (for there was
no great quarrel between them) will be more fully discovered; for these
reasons I may well shorten my journey. Let any man that desires satisfaction,
but peruse those Books which were Printed in England between 1630. and 1639.
and compare them with the Harmony of Confessions of the Reformed Churches, and
then he may easily judge. Mr. Chillingworth proves undeniably that the Church
of Rome is not Infallible, but to what end and purpose? why, that Rome and
Canterbury may shake hands, the Pope may abate something in point of Supremacy,
his Primacy being grounded upon his Infallibility; but if the Pope, Cardinals,
etc. the Archbishop of Canterbury and his adherents were united, the people
would be unwilling to part with their Mass: why for that if they will but
yield thus far, as to turn their Mass into English, the good men are
agreed; for Mr. Chillingworth tells the Papists, that no Godly Lay man (that is,
an ignorant Papist that is well conceited of the Mass) who is verily persuaded
that there is neither impiety nor superstition in the use of their Latin
Service shall be damned as he hopes for being present at it; Excellent
Divinity! A strong persuasion will Mr. Chillingworth^ Answer to the Preface of
Charity Maintained, which is as it were a second Preface, for it follows the
Preface joined with an Answer to the Direction to N. N. p. 9. Sect. 7.
turn superstition and impiety into godliness. Yet he says there is some
danger as long as the Service is in Latin, because the want of that devotion
which the frequent hearing the offices understood might happily beget in them,
the want of that instruction and edification which it might afford them, may
very probably hinder the salvation of many, which otherwise might have been
saved; that is, might have been saved if the Service had been in English;
this is plain dealing, the men are likely to agree, the Mass in English may
beget such devotion, afford such instruction and edification, as is sufficient
for salvation. Can the Papists desire fairer quarter, or a foller
acknowledgement? Is not this doctrine sufficient to effect an Accommodation
between Rome and Canterbury. I dare say all the Papists in England will fight
for such a Protestant Religion. Mr. Chillingworth in his Epistle Dedicatory
gives his Majesty to understand, That the Papists allow Protestants as much
charity as Protestants allow them; and therefore such Protestants and true
Papists will easily be reconciled, or indeed are already reconciled. I cannot
stand to reckon up Mr. Chillingworths principles, consider these that follow.

1. God is not offended with us for not doing what he The answer to the
Preface p. 19.
knows we cannot do. Whiles we are unregenerate God knows we cannot repent
and believe; is not God offended with us even then, for our impenitence and
unbeleefe? besides, he conceives that unaffected ignorance joined with
Implicit faith and general repentance is not damnable.

2. Mr. Chillingworth is verily persuaded that God will In the same Freface.

The second Preface. p. 19.


not impute errors to them as sins, who use such a measure of industry in
finding truth, as humane prudence and ordinary discretion (their abilities, and
opportunities, their distractions and hindrances, and all other things
considered) shall advise them unto, in a matter of such consequence. Sure God
will judge men with more then ordinary discretion, and therefore though we may
justify our selves when our opinions and practices are scanned by humane
prudence, yet God may justly condemn us for not attending upon him without
distraction; Such loose principles as these will nurse men up in security and
ignorance, or else betray them to indifferency in religions, to that Vide
Vedelium de Arc^nu Arminianismi: the four Professors of Leyden in their
approbation of that book declare them to be wilfully blind who do not see that
it was the scope of the Arminians to introduce Libertinisme. Vtnemo deinceps,
quinon sponte cacutire velit, de little ad Libertinismi Introductionem Scopo
dubitare possit Approbatio Facultatu Theologica Leydensis. Mr. Chilling first
Preface Sect. 29.
Arminian Libertinisme, which has been so much admired of late days, and
cried up as the only way to maintain peace. For if a man poisoned with this
principle be seduced by a Papist, Arminian, Socinian, he need use but ordinary
discretion, and therefore take but ordinary care to resist the seducer: Alas
his abilities are not great, his distractions not few, and his hindrances
many; besides if he have time to consider the Arguments propounded, yet he
wants opportunity, and therefore all things considered he had as good yield as
stand out, for it is in the eye of humane prudence, a matter of no great
consequence: for Mr. Chillingworth says a Papist may be saved, especially if
he have the Mass in English, and Socinians are a company of Christians, which
though they are erroneous in explicating mysteries and take too great a liberty
in Speculative matters, yet they explicate and maintain the Laws of Christ
with less indulgence to the flesh then the Papists.

3. Mr. Chillingworth thinks it sufficient to believe all those books of
Scripture (to be Gods Word) of whose Cap. 2 page 64.
Authority there was never any doubt made in the Church: he cannot in reason
believe the The book of Esther, Job, Ecclesiastes, the Epistle of James and
Jude, the second of Peter, the third of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
book of the Revelation. We live in a questioning age: and no man knows how soon
all the rest may be questioned. You may read more of Mr. Chillingworths
principles, in a book entitled Christianity maintained: the passage about Henry
the 8, etc. is too famous to be mentioned. Nos in diem vivi^ mus; quodcunque
nostros animos probabilitate percussit, illud dicimus. It aque soli sumusliberi
hoc est Sceptici, vide Ciceron. Tusc. quast. lib. 5. Answer to the Preface.
Sect. 26. The Archbishop himself is more sound. A Church may hold the
fundamental point Literally -- yet err damnably in the exposition of it: and
this is the Church of Romes case -- it has in the Exposition both of Creeds
and Councels quite changed and lost the sense and meaning of some of them.

The Arch Bishops Relat. page 320.


other books so undoubtedly as those books which were never questioned, and he
has the example of Saints in heaven to justify or excuse his doubting, nay his
denial. Sect. 38. There is no necessity of conforming our selves to the
judgment of any Church concerning the rest that were never questioned, for
that also he urges the Authority of some Saints in Heaven; ancient Fathers,
whole Churches by their difference about this point, showed that they knew no
necessity of conforming themselves herein to the judgment of any Church. Sect.
34. and yet of this controversy whether such or such books be Canonical, the
Church is to judge. Sect. 35. And the Churches testimony is, though no
demonstrative Enforcement, yet an highly probable inducement, and so a
sufficient ground of faith. What kind of faith this is like to prove, I know
not, which is grounded upon a probable testimony, to which no man need to
subseribe or conform.

4. It is enough to believe by a kind of Implicit faith, that the Scripture is
true in Gods own sense and meaning, though you know not what God meant, if you
use such industry as ordinary discretion shall advise for the knowing of Gods
meaning, of which I have said enough already; this may suffice for a taste. Dr.
Potter is very charitable to the Papists, because they receive the Apostles
Creed, but whether they receive it in the Apostles sense, is the question.
Whether Mr. Rouse or Dr. Potter has answered that subtle book most like a
Protestant, let the learned judge. I have said enough of Dr. Potter already, I
refer the Reader to Ladens. (...).

I am even ashamed to repeat what Dr. Pocklington has printed in his Sermon,
Sunday no Sabbath, See the first edition p. 48. 50. We must have an Altar with
a Cross upon it, if we will believe Dr. Pocklington, Altar Christianum. cap.
21. page 143. We may comply with the Jews in phrase, and other respects. cap.
22. page 147. I hope he does not mean in Caspar Barlaeus his sense, or as the
Socinians mean; he has a vain conceit that the Christian Church of the Jews
had Vide Vedelium de Deo Synagoga. Dr. Kellet his Tricenium. The Laick must
trust in his Priest, the Clergyman in his Church. p. 630. The ^u^harist to be
adored. p. 637. and received with our hands framed like a Cross. 655. Altars
adored. p. -- 644. The Arch Bishop of Ca^t. his Relat. page 147.
Altars. I hope they did not bow all, to, or toward the Altar when they met.
Act. 15. We must if we will believe this Dr. agree with the Jews in external
Rites and Ceremonies, p. 147. Give me leave to throw away this book; and Dr.
Kellet his Tricenium. When the Arch Bishop of Canterbury was to assign what
errors in Doctrine might give just cause of separation, he would not adventure
to set them down in particular, lest in these times of discord, he might be
thought to open a door for Schism; he knew full well that some who were
countenanced by him had brought in errors enough, which gave just cause of
separation. Knot the Jesuit spoke plain English to Mr. Chillingworth, when he
told him that the Doctrine of the Church of England began to be altered in many
things, for which our Progenitors forsook the Roman Church. For example, it
is said that the Pope is not Antichrist, Prayer for the dead is allowed, Limbus
Patrum, Pictures; it is maintained that the Church has Authority in This is
the Protestant Religion which the Papists fight for, in these fighting days.
determining controversies of faith, and to interpret Scripture, about
Free Will, Predestination, universal grace; that all our works are not
sins, Merit of good works Inherent Justice, Faith alone does not justify,
Traditions, Commandments possible to be kept. Your thirty nine Articles are
patient, nay ambitious of some sense in which they may seem Catholic.
Calvinisme is accounted Heresy, and little less then treason. Men in talk use
willingly the once fearful names of Priests and Altars. What says Mr.
Chillingworth to this bold charge? Why, Behold the Protestant Religion which
the Armiminians maintain. Mr. Chillingworth might have questioned the salvation
of the Jesuits as well as of the Dominicans, Ans. to the Preface. page 20.

First Preface with an Answer to the Directions to N. N. Sect. 26.


some things he excuses, and grants the rest. As for the Popes not being
Antichrist, the lawfulness of some kind of prayers for the dead, the Estate
of the Fathers souls before Christ's Ascension, Free Will, Predestination,
universal grace, the possibility of keeping Gods Commandments, and the use of
pictures in the Church; these are not things fit to be stood upon, we must not
break charity for such matters, these points have been anciently disputed
amongst Protestants, if you will believe an Archpriest Brearley; and so he
leaves that point; here is a fair compass, a long rope for a Papist,
Arminian, etc. to dance in. But Mr. Chillingworth says the Protestants have
constantly maintained, and do still maintain, that good works are not
properly meritorious, and that faith alone justifies; but either this is false,
or else men that are counted Protestants have changed their Religion.
Franciscus de Sancta Clara will inform him of the extravagancies of some in
these points, who passed for such Protestants as England has been guilty of
entertaining of late years. I have heard it publicly maintained in Oxford by
Mr. Wethereld of Queens College, that Bona opera sunt Mr. Wethereld his
Sermon at Saint Mary's.
Causae Physicae Vitae Aeternae, he had said before that they were Moral
Causes, by that he meant Meritorious, but that expression would not content
him. It is well known what Dr. Duncan maintained at Cambridge; what Shelford
printed there, what Dr. Dow and Dr. Heylin have since maintained, and to their
power justified; you may read their words at large in Ladensium (...) the fifth
Chapter.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has given us the reason why the Jesuits
refused to come to our Churches, (it seems he had invited them) since they
themselves acknowledge The Archbishop of Canterbury his Relat. Sect. 35.
Punct. 5. p. 307. A probable conjecture of his Graces Reason why he altered the
Service Book. The difference between the Scotch Li^u^gy and the English is
exactly set down in the Canterburians self conviction p. 97. to 113. See M.
Newcomen his Sermon preached on the fifth of November.
that there is no positive error in our Liturgy, and it is briefly this.
Because though our Liturgy had in it nothing ill, yet it wanted a great deal
of that which was good, and was in their Service. I can now give at least a
probable conjecture why his Grace altered the Service Book which he sent into
Scotland: why, surely to please the Jesuits, for he put in something which the
Jesuits counted good, and so in his apprehension made up the defect.

Mr. Newcomen in his learned Sermon has shown at large how punctual his
Grace was in observing the Jesuits instructions for the alteration of our
Religion. How truth has been sold at a low rate, by the highest Priests, is
clearly discovered by Mr. Hill in his accurate Sermon. Revend Dr. Hakewill
has set forth Dr. Heylin to the life, and therefore I will not presume to add
any thing to his happy observations. The Ministers Remonstrance will give
sufficient light to this point, I hope it will be published ere long. There is
a Book which passes from hand to hand as a precious manuscript called
Romano-Catholicus Pacificus, in which there are many fair offers made for a
Reconciliation between The large supplement of the Canterburian
selfe-conviction page 19, 20.

Bishop Mountagu^ says that the ^igne of the cross is the Instrument of
divine power and sufficient to drive away Devils, it is to be made in the
breast or forehead, etc. Orig. Eccles. Tom. prioris part poster' page 80.

Scripture and Reason, etc. Set forth by diverse; Ministers. The book called
Iesuitica Negotiatio gave Iesuited persons leave to profess the Protestant
religion, to keep any office, to pass sentence of death upon any person
according to his office, so he was as favorable as possible, and gave timely
intelligence of any severe sentence. page 74.


Rome and Canterbury, the Archbishop of Canterbury shall enjoy the Cyprian
privilege and be subject to no Patriarch, of which you may read at large in
the supplement of the Canterburian selfe-conviction, a passage well worthy the
serious consideration of all Statesmen. I might make my book swell if I should
but reckon up the tithe of Bishop Mountague his Popish expressions, and
therefore I leave men to peruse his writings, there are few points of Popery
which you may not find in his books or in his Articles at visitation; It
seems our guides were gone so far that the Papists thought they might accept
of all Propositions of Accommodation which were tendered to them by our gentle
Reconcilers.

Dr. Featley has excellently discovered what a good opinion the Romanists
conceive of some who profess themselves members of the Church of England;
Protestants are now counted Heretics no longer, if you will speak properly
and strictly, says that Popish Priest, and therefore sure Protestantisme is
waxed weary of it self, as Knot speaks; you may well know what Protestants
this Vertumnus means, such as have been cited in this sixth Chapter:
Concerning the book called Jesuitica Negotiatio, the Ministers have said enough
already. I admire at the impudence of diverse men who have thus freely expressed
themselves for the encouragement of the Arminian, Socinian and Popish party,
and yet are not ashamed to say that they stand for the Protestant religion. I
have seen a letter under Mr. Chillingworths own hand in which he does excite
Dr. Sheldon of All-soules, and Dean Just like the Iesuise Dr Potter speaks of,
who hoped well of honest Pagans, and rashly damned the best part of Christians.
sect. 2. p. 45. I say nothing of Dr. Sheldon his Latin Sermon in which he did
highly advance the Power of the Priest.
Potter, etc. to stand in defiance of the Parliament, and advises them to stir
up the youth (the young laddes of the University as he calls them) to oppose
the Parliament; Now can I or any man believe that Mr. Chillingworth does intend
to maintain Calvinisme, I mean pure Protestant Religion? I appeal to the
conscience of* Dr. Sheldon whether he has not reserved more charity for an
Infidel then a Calvinist? he has expressed himself very slily in his Sermons,
and yet plainly enough to intelligent Auditors, but I will take the counsel
of his Text, and judge nothing before the time. I remember his observations
upon that Text, Good Master what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
it is not, says he, what shall I believe, as the Calvinists would have it, (or
to that effect) but what shall I do? Sure the good Dr. forgot the Jaylours
cuestion, What shall I do to be saved? and the Apostles answer, Believe, etc.
Is this the Calvinisme he jerkes at? Knot I believe had some ground to say that
the infection was so general that it had overspread All Souls. I would there
had been no need of such discoveries, but since things are grown to this pass,
it is folly to complement, we are compelled to speak Plain English in Sober
Sadness. If our faith will be Dr Potter 2 edit. sect. 3. page 68.
lost except it be kept by a controversy, it is an act both of faith and love
for Orthodoxe men to undertake the controversy.

Dr. Potter does acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a member of the Church
universal, and says the Church of England has a true and real union still
with that Church in Faith and Charity: nay page 76. We do not forsake the
Communion of the Church of Rome any more then we forsake the Body of Christ,
whereof we acknowledge the Church of Rome a member though Impuritas non in
dogmatibus fidei reperitur, sed vel in conclusionibus minus certis, vel in
ritibus; alioqui si impuritas ipsum cor and medullam occupet, actum esse de
tali ecclesia omnes Orthodo ^i censent. Profess. Leyd. Censur. Praefat. Remonst
Praefix confess. sect. 23. That proud and cursed Dame of Rome, etc. says Dr.
Potter p. 11. She does poison her own children, gives them serpents instead of
fishes. p. 14. their charity is contrary to the true nature of Charity. p 16
they have more Charity for a Jew and a Turk then a Calvinist. p. 17. we are
persecuted with fire and sword and cursed into eternal fire by the Roman
Charity, as Dr. Potter says. p. 13
corrupted. But it seems in 8. or 9. years Dr. Potter had altered his opinion,
for in his Sermon preached at the Consecration of the Bishop of Carlslie, in
the year 1628. I find these words; [I am confident were the Fathers now alive
they would all side with us in our necessary separation from the abominations,
idolatry and tyranny of the papacy, with which no good Christian can hold any
union in faith, any communion in Charity.] p. 64, 65. The learned and reverend
Bishop Davenant did maintain that the Church of Rome was Apostaticall in his
sad determinations; if it be Apostatized from faith as Bishop Davenant says,
and has no more charity then Dean Potter says it has, how can we (especially
since our separation from Rome) be said to have a true and real union with it
still in Faith and Charity? It is in vain for him now to distinguish between
the Church of Rome, and the Court of Rome, though there was once ground for
that distinction, for Rome is all Court now; if he will have me use Charrons
similitude, the Church is the apple, and the C^ur the worm, the worm has
eaten up the apple, the Court has devoured the Church; we distinguish between
Fundamentalls and superstructions, and some talk as if the Papists were sound
in Fundamentalls, but the case is clear that they have overthrown the old
foundation, and all their superstructions are upon a new foundation, or upon no
foundation at all. For if their Churches authority be the foundation of all
their faith, and their Churches Authority be built lastly and wholly upon
Prudentiall motives; as Mr. Chillingworth shows, cap. 2. page 64. Sect. 35.
then sure here is a new Foundation, or else their Church is a Castle in the
air, a Church without foundations. I dare appeal to Master Chillingworth
whether the Papists do not err grossly (and therefore Fundamentally) in
those things which belong to the covenant between God and man in Christ? See
whether my inference be not grounded on his Assertion. page 17. the answer to
the Preface, Sect. 26. Dr. Potter tells us Read the ce^sure of Reverend Dr.
Twisse upon this passage of Dr. Potter in his treatise of the morality of the
fourth Commandment. page 34. Damnable i^ themselves is in both editio^s, only
corrected in the Errata of the second edition, damnable in their issue. D.
Twisse gives the reason. See Dr Potter 2d. edition p. 254, 255. We shall find
that in those Propositions which without al controversy are universally
received in the whole Christian World, so much truth is contained as being
joined with holy obedience may be sufficient to bring a manunto everlasting
salvation. p. 255.


that their errors and practices for which they have been forsaken of
Protestants are not damnable in themselves to men who believe as they profess;
but the Archbishop of Canterbury is more Orthodoxe, or else the man that gave
him this note was more Orthodoxe, (for doubtless the materials of that fair
fabric were brought in by men of different religions, the principles are so
cross) he says that error in points not Fundamental may be damnable to some
men, though they hold it not against their conscience. Sect. 37. Numb. 6. page
320. Dr. Potter and some others have a fancy of resting in the profession of
such truths as all Christians in the whole world agree upon. Master
Chillingworth will put in the Socinians for a company of Christians; I hope Dr.
Potter will not join with him; but the Archbishop dislikes this plot, as it
comes from A. C. or at least shows the danger of it, and would be better
advised in this point. He says he does not think it safest in a controverted
point of faith to believe that only which the dissenting parties agree upon, or
which the adverse party confesses; the Archbishop instances in the Doctrine
between the Orthodoxe and the Arian; if that rule be true which was mentioned
before, then says he it is safest The Arminians say no man is an Herelike who
denies a point which is, or may be controverted, and so they may deny the whole
creed. De harcticu quaritur, non qut ea qu^ in scrip turis aperte decis^ sunt
convellere audent, sed qui e^ qu^ controversa sunt, aut controverti pessunt in
dubium vo^ cant Exam. Cens. cap. 24. p. 276. The Archbishop of Cant. his
Relat. page 309, 310. Dr. Potter his Prayer.


for a Christian to believe that Christ is of like nature with God the Father,
and be free from belief, that he is Consubstantiall with him, etc. His second
instance is about the Resurrection. His third about the unity of the Godhead;
if we will rest in the acknowledgement of one God (he means, and not confess
the Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Godhead, for his Grace has not
framed his argument right) then Jews, Turks and Socinians will be as good
Christians as we are. The fourth instance is about the verity of Christ's
Godhead. The Archbishops Relat. p. 309, 310, etc. You see whither this
charitable principle would lead us, we must take in the Socinian first, as a
Christian, and then we may turn Turks with credit. I will conclude all with a
part of Dr. Potters prayer; The Lord take out of his Church all dissension and
discord, all Heresies, and Schisms, all Abuses and false doctrines, all
Idolatry, Superstition and tyranny, and unite all Christians in one holy band
of truth and Peace, that so with one mind and one mouth we may all join in
his service, and for ever glorify the holy name of the most holy and glorious
Trinity.

Amen. Amen. Amen.
The Printer to the Reader.
The Author being called from London to a business of higher conc^rnment could
not oversee the Press, but some few sheets being sent to him, he returned some
brief Corrections which he has desired me to communicate that the Reader might
blot out those things which are redundant, and rectify such mistakes as alter
the sense of the Author. Be pleased to take special notice of these that
follow.

S. G.

Errata.
In Page 2. lin. 6. r. he will not confess that they page 3. l. 19. dele (if
Smalcius be Judge) in page 3. l. 6. marg. dele [Sociniani] in page 6. l. 18. r.
[with him] but consider that Samosatenus p. 10. l. 20. dele [they] p. 27. l. 7.
r. but the cause of the quarrel is that the Churches p. 28. l. penult. r.
without the word. p. 33. l. ult. r. let them read my answer to Mr. webberley.
p. 37. l. 7. dele therefore. p. 38. l. 10. r. is it is quos ignorare.


