A SERMON Preached upon the First Sunday after the Proclamation OF THE High and
Mighty PRINCE, James the II. By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, etc.

Which was made at Leicester, February the 10th. 1684/5.

By Benj. Camfield, Rector of Aileston near Leicester.

Put them in mind to be subject, etc. Titus 3.1.

The Right of the Firstborn is His, Deuteronomy. 21.17.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's,
1685.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord and Patron, JOHN Earl of RUTLAND,
Lord Roos of Hamlake, Trusbut, and Belvoir, Lord Manners of Haddon, His
Majesty's Lord Lieutenant for the County of Leicester.
My LORD,
IT was a Transport of exceeding Joy, and comfortable Omen of our future
Happiness, (after that afflictive Sadness which filled all Loyal Hearts, upon
the surprising News of the Death of our most Gracious Sovereign of Bl. Memory)
to see and observe with what unanimous and cheerful Acclamations, and bravery
of Resolution, Your Honor, and others of the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy of
this County, with the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of Leicester, attended the
High Sheriff in Proclaiming the Succession of the High and Mighty King JAMES
the Second, as the Undoubted and only Lineal Heir of the Imperial Crown. And,
so soon as I had retired from that public Solemnity, my Thoughts resolved
themselves into These ensuing Meditations, which I here make bold to present
Your Lordship with; by that means to recommend them farther to a more common
acceptance and benefit: As containing in them a seasonable Mite or Two of that
Religious Loyalty which the Church of England traineth up all her Members to,
and is in a peculiar manner agreeable to Your Honor's constant Sentiments and
Inclinations: In hopes, that Your Lordship will not only pardon the
presumption, but admit of this small Present for an additional Testimony of the
most humble Duty of,

My LORD, Your Honor's Perpetually devoted Chaplain and Servant, Benj.
Camfield.

A SERMON Upon the Proclamation of King James II.
2 Chronicles 13.5. [ Septuagesima, Feb. 15. 1684.]
Ought ye not to know, that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel
to David for ever, even to him and to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt?


THe words are part of a notable Speech of King Abijah, (or Abijam, as he is
elsewhere 1 Kings 15.^.
called) the Son of Rehoboam, and Grandchild of Solomon: And they are directed
here to Jeroboam, who had headed the ten Tribes in their Revolt, and to all
Israel with him; as you may read in the foregoing verse. And Abijah stood up
on Mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, Thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; Ought ye
not to know, etc. -- And it is spoken immediately before a desperate battle
between their two Armies now set in array. On Jeroboam's side Eight hundred
Thousand men, and on Abijah's, but Four hundred Thousand, half the number: [*
impar congressus.]
Only he animates them here with the Goodness of their Cause, and alleges
That in the first place, as a terror and discouragement to their enemies.
"Ought ye not to know, etc. -- q. d. You cannot be ignorant of This, and
therefore it is your bounden duty to acknowledge it, that my right to the Crown
and Kingdom is inviolable, founded upon the Grant of God himself; from whom my
Father received the Kingdom over Israel [jure haereditario] by an Hereditary
Right, that ought to abide for ever: For so God gave the Kingdom over Israel to
David for ever, even to him and to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt.

["By a Covenant of Salt.] That is, by a perpetual, sacred, and inviolable
Covenant. For Salt drives away corruption, and is therefore (as Philo somewhere
[* L. de Victimas offerentib.]
calls it) the Emblem of Durability: And so it seems explained, Numb. 18.19.
"It is a Covenant of Salt for ever before the Lord. -- Or else we may take the
account of it from Vatablus. Salt, according to the Jewish Law, was required
with all their Sacrifices, Levit. 11.13.
and These were wont to accompany solemn Leagues and Covenants. Psalm. 50.5.
Agreeably to which, a Covenant of Salt is a sworn and solemn Covenant,
ratified and confirmed by such Religious Ceremonies.

Ought ye not to know, that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel
unto David for ever, even to him and his Sons by a Covenant of Salt? that is, a
sure, firm, and everlasting Covenant, called elsewhere, " The sure mercies of
David. (...). Isa. 55.3. Acts 13.34. For thus Nathan the Prophet addressed
himself to him, 2 Samuel 7.8, etc. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I took thee from
the Sheep-cote, from following the Sheep, to be Ruler over my people, over
Israel. Psalm. 78.72.
-- And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I
will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels [* Vnum
e liberis tuis.] Vatablus.
; And I will establish his Kingdom: He shall build an House for my Name, and I
will establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever. I will be his Father, and he
shall be my Son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of a
man, and with the stripes of the children of men, [ Humano more and poena
humana. i. benigna and clementi.] id.
but my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I
put away before thee: [* Regnum in tam longo tempore illis non auferam, ut
Saulis posteritati abstuli. Haec interpretatio optima, Josephi est, and aliorum
Hebraeorum.] Grotius in Loc.
[Rejecting him and his posterity from the Kingdom.] And thy House and thy
Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee. Thy Throne shall be
established for ever.

And therefore, though God in his Justice and displeasure, for the sins of King
Solomon, and Rehoboam's Insolency and Rashness, and the provocations under both
their Reigns, rent away Ten Tribes from the Twelve, yet he still reserved the
Principality of Judah to the Race of King David, on the score of This Oath and
Covenant, until the coming of Messiah; whose Kingdom was to be an Universal and
Everlasting Kingdom, though of a spiritual nature. Thus, when he speaks first
of this Judgment decreed, the Rent, I mean, of the Kingdom, he adds, That he
will not do it in King Solomon 's Reign, because he was the Son of David. For
David my Servants sake, says he, whom I have chosen, 1 Kings 11.34. Nay, That
he will continue a Tribe to his Son after him, ver. 36. That David my Servant,
says he, may have a Light [* Lucerna pr^ Regno, ut exponit Chaldaeus Paraph.
i. ut semper habeat aliquem ex nepotibus suis, qui regnet in Jerusalem, me
auspiciente.] Vatablus in Luc:
always before me in Jerusalem, the City which I have chosen to put my name
there. -- So therefore it is recorded of this King Abijah, notwithstanding the
provocation of his sins, whose heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as
the heart of David his Great-Grandfather: Nevertheless, faith the Text, for
David's sake did the Lord his God give him a Lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his
Son after him, and to establish Jerusalem, etc. 1 Kings 15.4, 5. -- And so
afterward, in the Reign of Jehoram the Son of Jehosaphat, notwithstanding his
provocations, 2 Kings 8.19. Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah for David his
Servant's sake, as he promised to give to him always a Light, [Lamp, or Candle]
and to his Children. And so it is repeted, 2 Chronicles. 21.7. Howbeit the Lord
would not destroy the house of David, because of the Covenant which he had made
with David, and as he promised to give a Light to him, and to his Sons for
ever. -- And to this you have a reference, Psalm. 132.10, etc. For thy Servant
David's sake turn not away the face of thine Anointed. The Lord has sworn in
truth unto David, he will not turn from it: Of the Fruit of thy body will I set
upon the Throne. If thy Children will keep my Covenant, and my Testimony that I
shall teach them, their Children also shall sit upon thy Throne for evermore.
[There should never have been any such thing known as a rent of the Kingdom, or
state of Captivity and Bondage.] For the Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired
it for his habitation: This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, etc. There
will I make the Horn of David to bud. I have ordained a Lamp, [Candle, or
Light, as before] for mine Anointed. His enemies will I cloth with shame, but
upon himself shall his Crown flourish. -- Whatever Diminutions or Interruptions
happened in the Succession, it was only an Affliction or punishment for the
wickedness both of Princes and People [* See Eccl^^ 47.20, 21.]
: But God resolved to continue a Lineal Descent of Kings from David until the
coming of Christ, the Son of David, and of the seed of David, as the Scripture
speaks. And therefore says he, even in the case of the division of the Kingdom
upon the transgression of David 's Children, I will for this afflict the Seed
of David, but not for ever, 1 Kings 11.39. which seems to refer unto the
Messiah, who was to be King of all the Tribes of Israel, and of the Gentiles
too, as Grotius notes. -- And this now is the Covenant of Salt, or perpetual,
incorruptible, inviolable Covenant, which King Abijah in the Text refers to,
and bottoms his claim upon. "Ought ye not to know, etc.

In which words he appeals unto them, as to Four points especially.

I. The Supremacy of the King over all his Subjects, called therefore here, "
The Kingdom over Israel.

II. The Divine Right of that Dominion or Supremacy. That the Lord God of
Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel unto David.

III. The Claim of Succession to this Hereditary Kingdom. Even to him, and to
his Sons for ever. And,

IV. The Vnalterableness of this Claim, grounded upon a particular Covenant of
God here in the Case. Even to him and his Sons by a Covenant of Salt.

As to all these points, I say, he appeals to their own knowledge and
conscience. "Ought ye not to know This? I will but briefly run over the
particulars.

First, here is couched the unquestionable Supremacy of the King over all his
Subjects. It Is the Kingdom over Israel. The Head of the Tribes of Israel
therefore is a phrase equivalent with King over Israel, 1 Samuel 15.17. When thou
wast little in thine own sight, faith he unto Saul, wast thou not made the Head
of the Tribes of Israel? and the Lord anointed thee King over Israel. The very
anointing typified as much, it being the known property of Oil to swim on the
top of other Liquors. -- And so of David, The Lord said unto thee, Feed my
people Israel, and thou shall be a Captain over Israel, 2 Samuel 5.2. And for
such a Pastor and Leader of the people the Elders of Israel acknowledged him.
The several Tribes had their respective Heads and Chieftains, but the King was
the Head of all those Tribes, and their Heads too. And therefore says St.
Peter, "To the King, (...), as Supreme, 1 Ep. 2.13. And, whoever teach
otherwise, [Et Apostolorum doctrinae repugnant, and Imperia turbant,] as
Grotius well expresses it, do both contradict the Apostles Doctrine, and
disturb Governments. Now it is the nature of the Supreme to admit of neither
Superior nor Equal upon Earth. Ea est summi conditio, us nihil aliud adaequet,
nedum superet. Tertull:
Thus St. Chrysostom speaks of Theodosius the Emperor Hom. 11. ad pop.
Antioch. and Hom. 20.
, [(...)] As having none of like Honor; for a King, says he, is the very top
and head of all men upon Earth. -- He is in the highest place, and highest
power; and consequently, all in his Dominions, Every soul of them Romans 13.1, 2,
5.
, are obliged to be subject to him. None may presume to judge or resist him
violently. There can be nothing justifiable on the Subjects part, but Obedience
and Submission. Rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus.-Aliter nec debeo, nec possum
resistere Ambros. Orat. cont. Auxent. and Epist. ad Marcell.
The rest must be referred to God alone, the only Ruler of Princes. For,

Secondly, It is by him that Kings reign: Their Power and Authority is derived
from him, and his Ministers and Vicegerents they are. It Is he that gives the
Kingdom over Israel, even the Lord God of Israel. There is no Power but of God;
The Powers that be are ordained (or ordered) of God, Romans 13. Nos judicium Dei
suspicimus in Imperatoribus, qui gentibus illos praefecit, etc. Tertull.
Apologet.
He only has the original power of life and death, and no one else can pretend
to it but by virtue of his Commission. -- And then again, He in his Providence
disposes of Kingdoms, both as to good and evil, shaking or settling, renting
or uniting, lessening or enlarging, the giving and taking away of Kings, either
in his Wrath or Mercy; putting down one, and setting up another, etc. Ps.
105.7, 8.
-- And Nebuchadnezzar, you read, was sent out a grazing among the beasts of
the field, till he came to know and acknowledge This, That the most High rules
in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.25. Thus
much was owned by Julius Caesar, in that excellent saying of his, Suetonius.
[Reges plurimum inter homines pollent, Deorum ipsi in potestate sunt Reges.]
Kings have the chiefest power among men; but Kings themselves are in the power
of God. Horace elegantly varies it: [Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.]


Thirdly, Of all sorts of Monarchy, that which is settled in a Lineal Descent
and Succession, is certainly the most eligible; and so God appointed the
Kingdom over Israel, when he had cast off the house of Saul, To David and his
Sons for ever. This tends most to the peace and quiet of Societies, when the
Heir to the Crown is known among them: This prevents the feuds, animosities,
and discords, which are almost unavoidable where the matter is put to vote
among many Electors. And, in Hereditary Kingdoms, we say truly, the King never
dies; the Sun never sets in total darkness: but upon the decease of any one
Monarch, the next Heir is immediately seized of his Authority, and stands up
forthwith in his place and stead. So Solomon speaks of himself, 1 Kings 8.20.
The Lord has performed his word that he spoke, and I am risen up in the room
of David my Father, and set on the Throne of Israel, as the Lord promised. --
And so did Rehoboam his Son, in the room of Solomon his Father, and our Abijah
in the Text, in the room of his Father Rehoboam. [ -- Vno avulso, non deficit
alter Aureus. -- ] The Golden Tree of Monarchy thus sends forth some fresh
sprout or other in the place of that which falls off.

And there is no pretense from any man's Religion or Morals to be admitted of,
as a bar on the one side, or excuse on the other, from Loyal submissions and
acknowledgments to this orderly succession. We must no more found Dominion,
than we do Property, in supernatural Grace or Piety. Christ, to be sure, who
proclaimed his Kingdom not to be of this world, [St. John 18.36. Audite omnia
Regna Terrena: Non impedio dominationem vestram in hoc mundo: D. Augustine in
Loc. Tract. 105. in Evang: Johan:
] never intended that his Religion should countenance any thing of Resistance
or Rebellion against the Rights of Princes. Nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani,
vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani. -- Christianus Nullius est Hostis,
nedum Imperatoris, etc. Tertull. ad Scapulam.
He came not with any intention to innovate in secular Governments, and has
obliged his Disciples by the Doctrine of the Cross, to take off all suspicion
from the Monarchs of the Earth of invading their Prerogatives by setting his
Title on foot among them. -- They proceed not therefore by his Rules and
Precepts, who seek to decline sufferings by any such unlawful methods, as the
interruption of a Lineal Succession for the safeguard of the Christian
Religion. And their Condemnation is just, who attempt so great an Evil, upon
the pretense, or to the end, that Good may come thereof, Romans 3.8. -- I have
often thought of what Erasmus Annotat. in St. Luc. 22.36.
says on the point of Christians Resisting by force of Arms, turning the Cross
into a Sword, etc. [Mitre nulla haeresis perniciosior, nulla blasphemia
sceleratior, etc.] In my esteem there is no heresy more dangerous, no
blasphemy more wicked. -- The precepts of Christ decrying it, his whole life
gainsaying it, the Apostolical Doctrine opposing it, so many Millions of
Martyrs, and the old Interpreters of Scripture all against it. Contra man
suetudinem Evangelicam. Victoria Evangelica in Tolerantia sita. Id. paraphr.
And here it may be remembered, that this learned man's worthy Paraphrase was in
a peculiar account at the beginning of our Reformation: it being one of the
Injunctions by K. Edward VI. [ That the Paraphrasis of Erasmus in English upon
the Gospels, should be set up in some convenient place in every Church, etc.]

Fourthly, We have a declaration here annexed of the inviolableness and
unalterableness of this succession in the Line of David, settled by a sacred
and solemn Covenant from God himself: Even to him and his Sons by a Covenant of
Salt. -- And, though God, according to his absolute Dominion, and in the course
of his Justice, as I said, upon provocation given, made some abatements in the
extent of this Government, by the renting of Ten Tribes from the rest, or dark
Intervals, by their Captivities; yet he secured a Principality to the last,
that the Scepter should not depart from Judah till Shiloh came Genesis 49.10.
; and overruled even the Lusts and sins of men to serve his own all-wise and
righteous purposes. But this is no apology at all for those who have no express
Warrant from the King of Kings to allege. We are bound up to the ordinary Laws
and Measures. If any men will enter into a Covenant or Association against
their Allegiance to Princes, it is none of God's Covenant, nor is there any
Divine Salt in it.

It Is the general compact and agreement of Society to be subject to Kings; and
we have the Tie of Religion superadded to that of our Natural Allegiance, to
strengthen it. On which account the Preacher lessons us; I counsel thee to keep
the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2.

These now are the Four points contained in King Abijah 's Allegation; The
King's Supremacy and Dominion over all his Subjects; The Divine Right of that
Dominion and Supremacy; The Claim of Succession to it in an Hereditary
Monarchy; And the Vnalterableness of that claim in the Government of Israel;
and, proportionably, in all like Governments, unless we will subvert or
overturn the Fundamentals of their Constitution.

And, as to all these particulars, he makes his appeal to them.

I. As matters of common knowledge, points wherein no one could justly pretend
ignorance. According to the vulgar Latin, [Num ignoratis?] says he, Are you
herein ignorant? or can you, with any modesty, in this case plead ignorance?
These are matters obvious enough to every one that opens his eyes to see and
understand. These have been sufficiently promulged and made known to you. If
there be any ignorance here, it is of that sort which we call gross and
affected; a willing, chosen, slothful, or wilful ignorance, which is no man's
excuse, but his condemnation. And then,

II. As matters fitting for Subjects, upon occasion, to acknowledge, and
testify their due acknowledgment of, by their ready compliance to and with
them. So Junius and Tremellius render it. [An non vestrum erat agnoscere?] Was
it not your part and duty to acknowledge this? And to that sense we read it:
Ought ye not to know, or own it?

So at all times, but so more especially upon the change of Governors, where
the Government remains still one and the same, immutable. It Is then proper,
when the person of any King fails or dies, to recognize the Right of his
immediate Successor: For the support of the Government, and the mutual
encouragement each of other to an hearty subjection unto it, that all things
may turn on their wonted hinges, and every one keep his place and station,
without confusion or disturbance, to the common quiet and welfare.
Particularly, that we may observe the wise man's injunction and fatherly
admonition, To fear the Lord and the King, and not to meddle with them that are
given to change, Prove. 24.

But I will not lead you at present beyond the circumstances of the Text: This
knowledge and acknowledgement then King Abijah here suggests for such weighty
ends as these ensuing.

I. To dash and discountenance all Insurrections and Rebellions against the
King in succession; like That of Jeroboam against his Leige-Lord Rehoboam, the
Son of Solomon, and this King's Father. Of which he adds in the following
words, ver. 6. Yet Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the Son
of David, is risen up, and has rebelled against his Lord. [* Out of Ephraim
ruled a Rebellious Kingdom. Ecclus. 47.21.]
Of him we read 1 Kings 11.26. Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of
Zereda, Solomon's servant, whose Mother's name was Zeruah, a widow-woman, even
he lift up his hand against the King. -- He was one whom Solomon had advanced
to a great place of Trust and Honor, making him ruler over all the charge of
the house of Joseph, ver. 28, etc.

And, though God in his wise and just Providence, as I have before in part
intimated, did overruled this man's ambition to bring his own designs to pass,
in the punishing of Israel by the rent of ten Tribes from the rest, yet this
was no more excuse to his irregular lust after Dominion, than the Jews might
have alleged for bringing about what God had before decreed, in the sufferings
of his beloved Son, the Savior of the world; They, nevertheless, by wicked
hands did crucify and slay him Acts 11.23.
; And so might Jeroboam, nevertheless, wickedly follow the temptations of his
own ombition or revenge. -- But, let us make the best of his case. God
Almighty, the absolutely Supreme, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, seems
to have commissioned him in extraordinary, as an Executioner of his Vengeance,
and raised him up for a scourge of his wrath, and so, not only to have given
him a bare permission, but also a Right and Title to those revolted Tribes, had
he persevered in obedience to him, 1 Kings 11.31, etc. And, on the same
account, he forbids Rehoboam, and the house of Judah and Benjamin adhering to
him, to give the men of Israel battle at first, for their reduction, chapter 12.24.
But, whatever abatements or allowances may be made in this single case of
Jeroboam, from the Divine Interposure; where That is wanting, there can be
none, to be sure, to justify the Insurrection and Rebellion of a Servant
against his Master, and a liege and obliged Subject (as he was) against his
undoubted Lord and Sovereign. As the sacrificing of Children to God is not any
whit the less Murder now, because Abraham once had a dispensation in the case,
and a command from God to offer up his Son. King Abijah fixes his charge upon
Jeroboam's known obligations as a subject, far enough from any ordinary title
to the Crown. Yet Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, the Servant of Solomon the Son of
David, is risen up, and has rebelled against his Lord. -- And then,

II. To deter others from siding with, or joining themselves unto Seditious and
Factious Leaders. So it follows, ver. 7. And there are gathered unto him vain
men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam
the Son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not
withstand them.

Observe, I beseech you, the Character he gives of those that Associated and
combined together in this Insurrection and Rebellion; the Party that listed
themselves under this new Head. There are gathered unto him vain men, the
children of Belial: That is, foolish and wicked men, who are ready, upon any
pretext, to throw off the yoke of lawful Government. This is the proper name of
Rebels. [* Scelestarum partium Socii, aut plausores. Tert. Apolog.
And so you find it noted at the very beginning of their Kingly Government,
upon the promotion of Saul, when the people gave their general shout, and said,
God save the King, 1 Samuel 10. There went with him, says the Text, a band of
men whose hearts God had touched, ver. 26. Where God touches men's hearts, you
see, they are inclined to Loyalty. But then it follows, ver. 27. But the
children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and
brought him no presents. -- So here again, There are gathered unto him vain
men, the Children of Belial. And if the Apostle's gloss on the phrase be good,
these enemies to rightful Powers, these Kingdespisers, are the Children of the
Devil; for so he speaks of Belial, as the grand enemy in opposition to Christ,
2 Cor. 6.15. "What concord has Christ with Belial? And then, What fellowship
or communion between the Disciples of Christ, and the Children of Belial? The
first time, I think, we meet with the expression, is Deuteronomy. 13.13. Certain men,
the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the
inhabitants of their City, saying, Let us go and serve other Gods which we have
not known. The Margin reads it, Naughty men. Such they are with a witness, in
the first place, who seduce us from the Lord our God, to a False and Idolatrous
Religion and Worship; and such, in the next, who draw others aside from their
lawful King. Wherever you read of these children of Belial in Scripture, you
will find they are the very worst of men; and so we are to look upon them that
revile and oppose Government, whatever holy appearances or disguises they come
in. Pessimus quisque asperrime Rectorem patitur. Salust.


Well, this is their Character, how many, and of what name or eminence soever
otherwise. There are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial. Of
whom he adds, And have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the Son of
Solomon. He keeps still the Emphasis on the Succession. So before, in Jeroboam:
The servant, says he, of Solomon the Son of David. And here again, "Against
Rehoboam the Son of Solomon. As he himself, in like manner, was the Son of
Rehoboam. -- And observe the juncture of time they laid hold on for their
purpose. When Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them. They took the opportunity of the King's weakness, When he was young and
tenderhearted; which some, with great probability, refer to the disposition of
his Mind, rather than Years, [juvenis animo, non aetate,] for he was of age
considerable enough when he came to the Crown. 41 Years old. 1 Kings 14.21.
But he was of too easy impression to the counsel of the rash young men,
against the judgment of his sager Statists, in answering of the people roughly,
and so disobliging them, when they came to tender their Loyalty to him. And
this is that which seems reflected on here, by the expression of his being
young and tenderhearted; a Novice only in the art of Government. This
teneritudo cordis is elsewhere used for faintness of heart, Levit. 26.36.
Whatever else there may be included in it, I will not stay to examine. These
children of Belial, you see, were very watchful to lay hold on the nick of
opportunity, "When their King could not withstand them. -- And that is the only
measure of some men's Loyalty; [quam diu desunt vires] until they have power and
strength enough to resist and rebel with the hopes of success. So they
blaspheme the primitive Christians, Confessors, and Martyrs patience under all
their sufferings and persecutions; and represent them to the world as Rebels at
heart, but such, as wanted strength for the execution; such, who submitted only
because they could not help it. Bellarmine l: 3. de Pontif. c. 7 Buchanan de
jure Reg: Author of the Life of Julian, etc.
[Quia deerant illis vires.] But the Fathers, in their Apologies for them,
abhor the imputation, etc.

For these ends now we are to know and acknowledge the principles of Loyaliy
beforementioned, that we may noither rise up and rebel against our Leige-Lord,
with Jeroboam; nor gather our selves to any such Head with vain men, the
children of Belial, whenever opportunity or the weakness of a Prince may tempt
us thereunto.

And the better to fortify all this, it is to be considered further, what he
goes on to suggest.

First, That the King in succession was not only their Sovereign Lord, but God
Almighty's Vicegerent, and so, in resisting him, they did, by a just
interpretation, withstand God himself, and seek to cast off the Kingdom of God,
ver. 8. And now ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord in the hand of
the Sons of David. He owns God for the Fountain of Royalty, and the Kings
successively only for his Ministers and Deputies. So the Throne of Solomon is
said to be the Throne of the Lord, [1 Kings 2: 12. with 1 Chronicles. 29.23. And 1
Kings 10.9. with 2 Chronicles 9.8.]
And,

Secondly, What kind of people the multitude of that rebellious Camp was made
up of; So it follows: [And ye be a great multitude.] That is confessed: But of
what sort of men? That deserves our special notice. And there are with you
golden Calves, which Jeroboam made you for Gods. The Revolters from their King
became at the same time Apostates from the service of the true God to set up
golden Calves in his stead. That was Jeroboam's policy: He considered wifely,
that had the people kept to their former established Worship at Jerusalem, they
would soon have returned to their former Loyalty. 1 Kings 12.26, etc. And
Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the Kingdom return to the house of David,
if this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem:
Then shall the heart of this people turn again to their Lord, even unto
Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam King
of Judah. Whereupon the King took counsel, and made two Calves of Gold;
(pretending, for a blind only, to ease them of their burden, and to consult
their advantage; as it follows,) And said unto them, It is too much for you to
go up to Jerusalem: Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
Land of Egypt! And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan: And
this thing became a sin, says the Text, a most provoking sin against God
Almighty, and turned to their ruin and destruction. But whatever he pretended
to make the people, the secret was, lest returning to the true Religion, they
should also return to their true Allegiance to the King of Judah. Thus you see,
in the first place, that these revolters from their Sovereing, as I said, were
Apostates from the established Worship of God, unto Idolatry, the worshipping
of Images and Imaginations of their own. And then, the attendant or consequence
of this was the discarding of the legitimate and rightly ordained Priests of
God, with the solemn Feasts appointed, and the setting up of others in their
room, even of the basest of the people, ver. 9. Have you not cast out the
Priests of the Lord, the Sons of Aaron and the Levites, and have made you
Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Lands? etc. Of which you may
read more at large in the story. Of such as these the multitude of the
Rebellious Army consisted; even such, as had forsaken the established worship
of the true God, and cast off their Obedience and Reverence to his appointed
Ministers, the Priests and Levites.

In opposition to whom we may find, Thirdly, the description and account given
of the Loyal Party, ver. 10. etc. "But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we
have not forsaken him. Namely, to reform his Worship by the abolition of it,
and bow down to golden Calves in his stead. And, as we have the true God, and
his appointed Worship and Ceremonies, so we have his ordained Priests too,
officiating. And the Priests which minister unto the Lord, are the Sons of
Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business; and they burn to the Lord
every morning and every evening burn Sacrifices and sweet Incense, etc. For we
keep the charge of the Lord our God, but ye have sorsaken him.

Hereupon therefore, from all these premises, King Abijah takes heart and
courage, for the animating of his Subjects, and the reflecting dread and terror
on the multitude of his and their Enemies, ver. 12. And behold God himself is
with us for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry alarm
against you. -- In the name of our God we set up our Standard, and on him we
build our confidenee; we keep fast to him, and doubt not but he will keep to us
while we so do, to protect and defend us; we adhere to his Priests, and they
sound the Trumpets orderly and religiously under the great Lord of Hosts. But
as for you, how many soever you are, or how great soever the numbers you glory
in, take heed, lest you be found, in the issue, (...), to fight against God,
who will be too hard for you. So he ends; O children of Israel, fight ye not
against the Lord God of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper. -- And the
success was accordingly, if you look on to the close of the chapter, for no
less than Five hundred thousand of their Eight hundred thousand chosen men were
cut off and destroyed. And the Text gives us this account of it, ver. 18. Thus
the children of Israel were brought under at this time, and the children of
Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord God of their Fathers. Now,
though the Argument of Providence and Success by it self be weak and
fallacious, (how much use soever some have made of it) yet, when in conjunction
with a good Cause, and backed with a Divine Testimony, (as here it is) it has
weight and moment in it.

Thus have I hastened through the Text and its appendant circumstances, and we
have found the whole Speech proper and apposite (as Grotius notes) to terrify
his Enemies, and hearten his own Subjects; wherein he alleges principally,
for himself, the Right of a Legitimate Succession, and that the True Religion
and Regular Clergy were on his side.

You have prevented me, I suppose, for the main of the Application to be made
of it, so far as we are concerned; for we are not, God be thanked, in any such
state of war, and I hope, through his Blessing, not like to be; nor is there
any case so exactly parallel, but will admit of some dissimilitude: it is
enough, if certain general proportions and analogies reach us.

You all know, or ought to know, I am sure, That this Kingdom of ours is an
undoubted Monarchy, under an Imperial Head as Supreme Governor; to whom, next
unto God, all sorts of men, of whatever Rank or Quality, Degree or Condition,
are bound to pay all Homage, Fealty, and Obedience. And it has been Declared
by all the Authority of the Land, That by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
neither the Peers of the Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in
Parliament, nor the People collectively or representatively, nor any other
person or persons whatsoever, ever had, has, or ought to have, any coercive
Power over the persons of the Kings of this Realm. And, That it is not lawful
upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King, or those
commissionated by him. And, That this Imperial Monarchy is Hereditary also,
such as defcends by a line of Succession from one to another; And accordingly
we are obliged by Oath to the King's Sacred Majesty for the time being, and to
His Heirs and Lawful Successors. And This, if not by so immediate a Covenant
from God as the Israelites, yet by as unviolable Ties as the Constitution of
the Government, or our own Consciences, can bring us under.

Now, since it has pleased Almighty God to call to himself our late most
Gracious Sovereign of Blessed Memory, King CHARLES II. under whose mild and
merciful Reign we have enjoyed for many years together infinite Benefits and
Blessings, had we but had more thankful hearts to acknowledge the same: Since, I
say, it has pleased Him, whom all must obey, to remand this eminent Servant
and Deputy of His, and advance him to a more Glorious Kingdom, as we have
reason to judge from his exemplary and Christian Death, as well as Good and
Religious Government over us; the Imperial Crown and Scepter forthwith are
devolved, beyond all dispute or question, upon the High and Mighty Prince JAMES
II. as our only Lawful, Lineal, and Rightful Liege Lord and King, as you have
heard by public Proclamation, received with the universal joy, contentment and
applause of all good people. And we shall not need to fear, I presume, any
ambitious or treacherous Jeroboam, nor any number of vain men, Children of
Belial, to gather themselves in Tumults under any such Head, to oppose his just
Rights, and therein their own, as well as the common Duty and Happiness.

O, what a wretched and disconsolate Estate had we now been in, if we had been
left, upon this sad Providence, as our sins deserved, like Sheep without a
Shepherd, having none to go in and out before us! In what a divided and
bleeding condition had we been, if the blind and furious Zeal of some men had
prevailed, to have cast out the undoubted Heir of the Crown from his Birthright
and Inheritance!

How much have we to bless God for, that we have yet a King of our own, and not
a Stranger! One that is well acquainted with and reconciled to our Laws and
Customs Ad concilium de Repub. dandum caput est nosse Rempublicam. Cicero 2. 4e
Orat.
! One that has often ventured his dearest Life and Blood in the Quarrels of
his Country, and testified his readiness on all occasions to do us good! A
Prince of no less Heroical Virtues, than Noble Extraction Eccles: 10.17. Fortes
creantur Fortibus, and b^nis, etc. Horat. [From the first British Kings, the
CXL Monarch; from the Scottish, CX; from the Saxon XLVII; from the Norman Line,
XXVII.]
! The Dutiful Son of our Martyred Sovereign, King CHARLES I. The Loving and
Faithful Brother of our Indulgent Sovereign, King CHARLES II.! Wonderfully
preserved, together with them, during our unnatural Wars, and abroad in Exile;
and as wonderfully Returned, together with them, into these Kingdoms, and kept
alive to this day, amidst many perils and dangers, for our defense and comfort!
A KING, whom the Church and State of Scotland found great reason to praise God
for, when our peevish discontents and jealousies forced him out from hence, by
the Providence of God to settle affairs there, to a general satisfaction See a
Letter, subscribed by seven Bishops there, to the Archbishop of Cant. from
Edinburgh, March 9. 1682.
! A KING, that has given us visible pledges of his regard to the Christian and
Protestant Religion by the education of his Children in it, and the bestowing
his two eldest Daughters in Marriage unto two Illustrious Princes of that
Belief and Denomination! A KING, who, notwithstanding all the Indignities and
Affronts which the rudeness, ignorance, and malice of some men have put upon
him, and Libellous Defamations wherewith they have sought to blacken him, yet
begins his Reign with the most obliging and endearing assurances of his hearty
affection unto, and care and concern for all his People; and in particular, as
of their just Rights, Properties and Liberties, so of that most excellent,
pure, and Reformed Religion which is by Law Established, more dear to pious and
devout Souls, than their Estates or Lives!

I cannot do you a more acceptable and beneficial Service, than by reading over
the Gracious Expressions which dropped from His Royal Mouth at his very first
appearing before his Privy Council, and leave you to comfort your selves and
one another with them; and raise up your hearts by the contemplation of so much
and so surprising a Goodness, to bless God most affectionately for him, and
prepare to return at least Love and Good Will for his Grace and Clemency, for
that is the lowest measure of Gratitude; that is no more than what Heathens
conclude absolutely just and necessary, to love those who love them, and to do
Good to those from whom they receive Kindness. Pass we on therefore from the
Speech of one King in the Text, to the Speech of another, etc. [Here was
inserted The Account of what His Majesty said at his first coming to Council [*
For the sake of those who have not seen or heard it, I have transcribed and
annexed it at the end.]
, and afterward ordered to be made public.]

I will end all by putting you in mind of the Prophet Samuel 's Good and Right
way to a Nations settlement and happiness, 1 Samuel: 12.23, etc.
which, after all, is the only course we can have any security in, amidst all
the chances and uncertainties of this present world, wherein the Lives of the
Best of Princes, as well as other men, are liable to the stroke of Death and
Violence. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, and with all your heart:
For consider how great things he has done for you. But, if ye shall still do
wickedly, ye shall be destroyed, both ye and your King.

Now let us pray, as the Church very seasonably instructs us in the Collect for
the day.

O Lord, Coll. for Septuagesima.
we beseech thee favorably to hear the Prayers of thy People, that we, who are
justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully delivered by thy Goodness,
for the Glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Savior, who lives and
reigns with Thee, and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

THE END.
An Account of what His Majesty said at His first coming to Council.
His Majesty, at His first sitting in His Privy Council, was graciously pleased
to express Himself in this manner.
My Lords,
BEfore I enter upon any other business, I think fit to say something to You.
Since it has pleased Almighty God to place me in this station, and I am now to
succeed so Good and Gracious a King, as well as so very Kind a Brother; I think
it fit to Declare to you, That I will endeavor to follow His Example, and most
especially in that of His great Clemency and Tenderness to his People. I have
been reported to be a Man for Arbitrary Power, but that is not the only story
has been made of me.

And I shall make it my endeavors to preserve this Government both in Church
and State, as it is now by Law Established.

I know, the Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the
Members of it have showed themselves Good and Loyal Subjects; Therefore I shall
always take care to Defend and Support it.

I know too, that the Laws of England are sufficient to make the King as Great
a Monarch as I can wish; And, as I shall never depart from the Just Rights and
Prerogative of the Crown, so I shall never invade any man's Property.

I have often heretofore ventured my Life in Defense of this Nation; and I
shall still go as far as any man in preserving it in all its Just Rights and
Liberties.

[Whereupon the Lords of the Council were humble Suitors to His Majesty, That
these His Gracious Expressions might be made public, which His Majesty did
order accordingly.]

And this is no more than what His Majesty several times before had given
assurance of; particularly, when the University of Cambridge waited upon His
(then) Royal Highness at Newmarket, to welcome his Return to England, in March
1682. To whom, after Thanks for their kind expressions, He thus answered, That
He was glad of this, and all other occasions to declare, That He would ever
stand by the Church of England as now Established, and countenance the Members
of it, as having seen by experience, that They are the best Supporters of the
Crown; And that He would use his Endeavors and Interest for the Preservation
of the King's Person, and the Government in the State, and the Church of
England as now Established by Law.

O Lord Save the KING;
And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Charles Brom.
DR. Comber's Paraphrase on the Common Prayer, in Folio. The Fathers Legacy to
his Friends, containing the whole Duty of Man. Dr. Du Moulin's Week of Prayers.
Precepts and Practical Rules for a truly Christian Life. The Reformed
Monastery: or, The Love of Jesus. Montluck's Commentaries, Fol. Mr. Simpson's
Compendium of Music. Dr. Comber's Advice to Roman Catholics. Bp. Lloyd's
several Sermons and Tracts in Defense of the Church. Bp. Sprat's Four Sermons.
Dr. Kenn's Devotions, in Twelves. All Mr. L'Estrange's Tracts, in Quarto. --
His History of the Plot, Fol. Guide to Heaven, Two Parts. Crumbs of Comfort,
Twenty-fours. The Exact Constable. Dr. Ford's Sermons on the Man whose Legs and
Arms rotted off. Brome's Songs and Poems. -- His Horace, with others. Lord
Castlehaven's Memoires complete. Vulgar Errors in Divinity. Visions of the
Reformation and Purgatory. Bp. Lloyd's Church History. Bp. of Winton's Tracts.
-- His Book against Baxter.

